

BIOGRAPHY
mmm mmm i




ADELAIDE EISTORI.
Italy has ever been the native place of the Arts. She who has
given to music Eossini, Donizetti, Bellini, and Verdi, can now
justly boast of having given to the Drama a matchless artist in
Adelaide Eistori.
The Peninsula, perhaps, lacked the glory of having produced
Dramatic artists of fame; foreigners proclaimed the art of
recitation so far decayed in Italy, that the actors there changed
themselves to mountebanks, and that the singers and dancers
excited only a transitory enthusiasm.
Italy has now, however, her tragic artist —through her, the names
and works of her great authors have become celebrated even be-
yond the Alps —through her, has been given a new and powerful
impulse towards the resuscitation of the Drama. Glory be there-
fore to the actress that with such divine inspirations knew how
to elevate herself to such a height.
Adelaide Eistori was born in Oividale, a small city of Triuli,
her parents being Antonio Eistori and Magdalena Pomatelli.
A child of barely two months old, she appeared before the
public, laid in a basket on the stage, of the humble company
of Cavicchi, to which her parents belonged, in a Comedy entitled
‘‘ El regalo del dia de Ano Nuevo’ ’ (“ The New Year’s Gift’ ’), and
who amongst the spectators of that piece would have thought
that in that cot was one of those gifts, that God so seldom be-
stows to Italy or any other nation.
At the age of four years she played the characters of
children, and displayed in her delivery such a degree of grace
and brilliancy that she was always greeted with thundering
applause. At ten years she played in the ingenious and loving
parts adapted to the premier junior aVtiste, in the company of the
famed director and artist Moncalvo, and at that time assumed
the character of Francesca da Rimini , in the tragedy of that name,
in a most spirited manner.


Nature endowed her with beauty of form, grace of person,
vivacity of spirit, and strength and constancy of affection; to
these Adelaide Eistori added what was of greater value —love of
her Art, which led her to the deep study of its Truths from the
writings of the greatest masters.
It is not to be wondered at therefore, that at the age of fifteen
she should have been admitted amongst the actors of the cele-
brated Eoyal Company of Cerdenia, side by side with the
renowned Carlota Marchionni, who inspired Silvio Pellico with
his Francesca de Eimini—it is not to be wondered at, that this
illustrious lady should have distinguished this girl with a special
love, and that she should have been to her as a mother, by her
goodness of heart and maternal affection—as an instructress by
her eminent virtues —as a mistress by her great genius.
Oh, who could imagine the flame that was awakened in the
soul of Adelaide Eistori, by the voice, —the look, —the gesture, —of
Carlota, that sublime interpreter of the master passions? and
who can describe the emotions of the heart of one whose genius
was revealed to her by the demonstrative power of another and
fellow genius? It was as if a voice cried —“Arise, 0 chosen
creature, arise, and go forth!” And Adelaide Eistori awoke to
the sense of her greatness; and her mistress could then predict
for Comedy what was later foretold for the Linternari Tragedy —-
“ Thou shalt be queen.”
With such remarkable examples at hand, she, in the mean-
time, occupied herself in overcoming the most arduous difficulties
of her art, and whilst France was glorying in the possession of
Mdlle. Mars, Italy called Signorita Eistori the Italian Mars.
When Marchionni bade farewell to the stage, Eistori con-
tinued for a short time in company with Amalia Bettini; not
unworthy of succeeding that great artist, she proved one of the
most precious gems of the company, which in the following year
came from Mascherpa united with the Ducal Company of Parma,
at whose head the name of Antonieta Eobotti figured con-
spicuously.


It was while with this company at Parma and at Liorna, that
the applause due to Eistori was showered from all sides, and
her acting was received with such favour by the public of Liorna
that it appeared as, and was in truth, nothing less than a com-
plete ovation.
From that time no actress was so much applauded as she in
appearing in the Comedies “ La Locandera,” “ Gl’ Innamorati,”
“ Zelinda e Lindoro of Goldoni,” “La Lusinghiera e la Tiera”
of Nota, performed by her, left imperishable memories. Her
name became so popular, that the Barrister Gherardi del Yesta
gave to one of his Comedies the title II Eegno di Adelaide.
Adelaide Eistori was now in Eome, and the Metastasio Theatre
resounded with the tumultuous applauses which greeted her.
Attracted by her fame, the young Marquis Julian Capranica
del Grillo conceived for this sublime actress an ardent affection
which was not long in being sincerely reciprocated.
Will the reader believe the following incidents which have all the
appearance of a romance ?
The austere father of Julian —to root out from the heart of
his son the passion that held dominion over him—had him con-
fined in the Castle of Santa Severa, which is situated in the
poisonous atmosphere of the flat Eoman country. On hearing
this, the loving and brave girl betook herself from Liorna to
Civitta Yecchia, encountering a violent tempest on the passage —
desiringto see him again who was suffering for her, —and aftermany
obstacles, her wish was fulfilled. In company they then directed
their steps towards Florence, and in a small village Church
offered to Heaven their marriage vows, and received the blessing
of the minister, in the presence of the villagers, who were much
astonished at this unexpected ceremony.
A band of Banditti assaulted them in the passage of the
Porretta, but they escaped without injury, thanks to the valour
of the actress who, though not desisting for one single moment
from calling for help, knew how with the majesty of her features
and presence to subdue their ferocity.


At last the blessings of the father descended, on this loving
couple (happier now by the birth of a beloved son) through
the intervention of Julian’s mother, a most excellent and
admirable lady of the family of Odescalchi, Hungarian
magnates. She knowing Eistori was a lady of fervent and
sincere piety who drew from the faith those religious senti-
ments and consolation, which embellished the last scenes of Mary
Stuart with such beauty—did not rest until the reconciliation
had taken place and the marriage approved of. But the new
Marchioness Capranica del Grillo had to renounce the stage, to
dedicate herself exclusively to the sacred and hallowed duties
of a mother rearing her first born.
But what power can repress the natural tendencies of the soul ?
Adelaide Eistori still felt in her heart the fire of her Art—the
fire that illumines, strengthens, and sways the soul of every
great artist; an irresistible power seemed to urge her to the
arena of her triumphs, the attractions of her art were before her,
the clamour and applause of a day would wake her from her
sleep. The Drama was still her predominant thought, in con-
sequence of which the dramatic entertainments of the polished
Eoman Nobility relied upon the co-operation of their illustrious
and proclaimed Queen.
And with her noble avocation, her feelings of pity called her
again on the stage, which she once more sought; to free the
manager Pisenti, who was confined in prison for debt, she gave
some performances for his benefit, which awoke among the
audiences an immense enthusiasm, and taught them the serious
loss they would have suffered in the Italian Dramatic Art had
her retirement been of greater length.
By the universal desire of her fellow citizens, Adelaide
Eistori now returned to the stage, and having received the
countenance of the Capranicas in regard to her marriage, it was
therefore re-celebrated with all the proper formalities in accordance
with the rules of the Church in 1849, her family now fully
-appreciating her great virtues and devotion to the art.


A small company was formed and conducted by her, but she
was compelled to disband it by reason of the many and arduous
duties it imposed upon her; she then joined the company of
Domeniconi, which she shortly after left to rejoin the Eoyal
Company in which she had shone so brilliantly in her youth.
She then bethought herself of directing her steps towards
France. What had she to fear? Was she not possessed of
the experience of the past ? Conscious of her merit and
of that power of will which strengthens and succours
genius.
She entered France with the impetuousity of a soul elected for
a noble work, without perhaps knowing that one of the principal
Dramatic writers of France, M. Scribe was then publishing in
Paris the fact of his never having witnessed an actress who
could be compared to her whom he had seen performing in Italy.
The desiro of making her language resound on the banks of the
Seine —to produce the master pieces of the Italian Poets—seemed
daring, or aspiring to so much to many, and a game of chance
to the envious, and was thought by the ignorant classes a
false and hazardous step.
They were, however, immediately awakened to a sense of their
error; on the night of the 22nd May, 1855, on the Boards at
Paris, the play of Francesca da Pimini was produced, and there
fell from Eistori’s lips words of fidelity and love, and her
language appeared as if emanating from some Being foreign and
superior to Earth.
After the pastoral and elegy, followed the tumult of real
Tragedy, and the amazed public held their breath so as not to
allow one of those sublime words to escape them. Between the
surprise and admiration she caused, there thundered forth rounds
of applause, which shook the very foundations, and when the
curtain dropped, the repeated calls for Eistori before the
curtain shewed the deep impression she had made. Goldoni’s
La Lacondiera , in which the artist appeared in the char-
acter of the mischievous Mirandolina, gave her an opportunity
of fully displaying the sparkling vivacity of her Comedy. Bow’s


amusing Comedy Nieuty d Male , in the character of the simple
villager, shows her captured by the jealously of the bridegroom.
Ohiossone’s “ Suonatrice d’arpa,” and the before mentioned
plajs were praised to such a pitch, that to any other actress
would have been immense, but for Pistori was only a short
prelude of what time had in store for her.
In La Mira , a tragedy, which is one of the highest class,
and wonderful for its marvellous soliloquy—its length being over
2000 verses, in which are expressed the sufferings which the
heart of man can endure, she awakened the utmost enthusiasm.
The stage boxes were filled by critics, literary men and
politicans as well as philosophers, all burning with desire to
know Pistori and grasp her hand, and to testify their admiration
of this incomparable actress. The highest circles of society
echoed her renown, repeating the praise of Alexander Dumas,
of Julius Janin, of Alfred De Vigny, of A. De Lamartine, and
other stars of literature. In the representation of “ Marie
Stuart” (Mary, Queen of Scots) the French actresses knelt before
her as the majesty of art, covering her garments with kisses. Her
name shone with such lustre, despite the efforts brought to bear
against her by envy and malice, her name being inscribed as
the first of those acknowledged as European celebrities.
Many compliments were tendered her by the illustrious French
authors. Lamartine, A. Dumas, Alfred De Vigny, De Fiennes,
Theophilus Gautier, Paul de Sante Victor, by the Spanish, Martin
de laPosa —by the German William, Wolf Sonches, &c., &c., &c.,
without mentioning Italians. Moreover, beyond this homage
rendered, there were painted and sculptured likenesses of this
geat artist—busts were modelled and medals struck.
It was determined afterwards by the Directors of the Italian
Opera of Paris, with the consent of Pistori, that for 3 years con-
secutively during the months of February, March, and April, she
should give performances in Italian, and finally the Imperial
voice expressed itself in the following terms through the pen of M.
Mocquard, the Private Secretary of Napoleon 111. “ The Emperor


.delighted to hear you before your departure, but before receiving
your farewell, his Majesty hopes with the Parisian public, that
your absence will be brief, and the applause they reserve signifies,
believe me, an invitation for you to return, and the wish to see
you again at an early date, I am happy madam to be the interpreter
of the Emperor towards the Italian artist, who is declared by the
unanimous voice of the people a Frenchwoman, and beg that
you will accept, &c., &c., &c.”
Amid all these festivals by which the glory of the famous
Rachel was eclipsed, the French speculators on one hand, and
those jealous of the Italian glory on the other, were preparing
against Ristori a “ sui generis” plot.
Arsenio Houssage, the able writer, and manager of the French
theatrical world, was the medium by which they absurdly offered
to our actress £3,333 per annum, on condition that she
would engage to play only in the French language, and renounce
totally Italian pieces. These objects were, however, foiled,
encountering as an insurpassable obstacle the fervent patriotism
of Adelaide Ristori, which signally defeated them as inspired by
it she refused both the offers of Houssage and of Fould, Minister
of State, and passing from triumph to triumph returned
to Italy. At the time of her departure she received a magnificent
gold casket from the Emperor, containing a valuable bracelet
of diamonds, on which was engraved these words—“ Napoleon
ITT, to Adelaide Ristori. ’ The modern Thalia returned
to Italy where awaited her the sincerest wishes and welcome of
her friends, and appreciative public.
After all that has been said of this famous tragedienne, all
the admiration shewn, what could more fully demonstrate the
great intellect, the faultless oratory, the sublime expression,
the graceful and significant gestures; the ideal beauty of her
characters, the mobile features that she so marvellously adopts
to pourtray the sentiments and passions ?
Can we paint the prodigious effects produced by this
extraordinary woman, that after having exalted herself to


the summit of her art, descends without an effort to more
temperate regions, there to display treasures of pure and
natural graces. How to express above all the originality of
her inspirations—her power of imitation which seemed to have
never yet reached the acme of her power ? It may be said
that the sources of the inspiration, common to all great artists
who store their minds with deep study, and acquire there-
from new vigour and life, by which they may be likened
to a mirror, which receives and reflects its fire and light,
augmenting by its brilliancy their splendour. Ever excelling
her previous efforts, Ristori never appeared twice in the
same place with the same effects. Being a genius of sublime
conception, and deep and profound meditation—a privileged
soul that knowing how to vibrate the chords of a mysterious
harpsichord, inspires and moves us to the depths and holds as
enthralled in enchantment with admiration of the prodigies that
perfection alone can produce.
Adelaide Ristori has never had rivals. The students of the
school of Modena were compared to her as wandering stars,
further because not having had any other master than Nature,
Ristori knew of herself how to express with the same felicity
the m ")st impetuous passions, and the softest poesies, the most
melting tenderness. And it may with truth be said that she
embraced in her method, the progress of the art in the 19th
Century.
When the art critics spoke of her, as the enthusiastic public
had already done, French Comedy wished to tender itself to
many testimonies of sympathetic admiration by the medium of.
one of its most illustrious representatives.
The master who brought Rachel to the confines of perfection,
Sanson, author, actor, and artist, recited in honour of Ristori,
the following original verses, that formed part of a poem com-
posed by him upon the Dramatic Art. Was not this a great
Compliment, and a most glorious and splendid proof of the
appreciation in which she was held ;


A MADAME ADELAIDE EISTOEI.
“ La voila parmiuous cette autre Melpomene
“ Souveraine de I’art et que I’art nous ramene
“ Ornant a mes regards chamies de son succes
“ Son front italien de mes lauriers fran9ais.
“ Ou trouver des accents plus vrais, plus sympathiques ?
* ‘ Quels beaux yeux ont verse des pleurs plus poetiques ?
“ Quelle ame ne s’emeut pour elle et n’admiie
“ Fran9oise et Rosmande et Stuart et Myrra?
“ De toi notre patrie a le droit d’etre fiere :
“ Des poetes fran9ais 6 Muse hospitaliere
“ Toi dont le noble coeur, sublime Ristori,
“ Vient offrir a leurs vers un genereux abri,
“ Tu resserres les noeuds d’une heureuse alliance
“ Les enfants du Piemont nous pietant leur vaillance
“ Ont devant le canon d’un ennemi puissant
‘ ‘ Avec nous confondu leur drapeaux et leur sang,
“ Et la paix et le prix de ce sang heroique.
“ Toi dans le champ des arts, guerriere pacifique,
“ Tu rapportes ici des bords de la Dora
“ Le celeste rayon qui toujours t’eclaira,
“ L’ardente passion, la flamme inspiratrice
“ Qui fait le grand poete et la sublime actrice.
“ Et la voix aux sons purs si tiers et si touchants
“ D’une lyre franqaise interpret e les chants ;
“ Par toi rivive Medee ; a la sorciere antique,
“ Grace au digne h6ritier d’un beau nom poetique,
“ Grace a ton jeu divin qui subjugue les coeurs,
“ Retrouve sa magie et ses charraes vainqueurs.”
What caused Eistori to be yet more admired was the power,
multiplicity, and variety of her genius, the representations were
placed and directed by her ; artistes in general never commanded
but followed her instructions, the painter executes her orders, the
wardrobe women work in accordance with her desires, and even
the authors consult her and avail themselves*of her experience.
On reading one of the acts of a drama that was written for
het, and seeing that the author had discoursed at great length
jn one scene where she poisons another and then herself, to shew
its impractibility, thinking the selection too slow, availed herself of


the telegraph to send him the following—“ You forget that I
ought to die quickly, and that in the presence of the corpse of
the victim with whom I divide the poison I should not speak at
such length.”
Those who know the political events of Italy, can well imagine
how surprised the telegraphic operator would be to see such a dis-
patch presented. What communication could to the police ?
Again, on the other hand, might it not result in bringing ridicule
upon him ? Nevertheless the scene was shortened, and that
drama now forms part of the select repertoire of Eistori. More than
once it has been endeavoured to ascertain how she could move
and entertain to such an extent her audiences in a language of
which the greater part must have been ignorant. The answer
is found on hearing her. The power of mimic ! the versatility
of gesture! the expression! that she could give to the most
trivial incidents of her recitation, reveal with such celerity with her
dumb language the harmony; with the effects they express, that
even Lamartine exclaimed on hearing her —“ If I did not under-
stand Italian, she would make me,” and our language is too poor
to give expression to the sensation felt on hearing her.”
A Bull-fighter of Madrid, who did not miss one of her per-
formances, answered Mortinez de la Eosa, who interrogated him—
“ I understand her so well that if she spoke in Turkish I would
comprehend her still.”
Her success in Paris caused other French cities to wish to
hear her, and at Havre, Angers, Tours, Blois, Orleans, Le Mans,
Bordeaux, Toulouse, Montpellier, Nimes, Avignon, Lyons, Mar-
seilles, Lille, Amiens, Boulogne, and Calais. She acquired new
laurels over and above those obtained at Paris ; her travels were
in fact like the triumphal tour of a conqueror.
Belgium, Prussia, Hanover, England, Austria, Hungary,
Wurtemburg, Eussia, Spain, Baden Baden, Frankfort, Hamburg,
Brunswick and Italy, all were desirous of this eminent
tragedienne, and the great capitals as London, Berlin, Vienna,
Dresden, Suttgard, Monaco, Versailles, Brussels, Naples and
Madrid, recalled her to renew the demonstrations of their
sincer regard.


In Hamburg, and likewise Germany, where she was engaged
five consecutive seasons, it is impossible to describe the enthu-
siasm of that naturally cold and calculating people.
In all the University towns the Students betook themselves
“En masse” to the station to receive her, accompanied by bands
of music.
In all of these places no less than fifty of the Students, mounted
on horseback, acted as an escort to her hotel. In Amsterdam,
on 6th July, 1860, the municipal, as well as the aitistic and
scientific bodies, gave her a most demonstrative and regal welcome,
and the crowds of the public were so great, that many were
injured and forced into the canals.
On the King congratulating Eistori on these proofs of ad-
miration, and whilst decorating her with the order of Arts and
Sciences, told her that the demonstration was the highest com-
pliment ever awarded to any artist in that country.
No less enthusiastic was her reception in Russia where, for
two winters, she gave performances. She gave in Moscow eight
of her performances, and the audiences were so great that the
house was overcrowded, and yielded a profit of £7OO per
night.
An occurrence took place here worthy of record. On her de
parture all the Students accompanied her to the station, which
was guarded by troops, and during her brief stay there, and even
after she had entered the carriage, the crowd pressed forward,
anxious to obtain her autograph, which she gracefully pre-
sented to upwards of 500 persons.
Whilst the public declared themselves votaries of the
Queen of Art by means of indescribable demonstrations, while
her carriage, surrounded by flaming torches, music, and enthu-


siastic applause, continued its course. The sovereigns held
her in high consideration, feteing and receiving and vieing with
each other to bestow the most honour.
In Brussels the Duke and Duchess of Brabant, in the absence
of their august father, themselves gave the sign of a call before
the curtain for applause. In Dresden the King being unable to
witness her, and having seen her on previous occasions and ap-
plauded all of them, sent his Chamberlain to report to him of
her; and the Princess Amelia, on hearing of her marvellous genius,
praised her, and regretted not being able to attend her perform-
ances in consequence of indisposition.
In Berlin, their Majesties, after having sent congratulations in
their and the Prince of Prussia’s name, by means of the Crown
Prince, and they desiring to see her immediately in their box,
sent the senior Chamberlain, who had been page of Frederick
the Great, to apprise her of their wishes; and when the artist
presented herself, the August Sovereign said to her —“I
am desirous of informing you lady that you have been
able to make a King shed tears,” his majesty had wept in
reality.
On the following day was presented to her, through his Excellency
the Baron Holsen, the Order of Merit of Prussia, the celebrated
Humbold being the last person so decorated. The Queen after-
wards delivered with her own hands, a magnificent album, on the
covers of which were miniatures of the Poyal Palace and the old
theatre, and said to her —“ Preserve these minatures—the one
bringing to remembrance the fact of your great triumphs, and
the other the abode of one of your sincerest admirersafter
which she wrote in the album, “ A token of regard to Adelaide
Ristori, from the Queen of Prussia.”
In Stuggart, the Queen of Holland invited Ristori to a private
entertainment, heaping upon her proofs of affection, which were
repeated by the King, who caused her to be seated between his
daughter and himself. Later, the Queen invited her by telegram,
to a serenade given in the Hague in her honour. Having gone
to Paris —during a performance she deigned to notify her arrival


to the actress, and not being able to give her a surprise, she
begged her to go and visit her (the Queen) at the Tuilleries,
desiring to witness a special performance, as the King of Wurtem-
burgh had already done ; and better to prove her affection, which
had already been shewn by many ways, she accorded her, by
means of a decree, an Honour never conferred but to those
nearest her person.
The King of Bavaria, who had already admired her in
Monaco, failed not to witness the performances given by her in
Eome and Paris during his stay in those cities.
The King and Queen of Hanover showered honours on her
and took her within the circles of their intimacy, sent her their
busts and likenesses, as likewise their children’s, who had played
with those of Eistori, making her promise to pay them frequent
visits.
In Yarsovia, the Governor Prince Gortschakoff gave in honour
of Eistori a gala party, and the Princess congratulated herself
on having received her, declared herself her friend, and presented
her with a most beautiful necklace; whilst her husband begged
that she would accept a magnificent bracelet enriched with
diamonds and precious stones. The noble families were ambitious
of the honour of being admitted to the presence of the Italian
artist.
The Emperor of Austria followed in the wake of the universal
ecstasy; he applauded more than any of the audience, and never
failed to witness her annual performances. The Imperial Princess,
and all the august society, looked upon her as a friend ; visits,
banquets, and parties were not wanting to prove it.
Some Managers gave the name of Eistori to their Theatres,
and many others expressed in divers ways to the Queen of their
Art, that she was not only the glory of Italy, but the recon-
structing genius of the universal drama.
Italy, ever doubtful of the triumphs in Paris, observed never-
theless with care everything that was done in honour of her who
was her glory, and seemed indifferent of seeing her amongst
them, but in a very short time, commotion transported the scenes,


and at the end of every appearance, notwithstanding some who
were still indifferent to her powers, and who availed themselves
of any imaginary doubt that existed, desired still to compete
rivals with her, Eistori soon was, however, the idol of all, and
the perfect ideal of a follower of her art.
From that time Trieste, Yenice, Milan, Florence, Eome, and
Turin continued to resound with her triumphs, the press were
pleased to record it, and the great artist was saluted now as
Queen of Tragedy as she had formerly been of Comedy. It
having been said by some French journals that the Italians had
not been able to conceive the genius of Eistori. The celebrated
poet Andrea Maffei dedicated to this artist the following magni-
ficent sonnet:
Donna, non ti ferir quelle impudenti
Parole che noi, molli e ratti al canto,
L’ arte tua non infiamma. ed abborrenti
Dal coturno, non sai moverne al pianto?
Ma in qual parte d’ltalia a tuoi lamenti
Lagrime non versammo ?Ove I’incanto
Di tua voce suono che cuori e menti
O I’ira o la pieta non abbia affranto?
Noi destammo il tuo genio, il plauso nostro
Ti erudi nell’agone, ove ora imprimi
Solitarie vestigie e siedi in trono?
No, la Senna non fd, noi fummo i primi
A cingerti, o gran donna il serto e I’ostro,
Di’ cui I’onda snperba a te fa’dono.
As an artist, Eistori is unrivalled in every respect as a cul-
tivator of the beautiful, none can compare with her; she sings
without having studied music, and can reproduce on the piano-
forte music after hearing it once. The works of Fiction studied
by her are reproduced in a more attractive form, truly shewing
that within the sphere of the beautiful, nothing was impossible
to this gifted woman.


The private charity of Ristori, apart from her professional
performances for such purposes, which she frequently gives, is
beyond calculation.
At once merciful and impressionable, she avails herself of
every opportunity to do good; search into her very heart, and
you would find everything that is just and meritorious, but in-
justice chafes her and finds her inaccessible.
In Madrid she was constantly feted in her frequent performances,
which the King and Queen invariably attended, exhibiting by
their applause and manner the appreciation and esteem in
which they held the artist.
Received in the Royal Palace she left grateful of the repeated
testimonies of admiration rendered her.
On the night of her benefit, the Queen concealed in the crown
of artificial flowers, which she presented her with, a flower
of diamonds of the value of £416; the enthusiasm of
the public was indescribable, and it cannot but be said
that during her stay in Madrid she was every one’s idol, and
to what noble use did Ristori make of the favours accorded
to her talent.
A soldier condemned to death was in a few days to meet his
sad doom of being shot. Insulted and beaten by his superior
he threatened him with his sword, but did not draw it from its
scabbard. If the sentence or punishment inflicted was just
according to Spanish law, it was not so by any means by the law
of neighbouring countries; but an example was needed, the
Queen could not pardon—the Executive having unanimously
decided that he should be executed. Clemency had in vain been
implored by his comrades and also by his family, the Press, the
Municipality of Madrid, the Grandees of Spain, and the Queen’s
Sister also petitioned in vain, the Queen would not give way.
There was only one lady who could avail, and that lady was
Ristori. A deputation waited upon her ; no argument was for-
gotten to overthrow her repugnance to accept, at last her magnani-
mous heart overcame her modesty, and she undertook the cause.


“ I directed my steps,” the actress observed, some time after-
wards “to the Prime Minister, and made him understand the
gravity of the case, the interest generally felt for the unfortunate,
and I succeeded in exciting his pity, and drew from him a
promise that he would not oppose the petition for pardon that I
was going to urge ; I then went to the theatre.” The performance
commenced, the King and Queen were present, and Medea }
though harassed by painful and opposing thoughts, did not
forget either her promise or her duty. All found her a hundred-
fold more beautiful than ever. The first act had closed —the
drop had fallen —Ristori had but one thought; she ascends,
dressed in the Grecian style, the stairs that lead to the Royal
Box. At the mention of her name the King rose, and the
Queen advanced to meet her with congratulations, but Ristori
fell on her knees, crying in piteous accents, “Mercy! mercy!
for the unhappy soldier whom rigorous justice has condemned to
death.” The Queen answered, “ I too wish it, but it is impossible.’’
Ristori continued, “ I address the most noble and generous heart
in Spain, and your majesty would not let one, whom every one
feels for and pities, be sacrificed.” On saying this, she kissed
the Queen’s hands convulsively, who shed tears trying to console
her, but she said, “No, I will remain at the feet of your majesty
until you have given the pardon I hope for from your clemency.’
The Queen said, “ I would wish it, but my Ministers.” * * In
meantime both King and Queen shed tears, Ristori adding to
her own emotion; her gesture, look, and words at that moment
became so eloquent that the Queen, throwing towards her
Ministers a most imploring look of pity, said, “ Arise, I grant
the pardon —continue your character; we would lose too much
if we did not now witness the impersonation of the character you
so ably pourtray, which is wanting —wanting to excite the
enthusiasm you know how to produce.”
This scene, which awoke in the theatre the greatest emotion,
and the result of which was awaited, with great anxiety provoked
a spontaneous and unanimous cry of “Long live the Queen,”
“ Long live Ristori;” Ristori retnrned to the stage, and saluted
the Queen in token of her thanks, while the Queen applauded


her personally so as to shew the actress the greatness of her
achievement.
The reader may be pleased by us publishing the following
translation of some verses written in praise of Eistori by the
great Spanish Poet Martinez de la Eosa, and translated by him
into the Italian.
I saw with rap’trous wonder this reigning Queen of Art,
’Twas the tragedy of Mira, where she took her wondrous part;
The daughter of Ciniro, with all her youthful glee,
Caused by the hate of Diva to leave her heart and flee.
But 0, the wondrous acting that Art could never make,
Shewed that the gifted lady did from Nature lessons take ;
She shewed her sweet affection and plaintive made lament,
That might have made the hardest heart to melt and to relent.
And amid the sweet enchantment that upon all lit down,
She crowned, was hy voice of all with music’s tragic crown.
And ’mid this joy I cried aloud, for rapture filled my heart,
O, Fame, how dear that all now here accord the Queen of Art.
Martinez de la Rosa.
Eistori preserves as one of her most precious mementos and
conquests the pen with which the Queen signed the pardon of
the unfortunate soldier, and keeps it as a talisman in a gold case.
In the autumn of 1864 Eistori made an excursion into Egypt,.
Constantinople, Smyrna and Athens, exciting everywhere the
greatest excitement and enthusiasm.
In Alexandria the Italian colonists presented her with a valuable
crown of massive gold, with a star of brilliants in the centre; and
in Constantinople the Sultan presented her—through the Italian
Consul —a bracelet, adorned with a splendid crescent of sapphires
and brilliants.
In Athens, that cradle of the Arts, she gave new life to the
excitable public. Her engagements in Paris would not allow
her to give more than five performances in Athens, but it is im-
possible to conceive the enthusiasm of the Greeks, when they
saw her representing the characters of mythology ; on her last
appearance the public burst the doors, and invaded the hall


Pistori handed the proceeds of this entertainment, which ex-
ceeded £250 to Benevolent Societies. The President pre-
sented Pistori with a magnificent album, containing photographs
of the great ruins of Cropoli and a most flattering letter. The
King also presented her with a set of brilliants.
Not satisfied with her European laurels, she wished to cross the
seas and gather others in America; and on 31st August, 1866, left
Paris to embark at Brest with all the company en route for New
York. An engagement contracted with the manager G. Grau,
compelling her to give one hundred performances, in the chief
cities of the Union, commencing at New York, where she was ad-
vertised to appear 12 times. However great the impatience might
have been to see this noted artist, it was only as a shadow, com-
pared with the enthusiasm she produced in that city; the 12
performances had to be increased to 38, and admittance could
not be obtained in the French theatre, when she re-appeared,
unless it was secured a week before-hand, or by paying a
fabulous price to speulators.
If the contracts already signed with other cities of the States, had
not compelled her to leave New York, she would have given the
100 performances there. But Philadelphia, Baltimore, Washing-
ton, and the other cities in the North, claimed the performances
promised, and in these places, she had to double the number of
her appearances.and to promise another series.
Having returned to New York in January, 1867, and given
100 performances, she had to renew her engagement for another
100, alternately with the cities of the South and West; New
Orleans being excluded from the list, through the civil war then
raging in its vicinity, and whose theatre doors being closed, could
not have well received the great artist. But the great enthusiasm
caused in the Northern States and also in the Western, caused
New Orleans to send a deputation to the Manager Grau at
Chicago, assuring him that they would use all the means in their
2>ower not to be eclipsed by the cities Pistori had already visited,


and we will remark here, that at Chicago; the receipts of five
performances amounted to the enormous sum of £4,600.
Arriving at New Orleans, and being the object of the greatest
admiration, she gave fourteen performances; that produced a
sum equal to the greatest amount received at the other cities,
viz., £7,583.
The time approaching for her to retrace her steps to Europe,
the most insignificant places that had to be passed through,
returning to New York, wishing to hear her, and having sub-
scribed, offered her £425 for each farewell performance.
Arriving at New York, where 8 performances had to be given,
it is beyond description the multitude that invaded the theatre,
which was much too small to contain them.
On the last performance given on the night of the 18th of
May, Eistori’s emotion was so great that she had to promise, in
a few words spoken in English, that she would return again in a
few months, and in fact that very night a contract was entered
into, for 200 more performances, and was signed on the following
morning on board the “ Yille de Paris,” the ship by which they
returned to Europe for little over 3 months, it having been
agreed on, that on the 31st August following, she would again
embark for New York.
The sojourn of Eistori in this country, had not been without
great benefit to the poor, and many Benevolent Societies.
In New Orleans, at the grand bazaar, she recited some pieces
in that immense establishment, and the receipts amounted to
over £2,000. The audience was most select, and Eistori
loaded with applause, had to accept a sumptuous supper, which
was attended by the leading people of the South, headed by the
generals Beauregard and Lee. In New York she gave benefits
in favour of the Asylums, the Italian Schools, the Society of
Destitute Artists, which caused the sweetest memories to follow
her to Europe.
If it were intended to describe the whole of the testimonies
of admiration, that she was the object of in all the cities, it would


fill a volume ; suffice it to saj that President Johnson, finding
himself in Washington on the opening of Congress, sent her
a message, placing at her disposal a man-of-war to visit the
Tomb of Washington on the Potomac, issuing orders to the
Arsenal and Dockyards that they should receive Eistori with a
salute of 31 guns, the same that are fired on the arrival of the
sovereign or representative of any other nation.
Eistori’s performances in the States realized £15,597.
Faithful to her promise, after embracing her parents and
friends, she sailed from Brest on the 31st August, in the steamer
“ Europe this time the voyage was not so prosperous as before,
and she encountered very stormy weather and heavy sea, which
frequently ran with great fury; on one occasion a poor seaman
was washed overboard, and could not be picked up; learning
that his family were left in a state of destitution, Eistori
gave on board some recitations, and afterwards appealed to the
generosity of the passengers, and a collection was made for the
unfortunates; fortunately the illustrious artist Senora de la
Grange was aho a passenger, and assisted Eistori in her charitable
project; the performance produced a brilliant result, and the
sum of £BO was placed in the hands of the ship’s captain, to
be forwarded to the widow of the unfortunate deceased.
She arrived at New York on the 13th September, and com-
menced her 20 performances, in a manner that left nothing
to be desired, and was, in short, perfection. The sensation
caused on the night of the 28th October, by the production of
the great historical drama “Marie Antoniette,” which was
written expressly for her, by the celebrated Paul Giacometi,
was the means of again increasing the number of her performances.
Eeturning to Boston, Philadelphia, Baltimore, and the other
cities visited the previous year, the same receptions were given
her, as in New York.
When on the point of embarking for Cuba, and when all her
luggage had been shipped, news arrived that the cholera was
making fearful havoc in the island; and Eistori again opening


the French Theatre at New York, was greeted with the same
tumultuous applause as previously, and on the receipt of more
favourable news from Havana, she sailed for it on the 24th
January, 1868, purporting to give 20 performances.
The enthusiasm with which she was greeted, however, on the
first night of her performance, Bth February, was so great, that
the Manager, Grau, at once saw that 20 performances would be
quite inadequate to meet the desires of the public, and for 42
nights Eistori drew crowded houses in the immense theatre in
which she played.
On the night of her benefit performance, the doors had to be
opened at 2 o’clock in the afternoon for the admittance of such
as were not ticket-holders ; the audience was so great that the
doors had to be closed, the City Architect declaring that he would
not answer for the galleries standing any additional weight.
The night’s receipts were £1250, and Eistori was also
presented with some splendid brilliants, as well as a crown of
massive gold from the Spanish residents.
Having given a few performances in other parts of the island,
such as Matanzas, Cardenas, Marianopolis, Guanabaco, she re-
turned to Havana, where she gave a benefit for the poor, which
yielded the handsome sum of £7OB, and another as a
farewell one, making the total receipts of these representations
amoimt to no less a sum than £27,000. She left on the morning
of the 25th April, accompanied for a great distance by three
steamers, carrying Military Bands, and crowded with the elite of
Havana, amongst which she left the sweetest memories and
dearest of friends.
On again reaching New York, she gave the same number of
benefits as the year before, adding a farewell one; this last
moyed and excited the public to such a degree, that it caused
them to shed tears. The actress again embarked for Europe oil
the 20th June, 1868, but not without giving some hopes of again
visiting them, it paining her to leave those shores, where she
has perhaps achieved the most brilliant triumphs of her glorious
career.


The applause given her in the United States, was echoed
all over America, and the wealthiest cities rendered homage to
this great actress, and her fame was a household word even in
the Brazils, La Plata, Peru, and the other Eepuhlics of South
America.
The risk of sea voyages, the innumerable, although exaggerated
dangers attending them, had no power over the spirit of Eistori;
Trusting in her guiding star, and imparting courage to the most
timorous, so that her artist companions felt confident, that where
she was, misfortune could not reign, their great wish only being,
to be at her side.
On the 29th May, 1869, she left Lisbon for Eio de Janeiro, wherer
a phenomenon occurred to her. Here fame had been sounded to
such an extent, that the public being so often misled by false
talent, had no faith in it, and put it down as Yankee humbug.
And on her appearance on the boards on the 25th June, in the
character of “ Medea,” she did not receive a single round of
applause, although the immense theatre was filled to overflowing,
the Emperor and his family being present, the performance having
been delayed at his request, he being detained opening a railroad.
Scarcely, however, had the opening stanza passed her lips, when
the whole house was thrilled by her melodious voice. Ten
minutes did not elapse without the enthusiasm, making itself
known in divers ways, and at the finish the applause and excite-
ment were such, that she was called before the curtain quite 30
times. Her triumph was secure, and the enthusiasm kept in-
creasing during the whole of her stay at Eio, where she gave
36 performances. Transformed into the idol of the public,-
feted by the Corps Diplomatic, and the elite of the city, she was
favored in the highest degree by his majesty the Emperor, the
most learned of living Monarchs. Constantly she was called to
Court, where she read Italian poetry. At the conclusion of her
first public performance, their Majesties desired her presence at
their private box to testify their admiration. The British Minister
gave a banquet in her honor, to which was invited all the Corps
Diplomatic; the Minister for Austria, Count Ludolf, gave &


aupeib luncheon in the Zoological Gardens, followed by a ball; and
the Emperor gave a magnificent soiree at Court. There was
nothing left to be desired in the manifestations in her honor.
Poems were declaimed or given during the performances; reci-
tations were dedicated to her, and given at all the theatres :
Serenades, Flowers and Garlands composed and arranged of the
rarest feathers to be found in Brazils, &c., &c.
The most splendid and unexpected demonstration offered her
was on her benefit. She lived in a beautiful village, about 2
miles from the theatre ; the public wishing to accompany her to
her residence, a committee was formed, which hired all the
vehicles in Eio, and had them drawn up in the Great Theatre
Square; they issued tickets, and there was not one vacant seat,
in any of the carriages. On Riston’s coming out of the theatre,
she was loaded with flowers and presents; her carriage was
escorted by ten gentlemen, and a passage was made to her house ;
the streets were crowded, and fully five hundred carriages
followed her, the cortege being headed by a band of music, and
four others were stationed in the principal squares, through which
this retinue had to pass, and advanced as the hour was, (1 a.m.)
all the windows were full of spectators, and coloured Bengal
lights in them illuminated the roads ; thus she proceeded amid
cheers and flowers given her from all sides. On reaching her
house she ascended into the balcony to speak her thanks, and was
received with shouts and huzzas.
The receipts of that night were over £1459, and the
presents received were worth a large sum. They comprised a
bracelet of brilliants and emeralds, presented by the Emperor;
another of pearls and emeralds, from the Empress; a medallion
of opals and brilliants, by her Imperial Highness the Countess
d’Eu ; a bracelet and medallion of gold, encirled with brillants,
representing Art holding out her arm to charity, from the Portu-
guese colonists for whose poor she had given a benefit. A diadem
of brilliants, having in its centre the finest topaz ever seen, be it
for its beauty or size, its weight being 42 carats, from the
Brazilians and Italians.


Before leaving she gave benefits for the Brazilian, Portuguese,
and Italian poor, leaving no less than £2,166 for division
among them.
Accompanied by a vast multitude, who cheered her as she
embarked, and sailed for Buenos Ayres on 24th August, where
further glories and triumphs awaited her.
When it became known in Monte Video, that Eistori was to
land there from the steamer so as to cross the “La Plata,” the
population, in conjunction with the Foreigners, prepared for her
an extraordinary fete; and on her entering the port, all the
English, United States, French, Italian, and Brazilian men-of-war
stationed there saluted with their flags her vessel in passing, she
being also saluted by the officers from on board their vessels.
As soon as the steamer had anchored, she was boarded by the
English, United States, and Brazilian Admirals, who came to
pay their respects ,* at the same time a small steamer came along-
side, fitted up in the most elegant manner, and adorned with
flags of all nations, and on board of which was a band of music,
which played the Eoyal Italian March and Garibaldi’s Hymn.
A deputation came off to her to beg that she would honor
them by landing with them, and partaking of a breakfast at the
Oriental Hotel, which invitation she gratefully accepted and
went, escorted by the launches of all the men-of-war in port.
To describe the ovation she received on landing would be
impossible—it would be necessary to read the reports printed in the
daily journals. The pier was packed with people, and the road
to the hotel strewn with flowers. All the windows were dressed
with Italian flags, and two bands of music, one of which played the
National Anthem and the other Garibaldi’s Hymn, were waiting
for her, and amid applause, cries and cheers, accompanied her to
fhe hotel. It was “ said the Monte Video Press truly a national
festival.”
The banquet was of seventy covers, and there were present,
the principal political notabilities, and the representatives of the
Press; and the toasts were all to the “Actress, the Arts, and
Italy.”


No less splendid was her reception at Buenos Ayres, where
all the Guilds and Orders, accompanied by their banners, followed
her to her hotel. The President of the Republic Senor Sarmiento
went on board to receive her; saluted again by all the shipping,
was received on board a small steamer, which the President and
deputation had prepared to receive her with. She was received
by the public with frantic applause, and was compelled to walk
the whole way to the hotel.
The city was dressed with flags as if for a great national event.
During thirty performances given there, she received all kinds
of manifestations of applause. Often the public awaited her
outside the theatre and accompanied her home, and invaded the
rooms of the hotel to applaud her and see her close by. In the
theatre there was not a seat to be had three days before the per-
formance, and as the best seats had been secured and occupied by
preference for every night, she was compelled to give an ex-
traordinary performance every week, so as to give the general
public an opportunity of hearing her.
Here, as in Rio, she was feted on all sides, and received
flowers, serenades, and presents of immense value, the chief of
which was a crown of brilliants, having in its centre the star of
Italy, presented by the Italian residents.
Here, as elsewhere, the poor were not forgotten. Four per-
formances, dedicated to the benefit of the Italian and Argentine
Benevolent Establishments, most in need, produced some £2500,
and Ristori left Buenos Ayres, accompanied, by a multitude,
saddened at parting from one, who with her gifts of genius had
succeeded in drawing towards her not only the admiration, but
also the greatest and most sincere respect.
Her departure for Europe on the 15th November allowed of
only 12 performances in Monte Video, but they were 12 great
triumphs, yielding 43,000 escudos, being equal to £9,406.
Having to remain three days in Rio, she had to accede to the
repeated requests that were made, to be allowed to hear her once
more; she, therefore, appeared twice again before a public, who


crushed themselves into the vestibule, the body of the theatre
being crammed. The proceeds of the first performance she gave
to the families of the Soldiers who were killed in the war with
Paraguay.
On the 22nd November she sailed for Europe, having received
from 80 performances given in Eio de Janerio, Buenos Ayres, and
Montevideo, £56,125 besides enormously valuable presents of
all kinds; she arrived at Southampton on the 15th December.
The limited space of this biography will only allow of a
small sketch of the wonderful career of this star.
In the meantime, before closing this brief review, we must
notice that Eistori, as ardent a patriot, as she was a sublime
artiste, worked zealously towards the progress and indepen-
dence of Italy. Bound by reciprocal ties of friendship and esteem
with the Count Cavour, who employed her as a secret envoy and
potent co-operator in his labour.
When in 1860 she visited St. Petersburg, this illustrious
Statesman gave her the task of convincing Prince Gortschakoff
of the real sentiments of the Italians, and to shew him the pro-
priety of recognizing their government, to which the Eussian Im-
perial family then seemed opposed, by a certain sympathy they
shewed the reigning house of Naples.
To Eistori’s communications respecting her interviews with
the Prince, and of the state of public feeling in Paris, Count
Cavour replied as follows —(also alluding to the great triumph
she obtained on performing in French the drama “Beatrice” at
the Odeon theatre, which was in Paris written expressly for her
by Ernest Legouve, which had a run in Paris of 67 nights): —
“Turin, 20th April, 1861.
My dear Marchioness,
“ I am very grateful for the very interesting letter you wrote
me from St. Petersburg. If you have not converted the Prince


Gcrtschakoff, he must be an impenitent sinner, for the arguments
you brought to bear on him, with such ability, in favour of our
cause, were to my mind irresistible; and I flatter myself that
the Prince, though not willing to appear in your presence con-
vinced, yet your words have implanted in his heart, a germ that
will develope and bring forth good fruits.
“ Continue in Paris your Patriotism, and amid the sceptical, con-
verting as I am assured you will, those of the populace, who
are hostile to our cause, Papal Prance being more faithful to
Papal representations than those of Princes.
“Although the custom—being opposed to the truth —these
prejudices cannot continue, so that a person like you, possessed of
great persuasive powers, declaring the truth in the midst of society,
would do immense good to our cause.
“ I congratulate you upon the splendid success you havej acquired
upon the French stage. This new triumph will give you an
immense power, and control over the Parisian public, who
should ever worship your genius.
“ Pray use this influence to advance the interests of our country
I heartily recognise you not only as the greatest actress of
Europe, but the most efficient co-operator in this diplomatic
business.
“ With best wishes, believe me,
“Yours devotedly,
“C. Cavour.”
And this letter to our thinking is the most precious gem in
Ristori’s diadem.
Numerous performances given for the benefit of the Gari-
baldians, caused her name to be fervently blessed by hundreds
of widows and orphans, and to the voice of the multitude blessing,
was added that of Garibaldi’s himself, who penned to Ristori the
following emotional and precious lines :
“Italian Volunteer Corps,
“ Commander of the General Barracks,
“Staro, 16th July, 1866.
Most Gentle Lady,
“ I have duly received the letter from Dr. Riboli, acquainting


me with all that you have done for our Volunteers. In their names,
therefore, allow me to offer you such acknowledgments, as can
he felt for an Italian patriot such as you. Glorying both in your
fame as an Artiste and Patriot.
“ Believe me,
“ Yours devotedly,
“G. GARIBALDI.”
Finally desiring to rest after her labours since the early part of
1870, she bade farewell to her companions in Art, who had for
the most part, followed her through her artistic career, and resided
alternately in Rome and Paris, in each place owning a magnificent
palace : moving in the best society, feted and beloved by all.
It fell to wealthy England, just patron of the Arts, to hear the
actress again. The offers made her from that country, being so
splendid that she could not well refuse them, and agreed to give,
30 performances between the 10th of June and the 20th of
August of the current year.
The enthusiasm she awoke was so great, that such and many
were the petitions made her by all the country towns, that she
did not leave England till the 12th of November, having given
90 performances, and refusing contracts, which would still have
prolonged her stay until April, returned to Rome, where her
parents anxiously awaited her, as likewise her friends, the circle
of which she was the idol.
In London, as formerly, she was shewn the greatest distinctions
by the Aristocracy, and by the Ministry, with Mr. Gladstone at its
head, at whose house she also had the honor of being presented,
with her children, to the Prince and Princess of Wales.
The opinions of the most famous critics, in reference to this
last triumphal trip were gathered, and will be published in a
volume as early as possible.
It is therefore a glory to Italy, the name of Adelaide Ristori,
which is echoed in all corners of the Globe, where the Dramatical


and Poetical Arts are honoured with ample reasons; well
may Foreign nations envy Italy this lady. Even France, so con-
scious of its own glories, and oblivious of that of other nations,
having shown herself so, through her poet, Lamartine, as follows :
A ADELAIDE EISTORI.
Toi qu’au tragique Arno la riche France envie,
Tu rends au Grand Toscan plus que tune lui dois
Si Dieu l’a fait poete, il te fit poesie ;
Du timbre de ton c»ur, la scene a fait sa voix.
Dites, vous qui pleurez, lequel est le poete;
De celui qui nota sous son doigt ses accents,
Ou de celle qui prend, sur la page muette,
Ces fantomes sans corps, et leur prete des sens ?
C’est lui, c’est toi. c’est vous ! Yous n’etes pas deux ames.
La gloire en vous nommant, vous doit I’egalite ;
Tu donnes de ton sang aux ombres de ses drames,
Et ce sang t’associe a I’immortalite.
Le drame, est I’instrument oil dort la lettre morte,
C’est en vain qu’il contient tousles accents humains,
II faut, pour que la joie ou la douleur en sorte,
Que le clavier du coeur soit frappe par tes mains.
Le marbre de Memnon sentait, bien qu’il fut pierre ;
Mais son ame, 6 soleil! n’etait que ta chaleur;
Nous pleurons ; mais avant de mouiller la paupiere
Les larmes de nos yeux ont coule de ton coeur,
ALPHONSO^iAMARTINE.
Caxton Steam Machine Printing Office, 156 Pitt-street, Sydney.


