

BIOGRAPHY, LIST OF
ORGAN RECITALS AND
PRESS EXTRACTS
. . . CHEVALIER
Auguste Wiegand
THE BELGIAN ORGANIST
i m
ffISSSf Wr 3i. L tf& '■ ‘ .’’-’’ *'-■' > ■■•'>' V . •
OSWEGO, N. Y., U. S. A.
A>' ■;••• t , -v- ?% .




BIOGRAPHY
AND
LIST of ORGAN RECITALS
GIVEN BY
Auguste Wiegand
THE CELEBRATED AND POPULAR
BELGIAN ORGANIST
From the Year 1878 to the Year 1903.
Chevalier de FOrdre de Leopold (Belgique). Chevalier de FOrdre du Merite.
Officier d'Academie (France). Holder of Three Gold Medals.
Late Professor at the Royal Conservatoire of Liege, Belgium.
Official Organist of the Town Hall, Sydney, N. S. W., Australia, the largest
organ in the world, from JB9I to 1900.
OSWEGO, N. Y.:
TIMES BOOK AND JOB PRINT,




First Prize for the Organ .... Unanimously....
First Prize for the Piano Unanimously ....
Silver Medal for the Organ... .
Gold Medal for the Piano, with the highest
distinction
12th August, 1867
10th August, 1868
nth August, 1868
Ath A nornct iRAn
Gold Medal for the Organ, with the highest
distinction, by acclamation
Uol j J.(JUvJ
5th August, 1868
CHEVALIER AUGUSTE WIEGAND.
/Medallist and late Professor at the Royal Conserva-
toire of Liege, Belgium.
UGUSTE WIEGAND, the late organist of the Sydney
Town Hall, is a native of Belgium, and was born at
<—. Eiege. When he was bnt four years of age, he com-
menced to study sol-fa-ing and the piano-forte. His musical
talent was so great, and his progress so rapid, that he had not
reached the age of seven when he received the appointment of
organist at St. Gilles’ church of his native city. A year later
we find him, in conjunction with his sister, appearing before the
public at a concert, in which he showed his skill on the piano
as well as on the violin. He then turned his steps towards the
Conservatoire of Liege, and after a competitive examination in
the subjects of the piano and sol-fa-ing, he was admitted out of
eighteen competitors. This was in the year 1859, when M.
Daussoigne Mehul was the director of the Conservatoire.
Young Wiegand then devoted himself more particularly to the
organ, having for his tutor Mr. Jules Duguet. Having passed
two years in the special study of the organ, Aug. Wiegand
obtained “primus accessit” for his skill at the organ and at the
age of fifteen his talent in this department was recognized in
a more marked degree by the awarding of second prize. From
that time to the end of his studies his course was simply a
triumphal progress.
First Prize in Harmony, Counterpoint and
Reading at Sight of an Orchestral Score on
the Superior Competitive Examination,. 19th November, 1869
After leaving the Conservatoire he spent his leisure time in
creating a choral society near Liege. This society, after a
year’s study under his direction, won the prize at the Inter-


national Festival at Cologne. In 1870 he was appointed Pro-
fessor-adjoint at the Liege Conservatoire, and followed his
profession there until 1876, when he resigned in order to fill
various engagemonts to play in different parts of Europe. Not
satisfied with his previous successes, he decided to take lessons
from the famous organist, Jacques Limmens, who was the
instructor of Guilmant, Widor, Trillat, Mailly, Tilborgs, Cal-
laerts, &c. Unfortunately, the death of this talented professor
abruptly terminated these lessons. It was at this juncture that
the Belgian government came forward and recognized M.
Wiegand’s genius. This recognition took the form of a bursary,
which was conferred as a mark of national approval. This
permitted M. Wiegand to continue his studies under Mr.
Alphonse Mailly, Professor of the Royal Conservatoire of Brus-
sels, and organist to His Majesty the King of the Belgians.
The Belgian Government followed up its patronage to M.
Wiegand by conferring upon him the much coveted appoint-
ment of Member of the Jury of the organ competitions. These
flattering successes coming in quick succession did not blunt
the energies of M. Wiegand, for we now find him giving a
series of 500 organ recitals, covering a peiiod of twelve years,
in the principal cities of Europe. The 500th recital took place
when M. Wiegand was called to preside at the great organ at
the Albert Hall, London.
This series of uninterrupted successes was productive of others,
and the clever artist had not yet gathered the last of his laurels.
The Municipality of Sydney, having the largest organ in the
world, wished to have an artist worthy of the instrument.
Therefore they looked to the great centers of the musical world
for an organist best fitted to fill this situation, and, on the
advice of the most competent musical authorities, unanimously
selected M. Wiegand out of 105 competitors. As to the im-
mense number of compositions interpreted by this eminent
organist, we owe it to Auguste Wiegand to state that he has
bestowed his attention upon each of the foreign schools of
music which possess organ composers; a very rare proof of per-
fect impartiality and eclectism. To understand, and to make
others appreciate musical compositions so diverse in style and
sentiment, by culling from so complex a list of musical
productions as that which exists in symphony, dramatic music,
choregraphy, morceaux , written for all kinds of instruments,
and to have performed the almost herculean task of transposing


these different productions tor the giant organ of the Sydney
Town Hall, shows an exceptional intelligence and a vigorous
industry.— Musical Standard , February ijth , ipoo.
The French and Belgian Governments have honored Mon-
sieur Aug. Wiegand’s exceptional talents by presenting him
with the following decorations: —
Chevalier de I’Ordre de Leopold (Belgique), May 10th, igoo
Chevalier de I’Order du Merite, August 15th, 1889.
Officer d’Academie (France,) March 24th, 1898.
Monsieur Wiegand has given 409 recitals on the Continent,
Belgium, France, Holland and Germany; 271 in England,
Scotland, Ireland, 1,161 ; in Australia, Sydney, Melbourne,
Brisbane, Adelaide, Ballarat, Goulburn, etc. ; 11 in America,
Oswego, New York; Providence, Brown University; Chicago,
Boston.
Total 1,851 during the period 1878-1903.
Oswego, N. Y., July 14th, 1903


EXTRACTS
Taken from Official Sources in connection with Concerts,
Organ Inaugurations, and Recitals.
BIOGRAPHY AND LIST OF ORGAN RECITALS
GIVEN BY
AUGUSTE WIEGAND
From the year 1878 to the year 1903
EUROPE.
“International Exhibition” 4
1878
Paris
Great Organs by “Cavaille-Coll” and “Stoltz
Charleville, France.
Falisolles, Belgium..
Leuze-Longchamps,.
1879
Parish Church 1
Parish Church 1
Aix-la-Chapelle, Germany
. ‘ ‘Kurhaus’ ’ Concert 1
1880
Grand Organ by “Stathout.”
Brussels, Belgium.
Catholic Society’s Concert 1
Harmonium by “Mustel”
Louvain,
Convent St. Barbe 1
Maestricht, Holland.
Brussels, Belgium
St. Martin’s Church 1
“National Exhibition” 34
Great Organ by “Schyven’
Amsterdam, Holland.
“Palace of Industry”.... 3
Great Organ by “Cavaille-Coll.’
Verviers, Belgium
Haltinne
St. Hubert’s Church... 2
Parish Church 1
Amsterdam, Holland.
Huy, Belgium
“Palace of Industry” (2nd time) 1
“Amateur Society’s” Concert 2
Piano and “Mustel” Harmonium.
Dinant
Priory College Church 2
Rosendael, Holland...
Lodelinsart, Belgium.
Namur
Redemptorist Church 1
Parish Church 1
Notre Dame 2
Parish Church 1
Renaix
London, England
Maestricht, Holland.. ..
Lantremange, Belgium.
Bergilez
Crystal Palace 1
1882
St. Servais Church 2
Parish Church 1
Parish Church 1
Amiens, France...
Breda, Holland,..
Brussels, Belgium.
St. Martin’s Church 2
1883
The Cathedral 3
“Palace of Fine Arts” 2
Great Organ by “Schyven.”
Church of the Holy Sepulchre 2
Mondidier, France.
Antwerp, Belgium.
“Artistic Society’s” Concert. 1
Piano and “Mustel” Harmonium.


1883 Antwerp, Belgium.
“ Antwerp, “
London, England.
London, “
1884
Nymegue, Holland.
Louvain, Belgium..
Antwerp
Waremme
Louvain .
Gertruidenberg, Holland
Bastogne, Belgium.
Graramont, “
Namur,
Antwerp, “
1885
Jemeppe,
Courtrai
Liege,
Antwerp,
1886
Gand, “
Havelange,
Avesnes, France. ~
Tildonck, Belgium.
Haarlem, Holland.
Ostende, Belgium..
Bececq, “
Barrowtord, England.
Eerneghem, Belgium. .
Barrowford, England. .
Brussels, Belgium
“ Maillen,
1888 Ostende,
Glasgow’, Scotland. .
Sprundel, Holland. .
Coquelaer, Belgium.
Roulers, “
Liege,
Mons, “
Bradford, England.
Ostende, Belgium. .
Bradford, England.
Manchester, “
Prestwich, “
Middlesbro’, “
London,
Conde, France
1889
Ostende, Belgium.
Antwerp, “
Bradford, England.
Bridlington, “
Bradford, “
St. Joseph’s Church 1
St. Joseph’s Church, Dec. 25th 1
New Mass by A. Wiegand, performed
with Full Orchestra.
St. Peter’s Italian Church 14
Crystal Palace I
St. Ignatius Church 1
Dominican Church 2
St. James’ Church 3
Parish Church 1
Jesuit Church 1
. Parish Church 2
Seminary Church 1
Josephite Church 1
St. Loup’s Church 1
“Catholic Society’s’’ Concert 1
Piano and “Mustel” Harmonium.
Parish Church ... 1
St. Joseph’s Church 1
St. Walburge’s Church 1
“International Exhibition” 184
Daily Recitals from May to November,
Great Organ daus la salle des fetes.
Church of Our Saviour 1
Parish Church 1
Parish Church 1
Ursuline Convent Church 1
Protestant Cathedral 1
Priory Church 3
Parish Church 1
Congregational Church 2
Parish Church 2
Congregational Church (2nd time) ... 2
“Universal Exhibition” 14
Great Organ by “Schyven.”
Parish Church 1
The “Kursal” (from July to October),. 38
Macleod Church 2
Parish Church 1
Parish Church 1
St. Michael’s Church 1
Jesuit Church 1
St. Stanislaus Church 1
St. Mary’s Church 4
Notre Dame Church 2
St. Mary’s Church (3rd time) 2
Salford Cathedral 1
Parish Church 1
Cathedral 4
Jesuit Church (Farm Street) 1
Parish Church 1
The “Kursal” (from July to October). 49
Notre Dame College 1
St. Mary’s Church 4
Priory Church 5
St. Joseph’s Church 3
7


1889
Sheffield, England.
Albert Hall 3
Great Organ by “Cavaille-Coll”.
Bradford, “
Middlesbrough, “
London, . “
St. Joseph’s Church (2nd time) 2
Cathedral 2
St. Mary’s Church 1
1890
Middlesbrough, “
Sheffield,
Cathedral, Jan. 22nd 1
Albert Hall, Feb. Bth 1
Middlesbrough, “
Sheffield, “
Cathedral, Feb. 19th 1
Albert Hall, March 10th 1
London,
St. Peter’s Italian Church, Hatton
Garden, May 27th, 28th, 29th and
3°th 4
Birmingham,
St. Paul, Lozell’s Road, June 12th and
13th 2
Glossop, “
St. Mary’s Church, June 15th 1
Middlesbrough, “
Bruges, Belgium.
Grammont, “
Cathedral, June 18th 1
Jesuit Church, June 24th 1
Priory Church, June 25th 1
Josephite Church, June 26th 1
Grammont, “
Colwyn Bay, England.
London, “
St. John’s Wesleyan Church, July 4th. 1
St. Barnabas, Pimlico, July 22nd.... 1
Leamington
Parish Church, Two Recitals, after-
noon and evening, July 23rd. ... 2
London,
Redcar,
Halifax,
Crystal Palace, July 24th 1
St. Peter’s Church, July 27th 1
Illingworth Church, July 29th 1
Avelin Parish Church, Aug. 12th.... 1
Lille, France
Priory Church (Six Recitals, after-
noon and evening, August 25th, 26th
and 27th) 6
1890
Bridlington, England.
Hastings,
St. Mary’s Church (Two Recitals) Aug.
28th and 29th 2
St. Mary’s Church (Three Recitals)
Sept, nth, 12th and 13th 3
Hastings,
Middlesbrough,
London,
Cathedral 3
St. Peter’s Italian Church, Oct. 6th.. 1
Lindsdale, Leighton
Buzzard, England
Bradford,
St, Barnabas Church, Oct. 9th 1
St. Mary’s, East Parade, Oct. 13th 1
St. John’s Parish Church, Oct 22nd.. 1
Middlesbrough, “
Birmingham,
Baptist Church, Stafford Road (Two
Recitals), Oct. 28th and 29th 2
Town Hall, Oct. 31st 1
Portsmouth,
Great Organ by “Davison.”
St. Peter’s Italian Church, Nov. 3rd.. 1
London,
London,
Royal Albert Hall (500th Organ Re-
cital), Nov. Bth 1
Great Organ by “Willis,
St. Mary’s, Nov. 10th 1
Bradford,
Sheffield,
Albert Hall, Nov. 15th 1
Birmingham,
Town Hall, Nov. 26th 1
Great Organ by “Hill & Son
St. George’s. Hall, Nov. 25th 1
Bradford,
Lancaster,
St. Peter’s Church (Two Recitals),
Nov. 27th and 28th 2
8


1890
London, England St. Peter’s Italian Church, Dec. 9th.. 1
Parkstone, Dorset, England. St. Peter’s Church, (Two Recitals) Dec.
Bradford, England
Middlesbrough, “
Newcastle,
Enfield.
Glasgow, Scotland.
West Hartlepool
London, England...
Bradford, “
London,
Bradford,
London,
Whitechapel,
Bradford,
Portsmouth,
Parkstone, Dorset,
England
Whitehaven,
Cumberland,
Portsmouth,
London, “
Paignton, Devon,
Blackheath,
London
Armley, near
Leeds,
Bradford,
Bournemouth, “
Portsmouth,
“ Whitehaven, “
“ Bradford,
(( r ootr .: M n
Leamington,
Barrowford,
London,
10th and 1 ith 2
St. Mary’s Church, Dec. 15th ... .... 1
Cathedral, Dec. 17th 1
Town Hall, Dec. 20th 1
Christ Church, Dec. 23rd 1
Parish Church ... 1
St. Peter’s Italian Church, Jan. sth. .. 1
St, Mary’s, Jan, 12th and 13th 2
St. Peter’s, Feb. 2nd 1
St. Mary’s, Feb. 16th 1
St. Peter’s, March 2nd 1
St. Jude’s, March sth 1
St, Mary’s, March 9th 1
Town Hall, March 9th and nth 2
St. Peter’s, March 13th and 14th 2
Parish Church, March 18th and 19th.. 2
Town Hall, April 2nd 1
St. Peter’s Italian Church, April 6th. . 1
Christ Church, April 9th 2
Congregational Church, April 10th. .. 1
April 13th and 14th 2
St. Mary’s, April 15th 2
St. Paul’s Church, April 17th 2
Town Hall, April 18th 1
Parish Church, April 20th 2
St. Mary’s, April 21st 2
Parish Church, April 22nd 2
April 25th and 26th 3
St. Peter’s Italian Church, April 27th
and 28th 2
Recitals given in Europe 554
AUSTRALIA.
1891-92 Sydney..
1891 Melbourne
1892 Newcastle
“ Annandale
“ Goulburn.
** Adelaide.,
“ Sydney.. ,
Newcastle
“ Sydney ..
4 ‘ Sydney...
44 Bathurst .
Town Hall 156
Town Hall 3
St, Andrew’s Presbyterian Church,
June 7th 1
Presbyterian Church 2
Cathedral, R. C 1
Town Hall, July 22nd, 23rd, 27th, 28th,
and 29th 5
St. Patrick’s Church, Aug. 4th 1
Sept. 22nd (2nd time) 1
University, Sept. 30th 1
St. Benedict’s Church, Sept 2
Wesleyan Church, Oct. 22d and 23rd.. 2
9


1892 Annandale
Presbyterian Church (2d time), Oct.
31st and Nov. 3rd 2
“ Sydney.
1893 Brisbane
Y. M. C. A. Hall, Nov. 2nd 1
Exhibition, Feb 5
Great Organ by “Willis,” London
Total 737
1892- Sydney.
1893- Sydney.
1894- Sydney.
1 895- Sydney.
1894 Brisbane .
1895 Brisbane .
1896 Sydney...
Town Hall 104
Town Hall 105
Town Hall 103.
Town Ha 11... 85
Exhibition 5
Wesleyan Church 4
St. Benedict Church 1
Sydney
St. Patrick’s Church 2
“ Newcastle
Presbyterian Church 1
Adelaide
Town Hall 3
Melbourne
Town Hall 2
“ Sydney.
University 1
1895 Goulburn
Cathedral 1
1896 West Maitland.
Wesleyan Church 1
Parramatta
Wesleyan Church, March 23rd 1
EUROPE.
Bradford, Yorkshire,
St. Mary’s Church, East Parade, Oct.
12th, 13th, 14th, 26th, 27th, 28th.. 6
England
Barrowford,
Portsmouth,
Glossop,
Oct. 24th and 25th 3,
Town Hall, Oct. 17th 1
St. Mary’s Church, Oct. 20th 1
Huddersfield,
London,
Highfield Chapel, Oct. 29th 1
Queen’s Hall, Oct. 9th 1
Sheffield,
Albert Hall, Oct. 4th, nth, and iSth.. 3,
Grand Organ by “Cavaille-Coll.” Paris.
Bridlington
Liverpool,
Oct. 19th (afternoon and evening).... 2
St. George’s Hall, Oct. 31st 1
AUSTRALIA
1897
Sydney
Town Hall ... 104
Melbourne
Ballarat ..
Town Hall 3.
Wesleyan Church 1
1898
Sydney.
Town Hall 104
Melbourne, St. Kilda.
Melbourne, City
Town Hall 2
Town Hall 3,
Goulburn .
Melbourne
Melbourne.
R. C. Cathedral, June 1
Town Hall, May 3.
Town Hall, June 2
Newtown, N. S. W.
Sydney
Presbyterian Church 1
1899
Town Hall . 104
Sydney.
Sydney.
Baptist Church, Bathurst Street 1
Town Hall (Newbury Pop. Concerts).. 52
Brisbane, Queensland.
Melbourne
Exhibition Building, Dec 3.
Town Hall 2
Armidale, N. S. W.
Roman Catholic Cathedral 2
1900
Opening of Organ, February 9th.
Sydney.
Town Hall, Jan. to July Ist 52


Sydney.
Town Hall 108
1900
Organ Recitals given in the Town Hall,
Sydney, on the occasion of Mayoress’s
At Homes, and private Organ. Recitals
given for special visitors, from 1891
to 1900.
Wesleyan Church, Waverley, June 1.. 1
Sydney.
Sydney.
Sydney.
German Church 1
Presbyterian Church, Annandale 1
The last three Organ Recitals were given
by M. A. Wiegand for the poor of
these three parishes.
Sydney
St. Patrick’s Church, June sth 1
Organ Recital and the Oratorio. “The
hast Seven Words of Christ,” by The-
odore Dubois. First Time in Austra-
lia.
Presbyterian Church,Glebe Road, July. 1
Sydney.
Bathurst, N. S. W..
Newcastle, N. S. W
Sydney
Wesleyan Church, July 1
Presbyterian Church, June 29th 1
Town Hall, Farew’ell Concerts, July.. 4
EUROPE.
Sheffield, England.
Bradford.
Albert Hall, September Bth 1
1900
St. Mary’s Church, Sept. 9th 2
Bridlington.
Sheffield .. .
St. Mary’s Priory Church, Sept. 13th, 2
Albert Hall, Sept. 29th 1
Philharmonic, Oct. 29th and Nov. Ist.. 2
Cologne, Germany.
Sheffield, England,
London, “
Albert Hall, Nov. 17th 1
Queen’s Hall, November 1
Portsmouth,
Town Hall, December Bth 1
Dublin, Ireland.
Pro-Cathedral, December 27th and
28th 2
Dublin,
Dublin,
Pro-Cathedral, January Ist 1
Pro-Cathedral, March 17th, 18th, 23rd,
and 24th 4
London
London
St. Peter’s Italian Church, June 10th.. 1
St. John the Baptist, Kensington, July
19th 1
Bridlington
London
Priory Church, August 19th 2
Congregational Church, Harrow Road,
October 13 2
Willesden
Belvedere.
Presbyterian Church, October 16th. .. 1
Craighead Private Music Room, Oct.
18th 1
Stockton-on-Tees ..
Glasgow Exhibition
Parish Church, October 25th 2
Six Recitals, October 28th, 29th, 30th,
31st, Nov. Ist and 2nd 6
Glasgow.
Queen’s Hall, Positive Organ, Oct.
28th, 29th, 30th, and 31st 4
Edinburgh.
St. Cuthbert’s Hall, Positive Organ,
November 2nd 1
London.
Ilford Congregational Church, No-
vember 6th 1
London.
London.
Paddington Chapel, Nov. 7th 1
Sutton, Surrey, St. Nicholas Church,
November 13th 1
Maryport.
Holy Trinity Church (Baptist) Novem-
ber 20th 1


igoi
London.
Carmelites Church, St. Cecilia Day,
November 22nd 1
Salford.
Glossop
London.
Manchester, Nov. 30th 1
St. Mary’s Church, Dec. Ist 1
Mr. A. Monk’s Factory, Halloway,
December 10th 1
Bedford.
Halifax.
Wesleyan Church, Dec. 16th 1
Victoria Hall, December 22nd 1
Manchester
Lutton
Free Trade Hall, December 25th 3
1902
Primitive Methodist Church, January
15th 1
Brockley
London,.
St. Cyprius Church, January 16th 1
Ilford Congregational Church, Febru-
ary sth 1
Sheffield
London.
Albert Hall, February 15th 1
Congregational Church, Harrow Road,
March sth 1
London.
M. A., Gern Factory, Dover College
Organ 3
Salford.
Manchester Royal Technical Institute,
March Ist 1
Halifax.
London.
Victoria Hall, March 2nd 1
Private Recital, Paddington Chapel,
March 7th 1
Bristol.
Clifton Victoria Room, March Bth 1
Grand Organ by Norman and Beard, 4
manuels electric.
Sheffield.
Albert Hall, March 15th 1
Grand Organ 4 manuals Cavaille-Coll.
Victoria Hall, March 28 and 29 3
1902
Clifton
Halifax
..Victoria Hall, May 10 2
Halifax
Victoria Hall, May 12 1
Worthing
Halifax .
St. Andrew’s Church, May 14 2
Victoria Hall, May 17 1
Ash Vale.
Halifax ..
St. Peter’s Church, July 16 2
Victoria Hall, August 16 1
Worthing..
Bridlington
London....
St. Andrews Church, August 20 2
Priory Church, September 11 2
Congregational Church, Harrow Road,
September 13 1
St. Andrew’s Church, September 17.. 2
Worthing.
London, Brockley.
Haddersfield
St. Cyprian’s Church, September 18.. 2
Town Hall, opening of the new Organ,
September 20 1
Halifax.
London.
Victoria Hall, September 21 2
Highbury Vale Park N. St. John’s
Church, September 29 1
Factory of Mr. Alphonse Notterman,
organ for St. Michael’s, Adelaide,
Australia, October 1, 2 and 11 3
London.
Congregational Church, Harrow Road,
October 13 1
London.
Frith
Baptist Church, opening new organ,
October 16 1


Crough End Port Chapel, November 5. 1
London.
London.
1902
Ilford Congregational Church, Novem-
ber 6 1
Town Hall, November 12 1
Bolton.
Albert Hall, November 13, 14, 15. .. . 3
Sheffield.
London .
Congregational Church, Harrow Road,
November 17 1
East Hill, Wandsworth,
London
.Congregational Church, November 24. 1
St. Mary’s, Paddington Green, De-
cember 15 1
London
.St. Nicholas’ Church, December 18... 1
London, Sutton, Surrey..
AMERICA
Oswego, New York,
1903
America,
.St. Paul’s, February 19 1
St, Paul’s, St. Patrick’s Day,*March 17. 1
Oswego
Oswego,
Oswego
Oswego
St. Paul's, April 23 1
First Presbyterian Church, May 1
St. Paul’s, Mav 28 1
Providence, R. I.
Brown University, opening of the
large new organ near Boston,
America, June 16 and 17 2
St. Paul’s, June 29 1
Oswego.
Brown University, July 1 and 3
Providence, R. I.
Total.- 1851


TESTIMONIALS.
Mr. Auguste Wiegand aprSs avoir obtenu toutes les premieres distinctions
au Conservatoire Royal de Liege, a pris des lecons de perfectionnement sous
ma direction. Organiste de tout premier ordre , M. Wiegand fera le plus
grand honneur a I’emploi qu’on voudra lui confier. II a £te nommg Chevalier
de VOrdre de Leopold en recompense des services rendus 6 I’enseignement au
Conservatoire Royal de Liege,
Alphonse Mailly,
Premier Organiste du Roi,
Professeur du Conservatoire Royal de Bruxelles.
Bruxelles, 27 Juin, 1902.
Universal Exhibition, Glasgow, Scotland, 1901 :—Commemorative Diploma
awarded to Chevalier Auguste Wiegand, Organist in London.
Signed by the President, Chairman of Executive Council and the General
Manager.
Glasgow, November 15th, 1901.
MUNICIPAL COUNCIL OF SYDNEY, TOWN CLERK’S OFFICE.
Sydney, July Ist, 1900.
Chevalier Wiegand , Sydney :
Dear Sir . —On the occasion of your severing your connection with the
Corporation as City Organist, I am desired by the Right Worshipful the
Mayor, Aldermen, Sir Matthew Harris, M. P., to express the appreciation of
the Council at the way in which you have performed your duties for the nine
years you have held the position of City Organist.
On no occasion during that long period have you ever missed a recital, nor
have you ever been a minute late.
That you brought great ability to the performance of your duties goes with-
out saying, for your fame as one of the world’s greatest Organists is known
evervwhere.
On behalf of the staff also, I express to you warm regards, and a sincere
hope that happiness and prosperity may hereafter attend you and yours.
I am, dear sir,
Yours faithfully,
Robt. M. M. E. Anderson,
Town Clerk.
MUNICIPAL COUNCIL OF SYDNEY, TOWN CLERK’S OFFICE,
q Sydney, June 14th, 1900.
£ To whom this may come :
O This is to certify that the bearer, Monsieur August Wiegand (whose
jT signature appears in the margin) is the Organist of the City of Sydney.
He has held the position for a period of nine years, and is now trav-
% eliing in Europe and America on leave of absence, and any attention
§ shown him will be accepted as complimentary to this city.
Sir Matthew Harris,
Mayor of Sydney and Chief Magistrate.
[seal.] Robt. M. M. E. Anderson,
Town Clerk of Sydney.


Brussels, Jan. 21st, 1886.
M. Alphonse Mailly, the organist to the King of the Belgians, and pro-
fessor of the organ at the Brussels Royal Conservatoire, certifies that M.
Auguste Wiegand has had, under his own direction, an excellent education.
He considers M. Wiegand as a virtuoso of the very first rank.
Alphonse Mailly.
ST. PATRICK’S CHURCH, SYDNEY.
17 Cumberland Street, Sydney,
September 20, 1900.
Monsieur Auguste Wiegand has been our Organist and Choir Master for a
period of ten years. Of his talent as an organist I shall not speak, for he is
universally known as one of the best organists in the world. But for his reg-
ularity in attending to his duty and his willingness to help he cannot be sur-
passed and his departure is a source of regret to the parish and city.
Le Rennetel
Rector of St. Patrick’s Church.
A. Aubry,
Provincial of the Society of Marists for Australia and the Islands.
UNIVERSAL EXHIBITION, ANTWERP, BELGIUM, 1885.
Antwerp, nth January, 1886.
The Executive Committee of the Antwerp Universal Exhibition certify
that Monsieur Wiegand, of Antwerp, an Organist of first rank, has given,
during the whole duration of the Exhibition, magnificent organ recitals in the
large Festival Hall. These recitals have brought together, without intermis-
sion, crowds who have applauded both the artist and the talented composer.
The Executive Council is glad to give evidence to their sentiments of
admiration to M. Auguste Wiegand.
P'or the Executive Committee,
Victor Lynen, President.
Lepold De Wael, Bourgmestre.
FRANCE.
ORGAN CONCERT HELD AT CHAMP DE MARS, PARIS EXHIBITION,
1878.
A. Wiegand has given us, here in Paris, specimens of his brilliant playing,
and he has charmed his audiences, as, indeed, he does everywhere when he
displays his rare skill. He is like one who scatters about him seeds bursting
forth into beautiful flowers. But the full harvest is not always reaped by his
hearers. He has now gathered up the palms of victory which an audience,
roused to a pitch of the utmost enthusiasm, has lavished upon him. He is
indeed a charmer whom Belgium has lent us for a time. —Le Figaro , Oct. 2nd,
1878.
M. Wiegand a seme ici les fleurs, comme partout ou il deploie la richesse
de son jeu, et il a en revanche recueilh les palmes que luLprodiguait un audi-
toire soulevd par I’enthousiasme ; c’est un charmeur que la Belgique nous a
prete. Son nom est deja bien connu. S°n jeu est surprenant, ce qui par
dessus tout erapoigne I’ame dans les diverses executions de ce grand virtuose,
c’est I’expression, c’est le sentiment profond qu’il communique k tous ceux
qui ont la bonne fortune de I’entendre. —Le Figaro , 2 Octobre, 1878.


GERMANY.
CONCERT HELD AT AIX-LA-CHAPELLE — 40th ANNIVERSARY OF
THE “CONCORDIA.”
The Hall of the Kurhaus was crowded last night. Many foreign dilet-
tanti attended this festival. We recognize in Mons. Wiegand an eminent
master, whose execution is without parallel. This perfect virtuoso possesses
a taste of great delicacy in his employment of the registers.— Aochener An-
zeiger, 23rd November, 1879.
La salle du Kurhaus dtait bondee hier soir. Un grand nombre de dilet-
tanti etrangers assistaient a cette fete. Nous avons fait eu M. Wiegand la
cannaissance d’un maitre eminent. A une technique sans exemple, le parfait
virtuose joint un gout d£licat daus I’emploi des registres.— Aachener An-
zieger, 23 Novembre, 1879.
BELGIUM.
NATIONAL EXHIBITION, BRUSSELS.
Amongst the popular organists, we must observe Mons. Wiegand, who
terms himself a pupil of Mons. Mailly, but who is already a consummate
master of his art. In our opinion, Mons. Wiegand has a supple talent, which
serves him equally as well in the difficulties of the fugue as in the improviza-
tion.—La Meuse , Aug. 7th, 1880.
Parmi les organistes qui tiennent I’orgue tousles; jours, nous avons re-
marqu6 M, Wiegand, qui se dit Sieve de M. Mailly, mais qui est dSja un
maitre consommS ! D’aprSs nous M. Wiegand ale grand merite d’avoir un
talent souple qui se joue aussi bien des de la fugue, que des im-
prevus d’une improvisation.— La Meuse , 7 Aout, 1880.
EXPOSITION DE BRUXELLES. 1880.
L’orgue et les organistes qui restent sisouvent effaces dans les solennites de
Part, occupent a I’Exposition nationale une premiere place d’honneur. MM.
Pierre Schyven et C ie , ont ose construire a leurs risques, un orgue monument
et ils ont convid les principaux organistes du pays et de I’Stranger a partager
leur succes artistique. Parmi ces virtuoses, nous comptoms I’excellent
organiste M. Wiegand. Notre compatriote joue chaque mercredi un pro-
gramme aussi savant que varie; il iutercale, mais avec discretion, quelques
morceaux d’ailleurs excellents de sa composition, laissant la meilleure place
aux grands maitres. La stance du mercredi, 4 aout, a dtd particuliSrement
interessante. Sans accabler son public d’uue sdrie de morceaux tres-classiques,
mais parfois indigestes, M. Wiegand a su, en variant habilement ses timbres,
se faire ecouter aussi bien dans les morceaux d’un caractere severe que dans
ceux d’une melodic tranch£e. — Gazette de Lihge , du 7 Aout 1880.
La section musicale du Cercle a donnd jeudi &la salle Marugg, avec le
concours de M. Wiegand, organisie un beau concert spirituel. On y a en-
tendu divers morceau pour choeurs et orchestre.
Quant a M. Wiegand, il a obtenu les houneurs du rappel par la
et le fini de son jeu dans l’ex£cution d’une toccate et fugue de Bach et de trois
morceaux de genre composes par M. Mailly. L’auteur, present au concert, a
recu, de I’auditorire enchantd une ovation bien m6rit6e.— Courier de
Bruxelles , Le 30 Mars, 1880.
HOLLAND.
Nous lisons dans le Courier de la Mense , journal neerlandais
dimanche, 9 de ce mois, une veritable aubaine- artistique pour tous


ceux qui se sont donnd la peine braver le mauvais temps en allant A I’dglise
de Wyck entendre I’essai des nouvelles orgues car on n’a pas chaque jour la
chance d’entendre un artiste comme celui qui tenait les claviers ce jour lA.
M. Wiegand, Imminent organiste, a fait valoir toutes les beautds de ce
magnifique instrument.—April, 1880.
L’dcole d’orgue Alphonse Mailly, vient d’obtenir un nouveau succds. Un
de ses disciples, M. Auguste Wiegand, s’est fait entendre au dernier concert
de musique classique du Palais de I’lndustrie, a Amsterdam. Les journaux
Hollandais sont unanimes pour constater le grand succds de M. Wiegand, et
les ovations dont il a dtd I’objet aprds I’exdcution d’une fugue de J. S. Bach,
d’une senate d’Alphonse Mailly et d’une marche de sa composition.— Courrier
de Bruxelles , le, 25 Mars, 1880.
CONCERT HELD AT THE PALACE OF INDUSTRY, AMSTERDAM.
M. Wiegand, whose renown deserves to be spread to all parts, has shown
himself in this case an artist without equal, not only in the sentiment intro-
duced in the interpretation of his brilliant repertoire, but also in the marvel
lous dexterity of manipulation of which he possesses the secret,—Anister-
damsche Courant, nth September, 1880.
M. Wiegand dont le renom tend A juste titre A s’accroitre partout, s’est
montrd en cette circonstance un artiste hors ligne, non seulement par le sen-
timent qu’il a su mettre dans I’interprdtation de son brilliant repertoire, mais
encore par le mdcanisme merveilleusement subtil dont il possdde le secret.—
Amsterdamsche Courant , n September, 1880.
EGLISE (?OLLEGIALE, DINANT, BELGIQUE.
La foule d’dlite qui remplissait jeudi soir notre vaste dglise primaire n’a
pas dtd, nous le pensons, ddQu dans son attente. Le concert d’orgue, grace A
M. Auguste Wiegand. est devenue pour les dilettanti un ddlicieux rdgal.
Impossible de donner ici une appreciation complete du talent de M. Wiegand,
des morceaux du riche programme si bien execute par lui.— L’ Union de
Dinant , 24 Juillet, 1881.
ENGLAND,
LONDON CRYSTAL PALACE.
Mons. Wiegand, a distinguished pupil of Mr, Mailly, has just given a
recital on the Crystal Palace Organ, at London. The artist performed with a
remarkable facility a varied programme, including a brilliant march of his
own composition.— Musical Standard , 16th September, 18S2.
M. Wiegand, un dldve distingue de Mailly vient de douner une seance sur
les orgues du Crystal Palace de Londres. L’artiste a joud avec une habiletd
remarquable un programme varid renfermant une belle marche de sa composi-
tion.—Musical Standard , 16 Septembre, 1882.
LE CONGRES DE SAINT-GREGOIRE.
Les edrdmonies et les fetes dont Maestricht a dtd hier le theatre a I’occa-
sion de la presence parmi nous des metnbres du Congrds de Saint-Grdgoire,
ont obtenu un succds au-dela de toute attente.
Une foule de musiciens, d’archdologues et d’araateurs, venus de la Hol-
de la Belgique et de I’Allemagne, avaient rdpondu a I’appel du comite


M. Wiegand est un organiste dont la juste reputation a 6t6 consacree
surtout en Belgique, en Hollande et en Angletterre. II a dtudid consciencieuse-
ment les maitres de diverses dcoles et possede un riche repertoire. Son style
est tour a tour brillant et sdvere ; sa virtcositd £gale celle des maitres du jour.
D£s le premier morceau du programme, I’artiste saisit I’auditoire par la
grandeur magistrale avec laquelle il rend la senate No 6de Mendelssohn. A
cette entree en matiere succMe toute une sdrie de pieces de differents caractSres,
on tousles genres de charmes ont dtd rdunis, soit par le plus heureux choix
dans les associations de sonoritds, soit par la grace de la mdlodie, soit enfin par
les richesses de I’harmonie et de la modulation, li faut avoir entendu ces mor-
ceaux dyiicieux pour comprendre jusqu’ou vont les impressions que I’orgue
pent produird sous la main d’un Eminent artiste —Courrier du Linibourg
Hollandais , 18 Septembre. 1882.
INAUGURATION OF THE ORGAN OF BREDA CATHEDRAL,
HOLLAND.
The program furnished Mons. Wiegand, an artist ot rare talent, the
opportunity of exhibiting the powerfulness of his manipulation. The eminent
organist, in his execution of the great works of the old masters, shows his
great superiority even to the most critical. —Nienwe Bredasche Oosterhoutsche
Courant , 4th October, 1883.
INAUGURATION DE L’ORGUE DE LA CATHEDRALE DE BREDA,
HOLLAND.
Le programme a fourrni a M. Wiegand, virtuose d’un rare talent, I’occa-
sion de faire apprdcier la richesse de la registration. L’dminent organiste
dans I’execution des ckefs d’oeuvre des anciens maitres a montre son baton de
marechal aux classiquss les plus intransigeants. —Nienwe Bredasche Ooster-
houtsche Courant , 4 October, ISB3.
INAUGURATION OF THE ORGAN AT SAINT SULPICE CHURCH,
MONDIDIER, FRANCE.
We confess that we are absolutely incapable of adequately appreciating
Mons. Wiegand as we ought to do. His playing varies infinitely ;he multiplies
the different shades of expression, with an exquisite refinement ; he seizes the
auditor, he charmes, he magnetizes, he entrances, he seduces him. —Le Prop-
agateur Picard, 16th December, 1883.
HOLLAND.
(Traduction).
La belle cathedrale de Brdda deja si riche eu ornements du culte, attend-
ait encore un orgue.
L’audition du mardi 2 Octobre a ddmontrd d’une manure dclante aux
connaisseurs et aux amateurs, les multiples beautds de I’instrument.
Le programme, contenant, en grande parlie des compositions de I’dcole
d’orgue moderne, a fourni a M. Wiegand, virtuose d’un rare talent.
L’eminent organiste, dans I’executions demaints chefs-d’oeuvre des
anciens maitres, tels que Mendelssohn, Bach, Haydn, et surtout dans la
superiority avec laquelle il a enlevd la fameuse Passacaglia de Sebastien Bach,
a, nous aimons a, le dire, montrd son baton de marechal aux classiques les
plus intransigeants. —Nieuwe Bredasche Oosterhoutsche Courant , 4 October,
1883.


LE CONCERT DU CERCLE, ANVERS.
La section nmsicale du Cercle astistique a donn(s son concert lundi dernier
dans la grande salle du local qui etait bondee de monde.
Le programme etait aussi vari6 qu’attrayant.
Divers autres elements venaient concourir a I’attrait de ce concert. C’est
d’abord M. Wiegand avec son puissant talent d’organiste, dont on apu apprecier,
autant que le permet un excellent harmonium Miistel, le jeu clair et correct
ou le brillant et la puissance se le deputent a la delicatesse. Son style est
essentiellement classique. —Le Courrier de la Sernained' Anvers, Samedi, 22
Decembre, 1883.
FRANCE.
MONDIDIER, PAROISSE SAINT-SfiPULCRE.
INAUGURATION DE I/ORGUE DU CHCEUR ET DU GRAND ORGUE DE EA TRIBUNE.
L'Escaut a reproduit cet article le 24 Decembre, 18S3.
L’a Journ6e du mardi, 11 Decembre, 1883, doit etre inscrite dans les
nanales de la cite Mondidienne parmi les plus heureuses et les plus emues.
L’inauguration des deux orgues a eu lieu Mardi 11 Decembre.
M. Wiegand que les journaux ont si soiivent de'ja lou6 tant en Belgique
qu’en Hollande et en France (a Moreuil) nous declarons absolument
incapable de Papprecier comme il conviendrait. Sur Porgue, cet artiste est
tout a fait dans son element. Toutes les ressources de cet instrument lui sont
connues. Variant son jeu a Pinfini, multipliant les nuances avec un tact
exquis, il saisit I’auditeur, le charme, le magnetise, le seduit. Sous Pinspira-
tion des grands maitres qui lui sont familiers, il devient prestidigateur avec S,
Bach, majestueux et grave avec Mendelssohn et Batiste, PoStique comme la
lyre avec Guilmant, doux, caressant, expressif, passionne avec Schubert,
religieux, d’une naivete ang6lique et divine avec la Carita de Rossini et ses
delicieux Noels. Nous comprenons que Porgue fut donn6 a Peminent artiste
charge d’en faire valoir toutes les ressources et les qualit6s superieures, M.
Auguste Wiegand, organiste au chateau de Moreuil, France, de la Marquise
Du Plessi de Belliere.
PALAIS DES BEAUX ARTS, BRUSSELS, BELGIQUE.
Mons. Wiegand is an artist of great merit, whose style and virtuosite
cannot be too much praised He is permeated with the best traditions of the
great masters. His style, which is sober and correct or sentimental, accord-
ing to his subject, produced a great impression on the audience, who recalled
him after each number. —Etoile Beige , 18 Janvier, 1884.
ANVERS, BELGIQUE.
ARTS, SCIENCES ET LETTRES.
Inauguration de Porgue de St. Jacques a Anvers. —Jeudi passe a
6te inaugurd le nouvel orgue a P6glise Saint Jacques de notre ville. Disons
tout de suite que ceux qui ont assists a la stance de jeudi seront de notre avis
M. Wiegand a d6ploy6 toutes les richesses de Pinstrument. M. Wiegand est
un organiste d’un merite transcendant et nous sommes heureux de pouvoir le
feliciter de son admirable talent.— L'Escaut, 5 Novembre, ISB4.
OPENING OF THE ORGAN OF THE ST. PETER’S ITALIAN CHURCH,
HALTON GARDEN, LONDON, ENGLAND.
The new organ has been inaugurated before a numerous attendance,
mostly composed of reputed artists, by Mons. Wiegand, the well known


organist. Even the most expert acknowledge that this is a new title to the
glory of the eminent artist.— The Daily Chronicle , Bth April, 1884.
Le nouvel orgne a 6i6 inaugurd, devant un public d’artistes distinguds,
par Porganiste bien connu M. Wiegand. L’artistes aeu un fort grand succbs,
de I’avis de tousles critiques.— The Daily Chronicle , Avril 18, 1884.
We think it right to say it is delightful to hear a virtuoso like Mons.
Wiegand, who is really master of his instrument. —Holborn Guardian , 25th
April, 1884.
Nous devons dire qu’il est delicieux d’entendre un artiste comme M.
Wiegand, et qui est rdellemeut maitre de son instrument. —Holborn Guardian ,
25th Avirl, 1884.
ENGLAND.
ARTS, SCIENCES ET LETTRES.
Nous lisons dans le Daily Telegraph , le Daily Chronicle et le Holborn
Guardian que les 10 concerts d’inauguration des grandes orgues A 4 claviers
de Pdglise Saint-Pierre Italienne A Hatton-Garden k Londres ont dte donnds
par M. Auguste Wiegand, organiste a Anvers, avec un grand succSs.
Les programmes de ces stances etaient composees de pieces de Handel,
Haydn, Mendelssohn, Mozart, Bach, Beethoven, Chopin, Schubert, Gounod,
Meyerbeer et Wiegand. Nous devons dire que comme executant M. Wiegand
est rdcellement admirable il est entidrement maitre de son instrument.
M. Wiegand a eu dgalement I’honneur d’ouvrir la sdrie des concerts
d’orgues au Cristal Palace mercerdi dernier, premier jour de I’Exposition
universelle. Nous apprenons egalement que M. Wiegand vient d’etre
redemandd psur donner une nouvelle sdrie de concerts k partir d’aujourd’hui
5 Mai.— L'Escaut , Lundi, 5 Mai, 1884.
MAESTRICH, HOLLAND.
La journde du 9 courant a ete pour les amateurs de musique nimgduois une
vraie jouissance ; elle a ajoute une nouvelle gloire a la maison Pereboom &
Leyser de Maestricht, comme elle a ete un triomphe pour M. Aug, Wiegand,
le celdbre organiste beige. Le jeu admirable de Partiste Beige ci-dessus
nomme, dont la reputation europdenne a fait echo au-delA des mers.
Les deux seances donnees par Imminent artiste Beige nous ont fourni
Poccasion de reconnaitre les beautes et les perfections de Pinstrument.
Mais que dire du jeu du virtuose? C’est ici que nous eprouvons, il nous
faut Pavouer, un bien grand embarras, ne trouvant pas assez de mots pour
exprimer les sentiments qui se sont empards de nous tout le long de ces deux
stances a jamais memorables, ni assez d’6loges pour celui qui nous a procurd
une aussi rare jouissance. D’abord, ce dont nous .avons ete stupdfait c’est
Paplomb, Pentrain, la justesse et le fini avec lesquels il envele la Sonata n c 6
de Mendelssohn, la Senate n° 1 de Mailly, la Marche funebre et Chant sera-
phique de Guilmant et surtout la Fugue de J. S. Bach en re majeur, ainsi que la
Toccate et P'ugue en re mineur du meme auteur. Ici vraiment il a fait briller
son grand talent dans tout sa splendeur ! Ce qui est dtonnant par dessus tout,
c’est que M. Wiegand, nonobstant les immenses difficnltds dont ces morceaux
sont herissds, surtout quand ils sont executes dans un mouvement aussi rapide,
trouve encore moyen de donner tant de couleur, de vie et de charme aux com-
positions des grands maitres classiques par les riches variations de ses accou-
plements et de ses claviers, disposant toujours en maitre des inepuisables


ressources de son instrument. Avons nous eu du bonheur a reconnattre en
M. Wiegand un virtuose qui sait interpreter les oeuvres des grands maitres
d’une manifere qui les aurait enchantes eux-memes ! De Maasbode, 22 Juni,
1884.
REPRODUIT DE L’ETOILE.
Les concerts d’orgue que nous annoncions, ont commence, samedi apr6s_
midi, dans la salle du Palais des Beaux-Arts.
M. Auguste Wiegand a execute une serie de huit morceaux choisis dans le
repertoire classique et aussi dans les productions modernes.
M. Wiegand est un artiste de grand m6rite dont on ne saurait assez loner
le style et la virtuosite'. II s’est penetre des bonnes traditions des maitres
organistes. Son jeu sobre et correct, puissant ou sentimental a produit une
grande impression sur les auditeurs qui Pont applaudi apr£s chaque morceau.
— L'Escaut, Mardi, 29 Janvier, 1884.
INAUGURATION DES ORGUES DE L’EGLISE ST. SAUVEUR A GAND.
Un bon artiste et un instrument de valeur sont les qualites requises pour
P inauguration brillante d’un nouvel orgue. Les orgues ont ct 6 jouees bier
pour la premiere fois par M. Wiegand, organiste Beige, devant un auditoire
aussi nombreux que distingue.
Pendant deux heures, M. Wiegand a passe en revue, avec un remarquable
talent d’execution, les diverses combinaisons de registres dont un instrument
de cette importance est susceptible.
FRANCE.
Le Mercredi 11 Novembre, Pimportante paroisse de Montigny (Oise-France)
6tait en fete a Poccasion de Pinanguration de Porgue de la tribune.
MM. Wiegand, le celebre organiste Beige, Pabbe Geispits, maitre de
chappelle de N.-D. de Paris, et Pabbe de Maindreville de Compi£gne, on fait
ressortir avec le talent qui leur conviennent Pexacte distinction des timbres
des jeux, don’t Pensemble produit une sonorite remarquablement bien com-
prise.—Le Patriote (Belgium) 21 Novembre 1884.
BELGIUM.
ANTWERP UNIVERSAL EXHIBITION.
The public were surprised and delighted with the playing of the eminent
and sympathetic organist. We wish Mons. Wiegand every success at his
next recitals ; he fully deserves it, having an extraordinary repertoire of two
hundred selections.— UOpinion, Aug., 1885.
Le public s’est montre surpris et emcrveille du jeu de Peminent et sympa-
tique organiste. Nous souhaitons aux prochains concerts de M. Wiegand,
tout le succes du a cet artiste appelle A une reputation universelle, ayant un
repertoire incroyable de 200 morceaux ! —D Opinion, Aout., 1885.
EXPOSITION UNIVERSELLE D’ANVERS —CHRONIQUE MUSICALE.
CONCERT D’ORGUE WIEGAND.
Mardi passe il y avait foule au conceit d’orgue que M. Wiegand donnait a
8 h. du soir dans la salle des fetes.
L’eminent et sympatique organiste a ele chaleureusement applaudi
aprfes chaque morceau de son intdressant programme et a ete plusieure fois
rappeler.— L' Opinion, 1885.


ANVERS EXPOSITION UNXVERSELLE, 1885.
L’audition donnee avant-hier par M. Wiegand sur le grand et bel orgue
dans la salle des fetes, avait attire heaucoup de monde.
L’excellent artiste a execute diverses compositions de son professeur or-
ganiste du Roi, M. Mailly, qui dtait dans I’assistance. Parmi les compositions
on a remarque une senate en re mineur, dont Pandante a beaucoup de cachet,
une marche trSs-imposante et une toccata originale. M. Mailly est un
chercheur, il a de Pinspiration et du style, il n’est pas (tout le monde).
M. Wiegand a execute en outre une toccata de Bach. Ce morceau est
d’une difficulte' d’autant plus haute qu’il est base presqu’ exclusivement sur
le pedallier, Ee succ&s de Partiste a dte considerable — Le Prtcurseur ,
S amedi, 12 Septembre, 1885.
GAND, BEEGIQUE.
La seance d’inauguration de Porgue de Sainte Barbe a Gand bier, pre-
sentait aussi bien ponr les amateurs de musique que pour les homines
de science, un interet tr£s particulier. La seance dont M. Wiegand a
fait les frais a dur6 environ deux heures. E’artiste est habile et maitre de
son instrument. Nous pouvons citer entre autres morceaux superieure-
ment rendus, la grande fugue en sol mineur de Bach, pris dans un mouve-
ment que Monsieur Ch. Wider, de Paris, nous avait paru seul A meme de sou-
tenir ; un grand choeur, une marche funebre et chant seraphique de M. Guil-
mant, une piece de Martini, etc. — Bien Public , 26 Septembre, 1886.
FRANCE.
L’inauguration des nouvelles orgues avait attire hier dans Peglise parois-
siale d’Avesnes une foule considerable. C’est a M. Wiegand qu’avait ele
confie le soin de le faire valoir.
Aussi brillamment doue comme executant que comme musicien, M.
Wiegand a tenu deux heures son auditoire sous le charme de compositions
choisies dans les genres les plus divers du repertoire. C’st un maitre c’est un
talent acheve, splendide, complet. Et que Pon ne s’imagine point qu’il
excelle seulement a faire des prodiges de grace, d’agilite et de finesse. Il
nous a prouve mardi dernier qu’il a su s’initier a la grande et severe 6colfe de
Sebastian Bach, et nous aimons a nous rappeler la maniere trSs distinguee dont
il executa alors la fugue ce'lebre en sol mineur.— L' Observateur d'Avesnes
(France), 31 Mai, 1887.
NAMUR, BELGIQUE.
On a inaugure Mardi dernier en Peglise d’Havelange les nouvelles orgues,
L’instrument a ete confie, pour ce jour-IA, A Peminent artiste M. Wiegand,
charge d’en faire ressortir toutes les ressources et la richesse.
Un public nombreux, parmi lequel on remarquait plusieurs organistes et
amateurs de musique de notre ville, assistait A ce concert.
Pendent pr6s de deux heures lecelebre organiste a passe en revue avec un
remarquable talent d’execution les diverses combinaisons de registres, en
nous faisant entendre les oeuvres des grand maitres.
Apres cette belle serie de morceaux, nous avons pu apprecier aussi le
talent d’improvisateur dont est doue M. Wiegand. Nous ne saurions trop
remercier ce virtuose pour le beau et religieux concert qu’il nous a donne'. —
L'Echo de Namur , 29 Aout, 1887.


ST. MARY’S CHURCH, BRADFORD, ENGLAND.
Mons. Wiegand, who played the organ on Monday night, had a numerous
audience of artists, who were profoundly impressed with the consummate art
of the organist. With such an instrument and a musician so accomplished,
the public must feel themselves very fortunate. — The Bradford Observer ,
26th June, 1888.
INAUGURATION DE L’ ORGUE A L’EGLISE ST. MARIE, BRADFORD,
ANGLETERRE.
M. Wiegand qui tenait I’orgue Lundi soir, avait un public nombreux
d’artistes qui ont 6i6 profonddment impressionnds de Part consommd de I’or-
ganiste. Avec un pareil instrument et un musicien aussi accompli, le public
avait tout sujet d’dtre heureux.— The Bradford Observer , 26 Juin, 1888.
COLLEGE NOTRE-DAME, ANVERS, BELGIQUE.
Nous venons d’assister a I’inauguration du nouvel orgue place I’eglise
du College Notre- Dame. Pendant plus de 2 h., M. Aug. Wiegand, le virtuose
bien connu de nos concitoyens pour son jeu correct et brilliant, a detaille avec
un art exquis a son public aussi distingu6 que nombreux, les multiples res-
sources du nouvel instrument.
Depuis des ann6es deja, M. Aug. Wiegand a etc proclame, sans contesta-
tion, sans reserve, et cela par des gens qui s’y connaissent, un organiste de
premier ordre.— L'Escaut (Anvers), 18 Janvier, 1889.
INAUGURATION OF THE ORGAN OF THE PRIORY CHURCH OF
BRIDLINGTON, ENGLAND.
The recital was given by the celebrated Belgian organist, Mons. A,
Wiegand. He is undoubtedly an absolute master of his instrument. One
does not know what to admire the most in Mons. Wiegand’s playing, his easy
execution or his fine expression, with which he produces surprising effects.
Never had we heard before such music. —Bridlington and Quay Gazette , 6th
April, 1889.
ORGAN RECITAL, LANCASTER, ENGLAND.
Last evening, Mons. Auguste Wiegand, the celebrated Belgian organist,
gave a recital at St. Peter’s Church, Lancaster. The programme was varied,
and included selections from most of the great composers, as well as musical
arrangements by the performer. The rendering of the pieces was a most en-
joyable one, the performer possessing great delicacy of touch, and, being a
perfect master of the instrument, brought out the music in a most expressive
way. —Lancaster Observer and Morecombe Chronicle , 1890.
SHEFFIELD, ENGLAND.
At the Albert Hall, on the 15th ult., an overflowing audience rewarded
Mr. William Brown’s enterprise in re-introducing the Belgian organist, Mr.
Auguste Wiegand. Mr. Wiegand’s treatment of Bach’s Toccata and Fugue
(No. 4) was, to say the least, exceedingly brilliant and masterly, the difficulties
of the work being as naught to the accomplished performer. —Musical Tunes ,
May, 1890.
ORGAN RECITAL AT THE TOWN HALL, PORTSMOUTH.
On Friday evening, at the invitation of the Mayor and Mayoress (Sir
William and Lady King), a large audience assembled in the Town Hall to


listen to an organ recital by M. Augnste Wiegand, a musician of high standing
as his playing on Friday night amply testified ; and the Mayor and the Town
Hall Committee must have felt more than satisfied with the organ, for, in the
hands of so accomplished an artist, its manifold beauties were displayed with
great skill, variety and completeness. In the pieces that required light and
delicate treatment, in the sombre and rather uninteresting fugue, and in the
descriptive and realistic subjects, the organist was equally at home. He used
the solo stops with great judgment and effect ; his execution was particularly
clean, and the pedalling was always distinct.— Hampshire Post (Portsmouth),
November yth, 1890.
RECITAL IN TOWN HALL, SYDNEY.
In the middle of the year the post of City Organist was most satisfactorily
filled by the appointment of Mr. Auguste Wiegand, the famous Belgian
organist. Mr. Wiegand landed in Australia on the 22d of June, was enter-
tained at supper by the Mayor of Sydney (Alderman W. P. Manning) on the
yth of July, when a party of about one hundred of the leading men of the
city were invited to meet him, and gave his first public recital on the 18th of
July. Mr. Wiegand then showed himself an artist of extraordinary executive
ability, and by the brilliancy of an esseritially concert style, and by the
thorough mastery of the instrument he displayed, he gained at once the pub-
lic confidence. This confidence has never been shaken ; several hundred
persons are present at every Wednesday afternoon recital, and the attendance
on Saturday evenings averages upwards of three thousand persons. — Sydney
Morning Herald , 31 Dec., 1891.
(Summary for Europe).
RECITALS DONNES A SYDNEY.
Dans le milieu de P annee le poste de City Organist fut tr&s heureuse-
ment rempli par la nomination de M. Auguste Wiegand, le celSbre organiste
Beige. M. Wiegand arriva en Australie, le 22 Juin, et fut recu par le maire
(alderman) M. P. W. Manning, qui lui offrit un souper auquel assistaient en-
viron 100 gens marquants de Sydney. II donna son premier recital le 18
Juillet. M. Wiegand se montra alors un artiste d’une habilet6 d’ execution
extraordinaire et remarquable par son brilliant style essentiellement de con-
cert, et par sa parfaite connaissance de Porgue. II gagua imm£diatement la
confiance du pablic, qui ne s’est jamais dementie ; plussieurs centaines de
personnes sont presentes le mercredi apres midi, et le public des samedis peut
etre evalu6 a 3,000 personnes.— The Sydney Morning Herald , 31 Dec., 1891.
(Summary for Europe).
Sydney may be congratulated on the choice of Auguste Wiegand as the
citv organist. I confess I was much surprised that his services had been
secured, although during the short while I have been here I have frequently
sounded his praises in the ears of friends and acquaintances. I have known
M. Wiegand for several years, and I have not the slightest hesitation in
affirming that among European organists—even including Mr. Best and Mr.
Frederick Archer—he is facile princeps . He is an artist of no category, but
a genius who excites awe and wonderment in every mind for the majestic
instrument he presides over aud transforms. I remember last March he gave
recitals on three consecutive evenings at the Italian Church, London. For
two hours on each evening you might have seen the same faces composing the
auditory—London organists and musicians—set in fixed rapture, fascinated by


Wiegand’s masterly power. His memory is prodigious. I remember he once
told me that he could go on for six months giving recitals, about 1,500 pieces
from the best masters. I.shall not be in Australia when he arrives, but I pre-
dict for M. Wiegand the enthusiastic admiration and applause of all from the
moment he takes his seat at that magnificent instrument, which for the first
time shall have found its master.— Musical News (London), 1891.
THE CITY ORGAN RECITALS, SYDNEY.
The crowded audiences, which had been the rule at the Centennial Hall on
the preceding four nights of last week, were fully equalled on Saturday even-
ing, when M. Auguste Wiegand gave an organ recital. As usual, the Saturday
night programme had been arranged on popular- lines, but this did not
exclude much that was very interesting. The “Italian Serenade" was vehe-
mently encored. M. Wiegand is exceedingly modest. The rarity with
which his name appears on the programme indicates but faintly the extent of
his work apart from that of executant on the organ. The operatic fantasias,
by whose means much pleasure is afforded to the bulk of the audience, are
invariably his own arrangements, transcribed expressly for the organ, and
this, with the adaptations of works composed for other instruments involves
an amount of labor and ability of which very few have any idea. When,
therefore, the organist openly appears as composer, and in such a delicious
production as the “Italian Serenade” reveals his creative power, the surprise
is equal to the delight, and the reception came with thorough appreciation
from the whole assembly.
RECITAL DONNE A SYDNEY.
A 7 heures x / 2 Samedi, il n’y avait plus moyen d’obtenir une chaise dans le
Centennial Hall; non seulement dans les galeries, mais meme dans I’orches-
tre, beaucoup de personnes durent rester debout pendant toute la duree
du concert. II y avait environ 6,000 personnes dans la salle, et plusieurs mil-
liers durent renoncer aentrer. Vu le grand nombrede personnes qui n’avaient
pu obtenir de place il a etait decide que le City Organist repeterait le mdme
concert le lendemain, qu’il aurait un recital mercredi midi, et qu’un
programme populaire formerait le concert du Samedi suivant.— The Daily
Telegraph , 17 Aout. 1891,
ORGAN RECITAL IN ADELAIDE, SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
THE OF M. WIEGAND, IHE SYDNEY CITY ORGANIST.
M. Wiegand has achieved immense success in Sydney. He plays the
organ as a master of the instrument, and does not attempt to tickle the ears
of his audience, for evidently he presumes that they can appreciate music as
it should be presented. As M. Wiegand ascended the platform he was
received with a round of applause. A specially clever pedal solo work with
striking chord on the manual, the former exhibiting the subject, prominently
led to manifestations of the resources of the organ in this movement.
M. Wiegand displayed his entire mastery of the organ. The rapidity of
his execution displayed his technical power, perhaps, in an inordinate degree,
and none but the most competent critics could follow his wonderfully clever
performance. Throughout this work the organist showed a complete mastery
of the instrument. —Evening Journal (Adelaide, South Australia), July 21st,
1892.
TOWN HALL. ADELAIDE, SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
The programme submitted both on Wednesday and Thursday was suffi-


ciently varied to display the ability of Mr. Wiegand, and he could not fail to
be delighted by the spontaneity of the applause which greeted his various
efforts. He is a master of the organ, and than that nothing more need be
written.— Quiz and Lantern (Adelaide, South Australia), July 22nd, 1892.
A well-known musical journal of Paris. Le Piano-Soleil , publishes a long
article upon M. Wiegand and the Sydney Town Hall organ, signed by C. M.
Wider, the famous organist of St. Sulpice and professor at the National Con-
servatorium. A full account of “the largest organ in the world” is given, and
a tribute of praise is paid to our city organist.— Daily Telegraph (Sydney)
March sth, 1893.
The organ recitals on the Sydney organ during the year numbered ninety-
one and the attendances have been uniformly good. The Wednesday after-
noon performances partake more of a classical character, and are patronized by
an audience somewhat different from that of the Saturday night. The after-
noon performance is looked upon in the light of a study ; and every week are
to be seen members of the musical fraternity putting the opportunity to its
best use. On Saturdays, the concerts are always of a somewhat popular char-
acter, though, at the same time, high in tone, and noble in educative ten-
dency. The city organist, M. Wiegand, is always well in touch with his
audiences, and they are as enthusiastic in their delight as he is anxious to
please by his careful selections.— Musical Opinion (London), May Ist, 1893
ORGAN RECITAL, BRISBANE, QUEENSLAND.
M. Wiegand gains in popularity. His recital last night attracted a very
large and deeply interested audience. The first part was closed, as usual with
a Fugue by Bach in G minor (Vol. 11., No. 4.) This was given with great
spirit, and afforded another illustration of the organist’s mastry of the king of
instruments. It is doubtful whether this Fugue has ever before had such
capable treatment in the Southern Hemisphere.— Brisbane Courier (Queens-
land), Sept. 16th, 1893.
IN MEMORY OF GOUNOD, SYDNEY
The artistic sympathy of the city organist in arranging a special Gounod
programme served to attract over 3,000 people to the Town Hall on Saturday
evening. The immense attendance must be taken as a tribute to the wide-
reaching influence of the composer, whose loss will be felt not only by France,
but by the whole music-loving world. M. Wiegand, who had the honor of
the friendship of Gounod, never, since his appointment to Sydney, played
with such whole-heartedness and emotional fervor as on this occasion. As an
introduction to the programme, M. Wiegand played Chopin’s Funeral March,
—Sydney Daily Telegraph , Oct. 23rd, 1893.
ORGAN RECITAL BY MONS. A. WIEGAND, GOULBURN, N. S. W.
Mons. A. Wiegand, Sydney’s talented organist, gave an organ recital in
St. Peter and Paul’s Cathedral. This was Mons. Wiegand’s second recital in
Goulburn, the first being given about twelve months ago. Such musical
treats are few and far between in our city, and, as might be expected, the
fame of the brilliant instrumentalist, which has spread throughout the colony,
attracted a very large attendance. At limes the audience were completely
carried away by the music, and could not refrain from applauding. The con-
cluding pieces by Mons. Wiegand were an improvization of “O Sanctissima”
and “Grand Coro Triumphale” (Philippo Capocci), and were given with fine
effect.— Goulbur7i Evening Penny Post (New South Wales), Nov. 4th, 1903.


NEWCASTLE. N. S. W., AUSTRALIA.
M. Aug. Wiegand, the famous Belgian musician and organist of the city
of Sydney, gave a grand organ recital in St. Andrew’s Presbyterian Church
last evening and the performance was the finest of its kind that has ever been
given in this city. Mr. Wiegand is known by repute as a perfect master, and
his performance certainly justified the great reputation he has won in the Old
World and in Sydney. Indeed his fame is so pronounced in the metropolis
that each recital given by him in the Town Hall, Sydney, has been attended
by crowded and enthusiastic audiences.— Newcastle Journal (N. S. W.) 1893.
CITY COUNCIL.
The finance committee of the City Council met yesterday afternoon at the
Town Hall. The Mayor (Sir W. P. Manning) presided.
The Town Clerk read a letter from M. A. Wiegand, the city organist,
whose engagement expires on June 22d next, offering to accept a further term
of engagement for three or five years at his present rate of salary, six months’
notice to be given by either party seeking a termination of the engagement.
Alderman Fowler moved “That M. Wiegand be appointed city organist
for a further term of five years.”
Alderman J. Harris thought the council had never made such a successful
appointment. He was in favor of the city organist being re-engaged for a
term of five years, or even more.— Sydney Daily Telegraph , May sth, 1894.
ST. PATRICK’S CHURCH, ALBURY, N. S. W., AUSTRALIA.
Mons. Wiegand gave a recital on the organ of this church last night to an
appreciative audience. He is master of the king of instruments and more
than that nothing need be written.— Albury Daily (N. S. W.) June 7th, 1894.
M. AUGUSTE WIEGAND AND THE TOWN HALL ORGAN, SYDNEY.
M. Wiegand, the celebrated Sydney organist, will commence on the Ist of
July next his new engagement of five years The Municipal Council has voted
unanimously in his favor The first engagement, which was for three years
only, concludes to-day. Beyond the realization of the considerable sum of
during the first engagement, it is interesting to detail the nationality
of the different works M. Wiegand has performed with unvaiying success.
In the 310 organ recitals during the three years, French music holds the record
with 967 pieces, chosen from amongst the works of its greatest masters ; fol-
lowing come German and Austrian with 707 pieces; English is represented
with 206 pieces ; Italian with 212 ; and Belgian with 314 pieces. Of the French
composers who are organists in Paris, M. M. Guilmant, Gigout, Dubois, de La
Tombelle, Grison. Widor, Salome, Mac Master, Deshayes have ah dedicated
works to M. Wiegand. and have composed pieces specially for the great organ
of Sydney Town Hall. These eminent artists, in writing autograph letters to
M. WTegand, congratulate him on his success in Australia, and thank him for
having performed such a great number of French works.— Australian Courier ,
June 30th, 1894.
THE GRAND ORGAN RECITAL, GOULBURN, N. S. W.
The grand organ recital given in St. Peter and St. Paul’s Cathedial last
night by Mons. A. Wiegand, the celebrated city organist of Sydney, was a
complete success, and the delicious programme was fully appreciated by a
large audience of between 600 and 700. Mons. Wiegand, though only some
three years in ?. ustralia, has taken first place amongst our composers and


interpreters of music, and has sustained the high reputation held by him in
the old world. As an organist, Mons. Wiegand has few equals and scarcely a
superior in the world —Evening Penny Post , (Goulburn, N. S. W.) Sept. 26th,
1894.
BRISBANE, QUEENSLAND.
Mons. Wiegand, the Sydney city organist, has just returned from Queens-
land, where he gave a series of six organ recitals at the Exhibition Building,
Brisbane. During the six recitals, which were given with considerable suc-
cess, sixty-four different works were performed, most of them being encored.
The Brisbane Courier and Telegraph have reported these recitals in the most
eulogistic terms.— Australia?i Courier , Oct. 27th, 1894.
Si, comme je vous I’ecrivais dernierement, I’art dramatique est en Aus-
tralie, A Sydney surtout, bien au-dessous de la moyenne, la musique classique
et le repertoire des maitres y est, par centre, en grand honneur.
La capitale de la Nouvelle-Galles possede une salle de concert et un orgue
comme certainement peu de villes d’Europe en ont.
Les Sydneens sont, avec raison du reste, tres fiers de Idur orgue monu-
mental qui est, ce sont du moins eux qui le disent, le plus grand et le plus beau
de tous ceux existant actuellement.
Ce magnifique instrument, construit dans les ateliers de Hill, a Londres,
possede cinq claviers a mains de 61 notes chacun, un pddalier de 30 notes, 128
jeux rdels et B,Bco tuyaux. Le clavier de pedale est droit, cintrd et concave.
Un jeu unique dans le monde entier, declarent les musiciens competents, est
le c< nitre-trombone (en bois) de 64 pieds, dont le premier tuyau a 64 pieds de
hauteur ; dans I’ensemble ce jeu est rdellement surprenant, car il parle fort
distinclement malgie sa puissance et sa profondeur ; il a une majeste vraiment
ramarquable dans les huit dermeres mesures d’un grand choeur ou d’une
marche.
11 y a trois claviers completement expressifs sur les cinq (sauf les trois
jeux a forte pression du solo, le tuba 8, le clarion 4 et le contre-tuba de 16
pieds). Le rdcit, le positif et le solo sont manoeuvres par les trois pedales a
bascule. La soufflerie est manoeuvrde par une machine a gaz de la force de
huit chevaux.
Ce ties bel instrument, qui a could 400,000 francs, est placd dans la salle
des fetes de I’hotel de ville Cette salle immense, de 196 pieds de profondeur
sur 85 pieds de largeur et 65 de hauteur, peut contenir six mille personnes.
Il y a trois ans, lorsque T orgue eut dtd installd, la municipality de Sydney
ouvrit un concours international pour I’emploi d’organiste de la ville. Cent
cinq concurrents se presentment et ce fut nn Beige, M. Auguste Wiegand, qui
fut choisi.
L’artiste est digne en tout point du superbe instrument que je vous ai
decrit.
Avec un impartiality et un dclectisme dignes deloges, Auguste Wiegand
execute dans les concerts publics d’orgue qu’il donne deux fois par semaine,
les compositions musicales de toutes les dcoles, de tousles maitres, de tousles
genre s.
Son talent possede une souplesse rare ; les oeuvres multiples si differentes
d’allure et de sentiment qui composent ses programmes bi-hebdomadaires en
sont une preuve ; ce n’est pas un mince travail, en effet, que detranscrire pour
I’orgue colosse de Sydney des morceaux de genres divers et dents pour toutes
sortes d’instruments.
J’ajouterai que I’organiste de la ville de S} T dney est un compositeur de
premier ordre. Il composa, il y a quelques semaines une marche triomphale


dediee a M. le consul general de France a Sydney et intitulee : “Marche Fran-
chise.” Cette composition magistrale a obtenu ici un grand et legitime succ&s
La musique des maitres Frangais tient une place d’honneur dans la liste
des ouvrages que M. Wiegand a depuis son entree en fonctions fait connaitre
aux dilettantes Australiens ; sur 2,406 morceaux joues en public, 967 moiceaux
de notre glorieuse ecole ont 6t6 executes par lui.
Une chose remarquable, bien digne d’etre notee, c'est que I’assistance, qui
regulierement assiste aux concerts d’orgue de I’hotel de ville de Sydney, est
composee en grande partie d’ouvriers et de petits employes. Le prix modeste
des places, 1 shilling et 6 pence, en fait surtout un spectacle et une recreation
populaire. Pendant une periode de trois annees, ces concerts, dont le produit
est verse dans la caisse de la ville. ont produit un benefice net de 200,000 francs.
—Le Petit Temps (Paris), 6 December, 1894, Le Courncr de Bruxelles et le
Courrier Australien.
ORGAN RECITAL, TOWN HALL, SYDNEY
It is pleasant to record that the city organist’s programme on Saturday
night attracted an audience numbering quite 2,000 people. Guilmant and
Batiste were strongly in evidence, and Grison and Mailly were well repre-
sented, so that M. Wiegand had an occrsion of great advantage to exhibit his
excellence as an exponent of the modern French school of organ music.—
Sydney Daily Telegraph , Jan. 28th, 1895.
EXHIBITION ORGAN RECITAL, BRISBANE, QUEENSLAND.
The second organ recital of the series to be given at the Exhibition Build-
ing by M. Wiegand took place last evening, and was a great musical treat.
The entertainment lasted for nearly two hours, and throughout the audience
evinced the warmest appreciation of the renowned organist’s ability, and as
the programme progressed frequent encores were demanded. Bachs’ Prelude
and Fugue in A minor was played in a masterly manner, and in response to a
persistent encore it was repeated Brisbane Courier (Queensland) Oct., 1895.
Apropos of nothing in particular, a little story is going the rounds which
may or may not be new or stale. It doesn’t matter much When Antoinette
Sterling was in Sydney she sang “The Lost Chord.” Also, she sang it her
own way, and by those who heard her in Sullivan’s lovely composition the
point may be understood. It was at a rehearsal, and M, Wiegand was accom-
panying on the grand organ at the Centennial Hall As those who heard
Antoinette may remember, she paid little attention either to tempo or phrasing,
and this the organist found out, for he said at the conclusion, “Madame, I do
not know what you have been doing ; Ido not understand.” “I sing in the
natural way that God taught me,” she explained ; and the great organist, who
had not heard very clearly the name of her teacher replied, “Well, he is no
artist.”— Australian Star , March 6th, 1896.
THE TOWN CLERK’S ANNUAL REPORT.—ORGAN RECITALS, SYDNEY.
The organ recitals have well maintained their character, both for attend-
ances and returns, as well as in the high standard of music rendered. A con-
stant change is afforded by the organist, Mons Wiegand, who seizes every
passing phase of public interest and favors his audience accordingly. There
were 97 recitals during the year, yielding 12s, 6d., while the number of
pieces played must have fallen little short of 1,000. The Saturday night con-
certs are the most largely patroniz d.— Sydney Morning Herald , March 7th,
1896.


THE CITY ORGANIST’S TESTIMONIAL.
That Mons. Wiegand is not only an artist in the front rank, but also a
popular favorite, was amply evidenced last evening, when a vast audience
numbering over 4,000 people gathered together in the big Town Hall to do
honor to the gentleman who has so acceptably occupied the post of city or-
ganist, and Mons. Wiegand must be very proud of the fact. He is an immense
favorite with his confreres in the musical world, and for that reason a splendid
programme of musical items was contributed by brother and sister artists.
The beneficiare was of course vociferously applauded, and presented with
bouquets and other tokens of esteem.— Sunday Times (Sydney), June 28, 1896.
COMPLIMENTARY CONCERT TO M. WIEGAND.
In vi.ew of M. Wiegand’s contemplated European tour (consequent upon
the leave granted him by the City Council), a complimentary concert was
given to the distinguished organist last Saturday evening. Illustrative of the
high esteem with which the city organist is regarded, a veritable multitude
flocked to the Town Hall, many of whom were unable to gain admittance.
Before eight, every seat in the vast hall was taken, the audience overflowing
the choir seats, and invading even the singer’s platform. In other respects
also the concert was a great success, gratifying alike to M. Wiegand and his
fellow artists, and to the numerous committee. Mme. Charbonnet-Kellermann
gave a clever interpretation of the Andante in Herz’s Fifth Concerto (M.
Wiegand at the organ) and the Finale of Mendelssohn’s Concerto in G minor.
Later the French pianist joined with M. Wiegand in a bright and engaging
performance of Saint-Saens’ duo, a “Theme and Variations,” for tw'o pianos.
—Daily Telegraph , June 29T1, 1896.
We owe the honour of the first item to the distinguished artist, M.
Wiegand, whom the city of Sydney has chosen as its municipal organist.
Organ recitals are given in America, England, and Germany, but w 7 e do not
think they are so successful as those presided over by M. Wiegand in Sydney
during the current year. * The eminent organist (W. T. Best) who inaugurated
the Town Hall organ said : “I often played at Liverpool before ridiculously
small audiences—a few sleepy old women, a nurse girl or two with their babies,
and a few people seeking shelter from the storm.” This is not the case in
Sydney, where hundreds are turned away from the doors, although the hall
contains seats for 4,000 people. This great success is due to the unquestioned
talent of M. Wiegand and the musical taste of the Australian public.— Aus-
tralian Courier , July 2nd, 1896.
TOWN HALL ORGAN RECITALS.
There was a very large attendance at the Town Hall on Saturday, the
occasion being the first of the three farewell recitals by the city organist prior
to his departure for Europe.— Morning Herald , Aug. 3rd, 1896.
M. WIEGAND’S FAREWELL RECITAL.
The Town Hall was filled to overflowing last night when M. Wiegand
gave his farew 7 ell recital. The city organist was greeted with great enthusi-
asm.—Evening News, August nth, 1896.
M. WIEGAND’S FAREWELL, SYDNEY TOWN HALL.
The farewell recital of the city organist drew an immense audience to the
Town Hall last night, so that between three and four thousand people were
present. The “Marche (Wiegand) was especially suited to the


occasion, as the composer introduces in it a clever fugue founded upon the
“Marseillaise,” and this grand melody was rendered at the close with im-
pressive sonorousness of effect.— Sydney Morning Herald , Aug. nth, 1896.
EUROPE.
Yesterday, M. Wiegand, the famous Belgian organist, gave the first of a
series of recitals on the organ of St. Mary’s Church, East Parade, Bradford, Eng-
land. This is not the first time that the player of the great Sydney organ has
handled the fine instrument at East Parade. As for M. Wiegand, he was what
he always is, admirable and unexcelled. His programmes are very eclectic,
combining both the solid grandeur of the German school and the lightsome
graces of the French style. The recital, as we have said, was a performance of
the utmost skill, showing not only wonderful powers of fingering and pedalling
and admirable command and choice of the stops, but also remarkable success
in maintaining the clearness of the parts and of obtaining accent from an
instrument not much susceptible to degrees of touch. — Bradford Observer ,
Oct. 13th, 1896.
QUEEN’S HALE, LONDON.
Before closing this, our final notice of this season’s promenade concerts,
we must mention the organ playing of Mr. Auguste Wiegand, city organist of
Sydney, Australia, who played Mendelsshon’s D minor Sonata, Bach’s Toc-
cata and Fugue in D minor, and Jules Grison’s Communion in F in a masterly
manner on Friday evening, Oct. 9th. Mr. Wiegand’s registration and man-
ipulation of the Queen’s Hall organ was remarkably good for a stranger unac-
customed to the instrument,— Musical Courier (London), Oct. 15th, 1896.
After the lapse of .some years M. A. Wiegand has been again giving
recitals on our grand organ. It requires an organist of great ability to show
off what the Bradford Observer calls our fine instrument. M. Wiegand is a
player who is quite capable of doing this, in fact, he is, without doubt, one of
the cleverest organists in the world. Those who desire a refined and intel-
lectual treat should not let this opportunity go by without hearing such a
great player bring out all the beauties of such an organ as we possess. The
Observer says : “The recital was a performance of the utmost skill, showing
not only wonderful powers of fingering and pedalling and admirable com-
mand and choice of the stops, but also remarkable success in maintaining the
clearness of the parts.’’— Bazaar Gazette (Bradford), Oct. 17th, 1896.
A large audience assembled in Highfield Chapel on Thursday evening to
listen to a recital on the organ by M. Auguste Wiegand (city organist, Town
Hall, Sydney), a celebrated Belgian musician, who is making a short tour in
Europe. His executive efforts were characterized by great clearness. — Hud-
dersfield Daily Chronicle , Oct. 30th, 1896.
ORGAN RECITAL AT ST. GEORGE’S HALL. LIVERPOOL, ENGLAND.
Local music lovers were afforded a rare treat on Saturday evening, when
Mons. Auguste Wiegand, city organist of Sydney, New South Wales, gave a
recital on the grand organ at St. George’s Hall, The programme was distin-
guished for variety and comprehensiveness, and included Mendelsshon’s
Sonata No. 1, in F minor, Sebastian Bach’s Toccata *and Fuga in D minor,
and an Operatic Fantasia on Gounod’s “Faust. ”* Each selection was treated
with a high degree of finish, the performer’s main characteristics being light-
ness of touch, accuracy and brilliancy in fingering, evenness of tone, and a


full command over and discriminate use of the pedals. His improvization on
“Adeste Fideles” afforded Mons. Wiegand ample opportunity for the display
of original power, the theme being subjected to a variety of effective treat-
ments. •The audience was thoroughly appreciative, and the eminent per-
former, whose capability ranks him among the foremost of the present day
organists, had a cordial reception.— Liverpool Daily Post , Nov. 2nd, 1896.
M. Auguste Wiegand, organist of the Town Hall, Sydney, is well on his
way back to resume his duties there at Christmas. During the month of
October, while he was in England, he had a busy time of it indeed. He
played at the Queen’s Hall promenade concerts, and he also gave recitals in
Bradford, Sheffield, Portsmouth, Glossop, Huddersfield, Barrowford, Liver-
pool, and other provincial centres, appearing altogether twenty-four times in
six weeks —Musical Courier , (London), Nov. 26th, 1896.
GRAND ORGAN RECITAL IN GOULBURN, N. S. W.
Readers, we are sure, will be pleased to note that M. Auguste Wiegand,
the Sydney city organist, who has been on a trip to Europe and is now re-
turning to Sydney, has been induced to break his journey and make a short
stay in Goulburn. A grand organ recital is accordingly announced for Thurs-
day evening next in SS. Peter and Paul’s Cathedral, when the residents will
be afforded a great musical treat, and will have the pleasure of hearing M.
Wiegand give his first recital since his return. Immense audiences welcomed
him everywhere, and testified in the most enthusiastic manner their apprecia-
tion of his great musical talent and brilliant playing. “World-renowned”
and “with few equals as an organist” are some of the phrases the home papers
use when speaking of M. Wiegand.— Goulburn Herald (New South Wales),
Dec. 14th, 1896.
TOWN HALL, ADELAIDE, SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
An immense audience, probably the largest that a performance of organ
music has ever attracted in Adelaide, assembled at the Town Hall on Satur-
day evening, to hear the famous Belgian organist, Mons. Wiegand. A large
party from the Government House was present, including His Excellency the
Governor and Lady Victoria Buxton, His Excellency Lord Brassey and Lady
Brassey. Among the audience were a large number of professional and
amateur musicians, devotees to the “king of instruments” being particularly
prominent. Mons. Wiegand was accorded a most attentive hearing. He is
undoubtedly an organ virtuoso of the first rank, thoroughly drilled in the
technique of his art, possessing wonderful dexterity of both hands and feet —
indeed, in the former respect his execution would put many professional
pianists to shame ; and by the way, it may be remarked that he is a most
brilliant and accomplished pianist—a fact that organ students would do well
to note.
Since Mons. Wiegand’s return amongst us, the organ recitals at the Town
Hall have once more regained the popularity that they had lost during the
absence of the city organist. The few recitals the local organists were author-
ized to give during Mr. Wiegand’s journey to Europe were neither a financial
nor artistic success ; at least that is what we find in Mr. Daniel’s (the Town
Clerk) report, which was published in the Sydney Morning Herald of March
20th, 1897. Now the public again crowd to the Saturday recitals at the Town
Hall, the programmes being composed chiefly of popular music, whereas those
at the Wednesday recitals are more classical. These recitals are patronized


every week by some 2,000 to 3,000 lovers of good music. Besides the impor
taut function of city organist of Sydney for the last six years, M«ns. Wiegand
is also organist and choirmaster of St Patrick’s Church. It was on the new
organ of this church, and in the presence of a great crowd of followers, that
Mons. Wiegand performed for the first time (on St. Patrick’s Day) a grand
Solennelle Mass of his own composition. This mass was a great success, and
different portions of it have been heard at the Town Hall. It will again be
performed at Easter in St. Patrick’s .—Courrier Australien, April 3rd, 1897.
The popular programme of organ music attracted the largest audience M.
Wiegand has played to at the Town Hall since his return from Europe. The
distinguished player was in his best form, and evoked much enthusiasm.—
Sydney Daily Telegraph , April 20th, 1897.
BALLARAT, VICTORIA.
Last evening there was a very large attendance at the L/diard Street Wes-
leyan Church, the occasion being an organ recital by M. Auguste Wiegand.
city organist of Sydney, who, it is stated, is not only the finest perfoimer on
that instrument in Australia, but also south of the Line ; and after listening
to his magnificent rendition of numerous high class w r orks last night, one
could very easily believe it. It is quite impossible, in a brief notice, to do
anything like justice to this fine musician, or the quality and character of his
playing, but, generally speaking, it might be said that it was of the highest
order. It was a rare treat to lovers of good music, and especiallv lovers of the
organ, some of the numbers given, of course, meeting with more favor than
others, but the whole being a delightful treat in organ playing.— Ballarat
Courier , Sept. 18th, 1897.
CITY ORGANIST’S RECITAL, SYDNEY.
Mendelssohn’s six organ sonatas filled the programme at yesterday after-
noon’s recital. M. Wiegand has already familiarized his mid-weekly clientele
with the chief characteristics of these works, but to hear the whole six at one
performance was to disclose more clearly Mendelssohn’s wonderful resource-
fulness. Structurally, each presents new and varied features. The same may
be said of their musical beauty and charm. Their whole expression breathes
of sublimity and nobleness, and altogether their position among works for the
organ is unique and unchallenged. What musician does not regret that, with
the exception of “Drei Praeludien and Fugen,” Mendelssohn has written no
other solo works for the “king of instruments” ? The performance was a ver-
itable tour de force. —Sydney Daily Telegraph , March 24th, 1898.
THE CITY ORGANIST.
During the inquiry at the Town Hall, a few local musicians, in giving
their opinion of the city organist’s talent, said that M. Wiegand was a per-
former only of the French school. We cannot understand what the Sydney
organists mean by the French school. If by that they intend blaming M.
Wiegand for following the path and gaining inspiration from the works of
such organists as Wider, Guilmant, Dubois, Mailly, &c., they indeed make
him a compliment of which he may well be proud. We heard last Wednesday
the splendid performance of Mendelssohn’s six sonatas, which M. Wiegand
played to perfection. Are there many organists in Australia who could do
the same?— Courrier Australien, March 26th, 1898.


LES CONCERTS D’ORGUES DE L’HOTEL DE VILLE DE SYDNEY.
Depuis le retour de M. Wiegand parmi nous, les concerts d’orgue de
I’hdtel de ville ont repris leur ancienne popularity, que I’absence de I’organiste
municipal leur avait fait un moment perdre.
Les quelques auditions d’artistes locaux que la municipality avait cru
devoir autoriser durant le voyage de M. Wiegand en Europe, ont yty un in-
succSs aussi bien au point de vue artistique qu’au point de vue financier ; c’est,
du moins, ce qui resort du rapport annuel de M. Daniel, secretaire de I’hdtel
de ville ; rapport qui a yty publie dans le Sydney Morning Herald du 20
Mars, 1897. Aujonrd’hui, la foule se porte dc nouveau vers le Town Hall ;
les concerts du samedi, dont les programmes sont essentiellement composes
d’oeuvres populaires, sont assidument suivis, tandis que les concerts du mer-
credi, d’un caractSre plus classique, attirent invariablement chaque semaine
de 2,000 a 3,000 auditeurs de bonne musique.
Outre les importantes, fonctions d’organiste muuicipal de la ville de
Sydney, qu’il remplit depuis 6 ans M. Aug. Wiegand est encore organist et
maitre de chapelle de I’dglise St. Patrick.
C’est sur les nouvelles orgues de cette dglise, ‘en presence d’une foula de
fideles, que M. Wiegand a joud pour la premiere fois, le jour de la fete de St.
St. Patrick, une messe solennelle de sa composition. Cette messe, qui a
eu un grand succds, et dont le compositeur a fait entendre divers frag-
ments k I’hotel de ville, sera executee de nouveau k St. Patrick, le jour de la
fete de Paques.
Nos lecteurs se rappellent certainement que Wiegand composa, il y b
deux ans, une “Marche francaise’’ dediee k M. Biard d’Aunet, Consul-General
de France a Sydney, et une meTodie, “Souvenir de Paris,” dediee a Mme.
Biard d’Aunet.
Ces deux compositions, ou se retouvent les brillantes qualites du maitre,
ainsi que la “New South Wales March,” dont Lord Jersey, ancien gouverneur
de la colonie, a bien voulu accepter la dedicace, seront prochainement pub-
liees.
Parmi les dernieres oeuvres de M. Wiegand, une des plus admirSes
est certainment la “Grande Marche Pontificale,” dediee a S. S. Leo
XIII.; cette oenvre d’un caractere trSs eleve a fait I’admiratxon des prelats
Australiens qui s”etaient, Pan dernier, reunis dn congres a Sydney.— Courier
Australien, 3 Avril, 1808.
M. AUGUSTE WIEGAND’S ORGAN RECITALS IN MELBOURNE,
VICTORIA.
There was a large and very appreciative audience in the Town Hall yes-
terday afternoon at the first of the two organ recitals given by M. Wiegand,
the Sydney city organist. The opening masterpiece in an exceptionally at-
tractive programme was Mendelssohn’s Sonata in B flat, No. 4, with its ani-
mated allegro con brio , placid andante religioso , tuneful allegretto in F, and
imposing allegro maestoso e vivace , constructed upon an ascending diatonic
scale, in the pedal bass, and leading to a fugue. Whilst M. Wiegand’s com-
plete mastery of both manuals and pedals has long been known and recog-
nized in Melbourne, it must be admitted that the performance of the sonata
came, to some extent, as a gratifying surprise, for it was not only notable for
absolutely perfect execution, but also'for the thorough grasp and reproduction
of the composer’s intentions, that caused it to be a musicianly and artistic
rendering. This was succeeded by Bach’s difficult Prelude and Fugue in A
minor (Peters’ Ed., Vol. 11., No. 8), which must certainly be included amongst
its great author’s grandest organ works. Here again M. Wiegand’s reu-


dering left technically not the slightest room for improvement. It was, how-
ever, the ensuing number on the programme —Batiste’s Grand Offertoire in
D—that the gifted and accomplished organist was heard at his best in, and
which brought the house down. M. Wiegand entered heart and soul into the
spirit of this composition ; his truly splendid interpretation being noteworthy
for brilliancy, and, at times, delicate refinement, that would undoubtedly
have satisfied the composer, and that created quite unusual excitement
amongst the listeners. The furore of applause at the conclusion was main-
tained unabated for several minutes, until, ultimately, M. Wiegand, being
convinced of the impossibility of proceeding with the following number on
the printed programme, granted an encore—namely, a “Romance sans Par-
oles” of his own composition. He subsequently excelled in a well arranged
and generally acceptable transcription, by himself, of the beautiful Larghetto
in A from Beethoven’s Symphony in D, No. 2. —Melbourne Argus, May sth,
1898.
TOWN HALL ORGAN RECITAL, SYDNEY.
The city organist divided his recital yesterday afternoon between classic
and popular numbers. Opening with Rheinberger’s melodious Sonata in C
minor, he added the Adagio from Beethoven's Sonata, No. 5, an Etude by
Mailly, and Bach’s Toccata in F. Mr. Wiegand’s brilliant solo pedalling, and
the clearness with which he rendered Bach’s difficult music at a very rapid
tempo , were remarkable. —Sydney Morning Herald , Dec. Bth, 1898.
ST. PATRICK’S CHURCH ORGAN—OPENING RECITAL, SYDNEY.
The new organ at St. Patrick’s R. C. Church, Charlotte Place, was
formally opened last evehing. 'I he specifications for St. Patrick’s organ were
prepared by the city organist, M. Auguste Wiegand. The instrument con-
tains in all forty-two stops, with three manual keyboards in console form
between them. It is the largest church organ in this colony, if not in
Australia, and as regards the manner in which the builders have done their
work, it is sufficient to say that M. Wiegand is quite satisfied, and other musi-
cians who have heard it speak in high terms of praise of the general powers
and qualities of the instrument. Unhappily, through pressure of work, Car-
dinal Moran was unable to attend ; but there were over forty members of the
clergy present, and amongst them the following prelates : The Archbishop of
Adelaide ; Dr. Byrne, Bishop of Bathurst ; Dr. Torregiani, Bishop of Armidale ;
Dr. Gallagher, Bishop of Goulburn ; Dr. Delaney, Bishop of Hobart; Dr.
Hutchinson, Bishop of North Queensland ; and Dr. Dunne, Bishop of Wil-
cannia. The prelude to the recital was an improvization on “St. Cecilia’s
Hymn.” After a few bars of introduction, during which M. Wiegand
brought into operation the full strength of the instrument, the simple theme
was given out on the voix celeste. Following came a series of ingenious, yet
beautiful, variations, the melody prevading all of them, until finally it was
enunciated on the pedal organ, and embellished with spendid elaborations on
the manuals. Mendelssohn’s Sixth Sonata came next, and following was a
morceaux of Martini, which some folk might perhaps regard as non-ecclesias-
tical in character. But it should be remembered that no less a genius than
Meyerbeer once said, when asked his opinion with reference to sacred and
secular music, “All good music is sacred, for it proceeds from the Giver of all
goodness; all bad music is damnable, fjr it proceeds from the devil.” This
piece was good music.— Telegraph , Feb. 13th, 1900.


The little Deutsche Kirche in Goulburn Street was crowded last
night, the attraction being an organ recital by M. Wiegand, partly by
way of a farewell to his compatriots. In a number of selections from Men-
delssohn, Beethoven, Handel, Mozart, Bach. Hayd’n and Meyerbeer, the city
organist succeeded in extracting music from the comparatively small church
organ which pleased his audience immensely. Perhaps the mos.t appreciated
number was “The Harmonious Blacksmith” (Handel).— Daily Telegraph ,
March 30th, 1900.
ORGAN RECITAL AT ANNANDALE.
Last night the city organist, M. Wiegand, gave a recital on the grand
organ at the Hunter-Baillie Memorial Presbyterian Church, Johnston Street,
Annandale, in the presence of a very large audience.
ST. PATRICK’S SACRED CONCERT.
St. Patrick’s Church was densely crowded last night, when Theo
Dubois’ oratorio, ‘‘The Seven Last Words of Christ,” was introduced for the
first time here in its entirety by M Wiegand. The chorus, which included a
fine body of soprano voices, sang steadily throughout. In addition to his
praiseworthy enterprise in rehearsing Dubois’ fine oratorio, M. Wiegand
played brilliantly Guilmant’s exultant Grand Chorus in D, in which the influ-
ence of Handel may be traced, and familiar pieces by Mendelssohn, Beethoven,
and Meyerbeer. —Sydney Morning Herald , June 6th, 1900.
THE WIEGAND FAREWELL.
The farewell concert to Chevalier Wiegand last night proved one of those
great popular occasions when the Town Hall is besieged by hundreds unable
to elbow their way into the spacious building. The avenues and approaches
to the hull were filled by a surging stream of people, and at eight o’clock the
vast chamber was crowded. The audience stood in dark clusters beneath the
white spandrels of the doors in the galleries, throngs were gathered round the
side of the platform, and all the choir seats were occupied. Such an audi-
ence formed a splendid testimony to the high esteem to which Chevalier
Wiegand has been raised by his talent as an organist during his nine years’
residence in Sydney. M. Wiegand had always been a loyal servant of the
council and public for nine years, and trusted that he had earned the good
will of the artists of Australia, which would recompense him for any short-
comings of the governing body by whom he was employed. He knew he had
done his duty, and during the wdiole term of his engagement had never
missed a recital when advertised to play. A most enjoyable evemng was
brought to a close by thiee cheers for the guest, which was accompanied with
musical honors. — Star , June 1 ith, 1900.
On Tuesday the organist booked his passage for France by the Armand
Behic. “Return ticket ?” said the clerk at the French mail boat company’s
office. “No, thank you ; no return. lam saying good-bye to the Town Hall,
to the organ blower, and to the City Council.” That verv afternoon M i
Wiegand received two official letters from Brussels, informing him that he
had been raised to the rank of Chevalier of the Order of King Leopold.—Free-
man's Journal , June 16th, 1900.


THE WIEGAND MATINEE—A PHENOMENAL ATTENDANCE.
The third edition of the Wiegand farewell by no means exhausted the
interest taken in the departing artist. Yesterday’s matinee, in point of
attendance, was phenomenal, the Town Hall again being filled An attempt
was made to pack the sealed audience closer. It started in the back seats ;in
a moment every row was in motion towards the front, creating a sensational
though good-humored hubbub. The cleared space at the back was quickly
filled by a standing crowd.
LE DEPART DE M. WIEGAND
Tousles amateurs de grande musique ont appris avec regret la nouvelle
du prochain depart de M. Wiegand, Imminent organiste. On s’en est £mu
egalement dans le monde artistique, et, avec une unanimite qui fait Peloge de
celui qui en est Pobjet, tous cot£s de Sydney, instrumentistes ou
chanteurs, ont d£cid6 de preter leur concours au maitre, pour le concert
d’adieu qu’il donnera le 20 Juin au Town Hall. Les habitants de Sydney ont
une occasion unique d’entendre, dans la meme soiree, tousles artistes qu’ils
n’ont g£neralement que Poccasiou d’applauder isolement et de donner une
preuve de sympathie a un homme qui en est digne a tous egards.
Ajoutons en terminent, et pour donner une idee de la haute estime en
laquelle est tenu M. Wiegand en Europe, que S. M. ie r« i des Beiges vient de
le nommer Chevalier de POrdre de Leopold. Courrier Australien , 16 Juin,
1900.
PROFESSIONAL MUSICIANS’ ASSOCIATION AND M. WIEGAND.
Last night M. Wiegand, the city organist, was “farewelled” by the mem-
bers of the Professional Musicians’ Benefit Association, at their commodious
quarters in the National Buildings, Pitt Street. The president of the Associa-
tion, Mr. Rivers Allpress, was in the chair, and the attendance numbered
some 160. During the evening the president happily voiced the cordial sen-
timents of the gathering towards the departing guest. M. Wiegand was an
artist of the front rank, whom they would always be glad to welcome back to
Australia. The toast was enthusiastically given, and the strains of the ancient
eulogistic chorus were sung con amove , and with full lung power —Sydney
Daily 'telegraph, June nth, 1900.
ORGAN RECITAL—DECORATION OF CHEVALIER WIEGAND.
The opening item of the programme was the stirring “See the Conquering
Hero comes” (Handel), which was well received ; but the delightful rendering
of the impromptu in D flat (A Jaell) evoked so much enthusiasm that it had
to be repealed. Home, Sweet Home” was another of Chevalier Wiegand’s
oest contributions. Immediately afier the termination of the programme
Mr. Scott informed the audience that the King of the Belgians had singled
out M. Wiegand as the recipient of a special honor, which was equivalent to
knighthood in England, namely, “Chevalier de POrdre de Lepold,” and Mr.
Currie Elies, Acting-Consul for Belgium, had kindly consented to present the
insigna of the order in the name of King Leopold. (Applause.) Mr. Cuiri-
Elles then, in the name of King Leopold, fastened the decoration to Chev-
alier Wiegaud’s breast, while the spectators amply manifested their approval
and good will. The Acting Consul expressed his regret that the public of
Sydney was about to lose one of the leading organists of the world, and
wished him hearty success in the new sphere of labor to which he was about


to proceed. At the request of the Chevalier, Mr. Scott returned thanks for
the appreciation of the audience of the honor conferred upon him, and stated
his regret in leaving the generous music loving public of Sydney, who had
shown so much appreciation of his work. Should it ever be his lot to return
to Australia, he hoped to spend many pleasant hours among them again. (Ap-
plause.)—Sydney Morning Herald , June 18th, 1900.
Chevalier Wiegand was decorated with the honor betsowed upon him by
King Leopold of Belgium on Saturday night at the town hall organ recital.
This is the third of the comparatively rare musical honours that Chevalier
Wiegand possesses, the second (Officier d’Academie) having also been con-
ferred on him in Sydney. The removal of the organist from Sydney seems to
have benefitted no one but Wiegand himself.— Punch (Melbourne), June 21st,
1900.
FAREWELL CONCERT TO CHEVALIER WIEGAND.
Soon after 7 o’clock last night, crowds thronged the main entrance to the
Town Hall, and hundreds stood patiently on the footpath outside, waiting to
get to the front steps. The Druitt Street entrance, set aside for ticket holders,
was packed with an excited mass, which struggled to put down their wet um-
brellas, find their tickets, reach the door and look pleasant under the pressure
of circumstances. Nor the damp crowd "were hurrying up and wondering in
loud tones, “Why the people near the door didn’t go in if they were going, or
stay out and not stand in the way of the people who had their tickets.” Dur-
ing the evening, Mr. Lewis Scott announced that the concert would be re-
pealed 011 Saturda}' evening, as so many people had been unable to get seats.
A great round of applause greeted this announcement. And M. Wiegand may
be sure of another big audience at his last concert. How they cheered our
city organist when be appeared on the crowded platform. He seemed to have
come, in some mysterious fashion, from the centre of the organ, and again
and again he bowed his acknowledgments to the applause, as he was presented
with a laurel wreath. Streaming ribbons of red, white, and blue hung from
the laurel leaves —the sharp-pointed musician’s crown, which Ln’t always
very comfortable wearing ! —Evening News , June 21st, 1900.
CHEVALIER WIEGAND’S FAREWELL—TWO THOUSAND PEOPLE
TURNED AWAY.
The musical function at the Town Hall last night bore the most convinc-
ing testimony to the wide popularity of the “beneficiare, ” Chevalier, Wiegand,
city organist since 1891, and now betaking himself to more profitable engage-
ments in Europe and America. The event may be said to have closed, in a
remarkably substantial and pleasant manner, a lengthy chapter in the musical
career of an artist whose name will find a permanent niche in the record of
Australian musical development. Before six o’clock people were mustering
in front of the Town Hall entrance, the doors had to be opened much earlier ;
in twenty minutes the sale of tickets had to be stopped and the doors were
closed in the face of an immensely disappointed crowd. At the Druilt street
entrance, opened for the convenience of holders of reserved seats, there was a
surging crowd seeking for admission. Through this throng the front-seat
people had to pnsh their way with much struggling, or else sacrifice the seats
they had purchased. It was a rough time for many, especially women.—Syd-
ney Daily Telegraph , June 21st, 1900.


COMPLIMENTARY CONCERT TO CHEVALIER WIEGAND.
One of the largest and most enthusiastic audiences that has ever been
seen in the Sydney Town Hall attended last night upon the occasion of the
citizens’ complimentary farewell conceit to Chevalier Auguste Wiegand, prior
to his departure from the colony. The vast auditorium of our civic auditori-
um of our civic institution was a perfect sea of faces, all eager to feast upon
the immense programme that was put before them. Quite as many were
turned away unable to gain admission, and loud was the applause that fol-
lowed the announcement that Chevalier Wiegand would give another concert
on Saturday night next, so as to enable those to attend who had tick-
ets for the last night’s entertainment, and had not been able to get into
the building, which was filled fully half an hour before the appointed hour of
starting the programme As was to be expected, great interest was centered
in the appearance of the city organist, and the way in which he cast a spell
over his listeners when playing Orison’s favorite Communion in F was some-
thing to be remembered. Even a greater success was made by him in his
celebrated Idylle No. i, “The Storm,” and as the musical worth of this com-
position has already been noticed in these columns, suffice it to say that no
more popular piece has ever been rendered by Chevalier Wiegand during his
nine years’ residence amongst us. The repittion will, doubtless, be as wel-
come on Saturday night, when we believe it wdll be played for positively the
last time. Quite an array of artists offered their kind assistance to Chevalier
Wiegand for this occasion. It would be invidious to particularize the indi-
vidual efforts of the contributing artists. Amongst those who took part may
be mentioned Miss Marie Narelle, Miss E. King, Miss Eva Mylott, Miss Kate
Rooney, Miss Maud Dairymple, Mine. Helen Rose, Miss Lily Juncker, Miss
Walker-Smith, Miss M. Robinson, JSenor de Alba, Mr. Henry Weir, Mr. G.
Rivers-Allpress, Mr. A. W. Juncker, Signor Podenzana, and the Italian Man-
dolin Society ; also the Artillery Band, the Original Meistersingers, Mr. H.
Freeman, Mr. S. J. Harte, and Mr. Lewis Scott. The latter, at the request
of Chevalier Wiegand, said a few words of thanks to the artists assisting, and
also paid some complimentary references to the public for their kind and gen-
erous appreciation.— Star, June 21st, 1900.
THE WIEGAND FAREWELL CONCERT—A BIG SUCCESS.
Undoubtedly the chief reason which animated the enormous crowd that
swamped our vast Town Hall on Wednesday night was the very laudable de-
sire on the part of the Sydney public to pay a more than well-merited com-
pliment to M. le Chevalier Wiegand, to whom a farewall concert had been
tendered by his musical friends. Every reservable seat in the hall —and many
seats that had never been reserved before—had been booked days and days in
advance, while of the immense number of people who presented themselves,
about 4,000 managed to cram themselves in somewhere, and hundreds and
hundieds—perhaps in all 2,000, roughly—had to retire disappointed. Asa
testimonial to M. Wiegand the effect was perfect. —Sydney Morning- Herald ,
June 25th, 1900.
THE WIEGAND CONCERTS.
Every one anticipated a great attendance at Chevalier Wiegand’s matinee
yesterday, but few were prepared for the tremendous inrush of people, nearly
all ladies, which set in at two o’clock. Mr. E. Lewis Scott (manager) threw
the doors open to the crowd before that hour, and by three o’clock the Town
Hall was completely filled. —Sydney Morning Herald , June 28, 1900.


PRESENTATION TO CHEVALIER WIEGAND.
The choir of St. Patrick’s Church, where Chevalier Wiegand is organist,
met at the Presbytery on Wednesday night to present the organist and his
wife with parting gifts. Father Le Rennetel made the presentation—a large
travelling bag to M. Wiegand, and a superb sword-shaped opal brooch to
Mme. Wiegand. The health of the departing pair and their family was pro-
posed by Mr. A. R. Richards, and responded to on behalf of the Chevalier and
Mme. Wiegand by Mr. E. Lewis Scott in a humorous speech. The Reverend
Father was also toasted, and the proceedings were harmonious and enthusi-
astic.—Evening News, June 29th, 1900.
GERMAN CHURCH CONCERT.
The city organist gave a concert and organ recital at the German Church,
Goulburn Street, last night, in the presence of a large audience. M. Wiegand’s
brilliant performance was warmly applauded. —Morning Herald, June 30th,
1900.
BATHURST N. S. W. AUSTRALIA.
LATE COUNTRY NEWS.
To-night an organ recital was given at the Wesleyan Church, Bathurst,
by Chevalier Wiegand, who played magnificently. Though the weather was
bitterly cold and wet, the church was filled by a large audience, who applaud-
ed all the numbers enthusiastically. —Sydney Morning Herald , July 4th, 1900.
The benefit concert to the departing Chevalier Wiegand on the 20th inst.
was one of the biggest successes ever known in Australia. From before six
o’clock people began to besiege the Town Hall, the sale of tickets had to be
stopped shortly after the doors opened, and before the concert started the
building was densely thronged in every direction. It was a wonderful “house”
and all the more so that the rain was simply torrenting outside. Hundreds of
people had to be turned away. To Chevalier Wiegand the overwhelming
attendance must have been a grateful balm to all his troubles with the Civic
Council. His reception was of the heartiest description, and, after his per-
formance of the popular “Storm Idylle,” he was recalled to the platform
again and again, finally adding Batiste’s Andante in G as an encore piece.
The program was of great length, and was contributed to by many of our
leading artists.— Star, July Bth, 1900.
THE WIEGAND FAREWELL.
Few artists have left Australia, in the whole course of its musical history,
amidst circumstances as flattering as those which have attended M. Wiegand’s
approaching departure. Famous actors or star vocalists have from time to
time repeated a farewell concert with .success, but we cannot recall a case in
which four farewell functions, within the brief space of seventeen days, have
drawn crowded audiences to the Town Hall. This testimony to the esteem in
which his great talents are held was nevertheless paid to Chevalier Wiegand
on Saturday. The great chamber was packed with people, and, as Mr. Lewis
Scott remarked, in making a congratulatory speech to the audience, “the} 7
had not come out of curiosity to hear some belauded artist from abroad, but to
listen to their own city organist for the last time, after he had been playing to
them twice a week for nine years.” This apropos remark caused great enthu-
siasm, and Mr. Lewis Scott then presented M. Wiegand with a handsome
tantalus from his pupils. Miss Walker-Smith, the formost of his organ stu-
dents, had drawn up the following inscription : —“Presented to Chevalier


Wiegand in warm admiration and affectionate remembrance by a few of his
later organ pupils, and in recognition of his unfailing kindly interest in them,
and untiring efforts for their improvement. ‘Will he no’ come back again ?’ ”
In addition to this souvenir of his happy stay in Sydney, Mme. Wiegand was
presented with a silver ‘ lady’s companion” by Mr, and Mrs. Lewis Scott.
The public leave-taking also afforded M. Wiegand an opportunity of giving
Mr. Scott a massive gold watch inscribed ‘‘for distinguished services rendered
to his friend, Auguste Wiegand, July 7th, T9OO” —so that everybody was made
happy all round. This last presentation was through the medium of a speech
by Alderman Jessep, who, as a member of the municipal council, was glad to
refer to the unwearied diligence of Chevalier Wiegand since his appointment
as the first city organist of Sydney. For nine years past M. Wiegand had
always been at his post, and had cheerfully responded to the demands made
upon him by the City Council, whether to play at the private entertainments
given by the Mayor, or to give increased interest to important functions.
Sydney was now parting with one who was a veritable king of organists—
(loud cheers) —and he was sure that he (M. Wiegand) must be pleased with the
sight of that over-crowded hall. (Cheers). The city organist had nobly ful-
filled his trust—(cheers) and on behalf of his fellow-citizens of Sydney he
would now wish their departing visitor, in plain Anglo-Saxon, ‘‘Good-bye.”
(Loud cheers.) —Sydney Morning Herald , July 9th, 1900.
MR. WM. BROWN’S SATURDAY EVENING CONCERT, SHEFFIELD,
ENGLAND.
In consequence of the great success which attended the Chevalier
Wiegand’s visit to Albert Hall three weeks ago, Mr. William Brown arranged
with the distinguished organist for another recital on Saturday evening.
The Albert Hall was again crowded on Saturday night, and the audience
had the satisfaction of hearing the pla\er do himself and his programme full
justice. The audience rose and joined in the chorus en masse, and at the con-
clusion the applause was tremendous, the organist having to bow his acknowl-
edgments again and again.— Sheffield and Rotherham Indepe7ident , Oct. Ist,
1900.
COLOGNE, GERMANY
CONCERT AT THE PHIEHARMONIC HAEL, AEEEMAGNE.
M. Auguste Wiegand’s first organ recital was given yesterday in the Phil-
harmonic Hall. This artist has the reputation of being one of the foremost
organ virtuosos of the day, which was certainly borne out by his masterful
playing. We would recommend all lovers of this instrument who were not
present on this occasion to attend his next and last recital here. They will
then be able to admire his art as well as the wonderful acoustic properties of
this hall, which, from the hands of this virtuoso were made manifest to the
utmost degree. On his second appearance, M. Wiegand, whose technique is
as astonishing as his pedalling, showed to even better advantage, in that he
was more familiar with the peculiarities of the organ, and was therefore more
confident in his actions. Of course compared with his organ in Sydney, with
its 128 registers, the technique required for the present instrument is but
slight. But it must be remembered, that there are many difficulties to sur-
mount in a fresh instrument. The second half of the programme was the
most interesting, consisting of items that were calculated to display the
sound capabilities of the modern organ. Although embellished with rich
contrapuntal writing, the melody, unlike that in a piece, was heard with
every distinctness. In part one, he played Bach’s D minor Toccata and


Fugue with much virtuosity, indeed more as the virtuoso than the musician ;
and here to show his dexterity, over much hastened the time. The religious
March from Alex. Guilmant, with which the concert closed, again served
to show off all the rich, majestic qualities of the organ. The performer was
at the close most warmly applauded.— Koluische Zieiung ,” October 30th, 1900.
SHEFFIELD.
M. Auguste Wiegand, the distinguished organist, was again favored by a
large audience on the occasion of his third recital this season in the Albert
Hall, Sheffield, on the 18th ult., when his programme was the most attractive
of the series. M. Wiegand was at the close very warmly applauded for his
exceptionally fine work. — Londoii Musical Courier , December 7th, 1900.
PORTSMOUTH.
SATURDAY’S CONCERTS AT THE TOWN HAUL.
The services of an eminent organist were a great attraction at the Town
Hall Concert on Satuiday evening. The hall was packed to its utmost limits.
Monsieur Auguste Wiegand has gained a great reputation for his skill as an
organist, both on the Continent and in Sydney, where for nine years he held
the post of city organist. He gained fresh laurels on Saturday by his fine
execution of the several items entrusted to him. M. Wiegand contributed
eight pieces al'ogether from the works of well known composers, such as
Mendelssohn, Jules Grison, Bach, Batiste, Thomas, and Meyerbeer. He also
performed two pieces of his own composition, one of them entitled “Prayer
on the Ocean. The music and its interpretation were alike superb, and the
author well deserved the enthusiastic tribute he received from the audience.
No less successful was M Wiegand’s other piece, in which the author repro-
duced the voices of nature on the instrument with remarkable accuracy. —
The Evening News, Monday, December 19th, 1900.
DUBLIN, IRELAND.
GRAND ORGAN IN THE PRO-CATHEDRAL—CHEVALIER WIEGAND’S RECITTL.
The first of two grand organ recitals by the celebrated organist, Chevalier
Auguste Wiegand, was given in the Pro-Cathedral, Marlborough Street, last
evening, and was attended by a very large audience, which was representative
of the highest musical culture ot the city, clerical and lay, and which includ-
ed, amongst others, the organists of the two Protestant Cathedrals and of the
Chapel Royal, as well as the organist of the Pro-Cathedral. The occasion
was one of considerable importance in musical circles in Dublin from more
than one point of view. The reputation of Chevalier Wiegand as one of the
foremost members of his profession has preceded him on his visit to Dublin,
and it is doing him but simple justice to say that it was fully sustained by his
performance last evening. Moreover, those who attended the recital were
afforded an opportunity of listening to the strains of the superb new organ
which has recently been opened in the Pro-Cathedral, and which is one of the
very best instruments of its kind to be found in the city. In the hands of a
musician of the skill of Chevalier Wiegand, it is hardly necessary to state that
the powers of the new organ were developed to the very fullest extent consist-
ent wi;h the requirements of the pieces which were produced. The organist
was here heard to the fullest advantage, and his incomparable command over
the instrument was splendidly demonstrated. Gounod’s “Nazareth” was also
given with magnificent effect.— The Irish Times , Friday, December 28th,
1900.


GRAND ORGAN IN THE PRO-CATHEDRAL, DUBLIN.
CHEVALIER WIEGAND’S SECOND RECITAL.
The second grand organ recital given in the Pro-Cathedral, Marlborough
street, yesterday afternoon by the distinguished organist, Chevalier Auguste
Wiegand, attracted an overflowing attendance, every available seat in all parts
of the sacred building being occupied. Even the Sanctuary, where his Grace
the Archbishop of Dublin sat, was filled. The occasion had evidently aroused
the greatest possible interest, not merely in the musical circles in the city and
suburbs, but amongst the community generally. It was a very select and ap-
preciative assembly, and included repi esentatives of practically every religious
denomination. There was a very large number of Catholic clergy, both secular
and regular, present. The programme contained a variety of interesting num-
bers, including selections from the classical works of Sebastian Bach, Handel,
and Haydn ; and those who had the privilege of hearing the talented Chevalier
do not require to be told of the exceptionally brilliant manner in which the
several items were rendered. The marvelous executive ability which charac-
terized his performance on Thursda} 7 night was again abundantly evidenced
throughout, and greatiy impressed the hearers. — The Irish Daily Independent
and Nation , and Evening Herald , Monday, December 31st, 1900.
GREAT NEW ORGAN IN THE PRO-CATHEDRAL.
CHEVALIER WIEGAND’S THIRD RECITAL.
The third and concluding recital on the magnificent new organ of the Pro-
Cathedral, was given last night by Chevalier Auguste Wiegand, in presence
of an audience as large as that which filled the spacious church on Sunday
afternoon. His Grace, the Archbishop, seated in the sanctuary, was again
amongst the most attentive and cordially appreciative of the listeners ; and
there was a great number of clergymen present as on the previous interesting
occasions. The audience listened to the brilliant performance with rapt atten-
tion throughout and were evidently deeply impressed by its superlative excel-
lence Chevalier Wiegand’s recitals, and the circumstances under which they
took place, are likely to be long and very favorably remembered by the citi-
zens of Dublin. —Daily Independent and Daily Nation , Wednesday, January
2d, 1901.
DUBLIN, IRELAND.
In proof of the unqualified successes won by the eminent organist, Chev-
alier Auguste Wiegand, at his recent series of three recitals given on the great
new organ in the Pro-Cathedral. Dublin, we quote from the Irish Times of
Dec. 28th : “The Chevalier’s achievement last evening cannot but add fresh
lustre to his past brilliant record. The programme was remarkably attrac-
tive, and its execution completely captivated the tremendous audience.” Of
his second recital the Dublin Daily Independent said : “Chevalier Wiegand’s
recital again attracted an overflowing audience, when his marvelous executive
ability greatly impressed the hearers. The Handel music was particularly
enjoyed, though there was praise on all sides for every number in the pro-
gramme.” From very lengthy notices on his third recital we select this from
the Dublin Daily Express: “The recital was an unqualified success. It is
rarely we hear so fine an organist as Chevalier Wiegand. He is a perfect
master of the king of instruments. The programme was very judiciously
selected,”— Musical Courier , (London) Friday, January 25, 1901.


UNIVERSAL EXHIBITION, GLASGOW, SCOTLAND, IQOI.
A FAMOUS BELGIAN ORGANIST IN GLASGOW.
Monsieur Auguste Wiegand, who to-day begins a series of organ recitals
at the Exhibition, was for over nine years official organist at Sydney Town
Hall, which boasts the largest organ in the world. During that period M.
Wiegand also acted as choir master and organist in St. Patrick’s Church,
Sydney. Last year he returned to Europe and has since given recitals in
various musical centers, in all of which he was warmly received. The tal-
ented Belgian is not only a master of technique but also a master of pedalling,
and can bring out the finest effects on any organ. On the monster instru-
ment in Sydney he had no fewer than 128 registers to manipulate, and for
this reason of course, must find other organs comparatively easy to manage ;
but, apart altogether from the facility thus acquired, his playing is possessed
of features as rare as they are admirable. By some people he is thought to
show “more of the virtuoso than the musician,” so rapid and at once so
thoroughly characteristic in his rendering of some Bach Fugues, in which he
takes a wonderful delight. His own compositions and adaptations show
a marked individuality, and it is hoped he will play a brief number during his
stay in Glascow. — The Evening Times , Monday, October 28, 1901.
ORGAN RECITAL, LONDON, ILFORD.
One of the choicest musical treats of the season was given at the Ilford
Congregational Church, on Wednesday evening, when Monsieur Auguste
Wiegand gave an organ recital upon the exquisite instrument with which that
place of worship is furnished. In spite of the thick fog prevailing there was a
very large attendance, and the congregation showed by their frequent ap-
plause their appreciation of the efforts of one of the most brilliant organists
that the world contains.— The Recorder , Friday, Novembers, 1901.
ORGAN RECITAL AT ST. PAUL’S WESLEYAN CHURCH, BEDFORD.
On Monday evening the celebrated Belgian organist, Mons. A. Wiegand,
gave an organ recital. The program which he submitted was remarkably at-
tractive, and the manner in which it was executed completely captivated the
audience.— Times and Indepe7ident , Friday, December 20, 1901.
CHEVALIER AUGUSTE WIEGAND IN HALIFAX.
Last night, under the auspices of the Sunday Lecture Society, Mons.
Auguste Wiegand. the Belgian organist, paid a return visit to Halifax. The
Victoria Hall was crowded to its utmost capacity, the seats on the platform
hiving to be brought into requisition .—Halifax Evening Courrier , Mon-
dry, March 3, 1902.
ORGAN RECITAL AT THE TECHNICAL INSTITUTE, SALFORD,
MANCHESTER.
The visits of Monsieur Auguste Wiegand to the Royal Technical Institute
in connection with the Saturday evening recitals are always notable events,
and Saturday’s recitals by that eminent organist formed no exception to the
rule. There was a large audience, and the various selections submitted by
Monsieur Wiegand formed a real treat to the lovers of music present. The
programme was a popular one and varied in character. — The Reporter , Satur-
day, March 8, 1902.


THE RE-OPENING OF THE TOWN HALL ORGAN, HUDDERSFIELD,
ENGLAND.
On Saturday night, the recital connected with the re-opening of the
Town Hall organ took place in the presence of a very large audience. The
organist on this occasion was Chevalier Wiegand, the celebrated Belgian
organist. The audience applauded loudly and the distinguished organist came
back twice, but the audience would have him again, and at length he came,
and, reseating himself by the organ, played the Coronation March composed
by himself. Chevalier Wiegand is an accomplished organist, and in such
pieces as the Communion in F. Offertoire in C Minor, and the Cantabile in A
flat, showed what might be done by the use of the softer stops ; whilst in the
storm fantasia and one or two other pieces where the “full organ” was tested,
the sound produced was almost overwhelming. Chevalier Wiegand gave a
delightful interpretation of the “Harmonious Blacksmith,” and the applause
was enthusiastic.—Huddersfield, September 22, 1902.
M. AUGUSTE WIEGAND IN SHEFFIELD.
Mr. Jasper Redfern has added very materially to the already powerful
attractions presented by his varied entertainment at the Albert Hall by the
engagement of M. Auguste Wiegand, the celebrated Belgian composer and
organist, erstwhile of Sydney Town Hall, and now the chosen organist of an
important Catholic Church in New York, whose recitals upon the Sheffield
organ are still vividly rememembered. Wiegand’s own “Storm” Idyll
brought the programme to a conclusion, and we had heard the last of the
broad, large-hearted playing that seems to belong particularly to the organist
who has made so great and so deserved a name for himself in almost every
country in Europe and in the new world also. — The Sheffield Recorder , Fri-
day, November 14, 1902.
ORGAN RECITAL AT THE VICTORIA HALL, HALIFAX.
Last night an audience assembled sufficient to fill the handsome and spa-
cious Victoria Hull from floor to ceiling. Under the skillful manipulation of
M. Aug. Wiegand, the eminent organist, its capabilities were admirably
brought out. At the close of the recital the vast audience applauded him with
enthusiasm. —Halifax Guardian , December 23, 1902.
AMERICA.
FIRST ORGAN RECITAL IN AMERICA AT OSWEGO, NEW YORK.
A DELIGHTFUL PROGRAM RENDERED AT ST. PAUL’S CHURCH,
Those of our citizens that were present at the organ recital last evening at
St. Paul’s church enjoyed one of the most glorious renditions of organ music
it was possible for the ingenuity and skill of man to produce. Never was the
noble instrument—though manipulated in the past by many able performers
—heard in its volume, variety and quality to such advantages as it was last
night under the hands of M. Wiegand.
Not a number of the well-arranged program failed to exhibit the exact
technique and the beautiful soul-inspiring melody that none but a genius and
a master hand could produce. The thrillingly beautiful music of the last por-
tion of the Harmonious Blacksmith was something to last for all time in one’s
memory, but the theme and variations—solo pedal— and the Le Dernier Som-
meil de la Vierge—the last sleep of the Virgin—was so prayerful, so filled with


a flood of melody that none could listen without being affected ; while the Ave
Maria by Gounod was something marvelous in just and beautiful expression
The storm fantasia by Mr. Wiegand as composer and performer, was a beauti
ful termination to a recital that will be long remembered.— The Palladium ,
(Oswego, New York, America) February 29, 1903.
NOS ARTISTES A L’ETR ANGER
Les journaux Americains sont tous eloges pour un de nos compatriotes
artiste organiste, M. Auguste Wiegand.
M. Wiegand est Beige de naissance. II a fait ses dtudes au conservatoire
de Li£ge et les a commencdes d£s I’age de sept ans. Aprfes avoir obtenu un
premier prix, il devint professeur au conservatoire et y resta pendant sept
ans. II fut organiste a Anvers. Puis I’amour des voyages le prit. II partit
pou I’Australie oh il fut pendant dix ans, de 1890 a 1900, organiste du plus
grand orgue qui existe, a I’hdtel de ville de Sydney.
Puis revint A Londres ou il resta deux ans, donnant des auditions et des
lemons dans la capitale de PAngleterre. C’est de 1A qu’il est parti en Ameri-
ique ou il a £td nommd organiste de I’dglise de Saint-Paul, A Oswego.
L’ Oswego Daily Palladium parle en ces termes de notre compatriote ;
“£)ue Wiegand soit un homme demure experience, on peut aisdment s’en
faire une idde quand on saura qu’il a donnd 409 auditions sur le continent,
Belgique, France, Holland et Allemagne ; 231 en Angleterre, Eccosse,
Irlande ; 1,16 r en Australie ; au total 1,801 auditions jusqu’au 18 Mars, 1902.
Les gouvernments of et Beige, ont voulu honorer le talent de M.
Wiegand et lui ont accorde le premier, le titre d’officier d’Acad£mie ; le
second, la croix de chevalier de I’order de Leopold. M. Wiegand est accom-
pagnd de sa femme et de ses deux filles.”
Le meme organe donne un compte rendu des plus flatteurs d’une audition
d’orgue, donnee A Saint-Paul. —La Metrople (Anvers) Lundi, 16 Mars,
1903-
CONCERT AT ST. PAUL’S, ST. PATRICKS DAY, MARCH 17.
TWELVE HUNDRED PERSONS THOROUGHLY ENJOYED THE PLAYING OF
MONS. WIEGAND.
Mons, Wiegand gave his second monthly organ recital at St. Paul’s Church
last evening and the results were highly gratifying, fully 1,200 persons being
in attendance. A program, varied in character, was rendered by Mons. Wie-
gand with his usual skill and he demonstrated again his mastery of the instru-
ment over which he presides. The Irish airs were never heard to better ad-
vantage than last evening and greatly delighted the large audience. These
included “The Minstrel Boy,” “Come Back to Erin,” “St. Patrick’s Day,”
“The Dear Little Shamrock” and “Killarney.” On the program were two
compositions of Chevalier Wiegand, including the celebrated Storm Fantasia,
which was rendered by request. This is indeed a wonderful composition and
of itself proves the ability of Wiegand as a composer — The Times , Wednesday,
March 18, 1902.
THE RECITAL AT ST. PAUL’S.
Another large audience heard Chevalier Auguste Wiegand’s organ recital
at St. Paul’s church last night, and despite the fact that the program was a
long one, every number was thoroughly enjoyed. Those who can look back
over a period of thirty years and'recall the matetial that Father Barry had to
work with when he came to Oswego, could not help last night commenting


upon his achievement. With one of the largest and best organized parishes
in the State, one of the finest church properties in the diocese practically free
from debt, a choir directed by one of the first masters of Europe, and an organ
that has few equals in this country, his life work, indeed, has been successful.
And it was from almost chaos that it was evolved and brought forth. —Oswego
Palladium , Friday, April 24th, 1903.
OPENING OF THE NEW ORGAN AT BROWN UNIVERSITY,
PROVIDENCE, R. I.
Professor Ashton and Dr. Jordan have, through the generosity of Mr.
Sharpe, secured the services of Chevalier Auguste Wiegand, the eminent
Belgian organist, to give the opening recital upon the new organ in Sayles
Hall, Tuesday evening, June the sixteenth. M. Wiegand has an international
reputation as an organist. He has given recitals on many of the most noted
organs in Germany, Belgium, Holland, France, England, Ireland and Scot-
land. From 1891 to 1900 he was the official organist at the Town Hall, Syd-
ney, Australia, where is the largest organ in the world.
Besides giving the opening recital on the sixteenth M. Wiegand will play
several groups of compositions on the organ in the course of the president’s
reception on the evening of commencement day.
INITIAL RECITAL BY M. WIEGAND SHOWS SHARPE’S GIFT TO
BE A WONDERFUL INSTRUMENT.
The grand organ at Sayles Hall, which Lucian Sharpe, of the class
of 1893, presented to Brown University, is probably the largest and most com-
plete instrument in the city and at the recital last night by Chevalier Auguste
Wiegand, its excellent voicing and rich tones being a revelation to many.
The organist, who is one of the most famous performers in the world on
that instrument, gave a masterly rendering of a varied programme which was
admirably suited to show the points of the grand organ at their best. The
programme follows : Sonata in D minor, No. 6, Op. 65, Mendelssohn ; choral
and variations —Fugue—Andante ; Communion in F, Grison ; “The Harmo-
nious Blacksmith,” Handel, (theme and variations) ; Grand Fugue in G minor,
Bach ; Grand Chorus in C minor, Batiste ; Cantabile in A flat, A. Wiegand ;
Toccata in G, Dubois ; “Rock of Ages,” Redhead, (theme and variations),
(Arranged for organ with solo pedal by A. Wiegand); Storm Fantasia, ar-
ranged by A. Wiegand.
The work of the organist was received with enthusiasm by those who
were greatly interested in his technique and wonderful familiarity with the
instrument. Mr. Wiegand is also famous as a composer and was formerly a
professor at the Royal Conservatory at Liege, Belgium.
Before coming to this country he was official organist of the Town Hall at
Sydney, New South Wales, which has the distinction of having the largest
organ in the world.
The instrument in Sayles Hall is a memorial by Mr. Sharpe to his mother
and father and on the front bears the legend, “Parentibus et Academiae Pig-
nus Pietatis.”
The organ was built by the Hutchings-Votey Organ Company of Boston
and New York. It is of very full scale, containing 50 speaking stops, three
manuals and pedals. The great organ has 12 stops, the swell 16, the choir 11
and the pedal 12, including a 32-foot Bourdon. It is unusually rich in 16 and
8-foot stops, which give it dignity and power of tone. — The News (Providence,
R. I.),June 17, 1903.


RECITAL at PROVIDENCE, R. 1., BY CHEVALIER WIEGAND, OF
CLASSICAL AND MODERN MUSIC.
NEW ORGAN AT SAYLES HATE, BROWN UNINERSITY, FORMAEEY OPENED
CHEVAUER WIEGAND DEEIGHTS A EARGE AND FASHIONABEE
AUDIENCE WITH HIS PEAYING.
Chevalier Auguste Wiegand, organist at St. Paul’s church, opened the new
organ at Sayles Memorial Hall, Brown University, Providence, R. 1., last
week. The Providence papers say :
M Wiegand Is one of the most famous organists in the world, and is also
widely known as a composer. Formerly a professor in the Royal Conservatory
at Liege, Belgium, he has devoted himself for many years to the giving of
organ recitals and has performed upon all the most noted instruments. For
several years previous to his coming to this country he was the official organist
of the Town Hall, Sydney, N. S. W., which contains the largest organ in the
world. Many honors and decorations have been bestowed on him.
The program which M. Wiegand performed last night was a comprehen-
sive one. It included examples of the strict classical school, together with a
fair representation of the modern style of composition for the organ, and was
well calculated to display the scope and resources of the fine instrument which
Brown has just acquired. His playing fully bore out his high reputation, be-
ing characterized by a smooth and highly developed technic, tasteful registra-
tion and unmistakable familiarity with both the powers and the limitations of
the organ as a musical instrument. The audience listened with the closest
attention and with an interest that showed itself in frequent and hearty ap-
plause. Among the numbers that met with particular favor were the variations
on Handel’s “Harmonious Blacksmith,” the “Communion” by Grison, and
M. Wiegand’s “Cantabile in A flat.” The Bach fugue and the brilliant “Toc-
cata” by Dubois were given with great technical effect, though without any
attempt at personal display.
The organ is the gift of Mr, Lucian Sharpe, of the class of 1903. The
instrument is perhaps the largest and most complete in the city, and undoubt-
edly the peer of any to be found in the hall of any American college.
SHARPE ORGAN DEDICATED AT BROWN UNIVERSITY.
A memorable event in the history of Brown university took place in Sayles
hall last evening when the new organ donated by Lucian Sharpe of the class
of ’93, was formally dedicated. Chevalier Auguste Wiegand, a world famed
organist, gave fine selections, rendered in a masterly manner, —Evening Tde-
gram, Providence, Wednesday, June 17, 1903.
HOME FROM PROVIDENCE.
Chevalier Wiegand has returned from Providence, R. 1., where during the
past week he gave the opening recital on the new organ at Sayles Memorial
Hall, at Brown University. The Providence musical critics spoke in terms of
the highest praise of Chevalier Wiegand’s ability and technical effect and all
assert that his playing was without any attempt at personal display. The
Providence News says ;
Chevalier Wiegand who is one of the most famous performers in the
world on that instrument, gave a masterly rendering of a varied program
which was admirably suited to show the points of the grand organ at their
best. The work of the organist was received with enthusiasm by those who


were greatly interested in his technique and wonderful familiarity with the
instrument. Mr. Wiegand is famous as a composer and was formerly a Pro-
fessor at the Royal Conservatory at Liege, Belgium —Oswego Daily Tunes ,
June 20, 1903,
ORGAN RECITAL AND CONCERT AT BROWN.
The Chevalier Auguste Wiegand, whose superb organ playing delighted
all who heard it at the recent opening of the new great organ at Brown, will
give another recital at the same place, Sayles Memorial Hall, on Wednesday
evening, July 1. This arrangement will give opportunity for those who did
not hear the first recital to see and hear the splendid instrument played by a
master. Arrangements are also being made for a concert of patriotic music
by a select choir of mixed voices supported by the organ, with Mons. Wiegand
at the organ desk and Dr. Jordan conducting. This will take place on the
evening of July 3 at Sayles Hall. The News , Providence, R. 1., June 23, 1903.
ORGAN RECITAL ST. PAUL’S, OSWEGO.
A large audience greatly enjoyed the monthly organ recital by Mons.
Auguste Wiegand at St. Paul’s Church last night. It was thought by
many to be the best given on the fine instrument by the eminent organist.
The professor will give two recitals at Brown University in Providence on
July 1 and 3. —Oswego Daily , Times , June 30, 1903.
CHEVALIER WIEGAND PLAYS AGAIN AT SAYLES HALL,
PROVIDENCE.
An audience that filled Sayles Memorial Hall to the doors greeted Chev-
alier Auguste Wiegand on the occasion of his second re o ital upon the fin
organ recently presented to Brown University by M. Lucian Sharpe. The
audience was not only large, but sympathetic and demonstrative, nearly every
number being followed by hearty and long continued applause. M. Wiegand’s
programme included the following selections : Senate, No. 1, in F minor,
Mendelssohn ; Larghetto of 2d Symphonie, Beethoven ; Elevation in F, E.
Batiste ; Etude de Concert, L. Lacombe ; Toccata in F (solo pedal), S. Bach ;
Marche Funebre et Chant Seraphique, Guilmant ; Andante in B flat from
Sonata No. 1, A. Mailly ; Grand Offertoire, Batiste ; Storm Fantasia, Wiegand.
According to statistics noted upon the printed programme, last night’s
performance was the 1850th recital given by M. Wiegand during the past 25
years. Truly an honorable and unusual record. The recapitulation of these
past achievments is hardly needed, however, for the emphasizing of M.
Wiegand’s ability as a player. That is soon evidenced to the listener by his
ample and fluent technique, his easy and effective manipulation of a strange
instrument, his fine taste and good judgment, shown in the appropriate col-
oring of his registration and the musicianly character of his interpretations.
As a virtuoso, M. Wiegand might be classified as belonging to the French
school. In his programme he draws liberally upou their representative com
posers, and in the general style of his playing and certain characteristic tricks
of registration he resembles Guilmant and other noted artists of that school.
But this tendency does not deny him the versatility ot a well-rounded musi -
cian. His playing of Bach is clean cut and without frills, as befits the music
of the greatest classicist, while in his admirable performance of the Mendel-
ssohn Sonata he seemed to catch the very spirit of that poetic and refined
composer.


The lighter pieces of the programme were delightfully rendered and
seemed to afford the greatest pleasure to the audience. Few people care to
hear how much noise a big organ can make. It is the dainty bit of melody,
the opalescent harmonies, the shimmering play of light and shade, the variety
and contrast of color that awakes their interest and holds their attention.
These characteristics were found in abundance in the beautiful larghetto from
Beethoven’s Second Symphony, the Andante by Mailly and the numbers by
Batiste. The Lacombe Etude and the Bach Toccata are primarily show pieces,
and in their performances M. Wiegand displayed all necessary digital and
pedal adroitness. The fine composition by Guilmant, one of his best inspira-
tions, was played with great sympathy and effective contrast. To close with,
M Wiegand repeated, by request, his own Storm Fantasia, which was on the
programme of his former recital. This, though conventional in treatment,
is not without originality in detail, and its brilliant performance brought to a
close a very artistic and enjoyable entertainment.— The Providence Journal ,
R. L, Thursday, July 2, 1903.
SECOND ORGAN RECITAL.
LARGE GATHERING ENJOY TONES OF NEW INSTRUMENT AT BROWN UNIVERSITY
Sayles Memorial Hall was again filled last evening for the second concert
given here by Chevalier Auguste Wiegand. The new organ recently presented
to Brown by Lucian Sharpe showed up magnificently under the supreme com-
mand of M. Wiegand’s skillful manipulation. Every number of the exquisite
programme was appreciatively received and received well merited and long
applause It was stated that last evening’s performance by M. Wiegand was
the 1,850 th recital given by him. surely a creditable record of achievement for
the twenty-five years of his career as a concert organist. By his fine technique,
fluent and easy rendering and ease of handling an instrument new to him, M.
Wiegand showed his characteristic ability in manipulation, and also in the
coloring and expression of his interpretation. —Evening Telegram, Providence,
Thursday, July 2, 1903.
ENTHUSIASTIC AUDIENCE LISTENED TO CHEVALIER WIEGAND’S
ORGAN RECITAL IN SAYLES MEMORIAL HALL.
Chevalier Auguste Wiegand gave a second recital in Sayles Memorial Hall
last evening upon the new great organ presented to Brown University by M.
Lucian Sharpe. He was greeted by a large and enthusiastic audience which
filled the hall to the doors and heartily applauded every number.
Chevalier Wiegand is a Belgian musician and his marked versatility was
especially noticeable in last evening’s variable performance. While he has
some strikingly individual methods of registration he is not limited in his
style. The printed programme gave an interesting sketch of some of Cheva-
lier Wiegand’s work. It was the 1850th recital that Chevalier Wiegand has
given during the period 1878-1903.
Monsieur Wiegand closed his performance last evening with a composi-
tion of his own, the “Storm Fantasia.” Chevalier Wiegand played the com-
position with a briliancy and artistic technique which held the closest interest.
The News (Providence, R. I.), July 2, 1903.
ST. PAUL’S WAS CROWDED WITH WORSHIPPERS TO-DAY.
At St. Paul’s Church this morning a solemn high mass of requium for the
repose of the soul of the great Roman Pontiff, Leo XIII, was celebrated.


From the vaulted ceiling, the gallery and the organ loft were emblems of
mourning entertwined with the Papal colors, yellow and white. The congre-
gation was a large one, every seat in the edifice being occupied. The Very
Rev. Father Barry acted as celebrant.
The Gregorian mass was sung by a choir of 58 voices, the musical pro-
gram being one of the principal features of the service The grand organ
never sounded better and the choir showed the effects of the master training
that had been received for the event. Two double quartettes, “O Salutaris ’
and Miserere” arranged by Mons. Wiegand for the occasion, without accom-
paniment were beautifully rendered. The musical program follows : Funeral
March, Chopin ; Gregorian Mass, St. Paul’s choir, fifty-eight voices:
Niedermeyer style of accompaniment by Mons. Wiegand. Offertory, “O Sal-
utaris Hostia Sacra Integer” ; double quartette specially harmonized for the
occasion, Misses Bruin and Lynch, sopranos ; Mrs. Driscoll and Miss Malone,
altos ; Charles Noonan, Fred T. Cahill, tenors ;L. iegand and N. Dow, bass-
es; Elevation, “Last Sleep of the Virgin,” Massenet; Mass, “Miserere.”
double quartet; ‘Libera Me.” full choir; Funeral March, Handel. —Daily
Palladium (Oswego), July 27.


Below will be found the specifications of the
ORGAN IN ST. PAUL’S
This instrument is, for its dimensions, one
many organs that I have played during my career
masterpiece in the quality and delicacy of
its tone
MANUAL
GRAND FOUR
Built by Messrs. Farrand,
, OSWEGO, N. Y.
CHURCH
of the best and most complete of the very
as a concert organist. It is a veritable
AUG. WIEGANU.
ELECTRIC ORGAN
Votey & Co., Detroit, Mich
Pedal Organ 30 Notes.
COLLEGE OF ORGANIST SCALE.
1 Large Open Diapason 16 feet
2 Dulciana 16
3 Bourdon echo 16
4 Large Soubasse (new) 16
5 Quint Acoustic (new) 32
6 Flute 8
7 Violoncelle 8
8 Super Octave 4
9 Trombone 16
10 Trumpet 8
Choir Organ 58 Notes.
1 Bourdon x 6 feet
2 Geigen Principal 8
3 Dulciana 8
4 Melodia Flute 8
5 Gem shorn 8
6 Flute Harm 4
7 Flageolet Harm 2
8 Cremone 8
9 Tremolo Choir (new)
Great Organ 58 Notes
1 Double Open Diapason 16 feet
2 Open Diapason, No 1 ... 8
3 Open Diapason, No 2 8
4 Viola di Gamba 8
5 Doppel Flute 8
6 Keraulophone 8
7 Harmonic Flute 8
8 Boheme Flute 4
9 Octave 4
10 Large Principal (new) 4
ii Octaviu Harm 2
12 Cornet, 4 ranks (new)
13 Trumptt Harm (new) 8
14 Harmonic Clarion (new). 4
Swell Organ j 8 Notes.
1 Bourdon 16 feet
2 Open Diapason 8
3 Dolce 8
4 Clarabella Flute 8
5 Bourdon 8
6 Quintadena (new) 16
7 Salicinnal 8
8 Voix Celestes 8
9 Wald Flute 4
io Fugara 4
ii Picolo Harmonic 2
12 Cornet, 3 ranks
13 Cornopeau 8
14 Oboe 8
15 Vox Humana (new) .8
16 Tremulant Swell.
17 Carillon, 38 bells.
Steel Bars.
Solo Organ §8 Notes (new)
In a swell box.
1 Large Open Diapason 8 feet
2 Contra Fagotto 16
3 Tuba Magna 8
4 Clarion 4
5 Clarinette 8
On heavy pressure of wind.
All new stops.
Echo Organ j 8 Notes.
In a separate swell box, situated at a dis.
tance of 175 feet from the Grand Organ at
the gallery.
1 Atheria 8 feet
2 Unda maris 8
3 Bourdon 8
4 Dulcet 4
5 Orchestral Flute 8
6 Vox Humana 8
7 Tremolo Echo
Couplers and Mechanical Accessories.
Balanced pedal swell and solo (new).
Balanced pedal echo.
Balanced pedal affecting all the manuals,
pedal and couplers 8 degrees.
6 Pistons Swell and Solo over great keys
affecting Swell, Solo and Pedal.
4 Pistons Great over choir keys affecting
Great and Pedal.
3 Piston Choir under choir keys affecting
Choir and Pedal.
4 Pedals combinations for Great and Pedal.
6 pedals combinations for Swell and Pedal.
1 Pedal to Great Reversible.
Couplers.
1 Pedal Octave.
2 Swell to Pedal.
3 Great to Pedal.
4 Choir to Pedal.
5 Swell to Great Unison.
6 Choir to Great Unison.
7 Swell to Choir Unison.
8 Choir to Great Sub Octave.
9 Swell to Great Sub Octave.
io Swell and Solo Octave by itself (new).
ii Swell to Great Sup Octave.
12 .Swell and Solo Sub Octave.by itself (new)
13 Sub Octave Echo by itself (new)
14 Wind Indicator.
15 Hydraulic Engine.
16 Detached Console, situated at a distance
of 20 ft. from Grrat Organ.
17 Electric-pneumatic action.
18 Cresendo Indicator, operating on entire
organ.
52


SUMMARY.
Pedal Organ 10 Stops
Choir Organ 9
Great Organ 14
Echo Organ 7
Swell Organ *. i 7
Solo Organ 5
Couplers 18
Mechanical Accessories... 6
Adjustable Combination Pistons 13
Pedal Movements .. 11
Total no
Total Pipes and Bells 3220.
SPECIFICATIONS OF A
Three Manual and Pedal Pipe Organ
AT MOZART COTTAGE STUDIO.
FOR THE PUPILS ORGAN LESSONS.
Pedal Organ.
Straight, coi cave and radiating sharp only.
U IVERSAL SCALE PEDAL 30 NOTES.
N. 1 Soubasse 16 feet, 30 pipes
N. 2 Contrebasse 16 feet, 30 pipes.
Choir and Great Organ in a swell box, 61
notes each
Choir Organ.
Ggdackt 8 feet 61 pipes
Keraulophone 8 “ 61 notes
Hohl Flute 8 “ 61 pipes
Great Organ in a Swell Box.
1 Bourdon 16 feet 61 notes
2 Open Diapason 8 “ 61 pipes
3 Bourdon Harmonic 8 “ 61 notes
4 Salicional 8 “ 61 notes
5 Flute Harmonic 8 61 notes
6 PTute Traverstere 4 “ 61 pipes
Space reserved for two stops more.
Swell Organ.
Quintadina 16 feet 61 pipes
Bourdon 8 “ 49
Viole d’orchcstre 8 “ 61
Voix Cfelestes 8 “ 49
Harmonic Picolo .. 2 “ 61
Harmonic Trumpet, small
scale 8 “ 61
Vox Humana 8 “ 49
Space prepared for two stops more.
2 Pistons Choir and Pedal.
4 Pistons Great and Pedal
6 Pistons Swell and Pedal.
COUPLERS OVER SWELL MANUAL.
First Group. Second Group. I Third Group. Fourth Group.
Pedal to Choir. Unison. Swell to Great 16. Swell to Swell 16.
Pedal to Choir.
Pedal-to Great. Swell to Great. i Swell to Great 4 Swell to Swell 4.
Pedol to Swell. | Swell to Choir
Tremolo Swell.
First balanced pedal crescendo choir.
Second balanced pedal crescendo great.
Third balanced pedal crescendo swell.
Fourth balanced pedal crescendo, full organ and all couplers together.
53


Mons. WIEGAND is also organ architect and expert with
25 years practical experience. He is prepared to advise as to
the building of new organs, restoration of old instruments, and
making specifications, plans and reports on all matters apper-
taining to church, chamber and concert organs.
Ccrms for Ccssons at tDe Studio:
Single Lesson on Piano, (one hour),
Single Lesson on Pipe Organ, (one hour),
Single Vocal Lesson, (forty-five minutes),
Single Lesson in Composition and Harmony, (forty-five
minutes),
TERMSCash with each lesson.
Terms for Organ Recitals and Opening Concerts on Application,
Mons. WIEGAND would call special attention to his
mode of teaching Organ Pupils, which embraces the proper
interpretation of classic and modern compositions, improvisa-
tion, registration (a most important feature); and a course of
lessons would include Harmony, Accompaniment of Gregorian
Plain Chant, Modulation, etc. Mons. Wiegand has several
pupils capable of taking a position as organist in any church
and ready to compete with other organists for such positions.
Will be pleased to preside at the opening of new Oigans, or to give Re-
citals on Organs in Churches or Concert Rooms, his wide experience and
enormous repertoire containing the best Organ Music of all schools, giving
him an advantage which audiences never fail to appreciate.
Mons. Auguste Wiegand has given 1852 organ recitals and concerts
in 23 years, from 1878 to 1903. These recitals have taken place in
various buildings, ecclesiastical and secular, in nearly every part of the world.
A Detailed List of these Recitals, arranged in consecutive order,
may be obtained of Mons. vViegand on application at
MOZART COTTAGE,
OSWEGO, N. Y.
Jl5 EAST FIFTH STREET,




.. • ■ ■ ■ - ■ ■' ••■■*.. #% ; ■
v J ( .* b '
V ,
r "'£n>; ' ~
