

• .•••• V
>•*
•••** (OJ
*•<.
BIOGRAPHY




BIOGRAPHY
DR. MANNIX
(Reprinted from the “Advocate," May 19, 1917.)
HOUGH the Pallium, which will be sent
from Rome, will not reach here for some
months, the Most Rev. Dr. Mannix, hav-
ing arrived in Melbourne in Easter, 1913,
as Coadjutor to the late Most Rev. Dr,
Carr, Archbishop of Melbourne, with the right of suc-
cession, owing to the lamented death of his predeces-
sor, has now become de facto Archbishop of Melbourne.
Though the war clouds were gathering in Europe
when Dr. Mannix left Holy Ireland for distant Aus-
tralia, there were few that could have foreseen that,
within a year of his arrival, Australia, with the re-
mainder of the Empire, would be plunged into one of
the greatest and most destructive wars that will be
recorded in the pages of history. Dr. Mannix takes
charge of his important diocese during the third, and it
is to be hoped last, phase of that great combat of.
nations.


HIS EARLY DAYS.
His Grace the Most Rev. Dr. Mannlx, D.D., LL.D., was
born at Charlville, Ireland, in 1864. He is thus in his
53rd year. He received his primary education from the
Christian Brothers, and afterwards he continued his studies
at St. Colman’s College, Fermoy. He passed from thence
to Maynooth, where he was ordained priest, and entered
for a course of theology at the Dumboyne establishment.
His career at college was brilliant and rapid. In 18 91 he
succeeded Dr. Esser in the Junior Chair of Philosophy, and
three years later he became Professor of Theology. He
next became Vice-President, and in 1903 President, of May-
nooth College. This was what may be termed the first
stage of a brilliant career, leading, as it did, to the Presi-
dency of one of the most famous colleges in Europe, the
nursery of priests in Ireland. His career as President
was also distinguished. Under Pius X., he became a
Domestic Prelate of the first rank, with the title of Mon-
signor, and also Canon of the Cloyne Chapter. He was
elected Senator when Maynooth joined with the Royal
University, and, with several others of the heads of the
affiliated colleges, he was made a Doctor of Laws. When
the Royal University was dissolved, he was nominated by
the Government as Senator of the National University,
Dublin.
PRESIDENT OF MAYNOOTH
During his term as President of Maynooth he received
the Papal Delegate, Cardinal Vannutelli, in 1904, and also
King George V. and Queen Mary in 1911. The appoint-
ment of Dr. Mannix to an important charge was expected by
those who knew him. As one of the students, who after-
wards wrote an appreciation for the “Austral Light,” said:
“The news of Mgr. Mannix’s appointment was no sur-
prise to those that knew him. The expected had happened
—I mean the general opinion had proved true, that, if there
was an Irish priest of our day predestined to rule as chief
pastor of a diocese, that one was Mgr. Mannix. We stu-
dents never doubted that some day it would come to pass,
and the opinions of the parochial clergy of Ireland, that we


came to hear of in various ways, confirmed our impressions.
The only question was, where? I have heard Dublin
mentioned, but Melbourne, to its good fortune, has won.
And, as his comrades and colleagues of late years stepped
from the decanal pulpits or professorial chairs to ascend
the steps of episcopal thrones. Mgr. Mannix must have felt
that his day was at hand.”
From the testimony of a class-mate, given in the “Advo-
cate” in July, 1912, Dr. Mannix was a brilliant student, dis-
tinguished above his fellows. This, of course, accords with
his academic successes. The writer of his appreciation in
the “Austral Light” says:—
“My first impressions of the Bishop-Elect were gained at
a temperance lecture. I had been a few months in the
Junior House at the time. I had not seen him before that,
nor, as far as I remember, had I heard of him till his com-
ing was mooted. That may seem strange, but it is quite
possible in Maynooth, where the Junior House is an alto-
gether different academic world from that of St. Joseph’s
and St. Mary’s. There was no hesitation that evening
about postponing an inter-class football match, or some
other event of unusual interest, when we heard Dr. Mannix
wished to address us. A diocesan of mine, who had heard
him previously, said to me, ‘You’ll never become a
“Pioneer”* if you don’t to-night. He made me one last
year, in spite of my better inclinations.’ I caught sight of
him first as he came along the corridor, with the profes-
sorial toga flying gracefully from his shoulders, a tall,
stately, statuesque figure, with a finely-shaped head, regular
features, surmounted by a lofty forehead, lips firmly com-
pressed, and raven hair, now, I think, well tinged with
grey.”
The writer then goes on to show how he was impressed
with Dr. Mannix as a speaker. He entered the pulpit, and
for about three-quarters of an hour held our attention from
beginning to end. As Jocelin says of the Abbot Sampson:
“He was an eloquent man, more intent on the substance and
method of what was to be said than on the ornamental way
* A member of the Pioneer Total Abstinence Association,
established by Father Cullen, S.J.


of saying it.” Mgr. Mannix uses no flamboyant rhetoric
or histrionic gesticulations; nor does he aim at picturesque
language. His style is incisive, sometimes electric, and
always dignified. ... A tradition, very unusual of its
kind, lingers in the college of the uncommon success of a
panegyric on St. Patrick given by him as an academic exer-
cise in his student days. He is very keen on the question
of total abstinence, but he has such a sensitive regard for
the individual’s legitimate personal liberty that he does not
favour coercion. He would like everyone to be as him-
self, but he will not use coercion. . . . Dr. O’Dea, the
Bishop of Galway, stated that he was elected President with-
out a dissentient vote, a very unusual thing to happen, and
which showed how he had won the confidence of the Bishops
of Ireland, though he was at the time a comparatively "young
man. It is not surprising to learn that the Archbishop of
Dublin did not like the idea of losing Mgr. Mannix, for the
Presidency of Maynooth is really the most responsible eccle-
siastical position in Ireland. As Bishop Spalding writes:
‘‘All educators have grave responsibilities, but the
gravest have those who form the men that are to counsel,
guide, and govern their fellows, not in their temporal affairs,
but in the things which concern character and conduct —
the welfare of the soul, for whose hurt and loss a universe
gained could not compensate.”
AS A THEOLOGIAN.
Those who were privileged to attend his theological lec-
tures speak in glowing terms of them. A pupil said that
one felt like taking no notes at his lectures, he explained
matters so lucidly. This lucidity and clearness was found
in Dr. Mannix’s replies to theological inquiries in the
“Ecclesiastical Record.”
COLLEGE IMPROVEMENT.
His greatest work was, however, accomplished as Presi-
dent of the college, where he was concerned in all the de-
partments, and was considered to be the moving spirit in
the progress that was made during a period of nine years.
During his time co-ordination with the Royal University


was brought about, and the college was made a University
centre. His aim was to raise the standard of the college,
and in this he succeeded, though not without some demur
on the part of some of those interested in the college; so
that all examinations, including that for the B.A. Degree,
were made universally obligatory. The judgment of the Pre-
sident, and those who acted with him, was vindicated, as a
stimulus was given to the students in the contest for exhibi-
tions, scholarships, and fellowships in the University, and
the partisans of Trinity College found that their sneers
were unavailing against the students from Maynooth. Not
that the standard of the college, which was always high,
was necessarily raised, but the evidence of it, as shown in
the success of the students, was overwhelming. Maynooth',
in short, had taken front rank amongst the University col-
leges. The greater part of Dr. Mannix’s attention, while in
Ireland, was, as we have shown, given to the affairs of
Maynooth and the important matter of education, and now
that the people of Victoria are establishing their Catholic
College, they are very fortunate in having one who may be
termed an expert in these matters at the head of affairs.
NATIONAL AFFAIRS.
Though Dr. Mannix was too deeply engrossed in his
work, as President of Ireland’s principal college, to give
much of his time to public affairs, there is evidence of the
interest he took in the general affairs of the nation. Not
only did he contribute articles, such as “Have We Solved
the Land Problem in Ireland?” to the pages of the “Eccle-
siastical Record,” but he also encouraged the Maynooth
Union to discuss social and economic subjects. The fol-
lowing extract from a paper written by him at the time
should be interesting:—
“Now, this legislation [i.e., Gladstone’s]' has been de-
nounced, in unmeasured terms, as an attack on the rights
of property, a violation of the sanctity of contract, an or-
ganised system of plunder. True, it is a perilous thing to
tamper with the rights of property, and undue interference
will usually bring its own punishment. But the rights of
property are not absolute, and it is a wise and fundamental


principle of English law that no man is deemed to have an
absolute ownership in the land. Landlord and tenant had
hitherto been allowed to fix the rent by what was called
free contract. But the result had proved disastrous.
Free contract was impossible. Under threat of evic-
tion, and under the pressure of the hunger for
land, the tenant was forced to promise a rent which
was, in most cases, exorbitant, and often impossible.
So-called free-trade in land had, therefore, been tried and
failed. We have all been witnesses of the fact that it
landed the country in an angry war of classes; that, in de-
fault of legal redress, it goaded the tenants to methods of
defence which were unjust and demoralising. The legal
right of the landlord to confiscate the tenant’s improve-
ments, by screwing up the rent and by the process of evic-
tion, was morally indefensible, and could not stand the
scrutiny of an electorate that was beginning to question the
traditional interpretation of the rights of property. The
right and freedom of contract is a sacred thing, for it is at
the root of all commerce. It should be jealously guarded,
for it is a frail thing, that does not stand unskilful hand-
ling. But there is something more sacred than the un-
trammelled rights of contract. And when contracts are
free only in name—when, in the name of free contracts, one
class systematically seizes what belongs to their neighbours
—it is the right and the duty of the State to protect those
who are not able to protect themselves.”
Dual ownership of land he condemned, and though per-
sonally opposed to compulsion, he found the compulsory
purchase of land the only remedy for existing evils. Seven-
teen years have passed since, and the principle of compul-
sion Dr. Mahnix then advocated has been adopted.
ENGLAND’S FOOD PROBLEM.
Now that, owing to the exigencies of war, England has
been brought to realise the truth of the lines of the poet
commencing
“111 fares the land, to hastening ills a prey.
Where wealth accumulates and men decay,”
the following utterance by Dr. Mannix at the time might be


regarded almost as prophetic:—
“1 am old-fashioned enough to think that the benefits of
free-trade, even to England, have been greatly exaggerated.
She has built up great manufacturing cities, and her wealth
and population have increased enormously. But, even in
England, the land is going out of cultivation, and her virile,
stalwart peasantry are disappearing. 1 am tempted to
think that England might be really a greater and more
powerful nation to-day if she had not sacrificed her peasan-
try in order to push her manufactures. Already England
has had to take anxious thought for her food supply in the
event of war. She has reason to regret the strong,
vigorous tillers of the fields, the strength of her armies in
war, and the sires of a virile, healthy people. But, how-
ever that may be, free-trade has been the ruin of Ireland’s
staple industry. . . . The land has been going out of
cultivation because the competition from foreign countries
has lowered the price of arable more than of grazing land.
Irish wheat has been driven out of the market. . . Until
the new countries have their own population to maintain, it
is hard to see how the Irish farmer can compete with his
rivals.”
AUSTRALIAN AFFAIRS.
Though Dr. Mannix, like his illustrious predecessor,
comes with such a brilliant record from his native land,
and though he is not likely to forget the country where' the
highest positions in the gift of the Church or the people
awaited him if he had remained, it must be remembered
that, when he landed in Australia, he became an Australian
as well as a high dignitary of the Church. His utterances
at the Maynooth Union stamp him as a democrat, whose
aim, outside his ecclesiastical duties, would be to support
reforms and do justice to the mass of the people. This
cannot be emphasised too strongly at the present time, when
feeling is so strong in political circles, and men cloak their
opposition to real progress and reform under the specious
pretext of a sole desire to assist the Empire in the great
war. This feeling of sympathy, and the desire to assist in
improving the condition of the people, is one of the leading
characteristics of the Archbishop. Though placed, in his


high position, above and beyond political parties, he repre-
sents that democratic spirit which has always been evident
in the Catholic Church. The following extract from a
speech he delivered in Bendigo in April, 1913, shortly after
he arrived in the State, will show how thoroughly he grasped
even then the position of affairs in the Commonwealth:—
“Australia would increase its greatness if only the
people would be true to themselves and act up to the duties
and opportunities of a people upon whom God had placed
great responsibilities. Australia would prosper if people
were brought here and put on the land and rooted there;
if inland industries were fostered by scientific government,
and the product of foreign industries were kept out as far
as possible; if Labour and Capital in the Commonwealth
would cease that fratricidal strife in which they appeared
to be engaged, each one looking for his own pound of flesh,
and forgetting the interests of the great country and those
coming after them. (Applause.) If these principles were
followed, Australia would, in the near future, be one of the
greatest countries under the canopy of heaven. (Applause.)
He hoped to be a good Australian. If he ever had to say
anything that would hurt an Australian, it would be with
the object of doing good for Australia.” (Applause.)
This speech, which was delivered in the year before the
outbreak of the war, might be taken as a text by our poli-
tical economists. It also shows that, while the Catholic
Church in Victoria has a worthy successor to the great
Archbishop who has passed away, the State itself will bene-
fit for having in a high position one who will aid “the
cause that needs assistance,” and oppose “the wrong that
needs resistance.”
Advocate Press, 284 Lonsdale Street. Melbourne.




■A
1508
00062064
