









BIRDS AND BOOKS




This book was edited and prepared
for the press by my friend, L. F.
Fitzhardinge, to whom my thanks
go willingly.
The edition is limited to 200 nurm
bered and signed copies.
‘
This copy is N0....5?.£






On “Warrigal,” Foulis Court, about 1925.


BIRDS AND BOOKS
THE STORY OF THE MATHEWS
ORNITHOLOGICAL LIBRARY
GREGORY M. MATHEWS, C.B.E.
VERITY HEWITT BOOKSHOP
CANBERRA
1942




PREFACE
In the field of Australian natural history, no section has
received greater and more expert study than has that of the
birds of Australia. It is only necessary to mention the names of
Lewin, Gould, Broinowski, Cayley and North to indicate the
distinguished company to which Mr. Gregory M. Mathews
belongs, and in which he takes a pre'eminent place.
For most of these, however, our Australian birds had mainly
an artistic or scientific appeal, whereas for him it was the love
of the native born for the feathered friends of his boyhood and
the bush companions of his mining and droving years. To him
they were joyous companions whose vibrant life he intimately
shared.
It was this enthusiasm which sent him to London so that
he might consult all the literature available for the writing of
his great and national work, “The Birds of Australia. 1 ’
During these years he systematically gathered his own
collection which he has now generously presented to the National
Library at Canberra. So complete is it that Australian ornitho'
logists will no longer need to go to London and even British
ornithologists may now need to come to Canberra For the rarest
and most important works on Australian birds.
Few people are so privileged that they can make the
passionate hobby of their youth the complete interest and
avocation of their lives, but, in the case of those who do, the
record of their lives is full of interest and appeal and in this lies
the charm of this autobiography.
I am sure, therefore, that this little and unpretentious story
will receive a warm welcome not only from ornithologists but
also that much greater company who like myself can only claim
a love of birds.
KENNETH BINNS
Commonwealth National Library,
November, 19^2.




CONTENTS
PAGE
Introduction: The Work of Gregory Mathews.
By Tom Iredale . ... . 7
Chapter I. Early Memories . . . H
11. Queensland Days . . . . 19
„ HI- A New Life ..... 32
IV. Bird Collections .... 47
V. The Library . . . . 55
VI. “The Birds of Australia” . . 62
Appendix I. The Skull of St. Teilo ... 66
11. Association with Scientific Bodies . 69
Bibliography ...... 69
ILLUSTRATIONS
On Warrigal, Foulis Court, about 1925. Frontispiece
The Author in 1902 .... 30
On “Tomboy,” 1931 .... 38
Field Master, Hambledon Hunt .... 39
Gregory M. Mathews, C.B •E 62
St Teil °
St. Teilo’s Cup ...... 67




INTRODUCTION: THE WORK OF GREGORY
MATHEWS
BY TOM IREDALE.
(Reprinted from : Royal Zoological Society of New South
Wales. Proceedings, 1939-40.)
When a lad at school in this State and afterwards on the
land in Queensland, Gregory Mathews was interested in bird
life, and at a comparatively early age in manhood the opportunity
came for him to issue a series of coloured illustrations of Aus-
tralian birds. In England he went to the British Museum
(Natural History) and there met Dr. Bowdler Sharpe, in charge
of the Department of Birds. Dr. Sharpe was the greatest ornith-
ologist of his day and one of the best of any time, having been
born with a love of birds, and blessed with a wealth of
enthusiasm, as well as ability. Dr. Sharpe took charge of the
young Australian and enthusiastically commended his aim and
offered to assist him in every way, urging him to prepare first
a down-to-date list of birds, there being no such guide in exist-
ence. This was a laborious task as though the young man knew
birds he did not know much about their classification. Not
daunted by his ignorance, Mathews set to work with dogged
Australian pride to master this new problem. Dr. Sharpe
assisted him and, in 1908, he had prepared the first of his many
Lists, the Handlist issued under the auspices of the Australian
Ornithologists’ Union. While preparing the Handlist he had
discovered really how little, instead of how much, was known
about the life histories and distribution of Australian birds.
There was only one remedy: a systematic investigation of the
bird life by means of new collections, correspondence, and study
of literature. He organised collectors, circulated requests for field
notes to all the working ornithologists in Australia, and secured
all the books bearing upon his study.
The latter part of his task was as difficult as any other
as, while many books may be procured for money, there are
many others very difficult to secure, although their apparent
intrinsic value may be little. The Library now at Canberra has
taken nearly forty years to build up, and contains many volumes
that may not occur in the market in the next forty years.


Mathews’ aim was to have at his hand every book bearing upon
the subject so that any disputable point could be settled instan-
taneously. Collections coming in had to be determined and
allotted to their place and correspondence carefully listed so that
the life history of every bird was quickly available.
The preliminaries having been brought into place, Mathews
began his herculean task with a time-table of twenty years’ work
ahead of him. For many years Mathews worked up to sixteen
hours a day, only possible through the work being a labour of
love. Unexpectedly, before the completion of his first volume,
his mentor, Dr. Sharpe, died, and Mathews had to continue
single-handed. Soon after, it was my good fortune to become
associated with Mathews, and I assisted him in the continuation
of his gigantic work. It may be here stated that the volumes
averaged nearly 500 pages each, a total of nearly 6,000 pages
and nearly 600 coloured plates. In addition, a Check List and
a Bibliography were added, and then the Birds of Lord Howe
and Norfolk Islands, and a final Supplement, making a total of
about 7,000 pages.
During the preparation of this work, Mathews got together
a huge collection of birds and examined all the other important
collections in Europe and America, as well as those in Australia,
in private hands as well as those in Museums. It is well-known
that figures impress more than words, so it may be recorded that
Mathews has examined over 100,000 bird skins from Australia,
and be it remembered that most of these were examined, not
once or twice, but twenty and more times. It was his custom
whenever a collection came in to examine the specimens in
conjunction with the series already in hand, and then with those
in the British Museum and at the Rothschild Museum, Tring,
so that errors were reduced to the absolute minimum as far as
personal ability could permit.
In touch personally and by correspondence with all the
leading ornithologists of the world, every debatable question was
freely discussed and only the truth was desired. It was the
elimination of personal prejudice that caused more disputes than
any other, and, strange to relate, after thirty years of increased
knowledge, personal prejudice has cropped up again in a recent
publication. How it was annulled in Britain can be seen in the
fact that Mathews was elected as a member of a Committee


formed to settle matters of dispute in connection with British
birds. The young Australian had mastered his subject so
thoroughly that he was given place among the lawgivers of
the most conservative British Ornithologists’ Union, the first and
probably the only Australian to receive such an unexampled
honour. When the British and American Ornithologists’ Unions
decided to issue a Systema Avium, that should be authoritative
throughout the world, Mathews was elected to represent Aus-
tralia and due to his unexampled enthusiasm his volume was the
first issued. The MS of the Systema Avium was submitted to
the leading ornithologists of Europe, America, Asia, Africa and
Australia, and the comments discussed, and then the printed
copy again re-submitted before publication. Recently some
workers, ignorant of these conditions, have suggested that this
work was merely a personal opinion given by Mathews.
Having now finished his work, prepared for the ornitholo-
gists of Australia as a reliable working basis, Mathews has
crowned his life work by the gift of the Library, whereby all
his statements can be checked by future Australians. As to the
extent of the collections worked upon, Mathews gave a list at
his talk to the Ornithological Section and it was most terrifying.
It read like a chapter in “Numbers”: Rogers in North-West Aus-
tralia, Tunney in South-West Australia, Dahl in Northern
Territory, Kemp and Meek in North Queensland, McLennan
in North Queensland and Northern Territory, and so on and
so on, it would take a page merely to write the names down.
Suffice to say that every portion of every State in Australia was
represented. It should be unnecessary to point out that in the
preparation of the Birds of Australia there was no opportunity
for easy work. When a bird was to be dealt with, the whole
family had to be examined very thoroughly, so that the plumage
changes could be understood. Then a fine male, a fine female
and a young one had to be selected for description, and then this
series had to be figured. While the illustration was being pre-
pared the variations in the series had to be criticised to find out
whether they were due to age, season or geographical distribu-
tion. In the last-mentioned case, the names had all to be
scrutinised to see if any supposed synonym were available and,
if none, a new name had to be proposed. As Mathews was the
pioneer in the study of sub-species of Australian birds discussions


have arisen, but all workers to-day recognise the great value of
his work, and in the future it will be even better understood.
Mathews, like many Australians, is most modest about the
quality he might boast of, and in his talk everyone noted how
he gave all the credit to his helpers, omitting all mention of his
own great enthusiasm that fired all the helpers to do their best.
He suggested that Sharpe was responsible for his success, but
the man himself has surely showed that he owes little to anyone,
and as this is not an obituary notice, I may be allowed to con-
clude with, “Long live Gregory Mathews!” with the sure
knowledge that when it becomes his time to pass on he will rest
happy in the assurance that he will continue to live by his works
always in the memory of present and future Australians.


CHAPTER I.
EARLY MEMORIES
It has been suggested to me that someone, some day,
browsing among the many volumes which comprise the Gregory
Mathews’ Collection in the National Library of the Australian
Commonwealth, may ask: “Who was Gregory Mathews? And
so I have been asked to write this monograph to accompany the
Collection.
I have often been asked how it came about that my father,
Robert Hamilton Mathews, licensed surveyor, turned ethnoky
gist and anthropologist and carried on with such enthusiasm and
persistence his valuable studies among the Australian aborigines.
Similarly, I have been asked what impelled me to devote the best
years of my life to the study of ornithology and the production of
the fourteen folio volumes relating to the birds of Australia
the biggest work ever produced on the fauna of one country.
The answer to these questions may be found in heredity.
For a moment let me forget all my birds and their trees, and
let me glance at my own ancestral tree. From the eleventh to
the twentieth century there have been many generations of the
Mathews family, and history records them as men of purpose
and action, serving their country and their God to the best of
their ability. They were happy to take up arms to defend their
King and country in what is called the age of chivalry. They
took part in the Crusades. At the same time they were careful
to keep their estate and those dependent upon them in good
order; and when duty called them away their womenfolk carried
on the work. The family were the hereditary keepers of the
Tomb of St. Teilo from the seventh century, and in the middle
of the fifteenth the Bishop of Landaff handed to the then head
of the house a reliquary made from the skull of the Saint as a
family heirloom in recognition of duty faithfully done—not by
Sir David only, who received it, but by all his kinsmen.
The years went by. Times changed; and as the family grew
in numbers they separated and settled, some here, some there, in
different parts of the British Isles. One branch went to Ireland


in the days of Queen Elizabeth, becoming landed proprietors in
the North, where the original settlers had received a grant of
land for services rendered with the army under the command of
the Earl of Essex. And there they and their descendants re'
mained for about two centuries and a half.
Then, as before, with changing conditions, new lands called
to them. Two brothers went to America; and two came to
Australia. Thus begins the history of the Mathews family in
this country.
My father had a property near Biamble, on the Castlereagh
River, New South Wales, and it was there that I was born. A
licensed surveyor, he had a large camp with a considerable
number of men and horses. The work was arduous and the hours
long; but the new land offered many compensations. To men
who were willing to give of their best to this land of sunshine
and health the land gave back a rich reward, and at the early
age of forty my father had made a competence and could call
himself an independent gentleman. Then, for two years, with
his wife, he went travelling round the world; only, alas, to find
on his return that a dishonest lawyer had misappropriated some
of his funds and he must needs resume his work.
My mother was a very beautiful woman. My father had
’met her while surveying in the Maitland district —Mary Bartlett,
a daughter of Edward Bartlett, of Wallah. The family was
descended from the Bartletts of Stopham. One branch settled
in East Anglia in the thirteenth century, and it was from there
that Edward Bartlett came to Australia in company with two
brothers. Mary Bartlett was known as the belle of the district,
and my father fell in love with her at their first meeting. They
were a splendidly matched couple.
Before they went on their world travels, my parents had
decided to settle in Singleton, not far from Maitland, chiefly
because of the educational advantages it offered for their
children. And so, in July, 1880, we "shifted camp” from the
old Biamble home to Singleton. It was a long overland journey,
and, young as I was, I can remember the gaping crowds that
stared at our cavalcade as we passed through the various settle-
ments along the road—my father driving the big buggy with
four horses, and all the other vehicles following. Except for an
occasional bush inn, we camped out in the open at night, and I
would sink to sleep in my little bunk with the stars blinking at


me and the more-pork calling in the bush. I can hear my old
nurse, Agnes Beck, saying to me now: “Listen, dear, to the
more-pork!”
Agnes Beck, a very dear and faithful nurse and friend, had
helped to save my life at birth and tended me through many a
year. To her I always turned for comfort in my troubles. Born
on March 13, 1853, she lived to the ripe old age of 84. When
she died I was with a shooting party in Scotland, and a strange
thing happened one night: 1 distinctly saw my foster-mother in
her grave-clothes. Six weeks later the letter telling me of her
death reached me. For those who delve into occult matters
there may be something in this to interest them. There was the
closest bond between us from my childhood up. I have spoken
of the influence of heredity in shaping our destinies; but this
I must also say —that Agnes Beck’s great interest in Nature and
its wonders helped in no small measure to encourage my own
natural bent.
Singleton was the first town of any siz,e that I had seen, and
I remember rising with the sun the morning after our arrival
there and going for a stroll around the town. In a near-by street
I saw a shop full of clocks and watches. I know now that it was
a pawn-shop; but I had never seen anything like it before and
was so fascinated by it that I glued my nose to the window in
wonderment. Then there appeared the figure of a remarkable-
looking man. He was tall and thin and wore a long white beard.
He looked like Moses in a dirty shirt, dressing gown and skull
cap, with skinny shanks appearing below his night shirt and
gown, his feet stuck into down-at-heel slippers —an awful
apparition to a child so young and inexperienced.
As I stood staring at him in horror and amazement, he
addressed me thus: “If you vant to buy a vatch you buy a vatch.
If you don’t vant to buy a vatch, go avay from de vindow and
let de peoples see de vatches and de vatches see de peoples!”
With this, he waved me away, and I hurried home.
We soon made friends. Among them were the Dalton family.
Stewart and Sedley Dalton were about our own age, and they
had an elder brother, Frank, who was a born naturalist. Every
Saturday we tramped the country far and near in search of the
nests and eggs of species breeding in the neighbourhood.
We had lots of adventures —and some narrow escapes. My
brother and I were very proud of our joint ownership of an old


fashioned muzzle-loading gun. We had been shown how to load
it and had been given ammunition. One day the ramrod got
jambed. My brother held the stock while I held the part of the
ramrod sticking out of the barrel, and we pulled. It was quite a
tug'O -war but nothing happened to us! To-day such an episode
would give us the jitters.
And I remember the day when a boy named Billy Dudding
came on an expedition with us and improved the shining hour
by showing us some “drill.” At the command “Ground arms!”
he banged his loaded gun on the ground with the muzzle pointed
directly upward. The gun went off and the charge went through
the rim of his straw hat, carrying the hat skyward and leaving
Billy so scared that he nearly jumped out of his skin. On another
occasion a friend of ours named Cobcroft, who was a very good
shot, tried to pull his gun through a wire fence by the muzzle,
with the unhappy result that the gun went off and the the charge
entered his arm. The whole arm had to be amputated.
As a child I suffered much from toothache. At the end of
our road lived Porter, the chemist, and to him I was sent one
day to get something to cure the toothache. Porter was a keen
gardener. Into the shop from the garden he came, wiped his
hands on his green gardening apron, asked me which tooth was
troubling me, sat me on a chair—and out came the tooth. I
walked home spitting blood into the gutter all the way. It was
the wrong tooth, and my mother was so angry that she made
me go back to get the right one taken out. Pleasant as life was
in those days, it had its drawbacks.
We lived in a large old Georgian house—Ness House, as it
was called. The grounds were quite large enough to accommo-
date all my father s horses. We also kept cows. The cart sheds
and stabling were extensive. . About half a dozen maids were
employed in the house, and they slept in another building across
the yard; I can recall how apprehensive was my mother when
“the camp” was at home, with a dozen men in their quarters and
the maids in theirs.
We were living in the “candle days.” The women made their
own candles in the house—the old “dip” with a floating wick
which showed a round moon on the ceiling and very little
diffused light and the wicks had to be snuffed by wetting the
thumb and forefinger in the mouth and then quickly removing
the ‘mushroom.” What an awful smell it was at bedtime when


the candle was extinguished and the red spark lingered and
smouldered before finally dying out! Last into bed had to blow
out the light. Imagine our delight when, in the early ’Eighties,
gas was brought to Singleton—and to our Georgian home—and
the lampdighter went his rounds lighting the street lamps.
The Hunter River was often in spate. In normal times we
could cross it over a log, but when it was in flood it was a mighty
swirl of water and we would stand and watch trees and logs,
huts and outhouses, flotsam and jetsam of all kinds, being carried
downstream in a wild confusion. I learnt to swim at a very early
age, but I would not have liked to have found myself battling
against those mad waters.
I was also able to ride when I was five years old. It seemed
to come naturally to me. My father was interested in a property
named Goorangula, some twenty-four miles from Singleton, and
here we boys usually went for our holidays. Once I spent a
school term out there, and I had to ride to school. Later, another
property, Springwood, was acquired’ which was only twelve
miles from Singleton, and there we also spent some very happy
times.
During one holiday spent at Goorangula I learnt a lesson
in humility that I have never forgotten. I had got up early one
morning, as was my wont, and had become so interested in some
work that was going on that I took no notice of the breakfast
bell. When, some time later, I entered the house I found a plate
of porridge at my place at table and saw some eggs ©n the hob.
I wanted the eggs; I did not want the porridge. But I had Mrs.
Richards to reckon with. She had brought up six sons and four
daughters and had her own ideas on how the young should be
fed. She insisted on my beginning as all the others had done, and
in a fit of anger I refused.
“If you arc hungry, my boy, you will eat your porridge,”
she said; “and if you are not hungry you do not need the eggs.”
Excellent logic, of course, but to my childish mind it was sheer
nonsense, and I marched out of the room in great indignation.
Out on the farm there was much to interest me, and I
wandered off to the orchard. By mid-day, however, the pangs
of hunger were gnawing at me and when the bell sounded for
lunch I answered with alacrity. When I reached the table the
plate of cold porridge was staring me in the face. To think that


before I would be allowed to have anything else I must eat the
porridge was too much for my rebellious mood and I ran out of
the house and lay on the grass to die. Thus would I pay this Mrs.
Richards out: she would be filled with remorse when she found
my poor shrivelled body lying there!
Three o’clock came, and I was still alive —and into my
nostrils floated the sweet smell of bread just baked in the camp
oven. It was too much for me, and I surrendered. “I will eat
the porridge,” I said to returning to the house—“l will eat it,
Mrs. Richards.”
And the face of the kindly old soul smiled at me. Then she
seised the porridge and threw it into the fowls’ bucket, following
this up by taking off the nice biscuit crust of the bread she had
just baked and giving it a good covering of butter overlaid with
a thick helping of fig jam. “There, my boy, eat that and be
happy,” she said to me.
How my heart went out to her for that —and for the won'
derful lesson she had taught me. Then and there I learnt
humility, and it has stood to me ever since. It taught me how
to face up to the hard things in life.
Humiliated as I was on that occasion, there came a time
when I was still more humiliated. My father had a white
carriage-horse called Theodocius, which pulled our big “abbott”
buggy laden with the family. This horse hated black folks and
once tried to pull a neighbour’s black coachman off his box, to
the danger of the occupants of both vehicles. On another
occasion he chased a blackfellow named “King Cocky” (prob-
ably the last of his tribe) who used to bring my mother the
honey of the wild stingless bee, from which she made a con-
coction that was very pleasant. But the incident I am to relate
had nothing to do with the blacks—it is about the “blues.”
Theodocius had to be exercised, and it was my job to take
him to water in the Hunter River. All went well until an aphis
attacked the white part on every horse, and the affected part
had to be blued with a blue-bag. With a horse with a blaze
or one white leg it did not matter much; but Theodocius was
white—then blue—all over. Think, then, of an all-blue horse
and a sensitive lad on his back. All the people turned to 100k —
and no doubt to laugh—at horse and rider. I felt so conspicuous,
and so humiliated, that I took to riding him through all the back
streets rather than face the hilarious multitude.


And here I must relate an amusing episode whieh happened,
not to me, but to my uncle—one concerning a pig and not a
horse. My mother’s people lived at Maitland and kept pigs and
cows as well as horses. All the family went to church on Sun'
days, and the men wore top'hats. Returning from church on one
occasion, they walked down to the orchard and, to my uncle’s
indignation, he found a pig rooting there. He picked up a stone
and threw it at the animal, hitting it on the head, and it rolled
over, apparently dead. Taken aback, my uncle walked up to it
and put his foot on its side, when, to his astonishment, the
animal rose suddenly and emitted a series of loud grunts. It was
too much for uncle; losing his temper, he snatched the top'hat
from his head, threw it on the ground and jumped on it. A
strange way of relieving his feelings, no doubt, but he felt better
lor it, although it cost him a new hat.
I have already mentioned that my parents went travelling
round the world. They were away for a considerable period and
during their absence, except for our visits to Goorangula and
Springfield, we lived at Ness House, with our beloved Beck
looking after us and Miss Schrader acting as governess to us.
We made a great many friends in Singleton and thereabout—the
Dangars, the Blaxlands, Reads, Dights, Goulds, McKays, Loders
and others. Years afterwards, Miss Dangar, who married Major
Lovell, came to live near us in the old city of Winchester in
England.
Some time after our parents returned from their travels,
education again compelled a family move —this time to Parra'
matta, the home of the famous King’s School and of Abbotsleigh,
the welbknown girls’ school founded by Miss Mariane Clarke.
At the King’s School I met a number of boys from “the bush’’
who taught me more about the habits of birds during our
Saturday walks, and helped me in making notes and registering
full data relating to all the eggs we collected.
After leaving school, my brother went on to the University
of Sydney; but as I showed no desire to follow him, my father
obtained an interest for me in a Queensland cattle station, some
eighty miles from Charters Towers. There I spent some pleasant
years. The work was continuous and arduous. We started at
daylight and finished at dark—if we were lucky enough to have
no cattle to watch during the night. But I was to find later on


that my scientific work was even harder than work on a station,
that constant brain work is more fatiguing than any muscular
work can be.


CHAPTER II.
QUEENSLAND DAYS.
From Sydney to Townsville in the ’Nineties was a steamer
trip of about ten days. Townsville (with its breakwater that
was constantly undergoing repair) was the port of call for
Charters Towers, and a small coastal vessel ran up to Cairns.
Townsville was full of goats. They walked the streets and
got a precarious living by eating papers and what little grass they
could find about the town. One old Billy was quite a character.
The bars of the hotels had a tub into which were thrown the
heel-taps, whisky, rum, beer, schnapps, cigarette ends, etc.; and
the tubs were placed out on the footpath after closing hours, to
be emptied by the dust-cart. Old Billy seems to have found out
that the contents were good for goats, and he systematically
went from hotel to hotel draining the tubs until finally, in a
delightful state of intoxication, he realised, like any other
“drunk,” that he must lie down and sleep it off —only to repeat
the happy experience the next day.
In Charters Towers I lived with the Morris family. The head
of the family had suffered pecuniary losses in England and had
come out to Australia in the hope of better times. He'was Chief
Magistrate at the Towers when I arrived there. His wife was a
second mother to me, and I loved the whole family, Ethel being
my especial friend. She grew into a splendid woman, but she
died, alas, in childbirth. Biddie, the youngest of the family, now
has a family of her own and lives at Bowral, in New South
Wales. Jim, who has been my lifelong friend, went to the war
of 1914-18, and afterwards settled with his wife and son near
Brisbane. I owe much to the Morris family. When I needed
friends they befriended me, and I am never likely to forget their
kindness.
Then there were the Plants and quite a lot of other good
folk at the Towers, and they all helped to make my life there
a pleasant one, notwithstanding all the hard work that had to
be done. Plant used to tell us how he “humped his bluey” on


to this prosperous mining field. Later, he became a very wealthy
mine-owner.
The Marsland brothers were the leading lawyers of the town,
here were the Cliftons, who had the brewery and entertained
us hospitably on Sunday afternoons; and there were the Huttons
and the Mills, of Mills United”—a famous mine. A son,
Uharles Mills, was a Colonel in the World War No. 1. He
married Maud White, of Bluff Downs, and they now live at
Panshanger, Tasmania.
a lading assayist, initiated me into the mysteries of
gold. I would watch the gold being turned into ingots, samples
being taken to be assayed, and the bar being stamped with a
number before being sent to the bank. The ingots varied in size,
ut were about the shape of a common bar of soap. It was not
an uncommon thing to see a man with a small, but heavy, bar
of the precious metal on his shoulder in the streets. When the
banks had accumulated a sufficient quantity of bars they would
ship them to Sydney and Melbourne. A special truck was
attached to the train between Charters Towers and Townsville,
and armed men sat in the truck guarding the gold.
One often heard stories of men who had acquired wealth
quickly by lucky speculation. Then they would build nice houses
and blossom out into leading entertainers. I remember one man
who bought a very nice house from a less fortunate family, and
there was a great house-warming party, everybody of any social
standing being invited to it, irrespective of whether the host and
hostess had known them previously or not. I was one of the
gay young bachelors who was invited. We were met by our
host in full evening dress. He was standing on the verandah
steps, saying, “This way to the drinks, ladies and gentlemen.”
Ihe verandah ran round three sides of the house, and on each
wing he had a “bar” complete even to golden-haired barmaids.
We passed on from bar to bar in a state of great satisfaction,
ina y, we entered the ballroom and were received by our
hostess who was feeling just as happy as we were. It was a most
enjoyable evening; but unfortunately our thanks were lost on
our host and hostess when the time came to say farewell for
the former was lying in the garden and the latter in the hall
On another occasion a family who had built a fine house
gave a big marriage-feast in celebration of the wedding of the


daughter to a handsome officer in one of the fighting forces.
After the ceremony in the church, we all drove out to the house
for the “breakfast.” Champagne was flowing everywhere.
Looking out of a window, I saw our coachman and other cab'
drivers enjoying the luxury of drinking champagne out of the
bottle, and I was careful to take my party away early.
Once, when I had come in from the station and was staying
at the Crown Hotel, a man, faultlessly attired in riding clothes
from England, rode up to the hotel at 10 o’clock in the morning,
and, leaving his horse with the groom, ordered a bottle of
champagne, drank half a glass, threw a couple of sovereigns on
the counter, and then walked out. He merely did it to impress
us with his importance. Judge of our surprise when, in the after'
noon, we saw this same man being driven in his carriage'and'pair
along the street, dressed as a miner and smoking a clay pipe,
while the coachman in livery was smoking a fat cigar.
Bicycles were becoming common about this time. I think it
was about 1892 that I first learned to ride the newfangled
“safety bicycle,” the hind wheel of which was a little larger
than the front one. It was an advance on the old “penny'
farthing” affair, but the tyres remained solid. Later came the
bicycles we know tO'day, with the pneumatic tyres.
Cycling was popular at Charters Towers, and it was decided
to invite some professionals to come to the Towers and make a
gala occasion of it. All the cyclists of the town lined up and met
the heroes at the railway station, led by the daughter, of one of
the leading bicycle dealers. Right well she looked to us men,
but the women frowned upon her, for lo! she was wearing
cycling breeches. Later, “bloomers” came in, but they were at
first illegal, as women masquerading in men’s attire were con'
sidered to be breaking the law. I call to mind the occasion when
a hostess organised a bicycle picnic and all rode some miles out
of town. The women then removed their skirts and rode in
their bloomers. Along came a policeman and he took the names
and addresses of these “fast” women; but whether any court
action followed or not I have forgotten. We have “advanced”
a bit since those days, as a visit to any of our surfing resorts will
fully demonstrate. Dear old Mrs. Grundy! I wonder what has
become of her?
On the staff of the Charters Towers newspaper was a young


fellow who had been at The King’s School with me, and no
sooner had he mentioned my school prowess as a Rugby foot"
bailer than I was invited by the local club to take part in a
game. At the trials I conducted myself with all the confidence
of a boy, but when I played in a match against those burly
northern miners I found it was no schoolboy play, but real hard
knocking. I played just outside the scrum and took the ball and
passed out to the halves. It did not take me long to realise that
our opponents were just as nimble as I was, and after being
buffeted about unmercifully, and limping home with gravebrash
on both legs from heel to hip, I decided that football in that
region was far too strenuous a pastime; for my weight was about
ten stone, and those gentlemen up north averaged about fifteen
stone and threw and bounced me about just as they liked.
I spent some time in the Towers learning how to assay gold
and studying the cyanide process of extraction. In order to be
near the scene of my labours, I stayed at a working men’s hotel
kept by a family whose name, if I remember rightly, was
Bucknell. It was on the way to Millchester, another mining
centre a few miles from the Towers. For the pound a week I
paid, I was very well fed and housed. The cooking was done by
a. Chinaman.
I worked with the men at all sorts of jobs, including the
screening of the sludge, receiving one shilling a ton for what
passed through the screen. Some of the men earned from 10/"
to 12/" a day, but my earnings only amounted to about 8/'.
On another plant, I filled a dray from 8 a.m. till noon, and
after hour for lunch went on working from one to five o’clock.
I walked the four miles there and back, and after a cold shower
and tea in the evening (the evening meal was always called
tea ) I usually went to see some friends or took part in a dance.
It was a strenuous life.
I could write a great deal about my mining experiences, but
I must pass on to the cattle station. The station was under con"
tract to supply cattle to the freezing works at Townsville and
it had also to supply meat for the coloured workers on the
Johnstone River canefields. The crossing of the cattle over the
Tully River was one of the exciting parts of the journey, which
I made on more than one occasion. For a birddover such as I
was, the trip via Ingham and Cardwell was full of interest. Flere


I saw the wild cassowary and its nest for the first time, as well as
innumerable scrub birds, but it was the crocodiles that made
the crossing of the rivers an exciting adventure.
The drovers were Jack Morgan, George Elliott, Medlicott,
Waldock and the famous Jimmy Fergusson, who took a thousand
bullocks from Beaudesert to Adelaide after the 1885-88 drought.
It took him nine months to make that trip, but he delivered the
cattle in good condition and they topped the market at £l2 per
head.
The dense jungle between Cardwell and the Johnstone River
was very trying when cattle had to be driven. Paths had to be
cut in the forests —tunnels one might describe them as, between
“pockets” where the grass grew. Into those pockets the cattle
were driven at night, and we camped at the mouth of the tunnel
through which we had passed to prevent the animals going back.
Beyond that, there was no need to watch the mob, as the jungle
was impenetrable except for the paths. The station had its own
killing pens at Geraldton (now known as Innisfail), and from
there the meat was delivered to the different cane estates. A
day or two would be spent in the town, and then back we would
go to the station to begin all over again.
At Geraldton I met the brother of a celebrated war corres-
pondent. Peter was one of a considerable band of “remittance”
men, so common at that time. It was easy enough to pick a
“gentleman once” in those days. Poor old Peter ... he would
hold my horse for sixpence, the price of a drink!
In 1896, Queensland had a visitation from what was destined
to be its greatest curse —the dreaded cattle tick. In one year we
lost 7,000 head of stock. This devastation was heart-breaking,
especially as we were busy building up a herd after the 1885-88
drought. However, the workers on the cane fields had to be
supplied with meat, and it was therefore necessary for us to buy
in any available market. We were fortunate in being able to
buy 519 head of fat cattle from Iffley Downs on the Saxby River,
a tributary of the Flinders; and so, with a full complement of
horses and all the paraphernalia necessary for a long droving trip,
I started overland with Fergusson, the drover, Jerry White as
cook and horseman, and two blackfellows, Peter and Joe. On
the way out we were held up by a flood in the Gilbert River,
which is named after Gould’s collector, John Gilbert, who


explored this country with Leichhardt, but we managed without
mishap.
We saw much new country, and while passing the Elizabeth
goldfield we enjoyed the hospitality of a miner who had just
struck a 200'ounce nugget and expected all who passed that way
to join in celebrating the find. After having revictualled at
Croydon, we passed on to Georgetown. There we stayed and
enjoyed the luxury of sleeping in a bed—which had become a
novelty to me at that period of my life. The bar of the leading
hotel was, as is usual in mining towns, full of men anxious to
drink with their fellows. Money was plentiful and the golden'
haired Hebe lured the men on. Most women have a sex'appeal
after men have been living for months up'country with only men
for company.
Then on to the town of Normanton, following the river,
which was almost dry; and so to Iffley. There, on a permanent
waterhole, close to the homestead, we pitched our camp. While
camped there, I met a rather remarkable character by the name
of McDowell. He was interested in a meat'canning place up
towards the Gulf of Carpentaria, and many were the stories told
of him. This, however, is not the place to tell them.
In due course we took delivery of the cattle and started off
with them, some of the station hands accompanying us for a
day or two. Wild bush cattle are not too easy to manage, and
after we had been some days on the road it was not very comfort'
mg to learn that the black boys had been inveigled away from
us. They had just walked off in the night. As a result, we had
to do double work. The cook had to get the horses in by day'
light, afterwards going on ahead to prepare camp and, at eventide
be ready to take the first watch. Fergusson and I divided the
night watch between us.
As we neared Black Boy Creek we found the grass all burnt
off the land and no feed for animals for many miles. The creek
was dry, and at one period we seriously considered whether we
should let the cattle go. We heard of a drover who had aban'
doned his stock owing to the lack of water, and he himself had
perished. However, we persevered.
I had been in the saddle for 36 hours without a drop of
water when Fergusson rode up with the joyful news that he had
found a running stream. I drained the half--pannikin of water


he had brought, and he went away and returned with a full one.
That was the most delicious drink I have ever had.
The cattle had found the water. When cattle smell water
they have a peculiar way of lowing, with their heads moving up
and down, and that’s how Fergusson got that drink for me —he
just let the cattle have their heads and followed them. It was
the first running water we had seen for six weeks. That is a long
while to go without a bath, or being able to wash one s clothes.
How pleasant it was, that evening by the river. I lay in the
limpid stream for a long time, letting the water run over my body
and swish about me; and then I washed all my clothes. And
what a fine meal we had! The cook had been taken ill, but with
the finding of this life-giving stream a miraculous change occurred
and he set to the fire-making and cooking with the best will in
the world. Yes, my friends —water is life!
It was life to us —it was life to the cattle. We had started
off with a mob of “fat cattle’’; but they were no longer fat. The
poor animals had suffered terribly, and some had died. How
they plunged into that living stream —and drank and drank.
Near Croydon I took a packhorse into the town for pro-
visions, and on my way I met a prospector who begged that I
take his packhorse in as well. It seemed a rather strange request,
but he told me he had not visited a town for twenty years and
felt frightened of a crowd. The loneliness of a prospector’s life
had told upon him. He wrote his order on one of the stores on
a piece of newspaper and handed me his bag of gold-dust, an
act of faith and confidence that surprised me somewhat, seeing
that I was a complete stranger to him. When, next day, I
brought back his packhorse laden with provisions and returned
his gold-bag, he thanked me profusely and did not even check
up his gold-dust.
At Georgetown we sold 16 bullocks that were footsore to
the local butcher; and he took out his scales and measured so
much gold-dust in payment. In this district no money passed in
any transaction. Later, we sold the gold-dust to a bank.
After passing through all the trials incidental to a droving
life, we eventually delivered the rest of the cattle at the cane-
fields, and then our tired horses took us back to the station in
time’for Christmas. We arrived at the station in a heavy
thunderstorm —the first rain we had seen for about five months.


The “daughter of the house” was enjoying it to the full; she was
ecstatically dancing about in this Heaven-sent shower-bath, clad
in her biothers pyjamas. I wonder if the charming lady who is
now a grandmother at Panshanger, in Tasmania, remembers that
glorious wet day?
I have spoken of the trials of a droving life—and they are
many. Once I was “hung up” with Fergusson on the Burdekin
River. After waiting for a couple of weeks, we were able to
get the cattle across, and we made a bark canoe for the saddles
and provisions. But we could not get the canoe across the swollen
river. Leaving Fergusson in charge of the provisions, the black
boy and I swam the horses across. We had to mind the cattle
all night, with no food except a raw piece of an opossum which
the native caught. Hunger makes us do wonders. In the morning
Fergusson was able to get the provisions over, and we lost no
time in getting the fire going and having a good square meal.
On the Tully River one of our bullocks was seized by a
crocodile and disappeared. At Geraldton I shot a 12-foot croc,
with a rifle. These ugly things are very plentiful up North, and
one has to be continually on guard against them.
One interesting experience we had at Geraldton was in
visiting a Chinese opium den; interesting, that is, until one of
the Chinamen began shooting off his revolver, and then it
occurred to us that we were not regarded with favour. We took
the hint and departed with a bow.
Jimmy Fergusson was a wonderful man to travel with. I
think he liked me because I fell easily into the ordinary routine,
such as getting up as soon as he touched me. As he boiled the
billy for our breakfast I was allowed full time to sleep because
he knew I could wake in a second. We never had an angry
word. In the evenings we would have many long talks under
the stars, and it was during one of these talks that he roused
in me a longing to see England. He told me about a man who
had gone to from Queensland and had found the Old
Land to be “the most beautiful country in the world,” full of
wonder and delight. And, somehow, I knew that night that I
would also go to England. It came to me in a flash. It was more
than a mere wish—l knew. I knew that I would go to England;
I knew that I would join in the hunting there, that I would
shoot pheasant and grouse, and do many things in that country


that at that time seemed so far away to me. People have often
asked me how I knew it; but I cannot tell. Many events have
happened in my life that I knew would happen long before they
did. Others may be able to explain it; I can not. In the same
way I knew beyond all doubt that I would finish my “Birds of
Australia,” which has taken up 30 years and more of my life. I
am no fortune-teller; I do not pretend to be able to foretell the
future for myself or for any other person; but when the “flash
comes, vivid as lightning, concerning some particular question or
event, I would as soon doubt the truth of it as I would doubt
my existence on this planet.
But lam digressing. Let us get back to our muttons and
our beef. I was talking of Fergusson, who taught me much
philosophy and helped me to “discover 1 myself. He came out
with some queer expressions sometimes. For instance, he had a
way of saying “Mickey Drippen where another man would use
the expression “What’s-’is-name,” and I have never since heard
it used by anyone else —and I have roamed about the world a
lot since then. He also used the word umpteen long before
it came into common use.
During working days Fergusson was a teetotaller, but when
he delivered a mob of cattle he would go on an almighty binge.
I can well imagine how he celebrated his arrival in Adelaide in
1889 after that droving trip that occupied nine months. I think
it will be admitted that he deserved a drink or two. I often saw
him enjoying himself at Collins’ Hotel in Charters Towers.
After he had received his cheque Mrs. Collins would cash it
for him and offer to place the money in her safe. As a rule, he
accepted the offer; but he would often sew a five-pound note
in his shirt before giving up the rest. With this he would
entertain his friends in the bar and would have a rollicking good
time.
On returning with the horses on one occasion after delivering
cattle at the Johnstone River, I asked Jimmy Fergusson if he
would get the provisions at Cardwell while I went on a mile or
so and pitched camp. A few hours later, as he had not returned,
I rode into the town. There, in front of the pub, was Jimmy’s
horse—and it was no puzzle to find Jimmy. After getting the
stores and putting him in the saddle, we went back to the camp.
As soon as Jimmy rolled off his horse he curled round a bush


and, declaring that he was a cassowary, said he did not wish to
be disturbed.
When alcohol was not obtainable, he would drink tea so
strong that it looked like pitch. Yet his nerves were as strong
as iron and his hand so steady that at sixty years of age he was
accounted one of the best rifle shots in the North. A few years
later, I regret to say, he met his death by drowning. Looking
back over the years, I remember him as one of the greatest
drovers that ever lived, and as one of the best pals I ever had
Good-bye, Jimmy Fergusson, my friend of half a century ago!
I guess if there s any cattle-droving or any rounding-up of lost
sheep to be done in the Elysian Fields, you’re holding your own
with the best of them.
As for my life on the cattle station itself, it had its drawbacks
no doubt, but it had its adventures and its thrills; and, anyway,
youth always looks upon the world through rose-coloured
spectacles. The breaking-in of horses was one of the exciting
things of these days. This work was let out by contract, and
the horse-breaker did the job at the station yards. Each horse
was tried out, and it was either accepted as having been properly
broken or was returned for further schooling. The young men
on the station, of whom I was one, vied with each other as to
who could ride the buckjumpers, and to survive the ordeal was
to experience a great thrill of satisfaction. In England, in later
years, I was considered to be a good horseman. Well, it was
there on that North Australian station that I learnt to sit a
saddle.
For a month, or perhaps six weeks, we had what we called
the “Wet,” when all outdoor work came to a standstill. At this
season we allowed the blacks to go bush.” On the station the
men acted as stockmen and the gins worked in the house, and
they were always very particular to be properly clothed; but
when they took to the bush for their annual “walk-about” they
abandoned all their clothes. They found all the food they
required out in the open. Meantime, the white men worked in
the station store, mending harness and saddlery, making new
bridles, or performing any other duties that were necessary. As
we had two teams of twelve horses to pull the heavily-laden
drays that made the journey to and from the station, it can be
imagined that we had a good deal of broken harness to mend or
repjace,


“Race Week” in Charters Towers was always sure to see
a good roll-up from the station, for it was then that we would
meet all our friends and neighbours. Incidental to the races, the
townsfolk always organised a dance, and it was quite a swell
affair in those prosperous days at The Towers. Saturday after'
noon and evening saw the town alive with people, many of
whom had come in from fifty or a hundred miles away. How
pleasant and carefree it all was.
Time passed, and I began to get restless. It was becoming
apparent to me that, whilst a pastoralist’s life was certainly a
happy one, it would not suit me as a career. My nature was
calling out for something different, something more creative, if
I may put it that way. In this short-sighted world, I found
myself taking a long-distance view. I wanted to be “moving on
—exactly in what direction I hardly knew. But, as the poet says,
“there’s a divinity that shapes our ends, rough-hew them how
we will” —and I felt that something would happen to start me
going. And something did happen!
When the Macarthur-Forrest process of extracting gold from
tailings by cyanide of potassium and precipitating it on filiform
z;inc became a “proposition” in Charters Towers, I followed the
example of a number of other people and began to make a study
of it. Finally, I drew some money from the Bank and bought
shares in a gold-mining company. Sellers were asking £2 for
the shares, and I bought all I could. I felt sure I was on the
right track, and my faith was justified when, a few months later,
I sold them for ,£lOO each.
I suppose we all remember the first Thousand Pounds we
are able to save; and to me it was a great thrill. Shortly after-
wards I left Queensland to join my brother on a newly-opened
piece of country; but I was not satisfied —something else, some-
thing distant, seemed to be calling me. Then a friend interested
me in Borneo. “Let us get some shares in the tobacco industry
in Borneo, and go over there to work.”
Borneo —yes, that would be the life! That would be a
splendid opening and pave the way to wealth . . . But it was
not to be. Something else happened —something I had not
bargained for, had never thought of. I fell in love! Like a bolt
from the blue, the “only woman in the world” suddenly stepped
right in front of me —and a widow at that. Also, she had two
children. What divinity was this! Just as I had about made up


my mind to join the wild men of Borneo a lovely woman (with
two children) crosses my path and makes me change my mind
. . . and instead of Borneo, I go to England. And 38 years of
happy married life are to follow.
Queen Victoria was dead. The Boer War was still being
fought; and some of my friends had gone to South Africa. The
coronation of King Edward VII was soon to take place—in
1902, and the lady who had now become my wife suggested
that we should visit England for this happy event. She also
expressed a wish to have her children educated there—a wish
that was supported by her sisters. Like my wife herself, her
sisters were women of strong and beautiful characters, and one
°f them consented to accompany us. A governess for the
children completed the party.
We took passage in the S.S. Damascus, calling at Melbourne,
Adelaide and Albany, the latter being the last Australian port
of call. On board was a party of school teachers from New
Zealand. They were going to South Africa to teach in the
concentration camps that had been formed by the British, who
were anxious that the wives and children of the Boers who were
fighting against us should be cared for in every possible way.
But peace was declared four days before we reached Durban.
We were only allowed to land at Durban under a permit
from the Army, as martial law was still in force. We went ashore
each day while we remained there, being lowered from the ship
in wicker cages to a tender alongside. When ashore, we hired
rickshaws drawn by Zulus of splendid physique, and the children
were greatly impressed by their head decorations of polished
bullock horns or brilliantly dyed feathers.
On the way from Durban to Capetown we passed several
wrecks, and our thoughts naturally turned to the mystery of
the Waratah which was then fresh in everybody’s memory. No
one knows what became of her. To this day it remains a mystery,
like that of the Marie Celeste.
On reaching Capetown we visited Cecil Rhodes’s fine old
home, Gioote Schuur, Table Mountain, and other places of
interest; and then we sailed for the Canary Islands.
We saw the peak of Teneriffe the day before we reached it.
There it is!” said the Captain. I was looking on the skyline,
and could see nothing. Then he pointed to the sky—and there
it was, away up in the clouds. When we arrived at Teneriffe


The author in 1902
(From a drawing.)




fruit'sellers clambered aboard the ship and we bought grapes
and figs from them.
As we neared the shores of the Old Land we struck thick,
foggy weather which delayed us considerably. For nearly thirty
hours the Captain was on the bridge; and the fact that the chief
engineer had not taken in enough coal at Teneriffe (being
anxious to hurry home to get married) meant a further slowing
down. By such carelessness does man defeat his own ends! But
love plays strange tricks with all of us; and even our poor
Captain had a shabby trick played upon him, for at Capetown
a lady with peroxided hair came aboard and so captivated him
that one gathered from his description of the fog that kept him
so long on the bridge, that it was by far the thickest, dirtiest,
damnedest fog he had ever known. And then, to cap it all, it
was reported that the lady completed her conquest by eventually
relieving him of all his savings.
However, he landed us all at Plymouth, safe and sound —so
God rest him, merry gentleman!


CHAPTER III.
A NEW LIFE
Now a new life was to begin for me. From the New land
of Australia, I had come to an Old, old land, the cradle of our
race —to a land that was full of history—“this blessed plot—this
England! 1 as Shakespeare has it —“set in the silver sea.” The
long twilight evenings, the ivy-covered church towers, the
English country-side and the ancient houses—all this, and much
more that I had dreamed of but had never seen, were soon to
become familiar, for here I was destined to live for many years.
The day after leaving the ship we went to London, the great,
throbbing heart of the Empire; and then on to Tunbridge Wells,
where we lived for some weeks. This old inland watering town
is full of interest and we found much enjoyment in cycling round
the neighbouring country. And then we went to live at “The
Larches,” Wadhurst.
The old century was behind us. The Victorian era had
passed with its Queen, and the Edwardian era had come in its
place. The Queen was dead—Long live the King!
Yet in many ways life was going on very much as in the
Naughty ’Nineties.” Piccadilly Circus, Leicester Square and
Burlington Arcade were what may be described as the “Abode
of Love.” The old Westminster Aquarium, of famous memory,
was tottering to its close. Regent Street, with Nash’s Crescent,
was beautiful and always full of splendidly equipped carriages,
not to mention the Hansom cab and the “Growler.” The motor
car was as yet in its infancy; almost a decade was to pass before
it ousted the old horse-drawn ’bus.
When visiting London it was necessary to wear a top hat
and frock coat. All the men had two evening suits, one to wear
at a dance or when escorting a lady to the theatre or concert hall,
and the other for “smoke” concerts and music-halls. To these
latter places the ladies were never taken and the men could smoke
there. What I have referred to as the “smoking” set of evening
clothes was reminiscent of the older “smoking jacket and cap”
—the former generally made of velvet, and the latter shaped like


a tin-can with a tassel that some men still wore in their homes
when they retired for a smoke in their den after dinner. Before
“joining the ladies” they would don their other clothes, so that
the smell of tobacco smoke would not annoy the ladies.
As for such a thing as smoking at dances, etc., it was
regarded almost as a crime, and no gentleman would indulge in
such a luxury unless he chewed a clove after it to banish the
horrid smell of smoke from his breath. King James’s famous—
or should I say infamous? —indictment of the filthy weed still
hung like a cloud over My Lady Nicotine.
There was no running water at the hotel. You rang for
your early morning shaving water, and the maid also prepared
the bath. In the evening, hot water was placed in all the rooms
as a matter of course, and while the guests were changing into
their evening wear a maid was in attendance in each passage
to attend to any special requirements.
For the summer holidays most of the families went to the
seaside. When the “season” opened in London there was a
continuous round of gaieties. The children loved the horse shows
and “Changing of the Guard,” while the grown-ups had plenty
to occupy them in the Grand National, Goodwood, the Derby,
Ascot and other such places where the multitudes assembled.
The social round culminated with the Cowes Regatta, at which
many members of the Royal Family were to be seen. Then came
grouse shooting and deer stalking in Scotland, and by the Ist of
November, fox hunting and shooting in England.
Such is a rough outline of the life we led in those days. The
English country captivated us by its beauty, and the roads were
so good that we spent many months cycling over them —a
delightful means of locomotion. The advent of a son, however,
put an end to these jaunts, and I soon became very busy with
my scientific work. In fact, I spent so many hours a day at it,
became so absorbed in it, that I was at length obliged to listen
to the advice of a medical friend and give the study a rest for
a while. So for a time I took to golf on the West Herts links
at Watford. But man likes best that at which he excels, and
when my step-daughter’s holidays from school came round she
and I would mount our horses and go for long rides across
country. We both loved to be on horseback. When I went back
to Hampshire I entirely abandoned golf for the horse and all
that it meant to me,


My Victorian life of the Nineteenth Century in Australia
had ended—but the horse remained, and my love of the horse.
But the earth moves—and Science moves with it ... It was
at Wadhurst, one afternoon in 1902, that we saw our first motor
car. It had broken down. The children especially were intensely
interested in it, and they were overjoyed on learning that the
repairs could not be effected that night and that the car had
to be placed in our empty cart shed. They stayed up long after
their usual bedtime studying this newfangled contraption.
Not only did we see our first motor car in this pretty village
of Wadhurst; but it was there, too, that we saw the last dancing
bear—and it also, strange to say, spent a night in one of our out'
houses. The bear was led by a man with a drum on his back
(played by a string worked by his foot), a set of pipes fixed
below his mouth so that he obtained a “mouth organ” effect
by moving his mouth along the openings, a cymbal in one hand
and another cymbal on the drum, whilst in his other hand he
held a cord which was tied to the bear and he pulled this cord
more or less gently according to the way in which he expected
the animal to dance to his barbaric music. This man was the
greatest living wonder I ever saw. I believe that this was the
last dancing bear seen in England. I never saw another one until
1937, when I was staying with my son at Grenoble, in France.
As I could plainly see that the motor car was to be the
vehicle of the future, I lost no time in learning to drive one. My
tutor was Gadd, of Wadhurst. He taught me all there was to
know about the motor car of the period—how to take the gears
apart and clean and replace them, and everything else there was
to know.
So “adventurous” were we that we decided to take my step'
son to Parkfield School, at Hayward’s Heath, by car. We started
off in great style—but, alas, we had to return in ignominy. The
next day we tried again. We got further this time, but again
broke down. Fortunately, however, it was near a railway station,
and we finished the journey by train. Still, we were making
progress, and at half-term we managed to get to the school and
return safely by car, a total distance of 80 miles. The old car
was one of six h.p. and built like a wagonette, with room for one
alongside the driver and with two back seats facing each other,
with a tail entrance. There was little, if any, protection against
dust and rain and wind, The cars had no roof,


By the year 1907, the motor car was firmly established;
nevertheless, it was far from reliable. We had passed the stage
when there was a pointed iron bar at the rear which was let
down if we were doubtful about being able to negotiate a steep
hill. If we could not manage the grade, this at least prevented
us from running backward down the hill, as the brakes were
not strong. We then turned the car round and backed up the
hill. Punctures, too’ were frequent, for the roads had not been
made for the motor car; and the speed was slow in coim
parison with that of the modern car. A journey from
Southampton to Watford, for instance —a distance of about 70
miles—was quite an adventure and took the best part of a day.
I met a man one day when I was making the trip, who said:
‘‘There will come a time when motor cars will be stoned. 11 Like
many other people of the time, he failed to realise that a new
age in locomotion had dawned. Within five years of that remark
this new method of travel had become almost universal.
Wadhurst was an old-fashioned village some four miles from
Tunbridge Wells. It had quite a history of its own, and some
strange tales were current. There was an old house which my
children used to call the “Sleeping Beauty 11 house. It was
unoccupied and obviously had a history. We had not been living
there very long before the tale was unfolded.
In the eighteenth century the owner of this house was one
of the wealthy squires who got their money from the land and
went in for hunting and shooting as a pastime. This man had
two daughters, and when he died they carried on the estate in
the same even tenor. But one day the butler, who had saved
enough money to keep him, gave notice of his intention to leave.
That anything could ever occur to upset their life’s routine had
never entered their heads and they were thrown into confusion.
They could not imagine life without the butler. What did they
do but ask the butler to retire while they discussed the moment'
ous happening, and when he was readmitted inform him that it
had been decided that, rather than lose him, one of them would
marry him. It was for him to make his choice. The proposition
appealed to him as a wise man of the world, and he intimated
that he would marry the elder of the two women. Not only
were they duly married, but when his wife died he married her
sister: Whether he knew that it was illegal to marry a deceased
wife’s sister history sayeth not —but Wadhurst was miles away


from the centre of things and marry the sister he did. He was
now a very wealthy man, with his racing stables and other
amenities which placed him on an equality with the squires of
the neighbourhood.
The story does not end there, however. Near the village
lived a lawyer, who had a good but not a very lucrative practice.
This man fell in love with the eldest of three girls whose father
was a very rich man, and though the father objected to the
match she declared that she would marry no one but her choice.
On the father s death it was found that his eldest daughter could
only inherit her share of the estate on condition that she married
a man with equal fortune. And then a very strange chain of
events occurred—such as one rarely reads of except in story'
books.
The lawyer frequently made business trips to London. One
day, when making one of these trips, he met the former butler
of whom I have spoken, and this man informed him that he was
going to London to make his will. “Who is the lucky heir?”
asked the man of law with a laugh. The man replied that he
was leaving his fortune to a nephew in South America. When
asked whether he was naming a residuary legatee, he said he
had not thought of it.
It is just as well to put someone in,” suggested the pro'
fessional man, speaking both as a lawyer and a friend.
Oh, well, I will put you in.”
They laughed and went on their ways, thinking no more
about it. But, to everyone’s astonishment, it was found when
the old man died, that the nephew in South America had pre'
deceased him—and the lawyer inherited the entire fortune.
That was a great thing for him; but a greater thing was that he
was now able to marry the lady of his heart as well without
asking her to forego the fortune her father had left her.
After spending a year at “The Larches,” Wadhurst, we
went to Hampshire— to Weston Farm, on Southampton Water
near the picturesque old fishing village of Weston. It was here
that I really settled down to my life s work, collecting notes
reading studiously and getting to know the ornithologists and
others who helped me in many important ways. Some ornitho'
logical works which I bought from Gilbert and Son, “Ye Olde
Booke Shop,” above Bar Southampton, proved very helpful to
me at this time.


It soon became obvious to me, however, that I must be near
the British Museum and Tring Museum; so, after taking a
holiday in the South of France and Brittany, we settled at
Langley Mount, Watford. It was there that my son was born;
and it was there that I started the library that was destined to
grow to such large proportions, my collection of skins, and the
compilation of the big ornithological work on which I was to
spend the rest of my life.
It was whilst living at Watford that I was initiated into
English hunting—the real king of sports —the “unspeakable in
pursuit of the uneatable,” as it has been ironically dubbed. The
pack was the Old Berkley East, and the master was Webber.
There was also much political activity there, centred in the
Conservative Club, and we all worked hard at canvassing. I
remember, too, the first-class Horse Show that was held each
year; and I remember the importance which was attached to the
football matches.
The place suited me ideally, as I had no difficulty in getting
to London or Tring Museum. This was of much importance to
me, as these Museums contained so many kinds of birds that I
had to examine. It was not very long before my bird collection
grew into a very respectable size, and the cabinets which housed
them were spread over the greater part of the house. It was at
Watford that John Porter Rogers came to see me, resulting in
an agreement that he should collect birds for me in North-West
Australia. This was most fortunate, because that part of
Australia had not been “worked” for birds. Rogers proved to
be one of the best collectors I have known; and his work on
Melville Island, in particular, is of great importance to
ornithology. But of this and other aspects of my work, more
later.
On several occasions it seemed that Fate must have inter-
vened to enable me to finish the work I had undertaken. For
instance, there was the night that I had arranged to take my
daughter to school in Brittany. That was when we were living
at Weston Farm. I had booked passages for my wife, my
daughter and myself, and we were to sail at midnight. A growler-
cab was to come for us and take us to the wharf. A great wind
arose and the cab was blown over as it was coming along the
shore of Southampton Water. We waited a long, long time for


it, and finally went to bed. t Next day I went into Southampton
and found that the ship had delayed sailing until daylight, and
then it had faced the storm, only to sink a few hours later with
all hands.
In 1910, the year in which my old friend Dr. Sharpe died,
I attended the International Ornithological Congress in Berlin
as a representative of Australia, and while there I arranged with
Menegaux, the Curator of the Paris Museum, to work at that
institution for a week or so. He recommended me to a rather
cheap hotel because it was near the Museum. It was a real
rabbit'warren of a place. One day, while I was at the Museum,
in came a friend, who had stayed on in Berlin after I had left.
He insisted that I change my hotel and that we have a “night
out seeing the gay life of Paris. I demurred, as I only had one
more night to put in there; but after further persuasion I agreed
and, packing my suitcase, I accompanied him to the Continental
Hotel. After our night out (of which I have some pleasant
memories) I discovered that I had left a hat at my previous
abode near the Museum. When I went to collect it in the
morning I found that the hotel had been burnt to the ground
and that many of the guests had perished with it.
In 1913, I arranged a world tour with my wife, son and
daughter. My life at Watford had been very full and I felt I
needed a holiday. My daughter was leaving school, and my
young son’s school days had not yet started. We did not get
away, however, until 1914. We had booked our passages by
the steam ship sailing down the St. Lawrence in June of that
year; but for some reason we were obliged to wait for a month,
necessitating a new set of bookings, so that it was July when
we sailed down the St. Lawrence. The boat that had sailed in
June was overturned, and many of the passengers were drowned.
Fate had decreed that we should miss it.
However, we had a bad scare when the boat on which we
crossed the Great Lakes was wrecked. The boat struck a sharp'
edged rock at midnight and nothing would shift it—fortunately.
The foolish captain reversed his engines, but the boat remained
fast. At daylight we could see the rock firmly embedded in the
vessel’s side. The water was seeping through, but the pumps
were able to cope with it. A relief ship came and took us off;
but we would have stood a poor chance of being saved if the


On “Tomboy,” 1931.
(Photograph by Miss Dutton.)


Field Master, Hambledon Hunt.


captain’s attempt to pull us off the rock, instead of transferring
us first and then trying to dislodge the wreck, had succeeded.
We visited Australia during our world tour, and whilst I
was in Perth, the Western Australian capital, I began an
intensive examination of every collection of birds in the Com'
monwealth. I found a great many interesting collections, large
and small, during my stay in Australia. At Adelaide I was
entertained at Wee-tun-gar by Captain Samuel A. White and
his hospitable wife. Captain White was one of my best
collaborators; he made several camel expeditions into Central
Australia, collecting birds and making notes to help me in the
big work I had undertaken.
One of the best private collections of birds in South Australia
was that of Mr. Mellor; and I also found much to interest me
at the Adelaide Museum. Later, I visited the Museums in
Melbourne, Launceston, Hobart, Sydney and Brisbane; and each
of them had its special attractions for me.
After having been away from Australia for so long I was
naturally anxious to see the members of my family again,
together with various relatives and friends. But my stay was
not very long, and when I finally bade farewell to my mother
and father it was with the feeling that I would not see them
again.
Then on again—oh to New Zealand, Fiji and Honolulu.
The famous Honolulu Aquarium and the surfing on Waikiki
Beach gave us much pleasure. On again—on to Canada, where
I visited some of the welhknown ornithologists and talked with
them about their work. To New York then, to see Chapman
and Murphy; and to Philadelphia to examine Gould’s collection
of Australian birds —especially his types, which I had worked
up with Witmer Stone and published for the benefit of other
workers, in the “Austral Avian Record.”
We arrived back in England just before the outbreak of
the Great War of 191448, and settled down at Foulis Court.
The village was called Fisher’s Pond. It took its name from a
large sheet of water, on which we skated in winter. There was
a larger village not far away known as Colden Common (called
Golden Common on some maps, after the gorse that grew there
so plentifully).
While in Watford I had joined the Volunteer Force, and we


now drilled as often as necessary in our khaki uniforms on
Twyford Down. But as I was just on the border-line for age
when the war broke out, the authorities decided that, instead
of my going into the fighting lines, I was to produce food on
my farm, and so here I remained till the war ended, also publish-
ing some parts of my book.
There, at Foulis Court, I farmed several hundred acres and
ran a pedigree shorthorn milking herd; horses too —hunters and
carriage horses. Hunting with the Hambledon fox-hounds was
my chief recreation, and at a later stage the hunting fraternity
elected me as their Field-master.
I was also very fond of shooting and was accounted one of
the fair shots in the neighbourhood. I was able to obtain the
shooting rights over much of the surrounding country, and in
conjunction with Major Standish, and subsequently with his son
Edward, whose estate marched with mine, we were able to
preserve the partridges; and by rearing pheasants under hens
we could count on having a very large number of birds when
we entertained our friends at shooting parties.
My wife liked to go out in her Victoria or Brougham, and
we drove in the open Victoria to the Winchester-Eton cricket
matches with our coachman Phillips in his livery. But the auto-
mobile was fast coming in and the days of the carriage and
horses were numbered; and many visitors to the cricket matches
from London, who had cameras with them, would take a delight
in photographing the resplendent Phillips on the box, one of the
last of his tribe. I remember how amused I was one day when,
after a tennis party at the home of Mrs. Gillett, a big girl down
from London, seeing Phillips driving to the front door for us,
pointed to the Victoria and asked: “Whatever is that?”
During the course of publication of my “magnum opus”—
amusingly called the “Gregorian Chants” by some of my
friends —I came to know Hastings Russell, now Duke of Bedford,
a well-known aviculturist. He gave me much information about
parrots, the result of close observation in his aviaries. Our
friendship ripened as the years passed, and he became a welcome
guest at my opening shoot of pheasants. He shot from the left
shoulder, and in spite of his bad eyesight he was a good and
quick shot. In turn, we went to Scotland with him and his
family to shoot grouse and blackcock, woodcock, snipe, etc.


Thus, for many years, I shot at Glen Trool, “the beautiful, 11
and later at Cairnsmore, not far from Newton Stewart. His
parents always had a warm welcome for us; his mother was a
very good shot and liked the sport.
There, too, I was initiated into that “king of sports, 11 deep
stalking, which entails many miles of rough walking and careful
manoeuvring before the quarry is secured. In time I became
adept at it, my record being two stags in a few hours, one head
being the finest ever taken in that part of Scotland. For a
change, we would fish the peat-coloured Minnock River for
silvery salmon, a sport all by itself; and so the months went by,
every day bringing some fresh interest and excitement, until it
was time to return to Hampshire for the fox-hunting.
Many sports have interested me. I have ridden buckjumpers.
I have chased the kangaroo with dogs and shot him with the
rifle. I have coursed the hare in Australia and in England; I
have done fly-fishing and fished for salmon; shot prairie-hen in
America; I have walked hundreds of miles shooting in Scotland
and England, and cycled many more; I have played football,
golf and cricket; I have taken part in winter sports in Switzer-
land, enjoyed Alpine-climbing and the exhilaration of a ski race.
But of all forms of sport, deer-stalking and grouse-shooting have
afforded me the greatest pleasure. Both of them take you to
out-of-the-way places and you have to climb to great heights.
From our shooting-box in Scotland we had to walk up the hills
for another 1,000 to 1,500 feet before we got to where the
grouse could be seen. It calls for legs of steel. This mode of
looking for the birds is very different from shooting driven
grouse, where you wait in “blinds 11 and shoot the birds as they
fly over you, driven by a series of beaters who walk in a line
in a given direction. In these covers the shooter waits with a
loader and two guns; as one gun is emptied it is handed to the
loader to be reloaded —the same procedure as at partridge and
pheasant “drives. 11 The birds are flying fast and to kill them
one must be a good and quick shot.
As for the Hambledon Hunt Club, the fact that I have been
a member of it for over a quarter of a century, a member of
the committee since 1919, and Field-master for four or five years
under Major Jack Blake —a master who himself acted as hunts-
man —is sufficient to show my great interest in the sport. This


Hunt was founded at the end of the 18th century and we have
the “books” going back for about a hundred years. The pack
has had some famous masters, including such men as Squire
Osbaldiston and “Gentleman” Smith. Owing to the increase in
housebuilding, the country hunted to-day is not so extensive,
of course, as it was in the old days. At one time it was divided
and one master hunted the country towards Portsmouth and
another the country towards Southampton; but in this century
they were united under Captain Standish.
Many of my old hunting friends have passed away, but I
shall not forget them. Nor am I likely to forget my splendid
old dark-brown horse Warrigal, nor my later one Tomboy, who
seemed to be a very part of me in the joy of the chase; each
a finished fencer and neither ever made a mistake.
How deeply the love of the chase is implanted in the heart
of man may be seen from an incident which occurred some years
ago when a friend of mine was hunting a pack of foxhounds in
Ireland, and asked me to come over and have part of the season
with him.
One time we had been out hunting all day and two or three
couple of hounds had taken a fox into a place where horsemen
could not go and the hounds must be collected by a man on
foot. My friend told me how to get home and went oja his way.
I rode down a winding path leading to the lane, along which I
was to ride. A gate led into the road and as I approached I
saw a procession walking slowly along, pushing a wheeled
vehicle. By the time I had untied the gate, led my horse through
and tied it up again (any thing will do in Ireland and wire is
cheap) I saw that the funeral procession was adjacent. I took
off my top-hat and covered my face, out of respect for the pass-
ing dead. Immediately behind the bier was a man walking with
his outspread hands held together palm to palm, fingers pointing
upwards. As he arrived opposite me I heard a voice say, “Did
you kill him, your Honour?” Peeping round my hat I saw
who had spoken and whispered back the single word “Yes.”
At this he was very pleased and said, “Glory be to God,” and
went on his way to bury his dead, while I rode home in a very
contemplative mood.
But let it not be thought that all my time was taken up with
sport. The obligations falling upon the “Squire of the village”


are both multifarious and onerous —voluntary and unpaid, yet
absorbing a great deal of time. Consider this list:
Overseer of the Parish of Owslebury; chairman of Parish
Council of Owslebury; chairman of Parish Council of Twyford;
president and treasurer of Crowd Hill Hospital Air Association,
chairman, trustee and treasurer of Colden Common Parish Hall;
president of Southampton and District Canine Association,
manager of Colden Common Church School; president of Colden
Common Football and Cricket Clubs; Vicar’s churchwarden of
Holy Trinity, Colden Common, and chairman of Church
Council; chairman and treasurer of the Twyford and District
Flower Show Committee.
Add a few other things of that kind and it will be obvious
that my life at that time was a very full one. Looking back
upon it all, I sometimes wonder how I managed to find the time
to get on with my work. Yet the ornithological work I had
set myself was the chief objective of my life, and all these other
activities which I have mentioned, were taken, as the saying is,
in my stride.
The war ended and we got back to peace conditions. By
the year 1927, my general work, which had been published in
parts, was completed—to be followed later by two Supplements.
Then came the big financial depression which left hardly any
part of the world untouched. Like many others, I was obliged
to part with my holding, and the price it realised hardly paid
for the mortgage. I left Foulis Court considerably poorer than
when I had arrived there a dozen or more years before.
We decided to take up our residence at St. Cross, a village
near Winchester; but before doing so we felt we needed rest
and change. My wife and her daughter went to North Africa,
and I made another trip to America, visiting all the museums
that were interested in bird collections, renewing old and valued
friendships and making new ones, visiting 40 of the States and
seeing quite new bird life in Florida and Mexico.
From St. Cross I brought out the “Birds of Norfolk and
Lord Howe Islands,” which was followed later by a Supplement.
I was also asked to do the Systema Avium Australasianarum
for the British Ornithologists’ Union. Moreover, having become
very interested in the petrels while engaged on the second
volume of my principal work, I decided to do a monograph on


them. The manuscript of this is now practically ready. In
addition, I have completed the “Birds of New Zealand,” and it
is also now ready for publication.
I had spent the best part of forty years in collecting my
ornithological library and in compiling my own work; had
travelled many thousands of miles, visited many out-of-the-way
places of the world as well as the large cities. And now I wished
the fruit of my life’s labour to find a permanent home in the land
which had given me birth, in gratitude for a happy and successful
career. The Commonwealth Government was graciously pleased
to accept my offer, and the Library is now housed in Canberra
as a special section of Australia’s great National Library. As
these last lines are being written, I am nearing the end of the
arduous task of cataloguing it, with the assistance of a member
of the staff whose ready and valuable help I here thankfully
acknowledge.
It has seemed strange to me, this home-coming. Having lived
there for many years, I had looked upon England as my home,
and it was a great wrench to pull up all the roots and leave so
many friends. But here I am now, back in the country where
I was born and educated, and I find so few of the old friends
I knew in the long years gone by. I had my 25th birthday in
New South Wales, and I shall have my 66th here this year
(1942). The years have taken my youth, and they have taken,
alas, my best and dearest friend - for my wife was always my
“cobber.” But here in this library where I sit, this library which
will, I hope, be of great value to future generations, are many
reminders of my dear old helpmate, and I know that she would
have wished nothing better than that it should be in Australia’s
safe-keeping.
Her family and mine have been entwined for some hundreds
of years. There is an old document in which a Hamilton (our
family had married into the Hamilton family) witnessed the
deed of a Low in Ireland. Our estate in Northern Ireland was
sold to an Irvine. The Lows and the Irvines were my wife’s
ancestors; and her grandfather Low died on my grandfather and
great uncle Bartlett’s station on the Namoi River in New South
Wales (see Gould’s introduction to “Birds of Australia,” p. 12).
And I recall with interest that Marianne Beck was governess to
my wife and her sister when “our Beck” was mothering us.


Hundreds of years . . . We are the sum of all our ancestors!
Early in the present century Archbishop Arnold Mathew was
trying to trace an old family heirloom given to our family in
the person of Sir David Mathew in the Fifteenth Century. He
located it, but could not secure it. He bequeathed his knowledge
of it to me and eventually it came into my possession. It is known
as St. Teilo’s skull, and has an interest not only for our family
but also for a large body of men devoted to archaeological
research. The reason why we value it will be apparent to thost
who read the Appendix relating to this historic skull. February
9 is St. Teilo’s Day, and on that day the drinking bowl is passed
around the table, all reverently seated. As each one takes the
skull from the former drinker, he holds it up before drinking
from it, saying, "To St. Teilo and absent friends, and then
passes it to his neighbour. We hope to hold a special celebration
in 1950 to mark the family’s 500 years of possession of the skull,
and members of the family from any part of the world are
invited to attend.
As for myself, I am an Australian on both sides of my family.
My grandmother was born here in 1830. Both my parents lived
and are buried at Parramatta. We were all educated there, and
I have a brother who practices his profession there. Thus, I
have more than a century of family history in Australia behind
me, and to come back to Australia is to return, literally, to the
land of my fathers. Yet England is my home also the home
of my ancestors.
Australia, birthplace, native land!
England, home-mother of the free!
What can break the filial band
That binds me for ever to thee?
When I went to England, a young, enthusiastic man, I was
quite unknown in the world of ornithology. When I returned
in 1940, it was with the knowledge—and, I think I may be
allowed to say, with some little satisfaction that my ornithological
work had won the approval of scientific men in many parts of
the world. For this work —a labour of love, though it meant a
lifetime of hard work—His Majesty the King graciously coiv
ferred upon me the Order of Commander of the British Empire.
Hard work —yes; and dogged persistence and pertinacity, such
as can perhaps only be fully appreciated by those who have set
themselves a similar task. In the case of one treasured book in
my library I had to wait for 35 years before I could acquire it,


Back again . . . and I am driving in a car with an ornitho'
logical friend near Perth. Suddenly I see a bird, and it gives me
a shock. Have I not figured every bird on the list of those
occurring in Australia? What, then, can this be? My friend
laughs heartily at my agitated question and says: “Don’t be
alarmed; that is a Bubbul—imported, and now quite common
since you were last here.’’ Very much relieved, I join him in
his laugh.
My old friend Woodward had died, and Perth Museum
now had a new head. It was a reminder of the inexorable years.
Ift Adelaide, where I stayed with Captain S. A. White, every'
body seemed to have grown old (just as I had) and there were
many new workers. They gave me a warm welcome and I
spent an enjoyable time with them. In Victoria I met some new
friends, with whom I had been corresponding, and they were
very kind in entertaining me in their State. Tasmania, New
South Wales and Queensland, which I visited in that order, also
proclaimed the passing of time; new scientists were on the staffs.
But Heber Longman was still the head in Brisbane Museum,
' an( l an °ther old friend, Joseph Colclough, still remained on the
staff.
Perhaps my greatest thrill on returning to Australia was the
sight of the great steel bridge over Sydney Harbour—certainly
a wonderful piece of engineering, and worthy of this great new
country. But among other great changes which impressed me,
Trans'continental railway, which links up the “Golden
West with the prolific eastern portion of the continent, stood
out as a remarkable illustration of the progress that was taking
place in this, my native land. It was the first time I had made
the overland journey from Perth to Adelaide, including what I
understand to be the longest stretch of railway in one continuous
straight line in the world—the 30(>mile run over the famous
Nullarbor Plain. Desert limestone country, with little but salt'
bush growing on it; yet it has its little railway stations and
there are white people living there as well as many of the
aborigines. That thousand miles, or thereabout, between
Kalgoorlie and Port Augusta, was full of interest to me, though
most travellers find it just one long, monotonous waste. Nobody,
however, could find any fault with the train —it is one of the
finest, one of the best'appointed, in the Commonwealth.
Nor could I help contrasting the life of the people settled


along this railway line with that we had to put up with in my
early Queensland days. It is some thing, at all events, to see a
train passing practically every day—and it is something to have
electricity and wireless sets and frigidaires!
Everywhere I was struck by the evidence of the advancement
and prosperity of the country. Magnificent city buildings,
flourishing inland towns, splendid roads. No sign of the grinding
poverty that was such a problem in the older lands; but a happy,
contented people, enjoying so many of the things that make life
worth living. Happy White Australia! What a bright destiny
seemed to lie before it. God grant that the hopes and ideals of
this Land of the Southern Cross may never be sullied by any
envious invader.
My contemporaries had grown old with me. Many had
passed on (and I hope they will still find birds to sing to them)
and their places had been filled by splendid young enthusiasts
who will, I doubt not, carry on the work with equal devotion
and success. Australia is worth all that they can give her; and
she will surely give back in full measure all that is given to
her —in full measure and with interest.
To them I say: Fix your minds on great things, and you will
bring great things nearer. Set your course; follow your star!
Success is a matter of hard work, and not of luck. I believe we
make our own luck by following our bent with -devotion and
singleness of purpose, and always honourably; and if in the
course of our own work, striving for the goal which lies ahead,
we can help others in their work, even if only with a cheery
and encouraging word, we shall get much satisfaction out of out-
lives, though what the world calls wealth may never come our
way. Real riches are of the mind and spirit, not of the pocket.


CHAPTER IV.
BIRD COLLECTIONS
That the standard work on the birds of Australia should
have been written by an Australian, seems, at first sight, natural.
In fact, however, this is the first time that the work has been
attempted on such a scale by a native-born scientist; and even
then, as the following articles will explain, about forty years
had to be spent in England to produce it.
Not only is “The Birds of Australia” accepted everywhere
as the standard work on its subject, but it is the largest faunal
work ever produced on the birds of a single country. Gould’s
splendid plates are deservedly famous, but the siz,e of his volume
prevents their being easily consulted. Mathews’s “Birds of
Australia” contains a hand-coloured figure of every single species
of bird included in the “List of Birds Occurring in Australia, ’
and about one hundred more species are figured in it than were
known to Gould. The nomenclature is modern, being based on
the International Rules of Zoological Nomenclature published in
1905; the synonymy is as complete as possible; the scientific
descriptions are accurate, and the life histories as up-to-date as
the Australian field workers could make them.
My book grew, in the first place, out of my collecting, and
in turn the collection and the library were indispensable for the
production of the work. One fed the other, and the story of
their growth is intertwined at every stage. For the sake of clear-
ness, however, I have separated them in the following account,
but the reader must constantly keep the relation between them
in mind.
My interest in ornithology began, almost unconsciously, at
a very early age. Butterflies, moths, beetles, odd stones, dried
frogs—all was grist that came to my mill in those days. My
brother was mildly interested and helped with the various
collections.
More and more we came to concentrate on birds’ eggs, till
we had sets or odd eggs of all the birds breeding in our vicinity.
They were all end-blown, the ordinary pin sufficing to make
the holes at each end, and our mouths supplying the fore?


necessary to expel the contents. We always carried an empty
baking-powder tin in which the disused nest of a Willie-wagtail
was placed, and some cotton wool served to keep the blown
eggs safe when the lid was replaced. We knew nothing of
classification or scientific names, but put together those eggs that
we considered related and used our own vernacular names. It
never occurred to us that grown people had any interest in our
hobby, though our father brought us home large eggs, such as
those of the plover and crane, and our collection began to be
known. One visitor to whom we showed our collection suggested
that we should glue the eggs on to sheets of cardboard like sea-
shells. This we did—with disastrous results, for the cardboard
buckled and broke all the eggs.
Later, we began to collect the nests with the full clutch.
This was quite successful, so then we thought we would add
the bird. Killing the creature was easy enough —how to preserve
it was the question. We tried cutting off the head, wings and
feet. The wings and feet soon dried, but the head, since we
could not remove the brains and eyes, became so odorous that
even Beck objected. So we gave up taking this part of the bird.
In the ’Eighties my father came from the northern part of
the State to Singleton so that his family could be educated, and
I attended the Singleton Grammar School. It was during my
sojourn in Singleton that my hobby developed, fn 1889, we
moved to Parramatta in order that my brother and I might have
the advantage of attending the King’s School. My brother’s
interest in our hobby atrophied, but I became one of a set of
boys with whom I continued egg-collecting at Toongabbie and
other nearby places.
Here I was taught to keep records of when I took eggs and
where, the kind of nest, and how high it was from the ground,
and so on. One day I saw a boy skinning a bird. This changed
my whole outlook on natural history, as my friend talked of the
joy of the bird and its beauty and why it had feet and claws of
a certain shape. From then onwards, in spite of the added interest
of keeping notes on our finds, my interest in collecting eggs
began to diminish and the bird itself became the centre of my
investigations.
After leaving the King’s School, I went to a cattle station
in Queensland. From there I went to the Flinders River, via the
Gulf of Carpentaria, and to the Johnstone River, and in each of


these places the bird life was different, and all, of course, differed
from that of New South Wales.
During my years in Queensland my interest grew by what
it fed on, and all unconsciously I was absorbing knowledge that
was to lie dormant until I began to write my book.
I arrived in England with the century still in swaddling
clothes, full of enthusiasm for the task I had set myself, of
producing a work dealing with the birds of my native land.
“The Catalogue of Birds” consisting of twenty-seven volumes,
compiled during 1874 to 1899, by the greatest European workers
of the last quarter of the 19th Century, was newly completed;
the synonymy in this was considered very up-to-date, and the
literature had been so well searched that all marvelled at the
collection of works that had been consulted, and most scientists
thought that here at least was stability and that all future works
would need only to be carried on from the several volumes of
the “Catalogue.” I thought that I could go to the Natural
History Museum in South Kensington, examine the individual
birds, young, nest and eggs, and, having referred to the “Cata-
logue” for the synonymy, pass on to the next bird and so finish
the work in a year or so. I was cruelly disillusioned when I
found that the British Museum did not contain all the bird skins
necessary for my purpose, and that my library was revealing
many gaps in the “Catalogue” as works unknown to the compilers
kept cropping up.
At the British Museum I met Dr. Richard Bowdler Sharpe.
He it was who taught me to work and what to do, and I spent
several years of intensive study under his personal supervision.
He impressed upon me how important it was to make a new
collection of Australian birds, with full data, and collected from
as many parts of Australia as possible.
When I first arrived in England I spent a little time at
Wadhurst, a few miles out of the town of Tunbridge Wells, so
famous for its chalybeate spring, which was given its iron-
producing properties by the Devil’s cooling his nose in it after
his encounter with St. Dunstan. Later, I moved to Weston Farm,
Hampshire, situated around the old fishing village of the same
name on Southampton Water. As my work progressed, however,
it became increasingly important that I should be near the British
Museum and the Tring Museum, and so my agent secured for
me a house, “Langly Mount,” at Watford, where I gradually


built up my collection of birds until it was the most complete
in the world.
The complete collection of Australian birds was amassed in
a comparatively short time. From the firm of Gerrard 6? Sons,
Mornington Crescent, Chalk Farm, I was able to buy very many
skins of birds on the Australian List and others of nearly-related
species from Siberia, thus making comparison easy between the
eastern and western form of migrants. The Gerrard family were
taxidermists, and were welbknown by their work for big-game
hunters, for the mounting of the heads of the elephant,
rhinoceros and hippopotamus is a specialist’s job. The father
remembered the old building “Montague House” before it was
replaced by the present British Museum; his work was the
mounting and general supervision of the mammals. He lived to
be 99, and I have seen five generations at work when a big job
was being sent away: the old man supervising, his son, aged 66,
grandson, aged 40, a great-grandson, and a small child handing
nails to the man making the case. It cannot often happen that
five generations are represented as doing useful work at one time
on any one job.
When it became known that I was building up a collection
of bird skins, all the people at South Kensington Museum were
prepared to help me. Some skins I was able to purchase direct
from the collectors, and others I obtained by having my own
field collectors located in various parts of the Continent. The
names of some of these people and the localities in which they
collected are deserving of record.
Sir William Ingram had sent William Stalker (1879-1911)
to collect on the Burdekin River, Queensland, and Alexandria,
in the Northern Territory, and I was able to acquire the birds
from his son, Collingwood Ingram. The first of those who
collected for me was my school friend, the late Lancelot Harrison.
Then John Porter Rogers was anxious to collect in North-
Western Australia, and after a satisfactory interview at my home
at Watford, he left England for Wyndham. Next he went inland
from Derby to places never before worked for birds; then to the
Melville Island, Cape York, and then to the Tanami Gold Fields.
In all these places he did extraordinarily good work which has
helped Australian ornithology more than that of any other single
collector. For an account of his life, I refer the reader to my


journal, the “Austral Avian Record,” vol. 5, No. 5, p. 103 and
plate, June Ist, 1927.
To give an example of his determination, he left Melville
Island in an open row-boat and rowed to Wyndham, landing
each night and pushing off during early morning. It is doubtful
if anyone else has accomplished this arduous voyage.
Captain S. A. White, son of Samuel White of Reedbeds,
Fulham, South Australia, who collected for Gould, made camel
excursions into the centre of Australia, collecting some of the
rarer specimens, including the Chestnut'breasted Whiteface.
Many of the forms collected by him have not since been obtained.
Captain White was accompanied by his wife, who rode a
thousand miles on a camel, a feat of womanly endurance other'
wise unparalleled in my experience. He also collected on Kan'
garoo Island, Mount Lofty, Fleurieu Peninsula and at various
places on the River Murray. For an account of his life refer to
“Austral Avian Record,” vol. 3, No. 7, p. 162 and plate, Dec.
3rd, 1919.
Robin Kemp left England for Cape York, and made an
extensive collection of birds within miles of his camp. He then
went to New Zealand and collected for me there for a year or
so. For an account of his life refer to “Austral Avian Record,”
vol. 5, No. 5, p. 105 with plate, June Ist, 1927.
Tom Carter collected in the South'West of Australia for
many seasons, and inspired others with a desire to help. He
had collected at the North'West Cape before this, and so was
able to compare his collections. He gave me odd skins collected
in other parts of Australia. For an account of his life, see
Austral Avian Record,” vol. 3, No. 7, p. 157, with plate, Dec.
3rd, 1919.
Edwin Ashby made quite a good representative collection
of skins for every State, and I acquired these by exchange. For
an account of his life, refer “Emu,” vol. 40, p. 409, pi. 69, April,
1941.
Henry Grensill Barnard sent me many skins from the Dawson
River and elsewhere in Queensland.
Roy Bell collected for me on Lord Howe Island and Norfolk
Island and sent me a series of birds collected by his brother,
King Bell, on Sunday Island.
T. H. Bowyer'Bower collected around Cairns, in Queens'
land, Derby, Western Australia, and at Palmerston, Northern


Territory, where he died. His mother gave me his skin collection.
(See: “South Australian Ornithologist,” vol. 1, p. 15ff., 1915).
Professor J. B. Cleland collected on the De Gray River and
at Marble Bar, in North-Western Australia. He sent me also
skins collected in other parts of Australia.
Knut Dahl collected in North and North-Western Australia
for the Norwegian Museum. Professor Collett allowed me to
acquire those skins that were new to my collection.
Allan P. Dodd, son of the well-known lepidopterist, collected
on the Atherton Tableland and inland towards the Gulf of
Carpentaria.
Frank Howe, in conjunction with J. Ross, sent me many
birds from Victoria.
Miss J. A. Fletcher sent me a collection from Tasmania.
Richard H. W. Leach, who is not to be confused with Dr.
J. A. Leach, of Victoria, who helped me in other ways, made a
collection during a trip to Australia in 1863, and about 1908
gave me his birds. I named some birds after this man.
William McLennan collected along the Gulf of Carpentaria
at the southern end, at Cape York and Lloyd’s Bay. This name
is always associated with “Billy” (W. D. K.) McGillivray, who
financed the work and accompanied McLennan, and from whom,
by arrangement, I acquired those skins that I required. For an
account of McGillivray’s life see “Austral Avian Record,” vol.
3, No. 7, p. 175 with plate, Dec. 3rd, 1919, and for McLennan
vol. 5, No. 5, p. 107 with plate, June Ist, 1927.
P. D. Montague collected on Monte Bello Island, off the
coast of Western Australia, and then on New Caledonia.
E. Olive collected around Cooktown and Cardwell, and I
bought the bird skins at a sale in London.
Mrs. Gabrielle Scott was around Cloncurry and Central
South Queensland. I examined her collection of skins in Brisbane
and described others sent to London.
T. Thorpe moved over much of Australia and made a very
good representative collection, which I bought from him in
Croydon, England.
Tom Tregallas sent me birds collected in the Dandenong
Ranges and other places in Victoria.
J. T. Tunny was on the Recherche Archipelago and on
the West Coast, as well as inland to Yalgo. I acquired some bird


skins in exchange with the Perth Museum and Tring Museum
Wheelwright went from Watford, and sent me several
small collections from Narrandera, New South Wales.
H. L. White sent me many birds collected for him in
Western Australia by F. Lawson Whitlock, who had previously
sent me skins from different parts.
I also had many friends from whom I obtained small collect
tions which were sent to me at irregular intervals during many
years: Belcher, Berney, Cayley, Chandler, Coles, Dyott, Hall,
Higham, Hull, Lloyd, Mellor, Alexander Morgan, Orton,
Parsons, Riordan, Ross, Sandland, Scrymgeour, Thomson
Vidgeon, Wilson, Woodward, the Campbells, father and son,’
who lent me their collection. Small collections made by unknown
collectors were bought from those who owned them and were
willing to help. A few of the more important ones were made
inland from Rockhampton on “Minnie Downs.” Another from
Bowen in Queensland, and one made in Western Australia
towards the South Australian border contained important
specimens.
From New Zealand I bought several collections, the most
important being the sbirds collected by Townson.
So my collection of bird skins grew until it contained well
over 30,000 specimens from most parts of Australia. Thus, it
was made possible for every figure on the coloured plates in my
volumes to be drawn from a specimen in my own collection with
the exception of the unique pair of Amytis goyderi , the only
known skins of which are in the British Museum, and which
Captain S. A. White had attempted unsuccessfully to collect,
and of the Dwarf Emu, the only example of which was collected
by Baudin’s naturalist, Peron, on Kangaroo Island in 1803, and
brought to Paris alive and lived in captivity in the Jardin des
Plantes for 20 years, and was mounted and placed in the Paris
Museum on its death. The war of 1914 ended collecting as ail
my men joined the forces.
The entire collection, which included all the type specimens
and all the skins made historical by being figured in my big
work, was offered to Australia for <£4,000, or less than 2/6 per
skin The Australians, however, were not sufficiently interested
in obtaining this scientific material. My collection was then sold
to Lord Rothschild of Tring Museum at a reduced figure on


condition that I retained a life interest in it during our joint lives,
thinking that afterwards the collection was to pass to the British
Museum. Rothschild, however, sold his collections to America
and after the sale he did not attend any more meetings of the
British Ornithologists’ Union. So the collection now rests in
the Natural History Museum, New York.


CHAPTER V.
THE LIBRARY
At the same time as I was collecting my bird skins, my
library of ornithological works was accumulating. As I have
said, when I went to England I thought that all the literature
had been exhaustively examined, and the gaps that were revealed
in the “Catalogue” were a source of disillusionment to me. Here
I would stress the point that all serious workers insist on a
personal examination of all references. And so I found that I
was constantly spending money in travelling about, examining
and verifying original references, and decided that I would use
this money to buy my own books.
1 suppose even now that half my library could be duplh
cated in a few years by the purchasing of sets of the journals
of different societies and certain individual books. But it is the
other, rarer half, that gives the library its special character of
completeness. To duplicate these now would entail a long and
arduous search and there are certain books that could never be
obtained.
In all scientific investigation, it is necessary to have all the
literature. This is becoming increasingly difficult, as many public
bodies also require the books, and when once a public body
acquires a work it never again comes into the open market. In
the early days only a comparatively few copies of books were
printed, and of these many were destroyed or lost, and so it
happens that competition is keen for the surviving copies. In
my collection I have one of two, and one of three extant copies;
one of five; several of only six known copies, and so on.
The birds of Australia have always attracted the attention
of visitors, from Willem de Vlamingh onwards. Dampier was
the first to give an illustration of a purely Australian bird. Often
the early travellers sent the birds collected to an ornithologist
to describe, and in these descriptions the locality “Australia”
was deemed sufficient, for those interested knew where the bird
had been shot. So the keen ornithologist must perforce become
a student of history and examine the works of explorers to find


the exact locality in which certain birds were found to occur.
Then, too, while the Australian birds could be collected
only in Australia, for books the whole world had to be combed.
A majority of the early books dealing with Australia were, of
course, published in England, but many important early
references and descriptions are to be found in the works of
German, Swedish, French, Dutch and Russian naturalists. Then
descriptions of closely related forms, or of birds common to
Australia and other places must also be included, and so it
happens that the places of publication represented in the Library
range over the whole of Europe, to say nothing of Asia, America
and Australia. Since publication, each book has wandered
wherever the chances of purchase have led it, so it will be seen
that the making of this Library, unique in its completeness, was
a herculanean task, and provided many thrills.
In the forming of a scientific library, the qualities required
are an exact knowledge of what one wants, perspicacity in
knowing where to find it, and unwearying perseverence in the
search.
“Ye Olde Booke Shoppe,” above Bar Southampton, was
kept by one of the old-fashioned second-hand firms of book
dealers, Gilbert & Son, men who knew their business and their
clients. Here, while living at Weston Farm, I was able to
be continually at the shops of Sotheran and Bernard Quaritch,
both in Piccadilly, Francis Edwards of Marylebone, Wheldon of
Long Acre, and Wesley of Sussex Street (the two latter later
united and become Wheldon and Wesley). The old Long Acre
bookshop was typical of the time and place; the owner wore
a skull cap and knew his stock fairly well, but allowed some of
his clients to poke about, and by this means I found many odd
and rare parts of publications that I required, such as Shaw’s
“Zoology and Botany of New Holland” (1794) in the original
wrappers.
During my many trips to different countries, I got to know
the second-hand booksellers, and to them my wants were made
known, with varying response. In Berlin, Friedlander & Sons
had buyers in many parts of the world, to whom lists of
desiderata were sent. Once they procured a book for which I
had been waiting a long time from Toowoomba, in Queensland.
In Paris, along the River Seine, many “junk” booths were


erected, some selling old gold, others old china and so on, others
books, and it was here that I obtained the unique copy of
Boddaert’s “Tables des Planches Enlumineez,” 1783. On this
occasion my wife was with me, and she advocated tea at a nearby
cafe. I begged for “just one more look. 11 At the bottom of a
pile of books was a brown-paper parcel done up with faded red
tape; this I opened, glanced at the title-page, asked the price,
and then joined my wife for tea. This work, on account of its
rarity, had been reprinted by W. B. Tegetmeier in London,
1874, and those who are book-lovers can imagine my satisfaction
when I found the work complete with an index which was
unknown to Tegetmeier and was therefore not in his reprint.
Later I sent my copy to the British Museum so that they could
make a photostat copy of the index and odd pages that were
missing in the national copy.
Another of my curious finds was in Faringdon Street, near
Ludgate Hill, London. In this place stand a lot of barrows, the
owners selling odds and ends for a few pence each. Half-a-doz,en
barrows are loaded with books, heaped up, and marked at a
penny, threepence, sixpence a volume, each barrow usually bear-
ing books at one price. Here a huge theological book will be
alongside a mathematical treatise or jostle with a French novel,
all now on the same level. It is the buyer’s task to find the grain
among the chaff; it is an amusing pastime, with a chance of, say,
1,000 to 1 of picking a winner. One morning I was examining
a barrow load —and I may tell you that it is a dirty job, as no
dusters are provided. I had had no luck, when suddenly under-
neath a dense pile I saw a bulky book. It gave no clue as to its
contents, but I dug it out, and found that it was the “Danske
Atlas, 11 1763, prepared by Pontoppidan. This work was most
sought after by British birdlovers, as it contained a list of Danish
birds, and the only copy then known was in the British Museum.
It was of great value to me, as just a short time previously a
wading bird had been found for the first time in Northern
Australia by one of my collectors, and its earliest description
was in this book.
The firm of Jacob & Johnston, in Winchester, provides an
example of continuity of tenure. This firm produced the
“Hampshire Chronicle,” a weekly newspaper, and it has
remained in the same family for over a century and a half.


Latham (17401837) having lost his money, came to live in
Winchester, and, when over 80 years of age, began his General
History of Birds” (1821-^1824). He reached his old plates and
did new letterpress to go with them, and the work was published
by Jacob 6? Johnston, on paper manufactured at Cater’s Mill,
on Southampton Water. In 1922, I visited my friend Johnston,
and found the office where Latham was wont to work exactly
the same as in his days, even to the glass in the bulging windows;
my friend told me that while he was in command the original
office would always remain. I asked Johnston ii he had a copy
of Latham’s work, and, sure enough, there was a set of the 10
volumes on the shelves, where it had remained for nearly a
century. This set, in the original boards, exactly as it had come
from the press, is now in my collection at Canberra.
When Cook discovered Australia he was accompanied by
Banks, the father of Australia, and Solander, the greatest
naturalist of his time, a pupil of the inimitable Linne. Solander
made all the natural history notes for the voyage, and was
preparing them for publication when he died. The notes on
Procellariiformes were examined by Kuhl and others, and were
then mislaid. I had the good fortune to unearth them in the
Library at South Kensington, and they are published in vol. II
of my “Birds of Australia.” With these Solander. MSS was
another set of slips which proved to be by Robert Brown, the
great Australian botanist.
My friends, when they knew my keenness for acquiring
all the books necessary for the scientific study of Australian
birds, helped me in my task.
Sherborn, who for forty years set himself to collect every
original reference dealing with zoology, unearthed many
references to books not before known, and passed on to me his
knowledge of newly'found works. One such work was
“Catalogue Raisonne” (1764), by Adrian Vroeg; which was
prepared by Pallas, though his name does not appear in the
book. This work was offered to me by Friedlander, of Berlin,
and I wired acceptance. That evening, while my wife and I
were talking over our latest find and congratulating ourselves,
a telegram was handed to me. It rather damped our spirits, for
it read: “Vroeg leaves tomight registered book lost.” However,
I had the wire repeated next morning and found that the last


word should have read “post.” Many of my friends thought
that I had made a mistake in paying as large a sum as I did for
this particular work, but I consider my action was justified, for
no copy has since come before the world.
In 1907 or 1908 I found where I could consult Rafinesque’s
“Analyse,” 1815. As the owner was very old, I suggested a
transfer of ownership, but this was rejected, and I had to wait
until his death to become the possessor of this rare work.
One very pleasant episode in the gathering of my books
occurred in 1911, when Henry Dresser (1838'1915), author of
“The Birds of Europe,” which, until I brought out my own
volumes, was the biggest faunal work on any country, asked me
to stay with him. Over our after-dinner coffee he spoke very
kindly of my work and my Library. He remarked on the
difficulties under which I was labouring, and then said, “This
is my birthday, and I intend giving you a present.” I was over-
whelmed when he gave up “Kaup, 1829,” a work that has not
appeared before the public for over half a century.. Further, he
told me that he would sell me any books I required from his
library; as he had collected for many years, I was able to augment
my collection with many rare and valuable works.
The earliest knowledge of Australian birds is based on
paintings made by the colonists, as their strangeness interested
the newcomers and they had no means of preserving the birds.
Most of these paintings are preserved in museums, and the most
important are a set known as the Lambert Drawings. About one
hundred years ago G. R. Gray had some of these latter
reproduced, and a friend of mine “found” this copy at a book-
stall. He had no idea of their scientific importance, and only a
chance remark revealed to me that he had these historical draw-
ings, which he then gave to me. I also “picked up” about a
doz;en of G. R. Gray’s notebooks.
I became the possessor of Lewin’s “Birds of New Holland
(1808), the first book devoted entirely to Australian birds, in
much the same way. I was in a public bar in Tottenham Court
Road, London, when I heard a man, far gone in his cups, talking
about books. I joined the group, and, seeing me, he at once said,
“You wanted Lewin 1808 nearly 40 years ago when I first saw
you; well, one has been sold in the open market to-day and was
bought by Francis Edwards of Marylebone.” That was enough


for me. I left my unfinished drink on the counter, rushed into
the street, all unmindful of the teeming rain, and took a taxi
to the shop. I saw the owner, and said that I would buy his
copy for the purchase price plus his profit, and would take it
with me there and then. But it had to go through the usual
routine, and I had to restrain my eagerness. Three days later the
book became actually mine, and it turned out to be the best of
the five known, being absolutely in mint condition. A few weeks
later the dealer offered me a big profit if I would resell, but,
after having waited for so long for this particular work, no one
could wrest it from my grasp. Of the other copies, two (those
formerly belonging to Sir Joseph Banks and King George III)
are in the British Museum. Two others were sold, also curiously
enough by Francis Edwards, in 1899, one of which is now in
the Petherick Collection in the National Library at Canberra,
and one in the York Gate Library, now in the possession of the
Royal Geographical Society in Adelaide. Although sixty'seven
copies of this book were subscribed for in Australia, and only
six in London, no copy has ever been found out here, and it is
conjectured that the whole cargo must have been lost at sea,
thus accounting for the rarity of the book. There is a curious
second edition, produced in New South Wales in 1813, made up
apparently from discarded proofs of the plates, which is almost
equally rare, and the copies of which differ from one another
in the detail of some of the plates. We may imagine that this
was a substitute edition, made up from rejected proofs in the
artist’s possession to placate those subscribers who were clamour
ing for a refund of their subscription. At any rate, no other
explanation seems to fit the facts. One of the half'dozen or less
perfect copies of this edition known is also in the Mathews
Library, which is thus the only collection in which the two
original editions of this fundamental book can be compared side
by side. Even in the British Museum, which has both, the
London edition is at Bloomsbury, and the Sydney one at South
Kensington.
My motto has always been: “What’s hit is history, and
what’s missed is mystery.” I have made it a rule always to
acquire rare books whenever the opportunity arises, irrespective
of whether or not I have copies of the work. These duplicates
I present to those of my friends who are interested in the books


and have not been able to obtain them. In some cases this
casting of my bread upon the waters has seen it returned to me
after many days. When in America for a couple of years I was
given some quite useful works for which I had been waiting, in
return for other rare books given years before.
So, item by item, my collection of books grew, until it
contained every work necessary to the study of Australian birds.
This Library, known by certain friends as “M.A.0.L.”
(Mathews’ Australian Ornithological Library), was presented
to the Australian nation as a thank-offering for the successful
career which I carved out for myself and for 38 years of married
happiness. It is now housed in the National Library, at Canberra,
where it will always be available to the students of the future.


Gregory M. Mathews, C.B.E.
1939




CHAPTER VI.
“THE BIRDS OF AUSTRALIA”
While the collection of birchskins and the library were
accumulating, and my house was becoming taxed to capacity
with cabinets and bookcases, I was busy on my “Birds ot
Australia.” Many of the “old school” ornithologists tried to
dissuade me from my self-appointed task, saying that it would
take so many years to complete, that I would grow tired of it,
and that the last volumes would suffer in consequence. But a
flame had been kindled that seemed to burn and generate force,
so that it was possible for me to work under all conditions,
without stopping to rest. At the end of Part 80, I was lost with-
out the work, and felt that I could quite easily have started all
over again. Two Supplements were published, the last in 1936,
so that actual publication occupied all the years from 1910 to
1936.
As soon as I realised that the “Catalogue of Birds” was
not the last word in scientific ornithology, I started .a card-index
containing every reference to Australian birds in all the work s
at my command. As I had the British Museum on which to
draw, my card-index grew until it contained well over 150,000
references. One of the first things I did was to copy out the
synonymy from the “Catalogue”—no small task —verify it, and.
discarding the irrelevant, add to my index all that might possibly
be useful. As I read any volume I would make my notes, and
so, all through the years, the work went on, new references
being added to those already noted. This will explain how my
“Review of the Procellariiformes” was so well received so soon
after the completion of Godman’s monograph in 1910.
One thing I found was that exact dates were ignored, and
that, although earlier names were known to exist, some names
were used because they had been in use for a certain time. I
published my first “List of Corrections” (made necessary by
newly-acquired knowledge of accurate dates) in the “Bulletin of
the British Ornithologist’s Club” about 1908, and from then
onwards made many more.


In searching for references I collected the exact date of
publication, even to the day of the month. This may be import'
ant, since if several names have been given to a bird, the choice
is determined by priority of publication. I found that the most
fruitful source of information about dates of publication is in
the reviews—sometimes out of the way—of such books. The
search for reviews in periodicals, too, brought before me other
works.
I should like to put on record my deep appreciation of the
work done by my private secretary, Tom Iredale, during the
twelve years he was with me. No one had a more loyal supporter
than he was, and his knowledge of the literature and his
retentive memory were a boon to me during publication.
My procedure was to collect the synonymy, prepare the
article, and have a coloured plate prepared from a skin in my
collection.
With the synonymy, I first copied out the reference to each
species from my index, checked it, and if acceptable, added the
reference to my synonymy and quoted the extract in the body
of the article on that bird.
Having successfully collected the synonymy, the article was
prepared, including all that was important from those who had
written on that particular bird, together with notes on the life
history sent by contributors in different parts of Australia, a
description of the bird in all its different stages —nest, eggs,
incubating period, etc. —its distribution, and any remarks about
its relations. In some cases the synonymy was small, and the
article, in consequence, was little more than my scientific des'
cription; this did not mean that it was soon completed, for the
search for information absorbed much time even although little
might be recorded.
When the article was finished, I had it typed by my
stenographer, and then again checked each reference from the
book, not the manuscript. I checked each reference in the galley
sheets, too, with the book, as errors occur in spite of all care.
Hence each of my references was checked three times, and errors
were eliminated as far as was humanly possible.
With the exception of the unique pair of Amytis goyderi
and the Dwarf Emu, all the plates in my book were prepared
from skins in my own collection, I would examine my series of


skins and pick out the actual one to be figured, give it to the
artist, and tell him the attitude in which I thought it should be
drawn. His drawing, when I had passed it, became the basis
for the plate. On the smooth white surface of a properly-
prepared lithographic stone the artist would copy in detail the
original drawing, placing accurately, by count or by measurement,
each feather, each scute on the leg, each rictral bristle. The
stone would then be returned, carefully packed, to the publisher,
where the surface would be covered with an acid which bit into
the stone to different depths controlled by the artist in his
original work on the stone. From this, four or five “pulls” in
black and white in different shades of density would be made.
The artist would select the one which he considered most suitable
for the edition, and, while the rest of the edition was being struck
off by the printers, he would be engaged in colouring a copy
direct from the bird’s skin. When I had passed the coloured
“pattern” it would be sent, with the edition, to the colourists,
who copied the original with faithful accuracy. On completion,
the edition would be checked with the “pattern” by women
trained to match colour, returned, if necessary, to the colourists
for correction, and the result would be an edition of uniformly
coloured plates. The paper used throughout the volumes, both
for the letterpress and the plates, was the best rag paper, made
especially for the work. I was my own publisher throughout.
Messrs. Witherby were the printers, and my thanks go willingly
to them for their excellent work.
When the Ornithologists’ Union decided to issue a series
of “Sytemata,” the world was divided into five parts, the
Palaearctic to be compiled by Hartert, the Aethiopian by
Sclater, the Indian by Baker, the American by Americans, while
I was allotted the Australasian. Each volume was the work of
the author, and the manuscript was examined by our colleagues.
I sent mine to Charles Richmond, Riley, Alexander Wetmore,
Witmer Stone and Robert C. Murphy, all in America. These
workers corrected and commented on the galley sheets, and
finally passed the page proofs.
So my two volumes of the “Systema Australasianarum,”
1927-30, were the official publication of the British Ornitholo-
gists’ Union, and my “List of Birds of Australasia,” 1931, was
the Australian and New Zealand portion of the big work,


One friend, when congratulating me on the finished
volumes of “The Birds of Australia,” said, “How thankful you
must be now that all is over.” I was contented that I had done
a work worthy of our great country and had brought it to a
successful conclusion. Contentment in a work that has been so
well received gives satisfaction. One of the curators of the
British Museum, when writing to congratulate me on the com-
pletion, said, “When I see your 16 large folio volumes and a
dozen octavo on the shelves, I borrow Wren’s motto on Sc.
Paul’s and say, 'lf you wish for a monument, look around you.’
We are all proud of you and your work.”
I am particularly grateful to the gods for allowing me the
three great wishes of my life:—
1. —The gathering under one roof of the only complete
collection of Australian birds;
2. —The amassing of the unique library necessary to their
study;
3. —The writing of the standard work on Australian birds,
which was made possible only by the fulfilment of the two
former wishes.


St. Teilo
(Taken from the fromtispiece in “Liber Landarensis,"
from a M.S. in the Hengiort Library.)


St. Teilo’s Cup.


APPENDIX I.
THE SKULL OF ST. TEILO
A cherished heirloom of the Mathews family which had
passed out of their keeping and has only been again restored to
it in this generation, is a unique drinking cup (the only one of
its kind of British or, indeed, of European make) fashioned from
the skull of St. Teilo.
Teilo was a Welsh saint born somewhere about 480 A.D.
in Pembrokeshire. In his youth he was a fellow student of St.
David and he soon made a name for himself by the sanctity of
his life and by his skill as an exponent of the Scriptures. Quite
early in his career he was the centre of various miraculous hap-
pcnings. When he went to draw wood from the forest two
wild stags came and allowed themselves to be harnessed to the
cart. Many springs were opened and the water was so pleasant
that it tasted like wine. After completing their studies Teilo and
David were told by an Angel to go to Jerusalem for consecration.
Here Teilo received as a present a bell which healed the sick
and sounded every hour without anyone touching it.
After his return Teilo received the pastoral care of the
church of Llandaff and the diocese adjacent. Soon after this-a
terrible pestilence broke out and many fled to distant lands. St.
Teilo was told by an Angel to take those that remained of his
flock to Brittany till the danger was past. Here they were
received by a fellow student of Teilo’s who was Archbishop of
Dol and here they remained for some time. Before leaving
Brittany to return home, St. Teilo rid the country of a winged
dragon, which had destroyed one-third part of it, by taking off
one of his vestments and tying it round the neck of the monster.
This caused it instantly to “cease to emit poison and pernicious
breath,” and the Saint then led it to the sea and tied it to a rock.
Altogether St. Teilo remained in Brittany seven years and seven
months. He then returned to Llandaff with his people and
remained there for the rest of his life. Under his rule as Arch-
bishop his flock multiplied and grew rich whilst his disciples
went throughout the country.


On the night of his death there arose a great dispute among
three of his churches as to which should be his last resting place.
Penally claimed it because it was there his ancestors had been
buried and there he had been born; Llandeilo Fawr because
there he had lived after he had retired from his see and there
he had died; and Llandaff because it had been his episcopal see.
The disputants decided to settle the matter by fasting and prayer,
and in the morning they found three bodies identical in every
respect, one for each church. These they buried respectively
with the greatest reverence. It was, however, known to all
people by the greater number of miracles that the true grave
of the Saint was at Llandaff, for at his tomb there the sick were
healed of their diseases, sight was given to the blind, and hearing
to the deaf. Not long after these events the cathedral of Llandaff
came under the protection of the ancient clan from which the
family of Mathews are descended. The badge of the Saint, a
blackcock, was adopted by this family as their crest. Many
centuries later, about 1450, Sir David Mathew restored the
cathedral which had been pillaged by pirates from Bristol. In
gratitude for this the Bishop presented to Sir David the drinking
cup made from the skull of the Saint which was set in a costly
reliquary and preserved as an heirloom in the family. Whether
the skull is really Teilo’s or not, the fact remains that Sir Arthur
Keith, the greatest living authority on such matters, has identified
it as being that of a mediaeval Welshman of medium height
and about seventy years old.
The skull remained in the Mathews family until 1658. In
this year the seventh holder of the sacred relic lay dying with
no heir to whom to bequeath it. Like many Welshmen he had
on his death bed the power of prophecy. The family of Melchoir,
sturdy yeomen of trusted Welsh stock, had been kind and
sympathetic to the dying man and to them he left the skull,
saying, “For seven generations have my race held the heirloom,
till there is no male heir in my branch; into thy keeping for
seven generations, to be a blessing to future men, who, when
ailing, will have their health restored by drinking from it, I
consign my inheritance, till your race in the male line will also
cease, and a woman will restore the relic to another branch of
the Mathews family, when their luck will be restored by St.
Teilo. Who restores the skull to the Mathews 1 will see St. Teilo


the Bishop, riding on a pure white stag, and St. Teilo will bless
his apple trees so that their next bearing will be very vast.”
(This is a modern and free translation of the Welsh as used by
the contracting parties). Thus in friendship has the skull ever
been surrounded. When Archbishop Mathew asked for a return
of the relic in 1890, the Melchoirs, mindful of the tradition,
refused, and so the prophecy or statement was fulfilled, and Miss
Dinah, the last of her race, made the restitution. Of the skull
it is said: “Who ever will keep it, may God keep it; and who
ever confirms it to the Mathews family may he be blessed.”
For many years while in the custody of the Melchoir family
the cup was used to dip up water from the sacred well of St.
Teilo, which was on their property, and those who drank therof
from it were cured of their illness. The earlier generations of the
family used to say, as they handed the draught to the patient,
“May St. Teilo bless you and your absent friends,” but later
this custom passed more or less into disuse. The skull has now
been restored to the Mathews family and the present owner has
had it remounted and has continued the ancient custom of drink'
ing from it on February 9th, St. Teilo’s Day, a solemn toast to
“St. Teilo and absent friends.”
In its present form the skull is supported on the tips of the
upraised wings of two silver angels, standing on a blackwood
base in the shape of St. Teilo’s cross. Around the edge of the
skull are two silver gilt pieces forming the lip. These bands
are hammered out of silver without any join to show the con'
tinuity of life, while the outside band bears the inscription,
“Presented by the Bishop of Llandaff to Sir David Mathew in
1450.”
However much of the foregoing story the reader may
believe, there is no doubt that this unique cup is of great
antiquity and that it has a most interesting history. In places
where the patina is worn off, the bone is smooth and polished
as old ivory, from the touch of the thousands who have handled
it in the past centuries.


APPENDIX II.
ASSOCIATION WITH SCIENTIFIC BODIES
Jon?"~?J eni !? er Royal Australasian Ornithologists’ Union.
1907.—Member British Ornithologists’ Union
In ternational Ornithological Committee.
Toil il 1 * 6 Fellow of Royal Society of Edinburgh.
iqi7 Gorres P°nding Fellow of American Ornithologists’ Union.
1916 Australian Ornithologists’ Association.
ioio'di ember of Check List Committee of the R.A.O.U.
M M ! mber of Committe e of British Ornithologists’ Union.
1919. Member of “Systema Avium” Committee.
1922 °l u iSt Committee of British Ornithologists’ Union.
1922.—Life Member British Ornithologists’ Union.
Jno?'~ C ° rreSponding M ember Bavarian Ornithologists’ Union
1924. Vice-President British Ornithologists’ Union. (Attended, with Dr
Berlin 7 ° th Anniversar y German Ornithological Union in
inol' Honoi 'ary Fellow American Ornithologists’ Union.
ino?‘ Bonorar y Fellow Bavarian Ornithologists’ Union.
9 9 3 4-7 fi H °^ rary Fell ® w R °y al Zoological Society of New South Wales
1930-38.—Chairman British Ornithologists’ Club.
,1940.—FcHoxv Royal Australasian Ornithologists’ Union.
v|L Member Council qf Royal Zoological Society of N.S.W.
President Royal" Zoological Society (August) of N.S.W.
Berlin" alia t 0 the followin £ International Congresses:
1926. (6th H Copenhagen.
1930.—(7th) Amsterdam.
1934.—(8th) Oxford.
QL93B. (9t») Rouen. /
BIBLIOGRAPHY
iq?a’ Band 'Lst °f the Birds of Australasia.
iqTo ? irds of Australia. (Completed in 1927).
J Reference List of the Birds of Australia.
TqTq A Beference List of the Birds of New Zealand.
iooa A °? * ke Ri r( ts of Australia,
loo?' £ heck List of the Birds of Australia—Part I.
i noo* ■^ anua l °f the Birds of Australia.
1923. —Check List —Part II.
1924. —Check List—Part III.
iqo7~J Mathiaid. (Privately published).
i noo S y stema Avium Australasianarum—Vol. 1.
~o ir ? S ° f Norfolk and Lord Howe Islands. ’
ino ‘ Avium Australasianarum — Vol. II.
1931. A List of the Birds of Australia.
1936. Supplement to the Birds of Norfolk Island.
Editor “Austral Avian Record’’ since 1912.
Assistant Editor “Ibis” 1931-40.
Contributor to the following other ornithological journals- “Auk”
British Birds,” “South Australian Ornithologist,” “Emu”
Novitates Zoologicae,” “Avicultural Magazine” “American
Museum Novitates,” “Victorian Naturalist ” ’ American








