

MISSION HEROES
BISHOP SELWYN
SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE
LONDON: NORTHUMBERLAND AVENUE, W.C.




MISSION HEROES
BISHOP SELWYN.
CHAPTER I.
BOYHOOD AND EDUCATION.
Descended from an ancient and honourable
family, George Augustus Selwyn was born at
Hampstead, in 1809. His father, Mr. William
Selwyn, Q.C., was Treasurer of Lincoln’s Inn,
and was selected as “the Instructor of Prince
Albert in the constitution and laws of his
adopted country,” soon after his marriage with
her most gracious majesty Queen Victoria.
According to the testimony of one of his sisters,
“ George was a strong self-willed child,” but side
by side with this self-will there always existed
that ready fund of unselfishness and considera-
tion for others, which became so marked a feature
in the character of his after life. “He was,” we
learn, “ always ready to assist in any emergency
that might arise in the nursery. If any case of
* Sources. —Tucker’s “ Life of Bishop Selwyn ”;
Barnett Smith’s “ Life of Gladstone ” ; “ Life of Bishop
Wilberforce”; and Sudimon’s “New Zealand Mission
life.”


distress was mentioned, his pocket-money was at
once devoted to its relief.” His passionate love,
and tender regard for his mother, from his earliest
years to the day of her death, was beautiful in
the extreme, and an unfailing source of happiness
to both mother and to son. “ I have known
him,” writes one of his sisters, “ spend many hours
of the few brief holidays he allowed himself, in
endeavouring to amuse his suffering mother,
who laboured for many years under a most
painful depression of spirits. He was, in fact,
the only person who could rouse her from the
morbid state of feeling produced by her malady ;
and though, with the zeal and devotion which
characterized her through life, she willingly gave
him up to his Masters service, yet she never
recovered the loss of his affectionate attentions,
and I found her, in a state of insensibility,
kneeling at her evening prayers beneath his
picture, under which she died. She never spoke
again, but lingered for a few hours, and expired
on the first anniversary of his consecration,
October 17, 1842. All the bishop’s earlier letters,
with interesting accounts of his voyage, were
addressed to her, but few reached their destina-
tion till after her death. The news of this loss
deeply affected him, and in one pathetic pas-
sage of a letter written just after receiving the
intelligence, he described himself as ‘ going
heavily as one that mourneth for his mother.*
There was nothing,” adds the same loving
sister, “ that was pious, noble, self-denying and
generous, that my brother did not exhibit in his
daily life; and as years drew on he became more
than ever constant in prayer, never ceasing in the
service of his heavenly Master.”


When George Selwyn was seven years old,
he entered Dr. Nichol’s school at Ealing,
where amongst his schoolfellows were the two
distinguished brothers, John Henry, now Car-
dinal Newman, and F. W. Newman, the Eme-
ritus Professor of Classics in the University of
London.
It was the nature of Selwyn, from his
earliest to his latest year, to appreciate and
to attach himself to those amongst his com-
panions who were endowed with the best
qualities of heart and head; and it is in this
light we can best understand his lifelong
friendly regard for Cardinal Newman.
From Ealing school he passed to Eton, where
he soon distinguished himself as an athlete,
a scholar, and a consistent Christian. He used
the great personal influence he possessed, as a
born leader of boys as well as of men, to effect-
ually put down the profane habit of swearing
at Eton.
At school as at home, no difficulties ever
daunted him in his efforts to do the right
thing or the kind thing from a sense of duty.
The story is told that when he came home
from Eton one Easter holiday he wished
to invite his schoolfellow—the present Mr.
Gladstone, one of his earliest and most attached
friends. His mother did not see her way to
second her son’s hospitable proposal, as the
spring cleaning was going on, “ and guests might
be in the way.” But young Selwyn was quite
equal to the emergency, and rushing upstairs
soon appeared again with a large mattress which
he hurled down on the wet boards, saying,
“ There now, mother, where is the difficulty”


His great popularity and influence at Eton
was in the main due to his thorough-going un-
selfishness. One who knew him well at Eton,
declared he was the most unselfish and the
kindest lad he ever knew. He had a word, a
look, and an act of kindness for everybody.
He was at every one’s service in trouble or in
pastime, or at study. In all this the boy was
father to the man, and the Christian youth to
the Christian bishop.
From Eton Selwyn passed to St, John’s
College, Cambridge. Here he distinguished
himself as at school, by strength of body,
strength of intellect, and strength of will. He
was in the first Oxford and Cambridge boat
race, which came off in 1829. “The great
benefit of our rowing,” he afterwards wrote,
“ was that we were all by rules, if not by
inclination, habitually temperate. Active exer-
cise, combined with strict and regular habits
had, I think, a most beneficial effect upon our
constitution, and certainly enabled Bishop
Tyrrell and myself, on horseback and foot, in
Australia and New Zealand, to make very long
journeys without any inconvenience. My advice
to all young men is in two sentences : *Be
temperate in all things,’ and ‘ Incumbite remis ’
(“ Press on your oars ”).
In 1831 Selwyn took the distinguished degree
of Second Classic, and returned a few months
afterwards to Eton, which, in the words of Mr.
Gladstone, “ he loved with a love passing the
love of Etonians,” and became the private tutor
of the present Earl of Powis.
Here he was once more “ the leading spirit
of a happy circle,” and an acknowledged bene-


factor to all around him. Owing to his influence,
boating at Eton became no longer an inter-
dicted and furtive amusement, while he guarded
against its dangers by establishing “ the
swimming system,” by which no boy was
allowed to go on the river until he had passed
an examination in swimming. He turned to
excellent account his popularity with the water-
men on the river, who were great admirers of
his accomplishments as a swimmer and an
oarsman, by improving their moral character
by his friendly advice and exemplary conduct.
He began about this time to read specially for
ordination, devoting most of his time to the
works of Pearson, Hooker, Barrow, and Butler.
The first two he knew almost by heart, but the
marvellous power which he already possessed
of applying Scripture, so notable in every
sermon he preached, was avowedly owing to his
mother, who from his infancy had familiarized
his mind with a knowledge of the Word of God.
CHAPTER 11.
ORDINATION AND MINISTRATION IN ENGLAND.
In 1833 Selwyn was ordained deacon on his
fellowship at Eton, and soon after, as a labour
of love, took the curacy at Boveney, near Eton,
while he continued his work as a private tutor,
and doing all the good he could for his old
school. He threw much of his unexhaustible
energy into the work of Sunday schools, and


persuaded his friends to become teachers in
them, and district visitors. It is recorded of
him, by one who knew him well at this period
of his work, “if there were any misunderstanding
among friends, he would not rest until they
were reconciled ; if pecuniary difficulty fell on
any one, he would make every endeavour to
extricate him ; if his friends were ill, he became
their nurse and companion ; if they lost
relations, or fell under any great sorrow, he
was with them at any hour to console and
uphold them. He was the friend, the adviser,
the comforter, of all who would admit him to
their confidence.” In his solemn estimate of
ministerial duties, he was never unconscious of
the dangers to their full and faithful discharge
which is inherent in our natural infirmity; and
his advice to a dear Eton friend just entering
the ministry was that, “we ought to enter
into a compact with one another to correct all
those natural dispositions that stand in the way
of the effective discharge of our duties.”
When Selwyn gave up the curacy of Boveney
for a wider sphere of work at Windsor, which
he held as a sole charge, he found a debt of
£ 3000, incurred by the churchwardens by
rebuilding the church, and this without any
means of repaying the debt, except by a
proposed rate of six shillings in the pound,
which would have practically pauperized the
parish. At the meeting held for the proposal
of the required rate the curate proposed, in
the interest of the poorer parishioners, a public
subscription in lieu of a rate, and munificently
promised to sacrifice his own stipend for
two years for this purpose, thus contributing


£ZQO towards the sum required. This unlooked
for act of generosity on his part at once opened
the hearts of his people to his ministrations and
his schemes for their spiritual and material
welfare. They co-operated at once and altogether
with him in his mothers’ meetings, soup-kitchen,
infant schools, and other parochial organizations
now so common, but at that time rare in the
extreme.
While the National Society was endeavouring
to provide the best method of inspection of
schools in a limited number of our dioceses,
Selwyn had matured a complete system of school
inspection, and had tabulated the results over
a considerable area, of which Windsor was the
centre.
On June 25, 1839, Selwyn was married to
Miss Sarah Richardson, the daughter of Sir
John Richardson, a judge of the Court of
Common Pleas. In July, 1841, he accepted the
offer of the Bishopric of New Zealand.
On Sunday, October 17, he was consecrated
in the chapel of Lambeth Palace to his great
office, “trembling at the thought of his own
weakness,” yet “relying on the sufficiency of
divine grace,”


CHAPTER 111.
HIS EPISCOPATE IN NEW ZEALAND.
During the bishop’s voyage to New Zealand
he read daily prayers, and studied the language
of the Maoris, as well as practised navigation,
with a view to preach to the natives in their
own tongue and to navigate his own missionary
schooner. He landed at Auckland on May 30,
and his first act was to kneel down on the sand
of the shore, and to return thanks to Almighty
God for the safe arrival of himself and the rest
of the passengers. On the following Sunday,
to the surprise and delight both of the Maoris
and the missionaries, the bishop read prayers
and preached in the Maori language, taking
for his text, “ If I take the wings of the morn-
ing, and remain in the uttermost parts of the
sea; even there shall Thy hand lead me, and
Thy right hand shall hold me” (Psa. cxxxix.
9, 10).
The aptness and felicity of the bishop’s texts
and quotations from Holy Scripture on all
occasions attests his thorough knowledge of the
Written Word as well as his ready power to
apply it. Here are a few examples of this gift.
The day before he sailed from England the
bishop gave his brother, Canon Selwyn, a Bible,
writing on the first page, “ Ready to depart on
the morrow On parting with Rev. E. Coleridge,
just before sailing, the bishop wrote in his
friend’s Bible, “When we had taken our leave


one of another, we took ship , and they returned
home again.”
His first year was passed in visiting every
settlement and every clergyman and catechist
in the country. At Widlington he spent some
time nursing on his deathbed, his friend and
companion, W. Evans, who had sailed with him
from England, and had been given over by his
physician. We learn from a letter from the
Chief Justice to Mrs. Selwyn that the bishop
watched and nursed as a mother or wife might
watch and nurse this sick man. He practised
every little art that nourishment might be
supplied to the patient, he pounded chicken into
fine powder, he made jellies, he listened to every
sound, and sat up the whole night through by
his bedside.
The hardships attendant on his long and
incessant journeyings may be partly conjectured
by such an entry in his diary as the following :
“Jan. 3, 1843. My last pair of thick shoes being
worn out, and my feet much blistered with
walking the day before on the stumps, which
I was obliged to tie to my insteps with pieces
of native flax, I borrowed a horse from a native
teacher, and started at four a.m. to go twelve
miles, to Mr. Hamlin’s mission station at
Manukau harbour, where I arrived at seven
a.m. in time for his family breakfast.”
The good bishop ever held it a part of his
missionary duty to reconcile warring tribes, and
alluding to one of his mediations in the interest
of peace he wrote : “ I arrived on the Saturday,
and immediately took up my position midway
between the hostile camps, in a field of Indian
corn which had been partially destroyed. From


this neutral ground I opened my communi-
cations with the rival chiefs. On the next
morning, Sunday, the whole valley was as quiet
as in the time of perfect peace, the natives
walking about unarmed among the cultivations,
it being perfectly understood that neither party
would fight on the Lord’s day.
“Going early in the morning to one of the
‘pas,’ I found the chief reading prayers to his
people. As he had just come to the end of the
Litany, I waited till he concluded, and then
read the Communion Service, and preached to
them on part of the lesson of the day— ‘ A new
commandment I give unto you, that ye love
one another.’ I spoke my opinions openly, but
without giving any offence; and the chief, after
the service, received me in a most friendly
manner.”
Of the noble qualities, in head and heart of
the natives Bishop Selwyn formed the highest
estimate. He was almost always hospitably
received. In his own house he had “no fasten-
ings to his windows, and the door was rarely
locked.” “In the course of some hundreds of
miles of travelling,” he tell us, “ I have never
lost anything. In the matter of land, about
which the quarrel at Nelson arose, hundreds
of thousands of acres of land have been
regularly sold and conveyed to the English in
other parts of the island, written deeds being
duly signed ; and in no instance, that I am aware
of, has a sale ever been disputed, when all the
conditions have been duly fulfilled in the first
instance. This is in fact a very wonderful
people, and I grow more and more attached to
them the longer I live among them. It will


still, however, require much time and perse-
verance before they can be made a civilized
nation.”
The cause of the Church amongst the natives
was sadly hindered, as the bishop again and
again lamented, by the ungodly lives and dis-
honest dealings of so-called Christian colonists
and traders. The notorious Maori wars were
due in the main to the unprincipled rapacity and
dishonesty of colonists who sought to rob the
native New Zealanders of their land. Though
the government of the day seemed to favour the
dishonest aggression of the settlers Bishop
Selwyn never failed to protest against this
policy of spoliation, and to maintain that we had
nothing to fear if the natives were only treated
with ordinary justice. His manly, independent,
vindication of the rights of the natives won for
the bishop their deepest veneration, and dis-
armed their savage warfare in defence of their
rights of more than half its terrors. When the
natives destroyed Kororareka by fire, house by
house, they studiously spared the two chapels
and the two parsonage houses. The Auckland
Times of March 18, 1845, thus notices the
conduct of the bishop during these disastrous
occasions:—
“His lordship the Bishop of New Zealand
was an active witness and participator in this
business; and it is only due to him to record
that it is impossible for the rapture of praise to
exceed that with which every tongue loads him.
Fearless in the very midst of the contest, Dr.
Selwyn sought to allay the heat of blood, and
to arrest the fury of the fight. He was also seen
bearing the wounded from the field; afterwards,
11
BISHOP SELWYN.


unwearied, at the bedside of the dying. Much
more than this—he was the nurse, and the
surgeon, and the servant of the sick, as well as
their spiritual attendant.”
The bishop’s well-placed confidence in the
good qualities of the natives who had benefited
by his Christian teaching, was singularly con-
firmed by the Christian conduct of the Maori
general, Henare Taratoa, who had been educated
at the Bishop’s college. Taratoa patriotically
sided with his countrymen in fighting for what
he believed to be their rights, but he never forgot
the Christian teaching of the bishop.
He was commanding the native forces at the
fight after the disaster that befell the English
at the Gate Pa. The English charged their
rifle pits and drove them out. The Maories
slowly retreated, facing the enemy, and were all
bayoneted, showing a courage that won the
admiration of the English. When Henare’s
body was searched, they found on him the
“orders of the day” for fighting. They began
with a form of prayer, and ended with the words
(in Maori), “ If thine enemy hunger, feed him ;
if he thirst, give him drink” (Rom. xii. 20).
These were not idle words, for on the occasion
of the panic that occurred amongst our troops
at the Gate Pa a few days before, several English
officers, naval and military, had got inside the
Maori redoubt, and were left there severely
wounded. One dying of his wounds was tended
all night by Henare Taratoa. The dying man
asked for water. There was none inside the
Maori redoubt, nor nearer than three miles on
their side of the Gate Pa; but there was water
inside the English lines at the foot of the Gate


Pa; and Henare Taratoa crept down amongst
the fern within reach of the sentries, and filled
a calabash with water, which he successfully
carried back to refresh the parched lips of his
enemy. The English officers told this story,
which in itself is a sufficient answer to the taunt
so often thrown at our missionaries, “What’s
the value of your supposed conversions to Chris-
tianity ? Where are the fruits of the Gospel
you have preached ? ”
To Bishop Abraham we are indebted for the
following. A Maori chief had killed his cousin.
The adherents of the murdered man determined
to avenge the murder, and assembled together
to give battle to the murderer and his followers.
When the two armies were at a little distance
from one another, Bishop Selwyn and Bishop
Abraham went from one to the other endeavour-
ing to make peace. When they came to the
redoubt of the murderer, the chief stood before
Bishop Selwyn and gave his version of his
cousin’s death, and then said, “Now what do
you think of that?” The man’s adherents were
lying on the ground handling their rifles, and
the chief and the two bishops were standing in
the middle. Bishop Selwyn looked straight
forward and said, “ I have no hesitation in say-
ing that on your own showing when you did
that deed you committed the crime that Cain
did when he slew his brother -Abel.” “ Say that
again if you dare,” shouted the man. He was
standing with his arms crossed, and Bishop
Abraham; who told me the story, said that he
thought that his last hour was come, for he saw
the man’s hand tighten on his tomahawk hidden
under his tartan plaid. But Bishop Se l wyn did


not hesitate, but calmly repeated what he had
said before. The chief looked round the ranks
of his followers, as if asking their decision. Then
there arose a loud cry among the fighting men
—“ The Bishop is right.” The chief (Katatore)
turned upon his heel and marched off to his
tent.
It was the well-founded opinion of those most
familiar with the facts of the Maori wars that,
but for the righteous and independent line of
action taken by the bishop, and the respect he
showed on all occasions for the rights and
feelings of the native population, the missionary
cause would have suffered irreparably, humanly
speaking, by the injustice done the natives by
aggressive settlers.
The popularity of the bishop became un-
bounded ; he was known personally and beloved
even on the most distant of the New Hebrides
group of islands. The name of “ bishop ”
became so popular in these latitudes, that when
Captain Denham, of H.M.S, Herald\ landed on
one of these islands and began to set up his
theodolites, the natives menaced him and his
party, but when he observed to his mate that one
of the natives had a terrible wound apparently
inflicted by a fish-hook , the people mistook the
word “ fish-hook ” for “ bishop,” and at once
became friendly, thinking that the party be-
longed to the good bishop.
The results of the bishop’s first seven years’
activity in New Zealand were incalculable. He
seems to have been everywhere and done every-
thing. He built colleges and schools for training
native ministers and catechists; he founded
hospitals for the sick. From Kaitaia at the


north to Stewart’s Island at the south, over a
length of one thousand miles, he brought it to
pass there was not a village in which the Holy
Scriptures were unknown; and out of a native
population of a hundred thousand, more than
half had been won over to Christianity, and the
remainder had ready access to the means of
grace.
Though it was the natural instinct of Bishop
Selwyn’s heart to prompt him to punish and to
openly denounce wrong-doing of any kind, as
he did on more than one occasion at school, yet
the grace of God had so tempered this tendency
with the softening leaven of Christian charity,
that in his New Zealand ministrations he invari-
ably acted upon the Christian principle which
he explains in the following words: “It is not
my desire or my office to hold up any man to
public execration, otherwise the names of certain
miscreants, who have disgraced their country
and belied their religion by their evil deeds
among these islands, would meet with the ex-
posure they deserve. But I have LEARNED to
leave all vengeance to Him to whom it belongs ,
and to His justice and to the re7norse of their
own consciences I assign iheml ’
The good work done by the bishop in New
Zealand owed no inconsiderable portion of its
extraordinary success to the example of his
consistent and continuous self-sacrifice in all
matters. When the income of his see was
per annum, he refused to receive more
than £5OO a year for himself, and dedicated the
remaining £ 7OO a year to the common fund of
the diocese.
Always ready to go anywhere and to do


anything to further the cause he loved so well
and served so faithfully, his whole missionary
career, like that of St. Paul, was one of almost
unexampled self-sacrificing toil and hardship,
and of constant exposure to deadly danger in
his devotion to duty. Like St. Paul, too, he
became all things to all men to win them to
Christ, and more than once the bishop won his
way to the hearts of the Maories by quoting
“one of their own poets.” On one occasion,
Bishop Abraham tells us, “ It was very striking
to see the men’s delight when he wound up his
speech with their old song—
‘ Ka tauzi te riroriro,
Kei te alu au tamariki! ’ *
the Maori equivalent for
“ Lady-bird, lady-bird, fly away home,” etc.
All the good advice and sober counsel given
before seemed to tell but little; but this quota-
tion set the whole party on the alert, and it
was repeated and bandied from one to another,
well illustrating the well-known saying, “ Give
me the writing of your ballads, and I don’t
care who makes the laws.”
His first introduction to the many islands of
his diocese, peopled as they were with savages,
was perilous on the extreme. After having
learned the name of the chief of the island, and
having swum ashore, he used to call the name
of the chief aloud. The bishop then presented
him with a tomahawk, and held out his hand
for the chiefs bow and arrows. If the chief sent
the tomahawk to the rear and gave the desired
bow and arrows, all was safe so far, and confi-


dence was established. The bishop then patted
the children on the head, and gave them red tape
and fish-hooks; and bringing forward a black
boy whom he had clothed and taught to read,
he tried to make the natives understand that
he wanted some of their boys to treat in the
same way. He then obtained what he wanted,
and by training those lads into teachers and
missionaries, he thus sowed the good seed in
the native soil, though at the risk of his own
life.
His marvellous passion and capacity for work
was not by any means limited to the discharge
of his strictly episcopal duties. When ten
thousand soldiers were landed at New Zealand
with only one chaplain, the bishop constituted
himself their chaplain, often taking eight services
a day, organizing and superintending Bible
classes. He won the hearts of the soldiers
and sailors, not merely by his enthusiastic dis-
charge of duty, but by his happy method of
adapting his language to them in their profes-
sional capacity. The soldiers thought the bishop
would have made a distinguished general, and
the sailors saw in his seamanlike qualities the
constituents of an admiral.
When the bishop’s missionary helpers came
over to him from England, he would often go to
meet them at their landing; and after a cordial
welcome would do porter’s work by helping to
carry their luggage to the gangway, to the
intense astonishment and admiration of the
captain, crew, and passengers. No work was too
mean in the eyes of this apostolic worker, who
had dedicated all that he was and all that he
had to further the glory of his God and to help


in any way he could the welfare of any of his
fellow-creatures.
When the mind of the natives was heated
with indignation at the wrongs inflicted by the
colonists, a fanatical prophet persuaded the
people in a certain village not to receive the
bishop into their houses, but to offer him a
pigstye for his night’s shelter. The bishop
accepted the churlish accommodation, set to
work and cleaned out the pigstye, turning out
the pigs, and then cut some clean fern and
littered it down for his bed. His conduct
astonished the Maoris and made them say,
“You cannot whaka tutua that man,” i.e. “de-
grade him from the character of a gentleman.”
This incident prompted the bishop’s brother,
Professor Selwyn, to write the following lines
“A Johnian bishop in New Zealand wood,
Finding no host to give him bed or food,
Was kindly lodged by two of porcine breed,
Who left their straw to rest his weary head.”
Many years afterwards, as Bishop of Lichfield,
by the same kindly and helpful condescension
to those of low estate, he won the heart of a
poor old woman whom he overtook toiling
with difficulty up a steep hill leading to a
village church. The bishop offered her his arm,
and pulled her up the hardest parts, and amused
her with a pleasant chat. Her astonishment
was indeed great when she saw the bishop
afterwards enter the church in his episcopal
robes, and recognized her companion and bene-
factor. The impression made upon her mind
by the bishop’s courtesy and his simple,
affectionate address was her conversion front


the ranks of dissent to the Church of her
forefathers.
In 1867, after twenty-six years of incessant
missionary work in New Zealand, the bishop
returned to England to attend the Lambeth
Conference ; partly, too, with a view to fan
the flame of missionary zeal in the Mother
Church, and partly to carry back to New
Zealand new recruits and additional resources
for the missionaiy cause. By the death of
the learned and popular Bishop Lonsdale
at this time, the see of Lichfield became
vacant. Bishop Selwyn, after refusing the offer
of it made to him by Lord Derby, accepted it
only at the urgent requests of our gracious
Queen and the Archbishop of Canterbury.
When the bishop paid his farewell visit to
New Zealand he was received everywhere and
by all the inhabitants, English and Maoris,
Churchmen and Dissenters, with the tenderest
and most enthusiastic affection. This only
deepened his sorrow at parting from them.
No words could be truer than those addressed
to the bishop in their valedictory address.
“ How can we ever forget you ? Every spot
in New Zealand is identified with you. Each
hill and valley, each river and bay and headland,
is full of memories of you; the busy town, the
lowly settler’s hut, the countless islands of the
sea, all speak to us of you. Whether your days
be few or many, we, as long as we live, will ever
hold you deep in our inmost hearts. All will
pray for you and yours: the clergy, to whom
indeed you have been a father in God; the old
tried friends with whom you have taken counsel;
the younger men of both nations whom you


have trained; the poor whom you have relieved ;
the mourners whom you have comforted; the
sick to whom you have ministered; the prisoners
whom you have visited—all think of you now,
and will think of you always with true and deep
affection, will offer for you always their fervent
prayers.”
CHAPTER IV.
HIS EPISCOPATE IN LICHFIELD.
On January 9, 1868, the bishop was enthroned
at Lichfield. He began his episcopate there by
taking up residence in the so-called “Palace,”
near the cathedral, and forsaking the more lordly
and commodious residence of his predecessors for
a thousand years at Eccleshall Castle, which was
far distant from the cathedral and from the
centre of his work. To the “Palace” he added
two wings, one of which contained a lofty hall,
which became the meeting-place of all diocesan
workers, and the seat of hospitality on a scale
truly episcopal. His power was soon felt in
every part of his extensive diocese, and
especially in the Potteries, the most degraded
portion of his episcopal charge. As the late
Archbishop of Canterbury said after the death
of Bishop Selwyn, “an electric force attended
his presence wherever he went.” He seemed
to give himself no rest. In addition to other
work he often took three services in one day;
and such was the simplicity and fervour of
his pastoral addresses, that the working-men


followed him in crowds, and hung as if
entranced on his lips as he told the story of
his missionary labours, and proclaimed himself
a working-man, working for the salvation of
souls. His love for the poor was always a
touching and striking trait in Bishop Selwyn’s
character. When the disastrous accident of the
Tilsall Colliery happened, the good bishop took
his place at once between the living and the
dead. He comforted the mourners with true
Christian comfort, and in tones that lingered
long in the grateful hearts of those that heard
them, who came afterwards to pay their last
tribute of affection at the grave of their chief
pastor and friend. For the honest, industrious
poor he invariably cherished a feeling of respect
and affection ; but he had no feeling but that
of contempt for “the shabby, mean, worthless
gentlemen , who are ashamed to dig but not to
beg, whose need never excites them to industry,
and whose pride never teaches them self-respect.”
Following the precedent of his ecclesiastical
organization in New Zealand, the bishop took
steps to organize a synod for Lichfield. His
plans were opposed by some of the clergy and
by Lord Harrowby, chiefly from their dislike to
the term “synod” and their preference for the
term conference. The bishop, at the close of
the Stafford Archidiaconal Conference, in his
ever consistent desire for unity and love of
peace, alluded to this by saying, “We are now
approaching the great question of the day,
whether our meetings are to be synods or not.
My own opinion I can state very briefly; it is
that I shall be perfectly willing to assist at such
meetings, let them be called what they may.


On personal grounds I feel with the poet
Moore—
‘ The choice what heart can doubt
Of tents with love or thrones without.’
I would rather be in a conference with Lord
Harrowby than in a synod without him.”
Bishop Selwyn visited, by special invitation,
the American Church in 1871, the year of jubi-
lee of their Missionary Society. The welcome
accorded to this most successful and the greatest
of modern missionaries was most enthusiastic.
The object of his visit was to promote the
intercommunion and to deepen the living sym-
pathy between the Church in England and in
America; and to fan the flame of missionary
zeal. He was the first English bishop to visit
America, and he worked as hard there as he
ever did in his own diocese.
On his return the bishop began to mature his
plans for the home mission work of his diocese,
and more especially for the establishment of
the Clergy House in Lichfield Close and the
Barge Mission for the canal workers. He was
extremely anxious, with a true fatherly love
for his clergy, to provide for the infirmities of
all aged and disabled vicars, by sending to them
help from an associated body of diocesan curates,
domiciled in the Clergy House.
As in his New Zealand so in his Lichfield
diocese, the bishop often laid aside his strictly
episcopal duties for pastoral work, wherever he
could be of real help to others, or best further
the interests of the Church or the poor.
One Lent he went down to minister to a
parish of twelve thousand souls, where the living


was sequestrated and the vicar an invalid.
Like his Lord and Master, the bishop took
compassion on the multitude and devoted him-
self to these neglected sheep in the wilderness.
He visited their sick, he ministered to the
dying, he buried their dead, he taught their
children, and he officiated in the church, and
on Easter Day he ministered to seventy com-
municants.
It was at this time (1878) the good bishop began
to feel acutely those infirmities which fifty years
of incessant toil had naturally brought upon
him. In his last earthly days he was attended
by his faithful friend and coadjutor, Bishop
Abraham. But amidst its many wanderings
caused by bodily weakness, his mind went back
to the distant islands in which he had toiled
so long and so effectually, and for whose
evangelization he had given his own son. In
the soft Maori language, which for a quarter of
a century was as familiar to him as his own
mother tongue, he would say at one time, “A
light to lighten the Gentiles,” and at another
time, “It is all light; ” and on Thursday,
April 11, the earthly end came, and he passed
into his eternal rest.
On the Tuesday following his body was laid,
as he had desired, in a grave dug out of the
rock on which his cathedral of Lichfield was
built, in the presence of his clergy, as well as of
men who held the highest positions in Church
and State. He was followed to his last resting-
place by many thousands of the poor, who
loved him as a father, because he first loved
them and cared for them, and had so often
proved to them that poverty had special claims


upon his services as a minister of Him who
preached the Gospel to the poor.
Though deaf to all the cries of party, he won
the admiration of all parties in the Church and
beyond it, by his ever consistent and persistent
discharge of duty. Though naturally combative
and self-willed, he was enabled by divine grace to
contend only for peace and for truth, and this
invariably in a spirit of love.
No missionary has ever combined in a larger
measure than Bishop Selwyn, the indefatigable
zeal of St. Paul, the tenderness of St. John, and
the ascetic self-denial of St. John the Baptist.
None has ever done the missionary work of the
Lord more in the spirit of the Lord, in spite of
natural infirmities which divine grace enabled
him to overcome.
It was in truth by the grace of God Bishop
Selwyn was what he was, and his whole life was
an evidence that that grace was not bestowed
upon him in vain.
LONDON:
SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE,
NORTHUMBERLAND AVENUE, W.C.


MISSION HEROES.
A Series of Lives of the Principal Workers
in the Mission Field.
Henry Martyn, as a Translator of the Perfect Life.
By the Rev, J. Hammond, LL.B., B.A.
Bishop Broughton, of Australia. By the Rev. Canon
Bailey. With Portrait.
Bishop Cotton, of India.
Bishop Feild, of Newfoundland.
Bishop Gray.
Bishop Mackenzie. By the Rev. E. HERMITAGE Day.
With Portrait.
Bishop Patteson, Missionary, Bishop, and Martyr.
Bishop Selwyn.
Bishop Steere, of Zanzibar.
Bishop Caldwell, of Tinnevelly. By the Rev. E. Her-
mitage Day. With Portrait.
Bishop Smythies. By the Rev. E. Hermitage Day.
With Portrait.
Chauncy Maples, Second Bishop of Likoma. By the
Rev. E. Hermitage Day. With Portrait.
Bishop Tozer. By a Worker in the Universities Mission
to Central Africa.
James Alfred Colbeck. A Short Memoir by his Brother.
Arthur Margbschis. By the Right Rev. A. A. WILLIAMS,
D.D.
Crown B vo, One Penny each.
Volume containing the first tiine, cloth boards , One Shilling.


