

IVli SSI ON HEROES.
BISHOP BROUGHTON
aus^raLl a.
\ '5 0 .M ;




MISSION HEROES.
BISHOP BROUGHTON,
AUSTRALIA.
HENRY BAILEY, D.D.,
RECTOR OF WEST TARRING ;
CANON OF ST. Augustine’s in canterbury cathedral;
LATE WARDEN OF ST. AUGUSTINE’s COLLEGE.
PUBLISHED UNDER THE DIRECTION OF THE TRACT COMMITTEE.
LONDON:
SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE,
NORTHUMBERLAND AVENUE, CHARING CROSS, W.C.;
43, QUEEN VICTORIA STREET, E.C.
BRIGHTON : 135, NORTH street.
New York : E. & J. B. YOUNG ANP CO.


SOURCES.
“ Memoir,” by Archdeacon Harrison ; “ Memoir of Joshua Watson,’^
ch, xxii.; Manuscript Letters to friends.
The Portrait is from a life-like wax cast (one of four) sent from Sydney
to England, now in the possession of Canon Bailey.


BISHOP BROUGHTON,
AUSTRALIA.
he work of the Church in Australia, or,
at least, in the settled districts of that
continent, has outlived the heroic age.
It was, however, the work of heroes to
minister in that newly peopled country sixty years
ago. Mr. Johnson, Mr. Marsden, —such men were
indeed the salt which saved the whole colony from
becoming irretrievably corrupt. Before Marsden’s
death, the Australian Church had received one who
was destined to exercise a great influence upon it;
this was William Grant Broughton” {Under
His Banner, ch. xxxi.). Yes, indeed ; and his Life
ought to have been written long ago in full detail.
Yet a sketch, such as can be given within the limits
of the following pages, may serve to exhibit the out-
lines of this remarkable man, and of his great work
for the Church of God. Without further preface, let
us take —


His earlier Life.
William Grant Broughton was bom in Bridge
Street, Westminster, in the year 1788. When he was
about six years old his family removed to Barnet,
Herts (his mother’s birth-place), where his boyish
days were passed. In January, 1797, he was placed
in the King’s School, Canterbury, being admitted to
a King’s scholarship in the same year, and he left
the school in December, 1804. He had obtained an
exhibition to Cambridge, but for want of means could
not then take up residence ; and, being offered a
situation in the East India House through the good
offices of the Marquess of Salisbury of Hatfield,
Herts, (who held Mr. Broughton senior in high
estimation), he gave up his own inclinations, and
became a clerk in the Treasury department. The
way, however, was made clear in the year 1813 for the
accomplishment of his long-cherished desire to enter
the sacred ministry of the Church ; and so he spent
a few months at Canterbury under the tuition of his
intimate friend the Rev. H. J. Hutchesson, Fellow of
Clare Hall, and, in October, 1814, became a resident
member of Pembroke Hall, Cambridge, taking his
Degree of B.A. in January, 1818, as sixth Wrangler
in that year. The same year saw him deacon and
priest, his title being the curacy of Hartley Wespall,
Hants, of which, during his tenure of the curacy, the
Rev. Dr. Keate (late Head Master of Eton) became
rector. That year, too, he was married, in Canterbury
Cathedral, to the daughter of the Rev. J. Francis, of
that city.
During the four years in which Mr. Broughton


held his first curacy, he published some learned and
elaborate works, which attracted the notice of Bishop
Tomline of Winchester, who removed him to the
curacy of Farnham, with the intention of bestowing
upon him the first preferment that should fall vacant.
Meanwhile, however, he had been brought under the
notice of the Duke of Wellington at Strathfieldsaye,
which was only one mile distant from Hartley
Wespall, through the intervention of the Duke’s
chaplain. The first result was the offer by the Duke,
entirely of his own motion, of the chaplaincy of
the Tower ; and the second, with far more widely
reaching consequences, of the archdeaconry of New
South Wales, then recently vacant by resignation.
Mr. Broughton, after expressing to the Duke’s chap-
lain his own desire to continue in the preferment he
had already received, added that of course he would
take the matter into his serious consideration, and
would return his final answer shortly. He consulted
his Diocesan, and, above all, he committed the case
to his God in prayer and at the Holy Communion.
Then and there it was (as he related the whole
narrative in his last striking address to members
of the S.P.G., in the year 1852) that he made his
determination, God helping him, to undertake the
office. Within a few days he was admitted to an
interview with the Duke, who said the colonists and
Australia “must have a Church,” and, after some
more characteristic remarks, desired him to give the
whole subject a second serious consideration. Within
a week his acceptance was given in, and “hence,”
he said, “ my connection with the Colonial Church.”
The well-known sagacity of the Duke did not forsake


him on this occasion. In truth, patron and nominee
were in many respects men cast in the same mould.
Nor did he repent of the selection he had made ; for
an interesting anecdote was told at Canterbury by an
eye-witness, that, at the King’s School Feast, in 1834,
the Duke of Wellington was one of the company,
when, as they were assembling for dinner, one of
them saw from the window Archdeacon Broughton
in the street, and mentioned his name, and the Duke
immediately said, He is a superior man,” and went
out of the room to greet him.
Like other great men, such as Bishop Andrewes
and Bishop Thomas Wilson, so was the subject of
this present sketch ever mindful, with heartfelt
gratitude, of “the persons and places to which God
had made him a debtor.” Thus of Barnet, speaking
on his last public appearance there, in the same
month in which he died: “It is now forty years since
I was in Barnet; it is a place associated with my
earliest recollections, and for which I still feel a deep
interest. My own early knowledge was all acquired
in your own Grammar School; and if this assisted
me to become a humble instrument in the Lord’s
vineyard, why should not any of our youth follow
in the same course, which, by God’s help, I have
been enabled to follow ; for men are required to go
forth to preach the gospel, until the earth is full of
the glory of God as the waters cover the sea.” Of
the King’s School, Canterbury: “ I remember as a
very little boy often going to old Gilbert (the father
of my excellent friend at Grantham), who had been
Bishop Horne’s attendant, who with him when
he died, to hear stories about him, the odour of


whose piety and goodness still hung around Canter-
bury Deanery; and when I was last there, old Mrs.
Gilbert showed me the inkstand which he used in
writing the Commentary. How very much, I often
think, of our character and principles is made up
of these odd out-of-the-way impressions, picked up
one hardly knows when or how, and remembered
one cannot tell wherefore. No boys in New South
Wales have any such reminiscences or regards. It
would be well for them if they had.” And the
practical result of thoughts like these was the estab-
lishment of a “ King’s School ” at Paramatta at a
very early date. Canterbury Cathedral lay still closer
to the heart of Bishop Broughton, for, in the very
year after his entrance on the Episcopate, he made a
beginning of a Cathedral for his diocese, the Governor
laying the foundation stone, and introduced into his
plan a visible reminder of his earlier associations
in the twin western towers of the building. And again,
in the extreme joy he felt and constantly expressed
on the rise and establishment of St. Augustine’s
Missionary College, it was one characteristic element
that the site was one so familiar to him, on the rescue
of which from its desecration he had himself in earlier
days held conversations with a friend. For his College
at Cambridge he ever retained the feelings of a
grateful and attached member. On receiving the first
volumes of the Anglo-Catholic Library (Andrewes),
and of the Parker Society (Ridley), he breaks out,
“Is it not a fine thing for my venerated old college,
Pembroke Hall, that it should have produced the
men, and such men—Ridley and Andrewes—who
stand respectively at the head of these two series ?


That is truly an academical triumph : and I heartily
enjoy it.” A trace of filial piety and gratitude to
God comes out in the following extract from a letter
to his aged mother (June, 1852): “I am going,
to-day, to have a guest at dinner, whose name will
perhaps surprise you. It is Lord Robert Cecil,
second son of the present Marquess of Salisbury. . , .
I could not help thinking how strange is the course
of events which brings one of that family to my
house ; and I think that my having the honour of
being able to receive and entertain him on terms of
equality may lawfully gratify you, and make some
little return for the exertions and sacrifices which
you and my dear father made to give me education,
and to prepare me for the situation in which I am.”
To that mother, then in her ninety-third year, he made
it his first duty to go on his arrival in England, in
the autumn of 1852 ; and his brother, who was present,
remarks on the touching sight of the Metropolitan
of Australasia throwing himself on his entrance at
her feet, and imploring her blessing.
Archidiaconate and Episcopate.
The jurisdiction of Archdeacon Broughton extended
over the whole of Australia and Van Dieman’s land,
and his Diocesan was the Bishop of Calcutta. Such
was our ecclesiastical organization in the year 1829.*
The history of the penal in Botany Bay,
the almost incredible spiritual destitution, and “ the
* The spirit in which the Archdeacon accepted his appointment
may be seen in an admirable letter he addressed to the Rev. H. 11,
Norris, printed in the “ Memoir of Joshua Watson,” vol. ii., p. 113,


shameful inattention to things sacred with which the
foundations of the colony were laid,” can only be
dealt with here, as they illustrate the task which lay
before the new Archdeacon. On that account, and
on other accounts too, it is best to use his own
words of description of what he found and what he
had to face, taken from his letter to the S.P.G.,
December, 1834, on his return to England, after five
years’ hard work in the colony, and from his Barnet
address. “Since 1788 more than 100,000 convicts
have been transported to this colony, to take up
their abode amidst forests coeval with the Creation.
Nor was it at first thought necessary by the Govern-
ment to send any clergymen to take charge of this
freight of wickedness, until, a few days before the
fleet sailed, at the earnest entreaty of Mr. Wilber-
force, one devoted man was allowed to accompany
them. A few more zealous and spiritually minded
men, as years went on, cast in their lot with this
good man ; and afterwards, till the year 1826, con-
siderable expense was incurred by the Government
for providing means of religious worship and instruc-
tion for these banished offenders. From that year
the entire provision was thrown on the colony. And
now (in 1829) 25,000 convicts survive in the country.
In Sydney, where there are 2000 of them, divine
worship can be held only in wretched rooms. There
are but eight churches and twelve clergymen in New
South Wales. Melbourne and South Australia are
uninhabited. During the past eight years not a
shilling has been contributed in England, though the
average of convicts transported has been 2500 for
the last three years. The question, in truth, which


the people of England have to consider is, Whether
they are prepared to lay the foundation of a vast
community of infidels ; and whether they can, col-
lectively or individually, answer to Almighty God
for conniving at such an execution of the trans-
portation laws as will infallibly lead us to this result.”
This trumpet-call brought to his aid the help of the
S.P.G., the S.P.C.K., and private individuals, to the
extent of 3,000, by means of which he at once
doubled the number of his clergy. The home Govern-
ment were not cordial in their support of his proposals,
but he was not the man to abandon his post of duty
by a voluntary act of resignation, “so long as there
remained the most distant prospect of doing good,
or even the shade of an obligation upon me to
maintain it.” Better counsels, however, prevailed,
and arrangements were made for erecting the Arch-
deaconry, with its original income of £2OOO, into a
Bishopric. Accordingly, on February 14, 1836,
Archdeacon Broughton was consecrated Bishop of
Australia in the Chapel of Lambeth Palace, the
excellent Rev. G. J. Mountain being at the same
time consecrated Bishop of Montreal.
One of his first acts, after his arrival in Australia,
as Bishop, was to collate to the newly formed Arch-
deaconry of Van Dieman’s Land an old College
friend and contemporary, a Wrangler like himself,
the Rev. W. Hutchins, a man whose name and
labours are commemorated in an excellent Grammar
School in Hobart.
The Church people in the colony made generous
efforts answerable to the encouragement they had
received from home, and a sum of more than ;^3OOO


was raised at a public meeting. The High Sheriff of
the colony, in a letter to the S.P.G., attributed it all
to the Bishop’s “prompt decision and firmness, his
unwearied exertions, and the high estimation in which
he was held.”
Meanwhile, the Bishop’s letters to his friends at home
revealed his real feelings—almost overwhelmed with
responsibility, and yet trusting to God’s grace to dis-
charge it aright. “I am set in the front of the battle,
against the forces of the Roman Catholics, and having
almost singly to sustain against them the cause of the
Church of England. And yet they are only one-
seventh or one-eighth of the population; and in
Sydney there are 14,000 Protestants, with only one
clergyman to minister to them. Whilst, on the other
hand, the so-called Protestantism is tinged with
sectarianism and indifference, and even professed
Churchmen are deplorably ignorant of the ground on
which the Church is founded.”
In truth, the education battle was imminent; for
the Governor was on the opposite side, and had a
measure in hand appropriating a large grant of money
to a scheme of education, from which all distinctive
religious instruction was shut out. And he had con-
trived to exclude the Bishop for a time, on technical
grounds, from his proper seat as a member of the
Legislative Council. The Bill, however, was thrown
out. A second struggle of the same kind was en-
countered later on, in 1839, but on that occasion also
the Bishop’s efforts were successful. As a member of
the Legislative Council he lifted up his voice in a
most able, eloquent speech, in which (according to
Ijiis wont) he illustrated how deeply rooted were his


principles of true education. “It happened to me,
sir” (addressing the Governor), “to be brought up
in a school founded by Archbishop Cranmer, and
afterwards in a College in which Bishop Ridley had
been Master; and I may, therefore, be supposed to
have directed more than ordinary attention to their
opinions.” And he concluded with an appeal to the
Governor, made partly on the ground of their having
been schoolfellows at Canterbury. His letter on the
occasion describes in strong language his sense of the
great injustice to the Church of the proposed measure.
“ However, we made a fair fight, and compelled the
Governor to give way.” The pleasant fact remains
to be told, that the two “ schoolfellows ” retained their
friendship to the last; and when the Governor retired,
the Bishop in his private letters home wrote a beautiful
and touching account of him. More touching still it
is to record that they now sleep side by side, in the
nave of the great Cathedral of Canterbury, till the
morning of the resurrection.
Still later, in 1846, the conflict was renewed. In
truth, with Bishop Broughton’s strict principles of
real Church education, inherited from his English
experience, and proved to his inmost conscience to
be the only sound ones, he could not fail to come into
frequent collision with the opinions of three chief
constituents of the colonial population, i.e. Romanists
(chiefly of Irish descent). Liberals in belief, and In-
differentists. But he was always supported, even in
defeat, by a body of faithful and zealous Churchmen.
Another chief and constantly pressing anxiety, was
the supply of clergy for the colony. His letters are
full of this topic, now being on the verge of despair,


—as when he writes, “My office will expire of itself, in
consequence of having no clergy to govern,”—and then
thanking God for the arrival of fresh helpers from
England. He could always speak highly of the great
body of his clergy, but he was very discriminating ;
he set the standard high, and declined to receive such
as were not likely to come up to it. In one, other-
wise distinguished, Priest that was offered him, he
discerned “ a kind of susceptibility about trifles, which
could never make the possessor of it equal to contend
with any great crisis of affairs,” Later on, when he
had not only to seek a supply of clergy for his own
diocese, but to discuss the sort of bishops that would
be required for the government of other dioceses,
whether in immediate or more remote prospect, he
would say that each one, whatever his other qualifica-
tions, must be in himself “ a substantive ; ” and again,
that “he must be a man ready for everything and
everybody that may require whilst he must re-
quire nothing, but just what he happens to find.”
Indeed, a collection of his recorded experiences on
the head of the qualifications of colonial clergy would
be very valuable. For the permanent benefit of his
clergy and of the diocese generally, he formed a
valuable library of standard books, obtained largely
through the indefatigable exertions of the Rev.
Edward Coleridge, of Eton College.
Subordinate to the supply of good men, the erection
of suitable churches in which they should minister
called for and received his careful attention. Here
he was considerably helped by grants from the
S.P.C.K. and the S.P.G., and his constant friends,
Mr. Edward Coleridge (who raised wonderful contribu-


tions for him year by year), Mr. Joshua Watson,
Dr. Warneford, and Mr. Gilbert of Grantham.
The progress of the Cathedral, indeed, after 1837,
was delayed for several years, and the consecration
did not take place till after his death, though the
Bishop’s deep interest in it was helped on by gifts
from England. But, indeed, there was not a church
erected in any part of his vast charge in which he was
not personally concerned. One striking instance, far
too long to reprint here, and too full of graphic details
to bear mere alusion, is given by Archdeacon Harrison
{Memoir, p. 25), taken from the Gospel Missionary
of 1852.
► The Letters Patent of the Bishop of Australia in-
cluded Tasmaiia, which island he visited in 1838, as
he did also Ntw Zealand and Norfolk Island, shortly
after, from puE zeal for the missionary cause, though
external to lis jurisdiction, and at that time, in
fact, out of th( Queen’s Dominions. His longings for
Episcopal coaljutors were gratified by the consecra-
tion of Bishof Selwyn for New Zealand, in 1841, and
of Bishop Niion for Tasmania, in 1842, —gratified,
but not satisfied. In 1844 he urged upon the Arch-
bishop of Caiterbury the establishment of a See in
South Austnlia, but received no encouragement.
Lord Stanley was “immovable.” To all which he
replied, “We must have Bishops, whether we get
money or not either married or single.” Meanwhile
he was contenplating a noble act of self-denial. His
Episcopal (!) <bode had at first been a second-rate
hotel, and aterwards a miserable and yet highly
rented house ; and the expenses of the administration
of his diocese were far too heavy for the income, so


that he was “ a poorer man than he had been thirteen
years before ; ” but he was not content with surrender-
ing an annual one fourth of his income, to
secure another bishopric; he offered another
for a second ; and fain would he have surrendered a
third for payment of clergy, though he ‘‘worked
harder than any curate in England.” Living himself
with his devoted wife in the most simple way, and
loving his children, he could still say, “ All I can hope
to do is to leave them above want.” He always said
he had accepted the office of Archdeacon, and then
that of Bishop, as a matter of duty, which Providence
clearly laid upon him ; but that now, having put his
hand to the plough, he could not look back. In
writing about his purposes of reducing his own income
to one of his friends, he says, “ Let no man think me
a fool ; I have just been a journey of 1500 miles,
occupying more than three months, and I ought to
start again to-morrow. It cannot, must not go on.”
He rejoiced in the high qualities of the Bishops who
were now his suffragans, but, whilst he gladly con-
tracted his jurisdiction to the Bishopric of Sydney,
he shrunk from the new position of Metropolitan, in
the thought that, such as they, were now under himself.
He always felt ready to retire, only that his‘ one
absorbing motive was to fulfil God’s purpose in
placing him where he was. Truly he was “lowly in
his own eyes.”
The sore lack of clergy, and the consequent evils to
the colony, drove him to devise measures for remedying
them by the establishment, first, of a good grammar
school, and then, through the assistance of the S.P.C.K.,
of a Diocesan College in Sydney, over which he placed


his trusted friend the Rev. Canon Allwood, whilst he
took much of the instruction upon himself. Mr.
Moore, a colonist, made over to him by will a sum
of £20,000, together with 6000 acres of land, to found
a college, to build a house for the Bishop, and for
other purposes. This was, though only prospectively,
a cause of thankfulness to him. But his great joy
and hope in this direction was in the foundation of
St. Augustine’s College, and in the supply from
thence (which he often dwelt on) of a succession of
well-trained, orthodox, and zealous clergy for the
Colonial Church.
He had paid great attention to the* Romish con-
troversy, which, indeed, was forced upon him by the
encouragement given in high places to Dr. Folding,
Roman Catholic Archbishop of Sydney. And he pre-
pared and delivered a celebrated protest, in the most
solemn way, in the church of St. James, Sydney, on
the Festival of the Annunciation, 1843. No notice
was taken of it by Dr. Folding, and the Bishop of
Australia was rather disappointed it was not actively
followed up by the heads of the Church at home,
though it was approved by the Archbishop of Canter-
bury and Bishop Selwyn. It would seem that his
experience in this matter led him to change his views
about the Oath of Supremacy, and to advocate its
abolition, as having been entirely and publicly violated
in the colonies And this, again, led him to convene
his suffragans to a conference at Sydney, in October,
1850, —one memorable in the history of the
Church, and resulting in the formation of the
Australasian Board of Missions. He explained to
the Bishops assembled on that occasion his desire


and plan, as he did afterwards, in 1852, to the whole
of the clergy and representative laity of his diocese.
The two distinct features of his plan were, first, to
obtain, by royal licence, liberty to the Clergy in
Synod, and the Laity in Convention, to deliberate
and consult on matters touching the ordering of the
affairs of the Church of England, it being understood,
secondly, that the Bishop was a separate order, and
that the distinction between Clergy and Laity was ob-
served. These propositions, after thorough discussion,
were accepted by all concerned ; and, in August, 1852,
the Bishop of Sydney took his departure for England
with the purpose of bringing them before the proper
authorities.
He commenced his voyage by way of Panama and
South America, in order to perform some service
there to the Church. But the Bishop shall give his
own story, as he gave it to his friend on his arrival at
Southampton on November 19, 1852 : “We have had
a most calamitous passage from the West Indies ;
having lost our captain, purser, one of the engineers,
and seven or eight men, chiefly by yellow fever.
Thanks to that merciful Providence which has watched
over me during so many years, and in the midst of
so many dangers, I have escaped that scourge;
although I was during a week or ten days lamentably
unwell; reduced to such a state of debility that it
was burdensome to me even to go up and downstairs
from my cabin to the saloon ; and my voice was
entirely lost. The first time that I got out of bed
to attend the funeral of a sailor, my power of utter-
ance was so impaired that, being quite unable to
make myself heard, I requested the captain, who


stood next b me, to read the lesson; and when I
looked upon the poor fellow who lay at my feet
ready to be )lunged into the surge, I could not sup-
press the thoight that not improbably I might be the
next to occu)y that place. Yet how mysterious and
unsearchable are the appointments of the Almighty!
Within four lays I was standing again in the gang-
way to perfom the same solemn office over the lifeless
body of our nuch-respected captain, whose assistance
I had so latdy solicited to supply my own infirmity.
We have jus; lost another of the crew, who will be
buried this afernoon. There are a few other sick. .. .
The same evtning, I landed, after having gone out to
sea again to nter the bodies of two poor fellows who
died on suoessive days. Each death detains the
ship in quanntine ten days. At the close of my
duties I tool my leave of the survivors in a short
address, suggested by the late events, and was thank-
ful to observ( it was attended to with earnest atten-
tion by all, s(me speaking to me afterwards in terms
which evidenly showed that a right impression had
been made u)on their minds. God grant it may be
a lasting one.’ The self-sacrificing devotion of Bishop
Broughton diring the whole of this trying time, till
all danger ws over, won the admiration of every one,
and was described in full, with high appreciation of
its noble chaiacter, in the Times newspaper.
No wonder that the following week the Bishop was
obliged to report of himself, that the attack of
bronchitis, under which he had been suffering severely
during the voyage, had revived, and assumed the form
of asthma, and confined him to his bed. As soon, how-
ever, as he was comparatively convalescent, he paid his


long-looked-for visit to his aged mother in Warwick-
shire, and after that had private conferences with
leading men in Church and State upon the important
measures which had brought him to England. In
the prospect of an appointment with the S.P.G., and
of a speech to be made by himself on that occasion,
he consulted a friend on the propriety of introducing
a topic on which he felt warmly and gratefully.
“ There is one relation peculiar to myself, which
might be introduced, with the effect of showing the
great Duke in one point of view in which he has not
yet appeared after all that has been said ; that is,
in connection, as Prime Minister, with the institu-
tion of the Colonial Church. In this he did not act
merely ministerially; but took personal pains, and
showed an interest in the matter, as a Church matter,
for which the world has not given him credit, and to
which, it may be, I am the only person living who
could bear testimony. My relation of events in 1828
would also evince on his part a spirit of kindness and
condescension (towards a curate, too,) which was very
noble and pleasing. May I venture ? ” The speech
is to be found in full in Colonial Clmrch Chrotiicle,
vol. vi., but it may here be mentioned that the day
on which the Bishop arrived at Southampton was
the very day of the funeral of the Duke of Wellington.
Besides attending the meeting aforesaid, the Bishop
preached two or three times, visited his diocesan and
former parishioners at Farnham, and delivered a
speech at Barnet, mentioned on a preceding page,
amidst the scenery of his early childhood. On his
return to London, while staying at the house of his
old and valued friend. Lady Gipps, the widow of the


former Governor of New South Wales, he was seized
with an attack of bronchitis. His pocket-calendar
was full of prospective engagements, which were all
necessarily cancelled. The rest may be told in the
words of Archdeacon Harrison: “ For a fortnight he
lingered in an uncertain state. On Saturday evening,
February 19th, he began suddenly to sink, and at a
quarter-past one on Sunday morning he quietly
breathed his last. During the whole of his illness,
his mind seemed to dwell on religious subjects, and
to occupy itself in prayer. He was constantly repeat-
ing psalms and prayers, and would lie for hours
engaged in devotional exercises. His voice and
articulation were scarcely changed at the last moment.
His whole thoughts, while he was conscious, and even
when his mind wandered in delirium, were upon the
Church. His faith seemed to grow brighter as his
strength failed ; and he expired almost with the words
of prophetic scripture on his lips, earnestly repeating
thrice the slight variation from the text marking
expressively his fervent zeal and holy faith, ‘The
earth is full of the glory-full of the glory—of the
Lord, as the waters cover the sea.’ ” * And then he
peacefully fell asleep, in the sixty-fifth year of his age.
On becoming acquainted with the sad event, the
Dean and Chapter of Canterbury expressed to the
* A doubt exists, and must always remain, whether the quotation
was made with this striking variation, or in the exact terms of our
English version. But this text had long been a favourite one with the
dying Christian. It is not a little interesting, that in a sermon preached
by him as Archdeacon, in November, 1829, two months only after his
first arrival in the colony, are the words, “The earth shall be full of the
glory of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea.” The promise was
evidently a life-long support to him.


family their earnest desire that the body of the great
prelate might find his resting-place within the walls
of their Cathedral, which had been so dear to him ;
—how much so may be gathered from his own words,
in a letter dated May 9, 1851: “The view of that
glorious Cathedral at the head of your letter occasions
a variety of emotions. It connects itself with the
remembrances of my earliest life, almost of infancy;
with all the hopes and enjoyments of youth; with
all that I have learned, and all that I have felt
through life ; with the memory of early friends—most
of them now in the grave.” Most fitting, then, was
it that should be laid there to sleep. And the
burial service and ceremonial were most impressive
and suitable to the occasion. Funeral sermons were
preached, the day after, in the Cathedral, by Arch-
deacon Harrison, and, in the Chapel of St. Augustine’s
College, by the Warden : both of these discourses
were printed by request, and largely circulated in the
colony. And without delay a memorial fund was
started, and all its objects were carried into execution:
first, an altar tomb with recumbent figure in alabaster
(by Lough) in Canterbury Cathedral ; second, a
Broughton scholarship at St. Augustine’s; third, a
similar tomb and figure for Sydney Cathedral; fourth,
prizes in Church History at the King’s School.
Public meetings were subsequently held in the colony
itself, and addressed by its most distinguished men,
full of the highest admiration for the wonderful
qualities and work of the beloved prelate, adviser,
and friend they had lost, the like to which they never
expected to see again. The same testimony was
borne by the pulpit and by the press in terms which
bespoke the feelings of the whole community.


Letters and Character.
From the fore-mentioned notices, necessarily im-
perfect, of the life and acts of the first and only
Bishop of Australia (so called), the reader will be able
to form some idea of what manner of man he was.
His letters to his chief friends in England, covering
a period of eighteen years, from A.D. 1834 to A.D.
1852, reveal the man more fully still. With but few
like-minded persons in the colony, except such as
Mr. Justice Burton and Canon Allwood, he found
relief in unbosoming his whole heart to those he loved
in England, who, in turn, it should be said, well repaid
him by their unfailing sympathy and material support.
The Bishop’s letters are written in a plain, regular,
manly hand ; the style is nervous, lively, and per-
spicuous ; the descriptions given in them of parties
and opinions are very graphic; the estimate of
characters is highly discriminating. His chronic con-
flict with the Romanists led him to study the whole
question of the Papal Supremacy by the light of
Christian antiquity, and he would deliver himself of
a really learned dissertation upon it, in beautiful
manuscript, and yet with evidently the pen of a ready
writer. On a threatened cessation of grants in aid of
additional clergy for the spiritual welfare of the
convicts, from government sources, he addressed a
letter, marked by Christian boldness, to Lord John
Russell. It is the like bravery, foresight, fixedness
of principle that mark all his references to the
controversies in which he was engaged, or to the
plans he was forming for the present and eternal
welfare of the community. He felt the full force of


the responsibility laid upon him. “ Episcopacy here
rests upon my single person.” “ I am paving the
way for others who are to come after; and their road,
I hope, will be smoother.” “I often consider what
will be the effect of what we now undergo, two
centuries hence.” Having thoroughly thrown himself
into the interests of his adopted country, he had
alternate seasons of hope and gloom according as he
regarded their condition. For himself he had no
other rule of life than that of his Divine Master: “ I
came not to do my own will, but the will of Him
that sent me.” Hence his indifference to personal
comfort, and even to position, except in view of his
office, and the influence of it; hence his readiness to
surrender one portion of his professional income after
another: “if so be I can place my children above
want, it will be enough.” When consulted about
translation to an episcopate more lucrative and of
greater supposed dignity than his own, he left himself
passively in the hands of Providence, saying, “ None
of these things move me.” His great year of domestic
sorrow was 1849, when his dear wife was taken from
him. Amongst other sources of comfort he especially
mentions a sermon by (the then) Archdeacon Manning,'
on “the Sleep of^ the Departed,” over the repeated
reading of which he “shed floods of tears.” But
with all the tenderness and susceptibility of his nature,
he was firm as a rock of granite where principle was
at stake. “Men,” he says, “are so taught to hate
exclusiveness, that they are startled at truth, because
it requires them to embrace one view in preference
to others.” The staunchness with which he retained
and maintained the Anglican position in which educa-


tion and experience had fixed him, was characteristic-
ally marked in his correspondence on the course of
events in the English Church from 1840 to 1845, of
which he was a very close observer. With all
charitable construction of motives, he never conceded
any right to mere sentiment, or strained interpretations
of authorized formularies. Besides his constant study
of theology proper, he made a translation of the
Book of Job with large annotations. His classical
studies seem never to have lost their charms to him.
Words, phrases, whole sentences, and whole lines,
come to his aid opportunely throughout his corre-
spondence. And to a sense of humour he was always
alive. Besides the care of all the Churches in Aus-
tralia which came upon him, he offered his services to
the Archbishop of Canterbury to go to Hong-Kong,
at a critical season, to " set in order the things that
were wanting,” as he did later on, to South America.
He plainly had come to love pioneering work, through
having it appointed to him. And in the pioneering
work of the Church, as a Church, in Australasia,
Bishop Broughton must ever stand a noble and pre-
eminent figure, if not quite alone. The motto which
that heroic soul adopted (in a letter to a friend) when
he was bracing himself up for one of the most
courageous acts of his Episcopal life, may well be
inscribed upon the whole of it:
“NEC TEMERE, NEC TIMIDE,”
PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED, LONDON AND BECCLES.




/ H ‘ ‘'i,
/ "’s 'f r
W Cl. ! \ ' -i '
’/’> ‘i."' ‘'■ .'
