

MISSION HEROES.
Bishop Patteson
Missionary Bishop and Martyr




MISSION HEROES
BISHOP PATTESON,
MISSIONARY BISHOP AND MARTYR.*
CHAPTER I.
EARLY LIFE AND MINISTRY.
John Coleridge Patteson, the eldest son of
the late Justice Patteson, was born on April I,
1827. Reverence for holy things, and a desire
to help in holy work, seem to have been
natural to him even from childhood. When he
was only six years old, he expressed a wish to
be a clergyman, that he “might make people
happy by reading to them the Absolution from
the Prayer-book.” On hearing of the praise-
worthy exertions of his cousin, the first Bishop
of Barbadoes, during the fearful hurricane that
devastated that island in 1833, young Patteson
exclaimed, “ I will be a bishop! I will have a
* Sources. —Miss Yonge’s “ Life of Bishop Patteson **;
Mr. Gladstone’s Life, by Mr. Barnett Smith; Mr. Glad-
stone’s Gleanings ; Mr. Tucker’s “Life of Selywn” ; Mis-
sionary periodicals and reports; Mr. Gladstone’s Mis-
sionary Speech ; Colonial Church Chronicle.


hurricane! ” an exclamation not merely pro-
phetic of his future episcopal career, but of the
self-sacrificing labour and love that marked that
career from first to last. At eleven years of age,
Patteson was sent to Eton, where he was dis-
tinguished not so much as a scholar, but rather as
a shrewd, sensible, affectionate lad, with a marked
love for Bible studies, and for sacred music, and
with a true Etonian delight in boating, bathing,
and cricket.
“Coley,” as he was called, had regular daily
Bible readings in his room with his brother,
cousin, and a friend or two; but the boys were
so shy about it that they kept an open Shake-
speare on the table, with an open drawer below,
in which the Bible was placed, and which was at
once closed at the sound of a hand on the door.
But October 31, 1841, may be justly regarded as
the great turning-point in Patteson’s career. It
was on that memorable day the Rev. Samuel
Wilberforce, then Archdeacon of Surrey, and
since Bishop of Oxford and of Winchester,
preached in the morning at New Windsor parish
church, and the newly made Bishop of New
Zealand in the evening. Coley was far more
affected than he then had power to express.
He says: “ I heard Archdeacon Wilberforce in
the morning, and the bishop in the evening,
though I was forced to stand all the time. It
was beautiful when he talked of his going out
to found a church, and then to die neglected
and forgotten. All the people burst out crying,
he was so very much beloved by his parishioners.
He spoke of his perils, and putting his trust in
God ; and then, when he had finished, I think I
never heard anything like the sensation, a kind


of feeling that if it had not been on so sacred
a spot, all would have exclaimed, ‘God bless
him! ’ ” The text of this memorable sermon
was, “ Thine heart shall be enlarged; because
the abundance of the sea shall be converted
unto thee, the forces of the Gentiles shall come
unto thee ” (Isa. lx. 5). Many years later we
shall find a reference to this, the watchword
of the young hearer’s life. The Archdeacon’s
sermon was from John xvii. 20, 21; “Neither
pray I for these alone, but for them also which
shall believe on Me through their word; that
they all may be One; as Thou, Father, art in Me,
and I in Thee, that they also may be one in Us:
that the world may believe that Thou hast sent
Me.” And here, again, we find one of the watch-
words of Coley’s life, for nothing so dwelt with
him, and so sustained him, as the sense of unity,
whether with those at home in England, or with
those in the inner home of the Saints. When
the sermon concluded with the words, “As we
are giving of our best, as our Church is giving
of her best, in sending forth from her own bosom
these cherished and chosen sons, so let there go
forth from every one of us a consenting offering ;
let us give this day largely, in a spirit of self-
sacrifice, as Christian men, to Christ our Lord,
and He will graciously accept and bless the
offerings that we make,” the preachft could
little guess that among the lads who stood in
the aisle was one in whom was forming the
purpose of offering his very self also. When
the Bishop of New Zealand came to take leave,
he said, half in earnest, half in playfulness,
“ Lady Patteson, will you give me Coley ? ” She
started, but did not say no; and when, inde-


pendently of this, her son told her that it was
his greatest wish to go with the bishop, she
replied that if he kept that wish when he grew
up he should have her blessing and consent.
Lady Patteson, however, did not live to see
her son enter upon this great work, as she died
in the following year. Her death, however,
made a deep impression for good upon his
mind, and writing to a cousin at the time, he
stated that “we should rather learn to imitate
her example and virtue, than spend our time in
useless tears and regret.” It was equally credit-
able to Patteson’s manliness and reverence that
he more than once exerted his authority as
captain of the Eton cricket eleven, to put down
with a high hand all attempts to sing an obscene
song, or to indulge in indecent talk at the festive
gatherings of the club. On leaving Eton he
writes to a friend, “ You may suppose that I was
really very miserable at leaving Eton. I did not,
I assure you, leave without thanking God for
the many advantages I have there enjoyed, and
praying for His forgiveness for my sin in neglect-
ing so many,” “So ended Coleridge Patteson’s
school life,” writes Miss Charlotte Yonge, “not
reaching to all he saw that it might have been,
but constrained, noble, happy, honourable, and
full of excellent training for the future man.
No sting was left to poison the fair memory of
youth, but many a friendship had been formed
on foundations of esteem, sympathy, and kind-
ness, which endured through life, standing all
tests of separation and difference.”
In 1845 he went to reside as an undergra-
duate at Balliol College, Oxford, which was dis-
tinguished, not merely for the pre-eminent success


of its alumni in winning university honours, but
for the high character of its members, who found
“its most delightful society, the very focus of
the most stimulating life of the university.” In
1849 he won second class honours at his final
examination. In the following year he travelled
on the Continent, and was intensely delighted
by his visits to the great cathedrals of Italy, and
by his journey through Switzerland. His visit
to Rome moved him with inexpressible delight,
though tempered with a strain of sadness and
regret at the religious condition of that great
city, with its prayers to the saints, its pretended
miraculous cures, and the reported abuses of
the Confessional. In 1852 Patteson became a
successful candidate for a Fellowship at Merton
College, Oxford. With a view to taking Holy
Orders, he now applied himself most assiduously
to the study of Hebrew and of Theology; and
as a help to a better understanding of Hebrew,
he took up the study of Arabic. His proficiency
was a marvel to others, and none the less to him-
self. The study of languages became an intense
delight to him, but a delight held in check as
only subordinate and subservient to his prepara-
tion as a steward of the oracles of God.
“He did not,” writes his biographer, Miss
Yonge, “mean to use languages as the acquire-
ment of academical honour, or for promotion, nor
did he even rest in the intellectual delight of
investigation ; he intended them only as keys to
the better appreciation of the Scriptures and of
the doctrine of the Church, unaware as yet that
the gift he was now cultivating would be of ines-
timable value in far distant regions.” In 1853
Patteson was ordained to the curacy of Alfing-


ton, a hamlet of the parish of Ottery St. Mary,
by Bishop Philpott, of Exeter. His superiority
in the examination led the bishop to select him
to read the Gospel on the occasion. The deep
spirituality of the man manifested itself in his first
sermon, causing, as it did, considerable emotion.
As a curate, his ministry was marked by devotion
to duty, self-denial, and sweetness of manner.
It is about this period of his life that we
gather the following account of his personal
appearance from the pictured pages of Miss
Yonge:—“ He was tall and of a large powerful
frame, broad in the chest and shoulders, and
with small neat hands and feet, with more of
sheer muscular strength and power of endurance
than of healthiness, so that though seldom break-
ing down and capable of undergoing a great deal
of fatigue and exertion, he was often slightly
ailing, and was very sensitive to cold. His com-
plexion was very dark, and there was a strongly
marked line between the cheeks and mouth,
the corners of which drooped when at rest, so
that it was a countenance peculiarly difficult to
photograph successfully. The most striking fea-
ture were his eyes, which were of a very dark
clear blue, full of an unusually deep earnest, and
so to speak, inward, yet far away expression.
His smile was remarkably bright, sweet, and
affectionate, like a gleam of sunshine, and was
one element of his great attractiveness. So was
his voice, which had the rich full sweetness
inherited from his mother’s family, and which
always excited a winning influence over the
hearers. Thus, though not a handsome man,
he was more than commonly engaging, exciting
the warmest affection in all who were concerned


with him, and giving in return an immense
amount of interest and sympathy, which only
became intensified to old friends while it ex-
panded towards new ones.”
It was in August, 1854, that Bishop Selwyn
paid a memorable visit to his old friends the
Pattesons. This rekindled in Patteson’s heart
his early enthusiasm for mission work. His
only obstacle was the leaving his father, Judge
Patteson, in his old age, with whom he was
living in the closest and tenderest relations.
The interview between father and son on this
occasion has been thus told by Miss Yonge:
“ So Coley repaired to his father, and confessed
his long-cherished wish, and how it had come
forth to the bishop. Sir John was manifestly
startled; but at once said, ‘ You have done
quite right to speak to me, and not to wait. It
is my first impulse to say No, but that would he
very selfish.’
“ Coley explained that he was ‘ driven to
speak ; ’ he declared himself not dissatisfied with
his present position, nor, he hoped, impatient.
If his staying at home were decided upon, he
would cheerfully work on there without dis-
appointment or imagining his wishes thwarted.
He would leave the decision entirely in the
hands of his father and the bishop.
“ Luncheon brought the whole family to-
gether, and Sir John, making room for his
younger daughter beside him, said, ‘Fan, did
you know this about Coley ? ’
“ She answered that she had some idea, but no
more could pass till the meal was ended; when
her father went into another room, and she
followed him. The great grief broke out in the


exclamation, ‘ I can’t let him go! ’ but even as
the words were uttered, they were caught back,
as it were, with— ‘ God forbid I should stop him.’
“The subject could not be pursued, for the
bishop was public property among the friends and
neighbours, and the rest of the day was bestowed
upon them. He preached on the Sunday at
Alfington, where the people thronged to hear
him, little thinking of the consequences of his
visit.
“ Not till afterwards were the bishop and the
father alone together, when Sir John brought
the subject forward. The bishop has since
said that what struck him most was the calm
balancing of arguments, like a true Christian
judge. Sir John spoke of the great comfort he
had in this son, cut off as he was by his infirmity
from so much of society, and enjoying the young
man’s coming in to talk about his work. He
dwelt on all with entire absence of excitement,
and added, ‘But then, what right have I to
stand in his way ? How do I know that I may
live another year ? ’
“And as the conversation ended, ‘Mind,’ he
said, ‘ I give him wholly, not with any thought
of seeing him again. I will not have him think-
ing he must come home again to see me.’ That
resolution was the cause of much peace of mind
to both father and son.
“ After family prayers that Sunday night, when
all the rest had gone upstairs, the bishop detained
the young man, and told him the result of the
conversation, then added, ‘ Now, my dear Coley,
having ascertained your own state of mind, and
having spoken at length to your father and your
family, I can no longer hesitate, as far as you


recognize any power to call on my part, to invite
you most distinctly to the work.’ The reply
was full acceptance.
“ Then taking his hand, the bishop said, ‘ God
bless you, my dear Coley! It is a great comfort
to me to have you for a friend and companion.’ ”
On July 6, 1855, Patteson landed in New
Zealand as the chosen fellow-worker of Bishop
Selwyn, who voyaged with him from England.
That Patteson was willing and able to help the
bishop, even in the lowest capacity, is clear from
the details recounted in the following incident,
which took place soon after landing, when they
went to the Duke of Portla7id to carry off the
rest of the luggage :—“ Well, on went our cart,
which had come from the college, with three
valuable horses, while the bishop and I stood
on the edge of the water. Presently one of the
horses lost his footing, and then all at once all
three slipped up, and the danger was of their
struggling violently and hurting themselves.
One of those in the shafts had his head under
water, too, for a time. Instantly bishop and I
had our coats off, my trousers were rolled over
my knees, and in we rushed to the horses. Such
a plunging and splashing ! but they were all got
up safe. This was about four p.m., and I was
busy about the packages and getting them into
the carts, unloading at Mr. Kissling’s, till past
eight; but I did not catch cold. Imagine an
English bishop with attending parson cutting
into the water up to their knees to disentangle
cart-horses from the harness in full view of every
person on the beach. ‘ This is your first lesson in
mudlarking, Coley,’ was the remark of the bishop
as we laughed over our respective appearances.”


He was scarcely six months in New Zealand
when he began to preach and catechize in the
Maori language, in which he became remarkably
proficient. The wonder is how he found time
to learn it, amidst his constant and anxious
engagements in the hospital and his “house-
keeping affairs,” about which he writes as follows :
—“ I not "only have to order things, but to weigh
them out, help to cut out and weigh the meat,
etc., and am quite learned in the mysteries of
the store-room, which, to be sure, is a curious
place on board ship. I hope you are well suited
with a housekeeper: if I were at home I could
fearlessly advertise for such a situation. I have
passed through the preliminary step of house-
maid and scullerymaid, and now, having taken
to serving out stores, am quite qualified for the
post, especially after my last performance of
making bread, and even a cake.”
On May I, 1854, Patteson sailed with Bishop
Selwyn in the Southern Cross , on her first
missionary voyage to the Melanesian isles,
chiefly to secure a number of Melanesian boys
to be trained, clothed, civilized, and, above all,
evangelized, with a view to make them in the
future the evangelizers of their benighted
countrymen. Many of the islands visited were
beautifully wooded, but “with a bad character
for cannibalism,” and for a spirit of retaliation,
owing to the outrages of European traders on
the natives. In most cases, where access to the
children was attained, they seem to have been
won easily and at once by the winsome ways of
Patteson, with whom they played, laughed, and
jumped about in a manner which proved beyond
question his marvellous force of attraction to


the young. The following sketch of a visit to
one of the islands is quite typical of the dangers
encountered :—“ Bellona likewise had a Maori-
speaking population. There was no passage
through the reef, so Bishop Selwyn and Patteson
took off their coats, one took two hatchets and
the other two adzes, and, with a good header,
swam ashore. Walking up to the beach, they
found a place in the bush with nine canoes, with
nets and large wooden hooks in them, but at
first no people; and they were leaving their
presents in the canoes when Patteson spied two
men, and advanced to them while the bishop
went back to fetch the goods. After a rubbing
of noses and a Maori greeting, the men were
reassured, and eleven more came up, one a chief
with a spear in his hand.” “ I,” writes Patteson,
■“ had my straw hat fastened by a ribbon, which
my friend coveted, so I let him take it, which he
did by putting his adze (my gift) against it, close
to my ears, and cutting it off—not the least oc-
casion to be afraid of them ! But there was no
foolhardiness. The bishop was on the alert, and
when presently he saw his companion linger for
a moment, a quick ‘Come along!’ was a reminder
‘ that this was not the beach at Sidmouth.’” The
peculiar quickness of eye—verily circumspect,
though without the least betrayal of alarm or
want of confidence, which was learnt from the
need of being always, as it were, on guard—was
soon learnt likewise by Patteson, while the air of
suspicion or fear was most carefully avoided.
The swim back to the boat was in water “ too
warm, but refreshing,” and ended with a dive
under the boat for the pure pleasure of the thing.
These Melanesian boys were settled at St,


John’s College under Patteson’s own training.
When any were sick, he had them lodged in his
own room, that they might be nursed under his
own eye. The majority of the lads fell very readily
into regular habits of school and out-of-door
work, meals, or hall and bed-time, and were
allowed a good deal of the free use of their limbs
to keep them happy and healthy. “ I talk with
them,” writes Patteson, “ about common things,
and learn a great deal of their wild savage
customs and habits, but I can do but little as
yet in the way of real instruction. Some ideas,
I trust, they are beginning to acquire concerning
our Blessed Lord. Is it not a significant fact
that the god worshipped in Gera, and in one
village of Bauro, is the serpent, the very type of
evil ? I need not say that these dear boys have
won their way to my heart; they are most docile
and affectionate. I think some will really, if
they live, leave their own island and live with
me at Norfolk Island, or here, or wherever my
dwelling may be, whenever I am not in the
Southern Cross.”
CHAPTER 11.
BISHOP PATTESON’S EPISCOPATE.
After five years of unremitting work with
Bishop Selwyn, it was felt by all minds except
his own that Patteson should relieve the Bishop
of the Melanesian islands. He was accordingly
consecrated on St. Matthias’s Day, Sunday,
February 24, 1861, in the little chapel at Tau-


rarua. In his loving letter to his father, the newly
consecrated Bishop of Melanesia thus writes:
“Then the dear Bishop of New Zealand walked
across to me, and taking my hand in both of his,
looking at me with that smile of love and deep
thought, so seldom seen, and so deeply prized,
‘ I can’t tell you what I feel,’ he said, with a low
and broken voice. ‘You know it —my heart is
too full! ’ ”
Of the manner of his life as a bishop visiting
the coasts of the Melanesian Archipelago, we
glean much from his diary. When an arrow
was pointd at him, it was his custom to look
the archer full in the face, with his bright smile,
and again and again that look of cheery confi-
dence and good will made the weapon drop. “ I
am so accustomed,” he writes, “ to sleeping about
anywhere, that I take little or no account of
thirty, forty, fifty naked fellows lying, sitting,
sleeping around me. Some one brings me a
native mat, some one else a bit of yam, a third
brings a cocoa-mat; so I get my supper, put
down the mat (like a very thin door-mat) on
the earth, roll up my coat for a pillow, and
make a very good night of it. I have had
deafness in my right ear again for some days ;
no pain with it, but it is inconvenient.”
At Kohimarama, where the Melanesian school
was called St. Andrew’s, the bishop, up at five in
the morning, went round pulling the blankets,
“not without many a joke, off the sleeping boys.”
Just before prayers he visited the kitchen to see
all was ready for breakfast. Prayers at 5.45,
in English, Mota, Baura and other languages,
beginning with a Mota hymn and ending with
the Lord’s Prayer in English. Writing to his


dear friend Keble about his “lads,” and the
solemn responsibility of the charge of training
them to be future missionaries, he remarks: “The
lads have no lack of intellectual capacity; they
not unfrequently surprise me. Now is the time
when they are in the receptive state, and now
especially any error on our part may give a
wrong direction to the early faith of thousands!
What an awful thought! We are their only
teachers, the only representatives of Christianity
among them. How inexpressibly solemn and
fearful! This is the thought so perpetually pre-
sent to me. The training of the future mis-
sionaries of Melanesia is, by God’s providence,
placed in our hands. No wonder that I feel
sometimes overwhelmed at the thought!”
Captain Tilly, who had the management of
the Southern Cross, supplies many interesting
particulars of Bishop Patteson’s voyages to his
islanders. It appears that the bishop took the
entire charge of the boys on board the vessel,
regulated everything concerning meals, sleeping
arrangements, performed the duties of school-
master, chaplain, regulated the amount of food
to be bought at the different islands, in fact did
so much of the secular work as to leave the
captain little to do but to navigate the vessel.
He kept up prayers morning and evening, in
English and the native languages, and his ser-
mons on Sundays were especially adapted for
sailors, and listened to with marked attention,
as they well might be, so earnest, simple, and
suitable as they were for the occasion. Captain
Tilly, who used to accompany the bishop,
occasionally landing, on his visits to the natives,
tells us, “We were paying a visit for the first


time to an island, and, the vessel being safe in
the offing, the bishop asked me if I would go
with them, as he sometimes did on similar
occasions. We pulled in to a small inner islet
among a group, where a number of (say, two
hundred) natives were collected on the beach.
Seeing they looked as if friendly, he waded on
shore without hesitation and joined them; the
reception was friendly, and after a time he
walked with them along the beach, we in the
boat keeping near. After a while we took him
into the boat again, and lay off the beach a few
yards to be clear of the throng, and to be able to
get at the thing he wanted to give them, they
coming about the boat in canoes ; and this is the
fact I wished to notice, viz. the look on his face
while the intercourse with them lasted. I was so
struck with it, quite involuntarily, for I had no
idea of watching for anything of the sort, but it
was one of such extreme gentleness, and of
yearning towards them. I never saw that look
on his face again—l suppose, because no similar
scene ever occurred again when I happened to be
with him. It was enough in itself to evoke
sympathy.”
One of the bishop’s chief aims had been the
establishment of a Christian community at Nor-
folk Island, his new settlement, where he was
training young Melanese men for the mission
work amongst their countrymen. To further
this end he collected young girls “to train up as
wives for his sons,” as he used to call his boys.
“You would,” writes the bishop, “be amused to
see me engaged in this match-making. It is all
the same a most important matter, for clearly
it is the best way to secure, as I trust, the


introduction of Christian family life amongst
the people.” Unbleached calico clothing was
made for the young girls taken on board from
Norfolk Island, cut out by the bishop’s own
hands, and made up by his scholars. “It was
an odd sight,” says Mr. Codrington, “to see the
bishop on the beach with a group of girls
around him, and a number of garments over his
arm. As each bride was brought by her friends,
she was clothed by the bishop, and added to the
group.”
From a letter of the bishop to Miss Yonge,
his cousin, we glean a further account of these
marriages: “ To-day we married three young
couples; the bridegrooms, Robert Pantatun,
William Pasrorang, and Marsden Sawa, who
have been many years with us, and are all
communicants; the brides, Emily Milevanwe,
Lydia Lastitia, and Rhoda Titrakranwe, who
were baptized a year ago. The chapel was
very prettily dressed up, with lilies and many
other flowers. The bridegrooms wore white
trousers, shirts, etc. ; the brides wore pretty,
simple dresses, and flowers in their hair. We
crowded as many persons as possible into our
little chapel. Mr. Nobbs and some ten or
twelve of our Pitcairn friends were all the
visitors that we could manage to make room for.
Great festivities followed ; a large pig was killed
yesterday and eaten to-day, and Mr. Palmer
had manufactured puddings without end, a new
kind of food to many of the present set of
scholars, but highly appreciated by most of
them. Then followed, in the evening, native
dances and songs, and a supper to end with,
with cheers for the brides and bridegrooms ”


Much of Bishop Patteson’s success as a mis-
sionary and his ascendency over the Melanese
mind within his range were, under God, chiefly
owing to his extraordinary humility, and his
power of becoming all things to all men to
win them to Christ, along with the principle
of equality of black and white in missionary
work, upon which he always acted with the most
thorough consistency and earnestness.
It was April 27, 1871, when the bishop began
his last missionary voyage. On the way to
Mota he landed at Whitsuntide Island, and
learned there that what the people called a
“ thief-ship ” had carried off some of the natives.
Star Island was found almost depopulated by
the infamous labour traffic. On May 16 the
bishop with his scholars landed at Mota, and
the Southern Cross went to Florida, when it was
found that the “ snatch-snatch ” vessels, as they
were then named, had carried off fifty of the
natives. They had unwittingly gone on board
to trade, but were instantly clapped under
hatches, while tobacco and a hatchet were
thrown to the friends in a canoe. Some canoes
had been upset by a noose from the vessel, then
a gun was fired, and while the natives tried to
swim away, a boat was lowered, which picked
up the swimmers and carried them off. At
Mota the mission prospers even beyond the
bishop’s expectation. In almost his last letter,
addressed to his sisters, he writes most hopefully
of this mission centre.
The bishop baptized no fewer than 248
persons at Mota. It was on the ever-memorable
September 20, 1871, Bishop Patteson came to
Nukapu, the scene of his martyrdom. His


scholar, Edward Wogale, thus described the
opening of that sad and solemn day—“ And
as we were going to the island where he died,
but were still in the open sea, he schooled us
continually upon Luke ii., iii., up to vi., but he
left off with us with his death. And he preached
to us continually at prayers in the morning,
every day, and every evening on the Acts of
the Apostles; and he spoke as far as to the
seventh chapter, and then we reached that
island. And he had spoken admirably and
very strongly indeed to us about the death
of Stephen, and then he went up ashore on
that island Nukapu.”
“That island Nukapu” lay with the blue
waves breaking over the circling reef, the white
line of coral sand, the trees coming down to it;
and in the glowing sun of September 20, the
equatorial midsummer eve, four canoes were
seen hovering about the reef, as the Southern
Cross tried to make for the inlet.
Mr. Brooke says that this lingering had
seemed to intensify the bishop’s prayer and
anxiety for these poor people; and, thinking
that the unusual movements of the vessel
puzzled the people in the canoes, and that they
might be afraid to approach, he desired that at
11.30 a.m. the boat should be lowered, and
entered it with Mr. Atkin, Stephen Taroniara,
James Minipa, and John Nonons. He sat in
the stern-sheets, and called back to Mr. Brooke,
“Tell the captain I may have to go ashore.”
Then he waited to collect more things as
presents to take on shore, and pulled towards
the canoes ; but they did not come to meet the
boat, and seemed undecided whether to pull


away or not The people recognized the bishop,
and when he offered to go on shore they assented,
and the boat went on to a part of the reef about
two miles from the island, and there met two
more canoes, making six in all. The natives
were very anxious that they should haul the
boat up to the reef, the tide being too low for
her to cross it; but, when this was not consented
to, two men proposed to take the bishop into
their boat.
There was a delay of about twenty minutes,
and then two canoes went with the one con-
taining the bishop, the two chiefs Moto and
Taula, who had before been so friendly to him,
being in them. The tide was so low that it was
necessary to wade over the reef, and drag the
canoes across to the deeper lagoon within. The
boat’s crew could not follow, but they could see
the bishop land on the beach, and then lost
sight of him.
The boat had been about half an hour drifting
about in company with the canoes, and there
had been some attempt at talk, when suddenly,
at about ten yards off, without any warning, a
man stood up in one of them, and calling out,
“ Have you anything like this ? ” shot off one
of the yard-long arrows, and his companions
in the other two canoes began shooting as
quickly as possible, calling out as they aimed,
“ This for New Zealand man! This for Bauro
man! This for Mota man ! ” The boat was
pulled back rapidly, and was soon out of range,
but not before three out of the four had been
struck. James only escaped by throwing him-
self back on the seat, while an arrow had nailed
John’s cap to his head, Mr. Atkin had one in his


left shoulder, and poor Stephen lay in the bottom
of the boat, “ trussed,” as Mr. Brooke described
it, with six arrows in the chest and shoulders.
It was about two hours since they had left
the ship when they reached it again, and Mr.
Atkin said, “We are all hurt,” as they were
helped on board ; but no sooner had the arrow-
head, formed of human bone and acutely sharp,
been extracted, than he insisted on going back
to find his bishop. He alone knew the way by
which the reef could be crossed in the now
rising tide, so that his presence was necessary.
Meantime Mr. Brooke extracted as best he
might the arrows from poor Stephen.
“We two bisope,” said the poor fellow, mean-
ing that he shared the same fate as the bishop.
As Joseph Wat&, a lad of fifteen, Mr. Atkin’s
Malanta godson and pupil, wrote afterwards,
“Joe said to me and Sapi, ‘We are going to
look for the bishop; are you too afraid ? 5
“‘ No. Why should Ibe afraid? ’
“‘Very well, you two go and get food for
yourselves, and bring a beaker full of water for
us all, for we shall have to lie on our oars a long
time to-day.’”
The others who pulled the boat were Charles
Lapinamba, a sailor, and Mr. Bongarde, the
mate, who carried a pistol, for the first time in
the records of the Southern Cross.
They had long to wait till the tide was high
enough to carry them across the reef, and they
could see people on shore, at whom they gazed
anxiously with a glass. About half-past four it
became possible to cross the reef, and then two
canoes rowed towards them. One cast off the
other, and went back; the other, with a heap in


the middle, drifted towards them, and they
rowed towards it.
“ But,” says Wate, “ when we came near we
two were afraid, and I said to Joe, ‘ If there is a
man inside to attack us, when he rises up, we
shall see him.’ ”
Then the mate took up his pistol, but the
sailor said, “ Those are the bishop’s shoes.” As
they came up with it, and lifted the bundle
wrapped in matting into the boat, a shout or
yell arose from the shore. Wat& says four
canoes put off in pursuit; but the others think
their only object was to secure the now empty
canoe as it drifted away. The boat came
alongside, and two words passed, “ The body! ”
Then it was lifted up, and laid across the sky-
light, rolled in the native mat, which was secured
at the head and feet. The placid smile was
still on his face ; there was a palm leaf fastened
over the breast, and when the mat was opened
there were five wounds, no more. The strange
mysterious beauty, as it may be called, of these
circumstances almost makes one feel as if this
were the legend of the martyr of the Primitive
Church ; but the fact is literally true, and can
be interpreted, though probably no account will
ever be obtained from the actors in the scene.
The wounds were—one evidently given with a
club, which had shattered the right side of the
skull at the back, and probably was the first,
and had destroyed life instantly, and almost
painlessly; another stroke of some sharp
weapon had cloven the top of the head; the
body was also pierced in one place; and there
were two arrow wounds in the legs, but ap-
parently not shot at the living man, but stuck


in after his fall, and after he had been stripped,
for the clothing was gone, all but the boots and
socks. In the front of the cocoa-nut palm, there
were five knots made in the long leaflets. All
this is an almost certain indication that his
death was the vengeance for five of the natives.
“Blood for blood,” is a sacred law, almost of
nature, wherever Christianity has not prevailed,
and a whole tribe is held responsible for the
crime of one. Five men in Fiji are known to
have been stolen from Nukapu, and probably
their families believed them to have been killed,
and believed themselves to be performing a
sacred duty when they dipped their weapons in
the blood of the bishop, whom they did not
know well enough to understand that he was
their protector. Nay, it is likely that there had
been some such discussion as had saved him
before at Mai from suffering for Petero’s death ;
and, indeed, one party seem to have wished to
keep him from landing, and to have thus
solemnly and reverently treated his body.
The sweet calm smile preached peace to the
mourners who had lost his guiding spirit, but
they could not look on it long. The next
morning, St. Matthew’s Day, the body of John
Coleridge Patteson was committed to the waters
of the Pacific, his “son after the faith,” Joseph
Atkin, reading the Burial Service,


CHAPTER 111.
HIS CHARACTER, AND ITS LESSON.
The keynote of Bishop Patteson’s character
and career, as a missionary, was his intense and
self-sacrificing love of souls. Henry Tagalana,
one of the bishop’s “lads,” has paid this true
tribute to the memory of the martyr missionary—
“As he taught he confirmed his word with his
good life among us, as we all know; and also
that he perfectly well helped any one who might
be unhappy about anything, and spoke comfort
to him about it; and about his character and
conduct, they are consistent with the law of
God. He gave the evidence of it in his practice,
for he did nothing carelessly, lest he should
make any one stumble and turn from the good
way; and again, he did nothing to gain any-
thing for himself alone, but he sought what he
might keep others with, and then he worked
with it: and the reason was his pitifulness and
his love. And again, he did not despise any
one, nor reject any one with scorn ; whether it
were a white or a black person he thought them
all as one, and he loved them all alike.”
No sketch of the character of Bishop Patteson
could be true and adequate if it omitted his
aversion from, and his utter indifference to,
popularity. He habitually shunned it. His
sincere and simple love for his dark-coloured
brethren was abundantly returned, and no
European ever won so many hearts, despite so
many difficulties, although this was not Bishop


Patteson’s aim, but rather to win souls to Christ.
Calmly and simply absorbed in his divine work,
he left the issue in God’s hands and did not
look for great results. To ail applications for
missionary anecdote, to all demands for sensa-
tional reports of his work, he turned a deaf ear.
He felt he was working for God and in his
God’s sight, and cared very little for what man
thought of his work.
Professor Max Muller, in a letter to the
Times , thus dwells on the character of the
martyred bishop—“ There are many great and
good men—it may be as great and good as he
was—who pass away unnoticed by the world.
But that is the very reason why we should be
ready to recognize and honour the man, who
himself looked for no recognition and no honour,
but who, as by a terrible flash of lightning, was
suddenly revealed to us by his death in all its
grandeur and human majesty. It is well that
we should know what stuff there may be, un-
known to us, in the men whom we meet in
common life, doing their allotted work steadily
and quietly; but carrying in their breasts those
lion hearts which neither ambition nor love of
ease, neither danger nor death, can force one
inch from the narrow path of duty,
“To have known such a man is one of life’s
greatest blessings. In his life of purity, un-
selfishness, devotion to man, a faith in a higher
world, —those who have eyes to see may read
the best, the most real Imitatio Christi. In his
death, following so closely on his prayer for
forgiveness for his enemies—‘For they know
not what they do’—we have witnessed once
more a truly Christ-like death.”
LONDON : SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE.




A.B.M. OFFICE
242 PITT ST.,
SYDNEY*
