

TA: F p
61 o
Preprint from
The Church of England Messenger
Bishop Broughton
On 18th June, 1836, by Letters Patent under the
Seal of King William IV William Grant Broughton
was appointed first Bishop of Australia. He was
consecrated at Lambeth on 14th February, and
occupied the See for 27 years.
His centenary this year is being specially cele-
brated in Sydney from 14th May to 7th June, and
the memory of the man and his work is being
recalled throughout the Commonwealth.
To more fully appreciate what he did for the
Church in Australia it is necessary to survey the
preceding years commencing with the first settle-
ment on the arrival on 26th January, 1788, in
Botany Bay of 8 ships with 565 male and 192
female convicts and 200 soldiers, all established a
little later at Port Jackson in a settlement under
Governor Phillip.
Rev. Richard Johnson had been attached to the
expedition as Chaplain.
No Church or other building was provided, how-
ever, so he held services in the open air for six
years, when, at his own expense, he built the first
Church of wattle and daub at the spot now the
corner of Bligh and Hunter Streets.
The population had meantime greatly increased
to 4,500, including 1,500 free settlers.
Assistance now arrived for the Chaplain in the
person of Rev. Samuel Marsden, a man destined to
play an important part in the colony’s development.
Six years later he in turn was left alone by the
departure for England of Chaplain Johnson, worn
out by his arduous work. For seven years Marsden
laboured single-handed, the population having
reached over 7,000.
His labours lasted in all 36 years, until 1838, and
reveal a remarkably interesting story.
Broughton was born at London in 1788 and
educated at King’s School, Canterbury, where he
had as a schoolfellow Sir Chas. Gipps, who after-
wards became Governor of New South Wales. He
was unable to enter Cambridge for want of means,
and became a clerk in the Treasury, through the
good offices of the Marquis of Salisbury, but desir-
ing Holy Orders, entered Pembroke Hall, Cam-
bridge, in 1814.
At 26 he became a Bachelor of Arts, sixth
wrangler (being a good classical scholar) was
ordained, became Curate at Hartley West and
married the daughter of a clergyman—a good year’s
achievement.
Whilst Curate at Parnham the Prime Minister,
the great Duke of Wellington, who had previously
marked him out for responsibilities and given him
the 1 post of Chaplain to the Tower of London,
appointed him to the vacant Archdeaconry of New
South Wales at the age of 41. The Duke told him
that he. had a strong feeling that the Colonies, for •
which he was very solicitous, would flourish in
proportion as their ground work was laid in the
knowledge of revealed religion, and that “They
must have a Church.” So he came to Sydney in
1829.
During all the period of 41 years up to his arrival
and continuing later, serious crime, vice and
wickedness were absolutely rampant.
In a population of over 30,000 convicts, ex-
convicts and free settlers, with the assistance of
eight clergymen and twelve Churches, he found his
superhuman task.
His territory was Australia and Van Diemen’s
Land, and he was technically subject to the Bishop
of Calcutta, to whose Diocese Australia had been
added in 1824.
Settlements had been established already at
Brisbane, Perth, and five years later South Aus-
tralia began to be settled. Melbourne was yet
unborn.
In Van Diemen’s Land there were four Churches
and six or eight clergy.
He set to work to visit all the settlements, and
completed this in five years. To his clergy in
Sydney he then, in 1834, stated his conclusions, and
announced his intention of visiting England in the
following words; —
“Having attentively examined and considered
all the circumstances connected with the advance-
ment of religion throughout the Colony, I am satis-
fied that we are attempting to provide for its
general extension and establishment with utterly


inadequate means. I cannot look on with tran-
quility while I see such extended and populous
districts devoid of Churches, devoid of clergy,
devoid of schools; the flock of Christ scattered
without a shepherd; destitute in a word of all the
means of Christian instruction and devotion; and
1 should be ashamed of my own inactivity in the
services of a Master who has done such great
things for me if, believing the possibility that my
interposition in making known these wants might
lead to their removal, I should hesitate at any
personal exertion or shrink from any hazard which
might be incurred in carrying that purpose into
effect. ”
These words are typical of his whole life’s out-
look.
The population had now reached 52,000. Convicts
were still coming as well as free settlers, who
rapidly penetrated the country.
Off he went to England, and so powerful and
successful were his representations that the Society
for Promoting Christian Knowledge and the
Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in
Foreign Parts provided him with £13,000, this being*
the first instalment of their many generous gifts
to Australian Dioceses.
Broughton at once doubled his clergy and was
also helped then and from year to year by munificent
gifts from personal friends in England, who made
his cause their own.
Before returning he was consecrated Bishop of
Australia in the Chapel of Lambeth, in 1836,
Governor Bourke having in the meantime recom-
mended this.
On arrival in Sydney he raised a further £3,000
at a public meeting. In the seven years of his
Archdeaconate the population had nearly doubled.
Educational difficulties now multiplied—the first
a Government proposal to establish schools with
readings of selected extracts from the Bible. All
denominations desired the full Bible to be used,
and eventually the plan was abandoned. The
second was a proposal by the new Governor Gipps,
a school-fellow of his at King’s, in the Legislative
Council (in which the Bishop now had a seat) to
apply £3,000 towards substituting for existing
denominational schools, schools for all Protestant
children in common, with no denominational teach-
ing, and £l,OOO for Roman Catholic schools
exclusively. The scheme was widely resented, and
the Bishop, by common desire, led the opposition.
He made a powerful speech in the Council and a
fervent appeal to Governor Gipps, his school-
fellow, with the result that the measure was with-
drawn.
There followed an intimate friendship between
the two school-fellows, and it was at the house
of his friend’s widow that the Bishop died.
He was anxious to build a Cathedral, and the
year after his return saw the foundation stone of
St. Andrew’s, Sydney, laid.
In the third year of his episcopate he visited
Tasmania and New Zealand. Though they were
not subject to his jurisdiction he considered them
under his pastoral care.
He resented the assumption of the title “Arch-
bishop of Sydney” by Dr. Poldig, a Bishop sent
to his Diocese from Rome, and made a public
protest against the introduction by the Church of
Rome without Her Majesty’s approval of a Bishop
into a Diocese which already had a Bishop.
An example of his untiring zeal and initiative
occurred at Bathurst on the occasion of a dis-
turbance on the goldfield. He called a meeting for
6 a.m. at the site chosen for a Church, and there
and then the building was commenced by his own
and the hands of others, and completed in eight
days.
Shortly after the settlement of Melbourne, he
paid it a visit, and arranged for a permanent
clergyman (Rev. J. C. Grylls) to minister at the
little wooden Church already built on the site on
which St. James’ Pro-Cathedral was built.
He resolved that more episcopal supervision was
essential for his vast Diocese, and as a result of
his earnest representations and the offer to surren-
der half his income, of which one-quarter was
accepted, the Sees of Melbourne and Newcastle
were created in 1847 as well as Adelaide, and he
became Bishop of Sydney and Metropolitan of
Australia.
He founded the well-known King’s School,
Parramatta, and also a valuable library.
In private life he was simple in his tastes and
devoted to his wife, who died four years before
him. In his later life he was provided with an
episcopal residence by the generosity of Mr. Moore,
who also founded Moore Theological College.
In 1850, the population having risen in 15 years
from 50,000 to 150,000 he called the memorable
conference of the six Bishops of Sydney, Adelaide,
New Zealand, Melbourne, Newcastle and Tasmania.
This was the beginning of the Church organisation
in Australia.
It was resolved that provision must be made for
the constitution of Provincial and Diocesan Synods
containing lay as well as clerical members, so that
the Church in the new land might organise itself.
Other important matters, including the establish-
ment of an Australian Board of Missions and
Religious Education, were also discussed and
policies laid down.
Settlers were commencing to pour into Australia,
increasing so rapidly that it doubled to half a
million in the next five years.
Broughton determined to bring the results of the
conference before the spiritual heads of the Church
at home, and after a perilous journey, taking the
West India Mail route via Panama, he reached
England, but with his health very much impaired.
The captain, purser, engineer and several of the
crew died on the way, mostly of Yellow Fever.


He arrived on the day of the burial of his patron
and friend, the Duke of Wellington.
He was able to preach two or three times and
address meetings of the two great Societies pre-
viously mentioned, though ill and worn and, seized
with bronchitis, he died at the home of Lady Gipps
after a fortnight’s illness, at the age of 65, and
was laid to rest in Canterbury Cathedral.
During the whole of his episcopate he gave of
himself and his substance for the benefit of his
fellows, and as he put it himself, always
endeavoured to pave the way for those that would
come after. Australia has cause to thank England
for the help and example of its noble pioneer,
Bishop Broughton.
Shortly after the settlement of Port Phillip he
visited Melbourne in September, 1843, and
arranged for a permanent clergyman for the little
wooden Church already erected, and administered
confirmation to 87 persons.
He then went to Tasmania and left there for
Sydney on 18th December, having preached 56
services in 90 days.
He was a man of great power and intellectual
capacity, and through his labours in laying the
foundation of the Church in Australia, he will
always stand forth as one of the most prominent
figures in the history of the Church.
Honoured by friend and foe alike, he advocated
unflinchingly what he felt to be true and right,
and he passed from his labours followed by
expressions of universal regret.
Sir Alfred Stephens, Chief Justice of New South
Wales, said:—“No man ever went down to his
grave full of years and honours, carrying with him
more deservedly the respect and veneration of his
fellow colonists. I believe that by all classes and
all sects no man in the Colony was more universally
respected than Bishop Broughton.
His successor, Bishop Barker, said: —“His zeal
and diligence and high-minded and disinterested
sacrifices, the foresight displayed in the creation
of new Dioceses, the patience with which he met
the difficulties of his position, are well known to
me, and although it was not m3 7 privilege to be
numbered amongst his personal friends, the oppor-
tunities T have possessed of becoming acquainted
with the excellencies of his character and the virtue
of his life have inspired me with a genuine and
affectionate regard for the first Bishop of Aus-
tralia. ’ ’
Thus ended the first period in the history of the
Church, and in the next ten years Victoria, Tas-
mania, South Australia and Queensland were
given powers of self government.
References:
Broughton ’s Sermons and Memoirs.
William G. Broughton (Fawcet), published by
Woodcock.
Bishop Broughton (Missionary Heroes Series),
S.P.C.K.
The Australian Church (Symonds), Colonial
Church Handbook Series.
—E.C.B.
Ramsay Publishing Pty. Ltd., 117-129 King Street, Melbourne


