

" '' '


ia *—^ M * 1^**^**— * i^^^*fc ‘*^-^ A *^* ,tI^*a -* ailL^^" -** 1 - “- ,m * - - -£. , a> i i J








WARANGESDA ABORIGINAL MISSION, MURRUMBIDGEE RIVER.


BLACK BUT COMELY:”
OR,
GLIMPSES OF ABORIGINAL LIFE
IN AUSTRALIA.
BY THE
RE V. J. B. GRIB B L E,
FOUNDER OF THE WARANGESDA MISSION.
“I am Black, but Comely.’'— Cant . I. 5.
LONDON; MORGAN AND SCOT T,
(office of K\}t Christian),
12, PATERNOSTER BUILDINGS, E.C.
And may he ordered of any Bookseller .


LONDON I
R. Clay, Sons, and Taylor,
BREAD STREET HfLL, E.C.


TO THE
*
RIGHT REVEREND MESAC THOMAS, D.D.,
LORD BISHOP OF GOULBURN,
This little Volume is hereby dedicated by the Author:
recognition of his many acts of kindness to the Missionaries
I *
at JVarangesda,as well as of the great interest he has mani-
fested for several years fast all things pertaining to
the amelioration of the condition of the Native tribes of
A us tralia.
JOHN B. GRIBBLE.
London, July 20 th, 1884.




LETTER FROM
ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY.
Lambeth Palace, S.E.,
5 1884.
Mr. Gribble carries on a great and genuine
work in Christianising and civilising the abo-
rigines of Australia a most self- denying
work, but in all ways a most hopeful one.
To undo some of the suffering and cor-
ruption to which our people introduce them
is a social debt on our part. The reward in
their improvement is already rich and pro-
gressive.
The Government of New South Wales
\
meet all contributions to this work by equal
grants. 1 commend it with earnestness to
the hearts and interest of Churchmen.
Ed. W. Cantuar.




PREFATORY NOTE.
IT is a great privilege to be able to offer such a
pamphlet as this to the public. It has been the
greatest drawback to the extension of the English
good character for humanity that the aborigines of
Australia have been so left out of the circle of the
usual interest displayed in foreign Missionary effort.
If there is a people to whom England owes a debt of
serious import it is the suffering nation from whom
she has taken the vast continent of Australia. This
nation may still be numbered by hundreds of thou-
sands. From the Murray river on the south to the
Gulf of Carpentaria on the north, they still wander
and die, for the most part in a condition
*
“•Unwept, unhonoured, and unsung-.”
The treatment they have received from some of
our own favoured nation may perhaps be best
gathered from one or two incidents.
A white man, who was a serjeant of black native
troopers, or police, captured a black woman and took
her away to his own home. The husband of this
woman lay in wait for this sergeant, and threw a spear
at him. He missed ; was captured, flogged, and then
incarcerated in a wooden lock-up, from which he


escaped. A second time the injured husband en-
deavoured to avenge himself by throwing a boome-
rang at this sergeant. On this occasion also he did
not hurt him, but was captured. The same man
then who had taken the wife and ruined the poor
black fellow’s sweetest home joys, had the husband
tied by his neck, body, and legs, to a log of wood, and
took an axe and chopped his head off. There is not
the slightest doubt as to the accuracy of this narra-
tive, it having been related at one of Mr. Gribble’s
lectures by Mr. E. G. W. Palmer, Secretary of the
Aborigines’ Protection Society for New South
Wales.
Reader, how would such treatment of any English
husband and wife stir every heart to its depths ! And
shall the black skin shut out the poor aborigine from
the same domestic rights ? It is true the sergeant
was brought before a court of justice for his action ;
but he pleaded that his life was in danger from the
black fellow, and not a w said about what
had been done with his wife.
A similar incident occurred in the following
manner : —“ Two black girls had been educated at a
good white settler’s homestead. They asked permis-
sion to visit their tribe. It was given. As they were
passing another settler’s hut he beckoned to the girls
to stop and talk to him. They smiled in their childish
way, but passed on. He persisted in asking them to
stop. The)' were equally firm in refusing. He then
said, ‘l’ll get something to make you stop;’ and
going in he brought out his gun and shot at them.
One of the women fell, and the other carried her into


the scrub. The tribe heard of it. They mustered
round the settler’s hut, and when he stood up they
speared him. Unhappily, they clubbed the shepherd
as well on his way home to the hut. The settler,
then, who had brought up the two girls, was so in-
dignant at the murder of the white men, that he
organised a revenge-party. They surrounded the
tribe, killed many of them, and drove almost all
the rest over a precipice, where they were dashed
to pieces on the rocks below,
“ It always remained in this man’s mind that he had
acted hastily. Years afterwards, one of the two black
girls, now grown an old woman, came to him and
explained how it had all happened. She had been
afraid to return home after her tribe had killed the
two white men. She then took the settler to where
the other girl was, now also aged, and still lame from
the effects of the cruel gunshot of the licentious white
man, that really was the root of the whole dreadful
massacre.” The Sydney Mail published the above
account.
Three women, now at Warangesda Mission
Station, married and comfortably settled, Annie,
Minnie, and Bella (Annie being on the point of
becoming a mother), were once chased for a con-
siderable distance by three wicked white men, and
the only way by which they could escape their bru-
tality was by plunging into the flooded waters of the
Murrumbidgee river and hiding amongst the rushes,
till their pursuers at length grew weary of hunting
them.
On another occasion an aged black woman hid in


the same way as soon as she saw a white man
coming. , He was an overseer of a sheep station,
and was riding with the very young man who nar-
rated the circumstance to the Rev. J. B. Gribble. The
overseer noticed something moving about upon the
water. As soon as he saw it was a black woman he
took out his revolver, and was on the point of shooting
her. His friend said, “For God’s sake do not shoot
her.” He replied, “ I am going to shoot the——.”
“ What, you wouldn’t really shoot the poor woman ? ”
“ Wouldn’t I ? ” he said : “ indeed I would ! ” And this
eye-witness of the scene informed the founder of
Warangesda that it was only by begging and praying
tnat he prevailed upon the overseer at last not to
murder the woman.
One more incident will perhaps suffice to illustrate
England’s debt to the blacks of Australia.
On one of his journeys Mr. Gribble was stopping
in front of a store. A black woman came forward,
leeling under the influence of drink given her by
white men. She took up a large stick as soon as
she saw the Missionary, and threw it at him. She
then took her cnild by the ankles, and swinging it
round and round over her head she was on the point
of dashing its brains out on the wheels of Mr.
Gribble’s vehicle. He prevented her doing this;
but not without suffering a little himself. “ Warra-
gal Lizzie,” as she was called, took hold of him by
the collar, and tore his coat in two from the neck to
the tails. At last he managed to take the poor wild
woman (Warragal means “wild animal,” a name given
her by blacks) into his vehicle with him. He drove


her home ; and she is now a Christian widow and
mother at the Warangesda Mission Station, on the
Murrumbidgee river. Mrs. Gribble writes that Lizzie
is one who gives her much help in the simple
quiet prayer meetings that she holds among her
black people.
The writer of this short prefatory note has known
the Rev. J. B. Gribble for some time in Australia. It
is without any human planning that they happen both
to be in England at the same time. As the former
incumbent of a church near Sydney, the writer once
had the pleasure of Mr. Gribble’s society as a guest
for three weeks. One of the converted blacks also
stayed in the house for a few days. Had it not been
for the Missionary’s own statement, it would never
have been believed that the orderly, intelligent, and
gentlemanly individual who sat at the table and
joined in family worship was formerly an almost
naked savage black fellow, dancing with others the
wild corroboree in some isolated portion of the bush,
or dealing and receiving terrible wounds with spear
and club.
It is little known (because on this point nothing is
said at lectures) how the large and now important
black settlement called Warangesda is simply the
outcome of much privation and hardship on the part
of one individual unsupported by any great Mis-
sionary Society. The most remarkable feature to
many people will be that this work has grown in five
years from a small gathering of Mr. Gribble and
four black fellows round a pine tree, to a large and
flourishing black settlement (of church, school, super-


intendent’s house, and people’s cottages), which has
just lately entertained the wife of the prime minister
for a week. This lady has taken the said pine-tree
into her special charge, and has caused a neat fence
to be erected around it, she providing the flowers and
shrubs for the inclosure in memory of its remarkable
associations.
The Government has now granted thirty new
reserves as sites for fresh stations after the model of
Warangesda. This diametrical change from previous
Governmental unconcern in New South Wales towards
the blacks cannot fail to cause in any observer of
recent political history the wondering reflection,
Whereas they were blind, now they see.” It is
indeed a miraculous conversion that the Government
should furthermore have actually appointed a Board
to facilitate all matters connected with the ameliora-
tion of the condition of the aboriginal tribes.
It will, therefore, hardly surprise even those who
are hitherto unacquainted wdth the rapid growth of
this Mission that it has reached that stage when the
establishment of a Training College for Missionaries
becomes a necessity. The further development of
the scheme throughout the land depends upon it The
founder of the well-known Young Men’s Christian
Association institutions has heartily accepted the
office of treasurer for the College Building Fund.
The Government of New South Wales give a
pound for every pound voluntarily subscribed towards
this object.
In connection with this education question there,
is one fact which perhaps demands mention in this
JO
■* **
PREFA TOR Y NOTE.


preface. The Government of Victoria recently
adopted a new system of education. Under this
system, the first school obtaining 100 per cent, of
marks zvas the Ramah Yuck School of Aborigines ,
Gippsland. This must settle for ever the question
as to the capacity of the aboriginal intellect to
receive the same education as the English. It will
be, therefore, quite possible to educate Aboriginal
Missionaries, and qualify them for the work of
evangelising their own people.
One point more in conclusion. It will be seen
from a letter in this pamphlet written by the highest
authority in New South Wales —namely, the Secretary
of the Aborigines’ Protection Association—that the
Warangesda scheme has been specially commended
to the Government Board in a letter dated May 7th,
1884.
The following are the names of those who are
acting in England in connection with this scheme:—
Hon. Treasurer: George Williams, Esq., (of Messrs. Hitch-
cock, Williams, and Co.), St. PauFs Churchyard, London.
Bankers: Messrs. Barclay, Bevan, and Co., 54, Lombard,
Street, London, E.C.
In sending forth this prefatory note, the writer is
convinced that England will not turn a deaf ear to
the cry from a most susceptible people, “ Give us
some hope of raising ourselves from the dust.”
May God now take this little volume into His
special care, and send it far and wide.
W, H. Ullmann
(.Formerly Vicar of Christ Churchy
Enmore , near Sydney, N.S. JV.),


INTRODUCTORY.
From the earliest days of settlement in Australia
its native tribes have been most wrongly treated by
the white man, who has taken possession of their
country. They have as a rule been regarded by him
as dull senseless clods, with but little brain, and
entirely destitute of a human soul. For their own
evil purposes many of the earliest settlers reported
to the world that the Australian blacks were closely
allied to the brute creation, that they were altogether
too low in the human scale ever to be improved.
They were simply as so many herds of wild beasts
to be “ dispersed/’ or as so many unpleasant vermin
to be destroyed. Acting on this, their own precon-
ceived and erroneous conceptions, they made the
blacks the victims of their carnal and cruel passions.
And sad to say this evil report has found its way
throughout the civilised world, so that the common
opinion is that nothing can be done to ameliorate
the condition of this unhappy people. But this
false impression has resulted from an imperfect
knowledge of the subject, or from a mere accidental
observation of the most degraded specimens of
the race.


VIEW OF SYDNEY HARBOUR. [To 14.




They who are in any way influenced by such
reports must not forget that such degradation is in a
great measure produced by contracting vices of the
white man, of which they were previously in blissful
ignorance.
It must be remembered that the condition of the
Australian aborigines is far worse to-day than it
would have been if they had never been brought into
contact with a professed Christian civilisation. This,
we know, is a serious charge to level against ourselves,
but in common honesty it must be admitted. Along
with much which tends to honour God and benefit
mankind, the European has introduced very much
into Australia of quite an opposite character. With
the noble institutions of England, which are the pride
and boast of her children in the colonies, we have
introduced its vices ; and these exotic plants have
taken deep root in the new soil, and have brought
forth a terrible harvest. The aborigines in their low
moral condition came into the closest contact with
these new and injurious influences; and they have
gone down before them just like snow before the
rising sun. The vices which we introduced, which by
our practice we recommended, and which they most
naturally adopted, have sent them wholesale into
eternity, and are still rapidly mowing down the
remnants of the race. And strange to say, not
until this state of things had long prevailed, did
even the Christian people of Australia put forth
the necessary efforts to alter their sad condition,
practically ignoring the almighty power of the Gospel
of. the Lord Jesus Christ.


Though late in the day, the eyes of the Church of
God in Australia were opened to see the sad injustice
to which the black population was subjected. Out of
the low depths of physical wretchedness and moral
degradation, the piercing death wail for “help” was
heard. Missionaries went forth into various parts of
the country, especially in the south, and although
great difficulties have been encountered, chiefly in
consequence of the contaminating influences so long
in existence, yet the work has been highly successful
in eveiy respect, as will be seen by perusing the
following pages.
It has been proved beyond the shadow of a doubt
that when these poor despised creatures are properly
treated, they are found to be susceptible of the very
best influences. And here I would say that the only
iever whereby the Australian race can be uplifted is
fhe Gospel. And unless the Gospel of peace and good-
will gets ahead of pioneer settlement, the rapid exter-
mination of the blacks will still proceed.
As Missionaries, our great desire is to penetrate
into the regions beyond, and so stem the flowing
torrents of injustice and cruelty.
Many things in this little book may sound harsh
and severe, especially to the ear of Australian colo-
nists. But facts are stuboorn things, and certain facts
very unpleasant to hear. And if the terrible gaping
wound does exist, is it right to keep it concealed ?
Nay, rather let it be uncovered and healed by the
application of the ointment of practical Christian
sympathy.
As many of my warmest friends in Australia have
i6
INTRODUCTOR Y.


expressed their wonder at my undertaking so un-
thankful a task, I would simply say that from my
earliest childhood I was led to admire the native
nobility and genuine kindness of the blacks of
Victoria. Indeed, my first childish recollection is
most intimately connected with them. On the great
separation day, when Victoria became a separate
colony, the aborigines, then numerous, were feasted
by the white settlers of Geelong. During the excite-
ment and crush I got away from my mother’s side,
and was really lost, but while wandering on I was
met by an old aboriginal woman, Biddy, to whom
my mother had been always kind. She was so de-
lighted at finding the white “ piccaninny,” that she
at once led me away to the camp of her tribe, and
feasted me the live-long day on roast beef and
damper. At sunset she took me safely home, to the
joy of my mother, who was almost distracted in con-
sequence of the non-success of the search party, they
never having dreamed that I was safely located in a
black camp.
It is not to be wondered at, then, that I should be
led to love the natives, who in my childhood had
showed me such kindness. The feeling of pity for
them has grown with my growth and strengthened
with my strength, as year after year I have been con-
fronted with the terrible wrongs to which they have
been subjected. And while I have life and strength I
trust my only ambition will be to befriend the black
population of that land where I have spent thirty-five
years of my life.
At the urgent request of friends here in London,


some of whom know much about the condition and
requirements of aboriginal races, I have ventured to
place the information which this little volume contains
before the public, trusting that the Divine blessing
may accompany it, and that those who now possess
uncharitable feelings respecting the Australian blacks
may be led to alter their opinions, and pity a people
to whom we owe so much, but for whom we have
done so little.
I must acknowledge my great indebtedness to the
Rev. F. Hagenauer, of Gippsland, Victoria, for the
pages on Missions to the Aborigines, and to the late
William Ridley, for many items of information. I
would also avail myself of this opportunity of ex-
pressing my deep gratitude to the many kind friends
in Australia, who, through the past five years, have
done all in their power to strengthen my hands in this
work of ameliorating the condition of the aborigines,
especially the Bishop of Goulburn and Mrs. Thomas,
Hon. Alexander Stuart and Mrs. Stuart, Hon. Alex-
ander Gordon and Mrs. Gordon, Hon. Richard Hill
and Mrs. Hill, Rev. Canon Gunther, Rev. J. Barnier,
Rev. H. B. Macartney, Mrs. Mary Roberts, Miss
Rainey, and Mr. E. G. W. Palmer, Secretary of the
Aborigines’ Protection Association of New South
Wales.
i8
INTRODUCTORY.


THE CONDITION AND REQUIREMENTS
OF OUR ABORIGINES.*
The subject with which I have to deal on the
present occasion is one which concerns the entire
community of this colony, and which commends
itself to the deepest sympathies of all Christian
people, whatever their name or creed. For it is a
most lamentable fact that, although as professed
Christians we have considerably altered the condition
of the blacks for the worse since we took possession
of their country, we have done nothing, or next to
nothing, to elevate them in the social or moral scale.
While we have been engaged in stretching forth the
arms of our Christian charity to regions far away,
and while we have greatly rejoiced at the success
attending Missionary effort in distant parts of the
earth, what has been taking place amongst the poor
heathen in our midst ? What ? —the most shameful
demoralisation. And as the consequence of the
* A Lecture delivered in Sydney, by the Rev. J. B. Gribble,
Judge Josephson in the chair.


importation of our civilised vices, in the short space
of half a century the old race has in many parts
become extinct. Our duty then is to remove the
blot from the escutcheon of our fame as a Christian
colony, by putting forth efforts to reclaim the miser-
able remnants of this unhappy race. And we ought
to be stirred up to extraordinary exertion in this
direction from the thought that if these poor creatures
are not speedily reached by proper appliances, they
will never be reached, for at the present rapid rate of
decrease they must in a comparatively short time
become extinct. In directing your attention then
to the “condition and requirements of the aborigines
of New South Wales,” let us in the first place glance
at their primitive condition —that is, their condition
prior to contact with white population.
Of course it was simply the condition of the savage
—a savage of the lowest type. For with the exception
of the bushmen of South Africa, some suppose the
aborigines of this country are about the lowest type of
humanity. As the lowest savages they lived, without
clothes, without care, without trouble for temporali-
ties, subsisting on the simple products of nature
without let or hindrance. Morally they were extremely
dark—so dark, indeed, as scarcely to possess any
idea or conception of anything superior to them-
selves. Their chief superstition seemed to encircle
the great Unknown, and of Him, the Great Spirit, they
possessed a terrible dread. Their religious sentiment,
if I may so express myself, was , only Fear.
But in this their state of utter savagery there was,
humanly speaking, much that was attractive, and


wild blacks of AUSTRALIA. [To face page 20.




far more productive of enjoyment than are the
associations of their present condition. They had
liberty ; freely they roamed over the hills and plains,
along the rivers and sea-board of their own tribal
territory. They possessed innocence—innocence, I
mean, in the light of the Divine laws. For being
without any knowledge of these they were simply
a law unto themselves. Their only light was the
natural light of conscience. Their lives therefore
when compared with the lives of thousands who have
the sure law of God for their guidance, were innocent.
In their social arrangements a kind of order and
harmony existed. True family bonds were carefully
recognised. The greatest attention was always paid
to matrimonial affairs. They always sought to prevent
the contact of family relationships in marriage.
Caste moreover existed to a very great extent, and
this would be seen especially in connection with
courtship and marriage. They were also without
contamination from any foreign source ; their vices
and follies were their OWN. And these consisted
principally in tribal disputes and warfare. And here
let me say that as a rule disputes arose and battles
were fought through the frail daughters of our
common mother, Eve. And further, in this their
primitive state, they lacked not the NECESSARIES of
life. Of course the requirements of the life of a
savage are far less than are those of the life of a
civilised being. Before the coming of the white
usurper the aborigines had full and plenty. They
possessed the overflowing resources of Australian
bush, river, and sea-shore ; emu, kangaroo, opossum,


game of all kinds, and fish of every description were
to be met with on every hand, and could be obtained
with but little trouble. Hence from the standpoint
of the blacks themselves the old LIFE was one of
great ease and enjoyment.
But let us now consider their present condition,
and mark the contrast. Glancing for a moment at
their TEMPORAL condition —what is IT? Well,
viewed from the standpoint of a civilised, a well-
cared-for being, the temporal condition of the
Australian black is one of absolute wretchedness.
How do we find him in the bush ? With the
ordinary natural resources cut off, interfered with on
every hand either by the settler or the unprincipled
waif and stray of European society, frequently for days
and weeks dragging out a miserable existence on the
very verge of starvation ; all he has to depend upon
being a stray opossum, kangaroo, fish, or bird. And
as regards his protection from the force of the ele-
ments, need I say that his covering is sadly inade-
quate to the requirements of the case ? As a rule
his only garment consists either of an old shirt or the
remnant of a blanket. And here I would say to the
discredit of those whom it may concern, that little
though the Government does to ameliorate the con-
dition of the blacks—their charity confining itself to
the narrow bounds of an annual grant of a pair of
blankets —yet that little is greatly lessened as regards
its beneficial effects, through the unpardonable neglect
of those Government officials in the bush whose duty
it is to receive and distribute the blankets to the
blacks on the Queen’s birthday. Why, sir, I have


heard of several cases where the only covering those
poor creatures have to depend upon for protection
against the severity of the winter has not come to
hand for several months after the date it was due ;
and this official neglect, combined with the frail and
miserable gunyahs in which they pass the long nights
of winter, is without doubt the principal cause of the
contraction of that fatal malady, consumption, which
is driving them rapidly as a race from off the face of
the earth.
But what of their moral state ? Though sad indeed
as is their temporal condition —quite sufficient of itself
to touch the deepest sympathies of human nature —
yet their temporal wretchedness is cast entirely into
the shade when compared with the revolting associa-
tions of their moral condition. In speaking upon this
subject I rely not upon books or second- or third-hand
report, but I speak from personal observation and
careful inquiry upon the very scenes. And I say
most emphatically the low dreadful immorality exist-
ing in the interior in connection with the blacks is a
loud-crying disgrace to our colonial Christianity. I
need only quote from letters of my own to the press
to give you some idea of my meaning. “Their
principal haunts during the daytime are the detest-
able bush hotels. And these, alas! you will find
flourishing in the remotest-parts of the bush, where,
in company with the fugitives and strays of European
society, they drink, and quarrel, and fight, and
indulge in the most abominable practices.” But the
worst feature in the life of these wretched creatures,
in my opinion, is the rising up of a race of wild half-


castes (more white than black) ; and these unfortu-
nate children, many of them with well-formed and
attractive features, and doubtless possessing minds
capable of deep and thorough cultivation, are allowed
to run as wild as the emu and kangaroo— and this
state of things existing in a country which boasts
a Christian Government, and whose churches con-
tribute large sums annually towards the support of
Missionary enterprises in far distant lands! And
again, quoting from the Sydney Morning Herald: “ I
have lecently visited some of their camps on the
Murrumbidgee, and found black women and numbers
of their half-caste children in a state of the most
melancholy destitution, deserted by the male members
of the tribe j for I find that when the black girls are
ruined by white men, they are then as a
rule left to their own dread resources, without food,
and nearly naked. And these poor creatures were at
the mercy of every white scamp and vagabond. And
what, I ask, is the consequence ? The up-rising of a
race of wuld half-castes in the very midst of a
Christian community. And I speak within bounds
when I say there are hundreds of these young half-
castes on the creeks and rivers of Riverina running as
wild as the emu and kangaroo, with no idea of any-
thing above or beyond themselves and their
immediate surroundings.
“ ‘ Like brutes they live,
And like brutes they must die/
unless rescued by true Christian charity.”
In commenting upon the letter from which I have
taken this extract, a local journal says : “ The reverend


gentleman drew a sad picture of the deep degradation
to which the remnants of the native race have been
reduced by the neglect of the Government and
civilised depravity. But it is evident that the Rev.
Mr. Gribble has not see the darkest phases of
aboriginal life. Very few of the blacks wander far
from the Murrumbidgee, and it is only on the banks
of that river that their debasement can be seen in all
its hideousness. In towns on the river scores of
natives, both men and women, often camp for a
considerable time. Intoxicating liquor is readily
procured by the prostitution of the females ; and scenes
of debauchery that would shock the most abandoned
denizen of Romeo Lane are of common occurrence.
“ The law prohibiting publicans from supplying drink
to aboriginals is openly violated. Travellers through
the towns indicated may at any time see numbers of
aborigines with their gins (women) in an inebriated
condition drinking at public-house bars, being as
freely served as if there were no enactment against
their being supplied. The police, for some reason
known to themselves, never make the slightest at-
tempt to prosecute, although the law is hourly broken
before their eyes. Many of the natives are afflicted
with loathsome diseases, the result of gross immor-
ality. Surely some means can be devised to put an
end to this frightful state of affairs. If the Govern-
ment fails to perform its obvious duty some body of
philanthropists ought to take the matter up and
remove the scandal from the fair fame of the colony.”
Beyond these extracts I need not go to enable you to
form some conception of the deep moral degradation


of the unfortunate aborigines of this colony. 1
may only add that I have been made personally ac-
quainted with practices so utterly abominable (in
which the representatives of our own race are far
more to blame than the poor ignorant blacks) as to
be altogether unfit for public disclosure. And as to
their spiritual and eternal welfare, theirs is indeed a
darkness which can be felt. They have no real idea
of God, they are entirely ignorant of Christ and the
glorious plan of human redemption. And their con-
tact with white population, instead of being the
means of enlightening them upon these great sub-
jects, has only resulted in increasing their darkness
and misery. For what purity, what nobility, what
grandeur can they detect in Christianity as repre-
sented in the lives of those with whom they are
brought into contact ? In my simple endeavours to
instruct them in things divine, I have found some of
them to be almost as senseless as stocks and stones.
In the very midst of the light of Gospel day theirs is
a darkness sad to contemplate. Although they are
surrounded by a people who owe their culture, their
prosperity, their happiness to the religion of the
Bible, they, alas ! are still unreached, still unbenefited
by its truths.
And now let me call your attention to what has
been done on behalf of the aborigines of this colony.
So far as I have been able to ascertain from inquiry,
all the efforts which have hitherto been put forth for
the good of the have been of a PRIVATE
character.


The late Rev. William Ridley was a true friend
to this despised race. In order to reach them
effectually, he for a period of three years, I have
been given to understand, took up his abode
amongst them on the Darling, and did all in his
power to enlighten and bless them; and I have
faith to believe, sir, that the bread he thus so
lovingly cast upon the waters shall be found after
many days. His name and work still live in the
memory of the Darling blacks. And at times they
have even jumped for joy at the very mention of the
name of Ridley. But of necessity his work was brief
and imperfect, and was never backed by either Church
or State sympathy as it ought to have been. And then
as regards the work being carried on at Maloga, on
the Murray, by Mr. Daniel Matthews and his devoted
wife. I must say candidly, that considering the
limited means at command, and the extreme noise-
lessness -of their work, they have done a very great
deal of good to a large number of the Murray blacks.
But: though theirs is a work of great self-denial, a
work of true Christian philanthropy, a work worthy
of all sympathy, yet their hands are tied from doing
what their hearts yearn to do for the poor down-
trodden aborigines through lack of funds.
But what have the churches and our Government
done in this direction ? Speaking of the churches of
this vast territory of New South Wales, with the ex-
ception of private effort on the part of individual
members, nothing in the shape of concerted action
has been done. I am well aware that very potent
reasons may be assigned for this seeming neglect on


the part of the churches. But, after making every
allowance for lack of funds, want of suitable men, and
the pressing requirements of the unreached thousands
of white heathen at their thresholds, let me ask, are
our churches honestly fulfilling the great commission
of the Master, to “ preach the Gospel to every crea-
ture,” in doing nothing to reach and save these dark
and depraved remnants of the old race ? As regards
the Government, whose reasonable duty it is to attend
carefully to the requirements of those whose posses-
sions they have taken, and from which they are to-day
deriving immense revenues, why, need I say, that with
the exception of a miserable annual pittance —princi-
pally in the shape of blankets and two or three
trifling grants to the private school at Maloga —it
has done nothing to alleviate the temporal misery,
or to drive away the moral darkness of this unfortu-
nate race.
To give you an idea of the utter neglect of those
in high places, take the following case, which I have
gleaned from a Wagga paper :
“ Clinging principally to the township of South
Gundagai, almost at any time may be seen an ancient
aboriginal, bearing the familiar name of Yarry. He
is old and decrepit now ; and the coming winter
promises to him to be one of suffering and priva-
tion. How few in our midst remember that in 1852
this uninviting specimen of humanity was then a
stalwart young black, who, by his skill and daring,
did admirable service in rescuing many valuable lives
at that memorable time when the doomed township
of Gundagai went down to destruction, amidst


darkness and storm, in the roaring waters of the Mur-
rumbidgee. How many homes there are now in
the colony where inmates owe the existence of their
parents to the brave efforts of this black fellow, no
one can tell, and it seems utterly wrong that he who
succoured so many in their direst need should find
himself forgotten in his old age. Had he been white,
decorations would have been showered upon him, and
a substantial recompense would have been his reward ;
but being only an aboriginal, a brass medal, and
subsequent neglect, are all that have been publicly
accorded for his services. There may be difficulties
how best to provide for the comfort of one with such
nomadic habits and unfortunate propensities. Still,
they can be easily surmounted, and at a very slight
cost, this neglect might be amply repaired. The
Government thought fit to award a pension to one of
his race who lost his arm when assisting the police
to capture the bushrangers, Clarke. Surely one who
risked his own life so many times to save the lives of
others should receive some such similar recognition.
Placed in the hands of our police magistrate such
allowance could be best directed towards its end, and
the debt left by our fathers would be then duly
discharged.”
But notwithstanding that direct appeal for help in a
case so deserving, the poor black fellow, he who had
done such heroic service for the whites in the time of
their great need, was permitted to die in destitution
and wretchedness a short time after that paragraph
was written.
To what I have already advanced, I have just a


few dreadful facts to add, in order to show the great
necessity that exists for immediate effort in the
direction of improving the condition of the abori-
gines within our borders. I recently met a young
gentleman engaged in squatting pursuits in the
Cooper’s Creek district, who informed me that from
the Queensland border, through to the Cooper’s
Creek country, the unfortunate blacks are at present
subjected to the most inhuman treatment by the
white settlers. “ Talk of slavery” he said ; “slavery
exists there in all its horrors.” If, when mustering
their cattle, they (the settlers) fall across a few stray
black fellows, they run them down and take them to
the home station, where they are compelled to do all
kinds and are fed just like dogs, the
females being used for immoral purposes.
Frequently the poor creatures are sent away in the
bush in search of horses, and they are told on
starting that if they return without them they will be
either flogged or shot. And to assure me that such
was really matter of fact, he referred to a case which
had come under his own observation, at a place only
eight miles from Hungerford, which is a border town.
He and his companions found on the roadside, tied
to a tree, the skeleton of an aboriginal, and on
inquiry, they found that the poor fellow had been
tied to the tree and flogged to death by his master,
because he had returned without a horse for which
he had been sent in search. And, as might be
expected, whenever they have the chance, the blacks
retaliate upon the white barbarians by stealing their
sheep or spearing their cattle. And then, when


such acts are committed, the settlers go out in parties
fully armed, and the first blacks they sight they
shoot down indiscriminately, whether they be the
guilty parties or no. On one occasion no less than
thirty dead bodies were found in a heap, shot down
in this way. And although the Government offered
a large reward for any information which would lead
to the apprehension of the murderers, of course the
affair was kept a profound secret, and nothing came
of it. Brought, as we are, thus face to face with such
revolting facts, as conscientious Christian people,
should we not become deeply impressed with the
importance of the work of ameliorating the condition
of these wretched victims of European vice ?
Let us now briefly glance at the REQUIREMENTS
of the aborigines.
What is required to be done for them ?
In the first place the Government ought to take
the matter up, and deal with it thoroughly as a
question of national importance. It is the duty of
the State to make an ample provision for these
representatives of the original occupiers of the soil.
Extensive grants of land should be made in different
parts of the interior. And, in addition to these land
grants, a sum of money should be voted for the
purpose of establishing Mission stations into which
the blacks could be gathered, and where they might
be taught the arts of civilised life, and receive in-
struction in the doctrines of Christianity. And such
stations should be intrusted to the care of men
known to be in possession of the essential qualifica-
tions for the management of such institutions.


And as to the churches —their duty is plain. Their
duty is to regard the pressing claims of the heathen
at their very thresholds. With all their noble effort
abroad, they should not forget that real Missionary
work needs to be done at home. It is the duty of
the Christian communities of this our adopted land
to reach and enlighten by the appliances of the
Gospel the deeply sunk and terribly benighted souls
of the poor blacks of our Australian bush.
And as individual Christians our duty is also
manifest. We should deeply sympathise with those
who have already devoted their life to this very
arduous sphere of Christian enterprise. We should
speak well of their work upon every fitting oppor-
tunity. We should give them an interest in our
daily prayers. W T e should exhibit our sympathy in
a practical manner by contributing, according to our
ability, to the support of aboriginal Mission institu-
tions. And if we thus act as a state, if we thus act
as churches, if we thus act as individual Christians,
we shall, with the blessing of the Most High, do
much to wipe out that long-standing disgrace, viz.
unjustifiable neglect of the heathen in midst.


THE WARANGESDA MISSION.
Warangesda —where is it? Warangesda, or the
(< Home of Mercy” for the poor down-trodden abori-
gines, is situated on the large and beautiful Murrum-
bidgee, in New South Wales. It occupies a position
on the south bank of that river, one hundred miles
below the town of Wagga-Wagga, and may be
reached by rail and steamboat from Victoria, or by
rail from Sydney, a distance of four hundred miles.
The small township of Darlington Point lies about
three miles away, where there is a most serviceable
post-office and a punt. The district for hundreds of
miles around the Mission Reserve is purely pastoral.
Some of the grandest sheep runs in New South
Wales are to be found here. Millions of sheep are
depastured upon the broad, and at certain seasons
lovely, plains of Riverina.
The climate, for about eight months of the year,
is everything that could be desired, but during [the
summer season the heat is very great, and every
vestige of herbage disappears before the fiery rays
of an almost vertical sun, and the raids of myriads
of locusts. Sterility and famine, as a natural


consequence, take the place of verdure and of plenty.
During such periods horses, cattle, and sheep die
in great numbers, and the settlers have to bear
serious losses.
The above description will prepare the minds of
my readers for many a little incident in the course
of the narrative which, without such information,
would perhaps appear rather strange.
Now for the facts connected with the founding of
the Mission and its subsequent history.
Well did Cowper sing—
“ God moves in a mysterious way
His wonders to perform.”
In a way most wonderful did He move to bring the
light of the Gospel to the long-neglected Waradgeri
people.
When in the order of God’s providence I crossed
the Murray, for the first time, between six and seven
years ago, little did I think that such was the very
first step towards a home and a work amongst the
abandoned waifs and strays of the once teeming
race of “ Murri ; ” but so it was. While travelling
from station to station in the wilds of Riverina,
scattering the incorruptible seed of the Word amongst
the white settlers, I unexpectedly came in contact
with the blacks. I found them in a condition most
shocking to contemplate. I visited their camps ; I
entered their wretched bark and bough gunyahs. I
went from place to place, and everywhere I met with
the same wretchedness and woe. In some instances,
on making a first visit to a camp, the children ran


away from me terrified at my presence ; whilst their
mothers —some of them, alas! only children them-
selves—cowered in their little dens like so many wild
beasts, doubtless wondering what brought me to such
a place. In one camp I gleaned from the women
that a tiny half-caste infant was concealed close at
hand. I made a search, and by and by I discovered
what I at first supposed to be a bundle of dirty rags
stowed away under some bushes, but on raising it
I found it contained a dear little infant girl. Oh !at
that sight how my heart sickened and my blood
warmed! Such helplessness, such woe, caused by
the professedly Christian white man ! And this case,
I soon learned from good authority, and from per-
sonal observation, was, so to speak, but an index to
a ponderous volume of iniquity existing throughout
the colony in this very respect. One evening, after
spending some time with the blacks, and having
heard the poor young women say that they would
like to have a home such as I described to them as
existing in Victoria, I returned to Station,
where I was engaged to hold service. I told the
lady of the house what I had heard and what I
had seen. She replied : “ Mr. Gribble, I have often
thought what a sin it must be for Christian ministers
to pass through these parts and never to speak a
word to the poor blacks. I can assure you that of
all the clergymen who have called here, the Rev.
A. Hardie, of Victoria, and yourself, are the only
two who seem to care anything about them. If
some earnest and kind-hearted minister would only
take the matter up, something might be done to


induce the Government to take steps to ameliorate
their condition” A long conversation followed, in
which this lady (a resident on the Murrumbidgee for
twenty years) drew a picture most sad to contem-
plate, which sent me to my room filled to overflowing
with the wants and woes of this unhappy people. I
threw myself upon my knees, and wept before God,
and said: “ O Lord, show me Thy way; teach me
Thy path; tell me what to do for these perishing
aborigines.” The answer was * u I will instruct thee,
and teach thee in the way which thou shalt go.” I
rose from my knees calmly resigned to the Divine
will, and feeling confident that something would be
done, but not even then for a moment thinking it
was my duty to become a Missionary.
T wrote to the Colonial Secretary upon the subject,
and after waiting four months I received a kind reply
from Sir Henry Parkes signifying his interest, and
requesting certain items of information, which I, of
course, supplied. Some time after this, in conjunc-
tion with my good friend and brother Missionary,
Mr. Daniel Matthews, of Maloga, I inspected a cer-
tain portion of the river in search of a suitable site
for a Mission station. During this tour we found a
little camp of women and children, and we prevailed
upon them all (eleven in number) to go along with
us. The poor creatures willingly undertook a journey
of two hundred miles to escape the horrors of their
camp life.
I subsequently removed several young women to
my home at Jerilderie, where they were properly
cared for. But all this time the conviction grew


stronger and stronger that a Mission should be
founded at once on the Murrumbidgee ; therefore
I wrote to Mr. Matthews, and asked him whether
he would be willing to break up his small Mission
school, and undertake the founding and management
of a large concern elsewhere. After much thought
and prayer he informed me that he could not leave
his Murray blacks. What, then, was Ito do for my
own unfortunates ? I saw very plainly that one of
two things must be done —either I must abandon the
idea of the new Mission, and remain at my regular
work, or else relinquish my comfortable position and
undertake the real work of the Mission myself. For
six months a severe struggle was kept up between
the flesh and spirit. The flesh said —“ Stay where
you are ; why impoverish your wife and family, and
isolate them from all society ? ” But the spirit said —
“Go and rescue the perishing ! Go and build them
a home in the wilderness I ” At length I said to my
wife —“ I cannot bear this any longer; I must bring
the matter to some issue. I have just been praying
about it, and I seem directed to leave the whole
matter with you. If you say No, I will not go ; but
if you say Yes, I will go.” Her answer decided me.
In her own quiet way she said —“ If you think God
is leading us amongst the blacks, go, and I will do
what I can to help you ; but if God is not leading
us, don’t go.”
I wrestled no longer with the flesh, but set about
arranging matters for the establishment of the Mission*
I resigned my charge, a very comfortable and profit-
able one, and early in March, iB6O, to the utter


amazement of our old friends, we left the town of
Jerilderie with our little belongings.
As we passed through the town we must have
made a singular procession, for everybody “came
out for to see.” Our household stuff was conveyed
in two waggons j my wife, little ones, and several
black girls followed in a waggonette, the rear being
brought up by myself and the black lads driving
the cattle and goats.
After three days and nights spent on the road we
arrived at our destination —a rough log cabin in the
wild forest, which I had secured from the owner as a
temporary home for Mrs. Gribble and our children,
and the few black girls we had brought from Jeril-
derie. After a day or two I drove down the river,
with my four black men, in search of a suitable spot
for our proposed Mission ; and decided to commence
operations on a reserve which I knew had but
recently been revoked from lease. I hoped that I
should thus escape all unpleasantness with the
squatter, for I was led to understand that the esta-
blishment of a home for the blacks was not well
received in the district. Here, then, on the south
bank of the Murrumbidgee, three miles from Dar-
lington Point, and twelve from cur temporary home,
we knelt down amidst the beautiful pine trees, and
gave ourselves to God for the work. We then began
in real earnest, cutting down the trees, and preparing
timber for building. In about a month, two huts
(the first for a married black couple, the other for my
own family) were drawing near completion, when sud-
denly I received a letter from the Lands Department


cautioning me not to proceed any further, and this
notwithstanding a distinct promise made beforehand.
I at once told the poor black fellows to leave off,
and we returned with heavy hearts to our rough
bush home to acquaint Mrs. Gribble and the black
women with the circumstances of our seeming
failure.
And failure did seem to stare us full in the face ;
for our money was nearly gone, our supplies would
soon be exhausted, and those around us were un-
favourable to our enterprise. After prayer, however,
upon the matter, it was decided that I should proceed
to Sydney and lay the matter before the Government.
After a wet and weary ride of one hundred miles to
Wagga-Wagga, I took train and went to Sydney,
where I was almost a stranger ; for the work amongst
the blacks was begun without anything in the shape
of human organisation. We were simply led step by
step under the great Fathers hand. On reaching
Sydney I made the acquaintance of a few Christian
men, who went with me to the Government; and we
very soon discovered that a most unjust influence
had been brought to bear on the Lands Depart-
ment by certain interested parties. But God, who
is the Judge of the oppressed, interposed for the
aborigines, and the result of my two months’ advocacy
in Sydney was the settlement of the land question,
authority to continue the work, and the establishment
of a Government School for black children, with the
appointment of myself as teacher, at a salary of 90/.
per annum —a matter which, in our straitened circum-
stances, proved a very great blessing. On my return


to the Murrumbidgee the work was resumed with a
fulness of faith and hope, and ere long we removed
our little community to the Mission station. It was
then that the poor waifs and strays in the district,
hearing that a home was prepared for them, began
to flock to Warengesda, our “ House of Mercy,” for
protection and food. Our accommodation was small,
and our means were slender, but seeing so many un-
fortunate women and children in a state of hunger
and nakedness touched our deepest sympathies, and
we were compelled to admit them. We had no
regular or certain income except my salary for
teaching, so that we were frequently reduced to
the deepest poverty. We were at times without
either sheep or flour, to say nothing of the other
necessaries of life. But in ways most wonderful —
as I shall by and by describe —God interposed for
us in every season of want, and cheered our hearts
with assurances of His favour and guidance.
By example, coupled with precept, I got the black
fellows to work pretty freely at building, fencing,
gardening, clearing, &c., and in the course of two
years quite a township sprang up in the lonely bush,
consisting of my own dwelling, the school-house
(which also served as a church), a number of two-
roomed cottages for married couples, a home for
v •
girls, a hut for "single men, store-room,, outbuildings,
and last, but not least, a schoolmaster’s cottage; for
after the first year I was obliged to give up the duties
of teacher, and secured the valuable services of Mr.
W. P. Carpenter, my cousin by marriage, to fill that
responsible post. During this time the work of


BILLY FOOTE, OF THE WARANGESDA MISSION.
[ To face page 40.




fencing in the Mission Reserve was also carried on,
so as to secure our grass against surrounding stock.
<
But although our work during the first two years
was very hard, and our privations many, these trials
did not affect us nearly as much as did the cruel
conduct of those around us, who were professedly
Christians. In different ways they sought to break
up the Mission and to scatter the blacks. On one
occasion a man, who passes for a gentleman, bought
a case of gin during my absence, sent it to the
women’s camp, at some distance from the Mission,
and made them all drunk. The scene which followed
was indescribable.
On another occasion the keeper of a low bush
hotel supplied the camp with drink, called in the
white men around, and, as an eye-witness informed
me, “the scene was a little hell.” The following
morning I visited the camp, and there I witnessed
a most revolting sight —poor old women and quite
young girls helplessly drunk. One poor young crea-
ture, with a half-caste babe upon her bosom, staggered
towards me at my approach. I said : “ What have
you been doing, Louisa ? ” “ I have been drinking,”
she replied. “ Who gave you the drink ?” “Mr.
D ,” referring to the publican ; and then, with
the big tears streaming down her black face, she
cried : “ Oh, do take me away from this place. I
don’t want to be a bad girl. I did not want to take
the drink, but they made me take it.” I said : “If
you will wait till to-morrow I will bring a buggy
and take you away,” which, of course, I did, to the
exceeding joy of the poor creature.


Even after the Mission home was founded, and we
had gathered in a goodly number, wicked white men
continued for a long time to cause us annoyance.
One night the girls’ cottage was broken into, and the
poor things ran screaming to the Mission House for
protection in the greatest alarm, and I was compelled
to mount my horse and to go in pursuit of the
offenders. At daybreak they were captured and
conveyed by the police to Narandera, a distance of
forty miles, where they were made to suffer for
their misconduct.
One day an employe from a neighbouring station
rode deliberately into the Mission square, and, after
tearing off the stirrup-iron from his saddle and
flourishing it over his head, swore that he would
kill the first man, white or black, that ventured near
him. After keeping everybody in a state of the
utmost terror for about half an hour, he gave me a
fortnights notice to break up the Mission, saying that
if I did not abandon it I should have to stand to the
consequences. Thus in many ways was the good
work opposed by those who should have regarded
the movement with favour. Before our fences were
erected our small reserve was daily flooded with
neighbours’ flocks driven there on purpose, and even
when we were doing all in our power to protect our-
selves peaceably they set fire to our fences, and
would not desist until the law was brought to bear
upon them.
Before the establishment of Warangesda, Darling-
ton Point was, so to speak, the very focus of iniquity
on the Murrumbidgee, so far as traffic in the blacks


was concerned. Therefore when the carnal interests
of men were interfered with by us they did all in
their power to thwart our endeavours.
For the first two years of our Mission life the main
difficulties we had to encounter were from the white
man’s horrible passions. But, thank God, stronger
was He that was for us than all the powers of evil
that were arrayed against us; and now, after four
years’ struggle, we see the same Darlington Point,
once the standing horror and disgrace of the district,
thoroughly reformed as regards the traffic in the
bodies and souls of the poor blacks.
But all through our difficulties, both from without
and from within, the work was never allowed to stand
still. Believing that God had sent us to set up a
place of refuge for those who were ready to perish,
we continued building, fencing, and clearing, com-
bined with preaching and teaching, feeling assured
that we should in due time reap the promised
harvest.
For three years we had no certain source of in-
come, consequently I was obliged to leave home
from time to time, and to make preaching and lec-
turing tours in different parts of the colony in order
to raise money to carry on the work. Such tours
resulted in awakening an interest, and creating a real
practical sympathy, the benefit of which we still
realise.
As time passed on our numbers continued to grow,
more natives came pouring in from all quarters —
from the Darling, the Lachlan, the Murray, and even
from the distant Namoi. Hearing that there was a


home for the blacks on the Murrumbidgee, they came
to see for themselves, and, although some returned,
many decided to remain. Increase of numbers called
for increased accommodation, and that called for in-
creased activity, and so our buildings have spread,
until now what is quite a township occupies the
spot where four years ago we lay down under a
forest tree.
Our school-house being now too small for our
congregation, I conceived the idea of building a sub-
stantial and roomy church. After due consideration
and prayer, I began felling timber with my black
fellows. We prepared and erected the framework,
and then waited until the way was further opened
up. Then I got boards, iron, doors, windows, &c.
from Sydney, and then, with the aid of a skilled car-
penter, the Mission Church became an accomplished
fact.
The opening celebration took place on the 22nd
October, 1882, and was indeed a red-letter day in
our history.
About this time the Department of Public Instruc-
tion, recognising the importance and the unmistakable
success of the day school, raised it to the position of
a public school, thereby securing to our institution all
the facilities and benefits enjoyed by every white
school in the colony.
I am happy to say that the educational part of
our work is very encouraging. Even from the very
first the. black boys and girls have shown great
aptitude. Many of them can read the Bible fluently,
and some of them can answer well, and the Word of


•God is becoming “a light to their feet and a lamp
to their path.’’
During the progress of our work we have frequently
been brought face to face with the most wonderful
exhibitions of the power of prayer. In the time of
our trouble we have called upon God, and He has de-
livered us. When we could do no more , and could
not take another step , God has in His own way divided
the waves before us, and we have passed over safely.
At one time we ran out of money. What with hard
work and anxiety, my strength of body and mind
failed, and I really felt as though the task must be
abandoned. In this state of utter despondency I
went down to Sydney to seek for sympathy and aid.
On my arrival I repaired to the Young Men’s Chris-
tian Association rooms, and there met the general
secretary. Noticing my careworn and dejected ap-
pearance, he asked me the cause. I said, “My
strength and faith are failing, and I must give up
the work.” He replied, “You must not talk like
that; come and let us pray for guidance.” He first
opened the Bible, and having made a few comments
on the words, “ Certainly I will be with thee,” we
knelt together. I rose somewhat encouraged; but
still my heart was heavy, and I retired to a private
room, and, locking the door, cast my burden on the
Lord. Our great need at the time was money, and
in my deep anxiety I was led to make a request
which startled me. I said, “ O Lord, send me 100/.”
Then, remembering that the resources of the whole
universe were in HIS hands, my faith took wing, and,
rising above doubt and fear, I said, “ O Lord, send


me 150/.” Faith was given. I was confident that
God had heard, and that the amount would be forth-
coming. For the whole of that week nothing came
to hand, but I knew that, “in some way or other,
the Lord would provide.” The following week money
began to flow into my hands, and before the end of
three weeks I had received about 125/. With this
I returned home, wondering where the other 25/.
could be; but on my arrival I found that Mrs.
Gribble had received it through the post! About
five months after this we were again reduced to great
straits. The 150/. had helped me thus far, but we
were within a week of Christmas, and' l was penni-
less ; worse than that, there was not a pound of flour
in the whole settlement. The overseer said, “ What
shall we do ? There is no flour in the camp.” “ I
don’t like to go into debt,” I said, “so call the
workers together.” So we met and read the account
of Elijah and the ravens, and asked God to send us
means to buy flour that very day. In the afternoon
I sent Mr. Bridle, the overseer, to the township with
instructions to open my letters, and, if they contained
money, to buy flour. By that day’s post a letter
came containing 5/. from an unknown friend in
Ireland. So our prayer was heard, and we were
enabled to buy all things necessary for our Christmas
festival!
We were once very badly off for animal food. The
season was very dry, and our sheep were dying of
starvation. I was sorely exercised, not knowing what
to do ; so I prayed for help and direction, and direc-
tion and help came. An old black fellow came home


one evening, saying, “ Plenty of fish down long river.”
At first I took no notice, but as he kept repeating it,
I said, “ All right, I will send a horseman to-morrow.”
Upon this he became very warm, and said, “You no
send horse, you send big dray; plenty fish.” I was
struck with the old man’s confidence, and, thinking
that in that way the Lord might provide, I arranged
for a fishing expedition. The following morning I
*
started for the place indicated by old Jackey, with
four black men. He led us on mile after mile till we
were ten miles from home. Suddenly reaching a
steep slope to a back-water of the river, three of the
black fellows bounded down the incline, and pulling
off their clothes plunged into the water, and began
spearing the fish. Such a sight I never before wit-
nessed. The three spearmen kept Sambo and myself
gathering up and bagging, and in the course of three
hours we had secured about six hundredweight.
After thanking God we returned home, and caused a
general rejoicing throughout the settlement. On the
following Friday I sent Mr. Carpenter, the school-
master, with another party of blacks, and they
brought home four hundredweight more; so that
our fishing expedition resulted in half a ton of fine
fish. . This timely supply helped us to tide over
existing difficulties.
Even the black fellows themselves were amazed at
our success. We could only remember Galilee, thank
God, and take courage.
From the very commencement of our work at
Warangesda our great end and aim has been to
enlighten the minds of the poor blacks upon the


great truths of the Gospel. Pervading all our tem-
poral efforts there has been the desire to reach the
inner feelings of their souls. We have endeavoured,
in season and out of season, to win them to Him
“who is able to save to the uttermost,” and we rejoice
in the knowledge that the Gospel of Christ has
proved itself to be the very power of God unto
salvation, even in the case of those whom so many
regard as little more than animals. Several of our
people have been brought to a saving knowledge of
the truth. Some of them are still with us, adorning
the doctrine of God their Saviour, while others, after
witnessing a good confession, have peacefully and
hopefully passed away, to “ be for ever with the Lord.”
I cannot better close my sketch of our Mission’s
history than by referring to the experience of two
or three of those who have died in the faith of
Christ.
Eliza Nelson, a pure aboriginal, was, when I found
her in the camp, a most pitiable object; but under
Christian training she soon exhibited some most
attractive traits of character. First of all she was
led to see herself a lost sinner. She showed every
sign of a true repentance, and then there followed a
simple trust in Christ, which she never again lost. I
saw from the first that she was very delicate. Con-
sumption, the dread enemy of our blacks, claimed
her, and she rapidly declined. A few days before
she died her sister came to me to say that Eliza was
very ill, and would like to see me. I found her
surrounded by weeping friends. She was having a


hud struggle for breath. I said: “You are very-
weak, Eliza. Have you any fear of death ? ” She
replied : “ No, because Jesus is with me.”
“ The Lord Jesus,” I said, “is always near those
who put their trust in Him, and especially those who,
like you, are passing through the dark valley.”
C lasping her hands, and with a look full of meaning,
she said ; “ 1 know that, sir, I know .” On the
night of her death she sent for me. I hastened to
her bedside, and found that she was indeed passing
away, I poured into her ears portions of the Divine
Word, which I knew she loved. She was unable to
speak, but enjoyed perfect calm and peace. Her
little boy stood by her side, and to him she had said
just before I arrived : “ Harry, I am going away from
you to Jesus ; I want you to be a good boy. Give
Jesus your heart ; serve Him, and then when you
die you will meet me in heaven.” Thus Eliza Nelson,
one of the first fruits of our Mission, was gathered to
the eternal home.
Rowley, one of the young men whom I had
brought to the station from the distant Namoi River,
had been a most wicked young fellow, drunkenness
being his chief failing; but from the time he joined
the Mission an entire reformation set in. He freely
gave up the use of all intoxicating drink, and it was
soon seen that the preaching and teaching of God’s
truth was working powerfully on his mind and heart.
He was most regular at the various religious services,
and appeared to drink in the water of life greedily.
By and by he expressed an earnest desire for Chris-
Can baptism. He humbly and sincerely professed


his faith in the Son of God, and then followed a
beautiful request to be admitted to the Lord’s table.
Not long after this he was laid low by consumption,
but all through his period of weakness and pain there
was cheerfulness and resignation. When at length
he felt that he must die, instead of sorrow and dread,
he manifested quite a spirit of gladness at the pro-
spect of being so soon with Jesus. His end was
perfect peace —“ Peace in believing.”
Johanna, a little black girl, about twelve years of
age, came with me to the Mission station from a
place called Cootamundra, about one hundred and
fifty miles away. Though her skin was very black,
her heart seemed pure and tender, and soon
yielded to the touch of the Saviour’s love. Very
earnestly she listened to “the old, old story,” until
the love of Jesus became to her a great reality. She
opened her heart to Him ; He entered, and dwelt
there.
One evening, after service, I was walking to the
Mission-house, when I heard the familiar pattering of
bare feet behind me. Looking round, I saw the little
girl. “Well, Johanna, what is it?” With a great
deal of native shyness she replied : “ I would like
you to baptise me, sir.” “ Why would you like me
to baptise you ? ” I said. “ Because I love the Lord
Jesus, sir, and I want to show my love to Him before
my friends.” Tears came to my eyes at these
touching words, and I said: “All right, Johanna, I
will baptise you and one Sunday shortly after-
wards the dear girl came forward, in the presence of
the whole of our Mission community, and in the holy
50
THE WARANGESDA MISSION.


rite of Christian baptism made her profession of faith
and love.
Only a few weeks afterwards Johanna’s pure and
loving spirit passed away from “our home of mercy”
to join that “great multitude” before the throne.
It was my sad duty to prepare the coffin, and to
place the little wasted black form therein ; but amid
my tears, joy filled my heart to overflowing at the
thought of this precious gem, the glorified spirit of
our dear little Waradgeri girl, shining in beauty in
the Saviour’s crown.
“ Rescue the perishing, care for the dying,
Snatch them in pity from sin and the grave ;
Weep o’er the erring one, lift up the fallen,
Tell them of Jesus, the mighty to save.
<c Down in the human heart, crushed by the tempter,
Feelings lie buried that grace can restore ;
Touched by a loving hand, wakened by kindness,
Cords that w r ere broken will vibrate once more.
“ Rescue the perishing, duty demands it,
Strength for thy labour the Lord will provide ;
Back to the narrow way patiently win them,
Tell the poor wanderers a Saviour has died.”
Note.
Since the above sketch was penned, I am happy to
be able to state that much has been done by the New
South Wales Government for the good of the blacks.
The Warangesda Reserve has been increased to 2,100
acres, a fine substantial school-house has been erected,
and strong recommendations have been made by the
5 1
THE WARANGESDA MISSION.


Board of Protection that the Warangesda and Maloga
Stations should be placed on a firm and progressive
basis, and that similar homes should be established in
different parts of the colony where they are most
needed.
As Missionaries, then, we thank God and take
courage, and confidently hope that ere long the way
maybe opened for the spread of our Mission agencies
throughout the north and west of Australia, the
islands of the Torres Straits, and even through the
dark land of New Guinea.


WORKERS AT PRESENT ENGAGED ON
THE MISSION.
Rev. J. B. Gribble.
Mrs. J. B. Gribble.
Mr. Geo, C. Bellenger y Far Overseer.
Mr. and Mrs. W.< P. Carpenter, Government
Teachers .
Mr, Robert Ledger, Storekeeper and Clerk.
Miss Eva Chudley, Matron.
Miss J, Lee, Teacher. ,
Missionary Candidates.
Mr. Fred, Brownlow, S}Mney, N.S.W.
Mr. Alfred Thompson, London.
Miss Hurst, London.
Mr. Peter Thompson, Edinburgh.
These will form the first band of Missionary
students in the projected Training College at
Warangesda.


SOWING AND REAPING IN VICTORIAS
More than thirty years ago a little black boy
wandered with tears in his eyes through the streets
of Melbourne, not knowing where he should go.
Some white children on their way to school saw
the distress of the little wanderer, and had compas-
sion on him. They spoke words of kindness, gave
him of their bread, and took him to St. James’s
School. There he was found weeping near his little
white friends by the Rev. S. L. Chase, who came to
school to give religious instruction to the children.
No sooner had he heard the story of the children
than his mind was made up to help the poor little
black fellow. The natural shyness of the child soon
disappeared, and he showed affection to his bene-
factor by willingness to accede to his wishes. After
some months, however, this affection was put to a
hard trial, for his kind friend required to go to
England ; but all difficulties were at once removed,
by his ready compliance with his benefactor’s wish
that he should accompany him, and when the time of
sailing came he cheerfully went with him to the ship.
During the first few days on board he was very sick,
but soon recovered, and enjoyed excellent health
1 By the Rev. F. A. Hagenauer, Moravian Missionary.


throughout the voyage. His kind friend commenced
to give him instruction, and he made wonderful
progress. Soon the first signs of the working of
God’s Holy Spirit could be observed, and ere long he
was found praying to that God who had so wonder-
fully guided his steps hitherto. In England all
expectations of Mr, Chase seemed about to be
realised, the boy became converted, testified of the
love of Jesus, and expressed his desire in due time
to become a messenger of good tidings to his
brethren in Australia. I would fain relate many of
the incidents of his short life ; but it may suffice
to say that, after being instructed in the Word and
doctrine, he was baptised, receiving the name of
William Wimmera. After being a few months in
England it was declared by the doctor that, on
account of the cold climate, he would be obliged
to return to his native land. When asked what he
would say to his friends in Australia about England,
he said, “I will tell them about God and Jesus, for
God is not known in the bush.’’ Very little could be
gathered from him regarding the country from which
he came, or the tribe of blacks to which he belonged.
“ My country is the Wimmera,” he said ; “ my master
is Mr. Ellerman ; my mother was shot by a white
man, after which I got very ill, and the blacks carried
me about ; and when I got better I went with a wool
dray to Melbourne, where I was lost among the
people.” It was not the will of God that he should
see his native land again, for he became very ill, and
after a short time died in faith of Jesus on the 10th
of March, 1852.


When Mr. Chase first patted little Willie’s head in
the schoolroom of St. James’s, little did he think to
what it would lead ; but God overruled all things to
o
His good pleasure. The first-fruit from the barren
field of Australia was then gathered in ; but was the
hope for the salvation of the blacks, which had been
created in the heart of Mr. Chase and others, interred
with the child ? No; the grain of mustard-seed now
began to grow, and the eye of faith saw, like the
prophet of old, the little cloud arise (2 Kings xix. 44)
which should pour out the Lord’s blessing over the
poor aborigines in God’s good time. The Moravian
Church, which, like the merciful Samaritan, had
brought the Gospel of Jesus to so many degraded
heathen nations, at this time sent her Missionaries
to the Australian blacks, in the confident expectation
that the Gospel which had softened the hearts of the
Greenlanders and other nations would also open the
hearts of the natives here. Yet another disappoint-
ment and another trial was at hand ; for some reason
the Moravian Missionaries left their first field of
labour near Swan Hill, and returned to Europe.
This retreat, however, did not slacken, but rather
increased, the earnest desire of the friends of the
poor blacks to see them brought under the influence
of the Gospel. The directors of the Moravian Mission
could never think of giving up the work which God
had directed them to perform, and accordingly opera-
tions were commenced again shortly afterwards by
my esteemed brother, Rev. F. W. Spieseke (who is
now laid aside from service after twenty-seven years
of patient toil and labour), and myself.


In passing through London on our way to Australia,
we had a most important conference in the house of
the Rev. P. La Trobe, in which the first Governor of
Victoria, Mr. C. Joseph La Trobe, took an active
part. At the conclusion of that conference a little
book was given to me by Mr. La Trobe containing
the history of the little boy mentioned above, as an
encouragement to us in our future field of labour.
After a pleasant voyage we arrived safely in
Australia, and were most kindly received by the
friends of the Mission. Great difficulties had arisen
in regard to the locality where we should commence
our labour, and after a delay of many months, we
were kindly invited by our esteemed Christian friend,
Mr. Ellerman, to come to his station, Antwerp, in
the Wimmera district, and begin operations there.
Through his kindness and valuable help, in God’s
good providence, a place was found in the bend of
the Wimmera River, about three miles from Antwerp,
where we began the Mission station Ebenezer, and
preached the Gospel. Soon the grain of mustard-
seed appeared to grow ; a wonderful awakening among
the blacks took place, and a young man named
Pepper, being converted to Christ, zealously testified
of the Saviour’s love and grace to his brethren, who
listened to him with great interest.
As a good deal was made known of that work at
the time, I need not here repeat it again, but wash
simply to give another part of that wonderful deal-
ing of God with those poor people to show how
mysteriously the Lord works in His own way.
On the evening of the 2nd of May, iB6O, a few


months after the first awakening among the blacks
had commenced, I was sitting with a number of
young black men in our hut at the Mission station,
reading the Word of God and explaining it in the
most simple manner. They all were very attentive,
especially Pepper, who was being prepared for his
baptism. Later in the evening, when our usual
lessons were finished and they not feeling inclined to
go to bed, I remembered the little book received in
England, and the encouraging words regarding this
new Mission. All seemed much pleased when I said
that I would read to them the story of a little black
boy who was found in the streets of Melbourne.
Whilst reading I could observe that they listened
with great attention, and as I went on I noticed in
the expression of their countenances and the look of
their eyes that there must be something remarkable
for them in the words they heard. They seemed
quite electrified when I read the words, “ My country
is the Wimmera, my master is Mr. Ellerman, and my
mother was shot by a white man.” They wept and
c.
rose from their seats, and one of them said, £< That
was Jim Crow ; I was with them when his mother
fell dead to the ground after the ball had entered her
heart. That,” pointing to one of the youths, “is his
little brother, and outside in the camp is his old
father, Dowler, and all of us are his cousins. Close
to where this hut stands, under the shade of the
trees, we children were sitting with our mothers when
the white man’s ball killed Jim’s mother ; and down
near the corner of the garden is the place where she
was buried.” In the silence of midnight we went to
58
SOWING AND REAPING IN VICTORIA.


the pine grove near the house where, through the
deed of a professed Christian, the poor woman had
shed her blood and breathed her last. That was a
mysterious beginning of a Mission. We all wept as
we bent our knees in prayer before Jehovah’s awful
throne on that remarkable spot. Words could not
be found to express our grateful emotions, which the
Lord graciously received from us, for He understands
the beatings of the heart and the tears of the eye.
After having visited the site of the grave, where we
again joined in prayer, we retired ; and next morning
I planted a tree on the spot.
At that moment it was not as if a Missionary, with
a number of heathen people, had been around that
sacred spot, for our hearts had truly been united
together through tears of thanksgiving and con-
fessions of our sins and feelings of unworthiness.
All those who were kneeling with me under the pine-
trees have gone, through faith in Jesus, to their eternal
home; the last one gave me his hand this morning
to say good-bye for a short time; and after saying to
us, “ I see Jesus, and God bless you and your children
—soon we meet again,” he went to that happy home.
I am the last one who is left here below, and with a
feeling of sadness and humble gratitude I join in the
words, “Just and true are Thy ways, Thou King
of Saints.”
It was God’s wonderful guidance which brought us,
after many difficulties and great trials of faith, to the
Wimmera district; it was His mysterious plan that
we should erect our Ebenezer on the very spot which
became so sacred to our memory, and it was the


loving hand of God which directed us to the relatives
and friends of the little boy who wished to tell them
of God and Jesus whom he loved.
The great gatherings of the blacks in the open air
and under the shade of the nearest gum-tree to listen
to the preaching of the Gospel and to attend frequent
prayer-meetings —which were often conducted with
some difficulties on account of the changes of the
weather —came happily to an end on the 12th August,
iB6O, when the new church at Ebenezer was solemnly
opened for divine service. That was a day which the
Lord had made. Our beloved friend, the benefactor
of the little boy, who had taken the deepest interest
in the welfare of the blacks, had hastened from
Melbourne to be present on that joyful occasion.
On Saturday evening he preached an impressive
sermon from the text — c< And as Moses lifted up the
serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son ol
Man be lifted up ” (John iii. 14), to all the blacks and
the many white visitors who had arrived from distant
places. The remainder of the evening was spent in
Christian conversation, thanksgiving, and prayers ;
and in the same manner the Lord’s Day was com-
menced again. It was indeed as if the wilderness
and the solitary bush resounded with the praise of
the Lord. Whilst some believing souls were deeply
engaged in conversation about the “ one thing need-
ful,” others found useful employment in the camps
of the natives, where that morning two little black
babies had been born. Others were with Mr. Chase in
♦
Pepper s hut, where they held a short prayer-meeting,
at which the new convert read a passage of God’s
6o
SOWING AND REAPIN IN VICTORIA


Word. Soon one party of friends arrived after
another; and when, at eleven o’clock, the new bell,
which had been sent as a present from Saxony,
sounded for the first time from the little church-spire,
the church filled at once with a most interesting con-
gregation. It was very touching to see all the blacks,
among whom was old Father Dowler, some with
walking-sticks, others with crutches, taking their seats
in the centre of the floor. The place in front of the
pulpit was occupied by the candidate for baptism,
and around the walls all the white people had taken
their seats.
Fashionable ladies and gentlemen from the sur-
rounding stations, shepherds and labouring men,
together with the poor aborigines, had assembled to
worship the same God all differences, it seemed,
having ceased in the presence of the Holy One
of Israel.
The service commenced with the singing of the
Hundredth Psalm, the consecration prayer, and the
reading of the text for the day—“ A little one shall
become a thousand, and a small one a strong nation :
I the Lord will hasten it in His time” (Isa. lx. 22).
The opening sermon was preached by the Rev. S. L.
Chase, from St, John’s Gospel, vi. 51 —“I am the
living bread, which came down from heaven,” &c.
After the sermon was the examination of the candi-
date, which ended by his clear confession of his sin,
his belief in Jesus, and the desire to be baptised.
The Rev. F. W. Spieseke received him into the
visible Church by baptism, and gave him his chosen
name, Nathanael. It was a most solemn moment


when Nathanael bowed his face to the ground and
the whole congregation joined in singing the doxo-
logy. The sacrament of the Lord’s Supper con-
cluded that portion of the services of this great day.
All this passed before my mind this morning when I
was standing before his happy death-bed, and saw
him, safe in the arms of Jesus, passing away from us
to join the host of the redeemed in glory. What
wonder that my voice refused its service ? We could
only stand for some moments around his bed in
silent adoration of the love and grace of Jesus, who
had thus given the victory to the firstborn of our
native Christian Church.
As those present left the church they were invited
to assemble again on the green before the Mission
house to partake of some refreshment, which had
been kindly provided by the ladies from the neigh-
bouring stations. When this repast was finished, our
esteemed friend Mr. Chase rose and addressed the
mixed assembly. “Years ago,” he said, “the Lord
sent me a little black boy, of whose history most of
you know. I wished to have him educated as a
messenger of the Gospel ; he himself prayed for his
black brethren, and wished to bring them the joyful
news of salvation, ‘for,’ said he, ‘no God in the bush.’
But he died many thousand miles away from his
native home. It was a great trial to me, but the
Lord knew best. The Lord is wonderful indeed.
There, under those pine-trees, is the spot where his
poor mother breathed her last after the bullet had
done its work ; here stands the little brother of my
boy, and tells me that he loves Jesus ; and over


yonder sits the old father of my little ward, who has
become grey in heathenism, but listened with tears in
his eyes when I spoke to him this morning. There,
in that little bark hut, and over in that little garden,
were the first tears of repentance shed by some of
this wild tribe ; and to-day the cousin of little Willie
—Nathanael Pepper —was baptised in yonder church.
So graciously the Lord has revealed Himself here at
Ebenezer. We feel inclined to join in the words of
Jacob —‘ This is none other but the house of God/
thanks be unto His name for ever and ever.” Many
silent tears could be observed in the eyes of those
who listened to that most, seasonable address, and
every one felt the presence of the Lord. At the
conclusion of this speech a procession was formed by
all present, to attend the funeral of a black woman at
some short distance in the bush. Soon the whole com-
pany of rich and poor, of white and black, stood around
the open grave, and with deeply affecting words our
dear friend said : —“ In the cemetery at Reading, in
distant England, are two graves. In the one rests a
pious African girl of the Hottentot nation, who died
in faith on Jesus, and on her gravestone is written—
‘ And they shall come from the east, and from the
west, and from the north, and from the south, and
shall sit down in the kingdom of God.’ In the
second grave sleeps a little Australian black boy, and
on his gravestone are written those words which were
pointed out to us this morning by Nathanael Pepper
as being of very great comfort to him ; —‘ I beheld,
and 10, a great multitude, which no man could
number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and


tongues, stood before the throne, and before the
Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their
hands’” (Rev. vii. 9), Mr. Chase addressed himself
after the above statements to the white people as to
the children of the Kingdom, or those who are first,
and exhorted them to seek above all the one thinsf
o
needful —to have Jesus, and to remain faithful unto
death, that those awful words may not be fulfilled,
“ The children of the kingdom are cast out, and there
are first which shall be last,” Then he spoke in
simple words of kindness and affection to the poor
blacks to follow the example of their brother, who
had given his heart to Jesus, that they also might be
added to that great multitude who “stand before the
Lamb.” The concluding address, which will never
be forgotten by many, and an earnest prayer, were
delivered by our esteemed and faithful friend Mr. H.
Ellerman, whom little Willie had named in England
as his “kind master.”
A number of our friends followed Mr, Ellerman’s
kind invitation to Antwerp Station, where in the
evening Mr, Chase again preached to a large congre-
gation. The natives, together with those of our
friends who remained on the station, had another
service in church, and a prayer-meeting in the
Mission-house later in the evening. Next morning a
few of us had a conference and meeting of thanks-
giving and prayer in the Mission church, at which
Mr. Ellerman stated his intention to become a
minister of the Gospel, which a few years later was
carried out, and ever since he has been a most
faithful and zealous minister of the Presbyterian


Church of Victoria, and is still labouring in the
Lord’s Vineyard, constrained by the love of Christ,
that sinners may be reconciled to God.
Old Father Dowler died on the 2ist of April,
1861, “looking unto Jesus.” Nathanael Pepper had
acted as a faithful evangelist, and the old man, who
was longing for Jesus, had received the sweet Gospel
of salvation. All the blacks in the neighbourhood
were gathered around his camp. It was Sunday, but
for the old man’s sake I proposed to keep the service
in the camp. I preached from Psalm xc., to a very
attentive congregation. The old father spoke for a
little in his own language of his going to his son
Willie and to the Lord Jesus ; and whilst we were
putting his head into a more comfortable position
his soul departed.
The evening service I kept again in the camp,
where the natives had gathered around their departed
friend. I spoke to them from the words of John xg
25 —“ lam the resurrection and the life : he that
believeth in Me, though he were dead, yet shall he
live.” These were new words of great importance to
them ; and when I kept the funeral on the following
Wednesday, I was requested to repeat what I had
said on Sunday evening.
It was quite evident that with the hopeful death of
old Father Dowler another point had been accom-
plished, in God’s wonderful way, with these people.
The small plant from the grain of mustard-seed was
more and more developed before the eyes of man.
The old awful customs among the blacks gradually
disappeared, and a new life could be observed. The


Gospel showed its regenerating influence and power.
Many friends of the poor natives had observed the
progress, and wished to see the work extended in
other parts of the colony. The Church of England
soon began a second station in Gippsland, and the
Presbyterian Church, shortly after their union of the
different branches, looked on the poor dying abori-
gines as those heathen who should get their help
first. After careful negotiations between the Com-
mittee of Missions of the Presbyterian Church and
the Directors of the Moravian Mission Board in
Germany, it was on all sides agreed that the Moravian
Missionaries should begin a new station in Gippsland,
for which the Presbyterian Church would find the
means. The late Bishop of Melbourne (Dr. Perry),
in a letter to one of the Missionaries, spoke most
favourably of the above arrangement, and urged the
commencement of the Mission, as the blacks were
dying out very fast. Shortly afterwards the Mission
in Gippsland was to be opened, and I was directed, with
my wife, to undertake the work. Many difficulties
and trials awaited us in Gippsland; but, having seen
the work of grace in the hearts of the blacks at
Ebenezer, we trusted in the Lord, and ere long the
work of God began here likewise, so that the first of
the Gippsland blacks could be baptised by the Rev.
A. J. Campbell, of Geelong, on the 18th of March,
1866, on which day the new church was opened at
Ramahyuck in the presence of a great many people.
When we left Ebenezer for Gippsland, in January,
1862, our friend, Nathanael Pepper, accompanied us
about forty miles, and the separation between us was


a great trial to all parties. Never had I felt parting
moments so deeply as when I saw our black brother
disappearing in the bush near Horsham on his way
back to Ebenezer. He followed us seven years later
to Ramahyuck, where he was married the second time
to a young, zealous Christian aboriginal woman, who,
since his blessed end, has been received, with her
three little children, into my own house.
The happy death of our black friend has brought
to my recollection many of the old scenes of our
Mission work, of which I have stated a very little
in the above lines. Who would have thought that
from the small beginning, when Mr. Chase showed
compassion to the lost little child, such a work of
grace was to follow ? What shall we say about the
blessed continuation of that work at Ebenezer, and
the great number of faithful Christian natives there,
and the open doors for the word of God in the hearts
of those who come and settle with their Christian
brethren ? Above all, what shall I say about the
many triumphs of the Gospel in the hearts of those
who went to eternal glory through faith in Jesus, and
whose bodies sleep in the beautiful little burial-ground
behind the church at Ebenezer, not far from the spot
where the mother of William Wimmera is buried ? Is
it needed to refer once more to happy old Paton, to
Samuel, to Daniel, who, as assistant to the Mission-
aries for Cooper’s Creek, died in faith at Adelaide—-to
Timothy, to Tommy, to Philip Pepper, to Rebecca,
to old Lena, to Dicky Dicky—the great cricket-player
in England—and a great many others who have
gained the victory through the blood of the Lamb ?


A little has been made known of it here on earth, but
before the sea of crystal the songs of praise will be
raised by them in the midst of the redeemed to the
Lord, who has indeed dealt very wonderfully with
them. About the work of the Lord here, I wish to
say nothing more than that the Lord has taken some
of our converts to glory, who testified of the Re-
deemer’s love to them, and died as faithful Chris-
tians ; and about two-thirds of the aboriginal popu-
lation in this locality have embraced Christianity,
and there is every hope that the remaining heathen
will in due time be brought to the knowledge of the
truth, and become heirs of the kingdom of God.
In regard to Nathanael Pepper’s life and happy
death, I wish to add that as a heathen youth, and
living amongst the most immoral and degraded
heathen, he and his brother Philip lived in all the
abominations of their tribe, and as sons of an old
chief had a great influence over their countrymen.
But the Lord had mercy on them, and both were
brought to their Saviour, and in a short time all the
members of that large family followed their example
in the way of life, and have since passed away from
this world as humble and happy Christians. Na-
thanael’s conversion was deep and powerful. Great
distress of his soul on account of his sins, and tears of
repentance, gave us a clear insight into the work of
God’s Holy Spirit; and we rejoiced with him when he
found forgiveness of sins and peace with God through
the blood of Jesus. His former influence among the
heathen was now turned towards the Gospel, and he
helped as a true and faithful evangelist during the


first awakening, and conducted continually, and often
without our knowledge, prayer-meetings and religious
services among them.
His Christian character was not so strong and
steady as that of his brother Philip, and in the course
of years he was several times overcome by tempta-
tion and fell into sin, which afterwards was a continual
source of repentance and deep humiliation to him, in
which he remained to the end of his days. He was
endued with many noble qualities, of which he made
good use, and which made him beloved among the
blacks as well as among white people. His kindness
towards every one, his sympathy with the afflicted,
his readiness to help at all times, and his charity far
beyond his means, were appreciated by all, which was
proved in a striking manner shortly before his death,
when the natives, on their own account, subscribed
among themselves to send once more for the doctor.
As a member of the church he was always found at
his place at service, and his earnest prayers on many
occasions in church and in his family or elsewhere
have often been a great blessing to many. In com-
pany with his good Christian wife, he kept his house
and garden in very good order, and, through careful-
ness, lived in comparative prosperity.
For many years he had been afflicted with a
disease of the lungs, which reached at last its climax,
so that he had to go to bed, from which he rose no
more. A few days before his end he declared to his
wife and others that this would be his last illness,
that he had peace with God through the blood of the
Lamb, and that he felt no more trouble about his


wife and children, for he knew them safe in the hands
of the Lord and in the care of the Missionaries.
When I asked him about the state of his heart and
soul, as he would shortly have to appear before the
Lord, he answered that he deeply felt his sins and
was much grieved about them, but that he had
received forgiveness of them, was sure of his eternal
salvation, and trusted alone in Jesus and in nothing-
•' o
else. His heart and mind were directed towards
heaven, and his whole conversation testified that the
bitterness of death had passed from him. For hours
he would speak to my wife of the wonderful manner
of love and the way the Lord had been leading him.
He expressed his best thanks towards his former
teachers —the Spiesekes, the Hartmans—who are now
among the Indians of North America —and the
Kramers at Ebenezer. “ Oh,” said he, “ how I shall
look forward in heaven to their arrival in the city of
God; and what a joyful meeting it will be when
we shall part no more! ” Over and over again
he declared his gratitude to us, and wished us the
blessings of the Lord.
When the doctor declared to him the evening
before his death that he could not live more
than twelve hours, he became quite happy, and ex-
pressed his thanks to him for the good news that in a
few hours he should enter into the glories of heaven,
and, clothed in white robes, stand among the multi-
tude of the redeemed in the presence of the Lord.
After reading and praying with him, in which he
joined very heartily, he desired to speak individually
to the blacks, and during the night each one came


before his bed to hear from him most seasonable
words. The Christians he encouraged to faithfulness
to the end, the heathen he entreated to come to
Jesus ; all he implored not to leave the station, where
the means of grace are so freely offered them. The
words from the lips of the dying brother made a
*
great impression on all the inhabitants of the place.
Towards the morning, when his strength began to
fail very fast, he wished the blacks to retire, that he
might be alone with his Lord —asking that only his
wife and children, my wife and myself, and a few
intimate friends should remain with him. When the
bell rang for the morning prayer in church, he said
that this was the last time he should hear that
blessed sound on earth; next time he would be in
the city of the living God. During service he spoke
to my wife as one who had already overcome the
pangs of death. When I came after prayer, he was
pleased when I read Psalm xxiii. and Rev. xxi. and
xxii., and followed with his lips the prayer which
was offered beside his bed. He then said for the
last time good-bye to us, and that he would soon
meet us in heaven again. He thanked us again for
every kindness, and then said, “ God bless you and
your children,” When his eyes began to break and
his lips could scarcely move, he beckoned with his
hand to me, and, pointing upwards, whispered to my
ear, “I see Jesus.” He then kissed each of his three
little children, and gave them God’s blessing with a
weak voice; he then kissed his wife, and whilst he
held her hand —I praying to the Lord to take him
gently through the valley of the shadow of death —
7i
SGIVING AND REAPING IN VICTORIA.


his breath began to fail, and when I laid my hands on
his head to pronounce the New Testament blessing
his soul departed to the realms of bliss, to be for
ever with the Lord. For a few minutes we stood in
silent contemplation, then bowed down to thank the
Lord who had given the victory to the departed
brother, remembering the words in which he so often
joined in singing :
“ Depth of love, past comprehension,
Whence can my weak spirit fetch
Thoughts profound enough to reach
V
This unfathomed condescension ?
Hallelujah ! Amen.”


HISTORICAL SKETCH OF AUSTRALIAN
MISSIONS. 1
I HAVE been requested to give a short outline of
the history of Missions to the aborigines of Australia,
from the beginning to the present day. It gives me
great pleasure to comply with this request, for not
only have I been personally acquainted with many
of the Missionaries and their labours, but more espe-
cially as I have been permitted by the grace of God
to preach the Gospel to these poor people for nearly
a quarter of a century, which is just half the time
since the foundation of this wonderful colony, when,
under the fostering care of Mr. Ch. J. La Trobe, the
first Governor of Victoria, a little school for native
children was opened near the present Botanical Gar-
dens, by a young man who was afterwards five times
mayor of the city of Melbourne.
In a serious as well as in a doubtful and even
mocking manner, the question has often been raised :
“What has been done for the aborigines of Aus-
tralia ? ” I shall endeavour to answer that question
as far as it is possible during the brief space which
is allowed me.
In passing, I may mention that considerable sums
1 By the Rev. F. A. Hagenauer, Moravian Missionary.


of money have been spent by the various colonial
Governments for the benefit of the blacks in their
respective territories, and that in Victoria alone at
least 150,000/. sterling, besides extensive reserves,
have been granted to the natives through the kind
attention of the Board for the Protection of the
Aborigines.
In reference to the work of Christianising the
blacks, you will observe that nearly all the great
Missionary Societies of Europe have been in the
field, and that among their agents were men of the
highest university qualifications, besides a great
number of most earnest Christian workers from
different ranks of society.
The first effort to Christianise and civilise the
aborigines was made by the Rev. Mr. Marsden, of
the Church of England, shortly after his arrival at
Sydney in 1795. Mr. Marsden, with the assistance
of Governor Macquarie, established a reformatory
school and farm for the blacks near Parramatta. 1
This first attempt to convert the natives of Aus-
tralia to Christianity was made in connection with
the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, but, the
undertaking not having given satisfaction, the estab-
lishment was relinquished after a short trial.
In the early part of the present century the work
was begun at another part of New South Wales, by
the Rev, Mr. Walker, of the Wesleyan Missionary
Society. He commenced his labours in great earnest-
ness, but great difficulties with the natives compelled
him to give it up. At a later date the same Society
1 The present Black Town.


established a school for children through the Rev. Mr.
Leigh, and his colleague, Mr. Cartwright, who followed
the wandering tribes, faithfully preaching the Gospel,
for some time, when they were removed to other
fields of labour for want of success among the natives.
Shortly afterwards another Mission was established
by the same Society near Geelong, in the district of
Port Philip, now Victoria. The Rev. Messrs. Tuck-
field and Hurst were appointed to the work, and
although given up long ago, I myself had the plea-
sure, whilst speaking about the salvation of Jesus
to the remnants of the blacks in that locality, that
they told me they had heard that before from Mr.
Tuckfield, and that they would never forget any more.
In 1832 the Church of England Missionary Society
opened their well-known station at Wellington Vale,
to the north of Sydney, through the Rev. Messrs.
Handt and Watson. In 1837 this Mission was
joined by the Rev. Mr. Gunther, who lately died as
Archdeacon of Mudgee. The Mission was carried
on with great zeal to 1843, when it was relinquished,
as the results did not come up to the expectations
of the Society at home. 1
In 1825 the London Missionary Society began its
operations among the aborigines of Australia, near
Lake Macquarie, through the Rev. Mr. Threlkeld, who
had been labouring before with John Williams,
at Erromanga. For seventeen years the work was
carried on, and great sums of money spent, but
on account of very great difficulties it had to be
given up in 1842.
1 Through the vile interference of white men.


In 1838 the Lutheran Society, at Dresden, sent
out the Rev. Messrs. Schlirmann and Teichelmann
to commence the Mission near Adelaide. They
were joined shortly afterwards by Meyer and Appelt.
They laboured with much patience and great zeal,
but after some years of toil and self-denial had to
take charges among the white settlers.
On the solicitation of Dr. Lang, of Sydney, the
Rev. Father Gossner, of Berlin, sent out to New
South Wales, in 1840, the Missionaries Schiermeister,
Engst, and Bauke, and one year afterwards Messrs.
Hausmann, Zillmann, Schmidt, and Niquet, who
began their work at Moreton Bay, a short distance
from Brisbane, and likewise more northwards, at
Keppel Bay. They continued their labours for
eighteen years, when they had to give up for want
of funds. Several of these Missionaries are still
living, and do what they can for the blacks of
Queensland.
In 1849 the Roman Catholic Church sent out ten
priests, fourteen monks, and seven nuns, under the
leadership of Dr. Brady, to commence a Mission on a
large scale in Western Australia. They divided into
three parties —the southern, the central, and the
northern Missions. The southern party endured great
hardships, and after a great deal of suffering left the
country and went to the Mauritius. The northern,
and largest party, under Dr. Brady, embarked for
Port Essington, but must have suffered shipwreck, as
none of them ever reached their destination, nor were
heard of any more. The central party, under the
leadership of Father Salvado, now Bishop of New


AMELIA, OF THE POONINDIE MISSION.
[ To face page 76




Norcia, settled among the natives north-east of Perth,
and began that still flourishing establishment of the
same name.
In 1850 the Rev. C. King, of the Church of Eng-
land, began his labours at Swan River, in Western
Australia, and carried them on with considerable
success, but gave up the work after some time, for
which I do not know the reasons.
About this time our old friend, the Rev. W. Ridley,
M.A., Missionary for the Presbyterian Church of
New South Wales, established his Mission in the
Namoi district. He did a great deal of work,
especially with the language of that tribe, but he,
too, was obliged to retire, after some years of patient
labour and trouble.
In the same year the Venerable Archdeacon Hale,
of Adelaide, now Bishop of Brisbane, began his
well-known native institution of Poonindie, in South
Australia, which is still carried on under the superin-
tendence of Mr. J. Shaw, formerly of Condah Station.
In the same year (1850) the Moravian Church sent
out the Rev. Mr. Tager and Mr. Spieseke to open a
station at Lake Bogo, near Swan Hill. They com-
menced their work some time afterwards, and ere long
were joined by a third Missionary, Mr. Hausen.
They also had to encounter great difficulties, and
finally in 1856 left the station and returned to Europe,
contrary to the direction of the Mission Board. Early
in 1858 the Moravian Church reopened their mission
to the aborigines, and sent the Rev. Mr, Spieseke and
myself. We began the work at Ebenezer Station, in
the Wimmera district, where we received a truly


Christian welcome from the neighbouring settlers, and
had soon the very great joy of witnessing an awaken-
ing among the natives, and many conversions and
happy deaths among young and old. This station is
still carried on by my former colleagues, the Rev. C.
W. Kramer and Rev. P. Bogisch.
Shortly after the union of the Presbyterian churches
in Victoria, we were asked to begin a Mission in
Gippsland, and after a successful exploratory journey
through that district, and needful arrangements with
the Mission Board in Germany, I was appointed in
1862 to commence our present station, Ramahyuck,
under the care of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria,
the Rev. A. J. Campbell having been Convener of the
Committee of Missions at that time. In 1869 I was
joined by the Rev, C. W, Kramer, who laboured
among the young very successfully till 1876, when
he was appointed to Ebenezer, in the place of the
Rev. Mr. Hartmann, who had gone to Canada to
carry on a Mission among the Indians there. In
1877 Mr. Spieseke died in harness, and Mr. Kramer
undertook the management of that Mission.
In 1854 the Church of England Committee of
Melbourne sent Messrs. Goodwin and Bulmer to the
Lower Murray, who established a station at Yelta,
below the junction of the rivers Darling and Murray,
not far from the spot where Captain Sturt, the dis-
coverer of the Murray and Darling rivers, had such
a wonderful escape from being killed by the numerous
blacks who lived there about fifty years ago. Six
years after the establishment of Yelta Station, Messrs.
Holden and Shaw joined the former Missionaries with


a view to carry the Gospel to the Upper Darling and
Cooper’s Creek. In the same year Mr. Bulmer re-
turned to Melbourne, and after a short time was sent
to Gippsland, where in 1862 he began the interesting
station, Lake Tyers, which is still carried on by him
with zeal and love for the work.
In 1862 the Church of England likewise engaged
Mr. Clark to commence a station near Warnambool,
When after some time Mr. Clark left Framlingham,
the Committee appointed Mr. Francis to that place,
and under his leadership the work was removed to
Condah, near Portland. In 1872 the Rev. Mr. Brazier
took charge of Condah, but was followed after his
resignation, a year afterwards, by the Rev. H. Stable,
a Moravian Missionary, who still carrries on the
work successfully and with very good prospects for
the future.
In 1857 a native school was commenced by Mr.
and Mrs. Camfield, at King George’s Sound, under the
fostering care of Bishop Hale, of Western Australia.
This school was carried on successfully for fifteen
years, but was given up in consequence of the dying
out of the natives. The intention of opening another
place at Fremantle on the same plan seems to have
never been carried into effect.
In the following year, 1858, the Aboriginal Friends’
Association of South Australia appointed the Rev.
Mr. Taplin as Missionary to the blacks, and estab-
lished their still flourishing station at Point Macleay,
on Lake Alexandrina. Mr. Taplin, who had been
labouring for twenty-one years, has lately been called
to his eternal rest.


A Mission in connection with the Moravian Churcn
and a Melbourne Association was undertaken in 1864
to the blacks at Cooper’s Creek, and the Rev. Messrs.
Walder, Meissel, Kuhn, and Kramer were sent to
begin the work. As the Mission to the far north
could not be commenced at once on account of the
great drought, Mr. Kuhn, one of the Missionaries,
began a station in the meantime near Wallaroo, on
York’s Peninsula; and was so successful, that when
the interior could be reached it was found advisable
to continue the work so earnestly begun, and it is
still carried on.
The station in the far north was established by the
three Missionaries in the following spring. The same
year four Missionaries of the Hermansburg Society
in Germany arrived, and began a station close to
Kopperamana, under the leadership of Rev. Mr.
Homan. In 1869 the Melbourne Society gave up
their station at Lake Kopperamana, and the Her-
mansburg Missionaries transferred their residence to
that place.
In 1877, by arrangement with the Lutheran
churches of South Australia and Victoria, the former
Missionaries moved 600 miles further north, and
began their present station at the Finke. Both
stations are progressing favourably, and eighteen
converts have already been baptised by the Rev. Mr.
Meyer, at Kopperamana.
Another trial was made at the Albert river in
Queensland in 1867, by the veteran Missionary, Mr.
Hausmann, who received several young men from
the Grossner’s Society at Berlin, but Messrs. Just,
8o
HISTORICAL SKETCH OF


Burkhardt and Hausmann, Jun., met again with diffi-
culties, and had to give it up without any results.
In 1873 a Mission was established on Frazer’s
Island by the Rev. Mr. Fuller, in connection with the
Primitive Methodist Church of Queensland, which
was carried on under great hardships and self-denials
for several years, but had likewise to be given up,
which was also the case with another trial by Mr.
Fuller, on the Mackay, at a later date. The only
Mission work among the blacks of Queensland now,
as far as I am aware, is that carried on by a convert
from the South Sea Mission, Samuel Cochrane, who
assisted Mr. Fuller formerly, and now works alone in
meekness and faith at Steward’s Creek.
Some years ago a Mission station was opened by
Mr. and Mrs. Matthews at Maloga, on the north side
of the Murray, near Echuca, and is still carried on
with excellent intentions and much energy.
The last effort to be mentioned is that recently
initiated by the Rev. Mr. Gribble, of Jerilderic, who
has succeeded in getting a reserve of land and assist-
ance in other ways from the Sydney Government,
and has already begun his labours among the blacks
on the Murrumbidgee river. 1 These last efforts, as
well as older fields of labour, I earnestly recommend
to your faithful prayers and Christian sympathy.
Having almost reached the limit of space allowed
to me, I shall only be able to touch the next question
we generally hear of in reference to aboriginal
Missions —“ Is it at all worth while to have any
Missions to the blacks ? ”
1 1880.


Mr. Anthony Trollope, in his book on Australia
clearly said on this point, “ The game is not worth
the candle.” We hear a great deal just now of
advanced thought, and I think I can make myself
best understood to one class of such inquirers if I
adapt myself to the manner of one of the most
advanced thinkers of our age. You will remember
that a learned countryman of mine, a great German
philosopher, most carefully analysed the afflictions,
sufferings, and miseries of mankind on the one side,
and the pleasures, joys, and happiness on the other,
and after having impartially weighed both in the
balance of philosophy, he answered the question “Is
it at all worth while for man to live ? ” with a decided
“ No, it is not.” This was a most wonderful answer,
and people were astonished about such wisdom.
Shortly after the above statement had been given
however, the cholera broke out in the city, and the
great philosopher at once proved himself equal to
the occasion, for he was one of the first who ordered
his carriage and drove away into the country. When
asked afterwards why he had acted in contradiction
to his own statement, he, as a true philosopher, de-
clared that there are other and higher principles of
philosophy, and according to these he had acted.
Sir, I say, well done! It is just according to such
principles that we carry on Missions in general, and
especially among the aborigines of Australia. Let
me ask, according to the highest authority, “ What is
the value of a human soul ? is it not the price of the
blood of Christ ? We preach Christ to perishing
souls, and are fully aware it is worth while to do so.”


I should next refer to the question, “ What are the
results of such Missions to the aborigines ? ” but not
having any more space to do so, I must refer you to
my last annual report, in which I have given a general
retrospective view of our work, and from it you will
observe that many souls have been brought to the
knowledge of the truth, and all who take an interest
in the work may rejoice and praise God that He has
also given repentance and life to the original inhabit-
ants of our adopted beautiful country.


RECENT ACTION OF THE GOVERNMENT,
Legislative Assembly, New South Wales.
PROTECTION OF THE ABORIGINES.
(Minute of Colonial Secretary, together with
Reports.)
%
Ordered by the Legislative Assembly to be printed.\
2nd March , 1883.
Minute of Colonial Secretary.
26th February , 1883.
Having carefully read the two reports by the
Protector, the various letters and articles which have
appeared in the newspapers on the La Perouse
blacks, and the report of Messrs. King and Fosbery
on the Warangesda and Maloga Mission stations, the
opinion which I formerly held is confirmed, viz., that
much more must be done than has yet been done for
the aborigines before there can be any national feel-
ing of satisfaction that the colony has done its duty
by the remnant of the aboriginal race. It has been
too generally assumed that that duty has been


liberally fulfilled by the annual distribution of a
certain number of blankets or a few articles of
clothing, by giving now and then a boat or some
fishing tackle, or by the relief on special occasion to
cases of starvation and disease.
A more systematic and enlightened treatment of
the aborigines, however, appears to be necessary if
we either desire to extend towards them any of the
blessings of civilisation or to feel that we have done
our duty as a nation in regard to them.
A movement in the right direction was taken by
the late Administration when a Protector to the
Aborigines was appointed; and a further step in
advance was made when the police collected the
valuable information published by Mr. Thornton’s
instructions on 12th September last, showing the
number of aborigines in the colony (which appears
to be about 9,000), in what districts they are situated,
and to what extent they are usefully occupied, or in
what degree they sustain themselves by work, either
regular or occasional.
Praiseworthy as these efforts are, I am constrained
to think that they are insufficient for the purpose.
To insure efficiency in itself, and to make it satisfac-
tory to the public, it seems to me that the protectorate
should not be in the hands of one person only, how-
ever able and zealous he may be, but should reside in
a Board, composed partly of officials and partly of
gentlemen who having taken an interest in the blacks,
have made themselves acquainted with their habits,
and are animated by a desire to assist in raising them
from their present degraded condition.


Inasmuch as some portion of the work to be done
lies beyond the province of the State, and yet must
run side by side with aid from the public funds,
advantage should, without distinction of creed, be
taken of any movement dictated or impelled by the
benevolent or religious instincts of individuals or
societies working in the same direction, such, for
instance, as the Society for the Protection of the
Aborigines, which should be aided on some re-
cognised scale in proportion to the funds voluntarily
raised, as well as by grants of land when necessary
on which to locate the blacks. This view was taken
by Sir John Robertson when acting for my prede-
cessor, and he then promised to supplement the
voluntary efforts of the Society and the Missions
which are befriended by it. A grant of land was
made to certain trustees for Warangesda, but no
amount of money seems to have been proposed to
or voted by Parliament for the purpose ; the promise
made will now be redeemed by the sum on the
Estimates for the present year. My predecessor
gave 200/. for the Maloga station, which appears on
N
the Supplementary Estimates, and I have now given
an equal amount to Warangesda, anticipatory of the
above vote.
In districts to which that Society or others of
kindred spirit have not as yet directed their atten-
tion, grants of suitable land might be made, and
stations formed to which the blacks might resort,
even though their residence may only be fitful, to
receive instruction in useful employments; such
stations might be made partially self-supporting, the


aborigines taught various branches of useful practical
knowledge, the children —especially the half-castes—
receive school instruction, and the aged, sick, and
infirm find a resting-place with some degree of
comfort and attention. While I would not altogether
shut out the idea of purely Government stations
where necessary, I cannot say that I am very favour-
able to them. I believe it to be a sounder principle
to encourage benevolent effort in this matter; it
should, however, be always kept in mind that all aid
should be given in such a way as to discourage idle-
ness and promote habits of useful work. It may be
difficult to accomplish, but ought ever to be aimed at
—the young to be educated, the sick, aged, and
infirm to be supported, and the strong, active, and
healthy to be engaged in useful work and encouraged
in self-sustaining efforts ; at the present time, for
instance, it is worthy of consideration whether many
of them could not be made useful in the extirpation
of the rabbit pest.
I do not here enter into the discussion as to the
extent of mental or moral culture to which the
aboriginals are capable of being trained. It is
sufficient that in one or two instances a marked
progress has been developed. (See, for instance, the
facsimile of an aboriginal female’s letter in Brough
Smyth’s Aborigines of Victoria , vol. ii., p. 260; also
the Victorian Protector’s reports for the past three
years, the reports of the Moravian station in South
Australia, and other sources.) It thus appears that
the fact has been proved sufficiently to prevent us
from sheltering ourselves from our duty under the


plea that it is impossible to reclaim them from their
nomadic habits, or from their ignorant superstition
and degraded condition.
It seems to me, therefore, to be the duty of the
State to assist in any effort which is being made for
the elevation of the race, by affording rudimentary
instruction, and by aiding in the cost of maintenance
or clothing where necessary, as well as by grants
of land, gifts of boats, or implements of industrial
work.
The mode of doing it, and the extent to which it
should be done, are much more difficult problems
than to decide in general terms that it should be
done. It is for this reason that I strongly advocate
a Board of Protection in preference to a single
Protector. It should be a special instruction to such
Board that, while it aids usefully benevolent efforts
and deals liberally in cases of hardship or suffering,
it must carefully guard the funds with which it may
be intrusted from the abuse which might attend lax
management or unwise and unnecessary deportation
of blacks from districts where there may be a reason-
able prospect of their obtaining work to others where,
being strangers, they become either too dependent on
charity or lapse into habits of idleness.
After much consideration of the whole question, I
submit to my colleagues that it is desirable —
I. To appoint a Board of Protection to the Abo-
rigines, consisting of from five to seven
persons.


2. To place at the disposal of the Board such
sum as Parliament may annually vote, to
be expended at the discretion of the Board,
partly in supplement of funds raised by
private benevolence and expended by volun-
tary associations, and partly in direct
support of Government stations; also the
distribution of blankets and clothing, which
is now made from the Store Department
through the Benches of Magistrates or
otherwise, and the administration of any
other aid which is given to the aborigines.
3. That the Board be subject to the control of
the Colonial Secretary, and render to him
an annual report of their proceedings to be
laid before Parliament.
4. That an office and services of a secretary be
*
placed at the. disposal of the Board, and
that the expense of visiting the stations or
other abodes of the aborigines, in pursuance
of the work hereby intrusted to them, be a
charge upon the funds.
5. Police magistrates or gentlemen who take an
interest in the aborigines may be invited to
act as district agents for the Board, with
the view of checking or reporting abuses or
of bringing under notice cases which merit
relief at the hands of the Board.
I have thus endeavoured to sketch the outlines of
a system which, when details are supplied by the


experience and observation of the Board, will I think
tend to the amelioration of the aborigines, and in
some degree remove the national stigma now resting
upon the community for the almost total neglect of
the race.
ALEX. STUART.
Approved by Cabinet. —A.S.
Extract from Report of the New South
Wales Aborigines’ Protection Association,
June 30TH, 1881.
To His Excellency LORD AUGUSTUS LOFTUS, G.C.8.,
&c., Governor of the Colony of New South Wales y
and Patron of the Association.
Your Committee respectfully submit for your
consideration the following report of the progress
of efforts on behalf of the native black population
of New South Wales, during the year 1880, together
with such items of records of similar work undertaken
in previous years as they have been able to gather.
The formation of this Association was mainly due
to a few gentlemen whose attention had been directed
by Mr. Matthews and the Rev. J. B. Cribble to the
miserable condition of the blacks, and who felt that
until some adequate protection and assistance were
guaranteed to them the Christian community in this
colony would be responsible for a grave neglect ol
their duty.
The objects of the Association are the promotion
of the social, moral, religious, and intellectual welfare


of the aboriginal natives of the colony of New
South Wales and their descendants of mixed blood ;
and as the general condition of the blacks is marked
by deep moral degradation and great physical dis-
comfort, to which the drink and vices of the Europeans
have largely contributed, it was felt that something
ought speedily to be done to alter this state of
things.
Two stations had already been organised, one on
the Murray river, at Maloga, near Moama, which
had been inaugurated six years previously by the
individual action of Mr. D. Matthews, and sub-
sequently sustained by private contributions and
occasional aid from Government. The other was
just commenced, under the superintendence of the
Rev. J. B. Gribble, at Warangesda, near Darlington
Point, on the Murrumbidgee river. It was therefore
decided to appeal to the public and to the Govern-
ment on behalf of these two institutions, and to aid
the formation of others, should sufficient funds be
procurable.
His Excellency Lord Augustus Loftus, G.C.8.,
having intimated his willingness to be the Patron
of the Association, and the Hon. Sir John Robertson,
K.C.M.G., Vice-President of the Executive Council
accepting the Presidency, the following gentlemen
were elected, viz.:—
Vice-Presidents —The Right Rev. F. Barker, D.D.,
late Bishop of Sydney, the Bishop of Goulburn, and
the Hon. W. J. Foster, Esq., M.P.
Honorary Treasurers —The Hon. John Frazer, Esq.,
M.L.C., and the Hon. John Marks, Esq., M.L.C.


Honorary Secretary —Edward G. W. Palmer, Esq.
Coimcil —The Hon, G. Thornton, Esq., M.P., R.
Barbour, Esq., M.P., J. Davies, Esq., M.P., J. Roseby,
Esq., M.P., Dr. Renwick, M.P., Rev. Canon H. S-
King, Rev. Dr. Steel, Rev. J. Jefferies, LL.B., Rev.
J. Barnier, Rev. D. Galloway, D. M’Beath, Esq,, J.P.,
Rev. T. J. Curtis, Rev. G, Hurst, J. Comrie, Esq.,
R. Jones, Esq., G. C. Tuting, Esq., J. Button, Esq,,
A. Balburnie, Esq., J. Palmer, Esq., D, Walker, Esq.,
J. Paxton, Esq., J.P., U. W. Carpenter, Esq., J.P.,
the Hon. R. Hill, Esq., M.P.
A prospectus of the Association was issued and
circulated as widely as possible in the city and
throughout the colony, and appeals were made
through the public newspapers, and other means
used for giving publicity to the matter.
The Rev. J. B. Gribble during a short stay in
Sydney lectured at many places in the city and
suburbs, and graphically portrayed the abject and
deplorable condition of the blacks resulting from
habits of drunkenness and revolting immorality be-
tween the whites and blacks. Their camp life was
described as miserable in the extreme, often verging
on starvation. The women, utterly debased, are
entirely without protection from the vilest outrage,
and often destitute of clothing and food. The chil-
dren frequently ruined at a tender age, and many
nearly white roaming wild, and totally uncared for,
through their tribal districts.
During the year Mr. Matthews and the Secretary
have availed themselves of every opportunity to
address Sunday-schools and meetings in connection


with many churches, and considerable interest has
been awakened in the movement. A large number
of ladies have afforded most acceptable aid by
contributions of clothing, books, and toys for the
children at Maloga and Warangesda, and by col-
tecting money which has often arrived to meet a
great and urgent need.
As usual in inaugurating an effort of this nature,
the Association had some obstacles to surmount
through misrepresentation and apathy. It was said
that any attempt to better the condition of the blacks
was labour in vain ; that they were such irreclaimable
savages, and so devoid of ordinary human sympathies,
that no hold could be got over them ; and that they
were dying out so fast that no good end could be
served by trying to civilise and educate them. Re-
ports unfavourable to Mr. Matthews’ work were also
circulated and accepted in certain quarters, and the
sympathy of many was withheld from this cause.
It is gratifying to know that these preliminary diffi-
culties have been satisfactorily overcome, and that
some who at first stood aloof are now fully persuaded
that the results attained sufficiently vindicate the
efforts put forth.
Protection of the Aborigines.
The following is the copy of a letter which it was
decided at the last meeting of the Council of the
Aborigines’ Protection Association should be for-
warded to the Government Board of Protection of
Aborigines, in order that the official relation of the


Association to the Board should be considered and
defined. It will be understood that the Aborigines’
Protection Association is a purely voluntary society
that was formed some years ago, for the benevolent
purpose of protecting the unfortunate black aboriginal
inhabitants of the colony. The Board is a Govern-
ment institution, established with the same object.
The letter is in the following terms :
“ Sydney, May 7, 1884.
“ Sir, —I am instructed by the Council of the
Aborigines’ Protection Association to submit, for the
information of your Board, the following statement of
the present position of the aboriginal stations at
Maloga and Warangesda, the relation in which the
Association stands to those stations, and the sug-
gestions which the Association consider would tend to
the furtherance of their own views and of the views
of the Government in regard to those stations, and
any others of a similar character which may be
established: —
“1. Maloga Aboriginal Station was commenced
some ten years since on private property by Mr.
D. Matthews, and has been maintained by contri-
butions from the public, sent direct to Mr. Matthews;
by occasional aid from Government, disbursed by the
local police magistrate ; and by grants from the funds
of the Association, which are derived from private
subscriptions, subsidised pro rata by Government.
The management of the station has been throughout
under the undisturbed control of Mr. Matthews and
his wife, aided from time to time by the assistance of


such persons as they have enlisted in the work. Mr.
Matthews has never been formally appointed an agent
or officer of the Association, but he has accounted to
the Association for all moneys received by him from
all sources, and has submitted vouchers for his ex-
penditure when requested, and the Association being
satisfied with the bona fides of his work, have given
him grants in aid from time to time as circumstances
seemed to justify them in so doing. Mr. Matthews
was for a time in receipt of a salary from the De-
partment of Public Instruction as teacher of the
school, but the position and salaty are now held by
Mr. James, and Mr. Matthews receives at present no
direct remuneration for his services as superintendent.
As Mr. Matthews was resident on his own property,
and the buildings of the Mission were also on private
jand, the Association was unable to assume any greater
responsibility than that indicated above, and have for
some time past urged on the Government the extreme
desirability of resuming at least twenty acres of the
Maloga estate (a suggestion that emanated from Mr.
Matthews, who was willing to give the land) on which
the buildings stand, and incorporating it with the
reserve of 1,800 acres recently set apart for the blacks
in that neighbourhood. Hitherto various circum-
stances have combined to render the efforts at Maloga
experimental rather than permanently practical, but
the success attendant on the experiment appears to
warrant systematic and complete organisation. To
this end the Council suggest : —I. That Mr. D.
Matthews, or some suitable person, be appointed
superintendent of Maloga at a salary of per


annum, 2. That an immediate estimate be obtained
of the cost of erection (by aboriginal labour) of all
necessary fencing for proper inclosure of the reserve
with wire, together with such subdivisions as may be
requisite. 3. Estimate of cost at per hut of
suitable buildings to be built of weatherboard, and
roofed with iron, to accommodate the various families
now on the station, and to replace their present
dilapidated dwellings. The blacks on the station
to perform all labour for which they are competent.
4, That milch cows be at once procured to supply
milk for all. That draught horses, bullocks, ploughs,,
and farming implements. be supplied, so that those
blacks who cannot assist in building and fencing
operations may be at once set to clear and prepare
the land for cultivation. 5. That a flock of sheep
commensurate with the pasturage of the reserve be
at once purchased to serve as food for the people,
the wool of which would be an item of profit; the
number of sheep to be maintained either by breeding
or purchase from time to time, as may be deemed
expedient. 6. That tenders be invited for the supply
of rations and all requisites (as per schedule to be
prepared). 7. That while provision is being made
for the present residents at Maloga, consideration be
also given to the requirements of other aborigines in
the district.
“ The Warangesda Station, though of later estab-
lishment, is in some respects better organised and more
fully developed than Malaga, the blacks from the first
having been settled on a Government reserve, and the
improvements erected with more method and per-


VIEW IN GOULBURN, NEW SOUTH WALES.




manency. The superintendent, the Rev. J. B. Gribble.
is an ordained minister of the Church of England,
and is supported by special funds. He receives no
salary from the Association, and the aid granted to
Warangesda by the Association is granted on the
same basis as that given to Maloga.
“As at Maloga so at Warangesda the Government
is represented by the teacher of the school, who is
appointed and paid by the Department of Public
Instruction, and the schools are regularly inspected.
“ Warangesda has an area of 2,000 acres, part of
which is inclosed, and the blacks are now erecting
posts for a wire fence to inclose the remaining
portions.
“ The requirements at Warangesda are :—lst. Wire
to complete fencing. 2nd. Additional dwellings. 3rd.
Horses or bullocks for draught, cows for milk, and an
increase to the flock of sheep. 4th. Tenders to be
called for supply of rations, &c. sth. Medical
requisites and attendance.
“ It is approximately estimated that about .£3,000
will be required to meet the expenditure above indi-
cated for the current year, and the question arises,
what amount would your Board give in aid of this
expenditure, and how is that amount to be dis-
bursed ?
“ Will the Board make all substantial improvements,
as erection of dwellings, fencing, &c,, supply rations
and appoint superintendent, or will they leave these
matters to the Association, paying over the estimated
cost ?
“ Will it be desirable for the Association to supply
■97
OF THE GOVERNMENT.


periodically to the Board a balance-sheet with
vouchers ; and if so, whether monthly, quarterly, or
annually ?
“Is it desirable that funds received from private
sources should be reserved for special purposes, or
should private subscriptions and Government subsidy
be treated as one fund, and dispensed at the discretion
of the Association ?
“If private subscriptions should be reserved for
special purposes, will your Board indicate their views
as to what those purposes should be ?
“ The members of the Association are of opinion
that it is necessary that all aboriginal stations should
be under definite control, and that the appointment
of all officers should be made either by the Association
or by your Board.
“ The object of the Association in thus addressing
you is that there may be a definite official recognition
of the functions of the Association, and of the relation
in which it shall stand to your Board.
“ I have the honour to be, sir,
“ Your obedient servant,
“ Ed. W. Palmer.
“ Hon . Secretary.
<£ Major Coote, Secretary to the Board of Protectorate
of Aborigines of New South Wales.”


Protection of Aborigines.
In our issue of 13th May we 1 published a letter
addressed by the Council of the Aborigines Protection
Association to the Board appointed by Government
for the Protection of the Aborigines. The design of
that letter was to obtain an expression of opinion as
to the relation in which the Association should in
future stand to the Board and to the aboriginal
stations at Maloga, Warangesda, and any others
which they may in future desire to assist. At their
meeting on Wednesday the Council received a reply
from the Board, which was deemed so satisfactory a
recognition of the Association that the hon. secretary
was directed to acknowledge its receipt with thanks
for the courteous terms in which the Board had indi-
cated the future functions and status of the Association.
It will be seen that though the Government are dis-
posed to provide liberally for the needs of the blacks,
the amount placed at the disposal of the Association
is contingent upon the sum that they can obtain from
piivate subscriptions. Every £1 subscribed is sup-
plemented by £2 from the Treasury, and there is
therefore a great incentive to the liberality of the
philanthropic and Christian public to aid with their
money the work of this Association. The following
is the letter from the Board :
(t Office of the Board for the Protection
of the Aborigines,
114, Phillip Street, May, 1884.
“ Sir, —I am desired by the Board for the Pro-
tection of the Aborigines to acknowledge the receipt
1 Sydney Morning Herald.


of your letter dated the 7th instant, with reference to
the stations at Warangesda and Maloga, and in reply
thereto to offer the following observations.
«It will be necessary in the first place to state that
the Legislative Assembly has agreed to a vote of
£2,000 (two thousand pounds) for the current year
in aid to your Association in the proportion of £2 to
every £1 raised by private contribution.
“ The Hon. the Colonial Secretary’s minute dated
the 25th February, 1884, a copy of which it is believed
has been sent to you, lays down as a principle that
‘ Government aid should pass through this protecto-
rate, as being the best channel through which to pass
the money aid.’
“ In view, therefore, of your approximate estimate
that about £3,000 will be required to meet the ex-
penditure for wires, additional dwellings, horses or
bullocks for draught, cows for milk, sheep, rations,
medical comforts, and attendance, I am directed to
state that, in the event of your receiving the full
amount of £I,OOO from private sources, there will then
be, in terms of the conditions of the vote, at your
disposal the sum of £3,000, being the amount required
as per your estimate, but it is observed that no
provision is therein included for salaries of officials
other than the schoolmasters who are paid by the
Department of Public Instruction.
“The Colonial Secretary’s minute before referred
to enjoins the Board to have a watchful inspection of
the physical welfare of the aborigines and control
over the Mission stations, care being taken not to in-
terfere with their religious aspect; and the Board, in


furtherance of the foregoing view of their duties,
suggest that you should furnish estimates from time
to time of your requirements in detail, and that on
being furnished with so much of the vote referred to,
as your Society is entitled to, a quarterly statement
of the expenditure thereof should be furnished to the
Board with vouchers substantiating the same.
“ Your funds being thus derived from private bene-
volence, supplemented by Government aid, your
expenditure will no doubt frequently be made from
the two sources collectively, and the Board’s super-
vision will naturally cover them both; but in the
event of any special appropriation of private sub-
scriptions the Board would feel relieved from requiring
any explanation. Still, however, such special appro-
priation should be included in the Society’s general
quarterly accounts.
“ The Board would prefer that the management of
the two Mission stations should continue as heretofore
in the hands of your Association, making all improve-
ments, erecting dwellings, fences, supplying rations,
and appointing superintendents ; the Association
merely recognising the definite functions of the
Board as before stated.
“ It is understood as the result of a personal inter-
view that private contributions to your Association
have been or will be collected during the current year
to the amount of Ai,ooo ; in this case the list of con-
tributors and the amounts with the dates of payments
should be furnished to the Board in order that the
supplementary vote may be available on the passing
of the Appropriation Act.
IOI
OF THE GOVERNMENT.


“ Understanding further that your Association is in
want of funds for immediate disbursement, the Board
will recommend that the sum of £250 be paid to you
in anticipation of the vote.
“ I have, &c.,
“T. Gethin Coote,
u Secretary
“ E. W. Palmer, Esq-, Hon. Secretary
A. P. Association, Sydney.”
j 02
RECENT ACTION OF THE GOVERNMENT.


LETTERS TESTIMONIAL.
Cowra, March 10, 1884
My DEAR Sir, —You are welcome to make use of
my name as that of a person interested in the
Mission to the Aborigines established by you. I
have always thought it a disgrace to us as a nation
that we have done so little for them, and was thank-
ful when you took up the work of civilising and
Christianising them. I hope the public at home will
give you that assistance you so much stand in
need of.
I am, yours truly,
G. E. MARSDEN,
Bishop of Bathurst .
Rev. J. B. Gribble,
Superintendent Warangesda Mission.
Warangesda.
It was my good fortune, while in Australia last
year, to pay a visit to the Missionary settlement,
known as Warangesda. Here are gathered the poor
natives of New South Wales, who, since the breaking
up of their forests and the occupation of their plains
by flocks of sheep, have been unable to support


themselves. I fear that the white men have done
much in the past to demoralise these natives, who,
although very sunken and degraded, knew not the
taste of the “ fire-water ” until colonists from
“ Christian England ” (!) brought it to them. Now
we have their lands, and the colonists grow rich
upon them. Common justice says, “ You are bound
to do what you can to repay them in temporal
things.” Christianity must not be behind in furthering
their spiritual welfare.
The work at Warangesda is a contribution towards
paying off our debt to the aborigines, and as such
deserves our hearty support.
Many of the adult men were absent, employed in
sheep-shearing for the squatters, and the village pre-
sented rather a forsaken appearance on the occasion
of my visit. Notwithstanding this, a good company
of men and lads were assembled at night school, and
when the bell rang for evening prayers I had round
me a semi-circle of women and children, who listened
most attentively, and joined with evident feeling in
the prayers and hymns. The wooden church was in
a fair way towards completion, and Mr. Gribble
hoped soon to hold his first service in it. I had the
pleasure of sending up some texts for the walls, and
r
some gay-coloured garments of striped cotton fabric,
which suits well the dark skins of the natives.
The national vice is undoubtedly laziness. Not-
withstanding this, however, many acres of land have
been fenced and are under cultivation. The houses
of the village, and now the church, have been built,
and those poor creatures who formerly roamed the


woods are being gathered in and taught the love of the
Good Shepherd ; and many will, I am sure, be trained
to live lives which shall be to the glory of God, and
a real blessing to their fellow-countrymen.
It gives me great pleasure to commend Mr
Gribble’s work to the interest, prayers, and sub-
stantial help of friends in the Old Country.
(Rev.) W. Bryan-Brown,
Curate , Yorks.
June 5, 1884.
isth May , 1884.
The Rev. John B. Gribble is one of the clergy
working in the Riverina diocese. His special sphere
of labour is among the aborigines. I have for some
years heard of his self-denying and successful work.
He has now come to England, with the consent of
the Bishop of Goulburn, in order to interest English
Church people in his work, in order that he may
%
extend it.
(Signed) SYDNEY LINTON,
Bishop of Riverina.
June ird , 1884.
DEAR Mr. Gribble, — I am very glad to hear you
are making efforts to found a Training College to
increase the number of labourers among the Aus-
tralian aborigines. All friends of Missionary work
who hear or read your account of the Warangesda
Mission and the work going on there, must feel how


truly such help is needed. I heartily wish the work
God speed, and shall hope to be able to add some
little to your funds.
Truly yours,
Charles Burd,
Vicar of , Warwickshire.
School House, Rugby,
Jime yrd, 1884.
My DEAR Sir, —Your work with the aborigines of
New South Wales is a genuine work, deserving of all
possible help. You are most welcome to use my
name, and I inclose a trifle towards your work.
Yours sincerely,
T. W. Jex-Blake.
To the Rev, John B. Gribble.
io6
LETTERS TESTIMONIAL.


APPENDICES.




APPENDICES.
Australian Folklore.
The aborigines of Australia have no written
language. The use of European letters to express
their vocables is to some extent arbitrary.
The following are amongst the most important
dialects spoken :
Kamilaroi.
Spoken from the Castlereigh to the Darling and on
the Namoi.
Wailwun.
Language of the aborigines on the Barwan, below
the junction with the Namoi.
Kogai.
The language of the aborigines to the westward
of the Balonne on the Maranoa and the Cogoon.
Rukumbul.
The language of the aborigines about Calandoon
in Queensland, on the Weir, and the Macintyre.
Dippil.
The language of the aborigines about Durundurun,
on the north side of Moreton Bay, and thence towards
Wide Bay and the Burnett district in Queensland.
Turrabul
The language of the aborigines on the Brisbane
River.


Turruwal.
The language spoken by the now extinct tribe of
Port Jackson.
Wodi- Wodi.
The language of lilawarra, from 1 to
the Shoalhaven. * 8
Waradgeri.
The language of the aborigines on the Murrum-
bidgee and Lauchlan and their tributaries.
Translations, Paraphrases, &c.
Kamilaroi.
Baia-me.
This name of Deity is known among many tribes
on the Narran, the Darling, and its tributaries It is
evidently derived, as the Rev. C. C. Greenway has
pointed out, from “ baia ”—to make or build. ■“ In
the ancient and still-preserved creed of the Mum—
‘ He who built all things is Baia-me.’ ”
*The Kamilaioi blacks say that Baia-me made all
things , that he is resting away in the far west. They
never saw him, but regard thunder as his voice.
Spirit, ghost, or sub-ordinate Deity . .
In all parts of Eastern Australia the aborigines
apply the word which signifies spirit, demon, or
to the white man.
. About Moreton Bay “Makoron” and “Mudhere”
signify ghost, and each of these words is applied to
white men. So the Namoi and Barwan blacks call
white men “ Wunda.”
Ma
giurr
woman ....... ylnar or tnar
Australian Aboriginal
white man wunda
no
A US TRALIAN


Man (continued).
young - man ylramurran
boy ...... . . birri
girl mie
young woman . . . , namurawuri
baby kainal
father
mother numba
son wuriime
daughter numund
old woman yambuli
chief durumni
The Human Body.
head kaoga
hair . tegul
brains kombiri
forehead nulu
eye mil
eye-lash
nose
lips Ule
teeth yira
tongue Mle
ear binna
chin tdl
neck nun
arm bunun
hand murra
heart ki
lungs Kaogt
hip . . mil a
thigh durra
leg buiyo
foot dinna
blood . gue
skin yule
Ill


Paraphrases. .
Baiame glr giwir gimobi ; mal giwir, Adam
Baiame goe; Kamie murruba giwir nandie nud-
delago ; naia giwirgo inar gimbille —Ila Baiame inar
gimobi mal inar Iva ; Iva gutlr Adamu.
Adam buba murrina, buba wundanu buba kanuns ;
Iva numba murrinu numba wundanu, numba kanuno.
Murruba Immanuel; Kamil naragedul murruba
yealokwai nerma.
Ilambo Immanuel taongo taiyanani giwir ginyi.
Burula kagil giwir Immanuel; kunmulta vjarma
kaogo bindea yulalle.
Vjarma ger tulu wimi naragedul tulu naubie wimi
vjarma gir Immanuel wimi. Murra biruduni dinna
biruduni; tului wurri vjarma tulu tiome. Immanuel
tului pindelundai Yerala Immanuel baluni. Yerala
giwir pilari turrur duni ; gue dulirri.
Verbatim Translation.
God verily man made ; first man, Adam. God
said “ Not it is good for man alone to dwell; I for
man woman will make.” Then God woman made ;
first w r ornan Eve. Eve wife of Adam.
Adam, father of blackfellow —father of whitefellow
father of all. Eve mother of blackfellow —mother
of whitefellow —mother of all.
Good is Immanuel, not another is good like Him.
Lono- aeo Immanuel to earth came, man he
c 5 O
became.
Many bad men Immanuel seized ; they on his
head thorns bound. They verily a log laid, another
log across they laid. They verily Immanuel laid ;
hands they pierced ; feet they pierced ; on log fas-
tened. They the log,lifted up, Immanuel on the log
hanging. Afterwards Immanuel died. Afterwards a
man with spear his side pierced, blood ( flowed forth.


Translations, Paraphrases, &c.
W aradg
The tribal boundaries of the Waradgeri are as
follows :
Bounded on the west by the Eta-eta tribe with
Hay as a starting point.
On the north-west by the Bagungee.
On the north by the Wong-i-bon.
On the north-east by the Kamilaroi.
On the east by the Ngun-na-wal.
On the south-east, south, and south-west by the
Burra-burra-ba.
This latter tribal line completing the circuit by
joining the Eta-eta.
Classes into which the Waradgeri is divided :
% *
Class. Male. Female. Family Names.
C Squirrel.
1. Kubl. Kubi. Kubitha. Bandicoot.
( Native bee.
( Opossum.
2. IpaT, Ipal Ipatha. -j Kangaroo rat.
( Mallee hen.
( Fly.
3. Wombee. Wombee. Bootha. Wallaroo
{Red kangaroo.
Whip snake.
Emu.
Sub-class of Murri — Tdoolen.
Kubi may marry Ipatha, and their offspring will
take the class of Wombee and Bootha.
Ipal may marry Kubitha, their offspring taking
class of Murri and Marda.
TI3
FOLKLORE.


Wombee may marry Marda, their offspring taking
class of Kubl and Kubitha.
Murri may marry Bootha, their offspring taking
class of Ipal and Ipatha.
Kubl being Bandicoot cannot marry Ipatha being
Opossum, but may marry Ipatha Mallee hen or
“ Tdoolenßlue Iguana.
Fully thirty “head men” or chiefs governed the
Waradgeri tribe in days gone by. The head men
call their respective subjects together for a General
Boorbung, or Parliament, when all matters relating
to the interests of the whole tribe are discussed, and
a course of action in relation to murder, abduction,
adultery and war is decided upon.
Succession of head men or chiefs is elective.
Each clan elects its own head man.
The doctor or medicine man class supplies the
head men.
The Boorbung or Parliament is composed of all
the head men of the tribe, who assemble in solemn
conclave. They only do the talking and law-making,
the assembled representatives of the different clans
sit round in solemn silence and listen, and whatever
decisions the head men arrive at they must endorse.
The powers of such Parliament are very com-
prehensive ; they can proclaim war or peace, outlaw
criminals, say how offenders are to be punished, and
whether prisoners are to be set at liberty or put to
death.
Pk)r petty theft, the culprit is brought before the
head men, and by them admonished (if it be the first
offence). But if he again offends he is punished by
either having a boomerang thrown at him, or re-
ceiving several strokes from the sharp edge of the
boomerang.
In cases of abduction, adultery, or murder, if the
offending party should happen to take refuge in
another tribe, or in a different community of his own


tribe, the head men decide that he must be punished
with death. The tribe or clan harbouring the offender
is then requested to give him up to justice. If this
request is granted he is killed by the nearest relatives
of the person whom he murdered, with spears or boom-
erangs. But if the request should be refused, war is
proclaimed against those who are giving him succour.
Messengers or heralds (tederin-tederin) are em-
ployed by the head men to convey important
information to the representatives of distant clans
or tribes. Sometimes a stick is used bearing the
number of notches or cuts representing the number
of persons to be informed; sometimes a skin is sent,
such as a padimelons, which signifies Murri , a man, to
another Murri, man.
All kinds of important information is conveyed in
this way.
Such messengers are regarded as sacred persons,
and are safe to travel anywhere so long as they possess
the proper sign or emblem.
Magic is practised by the medicine men or wizards .;
they are supposed to possess supernatural powers, and
can cause illness or death by enchantment, “ Yangurra ”
is a kind of charm consisting of a dead man’s hair
and fat, and iguanas’ fat, mixed together in a kind of
ball and fastened to a stick about six inches long, this
is carefully kept concealed by the doctor until he
requires to make a person ill, or cause his death, when
it is unwrapped and laid before his camp fire, pointed
carefully in the direction of the supposed location of
the person whom he desires to injure.
It is supposed that the spirit of the dead man
whose fat is contained in the charm will cause the
injury.
Recovery from illness is supposed to be brought
about in much the same way, that is, the doctor by
enchantment removes the cause of the trouble. Rub-
bing, squeezing, and sucking the affected parts are
US
FOLKL ORE.


frequently resorted to. The writer has witnessed some
astonishing and ludicrous manoeuvres of medicine
men on the Murrumbidgee river.
Bueoongal, death, is the passing away from the
body of the gheer, the spirit or ghost which dwells
for a season near the grave.
After death the body is rolled tightly in a rug, and
firmly tied like a mummy; it is then laid in the grave
about four feet deep ; all the clothes belonging to the
deceased are then thrown into tne grave, then a
covering of sticks and bark follows, over all a covering
of earth is placed.
The name of a dead person is not allowed to be
spoken.
From what has been stated above it will be seen
that the Waradgeri have an idea, however crude, of a
future life.
Man Making.
Boys are initiated into manhood at twelve or four-
teen. They are taken by the old men, without
their knowledge they are taken to the sacred inclosure
of the Boorbung; they are then informed that they
are about to be made men. They are then taken to
a place called “Gudthel” place of smoke, a kind of
bough gunyah, into which they are carried by the old
men in the presence of those assembled, including
the women. They are once more told that they aic
about to be made men, and are solemnly exhorted
to bear the ordeal patiently, and are told that to
bear the pain without flinching is noble. _
In some cases cutting with sharp stones is resorted to.
The initiated ones after, remaining in the Gudthel
for one night, are liberated and sent away in the
custody of an old man, who stays with them during
their season of banishment, extending over two or
three weeks \ they are then permitted to retuin to the
camp, and are seated on a very high seat in the midst


of the assembly, the women and girls sitting at some
distance behind. They are then seriously cautioned
by the presiding “ head man ” against all improprieties
with the opposite sex, they are further informed that
if those injunctions should not be obeyed, punishment
will be inflicted. They are then free to mingle with
the general community, but must not in any wise
seek the company of young women for a stated
period; and they are not allowed to marry until
their beards have well grown. •
The parents or guardians on both sides must be
agreeable to the union before marriage can take place.
Sundry Customs and Ideas.
Food is distributed on the principle of community
of goods.
Huts in a camp are arranged according to the
localities from which the respective occupiers have
come ; those from the east occupy positions on the
east side, and so on.
The women always look after the camp arrange-
ments.
Infanticide is not practised by the Waradgeri.
The writer has known of cases in which women
have destroyed their half-caste children when under
the influence of drink, but that is simply one of the
results of the white man’s vice.
On the Darling, in the early days of white
settlement, the old blacks would not suffer half-caste
children to live.
Cannibalism is not as a rule practised. On certain
occasions warriors are compelled to partake of a
certain part of the body of a slain foe. But this is
done not because they are fond of human flesh, but
that they may become more daring and successful
in battle.
So far as I have been able to ascertain, the


Waradgeri have but a crude idea of the structure of
the world, the sun, moon, stars, and other heavenly
bodies.
Many legends and strange stories are told by the
old men, to the great discomfort of the younger
members of the community.
The bunyip is described as a terrible creature, like
a great snake, having its dwelling-place in the rivers
and swamps. It is supposed to be able to carry
men away bodily. Gheers, or ghosts, are a fruitful
source of alarm. Stories concerning them are told
by the old men, and cause much fear and trembling
amongst the women and children; and even strong
men are easily frightened by reference to the gheers.
Waradgeri Dialect.
man goon
white man .... meen
woman end
head
hair of head . . .
eye
nose mddrddtha
tongue didung
ear
hand .... • .
thumb
foot
blood
bone . . • . . .
fire wheen
water gulden
sun yeerl
moon ghewon
my
thy or his . . . . ugwi
my foot . . . . . udgi-ghinung


WARADGERI CHILDREN IN SCHOOL, WAR AN GESD A MISSION.
[To face page 118.




Waradgeri Dialect (continued).
one nungboy
two boo la
three boola nungboy
four boola-boola
hve boola-boola-nungboy
ten goor-a-bung
twenty or any large
number . . . . geber-bung
master bejah
mistress b ellagan.
Interesting Scraps.
The soul, the Waradgeri people say, is like “the
breath.”
It was dropping gentle drops, there being little
cloud to be seen ; the old black fellow remarked the
drops were the tears of his departed father as he was
passing away to the west.
They say “Fear the Great Spirit and know no
other fear.”
The Waradgeri have a firm belief in Baia-me who
made everything ; whenever an old black fellow speaks
of the Great Spirit it is with bowed head and in a
whisper.
They say that for some time after death the spirit
of the departed one hovers round the grave, and that
it has power to injure those who venture near the
spot.
They shun an ancient burying-ground, especially
the burying-place connected with tne Bora , the rite of
initiation into manhood.
Origin of the Aborigines of Australia.
The general idea of the blacks themselves is that
their ancestors came from the north.


As they have no knowledge of the extent of the
country they inhabit, the names given to the land
can only be regarded as the names of small districts.
At Cape York, Australia, as known to the inhabitants
of that coast, is called “ Kai Dowdai ” (which I sup-
pose to mean “ Little Country”), in contradistinction
to “Muggi Dowdai” (“Great Country”), that is,
New Guinea. Mr. M’Gillivray, in his narrative of
the expedition of the Rattlesnake , gives the above
as the names used by the aborigines for Australia
and New Guinea. He renders “Kai Dowdai” Great
Dowdai, and “Muggi Dowdai ” Little Dowdai. But
“Kai” means little in Kamilaroi; and muggi looks
like a modification of “ murri,” great. To those who
live near Cape York, and pass to and fro across the
strait, without any means of knowing the real extent
of Australia or New Guinea, the low, narrow point of
land which terminates in Cape York must appear
very small compared with the great mountain ranges
of New Guinea. Regarding “ dowdai ’as a varia-
tion of “ towrai,” a country, I think it probable
that “ Little Country ” was the name given by the
aborigines to Australia. It may be that those of
the race of Murri who first came into this land,
passing from island to island, until they reached the
low, narrow point which forms the north-eastern ex-
tremity of this island continent, gave the name Kai
Towrai (Little Country) to the newly-discovered
land ; and as they passed onward to the south and
west, and found out somewhat of the vast extent ot
the country, the necessities and jealousies of the
numerous families that followed them forbade their
return. The current of migration was ever onward
towards the south and west ; and, therefore, the
north-eastern corner of Australia was always the
dwelling-place ot a people ignorant of the vast ex-
panse beyond them, and willing to call it still “Kai
Dowdai,” the Little Country.
This is, of course, only a conjecture. However,


the aborigines in various parts of the continent
point to the north-west as the quarter from which
their tribes came. And some travellers’ tales have
made public a tradition about the first landing of
man on the north-west coast of Australia, from Java.
—R idley.
The Creator.
The Rev. James Gunther (of Mudgee), who was
many years engaged on a mission to the aborigines
of the Wellington district in this colony, where the
Waradgeri language is spoken, has recorded in his
grammar of that language this conclusion : —“ There
is no doubt in my mind that the name Baia-me (so
it is pronounced in Waradgeri) refers to the Supreme
Being ; and the ideas held concerning Him by some
of the more thoughtful aborigines are a remnant of
original traditions prevalent among the ancients about
the Deity.” Mr. Gunther states that he has found in
what the aborigines said -to him about Baia-me
“ traces of three attributes of the God of the Bible,
viz.;—eternity, omnipotence, and goodness,” Pie
also says “ the idea of a future state of existence is
not quite extinct among the aborigines.” Some of
the more thoughtful expressed to him their belief
that “ good natives will go to Baia-me when they
die.”
The Rev. C. C. Greenway, who lived some years
at Collemungool, in the district of the Kamilaroi-
speaking tribes, and made himself conversant with
their language and traditions, says : “ Bhaia-me is
regarded as the maker of all things, the name signi-
fying maker, cutter out. He is regarded as the re-
warder and punisher of men, according to their
conduct. He is said to have been on the earth. He
sees all; he knows all; if not directly, through
Turramulan, a subordinate deity, durramulan is


mediator for all the operations of Bhai-me to man,
and from man to Bhai-me.”
For my own part, before seeing what Mr. Gunther
and Mr. Greenway had written, I heard of Baia-mae
from the aborigines on the Namoi and Barwan. Many
of them, when asked concerning any object, such as
the river, trees, sun, stars, &c., who made these ? uni-
formly and readily replied “ Baia-mae.” And many of
them have said to me in answer to questions about
him —as old King Rory of Gingi did in 1871 —“ Kamil
naia nummi Baiame ; naia winunulda ” (I have not
seen Baiame ; I hear him). — Ridley.
A “ Colonial Magistrate,” the author of Remarks on
the probable Origin arid Antiquity of the Aboriginal
Natives of New South W , says, “The Murray
(river) natives believe in a Being with supreme attri-
butes, whom they call Nourelle. Nourelle never dies ;
and black fellows go to him and never die again.”
From the same writer we learn that the natives of the
Loddon ascribe the creation of man and of all things
to Binbeal. They say that Binbeal subjects the spirits
of deceased persons to an ordeal of fire, to try whether
they are good or bad. The good he liberates at once ;
the bad are confined and punished.
Origin of the Human Race.
The same authority gives the following legend con-
cerning the beginning of the human race: —“ The
natives of Western Australia say that wdien men first
began to exist there were two beings, male and
female, Wallinyup (the father), and Dooanyup (the
mother) ; that they had a son named Blindinwor, who
received a deadly wound, which they carefully endea-
voured to heal, but without success ; whereupon it
was declared that Wallinyup should also die, as his


son had died. If Blindinwor’s wound could have
been healed, the natives think death could have had
no power over them. Blindinwor, though deprived of
life, and buried, did not remain in the grave, but rose
and went to the west across the sea, to the unknown
land of spirits, whither his father and mother followed
him, and there they have ever since remained.”
Seclusion of Women.
It might be supposed that a people who do not
wear any clothes must be utterly devoid of modesty ;
but in their own way, within the limits of traditional
rule, the aborigines are very strict in the observance
of the dictates of natural modesty. Their rules as to
the seclusion of women correspond remarkably with
the law of Moses in Leviticus (chapters xh. and xv.) ;
but the seclusion observed by the Australian women
is even more strict and prolonged than that which is
commanded in Leviticus.
Circumcision.
Another part of the Mosaic law—circumcision —is
observed by some of the tribes. Dr. Leichhardt and
other travellers have recorded this fact. The practice,
however, is not in vogue over the whole of Australia.
It is, as far as my information goes, in some of the
northern parts only that it has been observed.
The Noble Savage.
For the most part, the black fellows who have not
come under the pernicious influence of the lazy and
drunken habits which generally prevail over those
that live near the towns, are well formed and agile.
On the Namoi and Murrumbidgee I have seen some
of the race of Murri over six feet high. As a rule,
the smallness of the calf of the leg, especially when


contrasted with a fine muscular development about
the shoulders, detracts from their appearance; but
some are really splendid models of symmetry and
strength. The aspect of a troop of them on the
march, armed, and covered with red and yellow ochre,
recalls the designation of the “ noble savage.”
Aboriginal Kindness.
One common characteristic of the aborigines of
Australia, which ought not to be unnoticed, is their
tender care for the blind, and especially for the aged
blind. Dr. Creed (now of Scone) and other travellers
on the northern coast of Australia have related
instances of the care taken of the blind. They say
that these afflicted people were the fattest of the
company, being supplied with the best of everything.
I also saw an old blind Murri, on the Balonne, who
was treated with great attention by his tribe. He
held a spear in his hand, and when he wanted
guidance stretched it out for some one to take. Seeing
him signalling for a guide I took the end of the spear
for him, and all his friends joined in an approving
laueh as the old man said to me “ murruba inda ”
o
(good are you). — Ridley.
Moral Susceptibility.
Many reminiscences of a higher kind might be
produced from the several Mission stations. When
the present Bishop of Brisbane, Dr. Hale, then
Bishop of Perth, in Western Australia, was coming to
attend the General Conference, and to assist in
forming the General Synod for the Church of Kng-
land in Australia and Tasmania, he visited the
Mission which he had established more than twenty
years ago at Poonindie, Port Lincoln, and gave public
and solemn expression to his confidence in the
Christian character of twenty-nine aborigines there by


— : “1
COOKTOWN, QUEENSLAND. \To face page 124.




administering to them the communion of the Lord’s
Supper. The aboriginal congregation testified their
gratitude to the Bishop, as the founder of the Mission,
by presenting to him a service of plate, which had
cost them over
One of the first fruits of that mission was Daniel
Tudhku, a native of the Murray river, who was tor
years a diligent workman, a devout worshipper, and a
zealous promoter of the Gospel. The last character
he fulfilled by visiting his countrymen, and bringing
in all whom he could persuade to come and receive
instruction at the station. When that man was on
his death-bed, the ruling passion of his life was
strongly expressed in his prayer that a Mission might
be established on the Murray, for the benefit of his
tribe. At the last he gave a remarkable proof of his
faith and patience. As he was evidently in great
pain, those who stood by expressed their concern for
him, on which he said —“ Oh ! there’s no cause for
impatience ; this is the Lord’s doing ; let Him do
what seerneth Him good.”
A Parting Word for the Race of Murri.
By the late Rev. William Ridley.
It has been the misfortune of the Murri 1 and kindred
tribes, as it was of the Caribee, the Delaware, and
the Plottentot, to be found in the way of European
colonisation; and the Murri have not seen the- white
man take possession of their territory without many
an attempt (by deeds of cunning and of blood) to
stop the invasion and to avenge the injury. It
would be easy to gather from the records of British
colonisation in Australia many instances of horrid
crimes committed by the aborigines. They are, in
fact, partakers of the worst passions of human
nature. But it must not be forgotten that among
the people of British origin who have come to settle
1 Aborigines of Australia.


upon the land formerly occupied by Murri alone,
have been some whose crimes against the aborigines
were at least equal in atrocity to theirs. In short,
there has been war, and along certain lines of
Australian territory there is still war, between the
colonists and the aborigines. In this warfare,
cunning and ferocity have been developed ; and the
remembrance of what cunning and ferocity have
done tends to make the colonists slow to recognise
any characteristics of an opposite kind in the blacks.
There has been a tendency to seek reasons for
believing that these people are not of the same
species as ourselves. And even in a volume of
Gospel sermons the assertion has been, somewhat
oracularly, published to the world, that for the
aborigines there is no immortality, and they have no
idea of God, no devout feeling, nor any capacity for
such thoughts and feelings.
It has, however, been shown out of their own
mouths, from their songs and their cherished
traditions, that they are by no means destitute
of some qualities in which civilised men glory —such
as the power of inventing tragic and sarcastic
fiction, the thirst for religious mystery, stoical con-
tempt of pain, and reverence for departed friends
and ancestors. It may be affirmed, with some
reason, that they have handed down with reverential
care, through many generations, a fragment of
primeval revelation. The manner in which they
have displayed these characteristics presents to us
such a strange mixture of wisdom and folly, of
elevating and degrading thoughts, of interesting
and of repulsive traditions, of pathetic and grotesque
observances, —that in order to account for the
apparent contradictions, we must have recourse to
the supposition of an ancient civilisation from which
this race has fallen, but of which they have retained
some memorials.


The dark side of this people has not been con-
cealed. Their degrading customs and their brutal
crimes have been made public, but a very large book
might be filled with instances in which Australian
aborigines have exercised the nobler qualities of man,
as faithful servants and true friends of Europeans.
In no branch of the human family can there be
found more convincing proofs of gratitude and
affection. Many a settler and traveller could relate
instances of blacks who, when once assured that a
white man was their friend indeed, held to him in
danger and distress with unalterable attachment.
The faithfulness with which Jacky-Jacky attended
the explorer Kennedy in his last hours, which has
been commemorated by the muses of history and
painting, is by no means a solitary case of devoted
attachment.
Many a lost English child has been saved from a
miserable end in the bush by the earnest and clever
search of aboriginal trackers ; many a colonist has
been rescued from the floods by aboriginal swimmers ;
and many a time has the poison injected by a snake-
bite been sucked from a wounded settler by a black
fellow. There have been instances at different
Mission stations of aborigines who manifested in
their lives a good understanding of the principles of
the Christian faith, and a conscientious resolution to
fulfil its obligations. As for the artistic part of
worship, a congregation assembled in St. Phillip’s,
one of the Episcopal churches of Sydney, has heard
approvingly the sacred music of the service without
knowing until afterwards the fact that an aboriginal
organist was leading their devotions.
Hitherto, it must be confessed, British colonisation
has done much to destroy, and British Christianity
has done little to save, the aborigines of Australia.
Sometimes effort for their good is discouraged by the
anticipation of their speedy extinction. But this too


popular theory of the speedy extinction of the aborigi-
nal race must be modified, if not negatived, by such a
sight as I have seen, and as may, still be seen in some
parts of New South Wales —an assembly of hundreds
of them, including dozens of hoary heads, and dozens
of infants at the breast.
When the Christianity we profess has become a
living and a ruling power in the British Australian
community ; when the questions concerning different
ecclesiastical traditions and rules, which at present
engross too large a proportion of our zeal, have given
place to a supreme desire that the will of God may
be done upon earth ; it will be one of the objects
which the Australian Church will seek with the most
intense earnestness, to convey to the remnant of the
race of Murri and to their kindred, from Cape York
to Cape Leuwin, the knowledge of the love of Him
who gave Himself a ransom for all.
“ Shall we whose souls are lighted,
With wisdom from on high,
Shall we to men benighted,
The lamp of life deny ?
Salvation ; oh, Salvation !
The joyful sound proclaim,
Till earth’s remotest nation
Has learned Messiah’s name.”
NOTE. —The Rev. W. Ridley died in Sydney just
at the time that Mr. Matthew's and the Author were
led to devote themselves fully to this work.
His mantle seemed to fall on others who, from his
death, have carried on the work he desired to
develop.
“ One someth,and another reapethO








