

fMC\
/ / *
Jr
/
.. -~\
--^
■■& \
J U. C ** \
/ T Ur
\ •
' _
-w \ .rr-
9
%
' 1
% •.
*
-
dr
- ...-
*
'
HRjr IK l ■
v .
<4f-0
|nS* K
/ jfe
%
i. /
\
I ji*
>r- .
~s
0. ‘
m Mu
/
irs
\ 1
J^'
;^fll
Ip
■Ml


Cl. - I ‘ I - 5
ANGUS A ROBERTSON,
89 CASTLEREA6H ST„ SYDNEY
NUT IMMNIAL AMCAOC.
& > '-W
-




••
-




Dromoora.
[Page 87.
Frontispiece.


BLACKS AND BUSHRANGERS
ADVENTURES IN QUEENSLAND
E. B. KENNEDY
AUTHOR OF “FOUR YEARS IN QUEENSLAND,” ETC.
WITH ILLUSTRATIONS BY STANLEY BERKELEY
LONDON
SAMPSON LOW, MARSTON, SEARLE, & RIVINGTON
Limited
St. pnnstan’s iScmsc
Fetter Lane, Fleet Street, F.C.
1889
[All rights reserved ]


_
:■ 7 \fM. a.-
POPULAR WORKS OF TRAVEL AND
ADVENTURE.
The Great Lone Land. Bv Colonel W. F. Butler, C.B.
Illustrated. Crown Bvo, ys. 6d.
The Wild North. Land. By Colonel W. F. Butler, C.B.
Illustrated. Crown Bvo, js. 6 d.
How I Found Livingstone. By H. M. Stanley. Illus-
trations and Maps. Crown Bvo, ys. 6d.
Through the Dark Continent. By H. M. Stanley.
Numerous Illustrations. Crown Bvo, 12 s. 6d.
Through Masai Land. By Joseph Thomson. Numerous
Illustrations. Crown Bvo, 7 s. 6 d.
To the African Lakes and Back. By Joseph Thomson.
Numerous Illustrations. Crown Bvo, ys. 6 d.
The Threshold of the Unknown Region. By C. R.
Markham. Illustrated, tor. 6d.
Cruise of the Challenger. By W. J. J. Spry, R.N.
Illustrated, ys. td.
Burnaby’s “ On Horseback through Asia Minor.”
With Map. tos. 6d.
Schweinfurth’s “Heart of Africa.” Illustrated, avols.
tSJ.
Marshall’s “ Through America.” Illustrated, ys. 6 d.
The Cruise of the Falcon: a Voyage in a 20-ton Yacht.
By E. F. Knight. Numerous Illustrations. Crown Bvo, ys. 6 d.
The Queen’s Highway from Ocean to Ocean. By
Stuart Cumberland. Numerous Illustrations. Crown Bvo,
London :
SAMPSON, LOW, MARSTON, SEARLE & RIVINGTON ,
Limited,
St. Dunstan’s House, Fetter Lane, E.C.


1430S
W. R. K.


24
4i
6 3
6 7
1 12
. . . . I42
2 1 I
LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.
Dromoora ....... Frontispiece
“ He, by a quick movement, bitted the animal with
the rope ”....... 24
The Wreck of the Young Austral . . . . 41
The “ Corroboree 63
Climbing for Honey ...... 67
Mat throws the Tingura . . . . .112
Mat collars the Buckjumper . . . . .142
The death of Magan . . . . . .211


PREFACE.
A FEW words concerning the following narrative
may not be out of place.
Many years ago, and before the present town-
ship of Townsville, in Northern Queensland, was
thought of, I found myself wandering in the neigh-
bourhood cf Mount Elliott, and also about the
waters of the Burdekin river, in latitude a little south
of 19 degrees.
Whilst so engaged, looking for country suitable for
stock, hunting, &c., it was my privilege to make the
acquaintance of one “Jimmy Morrill,” and through
him I enjoyed the unusual advantage of intercourse
with the perfectly wild blacks.
A word about Morrill.
Many years before my meeting with him, he had
been wrecked upon the northern coast of Queensland,
and when I met him he had just left the northern
tribes who had protected and cared for him for seven-
teen years ; his own English language he had nearly
forgotten, never having seen a white man all that time.


At the end of that period, civilization, in the shape
of a handful of white men, had crept up to him, the
sole survivor of the wreck, from the southern districts.
From Morrill I heard of customs and ceremonies
of the natives which no other white man but himself
had ever been permitted to witness.
One of these “ rites ” I have described in my story,
it is called the “ Boorah ” or “ Boree.”
Therefore that part of the narrative referring to
the native blacks and their habits is absolutely
founded upon fact, and the statements made concern-
ing them I will answer for.
I spent many months amongst the Queensland
natives, and at a later period, when Morrill had
journeyed farther south, and had been induced to
publish a “Sketch of his residence among the Abori-
gines/’ he gave me a copy of his pamphlet, which
I have retained, and from which I have refreshed my
memory.
I may mention that the adventure with the big
cockle, or giant clam shell, Tridacna gigas, was a
fact ; also that the account of the walking fish,
Ceratodns fosteri, is true.
I am indebted to the kindness of my friend, Dr.
Gunther, of the British Museum, for the scientific
names.
The buckjumper, “ Satan the first,” was a notorious
horse, the worst of many which I saw ridden on a
northern station in 1864.


In that portion of my story where the scene is laid
in New South Wales, the bushranger “ Magan,” and
his coat of mail will be recognized by many old
Colonials, who will remember the great excitement
caused by the cruel crimes of this monster, and the
subsequently strange manner by which his death was
brought about.
In the hopes that this little work may amuse and
interest the youth of Great Britain, and also those of
my Queensland friends who may come across it, I
now offer it to the public.
E. B. K.


'


CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I.
The New Forest—Sampson Stanley the gipsy—Mat and
Tim —A New Forest sportsman —Braken Lodge . I
Squire Bell —Annie’s gift of a book —Shooting a New
Forest deer —Felony—Chased by a keeper —Capture
—Escape—Fight with a bloodhound . . . . 11
Mat bids farewell to the Forest —The Young Austral —
Tim and Jumper on board ..... 26
Life on board the Young Austral —The wreck —A swim
for life—Safe ashore .... 35
The island—The gigantic cockle-shell —Amongst the
blacks—The Coiroboree 48
Wild honey—They find the wreck—The Thunderstick . 65


chapter vii.
. PAGE
Spearing geese—Killing ducks with boomerangs— Possum-
hunting—How to make fire—The tribe shift camp —
The Boorah—Mat and Tim’s journal ... 82
Gold Hostile natives —Flight by night—The great battle
Clubs —Fists—New Forest wrestling—“ Old Joe ”. 99
After the battle Burial rites—The Waigonda wish to
make chiefs of the white men—Our “ twins’’ leave
with Dromoora and Terebare for the south . . 118
Burns’ station—The horse-breaker—Colonial “Blow”
Satan the First Mat "collars the buckjumper . jjy
An official summons—Travelling in state—Brisbane—On
board ship again—Triumphal entry into Sydney—ln
a church again—The lecture—Meeting old friends—
Soft reflections
Pirn starts for the Darling Downs—French as spoken by
Mrs. Bell—Parson Tabor—Leichardt's grave—The
1 rench “professor”—Mat unmasks the “professor". 163
CHAPTER XIII.
Tim’s unpleasant reception at Bulinda—The bushranger’s
camp—The robbery—Annie kidnapped—Tim’s good
Samaritans ... ,00


CHAPTER XIV.
Mat on the trail of the bushranger—Annie’s signal —Mat
tracks the bushranger to his lair—The cave —Our
hero as the black warrior once more —A fearful fight
—Dromoora’s timely cry—Annie’s rescue —Blissful
moments ......... 202
Magan’s armour —Safe at Bulinda Creek again—The pro-
fessor's last lesson on the island —Mat and Tim once
more together —Tim convalescent 221
CHAPTER XVI.
The Squire's offer —Tim decides to go home —Our
heroine’s advice to Mat —Our forester takes to gar-
dening—The “new churn’s’’ difficulties and troubles 231
CHAPTER XVII.
English Society v. Colonial—Music—The “new chum's”
letter —“Two’s company and three's none” —Un-
pleasant reflections —Parson Tabor’s advice —Mrs.
Bell shows that she has a “ down ” on our hero —The
“ Spider ” —The “ new chum ” proves that he is “ not
such a fool as he looks”—Tim returns home . . 249
Our hero visits the old Waigonda country once more —
The overlanding—The Golden Gully—The last sight
of Dromoora ........ 274
CHAPTER XIX.
Bulinda Creek once more —Mat again asks Tabor's advice
—The parson “on matrimony ” —Annie’s little arbour 294


chapter xx.
Back in the old Forest —Jumper's last home—Return of
our hero and heroine for good and all to Bulinda
Creek —Conclusion and farewell .... 306


BLACKS AND BUSHRANGERS.
CHAPTER I.
The New Forest—Sampson Stanley the gipsy—Mat and Tim
—A New Forest sportsman —Braken Lodge.
About the year ’43 there had lived for a long period
in the little hamlet of Burley, in the New Forest, a
clan of gipsies of the name of Stanley. Sampson,
the head of the tribe, had commenced life as a knife-
grinder, and by tramping the Forest summer and
winter, and plying his trade in the neighbouring
parishes, had collected sufficient funds to purchase a
good van, an old horse, and some donkeys.
He was also known, in the Forest phraseology, as
a “terrible” good man with an axe, and in those
days of wooden ships there was plenty of timber to
be hewn.
So Sampson always found enough to do when he
chose to exert himself, but he infinitely preferred
going out with the keepers after deer, and these men
were not sorry for his company, for he was a wonder-


ful tracker, and could follow up a wounded buck
almost like a hound.
Though nearly fifty years of age, Sampson could
still hold his own at most of the sports that took
place annually in the neighbourhood. His fleetness
of foot was remarkable, and though occasionally
beaten by younger men whilst racing, at wrestling he
had never yet found his match ; and so good was he
in his own county of Hampshire, that one or two of
the squires proposed to send him up to London to
meet some of the famous north-country men who
gathered there once every year to exhibit their
prowess ; but when they suggested this, Sampson
remarked that he was “afeard he shouldn’t do no
credit to the money as they proposed to lay out on
him ; reckoned he warn’t man enough for them north-
country folk, as knew tricks he’d never larnt, but that
if any of the zquires liked to get a chimpion down to
t’ Vorest, he ; d ’av a turn with ’im.”
Sampson’s appearance denoted that of an athletic
wild man of the woods.
Over six feet in height, straight as a spear, a spare
figure with but little flesh on him, the muscles of arms
and legs showed prominently through his buckskin
jacket and breeches, whilst his dark brown eyes
gleamed out from under a rabbit-skin cap ; eyes that
took in everything around him, and were only still
when fixed with a steady gaze upon the face of any
one addressing him.


Such was Sampson, the gipsy, a man who spoke
little, but thought much upon matters connected with
his means of livelihood.
Some years before this story opens Sampson had
married the daughter of one of the small forest
“squatters,” a hard-working, merry-eyed woman, who
owned but little gipsy blood in her veins. She had
not had much “schooling” herself, but for this very
reason determined to do her best for the children
born to her, and, with the help of an old schoolmaster,
these were taught to read and write, and learned the
elements of arithmetic.
At the period of which we write there was no
church in the district of Burley, but Sampson’s wife
read to her children, though with difficulty, every
Sunday out of her Bible, and explained what she read.
She taught them to say their prayers at her knee
before going to bed in the great van. Her system
was not to have the young ones’ heads crammed with
much learning, but, following the advice of the old
schoolmaster, to “ground ” them well.
Besides this careful supervision of her children, her
gentle counsels often influenced her husband, and
other men of the tribe, for the better, when sometimes
they were inclined to challenge the forest laws, or to
throw away their money by “getting on the spree ; ”
so that the neighbours round about came to say of
thetribe, “They’re a bit ‘ sobererer ’ since old Sampson
married.”


Two sons were born to Sampson and his wife,
twins—named “Mat” and “Tim” —and a daughter.
It is with Mat that our story chiefly deals.
Always recognized as the eldest, and at this time
still in his teens, Mat Stanley closely resembled his
father in many respects, and from having accompanied
him for some years on his various expeditions he was
intimately acquainted with the Forest, its woods and
o-lades. No one knew better than he the haunts of the
deer and blackgame, and he alone of all the Forest
youths could climb the gigantic beeches of “ Vinney
Ridge ” to rob the herons’ nests.
Mat could also hold his own very fairly at both
boxing and wrestling with far bigger lads than
himself.
Besides these achievements he made small sums
now and again by breaking-in forest colts, and other-
wise helping the squatters with their cattle. By
nature he was always ready to help any one, who
through misfortune or physical cause was not able to
help himself; though possessed of a quick temper, he
was never anxious to pick a quarrel, but when one
was forced upon him, ready to show of what deter-
mined stuff he was made.
“Tim,” the brother, was of a more retiring disposi-
tion, by reason of his health. His constitution not
being so robust, and suffering as he did sometimes
acutely from rheumatism, he was not calculated either
to join in the active pursuits of Mat, or accompany


him or his father during their expeditions ; but he
stayed at the camp, where he proved useful in helping
his mother and others of his tribe in looking after the
animals and pitching tents, though when the proper
season arrived he took his share at cutting and
“ rinding ” timber.
I he sister, Ruth, also assisted her mother in cook-
ing, washing, and other details of camp life.
Having thus shortly described the family, we must
not omit to mention the guard of the camp, a long-
legged, bob-tailed, powerful, rough-coated lurcher,
named “Jumper.”
As a pup he had been brought up to mind his
master’s grinding-machine and tools, and his chief
duty he thoroughly understood from that time,
namely, never to allow a stranger to approach any
property belonging to the gipsies; moreover, he
would fetch in the donkeys and horse unaided, and
on many occasions proved his speed by running down
a wounded deer.
Just previous to the time we are writing of, Mat had
made the acquaintance of a young stranger, who was
shooting in the forest, and this is how it came about.
Early one morning in the month of October, Mat
was looking for a colt which he had partly broken in,
when his attention was arrested by a shot immediately
outside the enclosure he was searching. Ever alive
to the chance of sport, he ran through the intervening
trees, and discovered a young man dressed in a new


and rather gaudy sporting costume, who was engaged
in searching a small bog with a setter.
Seeing Mat, the stranger accosted him somewhat
imperiously with, — *
“ Come here, youngster, and find this snipe I’ve
shot, look sharp.”
“ Not till I’ve found a colt I’ve lost,” responded Mat,
who did not appreciate this off-hand command.
“ Do you know who I am ? ” demanded the stranger,
standing up.
“ No, and don’t care ; however, if you’ll speak civil,
I’ll give you a hand.”
And not waiting for further remarks, Mat vaulted
over the rails of the enclosure, and very soon pointed
out the wing of the snipe protruding from a puddle,
into which the bird had been trodden by the foot of
the gunner.
“Now,” said the latter, pleased with this quick find,
“ will you beat for me homewards to Lyndhurst ?”
“I don’t mind,” answered the gipsy, “ifyou will
come into this enclosure first, and help me to find my
colt.”
“Very well, as I’m a stranger in this forest, I shall
be rather curious to see how you find a pony in that
thick wood.”
So they stepped in, and Mat went back to the spot
where the animal had effected an entrance over a
broken part of the fence, saying,—
“ This ’ere colt’s been lost for the best part of three


days, and I’m a bit upset about him, as he’s about as
good a one as I’ve ever handled.”
“Oh ! then you’re a horse-breaker?” remarked the
stranger.
“Yes, and employed finding lost lost cattle too, as
I know t’vorest ; I was born not far from where we are
now.”
Thus speaking, Mat took up the animal’s tracks,
and strode swiftly through the underwood, carrying
a small axe in his hand. This tracking was all
new to the stranger, who could only admire the
dexterity with which his companion kept the trail,
taking no heed of numerous other tracks, which led
off in various directions ; these, as Mat explained
subsequently, belonging to ponies whose feet were
shod.
The colt had pursued a very zigzag course in his
efforts to find food amongst the dry “ sedge.”
In an hour’s time the searchers came to a deep dyke
overgrown with heather.
“I was afeard so,” muttered Mat, as he pointed to
a spot where the animal had fallen into the ditch, and
a few hundred yards further on they found the poor
colt standing benumbed, with his coat all staring, at
the bottom of the drain.
By great efforts they induced him to walk along
till the banks became less steep, and here, with his
axe, Mat levelled a bit of the edge of the drain, cut
down some saplings and furze, and so built a tern-


porary roadway, up which they managed at length to
push and drag the exhausted beast.
“ Good work,” said the stranger, as he and Mat sat
down for an instant to recover their wind. “ This
part of the business I understand, at all events,” and
taking a flask of brandy from his pocket, he poured
the contents down the throat of the colt.
They then made him up a bed of “sedge,” and
cutting a quantity of the best herbage they could
find, placed it under his nose, and left him lying com-
fortably down ; Mat observing that he looked brighter,
and that he hoped “to get him home afore night.”
This incident occurred in Boldre Wood, and as
the day was getting on, the stranger said, —
“Take a straight line to Lyndhurst, and we'll get
something to eat and then go out again.”
Mat acquiesced, and, leading the way through
Mark Ash, brought his new acquaintance in an
hour’s time to Braken Lodge, outside Lyndhurst.
It is now time to introduce the stranger.
His name was “ Stephen Burns.”
Three months only had elapsed since he was pur-
suing his studies, or rather, perhaps, his sporting
instincts, at Oxford, when he was suddenly summoned
home to Braken Lodge, the paternal seat.
His father had long been ailing, but the end came
suddenly, and Stephen was only just in time to see
him before he died, and to find himself an orphan,
having lost his mother during his infancy, and alone


in the world, at all events the civilized world, for his
only relative, an elder brother, had emigrated to
Australia some years previous to this.
Braken Lodge he hardly looked upon as home,
for he had left it early for a preparatory school, and
his father, whose sole aim and interest in life con-
sisted of betting and racing, was rather relieved to get
his two sons comfortably disposed of, that he might
the better indulge his favourite pursuits, which he con-
tinued until he left the estate heavily mortgaged, as
Stephen found when he returned to the Forest.
When Burns arrived at the lodge, piloted by Mat,
he showed the latter into a dilapidated smoking-
room, where he told him to make himself at home,
whilst he sought the housekeeper, and bidding her
take in some refreshments, followed her into the
room, then seating himself, he prepared to learn more
of the independent young Forester. With that end
in view, he remarked, “We have not much time to
spare, either for eating or talking, but, by-the-bye,
what’s your name, and where do you live ? ”
“ My name’s Mat Stanley/’ was the answer, “and
we’re camped down to Wootton.”
“ Oh! gipsies, that’s a free life, any way.”
“Yes, pretty well, but I zeem to want a freer
one.”
“ More liberty than gipsies have ? ” returned
Burns, “ why, how do you mean ? n
“Do you know Squire Bell ? ” continued Mat.


“ No ? well, he lives t’other zide of Wootton, been all
his life forrin—in Australia—and he says as I should
get on there well. He gave me two books, which I
carries about with me, they’re all about Australia,
and I know ’em pretty nigh by heart. I’ve had the
whole run of his library and museum, and bin over
'em times without number. And Joe Broomfield, that’s
he as the colt belongs to, he’s got a brother out there
whot’s getting il. for every colt as he breaks in, and
plenty of grub found him besides. Fact is, I’d like to
go out if I had the money.”
The subject evidently appeared to excite the other-
wise taciturn gipsy, and kindled a certain amount of
enthusiasm in Burns, who, however, responded,—
“ What, go and leave all your tribe, and live in the
Bush amongst black fellows? ”
“Oh ! I don’t mind leaving my tribe, I might zee
’em again some day, and then they’re a-goingto make
new laws here, and not let gipsies camp in one place
more’n a few days together. I’d like to get away,
and the squire he says I shall , only I want to work a
bit of money together first to pay my passage out.”


CHAPTER 11.
Squire Bell—Annie’s gift of a book—Shooting a New Forest
deer —Felony—Chased by a keeper—Capture—Escape —
Fight with a bloodhound.
We must now digress a little; the squire that
was alluded to in the last chapter, was no British
squire at all, but born and bred a colonial. In ear-
lier days he was known as one of the wool kings of
Australia, and his “ brand ” was still to the fore in
the home markets. In his native district of “ Liver-
pool Plains,” he was always spoken of and recognized
as “the Squire,” a title given him solely on account
of his personal appearance. In later years he had
taken up additional country to the north of the
“Plains,” and a young man who went from England
to join him in this new country thus described him in
a letter home :
“ Bell calls himself a native, but I don’t believe it,
there's no ‘ cornstalk ’ look about him ; every’one out
here refers to him as ‘the Squire,’ and truth to tell
he is just like old Squire Mangles, of Greenmount,
same red face, hearty* laugh, breeches, drab gaiters
and all."


The “ Squire/’ then, having made a considerable for-
tune in wool, left an agent to look after the property,
came home, and settled down with wife, son, and
daughter, in the New Forest; but arriving there, he
soon found that it would take ten years or more before
the Forest aristocracy were likely to notice him or
his wool-sacks ; in fact, a candid Irish friend, an old
resident, told him that unless he had a handle to his
name, they would not notice him at all, but added,
“If ye had , me boy, they’d just jostle ye.” To which
the squire replied that he did not want to be either
jostled or slighted, and that he thought that anyhow,
“ before he suffered from either the coldness of En?-
lish society or that of another British winter, he had
better get back to his own country.”
During the period that he had been in Hampshire,
he had interested himself much concerning the
Forest and its breed of ponies, and in this way had
come into contact with Mat. He took a great interest
in the young man, even to the extent of permitting
him to take lessons with his son’s tutor, besides in-
teresting himself in the lad’s general career ; and Mat,
who had always had a craving for improving his
mind, proved himself a ready and apt pupil.
Though this conduct on the part of Bell in taking
up young Mat, and admitting him to his home circle,
may seem at first sight strange, and indeed, as the
squire observed, “ It put the dead finishon tothe neigh-
bouring gentry,” yet it must be borne in mind that


he had little in common with English habits and cus-
toms. Those who knew Australia in the early days,
before the Victorian gold-rush, and long after that
period, will remember that it was not at all uncom-
mon for a man who had just taken up country, not
only to be thrown into the society of all sorts, but
for him and his family to live with the station
hands altogether, both in tent-life and afterwards
when the station was formed, sitting down to the
same table and si eeping under the same roof together,
it being a rare exception when these same “hands”
did not act and behave as gentlemen, when properly
treated.
The squire, though he did not take Mat for a
gentleman bred and born, yet saw, on making his
further acquaintance, that he was one by nature ;
and this was sufficient for Bell, who had had so
much experience amongst the same class of people.
As he said,—
“Mat doesn’t speak the best English, but he doesn’t
mind my teaching him, and it’s a real pleasure ; he’s
so quick at picking anything up.”
And Mat found that his tasks were to his liking
What pleased him most was the fact that he could
give a return, in many little ways, for the kindness
shown him. One of his chief delights was teaching
Master Tom, the squire’s son, how to ride, and also
to shoot,—tramping through the forest, and beating
up the game for him.


One day Mat and Tom were engaged in this way,
when the latter, having been wanted at home earlier
than usual, Annie, his sister, was sent after them on
her pony. Having found them, she delivered her
message, and galloped home again.
Mat, coming in the back way soon afterwards,
happened to meet the gardener, who was a great
friend of his, with a book in his hand, walking
towards his cottage.
“ What book is that ? ” asked Mat.
Robinson Crusoe,’ ” answered the man.
“Why, that’s the very book Master Tom told me
to get and read ; I wish you’d lend it me.”
“ I can’t,” answered the gardener, “it belongs to
Miss Annie, and she wants it back."
“Oh ! well, then, never mind,” answered Mat, as
he passed into the gun-room with the game-bag.
A few minutes later a young girl flew quickly into
the room, and as rapidly said in a breath, —
“ Here, Jim says you want to borrow this book;
it’s mine; I’ll give it you; you’re so nice to Tom.
I’ve written your name in it to show it’s your very
own. I’ll lend Jim another some day.’’
Mat had only time to take off his cap and say,
“ Thank you, miss,” blushing to his cars as he took
the book, when the fair young apparition was gone.
On recounting the circumstance to Tim afterwards,
he said that he could “ only remember a girl out of
breath, with eyes like a fawn, a complexion like a,


rose, and hair all down her back, which was just the
colour of the tail of old Broomfield’s colt—the foxy
one-and she came and went a’most afore I could
zay ‘knife,’”
“ Well, she warn’t a beauty, then?” remarked
Tim.
“ Wh T* P’ r ’ a P s n °t, ’zactly ; but I was that took
aback I couldn’t see, but you’ve no call to say she's
ugly.”
“ I didn't ,” retorted Tim, “ only you said her hair
was the colour of Broomfield’s colt/-’
An old resident of the forest, a Mrs. Taplow, who,
up to this time had been doubting whether she should
call on Mrs. Bell, and being reminded by one of her
neighbours that she had at length promised to go
the first fine day with the Miss Taplows, answered
decidedly,—
“ No * 1 havc now <l uite made up my mind ; I don’t
know, and I do not want to know, these Australians ;
he let’s his son go about all day with a common
forest gipsy, and she sends this same gipsy books and
messages by her daughter ; of course, the poor girl,
never having been in England before, knows no better.’
fancy! dear Jane and Bella consorting with the
vulgar herd; yes, look in the dictionary— ‘ vulgar
crowd ; ’ \\ alker describes them exactly.”
” Ah! the Forest is not like it was when I was a
girl, broke in Bella (aged 40),


And then the two Miss Taplows lifted up their
noses, and sniffed scornfully.
We will now return to Burns’ smoking-room, where
we left the two young men discussing emigration.
“It is curious,” said Burns, in answer to Mat’s re-
marks concerning the colonies, “ that, you should get
on this subject, for I know something of Australia
from my brother, who has been for a few years in New
South Wales, and that very map hanging there came
from him last mail; he sent it to show the boundaries
of the new colony called Queensland, in which his
station will shortly be included. A ship named the
Young Austral sails in a day or two from London to
Moreton Bay. I daresay that if you are in the same
mind next trip, I could help you about the passage.
I know the skipper, and he is taking out a heap of
things to my brother for me. But now let us be off;
I would like to get back to the enclosure you called
‘ Boldre Wood there must be cock there.”
To Boldre Wood they then proceeded, and, striking
Into a thicket of hollies, Mat proceeded to beat, with
the result of putting up several woodcock, which
either flew the wrong side of the bushes for Burns,
or which he missed. Though usually a fair shot,
this snap-shooting in dense hollies was new to him ;
so, getting tired of missing, and the light being worse
here than in the open, he called to Mat, and stepped
out on to a furzy plain. No sooner were they in it


Blacks and Bushrangers. \y
than up sprang a doe from her seat. Burns threw
up his gun, and, in spite of the cries of Mat, rolled
her over with a charge of shot in the head.
hat the ‘ limb’s ’ to be done now ? ” quoth Mat
as he hurried up to the fallen beast, at the same time
casting a glance behind him. “My eye! it is a
beeper. I zee ’d zome one just as you throwed up vcr
gun.”
Burns, looking in the direction towards which his
companion was gazing, saw a man hurrying up from
the hollies which they had just quitted.
Instantly the gipsy gripped his companion by the
arm,saying, “It’s writ down felony to kill a deer, two
years at least, quick ! You go that way, right through
the enclosure on to the Lyndhurst road. Give I the
gun, and he’ll take after me/’ Then grasping the gun,
and giving Burns a push that nearly sent him on to
his face, Mat was gone,
“ What a fuss about a deer,” thought Burns, as he
plunged into the thicket ; “ but I suppose the gipsy’s
t'g t, though if I did not see honesty written on his
face, I should have thought it a dodge to clear off
with my gun.”
Meanwhile the keeper, seeing Mat disappearing
with the gun, shouted to him to stop ; but as no heed
was paid to this summons, he started off at a run to
seize him. Mat no sooner perceived his intention
than he bounded into the hollies, and by doubling
and dodging tried to throw his pursuer off, but the


latter was just as active as he was, and drove him right
through the thicket into the old beeches beyond, and
through them again on to a plain; and here com-
menced a terrific race ; but it was soon evident to
Mat that he had met his match, for being handicapped
with the gun and bag of Burns, neither of which
would he part with, he felt that the keeper w gain-
ing upon him.
“If I can only get over the Bratley Brook 111 do
him yet,” thought Mat, who was getting his second
wind, as he put on a spurt down the hill ; but, alas
for his hopes! the brook was swollen by the recent
heavy rains, and as he rose to take the leap his
pursuer was close behind him. The opposite bank
came down with him as he lit full and fair upon it ;
he had just time to throw the gun on to the land as
he fell backwards into the water. At the same instant
the keeper’s arms encircled his neck, for the latter had,
on seeing Mat’s mishap, jumped up to his middle in
the brook, and seized him with “Now then, my lad,
if you fight, down you go.”
Mat, who was half-drowned, and woefully out of
breath, choked out, “ I’ve saved the gun so far, any
way ; and be hanged to you.”
“ Have you, then, my young poacher ? returned
the keeper. “ I’ve got it, and you too ; and if you
don’t go quietly, and without any ‘ sarce, maybe
you’ll get the contents of the weapon. I’ve got one
on yer, at any rate. Who was yer mate ? A


question to which Mat did not vouchsafe any
answer.
“Never mind; we’ll soon find out, after I’ve
changed my things at the cottage, and when you go
to Lyndhurst with me on a charge of killing deer, I
knows w r here the beast lays, and, hullo !_” he cried, as
he examined the weapon, “stealing a gun, too; for
111 swear this Manton never belonged to you.”
Seeing that the game was up for the present, Mat
stalked moodily along in front of his captor to
Boldre Cottage.
Arriving there, the keeper locked him in a back
room, telling him that he might jump out of the
window if he liked ; but that the bloodhound, w’ho
had already about killed a former poacher, would
make short work of him if he did; adding, in a sneering
tone, that he would take care of the gun and bag, and
all that it contained.
Mat was now left to his own reflections, which were
not of the pleasantest.
Drenched to the skin, he paced the room for the
best part of an hour, to keep himself warm, revolving
in his mind all manner of means of escape, but only
with the gun. He had just concluded that if only the
keeper would leave the house for a few minutes, he
would have a chance, because, he argued, he must
think I’m a greenhorn to fear the dog. Why, he
ain t even loose. I seed him chained in the shed, a
fine-looking beast too, and keeper he’ll— But here


his meditations were interrupted by a noise which
sounded like the clinking of a glass, and applying his
eye to a chink in the logs, he saw his captor with his
legs stretched out before a turf fire, filling a glass
from Burns’ flask, which he had appropriated from
the game-bag.
Mat could scarcely suppress his joy on witnessing
this sight. He now remembered that Burns had
refilled his flask at the Lodge with old whisky.
“ Drink away, my fine fellow,” he almost whispered ;
“drink away; that’s not public-house tipple. I
know the strength of that whisky, as I drank Burns’
health with it.” And then he softly resumed his walk.
It was now quite dark, and shortly again applying
his ear to the logs, he could hear the keeper’s steady
snore.
Now or never was his time. So cautiously getting
out of the window, Mat crept round to the front door,
taking care to go round the building on the side
opposite to the shed of the bloodhound. In the porch
he saw the shimmer reflected on the barrels of Burns'
gun, and might then have made straight ofl with it;
but “ No,” he said to himself, “keeper didn’t ax me
if Fd like a drop, after all my hard work, so I’ll just
help myself.”
Gently opening the door, he dropped on his hands
and knees, and guided by the heavy breathing of the
keeper, who was now in a drunken sleep, he ap-
proached that worthy, reared himself up to the table,


found the flask, slipped it into his pocket, felt that the
keeper was sitting on the empty game bag, so left it
to keep that worthy man warm, retreated as silently
to the porch where he had left the gun, and picking it
U P> he got clear out without disturbing man or doo-
- o)
and with long strides made off in the direction of
Vinney Ridge, and in little over an hour’s time was
taking a breather under his old friends, the great trees
of the herons. Throwing himself down at full length,
he pulled the flask from his pocket, and was just
finding fault with the greediness of the keeper for
having drunk so much of its contents, when in the
far distance he distinctly heard the of a
hound !
“So soon ! ” angrily exclaimed Mat, as he jumped
up. ‘‘ Lucky it’s a still night; but I’ve almost ‘ drove
it off’ too long. However, here’s my healih, and
good luck,” as he applied the flask to his lips. “ Now
for the stream, and the scheme, which I’ve been
planning! ”
In two minutes he was down to the river, and,
knowing every inch of the ground, quickly found the
object of his search. This was a rude bridge, formed
of a couple of saplings, which spanned the swollen
stream. This he crossed, and, from the opposite side,
threw the logs in, when they were quickly carried
away by the current. He then cut down a very thin,
wlnppy, seedling oak, and twisted it round and round
until he had a supple rope strong enough to hold an


unbroken colt ; then, ensconcing himself behind a
bush, he awaited events.
For the first time Mat felt a bit nervous—nervous
as to the approaching contest, which he knew now to
be inevitable 5 and nervous in that his body had been
for hours in wet clothes. He could hardly bear the
tremendous strain of waiting. The tension was almost
overpowering, for he was aware that he had to deal
with one of the fiercest of the fierce breed of blood-
hounds lately imported into the forest.
Nearer and nearer came the bell-like notes of the
hound, now apparently dying away, then again
breaking out into a deep roar, as the intervening
timber shut out the sounds or let them be heard
again. At last a most appalling roar, which seemed
to Mat to thunder into his very ear, told where the
animal had come on to his resting-place on the ridge,
and then all was silent.
Mat took another little refresher from the flask, and
had hardly replaced it on the ground beside him when
the great hound burst into sight in the moonlight.
“ That’s a bit of luck,” thought Mat, as the clouds
cleared away, and allowed him to see the animal s
movements.
Coming to the water’s edge, the beast quested up
and down, and then, throwing his head up with another
roar —of satisfaction, as it sounded to Mat —prepared
to spring into the river exactly opposite to where his
would-be prey was watching.


At this moment the hound was completely at Mat’s
mercy; our forester could have blown his head to
atoms with the gun which was lying loaded by his
side, but no such thought crossed his mind. On the
contrary, his one idea for a brief second was, “ What
a noble beast! ”
The next moment the animal plunged into the
stream; but, before it could rise to the surface, Mat,
holding his rope in his teeth, with a lightning-like
bound was on to him, and, seizing the dog’s huge
throat, at first endeavoured to keep him under water,
but the animal, though taken at a disadvantage and
half-choked, fought so with its muscular paws that
it knocked Mat off his legs, and, as he lay for a second
underneath, made a grab at his throat. Had he
secured his grip, then and there would our gipsy’s life
have ended ; but Mat was too quick for him, by
plunging his head under water. The beast thus lost
sight of this most vulnerable part of his foe, but
gripped him instead through his buskins and deep
into his thigh. Mat felt during this terrible struggle
that his only chance of life was getting into deeper
water. The pain of the bloodhound’s teeth was ex-
cruciating ; but, securing a grasp of the loose skin of
the dog’s throat, he never let go, only struggled with
his free leg to get into deeper water. Thus locked in
a deadly embrace, man and hound rolled down stream.
At length, by a lucky touch of his foot on the bottom,
Mat got uppermost, and by keeping his full weight


on the dog, caused it at last to open its jaws for a gasp.
Had not the water rushed into that gaping chasm of
teeth, Mat’s chance would still have been small; but,
excited now to frenzy, and watching eagerly for the
chance, he, by a quick movement, bitted the animal
with the rope, which he had held on to with his teeth
as if it had been the rope of a life-buoy, and as quickly
took a half-turn round the lower jaw, over the upper,
and had time to make all fast before the hound had
sufficiently recovered to prevent him. Then Mat
crawled exhausted out of the water and lay motionless,
hardly caring whether the animal followed him or
not, so faint did he feel from loss of blood. But
the beast came after him, amd, striking savagely with
its heavy fore-feet, caused him to get up once more.
However, finding it could not use its teeth, it acknow-
ledged Mat as master for the time being, and made
no further attempt at fighting; but giving a shake,
and with a last ferocious glare out of its bloodshot
eyes, turned and trotted sullenly off into the moonlit
glades.
Mat felt it an immense relief to hear his own voice,
as he said in a low tone, “ Well, thank God, I’m out
of that business! He’s tied up like a ferret, and
every knot is good. He’d have killed me if we’d
fought on the shore, that’s certain. The Bratley
stream served me a dirty trick a few hours ago, but
the Blackwater saved my life this night.” Pulling off
his cotton handkerchief, he bound up the wound in




-


his thigh tightly, emptied his flask, and limped off at
once before his leg should get stififer than it was, and
to make good his way to Lyndhurst ere the hound
should have returned to the keeper, whom he surmised
had only been prevented from coming up to help his
hound by being too “ boosy ” to make his way quickly
over the rough ground.


CHAPTER 111.
Mat bids farewell to the Forest—The Young Austral Tim
and Jumper on board.
At length, shortly after midnight, as far as he could
judge by the moon, Mat arrived once again at Bra-
ken Lodge, and knocked up Burns, who, though
astonished to see him at that hour, immediately
routed out the old housekeeper to light a fire, brew
some coffee, and get provisions, whilst he found a
change of clothes for Mat, and bound up his wound
with a healing ointment. And all these things he
did without asking our gipsy any useless questions,
wherein he showed his sense.
After Mat had thoroughly refreshed himself, he
said, —
“ Now, Mr. Burns, I’ll just stretch out afore the
fire—that’ll ease my limb—and tell you all about
He then related shortly but accurately every detail
from the time of their parting in Boldre Wood down
to the termination of his fight with the hound, adding
that he was very sorry for the loss of the game-bag,
which Burns said did not matter a snuff.


“ Perhaps not for itself,’’ continued Mat, “ but they
might trace you by it.”
Burns listened with intense interest to the narra-
tive, and remarked, —
“ / should have shot that hound, I knew I should ;
but then, you see, I would not have thought of that
dodge of yours of tying him up ; besides, I could not
have done it, I’m not so quick and handy.”
“ And now,” went on Mat, “ I’ll ask you a favour :
help me to get away in that ship you spoke of this
very night, and the matter’ll blow over, for they
can’t really prove anything ’gin you.”
Burns looked at his watch ; then pondered awhile
over this suggestion. At last, after several vigorous
puffs at a *black clay pipe which he was smoking, he
spoke :
“It would be a very mean trick to send you out of
England because / have broken the law—for I find
it s true what you said, —were it not that a few hours
ago, before all this happened, you were wishing to be
oft as soon as you could earn some money. Now
promise, if I help you to start, never to go back on
me by saying, when you find what a hard life it is
out there, 1 If it had not been for Burns I might have
been home now.’ ”
“ I promise,” answered Mat eagerly.
Then I’ll start you fair. You shall have enouch
o
money to keep you until you can look about, and
the gun you stuck to so bravely is yours. You must


get more clothes in London, and I will write a line to
the captain for you to take ; I will also send a letter
to my brother on the Darling Downs about you, and
gave you his address. And now come round to the
stable; you have no time to lose if you wish to
catch the mail at Southampton. \ou can leave the
horse at the station inn there.”
When bidding good-bye, the gipsy wrung Burns
hand and said, —
“ I thank you for what you’re doing for me; it’s
just what I’ve set my heart on this long time, and if
hard work will do it, I shall make it a first matter to
pay you back the money as you’ve started me with.
And there’s one thing, let them know at my camp
all about my going. It won’t go no farther, anything
you tell ’em ; and bid good-bye for me to my old
dad, and mother and sister, and tell my brother
we’re twins, you know —and I can’t abide not saying
good-bye to him, —tell him all about Broomfield s
colt, and — ”
Here Mat’s feelings entirely failed him, wearied
with pain both in body and mind, he clambered
stiffly on to the horse. Burns called out, —
“ I’ll tell them all you say, and send your brother
to see you off; there’s time yet before she sails.”
“ Thank you for that,” replied Mat. And, waving
his arm, rode off, with his gun on his back, and a
bundle of things strapped to the bow of the saddle.
As Mat rode along, he found plenty of time to


ponder over the events of the last few hours. Curiously
enough, he first considered the matter of the forsaken
colt, and its owner, Broomfield.
He 11 think it mean of me/’ he mused, “when he
finds I’ve bolted clean away, and left the colt; but,
after all, he ‘jacked out’ when we once settled to
work our way to Australia together. Burns he’s be-
haved like a man, and I’m a lucky chap ; ten guineas
to start with, and passage found me; yes, and I’ll
work to pay him back, and send some money to the
old folk.”
Thus soliloquizing, he found himself at the station,
and had just time to put up his horse and feed him,
when the train came in. Buying a ticket, he jumped
into an empty compartment, and though it was the
first time he had ever travelled by rail, his fatigue
was so great that he fell asleep at once, and only
woke up as the train drew up at the London terminus.
Here he procured a cup of coffee, and then made his
way in a cab to the Docks, whilst the great city was
still asleep.
With some difficulty the driver of his hackney
carriage found the Young Austral. On going on
board Mat was told that the captain would not be
there for some hours, and that the ship would pos-
sibly leave the docks next evening. So leaving his
gun and bundle on board in charge of a good-
natured mate, and telling him that he was expecting
his brother, he hobbled out to get his leg dressed


ao-ain, and to look at the shops, which were just
o 1
being opened.
Strolling down Wharfgate Street, Mat encountered
an old man in the act of taking down his shutters.
Perceiving that it was a bookseller’s, he asked the
owner whether he had any good novels.
“Yes, plenty,” was the reply. “Come in; what
will you have ? Dickens, Thackeray, or something
racy ? ”
“ Why, zomething what’s useful on a long voyage,”
answered Mat, who was somewhat puzzled for an
answer.
“ You don’t look much like a sailor,” remarked the
shopkeeper, “ more like a youngster bolted from
home.”
“ Well, what if I have ? I want some books all the
same.”
“ Here you are, then ; take this second-hand lot for
three shillings.”
So the bargain was concluded, and Mat found after-
wards that the old man had given him a liberal
selection of all sorts of literature. Strolling on he
entered a second-hand clothes shop, where he con-
cluded his purchases with the addition of a few
clothes and necessaries ; and some hours later returned
to the ship, the mate of which accosted him
with, —
“ Heart alive ! If 'twasn t for your duds, Ida
thought you’d been the same youngster that came


here an hour ago, but he’s down below overhauling
the ship.”
So down jumped Mat, and found his brother and
Jumper.
Hullo, Tim,” he shouted, “ this is splendid ! How
quick you ve got here—brought the old dog to take
care of you, eh ? ”
No, fact is, father thought you ought to have
Jumper to take care of you, amongst the niggers ; and
I’ve brought your clothes and some tools, and I didn’t
forget the axe, and the ‘print,’ that Garrett the smith
made for you ; maybe you’ll want to print yer mark
on to a horse out there. And I got all the books the
squire gave you, and a lot more Mr. Burns shoved
into a box for you. He drove me to the station in
his own trap, else I’d never a’ caught the train.”
For the rest of the day, and indeed far into the
night, the brothers sat up ; for Mat had not only much
to relate concerning his late adventures, but also
many instructions to give Tim with regard to colts,
which he had undertaken to break in \ besides, there
were innumerable messages to be conveyed to his
family and friends, more especiaily to the squire. At
length their conversation was interrupted by the voice
of the mate singing out, —
“ Now then > youngsters, turn in, you can find bunks
in the emigrants’ quarters to-night.”
Whilst looking for these night quarters they passed
the doctors cabin, and Mat had his leg dressed ■ this


he had forgotten to have done ashore. The doctor, a
kindly hearted Irishman, told him he must lie up as
much as possible for some days, or he wouid ha\c
so Mat told his brother afterwards—“ hurryslippiness.”
Next morning the emigrants began crowding on
board, and Mat and Tim found plenty to occupy and
amuse them in scanning the new arrivals, and wit-
nessing in particular the various farewell takings of
the Irish families.
“ It’s pretty nigh time for us to part too,” said Mat,
“ for the day’s wearing on, but I’ll write a letter home
for you to take.”
Having finished this epistle, he gave it to his brother,
and grasping his hand said, —
“ Good-bye, Tim, we’ve been long mates in t’vorest,
mind and write to me when I give you the address."
Another grasp of the hand, and Tim walked slowly
down the planks for the shore, and Mat thought that
he had seen the last of him, and was turning away,
when back he came, crying,—
“ Where’s Jumper ? ”
But Jumper could not be found amongst the crowds
of people and heaps of deck-gear.
Tim ran ashore, calling and whistling, but came back
without having found him. Then they attempted to
search the ship all over, but no result: at length
they bethought them of looking into a cabin, into
which Tim had entered on first coming on board.
With some difficulty they found it, when there, sure


enough, they found the faithful beast, with his paws
stretched over Mat’s bundle which Tim had deposited
there.
But so much time had been lost in the search, that
upon ascending to the deck again, they found the
vessel on the point of being tugged down the river by
a small steamer.
Tim was in despair, which being observed by one
of the sailors, the man inquired what ailed him.
“ Why, I want to go ashore.”
Oh ! is that all,” laughed the sailor, “you can get
away in one of the shore-boats, or the pilot’s, later on
for that matter.”
So Tim resigned himself to the situation, which so
far pleased him, in that he should now enjoy a few
more hours of his brother’s society.
After some hours towing the tug cast off, and they
found themselves scudding down towards the channel
under a fair breeze. Night was coming on, so the
brothers turned in for a short sleep, intending to wake
m good time for Tim to get away with the pilot; but
when they came on deck again, at daylight the next
morning, what a sight met their view! To their
judgment they were far out in a tempestuous sea
whilst between them and the distant shore they
descried what appeared to be a heap of furious foam-
swept whirlpools.
After viewing this strange scene for a moment, Tim
anxiously asked his brother whether he thought they


could find the pilot ; in vain they looked about for
such a personage.
“ But that’s the captain, no doubt,” said Mat, point-
ing out a weather-beaten naan on the poop, and before
he could be prevented, Tim had walked up to and
commenced addressing the skipper with,
“ If you please, sir—”
“ Don’t bother me,” answered the latter, without
looking at him, “till I’m clear of Portland Race-'
get off the poop.”
« But I want to go ashore.”
“ So you will,” said the captain in a tone which ad-
mitted of no further argument, “so you will, in about
three months’ time, please the pigs— go."
Following the direction of the captain’s eyes, Tim
saw that they were fixed alternately on the whirlpools
which had attracted the attention of his brother and
himself, and the sails of his ship. Feeling that he had
made a mistake, he returned dolefully to Mat, who-
was for’ard, saying,—
“ It’s all up, I’m in for the whole journey.’
“ Never mind,” answered his brother, who was
secretly rather pleased, “we must make the best of
it, and we’ll talk to the captain, if we see a good
chance, but it musn’t he yet a good bit.”
“ I wouldn’t mind so much,” said Tim, “ if it wasn f
for the old folks ; they’ll think I’m lost in London.”
Shortly after this conversation, the emigrants were
divided into “ messes,” and Tim found from inquiries
he made that he was indeed in for the whole trip.


CHAPTER IV.
Life on board the Young Ausiral —The wreck—A swim for
life —Safe ashore.
THUS it was that both brothers joined the full-rigged
ship Young Austral, bound for Moreton Bay direct,
joining a band of sturdy Britons who were going to
seek their fortunes in the new colony. Though Tim
started against his will, he very soon did “make the
best of it,” seeing that there was no present hope of
returning. Mat, too, helped to cheer him, telling
him that the voyage would do him good, and buying
him clothes and a few necessaries from those emi-
grants who had any to part with.
A day later on, Mat was summoned to speak to
the captain, who, until then, had not had time to read
the letter from Burns, which Mat had sent into his
cabin upon first coming on board.
_ Said the skipper, as Mat made his appearance,
followed by Tim, —
“ I understand your story, this letter from my friend
explains all; that’s your brother alongside you, I’ll be
bound. Mr. Burns has arranged it all, so that you
will get better accommodation than the ‘free’ pas-


sengers, and your stowaway brother can mess with
you ; I’ve been hearing about him from my mate, and
I’m not sorry that he’s on board. If we speak a
homeward-bound ship, we may have a chance of send-
ing a letter home before long—that’s all ” —and the
skipper waved the two lads out of the cabin.
Comforted by these words, soon perceiving that
this gruff, hard-featured captain was a good-hearted
man, Mat and Tim congratulated themselves now
with having had the luck to ship under him.
It is not our business, nor indeed our wish, to go
into the many details of a long sea-voyage, tedious
alike to either passengers or readers : voyages which
have been described in many hundred volumes, in
many thousands of private letters. The emigrant-
ship has no battles to recount, no running down
of slavers, in fact no life of the tar pure and
simple, further made interesting by his adventures
and exploits ashore. The emigrant-ship, though just
as useful in her line, runs the same humdrum voyage
year after year, unrelieved by any adventure, save
the inevitable meeting with shark or whale, the cap-
ture of albatross or Cape pigeons, varied with such
innocent amusements as a little dancing, and a very
fair amount of interesting scandal. In fact a little
world, of no interest scarcely to any one excepting
those on board.
But as far as Mat was concerned, the voyage pro-
mised to be full of interest. He had long wished to


better himself in reading, in general knowledge, and,
as he himself said, in speaking better English, and
here, in three months’ idleness, as the landsmen
chiefly regarded it, was the opportunity he had sought
for.
The first few days after leaving the Channel were
devoted by officers and crew to getting the vessel
ship-shape, by the emigrants in arranging their
“ kits,” and generally “ shaking down,” not, however,
that they were shaken down or vp by the action of the
sea, for light breezes and calms prevailed for the first
week after losing sight of the coast of Devon, and it
was not until the twelfth day out that the island of
Madeira was sighted.
At the period of our story, many ships went to sea
underhanded ; the Young Azistral was one of these,
and the captain, who had been casting his eyes over
any likely lads, one day called all hands aft to say,
that if any men liked to form themselves into a
volunteer crew, it would not only give them plenty
to do during the voyage, but, besides, they would
have the opportunity of gaining general knowledge.
For that he would be glad to hold a class during his
spare hours, for instruction in matters connected with
working and steering a ship, that a willing volunteer
crew would be of great help in the manual working
of the ship, and that though he could not compel any
one to attend to his duties, which would be often
hard, and sometimes monotonous, yet he expected


that any one that joined would stick to his word and
obey those over him.
At the conclusion of this speech, most of his
audience retreated, saying they had had work enough
ashore, where they were paid : but some sixteen, dif-
ferently disposed, stepped forward, amongst them
Mat and Tim, and offered their services. These
men were divided into port and starboard watches,
and by the wish of the majority, Mat was made
lieutenant of port watch, with Tim as “ Bo’sun.”
It was in the “ Doldrums ” that the Young Austral
signalled a homeward-bound ship, which, in answer
to a request from the former, said she would take
letters home, so a boat was lowered, bearing a small
mail, and containing amongst other letters one from
Mat to the Squire, begging him to make the acquaint-
ance of Burns, by taking a letter, which he enclosed,
to him. Tim wrote to his father, explaining all the
circumstances of his absence, winding up by saying
that he was very happy, with plenty to do, and that
he did not try to get a passage in this homeward-
bound ship, the Asia , because the captain said that
“ the old tub was one hundred days out from Akyab,
and that we would never get home at this rate.”
As time passed, our voyagers found that they were
making good progress ; the rough sports connected
with crossing the line were forgotten —the brothers
vied with their messmates in zealously taking their
share of the working of the ship, keeping watches,


washing decks, and to such efficiency had they
attained in going aloft, that by the time that their
good ship was in the “ roaring forties,” they some-
times drew forth praise from even the old “ salts,
who, at the commencement of their apprenticeship,
had watched their proceedings somewhat contemp-
tuously.
More than one of the volunteers by this time had
“jacked out,” as Mat said, and others appeared
likely to follow their example, some from sheer
inability to go aloft.
“ Probably never been up anything bigger than an
apple-tree,” said Tim.
The captain complimented the remainder on
“ sticking to their guns,” and both he and the doctor
gave them regular instructions. With the latter, our
twins worked hard, both in writing and also reading
out loud, whilst their time was also taken up with
the captain, in some of his leisure hours, in studying
geography, also working the ship both by sun and
stars, and afterwards learning how to prick off her
track on the chart.
Nor was this the only tuition which they strove
for. During a succession of calms, they asked per-
mission to borrow the dinghy, which was readily
granted them, and our lads, accompanied by a young
cabin passenger who knew the rudiments of swim-
ming, took long lessons in the art, not forgetting to
practise treading water for long periods at a time;


this latter accomplishment was, their instructor to .cl
them, under certain circumstances more useful to
learn perfectly than the simple one of swimming. He
himself usually stayed in the boat, whilst the brothers
were paddling, as sharks were about, so it was said,
though none were seen on these occasions.
Before the calm weather ceased, the brothers found
that they could keep up with the ship, when she was
just moving, for long periods at a time.
No bad weather of any consequence was met with,
until off the “ Crozets,” when a stiff gale came on,
accompanied by a violent thunderstorm. These
storms and gales continued for several days, obliging
the captain to take the ship south of Tasmania in-
stead of going through Bass s Straits.
Whilst rounding the Tasmanian coast, they ex
changed signals, “All’s well,” with a homeward-
bound ship.
It was on the eighty-fourth day out, and when
nearing their port, that an ominous-looking bank of
black clouds showed itself astern. This was early
in the morning; by noon they were enveloped in
partial darkness, with wind and sea increasing in
fury; at night both elements had risen to a terrific
pitch.
Tim told his brother that he had seen the captain
consult his glass many times, and on the last occasion
shake his head, “ and he looked awful solemn, Mat,”
he added.






“It does seem hard, too,” said Mat, “just when
we expected to land.”
The storm raged for three days and as many
nights ; the days seemed as the nights in their utter
darkness ; no reckoning could be taken ; any sail
they attempted to get on the ship was at once
blown clean out of the bolt-holes. Captain and
officers consulted together frequently, poring over the
chart.
As it proved later, they were well aware that they
must already be nearing a portion of the “ Great
Barrier Reef,” and that unless the wind changed,
they would be carried surely and rapidly to destruc-
tion.
All deck gear had long since been either washed
overboard or smashed, and two of the boats carried
clean off the davits. The emigrants were battened
down ; whilst on deck remained captain, crew, and
volunteers gazing into the gloom ahead with calm
but anxious faces.
The brothers, with some half-dozen other pas-
sengers, were holding on to the shrouds for bare life
—silent, because talking was out of the question in
the fearful din of the elements.
Seeing the crew at the pumps, they joined them,
all labouring till well-nigh exhausted, when suddenly
Tim cried, —
“ Look at the line of white waters,”
The next instant there was a crash and a shock,


followed by several heavy bumps, which threw all
hands to the deck.
‘''Where are we,” shouted Tim, as soon as he could
muster breath.
“On the reef/’ roared the captain, who was stand-
ing close by, “ but work and trust in God, my lads—
clear away the masts.”
This was a work of great peril, owing to the huge
seas which, breaking one after another on the reef,
rose over the doomed vessel.
All the boats had now been swept away but one ;
crew and volunteers were clinging to anything and
everything they could lay their hands on.
No tool was forthcoming—none could be found ;
when the captain had ordered the masts to be cut away,
men shrunk from crossing that terrible storm-swept
deck, even our hero who had faced the bloodhound,
felt his spirit quail, but only for an instant. Turning
to get a view of the captain, he saw that which
decided him. The skipper was standing with one
arm round the mizen-shrouds, his hair and beard
apparently almost swept from his head by hurricane
and brine ; but the expression on his face !
Mat had once seen a copy of one of the grandest
faces that he had conceived possible—it was that of
an ancient martyr.
There he saw the same look, at the same moment
of death in life, on his beloved captain’s features.
As Mat turned round, their eyes met, the skipper


gave him one sad nod, which contained a world of
meaning; Mat, without thinking of either storm or
wave, made a rush, burst open the cabin-door, and
returned safely with his lorest axe to his post of
temporary shelter, the next moment an enormous
billow swept the deck he had lately trod.
Watching his opportunity, with a few sharply
delivered strokes, our forester sent the mizen-mast
overboard, this was shortly followed by the main-
mast, for two of the crew having witnessed Mat s
daring act, had seized his axe, prevented his following
them, and felled the main-mast before another wave
covered the spot where they stood ; the fore-mast
then went by the board, and as if the gallant ship had
made an effort to shake herself free, by thus heaving
over this last obstacle to her righting—she had been
on her beam ends—relieved now of her top weight,
she rose again, but alas! only to be lifted in one
wild plunge farther on to the reef.
This last shock was too much for her solid timbers,
and she broke her back.
“ Let the emigrants up,” hoarsely shouted the
captain ; and then commenced a scene which, if it
were possible, added fresh horrors to the situation.
In hundreds they came on deck, some of the men
yelling and cursing, others the picture of fright and
despair; but all struggling and fighting to get to the
one boat left. The poor women screaming, praying,
and beseeching, the whole forming a maddened


crowd of human beings, most of whom were washed
about the deck, till stunned and bleeding, they were
swept overboard. Some dozens of both men and
women had seized the boat, and managed in the
frenzy of despair, and despite the efforts of captain
and crew to prevent them, to get it overboard ; but
the few that succeeded in jumping in were at once
engulfed with the craft in the whirlpool of mighty
waters : a last despairing shriek being heard even
above the horrible din as they disappeared, a huge
sea overwhelming them, as it careered onwards with
its white crest towards the land, a glimpse of which
could now be seen for an instant looming through
the lurid sky.
Another moment, and the poor old ship parted
asunder, the brothers finding themselves clinging to
the poop, together with the captain and two
others.
“ Every man for himself, and God for us all,” cried
the skipper ; “ but / stick to this last bit of my old
ship; if any one thinks he can swim ashore, he can try;
but I hardly advise it.”
‘ We 11 stand by you,” said the brothers in a breath,
as they grasped each other’s hands.
That portion of the hull on which stood the last
few survivors, was evidently being impelled by a
current, and at this moment was driftingpast a head-
land, which appeared to be some quarter of a mile
away.


All eyes had been anxiously watching this, when
the captain again spoke.
“ My lads, there's a slight lull in the storm, and
there is just a bare chance of a good swimmer reach-
ing that shore ; two minutes more, and it will be too
late.” Then turning to the brothers, “ Go, lads, and
make a brave fight; he who remains has no hope.”
Drifting along as they were, on the ship’s poop,
their chance of ever being able to swim ashore seemed
small indeed, and the prospect of casting themselves
into such a stormy, raging sea, was enough to awe the
spirits of even such stout-hearted lads as our forest
twins; but it was their only hope of escape, and
slender as it seemed, they did not hesitate, at the
captain’s suggestion, to make that last effort for dear
life.
The brothers looked at one another, and saw in
each other’s eyes that a brave hope remained. They
then turned to the captain to bid him farewell; but
they only saw his broad back shaken with emotion,
his face buried in his hands.
Hurriedly divesting themselves of their clothes,
they slid down into the billows by means of some
of the ropes which were dangling over the bulwarks.
As Mat came down last, he was aware of Jumper
springing into the sea after him.
Everything now depended on strong arms and a
cool head. As each roller came they found that they
had to give up striking out, and let themselves be


carried on in its dark and roaring body, then up they
would come again, and strike out until overwhelmed
once more. With the strength of despair, our lads
continued to forge ahead for that land, which
appeared to their eyes as passing them. After this
struggle had continued a cruelly longtime, they were
aware that the billows did not break so heavily, and
that therefore they could the more easily keep on the
surface of their crests.
The land was now to the right of them, when Mat,
who was slightly ahead, heard Tim shout, “Go on ;
never mind me.” This sounded so like a despairing
cry that Mat turned himself slightly round, and
shouted back, “Tread water!” And here came in
that part of the science of swimming which is so often
neglected; but the brothers had learnt their lesson
well, as we shall see.
Keeping their mouths tightly shut to avoid the
spoon-drift as much as possible, treading water
enabled them to rest their arms and legs alternately
for a minute or so, then on they swam again ; but
they were both, more especially Tim, getting very
exhausted, and were on the point of giving up in
despair their struggle against the waves, when the
sight of a piece of wreckage being drifted landwards,
showing them that they had got into a current setting
that way, revived their drooping energies, and gave
them spirit to make a final effort.
An undercurrent now caught Mat, and carried him


rapidly round the point; he raised a feeble shout of joy
as his feet touched bottom. Tim ranged up along-
side him, and being now under the lee of the point in
shallow water, both lads were enabled to wade hand
in hand over the sharp coral bottom to the shore.
Utterly spent with their tremendous exertions,
they threw themselves down upon , the sandy beach,
thanking God for their merciful preservation.


CHAPTER V.
The island—The gigantic cockle-shell —Amongst the blacks
The Corroboree.
After getting out of the water, Mat and Tim re-
mained stretched on the sand without moving a limb,
enjoying the sense of perfect security from the sea ;
but at length they felt that they must commence to
look for water, their thirst was so great after all the
salt water that they had swallowed. On trying to
rise, they found they could scarcely stand, so numbed
and weary were their limbs ; but by stamping and
running, they caused the blood to flow through their
veins, and were thus enabled to start on a small
voyage of discovery.
The island, as it proved to be, consisted of large
rocks full of caves with a few bushes and ferns grow-
ing here and there. There was no lack of water in
the crevices of the rocks, and astringent though it
was, it seemed like nectar to the thirsty lads. In one
of the caves they found that the sand was deep, dry,
and even warm, and in this spot they determined to
take a good long rest, which they felt themselves
sadly in need of. Tim had proceeded to explore one


of thes- caves, when Mat heard him call. “Look
here,” and proceeding to the spot, found his brother
examining the floor of the cave, which was covered
with oyster shells ; a further search showed the remains
of several small fires with more shells round them.
Some one has had a good feast here, Mat; let us
ha\c a nap, and then iL'ell look for oysters.”
So v ithout more ado, they buried themselves in
the sand up to their necks, and fell into a sound
sleep.
How long they slept neither of them knew, but Mat
was awakened by a cold feeling about his nose, and
jumping up, found to his astonishment and delight,
his faithful dog, which greeted him with short, sharp
barks of delight ; the noise woke Tim, who perceiving
his favourite, seized him, and the two rolled over
together with joy. They found to their surprise that
Jumpers coat was quite dry, and on emerging from
the cave, perceived that whilst they had been sleeping,
the storm had abated, and the sun was now shining,
also that the tide had run out, leaving their island
connected with the mainland by a spit of sand. The
tracks of the dog plainly showed that, having landed
farther down the coast, he had been trying along the
edge of the water for his masters, until led to them by
this streak of sand.
Congratulating themselves upon the recovery of
their dog, which they had given up for lost, Mat and
Tim proceeded to gather a supply of oysters—these


being rock oysters were easily detached by the tap of
a stone.
In the pools, left by the receding tide, amongst the
rocks and coral, many kinds of fish were imprisoned,
and there were quantities of crabs in a muddy belt of
mangroves, so that there was no lack of food, which,
however, had to be eaten raw.
“ We’ve always eaten oysters raw,” quoth Mat,
“and why not fish that swim ? ”
gut Tim was too much engaged to answer, he had
seen some large mullet endeavouring to escape out of
a channel in the rocks, and was wading about amongst
the green weed, piling stones across the outlet of this
creek, previous to pursuing the fish, when suddenly
under water, in a cleft of the rocks, he felt his foot
seized, and held in a vice-like grasp. The shock
nearly threw him down, but recovering himself, he
shouted, —
“ Mat! here , quick ! ”
The latter rushed up at once, crying,—
“ Got a rock on your foot ? ”
“ No,” gasped Tim, “ it’s more like a dozen rat-traps,
and it's pinching fearful.”
Mat by this time had cleared away the weed, and
at length, through the dark water could be seen the
outlines of a gigantic double-shell, with his brother’s
leg imprisoned in its jaws.
“ Look, how awful! ” cried Tim ; “ I can never get
loose from that big brute of a cockle.”


Mat tugged and tore at the shell, and, being a
powerful lad, he expected to be able to rip one side
olt by the hinge, but he could no more move it than
he could the rocks to which it was attached.
Its no good, old man, it’s too far for me to reach
it yet, but, thank God, the water’s falling ; if ’twerc
rising we dbe done. Do you feel you can last out an
hour or so ? ”
I don t know, Mat, I feel awful queer and sick,
but I can find the pain is out of my foot, for I can’t
feci the limb at all,”
The fust thing that Mat did was to pile up rocks
under his brother, by this means getting him into a
more restful position, he then wedged stones into the
jaws of the fish, hoping thus to take some of the
frightful pressure off the foot, and, bidding Tim be of
good cheer, started for the shore, returning presently
wi 1 a heavy, waterlogged piece of wreckage, and—
“ See here, Tim ! ” he cried, as he approached him,
and triumphantly held up an iron spike, “I knocked
this out of the old timber, this’ll do the job.”
The water had now fallen so much that the jaws 01
the huge shell were well exposed.
First scraping the mud and stones, so as to get
down to the base of the fish, Mat placed the heavy
spike against the shell, which Tim had graphically
enough described as a huge cockle ; such, indeed, it
exactly resembled, but on a gigantic scale, measuring
along the jaws over three feet ; he then dealt his piece


of iron a heavy blow with the piece of timber, but the
iron would not penetrate —flew off at a tangent: re-
covering it, he proceeded to examine the shell more
closely, and for this purpose baled out most of the
remaining water with his hands, then inserted the
end of the spike at another angle ; the next time he
essayed he drove the bolt right through the shell up
to the hilt ; this, however, had no effect upon the
clasping powers of the monster, the foot was jammed
as tight as ever.
“Oh ! for my axe ! ” said Mat, “ but never fear.
Now to get the spike out. I’ll kill this devil some-
how''
It seemed a long time before the spike could be
released, but at length, succeeding in this, Mat drove
it in every direction through the living, leathery
substance of the creature itself.
It would not relax.
He then rammed the piece of timber in, and, exert-
ing his full strength, attempted to prise open the shell,
he felt that the enemy was slowly opening, when
snap went his rotten lever, broken short off.
“ It’s too ‘ brow ’ ” (brittle), gasped Tim.
Nothing discouraged, Mat set to work with the re-
maining bit of his stick, but after another hard
struggle, and sweating at every pore, he had to sit
down a moment to recover; literally a moment, for
he had hardly settled himself in a position to catch
the breeze, turning towards the open sea for this


purpose, when his ear caught the dull moaning of the
tide, which had turned ! !
Without a word, but with an agonized feeling in
his heart, Mat jumped up, and driving his lever far
down into the mutilated fish, and planting his feet
against the opposite rock, gave one long and frantic
“prise;” when, oh, joy ! through the blinding streams
of perspiration that ran over his face, he first saw the
stones falling in, and he plainly felt the double shell
slowly give.
“ Pull, Tim ! ” he yelled ; and his brother was free,
being, however, forced to lift his crippled foot with
both hands out of the jaws of the fish, whilst Mat
never relaxed his hold of the lever.
The instant that the foot was released, and the
timber thrown aside, the stones fell completely in,
and the shell closed with a sudden snap. Mat, how-
ever, did not wait to see more, for merely administer-
ing a furious blow on to the beast, which only had
the effect of splintering the lips, he seized the almost
unconscious Tim, hoisted him on his shoulders, and
hurried as fast as he could over cruelly sharp rocks
to the shore, somewhere about a quarter of a mile
distant. With a couple of rests he got over the
distance, and at length sank down with his burden
under some shady trees, through which a little stream
of water flowed on its way to the sea.
“ I believe that pure water has saved my life/ 1 said
Tim, after he had drunk his fill, and had his leg,


which was terribly swollen and cut, swathed in some
soft bark, which was hanging down in ragged tatters
on a large tree close by, and which Mat wetted in
the sweet water before applying.
Our foresters, it must be borne in mind, were in a
woeful plight. True, they had escaped the one great
danger which they shared during that terrible swim ;
but what had been their experience, so far, on the
shore ? In the first place, they were aware that
savages were about, for they had seen their lately-
used camping-places, at all events their fishing
resorts, and remains of their recent fires. Then the
action of the salt water and wind on their skins ; still
worse, the powerful rays of a tropical sun, subse-
quently, had caused a sort of boiling-peeling process
to set in. Added to this, Tim, as we have seen, had
had his ankle-bone nearly crushed through, and
Mat, now that he had a moment of leisure, found
that his old wound—that one inflicted by the blood-
hound—had broken open, a fact which he was aware
of during the last two hours from the pain he felt.
It is doubtful, had they not found shade and good
water, whether our lads would not have left their
bones on the strand.
After Mat had made up a soft bed of grass and
bark for his brother, and covered him over with the
same material, he stepped outside the timber to
have a look round.
Having finished his survey, he was returning to


doctor his own leg when he descried a thin column
of smoke, which seemed suddenly to shoot up in the
distance. Hastening to Tim, he told him what he
had just seen, and that he believed the fire must
have been just lit, for that there was no appearance
of smoke when he first quitted him to look round.
“ Now, Tim,” he continued, “ men have lit that fire,
and, be they friends or foes, we d better seek them
out when we can travel ; for I know we can t last
long without fire or clothes, and both of us wounded,
but I’ll strap up my leg tight with this soft bark
stuff, and then after a bit I’ll be able to carry you.
I can easily do it, with rests; anyhow, well
away from this salt water, there’s too much danger
• •a, a
in it.
Tim answered wearily enough,—
“ Let’s rest here a day or so, and then, I think, with
your help, in a cool night or early morning, I can
get along.”
So Mat brought up a heap of shell-fish to the
camp, and by evening had made their sleeping
quarters a little more comfortable by means of
boughs and bark.
The night passed without further incident; but it
was a period of feverish nightmare to both brothers ,
lie how they would, their skins were so blistered that
the pain was almost unendurable, and Mat, besides,
was up many times to cool his brother s wounded leg
with water.


At daylight they were awakened from a doze by
the barking of Jumper. Mat was on his legs in a
moment, and, proceeding cautiously to the spot, dis-
covered the dog trying to claw up a tree, evidently
striving to get at something in the branches. This
proved to be a huge lizard, which was lying out on a
limb a few feet from the ground.
Being an adept at “ squirrelling ” at his old home
in the Forest, Mat knocked the animal off his perch
with sticks; and Jumper, who had been intently
watching the proceedings, had it in his jaws alrrtOst
before it reached the ground.
Near this spot Mat observed lying on the ground
some tempting-looking fruits, in colour and shape
somewhat resembling an orange, which had evidently
fallen off a kind of stunted palm-tree. These he
gathered up, and, together with the lizard, carried
them back to their camp. With a sharp shell he
cut out the fat from the lizard, and put it by to dress
their wounds with ; but the raw flesh of the beast
proved quite uneatable by reason of its utter want of
taste ; whilst the delicious-looking fruit was far worse
from the opposite reason—it was so intensely bitter
and acrid that they quickly spat it out again. How-
ever, Jumper made a hearty meal off the lizard, the
poor dog not having had anything but raw fish up to
this time.
The view from their camp was a calm and peace-
ful one. The Pacific Ocean, which had so lately


belied its name, now stretched, as far as the eye could
reach, in one unruffled surface ; beautiful bays in-
dented the coast both north and south, whilst hu^e
1 o
grey-looking forests seemed to mingle with the now
blue waters, growing apparently to their very edge.
Not a sail of any description had the brothers seen
upon the ocean ; the only sign of man was the smoke,
or rather smokes, for by the second day the fires had
evidently increased in numbers.
Our foresters found that the fat of the lizard well
rubbed in did them more good than cold water
bandages, and one afternoon Tim said he thought he
could travel. They both agreed that it would be a
relief even to move camp, though they might take a
long time before they reached the strange fires. Mat
procured a couple of stout sticks to lean upon, re-
marking, as he gave one to his brother with a smile,
“ We’ve no call to trouble about the • ”
oo y
which, indeed, so far, was lucky.
As long as they travelled quite slowly, with long
rests, they found they could “ keep going ” very
well. Mat—by far the most able man, though they
were both cripples—carried Tim over bad bits of
ground ; but on level country the latter managed well
enough by resting one hand on his brother’s shoulder.
Having thus covered some miles of country, they
came to a water-hole with several small tracks lead-
ing to it; round the margin were prints of numerous
feet freshly stamped in the sand.


« Here they be,” whispered Mat, pointing to the
signs, “big feet and little feet, a whole tribe of’em,
and can’t be far off neither. We must go careful
like.”
Resuming their journey, they crossed a plain 01
treeless waste, and then entered a country thickly
overgrown with scrub.
J umper, who was ahead, and had entered the thicket,
returned growling, with bristles erect, and at the
same moment some dark forms could be seen rushing
into a lagoon, which now appeared in a sort of clear-
ing. Then all was still.
Mat, whose eyesight was specially sharp, whis-
pered, —
“ I can see what looks like a black nose shaking
the water by that great water-leaf.”
The brothers stood quietly, hesitating what to do
next.
Suddenly Jumper commenced growling again, with
his gaze fixed on one side of the lagoon. At the same
instant more than one black fellow could be seen
stealthily approaching through the long grass, their
bodies glistening with beads of water.
“ Some have got behind us, again whispered Mat.
And indeed the white men appeared to be sur-
rounded.
“ You hold the dog tight, Tim, and I’ll try and
make friends.”
Perceiving that Jumper was held, an old black fel-


low, armed with club, spear, and shield, walked boldly
up to Mat, jabbering loudly the whole time, with chin
in the air, and after feeling him all over, was about to
do the same to Tim ; but this Jumper would not
stand, and Tim, by signs, implored the native to keep
back.
The old man understood, and called to the other
blacks, who immediately flocked up, and, hearing
the white men talk, were evidently relieved to find
that they were human beings like themselves, and
thereupon made signs to know from whence they
came. Mat, for answer, pointed to the sea, imitating
the action of swimming. One of the blacks, who
seemed to be the chief, comprehended at once ;
and the brothers saw by his gestures that he was
explaining to the others what was meant, at
which there was much jabbering and guttural
ejaculations.
Mat pointed out how blistered and wounded their
bodies and legs were, and explained by pantomime
that they were hungry.
The natives now seemed satisfied, and led them by
the hand, or rather conducted Mat in this manner—
for they were afraid to approach Tim again, on
account of the furious growls of Jumper—to the
camp fires, where they intimated to the white men
they should lie down ; they then gave them a couple
of cloaks of ’possum skin to cover their bodies with,
and a quantity of roasted roots and fish to eat; this


fare seemed to put new life in the brothers as they
reclined on their soft rugs.
A black fellow then cooe’ed loudly, and several
women and children seemed to spring up from the
long grass around, where they had doubtless been
hiding until the men knew with whom they had to
deal.
Mat so far knew, as the whole tribe had now sur-
rounded them, that he and his brother had fallen
amongst blacks of the mainland of Australia, for he
not only recognized types of visage, pictures of which
he had seen in the squire’s museum in the Forest, but
also most of the camp equipment, of which the squire
had many specimens. Thus he was able to point out
and name to Tim spears, woomeras, yelamans,
boomerangs, stone tomahawks, and nullah-nullahs ;
also their dilly bags, large and small, containing fish
and roots, and many small articles wrapt up in
'possum skins.
Whilst they were regaling themselves the tribe
kept up an incessant jabbering, as they pointed out
the white men to each other.
One of the blacks showed by signs that there were
other white men, but men clothed ; he seemed to
imply far, far away to the west. This gave the
brothers hope that there might be a settlement in
that direction, until by repeated signs they surmised
that they must be white men travelling to the north.
It was almost night when our gipsies encountered


the natives, and by the time that they had finished
their meal, the camp was wrapped in darkness, save
for the light given out by the tiny fires.
Seeing that the white men had eaten up all their
food, the blacks gave them a gourd of water, and
then, taking Mat by the hand again, and signing to
Tim to follow, conducted them to a gunyah, or hut,
which was made of saplings and covered with bark.
It contained a tiny upper story, also made of sheets
of bark, just large enough for two men to lie down
in. Pointing to this, they intimated that the white
men might sleep there, which, indeed, they were
nothing loth to do.
Mat, having first placed some cool green leaves on
his brother's ankles, pulled the rugs over them, for
the night was chilly, and prepared to sleep.
Before darkness had quite set in they had observed
two blacks start off on their back trail towards the
coast, which caused Mat to remark that he “ had
read that blacks never travelled at night. However,”
he added, “ we shall know more about it in the morn-
ing. If I’d a pipe of’baccy now, I’d be all right, but
we can’t have everything, and these chaps don’t seem
a bad lot, though they’re rum ’uns to look at.”
“That they be,” said Tim ; “we shall know all
about ’em in a day or two. If they’d meant badly
you said as they’d have killed us at once.”
“Yes, from what I’ve been told, it was a good sign
their bringing up the women and children so soon.


We might get them to take us to the white men they
spoke about, who knows ? ”
The conversation, which took place as they were
lying in their hut, was at this point interrupted by the
sound of a high-pitched voice singing a sort of
mournful ditty? presently other voices joined in.
“ Hullo ! let’s see what’s up,” said Tim ; and from
the opening in their gunyah they witnessed a curious
sight.
Three or four women, or “jins,” were seated on the
ground, singing and beating time with pieces of
stick ; a dozen little freshly-lit fires were burning in
a circle, and in the midst of them were some fifteen
painted warriors, white paint and red paint was daubed
in regular lines over their faces and jaws, causing
them to resemble so many death’s heads, whilst their
bodies were streaked with broad white stripes, each
rib being distinctly marked.
These white lines followed the course of their limbs,
giving them the appearance of so many skeletons, as
they appeared in the flickering light cast upon them.
“What a rum sight!” said Tim, who, with his
brother, was intently watching these proceedings, as
we have said.
“Yes, a sort of free-and-easy, I should fancy, but,
look ! ” for as Mat spoke each warrior took up the
refrain of the “jins,” and, whilst singing a hoarse
chant, sprang high into the air, descending so heavily
that the earth seemed to shake under them ; then






shaking their spears with a quivering motion, and
uttering tremendous yells, they sprang again into
the air and ran “ amuck ” against each other.
As they pursued these ferocious antics, the sight
made the white men’s blood curdle, for they thought
that this must be the prelude to a rush upon them-
selves.
The “ Corroboree,” as they afterwards found was
the right name for this peculiar form of black-fellow
recreation, waxed louder and fiercer, each man work-
ing himself up to a perfect frenzy, now darting in and
out of the fires, and even in some cases plunging into
them, and scattering the blazing embers, till ex-
hausted, they would here and there “fall out ” and
beat time to recover.
Their aspect appeared terrible and unearthly, the
brothers were spell-bound, not knowing whether fury
or joy was the cause of this extraordinary scene.
Then the infernal din died away, only to be renewed
louder than ever, as fresh warriors took the places of
those pumped out, until the exhibition reached, as it
seemed, a fight in terrible reality, as man closed with
man, fending off each other’s spears and clubs with
their “ yelamans,” showing surprising feats of agility
as they sprang high into the air, shouting fiercely a
sort of war-cry the whole time.
The ceremony was brought to a close by all stamp-
ing their feet with heavy thuds on the ground, and
then each coiled himself up by his fire, exhausted.


Our foresters breathed again.
“ Well, if they ain’t the most bloodthirsty-looking
devils I ever seed,” said Tim ; “but I suppose it’s all
sham ; the women don’t dance, and ain’t painted,
they’re what’s called the ‘Orkistry’ in the playhouse,
I suppose.”
“Just about a rum go,” joined in Mat ; “ I reckon
we’re all right to sleep now, though.”
It was about midnight when the whole camp had
retired to rest, so the brothers followed the general
example.


CHAPTER VI.
Wild honey—They find the wreck —The Thunderstick.
DURING the voyage out Tim had proved to his ship-
mates that he had a fair voice for singing, and on the
strength of this was deputed to lead the hymns, when
the captain performed the little Sunday service on
deck.
So it struck Mat, upon awakening the next morn-
ing after the “ Corroborce ” in the native camp, that
Tim should give them one of the hymns they had
learnt on board ship. So, whilst lying in the
“gunyah,” Tim struck up at the top of his voice,
“ From Greenland’s icy Mountains,” and Mat joining
in, the black fellows flocked round, squatted them-
selves, with awe-struck faces, on the ground, and stared
in utter amazement.
But just as the singing concluded, the two blacks
who had been to the coast, returned, and evidently
conveyed some important news to the tribe, for they
all began talking excitedly together, and pointing to
the direction from which the white men had come,
intimated that they must go with them there.


The possibility of some of their late shipmates
being cast ashore occurred to the brothers, and they
signified their readiness to go.
“ I must have something to eat first though, Mat,”
said his brother, “ for I feel terrible * leer.’ So, in
response to their signs, the natives brought them
more roots and fish, and after partaking of a good
breakfast, the whole party started.
The blacks noticed before they had proceeded far
that both brothers were lame and weak, so cut them
each a stout “yam” stick as staves, and purposely
walked very slowly. Mat tried to explain that a dog
bigger than Jumper had caused his wound; however,
his black brethren concluded that that animal itself
was the culprit, and in consequence gave it a wider
berth than ever.
The tribe of blacks who had received our lads in
such a friendly way were a fine body of men, as Mat
and Tim perceived now that they appeared in broad
daylight with clean skins —minus the paint of the
preceding night. Their bushy but finely-textured
hair was now ornamented with tufts of the white
cockatoo and other feathers ; their brows encircled by
a band of reddish-coloured material ; their eyes were
dark and glittering.
Though small of bone as to their wrists and ankles,
and fine in loin, yet their every movement denoted
perfect muscular strength and agility. Many of them
were over six feet high, though Mat found by subse-.




Climbing for honey.
[Page 67.


quent experience that this stature was more peculiar
to the coast-tribes, owing probably to the better class
of food which they were able to procure.
Upon starting for the coast our young adventurers
found that the natives were conducting them step by
step over the very route which they had traversed
from the island.
“ They’re terrible good trackers,” said Mat, who had
been watching them ; “ I thought / knew something
about it, but I’d often have lost the trail here. Why,
their eyes are everywhere, staring into the trees, and
looking into the tops of them too. Whatever can they
be after ? ”
These examinations puzzled the lads vastly, till
suddenly a black stopped, and uttered an exclama-
tion, and looking up to where he was gazing, a
quantity of diminutive insects could be indistinctly
seen hovering about a broken “ spout” in the highest
part of a tall gum-tree.
To Mat’s astonishment, the black evidently intended
to ascend this tree. “ How on earth is he going to
get up there ? ” said he, as he eyed the tall, smooth
trunk, without branch or break for sixty feet. “ Why,
that tree’s a good three feet through ; he can’t
‘ swarm ’ it, and they haven’t climbing-irons here.”
But the black fellow soon showed them how ’twas
done.
First he cut a thick ropy vine, or creeper, out of the
shrub, and joined it in a circle round the base of the


tree and his own body, then hanging a dilly bag round
his neck, in which he had placed his tomahawk, he
commenced the ascent by planting his feet against
the trunk, and by this means literally walked up the
great tree, shifting his hoop at every step, and getting
a purchase by pressing his loins against the circle
of the vine which supported them. When he had
reached the first branch he paused to take breath.
“That beats anything I ever saw,” said Mat,
gazing up in astonishment; “if ever I get back to
the Forest, I’ll try that game too.”
Meanwhile the climber arrived at the dead limb,
and commenced chopping, brushing off the swarms
of insects every now and again which had settled on
his face. But this cutting was the slow part of the
process ; it took a long hour before the little stone
axe had opened up the old branch sufficiently for the
black fellow to insert his hand.
Meantime his brethren below had lit a fire, having
brought a smouldering brand with them for that
purpose , whilst all this delay afforded a welcome
rest to our lads.
At length the man in the tree descended, and
opening his bag, displayed about a quart of dark-
coloured honey, swarming all over with a diminutive
bee, which proved to be stingless. It was evident
that this was an immense treat to the natives, for
they quickly ate up honey, bees and all, giving the
brothers only sufficient to make them wish for more.


Resuming their journey, our party shortly after-
wards arrived opposite the island on which the
brothers had landed, and two of the black fellows
pointed down the coast for Mat to look.
“ I can only see something like a black rock/ he
said, in answer to Tim’s query, as he strained his
eyes.
“ Why, it might be a bit of the wreck,” suggested
Tim.
“ Yes ; that must be it, Tim. It’s what I saw drift-
ing when we were coming ashore.”
The natives were now very excited, and, as was their
wont when in this state, “jabbering” unceasingly
together; but as darkness was coming on, they
evidently meant to go no farther that night, for they
proceeded to make several fires on the sand, and lying
down, bid the white men do the same. These latter
found themselves comfortable enough, excepting for
the mosquitoes, to which they had been a prey ever
since they landed.
Before they went to sleep, a black fellow appeared
with a huge hammer-headed shark, which he had
speared in shallow water. This proved large enough
to furnish a meal for all. A black threw a piece of the
cooked fish to Jumper, who, however, resented the way
it was given him by growling and refusing to eat it
then.
Mat was interested in the way the blacks made
their fires. All the little sticks were pointed to the


centre of the embers, and each man had his own
fire.
Next morning at daylight the camp was broken up,
and after broiling and eating more fish, they started
along the margin of the salt water. As they ap-
proached the wreck they noticed that there was a
larger portion of it than had appeared when viewed
the pievious evening, the whole of the bows and a
portion of the waist being visible. The brothers had
hoped that the poop might be farther down the coast,
and the blacks evidently thought this might be
possible too, for one of their number was sent off to
reconnoitre past the next headland ; but he came
back after awhile, presumably without having seen
any more of the old ship, but that he had found
something was evident by his gesticulations.
Lpon clambering on board with their companions,
our lads found that the portion of wreck they had
arrived at, though much battered and riddled like a
sieve, yet by the strength of her outer timbers, held
together, and thus had saved a portion of her contents.
Some barrels and chests could be seen, and Mat
found the place which had been occupied by his
bunk ; and to his great delight, on looking closer, he
espied his gun jammed by the stock between the
beams, but otherwise uninjured, excepting by the
action of salt water. These beams, however, he could
not part; no axe could he find, so he and Tim
collected the black fellows, and on pointing out the


gun, they at once understood what was wanted, so by
their combined effort, and bringing their little toma-
hawks into play, the gun was freed.
“The gun’s no use without powder,Tim,”remarked
his brother as he fondly handled the weapon. “ Didn’t
Robinson Crusoe make powder ? Oh ! if I could
only come across my chest! ”
The black fellows soon carried everything ashore
that they could lay their hands on, and the result of
their labours made quite a respectable pile on the
beach. They then returned to strip every single nail,
bolt, and bit of ironwork and lead from the wreck ;
from the way they went about this, it was evident that
it was not the first time they had been so engaged.
On further examination it was seen that most of the
chests were smashed and empty. Mat threw these
aside, looking, however, first carefully at their marks ;
on scraping away the sea-weed and sand from one at
the bottom of the pile, and turning it over, there, oh !
joy! stood out plainly the two letters M. S., burnt
into it with the Forest print, which Tim had brought
to the docks on leaving home.
The chest was full and locked.
“ Hurrah ! ” shouted Mat.
“Hurrah!” joined in Tim, when he found what
had caused Mat’s joy, exclamations which so startled
the blacks that they came crowding up and wanted to
knock the chest to pieces at once, but Mat gently
prevented them, and showed them where to prise the


lock open. Then out came the greater part of his
outfit and that of Tim, not much the worse for wear,
but drenched into many colours. Mat promptly put
on a shirt and a pair of moleskin trousers. Tim
arrayed himself in a light coat and pair of drawers,
and the black fellows observing this, a most ludicrous
scene ensued.
One tall black drew his legs through a pair of
trousers, holding the garment upside down, the con-
sequence was that when he tried to walk he waddled
a few steps and fell prone ; another slipped on a pair
of canvas ducks hind part before. One young <f buck ”
pulled the sleeve of a shirt on, the balance of the gar-
ment, to his great delight, fluttering in the wind :
whilst yet another sat down into Tim’s best felt hat,
thinking that article could only be meant for a
seat.
All these antics were accompanied with shouts of
laughter, the dark men chasing each other about like
so many children. This festive scene much relieved
the owners of the property, pleased as they were to
find their comrades in such good-humour.
As suddenly tired with this buffoonery as they had
been ready to commence it, the natives pulled off
their eccentric-fitting garments, and signed to the
white men to come along the shore. These wanted
to examine further into the chests and casks, but
were not allowed any further delay.
“ What can they want down there ? ” cried Tim,


« Why, I expect that chap they sent down the coast
found another chest,” suggested Mat.
“ Come along, then, my darkies; more clothes,
perhaps! ” laughed his brother.
When they turned the point of the cliff it was
clothes, sure enough, that they found, but clothes
enveloping a corpse.
“ The poor old doctor ! ” murmured Mat, as he went
down on his knees beside the body, and recognized
the portly form. “ He’s awfully battered, but not
been touched by the fish or anything. He wasn ton
the poop, so there’s a small hope yet for the skipper
and those we left with him. Let’s bury him right up
there, above high-water mark.”
Up to this the blacks had held aloof, but now made
signs that they would divide the body or burn it, and
seemed offended when the brothers showed that they
could not have their own way in this. Mat wished to
bury his old comrade without making them angry, so
he pointed to the body, then to the sky, shaking his
head solemnly, upon which the natives fell back, and
did not attempt to interfere again.
The brothers then bore the corpse up the low cliff,
scooped as deep a hole as they could in the sand,
placed it there, rolled a great rock on the grave, and
walked away silently from the spot.
Many an anxious glance did they cast seawards
that day in hopes of seeing a vessel, but not a sign of
one was visible on the placid ocean.


Returning 1 to the scene of the wreckage, the black
fellows shouldered everything that had been found in
or on the wreck, and the whole party returned to their
camp in the woods without further adventures.
Our foresters had hoped that when they should
have arrived at what, for the present at any rate,
they designated “ Home,” they would have had ample
time to rummage into the chests and casks which had
been saved. But what was their astonishment to find
some fifty or sixty strange natives assembled at the
camp. These had evidently arrived from some distant
part, and had only come into camp shortly before the
brothers and their friends, for the “jins” had not all
disencumbered themselves of the children, whom they
carried on their backs, the infants’ legs hanging
straight down, according to the native custom.
Directly these freshly-arrived blacks saw our white
lads—who were now clothed—they scampered off in
every direction, only returning when the friendly
natives went after them and explained matters, when
they at length summoned up courage to come up
to where the brothers were standing. They finally
felt them all over, looked into their mouths, and with
gestures begged them to strip. This request being
also acceded to, their examiners seemed satisfied, and
squatted themselves on the ground to talk the white
men over.
But it was soon evident that these visitors had ar-
rived for a special purpose, for, on a signal being given,


every man assembled was formed up so as to make a
large circle. A corroboree on a grand scale was
about to take place.
Whilst the brothers were led into the circle the
“friendlies” went away to the chests, soon to re-
appear, not only in war-paint, but clad in every con-
ceivable form. These northern blacks —men and
women alike —were never in the habit of wearing the
most minute particle of dress, or even covering.
The contrast, then, between the friendly tribes and
the strangers was very great, and the lads took the
liberty of attending to the costumes in small particu-
lars. Tim this time clapped his hat on the head of
his dark friend, who thereupon assumed a look of
conscious pride ; for, though it was the only article of
dress he had on, yet he guessed that for this occasion
the hat had been placed upon the real seat of honour,
A pair of spectacles had also been brought to light in
one of the rescued boxes. These were being passed
around in wonder by the blacks, when our boys placed
them on a very skinny old jin, and led her into the
ring.
“ She looks quite grandmotherly, don’t she, Mat ? ”
said Tim.
When the proper place for spectacles was thus seen,
the nude old woman became the envy and delight of
the admiring natives.
Then the whole crowd, dressed and undressed,
stepped into a ring formed of spears stuck into the


ground, all bearing on their faces a look of extreme
dignity, which gave them even a more ludicrous ap-
pearance than when they were gambolling in like
attire on the sea-shore. But when our foresters saw
the old granny standing up, as if for her picture to be
taken, with nothing on but a pair of big goggles, they
could scarcely forbear from going into fits of laughter;
however, by great efforts, they controlled their mirth,
seeing how grave were the faces of all around them.
This corroboree commenced with a song, which
seemed as if it would never terminate, and which
evidently entirely referred to the presence of the white
men, as they were constantly pointed to.
The strange natives looked on silent and open-
mouthed, till it was over, when they all turned to, to
examine the shirts and other clothing; after this the
brothers were conducted to their gunyah, and upon
making signs that they were hungry, food and water
were quickly set before them, and they stretched out
in their bark hut for a rest: they could see the natives
after a time drop off one by one and go to sleep.
More than once that night a visitor would steal up
to have a peep at the white men, but J umper’s ominous
growl forbad a too close approach.
Night after night was the same scene enacted, cor-
roboree and singing, as fresh tribes came to take the
place of those who had already seen the wonderful
white men. At length this trotting-out became so
wearisome that Mat and Tim flatly declined upon one


occasion to go and be overhauled, and pinched, and
have their mouths looked into by every fresh lot of
black fellows.
This refusal enraged the natives, who rushed towards
them, fiercely swinging their waddies, or clubs, over
their heads. Our foresters stood perfectly unmoved,
which conduct evidently pleased the dark men, as
they dropped their weapons, and did not call for any
more exhibitions for some time to come. Most of the
tribes also living within “calling distance” had satis-
fied their curiosity by seeing the strange men ; and
matters resumed their usual course, the “ friendlies ”
keeping the brothers always well supplied with food,
to their great comfort.
Mat had now time to examine the remaining stores,
which had not as yet been interfered with. At the
bottom of his sea-chest he found his books, amongst
them his beloved “ Crusoe ; ” and what was of far
greater importance, he discovered in a water-tight
barrel, a tin of gunpowder stowed away amongst a
quantity of rice.
The brothers had many a talk over this powder, as
they surmised that if they proved to the natives that
they possessed the power of dealing instantaneous
death, it would cause them to be respected by all in
the district. So they resolved to show the power of
the weapon.
Mat set to work to clean and burnish up the gun
thoroughly, whilst Tim cut up some slugs from the lead.


The black fellows had looked at this gun, smelt it,
and could not make it out.
Said Tim, —
“ I was talking with our good old doctor, whom we
buried the other day—about the blacks, and he said
as they thinks a thing’s a kind of spirit if you go into a
lot of fooling over it ; so now do you shoot a bird, but
afore you fire we’ll have a game round the old gun.”
There happened, on this day of the conversation,
to be several hawks,, which were fully gorged with
odds and ends thrown out of the camp, placidly
blinking on the branches of the trees high overhead.
Having made their arrangements, the brothers col-
lected their friends and pointed to a particular bird,
which was sitting on a branch by himself, some forty
yards above their gunyah.
“ Old Joe” was then brought out, Mat bringing it
along with mock humility, as he crawled on his knees ;
the weapon was then placed on the ground at a spot
which Tim had been carefully dusting and removing
twigs from, burying this rubbish with the greatest
care. Then, with a great appearance of solemnity,
Tim knelt at the muzzle, Mat at the stock, as the gun
was placed carefully on the sacred spot. This was all
done so far in perfect silence. The natives remaining
awe-struck at these proceedings, commenced to
whisper.
“ Hush-sh! ” said both brothers, putting their
fingers to their lips.


Then sang out Mat, “ High cockelorum, jig, jig,
jig,” and at the last jig was on his brother’s back with
a flying leap, both in this fashion careering round the
gun ; Jumper lying perfectly still beside it, as he was
told. They then suddenly stopped, and in sepulchral
tones sang bits of every song they had learnt when
working the ship, commencing with, “ Oh, a bully
ship and a bully crew,” following this with another
solo, “And what do you think we had for dinner?”
then both taking up the refrain, “ Blow, boys, blow,”
“ A goose’s lights and a louse’s liver, blow, my bully
boys, blow.”
Many other ditties followed, finishing with, —
“ Now upon my life and upon my soul,
I never knew a nigger but had wool on his pole,”
&C., &C,
“Now we'll conclude the performance,” whispered
Mat; so first gently speaking to the lock of the gun,
and then emitting a most atrocious noise down the
barrel with his lips, he loaded, took a steady aim and
fired, whilst Tim was making horrible faces in the
background.
There was a death-like silence for an instant after
the report had died away ; and then, amidst the
shrieks of the jins, the howls of the children, and the
terrified yells of the men, who knocked each other
over in their frantic efforts to escape, the camp was
deserted.
Mat and Tim fairly rolled on the ground, convulsed


with laughter, whilst Jumper amidst all this uproar
rushed joyfully in, and worried the remains of the
carrion bird.
Not a black skin could be seen, excepting a couple
of unfortunate babies, who had been deserted by their
mothers in the general stampede, and who were now
squalling on the ground.
“ I think that act went off pretty tidy,” remarked
Tim, as soon as he could speak.
“ Not much the matter with it,” answered his
brother, “ I reckon they won’t ‘ ankor ’ us, they were
just about scared ; but I won’t put five fingers of
powder into ‘Old Joe’ again, she’s nearly taken my
shoulder off. If we always handle the gun as if twerc
an evil spirit, I expect we’ve more power in it than
we think of; it’s very certain they never heard that
noise before ; besides, she went off like a young
cannon.
By-and-by the blacks stole silently, one by one, into
the camp ; amongst the first arrivals were two women,
who seized the sprawling infants they had left behind,
and then retreated quickly into the scrub.
Mat and Tim, peeping out of their hut, to which
they had retreated, as became properly behaved
wizards, at length saw their friends gathered round
one man, who was examining the defunct hawk with
trembling fingers, to see what had killed it.
There was a dead silence amongst the tribe that
night, not one moved from his fire.


Next morning a native braver than the rest, the
chief in fact, asked by signs whether he might ap-
proach the gun, which he saw peeping out from the
hut ; but the brothers, by pantomime, showed that the
consequences would be too awful if he awoke the evil
spirit, and he was glad to make his escape back
again to his mates. No more inquiries were made
after this, but both brothers were watched whenever
they came out, to see that they had not the evil thing
in their hands
However, the startling incident was gradually for-
gotten, as the gun was carefully put by, and no more
powder used, for they never knew when they might
really want it.


CHAPTER VII.
Spearing geese —Killing ducks with boomerangs—’Possum-
hunting—How to make fire —The tribe shift camp —The
Boorah —Mat and Tim’s journal.
After our boys had been with the tribe for seven
months, as near as they could guess, by means of a
notched stick on which they nicked off the days, they
began to acquire a smattering of the dialect, so that
both black and white men could understand each
other to a limited extent.
In this way the brothers made out that in four
moons many tribes would visit them.
They now went out regularly hunting with their
black friends, and in this way learnt much concern-
ing the habits of the native game ; also where to look
for edible roots, of which there were many sorts ; and
though they found that the blacks were adepts at
snaring all sorts of fowl, yet from their experience at
home, and the many lessons in knots which they had
picked up from the sailors, the brothers soon became
even more successful in their art, more especially with
regard to snaring animals. They also made strong
kangaroo nets out of a fine flax, which the natives


showed them how to prepare ; these they turned out
very rapidly, and with superior knots to those formed
by the tribe, which pleased the latter.
But if the blacks were surprised at the quickness of
the white men, the clever way in which they learnt
their habits and customs, and quite confounded at
the effects of the “ Thunderstick,” by which name
they had dubbed the gun, in their hands, still more
on their side were the brothers astonished at the
prowess displayed by the former in using their spears.
Upon one occasion there was great preparation in
the camp ; dilly bags were filled with food, large
bundles of small light sticks were brought in and
fashioned into spears, and Mat and Tim were invited
to attend an expedition over the plains, to which the
natives kept pointing, and repeating the word “ Noor-
gooral.”
The constant repetition of this word, coupled with
the preparations for the hunt, raised the curiosity of
the brothers, and they were glad to have the chance
of going; so, divesting themselves of their scanty
and now ragged clothes, which they found irksome
to them when away from the camp, they prepared to
follow the tribe.
After walking for several hours, the party came in
sight of a long chain of narrow lagoons. This was
towards evening, and geese could be seen coming in
flocks of tens and twenties, and dropping into the
pools.


“ Flight time,” whispered Mat, who felt all his
sporting instincts aroused at this sight.
The blacks no sooner saw the geese than they
dropped into the long grass, bidding the white men
do the same. Each native had a bundle of the spears
in his hand, and thus crawling through the bladey
grass, they stealthily approached the nearest pool,
when all formed a line along and directly over the
water, without having disturbed a single bird.
At a given signal, up jumped each black fellow,
and, as quick as lightning, hurled spear after spear
into the dense bodies, or flocks, of the affrighted
geese as they rose clamorous from the water.
“Why, guns couldn’t do betcer ! ” exclaimed Tim
in astonishment, seeing the water covered with dead
and dying fowl.
“ No, a lot of them hit with guns would go away
wounded,” said Mat, “ and see, each bird that’s
struck with those spears drops.”
These spears at short ranges flew like arrows from
a bow, many birds fell dead, more were struggling in
the water ; but other flocks were approaching, so
down went the blacks again, and, rising up just as
the fresh arrivals had discovered their mistake, and
before they had settled, hurled their darts as before,
until they had no spears left.
With the exception of a whispered sentence or two
between the brothers, not a sound had escaped the
lips of the hunters up to this ; but noiv, with wild


yells of triumph, they gave vent to their pent-up
feelings, plunged into the lagoons and their reedy
edges, and commenced to retrieve botn game and
spears.
The brothers were rushing in like the rest, when
they were seized and implored by the natives, by
signs, not to go into the water; however, they laugh-
ingly shook themselves free, and dived in off the
bank, bringing geese to land, and returning for more.
When the blacks saw how completely at home they
were in the water they raised joyful exclamations,
and afterwards explained that they thought the
white men had been blown ashore at the time of the
shipwreck on a piece of the vessel.
Subsequently our lads accompanied their friends
on a similar expedition, but this time the birds they
were after proved to be ducks—a large black duck,
and another sort, brown and white in colour, which
perched on trees. On this occasion the weapons
used were boomerangs. Keeping a bundle of these
under the left arm, the natives hurled them one after
another into the midst of the scared fowl, as they
rose from the water, bagging over forty birds before
darkness terminated the sport.
The remarkable tameness of all the water-fowl
struck our foresters, for unless when being actively
pursued, both geese, ducks, and smaller water-birds
would simply swim a few yards away from the
bank on the approach of a human being, and this


when the whole lake was thickly covered with
them.
By dint of long practice the white men at last
succeeded in using the boomerang effectively; the
spear came to them much more readily; but the
boomerang required far greater patience and practice
to learn than they could have conceived possible. At
length they could hurl it even to the satisfaction of
the natives.
They had been told by men on board the Young
A ustral that a black fellow could so hurl a boomerang
that it should cut off his enemy’s head, and then, after
taking a little circular flight, presumably to examine
the country, return obediently to the feet of its
master. Their tribe soon exploded this absurd fable,
for they showed them that when the weapon struck
full, there it stayed ; if it glanced off an object it
might terminate its flight anywhere ; if it met with
no resistance they had to go after it and pick it up.
But they also showed them one or two other boome-
rangs, which, owing to some unseen peculiarity in
the cutting, did come back, in this way. A group of
seven tall trees grew on the edge of a water-hole,
which was situated on a plain close to the camp. An
able-bodied black beckoned the brothers to follow
him ; then, taking his stand some thirty yards from
the trees, he selected three boomerangs. Taking a
short run, he cast one so as to shape its course to the
right of the clump of timber, the weapon whirled


gracefully upwards, higher and higher, turned com-
pletely round the topmost branches to the left, and
descended with a heavy thud to the feet of the
thrower. The second failed in its perfect flight by
striking a small twig, whilst the third was as great a
success as the first.
The worst wound a boomerang could make (our
brothers were informed) was by either of the sharp
points entering ; each end terminating in one of
these.
That which Mat and Tim had all along been most
anxious to learn was the art of making fire, and an
opportunity soon presented itself.
One of the natives, who was recognized as the chief,
and named “ Dromoora,” a man who with his jin
had always proved most staunch and friendly to the
white men, invited them one day to go ’possum-
hunting in some high ranges, a considerable distance
from the camp.
Both Mat and Tim had often hunted these animals
before, and knew how to seek them, and when found,
how to cut them out ; but they at once accepted
Dromoora’s invitation, as he was such a good fellow.
Having arrived at the range, Mat soon picked out
a tree where the recently ascending marks, cut by the
claws of the little beast through the white bark,
showed that it had gone up the preceding night,
whilst there were no tracks to denote its having come
down again. So Mat cut little steps up the tree,


sufficiently large to afford a hold for the big toe,
ascending by this means till he reached the branches,
when he found the hole, and after chopping for a
considerable time, dragged out the little animal and
knocked it on the head.
When they had collected some dozens of ’possums
amongst them, Mat explained to the jin, whose name
was “Terebare,” that he wanted to make fire, where-
upon, with a good-tempered smile, which displayed
her beautiful row of white teeth, she disappeared into
a neighbouring scrub, and brought back a bit of very
rotten dry wood, the size of an ordinary walking-stick ;
this was a branch of the black fig-tree. .She then
split it down the middle, and placed it on the ground,
flat side uppermost, holding it down with her well-
shaped little feet. Dromoora meantime had cut a
sound piece, round and straight about a foot long.
Placing this round piece straight up on end, the girl
rolled it with her hands round and round on the split
wood under her feet, pressing it with some force into
it, until after the lapse of a minute or two, she had
bored a hole nearly through the latter, then cutting a
notch on the under side of this, the fine dust fell
through on to some fine dry grass which she had
already placed there. She then resumed the rolling
motion until sparks appeared, when, picking up the
dry grass and blowing into it, it flamed up.
“ That’s a secret worth knowing,” said Mat, as he
saw the small fire kindled ; “fancy, if we’d been able


to do that when we were wrecked. I expect it isn t
as easy as it looks.” And Mat went to \\ork to make
tire himself. He slaved and he rolled until the per-
spiration ran off him, being much laughed at by
Dromoora and his wife in consequence, who told him
that he must stay there until he succeeded. After
repeated failures he at length saw his heap of grass
begin to smoke, and Tim kneeling down and blowing
into this, the flame of victory flashed up. They then
shouldered their game, and returned in good spirits to
camp.
Heavy rains setting in soon after this, Dromoora’s
tribe shifted camp to higher ground some miles
away.
There was another reason for this movement on the
part of the natives, the fact that their old district was
getting short of roots and game. Of salt-water fish
there was plenty, though some distance off.
The blacks made many more excursions to the
coast, on rare occasions accompanied by our twins,
always returning with fish and odds and ends in the
shape of nails and other portions of metal.
After one of these trips Dromoora brought his
white friends something which he had carefully
wrapped up in ’possum skin, telling them as he un-
folded the precious flotsam, that he had found it
floating near the shore, and that he thought it must
be something to do with the gun, or “ Teegoora,” as
the weapon was known in the tribe.


When the parcel was unfolded Mat saw that it was
a pencil—an immense “find,” as he could now jot
down notes, and keep a rough journal on the margin
of his books, which he had long since dried and put
carefully away.
Thus time passed on.
Once a report was brought to the brothers by
blacks of a distant tribe that a white man had been
seen again far to the west ; but upon asking whether
they could not go and find him, they were told that it
w as impossible, as not only was the distance enormous,
but there were many hostile tribes between them and
the country where the white man had been seen.
After the rains had ceased, numbers of strange
natives began to collect. These were the tribes that
Dromoora and his men had spoken about.
Some eight tribes were represented amongst these
new arrivals, and at one time our foresters counted
over 600 on the ground together.
After the usual examination of the white men, which
was rendered more bearable by Dromoora being
present, and giving orders to the blacks that they
were to treat them as warriors, the strange tribes
introduced themselves to the “ friendlies” by organ-
izing a grand “ corroboree,” which lasted two nights
o •
At its conclusion it was evident by the preparations
made that something unusual was about to take
place.
Upon inquiry it was found that they were about to


celebrate a “ Boorah,” or “ Boree,” a ceremony to make
the lads young men.
Dromoora explained that for eight months previous
to this event the lads have to go into the bush and
cater for themselves, that during that period they
must on no account see a fem'ale, and that after this
term of independence they are brought in, and cane
rings are placed round their arms, and twisted
tightly.
Upon this special occasion the brothers were pre-
vented from sleeping all night by the hideous cries
and howls of the youths, who were enduring agony
from the pressure of the rings.
When daylight at length came, they saw forty of
the victims seated on the ground, surrounded by their
mothers, sisters, and female relatives. These women
were crying and cutting themselves all over with sharp
stones, in token of joy at seeing them.
The youths they had put comfortably to sleep in
shady places, while the old jins were away in the
swamps to get roots to make them cakes.
The older men had collected the spears of the
youngsters, which they had been carrying with them
during their eight months’ absence; these they had
fixed in the earth in a semicircle, fastening grass
festoons from head to head of each spear.
In the evening the young men were placed under
the decorated spears, and their sisters and female
cousins lay with their heads on the swollen arms.


Next morning the young men were taken into the
bush, and returned decorated with shells and feathers,
generally painted up and made to look becoming,
when they set about choosing their sweethearts, and
another grand “ corroboree ” closed the proceedings.
But there was much quarrelling and fighting after
this, for these newly-fledged warriors commenced
stealing the old men’s daughters, and even their
wives ; so that the brothers on this occasion presently
found themselves amongst a lot of infuriated savages
fighting chiefly with their clubs.
However, Dromoora came to their rescue, and,
leading them into their gunyah, bid them lie quiet,
and on no account in any way to interfere with the
jins, for that they always caused these troubles ;
advice which Mat thought was quite uncalled for, as
they had long seen that whenever there was fighting
it was invariably about the women ; but he answered
the chief good-humouredly enough, remarking that
white men also were known to have trouble about
women in their own country.
However, in the present case the fierce uproar did
not last long, and no one was killed, though some
terrible blows were exchanged. The combatants had
to leave off to go and find food.
Though Mat and Tim would not be separated from
each other, they gradually joined other tribes in the
district, or rather stayed with them during hunting
expeditions ; and though both were now so far settled


that they got on well with the natives, were accom-
plished and keen hunters, and never lacked food, } ct
they often thought and conversed together concerning
their white brethren and civilization.
The time had now dragged along until they were
aware that they had been more than five years
amongst the blacks, and still they saw no chance of
release from their somewhat degrading life. One
great comfort which supported them amidst their
hardships was that they could keep up their spirits
in each other’s society—in their own language, with
their own books. Had there been only one white
man, he must have almost forgotten his own language
by this time.
During this long period of “ free captivity,” our
foresters had acquired half a dozen different dialects,
which they had picked up amongst neighbouring
tribes. They had often spoken of trying to work
their way south, but had been dissuaded by their
friends, who told them that the danger was too great,
the tribes in that direction being fierce, and that they
dare not go themselves beyond a certain limit. At
the same time it was judged by our boys that their
friends wished them to stay, and possibly exaggerated
these dangers.
Though at first they “ got out ” very much in their
dates, the brothers kept a journal as regularly as
circumstances permitted, putting down everything of
interest in their own lives, but more especially enter-


mg into a description of the manners and customs of
the natives.
Tim cont'ributeS- also by giving specimens of the
language with their equivalents in English ; also he
mentioned with accuracy the edible plants, describing
the places where they should be looked for, and their
native names, as “ Kaourou,” a blue water-lily, of
which the natives eat seeds and roots. “ Kadolo,”
good root, something like a carrot, grows in every
valley, plain, or creek bank, has three narrow, long,
sharp-pointed leaves. He also mentioned the native
yam, the wild banana, and a sort of tobacco. Many
of these fruits and roots Mat guessed the English
names of from pictures which he recollected.
There was not much order in their journal, as both
brothers simply jotted down events and descriptions
independently of each other. For instance, Mat
wrote on the fly-leaf of the largest volume :
*■
This book we hope to carry with us into civiliza-
tion ; but if God wills that we both die here, it may
be found some day amongst our black brethren, who
look upon our books as a sort of white man’s spirit,
and they promise always to take care of them. Tim
and I are now as naked as when we landed from the
wreck of the Voting Austral, our clothes having
rotted long ago ; but our bodies are sun and weather-
proof. Tim gets a touch of rheumatism now and
again, but otherwise we are very well, though rather
thin. We don’t know what ’tis to be tired ; when


we’re caught by darkness far from camp we just lie
down where we are with our dog, and sleep as soundly
as ever we did at home. We know two sorts of trees
that always hold good drinking-water ; Tim is going
to describe them, he says, so we hope never to die
of thirst. Food we can get as easily as the natives
can.”
Mat then went on to describe the blacks in the
same somewhat unconnected manner :
“These natives amongst whom we are living are
called the ‘ Waigonda ; ’ they are not really black,
but more the colour of an old penny. When a child
is born ’tis a sort of dirty white ; but the jins squeeze
their milk over it, when about three days’ old, and
rub charcoal into its skin. Many of the natives are
treacherous and cunning : they have broad, flat
noses, sunken, black eyes, and terrible great mouths.
“ Sometimes twins are born, and we’ve known the
father kill one of them to save the trouble of bringing
o o
up two.
“ They are awful lazy, the men have —some of them
leastways—eight or nine wives, who do most all the
work for him, and often supply him with food for
days together.
“ I’ve known a man sell a wife for a new kangaroo
net; or letid one for some article they want. They
eat everything that creeps on the earth ; snakes they
are very fond of, particularly one that’s not poisonous,
called “ manoo.” Alany of the fruits look like English


ones, but they’re just about nasty, and ■ rrfp'sdly all
stone. One fruit looks like a bio; orange, but it will
O O '
just turn your throat inside out if you try to suck it,
but the blacks pound and soak it, and then bake it,
and it makes good flour. There’s a little fig the size
of a cherry that’s really good.
“ The blacks use the juice of different sorts of bark
for making fish stupid, so that they float belly up-
wards and can be caught. Fish-hooks they cut out
of fresh-water turtle shells. Sometimes they eat
human flesh, but only a friend killed in battle or by
accident, never their enemies. The bodies of these
they cut into strips, dry, and divide the pieces
amongst the tribe ; then they think that the strength
of the dead man is added to their own. They
sometimes get killed by crocodiles and snakes.
They have no remedy for snake-bites ; if they get
bitten by a poisonous one, they just lie down and
die, and the whole tribe howls for hours. They
cannot in any way write their language, but can send
messages by notched sticks, which are understood.
They can’t count above five ; more than that they
show by their fingers.
“ They speak very thick in the throat, but the young
women speak nice and soft. They measure time by
wet and dry seasons, and by moons. They fear
some sort of spirit, and don’t like to move about at
night.
“ There’s a great mountain near us ; Tim and I have


often hunted on it. The blacks tell us that their
forefathers once saw a great flood, which drowned all
the tribes, but that they got away in time and ran
up this mountain, and built a big canoe and escaped.
Tim and I judge from this that their forefather’s
name was Noah, as mentioned in our Bible, which
was saved. These natives cut their bodies into all
sorts of queer patterns, and make the wounds heal
with the lips open. They haven’t much hair on their
faces, as a rule ; I’ve only once or twice seen good
whiskers or beards. They cut the hair on their
heads when they are boys with tomahawks. Tim
and I have long beards.
“In their language a canoe or any ship is ‘ wool-
goora ; ’ water, ' doongalla.’
“ They believe that the moon is a human being like
themselves ; that one tribe throws it up, and it rises,
and then comes down again, when another tribe
catches it to prevent its hurting itself. Falling stars
mean danger or something extraordinary, in the
direction in which they fall. They declare that some
fell over the sea just before Tim and I landed ; we
didn’t see them, however. An eclipse frightens them
terribly, and they cower down and mumble grass till
it is over.”
Much more to the same effect wrote Mat, and to
his jottings copious notes were added by Tim. These
dilapidated books, the margins of which were covered
with their pencilled notes, they preserved with the


most jealous care ; noting also the seasons as they
passed, and the hot Christmas time.
Nothing very eventful had, so far, happened to
them; the same routine of hunting and fishing every
day, varied by an occasional tramp to the beach,
partly to collect crabs and shell-fish, but more par-
ticularly to look out for any passing vessel ; and
though more than one was seen during these years,
they always proved to be far beyond any signalizing
by smoke.
And what was Jumper doing all this time ? Though
beyond the middle age of dog life, he was as fleet
and strong as ever; the only ailment he suffered
from was a slight deafness, which first became ap-
parent after his long swim from the wreck. He had
long got over his dislike to the natives, though sus-
picious of any belonging to other tribes. He proved
of great use in running down wounded kangaroos
and wallaby, but more especially did he distinguish
himself when the great nets were set and the hunters
drove the game into them ; then the dog was in his
glory, helping, as he had before done at home when
cattle had to be driven in a certain direction. He
was a great favourite with the Waigonda tribe, and
the dingoes, or half-wild dogs, belonging to the camp,
treated him with the greatest respect.


CHAPTER VIII.
G old —Hostile natives —Flight by night—The great battle—
Clubs— Fists—New Fprest wrestling—“ Old Joe.”
THOUGH our foresters were looked upon and treated
as brothers by the Waigonda tribe, signs were not
wanting to show that some of the neighbouring
blacks, who had been present at the Boorah, were
envious of their position, and of the goods which
they possessed, and an incident happened before
long to prove this in an unpleasant way.
The brothers had gone on a distant hunting ex-
pedition by themselves ; they eventually reached a
country of dry gullies which they knew of old. Rest-
ing after their long march, Tim happened to sciape
in the sand for water under the roots of a tree, when
he suddenly called to his brother with a startled
exclamation.
“ What’s up ? ” answered Mat, running up, thinking
he had been bitten by a snake.
“ Look here, if this ain’t gold, I never saw a
sovereign ! ” cried Tim, as he displayed a water-worn
piece of the precious metal.


Mat could hardly believe his eyes, and whilst yet
examining the nugget, Tim brought forth another
from under the bank of the dried-up watercourse in
which he was standing-.
o
Both brothers now fell to with pointed stakes to
dig in the sand, and, before another hour had passed,
had unearthed several nuggets of various sizes.
At length this “ pocket ” of treasure ceased, and
their digging-sticks came on to hard rock, which, at
length, laying bare and following up the creek, they
discovered was milky white, with distinct veins of
gold running through it.
Why, the gully is full of gold! our fortune’s
made!” panted Tim, as he sat down to rest, and
surveyed the beautiful rock beneath him.
“ So it might be if we were away from here, Tim ;
as it is, it s not so much use to us as if ’twas a lot of
lead; all the same, we’ll take the bearings of the
gully, and as it s late, and we ve lost the best of the
day digging, we 11 camp to-night with the Tinguras,
they seemed friendly enough with the Waigondas,
though Dromoora says they’re thieves.”
The brothers marked the trees slightly, took up
their spoils, and moved away from the “golden
valley,” as they christened the spot, and by sundown
were at the camp in question, which they intended
to make their headquarters for a few days.
Upon arriving they showed the blacks one of the
nuggets they had found, but these merely remarked


that such “stones” had often been found bv them,
and that they were of no use.
It struck them that this tribe did not receive
them very cordially upon this occasion, for they
made uncalled-for remarks, said there was no food
in the camp for strangers, never showed them where
they might sleep, and behaved generally in a rough
and uncouth manner.
However, this behaviour did not trouble our lads,
they merely took the precaution to load their gun
that night ; this weapon, together with ammunition,
being their constant companion, when away from
home.
Next evening the brothers were engaged a few
yards from their sleeping-quarters, when a black
fellow took the opportunity to steal up, with the
intention of taking the gun, which was lying under
their ’possum rug, not having the respect for that
weapon which the \\ aigondas had, but coveting it
on account of the beautiful engravings upon the
locks. Jumper had always considered the weapon
as under his especial charge, and no sooner had the
black stretched out his arm to take it than his wrist
was seized in the dog’s powerful grip.
Howling and yelling, the native tried to shake off
the dog, but Jumper, who owed more than one
grudge for insults put upon him by black skins, took
this opportunity to make his teeth meet in the bony
wrist, nor would he let go, until another black fellow,


coming to the rescue, hit him a violent blow on the
head with his club.
Mat and Tim hurrying up at the uproar which
ensued, found their faithful dog lying half stunned
and bleeding on the ground, whilst the blacks were
"jabbering ” together in angry knots about the camp,
casting fierce glances towards them, and handling
their weapons in a menacing manner.
Befoie he appeared in view Mat distinctly caught
the words, “ Kill all three.”
L pon seeing tnat the white men were calmly
sitting down with their gun, the natives, who had
heaid some rumours of the death-dealing powers of
the Teegoora,’ appeared to quiet down, and retired
in a body, discussing matters in an undertone.
But the brothers had lived long enough amongst
these tribes to know them and their ways, and
turning to his brother, Mat said, in a quiet tone,
“ They mean murder to-night.”
“ I was thinking the same thing,” was Tim’s reply,
as he attended to the dog’s wound. “ We’ll clear out.”
So directly it was dark enough to slip away un-
observed, the brothers, carrying gun and Jumper,
glided silently out of the camp, and, taking a “ bee
line for the \\ aigonda country, never paused from
a long, slinging trot, until they drew up at midnight
at a waterhole.
It s something to know how to work yer way in
the dark, said Mat, as he put down the dog.


The fact was that the brothers were as good
bushmcn as the blacks, and in one respect even
better, in that they were accustomed to travel at
night whenever there was any reason to do so,
whereas the blacks had a great horror of moving
after dark.
Mat and Tim had hit off the very pool of water
which they had intended to, and now meant to take
a rest, eat something, and bathe the dog s head.
They felt, now that they were so far safe, that a
whole night’s start would enable them to reach the
country of their friends before the Tinguras could
overtake them.
The rest refreshed them all, more especially Jumper,
The brothers had carried him, up to this point, by
turns, but when they started again they found that he
could follow fast enough to keep up with them.
Thus the little party of fugitives continued through
the night, going at a more leisurely pace during the
greater part of the next day, and towards evening had
gained the new camp which their W aigonda friends
had formed.
No sooner were the brothers in sight than their
friends turned out with shouts of joy to receive them ,
but upon hearing the reason of their sudden appear-
ance—for they had not expected them for some days
] a ter —they looked grave, and without more ado
hastily summoned a council of war, for they told Mat
that the black which had been bitten by J umper was


the chief of the tribe, a revengeful brute, who would
be sure to come, with all his fighting-men, after them,
and that, so far, it was lucky they had got into camp
when they did.
“And they will come,” said Dromoora, after he had
commanded silence. “We must fight, and we shall
be glad to fight them ; but you white men must kill
" ith the ‘ thunder-stick,’ for they number two to our
_ „ _ ))
one.
So the brothers consulted together, and resolved to
do as the chief had requested, and use the gun, but
only at the last moment, their intention being to
fight the enemy fairly with their own wooden weapons,
in the use of which they were proficient. But they
resolved that if they saw that the W aigondas were
driven back, and that the day was almost lost, then
and only then , at the chief’s command, would they
show the power of “ Teegoora.”
So they informed the chief and his warriors of their
decision, adding that the “ thunder-stick ” was already
prepared to strike and kill.
At this news the blacks expressed their deep sense
of gratitude with many guttural exclamations, and
hoped, they said, that the white men would “ thunder ”
all the enemy dead, for that this tribe had often
molested them, and had even stolen their women.
Mat replied to these remarks by requesting his
friends to give him all the lead which they had kept
after stripping it from the wreck. This they joyfully


agreed to do ; and the brothers went away to cut up
slugs, and see that “ Old Joe.” was prepared to back
them up at a critical moment.
Whilst thus employed, Dromoora informed them
that he and his wife would have the honour of deco-
rating them for the battle.
o . • 11
Scouts had already been sent out to bring in all
stragglers, whilst the men and women in camp were
busily engaged in trimming up spears and other
weapons, and preparing food and filling many gourds
with water.
The brothers soon cut up a goodly heap of slugs,
divided their one canister of powder into exact loads,
and freshly chipped the flints of “ Old Joe.” They
had now reason to congratulate themselves that thej
had never wasted this powder, and that, besides that,
they could rely upon its strength, having often tested
its fitness.
By nightfall all preparations were completed to
give the enemy a warm reception.
Nome of the scouts had reported the appearance of
any of them yet; and as three sentries were to be on
the alert all night, Dromoora said that they might
sleep in camp tranquilly, for that no attack would
take place before early dawn.
Besides carefully arming themselves, Mat and Tim
had, with the help of the natives, prepared a cunningly-
devised trap, in the shape of concealed kangaroo-nets,
the use of which we shall see further on.


In one lespect Mats nature was a peculiar one, or,
as he thought, peculiar to and this was*
that he would shake like a leaf when waiting for a
foe. It had always been the same. Once, when a
boy. a burly lad had tripped him up purposely on the
ice. Mat walked to the bank of the pond, took off
his coat, and told the bully to “come on.” But the
bigger boy had walked away, having forgotten the
cii cumstance. Mat still remained, sending a mes-
senger to say he was ready. When this was known,
a crowd of his companions collected around to see the
fun. The other lad was a long time coming, and it
vas noticed, to the astonishment of all, that, during
the whole time of this “waiting,” Mat was trembling
in every limb. But the village lads better understood
their mate when, a few minutes later, after half a
dozen rounds, they saw his antagonist lying, stunned
and bleeding, on the ice, having been knocked clean
off the bank by one of Mat’s terrific “facers.”
So it was on this eventful night before the great
battle. Mat said to his brother, “ It’s no good, I can’t
sleep; feel just as I did before the bloodhound came
at me.” And in fact he passed most of the night
pacing, with short, quick steps, amongst the fires.
The sun had scarcely risen next morning when two
of the scouts came rushing into camp to say that the
nostile tribe was coming in full war-paint, singing
their war-chant, and that they might be expected by
the time that the sun was high in the heavens ; further,


that there were no women with them, and only a
couple of lads accompanied the warriors.
Dromoora, on hearing this, ordered all the women
and children to disappear and hide in the scrub, and
at the same time asked cur foresters to accompany
them, “ for,” said he, “ if you are killed, we cannot use
the ‘thunder-stick,’ as you only know its secret;
besides, they will all try to kill you first.
Then up spoke Mat, —
“We will not obey you in this, Dromoora ; I and
my brother will be in the front rank fighting the
enemy, with wooden weapons; if we are all diiven
in, we will retreat to the gun, and when you give the
order, but not before, we will make it speak. If we
are both killed, which is not very likely, you will save
the thunder-stick, and our books, and fly with them
to the white man.”
This speech was received with grunts of satisfaction,
and the chief answered in the name of the rest.
“So be it. We have taught you how to use our
own weapons ; you are brave men ; when I call the
word ‘ Teegoora,’ but not before, give forth the death-
dealing noise, it will end the fight.”
Terebare and other of the women, before retiring
to their hiding-places, proceeded tc decorate the
white men, under the eyes of the chief. W hen this
was completed, Tim very truthfully remarked,
“That their own mother would never know them.”
In truth our foresters, both men of splendid


physique, presented a noble, and at the same time
somewhat strange appearance.
At this period they were only a shade lighter in
colour than their black brethren ; their hair had been
cut moderately close to their heads, by means of
tomahawks, and now it was adorned with heavy
plumes of the black and scarlet feathers of the parrot;
beards black, and reaching down over their chests j
bodies painted with white, yellow, and red ochre, in
all sorts of grotesque patterns ; their appearance was
calculated to inspire awe even amongst the natives
themselves ; whilst, to complete their terrible appear-
ance, Terebare insisted on tying to the forehead of'
each one of the damaged old books saved from the
wreck, in such a manner that at each movement the
leaves opened and shut.
The natives gathered round the brothers when their
toilet was completed, and could not forbear a shout,
and even a short corroboree for the occasion.
This, however, only lasted a few seconds, for the
enemy were now reported as being near, and every
warrior at once got into position.
But long before the hostile band appeared one of
their youths, as forerunner, hailed a Waigonda scout,
and signified that he wished to speak.
Dromoora sent a young man to ask him what he
wanted, and this was the answer brought back,
“We, the tribe of Tingura, have come openly, not
creeping in upon you, and we intend to kill you all if


you do not give up the white men, their dog, and the
white men’s stick.”
“ Tell the messenger,” bellowed the enraged Wai-
eonda chief, as soon as he could get over this
o '
audacious threat, “ that neither white men nor stick
will be given up—that the Tingura may prepare to
lay their bones here; that we shall take all their
women, and that we have long wished to see how
the cowardly, thieving dingoes will fight”
When Dromoora’s message was conveyed to the
enemy, who were now quite close, tremendous yells,
minsrled with derisive cries could be heard, accom-
panied by the thunder of rushing feet, and the next
moment, as it seemed, a whole flight of boomerangs
entered the camp.
These were dodged or warded off by the yelamans
(or shields), and Dromoora and his warriors rushed
forth to meet the foe, and with clubs and spears the
battle commenced in earnest.
For the first few minutes Mat and Tim had their
attention entirely engaged in warding off or dodging
the numerous blows aimed at them, and whilst so
en cr ag , ed had not received a scratch, though more
c* o
than one assailant had felt the power of their arms.
At the very first onset, by sheer weight of numbers,
the friendlies were driven temporarily back a few
steps, when Mat, who towered above most of his as-
sailants, caught sight of a stoutly-built black fellow,
wearing an enormous head-dress of emu feathers,
o


fighting his way through friends and foes to get at
him. At the same moment he recognized Tim’s voice,
roaring out in English above the awful din, —
“ Look out ! the devil who the dog bit.”
And he it was, sure enough, with his wrist bound
up with some animal’s skin, and with fury gleaming
out of his deep-set eyes.
The man got close enough to Mat to hurl two
heavy spears at him ; but our forester was now in his
element. Never taking his steady eye off that of his
adversary, he received the first spear on his shield,
and the second, which followed instantaneously, he
escaped by springing high into the air.
Recognizing the fact that two great braves had met
to fight to the death, friends and foes in the immediate
vicinity suspended their struggles for the moment, to
watch the combatants.
After, as we have seen, escaping the spears, Mat
rushed upon his opponent before he could raise his
club, and, profiting by a lesson which he had learnt
at home, namely, the use of his fists, he dropped his
shield, and at the same moment feinted with his left.
These tactics, evidently new to the black fellow, some-
what disconcerted him, and for one instant he was
irresolute ; that moment proved fatal to him, for Mat
brought down his club with terrific force on the mass
of plumes.
Down went the Tingura chief half stunned, but the
thick, stiff feathers of the emu had deadened the


force of the blow, and he was up and on his feet
again, club in hand, but before he could raise the
weapon Mat repeated the blow behind his ear, driving
in his skull.
On seeing the chief fall to rise no more, the friend-
lies gave a loud shout, whilst the enemy yelled with
rage, and the fight waxed fiercer than ever.
Mat was well aware that there was a concerted
effort to kill him at any price. Yet for the moment,
having seen the power of his arm, and never having
thought that the white men could fight them with
their own weapons, the enemy held aloof, until, amidst
loud Tingura cries, another warrior advanced upon
him. At the same moment, in an effort to defend
himself from a side blow, Mat’s club was dashed from
him.
Our forester was now unarmed, but to the astonish-
ment of his enemies and admiration of his friends,
this fact seemed not to discourage him in the very
least.
Striking out right and left with his fists, he felled a
couple of his immediate opponents, with a bound was
over their prostrate forms, and had this fresh warrior
in his grasp, when, wrenching his club from him as he
seized him, but disdaining to use it, he threw it high
overhead to where he judged his Waigonda friends
would be.
It now became a question of brute force between
the white man and the black, the advantage being


slightly on the side of Mat as a wrestler. Had the
o J
native been brought up in the same school as our
forester, the issue would have been doubtful as to
which would have come off the victor ; for two finer
proportioned men it would have been difficult to find.
Although the battle was raging before and behind
them, again were the two combatants left to them-
selves for the time being. Mat had seized his man
by the wrist in disarming him, but at once found that
the black could twist this wrist round and round like
an eel, no matter how firmly he grasped it; the thin
muscular arm was too slippery to hold still. So,
changing his tactics as the fellow “ screwed ” away
from him, Mat let go suddenly, got a partial grip
round his loins, and for a brief moment held him as
in a vice ; but a sudden wrench, and again Mat’s
hands partially slipped. Owing to this final exertion
the Tingura fell, dragging Mat with him. There
they rolled together in the thick dust, locked in a
deadly embrace ; but the black, not relishing this
kind of fighting, by a violent effort was on his legs
again, yet still in the partial embrace of our forester.
Thus for an instant stood the two gladiators, with
quivering limbs, their muscles standing out like cords
ready to burst, when Mat got a full grip, this time
round the loins of the Tingura, and with one tre-
mendous heave, aided by his knee, threw him com-
pletely over his shoulder, and left him, stunned and
bleeding, a good three yards behind him.






The chief cause of Mat being at length able to
give his man this deadly fall was the fact that when
they rolled together on the ground he was enabled to
secure a handful of grit, and thus secure a firm grip
of the black’s skin. He had never before attempted
to hold a black fellow, and he now realized that when
he tried to, there was a natural sort of grease in the
native skin which prevented him. He had thus,
during the struggle, been watching for an opportunity
to grab some sand ; an effort which we have seen he
succeeded in.
Our forester was now pretty well exhausted, and
had it not been that theWagonda formed round him,
and covered his retreat towards the “ thunder-stick,”
he must have been either struck down or made
prisoner.
Tim, meantime, with Dromoora and the rest of the
tribe, had been bravely fightingagainst overwhelming
odds. They were being driven slowly but surely
back to the point at which they had previously deter-
mined to make their final stand, but it looked as
though they could not be forced to reach it, so stub-
born was their defence. Thinking by means of a
bold dash to finish the battle, the Tingura made a
rush, and Tim found himself separated from his
tribe.
One assailant, who rushed at him with a “ waddy,”
he knocked down with his right fist, receiving the
intended blow from the club on his shield. Whilst


still staggering from the shock of this, another native
hit him a crashing blow on the ribs, which knocked
Tim down. The black was in the act of raising his
club again to give him a finishing blow on the head*
when a yellow form seemed to spring out of the long
grass, hurl itself on to the native’s back, and by sheer
weight bear him to the earth, and there fix its teeth
firmly in his throat. Mat, having been a witness of
this act, rushed to the spot, and shouting, “ Cheer up,
Tim, I’ll put this brute out of his misery,” finished
the Tingura by a blow on the head, which, seeing
that Jumper had torn the savage’s throat open, was
the most humane act to perform.
But though fortune had so far befriended the
brothers, yet she had not altogether acted in like
manner with Dromoora and the rest of his tribe.
The Tinguras were so enraged at the unexpected
opposition, that with a savage yell the only surviving
chief gathered his men round him, and determined to
annihilate the Waigondas by their still overpowering
numbers.
They had succeeded in driving Dromoora and all
his fighting-men into the timber, where “ throwing
weapons ” were of no avail, so that each side relied
on their clubs only.
Many fell at this spot, both friends and foes. Blows
were given and received which would have rendered
any white man hors de combat; not so these wild
men. During this last struggle Mat saw more than


one knocked down apparently dead, and the next
instant this man would be on his legs again, fighting
more fiercely than ever.
The yells and shrieks were positively appalling.
Mat and his brother, who was on his legs again, had
never heard or read of anything to resemble this last
effort for victory.
The blacks, both friends and foes, seemed literally
to increase in stature as they sprang from side to side
to avoid each other's blows, whilst the countenances
of the combatants were positively fiendish.
At this period of the battle it was evident that the
Tingura were doing their utmost to kill Dromoora,
and in their efforts to accomplish this did not now
attack the brothers to the extent that these latter had
anticipated.
But numbers told; many of the Waigondas had
ropped in that clump of timber, never to rise a^ain
whilst a devoted band rallied round their beloved
chief.
The brothers were in an agony of doubt, and Mat
had more than once said, “ I'll shoot 1” as he handled
tie gun, which he had snatched from its hiding-place •
but Tim had begged him to wait for Dromoora’s
command.
At last Mat said, “ I’ll wait no longer ! ”
As he uttered these words, two blacks, one of whom
was the last survivor of the Tingura chiefs, sneaked
suddenly round a large tree, behind the group of
I 2


Waigonda warriors, and, with a fierce war-whoop,
threw themselves on Dromoora, who, wounded as he
already had been in the earlier part of the battle, was
no match for this sudden onslaught.
One black had already knocked him against the
tree by a blow, which was luckily partly fended off
by the shield of the chief; the other was in the act
of striking him with a heavy wooden sword, when
Dromoora, holding his hands high over his head,
shouted, —
“ Teegoora !!! ”
Mat had seen the signal coming, and, thundering
out a loud British “ Hurrah ! ” to call off the attention
of the attacking party, in one bound he was up to
the combatants, and, holding “ old Joe ” out at arm’s
length, he simply blew off the head of one of his
chiefs assailants, and with the remaining barrel scat-
tered the entrails of the other, as he stooped from
the shock of the explosion. This happened in the
very nick of time, for Dromoora at the same instant
fainted from wounds and exhaustion, thus making it
appear to all excepting the brothers that all three
men had been shot.
« Quick ! ” sang out Mat, as soon as he had fired ;
u quick, powder and lead !
But there was no need for such haste to load.
With the reports of the gun the weapons of the
attacking party fell from their hands, and, without
looking for a way, they fled in a frenzy of terror.


Our foresters had calculated on this final panic,
had foretold it to their friends, and had laid their
plans accordingly.
At the signal of the double report up jumped a
number of youths from the grass, and, aided by the
jins, “rounded up” and drove the greater part of
their bewildered enemies in a body towards a pre-
viously prepared cutting in the scrub, whilst Mat on
one side and Tim and Jumper on the other, kept
them from breaking away.
When Mat saw the fugitives fairly entering the
cleared path, he gave a loud war-whoop, and fired a
dose of slugs at their retreating forms, which, owing
to the distance, did not wound them ; but it had the
desired effect ; for, never looking for any impediment
that might be in their path, the Tinguras fell one
over the other into two rows of kangaroo nets, which
had been set there to entrap them.
Leaving the Waigondas, who had passed him in
pursuit, to deal with the prisoners, Mat and Tim
returned to Dromoora.


CHAPTER IX.
After the battle Burial rites—The Waigonda wish to make
chiefs of the white men—Our “twins” leave with Dro-
moora and Terebare for the south.
When the brothers returned to Dromoora they found
that chief lying on the ground, surrounded by Tere-
bare and her maidens, who had not joined in the
pursuit.
These were weeping and wailing, supposing him
to be dead ; but Tim brought a gourd of water and
poured it over his face and head. This act aroused
Terebare, and she quickly procured some young
shoots of the rough-leaved fig, then making poultices
of the milky juice, applied them to her lord’s wounds.
“ I knew he warn’t dead,” said Tim ; as, after the
lapse of a few minutes, the wounded man commenced
to breathe heavily. “ But I expect they’d ’av gone
on howling till he zvas, unless we’d flung the water
over ’im.”
The brothers then helped to place the chief in a ~
little arbour of boughs, which was erected for him,
and left him there in the hands of his wife.
The whole of that night were the Waigonda


lamenting their dead, the howls of the jins being
specially erie and dismal.
It was noticed with surprise by the brothers that,
notwithstanding the length of time that the fight had
lasted, and the numerous crushing blows given, they
could not find more than a score bodies on the battle-
field ; but it was explained to them that many of the
Tinguras, stricken down apparently to death, had so
far recovered that they had crawled away, most pro-
bably to die later on ; and, besides this, that many
more of the enemy had been clubbed to death by the
Waigondas, when caught in the nets.
Next day the natives proceeded to burn their own
dead, reserving the body of a youth for a feast. After
the bodies were burnt, the ashes were tied up in pieces
of bark and put carefully away; whilst portions of
the defunct Tinguras were divided into thin strips
and portioned out amongst the tribe, Mat and lim
each receiving a share of the two blacks who had
fallen to their gun.
As they were supposed to receive these relics with
great pride and solemnity, they wrapt them up
with extreme care and gravity in the presence of the
black, and, as carefully, a few days afterwards, left
them within reach of the dingoes or wild dogs.
This is how it happened that Jumper appeared so
opportunely on the scene of battle.
Before the fight commenced he had been tied up,
but fancying, no doubt, that his masters were in


distress during the uproar which ensued, he had bitten
through the cord, or rather vine, which held him, had
made his way to Tim, whose voice he heard, and had
fastened on the very black who had struck him a day
or two previously, when guarding his master’s gun.
The nati\e whom I\lat had thrown so heavily was
found moaning near a water-hole, to which he had
dragged himself, his spine being injured.
As soon as he was discovered, he was brought up
by the Waigondas to be butchered by Mat, as they
said that they had reserved that honour for him ; but
on being told that white men were not such cowards
as to kill a helpless prisoner, one of the natives jumped
up and said that he would willingly club him then and
there.
The brothers insisted that the life of the prisoner
should be spared, but it was not until Mat threatened
them with the gun if they attempted to carry out
their threat, that they agreed to spare the life of their
enemy for the present.
Shortly afterwards he was brought up before a
council of the elders, who told him that he was not to
be killed because the white men so wished it, that that
being the case he should be cared for until he re-
covered, when he was to go back to the remnant of
his tribe, and to tell them and certain other tribes
that the first time they molested man, woman, or child
of the Waigondas, the white men would at once come
and crush the whole lot by thunder.


The effect of this speech was to cause the prisoner
to tremble violently, for when lying helpless in the
grass he had been a witness of the death of Dro-
moora’s assailants, and, as he acknowledged, had
nearly then and there died of fright at the reports of
the weapon, and the result of the discharges.
Our foresters tended the man carefully, as the Wai-
gondas would have nothing to say to him, yet the
Tingura man never showed the slightest sign of
gratitude for this conduct, but scowled, at Mat more
especially, to the last, and at length departed, cured,
but with a look of hatred in his eyes.
As soon as he was sufficiently recovered, Dromoora
sent for the brothers, having heard that they wished
to get rid of their war-paint. When they appeared
before him, he thus addressed them, —
“Two such brave men, who have saved our tribe,
must be made chiefs, and for this ceremony join in a
‘ Corroboree ’ of triumph as well.”
Mat and his brother, who hated this everlasting
foolery, as they termed a “ Corroboree, 5 ’ begged to
be excused from taking part in it, on account of their
bodies being so bruised and stiff from the effects of
the late strife, and for the same reason requested that
the ceremony of making them chiefs might be
deferred.
The chief said there was reason in their request,
and continued, —
“ If it had not been for you, oh ! brave brothers,


Dromoora and his tribe would have been swept away,
I will give you all I have, anything you want, if you
will give me the ‘ stick ’ and tell me its secret.”
When- ’Dromoora had sent for the brothers, they
had partly suspected that the conversation would take
this turn, and had therefore agreed upon their anwer.
1 So Mat replied,—
* “You, oh, noble chief, and your brave tribe, have
saved our lives from the beginning, ever since we
landed on your coast. We were able to fight and kill
in this battle because we knew things that the Tin-
gura did not, and because we possessed the Teegora
‘ stick.’ We have also a favour to ask. You shall have
a ‘ thunder-stick,’ and be taught the secret; you shall
have iron tomahawks, and many other beautiful things,
if you will take us to where we can meet the white
man.”
“That cannot be,” answered Dromoora, “the
strange white men might kill me.”
“ Then ,” eagerly broke in Mat, “let your tribe keep
me as prisoner, till you return safely—take only
my brother with you.”
This idea seemed to strike the chief, and saying he
would talk it over with the elders, the conversation
terminated.
“ That’s very pretty of you saying you’d stay while
I went,” said Tim, as the brothers walked towards
their hut, “but I don’t stir without you, not a step.”
After some farther discussing the pros and cons of


the matter, our foresters received a summons to attend
the ciders.
They found the whole of their friends seated upon
the ground, awaiting them.
Upon their making their appearance, the chief at
once proceeded to cross-examine the brothers as to
their wishes, telling them that he utterly declined
to have anything to do with their going west, as
the tribes in that direction were very hostile and
treacherous.
Mat answered this by saying that they had long
wished to go to the south, as they were convinced that
there were white men there, many moons distant.
The chief said that he would go nowhere were it
not for the fact that the brothers held the power of
life and death in their hands ; would they kill a white
man if he attempted to murder him, Dromoora ?
To this question the brothers answered together,—
“ Without the slightest hesitation.”
After much desultory talk it was agreed that both
brothers might go with the chief, who should also be
accompanied by his wife, if they promised to bring the
two natives back again unharmed, under care of white
men armed with “ thunder-sticks and, further, that
all the tribe should receive presents, which Dromoora
would choose, and that no member of the tribe would
be harmed.
To these terms Mat joyfully agreed, with the pro-
viso that amongst the presents there should be only


one Teegora “stick,” and that for the chief, and that
to him alone would they impart the secret.
Our foresters were so overjoyed at this decision
that they wished to start off at once; but Dromoora
said he should not be ready for ten days’ time, hold-
ing up the fingers of both hands to express the
number ; so they were forced to curb their impatience,
occupying themselves during the now long days
in looking through the small stock of belongings
which they had managed to keep all these long
years, and throwing away such as would no longer
be necessary.
At length the eventful day arrived, and gathering
up their weapons of wood, “old Joe,” the nuggets,
and the remains of their library, the white men started
with Jumper and the two natives; without much
leave-taking between the travellers and the rest of
the tribe, excepting that they shouted messages to
each other until out of hearing.
The little band commenced working their route
by the sun and coast-line by day, and the stars by
night, when they happened to travel late.
They avoided the neighbourhood of all tribes by
the way, and journeyed but slowly, Tim and the
chief having scarcely recovered the effects of their
wounds, so that at first they did not cover much
ground, for having Jumper to guard them, they were
enabled to sleep every night far later than they
would otherwise have done, and the sun was often


hicrh in the heavens before they resumed their
o
march next morning.
During the daytime they were also much detained
by having to procure food, but in spite of all hin-
drances to a quick progress, the spirits of our foresters
were buoyed by the glorious hope of once again
joining their own kind, and hearing something of
that outside world which had been a blank to them
for many weary years.
Every description of country they passed over that
it was possible to conceive.
Large undulating prairies covered with rich grass
and interspersed with running streams, across miles
of dry and stony ranges, now cutting their way
through dense and seemingly endless scrubs, where
the heat was like a furnace, then out again across
a complete network of great sandy beds of rivers,
which in flood-time were roaring torrents, as denoted
by the drift-wood hanging thirty and forty feet high
in the trees on both banks.
At length they came to a river which was so
different to any they had yet seen that, though it
was mid-day when they arrived on its banks, they
determined to “ spell ” there a few days and explore
the neighbourhood.
This river was running with a blue and sparkling
stream, numerous islets peeped up amongst its water-
falls and cascades, its banks were clothed with dense
and lofty palm-tree scrubs.


Wondering how it was that this special strip of
country should be blessed with a large running river
when all the others were dry, or nearly so, our
travellers started to explore its source.
They fond, after many miles of walking-
o C) f
that it was fed by many springs which issued from
the foot of a good-sized mountain amongst some
Basaltic rocks. Judging from experience in other
places, the chief said that these springs would never
fail, probably never had done so.
Our party caught plenty of fish in this river,
amongst which were many large eels, and a specially
good eating fish which resembled a great silvery
perch, with an eye the colour of a ruby.
The country on the banks of this river consisted
of rich black soil, covered with wild bananas and
other tropical growth, and carpeted with a wealth of
wild flowers. Besides all this there were numerous
signs of game. Traces of small fires both up and
down the valley showed that it was a favourite
hunting-ground of the natives.
But this paradise of a country had two drawbacks,
one of which was that the river swarmed with croco-
diles, and the scrubs were full of stinging trees.
This gigantic nettle was well known to our party,
and therefore they never came into contact with it,
but its pungent smell and handsome blossom seemed
to pervade every scrub ; and as Jumper had a
narrow escape from the jaws of a crocodile, the


travellers found themselves rather disappointed with
the district on the third day of their sojourn, and so
decided to continue their journey southwards.
Three months had they thus crawled through the
bush, when one day, trudging along through a sandy
scrub, they descried two natives digging yams on the
plain beyond.
“You hide here whilst I go and talk to them,”
said Dromoora, and the next moment he and Tere-
bare were off to interview the strangers.
They were away an unusually long time, and re-
turned at length bearing an emu, which the chief had
stalked and speared.
Throwing down the bird, he informed his com-
panions that the two strange natives belonged to a
tribe lying far to the west, and that, as far as he
could understand their language, he understood them
to say, that white men were camped a day’s journey
to the west, men who use thunder, and killed ducks
with it.
“ Then exclaimed Mat, “ let us first have a
feast of emu, and then be off west also, as soon as
possible.”
However, by the time they had finished their
repast, the day had worn to its close; and Tim
feeling twinges of rheumatism again, the little party
decided to camp where they were.
When they looked out next day, they saw several
more strange natives on the plain, so that in going


west they had to make a considerable detour to
avoid them.
That evening they came on the tracks of unshod
horses, as Mat joyfully pointed out, telling his dark
friends at the same time that when the white man’s
camp was reached, they must stay behind, and that
Tim had better remain with them, as he was still a
bit leg-weary.
Dromoora and his wife willingly consented to this
plan, as they were much frightened at the enormous
tracks of the strange beast which Mat had pointed
out.
Whilst it was still light, Mat spied the camp of the
white men, situated near a lagoon. What first met
his eye was a tent, a solitary figure, and smoke
proceeding from a good-sized fire near it.
The sensation was new to him—the first white
men, the first signs of civilized life, that he had seen
for many a year—and as he gazed he shook in every
limb as he considered how best to approach the
camp.
Having made up his mind, he first proceeded to
hide his weapons, then walked boldly up to within
fifty yards, and gave a loud whistle to announce his
presence. He had noticed two men sitting by the
fire now that he was so much nearer.
The strangers, on hearing the whistle, looked
round, then, seeing, as they supposed, a strange black
fellow, instantly snatched up their guns.


Mat, expecting this movement, cried, “ Don't shoot!
White man ! ”
“ Come, I know better than that; you arc a black
who has learned English ! ” shouted one of the men.
“ A step nearer, and we shoot. Put down your gun,”
—for Mat had retained this weapon —“and then come
here! ”
Mat complied with this request, and placed his
gun against a tree ; then, seeing that he was unarmed,
the strangers allowed him to approach.
In a few words Mat told his story, how he had
been shipwrecked, together with his brother, up
north, had lived for many years with the blacks, and
was now journeying south with his friends and
brother.
“ Well, this beats creation,” said one of the young
men whom Mat was addressing. “You’re a regular
Crusoe, only without the clothes. Come and sit
down, and tell us more about it.”
“ Will you first let me bring up two of the blacks
who have befriended us all these years ? ”
“Yes, if they are unarmed, and their tribe does not
come with them.”
Mat gave a reassuring answer, and then went back
for the chief and his wife, whom he shortly returned
with, introducing his brother at the same time.
Our foresters were soon comfortably seated at the
fire, revelling in the long-forgotten luxuries of tea,
sugar, and tobacco, their hearts tpo full to speak, and,


as Tim observed, “he did not know how to think
even, it was so like a dream. 55 Our heroes, in fact,
felt prostrated with joy. They wished, in this supreme
first hour of real liberty, to hear no news, to ask no
questions ; which their new acquaintances observing-,
simply put another “billy 55 of tea on the fire, and
very thoughtfully left them to meditate undis-
turbed.
The evening had closed in, when two black boys
belonging to the camp came up.
Dromoora could not make out these “boys 55 at all,
dressed, as they were, in gaudy-coloured flannel shirts
and moleskins. He hailed them in every dialect he
knew, but all to no purpose ; they only stared at him,
and more still did they stare at the brothers, whom,
however, they told their masters at once “ were white
fellow, only all the same black fellow. 55
The strangers, seeing that Tim suffered from rheu-
matism, had thoughtfully rigged him up a kind of
tent, or “lean to, 55 of canvas, in a sheltered spot at
the back of the camp, his two native friends sleeping
in the same part, and carrying on their own and Tim's
cooking there.
Mat stayed with his hosts, and slept by their open
Before going to sleep this first night, one of them
said to him, “Now that you have collected your
thoughts a bit, tell me more about yourselves, and
we 5 1l let you know what we are doing up here. By


the way, if you had not dropped across us, you would
have wandered a lot further before finding anything
like a station.”
However, Mat had not much more to tell, for the
brothers had agreed, on first discovering the strangers,
that, though they would of course relate their adven-
tures in a general way, yet that many particulars and
incidents of their past lives they would withhold until
they knew more of their new comrades.
So Mat soon brought his story to a conclusion,
being also anxious to hear the strangers’ account of
themselves, and of colonial matters generally.
As Mat’s narrative was brought to a close, the
younger stranger knocked the ashes out of his pipe,
and said, —
“ Now I’ll tell you about ourselves. My name is
Carew, and my mate’s name is Terry. We came out
about two years ago, as ‘ new chums,’ to a station on
the ‘ Downs,’ but—well, there wasn’t much going on,
and it didn’t suit, so we are looking out for a bit of
country up here for ourselves ; and Burns, that’s the
boss— ”
“ Burns ! ” interrupted Mat, “ why, that’s the man I
had a letter to, I do believe.”
“Now you mention it,” continued Carew, “ I re-
member Burns said that he had been expecting a new
chum out years ago ; he often referred to it. The
ship was called the Austral , I think. She was sig-
nalled off Hobart Town, and has never been heard of


from that day to this. I see it all; you must be the
man whom he was looking out for. I remember now,
he said that steamers were sent everywhere to look
for the ship. I’ll tell you what I’ll do. I’ll lend you
one of our boys to put you on the direct track for
Burns’ station, and you shall take a second letter to
him. My eye, won't he be astonished !
“ By-the-bye, the other chap, who’s always in that
tent, and generally drunk, looks a bad lot, drunk or
sober ; I can’t tell you anythingabouthim, excepting
that his name is Boyd, he has an awful scar on his
face, caused in some drunken row probably ; we came
across him on the road, riding a thoroughbred-looking
horse —stolen I expect; he forced his company on us,
and we shall be glad when he goes, and now I vote
we turn in.”
Dromoora and his wife felt more at home after they
had been for a few hours in the company of their dark
brethren. They even, at length, summoned up courage
to stroke the horses, causing much laughter by asking
»
what the big kangaroos ate ? whether the white men
ate them ? And many remarks of a like nature, all of
which were interpreted to the strangers.
After they had spelled for three days, the camp was
broken up ; Carew and Terry to go north, the brothers
and their party south.
Carew had packed a horse with rations for the
brothers, giving them some “ notes ” as well, so that
they would be able to purchase clothes, in time to be


decently rigged out before they entered the district
of the Darling Downs.
Mat thanked his newly-found friends for their gene-
rosity, and promised to repay the money as soon as
he could make a little ; he then gave them directions
where to find some of the good cattle country, through
which he had lately been travelling. The parties bid
good-bye, mutually pleased with each other, and a
quarter of an hour later the camp was lost to
sight.
On the way south, our party conversed with each
other concerning their late acquaintances.
“ I only saw the third white man once, the first
morning, and then only for a second,” remarked
Mat.
“ But I saw him again,” said Dromoora. “ One
evening I was lying very still, and he crawled to the
opening of his tent to get a better light from the fire,
so that he might look at some of those yellow
stones, like yours. I suppose all white men have
them'? ”
“Did he?” asked Tim in a startled tone, “ Let’s
count the nuggets.”
Forthwith the dilly bag was opened, and several of
the lumps of gold were found to be missing !
\ et this loss did not affect our foresters much, for
they knew where more was to be found ; besides,
were they not “ Homeward bound.”
h or weeks more our little party journeyed on, happy


and contented, the brothers realizing that they were
really leaving their lonely life behind them, and know-
ing that their guide was taking them straight to their
destination, for the black told them one day that they
were getting near a small store, pointing to the tracks
of drays and bullocks.
Having reached this building, our party had to go
through so many examinations as to who they were,
and from what part of the world they hailed, that it
was a long time before they could be rigged out in
clothes. Dromoora said he knew all about shirts and
trousers, and declined to be burdened with anything
but a straw hat and a thin cotton shirt, the former of
which he ended by giving to his wife.
A looking-glass proved as great an object of in-
terest to the brothers as it did to the natives.
Keeping along a well-marked track, after quirting
the store, they came to a fenced-in country ; and,
guided by the barking of dogs, found themselves at
Burns’ Station.
Walking up to the house, Mat, who acted as spokes-
man, was confronted by a tall and dissipated-looking
man, who was lounging in a canvas chair, smoking
and reading.
This individual’s first words were not encouraging,
as putting down his paper, he stared at Mat, and
drawled out, —
“ What do you want ? I don’t require any hands
now, certainly not a half-caste.”


But Mat’s answer in right good English consider-
ably astonished Mr. Burns.
“ My name is Stanley, I was bringing out a letter
to you some years ago from a more civil-tongued
fellow than yourself, and that’s your own brother,
only I and my brother here got wrecked, were
the only two saved, and we’ve lived with the
blacks up north ever since; how long I don’t
know, as I’ve lost all tally, but a great number of
years.”
Before the conclusion of this speech, Burns had
started from his chair and was critically examining
the speaker.
“ Well, I be hanged ! ” he cried, as soon as he could
grasp the fact that he was addressing one of the only
two survivors of the ill-fated Young Austral; for he
guessed that was the ship. “ I didn’t mean to speak
roughly, only I’ve been so bothered lately | that s your
brother there, I’ll go bail by the likeness. But come
in, come in, and let’s talk all about it ; fetch the
niggers up too, I beg your pardon, I mean the natives.
You shall all have a good square meal before anything
else.”
Burns’ manner completely changed as he ordered
in the dinner, and bade them all be seated. Mat
then gave his host Carew’s letter, and whilst he was
reading it, our travellers were only too glad to be
left to enjoy their meal, having fasted since early
morning.


Burns reappeared after the lapse of a few minutes,
with a bottle of grog, saying,—
“Now you’ve about finished, let me hear some-
thing of your doings.”
So Mat gave him an outline of the history that he
had related to Carew.


CHAPTER X.
Burns’ station—The horse-breaker —Colonial “ Blow Satan
the First —Mat “ collars ” the buckjumper.
Burns listened in wonder to Mat’s narrative, and
when it was concluded, said, —
“You are the first white man who have lived
amongst the blacks of the northern coast, and come
again into civilization. I remember my brother writ-
ing out by mail about you perfectly well ; there were
a lot of my stores on that ship, but she never turned
up. Well, wonders will never cease ; what are you
thinking of doing ? By-the-bye, Stephen said that
you were the most undefeated rider, for your age, in
Hampshire.”
“ I could ride a bit then,” replied Mat, “ but I don’t
know what I could do now.”
“ Oh, you'll do all right, one does not forget riding
any more than swimming, and if you like to spell
here, why I shall be pleased to have you and your
mates too, and you can look about you. I’ve had no
end of new chums ; but unless they can ride any-
thing, and everything, they are of no use to me, and


I believe those men you met went off in a huff,
because I talked in the same way, and swore at
them a bit for their laziness ; but then, you see, one
always has to swear at new chums,”
Burns’ remarks were not altogether free from strong
language ; many of his expressions were remarkable,
and quite new to the brothers ; moreover they were
assisted “ up ” by sundry nips from a bottle of “ Three
Star” on the table, so that in a short time he grew
maudlin and monotonous, finally settling down in his
“ squatter ” chair for a sleep.
“ Well, what do you think of him ?” queried Mat,
as soon as Burns had disappeared.
“ Why he drinks like a fish, and is such a swearing
chap, that I don’t wonder at those men clearing
out.”
“ I don’t fancy him very much, myself,” agreed
Mat, “ but I don’t think he’s a bad sort when he’s
sober. Let us stay on a bit here ; he’s got a chap
coming to break in colts, and I want to see him at
work.”
So they stayed on until the breaker arrived—a long
limbed, actively built Victorian native (i.e. a white
man born in Victoria).
Mat had heard that this station of Burns’ carried
some notorious buckjumpers amongst the mob of
horses which pastured on it, so after a few general
remarks, he asked the man whether he could sit out
a real bad one.


“ Buckjumper!” answered the breaker, “me sit a
buckjumpcr? There ain’t a horse in the whole
country I can’t ride, and smoke my pipe on im, and
without a ' kid,’ too.”
“ What’s that ? ” asked Mat.
“Why, it’s plain you're a new chum, not to know
as a ‘ kid’s,’ what boobies use, a stick strapped in
front to keep ’em on. / never uses it, as Burns
will tell you.”
“All right,” cried Burns, who now came up and
joined in the conversation. “We shall have the mob
up to-morrow, and see how you shape on Satan the
First”
This sudden challenge somewhat sobered the brag-
ging tone of the trainer, to whom it was addressed ;
for after examining Burns for some seconds with a
bleary eye, he remarked, —
“ You’re in such a blooming hurry, I must prepare
a bit first”
“Which means,” said Burns aside to Mat, “that
with a few more nobblers he will get some Dutch
courage into him. I can sec that he has heard about
the horse from the change in his tone.
The next morning, however, our rough-rider was as
full of “spirits” and bounce as ever; yet he looked
“ full of riding” as he turned out in jack-boots, clean
white moleskin breeches, blue shirt, a silk hand-
kerchief of the same colour round his throat, and a
serviceable old “ cabbage-tree hat on his head; it


was evident, though, that his nerves were not very fit
when the horse was at length saddled.
“Too shaky about the hands,” whispered Burns.
And sure enough at the third “ buck,” “ Satan ”
proved the victor by sending his rider into a bunch
at one corner of the stockyard.
I never knew a horse shape like that of all I’ve
crossed,” swore the discomfited rider, as soon as
he could get his wind.
“ Never mind,” laughed Burns, “ when he’s fresh
to-morrow, Til mount my friend on him, and we’ll
all go and see the fun.”
f< \\ hat! that bloke with the black beard, what
had never heard tell on a ‘ kid ’ —he ride ! Til
bet you five notes he don’t sit him as long as I
did.”
“ Done with you,” cried Burns, who had long since
seen that the man ranked amongst the common class
of “ blowers,” or “ braggarts,” peculiar to his profession
in the colony.
The next day Mat was up early, and meeting
Burns, told him that as there was a bet on his riding,
he must take a “stretch ” with another horse first, or
he could not answer for keeping his seat.
So a hot-looking chestnut was saddled, Mat
straightway mounted and disappeared into the Bush.
V\ hen he returned a couple of hours later, he said
to Tim, as he threw himself out of the saddle, “ The
greatest treat Ive had for years; felt like a man


again on that horse, but he’s a hot un, and no
o
mistake.”
An hour’s rest, a gentle run, and then Mat changed
his shirt, and told Burns he was ready.
“ What! going to ride with bare legs and
feet ? ”
“ Yes, I seem to feel more supple, and my feet are
as hard as leather.”
These remarks were followed by a jeer from the
breaker, who hiccoughed between his cups, “ Ring up,
the show’s a-going to commence. “ Hullo! ”he added,
“ what’s the nigger up to ? ” for Dromoora approached
at this moment, armed with spears and club, and
calling Mat aside, whispered,—
“ Take the ‘ thunder-stick,’ that thing will kill you.”
Mat laughed, and was proceeding to explain the
matter to his companion, when they saw that the
horse had at last been yarded.
The last bit of advice came from the breaker.
“ Take a drink, mate ; it’s the last you’ll ever taste.”
“ No thanks,” laughed Mat, as he walked towards
the stockyard, which by this time was surrounded by
every man, woman, and child about the station.
It was a long time before the stock-riders could
induce the horse to put his head into the “ bail,” as he
rushed open-mouthed at every one who approached,
causing a general stampede to the rails.
When at last his head was between the two beams,
and these had been locked, he gave a heave with his


neck to test the timbers, and then remained quiet for
a moment.
“ Now bridle and saddle,” called out Burns. The
bridle difficulty was soon arranged; but getting
on the saddle took more time, as the animal’s hind
legs were at liberty.
This being at length accomplished, a “greenhide”
crupper was slipped under the tail, when from the top
rails two men quickly spliced the hair partially into it.
When all was ready, Burns sang out, “ Let go.”
The bail was opened, and the horse was free, and
making for the first man which caught his eye.
However, all hands were prepared for this rush, and
quickly gained the top rail of the stockyard fence—
all save Mat, who at first coolly dodged the brute ;
but at length followed the example of his companions,
as “ Satan ” was evidently determined to kill him,
and he could see no present chance of getting on his
back.
Finding now that he had the yard to himself, the
horse gave a moderate buck or two ; but realizing
that the saddle could not be shifted, contented him-
self with walking round and round, and glaring
sullenly at the spectators.
Not a sound could now be heard. All eyes were
fixed on Mat, who, watching his opportunity, sprang
lightly down, and seizing the bridle by both reins
close to the bit, was preparing to mount. Taken for
the moment unawares —so quickly and silently had


| ;




Mat accomplished this —the horse gave an angry
snort, and the next moment was careering round,
swinging Mat off his feet; but our forester’s grasp
was powerful, and could not be shaken off.
Finding that he could not free himself, the horse
was preparing to put in practice some of his old tricks,
when Mat vaulted, or swung himself as quick as
thought into the saddle ; yet before he could get
either foot into the stirrups, up went “ Satan ” into the
air, with head and tail down.
Three, four, six, ten, and more bucks, till the rider
appeared as if permanently balanced on a pivot.
Finding this process of no avail, and that Mat did
not feel to him like coming off just yet, the beast
next tried to bite his legs, gnashing his teeth in his
furious but futile efforts, as Mat cast each threatened
limb backwards, and thus baulked him. Then he
struck at his legs with his hind feet; but here again
no result. The man’s leg seemed simply to alight on
the horse’s neck at each threatened stroke. The
next “ round ” was of a very different nature. Satan
threw himself down, and rolled with his rider.
To those who were witnessing this mighty struggle
of man versus brute, it appeared as if this last act
was a decisive one, and as if Mat had “ gone down,”
never to come up again. Both had disappeared
amidst a mountain of dust; but a lusty cheer rang
out as the rider again showed himself, and still sitting
in his saddle, when the horse rose, though so covered


was his face and beard with blood and black dust,
that his features were barely recognizable.
The spectators could now no longer control them-
selves, but crowded into that portion of the yard
farthest from the contest. The horse took no notice
of them whatever, finding he had that on his back
the like of which he had never had before.
And now, not giving his rider time even to grasp a
wet towel which was thrown to him, “Satan” tried
his last and hitherto never-failing trick.
Gathering himself together with a snort of triumph,
he made a wild and terrific sidelong plunge against
the massive timbers of the stockyard fence.
The sensation of “ bucking,” as this horse had
bucked, had been new to Mat ; he had never been
rolled with before, in the peculiar manner with which
this horse had tried to crush him ; but of the last
“ round ” he had had many former experiences in his
old forest days ; whilst riding young colts in the
beech-woods, and as he afterwards remarked to Tim, —
“ It seemed quite ‘homely.’ ”
So when the horse made his plunge on the off
side, our forester slung his right leg behind him, and
“ Satan ” came with his ribs crashing against the heavy
fencing, with a shock that knocked the remaining-
w o
wind out of him, and which at the same time nearly
dismounted his rider.
One of the old stockmen in the yard now begged
Mat to get off during this lull ; but before he could


answer, a black form rushed through the throng, and
with spear poised in the air, screamed in Waigonda,—
“ Look out! whilst I spear the man-eater through
the throat.”
Mat stretched out to catch the poised weapon
seized it—at the same moment the horse made
another plunge for the fence. Mat again saved his
leg but was overbalanced trying to do two things at
once, and he fell off. Never, however, quitting his
hold of the reins, he gave Satan a sound slap with his
open hand as he regained the saddle, prepared for
further hostilities.
But the fight was over.
'1 he horse stood there, never caring even for the
jostling of men who were round him ; two jels of
steam spouting from his nostrils, his wet flanks heav-
ing with spasmodic jerks, and accompanied by a noise
of choking sobs.
Mat appeared ready to faint, so, without more ado,
Tim and his friends dragged h.m from the saddle,
bore him away on their shoulders out of the yard, and
deposited him on a mattress, which had been placed
under a shady tree by Tcrebare’s forethought.
Burns, during the time that this “ man-horse ”
struggle had lasted, had been in a perfect ecstasy of
delight, hopping round the crowd with a bottle of his
favourite *• three star ” in his hand, out of which he
constantly “ pledged our hero,” or proffered it to the
bystanders for the same purpose. When he saw Mat


at length carried out of the yard, he hurried up to
him with, —
“ By Jove ! old man, finest thing I’ve ever seen ; if
it hadn’t been for the two feet of dust, though, he d
have killed you outright when he rolled. Bj gad,
you’re the best man I’ve seen in over twenty
years of bush life. I’d offer you a hundred a year,
and more, if you’d stop | but anyhow, take a ball
now, you look as though you wanted it.”
But Mat, though he was glad of the brandy, and
took a deep pull at the bottle, had no voice left in
him.
So they left him to the care of the faithful Tere-
bare, who, taking his head on her lap and bathing his
face, sung him a soothing native chant until he fell
asleep from exhaustion.


CHAPTER XI.
An official summons—Travelling in state—Brisbane—On board
ship again—Triumphal entry into Sydney—ln a church
again The lecture-Meeting old friends-Soft reflections.
Some few weeks after this, the brothers were discussing
their future plans with Burns.
The fact was that ever since the riding episode, he
had been trying to induce them to stay altogether at his
station, and they had almost agreed with his proposal
to do so, at all events for six months, when their con-
versation was interrupted by the arrival of a mounted
messenger, who, with a loud clinking of spurs, came
up the verandah steps and handed Burns an official-
looking document, saying shortly, as he did so,—
“ From the Governor.”
“ Hullo, you Stanleys,” shouted Burns, as soon as
he had skipped through the letter, “ here, read this.
You are both—all of you—expected to accompany
the bearer back to Brisbane at once, to wait cn the
acting-Governor, and then be shipped off to Sydney.
But here, read it.”
The brothers read the letter carefully through, and


found that it was indeed a summons to Brisbane from
headquarters ; that “ the two natives were to go with
them, and that Burns was to find the horses.”
“ But how do they know anything about us.
inquired Mat.
“ That’s what beats me,” said Burns. “ Oh, stop ,
I’ve mDt it ! That drunken rider who was here has a
brother, sort of head-clerk in Government House.
The breaker has told his brother, and thus the whole
matter has come to the ears of the Governor. That
breaker, as you know, went back to Brisbane , but
I daresay you don't know that he never paid me my
five pounds ; only, I suppose just to show that there
was no coolness between us, took a bottle of my best
brandy with him. But now, my friends, this is no
time to talk. You must get your ‘ swags ’as quickly
as you can, and I’ll see about the you don’t
know what luck may be in store for you.”
“ But one moment,” said Tim. “ The natives can t
ride.” ,
.. Oh bother the blacks ! never mind, 111 send you
all in ’the buggy, besides, it will be easier going
for rheumatics and sliffjoints. It's lucky we have all
finished letters for the home mail; you can post
them.” • j
A few hours later, having bid farewell to their goo -
natured host, we again find our little party heading
southwards, but this time clothed, driving a carriage
and pair, with an outrider in uniform to show them


. r 49
the way ; and, in fact, “ travelling like gentlemen,
Tim said.
Dromoora and his wife, who had at first been much
frightened, and ultimately as delighted, at the novelty
of being driven on four wheels behind two of the
terrible horses, were still more dazed and astonished
at the appearance of the town of Brisbane, when they
anived there, at that time a township of wooden huts
roofed with zinc sheeting.
o
Our party drove straight to the house occupied by
the acting-Governor, who, after being satisfied that
the story reported of them was true, told them that
he had received a request from Sydney to send them
there at once, as every one was impatient to see the
only survivors of the emigrant-ship, and to hear their
story ; and that, as a steamer was waiting for them
at the \\ harf, they had better get away before the
inhabitants found them out. He added that he had
procuied some suitable clothing for them, so that they
had only to shift and walk on board.
“ Our twins ” were a handsome couple, as they
stepped on to the boat which was to convey them
south.
Owing, doubtless, to the better class of food on
which they had been subsisting lately, they had grown
stouter and broader, whilst their dark red complexions
were set off by the suits of white Indian drill in which
they were clothed.
As their tall manly forms appeared on the poop,


one might well echo the captain’s greeting, as he
said. , . ..
“Gentlemen, I’m proud to take you in my ship
adding aside to his chief officer, “ twins, I m told, and
a right handsome pair, too.”
Dromoora and his wife were rather subdued during
the voyage, for after leaving the Brisbane river a
choppy sea rendered them violently sea-sick, and they
had barely recovered their spirits when, after three
days, the vessel was standing up the magnificent
harbour of Sydney.
As they approached the town, the brothers re-
marked that the wharf was densely crowded with
people, whilst flags were fluttering in the streets
adjacent to the landing-place.
“ What does all this mean ? ” asked Mat of the
captain.
«Why, it’s in honour of your arrival, of course ;
don’t you see I have ‘ dressed ’ my ship, too.
As they slowly neared the quay, a band on shore
struck up, “ See, the conquering Hero comes ! ” whilst
the people cheered again and again on catching sight
of the tall figures of our foresters.
“ Well, this is coming it rather strong,” remarked
Mat with a smile. “ Lucky that we’ve come a bit
gradually into civilization, and know a few things,
and how to handle a knife and fork properly, I
almost wish I was back in the bush again.”
As the steamer sheered alongside, many of the


more active of the spectators sprang on board, whilst
more of the crowd poured in as soon as the gangway
was available.
The brothers were almost overwhelmed by the
army of reporters who besieged them, note-book and
pencil in hand, whilst volleys of questions were poured
in from every side. However, much to their relief
for they found it impossible to reply to the numerous
and varied questions, and their arms were aching from
the continued handshaking, an orderly forced his way
up, and told them that he had a carriage ashore to
convey them to Government House.
All four shortly found themselves seated in the
vehicle, and, accompanied by an enthusiastic portion
of the inhabitants running alongside, drove off.
The Governor, who stood on the steps of his house
to receive them, was a spare-built, shrewd-looking
man, between fifty and sixty years of age.
After welcoming our travellers to Sydney, he
ushered them into the house, and continued, —
“ You may have been surprised at the reception you
have met with, but you must remember that the
citizens are aware that you are the two sole survivors
of the ship Young Austral , in which ill-fated vessel
they had many relatives ; at least, we have quite
lately been told that you were the only two who came
ashore ; but that which also adds an intense interest
to your presence here is the fact that you are the only
two men ever known in this country who have lived for


years amongst the wild northern blacks and survived ;
and, judging from your appearance, you have evi-
dently been well treated during your captivity.
“ When the news of your escape arrived from Bris-
bane, the townspeople., the squatters also from up-
country, inundated me with letters and special mes-
sengers, begging me to get you down to Sydney.
The Government was appealed to, and—here you
are. We will make you as comfortable as possible
whilst you stay in this town ; and now I will intro-
duce you to my aide-de-camp. And your two blacks,
—would they like a tent, or where shall we put
them ? ”
On being appealed to, our dark friends said that
they would prefer to erect a “ gunyah out of doors,
if they might cut down a few branches ; so a suitable
spot was found, and strict orders given that they were
not to be molested.
Mat and Tim were then introduced to the aide-de-
camp, Captain Marvin, who led them into the smok-
ing-room, and, having made them comfortable in easy
chairs, said, —
“ You must not be afraid that I am going to cross-
examine you, but I may as well tell you at once that
a rather delicate affair has been deputed to me to
propose to you, and that is, to plunge at once into
matters, you are requested by every one—by the
voice of the people—to appear, one night, with your
two natives, at the School of Arts, and give a short


account of your adventures in the unknown northern
country.
“ I know that you will be well received. They do
not want to stare at you as if you were newly-caught
savages, but to listen and to learn ; and my impres-
sion is that, if you choose to appear, it will save you
a world of worrying questions in the future, besides, it
will be a kind act, as the door-money will go to a very
deserving charity, which I shall be glad to tell you all
about.”
“We will think it over,” said Mat when Marvin had
finished speaking. “ Meantime, we have some old
books, in which we have written a rough diary, and
when you began speaking it seemed to me that per-
haps the people would like to have it published,
instead of our lecturing to them.”
“ May I glance at the diary ? I promise not to
divulge a word.”
“ Certainly, you are welcome; there are no secrets.”
So Mat fetched the old novels, with their closely
pencilled margins, gave them to Marvin, and then
sauntered into the garden with Tim to discuss the
question of the lecture.
“/shan’t speak,” said Tim, as soon as they were by
themselves, “ but yon. can tell them a few things
straight, and they’ll be pleased enough. For all
Marvin says, I’ll bet they do want to have a good
look at us ; it’s natural enough, too, and ’twont hurt
us.”


“I’ll try, then,” said Mat; “and if I break down,
they can still stare —that’s all.”
In the evening, “ our lads,” as we may, perhaps,
still be permitted to call them, for old associations’
sake, were introduced to Mrs. Marvin, who told them
that she had already made the acquaintance of the
native girl, who had come to the house for something
to drink.
“ What a nice, dark-eyed woman she is,” said Mrs.
Marvin ; “ such a sweet voice, and she looks quite
pretty when she smiles and shows her white teeth ;
and she knows a little English, too ; she said ‘ milk,’
and ‘ bread,’ and several other words. What is her
name ? ”
“Terebare,” Mat informed her, “which means in
her language, ‘ Rainbow.’ ”
“ And a pretty name, too. I shall go and talk with
her, if I may.”
“ Oh, please do! They are a bit dull; it is such
a new life to them.”
And Mrs, Marvin departed, laden with good things
for our chief and his wife.
Before they went to bed that night, our brothers
adjourned with Captain Marvin for another consulta-
tion.
As soon as they were comfortably seated behind a
couple of the captain’s best cigars, he said, —
“ I have looked over your journal, and if you would
write it out at length, I should like to show it to our


publishers ; I know that they would agree with me
that it would make an interesting and valuable
book. You have described unknown native cus-
toms, besides dwelling upon the different sorts of
country (most important this) ; nor have you for-
gotten to jot down useful notes about geology and
plants. It will sell. Many words have got rubbed
out, but doubtless you know what they are.
“ We will re-write it carefully then,” said Mat, “ now
we can get pens, ink, and paper ; and leave it in your
charge. But now about this lecture. We have talked
about it, and I will try it if you will first let me try
speaking—as though I was talking to a lot of people,
I mean —in this room, before you, when we’re quite
alone.”
Captain Marvin was delighted to hear that Mat
would give the lecture, and promised to help him.
“ We will settle the day as soon as we can,” he said.
“ To-morrow will be Sunday, there is rather a famous
man going to preach in the evening in a church close
by, and if you are so inclined why there is plenty of
room for us all in the Governor’s pew.”
“ Yes, we’ll go,” said Tim ; “we haven’t been to
church since we were lads in t’Vorest, excepting on
board ship, and that ain’t ’zactly church.”
“ That’s settled then ; I’ll look out for you two to-
morrow evening. You will like Parson Tabor ; he is a
good man.”
When the brothers entered the church next evening


they found it crammed to suffocation, and with diffi-
culty they followed Captain Marvin to the Governor’s
pew.
The grand and solemn tones of the organ were
playing a voluntary as they passed up the aisle, —
music which sounded sweet and soothing to their
unaccustomed ears.
During the prayers which followed, our foresters
carefully imitated Mrs. Marvin in kneeling, standing,
or sitting, as the case might be. She also helped them
to find their places in the prayer-book, when at a loss.
Prayers over, the sermon commenced. Complete
silence reigned as the clergyman ascended the pulpit ;
the brothers, looking up, saw a broad-shouldered man
of florid complexion and square-cut jaw, whose pro-
file reminded Mat for an instant of a fighting-man.
o o )
whom he had once known in the Forest, but the re-
semblance quickly changed when he saw his full face,
with its solemn, earnest expression, and heard his
voice.
The preacher gave out a text which at once en-
wrapt the attention of our twins, so applicable did it
and the eloquent sermon which followed, appear to
their own case in having escaped so many dangers.
As they walked homewards their thoughts were with
the parson Tabor, and what he had said to them.
Yet Tim made one remark, —
“ Mat, if ever I want help or advice I’ll go to that
man.”


In the middle of the succeeding week, and after
Mat had rehearsed, to Marvin’s satisfaction, the latter
came in with the morning papers.
“ Look here,” he cried, “ you are in for it now ; here’s
the announcement of the lecture, there, read it —
* Under the patronage, &c.’ ”
“Yes, I am,” laughed Mat, as he glanced at the
advertisement. “As you are pleased to say I shall
pass, thanks to you, I shall go at it with a light heart.”
The much-thought-of evening had arrived. Though
Mat and his party, supported by the Governor and
suite, arrived early, they found the large building
already crammed, every seat having been engaged
some days beforehand.
Having gained the platform, the Governor intro-
duced his friends in a few happily chosen phrases,
and Mat, as soon as the applause was over, at once
commenced ; his brother and the two natives standing
by him.
He told his audience that he had never addressed a
meeting of his fellow-countrymen in his life, and that
he hoped they would forgive any shortcomings.
When he and his brother were told that not only
the citizens, who had received them so warmly at the
steamer, but that also many influential squatters had
expressed a wish to hear how they had passed their
time with the northern blacks, they determined to
come to that house to-night and obey the call. He
said, —


“To begin with, we are gipsies, born and bred in
the New Forest, in England —”
At these words, a stentorian voice in the audience
called out, —
“ I knew it; the lad I broke in myself.”
Mat looked in vain to see who spoke, but only
noticed in the quarter from whence the voice pro-
ceeded, a burly individual with a purple face, and a
long white beard, sitting rather prominently amongst
the audience, so he continued, —
“ I did not come out at the expense of my country,
but for all that I helped to break the Forest laws by
being out with a friend when he shot a deer.”
Mat then gave a full account of the wreck, of the
subsequent escape, and of life amongst his black
friends.
He added that he reckoned that as near as he could
put it the wreck happened in about seventeen degrees
south latitude.
That which interested his audience more especially
was his account of the habits of the wild blacks ; and
as the chief and his wife were led forward by the
brothers, tremendous cheers went up from the people ;
who were already aware in what manner these two
natives, together with their tribe, had befriended the
white men.
It so happened that Dromoorahad been told, upon
the occasion of their being cheered on board the
steamer, that when the white man “corroboreed ” he


must take his hat off; so remembering his lesson, or
rather knowing that it had something to do with his
hat, and not having that article on his head, he seized
it from the chair where it had been placed, with one
hand ; whilst with the other he dragged his wife’s
from off her head, throwing them both into the air ;
then shouting, “ White fellow, corroboree,” he was pro-
ceeding to force his “jin ” to beat two chairs together,
when he was promptly seized by the brothers and
conveyed to a seat.
Mat continued his lecture for a good hour after this
occurrence, and finally concluded by stating that their
trade consisted of breaking-in horses, and that they
looked forward to carrying it on in the country which
had given them such a kind reception.
Mat brought his lecture to a conclusion amidst
enthusiastic cheers, and the four guests of the evening
were preparing to retire, when a crowd of squatters
jumped on to the platform, amongst them the jovial
looking individual with the white beard, who elbowed
his way up to Mat, and said, with outstretched hand, —
“ Don’t you remember the squire, Mat ? a bit grey
about the muzzle, eh ?”
“ Why, my good old master,” eagerly replied our
forester, as gazing earnestly at him, he recognized the
well-known features of years gone by.
“ Here, Tim,” he continued, as he wrung Bell’s
hand ; “here’s the squire I so often told you of.”
“And my daughter, Annie,” added the squatter


«I don’t suppose you will remember her cither.”
And Mat certainly did not at first recognize the
young lady who now came forward, holding out her
hand, —and small blame to him.
It will be remembered that the last time he saw
Annie was in the gun-room of the squire’s home, in
the New Forest, and then only for a brief two
minutes ; but during the many years that had elapsed
since then, he had secretly kept in one corner of his
brave heart a remembrance of the fair young vision.
Without having a very distinct idea of her features
generally, he never had forgotten the soft look in her
eyes, the gentle voice, and above all the beauty of her
hair. He had never seen, in either man or woman,
hair of that peculiar type before ; in fact, he had not
been able to depict its colour, when describing the
young girl to Tim.
On this eventful evening Mat was confronted with
a young lady, with masses of the same beautiful dark
auburn hair gathered up in neat coils at the back of
her head. He ’knew that he had only seen that
colour once before in his life, and when Annie spoke,
the whole scene of his boyhood came back to him.
In her sweet, soft voice, yet in cheery tones, she
welcomed him to Sydney, and added slowly with a
smile, and raising her eyes to his, —
“ I remember you in the Forest home, Mr.
Stanley.”
As she stood there, her blushing face half*hidden


behind a bouquet of “ stephanotis,” the perfume—he
could not realize at the moment whether the scent
was of the flowers or Annie’s hair—the situation, this
sudden rencontre, and all the novelty of speaking in
public, which he had gone through that evening,
caused our hero to feel completely unnerved, so that
he felt himselt blushing in Jus turn, and murmuring
some words of “ pleasure at the meeting,” was turning
away, when the squire came to his rescue.
“You and your brother, and those frisky natives,
must come at once—to-morrow—and stay with us at
our new station quite near here. We shall all be
delighted to see you ; and Tom, whom you taught to
' o
shoot, you remember, when I told him I was sure it
was Mat Stanley who had escaped, said, —yes, by
gad, Mat !—he said he’d never speak to me again
if I didn’t bring you home ! What do you think of
that for cheek to his old governor ? He would have
been here to-night, but was obliged to meet a man
about some cattle at an out-station.”
” Thanks,’ responded Mat, who had now found his
tongue. “ I must speak to them at Government
House first ; they have been so kind to us.”
“ Here’s Tom’s tutor,” interrupted the squire.
“ Not the one you knew in England,—wants to grasp
the hands of the foresters.”
Our boys turned, and met the earnest face of
the man who had so impressed them by his sermon
a few days before. They exchanged friendly greet-


ings with him ; and after refusing, for the present,
many kind and pressing invitations from their late
audience, Mat and Tim were glad to make their
escape to Captain Marvin’s snug smoking-room,
where they intended to have a quiet chat; but hardly
had they sat down when the Governor came in and
carried them both off to supper.
Some time before they entered the dining-room a
young colonial had been giving his views concerning
the evening’s lecture.
“ My word,” he said, “it zvas a good yarn, and
well told. Why that man Stanley speaks as good
English, and almost as good grammar, as if he had
been to college, —and mostly self-taught they say.
I thought that gipsies in England were a sort of
half-breeds, who made tin kettles and ‘jackshays,’
those quart pots, you know, and ‘ planted ’ people’s
fowls and things; but this fellow’s a gentleman,
and —”
His remarks were here interrupted by the entrance
of the individuals in question, and the conversation
was abruptly changed by the young “ native,” for
such is a white person termed who is born in the
colonies, who from that moment, as he intimated to
Mrs. Marvin, intended “ to take a back seat.”
During supper-time the conversation turned upon
many interesting subjects connected with the past
adventures of our twins. From these it drifted
into colonial matters, the latest news from “home”


as England is always so referred to in the colonies ;
and the party broke up.
Mat could get but little sleep that night; the events
of the evening had been almost too much for his
otherwise strong nerves.
Besides the excitement of his lecture, and the
remembrance of that, thoughts of a softer nature
rushed through his mind.
It must be remembered that his experience of
woman-kind had been of the roughest description,
amounting to an exchange of chafif with the lassies at
the Hampshire fairs, and owing to the nature of his
occupation and mode of life in and around the gipsy
camp, he had but rarely come in contact with the
better class of New Forest “squatters” in his old
home.
Bearing this in mind, let us follow his thoughts as
he lay awake in the town of Sydney, New South
Wales.
“ I’ve met to-night for the second time a real lady,
and such a beautiful and gentle lady. I wonder
whether they are all like her. Oh, but how she has
altered ! Would she laugh at me if she knew I had
stuck to ‘ Robinson Crusoe.’ I expect she’d only open
her eyes big, as she did to-night, when she seemed
surprised. What a fool she must have thought me !
I couldn’t even say anything civil. I don’t know
what came over me. I could talk easily enough to that
big crowd of people, and to Mrs. Marvin, and be civil


to her. Perhaps Captain Marvin’s cigars are too
strong for me. Yes ; that must be it”
Having thus determined the nature of his malady,
though not entirely to his satisfaction, our forester
turned over, and went to sleep.


CHAPTER XII.
Tim starts for the Darlinj Downs—French as spoken by
Mrs. Bell—Parson Tabor—Leichardt’s grave —The French
“professor’’—Mat unmasks the “professor.”
Next morning the leading newspapers of the town
were placed in Mat’s hands by Marvin, who trium-
phantly remarked, —
“ See what an excellent * coach ’ I proved.”
The entire lecture was given in oxlenso , —what Mat
had said, and, as he remarked after a perusal, seme
things he had not said.
“ The old folks must have these,” agreed the
brothers, and the papers were accordingly sent home
to the Forest.
“ And now, brother,” said Tim, “ there was a Darling
Downs squatter got hold of me last night, and said I
must come up to his station. I felt so well up there,
the air is so grand, I think I’ll go. He’s promised me
work, and pay, and grub.”
“True; we must get work,” rejoined Mat; “we
have had enough ‘ spreeing ’ about; besides, I must
see about getting Dromoora and Terebare to their


home, only the squire has made me promise to go to
his station first—a new place, called, I think, ‘ Bulinda
Creek.’ I can ‘spell ’ there a few days,and then start
overland with the chief, join you on the Downs, and
send our friends on from there with a party perhaps.”
Thus it was settled, and after saying good-bye to
their hospitable friends at Government House, Mat
went to seek out the squire, whilst Tim found his way
to the Keens, who were leaving by steamer for
Brisbane.
Henry Keen was one of the early squatters of the
Darling Downs, and was now returning to his
station accompanied by his wife and daughter. The
chief object of his visit to Sydney had been to fetch
the latter from school.
Tim wondered, as he stepped on board the steamer,
how he would be received by the ladies, as he had
not yet made their acquaintance, but he was not
long left in doubt, for Miss Charlotte Keen at once
met him as he stepped on to the boat, and giving his
hand a hearty shake, said, —
“ You need not bother about an introduction to
me, I knew who you were as you came along the
wharf; where is your brother who lectured, I thought
he would have come too ? ”
“ Oh, no! ” replied Tim, who was rather taken
aback by this voluble welcome. “He has gone to
Bulinda Creek.”
“What! Squire Bell’s? I was at school with his


daughter Annie, a stuck-up girl, full of stupid, old-
country notions. Got ‘a down ’ upon me, because I
suppose she went ‘home’ for a few months, and
knew I had never been ; or because, as some say,
she’s full of nonsense, learnt from an old parson, a
sort of private tutor to her brother, who’s sponging
on the squire. Did you see the daughter ? she’s a
‘ native,’ you know.”
“Yes, I did see a shy-looking, pretty girl with
splendid hair, for a few seconds, whilst she was
standing with her father.”
“ Shy ! pretty ! ” snapped back Miss Charlotte ;
“ well, my word, if you called rusty-coloured hair,
and red cheeks pretty, why she is; but it’s not my
idea of a handsome girl. I admire the true class of
beauty—the statuesque ; and now I must look after
pa and ma in the saloon.”
With which announcement she turned abruptly on
her heel and departed.
“ Here’s a row,” said Tim ; “I wonder whether
there are many more like her on the Downs whilst
he gazed after the retreating form of Miss Keen, as
she stamped her way rapidly towards the com-
panion. “ I suppose then, that that girl’s washed-
out face and tow-coloured hair is true beauty. What
did she call it —the statue sort ? Well, I prefer
t’other sort of statue.”
Leaving Tim to pursue his journey with the Keen
family, we will return to Mat.


Two days after his brother’s departure, he and the
squire had started on horseback to the Creek, Annie
and Parson Tabor, with the two natives, having
1 o
gone on before in the buggy.
It was early on a beautiful morning, as the two
men wended their way out of Sydney, the air en-
livened with the cries of hundreds of Blue Mountain
parrots, busily engaged in chasing each other, in
whole flocks in the forests, or sucking their break-
fasts from the blossoms of the gum-trees.
The gay chirping of the tree-crickets, the crisp
morning air, which clearly defined the soft outline of
the Blue Mountains in the distance,—all combined,
with the fact that he was on horseback once more,
to make Mat in the highest spirits, as he and Bell
cantered over the high downs.
Xot so the latter, who was evidently in deep
thought over some perplexing matter, which had
caused his usual boisterous spirits to desert him. At
length he broke silence with a sudden, —
“ Drat it, man, I may as well say it at once, only
you are such an independent chap, I do not know how
to begin. Fact is, the Governor, and a heap of my
mates in town and country, want you and your brother
to accept a purse from them to help you to start.”
Mat was certainly startled by this proposition, but
answered promptly enough,—
“ It’s very good of you all, but we have no wish to
accept money until we have worked for it.”


“ I knew you would say that, but do take it, Mat, in
the spirit in which it is offered. It will hurt the.’r
feelings —my feelings—for I have a little hand in it, if
you don’t.”
“In that case, squire, I’ll ask you to keep it for
us, and if either or both of us come to grief, we will
ask you for a little help till times are better.”
“You promise that ?”
“ Yes, I do.”
“Then I’ll hold it in trust for you.”
“ And now, squire,” said Mat, after the two had
ridden some distance farther, “ I’ve got something
to tell you, that I have told to no man living,
excepting Tim. This ‘swag’ holds a lot of nuggets,
Tim has an equal quantity, and they should start us
without the purse, thanks to you all the same ; and
now I will tell you about our gold discovery.”
Mat then recounted full particulars of their “ find ”
in the Golden Gully, which Bell listened to with
interest, saying he “would not tell it to the ground''
By the time Mat had finished his narrative, they
reined their horses up at the station.
As soon as Mat had made himself presentable, the
squire reintroduced him to Mrs. Bell, and they shortly
afterwards sat down to dinner, where they were
joined by Annie and Parson Tabor.
Mrs. Bell was an easy-going soul, who, whilst
mutilating her own English tongue, managed to
utterly murder the French one, on the strength of


having once paid a few weeks’ visit to France, for the
sake of her daughter’s education. Her husband and
children had long since quenched these foreign out-
pourings as far as they themselves were concerned,
but whenever an unlucky stranger came to the house,
Mrs. Bell would open fire as soon as her guest was
seated, never caring whether he or she knew French
or not.
Here then was a chance when Mat made his
appearance, which she was not slow to avail herself
of, by asking him whether he could speak or under-
stand French, knowing perfectly well that in his case
he could do neither.
Mat, who wished to be specially civil to the mother
of Annie, answered, —
“ No, ma’am, I have never learnt it, and I would
hardly care about trying to.”
“Not want to learn French! the language of the
present day! And pray, Mat, don’t call me ‘mum,’
as you did in the Forest. If I must 'ave a ’andle, let
it be light and pretty, and pronounce it as I do —
Madam. And now will you pass me the ‘ menoo.’ ”
It so happened that this was the exact word, as
pronounced by Mrs. Bell, for one of the snakes of the
Waigonda country.
Mat was puzzled, but thinking that he must have
overlooked the dish, he carefully glanced over table,
sideboard, and mantlepiece; but not perceiving any
roast snake, replied,—


“ I do not see it, ‘ mydam.’ ”
Mrs. Bell was just commencing, with a kindly
wave of her hand, “ Oh, numport,” when the squire
bade her, “ Stop that fooling.”
Annie meantime slyly conveyed the bill of fare
over to her mother.
But the latter was not going to be shut up so soon
before her guest, on this, her favourite topic, and in
spite of her husband telling her either to talk English
or “ Blackfcllow,” she continued, to Bell first, —
“Yes, my dear, I can see, having lived in Parry,
not to mention Cally, that Mat does not know the
divine language, but it’s never too late to learn.”
Then turning to our forester : “ I see you’re not quite
‘ comme il faut au fait,’ but I want to hear the ’ole
of your adventures, so we’ll have a little ‘ cosy ’
after dinner on the verandah. It is late, so came
along.”
Mat said to himself, “ Whatever language cosy is,
it means a pipe for me” as he followed the others out
of the room.
Parson Tabor, whose age was nearly sixty, had, in
his earlier days, had a hard life of it in Western
Australia.
At one period of his life he had headed a little band
of explorers to that country, starting from Melbourne
in a small, badly-found vessel, with a small cargo of
sheep, which they had intended taking the whole
way by coast.


The result was disastrous. Their vessel was wrecked
when off the north-western portion of the continent,
their sheep drowned, and themselves only escaping
ashore to find that they had come to a land in which
there was scarcely any water, and inhabited by hostile
blacks. Most of the party managed with difficulty to
reach, at length, the settlements ; and Tabor found
means to return to Victoria by a coasting-vessel.
But the hardships which he had endured for many
months had told severely upon his constitution, and
from the time of his arrival in civilized life, he had
taken holy orders, and settled down as a clergyman,
L pon arriving at Sydney, he had also accepted the
situation of tutor in the squire’s family. Before
leaving Victoria on his ill-fated expedition he had
lost his wife, and it was this event, so preying upon
his mind, which had caused him, by seeking a new
colony, to endeavour to blot out associations con-
nected with the old.
\\ hen the little party at Bulinda Creek had stepped
out on to the verandah, and made themselves com-
fortable in easy chairs, Tabor turned to Mat, and
said, —
“Your history, that you related the other night,
is of the deepest interest to me, for I have suffered
hardships and lived for a time amongst the natives,
but in my case they were not the friendly-disposed
fellows that yours proved.
“One matter that you mentioned has struck many


of us, especially a friend of mine—an old explorer,
too—named Lund. He was not in Sydney at the
time of your lecture, but he received the newspapers
which so fully gave the account, and wrote to me by
return of post. This is what he says : ‘ Find out from
Stanley anything more about the white men he heard
of as passing to the west.’
“ I mention this to you, as Lund asked me to ; but
I may as well say that I heard you asked this very
question by numbers of people after your lecture,
and, from what I gathered, you said that you knew
no more than what you had told them there.”
“ That is so, Mr. Tabor; I can add but little to it.
Before we knew the language, we guessed, from the
signs of the natives, that there were other white men
far to the west of us ; and months afterwards, when
we could speak to the tribes and understand two or
three dialects, they again said that they had heard
that there was a white man, with some black men and
some very large and strange animals, working their
way northwards.”
“Then” said Tabor, with emphasis, “ that which
every one surmises must be the case. The white
man, without doubt, was one of our greatest ex-
plorers,'who has disappeared for years without leaving
the slightest clue as to his ultimate fate.
“My friend, who loved this man as a brother,found
himself too old to search for him himself, but he or-
ganized an expedition to try and follow him up, with


but faint hopes, however, of finding the lost man, as
previous similar attempts had utterly failed.
“ I have made myself acquainted with poetry and
poems, more or less, which have been written by the
greatest British and American poets, but never , to my
mind, have I ever heard anything which, for lovelv
J /O'
expression of holy feelings and great beauty of
wording, came up to the lines'which my friend wrote
on the eve of the departure of the explorers in search
of the lost one , —on the one who ever dwelt lightly on
the keen sufferings he endured on his former grand
expedition, whose simple faith in the goodness of the
Almighty seems silently to have supported him in his
trials, and to have been thankfully acknowledged.”
So far, the conversation had been carried on between
Parson Tabor and Mat, but at this point Annie broke
in with, —
“ Do you remember those lines, Mr. Tabor, and can
you repeat them to us ? ”
“Do I remember them, Annie ? Yes; I could never
forget them. Listen ! ”
o
It had now become almost too dark for our little
home party to see each other’s faces. A “ moon-
plant,” in the full glory of its lovely large white
flowers, partly covered a corner of the verandah, which
a last streak of evening light had brightened from the
surrounding gloom.
Under the soft white blossoms of the gigantic
convolvulus Parson Tabor took his stand, and with out-


stretched hand, and in soft, yet manly tones, rehearsed
tiic following lines :
“ Ye, who prepare with Pilgrim feet
Your long and doubtful path to wend.
If whitening on the waste ye meet
The relics of my murdered friend.
His bones with reverence ye shall bear,
To where some mountain streamlet flows,
There by its mossy bank prepare
The pillow of his long repose.
"It shall be by a stream, whose tides
Are drunk by birds of every wing,
Where every loveliest flower abides
The earliest wakening touch of spring
Oh ! meet that he who so caressed
All beauteous nature’s varied charms,
That he, her martyred son. should rest
\\ ithin his mother’s fondest arms.
“ W hen ye have made his narrow bed
And laid the good man’s ashes there,
Ye shall kneel round about the dead
And wait upon your God in prayer.
W hat though no reverend man be near,
No solemn anthem with its breath,
No holy walls invest his bier
With all the hallowed pomp of death ;
'*\et humble minds shall find the grace,
Devoutly bowed upon the sod.
Which calls a blessing round the place,
And consecrates the soil to God.
When ye, your gracious task have done,
Heap not the rock above his dust.
The angel of the Lord alone
Protects the ashes of the just.


“ And oh ! bethink in other times,
And be those happier times at hand,
When Progress, like the smile of God,
Comes brightening o’er this weary land.
Then shall her pilgrims hail the power
Beneath the drooping myall’s gloom,
To sit at eve and mourn an hour,
And pluck a leaf from Leichardt's tomb.” 1
As the parson concluded his recital, the suspicion
of a gentle little sob came from the direction where
Annie was sitting, whilst Bell and Mat said they
thought that they would take a turn and finish their
smoke in the garden, until it was time to go to bed.
The next day, after breakfast, the squire said, —
“ Come along, Mat, let’s go towards the stockyard ;
I want to have a chat with you. You will have to
hang your hat up here. I will show you a room I
have for you in the bachelors’ quarters presently.”
“You are very kind,” answered our forester, who
had noticed the little preparations made for him, and
had been thinking it all over; “ but I would rather
join Tom at the out-station.”
“ Bless my soul! Why, you have had enough of a
lonely life, surely, my boy. Tom is out all day,
and there are only blacks there, besides a stockman.”
“Well, squire, I’d like to see Tom again; besides,
I am not used to ladies’ society.”
1 The writer learnt these verses in Northern Queensland
many years ago from an old Bushman (since dead), who had
picked them up in the same casual manner.


My prophetic soul! Stuff and nonsense! Mrs.
Bell wants to hear your adventures from your own
lips, and says you must stay. I’ll call her. Follow
me into the house ! ”
When Mrs. Bell appeared, she begged that Mat
would remain ; as, she said, she “’adn’t ’card ’alf his
adventures, and, besides, there was a most “ dis-
tinguey professor of the French language coming to
stay with them, who had brought most flattering
testimonials from friends down south, and she wished
him to make his acquaintance.
“ Thank you, ‘ mydam,’” answered Mat; “ but Ido
not want to know the Frenchman.”
But he s such a tall, distinguished-looking ‘ parrty/
and he is coming to perfect my daughter in his
language. Of course, I shall hear what his pronuncia-
tion is like before regularly engaging him.”
Mat was still obdurate. So Mrs. Bell continued,
“y° u must go and join Tom, as the squire says
you wish to, will you drop in sometimes—it’s not
twenty miles from ’ere, you know—and take a short
lesson ? You will find it the greatest comfort.”
“ Y es, I will do that,” answered Mat, thankful to
have “got out of the Frenchman for the present.
lam so glad to hear you say so. Ihe professor
won’t be here for a month, I expect, but I shall see
you before then. Now, go and get some air, for you
look quite ‘ degage.’ ”
“Is she gone ? asked Bell, who, finding that French


was coming up again, had made his escape, and now
met Mat as he appeared outside the house. “ Well,
then, I want to ask you where you would like to
stow those nuggets you were telling me about. The
bachelors’ quarters are not safe, as every one goes in
there. Supposing you put them in my room ? ”
“Thank you ; that will be safe enough, I am sure,”
and the two men separated.
The following day Mat had intended to join Tom,
but was delayed on account of Dromoora and his wife.
He had told them that the squire had promised
them an escort to see them safely back to their tribe ;
but the chief, being now away from the towns, begged
to be allowed to see a little more of station-life, as he
could hunt and fish, and be his own master in the bush,
besides, he had made friends with some station blacks
who were camped at the lagoon, and now he thought
Mat might teach him how to use the thunder-stick.
This change of plans relieved Mat, as he knew
that Bell was rather short-handed, and could ill
spare the men for this escort just then ; so he took the
opportunity to instruct Dromoora in the use of a gun,
finally leaving that doughty chief a proficient in the
art of shooting anything sitting or swimming.
Our forester had been for some few weeks at the
out-station, when one morning two letters were
handed to him, one from Mrs. Bell to say that the
piofessor had arrived, and the other from Tim —a
very short one—saying that he did not much fancy


the Keens, that he had got rheumatism again, and
altogether felt restless, and was determined to join
his brother, and might turn up any day.
To Mrs. Bell’s delight the Frenchman had, indeed,
arrived at Bulinda Creek, bowing his way into the
house and making pretty speeches to the ladies.
Mrs. Bell had once before, in Sydney, had an inter-
view with him, and now, after introducing him to her
husband, beckoned the latter out of the room.
“ Isn't he charming , Bell,” she said ; “ I really quite
felt in dear Parry again when he spoke.”
But the squire was by no means so favourably
impressed. He had eyed the professor askance, and
now told his wife to lock up her spoons.
“ What! my dear ! ” she answered, “ you’re joking ;
look at his manners, look at his ‘ton.’ What a grand
face, what eyes, and such a lovely moustache! ”
“Yes, it’s just his face I don’t like,” retorted her
husband; “and his eyes are beastly cunning when he
thinks you’re not looking at him ; his moustache, to
my mind, is rather too good.”
“ But,” sharply continued Mrs. Bell, “ you will
never see that the French, though perhaps a little
vain as to their personal appearance, are ‘au fond,’ a
noble race ; which means that they are a fine people
‘ at bottom.’ ”
“Ha! ha!” laughed the squire, “you’re getting
worse and worse, that’s exactly what the great Duke
said, —but I’ll tell you the story.


“ Some time after the Battle of Waterloo, Welling-
ton’s health happened to be proposed at a great
dinner at which he was present, and at which there
happened to be also a number of French officers.
These stood up, but on hearing who the individual
was that was about to be pledged, immediately faced
round and turned their backs towards the Duke, who
simply remarked, as he sat at the table, ‘ Not the
first time, gentlemen, that you have turned your
backs upon me.’
“ I want no more arguments,” concluded Bell, “but
the less I see of this hair-dresser, the better I shall
be pleased.”
So Monsieur Rayon, such was the Frenchman’s
name, was duly installed at the Creek, making him-
self agreeable to the ladies, and, whilst showing an
equal civility to the squire, avoiding him as much as
possible, explaining to Mrs. Bell that it was natural
her husband took no notice of him, as he disliked
the French language. Matters, however, went on
smoothly enough, Rayon giving lessons to mother
and daughter, and rendering himself tolerable to the
squire, by insisting upon every one speaking English
when he was present, a language which seemed
as facile to him as French.
After Rayon had been settled a few days at
Bulinda Creek, Mat happened to return late one
evening to the station, and discovered the squire
smoking a cigar with the Frenchman.


The latter, as it turned out, had brought some full-
flavoured “ Havannahs ” with him. Now. if Bell had
one weakness, it was a good cigar; so that in spite of
his dislike to the foreigner, he felt bound in honour,
as he explained to the members of his family, to
smoke with him, when these were produced.
Mat had never seen Rayon till now, and on this
occasion it was too dark to see his features distinctly.
On reaching the verandah he was introduced to him,
when the foreigner made him a profound bow, and
said how proud he was to make the acquaintance of
such a “voyageur,” as all Australia was ringing with
his name ; which flowery speech Mat received with a
slight bow, and addressing himself to the squire, the
two were soon deep in matters connected with the
out-station, which they discussed until it was time to
turn in.
Next day, Mrs. Bell seeing Mat at the station,
accosted him with, —
“ I’m so glad to see you, Mat; now you’ll stop and
’av a lesson.”
“ No, I’m sorry I can’t,” he replied. “ I only came
in for the two horses ‘Wallaby’ and ‘Timeringle,’
and Tom must have them to-night; but I’ll be back
again soon, and stay a few days.”
“Oh, do! Monsieur Rayon is such a dear man, and
tells such amusing stories of ‘ Parisien ’ society, and
he’ll talk to you in English too. Poor man, he is
dreadfully troubled with indigestion, and walks in his


sleep. One night I was sleeping heavily, as I had
taken a little chlorale for neuralgia, when my husband
saw him in our room, and called out ; yet he took no
notice, but walked on, out of the ‘ French light ’ and
back to his own quarters, and the next day remem-
bered nothing about it. What a wonderful thing
somnambulism is ! ”
Mat reached the out-station and delivered the
horses in good time. Tom thanked him for his
ready help, and asked him if he would go again on
the following Monday and bring his father back, as
there was to be a meeting of importance, at which
Parson Tabor would also be present, who with his
sound advice would be of great service in discussing
the question as to how they could put an end to the
encroachments of the “cockatoo squatters,” or small
free selectors who, as a gang of useless loafers, infested
the run, with suspicious-looking intent.
Mat expressed his readiness to go, and accordingly,
when the time approached, prepared to start for
Bulinda, but as he could not find the horse he wanted
for the journey, he had to put up with an old one
that had had a hard week of it after cattle, and
in consequence he did not reach the station until
midnight.
Having turned his weary beast into the paddock,
he entered the house to tell the squire of Tom’s
wishes.
Bell was asleep, but came out at once on hearing


Mat’s summons, told him in answer to his question
that he would be ready to start in the morning with
Tabor, bade him get some refreshment, and turn
into the empty room next the Frenchman’s.
Mat went off to the sleeping-quarters to which he
had been directed ; but not finding any light, felt his
way to the “ bunk,” and turned in, though he did not
go to sleep, as he had much to divert his thoughts
with regard to a proposition which Tom had made
him in connection with his taking charge of the out-
station. After he had been in bed but a short time,
his train of thoughts was diverted by the sound of
whispering ; then a match was struck apparently close
to him, yet he could see no light. Softly creeping
out of bed, he was aware of a glimmer which came
through a chink in the log-hut, evidently from a room
next his own.
Straining his eye to the crack, he saw a human
hand on a table—more he could, not see. So feeling
about he found a beam, and cautiously drew himself
up to where the chink was larger, when just as he was
about to apply his eye to the crevice, he heard the
whispered but unconnected words, “That—gipsy—
to-morrow.” Again straining his eyes, he could in-
distinctly make out two scrubby heads in the dim
light beneath him. Whilst he was thus watching, one
of the speakers slightly raised his face. Our forester
was certain that he had seen those features before,
but to obtain a better view he slightly shifted his


position, and in doing so knocked off a piece of har-
ness which had been left hanging on the beam, and
which fell with a heavy thud on to the earthen floor.
Instantly the light was extinguished, and dead
silence reigned.
Mat quickly let himself down, regained his bunk,
and sat there till morning, pistol in hand, and nothing
more happened to disturb him through what ap-
peared an endless night. Had Jumper been there to
guard him, he might have enjoyed some sleep, but
Jumper he had always left to guard the squire’s bed-
room at the latter’s request.
When the family were assembled for breakfast next
morning, the Frenchman, amongst others, greeted
Mat most cordially, and asked him how he had slept
after his fatiguing journey, not being aware that he
had occupied a different room to that which he was
accustomed to use.
“ T °t very well,” replied our forester. “Some one
talked all night, and struck lights, and I could not
sleep.”
This he said, fixing his piercing eyes on the French-
man as though he would look him through. But
Rayon, whilst avoiding his gaze, answered in an ap-
parently unconcerned manner, —
“ Ah, my dear friend, I expect it was me you
heard. I had such an attack of indigestion, and when
I suffer from that, I walk in my sleep.”
“Oh ! ” began Mat, still fixing the man with his


gaze; but he was interrupted at this point by the
entrance of a boy with the mail from Sydney.
One letter was for Rayon, who, after glancing at
its contents, said in an apparently agitated voice,—
“ Business of great importance obliges me to ‘ ren-
der 5 myself in Sydney. I bought some valuable land
there, and my agent, I now hear, has run away with
the title-deeds.”
“ How dreadful! ” said Mrs. Bell. “ When will you
be back ? ”
“ Directlyl find the deeds, madame ; I must be off
at once, and try to discover the agent.’' And bowing
profusely in a general way, the Professor left the table.
“ And I will see him off,” thought Mat, as he
followed the Frenchman out.
Going to the hut, Mat found “ his man ” in the act
of packing his things, and under pretence of helping
him to strap his valise, brushed his arm across Raj on’s
heaJ, when, presto ! off tumbled a wig, disclosing a
shock head of hair of a much lighter colour under-
neath.
A furious oath of a strictly British character
escaped Rayon’s lips,, but the next instant he col-
lected himself together, apologized most deeply for
swearing, and explained that having had a fever, he
was obliged to wear a “ peruke.”
“ Yes, I see,” laughed Mat ; “ but I wish you
would give me the address of the gentleman who
cropped you. “ I want my own hair cut ! ”


By this time Rayon had mounted a horse which was
tied up close to the hut, and which Mat saw was a
stranger to the station, a better class of animal than
he had seen on the run yet. Feeling himself now
safe, the “ Professor” turned to Mat with a scowl, —
“ You'll find out before long, you low-bred gipsy.'”
“ Ha! ha ! ha ! ” yelled our forester, as the man
rode away, “ You lost your head when you lost your
wig. Why didn’t you keep to French, you fool? I
mightn’t have understood you then. Ido now.”
Rayon seemed half inclined to rein up as he heard
this parting shot, but thinking better of it, only
replied by an insulting gesture, and the next minute
galloped out of sight.
Mat was now in a dilemma.
He would have given anything to have stayed
behind, and let the squire and Tabor go on to Tom’s
abode ; but when, upon meeting with Bell, he sug-
gested this, and gave his reasons, the latter would not
listen to him, but for once lost his temper with our
hero, replying in an angry 7 tone, —
“ Stop behind ? We go without you ? Don’t talk
like that, Mat, when there’s all this bother at the out-
station. You don’t know foreigners as I do (the
squire had met somewhere about a dozen in his
life). Three parts of the French nation wear wigs,
just as all the Germans wear spectacles. Tell
“ Dromoora” to look after the station ; we shan’t be
gone long. Come.”


Mat was not convinced, but was fain at length to
let the old man have his way, as he was getting
more purple than ever with rage. So calling up the
chief, he put him on his guard, at the same time
telling him to warn Tim, who might arrive any hour.
Dromoora replied that he would look out a good
deal now, as he had to be all round the country to
procure some plain-turkeys, or bustards, which Mrs.
Bell wanted him to shoot.
So Mat, bidding farewell to Mrs. Bell and Annie,
rode away with his two companions to the out-station.


CHAPTER XIII.
Tim’s unpleasant reception at Bulinda—The bushranger’s
camp—The robbery—Annie kidnapped—Tim’s good Sa-
maritans.
We will now take up the thread of Tim’s movements
since he quitted the “ Keen ” family. He first made
his way by sea to Sydney, and, hiring a horse, rode
out to the first station on the road to Bulinda Creek,
leaving his “traps” to be sent direct to the squire’s
by one of the drays which were passing at intervals
between the town and the station.
Having arrived at his destination, he found, upon
making the acquaintance of the family who owned it,
that they were so glad to welcome him, and so hospi-
tably inclined, that he determined to stay there a few
days. At the end of that time he felt himself so much
improved in health, that he made up his mind to walk
the rest of the way to Bulinda Creek.
Having informed his newly-made friends of his
intention, and bidding them farewell, he started one
bright moonlight night, having before him, as he had
been told, a well-defined track as far as the outside
fence of Bell’s property.


Tim had just reached the Bulinda home-paddock
fence, when a horseman rode out from a neighbouring
scrub, and, without the slightest warning or preface,
came close up to him, and exclaimed, “ Be your name
Stanley ? ”
Tim, rather taken off his guard at this sudden
question, answered, “ Yes ! Why ? ”
“Then take that!” replied the man, with an oath,
and without another word drew a pistol and shot poor
Tim through the chest.
This terrible incident happened only a few hours
after Rayon had quitted Bulinda.
To the north of Bulinda, but several miles from that
station, lay a deep creek with a broad sandy bottom.
In the rainy season this ravine was a roaring tor-
rent ; uoiv, not a drop of water was to be seen, with
the exception of one or two tiny pools far down in
the rocks, where the sun could not pierce.
Three men were seated one day round a tiny firj
in tlvs creek. All three bore the same stamp of low
brutality on their clean-shaven faces; and as a!l
possessed the same scrubby heads of hair, they might
at first sight have been taken for brothers.
A couple of horses, which, to judge by their ap-
pearance, had just come off a hard journey, were
tethered close by, and the men were preparing to
camp for the night, though retaining their clothes and
boots.
One of the party, who exhibited a huge scar on his


face, was evidently looked upon as the leader, and
treated with a certain amount of respect by his com-
panions.
This leader, who was addressed as “Jack,” was
saying with many oaths, —
“I tell you it’s all right. You may say he rode
off, but I know he was on foot when I met him, and
I shot him as dead as a door-nail, I’ll swear it, as
sure as I was ‘ lagged ’ for sheep-lifting.”
“Ay, but I’ve got eyes in my head, too,” re-
turned the tallest of his companions. “You must
have had too much grog, and shot the wrong man
some chap looking for work, I expect. Why, I'll
swear they had got all their horses saddled and were
riding off to the out-station when I left.”
“ Yes,” broke in the man who had not as yet spoken,
whose name was Mike, “ when I was doing the cooking
for young Bell, I heard him say he expected all three
that day.”
“You lie,” said Jack, turning to the first speaker.
“ I shot a bloke who said his name was Stanley, and
he had a black beard. It's you who were drunk ; and
if I find you’ve been playing me any of your old
tricks, I’ll shoot you as dead as a ‘ nit.’ I knows what
I knows. There’s only that cursed nigger about now,
and Mike here says as he knows for sure that he’s
always away shootin’ birds with his gun. I ’av’nt
followed them nuggets down from the north to be
baulked now. I’ve ’ad one bite of ’em, and I’ll ’ave


another, and the girl at the same time. Now the
gipsy’s ‘copped’ I’ll do it; I’ll collar the wench
through blacks and whites. Well, I’ve told you two
what to do ; but I’ll tell you again, else you’ll make a
‘ hash ’of it. You ” —this to the tallest man—“ get into
the house first, and lead the way, as you know where
the ‘ swag ’is ; and you ” —to Mike—“ must hold the
horses ready outside. T’other blokes I’ve told to
look after the camp whilst we’re away. Now you
two get back to your ‘ Humpy,’ and meet me here
to-morrow night after sundown, and mind you’re both
sober.” Saying which, Jack took a pull at a bottle
he had with him, kicked out his fire, and prepared to
sleep in an old blanket which he pulled off one of the
horses.
These men consisted of a portion of the murderous
gang who, under the guise of “ free selectors,” had for
present purposes settled down in the district.
These outlaws, partly from fear, more from the
hope of gain, supplied the man they called Jack with
food, acted as scouts for him, and, under the pretence
of looking for country, made it their business to find
out stations and branch banks which were worth
“ sticking up ; ” whilst Jack himself was nothing less
than the famous bushranger of the day, John Magan.
An escaped convict, he had committed more mur-
ders—many of them of the most cold-blooded descrip-
tion —and robberies, single-handed, than had any of
the other gangs by which the country was infested.


He had long since been outlawed, and a price put
upon his head. However, by constantly changing
his camp and assuming different disguises, but more
particularly by having so many of his “ pals ” in league
with him, he was still free.
More than once had the police tracked him to his
lair, fired at, and even hit him, as they believed, but
hitherto he had borne a charmed life, and seemed
actually proof against powder and lead, whilst his
assailants came off second best in the fight, and
Magan escaped on his horse, which he always kept
ready saddled close to him.
According to agreement the conspirators met again
the next evening at the appointed time, and arming
themselves, proceeded at once by the nearest route to
Bulinda Creek.
So far everything seemed to favour their plans, for
the night was pitchy dark, and not a sound could be
heard as they approached the house.
When they arrived within a stone’s throw of the
building they dismounted, and leaving Mike to hold
the horses, Jack and his companion crawled to the
steps of the verandah. The tall man ascended first,
and in his stockinged feet gained the bedside of
Mrs. Bell ; he then felt for, and commenced to drag
silently out the heavy box of nuggets.
The noise caused by this act, however, woke old
Jumper, whose senses had latterly been very dull,
and springing out he fastened his teeth in the in-


trader’s arm. This was met by a blow from the butt
end of a pistol, which though partly stunning the
dog, never caused him to relax his hold. But the
tall ruffian had a far worse assailant to deal with, and
this time from above his head.
It so happened that Mrs. Bell had been lately
suffering much from neuralgia, and lying half asleep
had been awakened to her full senses by the rush
and furious growl of Jumper. At the same moment
she put out her hand to feel for the old dog, when it
came into contact with a scrubby head of human hair.
Uttering a scream, and losing her balance at the
same moment, she came right down on the top of
the crouching figure, and in doing so she dragged
a voluminous mosquito-net with her, when a dim
night-light burning in the room showed her the form
of a man struggling with Jumper.
In an instant she comprehended the situation ; her
self-possession did not desert her, for seizing her
bottle of chloral, she dashed half the contents into
the man’s eyes and nose, and as he opened his mouth
to give vent to most fearful curses, she rammed the
rest, bottle and all, into his throat.
Whilst this scene, which barely occupied a
minute, was taking place on one side of the room,
a struggle of a different character was going on,
oh the other.
Annie had been reclining fully dressed on a couch,
so as to be ready to fetch some medicine for her sick


mother in case of need, from a little store-closet
outside the house.
Dozing somewhat wearily, she felt herself suddenly
seized in the grip of a powerful arm, and in spite of
her frantic struggles, a towel was the next moment
forced into her mouth, and she felt herself carried,
whilst struggling for breath, towards the verandah.
Magan had nearly reached his horse with his
almost unconscious burden, when a dark figure came
rushing out of the surrounding gloom and drove a
heavy spear on to his back, being the only part of
his body which could safely be assaulted, by reason
of Annie’s form guarding the rest. The spear reached
its mark with a heavy thud, but the only effect of the
blow was to make the bushranger redouble his
efforts to gain the horse.
Dromoora, for he it was, now hurled a heavy club
at the man as he hoisted himself into the saddle,
aided by Mike. The blow told, and knocked Magan
forward in his saddle ; Dromoora with a bound was
on to him with a long-biaded knife, making a blow
a him between the shoulders ; the bushranger’s
horse at that moment gave a bound forward, the
knife glanced off and entered the calf of Magan’s
leg, causing a wound, which, however, in no way
had the effect of unseating him, and with another
bound the horse and his rider had disappeared into
the surrounding darkness, with Annie stretched across
the saddle-bow.


Mike would have gone to the help of his chief, or
would more likely perhaps have attacked Dromoora,
had not his time been entirely taken up during the
latter part of the fray in trying to curb the remaining
two horses which he was holding.
These animals, affrighted at the combat, plunged
and reared to such an extent that one of them broke
clean away, when Mike, seeing Dromoora rushing
upon him with an open knife, flung himself on to
the back of the other, and galloped off.
Our Waigonda chief hadbeen out hunting thewhole
of the previous day, in a vain endeavour to shoot
a turkey for Mrs. Bell. These birds had been much
disturbed of late, and in consequence had sought
more distant plains, too far for Dromoora to pursue
them, as he had promised Mat to sleep at the station
always during his absence. So the chief had come in
late at night tired with his tramp, and from carrying
a number of ducks, which he had procured without
difficulty on the numerous lagoons near the station.
He and his wife were camped within two hundred
yards of the house in their usual place, when Terebare
woke him up, saying, “Quick to the station.” She
had heard several shrieks which Mrs. Bell had given
vent to after she had fallen on the burglar. Dromoora
seeing that the case was urgent, left his gun, which
he had no time to load, and with spears and a club
rushed into the darkness, and encountered Magan as
we have seen.


When he saw that Mike had escaped him also, he
turned to Terebare, who had followed him out of
their camp with fresh weapons, and pointing in the
direction of the out-station, said, “ Quick, run all the
way ; there are no white men here, bring the white
chief and his friends.”
He then jumped on to the verandah, and hearing a
moaning noise proceeding from the house, struck a
match, and, guided by the sound, walked into the
squire’s bedroom, when an extraordinary scene pre-
sented itself to his gaze.
Amidst a quantity of overturned furniture and
medicine-bottles, lit up by the feeble glimmer of an
expiring night-light, lay a man as white as death,
enveloped in a mosquito-net, struggling for breath,
which came in convulsive gasps from his foam-
bedewed lips, whilst his face appeared to be smeared
over with a brown liquid : near him, and supported
by the legs of the bedstead, lay Mrs. Bell in a kind
of stupor. Remembering how water had brought him
to in the great fight with the Tingura, our chief, cast-
ing his eyes around, to his great joy espied a large
bath full of water; and intending to empty the whole
of the contents over Mrs. Bell, commenced the opera-
tion by pouring a gallon or two on to her head. The
effect was surprising ; for his patient immediately
sprang to her feet, asking wildly where she was, and
what had happened. Paying no attention to these
questions, as he saw that she was not hurt, Dromoora


next approached the partly insensible prisoner, and
whilst playfully toying with the edge of his long knife,
asked permission to cut the throat of the white man.
But Mrs. Bell, with a horrified look, cried, “ Oh, no ,
no."
Finding that this pleasure was denied him, the chief
proceeded to tie the legs and arms of the prisoner
together with the bed-clothes, making all fast to the
leg of the bed.
Then turning again to Mrs, Bell, he said, —
“Missy gone along a ‘yarraman’ and white
fellow.”
“What horse! what white fellow?” she shrieked.
“ What! Annie carried off, do you mean ? ”
Our chief was beginning to explain matters, and to
describe the late fight with great zest, when Mrs. Bell
interrupted him with, —
“ Don’t ‘ yabber ’ any more ; oh ! if the others were
only home.”
“ Me send Terebare long ago—come by-m-by.”
“ Good man,” faltered Mrs. Bell, “ there’s nothing
can be done till they come.”
At length, after a weary waiting of some six or
seven hours, Dromoora’s well-practised ear caught the
sound of hoofs, and rushing out, and then along the
track, he encountered the horsemen before they
reached the “slip-rails ” of the home-paddock.
As they galloped, so Dromoora ran alongside Mat’s
horse, giving our forester an account of the fight in a


few hurried sentences, which Mat interpreted to his
companions.
Not a word spoke the squire or Mat as they flung
themselves off their horses at the steps of the verandah.
The squire and Tabor went into the house, Mat
into the bachelors’ quarters to his room, and returning
immediately, called out the squire, and told him that
he was off at once on the tracks of the bushranger,
and bade the old man not to fret. Bell pressed his
hand, and in a husky whisper said, —
“ kind my daughter, Mat, and God prosper you ; I
will come after you soon.”
Just previous to the raid of the bushrangers
on Bulinda Creek, on a clear morning, with a touch
of frost in the air, two hawkers, named Langridge,
father and son, were travelling with a light cart
along one of the many tracks which led from the
Blue Mountains to Sydney.
These men had been up country with fancy goods,
and having disposed of them to their satisfaction, were
returning in high spirits to their native town. The
particular road which they were using was new to
them, and they had camped in one of Bell’s paddocks
without being aware that the station was close to
them.
Whilst engaged discussing the various classes of
goods which they should lay in for their next trip,
their little dog, which had been frisking along in front
of the horse, suddenly turned off the track into the


long grass, and commenced barking round some
object lying there.
Ever alive to the chance of killing a snake, which
they were certain it was, father and son rushed up,
armed with a whip and some sticks, but when they
gained the spot they were startled and horrified to find
there the body of a man stretched out to all appearance
dead.
The two men went down on their knees to examine
more closely the supposed corpse, and to their joy
found that the man not only breathed, but moved his
head and opened his eyes, as though the sound of their
voices had awakened him.
Father and son then gently lifted him into a sitting
position, and in doing so remarked blood upon the
grass, which had evidently escaped from the man’s
mouth, whereupon they forbore moving him again
until they could discern the nature of his wound ;
whilst looking for this the wounded man whispered
f * water,” upon which the younger man at once ran back
to the cart, and returned with a large tin mug, which
he had filled with water, adding a few drops of rum.
The suffering man gulped this down eagerly, and
seemed at once to be considerably revived, whilst a
faint colour returned to his cheeks, which before had
been deadly pale.
The hawkers, seeing that he had more appearance
of life in him, whilst still supporting him asked him
his name.


“ Stanley,” was the feeble answer.
It was indeed the youngest of our foresters, the
unfortunate Tim.
“ Don’t know that name,” remarked the elder
traveller shaking his head ; “ however, that's no odds.
Now, Stanley,” he continued, “ you shake your head
or make signs according as you want me to do this or
that, ’cos I can see your lungs are wrong somehow, so
don't speak. Where are you hurt ? ”
Tim pointed to his chest, which was enveloped in a
thick blue jumper or jersey ; for when he had started
on his moonlight walk the weather had been very
keen. On looking to where Tim pointed the hawkers
could see a little round hole in the jersey.
“ I know of no doctor about here,” continued the
elder man ; “shall we take you on to Sydney, we can
carry you in a cart pretty easy ? ”
Tim made an affirmative sign, and the men left him
to prepare their cart, having first made him as com-
fortable as circumstances would permit, by propping
him up with some bundles of grass. They then pro-
ceeded to make a high and springy bed in their empty
cart, forming it of alternate layers of grass and soft
ti-tree bark ; then bringing the little waggon up to
where Tim was lying, they lifted him carefully and
tenderly in.
Whilst one man walked by the side, and attended
to any wants of the sufferer, the other guided the
horse carefully over rough places, and in this way


they reached Sydney after several hours’ travelling,
and without any conversation on the road, excepting
that when they rested once to give Tim a little relief
from the jolting, they asked him who shot him.
Tim whispered back, “ Don’t know ; never saw him
in my life.”
The two good Samaritans deposited our forester
at the hospital, and upon inquiring of the doctor
whether it was a very bad case, received for answer,
‘ Don’t know yet; shot through the lung, and chilled
all night in the dew.”


CHAPTER XIV
Mat on the trail of the bushranger—Annie's signal—Mat
tracks the bushranger to his lair—The cave—Our hero as
the black warrior once more—A fearful fight—Dromoora’s
timely cry—Annie’s rescue—Blissful moments.
DEfORE Mat made his start after the bushranger, he
o *
had buckled on a brace of pistols, loaded his gun with
a heavy charge of slugs, and put some matches in his
leather pouch. Trusting entirely to his powers of
tracking, he went on foot, knowing that he could
approach his quarry in this manner, and no other.
Pood he did not stop for, either to eat or to burden him-
self with, that he could procure whenever he wished it.
One thing that puzzled him was, what had become of
Dromoora ; the chief had disappeared directly the
white men had dismounted after their ride from the
out-station. However, he had no time to search, his
first object was to find the tracks of the horse which
carried the greatest weight; he could tell as well as
any of the station blacks whether a horse was bcingf
ridden, or simply driven without a rider.
Daylight had broken, and our forester very soon
discovered that one horse had galloped away free, one
had been ridden by an ordinary weight, whilst the


third, which had gone straight away, had carried a
double weight.
The tracks of this last animal he followed up for
the first few miles at a steady run, only pulling up at
mid-day for a short respite at a water-hole. Towards
evening, as the tracks became fainter, he changed to
a more moderate pace, so as not to overrun the trail ;
all night he stuck to it like a sleuth-hound, sometimes
subsiding into a walk, then, as the tracks stood out in
the soft ground in the clear starlight, quickening his
pace again.
For the first few miles of his pursuit he had noticed
the track of a naked foot which had followed the
horse, and which he presumed belonged to some one
of the station blacks who frequented that part, but
after a bit these footmarks disappeared in a direction
away from the one that the horse was taking.
By early morning the trail brought him to another
water-hole —evidently these small lakes were well
known to the man he was pursuing—he perceived here
that the rider had dismounted to get a drink, and he
also saw that there were a few spots of blood on the
grass, as he sat down, for the first time that he had
done so, to roast and eat some “ unios,” a sort of
shellfish, which he found in the water.
Though burning for revenge on a wretch who dared
to touch the girl who was ever uppermost in his
thoughts, and whilst horrible doubts arose in his
mind as to her possible fate, there was a very large


amount of savage or wild feeling in all Mat’s plans
since he started on this race, which gave him an intense
pleasure : so perfect had been his training in the
Waigonda country, that in his mind he ridiculed the
idea of any white man or men being his match as long
as he employed his native tactics. In fine, from the
moment that he took up the trail, he dropped the
white man, and became once more the Waigonda
o
warrior.
After a rather long rest, Mat once more resumed
the trail, again following it all night, and the next
morning to his relief found that he was gaining on
his quarry, for the bushranger’s horse, having to bear
a double load, had been walking for several miles.
Our forester then had another rest, to roast and eat
a carpet snake which he had killed, and smoke a
pipe.
Off again, he crossed a rocky creek, and from there
the tracks entered a dry stony country and trended
towards the east. On this particular part of the
country the footprints of the horse were not discerni-
ble to the ordinary eye. Mat smiled, as he quickly
stepped over this hard ground, and said to himself,
“ The fool thought, I suppose, that his tracks would
now be lost.” Farther on Magan had again dis-
mounted to get water, and here a little matter was
cleared up which had puzzled our forester, namely,
how had the horse been fed all this time ? by bread ,
for by this water-hole was a small hollow full of


crumbs, distinctly showing to Mat’s eye that the
animal had there crunched up a loaf.
One invariable habit of a native black is to cast his
eyes all round into the branches of the trees, so it was
with Mat—a habit which he never lost, and as he
passed his eyes across a mimosa-tree which over-
shadowed the pond, he saw something which made
his heart beat wildly with delight. For there hung a
small shred of muslin. Now he knew that Annie was
well enough to leave a little signal, hanging it up
whilst sitting on the horse’s back.
With redoubled efforts he started on again, when,
upon ascending some high ground, there lay the octati
before him,—the Pacific Ocean, which formed a sil-
very horizon in the distance.
“ Going to get away in a boat,’’ muttered Mat, as
he spurted along the trail.
But in this surmise he was mistaken. Magan
knew better than to trust to the sea as a means of
escape. Besides, his villainous schemes tended in
another direction altogether.
Our forester soon again considered it prudent to
i( slow down, ’ as certain signs showed him that the
man he was pursuing could not be far off. On rounding
the corner of a hill, he found himself over a broad
and steep creek, which was covered on its banks with
dense stunted scrub.
Viewing the nature and “lay” of this ravine, as he
halted above it Mat entirely changed his method of


procedure, and once more prepared to follow the
tactics he had pursued for so many years with the
Waigondas when engaged in stalking game.
Divesting himself of his clothing, and twining green
leaves into his hair and beard, he dropped into the
long blady grass which grew along the bank of the
creek, and, wriggling himself, like a snake, to the
cover of a hibiscus bush, peered cautiously through,
and found that he was right over the robbers’
camp !
A couple of hundred yards to the right of him, and
in the dry bed of the creek, were two men lying
stretched out under a huge specimen of the eucalyptus
(known as the ti-tree, but pronounced te- tree),
with their cabbage-tree hats over their eyes, fast
asleep, and, as Mat hoped, in a drmiken sleep, for he
saw the glitter of empty bottles strewed around them.
Their guns he could also see leaning against the ti-
tree.
All this our forester took in at a glance. Without
shifting his position, he peered anxiously about, until
at length he descried a third man, Magan, wide awake
and eating something, seated on a spit of sand a
few yards higher up than the two sleepers. The
bushranger had chosen his position with great cunning,
not a tree or bush to afford cover to a foe being near
him.
Mat could see, even at the distance that he was,
that the whole attitude of the man betokened extreme


fatigue ; yet ever and anon he turned his head about,
as if listening for any sign of pursuit.
Here was evidently a stronghold of the gang, for
Mat could see a cave in the side of the gulley, with
saddles and swags lying in the mouth of it.
The two men, Mat guessed, had awaited the bush-
ranger at this spot. At all events, he had seen no
other tracks during his pursuit of the robber.
And where was Annie ?
Our forester decided —in that cave.
Long and anxiously did he study the situation, for
one false step would now ruin all.
He had hoped, during his pursuit, that he would
overtake the bushranger as he sat down to rest, with
no one but his helpless victim near him ; but it was
now evident that the cunning robber had never in-
tended to stop for more than an instant until he had
gained his lair and joined his “ pals. ’
Once the thought crossed Mat’s mind that, as he
had three enemies to deal with, he would wait until
the solitary one followed the example of the others,
and went to sleep ; but this idea he at once dismissed.
The agony of waiting , as we know, he never could
tolerate ; and now, with Annie a prisoner, to be un-
occupied would be intolerable to him.
At length, after having viewed the pros and cons
of the life-and-death struggle which he knew must
ensue, our forester made up his mind, drew himself
back from his place of concealment, made a long


detour, and, crossing the creek far below the big tree
which sheltered the two men, he approached their
camp from the other side.
Drawing himself along the ground, he found that
he was out of sight of the single robber, and thus
could approach the other two, whom he found still
asleep, and breathing heavily.
Having reached the guns, he cautiously put out
two fingers, eased the nearest one down from its posi-
tion against the tree, drew it towards him, opened the
pan, shook out the powder, and replaced it as care-
fully in its former position, serving the other one in
the same way. A large powder-flask lying against
one of the men had not escaped his eye. This he
buried deep in the sand. So far, mere child’s play to
our forester. He then retreated a few yards behind a
bush, looked to his own weapons, and took stock of the
place where he knew Hagan was sitting. Cautiously
peeping, he saw that he could shoot the man dead from
where he was lying concealed, but this act did not enter
into his plan. He wanted to get his gun, and so
have him, he hoped, at his mercy.
He found, upon further spying, that he would have
to make another detour to get round to the back of
his man ; and herein lay the difficulty, owing to want
of cover.
He now, for the first time, saw what he knew the
robber must have with him—the gun, lying near
Magan’s right hand, and slightly behind him. “If I


get that ” thought Mat, “ it will be the stalk of my
whole life and he crawled away. It seemed hours
to him before he had come round to the edge of the
sandy plain to the rear of Magan. Once there, he
wormed his way in the required direction with eyes
fixed on the robber, and grasping his gun ready for
any emergency.
Every time that the man was not looking at his
food—each time that he looked up or about him—
Mat was as a stone , and, in truth, his body being the
exact colour of the ruddy sand on which he lay, it
would have taken something sharper than a white
man’s eye to detect him.
Slowly he crept on. He could hear once, in the
stillness of the air, one of the two men turn over and
grumble in his sleep, and again was Mat motionless.
At last, his heart thumping so that he was afraid
it would be heard, silently and gently he drew him-
self so close behind the bushranger that he could hear
him breathe ; his hand was upon the gun, lifting it
gently, when the man made a movement as though
he would get up.
Mat’s other hand stole to his pistol, but Magan
had only reached forward to get a bottle, and whilst
applying it to his lips, our forester took the oppor-
tunity to slip back behind a slight ridge in the sand,
Magan’s gun in his hand. This he securely hid as
soon as he could do so with safety.
Continuing his retreat by the way he had come, he


passed the two sleepers, helped himself to a small
“ damper ” which was lying ready baked near a tiny
hre and which he had previously noticed, but had
left until his retreat, and recrossing the creek again
regained his clothes.
Putting these quickly on and eating a mouthful of
the bread, he came again into the creek, walked up,
hidden by the bushes, to within thirty yards of
Magan, stepped out into the open, and cried, “ Throw
up your arms, my mates are behind me,” at the same
time covering the man with his pistol.
The bushranger looked up and felt for his gun, but
not finding it, he got up leisurely on his feet, instead
of springing up as Mat had expected.
But once erect he snatched a pistol from his breast
and shot at Mat.
Our hero, watching his eye, had seen his intention,
and springing to one side, the bullet flew harmlessly
by him.
Mat returned the fire instantaneously and hit
Magan full in the chest, but to his astonishment the
latter instead of falling was merely spun partly round,
and steadying himself once more discharged another
pistol at Mat.
The ball again flew wide, and Mat returned the
fire with the same result as before, and Magan drew
yet a third pistol.
Our hero had dodged the two first shots by spring-
ing to one side or the other, but at this third attempt
b




“The Death of Magan.”
[Page 211,


at shooting' him he tried another ruse by springing
high into the air ; he did not, however, come off
scathless, for he was aware of a smarting blow like a
red-hot iron, passing round his thigh.
The thought that flashed through his mind at this
period of the fight was, “I did not put enough
powder into the pistols, but Old Joe’s got a fearful
dose in her.”
Magan at this moment turned his head on one side
to look for his gun. Mat threw up his Manton to
riddle his antagonist’s neck, and was in the act of
pulling the trigger, when a voice from the bushes
almost under his feet yelled out in Waigonda,—
“ Hit in lower legs for your life.”
For an instant Magan darted a glance to the spot
from whence the voice proceeded.
.Mat never moved his head, such was our hero’s
nerve, but depressing his aim, poured the contents of
both barrels into his adversary’s legs, when the bush-
ranger fell to the ground with a hideous yell, his
remaining pistol flying into the air with a spasmodic
jerk.
Mat walked cautiously towards the man to see that
he was not shamming, but as he approached him he
was received with such a volley of curses from his
late antagonist, who he saw was terribly wounded,
the lower portions of both legs being completely
smashed, that he came straight up to him and
stooped over to see if he could render any assistance


by staunching the flow of blood, which was pouring
in a torrent over the sand.
“Ah ! you gipsy,” groaned Magan, as soon as he
saw him close. “ Who are you, his ghost ? I shot
you dead near the station, I’ll swear it! Ghost or
not, I’d have killed you if I could have got my gun
in time; but that nigger standing there—they’ve
always been my curse, —he told you something! Yes,
I’d have killed you and left you to rot as you
will me now, if it hadn’t been for him!— curse you
both. I never pulled straight with the pistols ’cos I
believed ’twere a ghost! I—” but here Magan fell
back in a swoon.
This is how it was that Dromoora appeared on the
scene.
Some days before the night of the visit of the
bushrangers, when out with his gun, he had come
upon a deserted camp higher up this creek which had
evidently quite lately been occupied by white men ;
so thinking that Magan would make for this spot, as
he had found some cooking utensils hidden away
there, Dromoora, directly Mat and his party arrived
at Bulinda, and thus left him free to act, took a short
cut to this old camp,—it will be remembered that Mat
had noticed the steps of a native, —but finding that
no one had been there since, he made a cast down
the creek, taking a line parallel to it, and then ‘ cut
in ’ to the track of pursuer and pursued ; following
this up he was in time to watch Mat’s proceedings


from a spot close to that on which the latter had
disrobed himself, from which coign of vantage he
speedily realized his friend’s scheme, but did not
discover himself until the opportune moment, as
he did not wish to interfere with his plans in any
way.
Dromoora now complimented our hero upon his
stalking powers, telling him that no black in the
whole of the Waigonda tribe could have procured the
guns more neatly.
“I was so glad,” he said, “that you did not try to
kill the man when you were creeping upon him, as I
should have done had I not known something.
“ I saw at the last that you would get the worst of
it, and therefore cried out telling you where to
shoot.
“ For that man has iron all over his body, head and
neck 111
“ And when you were going to shoot at his neck he
was just turning, when all the lead would have struck
against the iron skin ; it’s all hidden, but I will show it
you ; I found this out when I tried to drag him off his
horse, but my knife went into his leg, and I knew
there was no iron there ; let us take his clothes off and
you shall see.”
Mat, who had listened rather impatiently to the
rapidly delivered utterances of the now excited chief,
replied,—
“ Yes, yes, but first where is the white girl ? ”


“In that cave,” promptly replied Dromoora.
“ Tracks go in, none come out.”
Together they searched the cave, but found it
empty, as far as they could see, so Mat felt for his
matches, but not finding them at the moment bade
Dromoora fetch a fire-stick, when suddenly a stone
came rolling down from the upper part of the cavern,
which lay buried in darkness.
“ Quick ! fire-stick,” shouted Mat. The chief seized
one from the small fire outside, and returning, blew
it into a flame, when to Mat’s intense relief and
joy they discovered Annie, lying on a ledge far up
the cave, with feet and hands tied, and a handkerchief
bound round her mouth. To cut through cords and
handkerchief was the work of an instant, and the two
men then carried her into the open air, and laying
her gently down on some soft grass under the great
ti-tree, placed water by her side, and left her to
recover herself.
Seeing that he could be of no further use, and feel-
ing- that as vet he had had no direct hand in extermi-
o «-
nating the enemies of his beloved white chief, our
Waigonda, disdaining firearms and contenting himself
with a steel tomahawk, was off before Mat could stop
him, shouting back, in answer to the latter’s question
as to where he was going,—
“To get the other two and their thunder-sticks.”
o
As Mat afterwards found out, when the duel be-
tween him and the bushranger commenced, these two


other ruffians had jumped up and taken deliberate
aim at him, with the result of two flashes in the pan.
They had then looked for their powder-flask, and not
finding it, the truth had dawned upon them ; so
seizing their guns they had bolted for their lives,
leaving Magan to shift for himself.
Our forester had taken care to place Annie in a
position from where she could not possibly see the
dying bushranger.
“ Thank God, you are now safe, Miss Bell,” he said,
as he approached her. “ I will leave you for a few
minutes whilst I look for the horse, but you’re quite
safe. I will hardly be out of your sight.”
Saying which he was turning away, in reality to
look after Magan, and also to see that there were no
signs of further miscreants, when Annie called him
back.
“ Oh ! don’t be long ; I want to get out of this hor-
rid place! But, ah ! forgive me for only thinking of
myself instead of my preserver—for such you are,
Mr. Stanley.”
“ Call me simply ‘ Mat,’ as the others do,” he re-
plied. “And rest yourself; I know you must be
terribly stiff with all you've gone through ; plenty of
time to tell me all about it afterwards. I must see
first that we have no enemies left.”
With that he took a turn round the camp, and
then walked up to Magan, who, he found had re-
gained his senses, but was slowfly bleeding to death.


Mat saw that the case of the man was hopeless, but
at the same time felt that he was utterly powerless to
help him ; however, he procured him water, placed his
bottle close to him, and asked him if he could do
anything at all for him.
* o
“No, curse you,” hissed the man between his teeth,
“ haven’t you done enough ? Why didn’t I kill you
and the others when I was with Carew, and you came
to the camp ? I got some of your nuggets, and meant
to wipe out the lot of you, only there were too many
niggers about : if ever I stirred even to the mouth of
the tent, there was one watching me. They’ve been
my curse all along. - ’
Mat had once, when camping with Carew, caught
a glimpse of the mysterious man in the tent, who
he was told was such a drunkard that he never stirred
out; and now, as he gazed carefully at the features of
the wounded man before him, he recognized the great
scar on his face.
Astonished at this recognition and the man’s words,
he said, —
“ Why, then, you’re Boyd ! ”
“In course I was, and now I'm Jack Magan, and
shall be both Boyd and Magan under the sod soon.
How did that nigger tell you where to shoot ? If it
hadn’t been for him, I’d ’av got a thousand pounds
ransom for that wench, after killing you ! I wish you
and him felt as Ido now. They’ve tried to take me
these years, and never would, only for you two find-


ing out the secret ; but perhaps that liar who lived
with Bell, that liar we called ‘ Frenchey,’ perhaps he
peached. But my senses are going ; what’s the good
of talking to a ghost ? I saw your black beard fly into
the air when I shot you one moonlight night at the
paddock, and I’ll swear you never stirred afterwards.”
Every sentence of the foregoing remarks was
larded with horrible oaths, and Magan soon after
died, cursing with his last breath the man who had
dealt him his death-blow. But Mat, seeing that his
presence only infuriated the bushranger, placed some
shady branches lightly around him before he was
dead, and turned away.
The horse he found in a miserable condition, so
tied that he could neither lie down nor get about to
seek for food or water, so our forester freed him, led
him to a small pool in the roctcs, and left him at
liberty amongst some good feed.
He then rejoined Annie, whom he found brighter,
and refreshed from her rest.
In answer to his questions, she told him that the
men had treated her without insult, and that the
wretch called “Jack” had informed her that he had
killed the gipsy days ago, which she knew at the time
must be a story. He also told her that some of his
men were guarding his camp ; it was quite impossible
for her to get away, and that his intention was to get
a large sum of money for her ransom, keeping her
prisoner until he could communicate safely with her


father. If his hiding-place was discovered, and a
force sent against him, he did not intend to be taken
himself, nor should he burden himself with her if he
had to fly, but should simply cut her throat before
going.
“ Oh, it’s so dreadful I" continued Annie. “ But I
will tell you more as I think of it. Yes, and when
we arrived here I was given damper and meat and
water, and then they tied a handkerchief round my
mouth, and my legs and arms together, and put me
in that dreadful cave. When they struck a match in
there I glanced round and spied that ledge, so when
the firing began I remembered the man’s threats,
and struggled inch by inch, until, in despair, I got
not only on to the ledge, but rolled beyond it out of
sight, and there I lay shaking with fear. At last I
recognized your voice—though in black-fellow lan-
guage I knew it —and I knew I was saved ! And I
just managed to kick a stone down, as I could not
call out. But, oh ! Mr. Stanley—Mat, I mean—are
my parents safe? Tell me everything. And how
was it you came up alone ? How I prayed for
you all, and my prayers have been answered, have
they not ? I kn e\v you would come, as you can track
anything, but where are the others ? ”
Mat assured her that her people were all safe, and
would be with her soon, at all events the squire
would, and that as he had started first, so he had
arrived before the others, having gone night and day ;


as she had surmised, he had followed the tracks, and
at a ran, whereas the other white men were not accus-
tomed to tracking, and, moreover, they would be
mounted, which would still more add to their difficul-
ties in following a trail ; and, “ believe me,” concluded
Mat, “ I would have followed across Australia to save
you, Miss Annie.”
Annie gazed at our hero earnestly for a moment,
but did not respond ; a dreamy look came into her
eyes as she looked at him and thought, “\\ hat a noble,
manlike fellow he is ! ” And the forester’s hitherto
rather stern-like expression gave way to a softer one,
as he met that gaze, and took in the appearance of
the fair girl beside him ; her rich long auburn hair had
fallen over her shoulders, its dark shades relieved by
golden gleams, where the sunlight played upon it.
Annie had loosened her dress at the neck, to get all
the air she could, thus disclosing her pure white skin
and the soft outlines of her throat, whilst her gentle
fawn-like eyes, still moist from the hours of agony
she had gone through in the cave, looked with a
startled anxious expression into those of our hero.
Truly, hers was a lovable, confiding nature, and
Mat felt it, —felt it as in a dream, —as in a heavenly
trance, and he also felt that he was rewarded
After they had thus sat for a brief space in silence.
Mat went on to tell Annie, without entering into par-
ticulars of the fight, that if it had not been for the
faithful Waigonda chief, matters might have had a


very different termination, for that he could not do
much against bullet-proof armour.
“Yes, that armour!” cried Annie, “ I knew that
there were many things I wanted to tell you ; I soon
found out how impossible it would be for any one to
harm the bushranger, for once he took off a lot of
armour when resting and eating, for he had a bag of
provisions, and then I remembered reading some-
where about a man who defied every one, and shot all
who tried to take him, and they supposed he wore a
breastplate of iron, because no one could ever hurt
him ; and, Mat, how agonizing were my feelings when
I found I had no means of scrawling this fact on a bit
of paper to let you know, for I knew you would come.
I tied a bit of handkerchief on to a tree to show
I was alive and— ”
“ And here it is,” said Mat, with a smile, as he
produced the remnant. “ And there’s a ‘ cooee,’ ”
he cried, jumping up. “ Terebare’s, I know, yes ! there
she is, on that high bank, and the squire on horse-
back.”
Annie sprang to her feet, and a few moments after-
wards was weeping tears of love and thankfulness on
her father’s breast.


CHAPTER XV.
Magan’s armour —Safe at Bulinda Creek again—The pro-
fessor’s last lesson on the island —Mat and 1 im once more
together —Tim convalescent.
AFTER the first transports of joy at again meeting
each other were over, Annie led her father under the
big ti-tree, and recounted to him some of the
adventures that had befallen her since she had been
carried off.
“And where is the man that saved you, lassie?”
said the squire, as soon as he had heard her nar-
rative.
“ He was here just now, father.”
Mat had retired, not wishing to disturb the meeting
between father and daughter, but he now came for-
ward, when Bell took his hand in both of his, saying
as he did so, —
“ Mat, you have saved my daughter’s life, like
a brave and noble fellow that you are. Accept
the gratitude of an old man, who owes her life and
honour to you. I cannot say all that I think, and
wish to, now, my nerves have been too much shaken,
but I will when we get home; I should never


have got here if it had not been for ‘ Terebare,’ who
ran pretty well the whole way in front of my horse.
I insisted on the others staying behind, so as not to
come away and leave the station undefended. Now
let us have some rest and refreshment.’-’
Whilst Annie went off with Terebare to cook some
provisions, which the squire had brought, Mat took
the latter aside and told him a few of the particulars
connected with the rescue of Annie, adding,—
f O)
“ Miss Beil knows scarcely anything of what I’m
telling you, and she certainly does not know that the
bushranger is lying dead about fifty yards up this
gully ; she must not go near the spot; but come and
see, and then you’ll judge,”
So the two men proceeded to the place, and found
the man lying dead sure enough.
Before they thought of burying him, which they
knew must be done in that climate without much loss
of time, they proceeded to take off and examine his
armour, which both viewed with astonishment.
“ How could the man bear the weight in this climate
and move about ? ” queried Bell.
“ I don’t think he did move about much,” replied
his companion ; “ I expect he always rode. What I
could not understand at the time was the slow way in
which he got up when I surprised him ; why, looking
at the weight of this lot, he must have carried nearly
a couple of hundred pounds.”
“ Not far off it,” said the squire, who, with the help


of Mat, had now got off the thigh pieces, breastplate,
back piece, and a sort of helmet with a cover for the
neck, from the body, all this iron being concealed by
ordinary clothing.
“This has stood some shooting,” continued Bell,
“and here’s your ‘brand’ too,” as he pointed to a
couple of deep dents in the breastplate. “ We’ll
keep all this gear, and bury the body under that tree
in the scrub, where the others can’t see us at work ;
I’m glad that Annie did not see this frightfully-
mutilated corpse.”
So they scraped a hole, put Magan’s body in,
marked the tree, and made a “ cache ” of the armour.
“ I saw you limping when helping to carry the
body,” said Bell ; “ are you wounded ? ”
“ No, it’s nothing,” answered Mat, “ else I couldn’t
walk, but I may as well look at it before we go back.”
Mat found that the ball from Magan’s pistol had
travelled just under the skin of his outer thigh,
causing a slight flesh wound, but causing him little
inconvenience.
After the little party had refreshed themselves,
they prepared to start for home.
Terebare brought up the horses ; Annie was
mounted on her father’s, the squire insisting on Mat’s
riding Magan’s, taking turn and turn about with him.
In this manner they reached home by easy stages,
and without further adventure. As they approached
the house, Mrs. Bell, rushed out to meet them, having


recognized them from far oft', and once again the family
party met in safety and happiness on the verandah
of Bulinda Creek.
When they had partly got over the first feelings of
thankfulness at the rescue of Annie, Mrs. Bell said
to her husband, —
“ And who do you think is the wretch we caught ?”
“ I don’t know,” answered Bell; “ I was too much
en S a g e d to look at the man ; some escaped convict,
probably/’
“You are partly right, but you ’av’nt guessed zvho
he is,—’e’s Rayon, the Frenchman ! The police have
recognized ’im as an escaped convict, and ’av carried
him off to jail more dead than alive. I remembered
afterwards, when Dromoora was tying him up he
said, ‘ French feller ’ ; but I was ’alf stunned by all
that ’appened, and didn’t know what he meant. I’ll
never speak French again.”
“ I see it all now,” replied her husband ; “ what a
lot of fools we were to be gulled so, and what a
doubly-distilled ass I was not to listen to Mat when
he wanted to stay behind, saying he thought there
was danger about.”
Mrs. Bell listened eagerly to the account of Annie’s
rescue by Mat.
“ What a brave man he is,” she said ; “he must
live with us altogether; we can never repay him. I
must ‘embrasser’ him; I—l—mean embrace him,
and Dromoora too.”


“ As you say, we cannot fully repay him,” joined in
her husband; te but I have some plans that I will
talk over with you by-and-by.”
The news of the death of one bushranger and the
capture of another soon rang over the whole district,
the newspapers especially devoting their columns to
what they knew of the history and doings of the two
miscreants.
There was no doubt that it was the intention of
the bushrangers to murder all who opposed them.
One paper stated that the leader of the gang, the
notorious Magan, had long been outlawed, and that
he fought with a halter round his neck, for that his
previous career showed that he had shot more than
one man in cold blood ; it related that—
“ Upon one occasion this fiend had ridden up to a
station down south, and had ordered the inmates to
‘ Bail up ! ’ This they at once did, being taken by
surprise. Magan had then shot at and wounded one
of the men, then despatched another for the doctor,
and then had deliberately shot him as he was going
away upon his errand.”
Concerning Rayon, whose real name was never
clearly made out, this much was known—that he was
English-born, had been very well educated travelled
as courier in France with some of the best families.
Having learnt French perfectly, he had settled in
Paris, but eventually ran away from there, owing to
his being found out at card-sharping. He next turned


up in London, and, being an accomplished penman,
had forged whilst there the name of one of his former
patrons for a large sum of money ; was tried, con-
victed, and transported for life to Botany Bay, and
escaped.
As we have seen, he was now captured again, and
doomed to pass the rest of his life, this time on a
well known island, whose sole sentries consisted of
swarms of gigantic sharks, which had already snapped
up more than one unlucky prisoner upon his attempt-
ing to swim to the mainland.
Our forester was surprised on his return to Bulinda
after the rescue of Annie, not to hear any news of
Tim. The squire, too, could not make it out, but
said, —
“ I expect he did not start from the ‘ Downs,’ as
he said he intended to when he wrote ; so, as we
have not done with this police business yet, having
to go to headquarters again soon, supposing we
make a start to-morrow to Sydney ; we may then hear
news of Tim.”
Mat gladly agreed to this proposal, and as Parson
Tabor also wished to visit the capital, the three men
started the next day.
Passing the stat'on where Tim had “spelled”
before starting on his moonlight walk, the travellers
were astonished to find that Tim had been there, and
as they had heard no tidings of his being about
Bulinda, they thought that he must have forgotten


something important, and returned to Sydney. So,
without further delay, they put spurs to their horses,
and galloped into the town.
Leaving their horses in a stable, they were walking
down one of the chief streets when a man accosted
Mat with, —
“ Beg pardon, how is your brother to-day ? ”
“ Brother ! ” replied Mat, “why, where is he ? ”
“ I know it’s your brother,” replied the man, “ I saw
you both at the School of Arts, at your lecture, he’s
ill in the hospital, so they say.”
Without another word the three friends hurried off
to the hospital, and there learnt that it was indeed
Tim who was one of the patients, but further they
could not learn until the house-surgeon appeared,
who gave them particulars of the case, and then, in
answer to their questions, said that Tim was now out
of danger, and that one of them might visit him ; so
it was settled that Mat should go to his brother,
whilst the others, Bell and Tabor, would transact
some business in the town and call for him again.
Our forester found his brother looking very white
and wan, lying in a small bed in one of the wards.
One of the nurses, before ushering him in, had warned
Mat not to let the patient talk above a whisper by
exciting him in any way, and not to stay long.
So he went in very softly, took his brother’s thin
hand, in his, and pressed it, saying,—
“Don’t talk, Tim, only a little whisper now and


aeain. The doctor has told us all about you, and I
would have come before, but have been away from
the station, and only heard you were here by accident.
Squire and the parson are in the town —”
Tim here interrupted him with a questioning look,
so IMat bent his head to hear what he had to say.
Tim’s whispered words came faintly to him, —
“ I want to get to the station where you and t’parson
are.”
Mat replied,—
“ I will go and ask the doctor,” and was leaving the
room, when Tim motioned him back with a plaintive
look, —
“ I want to go to-morrow.”
Mat nodded, went out, and having found the doctor,
repeated his brother’s wish to him.
The doctor was a little spare man, short in stature
and short in manner. He said,—
“ We knew some time ago who your brother was,
and where you were living, but we were also aware
that the patient’s life depended upon utter quiet, and
up to two days ago it would have been madness for
any of his friends to have seen him, therefore we sent
no message to Bulinda Creek: we meant to have let
you know to-day or to-morrow. As I told you, a
bullet in the lungs is no joke ; still if you could get
a very easy carriage and take him by short stages,
only travelling by day, it might be safe now ”
Mat told Tim the good news, and waited quietly


by his brother’s bedside until the squire and the
parson sent up to say that they were waiting below.
The three men then had a consultation, the doctor
being present, when it was decided to bring a carriage
there next day, should the weather be favourable
Mat was requested not to disturb his brother again
so sending word to him of their intention, they
adjourned to a hotel for the night.
The weather was warm and balmy, and looked as
though it would remain so for the next few days, as
the carriage drew up on the morrow at the hospital,
and Tim was comfortably and slowly driven to the
Creek, which he reached in two days’ time, escorted
by his brother, the squire and the parson, and not any
the worse for his journey.
The doctor, as he had promised Mat, came out to
see his patient on the day after his arrival, and find-
ing him all that he could wish, called Mat out on to
the verandah, and said, —
“ What he wants now is absolute quiet, no exciting
talk, no physic, merely cooling drinks ; your brother
is not likely to live to be an old man, but the best
chance of lengthening his days is, when he is well
enough, to get him out of this hot climate —a mild
sea voyage, if possible, I would suggest, even to going
home. But, above all, gentle nursing now.”
Annie, who had entered the verandah during the
latter part of the conversation, walked up to Mat, and
addressing him and the doctor, said, —


“ Let me look after him ; I will do so night and day,
I promise it.”
And Annie was as good as her word, never leaving
Tim without his cooling drinks, making him jellies
and other delicacies with her own hands, sitting by
his bedside night after night, and when at length he
was able to leave his bed, it was upon the same fair
nurse’s arm that he leaned, to take his first feeble
walks on the verandah.


CHAPTER XVI.
The Squire’s offer—Tim decides to go home—Our heroine’s
advice to Mat —Our forester takes to gardening—The “ new
chum’s” difficulties and troubles.
The squire, one evening after the inmates of Bulinda
Creek had once more settled down to their quiet
every-day life, beckoned Mat on to the verandah for a
smoke. When they had made themselves comfort-
able in a couple of “ squatters,” or easy seats made
of canvas, propped on two poles, the old man spoke.
“ Mat/ my lad, I have heard the opinion of the
doctor, that Tim should go home. I hope that you
and he will accept the offer that I am going to make
to you. If he wishes to go, and I believe he does, I
propose to pay his passage to the old country in the
best ship that we can find, and I intend to start him
in the forest with a thousand pounds, so that he can
take a little farm, or buy a bit of land, and he shall
draw upon me for any farther sum he may require.”
Mat was about to thank him for this generous pro-
posal, but the squire stopped him.
“ I know that you will never take money without
working for it and all that, but remember, should you
wish to ease your conscience, you can repay me when


you are a rich man, and I intend to put you on a road
by which you may attain this, the particulars of my
scheme I will explain to you in good time. Another
thing, you can also help your brother and yourself by
accepting the purse that was subscribed for you, and
which money I long ago placed out at interest in the
bank, and then there are your nuggets worth at least
three pounds sterling an ounce, and —”
“True enough, squire;” interrupted Mat, “ they are
what brought all the misery to your house, and to Tim
too, for ’twas Magan, of course, that shot him. I wish
I had put them in the bank, when I landed in Sydney.”
“ Very well, Mat, and now I have a proposition to
make which concerns yourself. No one in this
country could have rescued my daughter under the
peculiarly difficult circumstances of the case, as you
did it”—here Bell paused to light up another pipe,
whilst our forester waited with impatience, he
scarcely knew why, for his next words. The squire
quietly puffed at his pipe, and continued, “ Had the
police come up with this Magan, I feel convinced
that, proof as he was against their bullets, he would
have retreated fighting to the cave, and rather than
surrender would have killed Annie, for the brute
would as soon have shot a woman as a man ; and,
bear in mind, I never shall forget that that gallant
chief of yours saved your life, and thus the lives of
others, and I will make it one of my first cares to
reward him and his wife, and the whole of his tribe,


in any way you think they will most appreciate.
But to come back to yourself, Mat. You of all men
will appreciate deeds rather than words, and I pro-
pose that from this date you take up your abode with
us, and go equal shares with me in all the property I
possess.
“ Tom wishes this as well. Remember that you will
be, as the younger man, the working partner, and
will consequently be of the greatest assistance to me,
who am getting a bit portly and old. Now go and
sleep over all this. To-morrow I will show you my
books, and then you can tell me if you agree. Tom,
who is well provided for, says you must, and I say
you shall."
Mat did not “ sleep over it,” but lay awake that
night thinking over the squire’s proposal. To his
own way of thinking, he had not done anything so
wonderful after all in the way that he had rescued
Annie ; though true he recollected that Dromoora
had praised him in the matter, which praise, coming
from the lips of that old warrior, meant a very great
deal indeed. He plainly saw what a splendid open-
ing lay before him ; such a career had never occurred
to him in his wildest dreams. And then he thought
how splendid it would be if Tim could join him in
anything of the sort; or should he go home with
Tim? No, that would be no advantage to either;
besides, he thought he would like to stay at Bulinda.
Thus, reasoning the matter over in every possible


way, in trying to come to a conclusion, he went to
sleep.
Our forester was sauntering along the verandah
the next day, thinking of what he should say to the
squire, when Annie came softly out of Tim’s room,
and Mat almost ran against her, so absorbed was he
in his thoughts.
“ Oh, Mat,” she said, “ I was coming to look
for you. Tim would like to speak to you, and after
that I want you to help me get some bananas for
him.”
“ Is that you, Mat ? ” said a faint voice, as our hero
entered the sick-room. “ I want to talk to you about
what we were saying the other day, when I wasn’t
allowed to talk any more. I’m much better this
morning. The doctor says I can never ride, or do
anything worth doing again, that's what pains me ;
’taint the wound so much as that. But I ought to be
very thankful, I know, ’taint no worse, cos t’ parson
says I oughter. Oh ! he is just like an angel; steals
in and prays ; yes, prays at night, when he thinks
I’m asleep ; but I can hear him whispering his
prayers. And Miss Annie, she do just about take
care of me ; I never have to ask for anything I want.
I feel better in body and in mind when those two are
here, and they come different times, and never
bother me with ‘ How did you sleep last night ? ’
because they know ; they tell each other. And I told
t parson as how Td like to get back to t’ forest, and


he said the doctor told him that he wished I was
back, and if I went on so well as now, I might go in
a few weeks; and that is why I wanted to see you,
to ask you, is there enough money as my share, do
you think, for me to go ? ”
Tim broke down at this point from exhaustion,
and Mat gave him a cooling drink from a bottle
which his brother pointed out, and begged him not
to talk any more.
“You only listen , Tim,” he said. “ I’ve settled all
about the money; you’ll have plenty, and will go
home. I’ll tell you all about it another time. lam
going now to get some bananas for you.”
“ Will you come again after I’ve had a sleep, Mat ?
for I feel so much happier now I’ve seen you, I shall
get to sleep and dream of home.”
Mat promised, then stepped out and rejoined
Annie, and they proceeded to the garden, where he
cut a large bunch of “Lady’s Finger” bananas
which she showed him, and carried it back to the
house.
When he had deposited his burden, Mat turned to
Annie.
“ I am afraid I nearly pushed you over just now,
Miss Annie, when you were coming out of Tim’s
room, but I never looked up in time. I was stupidly
going along with my head down, thinking so much
of what your father said to me last night.”
“ Why, what did he say ? ”


“ I’ll tell you in a few words. He asked me to
live with him and be his partner.”
“ I guessed that might be it, for we were all talking
about it. And what was your answer ? ”
“ Why, he told me to give him an answer this
morning ; and it’s such a grand prospect for a poor
man like myself. But then, I am not used to live
amongst your class, Miss Annie, and I don’t know
what to say.”
“ Well, then, I will tell you what to say ; and you
must say it to please me. Tell my father that you
will be glad to avail yourself of his terms. And as
to what you say about ‘class,’ I daresay you will get
accustomed to ours, and all the other ‘ classes ’ round
about here, in time.”
“ Then, Miss Annie, I’ll say as you tell me.”
There was a noble specimen of the crimson-
flowered “ poinciania-tree ” growing near to the
entrance of the house, and a seat had been put up
under its shady branches. This tree was a favourite
resort of various members of the family, by reason of
the cool currents of air which played around it. The
verandah, though perfectly shady, was rather con-
fined as to atmosphere; the perfume of the creepers
which shut it in was also rather overpowering.
After his conversation with Annie, our forester
departed to look for the squire, but not finding him
thought that he would smoke a pipe under the
“poinciania-tree,” and there await his return.


Strolling up to the seat, he found it already occu-
pied by Annie, who had brought her work there.
“I cannot find your father. Miss Annie, do
you know, I was thinking, before I spoke with you
just now, that I would go back to England with
Tim.”
“ Why, Mat ? do you like England so much better?”
“ No, I don’t think I do, since you said I might
stay here.”
“Yes, I would rather you would stay,” said Annie,
as she went on rapidly with her knitting. “ I should
not like to think that the man who risked his life to
save mine was going away for ever.”
“Miss Annie, do you know that during the whole
of that wild, savage life I was leading, I used often
to get out a book that I saved, and think of the young
lady who gave it me.”
“Was she such a very nice girl, then?” inquired
Annie.
“ She was —she was Miss Annie Bell ! ”
“Me ! vie give you a book ! I never did , Mat.”
“ I think perhaps you will remember when I show
it you.” And Mat went off to his room, and re-
turning presently, laid an old and much-battered copy
of “ Robinson Crusoe” in her lap.
“ There ! ” he said triumphantly.
“ I do remember it,” said Annie, after looking at
the old yellow-leaved volume. “ I gave it you in the
forest, when I was a school-girl.”


“Yes; I never expected to show it to you again.”
“ Do you always keep presents like that, Mat ? ”
“ No; but that is the only present I ever had
from a lady who was kind to me, and I was pleased
when it was washed up from the wreck. By-the-bye,
would you like to see my journal ? I have been
writing it out as carefully as I can, because a publisher
in Sydney has offered me a good price if I’ll let him
print it, and it will be so nice if Tim and I can make
a few pounds by it.”
“ I should like to hear it, if you will read it to me,
Mat.”
Mat fetched the manuscript, and, taking his scat
by Annie said, —
“ I won’t give you all this beginning part, because
you heard most of that at the lecture ; but do listen to
this page, because, when I read that part to the pub-
lisher, he threw himself back in his chair, shoved his
spectacles on the top of his forehead, put his thumbs
into his waistcoat, and said, ‘ Um—ah !—yes ; just so.
I believe there are some curious freaks of nature in
those northern parts, but this is—well—er— er—a little
strong.’ What he really meant was—‘You and your
brother are terrible liars.’
“ This is the account, as I wrote it, only Tvc had
the ‘ wording ’ improved :
“ Tim and I were returning to the camp on a moon-
light night, along a chain of small water-holes, which
were fringed with * blady ’ grass, when some beast or


other suddenly floundered into the water, but never
rose to the surface again. Whilst I watched, Tim
went off to the camp close by, and soon returned
with half a dozen blacks with their clap-nets. These
entered the little pool, and, after working their nets
for some time, one of them jumped out with a fish of
about six pounds in his net. ‘Very good,’ I said to
my black friend, ‘but that is not the beast we heard
in the dry grass.’ ‘ Yes, that is it,’ he replied. ‘ Look !
he has two sorts of legs on his stomach, and he eats
grass at night, like a kangaroo, and we call him
“ Barramundi ” (Ceratodus forsteri) ; and sometimes
we have caught him on the banks of water-holes on
moonlight nights. He can breathe in the water be-
cause he has these things, showing me his gills ; and
he can breathe on land because he has these —l will
show you upon which the black cut open the fish,
and showed me his lungs.”
“ I can only say,” said Mat, as he stopped reading,
“ that we both saw all this, and, after all, it’s not
much more wonderful than some of the tree-snakes.
I can show you, on the next one I kill, two little short
points or legs under his stomach, to help him to grip
getting about trees.”
Before Mat could continue his journal they were
summoned to dinner, so Annie took up the book,
saying,—
“We must go on with it this evening. I am sure
that I shall like it so much.”


When, however, the evening came, Annie remem-
bered that her garden must be watered, for she had
neglected this of late ; so she asked Mat to come and
help her to carry the buckets, saying,—
“If you will fill the buckets at the water-hole, and
then carry them across the paddock to those trees —
that is where my garden is—l will walk on first, for I
do not suppose that there are any bushrangers about
now.”
Mat had often passed this garden, with its hedge of
prickly “ Osage orange,” but had never penetrated
through the little gate.
He soon filled his buckets, and was by Annie’s
side, in her garden, waiting for orders.
She pointed out those shrubs and flowers which
were specially thirsty subjects, and told him the
names of many of the plants.
“These many-coloured flowers arc Balsams; that
great bush, with its deep red flowers, is a Bougan-
villia ; and the creeper joining it, over the summer-
house, with its bunches of waxy flowers, is called
Stephanotis ; it scents the whole garden at night.”
“ I know the smell of that',' said Mat, “it Ido not
know the name, for you had a nosegay of it when I
saw you in Sydney.”
“Yes, I had, and I wear it at all the balls and
parties Igo to. It is my favourite flower.”
Our hero watered everything he was told to, and a
good many dead sticks and cuttings that he was not


told to. When they had finished, he asked Annie
whether they should come again the next evening to
water; also whether he might look after her garden
a bit, for that it was “terrible” weedy.
“Yes,” she returned, “I should be glad if you
would help me this dry weather. What funny expres-
sions you do use sometimes ! ”
“And,” continued Mat, “will you give me a bit of
the—the—sweet-smelling plant.”
Certainly I will, she said, as she plucked a spray
and gave it him, and I will write down those difficult
names for you. Now we will go in ; they will wonder
what has become of us.”
Mat told his brother that evening, before he went
to bed, that he had heard of three plants quite new
to him, called “Balsam,” “Boug-and-villia,” and “ Ste-
phen-oh-tis ; and Tim agreed that whatever the
plants were like, the names were very wonderful.
The following day our forester found the squire
and Tom alone in the former’s room. Parson Tabor
had been away a great deal of late upon affairs con-
nected with the station in Sydney, with Tom as
companion. “Our Parson” was always taken into
the confidence of the family in matters both temporal
and spiritual; he was one of those men who seldom
ventured an opinion upon any important matter until
it was asked for ; but when he did speak, his remarks
and advice were worth considering, and to the point.
Mat had hoped when he entered the squire’s room


that the clergyman would have been there too, but in
this he was disappointed : the parson was too busy
writing, they said, to attend ; besides, they had not
much to discuss, for, said Bell, —
“ I’ve got a new chum coming, but first, what is
your decision Mat, with reference to the matter we
were discussing the other night ? ”
Mat replied that if the squire and Tom still wished
him really to have a share in the station, and become
one of the partners, he would do his very best, and
certainly would be very proud of such a distinction
being conferred upon him. He would like, he said,
to begin work at once, and be off to the out*station
in a couple of days’ time. (Mat did not say so, but
the fact was he had taken a great fancy to gardening
all at once, and wished to have a couple more evenings
at that delightful occupation.)
Bell and his son were much pleased at having
secured such a powerful and useful aid as our forester
for the working of the station, and Mat was as de-
lighted at having achieved the very height of his
ambition, though he could never conceive that such
a possibility would be afforded him in Australia, when
he left the New Forest, as to rise suddenly to the
position of partner in one of the finest properties in
the country ; for though the “ books 55 of the station
were at present a little beyond his understanding, yet
by this time he was well acquainted with the whole of
the “run,” and the thousands of cabtle and horses


upon it, and during frequent visits to Sydney for
purposes connected with Bell’s affairs, he had heard
nothing but praise on all sides of the squire’s
management, and of the “ solidity ” attached to his
name.
When Mat proposed to lose no time in commencing
his work at the out-station, Bell replied that he wished
him to wait at Bulinda until a “new chum ” arrived
from England, who was expected daily.
“ Fact is,” he said. “ I thought I had done with
‘ new chums,’ but a letter I received some time ago
reminded me of a promise I once made to an old
friend at home, that I would take his son on my
station. He says it’s his only son, who will enter
into no profession, loves horses, and can f rough it ’ to
any extent. I know what that means by experience,”
growled Bell. “Anyhow he comes —‘The Honour-
able Lionel Fulrake;’ the ship was in a week ago.
We will do our best to welcome him anyhow, and we
shall soon see how he ‘ shapes/ ”
A few hours after this conversation, Mat was in his
room tidying up his things, arranging his “ manav-
Hns,” as Tom dubbed his odds and ends, when the
sound of wheels caught his ear; so he stole round
the building to see who had arrived.
A buggy and pair of horses, driven by a coachman
in livery, was just pulling up at the verandah. The
vehicle was laden, or rather piled up, with every con-
ceivable description of luggage : portmanteaux, hat-


boxes, guns, fishing-rods, a tent, and, perched on the
top of all, an enormous canteen.
Presently, a young man could be seen clearing
out of these impedimenta, and descending the vehicle.
“ What a swell ! ” thought Mat; and the new arrival
certainly was, if one judged by his clothes: a tall
white hat, an irreproachable collar, a scarf with two
pins in it, dust coat, nankeen trousers, and patent
boots.
“Brought over in a bandbox,” whispered Tom, who
had joined Mat in the inspection. “ I don’t think he
will ‘ shape ’ much ! ”
“ I don’t know,” rejoined his companion ; “ I’ve
seen swells just like him at home, and I’ve seen them
fight! ”
Mr. Fulrake, for he it was, had now ascended to
the verandah, and, looking about for a bell, but
finding none, subsided languidly into a “squatter,”
and lit a cigarette.
Having finished this without seeing anyone, he got
up to examine the house, and finally entered a room,
which happened to be the one occupied by the ladies
and the squire.
“ Welcome to Bulinda ! ” said Bell, coming forward.
“ I know it must be Mr. Fulrake from the family
likeness ! ”
“ Thanks ! ” replied the new arrival, as he exchanged
bows with Mrs. Bell and her daughter. “ I’ve been
outside for about a quarter of an hour; couldn’t find


any one, you know. Will you send the servant to
bring in my luggage ? ”
“All right/’ returned Bell; “we’ll get in your
traps, but it’s not here. I’ll tell the man to drive
round to the bachelors’ quarters ; your room is all
ready there. Sorry we never heard you come. You
should have walked in at once ! ”
“ Thanks ! I’m awfully tired with that jolting
cart! ”
“ Well, then, rest here ; the ladies will look after
you ! ”
Saying which, the squire went out, called his son
and Mat, and with their help proceeded to attack the
pile of luggage.
Our “new chum’s” appearance was distinctly
striking , in one especial peculiarity—that of his hair-
It was the lightest possible hair ever seen, almost
white in colour, whilst his moustache and the down
on his cheeks was only a shade darker. The contour
of his delicately pink-hued face denoted an equal
mixture of good temper and languor, whilst a pair
of thin legs supported an apparently frail body, and
a pair of remarkably long arms.
As soon as the squire had disappeared, Fulrake
threw himself into an easy armchair, which Annie
offered him, and, first gazing in a vacant sort of way
round the room, prepared to rest himself, and answer
questions.
“’Ad you a good passage,” inquired Mrs. Bell.


“ Pretty fair, only a horribly dirty ship, not a very
first-class lot of people on board, bad cook, and all
that sort of thing, don’t you know.”
“ You must find your first impressions out here
rather different to those of the old country—we live
in a very simple way, you know, Mr. Fulrake.”
“ Oh, well, it’s rather hot, and all that sort of thing,
but I’m rather used to roughing it, you know—led
quite a wild life in Norway, had to cook my own
food.”
“You did not find that so very hard, did you,” in-
quired Annie, with a smile ; “ how long had you to do
it ? ”
“Why, quite three weeks, last time I was there.”
“ Dear me, but could you not find any one to cook ?”
“ As a matter of fact, there was a man with me,
but he was so dirty I would not let him cook, and my
interpreter pretended he couldn't
“ I really do not think you were so badly off with
two men,” remarked Annie, “ unless, of course, you
had any real discomforts.”
“ Yes, but I had, though. One night I got drenched,
and had to have my clothes dried at the canteen fire ;
never travel without a portable stove. If you’ll excuse
me, I’ll go and get a change and hot bath, I’m so dusty,
don’t you know.”
“ Well,” said Annie, as soon as he had gone, “ ‘ Mr.
Matter-of-fact don’t you know,’ has a pretty good
opinion of himself and his personal comforts, I should


think, with his short answers, too ; what do you think,
mother.”
“My dear, I don’t like your talking in that light
way about him, he is evidently a gentleman of good
education and talents, and we know that he comes of
a good family. We have seen little of him as yet,
I’ve no doubt but what he speaks Frcn —, no, I mean
I daresay you will like him when you know him
better, you must take him in hand a little.”
“Me!" answered Annie, in a tone of scorn, “ me take
him in hand ! No thank you ; my opinion is, that
at his best he’s an amusing/*?/—what a funny-looking
little creature he is. But don’t you think, my dear
mother, that you are rather too fond of being taken
with strangers directly you see them ? remember that
wretched sham Frenchman.”
“Yes, yes, my dear ; there, you know I never can
abide an argument, but only remember that Mr. Ful-
rake is a thorough-bred English gentleman.”
Meantime, Fulrake had been shown the way to his
room, and entering it, sat down perfectly aghast,
uttering his thoughts out loud. “ Why, hang it, no
better than a Norwegian log-hut—worse —earthen
floor! no armchair! no toilet-table! no bell! no
nothing /” “Hi, you there,” he called out, hearing
some one in the next apartment.
And a man in moleskin trousers, and flannel
shirt with sleeves tucked up, appeared at his sum-
mons.


“I want a warm bath, and my things put out, and
a dressing-table, and above all a glass.”
“ All right,” said Mat, for he it was, “ I’ll speak to
the squire, a glass of what shall I tell him, he only
keeps whisky.”
“ Idiot,” was on Fulrake’s lips, but on second
thoughts, he said, “ a looking-^ lass, please.”
“ Queer place and queer people,” he muttered, as
Mat disappeared. “ What a rummy sort of flunky !
and who on earth is the squire, I wonder ? ”
However, as Bell never appeared, he had to unpack
his boxes himself, and after much hunting and bad
language, got out his dress clothes, but without the
aid of a looking-glass he could neither arrange his
moustaches nor put on his tie.
“ The bath I’ll go without for once,” he said, “ but a
glass I must, and will have.”
After considerable searching, he found the segment
of a looking-glass containing a minimum degree 01
quicksilver; and finally he reached the house as the
family were sitting down to supper.
Upon arriving in the room, he was introduced to
Parson Tabor, Tom, and Mat, with all of whom he
exchanged bows.
“ Is this the fellow,” he thought, as he eyed our
forester, “that I took for the ‘bush flunky/ I suppose
though they have their servants in to dinner in these
parts ; at least he’s had the decency to change his
things, and put on a collar,”


CHAPTER XVII.
English Society v. Colonial —Music—The “new chum’s’’ letter
“Two’s company and three’s none’’ —Unpleasant re-
flections —Parson Tabor’s advice —Mrs. Bell shows that
she has a “ down ’’ on our hero —The “ Spider ’’ —The “ new
chum ” proves that he is “ not such a fool as he looks ”
Tim returns home.
The conversation at supper turned upon station
matters, varied by a discussion concerning a concert
which had just taken place in Sydney ; and here r ul-
rake, who had a good knowledge of music, and who
had been present at the concert, was both interesting
and amusing, at all events to the ladies of the party ;
but he spoilt this favourable impression which he had
created, a little later on by making sarcastic remarks
upon the society of Sydney, this called forth a mild
reproach from Parson Tabor, as he found that no one
else took up the cudgels in the case of Colonial versus
English society.
“ I think, Mr. Fulrake,” he said, “ that you have only
been a few days in the colony, and whilst I fancy you
have very fairly criticized the music, I hardly think so
young a man as yourself would be a proper judge of
any society in that time.”


“Excuse me, Mr. Tabor, it’s true that I have not
been very long amongst you, but I'm considered at
home to be a very quick judge of characters, —as a
matter of fact always keep my eyes and ears open,
always on the qui-vive, don’t you know.”
“ Oh, how nice you speak French,” cried Mrs. Bell,
unable to restrain herself, “ Etes-vous” —but at this
point the squire brought his fist on the table, making
the glasses ring again, as in angry tones he said, —
“ For goodness' sake, Mrs. 8., don’t let’s have all
that over again, or 111 get Rayon back and chain him
in your sitting-room.”
This threat was so dreadful, that Mrs. Bell said not
another word, but afterwards whispered to Fulrake, —
“You must excuse my ’usband, but he can’t ‘ abide ’
French.”
After supper was ended, our new chum asked Annie
if she would favour him with a song, as he had heard
that all colonial ladies played and sang so well.
“ I sing very little, Mr. Fulrake; another evening
I will try, but to-night I promised Mat —Mr. Stanley
—that I would visit my garden to see what he has
been doing there. He has been weeding, and says
that he is afraid that he has pulled up some of my
young seedlings.”
Mat, who was standing by, on hearing this, promptly
got his hat, and the two left the room together.
Mrs. Bell then turned to Fulrake, and asked him if
he would play or sing.


“ I play a little,” he answered, and thereupon sat
down to the piano, and, first running his fingers in a
critical manner over the keys, went through a difficult
piece by Weber with such taste and feeling, playing
it perfectly by ear, that the squire, who had stepped
out to smoke a pipe with his son, said, —
“Tom, my boy, I’m not much of a judge, but I
declare I do believe we have got a professor of music
instead of French this time. By Jove, he can
play ! ”
“So he can, governor; but I think he had better
stay here with the ladies, instead of going with us to
the out-station. He’ll amuse them , anyhow.”
When Mr. Fulrake got back to his room that night,
he unpacked his writing-materials, lit a cigar, and
wrote a letter to his father, which ran thus :
“Bulinda, N.S.W., 18—
“ Christmas-time, 11 p.m.
“ My dear Dad, —At this hour it is a little cooler,
so I will write you another line. I sent you a letter
from Sydney about the voyage, colonial tozvn society,
&c., so I’ll say no more on that score, but bring
you at once to Bulinda Creek station.
“To begin with, the only good things in my sleep-
ing apartment —a veritable den —are the cigar lam
smoking and the pen I am writing with, both of which
I brought from home. Oh ! but I must tell you of
my light. My lamp, I didn’t bring that out. There’s


nothing very patent about it, excepting that it’s a
piece of rope floating in a bowl of dirty grease. For-
give the apparent joke, but I can only say that it
‘ couldn’t hold a candle to a farthing dip.’ It is called
a ‘ fat-lamp,’ I find. But these are trifles.
“ Judging from what we hear at home concerning
bush-life, and taking our impressions from the books
we read upon the subject, all should be very romantic,
and free, and beautiful. But the reality, great
Scot!
“I’ll say nothing of the offensive independence ot
the so-called labouring classes, which I met with from
the time I landed to my arrival here. You may say
that my colonial experience has only lasted a few
hours. True, oh, worthy dad ! but, let me tell you,
I don’t think it will last very many hours more, at all
events in these parts ; for, unless matters change very
much, the probability is that the next time I shall
write to you it will be from some partly-civilized
district, or maybe I shall start home straight.
“I won’t bother you any more about myself; but
first I must tell you, as a matter of fact, that there is
little comfort and no furniture in the place, and the
ood is of the coarsest.
“Now for society. Well, you know old Bell; but,
by gad, sir! you don’t know his wife. Vulgar aint
the word to describe her; ’tisn’t in it; so, to use her
own expression, ‘ let her abide.’
“ Next we come to a plump daughter, rich colour


as to hair, good eyes, head well set on, good temper.
I may have more to say about Miss Annie, as I intend
to ‘ cultivate ’ her, please the pigs !
“Her brother Tom, a regular boor, who eyes one
heavily, yet sits and says nothing excepting joining
in in a ponderous way if the conversation turns upon
horses, —or ‘ scrubbers,’ he seemed to call the ones he
referred to. By the way, there’s very little scrubbing
done here, either to man or beast
“There is a parson, named Tabor. He looks a
Christian, and undoubtedly is a gentleman, and, I
should say, is a good sort.
“ And then there’s a man named Stanley. Every
one in Sydney was talking of a sort of escaped gipsy
of that name, who had been living with the blacks or
wounded by bushrangers —all that sort of thing, you
know, —and no doubt this is the same individual whom
Bell has caught again. He’s a dark, good-looking
man, and fairly-well cultivated I should fancy. But
the most extraordinary thing is, perhaps, not so much
that the whole family —daughter and all—call him by
his Christian name and have him in to supper, but
that they let him take evening rambles alone with
Annie —that’s the daughter, you perceive.
“ Listen! On this, my first evening, I gave the
family some music. Now, I don’t play very badly,
and I wanted the daughter to listen. But no ; colonial
manners step in. This is the signal for her to rise ;
and, under the pretence of weeding some garden or


other, she retires out of doors to star-gaze with the
hanger-on Stanley!
“ I did not like to suggest that, in the absence ot a
moon, it was a case of gardening under difficulties,
as, to speak honestly, my mother’s one ewe lamb
didn’t want to get his sucking-teeth knocked out—and
this gipsy is a big ’un, very. The balance of the family
seemed to like my efforts on the piano; at all events,
Mrs. Bell asked for another ‘ toon/ but I don’t care
about throwing my pearls before those who can’t possi-
bly appreciate them, so I shut up—anyhow, shut the
piano up, a good one, by the way. The whole thing
smacks, to my mind, of the opening of a three-volume
novel ; only I say at once that I don’t much fancy the
hero, and I do rather like the heroine, as far as I’ve
got, if, indeed, they do represent these two characters,
vhich I hopes it isn’t.’ At all events, I shall tell
> ou if the plot thickens, as it will be some amusement
to watch events.
“ Give my love to my mother, and tell her that I
must now retire to my couch of sticks and rotten
bags—for of such does my bed appear to be com-
posed, as viewed by that brilliant meteor, the Tat lamp.’
“ From your affectionate son,
“Lionel B. Fulrake.”
> -•«- *
The next occasion on which our new chum saw
Annie was one afternoon shortly after the evening on
which he had written the letter to his father.


He lay stretched on the seat under the poinciania»
tree, lazily rolling a cigarette, when Annie passed him
with a basket of flowers in her hand.
Daintily dressed in a white gossamer material, the
graceful and pretty girl—and our heroine looked
especially winning on this occasion as she came trip-
ping by—caused the usually collected Fulrake to
start with surprise, and murmuring to himself, “how
sweetly 1 crisp,' ” sprang off his seat, and taking off his
hat said, —
‘‘ Miss Bell, may I see your garden ?”
“ Certainly, Mr. Fulrake, I will show it you ; but I
expect that you will not think much of it after the
well-kept old-country greenhouses.”
As they wended their way laughingly towards
the little grove, Mat followed at some distance
behind with two buckets of water ; but finding
' 0
that they passed through the garden gate without
apparently taking any notice of him, he deposited
the buckets outside and walked away to the stock-
yard .
As soon as they were inside the garden Fulrake
turned to Annie with, —
“ Who is that man Stanley that seemed to watch
you ajid I into this place, and then disappeared ? I
suppose what you would call in this country a sort of
educated ‘ Wood and Water Joe’ ? ”
“ What! ” answered Annie, her temper beginning
rise at these remarks, “ Mr. Stanley ; where is he ?


I don't see him. I wanted him here with the water,
and expected to find him.”
“Well, I saw him ‘slam’ his buckets down and
disappear over that rise.”
“ Then I hope that he will be back soon,” answered
Annie warmly. “ Mr. Stanley is a very old friend of
ours ; we knew him in the old country ; and if he is
not a gentleman bred and born, he is one by nature.
And, Mr. Fulrake, I will thank you not to couple you
and I together again in the familiar manner you did
just now. You may fetch the water if you like, or I
will get it myself.”
Fulrake fetched the water, and depositing the pails,
said to Annie, in a tone which seemed to her to have
a perceptible sneer in it, —
“ I’m sure I beg your pardon ; I had no idea he was
a friend of yours!'
“ I said a friend of ours” replied Annie, who was
now rather amused by noticing the peculiar way in
which the little man carried his two heavy buckets.
“Yes, but by the way you fired up I think I must
have trod on some soft place.”
“You are treading in one now,” retorted Annie,
with a laugh, “ spilling all the water about like that;
why, you will quite spoil your dandy shoes ; they
must be wet through.”
“Very well. Shall I call Mr. Stanley, then?”
said Fulrake, who felt that he was getting the worst
of it.


“Yes, if you like ;he is not so clumsy. And then
you can go in and change your shoes.”
This last was a crusher to our new chum, who was
not accustomed to be snubbed or talked to in this
way. However, determined to take ' himself off
decently, with his front to the fair foe, he was step-
ping backwards ; but forgetting, in his retreat, that
one of the buckets of water was behind him, he came
against it, overturned it, and found himself partly
sitting in the bucket and wholly in a pool of
water.
“I’m so sorry,” cried Annie, scarcely able to pre-
vent herself from going into fits of laughter.
“ Don’t mention it, Miss Bell,” called back Fulrake,
who was now walking rapidly away, as he muttered
the following lecture to himself:—
“You did not quite score there, Lionel, my boy.
Always will rush your fences with the fair sex ; ves,
and very often come an awful cropper. What a fool
you must have looked with your‘pins’ in the air.
How glad you must have been that the gipsy wasn’t
there. \ou 11 hardly loox for him nozv / no, you will
see him somewhere first.”
And so, having blown himself severely up, Fulrake
gained his room, changed his things, and rolling a
cigarette, soon forgot his intention of “ cultivating ”
Annie in a new novel which he found in his ba°-
b *
Meantime, where was Mat ? Poor Mat! he had
walked up to the stockyard, and finding the place


deserted, he placed his arms on one of the rails and
thus addressed the fence around him, —
“ I knew how ’twould be when that swell came
with the dancing-shoes. Of course she’d prefer his
genteel manners to my rough ones. He’s ‘ The
Honourable;’ well, so am I—at least, I always try
to be. I’ll break his head, —no, I won’t, that wouldn't
be honourable ; besides, they’d kick me off the place
if I did, and rightly, too, and shs would be no longer
kind. No, I’ll go home—home to the Forest; yes,
with Tim. And yet, the other day I said I’d stop.
Why, I must stop ; I’ve signed articles for partner-
ship. Hardly know what to do ; wish some one
would tell me. Wonder whether the parson would.
I’ll ask him .”
Mat ! Mat; heretofore your strongest point amongst
men—amongst dangers by flood and field —has been
self-reliance and presence of mind; now you do not
even seem to know your own mind. Have patience !
Try to live these thoughts, these trifles, down, as you
have before overcome great and serious troubles.
Annie had watered her plants, and returning home-
wards, thought that she would leave her empty pails
outside Mat’s door; but when she arrived there, late
in the evening, she found the door wide open, papers
and accounts being blown about by the wind, whilst
a candle was dimly burning in a sheltered corner of
the room.
Seeing that the apartment was unoccupied, she


stepped in to blow out the candle, when her eye lit
upon the old book, “ Robinson Crusoe,” which Mat
had once before shown her, and, taking it up, she
made out on the fly-leaf, written in barely legible
round-hand, “ From Miss Bell to M. 5.,” then the
word “ Forestbut all the rest was nearly obliterated.
Pinned on to the same page was a fresh sprig of
stephanotis.
She was still examining the old volume when an
approaching step caused her to shut it hastily, and
blowout the candle, so that she might escape unseen ;
when, turning to leave the room, she found herself
seized and held by a strong pair of arms.
“ Let me go ! Who are you ?” she cried, on finding
herself thus suddenly captured.
“Oh! Miss Annie, I beg you ten thousand par-
dons ! ” said the deep voice of Mat. “ I thought I
had caught some one pilfering in my room.”
“ You, Mat! Oh, how relieved lam ! I thought
I was being carried off again by bushrangers. Yes, I
was pilfering, or, rather, looking at your old books ;
but I went in to blow out the light. You have no
business to leave a candle burning in such a dangerous
position.”
“ I’m very sorry, Miss Annie ; but I was star-gazing
—and—thinking—and forgot,”
“ W ell, and what were you thinking of so deeply,
when the whole place might have been in a blaze
through your carelessness ? ”


“I—l cannot tell you.”
“ But you must, and you shall , Mat. Come ! I
know. You thought that Mr. Fulrake should have
taken his turn carrying the water for me.”
“ Oh, no !no ! Let me always wait upon you ! I
want no help. And oh! won’t you take my arm,
instead of his, next time in going up the steps, or
anywhere. Indeed, I’ll take you safely.”
“ Why, Mat, what has come over you ? Mr. Fulrake
merely repeated the formality of taking me in to
dinner, and that was only once. I’m sure I would
always rather you did come with me and carry my
buckets, for Mr. Fulrake was dreadfully clumsy, up-
setting the water everywhere, and quite rude when I
laughed at him ; and— ’’
“Was he?” broke in Mat, with sudden anger;
“ then I’ll have him out, and—”
“ Stop , Mat! Where are you going ? ”
“ Going ? Why, any one that is rude to you —”
and Mat was making off when Annie seized him by
the arm.
“ Listen to me! Mr. Fulrake was not insultingly
rude. I merely meant that he answered me rather
shortly when I laughed at his wetting his grand
shoes.”
Mat, who was secretly pleased to find that Fulrake
had been sent to the rightabout by Annie, now said, —
“ That is different. I will tell you what I was
thinking of. Of going back to the old country.”


te6i
would
“ What! Leaving us, after you said you
stay ? Leaving all your friends ? ”
“Would you be very sorry it I did go, Miss
Annie ? ”
“Yes, I should be very sorry indeed!'
“ Then forgive me for appearing so shifty. I ex-
pect that I got rather stupid trying to understand
accounts and figures, and such things, in those papers; ”
and Mat pointed to a pile of documents which littered
one of the tables near him, and which he had at-
tempted to study after his visit to the stockyard, but
had given up the attempt, and strolled into the night
air to think of Annie.
“And now,” said Annie, with a smile, “I must go
in, so you may give me an arm up the verandah
steps.”
One conclusion which Mat arrived at after the fore-
going conversation was that he would still consult
the parson on the morrow. The clergyman had on
more than one occasion given him good, hearty advice,
and he therefore again sought him.
Parson Tabor was engaged writing when Mat
walked into his room, but he got up with a smile of
welcome and motioned him to a seat, saying, “You
look rather fagged, Mat; not slept well ? ”
“No, I have not, Mr. Tabor, and I have come to
you, as I have come before, when I am bothered, and
want to do the right thing. I will tell you straight.
Yesterday—last night—l made up my mind to go


home, and never come out here again ; but, after that
I met Miss Bell, and she said she would be sorry if I
went home—and—and— ”
“I see it all,” gently interrupted Tabor, “and I
have seen it all for some time. But before any more
is said, I’ll tell you what is right—to go and talk to
the squire — l know that you have not said anything
to him—and Mrs. Bell, and then , if you like, you can
come to me; but I will not be the first to interfere in
these affairs.”
“ But I do not know what to say to them. I
daren't say it, Mr. Tabor ; that’s why I have come to
you.”
“ Mat, you are not a nervous man ;go ! ” And
with gentle force Tabor pushed him out of the door.
Our forester knew, at all events, that he had re-
ceived good advice, and he acted upon it there and
then. Knocking at the door of Bell’s study-smoking-
room, a cheery voice bade him enter, and he found
the squire at his accounts.
“Just in good'time, Mat,” he said, looking up for
an instant, “to go through the ‘ muster ’ book. Here,
partner, sit down,” he added, with a laugh/* roll up
your sleeves, light a pipe, and to work.”
“ Squire, I’ll smoke afterwards, but I want to talk
seriously first.”
“What’s up now, Mat. Drive on. Must be very
bad, you look so solemn.”
“ And ’tis very bad, Squire ; and I feel very bad


about it. I’m —I’m in love with your daughter, and
I can’t help it. There , it’s out ! ”
“ Mat, you surprise me,” said Bell, turning round
in his chair ; “ but say on.”
Now that the ice was broken our hero took courage,
and made quite a speech, for him ; telling Bell that he
had liked his daughter when she was a little girl in
the Forest, that he had never forgotten her during
his long years of wild life in the north, and that now
that he had met her again as a grown-up woman he
loved her.
“ Men say in books that I have read, squire,” con-
tinued our forester, lam not worthy of her.’ And
/say truly that / am not, neither by birth, manners,
nor education.”
“ Has my daughter given you any encouragement ?”
“ No,” replied Mat; “but Ido not think that Miss
Annie dislikes me.”
The squire mused.
“ I will talk to Mrs. Bell about it,” he at length
said, “ I will give no opinion now ; but this must
not prevent your helping me in the station-books, so
sit down.”
But when the squire afterwards sought his wife
and made her acquainted with Mat’s feelings, she
expressed herself as being highly indignant at the
very idea.
“ Look,” she said, “ at the grand chances all through
this season that Annie will have of making a really


good match. \ou know how she has been admired
at every ball, party, and picnic that she has been to.
Why, quite lately there's that young Lord Roulette,
who ’asn’t been out long in the colonies ; he seeks
out Annie at every reception she goes to ; and I
know he’ll be a millionaire. Then there’s the Gover-
nors nephew. See how well she might do with
any of these eligible ‘ parrties.’ ”
Mrs. Bell took care to keep inside the English
language whilst pronouncing this word, but she could
not forbear a slight roll with her tongue on the r’s.
“ On the other hand, my dear, though Stanley is a
fine fellow, and has saved Annie’s life, we must think
of her future. Fancy being introduced to Mat’s
people; to their tents and caravans. When you
mixed with those people—”
But Bell stopped his wife ; he knew of old that
this was only the commencement of a long, wordy
harangue, which would develop into a lecture upon
his own many supposed shortcomings and slights,
from which she had suffered in former times. Thus
the argument would become purely personal; so he
said shortly,—
“ Enough. It’s no good further discussing the
question until Annie gives us a bit of her mind ; so
we’ll drop it.”
Bell walked away, and thought, weakly enough,
that he had had the last word. But his wife called
after him, —


“ I forbid Mat to speak on the subject to Annie.”
The next time the squire saw Mat he told him of
the interview that he had had with Mrs. Bell, and of
her reasons for opposing an engagement between
Mat and his daughter.
“ She says she forbids you to speak on the subject
to Annie. But one thing I’ll tell you, my boy,” said
Bell, in conclusion, “ I have generally noticed that
these things right themselves ; so keep up a good
heart.”
Mat replied, “ I have often thought of what Mrs.
Bell has now mentioned, and as I expected that that
would be her argument, I have been thinking the
matter over deeply since I spoke to you. I would not
for the world stand in the way of Miss Annie’s future
prospects, therefore, I propose this : Dromoora and
Tercbare have told me several times lately that they
would like to return to their country. I will take
them there, and return here. The journey there and
back will take weeks—months. During that time
Miss Annie will have opportunities of seeing a great
number of families and people in Sydney, and will
have a lot of gaiety and pleasure, which she deserves.
I will not say a word on the subject to her now, but
when I return , why perhaps I may.”
“Mat, my lad,” said the squire, “your sentiments
are noble ones, and worthy of your nature. We will
now let events work themselves out.”
Our forester occupied himself for the next day or


two in getting Tim’s traps packed and settling his
brother’s affairs and his own generally with the
squire. The wound in his brother’s side had healed
outwardly, though he could feel the bullet within
him every now and then. Still, he was able to get
about now unassisted, and was anxious to be off, in a
ship which sailed shortly.
And how had our new chum, the Honourable
Lionel, been “shaping ” ?
He certainly showed no aptitude for bush-life or
work, and said as much. The solitude of the station
did not suit him, and, though he accompanied the
others on horseback once or twice on the run, and
proved a good rider, yet he never could be induced to
take any active part in station matters. As Tom said, —
“ He shot a kangaroo one day, and that’s all he’s
done, and all he wants to,”
So it was with a feeling of relief to Fulrake that
Tom asked him one day whether he would like to go
to Sydney with him. He gladly accepted the pro-
posal, adding,—
“ Yes, and I have heard of a good kangaroo hound
there I would like to buy.”
An event occurred during this visit to the town
which greatly raised him in Tom’s estimation.
After Tom had transacted his business in Sydney,
and Fulrake had purchased his hound, the two young
men were crossing a ferry in the harbour, when the
man who was rowing them made a rough remark to


Fulrake, and asked him what he was going to pay for
the cur he had with him, for that he interfered with
the balance of his boat.
Fulrake, who was dressed with his usual care, and
was lying back in the stern-sheets, smoking, blew a
cloud of smoke out of his mouth, and languidly
raising himself half up, shifted his big hound, and
then resumed his former position, without troubling
himself even to look at the abusive rower. The calm
disdain with which he was treated seemed to put the
man into a fury, as with many oaths he recommenced
his abuse, saying,—
“Just like you blank loafing new-chum 'swells,
don’t want to pay for him, I suppose ? Fvc half a
mind to pitch yer cur overboard.”
“If you do,” replied Fulrake, with a quiet wink at
Tom, “ I should most certainly pitch you after him
my man ! ”
This answer considerably astonished the ferryman
as well as Tom, as they glanced at the small, spare
figure of the new chum. And yet the man did not
seem to have any intention of putting his threat into
execution. He seemed to forget the dog ; but, staring
rudely at Fulrake, and rowing with all his might, he
thundered, —
“Wait till I get ashore, m 3' young bloke ! ”
“ Exactly what I’m going to do,” replied Fulrake,
with a calm smile, as he blew a huge cloud of tobacco
out of his nostrils.


The ferryman made one mistake; for when the
boat reached land he jumped out to fasten her to her
usual moorings—a tree some way up the bank. This
gave Fulrake the opportunity he had foreseen. All
his apparent languor disappeared as he sprang ashore
with the agility of a cat, and before the rower had
completed the fastening of the boat, he had given
Tom the hound to hold, and taken off a pair of
well-fitting kid gloves. He then addressed the ferry-
man in a tone that sounded almost tender, and
certainly was quite touching in its plaintiveness,—
“ \ ou told me just now, in a rough and uncivil
manner, that the dog was interfering with the balance
of your boat. I caused the animal to shift his position.
You then called me a blank new chum, and applied
the same epithet to the c:ir. I think I shall presently
show you which is the real cur ; but, firstly , perhaps
you think that that vulgar word which your low class
use on every possible occasion is an oath : it is merely
the corruption of an old expression.”
The man he was addressing had never been ap-
pealed to in this kind and gentle manner before, and
stood listening with open mouth, which, however, he
closed as Fulrake continued, —
“ Secondly , and what was more important, you called
me new chum. As a matter of fact, this is true ; but
at all events, I paid my passage out, and, judging by
your dirty scrub of a head, I should unhesitatingly
put jou down as a blackguard of a remarkably low


type ; what you arc pleased to call out here a 4 lag
an old hand—but which I prefer to put into new chum
language as a convict , sent out at the expense of the
country, and I should judge, in your especial case, for
kicking some defenceless creature to death. I have
no doubt, if you ever fought, you would fight like the
cur that you are!'
The ruffian before him evidently could not get the
meaning of Fulrakes calmly delivered sermon into
his thick head at first, but towards the end of it a full
sense of the words dawned on his heavy mind, and
when he heard the concluding words, coupled with
the immoderate laughter of Tom, he broke out into a
volley of furious oaths, and seizing a huge stone
which lay at his feet, hurled it with terrific force at
Fulrake’s head. The latter, quite prepared for this,
never shifted his ground, but simply throwing his
head to one side with a professional movement, the
well-aimed missile flew harmlessly by.
“I thought so,” said our new chum, “you’re too
big a coward even to fight fair. \\ ho is the cur
o 0
now ? ”
This last taunt brought on his adversary, livid with
rage, and, sparring with both arms in the air, he tried
to deliver a round-handed blow on the new chum’s
head. If that blow had got home, the little white-
haired man would have gone down, probably never
to rise again.
But the boatman did not know that he had to deal


with the “ Spider/’ for such was the name that his
insignificant-looking antagonist went by in London,
and in his own county, where he was well-known to
both friends and foes by his extreme agility, clever
defence, and the punishing power of his fists, and by
the cool and indomitable pluck he showed when facing
heavy odds.
The lound-hander that was intended to smash our
Spider, went, like its forerunner the rock, harmlessly
o\er his head, fended off and upwards by his left arm,
whilst with his right he countered his man full in the
mouth, sending him down with a crash which would
have had a stunning effect had not the oarsman lit in
the ooze which lined the bank.
This gave the Spider time to get his wind, which,
owing to his want of exercise of late, was none of the
best, as he remarked to Tom, —
“ breezy inside, long sea voyage against train-
ing ; but we’re getting on, eh ? ”
“ ' vord you are,” was Tom’s answer ; « you did
get on ; gave him fits.”
“ Round two,” cried the Spider, as the boatman,
after rinsing his mouth in the salt water, prepared to
renew the combat.
This time the ferryman, looking more nasty than
ever, and covered with blood, came at Fulrake
literally like a bull, as with head down he tried to butt
the little man off his legs,
o
The Spider met this charge with a terrific left-


hander, which he intended for his adversary's face,
but which, owing to the man’s dropping his head so
low, struck on the top of his skull ; this he followed
with a smart delivery, from his right, which landed
on the ferryman’s jaw as he staggered from the first
blow, and down he went again, this time rolling under
the bows of his own boat ; and there he lay still.
But Tom thought it time to interfere, so stepped
up to the man and asked him if he had had enough.
T he boatman looked up in a dazed way, hardly able
to articulate, his mouth being full of ooze and blood.
“ Enough !” he said ; “ I’ve got too much ! Is he
gone ? All my front teeth are driven in, and I believe
my jaw is broken ! ” Then, getting slowly up, he
approached his lips close to Tom, and said, in a
confidential whisper, “ That young’un hits like a kick
from a bullock ! ”
1 hereupon Tom told his friend that the man had
had enough of it.
“As a matter of fact,” replied the Spider, “so
have I. ’ At the same time showing Tom his left
hand. “ I’m not used to hitting my fists against the
top of a thick skull like that. It has, I think, driven
one of the knuckles in.” Saying which, the Spider
lit another cigarette, went up to his late antago-
nist, and putting a sovereign into his hand, said,
‘ There, my man, that will pay the boat and help to
straighten you up ; only don’t do it again, don’t you
know.”


“ No, I won’t,” said the fellow, “ leastways, I won’t
fight with you again, if that's what you mean.”
Then, as he spit on the gold in his hand, he added,
“You’re a gentleman, though you be a new chum.”
“ Well, you have a nerve,” said Tom, as they walked
away; “ and how you kept your temper in the boat
I can’t understand.”
“Very simple to understand, Tom: if there had
been a row in the boat, she might have capsized, and
/ can't swim. I guessed rightly he wouldn’t chuck
the dog overboard ; Td have had him as he seized
it.”
But to station life Fulrake never would take. As
Tom said to the squire a few days after the fight just
recorded, —
“ The little chap has tremendous pluck and nerve,
but he is such a lazy fellow, and so full of fads about
his grub and everything.”
And Fulrake,alias the “Spider,” soon after quitted
the country, taking passage in the same ship with
Tim and Jumper, for the old dog was getting very
feeble, and his master was much delighted when the
captain of the ship tcld him that he might take him
with him.
Tim arrived in the New Forest in due course, and
wrote a letter to his brother, which reached him many
months afterwards, telling him of their parents,
who though much aged were still hearty; of their
sister (who had long been married, as they were


aware) ; and he ended a long letter of Forest news by
saying that Fulrake had tended him during the
voyage like his own brother, and had looked after
the old dog too.
And so the u Spider ” disappears from the scene of
our story.


CHAPTER XVIII.
Our hero visits the old Waigonda country once more—The
overlanding—The Golden Gully—The last sight of Dro-
moora.
OUR hero, having seen his twin brother comfortably
off, and well provided for by the liberality of the
squire, decided to start at once with Dromoora and
Tercbare to the northern wild country, the land of the
Waigonda tribe.
Tom had often expressed a wish to accompany
him, whenever he made up his mind to go, and Mat
gladly accepted his offer now that he was actually
organizing the little expedition. The squire said
that he would get an extra hand or two to help him
during the absence of “ his boys,” and remarked how
glad he was that there were at least two white men
for such a long “ overlanding.”
So they started —a party of six—for two of the
station blacks joined the little band ; these were
partly to aid in looking after two extra pack-horses,
which were laden with useful and handsome articles
destined for the Waigondas, and chosen by the chief


and his wife. There was no occasion to take a buggy
this time, for our natives had learnt to ride during
their life at Bulinda Creek : besides this, a wheeled
vehicle would have been utterly useless in the wilder
districts.
On the last evening of their stay at the Creek Mat had
bidden farewell to Annie in her little garden, whither
they had resorted to water the plants as usual, he
had also requested her to take charge of his old
book for him, saying that instead of taking that with
him on his journey, he had a great favour to ask of
her, namely, to give him a little lock of her hair that
he might carry it with him.
Before Annie could open her lips to reply to this
request, Mrs. Bell came running out of the house
which the two were approaching, and, calling sharply
to her daughter, said, —
“Come, it’s nigh time for you to be a-bed, you’re
always about that garden now.”
Annie laughed and went in, and Mat saw her no
more that night.
The next morning when the family were collected
on the verandah to see the little party of adventurers
off, Annie stole softly up to Mat, placing a tiny
paper packet in his hand. Our hero grasped it, and
the hand that held it, and whispered,—
“ I can go through anything now, Annie.”
And when shortly afterwards he turned from the
“ Apple-tree ” ridge, to have a last look at the station ,


so he informed Tom, he saw a little white handker-
chief being waved from her corner of the verandah,
and our forester went on his way rejoicing.
Mat had kept to his promise of not speaking to
Annie of the one absorbing thought that lay deep in
his manly bosom; he had reasoned this matter so far
out that he had concluded that it was best to take
this overland trip, away from her sweet presence, away
from the constant round of station-work. During the
long days and nights in the silent bush he could
commune with himself.
Besides, Mat was aware that there was always a
certain amount of danger amongst the districts whither
he was bound ; and, again, there was a double feeling
of honour, so to speak, in his conduct, he had given
his promise to Annie’s parents, and he knew that she
would have the opportunities of attending many gay
parties during his absence, so that, reasoned Mat,
“ she will see plenty of other men besides me. At all
events, it shall never be said by others that I stood in
her way.”
Mrs. Bell had noticed the little farewell tribute
which Annie had given Mat, and determined to “ have
it out” with her daughter, who was still earnestly
gazing at the distant cloud of dust made by the
receding horsemen.
“ Annie, come here,” called Mrs. Bell, but Annie
took no notice of this appeal beyond saying,—
« In a moment, when they are out of sight.”


“Yes, but they are out of sight, besides Tom will
be back in a few months.”
“ Tom ! ” replied Annie in a tone which implied
that he did not enter into the subject of her thoughts ;
“ yes, I suppose they will come back ; but how I
wish we could write to them, or they to us; it’s a dan-
gerous journey, mother, many have told me so.”
Annie had been correctly informed, for in the
enormous stretch of country between Bulinda Creek
and the scene of Mat’s shipwreck, many events had
taken place, and though around the Waigonda country
the natives had not been disturbed, yet south of that
many collisions had taken place between the white
and the black man ; much country had been taken up ;
the new settlers had had their cattle speared, and even
one or two of the camps of these white men had been
destroyed, and themselves murdered. It was a very
old story, which had been often repeated, as new
colonies were taken up, from south to north of the
entire continent. The black man looked upon any
one, whether black or white in colour, who encroached
upon his territory, as an enemy, and dealt with him
accordingly, and the white man avenged the murders
of his countrymen by shooting the natives.
When Mrs. Bell saw that her daughter was really
grieved, and that her last words were spoken in a
choking tone, she said, —
“ They can't write, dear, of course, there’s no post
up there, but we will try to forget for the time ; and


you will have plenty to amuse you , I’m sure. Just
think of the engagements we have ; why, as you
know, I’ve a tray full of minor invitations. Then,
look at the grander ones; there’s—where shall I begin ?
Let me see ; first, the trip to the ‘ Heads ’ with the
Governor in his special steamer ; his nephew, of course,
will be there, that will be a picnic ; then there’s another
grand picnic at ‘ Rose Bay J with the Gilletts—Lord
Roulette is a great friend of theirs, you know—
Manly Beach ’ afterwards, and a ball at —”
“ Oh ; yes, I know,” interrupted Annie impatiently,
“ how you can remember it all I can’t think, I’m tired
of all those people and places, and prefer home life,
riding with my father and —my garden.”
“ That garden again ! why, I declare you have gone
gardening mad, Annie, at least lately you have ; since
Mat has been interfering in it you have thought of
nothing but flower-raising.”
“ Perhaps now he has made it tidier I take more
interest in it,” replied her daughter, and feeling that
she was reddening slightly under the solid stare of
her mother, added, “And I’m going there now to
put in some seeds.” And so escaped further ques-
tions for the time.
Matters were dreary enough at the station now.
Bell without “ his boys ; ” Annie having no one to
confide in, for she saw plainly that in one sense, in
her sense, Mat was not now in her mother’s good
graces.


Parson Xabor was the only one to cheer up the
spirits of the little party.
As an outsider, he had for some time been conver-
sant with the feelings of all parties, and though he
had so far been made a confidant of Mats secret,
that he guessed the state of our hero s feelings, yet
he followed his fast rule of making it no business of
his, unless specially appealed to by the elders. Yet
somehow he was always taking Mat s part when the
conversation happened to bring in his name, or touch
upon the absent ones, and it was wonderful to see
how both Bell and his daughter brightened up on
hearing the good man speak in this strain.
Annie had always been fond of horses, and was an
accomplished horsewoman, and to help pass the dajs,
which seemed long to her now, she took regular
rides with her father.
She, mounted on her favourite, Robin Hood,
which Mat had broken in as a colt, and left behind
for her special use; and Bell bestriding his own espe-
cial fancy, a confidential weight-carrier, sure and
steady.
Upon one of these occasions, it chanced that father
and daughter had ridden many miles around the run,
and, approaching home again, came across one of the
numerous small lagoons which lay to the north of
the station.
The day had been intensely hot, scarcely a breath
of wind moved the leaves of the stately Eucalypti,


but over this lagoon hung a group of the drooping
Myall, affording such shade that the squire pro-
posed to dismount and rest themselves and their
horses.
Bell, having found a comfortable resting-place, lit a
pipe, stretched himself out and prepared for a rest, or,
as he called it, a “ Bange.”
He had not taken many puffs at his pipe when,
turning his head, he found Annie busy with her
sketching-block, a tiny one, which she carried in the
pouch of her saddle.
“ Why, Annie, what on earth are you going to
sketch here ? ” said he. “ Not that old scaly Moreton
Bay ash on the opposite bank, surely ? ”
“No, father, you know I cannot sketch ; but I am
going to try and draw Robin Hood as he crops the
grass there, and, if it is anything like, send it to Mat.”
“ Why, you foolish little thing, there’s no post to
where Mat has gone ! ”
“ Then I will keep it until he returns, and give it
him then!'
“ I suspect, my girl, that you are keeping that little
heart of yours until he returns.”
The colour mounted into Annie’s face as she heard
these words from the squire’s lips, and, hastily putting
down the drawing materials, and gazing with wide-
open appealing eyes at her parent, she exclaimed,—
“Father, my good daddy, why did you say that ?
Would you be very, very angry ?”


“ There, lassie, don’t cry ! ” said Bell. “It has been
my earnest wish for many a day; and when Mat
spoke—l mean lam getting old, and long have I
hoped that you would be wedded to one of the most
honest, upright, and, by Jove ! manly fellows I have
ever met.”
“You have made me so happj r ,” whispered Annie,
who had now thrown herself into her father’s arms
and was silently weeping on his neck. “ I knew that
vou would not be against me, nor against him''
“ There, my dear,” said the squire, as he gently
disengaged himself from her embrace. “ Let us keep
this to ourselves until that young rover returns home.”
“ I must kiss your dear, kind old face again, dad.”
“ That will do, lassie,” laughed Bell, as he sub-
mitted to half a dozen little smacks administered in
quick succession over his rugged face. “Go on with
your drawing, and let me smoke in peace.”
“ I cannot finish it now, father ; let us go home ! ”
and Annie packed up her drawing materials and
called Robin.
The noble beast threw up his head from the grass
that he was cropping, fixed his great, calm eye upon
his mistress,and then, walking solemnlyup,commenced
“ nuzzling ” his nose into her hand.
“Why, how you must have petted the rascal!”
said the squire, who had watched these proceedings
with an amused smile.
“Yes, I often stroke his head, and kiss that pink


spot on his soft, velvety nose; but I expect that his
affection is all cupboard love, for, you see, he is sniffing
about for the bread and salt which I am in the habit
of giving him.”
As soon as the squire had finished his smoke he
mounted Annie on to her horse, when she said,
“ Now, dad, I must have a good gallop/' and, with-
out waiting to see if her father was in the saddle, she
spoke to Robin, who no sooner found that his head
was directed towards the Creek than he flew home-
wards as hard as he could gallop.
Together girl and horse cleared the home-paddock
fence, and pulled up breathless at the verandah,
followed a few minutes later by the squire, who
remarked, —
“ I never saw you go like that, Annie ; I really
cannot keep up with you another time. I hope that
you enjoyed your ride ! ”
“ Father, I shall never forget it!” said our heroine,
as she flew up the steps to her own room.
From this period both Annie and her father seemed
to find the time pass more quickly and cheerfully.
A “ something ” had been removed between them
which caused her to seek her father’s companionship
for a daily ride with eagerness, whilst most of the
evenings she devoted to her garden ; and the squire,
when he could find the time, wended his way to
Sydney on business connected with the station, and
matters concerning the publication of our forester’s


journal or narrative, which Annie had finished reading
with great delight.
We must now follow our hero and his little party
on their trip northwards.
Before starting, INI at had pointed out to Tom, on
an outline map, his proposed route as near as he
could guess. Placing his finger on a spot high up on
the north-eastern coast, he said, —
“ I should fancy the wreck took place within fifty
miles of this line, which, you see, is marked seventeenth
degree of south latitude. It must be a good bit over
eight hundred miles from here the way that we shall
have to go \ but, by hitting off Bay, we can
surely find a vessel which will carry us and our horses
some way north, and so give us a rest.
At first, after leaving the Creek, they pursued their
way through the more settled districts for some weeks,
sleeping either at stations or camping out, as time or
fancy suited, and, reaching Brisbane, were lucky
enough to find a schooner there, which they hired, the
captain of the boat saying that he knew the northern
coast up to a certain point, and so far he would take
them.
On the evening of the sixth day the skipper anchored
at the mouth of a fair-sized river, and declared that he
could not risk his vessel further, so our party reached
the shore, when the tide was suitable, by swimming
their horses 5 their food, ammunition, and fancy articles
being taken in the ship’s boat.


They found, upon coming ashore, that they had
landed amidst dense mangrove-swamps, and for many
hours had to cut their way through these scrubs,
until they at last emerged into higher ground, which
consisted of palm-tree scrubs, with a thick under-
growth of vines and rattan-cane.
Ihe difficulty of getting their horses through this
wilderness of trees was enormous, and when at length
a suitable spot was found, they determined to rest a
whole day to recruit themselves and their tired animals,
and to repair the packs which carried their goods.
They, however, found time for hunting and fishing
as well, and Tom said that it was the most sporting
district that he had ever been into.
They caught numbers of fish-cels, bream, and a
species of perch which ran up to twenty pounds’
weight and more, as far as they could guess.
In the palm-scrubs were quantities of scrub-turkeys,
and another smaller species of bird somewhat resem-
bling the domestic fowl, and, as they had no lack of
powder, the camp was well supplied.
This river reminded Mat and the chief of the one
they had crossed on their way south which was so
full of crocodiles, but they saw none of these reptiles
winch fact Dromoora explained by saying that they
did not often frequent mouths of rivers so near to the
salt water.
But delightful as this camp proved, Mat was anxious
to push on ; so, after having enjoyed a thoroughly


good spell, they crossed the river, and then kept a
north-westerly direction, hugging the coast-line as
much as the great mangrove scrubs and swamps would
allow.
Three ot our party being perfect scouts, and all
being good bushmen, they were enabled to avoid
anything like a near approach to strange natives, as
they agreed that a collision with them would be most
disastrous to all concerned.
At length, after many weeks of monotonous travel-
ling, and after following a large river almost to its
source, they entered on to a large salt-bush plain,
which was bounded on the horizon by a range of
hills terminating in a solitary mountain.
As soon as the big mountain was sighted the chief
and his wife broke into a corroboree of joy, and Mat
was as delighted as his two friends at seeing the
termination of their journey within sight, for this
mountain was situated in the Waigonda country. It
was long before this range of hills, which had appeared
comparatively near, was reached ; but when they at
length found themselves in their own country, Mat
and his two friends went forward, the others forming
a camp and guarding the horses, for our natives knew
that they could never approach their tribe on these
terrible-looking animals.
The first members of the tribe who appeared to
them were a party of jins digging yams, who no sooner
saw them than they fled in terror. But Dromoora


said, “Do not attempt to stop them ! they will go
home: ’’ which sure enough they did, for, following
up their trail, our party of three found themselves
within sight of a cluster of black fellows, all gazing
towards the supposed danger.
Dromoora then gave a peculiar call known to his
tribe, upon hearing which all those who were in the
Waigonda camp sprang forth to welcome their long-
absent friends, and with joyous shouts escorted them
to their fires.
Messengers were then despatched to bring in all the
blacks who were out hunting, whilst Terebare brought
up Tom, and introduced him and the Bulinda Creek
natives.
When all were assembled, the usual feasting, danc-
ing, and corroboree were gone through, and after
Dromoora and Mat had detailed all their adven-
tures to numerous knots of natives, Mat left the chief
to give his impressions of the white man and his won-
derful ways, whilst he superintended the unpacking of
the packhorses, having first assured his friends that
the big “ kangaroos ” would not injure them; they
were, however, hardly satisfied about this until, their
chief being free from his numerous questioners, they
prevailed upon him to mount one of the terrible
‘‘kangaroos.” When, however, they saw him sitting
m the saddle, their fears gave way to immoderate
laughter, and every man, woman, and child was brought
up to see their beloved chief in such a novel position.


Mat, during this spectacle, was engaged counting
over the presents, or “spoil” as he called it, to see
that nothing was broken, and beyond the fact that
one or two of the numerous mirrors were cracked, he
found nothing damaged, calling to Dromoora in the
midst of his task, he said, —
“ I told the Waigondas long ago that there should
be only one gun, or “ teegoora ” amongst them, but
you have brought two besides the one I gave you.”
“ Yes, oh, white chief,” answered Dromoora, “ but I
got these two fighting: I never wished to tell you
how, but I will now. I killed those two white men,
who would have killed you when you were fighting
the robber.”
“ Then,” said Mat, “ keep them, but never use them
to kill white or black men with, but only to shoot
game.”
“ I promise,returned Dromoora, “ I will only use
them against men in defence of our lives.”
Leaving the chief and his wife to distribute the
much-prized presents, Mat and Tom mounted their
horses, took a few provisions and tools, and started
on a visit to the “Golden Gully.” Our forester
taking a straight line to the place, they soon reached
the valley, and proceeded to work.
Tom, who had previously had some experience on
diggings, after working for some hours in the dry
watercourse, called his companion, and said, “ I have
found these few small nuggets, and there is gold, I


expect, in this sand, and you have some too, I see,’
as Mat produced a few nuggets also, “but this I’m
pretty sure is ‘ a poor man’s diggings.’ I will tell you
what I mean ; you would have to take all this sand
and shingle away to the nearest water, and wash it in
a ‘ cradle,’ and even then the gold would not last long,
for here is where the real quantity of the ore is, in these
rocks of hard white quartz, up the creek.”
Then taking Mat to the spot, he explained that
this gold-bearing quartz which was rich in veins of
ore, might be almost endless.
“ ut you see,” he continued, “ this part where
all the gold is, is not ‘a poor man’s diggings ;’ to win
this gold means erecting machinery, costing thou-
sands of pounds, on the spot; and what would it cost
even if it were possible to land it on the coast, to
transport it hither ? It cannot be done, Mat; some
future day, when the country is opened up, there is no
doubt that it will be done; but we can’t do it,
mate.”
Mat saw the truth of Tom’s argument, and at once
agreed to take what they could find, but not to waste
any more time there, adding, “No doubt Tim and I
got most of the loose gold, excepting the small stuff
which could only be found by using the cradle and
water as you say.”
Upon their return to the camp, they found the
whole tribe laughing and dancing round their “toys,”
axes, large and small, beads, and gaudy handker-


chiefs. The whole of the “spoil” was taken out
every morning' to be examined, and fresh wondcis
were discovered in the treasures every moment.
Dromoora had had to explain the secret powers of
the thunder-sticks till he was tired.
Mat returned for a few days to his wild, savage
life, chiefly to show Tom the various methods em-
ployed in hunting the game, as pursued by really
wild blacks, and Tom took such a fancy to the life,
that he wished to stay on for some weeks, but Mat
insisted that they had already stayed long enough,
that it would not be fair to the squire to delay, as
station matters required their presence at the Creek,
and that they really must not leave the ladies any
longer by themselves. To which Tom replied that
his mother and sister were perfectly well able to take
care of themselves, and besides that they had the
squire and parson to look after them.
Dromoora and his tribe, upon hearing Mats deci-
sion to return immediately, implored him to remain
and be their chief.
To refuse this request, when he saw their urgent
appeals, went to Mat’s heart, but he was obliged to
harden his feelings, and also to show some diplomacy
in refusing them.
But Mat had a powerful and steadfast friend in
Dromoora, with whom he had been conferring apart,
and when the tribe gathered round him to hear his
decision, he thus addressed them, —


“I have brought your chief and Terebare back
safely. I have brought the things I promised. Now
I ask you to let me go back; there are bad white
men about my friends at home. The chief will
tell.”
Mat had told Dromoora, of what that chief was
well aware, that though the gang of the bushranger
was broken up, that some of them had escaped over
the border into Victoria, and though it was not likelv
that they would return into New South Wales, yet it
was always possible ; but he had not told Dromoora
many other things, which the faithful chief took
upon himself to explain to the assembled tribe, for,
after giving a rapturous account of Mat’s doings in
general, and a specially detailed account of the
gallant fight with Magan, the whole scene of which he
acted to the life, and to the death, by making
another black fellow personate the bushranger, he
concluded, —
“ Our white chief, who won the white girl in a hard
and fair fight, claims that he should be rewarded by
taking her as his wife to his ‘ gunyah.’ ”
This speech was received with loud bursts of plea-
sure, mingled with cries of “ Such would be the re-
ward of a black warrior; such shall be the reward o*.
the white chief.”
Tom, to whom this language was Greek, asked
Mat to interpret it, and the meaning of the shouts,
which our hero very conveniently and truthfully did,


by telling him that they were making a great deal too
much of his fight with Magan. “ But then, you see,
they do love a good fight/’
So the Waigondas agreed that Mat should start
whenever he felt so inclined, and before another
white man “ should come along and steal his girl,”
and from that moment of their decision, they made
many little preparations to render the southern jour-
ney comfortable by collecting for the travellers all the
best roots and fruits they could find.
Mat made them a feeling speech on the morning of
his departure. When the whole tribe were assembled
once more, he said, —
“Oh Chief, and Terebare, and men of the Waigon-
das, you saved my brother’s life and mine ; you
cherished us as brothers for many years. The white
man does not forget ; the white man learns from a
book of the Great Spirit that he should try to do unto
others as he is done by. If you ever foresee troubles
with strange men, send a messenger to me, Dro-
moora knows the quickest way ; and if ever the white
man threatens to take your country, show him this
paper if you can. I have had it written by the white
man’s ink which never fades ; this is what it says on
many pieces, so that you may all have them :
“ Dromoora, and his whole tribe of Waigondas
saved the lives of the two brothers Stanley, and cared
for them as brothers, for many years. I ask you
to carry out their precept, and do - unto them as ye


shall wish that they do unto you ; as they did to
me.— Mat Stanley, Bulinda Creek, Sydney.”
Before our hero, Tom, and the two Creek blacks
started south, one of the Waigondas came to him
bearing an enormous shell, saying,—
“ The beast that you used to tell us of, that nearly
killed your brother; we found it when fishing once,
it was dead and open. Many tides we looked for
it.”
“That shall go to my brother, some day,” said
Mat, as he thanked the man ; and one pack-horse
was told off to carry the monster south.
“ They won’t believe it, Tom,” said our forester ;
“ unless I carry it home ; at least the one who’s going
to print my book won’t.”
When the white men turned their faces homewards
the chief and his whole tribe accompanied them as
far as the boundaries of the Waigonda country, then
the black men silently sat down to view them over
the next hill, and when Mat turned round for a last
wave of the hand he saw his old chief with his arm
round Terebare, seated on a stone, the attitude of
despair.
The tears rose in his eyes as he witnessed this
spectacle, which Tom observing, said soothingly,—
“ Never mind, old man, you might see them again,
some day.”
“Yes, in heaven, I hope,” responded our forester
in a choking voice, as he turned his face southwards.


But at nightfall, when they camped, Mat was him-
self again, and could talk of nothing but Bulinda
Creek, and the delights of that distant station. He
was further cheered that evening by the arrival of a
young black fellow whom the chief had sent, as the
youngster wished to go to the white man’s home
with Mat; he proved to be a valuable addition to the
party as a scout, and our hero was pleased to have
him as a connecting link with his old tribe of the
Waigonda.


CHAPTER XIX.
Lulinda Creek once more—Mat again asks Tabor’s advice—
-1 he parson “ on matrimony ’ —Annie’s little arbour.
Many weeks again passed over, and once again the
travellers reined up at Bulinda Creek, travel-stained
and weary, but otherwise as well as when they had
quitted that station.
They arrived during the night, whilst all the in-
mates were asleep, so turned out their horses, and
retired to their quarters.
Mat was up and out again by daylight, and, seeing
no one about, tnought that he would stroll down and
look at Annie’s garden, but early as he was he found
by the tracks that some one had preceded him, and
passing through the little gate, he came face to face
with Tabor.
“ Why, Mat, I am right glad to see you,” was the
cheery greeting as he grasped his hand ; “ I guessed
it was you last night when I heard the horses. I
have been doing a bit of weeding and looking after
Annie’s plants, for she says that her gardener is
away, and that the whole place is-going to ruin.”
Mat longed to ask about her, anything and every-


thing, but he controlled his impatience until an op-
portunity should arise.
“ Let us sit in the arbour whilst I rest my old
back,” said the parson, “ and you can tell me of your
travels until breakfast-time.”
Mat was only too pleased to have a quiet chat
with his good old friend, but the account of his late
overland journey gradually drifted into questioning
Tabor concerning events which had taken place at
Bulinda during his absence ; from this he led up to
talking of the family, and eventually said,
“ Mr. Tabor, I must tell you now of what passed
between the squire and me after I had been to con-
sult you once,” and having detailed the conversation
that had taken place, Mat continued,—
“ And now, sir, tell me, am I wrong in presuming
to think of asking Miss Bell to be my wife? And
please give me your opinion about marriage gene-
rally ; it may seem a strange question, but I never
could and I never would ask any one but yourself.”
His companion sat with face hidden in his hands,
and head bowed in deep thought for several minutes,
without opening his lips ; then, raising himself, he
faced round so as to meet Mat’s gaze, and at length
thus spoke Tabor, the oracle, —
My lad, as you tell me that you have appealed
to the squire, who has never said a word to me on
the subject, and that on the whole he was not
unfavourable to you as a possible suitor for the hand


of Annie, I may now advise you according to my
lights ; at the same time I warn you not to raise
your hopes through any words that may drop from
my lips ; for though I do not mix myself up in these
matters, I cannot have failed to notice the great
attention that has been paid to Annie during
your absence, upon the few occasions on which
I have accompanied her and her parents to
Sydney.
“ First you ask my opinion as to your presuming
to the hand of Miss Bell.
“ This question I will at once dismiss by saying that
I think you may, for whatever the difference in your
respective stations may have been at home, here ,
circumstances have brought you on more level terms,
—and if I may so express it without violating family
secrets, for it is no secret, though not a matter to
be proclaimed from the house-tops,—Mrs. Bell’s
father was master of a small collier, in fact a very
small collier or barge, with which he navigated the
canals ; a very worthy man, for I happen to have
known him personally.
From what you have told me of your father as
chief of his clan, so I understood, I fail to see a
very great difference between the respective stations
of these two men.
“ Mind you, Mat, gipsies have not got a very good
name in the old country, chiefly from their habits of
poaching, I suspect.


“ I have no doubt you were a sad poacher,” added
the parson, with a sly smile.
Mat shook his head, and laughed
“ However that may have been, there is not much
encouragement for the same line of business in this
country ; but I am wandering.
“ Your other question is a solemn one. I have never
been asked it before. A dissertation upon marriage
embraces many wide and different questions and
arguments ; and if you asked fifty men, and they
answered you truthfully, you would probably get
about fifty different statements or ideas.
“ However, I will answer you to the best of my
ability, drawing my experience from the lives of
many good, true, and loyal friends of mine, and —I
will give you rny own experience, for I am a widower,
Mat.”
The parson paused, and seemed to be revolving
thoughts of long ago in his mind.
At length, he resumed, —
“ Courtship and married life usually , mind I say
usually, resolve themselves into three phases, or, as
you will understand the expression better, three
periods.
“Thefirst is the young lover, who once having gained
the affections of a girl, thinks that there can be no other
like her in all the world. He secs not the imperfections
in her that others do ; she must have faults, who has
not ? but his goddess is absolutely without one fault in


his eyes, and who would dare to tell him that she
is not perfect ? Certainly not his friends, or her
friends ; more especially not those women who,
fancying that the young people are suited to each
other in the main points of character—in a case
which we may sjippose —urge on the courtship by
many little innocent devices. Thus these perfect
beings, for the man has equally no fault in the eyes
of the girl who has chosen him—are brought up or
rather carried along in an atmosphere of mutual bliss
and affection. Then follows the marriage. So far
the first period.
“ Now the second is like unto it, excepting that
after the honeymoon— yes, usually after that term of
bliss —during the first months of married life he has
sobered down a bit, she is much the same, and ex-
pects the same ardent attentions as she received
during courtship ; he, though just as fond of the girl
as his wife, thinks a little more of himself, is more
selfish how shall I put it ?—perhaps now and then
absents himself for the whole of the day; if in the
country, it may be for purposes of sport ; if in town,
he may remember that he has neglected his club of
late, and, rejoining his companions there, returns home
somewhat later than his wife thinks there is occasion for.
u l n this conduct the wife sees a change, considers
herself neglected ; and her spouse, for not quite the
first time, notices upon his return home, a little ‘mou ’
in her mouth.


“ The fact is that the man before he met this woman
was perfectly free in all his works and ways, was
selfish—that is, regarded his own interests solely he
now finds that he has surrendered his liberty, this he
never foresaw, or never dwelt upon during the in-
toxication of courtship.
“Granting that they are people imbued with com-
mon sense, they soon find that they must give in to each
other a little if they wish to live happily together.
“ Let us suppose, in the case we are picturing, that
they have succeeded in giving way to each other, the
years then roll on to the —
“ Third period—A new feeling has been springing
up between them, a better feeling, a better under-
standing exists, there is more real reliance upon each
other than ever truly took place during the days of
courtship. That long past event he never regrets,
though perhaps sometimes the thought has crossed
his mind for a brief instant that when he lost his
heart he lost his head too ; but now he feels that he
has gained a taithful and gentle companion, who has
helped to render him more gentle, and to think more
of others, and, we will hope, Mat, to help him to
think and to know that there is a world beyond this,
where ‘they two may meet again.’”
The parson stopped, and fixed his honest, grey
eyes on Mat, who, however, was lost in thought, and
did not respond.
Presently he resumed, —


“ And now, my boy, I have, as you see, pictured a
case where they lived happy ever afterwards, Mat,
I have told you my own experience , and though, if it
were necessary, I could tell you of many matrimonial
careers, where the ending has not been as related in
various fairy tales, yet believe me that my picture,
the one I now tell you of, is drawn from my life, my
very own. And before I quit the subject I will give
you a theory of mine which I stand by, and against
which I am positive there are few exceptions, and
that is, that in ninety-nine cases out of every hun-
dred, when two young people are thrown together
for any length of time into each other’s society, it
invariably ends by their feeling that they are
necessary to each other, that they cannot part, that
they are, in fact, what is generally understood as being
in love with each other.
“ My boy, I have given you a long enough sermon,
but I am inclined to give you one or two more of my
‘ notions,’ as I find you such a patient member ; these
ideas I likewise stand by, and have given forth pub-
licly, and by so doing I am aware that I have made
many enemies.
“ I have tried hard to preach down the frightful
expenditure of money that is spent when people
marry ; the parents and the young heads forgetting
how useful that money would be in after years ; and,
turning to a very different subject, but one that must
come to the minds of all men, I have the same ‘ down ’


on the hundreds of pounds which I have seen squan-
dered on a funeral.
“ In conclusion, to sum up, I have long thought
that Annie is one of the sweetest and frankest girls I
ever met. I have seen her temper severely tried many
times by one who should have been the last to so test
her, and though she was not aware that I was look-
ins at her. I never saw that ‘ mou ’ in her mouth of
o '
which I have spoken, but always a bright smile on her
face.
“And though I am sure it will make you jealous,”
added Tabor with a smile, “I have been in love with
her myself ever since I first knew her. As for her
faults, I have yet to learn them ; though I once
overheard a prattling old woman say that‘she has
no character.’ You need not start, Mat, I will ex-
plain another time what that means ; suffice it that
for the present you may bear in mind that a woman
with a great deal of ‘ character ’ very often means
with a great deal of temper.
“As for you, Mat, well, you are not a bad fellow ; so
now let us go in to breakfast, unless you wish to con-
tinue pondering, and—God bless you !”
The parson got up, and walked towards the house ;
not so Mat; he remained sitting in the arbour, and
puzzling over what he had heard ; as for breakfast, it
never entered his head ; but let us follow his train of
thoughts as he sat on that wooden bench.
o
“ Tabor is a good man and speaks out; ain’t afraid


of his opinions ; what a lot he knows ! I don’t believe
he ever was selfish, not he. I’m glad now I didn’t have
my name put down for that club when they wanted
me to in Sydney; but if she would have me ; I don’t
believe she would mind ; well, I’d be sure to be away
all day amongst the cattle, but I don’t think when
I came back she’d have a—what did the parson call
it? —a ‘mou’ in her mouth; no, I never saw any sulks
in her sweet mouth. No, before I go in, I will try
and reason all the parson’s words out, and I’ll talk to
my lock of golden hair, first.
Mat’s hand stole into his breast, and, drawing forth
a small leathern pouch, he took out of it a little lock
of dark auburn hair, which he was in the act of reve-
rently placing to his lips, when a light step sounded
under the heavy creepers, which, twining their tendrils
together, almost covered the entrance to the arbour,
and, looking up, his eyes encountered those of Annie.
Mat sprang up, blushing to the roots of his hair,
and in the first moment of surprise attempted to
return his keepsake to his breast.
Annie was equally unnerved at thus unexpectedly
finding Mat in her arbour, but was the first to find
her tongue.
“ I am so glad that you have all come home
safely,” she said ; “ but, Mat, we have all had break-
fast ; Tom is still asleep, I thought that you were too.
I—”
But Annie saw when she had got thus far, that


Mat’s thoughts were not of breakfast, and something
in his look caused her to stop. This little speech had
given him time to recover himself.
“Annie,” said our hero softly, as his dark eyes
looked into hers, “ come and sit down, and let me tell
you.my story in your own arbour,” and gently leading
the unresisting girl by the hand, he placed her on the
rustic seat which he had just vacated.
“ My story is not long,” he pleaded, “ but oh, listen
to it patiently ; and honestly will I lay my thoughts
and feelings before you.”
Here Mat came to a pause, for both thoughts and
feelings were so surging through his brain, that for a
moment he was at a loss how to proceed, but only
for one brief moment ; for suddenly taking up the
lock of Annie’s hair, he placed it in her lap.
Annie was not looking at him, but gazing out far
away, with a soft, dreamy look towards the distant
blue hills which could be seen through an opening in
the creepers. Encouraged by something he saw in
her face, our forester proceeded,—
“ Annie, when you were a little girl, and I was a
rough lad, you gave me a little book which I showed
you the other day ; you thought nothing of this ; I
did. I kept it through all my wanderings, as sacredly
as I did my old mother’s Bible, and I confess looked
at it a great deal more than my Bible. I escaped to
Sydney, and saw you again. I thought of you in the
wild bush, I have loved you here at the ‘ Creek,’ and


I have felt a better man since. Annie, will you take
the forest gipsy as your husband ; to help you, to
love and honour you as he always has loved and
honoured you ? I cannot say more, except, forgive
ine." And as he concluded the last sentence, in
tender, faltering tones, Mat fell on one knee, and
buried his face in Annie’s lap.
A few more moments passed of perfect silence,
broken only by the chirruping of the tree-crickets
around them, when Mat felt the touch of a gentle
hand on his head, and the sweet breath of the girl as
she whispered in his ear, —
“ Dear Mat, I have nothing to forgive ; let us go
home ; let me go to father.”
Two minutes later, and Annie was telling her
story, interrupted by little sobs, on the breast of her
father. That worthy man told her that he had been
searching for Mat all the morning, and had then
applied to Tabor to help him. “And what do
you think the parson said ? ” he continued. “ Why
he answered me quite rudely, said that Mat
might be engaged—or asleep; better not be dis-
turbed, and that he, Tabor, could not be bothered
looking for him, as his back ached from weeding the
garden, and that I might send Annie to fetch a prun-
ing-knife which he had left in her arbour, ‘to save his
old legs ’ —old legs indeed !—artful old chap !
“And then, lassie, I looked for you. Couldn’t find you
amongst your poultry ; had not even visited ‘ Robin


Hood,’ as you do every morning ; so I came back
here, and here you are.
“And to think that that rascal, Mat, had not even
had his breakfast, bless my soul ! In my time, we
managed these little affairs much more conveniently.
o
“ But seriously, child, I am glad, relieved, that now,
and afterwards, when I am gone, I can leave my
little crirl to the care of as honourable a man as ever
trod forest heather or Australian bush.”


CHAPTER XX.
Back in the old Forest —Jumper’s last home —Return of our
hero and heroine for good and all to Bulinda Creek —Con-
clusion and farewell.
Mrs. Bell had some time before this given up all
hopes of her daughter becoming attached to any of
the young visitors to Sydney whom she had set her
heart upon.
Addressing her husband upon the subject, some
weeks previously, she said, —-
“ It’s no good, Bell, I did ’ope she would take to
some one of those young men with a ’andle to their
names ; tfiey are ready enough to come forward ; but
though she is pleasant and gay enough with them
all, it’s very soon, ‘ Mother, riding at the Creek suits
me better than these stuffy rooms ; ’ and back we have
to come to Bulinda. I ’ate the Bush, and should be
glad of a change to Tasmania or somewhere ; it
would do Annie good too to be right away from the
station.”
Two days after our hero and heroine had plighted
their troth in the little arbour, Mat, with Annie by


his side, requested the whole of the family to meet
them on the verandah; and when they were assem-
bled, he told them of his wish —and Annie’s —to be
married in the old country, in his forest home, so that
he might once more see the land of his birth, before
settling for good in Australia.
In this wish, the fair girl by his side seconded
him, provided that her father and mother would
come home also. “ Yes, that is what we want,” added
Mat, “ and we ask Mr. Tabor as a great favour to
come too, and marry us.”
Many plans were discussed before the little family
council separated, but the wishes of Mat and
Annie were ultimately agreed to.
The squire had long been contemplating a change
for his wife, after the rough times which she had been
through, and as he actually hinted at a month on the
Continent, perhaps in Paris, Mrs. Bell appeared
suddenly to approve of the marriage of her daughter
with our forester, and professed herself as keen to
make a start for the old country without loss of time.
Tom decided to stay and look after the station.
He had no attractions in the old country, but much
to occupy himself with at Bulinda Creek, and Bell
was relieved that he could leave such a good manager
behind him during his absence.
Parson Tabor was glad to have the chance of going
to and returning from England with those who were
so dear to him, and, besides the pleasure of their com-


pany during a long voyage, he had relations at home,
whom he had not seen for many years, and so he
seized the opportunity which might never occur
again.
“ Besides,” as he said to our hero with a smile,
“ I told you of my love for Annie, which I fear now
is a hopeless attachment, but at least I shall not now
have the misery of pining in solitude, as I should
have if I stayed behind at the Creek.”
A few weeks later our hero and heroine found
themselves in the New Forest—a happy couple,
indeed.
They had been married quietly at Boldre Church
by Parson Tabor ; the latter had then accompanied
Bell and his wife for a trip to Paris, previous to their
all returning to Australia together.
Mat and his bride were spending their honeymoon
at Lyndhurst, or rather making that little town their
headquarters, for they were seldom at home, but
wandering about, sometimes on foot, but more often
mounted on forest ponies, together they explored
the scenes of Mat’s early life.
Our forester showed his bride everything connected
with the adventures of his youth. Round by Stoney
Cross they rode into Boldre Wood. He was able to
show her the ruins of the cottage in which he had
been imprisoned. He took her into Vinney Ridge,
and pointed out, in the Blackwater Stream close by,
the scene of his encounter with the bloodhound.


Annie had often, during the voyage to England,
expressed a wish to see these places ; for, besides
being new to her, as she had never been much beyond
Burley, all these scenes were associated with the early
days of her hero.
But though she seemed as though she would never
tire of these forest rambles, Mat confessed to her
that some things about his old district disappointed
him.
The gipsies and most of his old friends were either
dead or had emigrated to other lands ; some of the
(rood old Forest families, it was true, remained such
as the Youngs and Broomfields, but of a generation
that knew not him. Stephen Burns had long gone
to join his brother on the Darling Downs ; Mat had
paid the debt to his old friend and backer, and on
inquiry at Lyndhurst he found that the money had
been received, to his great relief, as it had never been
acknowledged.
One matter which especially shook our hero’s pride
in his forest home, was the fact that most of the
grand old trees associated with his youth had been
cut down for ship’s timbers. Only some of his
ancient friends in ‘ Boldre Woods’ and ‘ Vinney
Ridge ’ had been spared, and another eye-sore to
him was that he found the forest ‘ fenced in,’ in all
directions. As he observed after one of their long
rambles, —
It is too small, Annie, there seems to be no room


left, too civilized, too taken up, none of the good old
breed of ponies left. I suppose Australia has spoilt
me ; it is yourself and your country I love, and we
will soon return.”
Mat’s parents had settled down in their old age
on a small farm which they had been able to pur-
chase and cultivate through the aid of money sent
home to them by their sons. When Tim arrived in
the forest, he found that the money so generously
given him by the squire would increase this farm of
his father and mother, and also enable him to im-
prove the breed of the forest ponies. As he was not
able to do manual work this latter occupation suited
him well; and when Mat arrived he found that his
brother had taken up his abode with the old couple
altogether. And the faithful “Jumper” ?
Shortly before Mat’s arrival in England, the old
dog had taken his last sleep. He had laid himself
down in his usual place, at the foot of Tim’s bed one
night, and in the morning they found him dead, his
rough and scarred old body lying in the position he
had taken up on going to sleep,—a faithful guard to
the last.
Tim took his dumb companion of many a hunt
and many a fight, up in his arms, and with tears
rolling down his cheeks, spoke to him as if addressing
a human friend :“Oh !my dog , my old dog—my old
chum, shall I never see you in this life again ? Some
have told me that dogs have another world as well


as us; then I may meet you again. Oh! I can't
stand the look of that once affectionate eye.
‘Jumper,’ come'.' And poor heart-broken Tim
carried his last treasure to the old gipsy camping
ground, and there buried him deeply under a gnarled
old beech-tree, leaving an appropriate stone to mark
his last resting-place.
When the Squire, his wife, and Parson Tabor re-
turned from their trip to the Continent, they found
that our hero and heroine were quite ready, and
indeed anxious to return to their Australian home ;
and gladly did they again rejoice, when some few
weeks later the little party of five found themselves
one balmy evening collected together on the veran-
dah of Bulinda Creek.
Thus we take leave of our forester ; this man of
humble birth, who, like all brave men and true, enter-
tained a modest opinion of his own merits ; who by
manly and steadfast perseverance overcame all diffi-
culties, and who ever bore in mind and strove to act
up to that —to many of us difficult lesson —which he
had learnt at his mother’s knee, namely, “ to do to
others as we would be done bywhich precept Mat
continued to carry out for long years after he had
finally settled down as a rich and prosperous squatter
at Bulinda Creek, proving it by his conduct in being
not only ever ready to give a helping hand to his white
brethren, but by the kindness he showed and the just
feelings he displayed towards the blacks of every dis-


trict, both north and south ; in which conduct he was
ably seconded by his kind old friend and adviser,
Parson Tabor. Thus he showed that however others
might misjudge the natives, he who knew them so
well, if from feelings of gratitude alone would ever
be their friend.
In these noble sentiments he was ever aided and
encouraged by his loving wife ; and we now bid them
a kind and long farewell, at the moment when as our
hero and heroine were once more wending their way
into the little arbour in Annie’s garden, Mat turned
to the girl whose hand was in his, with, —
“My darling, I am happy now, I have lived
my troubles down, and have won a dear and loving
wife.”
FINIS.
GILBERT AND RIVINGTON, LD., ST. JOHN’S HOUSE, CLERKENWELL RD., LONDON.


A Catalogue of American and Foreign Books Published or
Imported by Messrs. Sampson Low & Co. can
be had on application.
St. Dunstan's House, Fetter Lane, Fleet Street, London,
September, 1888.
3 J&ekrtton from tfre gist of Books
PUBLISHED BY
SAMPSON LOW, MARSTON, SEARLE, & RIVINGTON.
LIMITED.
ALPHABETICAL LIST.
BBOTT (C. C ) Poaetquissings Chronicle, ioj, 6d.
Waste Land Wanderings. Crown Bvo, js. 6d.
Abney (W. de W.) and Cunningham. Pioneers of the Alps.
With photogravure portraits of guides. Imp. Bvo, gilt top, 21s.
Adam (G. Mercer) and Wet herald. An Algonquin Maiden.
Crown Bvo, 3s.
Adams {C. K.) Manual of Historical Literature. Cr. Bvo, 12s. 6a.
Agassiz (A.) Three Cruises of the Blake. Illustrated. 2 vols.
Bvo, 42 5. ’’
Alcott. Works of the late Miss Louisa May Alcott :—
Eight Cousins. Illustrated, 2 5.; cloth gilt, 3r. 6 d.
Jack and Jill. Illustrated, 25. ; cloth gilt, 3,1. 6d.
Jo’s Boys. s^.
Jimmy’s Cruise in the Pinafore, &c. Illustrated, cloth, 25.: gilt ecVes
3s. 6d. fa s >
Little Men. Double vol., 2j.; cloth, gilt edges, 3.1. 6d.
Little Women, is. ■) 1 vol., cloth, 2s. ; larger ed.. p-ilt
Little Women Wedded, is. $ edges, 3s. 6d. & ’ g
Old-fashioned Girl. 25.; cloth, gilt edges, 35. 6 d.
Rose in Bloom. 25.; cloth gilt, 3s. 6 d.
Silver Pitchers. Cloth, gilt edges, 3s. 6d.
Under the Lilacs. Illustrated, 2s ; cloth gilt, 3s.
Work: a Story of Experience, is. ■) 1 vol., clofh, gilt
Rs Sequel, “ Beginning Again.” u. j edges, 3*. 6d.
Alden ( W. L.) Adventures of Jimmy Brown, written by himself.
Illustrated. Small crown Bvo, cloth, zs.
Aldrich (T. B.) Friar Jerome’s Beautiful Book , &>c. 3s. 6d.
Alford (Lady Marian ) Needlework as Art. With over xoo
Woodcuts, Photogravures, &c. Royal Bvo, 21s. ; large paper, 84J.
Amateur Angle As Days in Dove Dale : Three Weeks' Holiday
in ISS4. Ly E. M. is. 6d. ; boards, is.; large paper, 3s.


Andersen. Fairy Tales. An entirely new Translation. With
over 500 Illustrations by Scandinavian Artists. Small 4to, 6s.
Anderson {IV.) Pictorial Arts of Japan. With 80 full-page
and other Plates, 16 of them in Colours. Large imp. 4to, £8 8n (in
four folio parts, £2 2s. each); Artists’ Proofs, £l2 12s.
Angler’s Strange Experiences {An). By Cotswold Isys. With
numerous Illustrations, 4to, 5-r. New Edition, 3 s. 6 d.
Angling. See Amateur, “British,” “ Cutcliffe,” “Fennell.”
“Halford,” “Hamilton,” “Martin,” “ Orvis,” “Pennell,” “ Pritt,”
“Senior,” “Stevens,” “Theakston,” “Walton,” “Wells,” and
“ Willis-Bund.”
Annals of the Life of Shakespeare, from the most recent authori-
ties. Fancy boards, 2 s.
Annesley ( C.) Standard Opera Glass. Detailed Plots of 80
Operas. Small Bvo, sewed, in 6d.
Antipodean Notes, collected on a Nine Month? Tour round the
World. By Wanderer, Author of “ Fair Diana.” Crown Bvo, 7 s. 6 d.
Appleton. European Guide. 2 Parts, Bvo, ror. each.
Armytage {Non. Mrs.) Wars of Victoria's Reign. 51.
Art Education. See “ Biographies,” “ D’Anvers,” “ Illustrated
Text Books,” “Mollett’s Dictionary.”
Artistic Japan. Illustrated with Coloured Plates. Monthly.
Royal 4to, 2s.
Attwell {Prof) The Italian Masters. Crown Bvo, 35.6 d.
Audslry {G. A.) Handbook of the Organ. Top edge gilt, 425. ;
large paper, 84^.
Ornamental Arts of Japan. 90 Plates, 74 in Colours
and Gold, with General and Descriptive Text 2 vols., 151.;
in specally designed leather, 2s.
The Art of Chromo-Lithography. Coloured Plates
and Text Folio, 63 5.
and Tomkinson. Ivory and Wood Carvings of Japan.
841. Artists’ proofs (100), l6Bn
Auerbach {B.) Brigitta. (B. Tauchnitz Collection.) 2 s.
On the Heights. 3 vols., 6s.
Spinoza. 2 vols., iBmo, 4 s.
JHA DDELE Y (S.) Tchay and Chianti. Small Bvo, 54
Baldwin {James) Story of Siegfried. 6 s
Story of the Golden Age. Illustrated by Howard
Pyle. Crown Bvo. 6j.


Baldwin (fames) Story of Roland. Crown Svo, 6s.
Bamford (A. /.) Turbans and Tails. Sketches in the Un-
romantic East. Crown Bvo, "js. 6 d.
Barlow (Alfred) Weaving by Hand and by Power. With
several hundred Illustrations. Third Edition, royal Bvo, £ I 5-r.
Barlow (P. W.) Kaipara, Experiences of a Settler in N. Nrw
Zealand. Illust., crown Bvo, 6s.
Barrow (J.) Mountain Ascents in Cumberland and Westmort-
land. Crown Bvo, ys. 6d. ; new edition, sr.
Bassett (F. S.) Legends and Superstitions of the Sea. ys. 6 d.
THE BAYARD SERIES.
Edited by the late J. Hain Friswell.
Comprising Pleasure Books of Literature produced in the Choicest Style.
"We can hardly imagine better books for boys to read 01 for men to ponder
over.” — Times.
Price is. 6 d. each Volume, complete in itself, flexible cloth extra, gilt edges.
•with silk Headbands and Registers.
The Story of the Chevalier Bayard
Joinville’s St. Louis of France.
The Essays of Abraham Cowley.
Abdallah. By Edouard Laboullaye.
Napoleon, Table-Talkand Opinions.
Words of Wellington.
Johnson’s Rasselas. With Notes.
Hazlitt’s Round Table.
The Religio Medici, Hydriotaphia,
&c. By Sir Thomas Browne, Knt.
Coleridge’s Christabel, &e With
Preface by Algernon C. Swinburne
Ballad Poetry of the Affections. By
Robert Buchanan.
A Case containing 12 Volumes, price 3is
Lord Chesterfield’s Letters, Sen-
tences, and Maxims. With Essa/
by Sainte- Heuve.
The King and the Commons. Cava-
lier and Puritan Songs.
Vathek. By William Beckford.
Essays in Mosaic. By Ballantyne.
My Unde Toby ; his Story and
his Fnends. By P. Fitzgerald,
Reflections of Rochefoucauld.
Socrntes : Memoirs for English
Kwaders' from Xenophon’s Memo-
rabilia. By Edw. Levien.
I’nnce Albert’s Golden Precepts.
(*t ; or the Case separately, price 35. 6d.
er Verses. C-"nw-i Sv ~), sewed.
Baynes (Canon) Hymns and other Verses. C"nw<» Svi, .sewed.
u.; cloth, ir. 6 d.
Beau grand (Cl) Walks Abroad of Two Young Naturalists.
By D. Sharp. Illust., Svo, ys. 6d.
Beecher (H. JV.) Authentic Biography, and Diary.
Behnke and Browne. Child's Voice : its Treatment with regard
to After Development. Small Svo, Jf. 6 d.
Beyschlag. Female Costume Figures of various Centuries, i 2
reproductions of pastel designs in portfolio, imperial. 21s.
Bickersteth (Bishop F. LL.) Clergyman in his Home. it.
—' Evangelical Churchmanship. is.


Burnaby [Mrs. F.) High Alps in Wittier; or, Mountaineering
in Search of Health. With Illustrations, &c., 14J. See also Main.
Burnley [f.) History of Wool and Woolcombing. Illust. Bvo, 2 is.
Burton [Sir R. F.) Early, Public, and Private Life. Edited
by F. Hitchman. 2 vols., Bvo, 365.
Butler [Sir W. F.) Campaign of the Cataracts. Illust., Bvo, iBj.
lnvasion of England, told twenty years after. 2 s. 6d.
Red Cloud; or, the Solitary Sioux. Imperial i6rao,
numerous illustrations, gilt edges, 3-f. 6d.-, plainer binding, 2s. 6d.
The Great Lone Land; Red River Expedition. 7 s. 6d.
■ The Wild North Land; the Story of a Winter fourney
with Dogs across Northern North America. Bvo, 1 Sr. Cr. Bvo, "js. 6 d.
r*ABLE [G. W.) Bonaventure : A Prose Pastoral of Acadian
Louisiana. Sm. post Bvo, ss.
Cadogan [Lady A.) Illustrated Games of Patience. Twenty-
four Diagrams in Colours, with Text. Fcap. 4to, 12 s. 6d.
New Games of Patience. Coloured Diagrams, 4to, 1 2s Ed.
Caldecott [Randolph) Memoir. By Henry Blackburn. With
170 Examples of the Artist’s Work. 14;.; large paper, 2U,
California. See Nordhoff.
Callan (H) Wanderings on Wheel and on Foot. Cr. Bvo, is. 6 d.
Campbell [Lady Colin) Book of the Running Brook: and of
Still Waters. ss.5 s.
Canadian People: Short History. Crown Bvo, 7 s. 6d.
Carleton ( Will) Farm Ballads, Farm Festivals, and Farm
Legends. Paper boards, is. each ; 1 vol., small post Bvo, 35. 6 d.
City Ballads. Illustrated, 12s. 6d. New Ed. (Rose
Library), i6mo, ir.
Carnegie [A.) American Four-in-Hand in Britain. Small
4to, Illustrated, lor. 61 i. Popular Edition, paper, is.
Round the World. Bvo, 10 s. 6 d.
Triumphant Democracy. 65. ; also is. 6d. and ij.
Chairman's Handbook. By R. F. D. Palgrave. sth Edit., 2 s.
Changed Cross, &=c. Religious Poems. i6mo, 2 s. 6 d. ; calf, 6s.
Chaplin [f. G.) Three Principles of Book-keeping. 2s. 6d.
Charities of London. See Low’s.
Chattock [R. S.) Practical Notes on Etching. New Ed. Bvo
1 or. 6 d. ’
Chess. See Bird (H. E.).


Children's Praises. Hymns for Sunday-Schools and Services.
Compiled by Louisa H. H. Tristram. 4 d.
Choice Editions of Choice Books. 2 s. 6 d. each. Illustrated by
C. W. Cope, R.A., T. Creswick, R.A., E. Duncan, Birket
Foster, J. C. Horsley, A.R.A., G. Hicks, R. Redgrave, R.A.,
C. Stonehouse, F. Tayler, G. Thomas, H. J. Townshend,
E. H. Wehnert, Harrison Weir, &c.
Bloomfield’s Farmer’s Boy.
Campbell’s Pleasures of Hope.
Coleridge’s Ancient Mariner.
Goldsmith’s Deserted Village.
Goldsmith’s Vicar of Wakefield.
Gray’s Elegy in a Churchyard.
Keat’s Eve of St. Agnes.
Milton’s L’Allegro.
Poetry of Nature. Harrison Weir.
Rogers’ (Sam.) Pleasures of Memory
Shakespeare’s Songs and Sonnets.
Tennyson’s May Queen.
Elizabethan Poets.
Wordsworth’s Pastoral Poems.
“ Such works are a glorious beatification for a poet.”— Athenceum.
Chreiman [Miss) Physical Culture of Women. A Lecture at the
Parkes Museum. Small Bvo, ir.
Christ in Song. By Philip Schaff. New Ed., gilt edges, 6s.
Chroma-Lithography. See Audsley.
Cochran {W.) Pen and Pencil in Asia Minor. Illust., Bvo, 21s.
Collingwood {Harry) Under the Meteor Flag. The Log of a
Midshipman. Illustrated, small post Bvo, gilt, 3 s. 6 d.; plainer, 2s. 6 d.
— Voyage of the “ Aurora." Gilt, 3J. 6d.; plainer , 2s. 6d.
Cook {Dutton) Book of the Play. New Edition. 1 vol., 3 s. 6 d.
On the Stage: Studies. 2 vols., Bvo, cloth, 245.
Cowen {/os., M.P.) Life and Speeches. Bvo, 14T.
Cowper { W.) Poetical Works : A Concordance. Roy. Bvo, 2 ij.
Cozzens {F) American Yachts. 27 Plates, 22 x 28 inches.
Proofs, ; Artist’s Proofs, lor.
Crew {B. Jf Practical Treatise on Petroleum. Illust., Bvo, 28 s.
Crouch (A. P.) On a Surf-bound Coast. Crown Bvo, 7 s. 6d.
Crown Prince of Germany : a Diary. 2s. 6 d.
Cudworth { W.) Life and Correspondence of Abraham Sharp
Illustrated from Drawings. (To Subscribers, 21 s.) 26 5.
Cumberland{Stuart) Thought Reader's Thoughts. Cr. Bvo., 1 os. 6 a .
Queen's Highway from Oceania Ocean. 111., Bvo, iBt. ;
new ed., ys. 6 d.
Cundall {Joseph) Annals of the Life and Work of Shakespeare.
With a List of Early Editions. Jr. 6 d. ; large paper, 51.; also 2 s.
Remarkable Bindings in the British ALuseum.
Curtis (W. E.) Capitals of Spanish America.. Illust., roy. Svo.
Cushing {W.) Lnitials and Pseudonyms. Large Svo, 25T. ;
second series, large Svo, 21 s.


Custer ( Eliz. B.) Tenting on the Plains; Gen. Custer in Kansas
and Texas. Royal Bvo, iSr.
Cutcliffe (H C.) Trout Fishing in Rapid Streams. Cr. Bvo, 3s. 6d
~T\ALY (Mrs. D.) Digging, Squatting, and Pioneering in
Northern South Australia. Bvo, 12s.
TP Anvers. Elementary History of Art. New ed., 360 illus.,
or. Bvo, 2 vols. {5 s. each), gilt, I os. 6d.
Elementary History of Music. Crown Bvo, 2s. 6d.
Davidson {H. C.) Old Adam; Tale of an Army Crammer. 3
vols. crown Bvo, 3 i f. 6 d.
Davis ( Clement ) Modern Whist. 4^.
Davis (C. T.) Bricks, Tiles, Terra-Cotta, &>c. 111. Bvo, 25 5.
Manufacture of Leather. With many Illustrations. 52.5-.6t/.
Manufacture of Paper. 28s.
Davis ( G. B.) Outlines of Lnternational Law. Bvo. 10s. 6d.
Dawidowsky. Glue, Gelatine, Isinglass, Cements, &c. Bvo, \2s.6d.
Day of ALy Life at Eton. By an Eton Boy. i6mo. 2 s. 6d.
Day’s Collacon: an Encyclopedia of Prose Quotations. Im-
perial Bvo, cloth, 3U. t\d .
De Leon (El) Under the Stars and under the Crescent. N. ed., 6s.
Dethroning Shakspere. Letters to the Daily Telegraph; and
Editorial Papers. Crown Svo, 2 s. 6d.
Dictionary. See Tolhausen, “ Technological.”
Dogs in Disease. By Ashmont. Crown Svo, 7s. 6d.
Donnelly ( Ignatius) Atlantis; or, the Antediluvian World.
7th. Edition, crown Svo, I2J. 6d.
Ragnarok : The Age of Fire and Gravel. Illustrated,
crown Bvo. 12s. 6J.
The Great Cryptogram : Francis Bacon's Cipher in the
so-called Shakspere Plays. With facsimiles. 2 vols., 30J.
Dore ( Gustave) Life and Reminiscences. By Blanche Roose-
velt. Illust. from the Artist’s Drawings. Medium Svo, 245.
Dougall (fames Dalziel) Shooting: its Appliances, Practice,
and Purpose. New Edition, revised with additions. Crown Svo, 7s. 6d.
“The book is admirable in every way We wish it every success.”— Globe.
“A very complete treatise. .... Likely to take high rank as an authority on
shooting " —Daily News.
Duprt ( Giovanni). By Frieze. With Dialogues on Art. 7s. 6d.
JJ DM OHDS (Cl) Poetry of the Anti-Jacobin. With Rddi-
±— tional matter. New ed. Illust., crown Svo.
Educational List and Directory for 1887-88. s*.


Educational Works published in Great Britain. A Classi-
fied Catalogue. Third Edition, Bvo, cloth extra, 6s.
Edzvards (E.) American Steam Engineer. Illust., ramo, 12 s. 6d.
Eight Months on the Argentine Gran Chaco. Bvo, Br. 6 d.
Elliott {I!. TV.) An Arctic Province : Alaska and the Seal
Islands. Illustrated from Drawings ; also with Maps. i6r.
Emerson (Dr. P. Hi) Pictures of East Anglian Life. Ordinary
ed., 105 5. ; edit, de luxe, 17 X 13a, vellum, morocco back, 147 J.
Naturalistic Photography for Art Students. Crown Bvo.
and Goodall. Life and Landscape on the Norfolk
Broads- Plates 12 X 8 inches, 126r.; large paper, 21 or.
English Catalogue of Books. Vol. 111., 1872 —1880. Royal
Bvo, half-morocco, 42,1. See also “ Index.”
English Etchings. Published Quarterly. 3 5.6 d. Vol. VI., 25*.
English Philosophers. Edited by E. B. Ivan Muller, M.A.
Crown Bvo volumes of 180 or 200 pp., price 35. 6d. each.
Francis Bacon, by Thomas Fowler. Shaftesbury and Hutcheson.
Hamilton, by W. H. S. Monck. Adam Smith, by J. A. Fairer.
Hartley and James Mill.
Esmarch (F.) Handbook of Surgery. Translation from the
last German Edition. With 647 new Illustrations. Bvo, leather, 24.0
Etching. See Chattock, and English Etchings.
Etchings (Modern) of Celebrated Paintings. 4to, 31J. 6d.
Evans (E. A.) Songs of the Birds. Analogies of Spiritual Life.
New Ed. Illust., 6s.
Evelyn. Life of Mrs. Godolphin. By William Harcourt,
of Nuneham. Steel Portrait. Extra binding, gilt top, Js. 6 d.
JffARLNT (G. A.) Through the Kalahari Desert. Bvo, 2ir.
Farm Ballads , Festivals , and Legends. See Carleton.
Fawcett (Edgar) A Gentleman of Leisure, is.
Penn ( G. Manville) Off to the Wilds: A Story for Boys.
Profusely Illustrated. Crown Bvo, gilt edges, 3s. 6 d. ; plainer, 2 s. 6 d.
Silver Canon. Illust., gilt ed., 3s. 6d. ; plainer, 2 s. 6 d.
Fennell ( Greville) Book of the Roach. New Edition, i2mo, 2 s.
Perns. See Heath.
Field (H. Mi) Greek Lslands and Turkey after the War. B s. 6d.
Field (Mrs. Horace) Anchorage. 2 vols., crotvn Bvo, 12 s.
Fields (J.T.) Yesterdays with Authors. New Ed., Bvo, lor. 6d.
Fitzgerald (Pi) Book Fancier. Cr. Bvo. 5 s. ; large pap. 1 2s. 6d.


Fleming {Sandford) England and Canada : a Tour. Cr. Bvo, 6s.
Florence. See Yriarte.
Folkard (R., Jun.) Plant Lore, Legends, and Lyrics. Bvo, 1 6s.
Forbes {Ed. 01) Naturalist in
21 s.
Foreign Countries and British
Australia, by J. F. Vesey Fitzgerald
Austria, by D. Kay, F. R. G. S.
Denmark and Iceland, by E. C.Otte,
Egypt, by S. Lane Poole, B.A.
France, by Miss M. Roberts.
Germany, by S. Baring-Gould.
Greece, by L. Sergeant, B.A.
the Eastern Archipelago. Bvo-
Colonies. Cr. Bvo, ss. 6d. each
Japan, by S. Mossman.
Peru, by Clements R. Markham.
Russia, by W. R. Morfill, M.A.
Spain, by Rev. Wentworth Webster.
Sweden and Norway, by Woods.
West Indies, by C. H. Eden,
F.R.G.S.
Foreign Etchings. From Paintings by Rembrandt, &c., 6y.- }
India proofs, 147^.
Fortunes made in Business. Vols. 1., 11., 111. 16s. each.
Frampton {Mary) Journal, Letters, and Anecdotes. Bvo, iqr.
Franc {Maud Jeanne). Small
Emily’s Choice. sr.
Hall’s Vineyard. ys.
John’s Wife: A Story of Life in
South Australia, 45-.
Marian; or, The Light of Some
One’s Home. sr.
Silken Cords and Iron Fetters. 4 s.
Into the Light. 4?.
Dost Bvo, uniform, gilt edges
Vermont Vale. ss.
Minnie’s Mission. 4 s.
Little Mercy. 4 s.
Beatrice Melton’s Discipline. 4 s.
No Longer a Child. ys.
Golden Gifts. 4 s.
Two Sides to Every Question. 4 j.
Master of Ralston. 4
Also a Cheap Edition, in cloth extra, 2s. 6 d. each.
Frank's Ranche ; or, My Holiday in the Rockies. A Contri-
bution to the Inquiry into What we are to Do with our Boys. ss.5 s.
Freeman (J.) Lights and Shadows of Melbourne Life. Cr. Bvo.
6s.
French. See Julien and Porcher.
Fresh Woods and Pastures New. By the Author of “An
Amateur Angler’s Days.” U. 6d.\ large paper, 5-f. ; new ed., Is.
Froissart. See Lanier.
Fuller {.Edward) Fellow Travellers, y. 6d.
Dramatic Year 1887-88 in the United States. With the
London Season, by W. Archer. Crown Bvo.
{D. N.) New South Wales and Victoria in 1885. 55.
Gasparin {Countess A. de) Sunny Fields and Shady Woods. 6s.
Geary {Grattan) Burma after the Conquest, js. 6d.
Gentle Life (Queen Edition). 2 vols. in 1, small 4to, 6s n


THE GENTLE LIFE SERIES.
Price 6s, each ;or in calf extra, price lor. 6d. ; Smaller Edition, cloth
extra, 2s. 6d., except where price is named.
The Gentle Life. Essays in aid of the Formation of Character.
About in the World. Essays by Author of “ The Gentle Life.”
Like unto Christ. New Translation of Thomas a Kempis.
Familiar Words. A Quotation Handbook. 6s.
Essays by Montaigne. Edited by the Author of “ The Gentle
Life.”
The Gentle Life. 2nd Series.
The Silent Hour: Essays, Original and Selected.
Half-Length Portraits. Short Studies of Notable Persons.
By J. Main Friswell.
Essays on English Writers, for Students in English Literature.
Other People! s Windows. By J. Hain Friswell. 6s.
A Man's Thoughts. By J. Hain Friswell.
The Countess of Pembroke's Arcadia. By Sir Philip Sidney. 6s.
Germany. By S. Baring-Gould. Crown Bvo, 3r. 6d.
Gibbon (C.) Beyond Compare : a Story. 3 vols., cr. Bvo, 3 ir. 6 d.
Yarmouth Coast.
Gisborne (W.) New Zealand Rulers and Statesmen. With
Portraits. Crown Bvo, 7 s. 6 d.
Goldsmith. She Stoops to Conquer. Introduction by Austin
Dobson ; the designs by E. A. Abbey. Imperial 4to, 48^.
Goode (G. Brown) American Fishes. A Popular Treatise.
Royal Bvo, 245.
Gordon ( f. E. //., B.A. Cantab.) Four Lectures on Electric
Induction at the Royal Institution, 1878-9. Illust., square i6mo, 31.
Electric Lighting. Illustrated, Bvo, 18s.
Physical Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism. 2nd
Edition, enlarged, with coloured, full-page, &c., Illust. 2 vols., Bvo, 42;.
Electricity for Schools. Illustrated. Crown Bvo, 55.
Gouffe ( fules) Royal Cookery Book. New Edition, with plates
in colours, Woodcuts, &c., Bvo, gilt edges, 42^.
Domestic Edition, half-bound, ior. 6d.
Grant ( General, U.S.) Personal Memoirs. 2 vols., Bvo, 28 s.
Illustrations, Maps, &c. 2 vols., Bvo, 28r.
Great Artists. See “ Biographies.


Great Musicians. Edited by F. Hueffer, A Series of
Biographies, crown Bvo, ss. each :
Bach. [ Mendelssohn.
English Church Com- Mozart.
posers. By Barrett. Purcell,
HandeL Rossini.
Schubert
Schumann.
Richard Wagner.
Weber.
Haydn.
Groves (J. Percy) Charmouth Grange. Gilt, 5 s.; plainer, 2 s. 6d.
Guizofs History of France. Translated by R. Black. In
8 vols., super-royal Svo, cloth extra, gilt, each 24 5. In cheaper
binding, 8 vols., at tor. 6 d. each.
“ It supplies a want winch has long been felt, and ought to be in the hands of all
students of history.”— Times.
Masson’s School Edition. Abridged
from the Translation by Robert Black, with Chronological Index, His-
torical and Genealogical Tables, &c. By Professor Gustave Masson,
B.A. With Portraits, Illustrations, &c. 1 voL, Svo, 600 pp., 51.
Guy on [Mde.) Life. By Upham. 6th Edition, crown Svo, 6s.
TTALFORD {F. M.) Floating Flies, and how to Dress them.
Coloured plates. Svo, 15-f.; large paper, 3or.
Dry Fly-Fishing in Theory and Practice. Col. Plates.
Hall ( W.'. IV.) How to Live Long; or, 140S Maxims. 2 s.
Hamilton (E.) Recollections of Flyfishing for Silmon, Trout,
and Grayling. With their Habits, Haunts, and History. Illust., dr.;
large paper, tor. 6d.
Hands (71) Numerical Exercises in Chemistry. Cr. Svo, 2 s. 6 d.
and 2r.; Answers separately, 6 d.
Hardy (Thomas). See Low’s Standard Novels.
Hare {J. S. Clark) Law of Contracts. Svo, 2 6s.
Harley (T.) Southward Ho Ito the State of Georgia. SJ,
Harper’s Magazine. Published Monthly. 160 pages, fully
Illustrated, is. Vols., half yearly, I. —XVI., super-royal Svo, Br. 6d.
each.
“ ‘ Harper’s Magazine ’ is so thickly sown with excellent illustrations that to count
them would be a work of time ; not that it is a picture magazine, for the engravings
illustrate the text after the manner seen in some of our choicest editions de luxe.” —
St. yames’s Gazette.
“Itis so pretty, so big, and so cheap. . . . An extraordinary shillingsworth—
f6o large octavo pages, with over a score of articles, and more than three times as
many illustrations.” —Edinburgh Daily Reziezu.
“ An amazing shillingsworth , . . combining choice literature of both nations. ”
Nonconformist.
Harper's Young People. Vols. 1.-IV., profusely Illustrated
with woodcuts and coloured plates. Royal 4.10, extra binding, each
"js. 6 d. ; gilt edges, Bs. Published Weekly, in wrapper, id. ; Annual
Subscription, post free, 6s. 6 d. ; Monthly, in wrapper, with coloured
. plate, 6d. ; Annual Subscription, post free, Js. 6 d.


Harrison { Alary ) Skilful Cook. New edition, crown Bvo, 55".
Hartshome (H) Household Medicine, Surgery, crc. Bvo. 21 s.
Hatton {Frank) North Borneo. Map and Illust., &c. iBr.
Hatton {Joseph) foumalistic London; with Engravings and
Portraits of Distinguished Writers of the Day. Fcap. 410, 12 s. 6d.
See also Low’s Standard Novels.
Hawthorne {Nathaniel) Life. By John R. Lowell.
Heath {Francis George) Fern World With Nature-printed
Coloured Plates. Crown Bvo, gilt edges, I2r. (id. Cheap Edition, 6s.
Heath {Gertrude). Tell us Why? The Customs and Ceremo-
nies of the Church of England explained for Children. Cr. Bvo, 2 s. 6 d.
Heldmann {B.) Mutiny of the Ship “ Leander .” Gilt edge;;,
3-f. 6 d,; plainer, 2s. (id.
Henty. Winning his Spurs. Cr. Bvo, 3-f. 6 d. ; plainer, 2 s. 6d.
Cornet of Horse. Cr. Bvo, 3s. 6 d.\ plainer, 2s. 6d.
Jack Archer. Illust. 3s. 6 d.; plainer, 2s. 6d.
Henty {.Richmond) Australiana : My Early Life. ss.
Herrick {Robert) Poetry. Preface by Austin Dobson. With
numerous Illustrations by E. A. Abbey. 4to, gilt edges, 42^.
Hdley {Mrs. E.) Native Flowers of New Zealand. Chromos
from Drawings. Three Parts, to Subscribers, 63^
Hewitt {fumes A.) Church History in South Africa , 1795-1848,
i2mo, s*.
Hicks {E. S.) Our Boys: How to Enter the Merchant Service. ss.
Yachts, Boats and Canoes. Illustrated. Bvo, ioj. 6 d.
Hitchman. Public Life of the Earl of Beaconsfield. 3 s. 6d.
Hoey {Mrs. Cashel) See Low’s Standard Novels.
Hofmann. Scenes from the Life of our Saviour. 12 mounted
plates, 12 X 9 inches, 21s.
Holder {C. F.) Marcels of Animal Life. Illustrated. B s. 6d.
Lvory King: Elephant and Allies. Illustrated. 8-f. 6 d.
Living Lights : Phosphorescent Animals and Vegetables.
Illustrated. Bvo, Bj. 6 d.
Holmes ( 0. W.) Before the Curfew, &c. Occasional Poems. sf.
Last Leaf: a Holiday Volume. 42 5.
Mortal Antipathy, B s. 6d.; also 2 5.; paper, is.
Our Hundred Days in Europe. 6s. Large Paper, 155.
Poetical Works. 2 vols., iBmo, gilt tops, io,y. 6d.
Homer, Iliad L.-XLL., done into English Verse. By Arthur
S. Way. 9 s.
—■ Odyssey, done into English Verse. By A. S. Way.
Fcap 4to, 6 d.


Hopkins ( Manley) Treatise on the Cardmal Numbers. 2s. 6d.
Hore (Mrs.) D Lake Tanganyika in a Bath Chair. Cr. Bvo,
7 s. 6d.
Howard (.Blanche IV.) Tony the Maid; a Novelette. Illust.,
i2mo, (id.
Haworth (H H.) Mammoth and the Flood. Bvo, iBt.
Huet (C. B.) Land of Rubens I For Visitors to Belgium. By
Van Dam. Crown Bvo, 31. 6 d.
Hu*o ( V.) Notre Dame. With coloured etchings and 150
engravings. 2 vols., Bvo, vellum cloth, 30 s.
Hundred Greatest Men {The). 8 portfolios, 2 it. each, or 4 vols.,
half-morocco, gilt edges, 10 guineas. New Ed., 1 vol., royal Bvo, 21 s.
ILutchinson ( T [) Diary and Letters. Vol. 1., i6t. ; Vol. 11., i6t.
Hygiene and Public Health. Edited by A. H. Buck, M.D.
Illustrated. 2 vols., royal Bvo, 42J.
Hymnal Companion to the Book of Common Prayer. By
Bishop Bickersteth. In various styles and bindings from id. to
3U. 6d. Price List and Prospectus will be forwarded on application.
Hymns and Tunes at St. Thomas' } New York. Music by G.
W. Barren. Royal Bvo, Sr.
ILLUSTRATED Text-Books of Art-Education. Edited by
Edward J. Poynter, R. A. Illustrated, and strongly bound, Sr.
Now ready:—
PAINTING.
Classic and Italian. By Head. French, and Spanish.
German, Flemish, and Dutch. English and American.
ARCHITECTURE.
Classic and Early Christian.
Gothic and Renaissance. By T. Roger Smith.
sculpture.
Antique : Egyptian and Greek.
Renaissance and modern. By Leader Scott.
Jnderwick (F. A. ; Q-C.) Side Lights on the Stuarts. Essays.
Illustrated, Bvo.
Index to the English Catalogue , Jan., 1874, to Dec., 1880.
Royal Bvo, half-morocco, iBr.
Inglis {Hon. James; “ Maori”) Our New Zealand Cousins.
Small post Bvo, 6s.
Tent Life in Tiger Land: Twelve Years a Pionee~
Planter. Col. plates, roy. Bvo, iBr.
Irving {Henry) Impressions of America. 2 vols., 2 it. ; 1 vol., 6s.
Jrving ( Washington). Library Edition of his Works in 27 vols.,
Copyright, with the Author’s Latest Revisions. “ Geoffrey Crayon ”
Edition, large square Bvo. I2r. 6 d. pervoL See also “Little Britain.”


JAMES {CL) Curiosities of Law and Lawyers. Bvo, 7s. 6d.
fapan. See Anderson, Artistic, Audsley, also Morse.
Jefferies (.Richard) Amaryllis at the Fair. Small Bvo, 7 r. 6d.
Jerdon {Gertrude ) Key-hole Country. Illustrated. Crown Bvo,
cloth, 2s.
Johnston {LI. IL) River Congo , from its Mouth to Bolobo.
New Edition, Bvo, 2is. .
Johnstone {D. Lawson) Land of the Mountain Kingdom -
Illust., crown Bvo.
Jones {Major) Heroes of Industry. Biographies with Portraits
7s. 6 d.
Emigrant? Friend. Guide to the U.S. N. Ed. 2s. 6.~.
Julien (F) English Student's French Examiner. i6mo, 2s.
Conversational French Reader, i6mo, cloth, 2 s. bd.
French at Home and at School. Book 1., Accidence. 2 s.
First Lessons in Conversational French Grammar, ij
Petites Logons de Conversation et de Grammaire. 35.
Phrases of Daily Use. Limp cloth, 6d.
“ Petites Logons ” and “ Phrases ”in one. 3s. 6d.
{H. W. Seton ) Shores and Alps of Alaska. Bvo,
Keats. Endymion. Illust. by W. St. John Harper. Imp.
4to, gilt top, 42J.
Kempis {Thomas a) Daily Text-Book. Square r6mo, 2s. bd. ;
interleaved as a Birthday Book, 3-f. 6 d.
Kent’s Commentaries : an Abridgment for Students of American
Law. By Eden F. Thompson, iot. 6 d.
Kerr {IV. ML) Far Interior : Cape of Good Hope y across the
Zambesi, to the Lake Regions. Illustrated from Sketches, 2 vols.
Bvo, 32J.
Kershaw {S. W.) Protestants from France in their English
Home. Crown Bvo, 6s.
King {Henry) Savage London; Riverside Characters , &"C.
Crown Bvo, 6s.
Kingston {W. H. G.) Works. Illustrated, i6mo, gilt edges,
3 s. 6 d. ; plainer binding, plain edges, 2s. 6a. each.
Captain Mugford, or, Our Salt 1 Snow-Shoes and Canoes.
and Fresh Water Tutors. I Two Supercargoes.
Dick Cheveley. With Axe and Ri£c.
Heir of Kilfininan. 1


Kingsley {Rose) Children of Westminster Abbey : Studies in
English History. s^.
Knight {E. /.) Cruise of the “ Falcon." New Ed. Cr. Bvo,
7s. 6 d. ’
Knox {Col.) Boy Travellers on the Congo. Ulus. Cr. Bvo, js. 6 d.
Kunhardt {C. d>.) Small Yachts: Design and Construction. 35^.
Steam Yachts and Launches. Illustrated. 4to, 16s.
TA MB {Charles ) Essays of Elia. Illustrated by C. 0.
Murray. 6s.
Lanier's Works. Illustrated, crown Bvo, gilt edges, 7 j. 6 d.
each. ° '
Boy’s King Arthur. Boy’s Percy: Ballads of Love and
Boy s Froissart. Adventure, selected from the
I.oy s Knightly Legends of Wales. “ Reliques.”
Lansdell (//.) Through Siberia. 2 vols., Bvo, 30*.; 1 vol., 10 s. 6d.
Russia in' Central Asia. Illustrated. 2 vols., 4 2j.
Through Central Asia; Russo-Afghan Frontier, Cc’c.
BVO,8 VO, I2X.
Larden {W.) School Course on Heat. Second Ed., Illust. s*.
Laurie {Andre) Selene Company, Limited. Crown Bvo, 7s. 6 d.
Layard {Mrs. Granville) Through the West Lndies. Small
post Bvo, 2 s. 6d.
Lea {LL C.). History of the Inquisition of the Middle
3 vols., Bvo, 42J.
Lemon {M.) Small House over the Water, and Stories. Illust.
by Cruikshank, &c. Crown Bvo, 6s.
Leo xi 11..: Life. By Bernard O’Reilly. With Steel
Portrait from Photograph, &c. Large Bvo, iBr.; Mil. de luxe, 6xs.
Leonardo da Vinci’s Lite7'ary Works . Edited by Dr. Jean
Paul Richter. Containing his Writings on Painting, Sculpture,
iw- , 1 ’ c ' lltecture > h' s Philosophical Maxims, Humorous Writings, and
Miscellaneous Notes on Personal Events, on his Contemporaries, on
.Literature, &c. ; published from Manuscripts. 2 vols., imperial Bvo,
containing about 200 Drawings in Autotype Reproductions, and nu-
merous other Illustrations. Twelve Guineas.
Library of Religious Poetry. Best Poems of all Ages. Edited
by Schaff and Gilman. Royal Bvo, 21 s.; cheaper binding, lor. 6d.
Lindsay [II . S.) History of Merchant Shipping. Over 150
Illustrations, Maps, and Charts. In 4 vols., demy Bvo, cloth extra.
7 jj7 a 7 nd , 2 ’ *' ls ‘ » vols. 3 a °d 4» l 4 s - each. 4 vols., 50^.
Liii.e {Archibald J.) Through the Yang-tse Gorges: Trade and
Travel in Western China. New Edition. Bvo, lor. bd.


J.ittle Britain , The Spectre Bridegroom , and Legend of Sleepy
Hollow. By Washington Irving. An entirely New Edition de
luxe. Illustrated by 120 very fine Engravings on Wood, by Mr.
J. D. Cooper. Designed by Mr. Charles 6. Murray. Re-issue,
square crown Bvo, cloth, 6s.
Longfellow. Maidenhood. With Coloured Plates. Oblong
4to, 2s. 6 d. ; gilt edges, 3J. 6 d.
Courtship of Miles Standish. Illust. by Broughton,
&c. Imp. 410, 21 s.
Nuremberg. 28 Photogravures. Ilium, by M. and A.
COMEGYS. 4tO. 3U. 6d.
Lowell {/. jR.) Vision of Sir Launfal. Illustrated, royal 4to, 63,0
Life of Nathaniel Hawthorne. Small post Bvo.
Lends Standard Ldbrary of Travel and Adventure. Crown Bvo,
uniform in cloth extra, "js. 6d. , except where price is given.
1. The Great Done Land. By Major W. F. Butler, C.B.
2. The Wild North Land. By Major W. F. Butler, C.B.
3. Eow I found Living-stone. By H. M. Stanley.
4. Through the Dark Continent. By H. M. Stanley. 12.?. 6 d.
5. The Threshold of the Unknown Region. By C. R. Mark-
ham. (4th Edition, with Additional Chapters, ioj. 6d. )
6. Cruise of the Challenger. By W. J. J. Spry, R.N.
7. Burnaby’s On Horseback through Asia Minor, icu. 6 d.
8. Schwemfurth’s Heart of Africa. 2 vols., 15.?.
9. Through America. By W, G. Marshall.
10. Through Siberia. 11. and unabridged, ios.6d. By 11. Lansdell.
11. From Home to Home. By Staveley Hill.
12. Cruise of the Falcon. By E. I. Knight.
13. Through Masai Land. By Joseph Thomson.
14. To the Central African Lakes. By Joseph Thomson.
15. Queen’s Highway, By Stuart Cumberland.
Low’s Standard Novels. Small post Bvo, cloth extra, 6s. each,
unless otherwise stated.
V-0.l VUIV.I MIOV, y
A Daughter of Heth. By W. Black.
In Silk Attire. By W. Black.
Kilmeny. A Novel By W. Black.
Lady Silverdale’s Sweetheart. By W. Black.
Sunrise. By W. Black.
Three Feathers. By William Black.
Alice Lorraine. By R. D. Blackmore.
Christowell, a Dartmoor Tale. By R. D. Blackmore.
Clara Vaughan. By R. D. Blackmore.
Cradock Nowell. By R. D. Blackmore.
Cripps the Carrier. By R. D. Blackmore.
Erema; or. My Father's Sin. By R. D. Blackmore.
Lorna Dooue. By R. D. Blackmore. 25th Edition.
Mary Anerley. By R. D. BLACKMORE.
Tommy Upmore. 'By R. D. Blackmore.


Low's Standard Novels — continued.
Bonaventure. By G. W. Cable.
An English Squire. By Miss Coleridge,
Some One Else. By Mrs. B. M. Croker.
Under the Stars and Stripes. By E. De Leon.
Halfway. By Miss Betham-Edwards.
A Story of the Dragonnades. By Rev. E. GILLIAT, M.A,
A Laodicean. By Thomas Hardy.
Far from the Madding Crowd. By Thomas Hardy.
Mayor of Casterhridge. By Thomas Hardy.
Pair of Blue Eyes. By Thomas Hardy.
Return of the Native. By Thomas Hardy.
The Hand of Ethelberta. By Thomas Hardy.
The Trumpet Major. By Thomas Hardy.
Two on a Tower. By Thomas Hardy.
Old House at Sandwich. By Joseph Hatton.
Three Recruits. By Joseph Hatton.
A Golden Sorrow. By Mrs. Cashel Hoey. New Edition.
A Stern Chase. By Mrs. Cashel Hoey.
Out of Court. By Mrs. Cashel Hoey.
Don John. By Jean Ingelow.
John Jerome. By Jean Ingelow. 5- f>
Sarah de Berenger. By Jean Ingelow.
Adela Cathcart. By George Mac Donald.
Guild Court. By George Mac Donald.
Mary Marston. By George Mac Donald.
Stephen Archer. New Ed. of “ Gifts.” By George Mac Donald.
The Vicar’s Daughter. By George Mac Donald.
Orts. By George Mac Donald.
Weighed and Wanting. By George Mac Donald.
Diane. By Mrs. Macquoid.
Elinor Dryden. By Mrs. Macquoid.
My Lady Greensleeves. By Helen Mathers.
Spell of Ashtaroth. By Duffield Osborne. sj.
Alaric Spenceley. By Mrs. J. H. Riddell.
Daisies and Buttercups. By Mrs. J. H. Riddell.
The Senior Partner. By Mrs. J. H. Riddell.
A Struggle for Fame. By Mrs. J. H. Riddell.
Frozen Pirate. By W. Clark Russell,
Jack's Courtship. ByW. Clark Russell.
John Holdsworth. By W. Clark Russell.
A Sailor’s Sweetheart. By W. Clark Russell.
Sea Queen. By W. Clark Russell.
Watch Below. By W. Clark Russell.
Strange Voyage. By W. Clark Russell.
Wreck of the Grosvenor. By W. Clark Russell.
The Lady Maud. By W. Clark Russell.
Little Loo. By W. Clark Russell.
Bee-man of Orn. By Frank R. Stockton.
My Wife and I. By Mrs. Harriet B. Stowr.


Low's Standard Novels — continued.
The Late Mrs. Null. By Frank R. Stockton.
Hundredth Man. By Frank R. Stockton.
Old Town Folk. By Mrs. Harriet B. Stowe.
We and our Neighbours. By Mrs. Harriet B. Stowe.
Poganuc People, their Loves and Lives. By Mrs. Stowe.
Ulu: an African Romance. By Joseph Thomson.
Ben Hur: a Tale of the Christ. By Lew. Wallace.
Anne. By Constance Fenimore Woolson.
East Angels. By Constance Fenimore Woolson.
For the Major. By Constance Fenimore Woolson. 51.
French Heiress in her own Chateau.
Low's Series of Standard Books for Boys. With numerous
Illustrations, 2s. 6d. ; gilt edges, 3s. 6 d. each.
Dick Cheveley. By W. H. G. Kingston.
Heir of Kilfinnan. By W. H. G. KINGSTON.
Off to the Wilds. By G. Manville Fenn.
The Two Supercargoes. By W. H. G. Kingston.
The Silver Canon. By G. Manville Fenn.
Tinder the Meteor Flag. By Harry Collingwood.
Jack Archer: a Tale of the Crimea. By G. A. Henty
The Mutiny on Board the Ship Leander. By B. Heldmann.
With Axe and Rifle on the Western Prairies. By W. H. G.
Kingston.
Red Cloud, the Solitary Sioux ; a Tale of the Great Prairie.
By Col. Sir Wm. Butler, K.C.B.
The Voyage of the Aurora. By Harry Collingwood.
Charmouth Grange: a Tale of the 17th Century. By J.
Percy Groves.
Snowshoes and Canoes. By W. H. G. Kingston.
The Son of the Constable of France. By Louis Rousselet.
Captain Mugford; or, Our Salt and Fresh Water Tutors.
Edited by W. H. G. Kingston.
The Cornet of Horse, a Tale of Marlborough’s Wars. By
G. A. Henty.
The Adventures of Captain Mago. By Leon Cahun.
Noble Words and Noble Needs.
The King of the Tigers. By Rousselet.
Hans Brinker; or, The Silver Skates. By Mrs. Dodge.
The Drummer-Boy, a Story of the time of Washington. By
Rousselet.
Adventures in New Guinea : The Narrative of Louis Tregance.
The Crusoes of Guiana. By Boussenard.
The Gold Seekers. A Sequel to the Above. By Boussenard.
Winning His Spurs, a Tale of the Crusades. By G. A. Henty.
The Blue Banner. By Leon Cahun.
Low's Pocket Efuyclopcedia : a Compendium of General Kn</iv-
ledge for Ready Reference. Upwards of 25,000 References, with
Plates. New ed., imp. 32010,c10th, marbled edges, 3*. 6 d.; roan, 4*. 6 d.


Louis Handbook to London Charities. Yearly, cloth, ir. 6d. ;
paper, is.
A/[ C CORMICK (/?.). Voyages in the Arctic and Antarctic
Seas in Search of Sir John Franklin, &c. With Maps and Lithos.
2 vols., royal Svo, 52 5. 6d.
Mac Donald {George). See Low’s Standard Novels.
Macdowail {Alex, B.) Curve Pictures of London for the Social
Reformer, is.
McGoun’s Commercial Correspondence. Crown Bvo, SJ.
Macgregor {John) “Rob Roy” on the Baltic. 3rd Edition,
small post Bvo, 2s. 6 d. ; cloth, gilt edges, 3 s. 6 d.
A Thousand Miles in the “Rob Roy” Canoe, nth
Edition, small post Bvo, 2s. 6 d. ; cloth, gilt edges, 3-r. 6 d.
Voyage Alone in the Yawl 11 Rob Roy.” New Edition,
with additions, small post Bvo, 5r. ; 3*. 6d. and 2 s. 6 d,
Mackay ( C.) Glossary of Obscure Words in Shakespeare, 21s.
Mackenzie {Sir Morel I) Fatal Illness of Frederick the Noble.
Crown Bvo, limp cloth, 2s. 6d.
Mackenzie {Rev.fohn) Austral Africa : Losing it or Ruling it?
Illustrations and Maps. 2 vols., Bvo, 32*.
McLellan’s Own Story; The War for the Union. Illust. 1 Sr.
McMurdo {Edward) History of Portugal. Bvo, 21 s.
Macquoid {Mrs.). See Low’s Standard Novels.
Magazine. See English Etchings, Harper.
Maginn { W. ) Miscellanies. Prose and Verse. With Memoir.
2 vols., crown Bvo, 24 5.
Main {Mrs.; Mrs. Fred Burnaby) High Life and Towers op
Silence. Illustrated, square Bvo, 10s. 6d.
Manitoba. See Bryce.
Mantling {E. F.) Delightful Thames. Illustrated. 4to, fancy
boards, SJ.
Markham (Clements R.) The Fighting Veres , Sir F. and Sir H.
Bvo, iS*.
War between Peru and Chili , 1879-1881. Third Ed.
Crown Bvo, with Maps, lor. 6 d.
See also “Foreign Countries,” Maury, and Veres.
Afarshall {W. G.) Through America. New Ed., cr. Bvo, 7 s. 6 d.
Marston {W.) Eminent Recent Actors , Reminiscences Critical ,
&c. 2 vols. Crown Svo, 2U.
Martin {f. IV.) Float Fishing and Spinning in the Nottingham
Style. New Edition. Crown Svo, 2 s. 6d.


Matthews (J. W., M.D.) Incwadi Yatni: Twenty years in
South Africa. With many Engravings, royal Bvo, 14J.
Maury {Commander) Physical Geography of the Sea, and its
Meteorology. New Edition, with Charts and Diagrams, cr. Bvo, 6s.
Life. By his Daughter. Edited by Mr. Clements R.
Markham. With portrait of Maury. Bvo, \zs.6d.
Men of Mark: Portraits of the most Eminent Men of the Day.
Complete in 7 Vols., 4to, handsomely bound, gilt edges, 251. each.
Mendelssohn Family {The), 1729 1847. From Letters and
Journals. Translated. New Edition, 2 vols., Bvo,
Mendelssohn. See also “ Great Musicians.”
Merrif eld’s Nautical Astronomy. Crown Bvo, 7 s. 6d.
Merrylees if.) Carlsbad and its Environs, js. 6d. ; roan, 9s.
Milford (P.) Ned Stafford's Experiences in the United States. 55.
Mills {/.) Alternative Elementary Chemistry. Illust., cr. Bvo.
Alernative Course in Physics.
Mitchell {D. G.; Lk. Marvel) Works. Uniform Edition,
small Bvo, each.
Bound together.
Doctor Johns.
Dream Life.
Out-of-Towrn Places.
Reveries of a Bachelor.
Seven Stories, Basement and Attic.
Wet Days at Edgewood.
Mitford {Mary Russell) Our
smaller Cuts. Cr. 4to, cloth,
Village.
age. With 12 full-page and 157
edges, 21 s.; cheaper binding, 10 5.6 d.
; Depression, Agricultural and
th, gilt edges.
Work; Dt
Moffatt { W.) Land and
Commercial. Crown Bvo, S*-
Mohammed Benani: A Story of To-day. Bvo, ror. 6 d.
Mollett {/. W.) Lllustrated Dictionary of Words used in Art and
Archaeology. Illustrated, small 4to, 15-r.
Moloney {Governor) Forestry of West Africa, ioj. 6d.
Money {£.) The Truth about America. New Edition. 2 s. 6d.
Morlands, The. A Tale of Anglo-Lndian Life. By Author of
“ Sleepy Sketches.” Crown Bvo, 6s.
Morley {Henry) English Literature in the Reign of Victoria.
2000 th volume of the Tauchnitz Collection of Authors. iBmo, 2s. 6 d.
Mormonism. See “ Stenhouse.”
Morse (E. S. ) Japanese Homes and their Surroimdings. With
more than 300 Illustrations. Re-issue, ior. 6 d.
Morten {Honnor) Sketches of Hospital Life. Cr. Bvo, sewed, is.
Morwood. Our Gipsies in City, Tent, and Van. Bvo, iBr.
Moxon {Walter) Pilocereus Senilis. Fcap. Bvo, gilt top, 3 s. 6d.
Muller {£.) Noble Words atid Noble Deeds. Illustrated, gilt
edges, 3-f. 6d. ; plainer binding, 2 s. 6 d.


Murray (E, C. Grenville) Memoirs. By his widow. 2 vols.
Musgrave (Mrs.) Miriam. Crown Bvo.
Music. See “ Great Musicians,”
ATAPOLEON and Marie Louise: Memoirs. By Madame
M v Durand, -js. 6d.
Nethercote (C. B) Pytchley Hunt. New Ed., or. Bvo, Bs. 6d.
New Zealand. See Bradshaw.
New Zealand Rulers and Statesmen. See Gisborne.
Nichoils (J. H. Kerry) The King Country: Explorations in
New Zealand. Many Illustrations and Map. New Edition, Bvo, 21s.
Nisbet (Hume) Life and Nature Studies. With Etching by
C. O. Murray. Crown Bvo, 6s.
Nordhoff (Cl) California, for Health, Pleasure, and Residence.
New Edition, Bvo, with Maps and Illustrations, 12s. 6d.
Norman (C. B.) Corsairs of France. With Portraits. Bvo, iBr.
Northbrook Gallery. Edited by Lord Ronald Gower. 36 Per-
manent Photographs. Imperial 4to, large paper, 105^.
Nott (Major) Wild Animals Photographed and Described. 35 5.
Nursery Playmates (Prince of). 217 Coloured Pictures for
Children by eminent Artists. Folio, in coloured boards, 6s.
Nursing Record. Yearly, Br.; half-yearly, 4 s. 6d.; quarterly,
2j. 6 d ; weekly, 2d.
fj BRIEN (R. B.) Fifty Years of Concessions to Lreland.
V - X _ With a Portrait of T. Drummond. Vol. 1., 16 5., 11., 1 6s.
Orient Line Guide Book. By W. J, Loftie. 5L
Orvis (C. A. 1 Fishing with the Fly. Illustrated. Bvo, 12 s. 6d.
Osborne (Duffield) Spell of Ashtaroth. Crown Bvo, ss.5 s.
Our Little Ones in Heaven. Edited by the Rev. H. Robbins.
With Frontispiece after Sir Joshua Reynolds. New Edition, Sr.
Owen (Douglas) Marine Lnsurance Notes and Clauses. New
Edition, 14^.
JOALLISER (Mrs.) A History of Lace. New Edition, with
additional cuts and text. Bvo, 2ir.
The China Collector’s Pocket Companion. With up-
wards of 1000 Illustrations of Marks and Monograms. Small Bvo, ss.
Parkin (f.) Antidotal Treatment of Epidemic Cholera. 3s. 6d.
Epidemiology in the Animal and Vegetable Kingdom.
Part 1., crown Bvo. 3 s. 6d.; Part 11., 3 s. 6d.
Volcanic Origin of Epidemics. Popular Edition,
crown Bvo, 2 s.


Payne {T. O.) Solomon's Temple and Capitol , Ark of the Flood
and Tabernacle (four sections at 245.), extra binding, 105 J.
Pennell (H Cholmondeley) Sporting Fish of Great Britain
15J. ; large paper, 3Or.
Mode?~n Improvements in Fishing-tackle. Crown Bvo, 2 s.
Perelaer (M T. Hi) Ran Away from the Dutch ; Borneo , &c.
Illustrated, square Bvo, 7r. 6 d.
Pharmacopoeia of the United States of America. Bvo, 21 s.
Philpot {II. f.) Diabetes Mellitus. Crown Bvo, 55.
Diet System. Tables. I. Diabetes; 11. Gout ;
111. Dyspepsia; IV. Corpulence. In cases, ir. each.
Plunkett {Alajor G. T.) Primer of Orthographic Projection.
Elementary Solid Geometry. With Problems and Exercises. 2 s. 6 d.
Poe {E. A.) The Raven. Illustr. by Dore. Imperial folio, 63L
Poems of the Inner Life. Chiefly Modern. Small Bvo, 5-f.
Polar Expeditions. See McCormick.
Porcher (A.) Juvenile French Plays. With Notes and a
Vocabulary. iBmo, is.
Porter {Admiral David Di) Naval History of Civil War.
Portraits, Plans, &c. 4to, 25 s.
Porter {Noah) Elements of Moral Science. 1 os. 6d.
Portraits of Celebrated Race-horses of the Past and Present
Centuries, with Pedigrees and Performances. 4 vols., 4to, 1261.
Powles {I. Di) Land of the Pink Pearl: Life in the Bahamas.
Bvo, 1 or. 6 d.
Poytiter {Edward J., R.A.). See “ Illustrated Text-books.”
Pritt {T. E.) North Coutitry Flies. Illustrated from the
Author’s Drawings. I or. 6d.
Publishers’ Circular {The), and General Record of British and
Foreign Literature. Published on the Ist and 15th of every Month, 3 d.
Pyle {Howard) Otto of the Silver Hand. Illustrated by the
Author. Bvo, Br. 6d.
7DAMBA UD. History of Russia. New Edition, Illustrated.
*■ 3 vols., Bvo, 2ir.
Reber. History of Mediaeval Art. Translated by Clarke.
422 Illustrations and Glossary. Bvo,
Redford {G.) Ancient Sculpture. New Ed. Crown Bvo, ioj. 6 a
Reed {Sir E. J., M.P.) and Simpson. Modern Ships of War.
Illust, royal Bvo, I Or. 6d.
Richards ( W.) Aluminium: its History, Occurrence, 6rc.
Illustrated, crown Bvo, I2r. 6d.


Richter (Dr. Jean Pant) Italian Art in the National Gallery.
4to. Illustrated. Cloth gilt, £ 2 25.; half-morocco, uncut, £2 12s, 6 d.
See also Leonardo da Vinci.
Riddell (Mrs. J. H.) See Low’s Standard Novels.
Robertson (Anne J.) Myself and my Relatives. New Edition,
crown Bvo, 5.?.
Robin Hood; Merry Adventures of. Written and illustrated
by Howard Pyle. Imperial Bvo, 15J.
Robinson (Phil.) In my Indian Garden. New Edition, i6mo,
limp cloth, 2s.
Noah’s Ark. Unnatural History. Sm. post Bvo, 12 s. 6 d.
Sinners and Saints : a Tour across the United States of
America, and Round them. Crown Bvo, I or. 6 d.
Under the Punkah. New Ed., cr. Bvo, limp cloth, 2 s.
Rocksiro ( IV. S.) History of Music. New Edition. Bvo, 14. J.
Roland , The Story of. Crown Bvo, illustrated, 6s.
Rolfe (Eustace Neville) Pompeii, Popular and Practical. Cr.
Bvo, 7 s. 6 d. ,
Rome and the Environs. With plans, 3 s.
Rose (J.) Complete Practical Machinist. New Ed., 12mo, 1 2 s. 6d.
Key to Engines and Engine-running. Crown Bvo, Bs. 6d.
Mechanical Drawing. Illustrated, small 4to, 1 6s.
Modern Steam Engines. Illustrated. 31L 6d.
Steam Boilers. Boiler Construction and Examination.
IHust., Bvo, i2r. 6 d.
Rose library. Each volume, it. Many are illustrated—
Little Women. By Louisa M. Alcott.
Little Women Wedded. Forming a Sequel to “ Little Women.
Little Women and Little Women Wedded. 1 vol., cloth gilt, 3s. 6d.
Little Men. By L. M. Alcott. Double vol., 25.; cloth gilt, 31-. 6 d.
An Old-Fashioned Girl. By Louisa M. Alcott. 25.; cloth,
3-r. 6 d.
Work. A Story of Experience. By L. M. Alcott. 3s. 6d.; 2 vols.,
is. each.
Stowe (Mrs. H. B.) The Pearl of Orr’s Island.
The Minister’s Wooing-.
We and our Neighbours. 2j. ; cloth gilt, 6s.
My Wife and I. 2s.
Hans Brinker; or, the Silver Skates. By Mrs. Dodge. Also 5.1.
Mv Study Windows. By J. R. Lowell.
The Guardian Angel. By Oliver Wendell Holmes.
My Summer in a Garden. By C. D. Warner.
Dred. By Mrs. Beecher Stowe. 25.; cloth gilt, 3*. 6d.
City Ballads. New Ed. i6mo. By Will Carlf.ton.


Rose Library {The) — continued.
Farm Ballads. By Will Carleton.
Farm Festivals. By Will Carleton. V i vol., cl., gilt ed., 3-r. 6d.
Farm Legends. By Will Carleton. )
The Rose in Bloom. By L. M. Alcott. 2s. ; cloth gilt, 3-f. 6 d.
Eight Cousins. By L. M. Alcott. 2 5. ; cloth gilt, 3-f. 6 d.
Under the Lilacs. By L. M. ALCOTT. 2 5.; also 3r. 6 d.
Undiscovered Country. By W. D. Howells.
Clients of Dr. Bernagius. By L. Biart. 2 parts.
Silver Pitchers. By Louisa M. Alcott. Cloth, 31-. 6d.
Jimmy’s Cruise in the “Pinafore,” and other Tales. By
Louisa M. Alcott. is.-, cloth gilt, y. 6 d.
Jack and Jill. By Louisa M. Alco tt. 2 5.; Illustrated, sr.
Hitherto. By the Author of the “ Gayworlhys.” 2 vols., it. each;
I vol., cloth gilt, 3_r. 6d.
A Gentleman of Leisure. A Novel. By Edgar Fawcett, it.
Ross {Mars) and Stoneheive? Cooper. Highlands of Cantabria ;
or, Three Days from England. Illustrations and Map, Bvo, 21 s.
Rothschilds, the Financial Rulers of Nations. By John
Reeves. Crown Bvo, "js. 6 d.
Rousselet {Louis) Son of the Constable of France. Small post
Bvo, numerous Illustrations, gilt edges, 3-f. 6d. • plainer, 2j. 6 d.
King of the Tigers : a Story of Central Inaia. Illus-
trated. Small post Bvo, gilt, y. 6 d. ; plainer, 2s. 6 d.
Drummer Boy. Illustrated. Small post Bvo, gilt
edges, 35. 6 d.; plainer, 2 s. 6 d.
Russell {Dora) Strange Message. 3 vols., crown Bvo, 315. 6d.
Russell {IF. Clark) fack's Courtship. New Ed., small post
Bvo, 6s.
English Channel Ports and the Estate of the East
and West India Dock Company. Crown Bvo, u.
Frozen Pirate. New Ed., Illust, small post Bvo, 6s.
Sailor’s Language. Illustrated. Crown Bvo, y. 6d.
Sea Queen. New Ed., small post Bvo, 6s.
Strange Voyage. New Ed., small post Bvo, 6s.
The Lady Aland. New Ed., small post Bvo, 6s.
Wreck of the Grosvenor. Small post Bvo, 6s. 4to,
sewed, 6 d.
(PALNTS and their Symbols: A Companion in the Churches
*—* and Picture Galleries of Europe. Illustrated. Royal l6mo, y. 6d.
Samuels {Capt. f. Si) From Forecastle to Cabin : Autobiography.
Illustrated. Crown Bvo, Br. 6 d. ; also with fewer Illustrations, cloth.
25, ; paper, is.
Sandlar.ds {f. P.) How to Develop Vocal Power, is.


Saunders {A.) Gur Domestic Birds: Poultry in England and
New Zealand. Crown Bvo, 6s.
Our Horses: the Best Muscles controlled by the Best
Brains. 6s.
Scherr {.Prof. J) History of English Literature. Cr. Bvo, Bs. 6 d.
Schley. Rescue of Greely. Maps and Illustrations, Bvo, 1 2S. 6 d.
Schuyler {Eugene) American Diplomacy and the Furtherance of
Commerce. I2J. 6 d.
The Life of Peter the Great. 2 vols., Bvo, 32 5.
Schweinfurth {Georg) Heart of Africa. 2 vols., crown Bvo, 15J.
Scott {Leader) Renaissance of Art in Italy. 4to, 3U. 6d.
Sculpture , Renaissance and Modern. ss.
Senimes {Adm. Raphael) Service Afloat; The “ Sumter" and
the “ Alabama. ” Illustrated. Royal Bvo, 16-.
Senior {IV.) A T ear and Far ;an Anglers Sketches of Home
Sport and Colonial Life. Crown Bvo, 6s.
Waterside Sketches. Imp. 32m0, is. 6d.; boards, is.
Shakespeare. Edited by R. Grant White. 3 vols., crown
Bvo, gilt top, 365. ; edition de luxe , 6 vols., Bvo, cloth extra, 63J.
See also Cundall, Dethroning, Donnelly, Mackay,
and White (R. Grant).
Shakespeare’s Heroines: Studies by Living English Painters.
105 X.; artists’ proofs, 6301.
Songs and Sonnets. Illust. by Sir John Gilbert, R.A.
4to, boards, ss.5 s.
Sharpe {R. Bozodler) Birds in Nature. 39 coloured plates
and text. 4to, 631-
Sidney {Sir Philip) Arcadia. New Edition, 6s.
Siegfried , The Story of. Illustrated, crown Bvo, cloth, 6s.
Simon. China : its Social Life. Crown Bvo, 6s.
Stmson{A.) Wilds of Ecuador and Exploration of the Putumayor
River. Crown Bvo, Br. 6d.
Sinclair (Mrs.) Indigenous Flowers of the Hawaiian Islands.
44 Plates in Colour. Imp. folio, extra binding, gilt edges, 31J. 6d.
Sloane{T. O.) Home Experiments in Science for Old and Young.
Crown Bvo. 6s.
Smith {G.) Assyrian Explorations. Illust. New Ed . Bvo, xBr.
The Chaldean Account of Genesis. With many Illustra-
tions. 16 s. New Ed. By Professor Sayce, Bvo, iBr.
Smith {G. Barnett) William L and the German Empire.
New Ed., Bvo, 35. 6 d.
Smith {/. Moyr) Wooing of /Ethra. Illustrated. 3 2m0, is.


Smith {Sydney) Life and Times. By Stuart J. Reid. Illus-
trated. B VO. 2IS.
Smith (W. R.) Laws concerning Public Health. Bvo, 3 is. 6 d.
Spiers' French Dictionary. 29th Edition, remodelled. 2 vols.,
Bvo, i&r.; half bound, 21 s.
Spry ( W.J. /., R.N., F.R.G.S.) Cruise of H.M.S. “ Challenger."
With Illustrations. Bvo, iBr. Cheap Edit., crown Bvo, 7 s. 6a’.
Spyri {fjfohl) Heidi's Early Experiences : a Story for Children
and those who love Children. Illustrated, small post Bvo, 4s. 6d.
Heidi's Further Experiences. Illust., sm. post Bvo, 45. 6d.
Stanley {H. Ml) Congo , and Founding its Free State. Illustrated,
2 vols., Bvo, 42 5.; re-issue, 2 vols. Bvo, 21 s.
How LFound Livingstone. Bvo, 10 s. 6d. ; cr. Bvo, 75. 6d.
Through the Dark Continent. Crown Bvo, 12 s. 6d,
Start (f, W. K.) Junior Mensuration Exercises. Sd.
Stenhouse {Mrs.) Tyranny of Mormonism. An Englishwoman
in Utah. New ed., cr. Bvo, cloth elegant, 6 d.
Sterry {J Ashby ) Cucumber Chronicles. 55.
Stevens (E. W.) Fly-Fishing in Maine Lakes. Bs. 6d.
Stevens (T.) Around the World on a Bicycle. Vol. 11. Bvo. 1 6s.
Stockton (Frank R.) Rudder Grange. 34. 6d.
Bee-Man of Orn, a7id other Fanciful Tales. Cr. Bvo,
5 J -
The Casting Away of Mrs. Leeks and Mrs. Aleshine. is.
The Dusantes. Sequel to the above. Sewed, u.;
this and the preceding book in one volume, cloth, 2 s. 6d.
The Hundredth Man. Small post Bvo, 6r.
The Late Mrs. Null. Small post Bvo, 6s.
The Story of Viteau. Illust. Cr. Bvo, 55.
See also Low’s Standard Novels.
Stoker ( Bram ) Under the Sunset. Crown Bvo, 6s.
Storer {.Professor F. H.) Agriculture in its Relations to
Chemistry. 2 vols., Bvo, 255.
Stowe {Mrs. Beecher) Dred. Cloth, gilt edges, 3 s. 6d.; cloth, 2 s.
Flowers and Fruit from her Writings. Sm. post Bvo,
Little Foxes. Cheap Ed., u.; Library Edition, 4 s. 6d.
My Wife and L. Cloth, 2 s.


Stowe {Mrs. Beecher) Old Town Folk. 6s.
We and our Neighbours. 2s.
Poganuc People. 6s.
See also Rose Library.
Strachan (_/.) Explorations and Adventures in New Guinea.
Illust., crown Bvo, 1 2s.
Stuttfield {Hugh E. M.) El Maghreb : 1200 Miles' Ride through
Marocco. Bj. 6 d.
Sullivan {A. AN) Nutshell History of Ireland. Paperboards, 6d.
'NALNE {H. A.) “ Origines." Translated by John Durand.
I. The Ancient Regime. Demy Bvo, cloth, l6r.
11. The French Revolution. Vol. 1. do.
111. Do. do. Vol. 2. do.
IV. Do. do. Vol. 3. do.
Tauchnitz’s English Editions of German Authors. Each
volume, cloth flexible, 2s. ;or sewed, is. 6d. (Catalogues post free.)
Tauchnitz {B.) Gentian Dictionary. 25.; paper, is. 6d.; roan,
2s. 6 d.
French Dictionary 2 5.; paper, ix. 6d.; roan, 2 s. 6d.
Italian Dictionary. 2 s. ; paper, is. 6d.; roan, 2 s. 6d.
Latin Dictionary. 25. ; paper, is. 6d. ; roan, 2 s. 6d.
Spanish and English. 25.; paper, is. 6d.; roan, 2 s. 6 d.
Spanish and French. 25.; paper, ix. 6d. ; roan, 2 s. 6d.
Taylor {R. L.) Chemical Analysis Tables, ix.
Chemistry for Beginners. Small Bvo, is. 6d.
Techno-Chemical Receipt Book. With additions by Brannt
and Wahl. 10 s. 6 d.
Technological Dictionary. See Tolhausen.
Thausing {Prof.) Malt and the Fabrication of Beer. Bvo, 45J.
Theakston {AN) British Angling Flies. Illustrated. Cr. Bvo, ss.5 s.
Thomson {Jos.) Central African Lakes. New edition, 2 vols.
in one, crown Bvo, 7r. 6d.
Through AlasaiLand. Illust. 2ix.; new edition, js. 6d-
and Afiss Harris-Smith. Ulu: an African Romance.
crown Bvo, 6s.


Thomson ( IVi) Algebra for Colleges and Schools. With Answers,
SJ. ; without, 4r. 6 d. ; Answers separate, ir. 6 d
Tolhausen. Technological German , English , and French Dic-
tionary. Vols. 1., 11., with Supplement, iZf. 6d. each; 111., Qs, ;
Supplement, cr. Bvo, 31. 6«/.
Tromholt {S.) Under the Rays of the Aurora Borealis. By
C. Siewers. Photographs and Portraits. 2 vols., Bvo, 30^.
Tucker ( IV. J.) Life and Society in Eastern Europe. 15*.
Tapper {.Martin Farquhar) My Life as an Author. 14$.
Turner ( Edward) Studies in Russian Literature. Cr. Bvo, Bj. 6d.
fTP TON {H) Manual of Practical Dairy Farming. Cr.
Bvo, 2S.
Tf AN DAM. Land of Rubens ; a companion for visitors to
* Belgium. See Huet.
Vane ( Denzil) From the Dead. A Romance. 2 vols., cr. Bvo,
Vane {Sir Harry Young). By Prof. James K. Hosmer.
Bvo, iBr.
Veres. Biography of Sir Francis Vere and Lord Vere, leading
Generals in the Netherlands. By Clements R. Markham. Bvo, iBr.
Victoria {Queen) Life of. By Grace Greenwood. Illust. 6s.
Vincent {Mrs. Howard) Forty Thousand Miles over Land and
Water. With Illustrations. New Edit., 3-r. 6 d.
Viollet-le-Duc {E.) Lectures on Architecture. Translated by
Benjamin Bucknall, Architect. 2 vols., super-royal Bvo, £3 3-f.
jfjyAKEFLELD. Aix-les-Bains : Bathing and Attractions.
Wolford {Mrs. L. B.) Her Great Idea , and other Stories. Cr.
Bvo, 1 or. 6 d.
Wallace {Li) Ben Hur: A Tale of the Christ. New Edition,
crown Svo, 65. ; cheaper edition, 2 s.
Waller {Rev. C. H.) The IVames on the Gates of Pearl ,
and other Studies. New Edition. Crown Svo, cloth extra, 6d.
Words in the Greek Testament. Part I. Grammar.
Small post Svo, cloth, 2s. 6d. Part 11. Vocabulary, 2s. 6d.


10 6 5 0 3 6 2
10 6 5 0 3 6 ?
7 6 3 6 2 0 Is. Oi,
76 36 20 10
76 36 20 10
7 6 o « r 2 0 10
i ' 6 3 6 [ 2 0 10
— — 2 0 10
— — 2 0 10
7 6 3 6 ( 2
22 6 10 6 6 0 3 0
76 36 20 10
76 36 20 10
76 36 20 10
76 36 20 10
*76 36 20 10
7 6 3 6 2 0 •» 0
)
>76 36 20 10
I 7 6 36 20 10
A
76 36 20 10
7 6 3 6 2 0 1 0
6 0 5 0 — 1 0
76 36 20 10
76 36 20 10
7 6 3 6 I, 2 0 10
76 36 2 0 10
76 36 20 10
10 6 5 0 i
7 6
7 6
7 6 i
? 6 !
7 I __
BOOKS BY JULES VERNE.
{Containing 350 to 800 pp,
and from 50 to 100
fall-page Ulnscraiions,
Labs* Cbowj Bto.
Containing the whole of the
text with some Uloßtratione.
In very
handsome
In cloth
binding, g
edges,
smaller
plainer
binding,
plain
edges.
WORKS.
cloth bind'
lug, gilt
edges.
Coloured board*.
20,000 Leagues under the Sea
Parts L and II
s. d.
j 10 6
s. d.
2 vols., I*. each.
2 vols., Is. each.
2 vols., Is. each.
2 vols., Is. each.
Hector Servadac
The Fur Country
The Earth to the Moon and a Trip
round it
10 6
5 0
5 0
10 6
j 10 6
f 2 vols., 1
(,2s. ea. )
Michael Strogoff ....
Dick Sands, the Boy Captain
Five Weeks in a Balloon
2 vols., Is, each.
2 vols., Is. each,
Adventures of Three Englishmen I
and Three Russians . . . . j
Round the World in Eighty Days
A Floating City d
The Blockade Runners
Dr. Ox’s Experiment .
A Winter amid the Ice
Survivors of the “ Chancellor ” . I
Martin Paz j
The Mysterious Island, 3 vols.:— >
I. Dropped from the Clouds . /
IL Abandoned r
lIL Secret of the Island . . . )
The Child of the Cavern . . . .
The Begum’s Fortune ....
2 vols., Is. each.
The Tribulations of a Chinaman .
The Steam House, 2 vols.:— \
I. Demon of Cawnpore ... I
IL Tigers and Traitors . . . )
The Giant Raft, 2 vols.: — -j
L 800 Leagues on the Amazon i
IL The Cryptogram . ...
The Green Ray .......
Godfrey Morgan
Keraban the Inflexible;—
I, Captain of the “Guiaara” . i
IL Scarpante the Spy. . . . j
The Archipelago on Fire. . . .
The Vanished Diamond ....
Mathias Sandorf
The Lottery Ticket
Clipper of the Clouds
Sorth against South , . . . ,
Adrift in the Pacific
Flight to France
nSXr™ e^h TELS nV\ D "T EtLEHS - 3 Vols -’ Bv "v (XX) PP-> iwf nil-page illustrations. 12.. 6 d. :
1 r PL ° F THB WoBLD - «) The Great Natisaioes of tii
I&HTEBITTH CEXTUBT. (3) THE GeEAI ExPtOBESS OP THE XISBIEBITTH CbKTUBT.


WallerQßev. C.H.) Adoption and the Covenant. On Confirma-
tion. 2 s. 6d.
Silver Sockets; and other Shadows oj Redemption.
Sermons at Christ Church, Hampstead. Small post Bvo, 6s.
Walsh {A. S.) Mary, Queen of the House of David. Bvo , 3s. 6d.
Walton ( Iz.) Wallet Book, CIdIoLXXXV. Crown Bvo, half
vellum, 21 s. ; large paper, 42 5.
Compleat Angler. Lea and Dove Edition. Ed. by R. B.
Marston. With full-page Photogravures on India paper, and the
Woodcuts on India paper from blocks. 4to, half-morocco,
large paper, royal 410, full dark green morocco, gilt top, 2lQr.
Walton (71 B.) Coal Mining. With Illustrations. 4to, 25*.
Wardrop {O.) Kingdom of Georgia. Illust. and map. Bvo. 14*.
Warner (C. D.) My Summer in a Garden. Boards, 1 s.\
leatherette, is. 6d. ; cloth, 2 s.
Their Pilgrimage. Illustrated by C. S. Reinhart.
Bvo, 7 s. 6 d.
Warren ( W. F) Paradise Found; the North Pole the Cradle
of the Human Race. Illustrated. Crown Bvo, 12s. 6d.
Washington Irving's Little Britain. Square crown Bvo, 6s.
Wells (H. P.) American Salmon Fisherman. 6s.
Fly Rods and Fly Tackle. Illustrated, ror. 6d.
Wells {f. W.) Three Thousand Miles through Brazil. Illus-
trated from Original Sketches. 2 vols. Svo, yis.
Wenzel (O.) Directory of Chemical Products of the German
Empire. Svo, 25,?.
White (R. Grant ) England Without and Within. Crown Svo,
1 os, 6d.
Every-day English, ror. 6d.
Fate of Mansfield Humphreys, &c. Crown Svo, 6s.
Studies in Shakespeare, ror. 6 d.
Words and their Uses. New Edit., crown Svo, SJ.
Whitney (Mrs.) The Other Girls. A Sequel to “ e Girls.”
New ed. i2mo, 2s.
We Girls. New Edition. 2 s.
Whittier (J. G.) The King’s Missive, and later Poems. 18mo,
choice parchment cover, 2 s - 6d.
- St. Gregory’s Guest, &*c. Recent Poems. s s.
Wilcox (Marrion) Real People. Sm. post Svo, 35. 67,
Sehora Villena ; and Gray, an Oldhaven Romance. 2
vols. in one, 6s.


3 2 Sampson Low, Mansion , fir» Cb.’j Zw/ of Publications.
William I. and the German Empire. By G. Barnett Smith.
New Edition, 3*. 6d.
Willis-Bund (J.) Salmon Problems. 3 s. 6d. ; boards, 2 s. 6d.
Wills {Dr. C. f.) Persia as it is. Crown Bvo, Sr. 6d.
Wills, A Few Hints on Proving, without Professional Assistance.
Ey a Probate Court Official. Bth Edition, revised, with Forms
of Wills, Residuary Accounts, &c. Fcap. Bvo, cloth limp, u.
Wilmot (A.) Poetry of South Africa. Collected and arranged.
Bvo, 6s.
Wilson {Dr. Andrew ) Health for the People. Cr. Bvo, -js. 6d.
Winsor {Justin) Narrative and Critical History of America.
8 vols., 30X. each; large paper, per vol., 635.
Woolsey. Introduction to International Law. sth Ed., iBr.
IJ oolson {Constance P.) See “ Low’s Standard Novels.”
Wright {H.) Friendship of God. Portrait, &c. Crown Bvo, 6s.
Wright {T.) Town of Couper, Olney, crc. 6s.
Written to Order; the Journeyings of an Irresponsible Egotist.
By the Author of “ A Day of my Life at Eton.” Crown Bvo, 6s.
PI ARTE {Charles ) Florence: its History. Translated by
C. B. Pitman. Illustrated with 500 Engravings. Large imperial
4-to, extra binding, gilt edges, 635. ; or 12 Parts, s*. each.
History ; the Medici; the Humanists; letters; arts; the Renaissance ;
illustrious Florentines; Etruscan art; monuments; sculpture; painting.
Sonhon:
SAMPSON LOW, MARSTON, SEARLE, & RIVINGTON, Ld.,
£l. Parisian's gjorrse,
FETTER LANE, FLEET STREET. E.C.
Gilbert and Rirington, Li., St. John’s House. Clerkensrell Hoad E.C.


(o> .


. J S. Tv / J


N ¥mhr
11 * r\
■
U3A
/ t r
5 SB*S£ZOO 80S I


