

>
$
V r* J
Or, S
L. THWAITES




'^jb
(E MtMonpf *jh




(3 foie \\\d res!', a
Jmwm& little box ar\d his pine
y M*JM§ cone 'goblin friends.
ViHca 8. llluslly L
klj
/
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by Harman & Jacka Ltd. 20-22 Wyatt Street, Adelaide,
for the Publisher Southern Press, Box 877 G
1945
Registered in Australia for Transmission by Post as a Book.


■ Vw jt.lkdeir ■*?■'¥ w c '#*k ‘ TT*Ci”f Mr a fl / •* JUmBj
ON A BIG MOSSY LOG STOOD THE GOBLINS


C 1914' 1
1 0 APR 1946
“IPe are such stuff as dreams are made of—
Jlnd our little life is rounded with a sleep! ’
—Shakespeare


J\6lug![ !
f wlU '•! Xi ’L/m^V '\ N\
X V Xr^\l' : -- : V V f b, ' n5^ich n X
Ist Edition,
2nd
1944
1945
Copyright. All Rights Reserved.


WAY in the cool depths of the far blue
where a little boy lived with his /V\um and
hills stood a cottage where a little boy uvea wirn ms mum
Dsd He was a lovable little fellow, with little legs that looked
almost too weak for his very round turn. He was always happy
and full of fun and the twinkle in his big dark brown eyes just
shewed what an imp he was.
He loved to play under the pine and gum trees which
grew around the cottage. His Daddy used to take him gather-
ing pine cones for the fire, and when they reached home Peter
would stand them up and pretend they were little men.
It was great fun for Peter when his Daddy would sit
down and tell him all about the different kinds of pine trees
on which the cones grew. Peter never tired of listening, because
ike his Daddy he loved trees.
One night, when Peter had been tucked up in bed, he
asked for just one more story about the pine cones, but before
his Daddy had finished Peter became drowsy and was soon fast
asleep.


•
PETER WOULD STAND THEM UP
Everything was quiet and it must have been nearly morn-
ing when Peter heard a little voice calling him. He sat up and
to his great surprise saw a cheeky little cone goblin peeping
around the door. Peter jumped up quickly and wanted to
pick the little chap up, but the goblin stepped back and said,
"You love our pine trees, Peter, would you like to come and
meet my cousins? They would love to tell you all about them-
selves."


Peter was excited and said he would love to come. He
slipped his little blue pants and jersey on as quickly as he could,
and followed the little goblin out of the cottage.
HE SAT UP AND SAW A GOBLIN
He led Peter down a path covered with moss, ferns and blue-
bells growing on each side. Peter had never been down that
way before. It seemed like fairyland. He thought to himself,
"| must remember my way, then I can come again and bring
my Mummy and Daddy/ 7 On they went, walking on the soft
green moss, and Peter could see his little goblin friend just in
front of him.


Green ferns reached as high as Peter himself. He
started thinking he might get lost only for that little
goblin, but then, where was he? He looked and the cone
goblin was nowhere to be seen! He wasn't in front of
him any more and Peter became very frightened.
"Don't worry, little boy," said a kindly old lizard nearby.
"Keep on that track,
but keep on that way."
t is narrow and others look greener,
Peter went on a little further, then he came to a creek
with its smell of damp sand and water-cress. Sitting on the bank
near him were two bunnies with their arms around each other.
The bunnies were near some toadstools and were looking
hard at something; when Peter saw what they were looking at
he nearly fell into the creek with surprise.
There on a big mossy log stood his little
friend the cone goblin; around him were
seven other goblins all looking hard at
Peter and wondering who he could be.
One little fellow was dangling from
a long strip of bark that was hanging
right down from a high gum tree.
Peter just stood in silence and
stared.
Don't be afraid, Peter;
"DON'T WORRY," SAID THE LIZARD


1
Monty Pine/ 7 said the little goblin, who had shown him
the way, "and these are all my cousins; we will tell you
all about ourselves and be very good friends.
At first they all wanted to scamper away, but
Monty told them that Peter was a kind little boy who
would not hurt them, so they all crept back and sat in
a row on the log and Peter and the bunnies sat on a
stone to listen to their stories
Monty Pine said, "My Grandfather used to grow in the
big mountains in California; nowadays we are planted in many
countries because we grow quickly and our wood is soft; saws
and nails go through it easily. They make floors, and boxes in
which lovely apples and oranges go to market/ 7
Ben Bunya, a true Australian, big-
gest of them all, started in his gruff
old voice to tell his story.
77 1 come from Queensland, my
tree grows very tall. lam as big and
heavy as a water-melon and perch
right up at the top. In our cones
n our cones
there are rows and rows of sweet
nuts. The Australian blackfellows
would walk miles to their own trees
to gather the nuts for food when
they ripened each year. 77
MONTY PINE


Blue Peter was thrilled with these stories and moved up
closer as Ken Kauri came out from behind a tree and showed
BEN BUNYA
himself. Peter then found that this shy fellow also came from
the big mountains of Eastern Australia.


'
Ken Kauri was a very happy
chap and spoke with a dear
voice, "The wood from my tree
is so soft and smooth that school
boys can carve patterns and all
kinds of useful things out of it
with their pocket knives. Some
of my cousins grow high up
among the mountains in the
cold snow country of New Zea-
land, but in the warmer moun-
tains of Queensland, where
pineapples and bananas grow,
we are much bigger."
KEN KAURI
Ken Kauri then walked over to the long strip of bark
hanging from the gum tree and, shaking it, he said.
"Now, Master Murray Pine, you are also a little Aus
tralian chappie; slip down here
and tell our new playmate, Blue
Peter, what your history is."
Obediently Murray Pine
slipped down his bark rope onto
the log and bowed to Peter.
"We are strong and tough,"
said Murray Pine, "and many
of my folk live along the River
MURRAY PINE


Murray in the sandy country.
''Lots of bunny rabbits make their
homes in the soft sandy ground
around our roots. People have many
uses for our wood on farms, but there
is much hot dry weather where we
DARYL THE DRAGON FLY
come from and we always like to hear stories from our tired
friend, Droopy Cedar, down there, because he comes from cool
mountain valleys."
Ves," drawled Droopy Cedar, "our
mountains of India are the highest in the
world. We are grown in Australia for our
beauty in the coolest parts of people's gar-
dens, and graceful, drooping fellows we are."
Then he yawned, "I'm tired of talking;
Peter, you ask Freddie Fir, sitting on that leaf
up there, why he is here and I will have
another sleep."
Peter was just thinking what a lazy old
goblin Droopy was when there was a loud
buzz; they all looked up and saw Daryl, the
dragon-fly zooming to-
wards them. The goblins
were all startled and poor
Freddie Fir tried so hard
to get out of the way that
he fell off the log into the
creek —splash! and had to
be dragged out by his big
BUNNIES' HOMES IN THE SANDY GROUND
ear.


«* * c! o **«g^
While the other goblins
were helping him to dry him-
self, Peter heard the two bun-
nies talking about their coach
and saying they would be
late home for breakfast if it
didn't come very soon. Peter
was beginning to wonder
when he would see his
Mummy and Daddy again and
whether this was all a dream.
Freddie Fir was dry again and
Peter heard him say:
FREDDY FIR
DROOPY CEDAR
"Well, long ago we all lived in
the cold wet mountain valleys
of India. We like the sparkling
raindrops clinging to our
needles like diamonds, and
dense fogs to blow through our
branches."
An old forest of fir trees is
still growing in the country


where Santa Claus first came from, but in those days he was
called Saint Nicholas.
'That was where the little old men called gnomes first
came from, too," said Freddie Fir. "What mischief they got
up to; they were worse than us for playing tricks on people, but
in those days—" Bang! Bang! Snap! Rumble! Patter —
—Patter —Patter! went something. Peter and the goblins
ooked around and there, coming along a track through the
titree and bracken fern was a little wooden cart with two shafts
pulled by a lizard.
THE BUNNIES' COACH
He was running very fast and was saying to himself, "My
word, those bunny boys will be cross with me for being so late."
"Oh!" thought Peter, "that's why he's in such a hurry.
It's the bunnies' coach;" Then the cart stopped just near the
bunnies, in they jumped and away they drove, without saying a
word to the goblins.


Jllll
Peter thought that they were too shy to talk and won-
dered if Bert Beetle would get run over, as he was on the rabbits'
track. Bert Beetle had just passed "Toadstool Villa," the ants
house
TOADSTOOL VILLA
"He will jump out of the way," said Ben, in his gruff
"Those rabbit lads never will learn manners!"
voice.


"Manners! What are manners?" piped up a little chap
with long ears, who was standing on a tree-fern.
"Oh," said old Ben, looking at Peter, "this is our little
Cedric Cypress; he is a well-mannered little chap, but he does
not know what the word 'manners' means’" Then said old Ben
to little Cedric, " 'Manners' means to act and speak nicely to all,
no matter who they are. Now tell Blue Peter your story."
In a tiny voice this little goblin said that he came from
sunny California and that his trees were tall dark fellows like
great needles. He had some very graceful relations called
Lawsons, with flat leaves that looked like lace.
Peter was not so shy now and pointing to a little goblin
standing on the log, who was holding Ben's ear with one hand
and a leaf with the other, he said, "You are the only one left
that I haven't heard from. Who are
you and what is your story?"
This bright little chap with big
ears told Peter that his trees grew in
England and Russia before they came to
Australia and that his name was Larry
Larch. "Our light green needles are
soft and pretty in their little bunches,"
he said, "but they all go yellow in
autumn and drop."
CEDRIC CYPRESS


"What were we doing here before Peter came to see us?"
said Ken Kauri.
"Ah! Ah! Ah!" yawned Droopy. " I may be half-asleep,
but I don't forget like you fellows. We were on our way to see
the new baby 'possum in that gum tree down by the waterfalls.
You know, the little 'possum that that kookaburra was laughing
about because of his big black eyes and the way he stares."
"Yes," said Murray Pine, "let's go." So off they a


Ast of all, Peter.
the funniest thing I have ever been in
trooped one behind the other, led by Ben,
down a rabbit-track under some spreading
bracken fern. There was Ben, Freddy, Ken,
Larry, Cedric, Monty, Murray, Droopy and,
“Well/ 7 said Peter to himself, “this is
do wish my Mummy
and Daddy could be here to see us —but then how strange it all
is, 77 he thought, as he walked along behind the goblins past
lovely tree-ferns and around great black butts of towering gum
trees.
“Ha! Ha! Ha! He! He! He! 77 someone was laughing,
and Peter saw a sleepy lizard standing on the doorstep of his
og house. He was laughing heartily and enjoying the pranks
of the goblins as they passed
him. Murray Pine asked Mr.
Lizard, “How much further
have we to go; this acorn is get-
ting very heavy? 77
“You 7 re nearly there, if you
are going to see Terry 'Possum, 77
said the lizard. “Yes, 77 said
Peter, as the old sleepy darted
forward and caught a fly.
“That was smart work, 77 said
Peter; 77 1 didn't know you could
jump as quickly as that. 77
LARRY LARCH


Soon they came to an open place where three big white
gum trees were standing close together. They had huge trunks
and shaggy bark, and the green grass all around made it a lovely
place to play. Peter started playing hide-and-seek with the gob-
ins around the gum trees, and couldn't those goblins run! Even
PLAYING HIDE AND SEEK
little Murray and Cedric could always race Peter to the home
tree. Peter soon got tired of that and he told the goblins that
if they all went into the scrub and found some bark he would
make them a little house like a blackfellow's wurlie.


"Ought to be easy for a fit man like me;
bark off that log," said Big Ben, pointing.
strip all the
"No, we can do some; wed! show you we have
muscles," piped up Cedric and Murray.
got
DROP IT AND RUN
"We will all do our bit, then it's easy," said Ken
what would Peter think if we were lazy,"
"and
Well, they very soon had a big heap of bark stacked up in


front of Peter, who was sitting down plaiting
kangaroo grass while he was waiting. Peter col-
lected a few sticks and stones and soon had a
lovely little bark hut built, with the help of the
goblins. Then Peter made some brown paint out
of mud and water and painted two words — Scrub
Hut" —on the inside of a piece of bark over the
door. They thought that they would have a big
stone for a table, so they soon found one.
"This will do," said Larry. "Right, all lift," said Ben
then sixteen little knees bent and little arms tugged. Up came
the heavy flat stone. "Drop it and run! yelled Peter.
The little fellows dropped the stone back into its hole
and all ran in fright.
"There was a great big scorpion under that stone, said
Peter. "I think we had better go."
Just then two gorgeous coloured parrots flew over, they
were chattering very loudly to each other and seemed to be
talking at once.
"They are saying something about a
hare," said Monty. "I can understand parrot
language and those birds have seen a cruel
fox sneaking after a poor old hare."


"We must warn him/ 7 drawled Droopy.
'"Yes, yes," said a chorus of voices from the others, so
off they set to find the hare.
7/ Will Mr. Hare be in his burrow, Ben? /7 asked Monty.
"No, hares never dig a burrow like rabbits do, 77 said Ben
MR. FOX'S HOME
"they just squat under a bush and when they run it takes a
strong wind to catch them. 77
The goblins and Peter were all spread out in line search-
ing the scrub for the poor hare.
Peter said, "Well, Ben, if Mr. Hare can run like the wind
however will the wicked old fox catch him? 77


"Ah," said Ben, "the old fox might take a short cut; he
will be cunning and use all the tricks he knows."
"Perhaps he doesn't know THIS trick," said Peter. "My
Daddy told it to me. All you have to do is to sit on the ground
near where the foxes live and give some long shrill whistles.
Mr. Fox hears and thinks it is some poor little bunny rabbit in
trouble which he could easily catch —so up comes Mr. Fox and
you've got him!"
THE HARE RUSHED PAST
"That sounds good," said Ben; "we'll try that. We must
save Mr. Henry Hare from going into the pot for old fox's tea if
we can."
Just then there was a Thump! Thump' Thump! and a
Swish! and the poor frightened hare rushed past the goblins
and was out of sight in the bushes in a flash.


i/./j I( I /
| i ' I /
P§0t f 0
"I don't like foxes/' said Larry, as they all stared at the
swaying bushes where the hare disappeared.
"We'll catch him," said Ben. "Over there in the creek
is a big pool and over the pool is a long thin log. We'll go and
sprinkle dry sand all along the log."
They did this and then Ben said, "Now all you fellows
hide while Cedric goes to the other side of the creek by another
track. I will wait on the bank under the log with a big stone."
Little Cedric did as he was told and when he got there
he hid in some ferns and set up a long shrill whistle. Ihe old
fox heard the whistle and turned away from the right track.
On he came, trot, trot, trot, trot
straight for the log. He only got half way
over when there was a loud chorus of
yells from the goblins and Splash! went
the old fox into the deep black pool. He
went right down under, and when he came
up he could just reach the bank. His eyes
were fixed on Ben —Whump'—Ben's big
stone came down right on the cruel old
fox's head, and that was the end of him.
The happy goblins now set off to
find Mr. Hare and tell him the good news.
They had not gone far when they found
him tired out, hiding under a bush,
WHUMP ! WENT IHE STONE


HENRY HARE HAS A PARTY
shivering with fright. He was so grateful when he heard the old
fox was dead that he asked them all to sit down and he would
find them something to eat and they would have a party.
He went away and soon returned with his pockets full of


blackberries, crab apples, wild cherries, and cranberries! They
all sat down and each put a wide stringy bark leaf in front of
him for a plate. They talked about ants, grass-hoppers, bees,
MR. POSSUM'S HOUSE
scorpions, lizards, and butterflies, and had a real picnic lunch
together.
t was Monty who started off again down the track, and


soon they were out in the dense scrub where the billy
buttons and orchids grow. They came to the home
of Mr. Terry 'Possum in the thickest of the trees.
"Here he is," shouted Cedric
"1 saw him first," squeaked Murray.
"He's sitting on a bough," said Monty.
"What big black eyes he has," drawled Droopy.
"Look at his long tail," said Larry.
"Please don't frighten the lad," said Ken.
"Im going to get on his back, said Freddie.
"You'll do nothing of the sort," growled Ben. "There s
too much talk, find the 'possum some nuts; actions speak louder
than words."
So all the goblins went different ways into the woods and
soon returned with all sorts of nuts.
Old Ben said, "Little Terry is frightened. Let us leave
him to his lunch and go back to our big gum trees in the
clearing."
There they met the Kookaburra. He was still laughing
and said, "Heigh Ho! Boys. Did you see the baby'possum with
his great black eyes? Eyes like saucers, 1 would call them.
Ha! Ha! Ha! He! He! He! Ho! Ho! Ho!"


~! :r !. \
' '■ ' L -" & ,^ 6 -'- 'Y ' I '' I
' W*'”
Peter thought he would love to see the Kookaburra
swoop down and catch a snake, and fly up with it very high, and
then drop the old snake to the ground and kill it.
All of a sudden the Kookaburra flew away and down
swooped a big black eagle. Catching Peter by the belt with his
AWAY HE FLEW
strong beak, away he flew, and as he soared higher and higher
Peter could hear the tiny cries of the goblins as they called him
back.
Then the eagle let him go, and he felt himself falling
through the air, and as the gum trees seemed to be getting


t . ij b BB~ -■’' *
% '
bigger and coming up to meet him, there was a bump. He found
that he had fallen out of bed and his Mummy was by his side.
"Where are all those pine goblins, Mummy?" said Peter.
"You have been dreaming, little boy, and now it s time
to get up," said his Mummy.
Peter sat up and rubbed his eyes. The same fat ele
phant was on the mantelpiece, and his precious horse was stil
on the floor near his bed, where he had left it.
THE END OF THE TALE


. V:




