

Wt


* >


- - —&FEB 1945
31652
A STO RY ABOUT A LITTLE
KOALA BEAR
WHO LOST HIMSELF AND
WAS FOUND AGAIN
/
STORY BY
TIMOTHY KAY
DRAWINGS BY
■RUFUS MORRIS


BOBBIE RUBBERNOSE
BOBBIE RUBBERNOSE FALLS FROM HIS GUM TREE
HIGH up in a great, red gum tree, wedged between a big branch and the thick main trunk, was
what appeared from the ground to be a bundle of fluffy grey fur.
That was Katie Koala, the mother of Bobbie Rubbernose. She was sitting very still because she
was trying hard to have her morning forty winks. But she was finding it very hard to sleep because
Bobbie, her baby, would not stop fidgeting.
Bobbie was only two months old, and had not yet learnt to sleep most of the day like the older
bears, so that he could keep awake all night. Koala bears like the night-time, and do most of their
work, and eating, and playing after the sun goes down. Besides, Bobbie thought the world was such
an interesting place, even if he did live only up a gum tree, and to sleep the day away seemed to him
such a shame.
It was a warm day, and Bobbie found it very hot as he crouched in his mother’s pouch. Now
that he was so big his fur was already thick, and whilst that was lovely for a cold day, it sometimes
was a little warm in the hot weather. And for that reason Bobbie fidgeted while his mother was trying
to sleep.
Every now and then Katie would slowly place one of her front paws on Bobbie’s head and push
him down into her pouch, saying wearily:
"Oh, do be still!”
Then she would fall asleep again—until Bobbie once more popped out his little furry head and
shouted: Mummy! Mummy! I want to go climbing.” Then Katie would again wake up, and
sound very cross as she said: "Do be still!”
However, after a while Katie slept so very soundly that she ceased to notice Bobbie’s fidgets.
And that was when Bobbie, noticing that his mother was sound asleep, decided that he could get away
to go climbing before she should wake up and stop him. So, moving as gently and as quietly as he
could, Bobbie sneaked out of his mother’s pouch, and climbed up onto her neck.
Ah,” he said. "That’s much nicer. I wonder if I could find Daddy. I wish I could see him.”
He looked up and down the great tree and peered among its leafy branches and twigs. There
were lots and lots of koala bears there, nearly all of them sitting very still, holding tightly to a branch
and peacefully sleeping. It was not until his eyes looked up at the very topmost branch of the tree that
he saw his father, Danny Koala.




'Daddy! Daddy!” Bobbie called. "Wait for me, I’m coming up.”
But the wind was blowing so hard, making all the leaves and twigs rattle
together, and making such a loud noise that Danny, high up at the top of
the tree, could not hear Bobbie calling to him. That is why he did not
come down to help his little son climb up. So Bobbie began pulling himself
up the great trunk as well as he could. Although he was so young he was
quite a big baby. Sitting on the ground he would reach as high as your
knee. Baby koala bears grow very quickly, and quite soon become as big
But climbing was hard work for Bobbie’s arms and legs, for he
was so fat, and, of course, he had not done a great deal of it. After
climbing for quite a long time, he still seemed as far as ever from
his father, who was such a long way up in that very tall tree. The
wind was blowing so very hard, and that made climbing much more
difficult. The tree swayed backwards and forwards in a most
alarming way,
mother. She
Bobbie almost wished he had stayed with his
was always so strong, and took such great care
"'Better stay where you are until this wind stops blow-
ing,” said an old koala bear as she passed Bobbie on her way
down the tree. "'This is no weather for young bears like
you to be out alone in.”
But Bobbie only smiled. Just to show her that he
was not a bit scared of the old wind, he gave himself
another heave up, and another —and still another.
But at the last big heave up, just before he could dig
his sharp claws into the bark, a most terrific gust of
/ wind came along and almost blew the great tree
down. SSsshhhhh-swish! Shooooo
Phewwwww! it went, and before Bobbie could
grab hold of a twig to save himself, the nasty
old wind blew him right off and sent him
twirling like a thistle down among the
branches.


wX X// y w
" r / — s _ —' x /'
V" // f ''
% §0 s*' *, """/x J^
•. -v '*' —-*___v y ,
/ >/7


/ K,
Down, down, down, he fell tumble,
tumble, tumble bead over heels, and bump-
ing from branch to branch until he thought he
would never stop falling and come to the bottom.
And hard as he tried, he simply could not grab
hold of a branch with any one of his four paws.
And then Bang! Oouch!! 00-oooH!!!
When he opened his eyes Bobbie found
he had landed right bang onto the furry back
of a lovely big squirrel! And the squirrel didn’t
seem a bit surprised, nor was he the littlest bit
angry at being fallen upon like that, for he
yelled so that he could be heard above the
roaring of the wind: "Hang on to me. I’m get-
ting down from here.”
So Bobbie hung on as tightly as he could
to the long, strong fur on the squirrel’s back as
he raced down the trunk of the tree towards the
ground.
DOWN IN THE RABBIT WARREN
FTER they had been travelling for a little
■Lm- while across the ground and in and out of
blackberry bushes that tore at their fur Bobbie
called out to the squirrel: "W’here are we going,
please?”
Out of the wind,” puffed the squirrel. "I know a
nice sheltered place near here. Just you hang on. You’ll be
Just then the squirrel dived in among a great clump of
and suddenly, to Bobbie’s surprise, everything went dark.
wattles, and
There, said the squirrel as he came to a stop. "You can get
down now. The wind can’t reach us in here.”




' Thanks,” said Bobbie. "But I can’t see. Where are we?”
"In a rabbit warren,” replied the squirrel. "You’ll soon get used to the dark. Anyway, it is
safe. Outside there you’d be likely to have a tree fall on you in that wind.”
"But what about the rabbits?” asked Bobbie. "Won’t they mind?’ We have not been invited,
you know.”
But before the squirrel could answer, the Chief Rabbit came forward. By then Bobbie’s eyes
had got used to the darkness, and he could see that the rabbit was a very big fellow and herce-looking.
He seemed quite angry, too.
"What do you two want in here?” he asked —in such a rude way. "We are too busy to have
visitors to-day.”
"We are not visitors,” said the squirrel. "We are sheltering from the wind. My young friend
here, whose name is—er —humm —er ”
"Bobbie Rubbernose,” whispered Bobbie.
"Ah, yes —my young friend, Bobbie Rubbernose, has just been blown off his tree —a very high
tree it is, too. Of course, you can’t understand what it means to be blown off a tree. You never
climb trees, do you?”
No, replied the Chief Rabbit very coldly. "Of course we don’t climb trees. W’hat next!”
"Then we can hardly expect you to feel sorry for us,” said the squirrel.
Oh, I don’t know,” replied the Chief Rabbit. "Perhaps I can. I once fell down an old mine
shaft. It was quite a long way down, too. Anyway, now you are here, make yourselves at home. But
please don t get in our way. We are busy enlarging the warren.”
Thanks, said the squirrel. "As soon as the wind drops we’ll go.
That s right, said Bobbie. We shan’t bother you for long. Besides, my mother will be
getting anxious about me.”
That satisfied the Chief Rabbit, and so, having nothing else to do, Bobbie and the squirrel went
to sleep.
When they woke up the wind had gone.
SaiC * t^ie sc l yawning loudly and stretching himself, "I’ll be getting along now.
Good-bye. went * Bobbie, too, thought he had better go home, so he called out to the
Chief Rabbit: I m going now. Thank you for letting me stay.”


m ypjHP


Oh, that's alright,*' replied the Chief Rabbit. "Come again
some time. We shan’t mind —so long as you never stop us work-
ing. We’re busy people, you know. Well, good-bye. I hope you 11
find your way home safely Let me show you out.’’
BOBBIE DISCOVERS THAT HE IS LOST
ONCE out in the bright sunshine, Bobbie blinked hard, for it
dazzled his eyes after the darkness of the rabbit warren. He
didn’t know which way to go, and just could not remember where
his family’s tree was. All the big trees looked so alike, as he ran
about from one to the other. And what made it so much worse for
him, he could not see even one koala from whom to ask the way.
'That’s funny,” he said to himself. "There are usually so
many koalas about. Wherever can they all have gone to?”
So he continued his search for the tree that was his home.
But the more he looked the less near home did he seem to get.
Poor Bobbie. He grew more and more unhappy.
Oh, dear,'' he muttered with a sob. "Oh, dear, oh, dear!
I do believe I m lost. Now whatever shall I do?”
And while he was wondering what he should do, he began to cry. Oh, how he did cry, for he
was tired, and very, very miserable.
Just then a big Mammy Kangaroo came along.
"Hello,” she said to Bobbie. "What’s the matter?”
I m lost, sobbed Bobbie. "Nobody knows where I am.”
Oh, you poor little darling,” cried the kangaroo in a most kindly voice. "Come to me and
let me look after you. Just you hop up onto my back . . . there . . . that’s the way. Now hang on
tightly as you would on your own mummies back. That’s right. And now I’ll hop along with you
and we II see if we can find your people.”
Oh, thank you, said Bobbie, gratefully. "It’s very kind of you.” But before Bobbie could
say any more, the kangaroo let out a most awful yell. 000-oh!” she cried. "Oh, goodness,
gracious me! There s that dreadful hunter with his gun again.” And off she hopped as fast as she


.^k.
£* r*£¥L
j0t~**-- %t^S\
A A
jt MJ
I ’ ■ JBa v
L^/
W i / *■! \,
w - /jr
ll
w
v.
1
-A.
V,
\ 4^^^
m


could go, deep into the thickest part of the bush where the trees hid her from the hunter’s sharp eyes.
Not until she came to a big cave did the kangaroo stop for breath. "There!" she cried. "I think we’re
safe enough here. And now we had better have something to eat. Would you like me to collect
a few gum leaves for you?” "Yes, please,” answered Bobbie. "I am so hungry,”
So they had a nice meal together while Bobbie tried to tell his kind friend where his family lived.
But as he had never been away from home before he was not much good at telling one big gum tree
from another. Somehow all the big gum trees looked so much alike, and there were thousands and
thousands of them all about the cave where they were having their meal.
"Well, never mind trying to tell me,” said the kangaroo. "I know where there are a lot of koala
bears. And that, probably, is where you live. Now you hop right up onto my back once more and
make yourself comfortable again. Be sure to hold on tightly because I like to travel quickly.”
So off they went again. After a long time they came to a huge gum tree, in the branches of
which there were lots of koala bears, just as the kangaroo had said there were.
'There you are,” she said. "Now you’ll be alright, I’m sure. Just you climb up to where your
own people are, and if your mother isn’t among them, they will surely tell you where to find her.
Good-bye—and I hope you won’t be scolded for getting lost.” And off she hopped.
"Good-bye,’ Bobbie called after her. "And thank you for looking after me,” Then he began
to climb up into the tree where the koalas were. But when he came to where they were sitting, there was
none whom he knew. Every one was a complete stranger to him. Nor did any of them seem at all
pleased to see him.
"Oh, dear,” said Bobbie to himself as no one seemed to want to listen to him. "This isn’t my
tribe at all. I don’t seem to belong to anyone here. Oh, what shall I do?”
Then he began to cry. Oh, how he did cry. Have you ever heard a little koala bear crying?
You can’t help feeling sorry for them when they do, because it sounds just like a baby’s crying—a
baby whom no one loves. And Bobbie on that occasion must have sounded very sad, so sad, indeed,
that even the strange koalas were sorry.
Ah, you poor little darling," said one old mamma koala. "Don’t you worry, my pet. Come to
me and 111 see what I can do to help you.” Of course, Bobbie was very grateful, and was about to
climb over to where she sat when another mamma koala came up and said to her: "Oh, no you don’t,
my fine lady. I’m going to take care of this poor little boy. I did see him first.” And holding out her
arms to Bobbie she said: "You come to me, darling. I’ll see that no harm comes to you.”


v i
JSr i v ik
jB ' j t ' n .


Of course, poor Bobbie didn’t know
which one to go to. They both wished to help
him in his trouble, and as he was wondering
what to do next, the two mamma koalas began
to have a most awful quarrel, and it went on
for such a long time that Bobbie wondered
would they ever stop. Lots of the other koalas
gathered round, too, to see what all the fuss
was about. And when they discovered that it
was all about which was to look after Bobbie,
they said there was only one thing to do, and
that was to go to the Chief Koala of the tree
and let him decide which of them should have
him. And so they all climbed up to where the
wise old Chief sat, and asked him what to do.
"Well,” said the Chief, looking very
wise, "we can’t very well send Bobbie away,
because he might get lost again. And it would
be dreadful to be lost twice. And so, as neither
of you ladies is willing to give way to the other
in your desire to adopt the little stranger, I
think the best way to settle the matter is to
hold a contest.”
"Ah,” said the koalas. "That’ s a very wise
way of settling the matter. But what sort of a
contest?”
I think, went on the Chief, "that the best contest
high climb. Yes, that’s it! A high climb. I will give
will be a high
W Koto's, v
the little stranger into the care of the mammy koala who can climb
to the highest point in this tree.”
Everybody then, of course, had to agree to that, and they began to get ready for the contest.
But scarcely had they taken their places on the various branches from which to watch the mammies
climb, when there was a sudden alarm, and all the koalas started to scamper off as fast as they could
go. And soon, to his great surprise, Bobbie found himself left all alone in that big gum tree.


\
J
WB'‘ /
BOBBIE IS CAPTURED!
“TT THATEVER has happened?” Bobbie wondered. But he hadn’t to
T ▼ wonder for long, because just then he saw the cause of the alarm. It
was the hunter with his gun.
"Oh!” cried Bobbie. "Oh, dear, oh, dear! Why
taken me with them?” And then he began to cry again.
couldn’t they have
"800-hoo-ooo,” he
sobbed. "I’m f-f-frightened.” He was, too, poor little fellow. All he could
do was cry, and cry, and cry as he waited for the hunter with his gun to come
towards him. Bobbie closed his eyes as tightly as he could, and the next thing
he knew was
the hunter had grabbed him with both his big, strong hands!
But instead of it hurting Bobbie, the hunter very tenderly stroked the
soft fur of his head.
"There,” Bobbie heard the hunter say, and in such a kindly voice, too,
"I shan’t hurt you. Now just you stop crying, for I’m going to take you home
to my little children. They’ll make a pet of you and in no time you’ll be as
happy as a lark.” Then he held Bobbie firmly in his arm and set off for his
home.
"Well,” thought Bobbie as he settled down in the big pocket
that smelt of rabbits, "it could be worse. At least he doesn’t seem
to want to hurt me. In fact, he sounds quite a kindly man.”
It seemed such a long time before the hunter arrived at his
home. And Bobbie knew it was his home for he could hear the
glad cries of two children as they came running out to meet their
father.
"Guess what I’ve brought you?” Bobbie heard the father say.
"A ’possum?” asked a little boy.
"No, Jimmy,” said the hunter, "it’s not a ’possum. What’s
your guess, Agnes?”
"A wallaby?” asked the little girl.
"No,” replied the hunter, "it’s not a wallaby either. Give
it up?”


>Z 7^
’ r
§r i* l^--
?sii
kiJKr p*
_ r&o*
r
fe-
W- ■ 5 ?
w % mfl~ 1
isw
■-v iHP 1
tj f f
/
I f
« I
I I
It
It
\ ' l •. .
gf X p J
i faitfgfe
| V^.
%/ _
■w J. A
i




"Yes,” cried both children, "we give it up.
Tell us, Daddy.”
"A baby koala bear!” the father cried, and
with that he put his hand into his pocket and
pulled Bobbie out. "There,” he said, "isn’t he a
nice little chap? But be very gentle with him. He
is likely to feel a bit frightened until he gets used
to you.”
My, how pleased Jimmy and Agnes were with
Bobbie!
"Oh,” said Agnes, "what a lovely little
cuddly.”
"Isn’t his fur soft?” exclaimed Jimmy. "Let
me hold him.”
"Be careful, then,” said Agnes. "You know
how rough you are.”
"I’m not rough!” replied Jimmy. "Anyway,
I’m going to take him indoors and give him some
biscuits.”
"Silly!” said Agnes. "Koalas don’t eat bis-
cuits. They eat only gum leaves.”
"Gum leaves!” cried Jimmy. "You can’t live on gum
leaves. I ate one once and it was horrid. Tasted like medicine.”
"Well, then, you ask Daddy,” his sister replied
"I will, too,” said Jimmy. "Anyway, I’m going to give him a biscuit first,
and you see if he doesn’t like it.”
So they went into the house, and in a few minutes the children were trying to coax Bobbie to
eat biscuits and drink some milk.
Agnes, of course, was right when she said that koalas eat only gum leaves. Nor do they ever
drink anything. That, of course, is most unusual, too. But it is quite true. And so, when Bobbie
found a saucer of milk placed in front of him, he didn’t know what it was for.


"Perhaps he has never tasted milk before," said Agnes.
"Well, then, try him with a biscuit," said her brother.
"I don’t suppose he’s ever seen a biscuit, either," said Agnes, but she broke one into little pieces
and popped one into Bobbie’s mouth. And Bobbie liked it! In fact, he liked it so much that he
gobbled it up and put out his little paw for some more.
"There," said Jimmy with pleasure. "What did I tell you? He does like biscuits."
"Well, now let’s see if he will drink a little milk. Perhaps he will if we give him a drop at a time
so that he can get used to the taste of it," Agnes said. So, dipping her finger-tip in the milk, she
dabbed a little drop on Bobbie’s tongue. At first Bobbie was not sure whether he liked it or not, but
after a little while he stooped down and, to the children’s delight, began to lap up the milk just as a
kitten does.
After that Bobbie felt quite happy with his little friends, and was soon very much at home with
them, for they were as kind as kind could be.
BOBBIE FALLS SICK AND
GOES WALKABOUT
UNFORTUNATELY, Bobbie became too fond
of lots of nice, sweet biscuits, and saucer after
saucer full of lovely fresh milk, heavy with cream.
And although there were some beautiful big blue
gum trees right in the garden, he never troubled to
climb one and have a meal of gum tips.
"That little fellow is getting so fat," said the
hunter after Bobbie had been with him and his chil-
dren for a few days, "that he’ll never want to climb
a tree again. He’ll be too heavy to pull himself up."
That made Bobbie, for the first time since he
lost himself, think of his mother and father.
They,’ he thought to himself, "will be climbing up
and down gum trees and eating lots of tender little
gum tips." And then he remembered that he really
didn’t belong where he was, and that milk and biscuits


..... ■•. gyPffip| sjj|
i '“Vay't* » ?
- '; : Ht . jP I
>SVSNV^|^^


were not proper food for any koala bear. The thought
made him feel quite sad. He wondered did his parents
miss him very much, and were they still looking for
him? Of course, it might just have been home-sickness
—or it might have been too much biscuits and milk.
But all of a sudden Bobbie began to feel ill. He even
grew tired of Agnes and Jimmy, who were always
playing with him and cuddling him. Then he began to
look sick, and when the children noticed how quiet he
was, they became very worried. Ahd then they cuddled
him all the more —as if they hoped they would cure
him with even more kindness. But it only made Bobbie
worse, and he became more and more ill, poor little
fellow, and more and more unhappy. He wanted his
mother so badly, and, oh, how he longed to see his Daddy again, and to eat some really nice, tender
gum tips. And he thought: "Why not? This is no life for a koala. If only I could climb up a gum
tree and once more taste some gum tips, I do believe I should feel well once more. I think I’ll go away
and see if I can find Mummy and Daddy. I’m sure they must be most worried about me.”
So the next day, when the children were away at school, Bobbie sneaked away from the hunter’s
home and made his way as quickly as he could into the bush. And when he came to a great big, blue
gum tree he said to himself: "Ah, Ido believe I feel better already. How tender and juicy those gum
tips are looking. I feel lam going to enjoy my first really nice meal for days.”
Slowly he climbed his way up into the upper branches of the tree. It was hard work for poor
Bobbie. For one thing he really was a sick boy, and for another he had grown so fat that his heavy
weight was almost too much for his young arms to pull up. But he managed to reach the top of the
tree, although it took him quite a long time, and soon was nibbling away at the tenderest gum tips and
quite enjoying them.
When he had eaten his fill he fell asleep, and dreamed happily of once more meeting his
parents in the family tree. He must have slept very soundly and for a long time, for when he woke
up he was feeling much better.
"Ah,” he said to himself, "this is good. I feel almost well again. Now I’ll set off and see if I
can find my way home. Although,” he added ruefully, "I haven’t the least idea where to look.
Anyhow, I’ll try. Perhaps I’ll meet someone who knows where I live.”


p ■*»
£ 11'. -
I m
I V-' r >* > ; w -'.
' ■;
* \'/<
I * I
fe:- . Ji
ijiit'K 4 ■ < : S5aSt
**?» j# "i*. 5
& ■ -
- rr iiM
• • Vvi.Uv>.®S
,*fe|
MM 9 y jw
.6 ;#-*&


He was about to begin his way down the tree when, overhead, he heard a swishing sound that
seemed strange to him. Wondering what it could be, he looked up, and there, trying to alight on a
branch close to him, was a huge golden eagle! And what a fierce looking eagle it was, too, staring
right into Bobbie’s eyes as much as to say: "If only I could get hold of you, my fine, fat little koala,
my family and I would have a lovely dinner to-night!”
For a moment Bobbie was too scared to know what to do. Luckily the eagle was not able to
pounce upon him because of the branches that were in his way. But Bobbie felt that it would try hard
to catch him, so tearing a twig from the branch at his side, he tried to shoo the eagle off.
But that only made the eagle angry, which made him look fiercer than ever. And the more
Bobbie tried to shoo him off, the closer the eagle came. Bobbie became quite terrified and decided
there was only one thing to do, and that was to cry for help—if there was anyone about who might
hear him.
So —"Help!” he cried. "Oh, ho, help!!!” And he kept on yelling until he was out of breath.
Of course, his cries just made the eagle more anxious than ever to grab him and carry him off to his
nest. But still Bobbie managed to keep him at a distance by threatening him with his twig of gum
leaves. Goodness knows what might have happened to Bobbie if the eagle had been as fierce as he
looked! But he was an artful old eagle who knew that if he waited long enough, the baby bear would
wear himself out and soon become too tired to fight. And then he would just reach out with his great
wings and, grabbing Bobbie in his sharp claws, fly away with him.
However, Bobbie’s cries had been heard, for all of a sudden there was a noisy rustling among
the branches of the tree as a whole lot of angry koala bears came hurrying up to his aid. And what
angry noises they did make, snarling and barking in a most frightening way. It so alarmed the eagle
that he spread his wings and flew off.
Dear, oh, dear,” puffed Bobbie as he watched the eagle disappear in the distance. "That was a
narrow escape. I was beginning to feel sure he would
get me.”




BOBBIE IS FOUND AGAIN
THEN he turned round to see who his rescuers were, and, to his joy, he saw his own mother, Katie
Koala, right behind him.
"Why!” exclaimed his mother, "it’s my little
Bobbie! Wherever have you been all this time?”
Oh, Mummy, ’ said Bobbie, leaping onto his \
mother s back, "I’ve been everywhere with a
squirrel, and a kangaroo, and rabbits, and a hunter
with a gun, and some children. I’ve had a most
exciting time. And I’ve eaten things called
biscuits.”
"Never mind what you’ve eaten,” replied
his mother. Think of the worry you’ve
given your father and me. We thought
you’d been carried off by a fox and eaten.
I really don’t know what your father will
say when he sees you. He’ll most likely
be very angry when he finds you
merely went and lost yourself.”
Just then Bobbie’s father came
climbing up. And when he saw his
little son all safe and well, he
looked very stern.
"Where have you been all
this time?” he asked. "Ex-
plain yourself, you young
scamp.”
„"I I — er 1 got
lost,” stammered Bobbie. For j
a moment he thought his '
father was going to spank <
him. "I really couldn’t help


X x
V A
I Jj|B||k \ I
\ V
\ tBwN
V|P
,, /,■ -, \Uf\y , ui
C' \j \ \. NC \ // t\
% W \\ )Vj/ 1 7 /' HA
\V i j 1 \ jk ( /> / I
\ / \ \ / \ V, ',1 .*■*.
\ / 1 \ / \ I W m
' \ \ i / ; • Ai
- M | 'j ( I (/ / \ A
i'> 1 1 ! / /
' \ v t


it, Daddy. That strong wind blew me out of the tree onto a squirrel’s
back. He took me into a rabbit warren to shelter from the wind, and
when I came out of it I couldn’t find my way home,”
'That’s what comes from mixing up with squirrels,” mumbled
his fathet "You never know where they might take you. Anyway, let
that be a lesson to you. Next time the wind blows hard, dig your
claws deeper into the tree and hold on tightly. And, what’s more,
keep close to your mother. If you hadn’t sneaked away from
her pouch while she was having her sleep, you wouldn’t
have got blown out of the tree.”
V
Bobbie said he was sorry, and that he wouldn’t get
lost again if he could help it, and once again that little *
koala family were all happy together.
But just as they were planning to hold a nice, jolly
party to show how glad they all were at Bobbie’s safe
return, one of the koalas at the top of the tree yelled out:
' Look out. Scamper off, everyone. Here comes that
hunter again, with his gun, too!”
"'Oh, dear,” said Bobbie. "I am so tired of all these
scares. Why can’t that hunter leave us folks of the bush alone?”
"'Oh, my goodness!” cried Bobbie’s mother. "If it’s not one
thing after us poor koala bears, it’s another. Come on, every-
body. Down to the ground and hide in the blackberry bushes.
Quickly—here he comes!”
That started a great hullaballoo. All the koalas wanted to
be the first on the ground and to hide from the hunter, and there
was an awful rush to scamper down the tree. Bobbie felt far too
tired to push his way through the crowd of bears about him, and
by the time the tree was almost cleared of them, Bobbie saw the
hunter coming quickly closer.
Why, cried Bobbie to his parents, "he’s my friend. Don’t
run away. He won’t hurt any of us —not if he knows I’m here,
anyway.”




"Rubbish!” declared his mother. "Why, the man has a gun. And you never can trust a
hunter who has a gun. I know”
"They only carry them to shoot us bears with,” said his father. "Come on, don’t waste time
arguing. Hurry down to where you will be safe.”
He didn t shoot me, said Bobbie, "I liked him. He was really very kind. He’s got two
lovely children of his own. They liked me, too. Let me go and talk to him, Mother.”
"That might be a very good idea,” said one of the very old koalas. "If what that boy of yours
says is true, he might save all our lives merely by asking that hunter to go away.”
"Why don’t you go yourself?” asked Katie.
"Because I don’t know the man,” replied the old koala. "Bobbie does —or at least he says
he does.”
"And so he does,” said Katie.
"Well, then, send the lad to talk to the hunter,”
another koala said. "If something isn’t done quickly
our lives aren’t worth a handful of gum nuts.”
So several of the bears huddled together with
Bobbie’s parents, and held a hurried council to see if
they should send Bobbie down to ask the hunter to go
away home. But while they were trying to make up
their minds whether it would be safe to send Bobbie
down all by himself, the lad had slipped away unnoticed,
and was quickly scurrying over the ground towards the
hunter.
When at last the koalas looked up and saw Bobbie


really and truly talking to the hunter, they were very surprised. For they all believed that hunters
shoot every koala they see. But this hunter, they saw, instead of shooting Bobbie Rubbernose,
stooped down and very gently picked him up.
"Goodness!” exclaimed Bobbie’s mother. "Look at the boy. He’s not the least bit scared!”
"Well, I declare!” said Bobbie’s father. "The brave lad —he takes after his father. That’s
the sort of son to have.”
All the rest of the koala bears agreed that Bobbie was a little hero. And one said to another:
"We might all have been shot by now but for Bobbie Rubbernose. Just look at him talking with that
hunter as if he was an old friend.”
As they watched they saw the hunter gently stroking Bobbie’s fur, and then, patting him on
the head, put him down on the ground again as he turned to make his way back home. And as he
went he waved a most friendly farewell.
When Bobbie came back to his people again they were all as pleased with him as they
could be.
Everyone wanted to pat him and say: "Thank you, Bobbie!” And the old Chief Koala of the
tree said:
"To-night we shall hold a great, big party for Bobbie Rubbernose.”
And they did. When the moon came up that night the koala bears were coming from all parts
to join in the party to Bobbie Rubbernose who had made the hunter with his gun promise never
again to shoot any koala bears. And every visitor brought a special little bunch of the very choicest
gum tips for Bobbie.
Of course, Bobbie was very happy, but he was very modest, too. For when he thanked every-
one, in a nice little speech, for coming to the party, he said:


x


PRODUCTION
"We also have to thank those who helped me when I was lost. First there was the squirrel who
carried me on his back into the shelter of the rabbit warren. Then there was the Chief Rabbit who
allowed me to stay and shelter from the wind. Then came the kangaroo who tried to find the way
home for me. And I think we might even thank that old eagle who tried to capture me for his
dinner, for if it had not been for him I should not have cried so loudly for help, and then you would
never, perhaps, have found me as you did. And so you see,” finished Bobbie very wisely, "every-
thing happens for the best.”


V
Date Due
jaT '
i
i
}iL — 1
kw
) 1508 01469854 7


* &
; _
T * - ■ " ?? _ _ ~ * “ 5
. -i? * t ■'•■ |. >*
*
. ■ *
v*
