

Body Whine !
A TREATISE ON THE JARDINIAN THEORY.


THE BODY-LINE BOWLER'S NIGHTMARE.


BODY WHINE
A TREATISE ON THE JARDINIAN THEORY
CARTOONS BY
R. W. BLUNDELL
WITH A FEW WORDS BY
V. M. BRANSON
COPYRIGHT
RIGBY LTD.
16 GRENFELL STREET and IMPERIAL PLACE
ADELAIDE SOUTH AUSTRALIA


Wholly set up and printed in Australia by
THE MAIL NEWSPAPERS LTD.
135 Currie Street Adelaide, for the Publishers
Rigby Ltd. 16 Grenfell Street, and
Imperial Place, Adelaide.
1933.
Registered at the General Post Office Adelaide for Transmission through the post
as a Book.


PREFACE
THIS Book has been written and illustrated for the new regime of cricket; the batter, bruise and
bust cricket, which has been thrust upon us. This travesty of an erstwhile noble sport demands
new technique to master it, and all young cricketers with Test aspirations would do well to
study this book and follow the totally erroneous hints given. You will probably never read
a book like it again as it reveals the inner thoughts of an unknown, but notorious fast bowler
and takes the readers from babyhood to the ultimate goal of all cricketers, the Test Match.
Time was, when cricket was a cairn and dignified game, played in a friendly spirit between two
sets of sportsmen, but to-day it has developed into a grim struggle wherein batting and bowling are
practically disregarded and one team endeavours to frighten the other out. The new weapon of attack
is the old-time fast bowler, transformed into a leg theory bowler, who boasts of how many times he
can make the batsmen flinch.
The body-line plan is simple. In the past, if an occasional ball flew towards the batsman he
had two courses open to him, either he could duck or protect himself with his bat. Now, however,
six men cluster around him on the leg side and he has no alternative but to duck, for if be uses his bat
to protect his body the chances are that he will be caught.
We find after years of research that all previous books on cricket dealt mainly with batting,
bowling, fielding and records. It is now not sufficient to be able to wield a polished bat, to execute a
classic leg glance or a neat on-drive, but one must also possess at least a rudimentary knowledge of the
art of self-defence. Lectures should be attended on the Jardinian Theory, on the essentials of gentlemanly
barracking and on the science of literary expression. With this knowledge the qualified student should
estimate the economic result of England going off the cricket standard.
Consequent on this change of tactics we have persuaded a body-liner to present his knowledge in
abbreviated form, embellished with suitable illustrations for the benefit of cricket lovers of the past,
present and future.


THE FAST BOWLER WHO CLUNG TO THE BALL


BODYWHINE
I would like to state before commencing any hints on fast bowling that I resent the term “body-
line” being used in connection with my fast leg theory. I affirm with all sincerity that I have never
bowled a ball at a batsman in cold blood —well, hardly ever. My procedure is to hurl the ball short
at 96 miles per hour, about a foot outside the leg stump rising to a height between the batsman’s
abdomen and his eyebrows. The rest I leave entirely to the batsman. He may jump to the left, in
which case he will probably be too slow and be hit, or he may leap to the right and suffer a similar fate.
The only other avenues of escape are to lie down hastily as the bowler commences his run, or if he is
lucky, he may push the ball away with his bat and be caught by one of my leg fieldsmen.
" — TO LIE DOWN HASTILY — "


If I were really a vindictive bowler and there were not any barrackers present I could knock as
man’s teeth out five times out of six. I would like to bowl against a team of blindfolded Australian
journalists before a crowd of Australian barrackers. bound, and of course gagged. Without wishing to
commercialise the great game of cricket, I am sure I could collect a substantial commission from the local
dentists after this match, and I would have the satisfaction of knowing that if the press gnashed their
teeth over body-line bowling, they would be gnashing false teeth !
I am setting down below my complete averages (not first class) and I hope my readers will find
them sufficiently interesting to absolve me from the charge of boasting.
Overs, 900 Bruises, 2,000 Retired Hurt, 40 Hospital Cases, 20 Morgue, 2 Wickets, 62
Average, 20.
Three points are worthy of note in connection with my bowling, and I have given careful thought
to the compilation of these, so that I might clear the air and crush for ever that dire term “body-line
bowling.”
1. My leg theory bowling is not body-line bowling.
2. My leg theory bowling is not more physically dangerous to the batsmen than boxing, wrestling,
football or bowls.
3. It is less dangerous because I always let the batsmen know I am going to hit them by putting
six men on the leg side.
If any discrepancy is found between points one and three the indulgent reader must attribute it
to my inexperience as an author.
It is really remarkable how cricket improves one’s literary skill, for although this is my first book
it has created heated discussions among Lords, gentlemen and Australian barrackers.


I am sure that many years hence my book will become a classic along with Bill Shakespeare and
•Charlie Dickens —or was it Chaplin? Immediately on completion of this book I intend putting it into
blank verse, for which my mind appears singularly suitable. If only Wagner were alive, what a marvel-
lous symphony he could compose on the beauty of my long run to the wicket. He would call it
'Movement in A Minor." I can almost see his fingers coming down on the bass notes as I thunder
up to the wicket and an occasional treble to represent the squeaking of my suffering boots.
But my readers will have had enough of the day dreams of the great and will want some concrete
bints for success in cricket.


" — TAKE TEN PACES BACK AND HURL HIS RATTLE AT HIM—”


I cannot stress too much the necessity of commencing young in the making of a Test cricketer.
The Test player of to-morrow will need to be brought up with Spartan simplicity to withstand the
rigours of the game. Parents must avoid spoiling a child if it is intended to make a cricketer of him,
for the first fast bowler he meets will soon spoil him. Listen for the first word he speaks and if it
resembles the cry “owz-at” the proud father has a born cricketer for a son or the baby has the wind. Right
from twelve months he should be disciplined to stand up to punishment. If the family live in a two-
storey dwelling, the boy should be lured to the first floor and his father, whilst pointing to an imaginary
spider on the ceiling, should push him heavily in the back and observe his reaction to the tumble down
the stairs. This plan is particularly suitable for twins for there is another one to go on with anyway.
As soon as the boy is sufficiently hardened by this treatment he should have his first practice.
Seat the youngster on the floor, take ten paces back and hurl his rattle at him. If he takes his medicine
like a batsman continue his training, but if he dissolves into tears make him a footballer or a boxer,
or initiate him in the much gentler art of wrestling. If he progresses at the last named sport and some-
one has him writhing in a Boston Crab or groaning in a Mexican toe hold the parents should cheer him
up by saying: “Well, my boy you might have met Larwood/’
When the boy reaches school age make his tests more drastic. At the tea table, if his glance
should wander, throw an enamel plate at him and he soon will be dodging like a veteran. Any attempt
at returning a cup and saucer should be severely discouraged, unless, of course, this is the usual procedure
in the domestic arrangements. Many well-known cricketers will disagree with this scheme as it would
be such a bad example for the wife.
In the past when a boy committed a mean act, his father would say in shocked tones —“That’s
not cricket,” but to-day if he should pick up a brickbat and hurl it at his playmate and miss, it is then
it should be said “That’s not cricket.”


The young cricketer must rise at dawn and practise with a punchball, not, as it may seem at
first glance, to be able to punch with vigour, but to learn to receive with equanimity a blow in the face.
If, after long practice the boy should become too adept at ducking and dodging he should stand quite still
and take a few in the nose or ear, for the cricketer of the future will not be famous for his clear eye and
springy step, but will be known by his cauliflower ear, broken nose or housemaid's knee.
" — TO RECEIVE WITH EQUANIMITY A BLOW IN THE FACE—”
For a change the aspiring junior should take a few lessons in tap dancing, for woe betide the
batsman who is not quick on his feet. It would be sad if bis remains had to be scraped off the pitch
and removed for burial. In such a case three stumps would make an appropriate tombstone, inscribed
with the letters: “R.1.P.,” which being interpreted mean ‘Resting in Pieces.”


After Tap Dancing and Punch Ball are mastered, practice should be indulged in of running about
the house with crash helmet and body pads on. If the house contains a good heavy set of medieval
armour a number of fast sprints clad in this would be excellent training. I have no doubt that this will
take the place of flannels for cricketing attire, as being much safer and more productive of runs. Think
of the leg byes that could be recorded as the ball bounds off the steel visor to the fence. With a neat
twist of the head even a six might be scored off a fast bowler.
A clever captain, however, would soon put his slow bowler on, equipped with a tin opener, or
furnish the wicket keeper with a screwdriver and thus encompass the undoing of the batsman.
It would be inadvisable to interfere with the student’s school curriculum by adding subjects of
cricket value, but I venture to recommend two courses to take up at night school. The first of these is
the ambulance class where special attention would be given to the procedure on meeting with a serious
accident. No captain of a team worthy of his salt would go on the field without his first aid outfit or
without a number of doctors and nurses—particularly nurses —present.
Stretcher bearing can be learnt in this class and the pupil would do well to take his place in the
stretcher in order to discover the most comfortable position in which to lie.
The other subject for study is English literature, and a course of typewriting is essential. Both
of these will be indispensable when writing the inevitable book on cricket.
All this strenuous training should be interspersed with a certain amount of recreation. If within
easy distance of a beach, a visit to the sideshows would be amply repaid, for the student could take his
place among the Aunt Sallys and cocoanut shies. The experience will be invaluable when facing a
frenzied fast bowler, driven crazy by sore feet caused through trampling on the pitch, which he does
for the benefit of the leg theory bowler at the other end.


It would be advisable at about 16 years of age to join a well-known cricket club and commence
actual practice of England’s national game, or maim as it is likely to be called. A very weighty decision
has to be made at this stage as to whether the junior is to become a professional or remain an
amateur, the difference being that a professional is paid a fixed sum for his services and the amateur
receives considerably more for his, indirectly.
If a man by the name of Higgins is a professional he is called plain Higgins, or even 'iggins, but
if he retains his amateur status he receives the title of Mr. Higgins and has to spend a lot of his allowance
on top hats and spats.
The secretary of any reputable club should have a Taxi available for the team to take them to
the cricket ground as the barrackcrs of opposing teams arc said to be very unmannerly. If a member of the
team missed the taxi and is forced to walk to the oval he will run the risk of having offensive remarks
thrown at him. Vulgar Australians, we are told, followed a dignified English captain about the town
hurling insulting remarks in his fastidious ears. These brutes averaged eight years in age and their most
offensive remark, as far as can be ascertained, was: “Give us yer autograph, mister.” The reason why
this gentleman came to Australia was not to make runs or take wickets, but to develop the Jardinian
theory, which successfully broke the hearts and heads of the Australians. Everywhere he went throughout
Australia he seemed to tread on someone’s toes, even including his fast bowler, who consequently became
famous for his bad feet and spent almost as much time changing his boots as he did in bowling.
The barracking is one of the worst features of cricket in Australia. No one is safe from the
raucous voices from the hill. I used to think it rather amusing when the crowds exercised their wits
on the Australians, or even my team-mates, but it was when they turned their attention to me that the
cricket boots pinched. The English barracker only barracks the opposing team and this never worried
me very much. He, too, has not such a loud voice nor the faculty of making such relevant, if caustic,
remarks as the Australian.


" — TO ERECT SPECIAL BARRACKERS’ TOWERS — "
Several suggestions have been made to overcome the annoyance of unseemly noise at the Test
matches. One is to erect special barrackers’ towers around the oval from which they could shout to their
heart’s content without disturbing the players. Another was to have neatly uniformed page boys posted
at vantage points aroung the pickets. Any remarks which the barrackers wish to make will be whispered
to the boy who will proceed to ring a bell to stop play. Approaching the object of the spectator’s
annoyance at the double he will deliver the shaft ofwit and receive the reply which he will take back to
the barracker.


" — NEATLY UNIFORMED PAGE BOYS POSTED AROUND THE PICKETS—”
The third, last and perhaps best suggestion was made by a popular (?) English captain. It
would be interesting to know how many gallons of midnight oil and how many yards of wet towelling
were used while framing this remarkable plan. It was that a board be placed outside the oval reading;
"In the event of any barracking the play will be stopped for half-an-hour.” What an opportunity for
the team batting on a wet wicket!. By the judicious bribing of a few friends the game could be held
up for a week.
The main objection to this idea is that though it was framed to abolish barracking it would only
succeed in abolishing the spectators.
(Continued on Page 22.)


MR. JARDINE’S SUGGESTION WOULD BE POPULAR WITH BUSINESS MEN.


THE “BUMPER” HITS BACK (PART 1).


THE “BUMPER” HITS BACK (PART 2).


If all methods of limiting barracking are unsuccessful there will be nothing else for the English-
men to do but to import an Australian to give lessons to the M.C.C. Voice tests and language
examinations would fit them to compete with the noisy Hillite on even terms and with their inimitable
(thank Goodness) sense of humour they might reach an excellence that would astonish the world.
To return to the young man whom we left proceeding to the practice ground in a taxi. On
arrival there, he proceeds to the dressing room and introduces himself to the captain who furnishes him
with a modern cricketer’s uniform, consisting of crash helmet, shoulder pads, chest protectors, hip and
kidney pads and a first aid outfit. After donning these he pads up and taking his bat in one hand and
his courage in the other he sallies forth to the nets. There is stationed a mechanical robot which has
been geared to bowl at approximately 150 miles an hour and the cricketer prepares for the worst. With
a whirling noise the arm of the robot spins around and launches a ball down the pitch. The best thing
to do at the first attempt is to scream and fall to the ground. Before the mechanical man has time to
wind up again flee to the dressing room and hide under the table. After several practice nights, however,
the more venturesome batsman will essay a shot or two to leg. If he connects all is well, but if not,
he is carried off without ceremony to the ambulance and replaced by another victim.
After batting practice a modern method of training is adopted, which has the double purpose of
increasing the stamina and improving the judgment. The apparatus for this consists of revolving flails
about three feet from the ground and the intending batsman stands in the way of these and jumps or
ducks until he is struck.
The merit of a batsman under this scheme depends entirely on how many ducks he can make.
These are more valuable than centuries and much less dangerous.
At the other end of the ground the prospective bodyline bowler is undergoing intensive coaching.
Trainers with tape measure, finding the ideal fourteen pace run; small boys on step ladders measuring
the height of bumpers; technical experts computing the speed of the ball at impact with the body; all give
such an air of science that would strike terror into the hearts of the rival clubs.


" — TO IMPORT AN AUSTRALIAN TO GIVE LESSONS—”


" — A MODERN METHOD OF TRAINING IS ADOPTED—”
A dummy figure tied to a pole provides an admirable target for the fast bowlers. They attempt
to knock as much stuffing from the dummy as they can in as short a time as possible. A score board
records the ratio of hits to misses.
All the training would give the young cricketer inspiration and an appreciation of the higher
things in life. I have no doubt that, by careful attention to my hints and assiduous practice on the
lines set down, almost any keen lad can approach the standard of Test Cricket.
In conclusion, I should have something to say about the older cricketer, as up to the present I
have dealt almost exclusively with the juvenile stages. lam afraid, however, that such is the arduous
nature of present-day cricket, there will be few able-bodied survivors of over twenty-five years. The
present trend of thought among the veterans is to give up the game with the laurels, gained with off
theory bowling, thick upon them.


Personally, if leg theory, with a packed field is abolished, I shall retire from the game. I think
I can take credit for discovering the most destructive attack in modern cricket in rather a novel way.
I was an employee at a woodyard at the time and was delivering a sack of coal to a suburban dwelling.
Hearing a noise inside I pushed open the kitchen door just in time to see the man of the house protecting
himself with outflung arm from a saucepan which his enraged spouse had thrown at him. His small
son leaped to take the catch before the utensil reached the ground. It would be bad luck to have this
theory banned after I had applied such ingenuity in adapting this to bowling.
If I am forced to give up cricket I shall have an opportunity to take up the older English game
of bowls and increase my bodyline with numerous visits to the club house.
" — TO KNOCK AS MUCH STUFFING FROM THE DUMMY AS THEY CAN —”


" — DISCOVERING THE MOST DESTRUCTIVE ATTACK IN MODERN CRICKET —”


A FORMER BODY-LINER PLAYS BOWLS


A BODY-LINER’S NIGHTMARE.
I had supped that evening, not wisely, but too well, on succulent fish and chips. In three days
I would be engaged in a Test Match and perhaps this preyed on my mind. Be that as it may, I had
thrown the proverbial clock out, wound the cat and retired to my bed. No sooner had I dropped off to
sleep than wild dreams surged through my overcharged brain.
It was the Sixth Text Match, and I had been selected as the opening bowler. From early
morning thousands of people surged to the ground shepherded this way and that by vigilant mounted
police. An armed guard called for me at eleven o' clock and escorted me amid cat-calls and hooting to
the dressing room. There, bevies of trainers and ambulance men and undertakers thronged, jostling
each other with ghoulish delight as they thought of the slaughter to come.
The captain of my side lost the toss and punctually at five minutes to twelve our team ran on to
the field throwing a ball from one to the other. The batsmen came to the wickets and took block. I
measured out my run and prepared to bowl, but to my horror I found that a heavy ball and chain had
become attached to my ankle. With increasing dismay I realised that in my hand I held a ping-pong
ball and to make matters worse one batsman was clad in armour and the other was completely encircled
in used motor tyres so that nothing more than the tip of his nose could be seen.
For two solid hours I struggled bravely up the wicket and bowled while the runs piled up until I
thought the scoring board could not hold any more.
Sweat poured from my tired body, when the captain mercifully called for the third round of
drinks. Catching my ball and chain over my arm I hobbled to the dressing room, where the village
smithy stood. He filed the encumbrance from my leg and securing a leather ball, I dashed on to the
ground like a giant refreshed.
Taking my famous run I commenced to skittle the opposition’s bodies like ninepins. I secured
the first two batsmen’s wickets just as they reached the century. Increasing my speed with every ball
I accounted, in some way or another, for almost every wicket. Trainers and doctors rushed hither and
thither dispatching patients and bodies by ambulance and motor hearse, but just as the last cricketer fell
the bombshell dropped. I was arrested That night I spent in a cell, while a vast concourse of people stared
at me through the bars.


“RETIRED DEAD”


The trial did not take long. Without leaving the box the Jury shook their heads and the Judge
with a very serious air donned his black cap. I was hurried away and prepared for the zero hour.
All my past misdeeds, or as many of them as possible in the time, rose up before me in a ceaseless
procession. Goom! how I suffered in those hours before my lonely walk from the cell to the trap.
The warders mumbled their sympathy and commenced to adjust my head gear. With a gesture
of disdain I brushed it aside and waited for the end. Suddenly I commenced to fall and then—and then
(thank Heavens), I woke up!
SIXTH TEST MATCH.
AUSTRALIA.
First Innings—
Hitts, b. A. Bodyliner 100
Batts, b. A. Bodyliner 100
Knox, retired hurt
Sloggs, retired dead
Googlie, ran out (hurriedly)
Cutts, retired 105° (Clinical Temperature)
Snix, refused to bat
Drives, ran out (Screaming)
Bowles, stayed at home
Tipps, not out
Quailes, absent
Sundries 40
Total 240
Bowling—
A. Bodyliner 2 for 100
Others 0 for 140
Play stopped, owing to the arrest of A. Bodyliner.


“RAN OUT (SCREAMING)"


AN EYE FOR AN EYE AND A TOOTH FOR A TOOTH.


THE MAN WHO HOOTED AT LORDS.


THE BODY-LINE BOWLER DEVELOPS A CONSCIENCE


THE TEN COMMANDMENTS OF CRICKET.
C. Thou shalt not barrack, but thou mayst abuse in the press yea, verily, thou mayst write books wherein
thou runneSt down thine opponents.
C, Thou shall not kill, but merely batter and bruise, yea, of a truth, shalt thou pound the batsman in the
ribs.
C. Thou shalt not show mercy, but must extend thy leg tactics even if thou hast struck thine enemy thrice
in the Mary that is little.
C, Thou shalt have pauses, wherein long drinks are consumed, which incenseth the barrackers, but which
giveth thy fast bowler his rest.
c. Thou shalt not flinch, but if struck on the right cheek thou shalt accommodatingly turn the left cheek.
C. Thou shalt honour the M.C.C. and bow down before them, for their decrees reach to the uttermost parts
of the earth.
C, Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's wicket, but thou mayest covet his scalp to hang in thy wigwam.
C. Thou shalt not smite the umpire for he is a just man Feed him with honeyed words for he will repay
you by giving thine enemy out L.B.W.
C, Thou shalt not wear false whiskers for the barrackers will think thee chairman of the M.C.C. and tear
them asunder.
C, Thou shalt be initiated into the mysteries of the L.B.W.—Look Both Ways Club that thy days may
be long in the land of the Aussies.


In a sincere effort to stamp out body-line bowling the Australian Board of Control suggested
a new rule, enabling the umpire to call a no-ball if be thought the bowler intended to injure the batsman.
As this rule would make the umpire’s task extremely difficult, we would like to suggest that an
Indian Fakir be imported to read the Bowler’s mind as he runs to the wicket. If our dusky friend sus-
pects evil intentions he would ring a bell. To eliminate all chances of injustice the match could be
adjourned and a conference held, at which the accused would be given full opportunity to defend him
self.


A RETIRED CRICKETER.


HE DID DUCK. BUT MAYBE HE PAUSED TOO LONG.


Published by Rigby Limited, 16 Grenfell St., Adelaide, South Aust.
