

BOER WAR
MEMORIES
BY
L ieut.-Colonel F. A. B. DALY C.B.


[?]


BOER WAR MEMORIES.




PRELUDE.
Many years ago, when I was in the British Royal
Army Medical Corps, I was asked to write a record
of my experiences at Dundee, where I was officially
ordered to remain to look after the dangerously
wounded officers and men, and thus I fell under
the control of the Boer Forces.
However, I was excused doing so, as I pointed
out that such a report might cause jealousy amongst
my brother officers. Also I stated I knew that very
excellent reports had been submitted by the P.M.O.
of the war. It was then suggested that I should
write an account after I left the service, as I was
the only one who could do so.
Now, as I have reached the age of 80 years my
span of life must be limited. I am now recording
events which have always been vividly fixed in my
memory.


Published with the permission of
Sir R. J. G. C. Paterson, K.8.E.,
C. 8.. Deputy Under-Secretary of
State, 14th August, 1935.
Ist Edition. May, 1935.
2nd Edition, November, 1935.


Boer War Memories
Personal Experiences
By
Lieut.-Colonel F. A. B. DALY C.B.
Fellow Royal College of Surgeons, Ireland;
Bachelor of Surgery and Dip. State
Medicine, University of Dublin.
Late R.A.M.C. British
Forces.
On the Early Stages of the
Boer War, 1899-1900.
Picture of Swedish Mission Chapel
From the “Illustrated London News,”
and their published report,
dated Feb. 10, 1900.
Picture of Trophies
presented to Australian Club, Melbourne,
by the Author.
MELBOURNE;
Wilke & Co. Pty. Ltd., Printers, 241 William Street.
1 9 3 5.




Boer War Memories
CHAPTER I.
I believe the immediate cause of the last Boer war
was “the Jameson Raid” (1896), as before that the
Boers were satisfied with the peace terms made after
the Majuba disaster (1881). From that period to the
outbreak of war, October 20, 1899, the Boers secretly
began to arm, and with the assistance of a foreign
power were instructed in the art of warfare, turn-
ing their country farmers into efficient soldiers.
All kinds of deceptions were employed by them to
get arms to their country through Delagoa Bay, in
Portuguese territory. Military equipment and boxes
were labelled pianos or other harmless goods.
At that time it was openly stated by them that
they intended to annex Natal and drive the hated
English into the sea. Their great object was to
obtain a harbour, as they had not one in their own
country, being completely cut off from the sea by
Portuguese territory and Tongaland.


The Natal Government, realising their position,
requested the Home authorities for reinforcements,
and thus a battalion of the Royal Irish Fusiliers was
selected. I received orders to join the troopship at
Southampton, and to be in medical charge of this
regiment.
Boer War Memories


CHAPTER II.
We left England in September, 1899, and about
October 11, 1899, we arrived at Durban, our passage
being via Suez Canal and east coast of Africa. There
we disembarked at once, and proceeded by train to
Ladysmith military camp, arriving there late at
night. Next morning at daybreak we again pro-
ceeded by train to join the forces at Dundee.
This military camp was situated on a plain about
one mile north of the town of Dundee, with lofty
mountains on its three sides; that of Talana was on
our north-east.
After our arrival the forces camped there were the
following:—Four regiments of infantry, of one bat-
talion each, viz.. King’s Royal Rifles, Royal Dublin
Fusiliers, Leicester Regiment, and Royal Irish Fusi-
liers ; two batteries Royal Field Artillery, 69th and
13th; a detachment of Army Service Corps, a few
ordnance, and 10 natives from an Indian field hos-
pital.
Besides the above a special camp existed in the
town of Dundee for General Sir Penn Symons,
Boer Wa r Memories


K.C.8., and his staff, which included part of a
Cavalry Regiment; the other part remained in our
camp.
There were in this camp No. 18th British Field
Hospital, four medical officers and one Major
R.A.M.C. as P.M.O. In the main camp where I was
stationed all the troops were housed in bell tents,
and the officers’ lines were placed north of the
camp, and thus nearest to Talana Hill.
Now the procedure adopted each morning, every-
one had to be on parade at 4.30 a.m., no lights
whatever were allowed, so all had to dress in the
dark. This was done with the object to deceive the
Boers and not give them the position of our camp.
All on parade had to wait until the Brigade Major
and his staff had arrived from the headquarter camp.
Then he gave orders to dismiss the combined parade,
stating that there would be no attack of the
Boers that day. This dismissal always made me
free for other duties.
Boer Wa r Memories


CHAPTER III.
On October 20, 1899, being about seven days
after our arrival, the Brigade Major had dismissed
the parade, and the horses of the field batteries had
gone to get water at a spruit south of our camp.
As I was walking to my tent a Boer shell whistled
over my head and burst with great accuracy in the
men’s lines.
This shelling continued, and from information I
received afterwards the Boers thought they were
killing hundreds of our men, while in reality they
were only smashing tent poles. However, our scout-
ing must have been very defective for the Boers
to shell with such accuracy.
After this event confusion raged. The first man
killed was a gunner* who was watering his horse
and a shell took the top of his head off. Shortly
after that our field batteries got in position, and in
a short time silenced the Boer guns on Talana Hill.
Now I shall make no further remarks about this
battle, as it has been fully reported by other
writers, beyond stating that the battle commenced
at 5.30 a.m. and ended at 2 p.m. Talana Hill was
taken by a frontal attack.
* See Appendix I.
Boer War Memories


CHAPTER IV.
Personally I was given the bandsmen of the
Royal Irish Fusiliers, who were trained by me in
first aid on the voyage out from England, and they
were very efficient.
Our great difficulty was handling the heavy pan-
niers, medical and surgical, as they had to be car-
ried by these orderlies on to the field where the at-
tack was in progress. The mules for this duty were
not available. This greatly delayed our movements,
and our attacking forces had reached the shelter of a
wood before we practically had started.
Well, all casualties were attended to about 3 p.m.,
when the battle was over. I received written orders
for these bandsmen to return to headquarters at
once, but I was to remain on the field untjl I re-
ceived further orders. At about 6 p.m., it getting
dark at the time, the P.M.O. came personally to
see me. He then informed me that he had decided
to leave me behind at Dundee in charge of the
dangerously wounded now housed in the Swedish
Mission Chapel and other rooms.
Boer War Memories


The following information he gave me:—
(1) That the whole force was retiring to Lady-
smith.
(2) That four privates from each infantry bat-
talion had been sent to act as orderlies. They were
men of the best character, and volunteers.
(3) I then asked him for another medical officer;
this he refused. Then I asked for an N.C.0., or
orderlies of our corps who were trained men; this
he also refused, though I suggested he could easily
obtain them from the British Field Hospital under
his command.
(4) Then I asked him where I was to get the pro-
visions and necessary stores. He replied that I
could get everything required from the camp they
had just vacated.
(5) I asked him what about the Boer wounded.
He replied not to handle any. This I thought very
bad advice, and I made up my mind to get all I
could, as I was sure it would be to my advantage.
As events turned out afterwards I was quite cor-
rect in doing so.
On parting we shook hands. He then followed
the retiring troops and I walked back to the
Swedish mission, and to a place to w'hich I was an
utter stranger.
Boer War Memories


CHAPTER V.
When I arrived at this mission station the sight
was an appalling one. All the wounded were lying
shoulder to shoulder on the floor of the building,
some delirious. All were wet from exposure from
the rain, which was falling all day, and their uni-
forms were marked with mud and dirt ofif the battle-
field.
Up to my arrival apparently nothing whatever
had been done, and those there told me that before
doing anything they considered it best to wait un-
til my arrival.
Now the first thing I did was to interview the
sixteen men who had been sent to me as orderlies,
and I gave them separate orders, four of the King’s
Rifles to make a field kitchen in the open ground
of our enclosure, and to dig a pit for rubbish. Camp
kettles had been sent, so hot water was provided for
four men whom I told to use it for the wounded,
and clean some of the mud and dirt off their clothes
and faces.
Boer War Memories


No. 1.—Horns of Black Buck shot in India by Colonel Daly.
No. 2.-Koodoo Horns. Presented to Colonel Daly, C. B., by
General Botha as a token o f good will during the occupation of
Dundee by the Boer Forces, December, 1899. Span of horns from
point to point, 3 feet. From information supplied to Colonel
Daly at the British Museum, this constitutes a World’s Record.
No. 3. —Bugle carried by the first man killed in the Boer War
(69th Battery, R.F.A.). The trumpet, also carried by this gunner,
was returned to his C.O. by Colonel Daly, C. B., at his request,
with a similar inscription on its edge, and, on its acceptance, a
promise was made that the trumpet would be blown on the Com-
manding Officer’s parade, as long as the battery lasted.
(See pages 13 and 25.)


Then myself and the remaining eight men, on
getting a hand cart, we all proceeded to the main
camp to get the very necessary supplies we were
so much in need of.
Now when we got to our old camp we found it
strongly guarded, and the Boer guard positively re-
fused to allow us to enter the camp; though I
pleaded that I wanted food for their sick and mine,
they would not allow any entry whatever.
Now this refusal put me into an awful position.
However, as I knew “necessity has no laws,” I
noticed on my way up a waggon and a span of
sixteen bullocks, and I could see no one near, so I
determined to get one of the beasts. It turned out
a fairly easy job. it being very dark and wet at the
time.
Fortunately I had a butcher by trade amongst the
orderlies. The job was done, the animal brought
to the mission enclosure, and cut up in quarters,
and the skin, hoofs and horns buried in the pit
already made at my cookhouse.
That night beef tea was made, and rump steak
provided for all those who could eat it.
Boer War Memories


CHAPTER VI.
On my return to the mission I got a great sur-
prise. Sixteen men of the Town Guard of Dundee
had turned up fully armed and with two boxes of
ammunition. These I ordered them to bury at once,
and to hide away their rifles in some outhouse.
Now, as these men knew all the run of the town, I
ordered them to go there at once, and bring me
back a supply of bread, sugar, tea and tinned foods,
and they returned with a good haul. With these
I was all right for that night; all the wounded were
washed, fed and cared for, but still they only had the
floor to lie on.
The medical and surgical panniers my natives had
brought in from the battle area, and from them I
got medical and surgical dressings.
Boer Wa r Memories


CHAPTER VII.
The next complication that happened was that up-
wards of 40 women and children had arrived. I
asked them why they came; they replied to get pro-
tection from the Boers. I told them that I had no
food, and that it would be far better and safer for
them to return to their homes, as leaving them only
left their houses for looting when the Boers re-
turned.
They took my advice and departed. At this time
a local doctor and his wife had come; the former re-
mained. He was in a very nervous state and in
terror of the Boers, as he knew he should have pre-
viously offered his services to the English, and not
have remained behind.
The Boers considered everyone who did so should
be shot, calling them Africanders. However, he
helped me looking after the sick and wounded, but
he had no initiative whatever. I virtually had to
tell him everything I wanted done. On two oc-
casions he positively refused to visit sick Boers,
and I had to go. It would have been bad policy to
have refused.
Boer War Memories


In fact, I made it my duty for all the time I was
in Dundee (with the exception of the n days of
close arrest as subsequently recorded) to be useful
to the Boers by attending to all their sick and
wounded, so that by doing so our stay at Dundee
would be prolonged until the promise made by our
departing troops (October 20, 1899) would be ful-
filled—viz., “our relief.”
Unfortunately this never came off, but through
great luck, with the aid of my identity cards (how
they were obtained is recorded later on), I and my
staff were transferred over their border.
Next morning at daybreak, October 21, 1899, I
had a parade of my staff. Sixteen of them were the
soldiers originally sent, and the remainder the six-
teen of the Town Guard. I divided them into sec-
tions, one for equipment and the other for food
supplies. I told the men on parade that I held my-
self responsible for all their actions. Further, I
made them understand that they would only have
a limited time, as I was sure the main body of the
Boer forces would certainly return by the next
day, and subsequent events proved this to be ac-
tually correct.
When I started at daybreak on October 21, 1899,
to obtain food and equipment and food for my sick
and wounded, I remembered how a medical officer in
the Afghan War of 1879 was treated. He took
supplies for his sick from the native bazaar to the
value of £4OO. He was compelled by the Indian
Government to refund from his monthly pay this
amount. Knowing this I determined to take in
Boer Wa r Memories


thousands what he took in hundreds —the sum be-
ing so large, though not over my requirements, that
if the British Government adopted similar measures
my pay would never cover the amount.
Everyone worked hard all day and night, and by
that time I had stored sufficient food for 200 men
for six months. The other section of my staff had
obtained bedsteads for all the sick and staff, also
bedding and clean clothes for the sick. The shirts
I got were of all colours, and besides the above
everything was got necessary for the comfort of the
sick.
I told my men that for any goods taken by my
orders, if the owner was present, I would give a
receipt, but these were found to be very few, as
nearly everyone had run away when the war
started, leaving their prosperous town with their
well-stocked shops open to everyone.
I may mention now that I had two badly wounded
officers, but they had no discomfort, as they were
given comfortable quarters at once, occupying the
bedroom of Rev. Minister of the mission. This was
built for a Kaffir hospital, which was empty of sick
or staff when I arrived to occupy the place. Only
empty houses existed.
Boer War Memories


CHAPTER VIII.
On October 22, 1899, at 2 p.m., the Boers took
possession of the town, and a large number of armed
Burghers crowded into my hospital. At first they
would not believe that the sick men were British
soldiers (chiefly owing to the fact that they had
been supplied from the town with coloured shirts).
The Boers insisted that they were Africanders, and
as such, they intended to shoot every one of them
for not joining their forces. Finally I convinced
them that they were really British soldiers.
They then asked for their own wounded, and I
had several of them in this same ward dovetailed
between our men. These they questioned closely,
of course in Dutch, and when they found that they
had received every care, exactly the same as our
own men, the Boer commander at once became civil,
and thanked me. He then added, “Can I do any-
thing for you?” I replied, “Please give me a pass
to search for food in the town and private houses.”
Then they all left to loot the town, where I after-
wards made a personal visit, and no words of mine
Boer War Memories


can describe the confusion prevailing. Here
Burghers obtained fresh outfits, while old boots,
hats, clothing, half-opened tins of jam and tinned
meats, and draperies were scattered in heaps every-
where.
In my search of vacated private houses I got
all kinds of luxuries, such as pillows, bedspreads,
crockery, glass, lamps, kerosene and numerous other
useful articles. Also amongst these I got an ex-
cellent typewriter; the use I made of this will be
related later on. The owners of these houses ran
away leaving their breakfasts untouched on their
tables. Also I relieved dogs that were tied to
tables, etc.
A Boer magistrate on October 25, 1899, was ap-
pointed, and after that date nothing could be taken
without his personal permit.
Boer War Memories


CHAPTER IX.
Towards the end of the first week I was asked to
go to a camp of the Boers to inspect an artillery
Boer officer who was badly wounded, and the Boer
doctors wished to amputate his leg. I consented,
and two horses were sent to my hospital, one for
me, the other for an orderly with a white flag.* lat
once recognised the horses, as they had British
saddles and belonged to a cavalry regiment of ours.
On the ride out to the Blood River (10 miles from
Dundee), where their camp was, we passed large
numbers of young Boers riding five abreast. My
orderly told me that they had been mobilised to join
the forces at Ladysmith.
There is very little doubt that if the Boers had
delayed their first attack for a few days they would
have had a sufficient number to have annihilated
our whole force. Our troops did the right move-
ment to retreat to Ladysmith.
On arriving at the Boer camp, situated at about 10
miles from Dundee, I examined the wounded officer.
I assured him if he came to my hospital at Dundee
* See Appendix IV.
Boer Wa r Memories


I would save his leg. This he gladly accepted, and
the next day I had him brought in. He turned out
a great asset, as through him I could get any extras
I applied for.
On November 10, 1899, the condition of this Boer
officer was so improved that he was fit to travel.
So a special train with an ambulance carriage con-
veyed him to Pretoria. Before leaving he obtained
for me a flock of 297 sheep. Before that date I
could always get sheep from abandoned farms in
our vicinity.
For the information of my readers this number
of sheep may appear to them to be more than my
requirements, but such was not the case. For after
their arrival the Boer commander arranged that in
addition to supplying my unit I had to supply seve-
ral of the families left behind in Dundee. Further,
my flock of sheep was guarded daily by four of
my native Indian bearers, each with a white flag,
and at night herded in our enclosure. We always
kept the number of sheep up with straying animals.
Further, I am sure on his return to Pretoria this
Boer officer must have spoken very highly to Gene-
ral Botha of what I had done for him. About ten
days afterwards Chris. Botha, a brother of General
Botha, arrived with a present for me of a splendid
pair of koodoo horns from the largest antelope ever
shot in the Transvaal, also a letter was sent asking
me “to accept the same as a token of good will
during the occupation of Dundee by his forces.”
Boer Wa r Memories


These horns General Botha prized very much,
having them, before he gave them to me, hung up in
his own house for seven years. The animal shot
was considered the “King of the Forest.”
Some years ago I presented these horns to the
Australian Club, Melbourne, where they will re-
main for all time. They were measured with those
at South Kensington Museum, and they have proved
to be world size.
On my visit to the Blood River, described above,
speaking to my orderly I asked him whether the
Boers were as deadly shots as formerly. He replied,
“Probably better.” He suggested a demonstration
at the expense of a dog sitting some 300 yards away.
He then stopped a large number of Boers, and these
men selected a marksman, who knelt and took care-
ful aim. At the first shot the dog never moved; at
the second shot it ran away. This failure caused a
commotion amongst the Boers, whereupon my
orderly whispered, “Don’t laugh, but come away
quickly or they might shoot you.” With a straight
face I said “Good-bye, boys,” and rode away.
Boer War Memories


CHAPTER X.
On November i, 1899, the members of the Town
Guard, who up to that date had been doing their
services satisfactorily, came in a body to my office
at 9 a.m., and they informed me that they would
not do any more work except I guaranteed them
payment at the rate of 5/ a day to each man.
I told them at once I could not agree to such
terms. I said I could recommend payment, but that
would have to be passed by the British military
authorities. They even refused this offer. So I
told them to come to my office at 9 a.m. the next
morning, and if they still refused to do any work I
would hand the whole lot of them to the Boers.*
Well, next morning they completely surrendered,
and each signed a written document that they will-
ingly gave their services, without any payment, to
my unit, on the only condition that I gave them
the protection of the Geneva convention and fed
them.
* See Appendix IV.
Boer Wa r Memories


I may add now, a little time after our return to
the British Forces these very men, after stealing
this copy, sent to Lord Roberts an awful letter
against me, accusing me that the treatment they
received afterwards was cruel and dreadful, and
that, for men who had worked so hard to care for
the sick and wounded, was disgraceful.
Officially I was asked if I had made any agree-
ment with these men. I at once produced the dupli-
cate which they had all signed. From the first I
kept this document in my pocket, for I did not trust
any of them. They quite forgot about my having
a duplicate, or they never would have dared to
have written such lies. Their action was pure spite,
and as they got fully paid when I sent in their
names they had no just grievance. Needless to add,
I got rid of them as soon as I could.
Boer War Memories


CHAPTER XI
Towards the end of November, 1899, the Boers
paid a visit to my hospital with a hand cart and an
armed escort, and demanded foodstuffs, which they
knew I had. Their visit had been anticipated, and
one hut which was situated in the middle of our
hospital enclosure was always used for issue of
supplies, while in reality 80 per cent, of the stores
were hidden away under the floors and ceilings of
other buildings.
The Boers took away one-third of what was in
our store, remarking at the time that they did not
see why we should be living on the fat of the land
and they without. To put them off their guard, I
kept constantly asking for foodstuffs, which I never
got.
At this time the Boers had some reverse at Lady-
smith, and they compelled me to give them most of
my surgical dressings; they promised to give in
return any amount from Pretoria. This promise
they never fulfilled, and so short was I towards the
Boer Wa r Memories


end of my stay that ordinary sheepswool had to be
used, washed several times in perchloride of mer-
cury, to replace antiseptic dressings.
During the first week at Dundee I received orders
to put up two ambulance Boer officers, and on
visiting them I found them drunk, and, seeing one of
their identity cards on the floor, I put it into my
pocket. Next day these officers left, so I had this
card copied exactly, using the typewriter which I
referred to previously.
The wording was first in Dutch, and secondly in
English, so I simply reversed the order, and after-
wards gave each man of my staff one, duly signed.
By these alone I finally got my whole party across
the border out of Transvaal territory.
After their departure I was called to see the state
in which these two Hollander ambulance officers had
left the comfortable quarters of a resident, whose
house was outside our enclosure, which I had given
to them for their use. The mattress on each bed was
cut open from end to end, and also all the pillows
and the rest of the furniture smashed.
The orderly of the town guard, a former resident
before he came to me, told me that it was the custom
for Boers to hide their valuables in beds, etc., so
when these officers found nothing they smashed
everything in spite.
Boer War Memories


CHAPTER XII.
During our stay in Dundee we had several
inspections by Boer officers, who came to find out
whether I had any recoveries fit to be sent to
Pretoria. Their object was to increase the number
of prisoners there. This move all our men dreaded,
so all acted according to my suggestions, to remain
in bed, and do the doleful, and this action of theirs
always succeeded.
This was the first war where the high-velocity
smooth bullet was used, and thus cases through
ignorance were marked dangerous, while really they
healed quickly, and thus were wrongly named
originally.
The old Snider bullet previously used caused
great damage by smashing bones, while the other
often went through without damaging the tissues.
I mention these facts, as I had a few cases who
came under these conditions, and really I had some
trouble to make it appear to the Boers that I had
no recoveries. We always kept hoping that the
Boer Wa r Memories


English troops would relieve us, but that never came
off.
Another annoyance was the arrival of the excur-
sion trains, chiefly of Boer women, who came to see
the British wounded, and I had to use the greatest
tact in handling these people, and they never learnt
anything from the patients; all they got was a groan.
Another time I succeeded in bluffing the Boers
was when a Dutch patient had given information
about the rifles of the Town Guard. So that these
would be of no use to them, I removed all the bolts.
They missed them and asked me why. lat once
replied that these rifles, two at a time, had, with the
addition of a soldier’s blanket, been used as
stretchers, and the projection made by the bolts
caused them to be thrown away before we left
Talana Hill, and, curious to add, they were quite
satisfied.
It would have been fatal if they had searched our
buildings for them, for then they would have found
out about our foodstuffs. I was very lucky to have
bluffed them for that reason.
Boer War Memories


A RESTING-PLACE OF FRIEND AND FOE
From a Photograph by Mr. G. Lynch.
Enclosure containing the graves of fifteen British and four Boers who died of wounds received at the battle of Dundee, October
Erected by Major Daly. R.A.M.C. (See page 14 and Appendix V.)


CHAPTER XIII.
im
About the middle of December, 1889-, everyone in
the hospital enclosure was placed under close arrest
and confined to the railed-in compound of the
Swedish mission, which equalled about an acre in
extent. It contained a mission chapel, used as the
principal hospital ward, and several other detached
buildings, which were situated on the east and south
sides. These were used as an office and housing
for my staff.
During Christmas-time a terrible amount of
drunkenness and rowdiness existed in the Town of
Dundee, and evidently our Guard got drink and
became offensive, and on two occasions they were
seen pointing loaded rifles at me, so I walked direct
to them and remonstrated. They were all Hol-
landers and hated us. On reporting the matter, we
got a Boer guard, and the trouble ceased.
At the end of December, 1899, I received sudden
orders to proceed with my staff and patients to
Pretoria, and the same day a train arrived with
Boer War Memories


ambulance carriages in its front portion and third-
class carriages behind. The Boer ambulance men
handled all the patients, while they locked us up in
the third-class division of the train.
Before this transfer above mentioned I received
an order from the Boer authorities at Pretoria to
send them a complete list of the patients under my
care, and I truthfully stated that, with only a few
exceptions, all were very serious cases, and most
of them suffering from multiple wounds, some fol-
lowed by abscess and parts of bullets still embedded
in the tissues. Two cases of paraplegia, one case
of rheumatic fever, an absolutely helpless patient,
also a few amputations.
When we arrived at Pretoria railway junction
neither myself nor any of my staff were allowed to
bid farewell to men we had nursed so long. It was
a very pathetic sight; some of the wounded were
crying, and it was a scene I could never forget.
I know that a full report of all cases of ours
handled by our medical officers doing duty at
Pretoria after my party and I were put across the
border, is in existence, which will prove that the
statements I have made now from memory are quite
correct.
The Boer authorities at this time also asked me
for a copy of the identity cards which they knew
each member of my staff had.
Before our end of the train was allowed to start,
I had to give a guarantee to the Boers that none
of my party would ever take up arms against them
Boer War Memories


and would remain with me until the end of the
war. lam sure the reason they asked for the above
was that, after their inspection, they had found
amongst my party sixteen soldiers in British
uniforms; but, as they all had identity cards similar
to those their own ambulance orderlies had, they
allowed the train to start for Koomati Poort, the
entrance to Portuguese territory.
I may add now that months after joining the
British lines my guarantee was questioned by the
C.O. of the four orderlies of the King’s Royal Rifles,
and finally this was referred to the Secretary of State
for war, Mr. Broderick, and he at once ruled in my
favour.
On arriving at Koomati Poort I at once wired to
the British Consul, asking him to make arrange-
ments for housing myself and a party of 42 orderlies.
I was put up in his house, and my men at a hotel.
On our arrival at Delagoa Bay great kindness was
shown to all of us. After a few days H.M. Ship
Widgeon was placed at my disposal, and after nine
days of a most pleasant trip we landed at Durban,
about January nth, 1900.
After our arrival my party and I were posted to
No. 1 Station, Field Hospital, which followed Gene-
ral Buller’s advance for the relief of Ladysmith and
the reconquest of Natal. After that I was
posted in charge of No. 18 General Hospital, of 1000
beds, and P.M.O. Volcrust sub-district, and there my
staff and I remained until the end of the war.
Boer War Memories


CHAPTER XIV.
Some months after my return a Royal Commis-
sion was sent out from England to investigate the
losses of our people by the war at Dundee and other
towns.
For all goods taken by the Boers, wholesale prices
were paid; but for those taken by the military, retail
prices were paid. This distinction caused a lot of
trouble, especially to myself, as all doubtful accounts
were sent to me for confirmation.
The Royal Commission President was the Chief
Justice of England (Lord Chief Justice Romer), and
I was the first witness to appear before this Com-
mittee. The President asked me the following-
question;—
“On whose authority did you remove from the
town and private houses in Dundee food and equip-
ment for the comfort of your sick and wounded?’’
I answered: “My Lord, on my own authority, as
I had no one else to ask.”
Boer Wa r Memories


He at once replied as follows: —“We congratulate
you on your action, and absolve you from all blame.”
Then all shook hands with me, and I left with the
satisfaction that I had done well.
Some time afterwards I was sent down from 18
General Hospital at Charlestown to settle a claim
made by a storeholder at Dundee, who persistently
stated that a large amount of stores was taken by
me for my hospital at Dundee. Knowing this to be
false, I would not pass his account.
I must add that this store was the furthest away
from my hospital, and, as I could get all I wanted
from stores nearer, I knew I was not the cause of
his losses.
Arriving at his store with an Army Service Corps
officer as a witness on my behalf, on entering his
store I told the storeholder that I had come to pay
an account which you say a Major Daly owes.
I asked him then: “Do you know him?”
He replied: “Indeed I do, and he is no class.”
“Well, then,” I told him, “we will now go to your
office, and will go over your account," and we all sat
down at his table.
I asked the officer with me; “Do you know this
Major Daly?”
He replied: “I think I do,” in a doubtful manner.
So I turned to the storeholder, asking: “What is
this Major Daly like?”
Boer War Memories


He said: “He is a medium-sized man with a heavy
black moustache and a bald head.”
I at once stood up, 6 ft. 4 in. in height, and, taking
off my helmet, I replied: “I am Major Daly, and my
hair is still there.”
The storeholder collapsed on the floor, and it took
a jug of water to revive him. He asked for mercy,
and said that he knew he was a very wicked man.
I told him that he would probably be in gaol soon,
and we left. It is needless to add that his account
was not paid at retail prices.
Personally, I reported this scene to the General
at Pretoria, and it caused the greatest amusement
and laughter to all present.
Boer War Memories


CHAPTER XV.
My rescue of regimental drums is worth recording.
During the greater time of our stay at Dundee, when
the Boers were removing the spoils of war from the
military camp, many of the bullock waggons passed
close to our enclosure, and on one of them I noticed
two regimental drums. So I went out with the hope
of rescuing the same. One was the big drum of the
ist Battalion of the Royal Irish Fusiliers, the other
a battle drum of the 2nd Battalion of the Royal
Dublin Fusiliers.
On speaking to the driver, I asked him what he
was going to do with these drums. He replied that
he was taking them home for his small boys.
Knowing how very superstitious old Burghers were,
I told him he was doing a very wrong act, for if he
brought them home bad luck would surely follow.
He at once went to the back of his waggon and
pitched them on to the grass and told me to take
the damned things away.
Their parchments were broken, and many of us
made bookmarkers from them. Mine has been sent
Boer Wa r Memories


by a lady in Melbourne to an officer of one of the
regiments above noted now living in Ireland.
On leaving for Pretoria, as previously reported, I
handed these two drums to the Rev. Mr. Nauranius,
chaplain to the Swedish Mission, and after this town
was recaptured he handed them over to a Major
Kelly on behalf of the Imperial authorities.
Boer War Memories


CHAPTER XVI.
In conclusion, I beg to add that, though nearly
thirty-five years have passed since the events re-
corded, my visual remembrances were my guide
for when leaving Dundee for Pretoria myself and
party were allowed no personal baggage, except
General Botha’s present, and the two panniers.
For the information of my readers, after the war
General Botha became a great friend of England,
and before his death was made a Field-Marshal in
our army.
Now I hope those who read this account of
Dundee will realise my very difficult position as
a young officer, without any previous experience,
either written or otherwise, to guide me. I had to
work for all; no one would take any responsibility
whatever.
Finally I beg to report the wonderful assistance I
always got from the sixteen regimental orderlies.
They were always loyal to me, very attentive to the
patients, and, above all, loyal to their Queen and
country. In great contrast to the other sixteen
orderlies of the Town Guard, who did their duty
reluctantly, and their main object in coming to me
was to save their own skins.
Boer War Memories


ADDENDA
I seemed to move under a lucky star. For in-
stance, on one occasion, accompanied by an orderly
with a white flag, when returning from one of my
visits to a sick Boer at an outlying farm, when
nearing Dundee we were shot at by a Hollander
Boer, who fortunately missed us by a few inches.
On investigation afterwards by the Commandant at
Dundee, the man acknowledged shooting at us. For
this I received official apologies!
For the information of my readers, I mention the
following incidents, which were only in a remote
way connected with my record of Dundee;—
During the war, when I was P.M.O. of 18 General
Hospital, I had to inspect large numbers of sick and
wounded Boer prisoners en route to St. Helena, and
on one occasion an old Boer asked for a private
interview, which lat once granted. He implored me
not to send him to St. Helena, as it would kill his
old mother. He further stated that he had done
duty around Dundee, and he knew how kind I had
Boer War Memories


been to all sick Boers while I was there, otherwise
he would never have asked me to grant him this
favour. I kept him back, and he never was sent to
St. Helena.
Now, I thought that ended the incident; but no,
after the war was over I was stationed for a few
years at Standerton, in the Transvaal, and one day,
to my surprise, this old Boer turned up, and then in
my office he informed that he had come personally to
thank me for my kindness to him at Charlestown,
where my previous hospital was situated. But
before leaving he made me promise that I would pay
him a visit.
So a day was fixed, and I drove to his home, which
was 40 miles over the border of the Orange Free
State, and I can never forget the welcome I received
on arrival. A very large number of Boers had
assembled, all of whom I had to shake hands
with.
Next day, while there, a large shoot was arranged,
which was very successful, resulting in a great
number of large and small game being shot. At his
request I visited him several times, and on one of
them I brought to his attention two shell holes on
his verandah roof, and I asked him why he had left
them still there.
He replied that they were caused by pom-pom
shells, and he intended to always leave them, as it
reminded him of how England had generously
treated him by giving him back his farm.
Boer War Memories


On my last visit, when I told him I was going
home, he replied:—
“Tell England that the Orange Free State will
always fight for her, but never against her.”
P.S.—I greatly regret that my memory has failed
me, and, though I have a visual remembrance of his
homestead, and his verandah roof with the pom-
pom punctures, I am unable to remember his name,
so I am taking steps to have him traced through the
authorities at Standerton, and to send him or his
relations a copy of this book to show that my brother
officers and I have not forgotten his kindness to us
at that period.
F. A. B. DALY
Lieut.-Col. late R.A.M.C.
British Forces.
Portsea, Victoria,
May 29th, 1935.
Boer Wa r Memories


APPENDIX
APPENDIX I.
This gunner mentioned on page 13, he being the first
soldier killed in the Boer War. I was present when he was
being buried in a shallow grave, with a number of civilians.
Noticing that he had his bugle and trumpet on, I jumped
into the grave and took them off and hid them under a
house at Dundee, taking care it was dark at the time, and
that no one saw me doing so. When Dundee was recap-
tured I obtained the same.
Some years afterwards, when stationed in England, I
received a letter from the officer commanding the 69th
Battalion R.F.A., then stationed at Rawal Pindi, 1906, to
the following effect:—“l believe you have two trophies in
your possession. If you give us one, I can assure you
that such a gift will be greatly appreciated by us all.”
I replied by letter at once, offering whichever they liked,
and they chose the trumpet, and asked me to have engraved
on each its history and to guarantee the same, so that in
years to come their identity could always be traced.
Finally, I got a letter of thanks, which also stated that
this trumpet would always be blown on the commanding
officer’s parade as long as the battery lasted.
This bugle I have presented to the members of the
Australian Club, and it has been placed under the Koodoo
horns previously presented by me.


APPENDIX II.
Copy of letter, original in my possession, from a loyal
Boer farmer living near Dundee. His conduct I brought
to the notice of the military authorities on my return to
the British lines, and he received an acknowledgment, and
thanks for his action. '
Copy of letter of James Payne, dated 2/12/99: —
Major Daly.
Dear Sir, —On account of my health, I prefer to be near
the hospital. lam prepared to place my waggon and
oxen for the use of the hospital, and two milk cows, also
five head of cattle for slaughter, all free of expense.
Yours obediently,
(Sgd.) JAMES PAYNE.
APPENDIX III.
Abbreviations:—
R.F.A.—Royal Field Artillery.
C.O. means Commanding Officer.
O. —Officer Commanding.
P. —Principal Medical Officer.
Paraplegia—Total paralysis.
APPENDIX IV.
Africanders.—A term used by the Boers for British
subjects who remained behind in a British colony, who
neither joined the British forces nor previously the Boer
army. Some of these I was told were shot. So when
the Town Guard surrendered (see page 27), I knew, and
they knew, what might be their fate if they acted other-
wise.
There was one British subject who fought both with the
Boers and the British forces. He was discovered by me
Appendix


when at Charlestown General Hospital. I was inspect-
ing a draft of sick and wounded patients on their way to
the Base, and I recognised him as the Boer who rode
with me carrying a white flag on my way to the Blood
River (see page 24). This man confessed that he had
fought with the Boer forces, until he saw that they were
losing, then he joined the British forces, and then he
added: “I have been recognised by you, wounded besides,
and thus gained nothing.” This man was then sent back
under arrest, and I had to send a full report; but I never
learned how his case ended.
I may add for the information of my readers that the
Boer forces as a rule did not wear any uniforms; only some
of their officers, so that made it more difficult to recognise
men clothed in British uniforms.
APPENDIX V.
GRAVEYARD AT DUNDEE.
Readers will be much interested in the illustration of
the churchyard at Dundee, in which are buried fifteen of
our men who died of wounds received at the battle of
Dundee. In the same graveyard lie four of their Boer
enemies, who succumbed to fearful injuries in spite of
the assiduous care of the Royal Army Medical Corps. As
we know, the slain are usually buried on the field of
battle; it is the wounded who are carried off the field and
then succumb who lie in the shadow of a church-tower.
However, there was no graveyard enclosure attached to
this little church near Dundee, and the railing, as well as
the crosses marking the graves, are due to the pious care
of Major Daly, of the R.A.M.C. Major Daly took care
that the nineteen wounded men whom his corps could not
save, in spite of all their efforts, should at least have all
the sanctities of Christian burial, with simple crosses to
tell the name and designation of the fallen. So here they
lie, Briton and Boer, side by side, and at peace.
Appendix


APPENDIX VI.
Since the first publication of
this book I have received from the
O.C. 69th Battery, R.F.A., now
stationed in India, a confirmation
that their voluntary promise of
1906, as per Appendix 1., para,
iv.. is still being carried out.
