

Souvenir




This Souvenir is presented
upon my 57th Birthday to
permanently record what
united effort has accom-
plished in a suburb of
Sydney where I resided
for almost a quarter of a
century.
C. J. Loewenthal.
25th MAY, 1917




Photo by Glen Broughton Studio.




Bondi — Waverley
School of Arts.


REPLICA OF MARBLE TABLFT ERECTED UNDER THE PORTICO OF
THE TOWER AT THE MAIN ENTRANCE TO THE BUILDING


Representative Public Men meet at
Festive Board.
Banquet by the President.
PON the 9th March. 1914 (a fortnight before
¥o the official opening), the President enter-
ic T li\ tained at a banc|uet in the Lecture Hall of
II Ijl the Institution, the Mayor (Mr. Joseph
Barracluff, J.P.) and the Aldermen of the
Municipal Council of Waverley, the
President (Dr. L. J. Lamrock) and the
Committee of the Waverley Bowling Club, Ltd., the
Trustees and Committee of the Bondi-Waverley School
of Arts, the Hon. R. D. Meagher, M.L.A. (Speaker of
the Legislative Assembly), Mr. H. D. Morton, M.L.A.
(ex-Speaker), Sir Joseph Carruthers, K.C.M.G. (cx-
Promier of N.S.W.), Colonel J. Macarthur-Onslow,
M.L.A. (Member for Bondi), Mr. Watkin Wynne
(Manager, “Daily Telegraph”), Mr. D. J. Brownhill
(Founder of the Bankers’ Institute of N.S.W.), Mr. C.
O’Sullivan, J.P. (brother of a member of Queensland
Government), Mr. Robert Sands, and Mr. Joseph
Sands (of Messrs. John Sands, Ltd.), Mr. R. G. Watkins,
J .P, (ex-Mayor of Waverley), Mr. Ebenezer Vickery,
J.P., and other prominent citizens.
Appropriate speeches were made upon that occasion
and were reported in the leading Sydney newspapers.
The following toasts were proposed and carried
with musical honours : —“ The King,” “ Bondi-Waverley
School of Arts,” “ The Parliament of New South
Wales,” “ Waverley Municipal Council,” “Waverley
Bowling and Recreation Club Ltd.,” “Benefactors to
the Institution.”


Sir Joseph (’arri'thers, K.C.M.G., proposed the
toast, " The Bondi-Waverlev School of Arts,” which
was seconded by the Hon. R. D. Meagher,
Speaker of the Legislative Assemble of N.S.W.
Mr. Loewexthai, responded as follows : —“ I accept
your compliment on behalf of the Committee of the
School of Arts of which L am the President, and also
upon behalf of the Institution of which I am the Head.
Unfortunately T cannot lav claim to have been endowed
with the faculty of being a public speaker—that is a
gilt ; to be eloquent is a blessing. There are many
people who say that I am suffering from a complaint
called ‘Schoolofartsitis,’ but. whether I am or not, in
my opinion it is every man’s duty to in some way be
mixed up in public work. If a man wants his point
of view understood, he should try and understand the
point of view of others. This. I think, can only be
done by being mixed up in Public Work, Municipal Work.
Social and Educational Work, and, above all. Philan-
throphic Work, and thus one can get that better under-
standing between different classes which is necessary
to make a solid and wholesome public opinion. (Cheers.)
No one has a monopoly of either talent or industry.
Few people realise the amount of work involved in the
establishment of a new Institution ; The acquisition of
the Property, the carrying out of all constructional
arrangements, the acquisition of Government Subsidy,
securing Annua! and Life Members —these, like the little
Snowflake, come, so to speak, daily almost unperceived,
but as time goes on the Avalanche is formed. Then the
furnishing of the Institution, and the most important
of all, the attention to numerous details each one
in itself does not count, but as one united whole
spell Success to the Movement. Aurelius says : " Ob-
serve always that everything is the result of a change,
and get used to thinking.’ The trouble is, some people
don’t think at all ; others talk impulsively and think-
after ; some think too much and then baulk ; others
dream about what thev are going to do when thev wake
up. (Applause.) To obtain a fair equilibrium of
mental thought it is necessary to make liberal conces-
sions to human weakness. Most people work and think


as Units. Once get a few individuals together making
Common Cause with each other, and things begin to
happen. The, man who succeeds is the man who can
organise this sort of Unity. Fortunately 1 have been
blessed with the assistance of good and most represen-
tative Committeemen; they have allowed me to order
anything f wished for so long as L have been able to
find the money to pay for it ; but. after all, is not silent
assistance better than silent resistance ? I take it that
once a Business Policy has been arranged it must be
carried out; every business must be controlled. The
Policy for such an Institution as this must not be
parochial ; it should be a fine conception, the result of
imagination, forethought and broadmindedness. I think
it was Emerson who said : ‘ Nothing great was ever
achieved without enthusiasm.’ Whilst that no doubt
is true, I think that Determination and Grit (the Yankee
term is ‘ Sticktoitiveness ’) get there just as soon as
Genius. The Business man of to-day must remember
that if he will ‘ make good ’ he must possess three
qualifications ; Concentration, Originality and Con-
tinuity. It is not isolated great Deeds, but a number of
small conterminous acts of good Citizenship, which
count most towards strengthening the Country and
making it great. It is the duty of every Citizen to try
and render some service to the Country to which he
belongs and to which he owes so much. If I were to
quote an Axiom it would be this ; ‘ May men of principle
be our principal men.’ (Applause.) The Bondi-Waver-
ley School of Arts will gradually develop in importance
in response to genuine need, which is the soundest
possible origin for any Institution. 1 am very pleased
to be honoured by the company of gentlemen who
surround me this evening—representative men, not
alone of our Public Life, but our Commercial, Industrial,
Financial and Social Life. I would be made of poor
material if I did not realise that the honour of their
presence is not alone conferred upon me as an individual,
but as the Representative Head of an Educational Demo-
cratic Institution, representative of all classes in this
Community, a Community blessed by Nature and the
cynosure of all neighbouring eyes. It would not be
wise for me to speak at great length, because I must


remember that there are others you may probably be
pleased to hear, and who are entitled to speak to you
this evening. This is the first time that Representatives
of the various Local Bodies have met in this Suburb at
any Social Function, and I am delighted to be the Host
upon this occasion. My hope is, that a happy and
joyous sentiment will be in daily attendance ; that a
broad spirit of chivalrous forbearance will develop and
flourish among Members—generous to the faults of
others, and appreciative of their virtues. (Cheers.)
Women both young and old should be encouraged to
take an interest in our work, because they seem to get
a better perspective of work that men seem to miss,
and indeed the success which has followed the combined
efforts of all concerned could not possible have been
nearly so marked had it not been for the assistance
rendered by those ‘ Beacon Lights of our Social joys.’
(Laughter.) This is not the occasion to weary you,
gentlemen, with drv figures ; it will be sufficient to tell
you that about £425 has been subscribed by the Com-
munity by Voluntary Subscriptions towards the Building
Fund, and that as the result of two Annual Balls, the
acquisition of the Waverley Jubilee Fund, two Euchre
Parties, one Picture Entertainment, one High-class
Concert by lady and gentlemen artists, and two Concerts
given by pupils of the Bondi Superior Public School,
together with Bank Interest accrued on fixed deposits,
a further £SOO has been added, making a total of about
£750 gross ; and after deducting Interest and Adminis-
tration Expenses amounting to about £IOO, a nett
surplus of something like £OSO formed the starting
Capital upon which the Foundation of this magnificent
Institution was limit. More money is wanted, and a very
great amount, too, because when I tell you that this
Building equipped and furnished throughout will eost
between £SOOO and £<U)()(), you will understand that the
joint and personal responsibility of the Committee is
very great, and the financial and moral assistance of
the Public is therefore solicited. 1 am pleased to
announce that so far sixty Life Members have each paid
£5 55., many of whom have contributed similar sums
to the Building Fund, and that already, before the
doors have been officially opened, over 200 Members


have paid their Annual Subscription. (Cheers.) Upon
Saturday afternoon, 21st inst., at d o’clock, the Hon.
the Premier will officially open the Institution for the
use of Members, and that day will be a Red Letter Day in
Bondi. I believe that every gentleman present at this
Festive Board has already in some way contributed to
the Funds of this Institution —some more, some less, in
accordance with their desires and inclinations. I now
ask, in conclusion, that they will each plant the Seeds
of Good-will and Good Intentions, and that ere long a
bountiful Harvest of Prosperity will be garnered. Gentle-
men, I thank you sincerely for the manner in which you
have honoured the Toast, and I must repeat that from
the bottom of my heart I feel right glad to have you
with me, if only to sec your smiling faces around me
this evening.” (Much applause.)
Tht’ Toi'e<l<ilny i* " I 'l’l liiftiiii from the
/'ifrinn ui’iif AVr«yr/x o f Hw / us: It i'f ion.


Official Opening by the Premier.
OPON 21st March, 1914, the Hon. W. A.
Holman, M.L.A., Premier of N.S.W.,
officially opened the building with a gold
Yale key presented by the Committee.
The key was designed and manufactured
by Messrs. Fairfax & Roberts, Ltd., one
end of the key being beautifully enamelled
in the colour of Mr. Holman’s political party, the colour
being surrounded by an embossed gold circle. The key
upon the reverse side bore the following inscription :
L ‘ Presented by the Committee to the Hon. IT. A.
Holman, Premier of iV.<S.TT., upon
the occasion of the Official Opening by him of
the Bondi-W averley School of Arts, 21s/
March, 1914.”
At the President’s request, and upon behalf of the
Committee, Mr. Holman temporarily returned the key,
which was afterwards converted by the manufacturers
into an exquisite brooch of delicate design, and at a
later date presented to Mrs. Holman, who acknowledged
the gift in characteristic and suitable terms.
Upon the lawn at the rear of the building, where
the Premier and other prominent gentlemen delivered
speeches, about a dozen members of the Legislative
Council and Legislative Assembly, also some 50 repre-
sentative ladies and gentlemen were provided with
seating accommodation upon a permanently erected
stage. The Committee had previously issued to the


citizens about 1,200 invitations to the Opening Cere-
mony ; about 800 responded, all of whom were provided
with seating accommodation upon the lawn. The
grounds were tastefully decorated with flags and other
descriptions of national emblems.
After the speech-making, the whole of the 800
visitors were entertained by the Committee at afternoon
tea. It was a gala day, and one of rejoicing for Bondi-
Waverley. Miss Loewenthal, the President’s daughter,
presented Mrs. Holman with a bouquet of choice
flowers. After the Official Function, the President
entertained in the Committee room the Premier, Mem-
bers of the Legislative Council and Legislative Assembly,
together with their wives, also other representative
citizens.
Extract front the Permanent Record's oj the
! limitation.


Presentation of Illuminated Address
TO
Mr. C. J. Loewenthal,
ex-President.
T a Social Evening held in the Debating
§f Hoorn of the Bondi-Waverley School of
Iff /\ Arts, upon Thursday, loth February, J!H7;
i Vl| Mr. C. J. Loewenthal, ex-President Bondi-
T&a Si Waverley School of Arts, was presented
by Mr. J. J. Jagelman (President of the
Institution) with an illuminated address
on behalf of the past and present members of the
General Committee.
Mr. JxGELiiAN made eulogistic references to Mr.
Loewenthal’s farsightedness in the establishment of the
School of Arts, as well as the great ability he had at all
times displayed in the conduct of its Affairs. He,
however, could not promise to do anything like half the
amount of work which Mr. Loewenthal had done, but
would nevertheless endeavour to do all that he .was
able. Mr. Loewenthal was a man of strong personality,
whose object always dominated his puiyioso, and he
could not but admit that whilst it was not at all times
possible to endorse his every Act, it was always safe to
acknowledge his Sincerity. He felt sure that the
residents of the Eastern Suburbs at least owed Mr.
Loewenthal their best thanks for what he had accom-
plished for their benefit. He then called upon the
gentlemen present to charge their glasses in bumpers,
and drink to the health of Mr. Loewenthal.
The toast was supported by Mr. H. W. F. Rogers,
Mayor of Waverley, who expressed his pleasure at being
present upon such an auspicious occasion. He stated


that Mr. C. J. Loewenthal was well known throughout
the Bondi district, where he had resided for the past
T.i years ; he had at all times taken a very great amount
of interest in all matters of a Public nature, and the
people knew well that every obligation he had under-
taken had been carried out by him with marked Credit
and Distinction. He knew that the Waverley Muni-
cipal Council was sorry to lose his services, because he
was a keen business man who looked well into every-
thing. It was well known that he had sold his fine
home “ Scarba ” to the Government, and had left the
District, and he joined Mr. Loewenthal’s many other
friends in hoping that the day was not far distant when
he would again return as a Resident, and once more take
his place in connection with their Public Movements.
If he did not return to them he would be missed, because
he had found from experience that it was not easy to
fill the places of honourable men who had always
creditably carried out their Public Duties. (Cheers.)
The toast was then drunk with musical honours,
after being supported by Mr. William L. Cohen, Mr.
Desmond O’Brien, and Mr. P. B. Bailev, all past Hon.
Secretaries of the Institution.
Mr. Jag elman then read the Illuminated Address,
(a photograph of which is reproduced on next page),
and then presented it to Mr. Loewenthal.
Mr. Loewenthal responded as follows ; —“ Mr.
President, Mr. Mayor, my late Honorary Secretaries
(Mr. Cohen, Mr. O’Brien, and Mr. Bailey), and members
of present and past Committees, —This is not the first
occasion upon which I have been called upon to express
myself in response to the solicitations of those who
believe in mo, or even to defend myself against those
who think otherwise. Mr. Jagelman, you now occupy
a position which will be watched with much interest —
a position which it was always my endeavour to make
honoured and respected. I can only hope that the
Mantle which has fallen from my Shoulders will grace
yours, and will never be held in less esteem that it has
been during the five arduous years of my Presidency.
To me it seems peculiar that I should be your Guest,
and you, my Friends, my Hosts. I feel somewhat like


MS
esßCsaK
V:
, '^ .J*3Ni,”^rJ:*.%.,
J
f.
1
i l/M I
- p£AR SIR
m t
KE
m
3J*
u
, 1
....
I)an . Sb . v. .1. i.okwkxtiiai., Ksq., .i.i>. 15f/l O'bnim'/i, i'*'T.
Tfi'' present and past members of the ('ommittee of the Dondl-Wanrlr y
School o} Arts fee! that the// cannot aW.nr yon to rrlhu/uhsh the office of President
of the Institution without in some s/iy/if manner ",i pressing their admiration
o/ the great amount of time and trouble u< mi bore expended hi order to make the
Institution a sueeiss.
When i/oa assumed the office of President, affairs irere in an nnhri/o state f
under pour energetic leadership, crude mailer ira s- brought into due form
and order out of chaos.
Jl'c deeply appreciate pour efforts, and the result is that the District pos-
sesses an Institution which is a model of its bind, and will always stand as a
monument to show what can he done when the machinery is properly directed.
I!V are aware of your personal objection to receiving presentations, the
('‘ommittee, therefore, are taking this means of placing on record their high
appreciation of your work.
You ore sill} a Trustee of oar Institution, and ire trust that you may long
be s/mred to hold such office, as ire know that, although you hare left the.
District, your heart is still with ns for the welfare of the Institution.


a square peg in a round hole, but. notwithstanding, if
ever there was an Occasion when I would desire to
possess the temporary gift of Eloquence, if only in small
proportion to that possessed by you, Mr. President,
and by Mr. Rogers also—that time is now. In short,
I feel somewhat embarrassed. (Laughter.) In the
words of your Address, you say that the members of
Committee could not allow me to relinquish the office
of President without in some slight manner expressing
their admiration of the great amount of time and
trouble 1 have expended in my endeavour to make the
Institution a success : and further, that they deeply
appreciate the efforts which 1 have bestowed, and feel
assured that although 1 am no longer a resident of the
O ft)
district, my heart remains with them for the welfare
of the Institution. Need I say, Mr. President, that
those Sentiments I deeply appreciate, because they have
not been misplaced. I quite understand that this is not
the time to unfold my views with regard to the future
Policy which should dominate the affairs of the School
of Arts ; still, I feel sure that you will all be sufficiently
generous to permit me to indulge in a few Retrospective
Observations whilst referring to some pleasant 'Memo-
ries of the Past.’ (Applause.) A man, to bo a leader
in a Society consisting of a combination of men and
women, should be one possessing Individuality, Initia-
tive, as well as a bold power of Conception. To be
successful, his purpose must be dominated primarily
by Honesty, and he must be Tactful, as well as Generous
to the faults of Others, always recollecting that although
for the time being he may be the Chief Executive Head,
he does not possess 1 Letters Patent ’ making him the
sole judge of Mankind. To please everyone in his every
Act he would have to possess a Subtle Brain so dexterous
that it would almost amount to Genius. During mv
five years of office five Annual Reports have been pub-
lished, and those Reports have clearly set out the prin-
cipal works that have been accomplished since the
Genesis of the Movement. The following References
covering a span of the past may prove of interest. It
was upon the Ith August, 1911, that a Resolution was
carried at a meeting of the Bondi District Ratepayers'
Association affirming the desirability of starting the


Movement. Later on, for the purpose of raising Funds,
various meetings of good intentioned residents were
held, chiefly in a little room at the Royal Hotel, Bondi.
At the first meeting £8 18s. (id. was raised, at the next
meeting a fortnight later £5 15s. (id. was added, and at
a still later meeting £5 13s, (id. more was received, when
a discussion took place with regard to the advisability
of convening a Public Meeting to further ventilate the
matter. Other meetings were of course held at the
' rendezvous,’ the Royal Hotel, Bondi. I attended one
of those meetings, but being dissatisfied with both the
location and the surroundings, suggested that the Waver-
ley Municipal Council be asked to grant the free use of
the Council Chambers in which to hold further meetings.
The Mayor at that time, Mr. J. Campbell, J.P., and the
Aldermen cheerfully granted the request. At a later
meeting it was finally decided to convene a Special Meet-
ing of the Residents.
In response to Advertisements in the Newspapers
a large and very representative gathering of ladies
and gentlemen attended the first Public Meeting,
which was presided over by the Mayor, and held
in the Cricket Pavilion, Waverley Park, on the night
of the 25th September, 1911. A resolution was carried
to establish a School of Arts for the Bondi and Waverley
Districts, and for the purpose of giving practical effect
to the resolution a Subscription List was started;
£l7 7s. (id. was promised at that meeting, my personal
donation being £lO 10s. An Organising Committee was
appointed, with power to add to the number. Some
short while after the public meeting referred to, the
President of the initial movement, Mr. S. 0. Irvine,
tendered his Resignation, which was accepted, and at
the following meeting, held at the old Waverley Council
Chambers, I was elected (upon the resolution of the
retiring President) the new President of the Movement.
At that date the cash at Bankers totalled £Bl. I domot
propose to follow the numerous doings and workings of
the Organising Committee more than to say that they
were certainly kaleidoscopic and frequently exciting.
Many further meetings were held at the old Council
Chambers. To show the interest which was then being
taken, it was not unusual to find (50 to 100 residents in


attendance at those meetings, all of which were under
my Presidency. Upon all sides difficulties presented
themselves, rocks and shoals abounded everywhere,
and I can assure you, nay friends, it was a work of Art,
bordering on Genius, to conduct those meetings with
satisfaction and success. I shall never forget one
meeting when a number of ladies walked in ‘ a la Mrs.
Pankhurst,’ and demanded Women’s Rights for election
upon the Committee. (Laughter.) There is not an-
other man in the Community who realises more than
myself, or more freely acknowledges the help that
women can render ; I speak of women’s help both with
bowed and uncovered head, for are not women
responsible for our chief Social Joys ? But, not-
withstanding the well-intentioned efforts of the ladies
referred to, and their wish to wear the ‘ breeches of
Government,’ their desire in that direction did not meet
with approbation. (Laughter.) The acquisition of a
suitable and central Site proved a source of tremendous
anxiety. Waverley residents wanted a site somewhere
near the Waverley Junction; Bondi residents wanted
it somewhere near the ocean beach. I often wondered,
if 1 could construct a Building upon wheels, whether I
would succeed by that means in pleasing everyone.
Advertisements in the newspapers brought " offers to
sell ’at fictitious values. Deputations waited upon the
Council, upon important individual members of the
Community, as well as upon Ministers of the Crown, and
eventually, upon behalf of the community, I entered
into a Contract with Mr. John Gibbs to purchase the
Property we now own (then a two-storey private resi-
dence known as ‘ Navestock’), afterwards vested in
Dr. Alfred Burne, Mr. F. P. J. Gray and myself, as
Trustees and joint guardians of the interests of the
Government and the community. I cannot possibly,
upon an Occasion like this, specifically or in detail
individualise the abundant as well as the cheerful
assistance I have received from many worthy men and
women in the community, but I must not overlook or
omit to acknowledge the great service rendered me
and the Institution by my personal friend, Mr. F.
Stockham, our architect, and also his firm. If any man
here has ever had anything to do with the conversion


of a private residence into a Public Institution, and then
attend to the furnishing in all its multifarious details,
he will know and understand exactly what I mean.
Mr. Stockham’s professional fee, upon a Commission
Basis, was just over £IOO, half of which he and his
partner returned in cash to the Institution. If his Fee
had been increased threefold ho would not have been
overpaid. Actions talk louder than words! (Cheers.)
During the first year of my Presidency I succeeded in
obtaining £2(1(110s. sd. by Gratuitous Donations. During
the second year that sum was increased to over £IOO,
and during the third year (after the payment of all
working expenses) the capital stood at £7OO nett. With
the Capital referred to, and a good many promises in
store, I entered into various Obligations amounting to
between £SOOO and £(1000. To most persons it might
be quite an enjoyable Diversion spending money, but
to me it did not prove quite so easy an Occupation as
might be imagined—spending a matter of about £(1000
when I hadn’t got it. As a matter of fact, you will
remember the Premier’s observation at the Official
Opening of the Institution : ‘He regretted that I was
not a Cabinet Minister in his Government occupying
the position of Colonial Treasurer.’ A good Under-
standing as well as a good knowledge of Finance has been
necessary, as indicated by the fact that 1 have spent
over £(1000 in connection with the Building and its
Equipment, and am glad to state that every Obligation
has been met upon its due date, whilst not one penny
of Cash Discount has ever been lost. (Cheers.) During
the early period and afterwards, many Public Enter-
prises w r ore carried out—Euchre Tournaments, High-class
Concerts,Picture Entertainments, Continentals, Juvenile
public school Concerts, Dramatic Entertainments, and
Public Balls, the latter being always held at the Pad-
dington Town Hall. The first Annual Ball netted nearly
£1)0. The amount of hard labour and organising work
involved was stupendous ; but, I must say in the most
cheerful and in the most public spirited manner possible,
that the great Success which followed the efforts of the
various committees and others associated with the
various Enterprises could not have occurred had it not
been for the energy displayed and the assistance 1 have


at all times received from the Ladies of the Community.
(Cheers.) Little differences of opinion—as is usual —
at times presented themselves, but the Cobwebs of
Misunderstanding which germinate in ardour were
always cleared away by that resourceful Presidential
specific, “firmness and tact.” (Laughter.) Will those
gentlemen present ever forget the beautiful, exciting
and lovely meetings which were held for nearly two
years at my old home, ‘ Scarba ’ ? Indeed, it would be
difficult for me to decide whether it was the Sherbet, the
Cigars, the Coffee, the Atmosphere, or the Host which
proved the greatest measure of Attraction ; but you
may take my word, they were ‘ some ’ meetings, at
which no one was more delighted than your humble
servant. (Hear, hear.) What shall I say of that magni-
ficent gift, ‘ The Sands Library and Cedar Fittings,’
presented by my dear and esteemed friends, the Sands
family ! (Cheers.) What shall I say about that
munificent gift that came to us through the courtesy
of my dear old friend, Mr. 11. G. Watkins (ex-Mayor of
Waverley), the ‘ Waverley Jubilee Fund,’ amounting
to £77 17s. od. (Cheers.) What shall I say about the
great assistance 1 received in other directions, primarily
from my first Honorary Secretary and esteemed friend,
Mr. W. F. Gregory, and some of his Co-workers at that
time ; Mr. H. Thompson, my first Honorary Treasurer,
and Mr. J. S. Robyns, my first and continuous Honorary
Librarian? You all know in what form I acknowledged
and still acknowledge the great services rendered to
the Institution by Mr. Robyns. I had other Honorary
Secretaries, good men and true, but being such a Tiger
for work myself, and expecting them to follow my lead
and example, I broke them all up one by one. (Laughter.)
I shall not make further reference to ‘ Memories of the
Past ’ beyond referring to the numerous and varied
interviews I personally had, and at times in conjunction
with others, with various Ministers of the Crown re-
specting the long-promised Government Subsidy, which
I ultimately obtained ; and also to remind you of the
names of the men and women who have honoured
themselves by becoming Benefactors and Life Members
of this Institution. Still, 1 think 1 may be pardoned
if I draw your attention to one Act of my Administration


—shall I call it ‘ The Window Dressing Act ? ’ —the
publication of our five Annual Reports, each of which
1 personally edited, after receiving great assistance in
various directions. Apart from ordinary Membership
Subscriptions, 1 succeeded in raising the large sum of
over £2OOO in cash from Benefactors, Life Members,
Gratuitous Donations and Public Enterprises, and during
the whole five years kept a private stenographer ami
typiste fully employed, entirely at my own expense.
(Cheers.) The man who says ‘Advertising is no good,’
in my opinion should be re-incarnated. Had it not been
for the wretched War, I do believe that I could have
succeeded in obtaining a further £750 from the Govern-
ment ; a further £SOO from Benefactors and Life Mem-
bers (who now number 110), and at least another £IOOO
from Public Enterprises, and 1 also believe the Members’
Roll would undoubtedly have reached my Objective,
1000. (Cheers.) You all know, gentlemen, that it has
required a strong will, a stiff back, and a stout heart,
as well as Herculean strength, to keep the Ship on even
keel and in the ‘ Fairway.’ It has always been my wish
and my Policy to endeavour to possess a Committee
composed of men representing divergent opinions,
because, after all, ‘ Right and Truth ’ must prevail;
it is only by understanding and learning the point
of view of others that Satisfactory Results can be
achieved. Ido not believe much in Luck ; am rather
inclined to place more reliance in Effort, for it is a
well-known truism that ‘ Effect ’ always follows ‘ Cause’;
without a good Cause, the effect often proves barren
and disappointing. At some of our Committee meetings
strange ideas were at times introduced. I have often
felt embarrassed, and would have liked to metaphorically
put out my hand to feel if some of the things which were
said were tangible, or —only ‘ Things of Illusion.’ On
occasions I have been blamed for my failure to place
the rubber stamp of ‘ Passive Acquiescence ’ upon Pro-
posals I did not believe in. Perhaps my ideas were
the result of Incompatibility of Conception, because,
after all, it chiefly depends from which Angle a man
or his Proposals are judged ; but, there is one thing,
gentlemen, I am sure that even those who were
not able to see eye to eye with me will gladly admit—


1 have always been sincere, and ‘ Sincerity and the
Opposite ’ cannot live together. Although language
may be used to cover thought, I have never been able
to live side by side with ‘ a Gilded Lie.’ Truth is truth,
whether it is spoken in Bondi or Kamtchatka. (Cheers.)
Unfortunately, there are some persons in this, as in
other Communities, to whom the mere suggestion of
wrongdoing is an unpardonable Sin. Some persons can-
not stand Criticism or even a suggestion of reproof; it
rankles so in them that it puckers up all their good
qualities, and counteracts the very best chance of their
Improvement. I have always found throughout my
busy life that the man who quits his task because some-
one criticised the way he did it, either has no grounds
upon which to defend himself, or the bigness to overcome
the childishness left in his Nature. A man cannot be both
Friend and Flatterer, but the man who does us the most
good is the man who shows us how to improve our work.
In short, it is a man’s Duty, whatever his position may
be, if ‘ Duty ’ means anything at all, to come up to the
Scratch and toe the Mark. (Cheers.) During my Public
Life I have been the leader of different Successful Move-
ments, and whilst occupying such positions have always
endeavoured to lay down for the consideration of those
who have been opposed to me, the words of Horace—
‘ // a beMer system's thine,
Impart it frankly, or make use of mine.'
Never at any time have I expected anyone to suppose
that observations made by me at the Committee table
were like so many Postage Stamps, each to be only
uttered once ; if anyone did think so, he was mistaken.
He must be a poor Creature who does not often repeat
himself. Why, the Truths a man carries about with him
are his Tools ; and do you think a Carpenter is bound
to use the same Plane but once to smooth a knotty
Board with, or hang up his Hammer after he has driven
the first nail ? I shall never repeat a Conversation, but
an Idea, often. (Cheers.) Mr. President and Gentlemen
all, I fear that 1 have trespassed upon time, but if I have
spoken at greater length than I should you must pardon
me, because the Occasion is unique ; and though per-
haps I have said much, 1 believe you will acknowledge


1 have said something. I thank you sincerely for the
beautiful Address which you have this night presented
to me, as well as your words of kindness which accom-
panied it. As the Address indicates, I am still a
Trustee. Unless 1 die or go mad, or become removed
to some other sphere far, far away, I shall very likely
continue to remain a Trustee ; firstly, because the
School of Arts is ‘ my Child ’ whose upbringing it is my
bounden duty to assist and to guard ; and secondly,
because 1 am hemmed in by both Legal and Moral
Responsibilities. 1 have no fault to find with any
individual man or woman, and bear no feeling of un-
kindness against anyone connected with the School of
Arts. At all times I have fairly, fearlessly, and faith-
fully done my best to carryout the Duties of my Office.
I believe, if the Committee had given the Benefactors, the
Life Members, and my many other personal friends also
associated with the School of Arts the desired Oppor-
tunity of joining hands with to-night’s function, such
action would have afforded them both acquiescence and
pleasure. Before taking my seat, permit me, Mr.
President, to conclude by quoting those beautiful senti-
mental Lines by Horace Arnold Walters entitled ‘ My
Creed’
‘ I would be true, for there are those who trust me ;
1 would he pure, for there are those who care :
I would be strong, for there is much to suffer :
I would be brave, for there is much to dare.
I would he friend to all —the foe, the friendless :
I would he giving, and forget the gift :
I would be humble, for I know mg weakness :
I would look up —and laugh—and love—and lift.'’ ”
(Much applause.)
During the evening some fine songs and recitations
were rendered, and it was just upon midnight when the
Social Gathering dispersed, each one wishing “Good
Luck” to their esteemed Guest.
