









Portland pioneer Women’s
Book of Remembrance




CENTENARY OF PORTLAND
(First Permanent Settlement of Victoria)
1834 -1934
' ' BOOK ' '
OF
REMEMBRANCE
.... OF THE ....
Pioneer Women of the Portland Bay District
Whose self-sacrificing devotion to duty contributed so greatly to the Peace, Happiness
and Prosperity of the State.
IDt'Mcah'ii to tlu' JHrmortt of Jllra. jSL ®. Utrutu our Jnrst Ilf omau tourer.




‘8? 1?
MRS. A. M. MOSS, C.B.E., J.P.
3rd April, 1934.
T[| AM very sensible of and sensitive
v to the compliment Miss Wadmore
pays me in asking* me to write a “Fore-
word" to the ‘‘Pioneer Women’s Book
of Remembrance.”
This book will grow in value as the
years pass, for though the hurrying
present may do its best to blot out the
inspiring past, these records will stand
as sentinels of achievement.
To all Victorians the early history
of Portland and the subsequent de-
velopment of our State must be of ab-
sorbing interest, and on the eve of her
hundredth birthday it were well to
turn back the pages of history and
envisage that sunny day in November.
1834. when the new territory now
known as Victoria, was invaded by
that adventurous spirit, who, landing,
saw “The Vision Beautiful' ’and made
haste to see “Another Eden blossom
from the soil." and who relied on his
own strength to overcome the difficul-
ties which beset him.
The name of Henty is so inter-
woven with that of Portland, and from
Portland to what we Victorians owe
to his initiative that no “Foreword"
could be complete without mention of
Edward Henty and his brave, unselfish
wife, to whom all honour must be paid.
I feel this “Book of Remembrance"
has been compiled in a spirit of Loyalty,
Love and Reverence, and its dedication
to Mrs. Stephen George Henty pays a
worthy tribute to the memory of the
first of our pioneer women.
It could be no easy matter gather-
ing the records of nearly two thousand
women in a land where the work of
these splendid Pioneer Women was
just accepted as a matter of course,
and one is reminded of Ethel Martyr’s
lines, wherein she paints the Pioneer
Women in a setting we of to-day can
barely understand: —
“Their women live apart, and wearily they work
And little dream the shining strands
Which make this nation’s robe of destiny
Are placed within their strong, unresting hands.’’
All honour to those splendid women
whose unselfish. unwearying zeal
helped to make the Victoria of to-day!
All honour to those who, determin-
ing that that zeal should no longer
remain unsung, have answered the
challenge and given us this “Book of
Remembrance."
I am honoured in being* asked to
write a “Foreword" for it.
ALICE MABEL MOSS.
Chairman Women’s Centenary Couneil.
FOREWORD




plmmm uf llictnria at appreciation
‘‘For them no trumpet sounds the call, no poet plies his arts,
They only hear the beating of their gallant, loving hearts;
For they have sung with silent lives the song all songs above —
The holiness of sacrifice, the dignity of love.’’
These lines justly eulogise the Women of the
West, why not the Women of the South-West of
Victoria ?
The pioneer women of Victoria; Who shall sing
their praises? Who will build a fitting monument to
them? Their lives of self-sacrifice are forgotten by
men’s short memories, but they live in the courage
and endurance their children have inherited
through the generations.
In the pioneering days there were no Unions to
regulate the settlers' hours of toil. They cleared and
tilled the land —a herculean task —made roads and
established trading centres. The women cooked and
baked and washed, but kept their smile always
bright to cheer their husbands’ fagged and drooping
spirits. Sewing machines were unknown then, but
fingers that were never idle were just as effective.
While the men rested after their day’s work, the
women darned and patched and hemmed. There
was always a sock on the needles ready to be taken
up at any minute; even the rocking of the cradle
did not hinder its progress. Only in the grave
would those busy fingers rest.
When the simple household tasks permitted,
the women gave whatever outdoor help they could
to their husbands, whose heavy toil was lightened
by conjugal love.
In the Summer the fear of drought worried the
men —the cattle might die, or at least water would
have to be carted; still the women managed to keep
the little gardens alive. They treated the flowers
almost like children —chiding one, coaxing another,
protecting yet another —and this is the secret of
“the growing touch” which people, less successful
with plants, so often envy. Even in our sophisti-
cated age it is the garden that makes the “home”
as distinguished from a mere dwelling.
The garden was some little compensation for
incredible discomforts the early settlers, especially
women who had been tenderly nurtured, had to en-
dure from log huts with leaking roofs, to sickness
without doctor or friend to afford some measure of
relief. How ready they were to succour one another
in sickness, we have an example in the early history
ot Cape Bridgewater. It is recorded that a woman,
hearing of a neighbour’s illness, set out to her aid
on the back of a draught horse, but deeming its
slow and measured stride too tedious —every minute
being precious—she dismounted and ran. Spaces
were wide “when the world was young,” and for
Victoria then the world was in its infancy. Neigh-
bours lived far away; the sight of another woman’s
face was rare indeed.
The pioneer mother did not shrink from the
pangs of motherhood, and the advent of a stalwart
son or winsome daughter rewarded them a hundred-
fold for all they had suffered or were yet to endure,
for the parents, and particularly the mother's, anxie-
ty increases with the children's advancement in age.
We cannot conclude this appreciation more fit-
tingly than with “John O’Brien’s” simple words: —■
‘‘There’s a little Irish mother that a lonely vigil keeps
In the settler’s hut where seldom stranger comes,
Watching by the home-made cradle where one more Australian sleeps,
While the breezes whisper weird things to the gums;
Where the settlers battle gamely, beaten down to rise again,
And the brave bush wives the toil and silence share,
Where the nation is a-building in the hearts of splendid men—
There’s a little Irish mother always there.’’
But whatever the nationality, the spirit was the
same, and their descendants who live in luxurv and
ease are indeed degenerate if they do not hold in
honour those valiant women whose fortitude was
the source of untold blessings to all who came
within their sphere of influence.




M RS. Stephen George Henty, to whom
this ''Book of Remembrance” is
dedicated, was the first white woman
to make her home at Portland, the first
permanent settlement in Victoria. Her
son Richmond was the first white child
born in the settlement (August 3, 1837).
In his book '' Australiana, or My
Early Life,’’ Richmond Henty tells us
something of his parentage. Referring
to the Swan River (W.A.) settlement
of the Hentys, he states: —''At this
time (1833), my father was at Swan
River, where he had been left to wind
up affairs after the departure of his
brothers. He there married my mother,
the daughter of Captain Pace, com-
mander of an armed sloop-of-war in the
East India Company’s service Sir
James Stirling, then Governor of West-
ern Australia, acting in loco parentis
and giving my mother away, her father
at that time being absent on the coast
of Java. In June, 1836, my father
sailed for Portland Bay and Launces-
ton from King George’s Sound, where
tne captain of the ship, the Sally Ann,
was accidentally drowned by the up-
setting of a .whale boat when coming
off to the schooner in Princess Royal
Harbour. The navigation of the vessel
then devolved on my father, although
his knowledge of seamanship had only
been obtained on his voyage from the
old country. Hence, either from the
set of the currents or faulty observa-
tion, he mistook Cape Otway for Cape
Bridgewater, and sailing down the
coast entered Port Phillip Heads, and
sailing up the bay for 25 miles an-
chored. Finding his mistake he put
about and took a fresh departure for
Portland, where he arrived with ray
mother on the 18th December, 1836.
The arrival of Stephen with his young
wife (he was 25 years, she 19), made
some stir in the settlement. Edward
and Francis vacated Richmond Cottage
for the young couple. Mrs. Henty thus
wrote of her reception;—“lt was on a
Sunday night we landed by moonlight.
I was carried on shore through the surf
by a sailor and landed safely on terra
firma. On reaching the homestead, a
comfortable dwelling composed of four
rooms with kitchen and dairy, a bright
log fire was burning, table spread with
a large 'pot’ loaf, butter, piles of eggs
and tea. My brother-in-law, Frank
Kenty, met me at the door, saying:
'Welcome, Mrs. Stephen.’ I said: ‘My
name is Jane Henty, your sister.’ After
a night’s rest, I rose about 10 in the
morning, having been ill on the voyage.
My husband was engaged landing
stores, furniture, etc., and Edward put-
ting the sitting-room what he called
ship-shape. It had been white-washed
on Saturday, and there had been no
time to remove the splashes, which he
and a man they had brought over from
Swan River were trying to obliterate,
so I quietly returned to my room till
the work was completed. We were a
happy, merry party —ray three brothers,
Edward, John and Frank, all thought-
fulness and kindness; but I felt tie
want of a woman’s company. The one
we had engaged in Tasmania had re-
fused to go just as the vessel was
dropping down the River Tamar, some-
one having told her she would be
eaten by cannibals.”
MRS. STEPHEN GEORGE HENTY.




'
f
' jgg jms -l&iSL
J®p» | i B . ar '
Tn “Some Recollections of Earlv
Days in Australia—from January,
1840, to 1917“ Mrs. George
Godwin Crouch, of “Armadale,”
Portland, has preserved to pos-
terity a store of valuable histori-
cal information concerning early
colonial experiences, particularly
in relation to the Portland Bay
settlement. Her written record
closed in her 95th year, but she
was spared to reach her century,
still retaining her remarkable
mental faculties.
The accompanying letterpress
briefly summarises some of her
“Recollections” :
In 1839 1 and my brother James
left England on board the good
ship Java, a teak-built East India-
man, and after a four months’
passage and many events, landed
early in January, 1840, a„ Holdfast
Bay, in South Australia. We were
two young colonists, and all was
new and strange—the open road-
stead, the sandy hummocks, the
distant hills, the shrubs and plants
and intense heat, which caused the
pitch to melt in the seams of the
deck, ere we left it. To be carried
through the surf in the strong
arms of a good-natured sailor was
a novelty, and a few miles drive to
the settlement on a dray was an-
other. There were no piers or jet-
ties then, nor any coaches or cabs.
Reminiscences of One of Our Earliest
Women Pioneers.
MRS. GEORGE GODWIN CROUCH.
Sometimes we walked as others
rode, and no one complained. We
made no delay in Adelaide (a city
in prospect then). The streets
were laid out, stumps of felled
trees here and there. Scattered far
and wide were a few iron and
piesse cottages and tents in Hind-
ley and Bundle streets. (Here is
described a trip into the country.)
Returned to Adelaide, feeling we
must not be idlers in it, but intent
on doing a share in the settling of
the new colony. Vegetables could
hardly be thought of, A sealer
came from Kangaroo Is., where he
lived with a native wife and child-
ren, bringing with him a sack of
turnips, which he sold readily at
2/6 each, so precious were they.
Bad times fell upon the settle-
ment. Only one or two of the
merchants escaped failure. Peo])le
faced hardship with brave resolu-
tion. and turned their hands to
agriculture—ploughing and sow-
ing. Mrs. Gawler showed me with
pleasure and pride the first loaf
made from flour grown locally.
I he bread had a ]>lace on the side-
board at the Government cottage.
(The departure of Captain Sturt
on a journey of exploration is
mentioned.) Bad times continued.
There was a rumour that the
Home Government had repudiated
the debts contracted by the colo-
nists, and it was a standing joke


that the man who built the jail was
the first man to be put into it, be-
cause he could not pay his workmen.
My brother took up land with a
friend. The country was pleasant to
the eye, with the beauty of tree and
flower. (Here the writer briefly re-
fers to her marriage, which took
place quietly in the little Church of
England.) “G” went to Launceston,
where I was to follow when he set-
tled. After some time I was request-
ed to meet him in Portland Bay,
where the Henty family had a settle-
ment. Making inquiries I found
vessels had resumed running, but no
captain would take the risk of putting
me ashore there, so little was the
coast known. It was considered too
dangerous. Then my brother came to
the rescue by making arrangements
for both of us to go together to Laun-
ceston in the pretty little schooner
Hawk, Captain Brown in command.
A favourable wind, and good-byes to
friends on shore, we sailed, and atter
a short passage reached the Tamar.
There was no other communication
with Portland Bay at that time than
Mr. S. G. Henty’s schooner Minerva
and the Essington. After a few days
spent in Launceston we managed to
get a passage in the Essington. 1 here
were no other passengers but a cattle
cargo in the hold, rather unpleasant-
Iv near, as there were only the boards
between them and our berths, and
the creatures were unhappy in then-
close confinement. After a quick run
anchor was dropped in the bay, while
a boat rapidly pulled off to meet us.
Eyes and heart rejoiced at the sight
of my husband. But what a place I
had come to. A deep bay; its waters
glittering in the bright sunshine. To
the south a steep bluff, covered with
shrubs from top to bottom, and fes-
tooned with the mesambryan. At the
foot a whaling station on the point
where a creek flowed out; low sand-
stone cliffs dipping to sand hum-
mocks. and here and there beyond a
few scattered dwellings. Then Mr.
Henty’s cottage, with a garden run-
ning down to the sand. Beyond, ris-
ing ground and cliffs to the North
Bluff, where was another whaling-
station and look-out for the men en-
gaged in it. Beyond that again, a
long, low, sandy shore, bending round
under Mount Cla}-, and called the
Convincing Ground, backed by scrub
and forest all unspoiled by the
hand of man. On the horizon, Jul a
Percy Is. and Lawrence Rocks. Only
one spot of ground in the township
had been cleared, and this was for
a home paddock at the back of Mr.
Henty’s cottage, and log fenced. An-
other piece of ground had been cleared
on the North Bluff, where the casur-
ina waved and moaned in the wind.
This tree gave splendid wood for the
fires on cold winter nights. The boat
was run into the surf, and a bright,
strong, kindly man caught me in his
arms and I was ashore in this place,
so new and strange to me. It seemed
so out of the world. Only two little
vessels linked us with the rest of it.
There was plenty to do. The people
were kindly, especially Mrs. Henty,
kind and interested.
Continuing- her story, Mrs. Crouch
describes the difficulties of making a
home in a new country, where one's
resources are limited to the few
things that chance to be at hand. A
temporary shelter was run up. After
seeing me safely settled my brother
returned to Van Diemen's Land. Our
house was barely a shelter from sun
and rain. The wind whistled through
the place, while rain came down the
chimney in torrents and put out the
fire. The conditions were quite
enough to rouse one to the efifort of
bettering things. Stout unbleached
calico was tacked on the walls,
shingles were laid loosely on the
ground floor and covered with thick
carpet; a shallow case, with a shelf
put in and covered with some black
linen, served to hold books; boxes
draped for side-tables, with a few
flowers and foliage, and sundry small
inventions, soon made it more in-
habitable, though in spite of a roar-
ing fire the cold south-east wind
could not be denied. That winter an
umbrella protected the bed when the
rain came from a certain quarter.
At other times the outlook would
have suited an astronomer —there
was ample opportunitv for studving
the stars through the open parts.
Equally interesting chapters de-
scribe the making of a garden, yield-
ing - vegetables and flowers. The
colonists were not easily daunted.


||||' m / r v m
WES'* x?" 4>'
yU::
>;.
' " JBk'
MRS. ALEXANDER LAURIE.
The late Mrs. Alexander Laurie
was born at Carstairs, Lanarkshire,
Scotland, on February 20th, 1822.
Her maiden name was Janet Bunyan
Nicol. She was one of a family of
eight girls, and her father, Andrew
Nicol (Professor) had a college for
young gentlemen at Carwarth, she
herself being educated at a boarding-
school at Melrose. She married the
Rev. Alexander Laurie on June Ist,
1841. With her husband she came to
Australia shortly after her marriage,
taking passage in the ship William
Nicol. After a voyage of five months
they landed first at Port Phillip on
February 9. 1842, where they were
entertained by the Rev. and Mrs.
James Forbes. After sojourning
there a while they came on to Port-
land by sailing boat, where she was
carried ashore in a chair through the
surf by sailors. Her eldest son was
born the same day. Owing to quar-
antine regulations, they were not al-
lowed to stay at any of the hotels,
and perforce found a shelter in a
draughty place near the old flour
mills in Percy-street, where she
caught cold and was deaf all the \ est
of her life. In 1850 Mr. Laurie be-
came actively interested in the “Port-
land Herald,” and upon his demise
Mrs. Laurie edited the paper. On
22nd April, 1861. she married Joshua
Black, of “Corkhill.” Cape Bridge-
water. She went to Mount Gammer
WORTHY PIONEERS
(BY S. J. W.)
for a short while to start her two
sons in the “Border Watch,” The
elder brother, Andrew Frederick, was
seventeen years old. Park was the
other. The paper was first published
April 26. 1861. The settlement pros-
MRS. ALEXANDER LAURIE.
pered and the enterprise of the Laurie
boys was wholly successful. The
name of the paper was suggested by
Mrs. Laurie. On the border between
England and Scotland there was a
paper called “The Border Watch,”
and as Mount Gambler was close to
the border Mrs. Laurie thought it
would be an appropriate name for
the new paper. The “Border Watch"
celebrated its entry into its 73rd year
of publication in May, 1933. The
paper is carried on by Messrs. Fred.
J. and C. H. Laurie, and Mr. J. R.
Watson. Mrs. Laurie died at Bridge-
water in her 82nd year.
MRS. WILLIAM LIGHTBODY.
Mrs. William Lightbody, before
she was married, was Miss Rebecca
Kittson, daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James Kittson, who, with their
family, came over from Geelong to
Portland in 1842. They were in
quest of land, and settled at “The
Lakes,” Bridgewater, A strong tide
of emigration to Portland Bay had
set in from the old country, and as
the spiritual wants of the people had
to be attended to, and there was a
great number of Methodists amongst
them, they sent an application to the
Genera] Superintendent for the ap-
pointment of a minister, and in
answer to their urgent presentation
of the matter the Rev. William
Lightbody was sent over from Syd-
ney to take charge of the Methodist
cause. His circuit extended to Port
Fairy and Warrnambool (then bud-
ding into existence). His heart, how-
ever. turned to the far west, as the


needle turns to the pole, for there at
Bridgewater was the “fair Lady of
the Lake,” who became his faithful
wife. In the absence of any quali-
fied minister nearer than Geelong,
thither they went, each on horseback
—bride and bridegroom, accompanied
by the bride’s brother, Hugh. Mrs.
Lightbodv carried out her wifely
duties conscientiously, mothering
four sons and two daughters. After
the death of her husband she came
to Portland and resided with her
daughter. Ella. Full of years and
ripened experience, and greatly be-
loved, she passed away at the re-
markable age of 101 years, retaining
all her faculties to the last. Pos-
teritv may well acclaim her one of
Victoria’s noble pioneer women.
MRS. HENRY McKINLEY.
Mrs. Henry McKinley (nee Rose
Anna Kennedy) came with her par-
ents, Mr. and Mrs. James Kennedy,
to Portland, in the year 1842, and
later went to Cape Bridgewater,
where many of the descendants still
live. Rose Anna, prior to coming to
Portland, had visited New York and
gained great experiences in that city.
After marrying Henry McKinley, she
and her husband opened a guest
house at the Cape for visitors and
tourists, and carried on the establish-
ment for several years. Many of the
Western District station holders, well
known artists, members of Parlia-
ment, several members of the Plenty
family, used to spend the summer on
the Cape at McKinley’s. Mrs. Mc-
Kinley was a wonderfully skilled
woman and much sought after in
times of sickness and need, and
generally exercised a beneficent in-
fluence on those around her.
MRS. FAWTHROP.
Mrs. Fawthrop, wife of Captain
James Fawthrop, was born in Corn-
wall, her maiden name being jane
Rosevear, She arrived at Rosevear’s
Point, Launceston, Tasmania, in
1832, and married Mr. Ward in 1835.
Three years later she was left a
widow with two sons. In 1839 she
married Captain James Fawthrop
and came with him to Portland in
1850, and lived at “Windsor” (the
fine old house now occupied by the
Misses Mallon) until the Captain’s
death in 1878. She then went to
Brisbane, where her only daughter,
Mary, lived with her husband, who
was one of the twenty-two survivors
of the ill-fated Admella, in whose
rescue Captain Fawthrop played a
gallant part. No doubt Mary Miller
has in her possession the gold medal
awarded her father for his heroic
deed. We can easily understand Mrs.
Fawthrop, as well as other noble
women of that time, vieing with one
another in attending and caring for
the poor famished creatures who had
for seven days and nights endured
the tortures and agonies of ship-
wreck of the most harrowing descrip-
tion. Well may we say, God bless the
Portland women who cared for and
comforted the Admella survivors.
MRS. THOMAS WARD.
Mrs. Ward was born in Launces-
ton, Tasmania, in 183-I—the year the
Hentys founded the first settlement
at Portland, in Victoria. Her name
was Eleanor R. Jones, and she came
over to Portland to visit her friend,
Mrs. Fawthrop, and eventually mar-
ried that lady’s son (by her first hus-
band), Thomas Ward, and was a
young bride when Captain Faw-
throp and his gallant crew rescued
the survivors of the ill-fated Ad-
mella, young Tom Ward being one
of the life-boat’s crew. Afterwards
he became Pilot Ward, and he and
his wife and family (four daughters
and three sons) lived at Battery
Point, South Portland, from which a
wonderful view of the town and
coast line can be seen. We can pic-
ture that young bride standing on
the headland on that memorable oc-
casion, watching and praying (for
we are told she was an earnest
worker in our Lord's cause, and a
devoted wife and mother) for the
return of the lifeboat, and the joy
and relief that must have been hers
when it hove in sight; and how she
would hasten to greet her husband
and tender her help and sympathy
to the sorely distressed survivors of
the wreck. Again we say, God bless
the noble Portland women of Aug-
ust, 1859.
It is recorded that in 1842 some excitement
was caused in the settlement by a pack of native
dogs running away with the canine protector of
the poundkeeper, so close was the virgin forest.


' .
. _.. .-.Jam
-
SARAH JANE WADMORE.
the convener of the Portland
Bay District Pioneer Women’s
Book of Remembrance, was
born on Cape Bridgewater,
fourteen miles from Portland.
Her parents, James and Mary
Wadmore, came from Brasted,
Kent, England, in the sailing
ship “Constant,” registered 535
tons. Captain James, the agents
being Messrs. S. G. Henty and
Co. It was her maiden voy-
age. She sailed into Portland
Bay on February 24, 1855, after
being becalmed for two days
off Cape Bridgewater. James
Wadmore acted as doctor’s
assistant on the voyage, which
lasted three months, and was
instrumental in quelling a riot
on board ship. Consequently
he and his young wife enjoyed
many privileges. On arrival
at Portland Bay. as there were
no jetties in those days. Mrs.
Wadmore was carried ashore
on the back of a kindly sailor.
After spending a short time in
Portland, the young couple got
employment with the late Mr.
Charlton Hedditch, at Cape
Bridgewater, and subsequently
took up land and began farm-
ing. A month after the birth
of their youngest child. Sarah,
a dire calamity befell the family
in the accidental death of their
father and breadwinner. Mr.
Wadmore was fishing off the
rocks on the west coast of
Bridgewater, with another man
and a boy, and was washed off
by one of those treacherous
waves which rise up nnexpect-
edly. Although he was a
powerful swimmer and called
lustily for aid, his companions
were powerless to render any
assistance. His body was
sucked under a ledge of rock
and was not recovered until
the third day. The poor young
widow, just recovering from
her maternal illness, might
have succumbed to her loss,
only for the sympathetic help
of her neighbours—those won-
derful pioneers who were the
backbone of society in the
early days of settlement. When
time had softened and mel-
lowed the shock of her bus-
band’s death. Mrs. Wadmore,
although born and bred in the
City of London, and unused to
the hardships and privations
attending life in a new coun-
try, rose to everv emergency
and struggled bravely and sue-
cessfully to maintain and edu-
cate her children. “Whatso-
ever her hand found to do, she
did it with her might,” not for-
getting the troubles of others
in her own. On her high spirit-
ed bay mare, at all hours of the
day and night, she sought to
help the sick and afflicted, and
those in trouble and distress. At
SARAH JANE WADMORE.


a time like this when we speak with
pride of our humanitarian legislation
and amelioration of social wrongs,
it is well to remember that in those
primitive times there was no State
aid for widows and orphans, and the
rearing and training of a young and
helpless family was no light task. So
at an early age. Sarah, who had de-
veloped into a healthy country
woman at the age of fifteen years,
was able to help her brother in all
the duties of the farm. The State
school teachers, Mr. and Mrs. Joseph
Voysey, who had always taken a
great interest in Sarah, offered lo
train her for a school teacher This
was gladly accepted by the widow,
and so to those people can be attrib-
uted any success achieved in her life.
At the age of twenty she was ap-
pointed head teacher of the Kent-
bruck State school, and for years
carried out her duties in that capaci-
ty. Some of her reminiscences have
been published recently.
When the Portland Centenary cele-
brations were first spoken of, it was
her one great ambition in connection
with the great historical event to
have a Book of Remembrance com-
piled of the Portland Bay District
Pioneer Women, who had done such
yeoman work in developing die
country. Belonging to the original
Centenary Committee, she enlisted
the heln of her life-long friend, Mr.
W. F. Hedditch, formerly of Bridge-
water, and Mr. E. Davis, proprietor
of the “Observer” newspaper, and
this little book, the product of their
labours, may serve the end in view
by recalling kindly memories of our
women pioneers.
MRS. DUNCAN McRAE.
(By S. J. W.)
Mrs. Duncan Mcßae, whose maiden
name was Janet Mcßa, was married
in Scots Church, Melbourne, on Nov.
30, 1841, and went by sailing boat to
Geelong ,and from there rode on
horseback to Portland. She stayed
there for twelve months, and then
rode to Glenorchy station, near Cas-
terton, on the Glenelg River. A
while later she moved to Glenlivet,
near Merino, and a few years after-
wards went to Glenaulin, near Dart-
moor. Though not abiding long in
one stay, she usually journeyed to
Portland several times a year to do
her shopping. Portland being the
only available town at the time. Her
daughter, Miss Laura Mcßae, who
is now (March, 1934) over 80 years
of age and still full of life and vigour,
and much interested in the centenaffy
celebrations, has in her possession an
article bought from John Finn, of
Portland in 185-1 —80 years old. The
Mcßaes were well and favourably
known in the Portland district, and
Mr. Mcßae was always spoken of as
“The real man Mcßae.’’ The blacks
never molested his home, cattle or
sheep, and never troubled him in any
way, because he was always good to
them. Mrs. Mcßae is one of the most
worthy pioneers to be honoured in
the Book of Remembrance, for she
was a wonderful mother and home
maker. She was always ready to visit
the sick or injured, and it is note-
worthy that after being - shown by a
Portland doctor she used to vaccin-
ate children, set broken limbs, or help
at births and deaths —a most useful
woman in every sense of the word.
She reared six sons and three daugh-
ters, and lived to the ripe old age of
81 years, having spent more than
half a century in the Portland district.
Mrs. McPherson.
Mrs. Marie Bennett McPherson
married Mr. McPherson, of Nan-
geela, Casterton, in May, 1845, at
Hobart, Tasmania, and landed in
Portland as a bride. They left Laun-
ceston in the brig Minerva. The first
jetty then was being built, and as
there was no other landing place,
Captain Fawthrop carried Mrs. Mc-
Pherson ashore. After a few days’
stay in Portland she and her husband
left for Casterton, riding as far as
Merino Downs on a pony lent by
Mr. S. G. Plenty; then on by his gig.
Portland in those days was the
nearest town and post office.
MRS. PEARSON.
Mrs. John Pearson, mother of
Mrs. Peter Learmonth, was closely
related to the Rev. J. Y. Simpson,
and lived for many years in the
beautiful home built by her husband
in Percy-street.


MISS ANN BEGLEN
According to the writer’s knowledge,
Miss Ann Beglen, of Pioneer Cottage,
Bentick-street, Portland, is the oldest born
native of the town living at the present
time (February, 1934). Her parents (Mr.
and Mrs. John Beglen) landed at Port-
land Bay on October 27, 1841, in the ship
Agricola. Two daughters Mary and
Bridget—married, the former became Mrs.
James Molloy, and the latter Mrs. John
Hall Beauvais, whose daughters and son
live in Portland. Miss Beglen was born
on July 12, 1847, so she is now in her 87th
year, and still retains all her mental
faculties and has rendered invaluable help
to the writer (through her niece’s kind-
ness) in recording names for the Portland
Bay District Pioneer Women’s Book of
Remembrance. Living almost at the gates
of Burswood (Edward Henty’s old home),
Miss Beglen had almost daily intercourse
with the Hentys and always speaks of
thinn in tlie highest terms as friends and
neighbours, and can recall many interest-
ing accounts and reminiscences of the past
associated with them. She is living at
Pioneer Cottage with her nieces, the
Misses Beauvais, who now own the old
home where she was born. It was built for
her father in the days before roads were
formed, of Tasmanian palings and it still
defies the ravages of time, being well and
truly built. There are many souvenirs of
the Henty family in the old house, such as
the mallet and caulking irons probably
used by Edward Henty on the Thistle;
large silver tea tray, chess table inlaid
with mother of pearl, etc. Should Prince
Henry visit Portland for the Centenary
celebrations it would be an act of gracious
kindness for him to shake hands with the
old lady and for her to hear his voice; for
alas, she could not see him, her sight being
impaired.
MRS. THOMAS WALKER.
Mrs. Thomas Walker, whose maiden
name was Margaret Brown, was born on
the 11th August, 1835, in Launceston (Tas-
mania) and came to Portland with her
father and mother (Mr. and Mrs. John
Hamilton Brown) about 1840. Her father
was an employe of the Customs House, so
all her childhood and girlhood days were
spent amongst the Hentys, of whom she
retains kindly memories, as well as the
old town itself. She was married on the
11th August, 1852, at the early age of
seventeen years, by the Rev. Ross, Pres-
byterian minister in Scots’ Church. Her
husband (Thomas Walker) had several
businesses in Portland ere he and his wife
and family removed to Hamilton, where
the widow still lives. Although Mrs,
Walker is now in her 99th year she still
retains all her faculties, and since the
death of one of her daughters, who lived
with her, she has conducted all her own
business; keeps her garden in perfect
order; makes beautiful fancy work of
every description -without the aid of
glasses; is keen and alert; visited Port-
land on Foundation Day; and booked a
room at one of the leading hotels to be
present at the forthcoming Centenary cele-
brations in November, 1934. Truly a
worthy pioneer in every sense of the word,
MRS. MARY VINE.
Mrs, Mary Vine’s name was a house-
hold word in the early days on account
of her benificence and kindness, and, as
sue was comfortably provided for, she did
a great amount of good among the poorer
class of people with whom she came in
contact. Her husband (Richard Vine)
was a retired station owner, and on his
death his widow had the present baptistry
of St. Stephen’s Church of England built
to his memory; the beautiful oral window
with its various symbols as well as other
coloured leadlight window® and inscrip-
tions, being the admiration of all who see
them, and a lasting monument to a faith-
ful adherent of the church.
MRS. ROBERT HERBERTSON.
Mrs. Robert Herbertson, who was Miss
Isabella Bailey, was born in the year 1812,
at Leith ('Shetland), and came lout to
Hobart Town, Tasmania, with her parents,
(Mr. and Mrs. Samuel Bailey), whose eld-
est son, Captain Samuel Bailey, traded
between Hobart and Portland eighty-five
years ago. Mrs, Herbertson left Tasmania
with her husband and three children and
landed in Portland in 1842, and carried on
a business until her death in May, 1883,
at the age of seventy-one years. In 1855
she and her husband went to Scotland for
a holiday of two years, and took their ten
children with them. Many of their de-
scendants still live in Portland.
MISS ANN CLARKE
Daughter of Joseph L. Clarke. Born
at Houston, Devon, England, August 13,
1814. She came to Australia by the ship
Brands Henty, arriving in Portland in
1854, where she opened the first Ladies’
School in Ga-wler-street, of which she was
principal till she retired. She died a few
years later, December 13, 1893.
Before leaving England, Miss Clarke
taught in the school for clergymen’s
daughters, mentioned in the well known
book, “Jane Eyre.’’


MUS. WILLIAM SMITH
Mrs. Wm, Smith, of Thornley Lodge,
Muntham (Edward Henty’s station),
whose maiden name was Catherine Mc-
Lean, is a granddaughter of two of the
oldest settlers of Portland, Mr. and Mrs.
Jonas Smith, who, with their two children,
landed at Melbourne in 1836 and camped
on Batman’s Hill in a tent. Almost im-
mediately they left for Port Fairy, where
Mr. Smith baked a batch of bread on the
beach, surrounded by blacks. They then
came on to Portland. Mr. Smith was the
first wheelwright to ply his calling in the
settlement, while his wife shared- with
Mrs. Honeyball the honour of being the
first nurse. Their daughter Frances mar-
ried James Ewen Mac-Lean, from the Isle
of Skye, in Scots’ Church, Portland,
James Cameron and John McMaster being
witnesses. Previously to coming to Port-
land, Air. McLean worked as a bookkeeper
in Geelong, and also tried his luck on the
gold diggings. He supervised and carried
out the first contract ever let by the Port-
land shire. Airs. William Smith is a sister
of Donald McLean, the writer and author
of “The Man from Curdie’s River” and
other books. She hopes to celebrate her
golden wedding on the Bth December,
1934. She is a financial member of the
Portland Historical Society, and one of
the most enthusiastic of the Portland Dis-
trict Pioneer Women’s Association, and
by her monetary help and encouragement
rendered valuable assistance in the task
of the compilation of the “Book of Re-
membrance.” She distinctly remembers
Captain William Dutton, who often nursed
her in her childhood, as he was a frequent
visitor at her mother’s home.
MESDAMES STEPHEN AND
GEO. JARRETT.
These two pioneer women were well
known and remembered for their many
acts of charity and kindness. Mr. Stephen
Jarrett was one of Portland’s earliest
settlers. Descendants of the same name
are still living in the town. The former
was the mother of Mrs. H. J. M. Campbell
and Mrs. Croft. The latter’s maiden name
was Mary Ann Kean. Both ladies were
true helpmates to their husbands in carry-
ing on all good works in connection with
the Methodist Church. Mrs. George Jarrett
was president of the W.C.T.U. for eight
years. “ Their children shall rise up and
call them blessed.”
MRS. JAMES PEDEN.
Mrs. James Peden, whose maiden name
was Janet Sutherland, was a daughter of
the late William and Janet Sutherland,
the former being the engineer in charge of
the Aberchalder Loch Gate, on the Cale-
donian Canal, near Inverness, Scotland.
She was born on 18th September, 1837,
and came to Australia at the age of 25
years. She was a passenger in the sailing
ship Maori, which, after a voyage of three
months, berthed at Williamstown, the
passengers who were for Portland being
transferred to a steamer. Janet Suther-
land landed at Portland (at the old
depot) on Ist July, 1863. She stayed at
Mac’s Hotel, which was owned by the
late Mr. and Mrs. McDonald. After spend-
ing a happy time with her newly made
friends she went by coach to Digby to
join her sister (the late Mrs. Angus Turner,
of Harland Hills, Dergholm), who had
come to Australia eight years previously.
Later she moved to the iCasterton district,
where she married Mr. James Peden, who
carried on the business of a general
merchant from 1867 to 1907, at Caster-
ton, where she remained till her death at
the age of 82 years.
MRS. C. ALLEN.
Mrs. C. Allen, who is now in her 85th
year, is the oldest of four daughters of
the late Mr. and Mrs. Alexander McDon-
ald. She and her sister Christina, who
became Mrs. Hanlon, were born in Scot-
land and came out to Australia in the
ship John Davis, arriving in Portland in
1852. Her two younger sisters, Mary Ann
and Elizabeth, were born in Portland. The
former married William Worthy, and the
latter George Be van. Their father was a
Highland piper. Mrs. Allen suffered great
bereavement, after the death of her hus-
band, in the loss of both her sons, .who
paid the supreme sacrifice in the great war.
MRS. DUSTING.
Mrs. Henry Crees Dusting, whose maiden
name was Emma Daniels, was married at
Penzance, Cornwall. Sailing to Australia,
they landed from the .ship Coldstream at
Melbourne, and then took the steamer
Lady Bird to Portland, arriving here in
April, 1853. Although she had the care of
a large family—four sons and six daughters
—she gave her energies where required,
and was a most useful member of the com-
munity. She was a .wonderful worker in
the Methodist cause.
MRS. E. F. HUGHES.
Mrs. Hughes, widow of Mr. E. F.
Hughes, editor of the ‘‘Portland
Chronicle” (1855-1872), was a charm-
ing and literary lady, a schoolmate
and personal friend of Marion Evans,
authoress, who become famous as
“George Eliot." Mrs. Hughes was
the mother of several sons and
daughters, the eldest son being the
late Mr. E. F. Hughes, editor of the
“Casterton News.” Mrs. Hughes
survived her husband and passed
away at Portland at the ripe age of
81 years.


In the “Argus’* issue of March 13, 1934,
mention is made of the marriages of John
Fawkner and John Batman in St. John’s
Church, Launceston, one of the witnesses
for Batman on the 29th March, 1828, being
Thomas Underwood.
It may ibe interesting to some of the
Portland people to know that the Under-
woods were very early settlers of Launces-
ton, mention being made of them often in
the history of the city, as being personal
friends of Sir John and Lady Franklin, the
Hentys, De Littles and others. J. C.
Underwood was the grandfather of Miss
Brewer (of Annesley). lately deceased.
On the death of J. C. Underwood, his
•widow and two daughters, Harriette Isles,
and Mary Ann, came over to Portland in
the early 50’s. The former became the
wife of Ur. H. E. Brewer, and the latter
married James Smith, of the Savings
Bank. Mrs. Underwood and Mr. and Mrs.
Smith are all buried in the old cemetery at
Portland.
The writer has in her possession two
large oil portraits, attributed to the fam-
ous Launceston artist, Robert Dowling:
one of J. C. Underwood, and the other of
his beautiful daughter, Mary Ann, in the
wonderful old-time dress of the early days.
Also a miniature photograph of Mrs.
Underwood, as well as many daguerreo-
types of early pioneer .women of note.
I remember, I remember
The fir trees, dark and high.
I used to think their slender tops
Were close against the sky.
It was a childish ignorance,
But now ’tis little joy
To know I’m further off from heaven
Than when I was a boy.—Tom Hood.
THE MACLEOD FAMILY.
Mr. J. Norman MacLeod, of Castle-
maddie, Tyrcndarra, landed at Indented
Head, with sheep from Tasmania, on 18th
July, 1838, and travelled round by Geelong,
35 miles up the River Moorabool, where he
formed a station. In 1849 he sold out and
purchased another station on the River
Wannon (Tahara). In 1841 he was made a
magistrate by Sir George Gipps, and was
the only one, after the death of Dr.
Walton, to attend the bench at Hamilton,
a distance of 20 miles from home. In
1859, when member of Parliament for
Portland, he succeeded in getting a bill
brought in to fine anyone £3O for giving
intoxicating drink to an aboriginal, and
he recommended the Government to make
reserves of land for them. He also suc-
ceeded in getting local guardians appointed
to receive and distribute blankets, clothes
and provisions amongst the natives. He
befriended the natives in many ways.
Grandfather Major Donald McLeod landed
in Van Diemen’s Land in 1820 with the
elder part of his family. Others were
born afterwards, and all might fairly be
classed as early pioneers. The MacLeods
came to Portland about 1855. Mrs. Mac-
Leod and her sister, Mrs. Byerley, were
two of a large family born in Van Die-
men’s Land in the early days. Miss
Constance MacLeod and her sister, Mrs.
Loisel, are Portlanders.
MRS. PEERS.
In 1837 Mrs. J. J. Peers, with her hus-
band and family, left Van Diemen’s Land
in the brig Isabella for Adelaide, but the
vessel was wrecked on the night of April
1, 1837, at Cape Nelson. Fortunately, the
passengers and crew, twenty-one in all,
got safely to land. The Peers lost all
their goods, and were without clothing.
They were brought to Portland and were
kindly cared for by the whalers and Mrs.
S. G. Henty. The Peers remained in Port-
land for some time.
MISS DOOLAN.
Miss Minnie Doolan, who now (4-34)
lives at 28 Pasley-street, 'South Yarra, and
who is in her 80th year, is one of Port-
land’s pioneer women. Naturally, she is
taking a keen interest in the (Centenary
celebrations. She and her parents were
personal friends of the Hentys. Mr. Doolan
was clerk of courts for a number of years.
The Doolans landed here on the 3rd of
June, 1852, in the ship Runneymede, after
a voyage of six months. Miss Doolan was
then three years old. There were 200
emigrants on board, and owing to the
protracted voyage the stores of food and
water were running short. Although all
were glad to get ashore, some had reason
to complain. The Doolans, with others,
had paid their fare to Melbourne, but the
Captain made no distinction, and landed
all his passengers at Portland, without re-
dress. Mr. Doolan built a house in Hurd-
street, and it is still known as Doolan’s
House. Miss Doolan revisited her old
home-town at the last Back-to-Portland.
when Mayor Wyatt’s daughter drove her
round and she renewed old acquaintances.
She distinctly remembers the wreck of the
Admella.
“The gods have made the measure
Of evil and of good,
And no man here may treasure
The pleasure that he would.
So go and take your going
And praise the way you go—
If you work long enough.
If you work strong enough,
If you work well enough,
Some one will know.’’




| “T ' |
j *
MRS. CHARLTON HEUDITCH.
| [
iiVjRS. HEDDITCH was born at Bour-
ton, Dorsetshire, England, on the Ist
of March, 1815, and married Richard
Charlton Hedditch on 23rd of June, 1837.
Early in the following year they sailed for
Australia in the ship Eden, and arrived at
Adelaide in June, 1838. They remained
there for two years, but as prospects were
not encouraging they removed to George
Town, Tasmania. Shortly afterwards glow-
ing accounts of the new settlement at
Portland induced them to cross over, and
they arrived here in 1841, They were
soon appointed to the charge of the Church
of England school, Mrs. Hedditch having
charge of the infant classes. The close
confinement of school life, however, did
not appeal to them, and in 1845 they de-
cided to go into the country. Choosing
Bridgewater as their future home, they
took up a pastoral lease there in 1845. In
18(54 Airs. Hedditch took charge of the
first post office and conducted it for 35
years. She was an earnest and faithful
church and Sunday school worker. Though
living so far from the “madding crowd’ ’
she found time to cherish a life-long
heart-deep interest in the Kingdom of
Christ, and besides the cares of a family
she found a heart at leisure to soothe
and sympathise in the sorrows of others.
Her home was at all times an open house
for all ministers and church workers. On
the 20th of June, 1887, their home was
the scene of friendly greeting and festive
gladness, as many gathered from far and
near to celebrate the golden wedding of
the venerable pair who dwelt there. Who
is there, knowing the Portland Circuit,
that does not cherish the memory of the
peaceful and hospitable home nestling
among the hills? She lived to the ripe
old nge of 88 years, and lies buried in
the Bridgewater cemetery.
BRIDGEWATER lies about twelve miles
to the west of Portland, with Cape Bridge-
water as its centre. It embraces the
parishes of Tarragal and Trewalla, in
which there are several thousand acres of
well grassed and comparatively clear, un-
dulating country, timbered chiefly with
sheoaks. The Hentys soon discovered it
and formed an outstation there foi theii
stock. They also grew turnips and pota-
toes on some of the fertile flats and
shipped the produce from Bridgewater Bay
to Adelaide. After Major Mitchell ar-
rived and told them of the fertile land on
the Wannon, the Hentys abandoned Bridge-
water for the more spacious and prolific-
country of the north. In 1842 the first
permanent settlers of Bridgewater began
to arrive. Mr. John Kenney established
a lime-burning industry, which he com
bined with stock raising. Mr. Jas. Ken-
nedy, senior, established himself on the
Cape, bringing with him a large family.
At the same time Mr, James Kittson made
a home on the banks of the Lakes, together
with a family of five children. Other
settlers soon followed, and by 1860 there
were thirty-eight families established. Ah
pioneers they built their own homes, some
of wattle and dab, with thatched roof;
stringy bark or slabs, with shingle roof.
Dairying and stock raising comprised their
main industry. They were happy and con-
tented people.




THE PIONEER MOTHER
One of the most beautiful and appealing
statues in the world is that of the pioneer
woman in America. The strong, graceful
figure, the lifted head, with far-seeing eyes
and firm mouth, the clasp of her boy’s
hand, are symbolical of a pioneer, both
courageous and purposeful. The poise shows
movement, forward and onward. Nerved
by the touch of a child’s hand, moved by
the pathos of a child’s need, the woman
presses towards a new world.
Can we erect such a statue to the pioneer
women as a Centenary tribute?
To-morrow is Mother’s Day.
Why? Why not? Every day is mother’s
day. All our days we remember them,
whether they be living here or are “there”
within the Veil unseen. All our days we
strive, however feebly, to live out the in-
spirations that were lit in us from the
altar fires of their hearts. Many who wor-
ship at no other altar keep a secret sanct-
uary in their souls where the Madonna is
their own mother.
I recall a passage in Fay Myddleton’s
story of “Impossible Peter,” where Peter
says:—“ When I look into a woman’s eyes,
however hard and cold or even cruel they
may be, I seem to catch a reflection of my
mother’s smile as she bent over me at
night to kiss—as she -was wont to say—
sweet dreams into my sleepy eyes. ’ ’ It
was that memory which explained the man
who else was impossible of understanding.
“All that I am, or hope to be, I owe to
my angel mother,” said Lincoln. A great
multitude make the same good confession.
Lincoln was born in a humble log cabin
and when he was nine years old his mother
died. Before she passed away she called
him to her side and said: “I am going to
leave you, Abe, —and it is so hard to part
from you. It is beautiful to serve God,
and I want you to love Him.”
Then she said these words, which I want
you to remember: “Love everybody, hinder
nobody, never lie; never drink and the
world will be glad some day that yon were
born. ’ ’
The father who was standing in the door-
way, said: “But he can’t sing like you,
Nancy. ’ ’
“The heart sings in man}' ways,’ ’ she
replied. “ Some hearts make other hearts
sing. Abraham may not hare my voice;
but he has my heart, and he may make
others sing. ’ ’
Lincoln was only nine years old when
she died, and those parting words and her
lonely burial had elements of vividness
which he never forgot. Thomas Lincoln
used his skill as a carpenter to make a
coffin; her body was hauled on a sled to a
sylvan knoll, and there she was buried, to
lie long years without memorial statue,
Bryant Baker’s Statue.
One of the most appealing statues in
America is that of the Pioneer Woman near
Ponca City, in Oklahoma. It is the work
of Mr. Bryant Baker, a New York sculptor.
Mr. Baker tried —and undoubtedly succeed-
ed —in symbolising the Pioneer Woman of
America. He has depicted courage and
faith as the Pioneer Woman steps out 'with-
out fear.
Mr. Baker says that he tried to combine
Strength and Beauty and determination to
win; with sureness and joy she marches
straight into the future; no trick of fate
or blow of circumstances will stop the on-
ward sweep of her spirit until she faces
death itself.
With the determination to win there is
a tenderness and love expressed by the
mother both leading and protecting her
son—the enthusiastic little fellow in his
home-made clothes. iAnd the mother’s pride
in him as she lovingly leads is expressed
by the firm grip of their hands; she is en-
visioning a future of hope and success for
him.
The bundle on her arm represents both
the burden of life and all her worldly
goods, for what does she know of riches,
if to be rich is to have lands, money and
houses? Yet she is the possessor of that
real wealth that survives pain, sorrow and
disaster the inexhaustible wealth of a
magnificent soul. Home is wherever she is,
and with her love and willingness to do
more than her share of the work and
burdens, her home can be on the wind-swept
prairies with only the stars above for
shelter, or the four rude walls of a log or
sod cabin.
The Bible was a vital factor in building
up this country. Frequently it was the
one indispensable book, recording the facts
of family life, of births, marriages and
deaths; and often the only reading material
available for mothers to teach their child-
ren to read and write.


The expression on the face is a quality
of spiritual yearning combined with a de-
termination to win the Promised Land for
her offspring. Motherhood is always an
adventure and the woman .who bears child-
ren is in a sense always a pioneer.
A Centenary Suggestion.
I hope that in connection with the Cent-
enary of Victoria we shall erect some such
symbol as a tribute to the pioneer woman.
Whether such a sculpture can be made to
order is a question to decide. Certainly if
it is to be done at all, it must be done
perfectly.
The Mother as Colonist.
The part of the mother in Empire-build-
ing and colonisation has been but little
recognised. Great as was her share in
heroic fortitude, her partner in pioneering,
because she was inarticulate, omitted to
recognise her equal services in the settle-
ment of the State. Yet were her hardships
greater, for had she not to suffer the pains
and perils of childbirth, in addition to the
loneliness, hardships, and the peril from
the blackfellows?
What magnificent women those pioneer
Victorian women must have been. Never
do I see the crumbling walls of an old
wattle and daub cottage —the long neglect-
ed garden where a house once stood —with-
out thinking of the brave women who made
it home.
Some of those gallant -women the
earliest of them —sleep in unmarked graves
overgrown with long grass; bush fires have
swept away the rails which once enclosed
them; they lie in the undistinguishable
dust; but they live in the work they
wrought, in the children they gave to their
new country. They have their place in the
Book of Divine Remembrance, where are
recorded the lives of the hidden heroes of
our race into whose labours we have ent-
ered, of whose sowing we reap the harvest.
Life in the Early Days.
We complain bitterly if something goes
wrong with the electric light, or the gas,
the telephone, the wireless. But what was
life like to those early women?
Many of them went out into the un-
mapped virgin bush where the loneliness
must have been desolating at times, and
the lack of conveniences of civilised life
must have been keenly felt.
I think of them—these wonderful mothers
—leaving their cottages in the trim little
English villages; uprooting themselves
from their native towns; laboriously crawl-
ing across the seas in ill-equipped ships,
taking months on the voyage; subsisting
for the most part on salt junk and ship’s
biscuits; then landing in a strange, new
land and setting out with their husbands
to take up land or try their luck on the
gold fields.
The women who survived those first few
years must have been fine types. I often
wish some of them had kept diaries, or
that their letters had been preserved. The
worst of the men diarists and explorers is
that they leave out the homely things a
woman would have written, to dwell on
latitudes and longitudes. But they had
something to do other than write diaries,
these brave women.
Ethel Martyr sings of them in her poem,
“ Pioneers’ ’:- —
Their women live apart, and wearily
They work, and little dream the shining
strands
That make this nation’s robe of destiny
Are placed within their rough, unresting
hands.
A Lonely Grave.
There is a pathetic little slab in the
Avoca cemetery. The crudely carved in-
scription reads: “ Sacred to the memory of
Harriet, the beloved daughter of George
and Eliza Crowhurst, who departed this
life on the loth November, 1870. Born
14th October, 1866. Age, 4 years.” On
the back of the stone are the words:
“ Worked by her mother’s hands.”
Try to think w r hat lies behind it. A
pair of pioneers make their home in a
tent or a hut, and a little lassie is born to
them. I think of that little child, the de-
light of their eyes, playing in the golden
sunshine, running to meet her Daddy as he
came home from the long day’s toil.
Then comes the fell day when the child
is sick and fevered. There is no doctor
within reach. They try such homely
remedies as they know or their neighbours
advise. But there they watch in dumb
agony and utter helplessness the little life
ebb away.
In a home-made coffin they carry the
mite to that lonely grave. Then the father
hews a rough slab of stone out of the hills,
and day after day the mother works with
stone and water to smooth it, and her un-
trained hands, using such tools as are
available, grave these simple lines.
Such were the pioneer mothers. Let us
honour them with thanksgiving and thanks-
living.—Rev. C. Irving Benson in the Mel-
bourne ‘ ‘Herald.”


luuths J\iTUss i\]t An Of)lit-(Eime Oll|rtstmas fetter
The following letter, written by Mrs, Charlton Hedditch (mother of Mr. W. F. Hedditch), from her home at
Cape Bridgewater, to her parents in England on Christmas Day, 1848, makes a valuable contribution to the literature
of the early days of settlement, particularly as it relates to the patient, self-sacrificing devotion to duty of our women
pioneers, and their calm and trustful reliance in a beneficent and over-ruling Providence:—
Cape Bridgewater, December 25, 1848:
‘‘ My Beloved Father and Mother. 1
have long contemplated writing to you,
but still delayed doing so until now. When
I last wrote I intended writing again in
three months, but have had so much to do
I could not really find the time without
sitting up very late and I always felt too
wearied after a long day’s work; but last
Sunday after dinner I was considering
whether it would be wrong to devote part
of the Sabbath in writing to you, and
coming to the conclusion that under present
circumstances it would not I rose to take a
sheet of paper from my portfolio, when I
felt quite unwell, and continued worse until
about ten o’clock, when I gave birth to a
little girl —stillborn —an event which I had
long dreaded, for my hands were always
full. I also expected to have suffered from
the heat, for it is usually very hot here at
this season of the year; but it has been
cooler this summer than any white in-
habitants have ever known. How apt we
are to murmur and despair, forgetting our
Heavenly Father dees all things for our
good. 'Although I felt amiss—a kind of
loss of the infant—yet I cannot help feel-
ing very thankful that it pleased God to
order it as it was. Although my mind seems
overburdened with the cares of this life, I
often feel, like Martha, too much cumbered
about many thing's. Would that I possessed
faith and love like hers. 1 often fear,
my dear mother, that if I live many years,
I shall have much of your complaint. I
am exceedingly low-spirited at times, es-
pecially the last three or four months. I
got over my trouble pretty well this time,
and am now aide to do all my work again,
only my back is weak.
“This, you will see, is Christmas Day.
We are quite alone, and I trust we shall
have a quiet Christmas, as I do not care
for company; but I expect my old friend,
Mrs. Wilkinson, for a few days shortly.
She is a truly pious and worthy kind of
woman. I have three or four sincerely
kind friends at home. How is my dear
father getting on? He has arrived at a
great age —has had a long time to prepare
for Eternity. If we but meet in a. better
world what signifies the little troubles we
have to meet with here, but 1 have not
sufficient faith to cast all my cares on Him
Who careth for me. I was much pleased
to hear so encouraging an account of the
progress of Religion with you, especially
the Baptists. What rejoicing it would have
given poor Mr. Parsons to have witnessed
it. There seems to be a revival amongst
the church people here. [Some very excel-
lent pious men, both bishops and clergy,
have lately been sent out. The bishop of
this diocese has lately visited Portland.
The severe weather prevented his paying
us a visit, but he sent us some good books
and tracts and a book of sermons. Both he
and his clergymen wish us to take the
school again. Only they have not got any
one to remain long since we left. But al-
though we are not doing better in this
country we have better health; and I think
the children are better for being away
from the others; and children out here are
generally brought up badly. I had but a
bad account to give you of our affairs the
last time I wrote, and have not much bet-
ter now. Times are very bad indeed. Al-
most the whole dependence of this district
is on wool growing and tallow, and on
account of the disturbed state of Europe
the wool at home has fallen in value more
than half. Tallow is very low also, and it
has caused such a depression of business
here that it is almost impossible to dis-
pose of anything; or if a sale is made it is
difficult to get the cash. I believe 1 told
you something about our new land regula-
tions in my last letter. We have this month
a notice from Government (not only our


selves, but all the settlers) that they offer
us the purchase of thirty acres of land at
£1 per acre, and with it a right to com-
monage of 160 acres, and if we fail to pur-
chase we risk being turned off without
being able to claim any compensation for
the improvements we have effected. The
land here is very poor indeed, scarce worth
cultivating without being greatly manured;
but it is excellent pasturing for cattle.
Our fences were all burnt, but we have a
garden fenced and a half-acre paddock. We
have also a comfortable three-roomed cot-
tage and a kitchen and dairy, besides fowl
house and yard, and it would be a pity
to risk losing it for the sake of £3O, al-
though these times we shall find it difficult
to raise even that small sum. We have
both fat cattle and milking cows for sale,
but nobody is inclined to purchase. Butchers
will not give more than eight shillings a
hundredweight for fat beef, and a fine cow
with calf at side will not fetch more than
£3. There were good milking cows, with
calves, sold by auction last week at about
30/ per head. Butter is now down to 1/
per lb. If things do not get better I do
not know what shall become of us all. Our
prospects are not worse than that of many
others. Indeed, I think we live at less ex-
pense than most families here. We have
no one with us now, but one of the native
blacks to shepherd the cattle iby day. I
wish we could get a good steady single
from home —one who would work without
being watched. We would gladly give such
a man £25 a year, with board and lodging.
The men in this country will not work
without a master with them, and Charlton
is too easy to be master. I suppose you
could not pursuade such a man to come
out to us. A man that could be depended
on to look to anything that wanted doing.
“ About a month ago, when Charlton
was in town, the postmaster told him there
was a small parcel for him which had
come overland from Adelaide by post, and
that the postage amounted to upward of
£l. Charlton did not know the handwrit-
ing of the address, and supposing it was
from some acquaintance at Adelaide, told
Mr. Crouch he had better return it —that
lie would not pay that amount for it —hut
about three weeks later he had a letter
from Charles Hedditch in which he states
that Edward Hall and family had arrived
at Adelaide—that he had brought a small
parcel from you and wished to know if jwe
had received it. He must have very foolish-
ly put it in the post office instead of for-
warding by a vessel, which if he had done,
we should have got it for a trifle, but land
postage is exceedingly high. I do not yet
know whether I shall get it or not. Mr.
Crouch, the postmaster, has written to the
postmaster at Adelaide respecting it.
“Charlton Waldy desires his dutiful af-
fection to his dear grandfather and grand-
mother. He says he would very much like
to see you, but is afraid of being so long
at sea. Poor fellow! It grieves me to
think of your never seeing my little ones.
He is a very useful, good hoy. I often
think of the difference between his child-
hood and that of his cousins; though, per-
haps, he is quite as happy as any of them.
He has to be up at daylight all the year
round, and is in the yards three hours. We
have not much cold frost, nor any snow.
I have not seen snow since I left England,
but we have sometimes very keen winds. ”
AN OLD STORY RETOLD.
_
About the year 1850, on Queen Victoria’s
birthday, a number of children at Lower
* 7
Cape Bridgewater went out into the bush
to hunt for butterflies, beetles, etc., as their
manner was. Among them was a child
whom Mrs. Jamieson remembers as a pretty
fairhaired little boy, four years of age,
son of Mr. Heazlewood. When the child-
ren came home, little Freddy Heazlewood
was not with them. At first his absence
caused no anxiety; he wmuld be sure to
come back before long. But as the time
went by his parents became alarmed. The
news spread and the whole neighbourhood
turned out to look for him. Diligent search
was made for several days. The whole
. .
countryside was scoured, but without sue-
cess, and the agonised parents never saw
their child again. The only trace of him
,
they could find was footprints on the top
*
of a sandy hillock, where he seems to have
V J «
stood to look round, and one of his little
socks, into which he had put a beetle.
Some time after his disappearance a
friend of the family, Mrs. Badnall, saw a
light coloured boy at the camp of the
Mount Gambier blacks. She at once jumped
to the conclusion that it was the lost child,
“You have a white boy there,” she said
to the natives. ‘ 1 Give him to me, so that
I may wash the dirt off and find out who
he is. ’ ’ The blacks forthwith raised a
great hullabaloo. They picked up the child
and fled from the neighbourhood. Mrs.
Badnall reported what she had seen. Search
was made, but without success, and no one
ever knew what became of the poor little
fellow.


PORTLAND REVISITED
BACK-TO-PORTLAND, 1922.
I met her in youth when the heart was
young
(In the days that now are olden),
When the pulses throbbed and the spirit
sung,
And the sky of life was golden.
Dear Portland! Oh, thou were passing fair,
And blithe as the day’s awaking;
Thine eyes were bright, and thy heart was
light,
And thy lovers’ hearts .were aching.
I meet her again after sixty years;
Her face is as fair as ever.
She has bloomed through strenuous hopes
and fears,
Through failure and brave endeavour.
The waves still toy on her yellow sands,
The winds still whisper above them;
The same sun shines on her aged pines,
With lovers beneath to love them.
Yes, cliffs and bluff, and strand and wave,
Still mingle in thy adorning.
Thy girls are as fair, thy men as brave,
As they were in my boyhood’s morning,
But where are the friends that once were
mine?
Those lips once wreathed in laughter?
The eyes that used for me to shine?
I may know in the glad hereafter,
BENJ. HO ARE.
DE PROFUNDIS
If I could call thee back from Death
And see thy clear eyes softly shine,
As from thy lips in living breath
Came words that set my soul to thine;
If I could clasp thee by the hand,
As for Love’s lingering last farewell,
When friend goes forth to some strange
land,
Afar from wonted haunts to dwoll;
I could 'but say what now I weep—
And weeping now I cannot say—
Love’s voice is lost in sorrows deep,
And in low meanings fades away.
But if from bliss on that far shore,
Where thou behold ’st Love’s central
light,
Thou hear’st as music evermore
Earth’s sounds, and see’st as day our
night.
Perchance the wailing of a heart
May voice in some melodious tone
How dear thou wast, how dear thou art,
And Love through grief be clearer
shown.
And all the dark that dims the days,
Though spring is shining in the flowers,
Be changed into the silvery haze
That morning wreathes from midnight
showers.
LYDIA DAVIS (1854-1893).
TWO SONNETS
PORTLAND BAY
(Sunrise).
The heralds of the coming morn have told
The night stars that the God of Day is
nigh.
And radiant beams light up the orient sky,
Revealing rocks and crags and headlands
bold;
And now, uprising from the restless waves,
Bright Sol again displays his glorious
head,
To drink the dewy tears sad night has
shed,
And darkness steals away to unknown
eaves.
On yonder cliff a massive lighthouse
stands
That through the gloom has shed effulgent
ray
Of light to cheer the seaman on his way;
A friendly guide to ships from distant
lands;
A comforter that nightly seems to say—
“ Rude winds no havoc make in Portland
Bay.”
SHELLY BEACH, CAPE NELSON.
No masonry in old cathedral nave
Shows such rare carvings as these grand
old rocks,
Wrought to fantastic forms by wind and
wave
And Time, the sculptor with the hoary
locks;
And myriad stars that on the pearly floor
Flash back the Day God’s smile as waves
recede,
Spent in their might, and, with deep,
sullen roar,
Return like prodigals in direst need.
High overhead, and dressed in sombre
green,
The tall cliffs stand like ivy-mantled
towers
That seem to hide from careless eyes the
sheen
And glory of this favourite haunt of ours,
Where God has stamped his impress, and
where man,
In deep abasement, may His wonders scan.
T. H. DAVIS.
THE LAW OF LOVE
Love is our law. Though rival powers
Would share the empire of the breast,
Love rules us through our active hours,
And cheers and soothes us when we rest.
Love is our life. Impelled by love,
Care is a spur, and labour light;
Waile love smiles on us from above
We prove the gloomiest pathway bright.
We love ourselves; we love our .wives;
We love our children, and would dare
For wife or child to risk our lives
To rescue them from any snare.
We love our friends; and all love owes,
In friendship’s name, we would supply;
Nor would we, even to our foes,
The offices of love deny.
Would all thus loved; then all would find,
Wherever we might rest or roam,
Our kindred are all humankind,
And all the world a happy home.
E. H. HUGHES.


PORTLAND.
(BY “DEN,” IN THE “HEEAHD”)
Here she hides, an aged dame,
Here she dreams beside the waves,
Ever baulked of modern fame
And the deep sea trade she craves:
Tall ships riding at her port,
Waking her to life anew —
Here she hides and holds the fort,
Hoping yet dreams will come true.
Charming lady, dignified,
Proud, hospitable and kind;
With full half her rights denied,
Here she waits and calls to mind
Pictures of the olden days
When the whalers, sailing down
To her qniet waterways,
Gave first promise to her town.
First came Dutton —half forgot—
To establish well her claim
As the land’s historic spot.
After him stout Plenty came;
Followed Major Mitchell then,
Pushing forward with the task —
Still she waits, denied by men
All she has a right to ask.
But Dame Portland is not done;
For her pioneering blood
Yet shall have ambition won,
And her fortunes at the flood —
Tall ships riding at her port,
Thriving life about her strand;
She, the storehouse and the fort,
Of her fertile hinterland.
FOR A GOLDEN WEDDING.
In answer to a correspondent a writer in
the London “Sunday Times” suggests a
verse suitable for the occasion of a golden
wedding, the lovely lines of Alfred Noyes,
called “The Double Fortress.” Here it is:
Time, would’st thou hurt us? Never shall
we grow old,
Break as thou wilt these bodies of blind
clay.
Thou canst not touch us here in our strong-
hold,
Where two, made one, laugh all thy powers
away.
Though ramparts crumble and rusty gates
grow thin,
And our brave fortress dwine to a hollow
shell,
Thou shalt hear heavenly laughter far
within,
Where, young as Love, two hidden lovers
dwell.
We shall go clambering up our twisted
stairs,
To watch the moon through rifts in our
grey towers;
Thou shalt hear whispers, kisses and sweet
prayers
Creeping through all our creviced walls like
flowers.
Would’st wreck us, Time? When thy dull
leaguer brings
The last wall down, look heavenward. We
have wings.
Another thinks that lines from Tenny-
son’s “Princess” seem to be peculiarly
suitable: —
Not like to like, but like in difference,
Yet in the long years liker must they grow;
The man be more of woman, she of man;
He gain in sweetness and in moral height,
Nor lose the .wrestling thews that throw
the world.
She, mental breath, nor fail in childward
care,
Nor lose the childlike in the larger mind;
Till at the last she set herself to man
Like perfect music unto noble words.
A WELL TRODDEN WAY.
One night in 1825 Anna Letitia Barbauld,
an old lady whose writings were widely
known, sat alone in her room. She wrote:
“The .way is dark, but it is well trodden.”
Then her hands were still, and an hour
afterward they found her asleep, her last
sleep.
Here is a poem she will long be re-
membered for: —
Life! I know not what thou art,
But know that thou and I must part;
And when, or how, or where .we met,
I own to me’s a secret yet.
Life! We’ve been long together,
Through pleasant and through cloudy
weather.
’Tis hard to part when friends are dear,
Perhaps ’twill cost a sigh, a tear.
Then steal away, give little warning;
Choose thine own time;
Say not good-night, but in some brighter
clime
Bid me good-morning.


- - Relics anb beauties of the "Carlo Claus .
af tljc Jfurtu's, fifties anb
(By S. J. W.)
Misses Henty, Must, Learmonth, Mc-
Leod, Finn, Wilson, Campbell, Birming-
bam, Trangmar, Hawkins, Lindsay Clarke,
Jones, Levett, Douglas, Barrow,'Bennett,
Smith, Herbertson, Farr, Jarrett, Greene.
Well does the writer remember when
a very small child, having the pleasure of
viewing some of these beauties and
many were very beautiful wihtout the aid
of lipstick, powder or rouge—at a ball
given in honour of the Duke of Edinburgh
on his visit to Portland Bay in the year
1867—1 think it was—and gazing with
'vide opened eyes on the long-fringed
silken shawls of various colours, all worked
by the matrons—and the wonderful trains
of the dresses of satins, silks and other
rich fabrics which could almost stand
alone without the aid of the wearer. No
wonder the poor young country girl thought
she was in fairyland, and to' this day she
will never forget that fascinating kaleido-
scopic scene.
A few years later some of these young
dancers visited Cape Bridgewater, invited
to the annual picnics, and joined in play-
ing games such as Jolly Old Miller, Kiss
in the Ring, Here Comes Two Dukes a-
Riding; and so on —and danced on the
green to the music of a concertina, hold-
Lig pp their dresses and showing their
handworked embroidery petticoats not
undies. How she longed—oh, so much!—
to be similarly dressed—instead of in the
‘ ‘ lindsey woolleys”—alpacas, winceys and
ginghams of the country girls.
Ah! those were the days!
When soft eyes looked love to eyes that
spoke again,
And all went merry as a marriage bell.
Alas! many of those belles and beauties
have passed on; but there are still a few
remaining to remind us of the past; but
time and age have withered their beauti-
ful faces and their black and auburn
tresses show a silvery sheen; but their
memories are as keen and alert as in the
days of yore; and oh! how they revel in
talking of the days when they were young
and did so and so in those good old days,
and they live them over again. Can we
wonder at them? Do we not all go back
to childhood and girlhood days? And
many think those days were the best days
of all. But—NOW is the time. Let us
enjoy it while -we may.
Sunshine passes—shadows fall;
Love and remembrance outlast all.
Before closing this chapter special men-
tion must be made of two or more of the
remaining belles of the times gone by—
wuo stand out conspicuously in the writer’s
memory. One of these was Miss Bessie
Learmonth, of Ettrick, after whom the
parish of Bessiebelle is named by the sur-
veyor who fell a victim to the charms of
Ihe lady. She married Mr. Anketell Jones.
Another charming, dignified, stately and
gracious lady was Miss Annie Trangmar—
daughter of Major Trangmar—-who became
Mrs. Frederick Lyne. One cannot help
when gazing at the photographs of these
graceful ladies, contrasting them with the
ladies of to-day. Their beautifully cut
cameo faces, charming expressions, wide-
spreading silken dresses, displayed to ad-
vantage over the hoops then worn—all
tend to enhance their personality.
I will finish up 'with the following lines:—
Some have gone from us for ever;
Longer here they might not stay;
They have reached a fairer region
Not so very far away.
Then we must not forget Miss Mary
Wright, who eventually became a school
teacher, and then a Nun, through obeying
parental authority in the matter of her
love affairs; and whose pupils to this day
love her goodness and memory.
Many others I could mention: Misses
Catuerine McLeod, Sophie and Lizzie Jones.
MOTHER AND SON.
As the fervent smith of yore
Befit out the glowing blade,
Nor wielded in the front of war
The weapon that lie made.
But in the tower at home still plied his ring-
trade :
ISo like a sword the son shall roam
On nobler missions sent;
And as the smith remained at home
In peaceful turret pent,
So sits the while at home the mother well
content. —Stevenson.
WE WILL REMEMBER THEM.
“They shall not grow old, as we that are left
grow old.
Age shall not weary them, nor the years con-
temn.
At the going down of the sun, and in the morn-
ing,
We will remember them.”—Lawrence Binyon.




801 l of pioneer piomen of tire Portland Hau Bistrid
JUllo ixn'xc hunt or rcsrfcrft Ijrre prior to 1864.
A’ BECKETT, Mrs.; nee Jane North,
Adams, Mrs.; nee Ellen Marsh. Her father
and mother landed at Portland from
the ship Oitland in the fifties. Mr.
Marsh was Henty’s gardener, and
helped to lay out Burs wood.
Adams, Peter, Mrs., senior.
Adams, Peter, Mrs,; nee Mary Gurney
Dancer.
Adams, Edwin, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth Ed-
wards.
Adamson, Thomas, Mrs.; nee Charlotte
Wilkinson; 1841, Superintendent of
Police, Western District.
Adamson, Thomas, Mrs.; nee Mary Reynolds.
Adamson, Thomas, Mrs.; nee Frances Ann
Malseed.
Adamson, A. G., Mrs.; nee Mary Ann
Webber; 1852.
Adamson, Mary, Miss.
Adamson, Jane, Miss.
Aitkens, Mrs.; nee Mary Hay.
Aitkinson, Edwin, Mrs, (Town Clerk).
Allen, Charles, Mrs.; nee Jane McDonald;
ship John Davis, 1852.
Allen, John, Mrs,; nee Mary Ann Stevens.
Alexander, Robert, Mrs.; nee Emma Raw-
linson.
Alexander, David, Mrs.
Alexander, Mrs.; nee Annie Thurman.
Alexander, William, Mrs.; nee Diana
Waddy Clarke Tory.
Alberts, Mrs.; nee Hannah Haddock.
Alexander, Andrew, Mrs.; nee Ellen Brown.
Allen, Joseph, Mrs.; nee Ruth Barnes.
Allen, Wm. Tucker, Mrs.; nee Emily Barnes
Alloock, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth Bainbridge;
1841.
Allitt, William, Mrs.
Allison, Dr., Mrs.; 1865.
Allison, Misses (teachers).
Allison, Mrs, (Savings Bank).
Allison, James, Mrs. (Clerk of Courts);
1842.
Allnutt, Archdeacon, John Charles Parrott,
Mrs.
Allsop, Mrs. (Volunteers Instructor).
Annett, Henry, Mrs.
Anderson, William Primrose, Mrs.; nee
Phoebe Brown.
Anderson, Mrs.; nee Maria Frances.
Anderson, T., Mrs.
Anderson, Mrs.; nee Lewis,
Andrew, Hugh, Mrs.; nee Jean Blair; 1855.
Andrew, John, Mrs.; nee Ann Shaw Hughes
Andrews, Thomas Hunter Richardson, Mrs.;
nee Annie Hughes.
Andrews, Stewart, Mrs.; nee Winifred Mc-
Leod.
Andrews, H. C., Mrs.; nee Frances Knubley.
Arkell, William Harman, Mrs.
Arkell, James, Mrs.; nee Rose Roddcn.
Arkell, Uriah, Mrs.
Armstrong, Mrs.
Arnott, J., Mrs.; nee Ellen Cameron.
Amott, Mrs,; nee Agnes Hutchinson.
Amott, D.„ Mrs.; nee Elizabeth Cameron;
1845.
Arnott, William, Mrs.; nee Jane Sundry.
Astbury, James, Mrs,; nee Eupheraia Mc-
Lean
Atherton, Mrs.
Avery, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth Carey; 1855;
ship Constant.
JJADNALL, Charles H., Mrs.; nee Mrs. Mc-
Keand.
Bagley, John, Mrs. (Presbyterian Minister)
Baine, Ann, Mrs.
Bailey, Gracious, Mrs.
Bailey, William, Mrs.; nee Grace Gib
Bailey, Jamjes, Mrs.; nee Martha Ming |
Pitts; 1841. i-
Baker, Hugh, Mrs.; nee Clara Lear,
Baldersou, Mrs.; nee Emma Porter.
Balderstone, Mrs.; nee Schofield. |
Balfour, James, Mrs. |
Bannon, James, Mrs.; nee Janet Barclay. |
Barber, Mrs.; nee Ellen Holmes.
Barcham, Wm. Henry, Min.; nee Jane I
Richards; ship Nestor, 1864.
Barker, Jacob, Mrs.; nee Rachel Freestone; |
1855.
Barclay, John, Mrs.; nee Janet Johnson;
contemporaneous with the Heutys.
Barclay, John, Mrs.; nee Annie Adelaide |
Carey; ship Constant, 1865. |
Barclay, William, Mrs.; nee Cecilia Carey; |
ship Constant, 1855. 1
Barclay, Alexander, Mrs. j
Barclay, Hugh Ross, Mrs. |
Barclay, James, Mrs. .
Barclay, Mercey, Miss.
Barlow, John, Mrs.; nee Lilian Doolan,
Barnes, Wm. Henry, Mrs.; ship Sally Ann, j
1845. |
Barnett, James, Mrs.
Barsby, Edward, Mrs. 1
Barter, William, Mrs.; nee Mary Jane Finn, jj
Barton, George Lafayette, Mrs.; nee Eliza- |
beth Fordham. .
Barrett, Abraham Field A. F., Mrs. f
Barrett, Emma Georgina, Miss.
Barrett, Thomas, Mrs.; nee Bridget Lynch. )
Barrow, John, Mrs. (surveyor).
Barry, George, Mrs.; nee Christina Graham s
Munro.
Beanies, James, Mrs.; nee Sarah Haddock. I
Beames, Daniel, Mrs.; nee Rebecca Sea- I
brook.




Beattie, David, Mrs.; nee Charlotte Mar-
garet Morton.
Beattie, David, Mrs.; nee Margaret Massey.
Beattie, Mrs.; nee Charlotte Margaret
Morton.
Beauglehole, Henry, Mrs.; 1856.
Beauglehole, Richard, Mrs.; nee Sarah Mar-
shall.
Beauvais, John Hall, Mrs.; nee Bridget
Beglen.
Beeson, James, Mrs.; nee Annie Boyes.
Beeson, Mary, Miss; 1852.
Beeson, James, Mrs.; nee Sarah Vickery,
Beeson, James, Mrs., senior; nee Mary
David; Ship Dominion, Captain Park,
1852.
Beglen, John, Mrs., senior; nee Margaret
Flynn; 1841.
Beglen, Annie, Miss; 1849.
Beglen, John, Mrs.; nee Lucy Farr; 1854.
Bell, Richardson, Mrs.; 1857.
Bell, Scott, Mrs.
Bell, Jameg Henry, Mrs.; nee Margaret
Best.
Bell, William, Mrs.; ship General Hewitt.
Bell, Mrs.; nee Jeanie Duff (stewardess).
Bell, Matilda, Miss.
Bell, John, Mrs.
Bell, Henry, Mrs.
Benbow, Mrs.
Bennett, Mrs.; nee Sarah Campbell.
Bennett, Thomas, Mrs.; nee Emily Mary
Jane Green; 1854.
Benson, John, Mrs.; 1855, ship Shand.
Benson, James, Mrs.; ship Shand.
Best, John, Mrs.; nee Betsy Kenney.
Bergin, Michael, Mrs.
Bergin, Julia, Miss,
Berncastle, Dr., Mrs.
Bevan, George, Mrs.; noe Elizabeth Mc-
Donald.
Bilston, Alexander, Mrs.
Bilston, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth Nash.
Bilston, Henry, Mrs.; nee Mary Minogue.
Birmingham, Walter, Mrs.; nee Mary Dunn.
Birmingham, Mary Jane, Miss.
Birmingham, Sarah, Miss.
Bishop, Mrs.; nee Sophie Powell.
Black, Joshua, Mrs,; nee Letitia Brewster.
Black, Joshua, Mrs.; nee Janet Nicol Laurie
Black, Henry J,, Mrs.; nee Mary Jane
Dusting.
Black, Dr., Mrs.
Black, Mrs.; nee Ann Armstrong.
Black, Wm., Geo., Mrs.; nee Margaret Bur-
chell; ship Queen of the Seas, 1860.
Blackburn, W. H., Mrs.; nee Elizabeth Fox.
Blackburn, William, Mrs.; nee Fanny
Bishop.
Blackburn, Rose, Miss.
Blackburn, Ellen, Miss.
Blair, Ann Jane and Frances, Misses.
Blair, James, Mrs.; nee Margaret Le-
Massony.
Blay, James, Mrs.; nee Jane Smith; 1855,
ship Athona.
Blay, John, Mrs.; boiled the billy for Bat-
man on the banks of the Yarra, and
heard him say; “This is the place for
a village.” Came to Portland in 1842
with Rev, and Mrs. Laurie.
Bloodworthy, Mrs.; nee Mary Morgan.
Bond, John, Mrs.; 1852,
Bond, William, Mrs.
Bond, George, Mrs.; nee Charlotte Smith.
Bond, Robert, Mrs.; nee Sarah Jane Mullens
Booth, William, Mrs.; Admella fame.
Boothby, Mrs.; nee Emma Yelverton Wilson
Bootcher, Andreas Adolph, Mrs.; nee Ann
Chaplin.
Bootcher, Herr, Mrs.; nee Annie Hazel-
wood.
Bourke, Michael, Mrs.
Bowes, Maurice, Mrs.
Boyes, Mrs.; nee Sarah Hale.
Boyes, W., Mrs.; nee Marian Saunders.
Boyes, W., Mrs.; nee Elizabeth Saunders.
Boyle, Richard, Mrs.
Boyle, William, Mrs.
Brackston, Mrs.
Bradshaw, Wm., Mrs.
Brahm, Mrs.; nee Lily Kerkin.
Brand, John, Mrs.; nee Eliza Looker.
Bree, Stapleton, Mrs.; nee Annie Maria
Henty.
Brennand, Rev., Mrs. (Baptist Minister).
Brennand, Miss.
Brewer, Henry Edmund, Dr., Mrs.; nee
Harriette Isles Underwood; 1859.
Brewer, Rosalie Harriette, Miss.
Brewer, Robert, Mrs.; 1848.
Brewster, Wm., Mrs.; nee Letitia Black.
Brewster, David, Mrs.; nee Annie Wilson.
Briggs, Thomas, Mrs.; nee Lily Kerkin.
Brittain, Dr., Mm.
Brooks, Thomas, Mrs.
Brooks, William, Mrs.
Brown, John Hamilton, Mrs.; 1840.
Brown, Peter, Mrs.; nee Thebie Robb.
Brown, Walter, Mrs.
Brown, G. R., Mrs.; nee Mary Robb.
Brown, Mrs.; nee Clare .
Brown, Everard Home, Mrs.; nee Jane
Chinery.
Brown, Walter, Mrs.; nee Ann Williams;
ship Wycliff, 1854.
Brown, William, Mrs.; nee Maria Bond.
Brown, Thomas, Mrs.; nee Mary Ann
Cameron; 1847.
Browne, T. A., Mrs. (Rolfe Bolderwood).
Browning, James, Mrs.; nee Mrs, Duncan.
Browning, John, Mrs.; nee Janet Miller
(teacher).
Bryan, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth McDowell.
Buckle, William, Mrs.
Buckley, Thomas, Mrs.
Buckley, Mary Ann, Miss.
Buckley, Margaret, Miss.
Buckley, Julia, Miss.
Bullen, R., Mrs.; nee Jane Cameron,
Burbank, Ednott, Mrs, (teacher).
Butchers, Rev,, Mrs. (Methodist Minister).
Burkitt, Richard, Mrs.; nee Martha Charter;
1852, ship Sarah.
Burnett, Bella Penelope, Miss.
Burnett, Henriette, Miss,
Burkitt, Rebecca, Mise.




Burnett, James- Mrs.; nee Sophie Salters;
1863.
Burnett, Henrietta, Miss.
Burnett, Sophia, Miss.
Burns, Andrew, Mrs.; Noe Catherine
Browne.
Bush, George, Mrs.; 1853.
Byass, Lovell, Dr., Mrs.; 1857.
Bye, E. H., Mrs.; nee Caroline Hazelwood.
CAIN, John, Mrs.
Cameron, Thomas, Mrs.
Cameron, Kenneth, Mrs.
Cameron, Hugh, Mrs.
Cameron, Donald, Mrs.
Cameron, Duncan, Mrs.
Cameron, Ewen, Mrs.
Cameron, John, Mrs.
Cameron, , Mrs. Her mother came
with the Hentys.
Cameron, Ronald, Mrs.; noe Isabella Mc-
Rae; ship John Davis, 1852.
Campbell, Andrew, Mrs.; 1855.
Campbell, George, Mrs.; 1855.
Campbell, Wm., Mrs., senior.
Campbell, Hugh Munro, Mrs.; nee Harriet
J arrett.
Campbell, Oliver, Mrs.
Campbell, Thomas, Mrs.
Campbell, Wm., Mrs.; nee Elizabeth Dust-
ing
Campbell, Neil, Mrs.; nee Annie Saunders.
Campbell, John, Mrs.; nee Louisa Keeping.
Campbell, Janet, Miss.
Campbell, Chrissie, Miss.
Campbell, Catherine, Miss.
Cannon, Wm., Mrs.; nee Arabella Arm-
strong.
Carter, George, Mrs.
Carter, William, Mrs.
Carey, Abbott, Mrs.; nee Pitcher.
Carey, Abbott, Mrs.; nee Betsy Wilson
(Admella fame).
Carey, Wm., Mrs.; nee Elizabeth Huelin;
1855, ship Constant.
Carey, Israel, Mrs.; neo Elizabeth Salmon.
Carolin, Simon, Mrs.; nee Bridget Doherty.
Carracher, Jamas, Mrs,
Carroll, John, Mrs,; noc Ann Loaliy.
Carroll, Michael, Mrs.
Cathels, A. E., Miss.
Cathels, Wm,, Mrs.; nee Eliza Cochrane;
1854, ship Indian Ocean.
Catterall, Rev., Mrs. (Methodist Minister),
Cawker, John, Mrs.
Cassidy, Mrs,; nee Mary Alexander.
Chaulkland, Robert, Mrs.; nee Annie Cun-
ning.
Cavanagh, George, Mrs.; nee Mary Lodcr
(banker).
Chandler, James, Mrs,
Charles, Walter Tuthill, Mrs.
Christie, Mrs.; nee Margaret Simson Mc-
Donald.
Chapman, Jimmy, Mrs.
Charman, Mrs.; neo Lily Hollis.
Cheslitt, Mrs.
Charter, William, Mrs.
Chlnnery, Samuel, Mrs.; ncc Susan Clark;
1855.
Chute, James, Mrs.; nee Margaret Molloy.
Clarke, Annie, Miss; Principal of the first
Ladies’ School; ship Francis Hcnty,
1854.
Clarke, Thomas Henry, Mrs.
Clarke, Patrick, Mrs.
Clarke, Isaac, Mrs.; nee Catherine O'Neill,
Clarke, Phillip, Mrs.
Clarke, Lindsay, Mrs.; 1848 (surveyor).
Clarke, Captain Thomas, Mrs.; nee Mary
Ellen Pethers.
Clarke, Eva, Miss.
Clarke, Blanche, Miss.
Clarke, Bessie, Miss.
Clark, Jemina, Miss.
Clarke, Allison, Miss.
Clark, Andrew, Mrs.; nee Jane Cook.
Clark, Mrs.; nee Agnes Hale.
Clay, Richard, Mrs. (accountant).
Clay, Charles, Mrs.; nee Ellen Martyn.
Clapham, Wm., Mrs.
Claridge, George, Mrs.; nee Rose Green
(banker).
Claridge, George Gore, Mrs.; nee Phillpin
Eddy.
Cock, Wm. Vivian, Mrs.; nee Cissie Light-
body.
Cochrane, Mrs.
Cochrane, Grace, Miss.
Codrington, John, Mrs. (South Portland).
Cole, Mrs.; 3845.
Cook, R., Mrs.; nee Annie Bundle Quick;
1862.
Cook, Thomas, Mrs.; nee Phoebe Luff man.
Cook, George, Mrs.; nee Hannah Powell.
Cook, Reuben Mrs.; nee Ann Quick.
Quick, William, Mrs.; nee Ann Ward.
Cook, Elijah, Mrs.; nee Lucy Ann Bailey.
Cook, William, Mrs.; nee Mrs. Freestone;
also Mrs. Saunders.
Cooke, R. 8., Mrs. (Hospital Superin-
tendent) .
Cooke, Emma, Mrs.
Cooke, Mary, Miss.
Cooke, Cecil Pybus, Mrs.; nee Arrabella
Winter.
Cooke, Wm., Mrs.; nee Ann Molloy.
Cobb, Mrs. (Policeman).
Cohen, Louis, Mrs.; nee Mary Kay.
Coldham, John, Rev., Mrs.
Colebeck, Mrs.; nee Jennie White.
Cole, J., Mrs.
Cole, Bridget, Miss.
Collins, A. A., Mrs,; nee Harrictte A.
Davis; 1854.
Collyer, Thomas, Mrs.; nee Sarah Clay.
Colvin, Lady, Mrs.; nee Fannie Feather-
stonhaugh Sitwell.
Compton, James, Mrs.
Commerford, Thomas, Mrs.
Connor (Watson), Mrs.
Connelly, M., Mrs.
Cooper, Wm., Mrs.; nee Elizabeth Hale.
Coopjer, William, Mrs. (Editor Portland
“Guardian,” 1863).
Corney, Wm., Mrs.; 1840.
Condon, Mrs.; nee Margaret McConachy.




Condon, Margaret, Miss.
Cosgrove, John, Mrs.; nee Margaret Doran.
Coster, Mrs.; nee Ellen Henty.
Coster. Mrs.; nee Agnes Henty.
Costelloe, Sergeant-Major, Mrs.; nee Mar-
garet Blair.
Coulson, Corry, Mrs.; nee Eleanor Black.
Coulson, Joseph, Mrs.
Couch, Joseph, Mrs.; nee Jane Kendall.
Couch, John Janies, Mrs,; nee Elizabeth
Jane Dusting.
Couch, Edward, Mrs.; nee Annie Phillips.
Cowan, James, Mrs.; nee Eliza McAnnally.
Cowland, George, Mrs.
Cox, Mrs.
Coxen, Mrs.
Orabbe, Thomas, Mrs. (solicitor).
Crawford, Alexander, Mrs.; nee Harriet
Maddock.
Crouch, G. G., Mrs.; nee Marianne Traug-
mar; 1840.
Crouch, Charles Frederick, Mrs.; nee Char-
lotte Ellen Trangmar.
Croaker, Charles, Mrs.; nee Miss Roberts.
Croft, Mrs.; nee Mary Jarrett.
Cross, Samuel, Mrs.; nee Martha Beeson.
Cross, John, Mrs.; 1852, ship Tasmania.
Cross, Wm, Mrs.; nee Annie Stollery.
Crowe, Wm., Mrs.
Cruse, Peter, Mrs.; nee Bridget Moroney;
1854, ship Aimora.
Cruse, Amelia Gustava, Miss.
Cruickshanks, William, Mrs,; nee Buphe-
mia Burnett.
Cruickshanks, Colin, Mrs,; 1863.
Crnickshank, Captain, Mrs.; nee Mias
Pearson,
Cunning, Peter, Mrs.; nee Ann McCarthy;
1848, ship Nelson. Warder in Port-
land Gaol.
Cunning, Elizabeth, Miss.
Cunningham, Mrs. (warder).
Curtis, Sophia, Miss.
Curtis, Charles, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth Voysey.
Curtis, Sophia, Miss.
Cussens, Mrs.; nee Finn.
Ourtayne, Frank Lee, Mrs.; nee Henrietta
Kerkin.
Cuthbert, Mrs.; nee Sarah Black.
Cuakelly, Mrs.; nee Mary Ellen Dwyer.
£)ACOMB, Edmund, Mrs. (merchant).
Dacomb, Lily, Mrs.
Dahl, Patrick, Mrs.; nee Miss Le Camp.
Dahl, Murdock Cameron, Mrs.
Dancer, John, Mrs.; nee Mary Gurney.
Dancocks, Edward Bearcroft, Mrs.; nee
Martha Foster; 1852.
Dancocks, Hercules Hales, Mrs.; nee Eliza-
beth Ann Foster; 1844.
Dancocks, H. H., Mrs.; nee Eliza Barnes;
ship Priam, 1852.
Dancocks, John Thornton, Mrs.; nee Mary
Jane Foster; 1845.
Dancocks, Hurkluss, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth
Foster.
Dancocks, Bearcroft, Mrs.; nee Mattie
Foster.
D’Arcy, W. C., Mrs.; nee Nancy Frances
Barnes.
Dargavllle, Joseph McMullen, Mrs.; nee
Emily Must.
David, Mrs.; nee Fanny Rogers.
Davidson, Angus, Mrs.; nee Ann Robertson,
Davis, Henry Snell, Mrs.; nee Harriette
Rhooke; 1854.
Davis, Thomas Henry, Mrs.; nec Martha
Turner; 1852, ship Queen of the Seas.
Davis, Lydia, Miss.
Davis, Benjamin, Mrs.; nee Catherine
Hutchinson.
Davis, Edwin, Mrs.; nee Annie Lindsay
Brown. (Editor Portland “Observer”)
Davis, Mrs.; nee Grace Martin (Doctor).
Day, George, Mrs.; nee Jane Henderson.
Dawkins, John, Mrs,
Dawkins, Jonathan, Mrs.; nee Jane Hunt-
ley; 1853, ship Ann Muller.
Dawkins, Robert, Mrs.; nee Susan Frost;
1853, ship Ann Muller.
Dawkins, Henry, Mrs.; nee Judith Piggott,
Dawkins, Wm., Mrs.; nee Mary Richards.
Dawson, Mrs.; ship Sally Ann, 1845.
Deacon, Henry, Mrs.; nee Sarah Pyers;
1839.
De La Coeur, Mrs.; nee Eliza Harriet
Thomas; 1857.
Dent, M., Mrs.; nee Alice Morris.
Denny, John Thomas, Mrs.; nec Frances
Wilcox.
Dempster, John, Mrs. (teacher).
Dempster, Mrs. (Police Sergeant).
Desmond, Mrs.
Destree, Adolphe Jean Baptiste, Mrs.
Devlin, Bernard, Mrs.
Dick, John, Mrs.; 1854.
Dimond, Alfred, Mrs.; 1851.
Dimond, James, Mrs.; 1853. (Admella
fame.)
Dimond, Arthur, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth Poland
Diwell, William, Mrs.; nee Frances Webb.
Diwell, William, Mrs.; nee Margaret
Turner; 1850.
Dimock, Dr., Mrs.; nee Clementina Lcvctt.
Dodd, C. A., Mrs. (solicitor).
Dodds, Miss (teacher).
Don, Rev,, Mrs. (Presbyterian Minister).
Donaldson, Mrs.
Donohue, T., Mrs.
Donovan, Mrs.; nee Catherine u’Bryan.
Donovan, Wm., Mrs.; nee Catherine O’Brian
Doolan, Thomas, Mrs.; nee Catherine
Sharpe; 1851, ship Runneymede.
Doolan, Minnie, Miss.
Doran, Teresa, Miss.
Douglas, William, Mrs.
Douglas, Richard, Mrs.; nee Helen A.
Sutherland.
Douglas, Richard, Mrs,; nee Sarah Hag-
gestton,
Douglas, Richard, Mrs.; nee Eliza Adams.
Douglas, William, Mrs.
Douglas, Sholto, Mrs.; nee Minnie O’Gor-
mon.
Dowling, Alfred, Mrs.; nee Priscilla
Spencer.
Drew, Silas, Mrs.; nec Margaret O’Meara.
Dudley, Mrs.; ship Fairy Queen.




Duncan, Mrs.
Duff, William, Mrs.
Duffy, Michael, Mrs.
Dunn, James, Mrs.; nee Annie Morrison.
Dunbar, James, Mrs. (teacher).
Dunbar, Ravenscroft, Miss.
Dunbar, Jessie, Miss,
Dunn, Edward, Mrs.; nee Jane Stollery.
Dusting, Joseph, Mrs.; nee Mary Clem-
ents; 1856.
Dusting, John, Mrs.; nee Sally Harris (Ad-
mella fame).
Dusting, Martin, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth Wilson
Dusting, Henry Cree, Mrs.; nee Emma
Daniels; 1858.
Dusting, John Matthew, Mrs.; nee Jessie
White.
Dusting, Ellen Jane, Miss.
Dusting, William Thomas, Mrs.; nee Mar-
garet Alexander.
Dusting, William Henry, Mrs.; nee Eliza-
beth Eastman.
Dusting, James, Mrs.; nee Susan Patterson
Dusting, Joseph, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth Pat-
terson.
Dusting, Thomas, Mrs.; nee Alice Dawkins.
Dusting, Thomas, Mrs.; nee Margaret
Amelia Spencer Gustus.
Dusting, Johnnie, Mrs.; nee Fanny Taylor.
Dusting, James, Mrs.; nee Annie Rapley.
Dutton, William, Mrs.; nee Mary Saggers.
(Came over from Tasmania; was in
the employ of Mr. John Sinclair, in
1832.)
Dwyer, Michael, Mrs.; nee Mary Edwards,
Dwyer, John, Mrs.
Dymond, Benjamin, Mrs.; nee Jane Treloar.
Dyster, Kezeah, Mrs.; 1837.
EAGLE, Elias, Mrs.; nee Mary Ann Bailey
.Earl, John, Mrs.; nee Hannah Tunnock.
Earle, Samuel, Mrs.; nee Sarah Bedford.
Eastman, John, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth Ann
Rich.
Edgar, David, Mrs.; nee Sarah O’Meara.
Bdrich, Richard, Mrs., senior.
Edrich, Benjamin, Mrs.
Bdrich, Richard, Mrs., junior; nee Emily
Smith.
Edrich, Elizabeth, Miss.
Edrich, Maria, Miss.
Edrich, Frances, Miss.
Edrich, Sophie, Miss.
Edwards, James, Mrs., senior.
Edwards, James, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth Brad-
ford; 1852, ship Prime,
Edwards, Ewen, Mrs.; nee Naomi Cook.
Edwards, John, Mrs.; nee Jane Gibeon.
Edwards, Margaret, Mias.
Edwards, Annie, Miss.
Edwards, Ellen, Miss.
Egan, Frances, Mrs., senior.
Egan, Sarah, Miss.
Egan, Mary, Miss.
Emerson, Joseph, Mrs.; nee Martha Wilson;
ship Cairn Gonm, 1855.
Enscoe, J., Mrs.; nee Margaret Mewpoo.
Esdalc, Archibald, Mrs.; nee Isabella Gall.
Esprey, Robert, Mrs,
Esprey, Charlotte, Miss.
FAHEY, Mrs.
Fairbaim, Thomas, Mrs.; nee Grace Mar-
shall.
Fallon, Thomas, Mrs.
Farr, Charles, Mrs.; nee Mary Farr; 1864,
Farrell, Thomas, Mrs.
Fawthrop, Captain James, Mrs.; nee Jane
Rosevear Ward; 1850.
Fawsett, James, Mrs. (dentist).
Feathers, James, Mrs.; nee Jane Denton.
Feathers, Stonhaugh Cuthbert, Mrs.
Featherstonhaugb, Cuthbert, Mrs. senior;
nee Susan Curtis; 1856.
Fearon, John Charles, Mrs.; nee Marguerita
Maria Hudson.
Field, Thomas, Mrs.
Findley, Donald, Mrs.; nee Flora McDonald
Findley, Dr., Mrs.
Findley, Katie, Miss.
Findlay, George, Mrs.; uee Jessie Stevens.
Findlay, Georgs, Mre,; u«e Annie Barton.
Finn, John, Mrs.; nee Mary McKenzie.
Finn, Thomas, Mrs.
Firm, Thomas, Mrs.; nee Miss McDowell.
Finnigan, John, Mrs.
Fisher, George, Mrs.; nee Emma Surrey,
Fitzgerald, Julia, Miss (a Nun).
Fitzgerald, Mary Ellen, Miss.
Fitzgerald, Isabella, Miss.
Fitzgerald, Margaret, Miss.
Fitzgerald, Rabina, Miss.
Fitzgerald, John Bryan, Mrs.
Fitzgerald, Bryon, Mrs.; nee Rabina Haw-
kins.
Fitzgerald, John, Mrs.; neo Elizabeth Sil-
vester.
Flynn, Christopher, Mrs.; nee Catherine
Fitzsimmons.
Flynn, Mrs.; nee Mary Doolan.
Flynn, Catherine, Miss.
Flynn, Maria, Miss.
Foot, Fred, Mrs.
Foster, Charles, Mrs.; neo Mary O’Brien;
ship Agricola, 1841.
Foster, Mrs.
Forsyth, Mrs.; nee Harriette Douglas.
Fox, Charles, Mrs.
Frank, Julius, Mrs.; nee Emma Marshall.
Fredericks, Alfred John, Mrs.; nee Mary
Jones Jennings.
French, Roger, Mrs.; nee Lucy Bailey.
French, Henry, Mrs.; nee Mary Ann Kenney
Freestone, Mrs.; 1855.
Francis, W., Mrs. (Admella fame).
Francis, Phillips, Mrs.
Fraser, Mrs.
Fraser, Mrs.; nee Edith Seaton; 1863.
Fraulyn, Mrs.; nee Emma Adamson.
Frayer, Mrs.
Frost, Charles, Mrs.; nee Hetty Rawlings.
Frost, Robert, Mrs.; nee EUce Mullaly.
Frost, William, Mrs.; nee El 11 nor Mills.
Frost, Richard Beaumont Stephen, Mrs.;
nee Ellen Leitch; 1866.
Frost, William, Mrs.; nee Lucy Speed.
Frost, Edward, Mrs.; nee Lavinia Robins,
Friend, Captain, Mrs.; 1838, ship Rebecca.
Fulton, Mrs.




GALE, William, Mrs.
Gale, George, Mrs.; nee Jane Kerr.
Gall, Mrs.
Gallagher, Mrs.; nee Mrs. Blair (Band-
master).
Gallie, Eliza, Miss; Mrs. Edward Henty’s
sister.
Gallic, E. W., Mrs. (banker).
Galway, Bernard, Mrs.
Gapes, John, Mrs.; nee Mary Ann, Porter;
ship Constant, 1855.
Gardiner, John, Mrs.
Gash, John, Mrs.; nee Ellen O’Keefe.
Gattwood, Mrs.; nee Lily Must.
Gay, James, Mrs.
Gell, Phillip Parker, Mrs.; nee Margaret
Findon Levett.
Gendall, Mrs.
Gibbs, John, Mrs.; nee Caroline de Lancy
Rose.
Gibbs, Caroline, Miss.
Gibbs, Archibald, Mrs.; nee Rebecca Diana
Rhodes.
Gibbs, Douel John Frederick, Mrs.
Gibson, James, Mrs.
Gill, John, Mrs.; ship Athona, 1865.
Gill, John Thomas, Mrs.
Gillam, John, Mrs.; nee Isabella Mcßae.
Gillies, Mrs.
Gillespie, Mrs.; nee Rose Trangmar.
Glossop, John, Mrs.; nee Emily Jones.
Goldsmith, Henry, Mrs.; nee Mary Padfield.
Goldsmith, Peter, Mrs.; nee Mary Ann
Blay; 1851.
Goldsmith, Elizabeth, Miss.
Goldstein, Jacob Robert Y anna ash, Mrs.;
nee Isabella Hawkins.
Gordon, James Duncan, Mrs.; nee Blanche
Eleanor Edwards.
Gough, Edward, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth Smith.
Grant, Alexander, Mrs,
Grant, James, Mrs.; nee ’Liza O’Brien.
Grant, James, Mrs., senior.
Grant, Robert, Mrs.; nee Helen Foster;
1860.
Graves, Mrs.; nee Alice Mullaly Frost,
Green, Henry, Mrs.; nee Christina Matheson
Greenham, George, Mrs.; nee Susanna Alice
Spencer.
Greenham, George, Mrs.; nee Mary What-
more.
Gray, Andrew, Mrs.; nee Isabella Edgar.
Gray, Robert, Mrs.; nee Mary Mackie.
Gray, James, Mrs.
Grey, Charles, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth Sharp
(Artist).
Grey, Mrs.; nee Marie Vivian,
Greed, Abraham, Mrs.
Greer, Dr., Mrs.; nee Munro,
Griffin, J. c., Mrs. (Surveyor).
Griffiths, Mrs.
Guilfoyle, Annie, Mias.
Guilfoyle, Cornelius, Mrs.
Guilfoyle, Mary, Miss.
Guiness, Rev., Herbert, Mrs. (Baptist
Minister).
Ourr, Henry, Mrs.
Gurr, John, Mrs.
Guy, William, Mrs. (Admolla fame); 1855.
Guy, John, Mrs.; nee Clara Edrich.
Gostus, Carl, Mrs.; nee Margaret Spencer.
HAINES, George, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth
Lock Levett.
Haggestton, Joseph, Mrs.
Hale, Andrew, Mrs.
Hale, Jane, Miss.
Hale, Alexander, Mrs.; 1863.
Haley, Patrick, Mrs.
Halon, James, Mrs.; nee Bessie Sutton.
Hanlon, John, Mrs; nee Amelia Livingstone
Hanlon, William, Mrs.; nee Esther Jerrett.
Hanlon, Sutton, Mrs.; nee M. A. Pararnor.
Hanlon, Sutton, Mrs., senior; nee
Stanford.
Hanlon, Henry, Mrs.; nee Christina Mc-
Donald; 1863, ship John Davis.
Hann, Paul, Mrs.
Harm, David, Mrs.; nee Rose Grant.
Hannan, James, Mrs.; nee Mary O’Neill.
Haroom, John, Mrs.; nee Susan Kittson.
Hannasse, William, Mrs.; nee Margaret
Herkln.
Hardcastle, Johnston, Mrs.; nee Jessie
Herbertson.
Hardy, Walter, Mrs.
Hardy, Henry, Mrs.
Hardy, William, Mrs.; nee Sarah McKeanl.
Hardie, John, Mrs.; nee Isabella Scott.
Hardie, James, Mrs.; nee Agnes Wilson.
Harland, Mrs.
Harrogan, Mrs.; nee Mary Reilly.
Hartt, Mrs.; nee Frances Sedgewick; 1864.
Harvey, Edward, Mrs.; nee Isabella Hardie.
HatherlU, Mrs.
Half, James, Mrs.
Haskins, Mrs.; nee Priscilla Cook.
Bay, Elizabeth, Grace, Miss.
Hay, Mary, Miss.
Hayward, Henry, Mrs.; nee Agnes Miller.
Hayward, Joseph, Mrs. (Turnkey at the
gaol).
Hawkins, Frederick, Mrs.
Hawkins, Samuel Froudfoot, Mrs.; nee Jane
Hutchinson.
Hawkins, Samuel Froudfoot, Mrs.; nee
Isabella Gray. j
Hawkins, David, Mrs.; nee Sarah Kenyon.
Hawkins, David, Mrs.; nee Mary Ann
Adamson.
Hawkins, Melville, Mrs.; nee Ida M. Black-
bum.
Hawkins, James, Mrs.; nee Margaret
Cmthers.
Hawkins, Henry, Mrs.; nee Janet Alexander
Hawthorne, Mrs.; nee Amy Must.
Haynes, Mrs.; nee Sarah Adamson.
Haydn, Mrs. (Warder in the gaol).
Haydn, Caroline, Miss.
Haydn, Florence, Miss.
Hazeldine, Mrs.; 1887.
Hazeldine, Clara, Miss.
Hazeldine, Henry, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth
Thomas.
Hazelwood, Robt., Mrs.; nee Miss Richard-
son; second wife.
Hazelwood, Robert, Mrs., senior.




Hazelwood, William Orange, Mrs.; nee
Grace Mitchell.
Hazelwood, Robert, Mrs., junior; nee Joan
Duff,
Hazelwood, Susan, Miss.
Hazelwood, Jane, Miss.
Hazelwood, Martha, Miss.
Hazelwood, Arthur, Mrs.; nee Mary Camp-
bell.
Heaney, Robert, Mrs.; nee Jane Armstrong.
Heaney, William, Mrs.; nee Georgina Bell,
Hearne, Josiah, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth Payne;
1853, ship Eliza.
Heame, Hamina India, Miss.
Herbertson, Robert, Mrs.; nee Isabella
Bailey; 1842.
Herbertson, Robert, Mrs.; nee Susan Cathels
Herbertson, Robert, Mrs.; nee Mary Cathels
Herbertson, Thomas, Mrs.; nee Janet
Miller.
Herbertson, Mary, Miss.
Hedditch, Charlton, Mrs.; nee Rachel Read;
1841, ship Eden.
Hedditch, William Forward, Mrs.; nee
Marion Jones.
Hedditch, John Read, Mrs.; nee Mary Jane
Holmes.
Hedges, Mrs.
Hemers, John, Mrs.; nee Ann Hay.
Henderson, Mrs.
Henty, Edward, Mrs.; nee Anna Maria
Gailie; 1834, ship Thistle.
Henty, Stephen George, Mrs.; nee Jane
Pace; 1836.
Henty, Francis, Mrs.; nee Mary Ann Law-
rence.
Henty, John, Mrs.; nee Eliza Whitfield;
1837.
Henty, Richmond, Mrs.; nee Agnes Barbara
Read.
Henty, Louisa, Miss.
Henty, Susan Goldsmith, Miss; 1843.
Henty, Margaret Mears, Miss; 1846.
Henty, William, Mrs.; nee Annie Campbell.
Hepburn, Captain, Mrs.
Hickey, Thomas, Mrs.
Hickey, Cornelius, Mrs.
Hlckleton, Robert, Mrs.
Hickmer, Samuel, Mrs.; nee Catherine Milne
Hide, Mrs., senior.
Hindson, Louisa, Miss.
Hindson, Mrs.; nee Alice Henty.
Hinchliffe, Yorke, Mrs.
Hill, John, Mrs., senior.
Hill, John, Mrs.; nee Agues Fletcher.
Hill, James, Mrs.
Hill, Richard, Mrs.
Hill, Thomas, Mrs.
Hill, Edward, Mrs.; nee Lavinia Trickey.
Hill, James, Mrs.; nee Martha Hazeldine.
Hills, Henry, Mrs,
Hird, Mrs.; nee Jane Douglas.
Hodge, James William Henry, Mrs.; nee
Mary Ann Lambert; 1852, ship Eliza.
Hodge, Charlotte Amanda, Miss.
Hodge, Mary, Miss.
Hodge, Alfred Henry, Mrs.; noe Clara Ann
Davis.
Hodgetts, Charles, Mrs.; nee Grace Kittson,
Hodgetts, Thomas, Mrs.
Hoggan, Mrs.
Hogan, John, Mrs.
Hogan, Alfred, Mrs.; nee Sarah Pitts,
Hogan, Mrs,; nee Catherine McCrystal.
Hollis, John Webb, Mrs.; nee Isabella Vic-
toria McKay.
Hollis, William, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth Webb.
Hollis, R., Mrs.; nee Mary Ann Pitcher;
1854.
Holmes, Edward, Mrs.
Holmes, Eleanor, Miss.
Holmes, Susan, Mies.
Holmes, Lillah, Miss.
Holmes, William, Mrs.; nee Susan Fowler.
Holmes, William, Mrs.; nee Rachel Plaisted;
ship John Daire, 1852.
Holmes, H. F., Mrs.
Holmes, John, Mrs.; nee Isabella Wilson.
Holmes, Mrs.; nee Harriet Beeson; 1852.
Holland, George, Mrs.; nee Agnes Jones.
Holloway, James, Mrs.; nee Ellen Cuxming.
Honeyball, John, Mrs. (Nurse).
Horn, George, Mrs.; ship New Zealander,
1853.
Horn, Edward, Mrs.; nee Mary Mair.
Horn, Mary Ann and Eliza, Misses.
Hoskins, Robert, Mrs.
Hooiey, Daniel, Mrs.; nee Bridget Molloy.
Horn, Fox G., Mrs.
Housen, Frederick, Mrs.; 1855.
Howard, Mrs.; school teacher.
Howard, J. 8., Mrs. (Clerk of Courts); 1844.
Hudson, Mrs.
Hudson, Milly, Miss.
Hudspeth, Henry, Mrs.
Hughes, E. F., Mrs.; 1855 (Editor Portland
“Chronicle”)*
Hughes, E. W., Mrs.; nee Jeannie Harkins.
Hughes, William, Mrs.; nee Emily Haim
McKnight.
Hunt, Edward, Mrs.
Hunt, Henry, Mrs.
Hunter, R. M., Mrs. (Rev.),
Huntley, Ebenezer, Mrs. (Rev.).
Huntley, Sarah, Miss.
Huntley, Mrs., senior.
Hutchinson, Josiah, Mrs.; nee Annie Hay.
Hutchinson, John, Mrs.
Hutchinson, Samuel, Mrs.; nee Alice
Hutchinson, Hugh, Mrs.
Hutchinson, Samuel, Mrs.; noe Ellen Cow-
land.
Huxley, Edward, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth Beeson.
Huxley, John, Mrs.; nee Laura Stewart.
Huxley, Thomas, Mrs.
Huxley, £,, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth Beeson;
1852.
Hyland, Thomas Francis, Mrs.; nee Mary
Georgina Ann Penfold; Governor of
Portland Gaol; 1860.
INGRAM, Alexander, Mrs.; nee Annie
Livingstone.
Ivey, Mrs.; nee Janet Robb.
JAMES, Mrs.; nee Caroline Marshall.
Jameson, Mrs.; nee Mary Schofield.
Jarrett, Stephen, Mrs,; 1849.




Jarrett, George, Mrs.; nee Mary Ann Kean.
Jelbert, Charles, Mrs.; nee Annie Louisa
Daniel Dusting.
Jennings, John, Mrs.; uoe Aim Pitts.
Jennings, James, Mrs.; nee Mary Jones.
Jennings, Samuel, Mrs.; nee Mary Stevens.
Jennings, George, Mrs.; nee Annie Minoguo.
Jennings, Abraham, Mi's.
Jenkins, William, Mrs.; nee Mary Jane
Spiken.
Jenkinson, Georg©, Mrs.; nee Mary Barclay.
Jonyns, Jonathan, Mrs.; nee Alice Dawkins.
Jerrett, Annie, Miss.
Jerrett, Francis, Mrs.; nee Lucy Aitkinson.
Johnstone, James, Mrs.; nee Maria Miller.
Johnstone, John, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth Angus.
Johnstone, James, Mrs.; nee Dorothy Simp-
son.
Johnstone, Thomas Watt, Mrs. (Teacher).
Johnstone, Elizabeth, Miss.
Johnstone, Alice, Miss.
Johnstone, Jervis, Mrs.; nee Isabel Kittson.
Johnson, Charles, Mrs.; nee Catherine Hayes
Jones, William, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth All-
cock; 1841.
Jones, Anketell, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth Lear-
month.
Jones, James, Mrs.; nee Jane Robins.
Jones, Arvon, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth Jones.
Jones, W. H., Mrs.; nee Catherine Theis-
singer Munro.
Jones, J. H., Mrs.; nee Rose Richards Lowe;
1841.
Jones, John, Mrs.; nee Jessie McLaughlin;
1841.
Jones, Robert, Mrs.
Jones, Win., Mrs.; nee Agnes Wright.
Jones, Owen, Mrs.; nee Amy Kennedy,
Jones, Charles, Mrs.
Jones, Win,, Mrs.; nee Susan Stevens.
Joyce, Isabella, Miss; 1851.
Joyce, Joseph, Mrs.; nee Miss Price; 1851.
KAY. David, Mrs.; nee Lucy Lowe; 1841.
Kay, Lucy, Miss.
Kay, Richard Lowe, Mrs.; nee Sarah Daw-
kins.
Kean, James, Mi’s. (Admella fame); 1843.
Kean, Thomas, Mrs.; nee Mooney; 1843
Kean, Thomas, Mrs.; nee Ann Smith.
Kean, Martha, Miss.
Kean, Lily, Miss.
Kean, Annie, Miss.
Kean, James R,, Mrs.; nee Janet Robertson,
Kelso, Samuel, Rev., Mrs. (Presbyterian
Minister).
Kecble, Robert, Mrs.
Keeping, John, Mrs.; nee Sarah Smith.
Keiller, Thomas, Mrs.; nee Agnes Moffat
Kean.
Keiller, Andrew, Mrs.; nee Martha Barton.
Kemp, Mrs.; nee Catherine Molloy.
Kempton, John, Mrs.; neo Hannah Keys,
Kennedy, James, Mrs.; nee Mary Mclntyre;
1842.
Kennedy; John Thomson, Mrs.; nee Frances
Ann Holmes; 1842.
Kennedy, James, Mrs.; nee Margaret Me-
Lellan; 1842.
Kennedy, Catherine, Miss.
Kennedy, Mary, Miss.
Kenney, John, Mrs.; nee Ellen Kennedy
(contemporaneous with the Hentys).
Kenney, Samuel, Mrs.; nee Janet I. M.
Black.
Kenyon, Mrs.; nee Sarah Hopper Clarke.
Kent, Robert, Mrs., senior; 1854.
Kent, Robert, Mrs.; nee Jane Donaldson.
Kent, Michael, Mrs.; nee Norah O’Brien.
Kent, James, Mrs.; nee Margaret Duffy,
Keys, William, Mrs.; nee Margaret Orr.
Kerby, William, Mrs.
Kerkin, William, Mrs.; 1853 (Admella fame)
Kerr, Mark, Mrs.; nee Mary Ann Johnstone
Kilbride, Mrs.
Kinnery, Mrs.
Kong, Michael, Mrs.
Kittson, James, Mrs., senior; 1842.
Kittson, John, Mrs.; nee Eliza Stevens; 1842
Kittson, James, Mrs,; nee Rachel Stevens;
1842.
Kittson, Hugh, Mrs.; nee Margaret Jen-
nings; 1842.
Kittson, John, Mrs.; nee Marion Remfrey.
Knight, E., Mrs.; nee Elizabeth Orefeld
Cross; 1852, ship Tasmania.
Koch, Charles, Mrs.; nee Sarah Stanford.
Knubley, Thomas Lupton, Mrs.; nee Esther
Watson.
LAMB, George, Mrs.; nee Mary Foley.
Lamb, Joseph, Mrs.; nee Emma Warfuor.
Lamb, William, Mrs,
Lamb, Phillip, Mrs.; nee Charlotte Huxley,
Laldlaw, Mrs.; nee Euphemia Hope.
Lancaster, Samuel, Mrs.; nee Emily Haw-
kins.
Lane, George, Mrs.
Lane, Caroline, Miss.
Lang, William, Mrs,
Lang, Mary Caroline, Miss.
Langford, William, Dr., Mrs.; nee Eliza
Gertrude White Henty; 1863.
Lannigan, John, Mrs.; nee Mary Taylor.
Lawson, Rev. J. W., Mrs.; nee Penelope
Bell Hawkins (Presbyterian Minister).
Laurie, Alexander, Rev., Mrs.; nee Janet
Nicol; 1842. (The first Presbyterian
Minister in Portland.)
Laurie, Andrew Frederick, Mrs.; nee Emily
Barrow.
Laurie, Park, Mrs.; nee Dora Kean.
Lear, Benjamin, Mrs.; nee Mary Ann
Dusting.
Lear, Benjamin, Mrs.; nee Jeamiie Crabbe,
Lear, Elijah, Mrs.
Learmonth, Major, William, Mrs.
Learmonth, J. R., Mi's.; nee Mary Fulford.
Learmonth, Peter, Mrs.; nee Pearson.
Leary, W., Mrs.; nee Margaret Leahy.
Leahy, John, Mrs.; nee Bridget Edwards.
Leahy, Ellen, Miss; 1838.
Lea, Job, Mrs.; nee Eliza Hazeldine.
Lee, Solomon, Mrs.
Lewis, Daniel, Mrs.
Levett, Francis Findon, Mrs.
Levett, William Ward; Mrs.




Levett, Amy, Miss.
Levett, Mary Ann Powneil, Miss.
Liddle, Robert, Mrs.; nee Mary Ann Coul-
son; 1853.
Liddle, John George, Mrs.; nee Eliza Wil-
son; 1855, ship Cairn Gorun,
Lightbody, William, Mrs. ; nee Rebecca
Kittson; 1842.
Lightbody, James, Mrs.; nee Rachel Black.
Lightbody, Thomas, Mrs.; nee Ellen Living-
stone.
Lister, Edward Henry, Mrs.; nee Annie
Fitzpatrick; 1857, ship British Empire.
Livingstone, Joseph, Mrs.; nee Annie Hud-
son.
Livingstone, James, Mrs.
Lodge, Mrs.; nee Jeannie Black.
Loisel, Mrs.; nee Norma McLeod.
Loisel, Mrs.; nee Jessie McLeod.
Looker, David, Mrs.; nee Mary Ann New-
man; 1852.
Looker, Jacob, Mrs.
Looker, Ephraim, Mrs.
Longthorn, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth Guy.
Lott, Charles, Mrs.
Lowe, Mrs.; nee Rose Richards.
Lowe, James, Mrs. (Mac’s Hotel).
Lyall, Mrs.
Lyne, Frederick Lewis, Mrs.; nee Annie
Trangmar (Solicitor).
jyjACARTNEY, William, Mrs.; nee Sarah
Moore.
Mackay, William, Mrs.; nee Sarah Lewis.
Mackie, Charles, Mrs.
Mackie, Thomas, Mrs.; nee Catherine
Cameron.
Maddick, David, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth
Sandry.
Maddock, William, Mrs.; nee Sarah Hunt-
ley.
Maddock, William, Mrs.; nee Louisa
Huntley.
Maddock, John, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth
Marshall.
Mair, Mrs.; mother of Mrs. Edward Horn.
Mallee, Mrs.; nee Bridget Buckley.
Malseed, John, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth Wallace
Malseed, Robert, Mrs.
Malseed, Janies, Mrs.; nee Eliza Malseed.
Malseed, Stewart, Mrs.; nee Sarah Slater.
Malseed, John, Mrs.; nee Mary Satchell.
Malseed, Janies, Mrs.; nee Mary Thurza
Hedditch; 1844.
Mallett, James, Mrs.; nee Eliza Sarah
Seaborn; 1841.
Mallon, Hugh, Mrs.; nee Mary Smith.
Mallon, Mary Ann, Miss.
Maney, Mrs.
Manning, Mrs.; nee Mary Jane Yelverton
Wilson.
Marsh, John, Mrs.; nee Sophie Jones.
Marshall, Joseph, Mrs.; nee Ann Brown.
Marshall, Francis, Mrs.; nee Isabella
Murphy Anderson.
Marshall, John, Mrs.; nee Rose Hann.
Marshall, Wm., Mrs.; nee Elizabeth Janies.
Marriott, Joseph, Mrs.
Martin, Angus, Mrs.
Martin, Mrs.; nee Grace Haydn.
Martin, Dr., Mrs.
Martyn, John Pierce, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth
C. Hill.
Martyn, Frederick, Mrs.; nee Emily Hill,
Martyn, Edward, Mrs.
Matheson, Murdock, Mrs.; nee Jessie
Cameron.
Matheson, Donald, Mrs.
Matheson, Robert, Mrs.; nee Charlotte
Yelverton Wilson.
Mason, Charles, Mrs.; nee Eliza Davis;
1864.
Mason, Mary Ann, Miss.
McCombe, Samuel, Mrs.; nee Sarah Hum-
phries.
McCrae, Mrs. (South Portland).
McDonald, Dr., Mrs.; nee Miss Mclnnes;
(Admella fame).
McDonald, Mrs.; nee Christina ; ship
Fairy Queen.
Mclnnes, Rev. Malcolm, Mrs.; nee Jane
McLean; Gaelic Minister; ship Edward
Johnston.
Mclntyre, Mrs.; ship John Davis, 1852.
McKenzie, Colin, Mrs.; nee Isabella Mc-
Donald.
McKinnon, Donald, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth
Mclnnes; ship Argyle, 1854.
McKinnon, Hector, Mrs.
McLaughlan, Sandy, Mrs.; nee Mcßae.
McLean, Hector, Mrs.; nee Mary Ann
Humphries.
McLellan, David, Mrs.
McMillen, Mrs.; nee Margaret McDonald.
McMillen, Mrs.; nee Margaret McDonald;
1856.
Mcßae, Donald, Mrs.; nee Janet .
Meek, Mrs., nee Ellen McMullen.
Meares, George, Mrs.
Mehaffey, Mrs.
Mehaffey, John, Mrs.; nee Beatrice Nicolla.
Melbourne, Thomas, Mrs.; nee Sarah Jane
Davis; 1858.
McCann, John, Mrs,; nee Lucy Foster; 1847
Michael, Mrs.
Middle, Thomas, Mrs,
Millar, Thomas, Mrs.; nee Jeannie Hay-
ward.
Millar, Alexander, Mrs.; nee Harriett
Taylor.
Miller, Mrs.; nee Mary Fawthrop; an Ad-
mella survivor.
Millard, William, Mrs.
Millard, J., Mrs.; nee Jane Yeoman.
Millard, Emmanuel, Mrs.; nee Jane Stan-
ford.
Milne, Mrs., senior.
Milne, Wm., Mrs.; nee Jessie Kay.
Mills, James, Mrs.; nee Margaret Duff.
Mills, James, Mrs.; nee Mary Ann Carey.
Mills, Geordy, Mrs.; nee Prudence Hill.
Mills, Charles Brabyn, Mrs.; 1837.
Mills, C. Frederick, Mrs.; 1836.
Milstead, J., Mrs.; nee Eliza Vickery.
Minogue, Simon, Mrs.; nee Johanna Min-
ogue.
Minogue, Bridget, Miss.
Minogue, Michael, Mrs.; nee Annie Kenney
May, Mrs.; nee Margaret Glbeon.




Moiloy, James, Mrs.; nee Mary Beglen;
1842, ship Flora McDonald.
Moiloy, John, Mrs.; nee Sarah Hollis.
Moiloy, James, Mrs.; nee Margaret Mc-
Peake.
Montrose, George, Mrs.; nee Lisa Jones.
Moon, C., Mrs.; nee M. A. Le Camp
(Banker, Union); 1846.
Moore, Patrick, Mrs.; nee Johanna Fitz-
Gerald.
Moore, Hugh Henry, Mrs.; nee Frances
Mackay.
Moorfoot, Thomas, Mrs.; nee Annie Wilson.
Morrosin, John, Mrs..
Morrison, Donald, Mrs.; nee Clementina
McDongall.
Morrison, Margaret Miss.
Morrison, Emma, Miss.
Morrisay, Mrs.; ship New Zealander; 1863.
Morton, George, Mrs.; nee Sarah Brown.
Moss, John, Mrs.; nee Janet Kennedy.
Muir, Mrs.; Savings Bank; 1847; (Henty’s
clerk).
Mnlder, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth Theesinger.
Mullaley, Mrs.
Mullens, James, Mrs.; nee Caroline Clarke.
Mullen, Wm„ Mrs.; nee Emma Holmes.
Mullholland, Samuel, Mrs, (Teacher).
Mullene, James, Mrs.
Munro, Duncan, Mrs.; nee Kathrine Me-
Phee; 1854,
Munro, Mary Matheson, Mias.
Munro. Catherine McLeod, Miss.
Murray, John Alexander, Mrs.; nee Miss
Roberta.
Must, Thomas, Mre.; nee Annie Wilcox
(Merchant).
Must, Clara, Miss.
Must, Frances, Muse.
McAULEY, Donald, Mrs.; nee Ada Saunders
Mcßean, Donald, Mrs.; nee Jeesie Mar
garet McPherson.
McOalliater, Mrs.; nee Mary Starrltt.
MoCalman, Hepburn, Mrs.
McCartney, Mrs.; nee Elisabeth Hale.
McClelland, Mrs. (contemporaneous with
the Hentys).
McConacby, Mrs., senior.
McConachy, John, Mrs.
McConachy, Thomas, Mrs.; nse Sarah
Hutchinson.
McCombe, Mrs.
McCrystal, Patrick, Mrs.
McDonald, Archibald, Mrs.
McDonald, Hector, Mrs. (built Mao’s
Hotel).
McDonald, Hugh, Mrs.; 1808, ship New
Zealander.
McDonald, Alexander, Mrs.; nee Barbara
McKle.
McDonald, Margaret, Miss.
McDonald, Mary, Miss.
McDonald, Flora, Miss.
McDonald, Annie, Miss.
McDonald, Janet, Miss.
McDonald, Mary, Miss.
McDonald, Mrs.; nee Jessie Douglas.
McDonald, Mrs.; nee McDonald.
McDonald, Sarah Sorlle, Miss.
McDonald, Andrew Sorlle, Mrs.
McDonald, Angus, Mrs.; nee Jessie Mor-
rison.
McDonald, A., Mrs.; nee Mary Grace Cross;
1852, ship Tasmania.
McDowall, Mrs. (Merchant).
MeEdwards, Alexander, Mrs.; nee Jessie
Laurie.
Mcßachem, John, Mrs.; nee Anna bell a Mc-
Kenzie.
McGillivary, Mrs.; nee Janet Scott Mc-
Donald.
MoGuinness, Thomas, Mrs.
McGuinness, Margaret, Miss.
Mclntosh, Mrs. (Dutton’s mate).
Mclntosh, Edward, Mrs.; nee Margaret
Livingstone.
McKay, Richard, Mrs.
McKay, Louisa, Miss.
McKay, Mrs.; nee Barnett.
MoKee, Mrs.; senior.
McKee, Henry, Mre.; nee Annie Epaix.
McKellar, Bin.
McKeever, Mrs.
McKenna, Mrs.; nee Annie Heddltch.
McKenzie, Donald, Mrs.; nee Mary Mc-
Donald; 1864, ship Edward Johnstone.
McKenzie, Kenneth, Mre.
McKenzie, Peter, Mrs.; nee Jane Temple.
McKle, Margaret, Miss.
McKie, Catherine, Miss.
McKie, Mrs.
McKlllop, Mrs.
McKellop, Mary, Miss (a Nun).
McKellop, Lexle, Miss (a Non).
McKellop, Annie, Miss.
McKinley, Henry, Mrs.; nee Roee Anna
Kennedy; 1842.
McLean, Nell, Mrs.
McLean, Donald, Mrs.
McLean, Ewen, Mrs.; nee Frances Smith.
McLeod, J. Norman; Mrs.
McLeod, Alexander Magnus, Mrs.; nee
Caroline Henty.
McLeod, Catherine, Miss.
McLeod, Constance, Miss.
McMullen, Mrs., sen.; nee Livingstone,
McMullen, Mrs.; nee Jane Cameron.
McMullen, Edward, Mrs., senior.
McMullen, Edward, Mrs., junior; nee
McCombe.
McNair, David, Mrs.; nee Jane McCombe.
McPherson, William, Mrs.; nee Marie Ben-
nett Clarke; 1854, ship Minerrm.
McNaughton, Janet, Miss.
McPherson, Angus, Mrs.
McPhee, John, Mrs.; nee Flora McLean;
1864, ship New Zealand.
McPhee, Archibald, Mrs.; nee Ellen Tun-
nock.
Moßae, Duncan, Mrs.; nee Janet Meßa;
1848.
Mcßae, Alexander, Mrs.; nee Isabella Me
kay.
Mcßae, Farquhar, Mm.; nee Eleanor Davis.
Mcßae, John, Mrs.; nee Ada Davis,
Msßaa, Laura, Miss.
MoAorley, Peter, Mrs.; nse Annie Moiloy.




NANCARROW, Mrs.
Nevill, J. T., Mrs.; nee Louisa Patterson.
Nevili, Mrs.; nee Catherine Davis.
Newton, John, Mrs.; nee Sophie Kerr.
Newton, John, Mrs.; senior.
Newton, Robert, Mrs.
Newton, Mrs.; nee Edith Campbell.
Nicholls, George, Mrs.
Nicholls, A,, Mrs.; nee Georgina Hawkins.
Nicholson, B. J., Mrs. (Architect).
Nicholson, Archibald, Mrs.; nee Ann Mc-
Dermott.
Nicholson, Sarah, Miss.
Nicholson, Charlotte, Miss.
Northway, George, Mrs.; nee Isabella Bed
ford.
Norton, J., Mrs.; 1849.
QAKLEY, Mrs.
Oaklands, Mrs.; nee Mary Aim Wyatt.
O’Brien, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth Smith.
O’Brien, John, Mrs.; nee Bessie Barrie.
O’Brien, J. 0., Mrs.; 1850,
O’Connor, Mrs.; nee Maria Hanlon.
O’Connor, Michael, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth
Kelleher.
Ogilvie, Mrs.; 1855; Bank of Victoria.
Oswald, Francis Christian, Mrs. (Banker,
Bank of Victoria).
O'Keeie, Patrick, Mrs.
O'Meara, P., Mrs.; nee Margaret Stokes.
O’Neill, Mrs.
O’Neill, Johanna, Miss.
O’Reilly, Owen, Mrs.; nee Mooney.
O’Reilly, Owen, Mrs.; nee Annie Phelan.
O’Shea, Mrs.; nee Julia Buckley.
Osbourne, William, Mrs.; nee Matilda
Winter; 1854.
Osbourne, Alfred, Mrs.; nee Mary Mc-
Guinness.
Osbourne, William, Mrs.; nee Cissie Mel-
bourne.
Osbourne, Mary, Miss.
Osbourne, Rev, J., Mrs.; Editor Portland
“Mercury”; 1842.
Otway, Captain, Mrs.
Owen, C. W., Mrs,
PALMER, James M., Mrs.; nee Mary
Kennedy.
Palmer, Matthew, Mrs.; uec Mary Kennedy
Papley, Mrs.
Paramour, Mrs.
Parker, Daniel Green, Mrs.; nee Ann
Adamson.
Parker, William, Mrs.; nee Annie Steven-
son.
Parsons, Mrs.; nee Louisa Pitts.
Partington, George, Mrs.; nee Annie
Stollery.
Patmore, Gurney, Mrs. (Proprietor of the
“Western Times”).
Patterson, John, Mrs.; nee Jane Mason.
Patterson, W. J., Mrs.; nee Frances E.
Robertson.
Patterson, Charles, Mrs.; nee (Nurse) Mary
Sloan (Admella fame); 1855.
Patterson, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth Eastman.
Patterson, Mrs.; nee Robina Douglas.
Paterson, William, Mrs.; nee Janet Hog-
gan; 1855, ship Atlanta.
Paterson, Jane Catherine, Miss.
Payne, Mrs.; 1855, ship Constant.
Payne, Lucy, Miss; ship Constant.
Payne, Agnes, Miss; ship Constant.
Payne, Catherine, Miss; ship Constant.
Payne, Annie, Miss; ship Constant.
Pearson, John, Mrs.
Pearson, Joseph, Mrs.
Peden, James, Mrs.; nee Janet Sutherland;
1863, ship Maori.
Pemberty, Bichard, Mrs.; nee Louisa
Dusting.
Peake, Mrs.
Peake, Elizabeth Annie, and Mary, Misses.
Pennell, John, Rev., Mrs. (Wesleyan Min-
ister).
Pevitt, Henry, Mrs.
Peters, George, Mrs.
Peters, Mrs.; nee Erne Yelverton Wilson.
Phelan, Mary Ann, Miss.
Phelan, Mrs.; nee Catherine Ooulson.
Phillips. Henry, Mrs.; nee Mary Ann
Bishop.
Phillips, Henry, Mrs.; nee Peggy Fox.
Phillips, Harry, Mrs.; nee Annie Bradshaw.
Phillips, John, Mrs.; nee Mary Jane Taylor.
Phillips, James, Mrs.; nee Mary Hawkins.
Phillips, Charles, Mrs,; nee Frances Trickey
Phillips, William, Mrs.; nee Blanche
Wilson,
Phillips, Mrs.; nee Maude Saunders,
Phillipin, T. C., Mrs. (Customs).
Pick, Joseph, Mrs.
Pickhard, Mrs.; nee Catherine Mary Cruse.
Piercy, Dr., Mrs.; nee Annie ; 1862.
Pilven, Charles, Mrs.
Pill, Jacob, Mrs.
Pill, Johanna, Miss.
Piilcan, Arthur, Mrs.; nee Emily Jones;
1849.
Pitcher, John, Mrs.; nee Rigby.
Pitcher, John, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth Stokes.
Pitcher, John, Mrs.; nee Mary Ann Carey.
Pitcher, George, Mrs.; nee Mary Ann Hollis
Pitcher, Albert, Mrs.; nee Jane Hollis.
Pitts, William, Mrs.
Pitts, Frederick, Mrs,
Pitts, Henry, Mrs.; nee Mary Ann Arm-
strong.
Pitts, George, Mrs.; nee Lucy Brackston.
Pitts, Walter, Mrs,; nee Hannah Spiken.
Pomeroy, John, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth Kerkin.
Pomeroy, Edward, Mrs.; nee Annie Nichol-
son (architect’s daughter).
Ponsarde, M., Mrs.; nee Featheraton-
haugh.
Port, Mrs.
Fort, Emma, Miss.
Porter, Mrs. (mother of Mrs. John Gapes).
Porter, Benjamin, Mrs.; 1852.
Porter, Martha, Miss.
Porter, Joseph Henry, Mrs.; nee Sarah
Herbertson.
Porter, Mrs.; nee Martha Huntley.
Poland, Wm, Mrs.; nee Mary Calvert.
Poland, Mary Ann, Miss.




Powell, Mre.
Power, Mrs.
Price, Richard, Mr#.
Price, James, Mrs.; nee Caroline Mullen#.
Prior, Alfred, Mrs.; nee Anni# Elizabeth
Hollie.
Plummer, Charles, Mrs,; nee Jane Dusting.
QUICK, William, Mr#.; nee Sarah Jane
Nettle; 1856, ship Severn Euphrates.
Quinan, Mrs.; nee Isabella Sorle McDonald.
Quinlivan, John, Mrs.; nee Lavery.
Quigley, Mrs.; nee Annie Flynn.
Quirk, Patrick, Mrs.
RANKIN, John, Mrs.; nee Agnes Miller
Read.
Ramsay, Mrs.
Reid, James, Mrs.; nee Phoebe Dodd.
Reid, William, Mrs.; nee Johanna Stevens.
Read, W., Mrs.; nee Agues Miller.
Reed, Fanny, Miss.
Reed, Cornelius, Mrs.
Redfern, Thomas, Mrs.
Remfrey, Thomas, Mrs,
Renfry, Joeiah, Mrs.
Reynolds, Mrs.; nee Mary Campbell.
Reynolds, Charles, Mrs.; nee Miss Mcßae.
Reynolds, Mrs.; nee Tilly Beeson; 1852.
Rhooke, Matthew, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth
Jane Quick.
Rhooke, William, Mrs.; nee Sophie Millard.
Rhodes, Charles, Mrs.
Richards, Rev, G. 8., Mr#. (Methodist
Minister).
Richards, Jonah, Mrs.
Richards, Lavinia, Mil#.
Richards, Jane, Miss.
Richardson, Thomas F,, Mr#. (Editor of
Portland “Guardian” early ’6O).
Rickards, Arthur, Mrs.; nee Eliza Herbert-
gon.
Ridgeway, Mrs.; nee Bella Barnes.
Ridgeway, Mrs.; nee Kate Bergin.
Riddock, George, Mrs.; nee Bustasia De
Arroyove.
Rigby, Mm.; nee Caroline Hazelwood Bye.
Biggs, Mrs. (Sergeant of Police).
Riordan, Mrs.
Rizzo, Mrs.; nee Roue Anna McCrystal.
Robb, William, Mrs.; 1864.
Robb, Andrew, Mrs.; nee Frances Susan
Wyatt.
Roberts, Joseph, Mrs.; nee Aaran#
(Banker).
Roberta, Mrs.; nee Inly Malseed.
Robertson, Mrs.; nee Sarah McDonald.
Robertson, James, Mrs.; nee Mrs. Milne.
Robertson, James, Mrs.; nee Jane Davis;
1854.
Robertson, C., Mrs. (first Union Bank man-
ager); 1846.
Robex-taon, Mrs.; nee Janie Levett.
Robertson, Mrs.; nee Christina McDonald.
Robins, Thomas, Mrs.; nee Mary Hazeldine.
Robins, Thomas, Mr#.; nee Jane Tippett.
Roclden, J., Mrs.
Roderlque, Mrs,
Rogers, David, Mrs.; nee Fanny Beeson.
Roney, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth Surrey.
Rose, Richard de Courcey, Mrs.; nee Mary
Gibb.
Rose, William, Mrs.; nee Alice Must.
Rosevear, W., Mrs.; nee Sarah Plummer
(Admella fame).
Rosevear, Wm., Mrs.; ne« Margaret Mor-
rison.
Rosevear, W. H., Mr«.
Rosevear, Arthur, Mrs.; nee Christina
Morrison.
Rosevear, Mrs.; ne# Mrs. Fary; second wif#
Ross, Mrs.; nee Annie Cross.
Ross, Rev., Mrs, (Presbyterian Minister);
1869.
Ross, A. M., Mrs. (Surveyor).
Boss, Thomas, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth Mcßae.
Ross, Mrs.; nee Eliza Bielly.
Rundell, Charles, Mrs.; nee Asubah Looker.
Bundell, James, Mrs.
Rundell, William Dyer; nee Zipporah
Looker.
Rundell, George, Mrs.; nee Mary Field.
Rundell, John, Mrs.; nee Agnes Willing;
1868.
Rule, Mrs.; net Cecilia Morgan.
Rutledge, Wm,, hire.; nee Jane Dusting.
Russell, Dr., Mrs.
Russell, Patrick, Mrs.; nee Charlotte Mar-
shall.
gAIiMON, Thomas Faux, Mrs.
Salmon, Jabez, Mrs.
Salmon, John, Mrs.
Salmon, Mary Jane, Miss.
Sampson, Henry Edward, Mrs.; 1854, ship
Cloud.
Sampson, George, Mrs.; nee Annie Thur-
man.
Sandry, William, Mrs.
Sarkie, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth Nicholson
(architect’s daughter).
Saunders, F., Mrs.; 1841 (First Local
Preacher).
Saunders, Nicholas, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth
Tytherleigh.
Saunders, Alfred, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth
Broadbent; 1836.
Saunders, Alfred, Mrs.; nee Selinia Morris;
1858, ship Swiftshire.
Saunders, F., Mrs.; nee Mary Marshall;
1849, ship Swiftshire.
Saimders, Annie Broadbent, Miss.
Saunders, /Mrs.; afterwtaxds Mrs. Free-
stone; then Mrs. Cook.
Saunders, Frederick, Mrs.; nee Mary Mar-
shall.
Saunders, Eleanor, Miss.
Sault, Mrs., senior.
Sault, George, Mrs.; nee Ellen Minogue.
Sault, Charles, Mrs.; nee Rose Haggcstton.
Savin, Mrs,; nee Ellen Lear.
Scott, Mrs.; nee Edith Must.
Scott, Mrs. (contemporaneous with the
Hentys).
Schofield, JamM, Mr».: 1848.
Schofield, George, Mrs. (Methodist Minis-
ter).
Schunberzer, Mrs.; nee Eleanor Saunders.




Seaton, David, Mrs.
Seaborn, Mrs.; nee Eliza Chambers.
Seabrook, Joseph, Mrs,; nee Mary Ann
Warner.
Sedgewick, George, Mrs.; 1854.
Sedgewick, John, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth Milne
Selby, R. H., Mrs.; nee Sarah Edrieh.
Sevlor, John, Mrs.
Sharp, Stephen, Miss.
Sharp, Emma, Miss.
Shacklock, Mrs.; nee H. E. Richardson.
Shacklock, Henrietta, Miss.
Sharrock, James, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth
Smith; 1852.
Sheridan, George, Mrs.; nee Miss Mcßae.
Shevill, Peter Wotton, Mrs.; nee Frances
Fordham.
Shevill, Triphena, Agneta, Elfreda, Misses.
Shiels, Mrs.
Shine, Mra.
Simpson, John, Mrs., senior; nee Mary
Pollock.
Simpson, William McCombe, Mrs.
Silvester, Thomas, Mrs.; nee Mary Fitz-
gerald.
Simkins, George, Mrs.; nee Sarah Joyce;
1853.
Simkins, Wra., Mrs.; nee Elizabeth Freer;
ship Ann Milne, 1852.
Simmons, Mrs.; nee Emily Richards.
Sitwell, Mrs.; nee Fannie FJeatherstou-
haugh; 1856.
Skane, John, Mrs.; nee Alice McNamara.
Skinner, Jacob, Mrs.; nee Jane Maria
Rhodes.
Slater, Mrs.; nee Hannah Kinery.
Slater, James, Mrs.; nee Alice Brown.
Sloan, Thomas, Mrs,
Smallpago, Mordant, Mrs.; nee Frances
Elizabeth Henty.
Smallpage, Esther May, Miss.
Smith, Mrs.; nee Ellen Sutton.
Smith, Thomas, Mrs.; nee Sophia Lambley;
1840.
Smith, Jonas, Mrs. (Nurse),
Smith, Robert, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth Millard.
Smith, Joseph, Mrs.; nee McNicoll;
1852.
Smith, Andrew, Mra.; nee Margaret White.
Smith, Daniel, Mrs.; nee Lydia Holmes.
Smith, Paddy, Mrs.
Smith, Mary Ann, Miss.
Smith, Annie, Miss.
Smith, Amy, Miss.
Smith, George, Mrs.; nee Chrissie Nicholls.
Smith, Andrew, Mrs.; nee Ann Ferrier;
1855.
Smith, Catherine, Miss.
Smith (Mangana), Mra; nee Emma Hale
McCarthy.
Smith, John Skerritt, Mrs.; nee Mary Ann
Carr.
Smith, Thomas, Mrs.; nee Jane Sandry.
Smith, Mursell, Mrs.
Smith, William, Mrs.; nee Jonas Smith’s
granddaughter.
Smith, Thomas, Mrs.; nee Eliza Smith.
Smith, Henry, Mrs.
Smith, James, Mrs.; nee Mary Ann Under-
wood; 1855 (Savings Bank Manager).
Smith, John, Mrs.; nee Mary Hoskings.
Smith, Mrs.; nee Jane Troy; 1849, ship
Jane Pemberton. (Contemporaneous
with the Hentys.)
Smith, Thomas, Mrs.; nee Christina Camp-
bell.
Smith, J. 8., Rev., Mrs. (Methodist Minis-
ter).
Smith, John, Mra. (Bridgewater).
Smith, Robert, Mrs.; nee Martha Wilson.
Smith, Silas, Mrs.; 1857.
Smith, Rev. James, Mrs. (Baptist Minister)
Smith, John, Mrs.; nee Mary Sullivan.
Smith, George, Mrs.; nee Frances Flora
McLean.
Sneath, Andrew, Mrs.; nee Mary Ann
Wilson,
Southern, Mrs.; nee Annie Osbourne.
Somerville, Townsend, Mrs.; 1855 (Savings
Bank Manager).
Spencer, George Frederick, Mrs.; nee
Annie Compton.
Spence, Mrs.; nee Oherry Howard.
Sparks, Charles, Mrs.; nee Eliza Blay.
Spiken, George, Mrs.; nee Hannah Harland. |
Spiken, George, Mrs.; nee Mary Ann Webh. |
Spinks, Frederick, Mrs.; nee Emily Augusta i
Goldsmith.
Spurrell, George, Mrs.; nee Annie McLean, I
Starkey, Captain, G. 8., Mrs.; nee Eveline |
Henty. j
Staff, Mrs.; nee Pitte.
Stanford, John, Mrs.; nee Mary Duff.
Staff, Mrs.; nee Jennings.
Starritt, Hugh, Mrs. |
Starritt, Susan, Mary, and Kitty, Misses, i
Stevens, Robert, Mrs.
Stevens, John, Mrs.
Stearne, Edward, Mrs.; nee Rabina Cun- |
ning; 1854.
Stevenson, Edward, Mrs.; nee Teresa Brown
Stevenson, Teresa, Miss.
Stevenson, Joseph, Mrs.; nee Mary Hale. |
Stevenson, George, Mrs. i
Stewart, Mrs. f
Stokes* William Alexander, Mrs.; 1863
(Union Bank Manager).
Stokes, Ellen Bertha, Miss. |
Stollery, Thomas, Mrs., senior; nee Ann I
Wilson.
Stollery, Thomas, Mrs.; nee Eliza Field.
Stone, David Blair, Mrs.
Stone, Mrs.; nee Whitfield (Chief |
Justice). |
Storan, Patrick, Mrs, -
Storie, J., Mrs.; nee Miss Andison.
Stranaghan, Mrs.; nee Louisa Cross; 1854. |
Stuchbery, Mrs.; nee Grace Richards.
Stuchbery, Wm,, Mrs.; nee Susan Morton.
Surrey, Mrs.
Surrey, Martha, Miss. |
Suss, Joseph, Mrs.; nee Mary Flynn.
Sutherland, Dr. William Sinclair, Mrs.; nee j
Margaret Tulloh; 1844.
Sutherland, Ann, Miss; 1849.
Sutherland, Pauline Amelia Margaret; )
1861. |
Sutton, Francis, Mrs.; nee Mary Harris.




Sutton, Francis, Mrs.; nee Teresa Julia
Doyle.
Sutton, John, Mrs.; nee Julia Mlnogue.
Sutton, Mrs.; nee Sarah Rielly.
Symington, Thomas, Mrs.; nee Margaret
Martin.
Synaman, Mrs.; nee Emma Frances.
TAYLOR, Wm., Mrs.; nee Johanna Brown;
1854.
Taylor, Mrs.; nee Dawson; 1858.
Taylor, Elizabeth, Miss,
Taylor, Samuel, Mrs.; nee Annie McMullen.
Taylor, Charles, Mrs.; nee Charlotte Jones.
Taylor, William, Mrs.; nee Eliza Bdrich.
Tattersall, Mrs.; nee Mary Ann Barsby.
Terrill, George Hicks, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth
Ann Gladdin; 1854.
Terrill, Thomas, Mrs.; nee Lily Fox.
Tester Mrs.; nee Julia Wright.
Thessinger, Phillip, Mrs. senior,
Thessinger, Phillip, Mrs., junior; nee Sarah
Surrey.
Thessinger, Jacob, Mrs.
Thessinger, Phillipena, Miss.
Thomas, Edward, Mrs.; nee Annie Barclay.
Thomas, Frederick, Mrs.; nee Sarah Mc-
Pherson.
Thomas, James, Mrs.; nee Grace Bossence;
1854.
Thomas, Delias, Miss.
Thomas, George, Mrs.; nee Power.
Thomas, Mrs., senior.
Thomson, William, Mrs,; nee Margaret
Patterson; ship Mervyn (Captain Had-
ley), 1852.
Thomson, Mrs.; nee Kate Sutton.
Thomson, William, Mrs.
Thomson, Samuel, Mrs.; nee Mary Terrill.
Thomson, Alexander, Mrs.; nee Jane Gar-
rett.
Thomson, Mrs.; nee Fanny Livingstone,
Thornhill, William, Mrs.; nee Mary Ann
Charter.
Thurman, Richard, Mrs.
Thurman, William, Mrs.
Thurman, Joseph, Mrs.
Thurman, Nathaniel, Mrs.
Thurman, Joseph Henry, Mrs.
Tonkins, Dobell, Mrs.; nee Sarah Elizabeth
Lovett.
Towle, Dr., Mrs.
Tracey, Richard, Mrs. (Customs Officer).
Trangmar, Major, Mrs.; nee Catherine Mo-
Kebery.
Trangmar, Major, Mrs.; nee Mary Ann
Coulston.
Trangmar, George, Mrs.; nee Matilda Mc-
Kebery.
Trangmar, Charles Marshall, Mrs.; nee ——
Allen.
Trangmar, James William, Mrs.; nee Kate
St. George.
Treloar, James Henry, Mrs.; nee Hamutal
Looker; ship Duke of Richmond; 1862.
Trennear, Mrs.; nee Lily Maleeed.
Trennear, David, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth
Hazeldine.
Trickey, Charles, Mrs.; nee Mary Hannah
Huntley; 1854.
Troeth, James, Mrs.; nee Belinda Mullens.
Tuck, Mrs.
Tuckfleld, Francis, Rev., Mrs. (Methodist
Minister); 1866.
Tulloh, William, Mrs. (Savings Bank Man-
ager); 1870.
Tulloh, Wm., Mrs,; nee Catherine Grant.
Tulloh, George, Mrs.; nee Maxjorie Kerkin.
Tulloh, Colin Robertson, Mrs.
Tunnock, John Cariek, Mrs.; nee Jane
Kennedy; 1842.
Tunnock, Mary Jane, Miss.
Tunnock, Jessie, Miss (Nurse).
Turner, Archibald, Mrs.; nee Isabella Fer-
guson.
Turner, Mrs. (Customs Officer).
Tytherleigh, John, Mrs.; nee Eliza Augus-
tine Smith; 1857, ship Maria Ann.
Tytherleigh, Elizabeth Ann, Miss.
UNDERWOOD, J. 0., Mrs.
Urquhart, Alexander, Mrs.
Upton, Mrs.; nee Louisa Patterson.
VANCE, Isabella Crawford, Miss.
Vance, Samuel, Mrs.; nee Susan Crawford.
Vickery, Reuben, Mrs.; 1866.
Vickery, Jessie, Charlotte, Mary Ann,
Misses.
Veitch, Mrs.; nee Mary E. Phemie Kean.
Vine, Richard, Mrs.
Vincent, Mrs.; nee Mrs. Gough.
Vivian, Thomas, Mrs.
Voysey, Mis., senior.
Voysey, Joseph, Mrs.; nee Mary Ann Porter
WACKELDINE, Mrs. (Bandmaster).
Wadmore, James, Mrs.; nee Mary 0. Dris-
coll; ship Constant, 1855.
Wadmore, William James, Mrs.; nee Mary
Macartney.
Wadmore, Annie, Miss.
Wadmore, Sarah Jane, Miss.
Wagland, Sirs.
Walker, John, Mrs.; nee Mary Hughes.
Walker, Helen, Mary and Elizabeth, Missea.
Walker, Thomas, Mrs.; bom 1835; still
living.
Wallace, Mrs.; nee Isabel Cameron; 1842.
Walpole, William, Mrs.; nee Sarah Jane
Cochrane.
Ward, Thomas J., Mrs.; nee Eleanor R.
Jones; 1854.
Waters, Mrs.
Watson, Mrs.; nee Jane Laidlaw.
Watson (Pilot), James Wentworth, Mrs.
Webb, Thomas, Mrs.; nee Jane Kerr; 1851,
Webb, Sophie and Agnes, Misses.
Webb, John, Mrs.; nee Margaret Smith.
Webber, Charles, Mrs.; nee Julia Mc-
Crystal.
Wedd, William, Mrs.; nee Matilda Carey;
ship Constant, 1855.
Weedle, T. 8., Mrs. (Admella fame).
West, Dr., Mrs.; ship Eliza, 1852.
West, John, Mrs.
West, Lavinia and Hannah, Misses.
Wells, William, Hobart, Mrs.; nee Sophie
Hollis.




Wheeler, William, Mrs.
White, James, Craig, Mrs.; nec Hannah
Kennedy; 1842.
White, John Thomson Kennedy, Mrs.; nee
Hannah Kittson.
White, Margaret, Miss.
White. Dr. Thomas Edward, Mrs.; nee Eliza
Whitfield Heuty; 1840.
White, Adam, Mrs.
Whitton, William, Mrs.; 1843. Built the
Court House and Gaol.
Whyte, Robert, Mrs.; nee Minnie Smith.
Wickman, John Soren, Mrs.; nee Martha
Terrill.
Wiggins, John, Mrs.
Wigley, Thomas, Mrs.
Wiley, Thomas Maney, Mrs.; nee Emily
Henty (M.L.C.).
Wilkinson, Thomas, Mrs. Founded the first
local paper, the “Guardian,” 1841
and 1842.
Williams, Mrs.; nee Charlotte Mackay.
Williamson, Mrs.; nee Frost.
Williamson, A., Mrs,; nee Jessie Hawkins.
Wilson, William, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth Ann
Terrill.
Wilson, Alice and Claude, Misses.
Wilson, William, Mrs.; nee Farroll.
Wilson, James, Mrs.; nee Sarah Holland.
Wilson, David, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth Barsby.
Wilson, John, Mrs.; nee Margaret Benson.
Wilson, Robert, Mrs.; nee Mary Jane Gil-
mour; ship Star of India, 1866.
Wilson, John, Mrs.; nee Matilda Davison;
ship Cairn Gorun.
Wilson, George, Mrs.; nee Ellen Kenney.
Wilson, George, (Chemist).
Wilson, James Yelverton, Rev,, Mrs.
(Church of England Minister); 1839.
Wilson, John, Mrs.; nee Agnes Walker;
1852.
Wilson, Mrs.; nee Jeannie Spence.
Wilson, Mrs.; nee Cherry Spence.
Wilson, Israel, Mrs,
Wiltshire, Joseph, Mrs.
Winter, William, Mrs.
Winter, Mrs,; nee Frances Edrich.
Witton, William, Rev., Mrs. (Methodist
Minister); 1845.
Wolfe, William, Mrs.
Wood, Claude, Mrs.; nee Annie Foster;
1861.
Woods, T. E., Mrs. (Gaoler).
Woods, Mrs.; nee Nellie Blackburn.
Woofmdeu, David, Mrs.
Woolley, Mrs.; nee Jessie Dunbar.
Worth, W. S,, Rev., Mrs. (Methodist Minis-
ter).
Worthy, William, Mrs.; nee Mary Ann Mc-
Donald.
Wright, Harry, Mrs.; nee Mary Dalgleish.
Wright, Ellen, Miss.
Wright, George, Mrs.; nee Sarah Sarsfield.
Wright, Mary, Miss (a Nun).
Wright, George, Mrs., senior.
Wright, Jeannie, Miss.
Wright, James, Mrs. (Admella fame).
Wright, George, Mrs.; nee Elizabeth Ben-
son.
Wyatt, J. L., Mrs.; nee Rachel Fryer.
Wyatt, Alice, Miss.
Wyatt, Mrs. (Photographer).
YOUNG, Samuel, Mrs., senior.
Young, Samuel, Mi's.; nee Sarah Jane
Sedgewick.
YOUNG, Hugh, Mrs.; nee Annie Barnes.
ZIMMERMAN, Mi's.




PIONEER WOMEN LIVING IN THE
PORTLAND DISTRICT AT THE PRES-
ENT TIME (APRIL, 1934), WHOSE AGES
RUN FROM 80 TO OVER 90 YEARS.
Mrs. John Thomson Kennedy, nee Frances
Ann Holmes; in her 91st year.
Mrs. William Mullen, nee Emma Holmes;
in her 89th year.
Mrs. John Jennings, nee Ann Pitts; in her
87th year.
Mrs. John Beglen, nee Lucy Farr; in her
87th year.
Miss Anne Beglen, in her 89th year.
Mrs. John Row, nee Emma Phillip; in her
86th year.
Mrs. Charles Allen, nee Jane McDonald;
in her 85th year.
Mrs. William Forward Hedditch, nee
Marion Jones; in her 83rd year.
Miss Catherine Smith; in her 80th year.
Mrs. John Newton, nee Sophie Kerr; in
her 81st year.
Mrs. W, H. Jones, nee Catherine Munro
Thessinger; in her 80th year.
Mrs. McDonald (Battery Point), nee Eliza
McDonald; in her 82nd year.
Mrs. W. P, Anderson, nee Phoebe Brown;
in her 82nd year.
Mrs. Cook, nee Hannah Powell; in her 81st
year.
Mrs. John Kempton, nee Hannah Keys; in
her,B2nd year.
OTHER PIONEER WOMEN OF PORT-
LAND BETWEEN THE AGES OF 80 AND
OVER 90 YEARS, NOT LIVING IN
PORTLAND IN APRIL, 1934.
Mrs. Thomas Walker; in her 99th year;
at Hamilton.
Mrs. E. Edwards, nee Hills; in her 93rd
year; at Pomonel.
Mrs. Oliver Reynolds, nee Aimie Campbell;
in her 90th year; at Crib Point, Bittern
Mrs. Cameron (North Albury); in her 91st
year.
Mrs. John Thornton Dancocks, nee Mary
Jane Foster (Russell-street, Caster-
ton); in her 89tb year.
Mrs. E. Knight, nee Elizabeth 0. Crass
(Footscray); in her 87th year.
Mrs. McDonald, nee Mary Grace Cross
(Brunswick West); in her 82nd year.
Miss Minnie Doolan (South Yarra); in her
81st year.
Miss Laura Mcßae (Ballarat); in her 81st
year.
Mrs. O’Bryan, nee Elizabeth Smith (Mum-
bannar); in her 80th year.
Mrs. J. Molloy (Hamilton); in her 86th
year.
Mrs. John Henry Broughton, nee Catherine
Hedditch (Essendon); in her 82nd year
Mrs. Aivon Jones, nee Elizabeth Jones
(Brighton); in her 87th year.
Mrs. McGillivery, nee Janet Scott Me-
donald (Peterborough); in her 92nd
year.
Mrs. Bryou, nee Ann Elizabeth McDonald
(Temora, New South Wales); in her
86th year.
Mrs. William Gillan, nee Clarice Colley
(Gladstone-street, South Melbourne);
in her 87th year.
Miss Amina India Hearne (Melbourne); in
her 87th year.




I — - I
j ~~ ■ I
! «
9 «
9 Crag and Cliff, Dutton’s Bluff, Portland. S
j j
THE VOICE OF THE SEA
QAZE upon the limitless sea, with its
infinity of expression—now, like some
mobile face, it wears an aspect of ex-
ceeding peace; and, again, a dripping mist
crosses its mighty form as if in sorrow
to bemoan those whom it has embosomed
in its mighty depths.
But what are the wild waves saying!
Draw near, stand beside the wintry ocean
and hearken to the message of the stormy
billows, for the voice of the great Creator
dwells in their mighty tone. Listen! They,
seem eager as they dash onward in rhyth-
mic strain to impart the great lesson and
secret of their power. Learn, they would
say, to become great by gathering strength
in the smallest actions of a day well and
holily spent. Like a tide, your work should
rise, each later wave the mightier. Catch
the transient hours, improve each moment
as it flies: each has its task to do or bear.
Hark! They now speak in fascinating
utterances of that unseen Power which
has made the sand their boundary, an
everlasting ordinance which they must ever
obey. Now, in cadence soft, they breathe
music on the rock-bound coast as they ask
you to express in words a ceaseless “Bene-
dicitc” that, like their misty vapour, it
may ascend as in incense before the throne
of God’s invisible majesty. See how the
waves recede. They will return, slowly,
surely, and finally touch the shore. This,
the eloquent, silent sermon on persever-
ance which they never cease to preach.
Watch! What a symbol of human
passions is here portrayed, striving with
a last impotent effort at the object of re-
venge as they dash with furious onslaught
against the bare cliffs, rudely climbing up
their very sides, fuming as with a deadly
anger at their base, seizing within their
grasp everything that comes in their way;
the face of the angry waves grows black
with wrath, while the brow becomes white
with rage. The strife goes on and on,
until at length they break into feathery
spray as they touch the silvery sand. So
our stormy voices clash and sweep along
until they come in contact with the gentle
virtues of Charity, Meekness and Humili-
ty. Then their power is scattered like the
spray which is wafted along the rocks in
wandering dewdrops.
Where is he who says there is no Cod 1
Let him come and view this “mirror
where the Almighty’s form glasses itself
in tempests,” and then, in answer true,
respond to the voice within. In presence
of this heaving, endless sea, this image
of eternity, say there is no future.
When driven by doubt and haggard care
on the rough seas of life, where can the
weary spirit find anchorage far from its
noise, its stormy strife and yawning waves,
save in the haven of God’s all-sheltering
mercy. Here storms can rage no more.
Here the clouds shall be rolled aside, and
the vision of a fairer world shall break
upon his view.—A.G.W.
CROSSING THE BAR.
Sunset and Evening Star
And one clear call for me 1
And may there be no moaning at the bar
When I put out to sea.
But such a tide as moving seems asleep,
Too full for sound and foam,
When that which drew 1 from out the boundless deep
Turns again home.
Twilight and evening hell,
And after that the dark!
And may there be no sadness of farewell
When I embark;
For tho’ from out the bourne of Time and Place
The Hood may bear me far,
I hope to see my Pilot face to face
When I have crost the bar. —Tennyson.


SECOND EDITION
WHOLLY SET UP AND PRINTED
IN AUSTRALIA BY
HAMILTON “SPECTATOR.’'
HAMILTON. VIC.












