





For
Badge Brooches
GOLD , SILVER and GILT
the Best Value is obtainable at
H.
Engagement and Wedding Rings
You CANNOT GET BETTER
VALUE than at H. LLOYD’S
Wristlet Watches
SCREW BACK is the Best Watch
now on the market.
H. W. LLOYDS “Omega”
Genuine 9-carat Gold Goods
all sold by H. W. LLOYD as such are
Absolutely ‘Dependable.
Quality W
CO TO H. W. LLOYD
282 Lambton Quay and Cuba Street ,
WELLINGTON
Also Trentharn, Featherston and
Tauherenikau Camps.
WATCHMAKER
and JEWELLER
©


MILITARY MEN
p/ease
yvoce
Be
A.
117
w
E are
fully stocked
with all Military Requisites
and we are in the position to
supply you with Complete Out-
fits within 24 Hours for £IS .
This will comprise the following;
Tunic. Slacks, Breeches. British
Warmer or Great Coat, Boots,
Cape, Wollen Shirts and Collars,
Puttees, Gloves. Sleeping Bag and
Uniform Trunk.
Send your order or send
for our Representative
BRANCHES AT FEATHERSTON
AND TRENTHAM
The Military Firm of over
Twenty Years' Standing
Army Supply
:: Stores ::
LEVY
CUSTOMHOUSE QUAY,
©
WELLINGTON
Goldberg—2
Read this Testimonial. Westminster Chambers. 13 Victoria Street, LONDON. S.W.
Dear Sirs, —I am directed by the High Commissioner to thank you for the great
assistance tendered by you in this Department in connection with the out-fitting of the
New Zealand Expeditionary Force, more particularly the British Section.
The various items supplied have been in accordance with samples, and the con-
tracts generally both as to prices and execution have given every satisfaction.
I am, dear Sir, yours faithfnlly, HUGH PALLISSER, Secretary.


From
To


MAJOR J. W. BRUNT
Commanding Officer


BOOK OF THE
Cl CAMP
TAUHERENIKAU M C.
5
WHITCOMBE <32 TOMBS LIMITED
Auckland, Christchurch. Dunedin, Wellington,
Melbourne *32 London
1917




HOOK OF THE Cl CAMP
T is hoped that a tolerant public will accept
this book and find some pleasure in the
reproductions and letterpress, all of which
are from the brush or pen of Cl soldiers.
When a golden era of peace descends once
more on a war-tired world, and our association with the
Cl Camp becomes a retrospect, the subject of recollec-
tions—tender, humorous and pathetic—if this book helps
to revive old memories, recall old comradeships, and, as
a souvenir, brings us back again to the days incense
sweetened by a sense of duty done, and of efforts made
to pass on a heritage of liberty to those coming after,
the promoters will feel their work amply rewarded. . . .
H. HECTOR BOLITHO , <Pte.,
Editor. v
Tauherenikau Military Camp,
December, 1917


‘BOOK OF THE Cl CAMP
Committee:
2nd Lieut. R. H, QUILLIAM (Adjutant of the Camp),
Chairman.
C. M. S. HARVEY, Sergts. T. JORDAN and
McDAVITT, Corporals MARKER and
HOWARD.
Sub-Editorial Committee:
Sergt. T. JORDON and Sergt. McDAVITT.
TAUHEREKIKAU :::DECEMBER.


C1 CAMP
It is now more than three years since the wild beast
of Europe ran amok with Western Civilisation, and the
end of his career is not yet. We have passed onr word that
nntil he is securely chained and his claws cut we shall
make no peace with him, and we shall not falter. In this
Dominion the call to the colours was eagerly answered,
and New Zealand has been able to train and despatch to
Europe an army exceeding the total strength of the force
with which Wellington won Waterloo. The rigours of
active service are only for the fittest, and the authorities
at the outset devised a system of classification of those
enlisting in accordance with their degree of fitness. Num-
bers' of men volunteered for foreign service who had not
the remotest chance of leaving these shores: the spirit was
exceeding willing, but the flesh exceeding weak. Those
men whose physique and general health were beyond re-
proach were graded as A—fit for active service forthwith.
Those whose general condition was not quite so forward—
to use a stock term —were graded B: they required “ top-
ping off ” before being ready for service abroad. Below
these again in the physical scale were the men of Class C,
subdivided in its turn into Cl and C 2. The men of the
latter subdivision were known as Home Service men, i.e.
their condition precluded the military authorities from
counting upon their services for active service during the
war, and they were definitely relegated to service within
the Dominion. It is with the other subdivision, Cl, that
we are here concerned. In the case of very many of these
men, at the time of their medical examination, they were
barely out of their teens, in some cases they were certainly
not. Their physical development did not appear to the
doctors to be mature: an indoor life was perhaps respon-
sible. In some cases the men were only just convalescent
from a severe illness or a recent operation, but their sense


of duty was nothing dulled, and they made haste to the
recruiting office only to be put on one side in favour of
their more robust brothers. Three years of tremendous
world war and appalling slaughter have not brought us the
peace we desire, and the struggle bids fair to fulfil the
prediction made early in its course that it was to be a war
of attrition —a question of man power.
Recently Mr. Lloyd George, in one of his illuminating
surveys of the situation, stated that the two factors upon
which we must cencentrate our attention were man power
and ship power. Hence we find that in this, as in every
other land, there has been a general stock-taking of its man
power. In this general stock taking the existence of a
numerous class of Cl men has not been overlooked, and
during the middle of this year the authorities decided to
comb out this class. A comprehensive examination of the
medical reports of the class seemed to justify the hope that
a large percentage of these men would, with proper train-
ing, be enabled ultimately to take their place in the firing
line. A regular, graduated system of training was de-
vised, so that a minimum of strain would at first be placed
upon the recruit, and yet gradually lead up to the more
strenuous work of the trained soldier.
Naturally physical training took pride of place in the
system, in short, the authorities pinned their faith in fresh
air, sunshine and physical exercise to make of the Cl man
an A man. A special class of physical instructors was put
through a course of training under an expert in this work—
Captain Brock. He has had many years’ experience at
Aldershot in time of peace, and in the war he has rendered
distinguished services at the front, for which he wears the
decoration of the Military Cross.
The site decided upon for the training camp was Tan-
herenikau, but this was not yet clear of reinforcement
drafts until October last. Meanwhile the first draft of Cl
men, to the number of about 300, had arrived in Feather-
ston, and made its first home in Canvastown. For Com-
mandant of the Camp the choice fell upon Major J. W.
Brunt, late of the Wellington Battalion. He was one of
the original Main Body that set the standard for our New
Zealand army by its heroic deeds on the Peninsula at


Gallipoli. He was invalided home, and was subsequently
appointed Camp Adjutant at Tauherenikau. He has
always been a conspicuous administrator: thorough is his
motto. He has a rare eye for detail and a keen sense of
discipline. Under his charge the recruit will have more
than the rudiments of military training. On October 25th
a second draft of about 600 men was added to the strength
of the camp, and the organisation was placed upon a proper
footing, Rive companies were formed with a full comple-
ment of officers, carefully selected from the number of
those returned from active service. On November 17th
the Whole camp removed to its permanent home at
Tauherenikau. The site is an ideal one for the purpose.
Here the recruit is far removed from outside influences
and breathes the air of health and freedom. There is no
excuse for his not doing well. The camp is a canvas one,
and the training exclusively in the open air. The whole
is organised and disciplined exactly as in a reinforcement
draft. The work of the recruit consists of a judicious
blending of physical exercises, route marching, infantry
training, and general fatigues, and it has already produced
excellent results. Large numbers of fit men have
graduated from the camp into the reinforcements, and the
camp bids fair to become a military success. Of course,
the success or failure of such a camp as this is not to be
judged entirely upon the number of men passing through
into reinforcement drafts as fit. Quite apart from its
value from a military viewpoint, this camp is of a wider
national importance. The figures of the medical autho-
rities who inspected recruits on enlistment have given some
cause for inquiring into our national physique. Relaxa-
tion from time to time of our physical standard seemed
to lend some colour to the allegation made in some quarters
that we are not the men we were. The course of training
undergone by the Cl men, even in the case of those not
finally fit for service, should serve in some measure as a
corrective of such an allegation. No man that passes
through the camp can fail to derive material benefit in his
general well being from his stay here, and the ultimate
effects upon the next generation are still to be appraised.


Officer of the Day: “Any Complaints?”
Mess Orderly : “ No !”
Officer : “ No What ?’*
Mess Orderly: “No Blasted Complaints.”
The Legend of 41&e Bs*eeßs
It is curious how history repeats itself. While excava-
ting in C Coy.’s lines for the purpose of putting down a
landscape garden, a party of soldiers came across a quantity
of thin square-shaped bricks. These were in a remarkably
good state of preservation and appeared to have lain in the


ground a great time. Some bore unmistakeable signs of
having been used as kit labels, while others appeared to
have been used as manuscript. All bore the imprint By-
croft, the name of a famous hardware firm flourishing about
the time of Jokata. The reference to soldiers in the manu-
script probably refers to one of the many inter-tribal fights
of that period. As testifying to the terrible privation
which these soldiers suffered, a reporter of the Glaxo Gil-
gerina was shown marks made by human teeth on some
of the bricks. The manuscript is incomplete but seems to
feg ail attempt to show the cause of the war. Pieced
together, the story of the bricks reads thus :
And Bil the Masseyite spake unto his henchman Jim-
alan, saying: Know you that the damsels of Nooseland do
cast the gleeful optic upon the young men of Trent Ham,
Pether Stun and Terrynee Kow and know you not also
that the damsels do look with disfavour on mine own
annotated the cowcocky and the squata.
And verily know you that the squata spake unto me
saying: Pail not O Bil to put the kibosh on the young
men as otherwise the men of my tribe will not bear allegiance
unto you neither will our votes be yours and mud shall be
your name in the high places.
And know" you also that the cowmocky spake unto me
saying: ‘ ‘ The damsels wall not wed themselves to us and
with the many shekels that the Hebrews require for their
milk extracting machines, our profits are up to “put.”
Look then to it 0 Bil that the damsel’s come to wed us
that wm may get much work done for nix.”
And Jimalan answered unto Bil the Masseyite saying:
“I have a trusted servant one Gib the son of Agun wish
you not that he sling his weight about. ’ 9
And they called unto Gib saying: Put you the acid
upon the young men that they appear shamed in the eyes
of the damsels and mean upon the earth as a tree that is
fallen and of no repute.
And Gib called unto sundry of his varlets who were
called Koatamasters, which means wicked ones, saying:
Gather ye, together all the rubbish which you have in
stock, verily all the odd sizes of thirty-five reinforcements:
gather ye that it may be issued to the young men wherewith
to clothe themselves.


And the Koatamasters gathered all the sackcloth and
the jelly bags that they could lay hands upon verily even
unto the cast-off rags of the discharged men.
And they issued it unto the young men saying: Take ye
what is offered ye otherwise the clink shall he your lot.
And Gib made order unto the young men even unto
the company sergeant-major saying wear ye only that which
is given unto ye for verily if your tunic is ten sizes too
large that is the regulation as also with your pants and
your puttees and everything that is yours and know ye
that the word of Gib is as the law of the Medes and Persians
immutable.
And Bil the Masseyite made oration unto the people
the high priests and the parasites saying: ‘ ‘ The young
men must be dressed as Gib ordereth, for it is written in
the book of the Profits and the wrath of the Brasshats shall
descend upon him that defaulteth.”
And a stir arose in the land whereupon the reporter of
the Holy Host did visit Gib but he heard him as one that
is dumb who openeth not his mouth.
But the young men were sorrowful indeed saying among
themselves ,"What damrot is this?” and "why should the
jellybags of Bil the Masseyite be worn except on fatigue
and in the silent places where no one sees?”
And the young men of Trent Ham who were of a war-
like disposition spake unto the police saying: "wish ye that
the gravel crushers of Bil disfigure you or are ye content
to open the gates that we may pass even unto the city of
the damsels?”
And the police were sore afraid and said "go ye forth,
as you please and we will note your going out and your
coming in.”
And when Bil the Masseyite heard these things he mar-
velled and spake unto Jimalan saying: "Persecute the
young men no longer for their spirit becometh them. Bring
unto me four and eighty Koatamasters and all odd size
clothing that I may make a bonfire of them.”
And Jimalan hearing these words
The manuscript breaks off here and a d'iligent search
failed to unearth the missing bricks.


“ The Inevitable Daub ”


'
* . j • • > .. . «*# *.
• ■ ■# , ' - :■
Tike Ma.s*clk —and tlkea tike Rivet*
‘' ‘Philistine
There were three colours—the blue of the sky, the
grey-green grass, and between, a slowly moving line of
khaki. Distance made the formation of the line indefinite,
but skilfully as a pastel artist’s finger, the sunshine
worked the colours together, casting shadows where the
green of the grass became monotonous. It was at the
time when the heat of summer was almost sensuous—the
gentle wind was a caress and the earth warm to the feet.
The line of khaki swayed, and as it neared me, sun-
browned faces and knees became distinct from the haze.
What a force there is in a moving line of men! The un-
covered chests—sunbrowned and muscular—the strong
swinging arms and the steady march along the road. As
they came nearer, comedy introduced itself, the sound of
laughter and talking adding more life to the scene.
Sturdy fellows there were, whose healthy minds were
reflected in the happy laughter in their faces.


Why mention the deeper aspects of war when there is
such joy in this preparation? Thoughts of bloody scenes
on battlefields could find no place in the minds of these
fellows. And yet among such scenes may be their lot.
So quickly does life change from comedy to tragedy that
we must dwell on the happy moments and forgot the
future. Jokes that vie with those of Rabelais, songs with
an ocean of enthusiasm in them, and above all, the steady
tread of a thousand men on the shingle, these are the il-
lustrations on the march. Gradually the long line of men
pa§§§d toy, and the laughter was lost in the distance.
They followed a bend in the 'path where the sky was hid
by overhanging willows and tall pine trees that seemed
like fingers clutching at the clouds. There the air was
cool and the ground less heated by the sun. Far in the
distance was a line of blue. It might be a river or the
edge of a lake. Nearer and then it could be seen as a
stream speeding over the rock-strewn plain.
God made the earth long before armies were thought
of, but we are sure he put streams here in view of the
advent of soldiers, for by whom are they more appre-
ciated? Streams may turn millwheels and water the
land, but what is that compared with the pleasure they
give to a soldier on the march ? Just when the heat of the
day became oppressive, when the vigour of the men be-
came a little overtaxed, the rippling expanse of water
filled the mind with the expectancy of a cool bathe.
The water was rapid in its passing, except where at
the banks, tiring of the journey, it had crept into the
clefts and hollows. Here the pools crystal clear and
“reflecting an image of heaven.” Small fishes darted
across them, and green moss grew on the stones which
were high enough to escape the surface of the water.
The men broke off and expressed their joy in a yell;
tunics and trousers were hurriedly discarded and thrown
on the bank, and naked and laughing, a thousand men ran
to the water. Such a number almost arrested the stream
in its course.
Some there were who dived deep into the cool water.
They were lost for a moment, but soon came to the surface
near the opposite bank. They waded to the shore and
stood along the bank dripping wet and happy.


A Dfeam
*By L’ Imp.
After a whirl of preparation and issue of clothes, etc.,.
I was installed as a Cl soldier, and not until 24 hours of
bustle had passed, was I able to steal a rest. I crept,
languid and sleepy, into an Institute, and then into one
of its cushioned chairs. The distant noises of the camp
became indistinct, and the smell of stew became hazy.
The continual thump of “left” “right” in my head
ceased, and I was asleep. When I awoke, it was to the
timid rat-tat of an orderly upon the door. “Is this where
Private L. Imp. is quartered!” I heard him softly call,
and when I assured him there had been no mistake he
apologised most considerately for awakening me so early.
It was barely 8.30 a.m. Could he come in! he asked. I
was just a little surprised at the grateful way in which
he replied “thank you.” He bore my bath water in two
steaming cans, while a fellow-orderly followed with a
shaving water spirit-stove and a tray of wafers and cocoa.
While I sipped my cocoa, the corporal-orderly filled my
portable bath and lit the spirit-stove. Would I care to
rise! he asked, adding that it was desired that Cl men
should take a few minutes stroll before breakfast. He
laid out my tastefully-cut suit of strong, brown coloured
cloth (which I think he called a “Denim” cloth), and
apologised for the poor manner in wdiich my boots had
been cleaned. While he folded my two eider-down quilts
and adjusted the pillow shams in true military style, I
bathed, shaved and dressed. As I was inspecting the fit
of my uniform with the aid of the cheval glass he again
asked if I would care to join in the morning stroll. I
thought the repeated request somewhat presumptuous,
and told him so. His sorrow was so apparent that I felt
compelled to give him a small tip out of the notes lying
on my dressing table. The watch on my wrist showed the
time to be 9.30 as I strolled out. Borrowing a match for
my cigarette from a lieutenant who was strolling round, I
joined a few similarly clad Cl men who were standing
together. Presently an officer came along and asked
wdiere we wmuld like to stroll. We elected to make for


the shade of the willows overhanging the seats near the
men’s tennis lawn. I had little fault to find with the
tasteful breakfast provided us, except that the cutlets
were a little overdone, and I felt constrained to mention
this to the Brigadier as we sat over our coffee. I also
mentioned that the tastefully arranged glass and silver-
ware and table napkins had quite taken my fancy. He
seemed pleased, and said he would mention it in Routine
Orders—whatever they might be. A game of croquet
with the General’s two daughters passed away a delight-
ful morning. Such stunning girls ! After a light luncheon
had served under the trees, the Adjutant suggested
a little physical exercise. Two or three minutes of this
proved its unpopularity, and the Adjutant wisely sug-
gested a game of tennis before afternoon tea, adding that
we should really take a little exercise to make us fit. The
afternoon proved rather hot, and so the shady parts of
the camp’s extensive lawns were well filled. I had, by
this time, become a little more used to being spoken of as
“Private” L. Imp., and found it quite a pleasant change.
I had gained an abnormal appetite, I found at dinner that
evening, and even took a second helping of chicken.
Soon the General suggested an adjournment to the
smoking-room for cigars, etc., where the Colonel asked
would I care to spend the evening wuth the ladies at
bridge and whist. I declined. Soon I became sleepy, but
a deep throated cry of “Stand up, there!” reawakened
me. I rose bewildered, to be confronted by the Sergeant
of Military Police, who promptly demanded my Excused
Duty Pass.


Physical Training
“Mens sana in cor pore sano.”
<By C.B.
The Latin proverb quoted might well be the motto of
every individual who has his immediate and future well-
being in mind—“A healthy mind in a healthy body.”
Can we all, if we ask ourselves the question, truthfully say
that this applies to us f And yet we should be able to do
so. Setting aside artificialities, what is the most im-
portant factor in the life of any, and every human being?
The answer can be given in one word “health,” and this
not only of body, but of mind, perhaps more especially of
mind.
With this in view—and let us hope, there are none who
disagree with the facts laid down—we can safely go on
to consider the means to the end. Setting aside food,
fresh air, companionship, congenial work, and any other
factor in the ideal life, we come to “exercise.” Without
exercise we could not carry on the various functions of
the human body, each and every one a necessity in its
own particular way. The ordinary daily life of a man is
composed of a variety of exercises. He uses various
muscles to get out of bed in the morning, others to wash,
shave, dress, get to work, feed himself, and do the
hundred and one things that the average man does in the
average day. The outdoor man, of course, gets his exer-
cise in a greater degree than the man with the pen, but
each one of us is exercising himself all day and every
day. But in our work or our play, we bring into play
perhaps one or two muscles of the body while others are
partially or entirely neglected. Herein comes the value
of physical training and physical exercise.
There are several different kinds of physical exercise,
but that judged to be the most beneficial generally is the
universally accepted Swedish Drill. The result of years
of experience and thought, this system, so widely used,
both in military and civilian life, does not aim at turning
out men with enormous muscles, the well-known and much
advertised “strong men” of a few years ago. Its object


make the most of what has been given ns. Perhaps in
the nominally healthy man who has been leading* an
active outdoor life one does not see such results from
A Class at Physical Training (Sergt.-Major Brown standing)
physical exercise as one might be led to expect, but there
arc times when the results are more obvious.


is the harmonious development of the whole body, the co-
ordination of mind and muscle, the improvement of the
general health. To all of us it is not given to start life
with a normally healthy body and mind. Through forces
Physical Training Instructors
over which neither our parents nor ourselves have any
control, we may be weaklings from the time when we
make our bow to a waiting world. But we can at least


To some of us has been given the work of training
men who have been smashed up in the firing line. Here
is where you will see the result of carefully thought out
training. Certainly good food, fresh air, rest and quiet,
all pay their indispensable quota to the remodelling of
the man, the poor; wasted, wreckage of humanity who
staggers back to a convalescent camp in England, ready
to start for another “go.” And, please don’t make any
mistake, a man who has been badly wounded or gassed or
shell shocked can be a wreck. In fact, it is very difficult
idf him to be anything else for a considerable time.
That’s when he comes off his sick leave. Yet you would
not recognise him as the same man a month afterwards.
So, cheer up, Cl’s, there’s hope for same of us yet, and
all kinds of fun over the other side, but do not forget
your “physical jerks.” To those of you who do not,
through no fault of your own, attain the honour of bear-
ing arms for the Empire, it will be some consolation to
know that you have tried, and tried hard, and the train-
ing will not have been without effect upon your general
well being.
A SIIIf Psalm
The tent is my sleeping place; I cannot sleep.
It maketh me to lie down in damp places, it runneth with
wet waters.
It restoreth my temper; it leadeth me to use bad language.
Yet, though I wear warm pyjamas, I cannot sleep; for the
wind whistles through my tent floor, and it is with me.
The cold and damp disturb me.
I prepare a supper before me in the presence of my tent
mates: then cometh the wind and anointeth my legs
with hot tea, for my cup bloweth over.
Surely rheumatics and coughs will follow me all the days
of my life, and I shall dwell in the house of the sick
for ever.
—“ PHILISTINE."


Tent Eleven
There's a bunch of ginks in tent Eleven
Who think Cl a taste of Heaven.
No telling stories of lurid hue,
No rude remarks on Massey’s stew.
No swearing making all things blue,
The holy mob. Eleven!
There’s “ Cinquevalli” and his box of tricks
Who proves to you twice four are six:
And “Cockey, ” airy, light, and lean,
Who keep's the O.C.’s boudoir clean,
And scrubs the place where flies have been,
A useful bunch. Eleven!
And “Grand-dad,” dear old handy man
Who plays sweet tunes with broom and pan.
And “Scotland,” mighty man of war,
Who robs the rich to help the poor,
And takes the best part of the floor
A giddy crowd. Eleven!
Then “Jarge,” of high and gentle birth.
Productive oft of ribald mirth:
Then a chap of lordly grace
They call “Professor” to his face,
With stained glass windows in the place
Of' eyes. Lead on Eleven !
“Levinsky”! No, he’s not a Jew;
He might be after two months’ stew;
He sleeps beside a long lost lamb
A great “Reporter,” call him Sam,
Who nearly died when “Jarge” said “Damn!”
Religious clique. Eleven!
If you should see a handsome man,
With or without a washing pan,
And you should ask him for a loan
And he should answer with a groan
And nineteen swears and a ten-pound stone,
He’s from tent Eleven!
The “Professor,”
B. Coy.: Tent 11, Cl
21




A Chapter in Greece
We tried to force the Dardanelles and we failed. We
have since washed all the dirty linen of our enterprise
through the medium of a Commission, hut light is still
wanting on many phases of the gallant attempt. Not until
the great struggle is over shall we know to what extent we
were affected in our undertaking by the attitude of Greece.
Prior to this war and the Balkan wars that preceded it,
where did Greece stand in Europe? Let us refresh our
memories.
The fall of Constantinople in 1453 let loose the horde
of Turks into South Eastern Europe and Greece shared
the fate of the other States on the Balkan Peninsula. It
was subjugated by the invaders before the close of 1460
and lay under the Turkish yoke with all its awful conse-
quences for over three centuries. Throughout this long
period a small section of the Greek community maintained
itself in a state of more or less defiant independence in the
hill country in the South of Greece and this community
served as a nucleus for the future party of independence.
The tide of Turkish invasion in Europe reached its
flood before the walls of Vienna towards the end of the
17th century and thereafter the ebb set in.
At the beginning of the 18th century the Turks were
engaged in constant warfore in and around what we now
call Greece with the Venetian Republic whose command of
the sea rendered them no mean foes in a country such as
Greece with its many islands and indentations.
The Greeks, in a half-hearted manner attached
themselves to the Venetians, but the latter
were finally ousted from the country and by
the peace of Passarovitz (1718) the whole country
passed under the Ottoman Empire. But a promise of
deliverance soon came from another and more powerful
quarter. Ever since the days of Peter the Great the eyes of
Russia were directed towards Constantinople, the metro-
polis of the orthodox faith, and in 1764 we find that Russian
agents appeared among the Greeks promising them speedv


emancipation from the hated Moslem. A small Russian
expedition even was landed but failed to rouse the Greeks
to any national extent. The outbreak of the French Revo-
lution, however, gave a new impulse to the Greeks to strike
for freedom. It roused them at length to a sense of
nationality—they caught the fever of political freedom
that spread from the ruins of the Bastille. There was now
formed in Greece a secret society known as the “Friendly
Society,” in reality a Revolutionary Society having for its
aim the resurrection of the Greek nation. It had centres in
Moscow, Bucharest, Trieste and other cities beyond the
reach of the Turk and in each of these centres preparations
were gradually made for the rising that would come when
the opportunity offered. As has often been the fact, this
political revival among the subject Greeks was preceded
by a literary revival. The Greeks had begun to know the
past and the glories of ancient Greece. Were they not the
descendants of the Spartans of old ? Early in the 19th
century spasmodic efforts were made from time to time to
raise the standard of freedom but lack of organisation and
resources rendered them futile. In 1821, however, there
began a rising upon such a scale as to put the Turkish
power to the supreme test. The methods of repression
adopted by the Turks were not less fiendish in those days
than in these and the sufferings of the Greeks enlisted a
great deal of sympathy from the Western powers. There
were wholesale massacres and executions, but as usual such
methods brought the Turk no lasting success. Repression
and massacre short of utter extermination will not repress
any people. Steeped in the glories of the Greeks of old,
Lord Byron became the champion of the downtrodden
Greeks and his passionate poetry served as a trumpet call
to the civilized West to succour them while there was yet
time. The Greeks were not slow to assume the style and
trappings of the Ancient Greeks and posed as the champions
of classic culture. In short they made it their aim to foster
the belief that the struggle was between civilisation and
barbarism. Unfortunately in their methods of warfare the
Greeks had become too apt pupils of their Turkish masters.
Atrocity was piled on atrocity—it was a war of mutual
extermination, for both sides were barbarians without dis-
cipline or competent organisation. From time to time the
Greek cause was flattered with victory but as often party


feuds robbed them of the fruits. The worst enemy of the
Greeks was their own incurable spirit of faction which
broke out the moment the common enemy was out o,f sight.
During the course of their own War of Independence they
fought amongst themselves not fewer than three Civil wars.
The Turks made their effort in 1825 with a combined Turk-
ish and Egyptian army under Ibrahim Pasha and Greece
seemed doomed, when the Powers, (England, France and
Russia) intervened to prevent the systematic devastation
of the country by Ibrahim. They called for an Armistice in
1827 and when Ibrahim declined this the Allied fleets
annihilated the Turko-Egyptian fleets at Navarino (1829),
and aßussian army crossed the Danube and invaded the
lands that now form part of Bulgaria. This had the effect
of forcing Turkey to yield and by the London Protocol of
February, 1830, Greece became an independent kingdom
under the protecting powers Great Britain, France and
Russia.
After an unsuccessful attempt at government by the
Greeks, the powers were compelled to step in and re-organise
the country. Owing to their jealousy of one another it had
been stipulated that no member of their ruling houses
should ascend the throne of Greece; the Powers accord-
ingly chose Otho of Bavaria as the first king of the new
kingdom. Otho had been brought up in a despotic Court
and he ruled his new subjects absolutely and in consequence
the country was in a state of continual unrest for a number
of years. There were three factions in the country, each
one more or less supported by one of the three protecting
powers, and thanks to the rivalry between these factions
Greece was treated in a very niggardly way by the Powers.
When the Crimean War broke out, the Greeks desired
to assist Russia against Turkey, and France and Britain
were compelled to land troops to prevent their active inter-
vention. The unrest continued unallayed until in 1862 it
culminated in open revolt and the king was driven from
his throne and the country. The next choice was George,
second son of the King of Denmark, and in his long reign
he saw order evolve from chaos and Greece become a con-
stitutional monarchy.
When the next Turco-Russian War of 1877-78 was over,
the Russians did not forget Greece. The Berlin Congress


materially enlarged her boundaries at the expense of Tur-
key, but it did not give her the territory she most coveted—
the island of Crete, so rich in Greek tradition. The
acquisition of this island now became the avowed object of
an aggressive party in the State, and the party forced the
country into war with Turkey in 1897 doubtless in the
hope that discord among the powers would lead to a Euro-
pean War and the dismemberment of Turkey. The country
was in no condition to undertake a war and was soon at the
mercy of the Turkish forces. Once more Russia came to
her rescue and a per-emptory demand by Russia brought
an armistice and peace whereby Greece suffered little loss
of territory. The continual interference of the Greeks in
Crete now had the effect of removing the island from the
Turkish rule and the powers appointed a separate Commis-
sioner as their representative on the island. The choice fell
upcn Prince George of Greece, the personal friend of the
Tsar who remained there until 1906. Throughout all these
years there was an entire absence of political stability in
the land . The King made light of dismissing a powerful
Minister whose views were not conformable to his own and
this removal of powerful ministers commanding a large
political majority constituted an important precedent in
the exercise of the royal prerogative. It occurred at least
three times in the reign of George and the practice we have
seen recently has survived under his son Constantine. As
a result of the political unrest in 1909 a military movement
for reform in the army led to numerous Minis-
terial changes and produced a feeling of public
insecurity. A Military League was formed declar-
ing that a tenure of commands by Royal Princes
in the army was fatal to the best interests of the
army. So powerful was the League that its demands were
acceded to and the Princes were placed on the retired
list and later resigned. This league practically ruled the
country for more than six months, but the country was by
no means at rest. The league now called to its assistance
the eminent Cretan politician who for some years had been
the dominant personality on the island, Yenizelos. He
had only arrived in Athens on January 10th, 1910. He at
once devised a scheme to enable the league to make a
triumphant exit from the political arenas—he suggested the
convocation of a National Assembly, thereby to reach the


mass of the people, to sanction the changes which
the League, and indeed the hulk of the people
desired, and in the space of a few weeks suc-
ceeded in inducing not only the officers, but the
Opposition leaders, and eventually the King, much
against his will, to accept his proposal. Having practically
arranged Greek affairs in accordance with his ideas, he
returned to Crete on February 28th. The new ministry
carried out his programme and the league ceased to exist.
Its methods were crude, but its intentions were excellent
and the general results of its aims were beneficial to the
nation. At the elections of August, 1910, Yenizelos and the
other Cretans were returned as deputies tp the Greek
Chamber, but at the instance of the Powers—to allay
Turkey’s susceptibilities—they were not allowed to sit ex-
cept in the case of Yenizelos. He was technically a Greek
subject having received the freedom of Athens and his
election was allowed to stand. He at once took a prominent
part in the political field, and in October of the same year,
i.e., two months after he took his seat first, he became Prime
Minister. All the old party leaders combined against him
and the king dissolved the house a fortnight later. The
leaders abstained from the elections and Yenizelos by an
overwhelming majority was returned to carry out his
reforms. He set to work practically to revise the Consti-
tution and with his characteristic energy and thoroughness
the work was completed by June, 1911. Chief amongst his
reforms was the exclusion of military and naval officers
from the Chamber and a permission to foreigners to enter
the service of the State. In view of this the re-
organisation of the army was entrusted to French officers,
that of the navy to British.
Meanwhile the trouble in Crete continued and the island
was divided into two hostile factions, Turk and Greek,
Mussulman and Christian, with all the bitterness that
ignorant bigotry begets. The intervention of the Powers
was constantly required to suppress violence first by one
side, and then by the other. In 1912 came the Italian War
with Turkey, and Greece’s opportunity. The unrest in
Macedonia was increased and Turkish repression became
even more terrible. This spurred the Balkan States to
take concerted action to put an end to an intolerable situa-


tion and a definite alliance was formed directed solely at
Turkey. The Balkan League became an accomplished fact
and in October, 1912, Venizelos sent to Turkey an ultimatum
on the Cretan question and the Balkan War followed. One
of the prizes to Greece was the long coveted island of Crete.


In n, Train.
(Written while c L{eturnin£ from Leave)
44 Philistine.
On the way to Wellington, what concerned me most
was the mental planning of how to spend leave, but the
days of freedom having passed, I find the scope of my
imagination narrowed, and my mind has returned to the
contemplation of immediate things. I thus am inclined to
find tbe train journey back to camp rather tedious
although there is always pleasure in studying fellow-
passengers. Even if I were a lieutenant (synonym for
dignity) I would risk the endangering of my “castle” and
travel second class, for those uncomfortable carriages
seat a more interesting type of traveller than the first class
compartment. Just before we left Lambton, a stout old
lady boarded the train, “late and luggaged,” to coin a
word. Groceries protruded from a string kit and she
carried a bunch of thirsty flowers. She placed her dress
basket (then escaping from the straps) under the seat,
and having settled down, smiled at the tall lady next to
her. The tall lady became cold and erect at the presump-
tion. I imagine she has had what she would call “re-
verses,” and has thus been reduced to a second class pas-
senger. Such social decline has not robbed her of a “best
family” expression, and an old cameo brooch tells me that
she is probably aware of her ancestry for two generations
back. A beautifully respectable condition in these days
of laxity about such things! Only once during the
journey has her expression changed. It was when draw-
ing a handkerchief from her dressing case—the lid slipped
from her fingers, and a powder box was revealed. She
looked annoyed for a moment, but immediately resumed
her tombstonesque appearance.
Opposite me is a family travelling en masse. There is
a mother 1 i married to that extent that she has the appear-
ance of a public building,” a child of the usual type—
sticky and ugly, and a one-legged father. lam sure the
accident which robbed the father of his limb happened
long ago, as his wooden leg is worn, and the paint has
almost disappeared. This party first attracted my atten-


tion when the child commenced to chew the upholstery.
The mother, knowing that leather is foreign to stomachs,
intervened, and “Mona’’ bawled from Lower Hutt to
Kaitoke, where a soldier joined the party and danced the
infant on his knee. This domestic scene was accompanied
by a discussion on the war. The thin mother wiped her
face with a soiled handkerchief and assured the soldier
that “it was simply scandalous the way those members of
Parliament went Home to England first-class and dying
round spending money while our boys are fighting and
givin’ their all.” But that homelike trio is lacking in
tone, when compared with the duo next to me. A much
befeathered woman is trying to suppress the exclamations
of her “non six o’clock closing” hubbie. He commenced
an argument about the luggage, and with a plentiful
introduction of “damns,” made the tall cold lady look
more haughty and his wife more disgusted. She feels her
status becoming fragile at each sentence he speaks.
Hubby is a jolly being, and just sufficiently drunk to be
interesting. The wife represents a vigorous battle be-
tween increasing age and youthful tendencies. Her
armour is of but powder and her weapons ostrich plumes
and corsets. These, ill-fitting, form a ridge across her
back and make her angular. The apex of her horror was
reached when the husband unbuttoned his waistcoat and
scratched his chest.
Not far along the seat is a sergeant returning from
leave. In spite of his stripes, he is a decent fellow, and a
rather interesting companion. The feeling of fellowship
has loosened our tongues, and I find him particularly in-
telligent for an N.C.O. But how can I notice the sergeant
while that tipsy husband continues his recital! He has
ITSfllffl that stage when scenery shakes and people go
around in circles and have discs like shillings moving
about their faces. His eye lids rise and fall and his
fingers are becoming limp. The back street odour of
Peer is distinguishable. In the rack above him is a news-
paper parcel. But he could not expect brown paper in
these days of “tax the publican.”
The family circle has produced apples and biscuits,
and the child is devouring the latter with haste that is
detrimental to cleanliness of face and hands.


Tv r>v S Foot tb A t i >
Nearing Featherston, most of the travellers prepare
for leaving the train. The tall and dignified lady draws
her dressing case towards her, and the family individually
disentangle themselves from empty fruit bags and
crumpled newspapers. The drunken husband has sub-
sided, and is willing to be guided, and ray pencil lead has
worn doAvn to the Avood.


i
p' : I
CAPT. W. A. WHEELER
t Medical Officer
’35


First Impressions
Dear Father, —
I suppose you have been anxiously waiting for news
from me. We had a long, tedious journey through from
Auckland, relieved only by the carefully cushioned rails
of the trucks into which the considerate guard packed us.
Sleep, of course, was out of the question, and your son
presented a sorry spectacle when he was released from
his truck in the soldier factory at Featherston. Once in
the camp we were rounded up by an army of officers,
sergeants and corporals, and put through various evolu-
tions of a more or less implicated military nature, as a
result of which we were ultimately delivered over to some
officers who I afterwards found out were the medical
officers of the camp. They had designs on us, and we
were compelled to disrobe in double-quick time and parade
before them. One very heavily built officer with much
braid and red tape walked solmenly through our ranks,
eyeing us up and down in our birthday suits. In one hand
he carried a small hand camera. Someone said he was
the proprietor of the Picture Show, someone else said he
was a P.M.O. What this means lam not quite sure, but
I shall bud out and let you know later. When this per-
formance was over we were hustled once more through
many labyrinths of movements by the same officers, ser-
geants and corporals, and when next we moved ourselves
we found we were in what looked like a second-hand
goods store. Unfortunately the hustlers gave me little
time to satisfy my curiosity, for before I knew what was
happening I was told I had a knife, fork, spoon, plate and
pannikin, and had signed for them. The cutlery reminded
me a great deal of the trophies I won last summer at the
Regatta, and I came to the conclusion that my first im-
pression of the store was not correct.
The next item was a light meal—l shall not detail the
menu, you might want to leave home too. We were then
evidently regarded as ready for equipping, for back we
sped to the same store as provided us mess tools.
When my turn came, a gruff fellow with a cast in his
3(\


eye threw a tunic at me, size 6. I at once began to try
it on to show how ridiculous a fit it was. You know that
size 4 was almost too big for me. To my astonishment I
was ordered to keep it. Trousers and boots and under-
cloths were showed on me in rapid succession, and finally
I staggered to the exit door beneath a bale of all manner
of clothes and bedding. I began to think my second-hand
goods store was a reality. While 1 was almost despairing
of the situation, one of the corporals came to the rescue,
and with a few swift passes he caused my heap to take
shape, and it became a real soldier’s kit.
Once more we moved off into the night, and at last
reached the hut where we were to be quartered. But
there was to be no rest yet. Out into the darkness again
we went to fill our bags with straw. You should have
seen a dozen of us tearing a small bundle of straw to
pieces and trying to imagine we had a bed each out of it.
At last I did turn in for my first night’s rest in the King’s
Service. But here in the army night is often made to re-
semble day—it teems with life and noise. Somewhere
early in the morning I was awakened by a voice in the
next hut singing in the most reverent choir-like style.
Jesus, lover of my soul,
Let me to Thy bosom fly.
A pause, and then several hearty bursts of irreverent
laughter, capped by a wide-awake wag next door with
4 'lt’s a damned good job there are no blooming aeroplanes
about or he’d be off.” I had just settled down again into
the hollow of my straw bag when I heard my mate Smith
(you know the solicitor down by the Queen’s Ferry)
talking in a very animated fashion about making dolls r
dresses and the Factory Act. Then once again silence. In
the morning I asked him if he had been in Court since
the night before, and to my surprise Smith remembered.
“I was defending a girl before J.B.’s on a trumpery
charge of making dolls’ clothes in breach of the Factories
Act.” So you see there is no lack of entertainment and
variety by day or by night. While I think of it let me
tell you of the ordeal we had to undergo the next morn-
ing. We were marched into a sanctuary called the Salva-
tion Army Institute, and seated along the side of a row of
tables. On the other side sat a row of inquisitive clerks.


or corporals, and they proceeded to put ns through a most
searching catechism as to our past. Imagine your son
plied, by such questions as Who is your next-of-kin 1
How many children have you? One fellow was asked if
his wife was a spinster when he married her. "No, a
typiste,” came the reply. The corporal got no change
from him. This cross-examination, as you can see, was of
the most private and intimate nature. We all wondered
what use was being made of our past—perhaps it was an
ingredient in the Cl training, and we let it rest at that.
Our first parade in the new outfit took place last Tuesday
—you should have seen the turn out. I think the uniform
is called Denims—fit is adjustable to all years and girths
so that your son and everybody's son looks alike. That
is the origin, so I hear, of the term uniform. Our whole
party—they call it a platoon—stood off and looked at one
another. Nothing was said, but written on each face was
the inscription: "How did you get like that?” That over,
we were marched to a jmrade ground and handed over
to some of the fellows doing duty as instructors. They
are not like our Denims —they are not uniforms but re-
semble a bag of allsorts. Their language is strange and
picturesque—we made no complaint as we were told
before leaving Auckland that we should have to begin a
military vocabulary to enable us to understand the
technicalities of military service. lam afraid your friend
the Rev. Mr. Walker has had no military training—his
best sermons showed no signs of it. These instructors, I
believe, finally graduate as bayonet fighters when their
vocabulary becomes sufficiently flowing and ornamented
with high explosive. The latest order out is that we are
to march away to Tauherenikau to a canvas camp, and I
expect the real work will begin then. Tell mother I have
polished off the tuck box she sent down with me.
Perhaps she could smuggle another through to me. The
censorship at the P.O. is very strict, so the corporal says.
The whistle has just sounded for mess orderlies so I must
bolt.
Your loving son,


P.T.O.


My Tent Life
No greater contrast could well be imagined than that
whicii exists between the old life and tne new. But a few
weeks ago many of us spent the day gazing wearily at the
clock, and the night lying awake thinking anxiously of all
our petty worries. Now the day is spent out in the fresh
air and sunshine, and no more do the cares of the day
disturb our rest at night—chiefly, perhaps, because by
night everyone is too tired to worry about anything.
This feeling of freedom from all sense of responsibility
is one of the marked characteristics of camp life. If a
soldier is ordered to do something which is obviously wrong,
all he has to do is to obey the order. No mental effort is
required on his part, nor, indeed, is it expected. If a
mistake is made, it is not the private who has to bear the
brunt of the major’s wrath, but the poor, unfortunate,,
over-worked officer or non-com.
In the case of those who have never been to a territorial
camp, the memory of the first night under canvas will ever
stand out clearly and distinctly. The soft patter of the
rain on the tent, the low meaning of the wind in the ropes,
and the sharp metallic ling of foot-steps on the rocky paths
-—all these are stamped indelibly on the memory of many
a soldier.
Then, just when one is settling down to a last quiet
doze, to be rudely recalled to the changed order of things
by the harsh blare of the bugle and the unfeeling voice of
the sergeant: “ Tent flaps rolled up and floor boards up
against the tent poles,” certainly adds the charm of novelty
to the experience.
From six o’clock till a quarter to nine the camp re-
sembles a bee-hive. First of all there are blankets to be
folded and overcoats to be rolled. Then comes a wild rush
to the tap, and a hurried douch in cold water before the
route march. After the march, the stew—Massey’s no-
torious stew—a slimy, greasy, evil-smelling concoction with
here and there an onion, and here and there a potato
hiding themselves, as if half ashamed, among an indiges-


tible mixture of empty jam tins, untanned leather, and dish
water. But what’s the use of growling? Others have
eaten it, and survived it, too —it’s all part of the big stunt,
for if a man can eat Massey’s stew and live, assuredly the
future holds no terrors for him.
Undoubtedly the stew is not up to the standard of the
other meals, but lucky is the man who has not tasted worse:
Ask any newly married man in camp, for here, a hundred
miles or more from home, he has nothing to fear in speaking
the truth.
After breakfast, what a novel sight. Would that the
wives could sec their dignified hubbies now! Men who
have sat and smoked while their wives scrubbed floors,
washed up the dishes, or slaved at the wash-tub, are now
on their hands and knees working as if the fate of the
whole British nation depended on their efforts. Irresis-
tibly comes the exclamation: “ How did you get like that?”
But what a fine domestic training camp life is for the
future husbands of New Zealand!
Imagine eight men in a small tent shaving by the aid
of a piece of broken looking-glass. The very thought
makes you shudder and thrust your fingers in your ears.
The reality is enough to make a man call for a stiff whisky
and soda and a gas mask. For the first time one appre-
ciates to the full the deep significance underlying the ex-
pression, “ to swear like a trooper.”
At four o’clock, according to routine orders, work is
over for the day. But no sooner has the poor deluded re-
cruit stretched himself out gracefully on the floor of the
tent and propped his feet up against the tent-pole, than
the cry of “ Fall-in for gargle ” is heard, and two seconds
later a more or less lurid request from a perspiring N.C.O.
to “ Double up, d it.”
Assuredly there is no rest for the wicked. No sooner
have the men been covered off and dressed than they are
told that they should have paraded without hats. A head-
ions: rush back to the tents and the hurried shedding of
hat and coat. Then, the process of dressing off having
been once again satisfactorily completed, a further delay
is occasioned while the erring ones are sent back for their
coats. At last everything is ready—that is, of course, with
the exception of the gargle, which puts in a leisurely ap-
pearance ten minutes later.


Each night, just before dusk, a difficult problem has
to be solved. Is it going to rain? or is it going to blow?
If it is going to rain, the guy-ropes have to be slackened off
to allow for the shrinking of the canvas caused by the
rain. On the other hand, if it is going to blow, the guy-
ropes have to be pulled taut and the pegs hammered
securely down. What would happen if these precautions
were neglected no one seems to know definitely; the only
reason that has ever been brought forward for these pre-
parations is the philosophical one that ‘ ‘ It has to be done,
so it’s got to be done.”
Often on a wet night towards midnight a number of
silent ghost-like figures may be seen stealing noiselessly
round the white tents, giving an uncanny feeling to the
hidden onlooker. Suddenly one stumbles over a guy-rope
—there is a dull, wet thud, a moment’s silence, and then
the night rings with curses loud and deep. At once the
weird spell is broken and a sleepy voice from inside the
tent inquires wearily of an imaginary sergeant if it is time
to roll the blanky flaps up. Suppose it had been the major
himself!
In camp, where all are dressed alike in denims, a man
is judged by quite a different standard from that generally
.adopted in civil life. Under ordinary conditions one man
is in another’s company for but a few minutes a day, and
in consequence sees him only when he is on his best
behaviour. In camp, conditions are totally different. A
man gets to know his tent-mate’s character quite as well as
their own wives do. In some cases, it is to be hoped for the
sake of the unsuspecting wives, much better. Whatever
would George’s wife say if she knew what-—but, quietly,
what George’s wife doesn’t know won’t hurt her.
In Cl, are men who, through no fault of their own,
have so far been debarred from taking an active part in
the defence of their country. Men there are who are re-
solved to play the game and see it through. Already many
of our comrades have been drafted to the reinforcements,
and still many more are going to swell the numbers who,
through their Cl training, have been enabled to take their
:stand with those who have gone before.


On the other hand, here as elsewhere, there are men,
and fit men too, whose one fixed purpose it is to let the
other man shoulder their responsibilities. This they may
succeed in doing; but what will they gain ? He who fights
and runs away, lives but to fight another day, and when
Death is the enemy, what does it avail a man to put off the
contest ? What may happen in the next twenty-four hours ?
What may happen in the next twenty-four months? W T hat
may happen in the next twenty-four years ? Who knows ?
Who knows—and who cares?
“ Like snow upon the desert’s dusty face,
Lighting a little hour or two —is gone.”
67878.


Camp F'lf© Concert
lii the presence of Colonel Adams (Camp Commandant
at Featherston), Major Brunt, Officers of Cl Camp, and
many lady visitors from Featherston and the surrounding
district, together with the full complement of men in Cl
Camp, a highly successful Camp Fire Concert was held
in the manuka at Tauherenikau Camp on Thursday, Nov.
29. Many of the officers present were most emphatic in
pronouncing the concert the best yet produced in the Camp.
The spot chosen for the concert —just near C Company
lines —was almost ideal. The natural tree growth formed
a splendid amphitheatre. Thanks to an energetic fatigue
party we had an excellent bonfire, and the weather condi-
tions were perfect—a still, clear night. The vocalists,
couid thus be distinctly heard from all parts of the crowded
shrub. The organisers;—Lieut. Mitchell and Private G. R.
Watts —are to be congratulated on the success of their
efforts. Rehearsals were held previous to the concert —
qualifying heats, so to speak—with a view to reducing the
number of performers. Even then, so long was the pro-
gramme that after the singing of the National Anthem
punctually at 7.30 Lieut. Mitchell had to ask the audience
to refrain from demanding encores. This ruling was
broken in several instances, owing to the insistent demands
of a highly delighted audience. Many of the numbers
rendered had very catchy refrains, or popular themes, and
the men of the Camp were greatly pleased and even sur-
prised to hear our popular Major sing with enthusiasm
many of the choruses. He seemed to learn the Stew Re-
frain with almost lightning speed.
The Featherston Band greatly helped by their presence
and items, of which three were contributed.
Under the direction of Lieut. Mitchell the stage was
very tastefully decorated in greens and flags. The piano
was lent by the C.E. Institute, and was tuned especially
for the occasion by Private Barnett (D Company).
To individualise the items and their merits would take
up more space than is at our disposal, but with a view to


making known the talent available for future camp con-
verts the programme is printed herewith:—
PROGRAMME
“ God Save the King.”
Overture .. .. .. Featherston Brass Band
1. Bag Pipe Selection .. Pte. C. B. Walker, A Coy.
2. “ Mother Macree ” .. Pte. J. G. Sissons, D Coy.
2. “ Mr. John McKay .. Pte. Scotty Carr, E Coy.
4. “ The Blue Dragoons ” .. Lieut. Prime, Instl. Staff.
5. Banjo Solo .. .. Pte. Gadd, D Coy.
6. “ Kate O’Shea ” .. .. Pte. J. I. Pctiki, D Coy.
7. Cornet Solo .. .. Pte. Wills, C Coy.
8. “ I Want to See the War Pte. Young, A Coy.
all Over ”
9. Violin Solo .. .. Pte. Grubb, A Coy.
10. “ Way Down in my Heart ” Ptes. Chalmers & Peterson, B Co.
11. Duet; Flute and Whistle Ptes. Wylie & Burt, C Coy.
12. “ Roses ” Pte. Gibbon, D Coy.
13. Piano Selection .. .. Pte. Mackay, A Coy.
14. Band Selection .. .. Featherston Brass Band
15. “ Parted ” .. .. Pte. Courts, C Coy.
16. Whistling Solo .. . . Pte. Buckley, E Coy.
17. “ Fol-101-of-the-day ” .. Pte. Jacobsen, D Coy.
18. “ Kentucky Home ” .. Pte. Church, D Coy.
18a. Concertina Solo . . .. Pte. Lee, D Coy.
19. ‘‘Uncle Joe on his old
ganjO ” Pte. Watson, E Coy.
20. Selection .. .. .. Featherston Brass Band.
“ God Save the King.”
Accompanists:
Pte. Barnett .. D Coy.
Pte. Haigh . . . . B Coy.


Headquarters Staff
How D Company Lost tike
The sun’s hot rays were shining fast
As through “ D ” Company’s lines there passed
The Commandant and all the Heads
Inspecting tents, and kits and beds.
From tent to tent they passed along
With eagle eyes for details wrong,
Each noting on his little list
Some point the other might have missed.


“ D 7 7 Company must hold the Cup,
And so, to make the score mount up,
The mess utensils, clean and bright,
With pride flashed back the summer light..
The Empire's destiny depends
On “ Lines Inspection " at week ends;
Therefore, each blanket brave and bold
Held to the last its careful fold.
With bulldog pluck and British grit
The kit bags did their little bit,
Maintaining with a courage fine
Their long undeviating line.
As usual at the P.T.'s tent
An interesting time was spent,
That some rare feature there contained
Might be discussed, approved, explained.
So everything was going grand,
And victory seemed quite close at hand,
When through the long tormented air
There rose a cry of dire despair.
A pail, and an inverted plate,
The trap of some base traitor's hate,
When lifted up disclosed to view
A heap of that same morning's stew!
The Major turned away his head:
The Censor won't pass what he said.
D " Company’s score fell with a crash,
Laid low by that unholy hash.
—56367, “ D " Company
Seiko©! Picnic
It was a bright Spring day, a welcome change after a
spell of wintry weather. W 7 e were like other children:
hoping and praying for fine weather for this particular
day. as the annual Sunday School picnic was to be held at
Featherston. This year's picnic took place on November


Ist, and the 220 children chosen from Sunday schools
throughout New Zealand were aroused at 6 a.m. To us
it was midnight, but our thoughts were pinned on the
day’s fun to follow, and we did not mind being disturbed.
As soon as we were all washed by the teachers, we were
served with hot cocoa by the verger, and at 6.30 taken for
a walk through lovely bush to give us an appetite for break-
fast. On returning we were called together for break-
fast : such a repast! Some of us had never eaten such food
before. This was a happy prelude to what was coming.
We were assembled again at 9 a.m., and after being told
what to do by the chief preacher broke off into four groups,
each under the charge of a second-grade Sunday school
teacher and three of his assistants. We had all sorts of
games, rounders, twos and threes, handkerchief and relay
races, kiss in the ring and others ad lib. We were given
plenty of rests, and at one of these, lollies, kindly donated
by the ladies of the church, were strewn amongst us. We
had lunch at noon, and the same programme was carried out
in the afternoon. After a drink of raspberry at 4 o’clock
avc rested until 5, when another excellent meal Avas handed
round by the choir boys. ToAvards dusk we left for our
respective homes, tired and Aveary, but happy after our
day’s pleasure. Sleep made a strong call on me Avhen I
entered my little boudoir, and I remember only the boyish
teacher kissing me good-night before I entered slumber-
land. When I aAvoke at six o’clock the next morning I
was in Tent 17, A Company, Cl Camp, and the first man
to meet my sleepy gaze was a bald-headed sergeant, who
greeted me Avith the kindly words, “ Rise and shine.”
CHOIR BOY.”
A returned chaplain speaks thus of the attitude of the
soldier towards the chaplains :
“ Tommy Atkins is a strange mixture, a mixture of
hymns and curses. Strange to say, he does not swear at
us. He looks on us as half pai men —half men and half
women —and he treats us all as women.”


Q.M.S.: “Damn you, man, cant you keep your thumbs out
of the stew ?”
Mess Orderly: “Oh it’s alright, sir, it ain’t hot.” d


- ■ ' I
HEADQUARTERS AT CANVAS CAMP
wfe© In Cl
Major Brunt (XI Taranaki Rifles), Commanding Officer
Cl Camp, has seen service in South Africa, the Butter-fat
Province, Egypt and Gallipoli. Missed his vocation in the
Infantry—should have been in the Pioneers. The “ roam-
ing ” roads in and around the camp are lasting monuments
to his engineering skill.
Major Mackesy (15th North Auckland M.R.), Officer
Commanding A Company, hails from the “ Roadless
North,” and would dearly love to see his N.C.O.’s reach
the standard of efficiency set by his old regiment. Is it
true that the old regiment mustered strong at smoke
concerts ?
2nd Lieut. R. H. Quilliam (XI Taranaki Rifles), Camp
Adjutant, like his C.0., hails from the land of milk and
petroleum. Recently returned from a pleasant sojourn in
Prance, and finds Cl life most exciting.
2nd Lieuts. Gillingham and Jackman (A Company) T
come from the East Coast way, and own chariots. Steady
old warriors, but still good for an evening with the “boys. ”


R.S.M. Doig. —A canny Scot, who could always de-
tect any faked “states,” and had a quiet way of his own
of delivering a P.E. Orderly Sergeants miss his “Staff
Parade! ’Shun 1”
Sgt. Costelloe (A Company) hails from the Cathedral
City. It is not true that “Cos” was in the last Sinn
Fein rebellion. Plis latest attempt to further the cause
reached no further than Greytown. He denies that he is
any relation to Maurice Costelloe, of “ Movie ” fame.
Sgt. Hill (E Company), also belongs to Christchurch.
Was a “ drummer ” in civil life, and will toss “ double or
quits 7 7 with anyone.
Sgt. Burdekin (E Company) lived at Eltham before he
joined the outfit. Came to Cl staff from 30th Reinforce-
ments. Is writing a treatise on “ How to arrange
fatigues.”
Captain Rust was area officer for Auckland City until
recently, when a paternal Government decided to “ put
him out to grass 77 for a spell and sent him in here to
recuperate. The only harm we wish him is that he leaves
the Camp “ A. 77
Captain Rogers, lately representing the Defence Dept,
on the 2nd Auckland Military Service Board, is also in the
“ fattening paddock. 77 The shirkers around the Waikato
will be breathing a bit easier during Captain Rogers 7
absence.
Lieut. Baxter, of “ The Devil’s Own,” is also in from
Auckland. Having stood a month of physical jerks,
canned fruits, and “Eno’s,” he should be able to face any
reinforcement diet.
Cpl. Hewitt (A Company) enlisted from Welling-
ton and joined the 30th N.C.O. 7 s. His particular stunt is
week-end leave, which he can charm out of the sternest-
hearted O.C. Has recently acquired the habit of running
to “ orderly sergeants at the double.”
Cpl. Carline (A Company), from far south, Cpl.
Hewitt 7 s deadly rival, will deliver a lecture at any time on
“ How I didn’t get my third stripe.” Is being appointed
to “ B 77 Company as an Instructor in Guard Mounting.
Has taken on walking as a side issue. Has done some
great track work —in his sleep.


Sgt. Tolmie, a braw Scot with a liking for Scotch, has
not lessened in avoirdupois since he got his “ third. ”
Sgt. Jensen (B Company), is growing quite used to
camp life, having been for some time in the Veterinary
Corps. “ Jen ”is putting on weight at this game.




A H&ll&cl of Cl Camp
Written hy J. 3\£. A.
Tune: “The Old Folks at Homed’
I.
Right out upon the Wairarapa,
Is where I stay;
I’m trying to be a soldier dapper
Drawing full five bob a day.
Marching about among the boulders
Daily I drill,
Sun blistering my legs and shoulders.
Much is the sweat I spill.
CHORUS:—
Up at six o’clock each morning,
Till each night at nine
I, many arts of war am learning,
In weather wet or fine.
11.
One small bell-tent among a cluster
I call my home,
And there, with seven mates, I muster
Whenever meal times come.
We’ve porridge splendid served for breakfast
Then eggs and ham,
And, should the beef be tough for dinner,
We turn to bread and jam.
CHORUS:—
All the tea is thick with sugar,
Cocoa rich in cream;
And, if to Irish stew we’re treated,
It’s simply just a dream.


111.
I’m jolly keen to be in action
When I am fit:
And, to the dirty German faction,
I’ll give a nasty hit.
I’ll teach a salutary lesson
To Kaiser Bill;
Soon as he gets it in his noddle
He’ll look some white and ill.
CHORUS:—
When the last great stunt fe ended,
Final viet’ry won,
Lots of the Y.C.’s recommended
Will be for men Cl.
WAITRESS, OFFICERS’ MESS


Soldler c s fs®osnL Cl to
Wellington Paper
Further Seditious Comments.
The Principal Dental officer of Cl camp has eagerly
offered a reward of five dental appointments of priceless
value for evidence leading to the detection and conviction
of the recruit who penned the subjoined paragraph for a
well-known New Zealand weekly journal:
A Philosophical CL
A Cl recruit, writing to a friend from camp, says: It’s
hard to kill a bad thing, but I must say they do their best
to find out how far they can go without killing you. I
have swollen ankles through drilling on ground which
averages two blades of grass to 1,000 stones. I have breasts
from innoculation that any wet nurse might justly feel
proud of. And I am wearing putties on my jaw as well
as on my legs. I fell a victim to dental parade. The
gentleman who took hold of my jaw ordered me so often to
open and close that I expected to next hear him shout,
; ‘ Mark time left lip, right lip, left lip, right lip. 7 7 Anyway
he practised dental drill on me for twenty minutes, and
then discovered my teeth were so close that they prevented
a proper flow of speech. Accordingly he yanked them out,
and you should have heard my language when I found
myself toothless. Next day, when I woke up, I discovered
what I thought to be the stump of a tooth, and as it was
very painful, I presented myself again to the gentleman.
He found it was not a tooth but the jaw bone which had
got fractured! He called another gentleman of the same
profession, who found that his friend had been on the
wrong track owing to the gentleman who made out my
chart at Buckle street not being up to his work. So he
gripped my jawbones and set to work, and by the time he
had finished with me I was a complete ‘ ‘ gummy. 7 7 However,
he kindly expressed regret at having had to extract some of
the best and soundest. Summed up, I find that I will go
through some drilling before the Germans start their


Ta\A\e«~e r\\ kc* o G ko v e !
/\
attempt to drill me. However, I’m not complaining. I
find I can always get redress by reporting to the officers,
who are only too pleased to attend to matters if we go the
right way about things. It ’s a great game getting physically
fit. Eh, what?


Boofe Reviews
The Bookman.
Company Drill and the War ; by Col. Makeasy, 1917.
This is an admirable work that meets a long-felt want.
The author has been at some pains to trace the history of
each movement since its inception down to the day of the
Battle of Messines. The plates are neatly executed and are
a valuable aid to the interpretation of the detailed move-
ments. No company commander should be without a copy.
The price (2 piastres) is prohibitive to all other ranks.
Landscape Gardening : by R. H. Q. William, F.R.H.S., 1917.
This is a welcome addition to the long list of publi-
cations of this well-known author. It has especial interest
at this juncture as the second part of the work is devoted
exclusively to the application of the principles of Land-
scape Gardening to the beautification of camps. Mr.
William seems to have discovered the long-sought secret of
how to make the desert smile. We commend the work to
the notice of the tree planting authorities of New Zealand.
His photograph of D company lines at Featherston is a
masterpiece.
The Food Controller : by F. Barker, Q.M.S., 1917.
The present world-wide war threatens a world-wide
shortage of food among belligerents and neutrals alike. In
this latest work of his, the eminent economist, Mr. Barker,
deals exhaustively with the question of supply and demand.
Some of the remedies suggested by him to meet the present
crisis are drastic in the extreme. But why apply the loaves
and fishes yarn to a camp? The book is written in the
language of the camp and requires no illustration.
The Life of Napoleon : by J. W. Blunt, 1.G.C., 1917.
This is the latest biography of the great Emperor and
will doubtless be the subject of much military criticism The
author has made an affectionate study of his career—it has
been a labour of love. An immense amount of original
information has been carefully sifted and the result is a
work of the highest military value. The plans of the various


battlefields are probably unique in that the author has had
the peculiar advantage of visiting in person the actual
fields. The style is racy and full of interest. We doubt the
wisdom of adding a chapter on “How Napoleon would
have attacked Gallipoli/ ’ Such moralising serves no
military purpose.
A Manual of Military Laws by C. MacDavitt, K.C., 1917.
As a result of the overthrow of most of the old law and
order of civilization, it was inevitable that our military
law should be revised. Mr. MacDavitt has succeeded in
reducing the law pertaining to soldiers to the narrow com-
pass of 50 pages. In several places the unduration has
rendered the law somewhat obscure. It should command a
ready sale in camp. The writer has fallen foul of King’s
Regulations paragraph 3001 at the top of page 31. It is
not an offence to drink liquor in a hotel after 6 p.m., pro-
vided you make a meal of it.
Trial loy Court Martial : by the Black Prince, 1917.
This work might be regarded as a companion volume to
the preceding one. The learned author here deals with the
development of the several military courts still subsisting
and adds interest to the history by relating instances of
famous trials of the past leading up to the celebrated
Brook’s case. It would have been enlightening had the
author favoured us with some of the actual evidence of
the principal witnesses in this case.
lodine and its Uses: by W. A. Wheeler, F.R.C.S., 1917,
It is a thousand pities that the needs of an extensive
practice prevented this eminent surgeon from completing
his researches in this subject. It is less than 50 years since
lodine was first discovered and in his work Dr. Wheeler
traces the remarkable application of its healing properties
to modern ailments. He advocates a much wider use of
lodine in diseases of the feet and affections of the stomach,
particularly among those in military camps. During the
last few months the doctor has been conducting a series of
experiments to show that it is also a valuable antidote to
sea sickness if taken lightly with ship biscuit. We shall be
interested to read his conclusions.


THE Cl SEPARATOR


Tlie CSimriot ©£ tlie Miglit
There was an N.C.O. who wore no stripe;
He drove a cart of the strangest type.
This N.C.O. was a driver slow,
Abroad but at night when the lights were low.
Each night we heard him pass our camp,
With naught for light but a flickering lamp.
Canvas Camp, November.
Sports
On Wednesday, the Bth November, an afternoon was
spent at the Featherston Town Baths, where about 150
officers, N.C.O.s and men went - through a programme of
swimming and diving events. Notwithstanding that the
programme had to be arranged at very short notice and all
the entries w r ere “post”, the afternoon’s sport went off with-
out a hitch, and some of the swimmers showed splendid form.
At this time of year, the water in the Tauherenikau
River is too shallow for swimming, but a bathing pool is
being constructed where swimming will be taught and sports
meetings held.
The points prize for the afternoon’s sport was won by
E Coy. with 22 points, C being runner up with 16.
The camp contains also a fair sprinkling of good
cricketers from N.Z. representatives downwards. We
have been on short commons for material, but this is being
remedied at once. Now that we have our own camp it is
hoj)ed that we shall soon have a real wicket laid down and
games regularly played.
The athletic meeting arranged for Dec. Ist at Welling-
ton gave a great impetus to our runners, and a team of 51
upheld the honour of the camp. We have many heroes of
past times on the tracks in our midst, and some of their
glory is surely not yet departed.


Tlbe Camp Clocfe,
Prepared for the denial of all things associated with
city life, T was rather surprised on my first morning in
camp, to hear the hours struck by what was apparently a
clock of “town hall” proportions. Six clear rings pre-
ceded “reveille.” All through the day, the time was
struck in the same manner, until I felt that I was within
reach of the city, and almost expected to hear the drone


of tramcars and other sounds of busy people. It made
me forget that I was in a camp—isolated in the Wairarapa
Valley.
Curiosity bade me explore the forbidden region about
Headquarters. I searched among the trees, where the sun-
light, slanting through the branches, clothed the place in
amber, and green shadows. There stood a young soldier,
hammer in hand and looking at his watch. Soon he
struck an old iron rail suspended in front of him. My
giant bell was three feet of tram rail, and my clock tower
a wooden gallows four feet in height.
Answers to Correspondents
Lieut. Nemo : We have consulted the leading Medical
authorities and the weight of opinion is in favour
of four months as the period necessary for the
complete cure of your wound. The Camp Chiro-
podist agrees with them.
Lieut. Squirm: Quite correct. Para. Z. sec. 99 of Officers’
Guide to promotion says it is permissible for an
officer to stand his platoon at ease while he consults
his notes on platoon and company drill to refresh
his memory on the next easy platoon movement.
Beware lest the platoon see you, however !
Sergt. J. C. Burns: We have passed on your suggestion for
an 18 hole course. The camp sergt.-major is the
proper authority to decide the matter. Your ser-
vices as honorary coach are accepted in anticipa-
tion and you are hereby granted the honorary
rank of second lieut. while so employed.
Sergt. Saddun: There is now no Royalty paid by the Gov-
ernment on bricks. Apply to the camp quarter-
master for a refund.
Sergt.-major McLaughlin: Your lengthy article on company
organisation and administration has been unavoid-
ably held over. It will require re-casting in several
places. In your enthusiasm for system and reform


you have been carried away into personal attacks
upon individuals. We hope to produce the article
in a less offensive form.
Lieut. Borland: We are pleased to acknowledge receipt of
an advanced copy of your history of the Highland
Rifles. We have handed it to our literary critic
and a review will appear in due course.
Corp. Adams: You are in error: voice production is not
an essential part of physical training. For yotir
information we point out that classes for voice
production are held nightly in the Isolation Camp.
Sergt.-Major McNamara: Thanks for the disclaimer. We
were always convinced that you did not belong to
the Sinn Fein Society. Consult a solicitor as to
your remedy. There is one in every other tent in
the camp.
Lieut. Lewis: Your opponent wins the bet. Advance won
the Canterbury Cup in 1905. Bookmaking in
camp is prohibited. (See Standing Orders or the
Gaming Act.)
Contest
On Friday night last the annual competition in Elocu-
tion was held at the Officers ’ Mess, Tauherenikau, the
Camp Commandant presiding and judging. There was
a compulsory parade of all ranks in denims and
peanuts. There were six competitors and the subject was
4,4 0wn Choice. 7 ’ The competitors drew lots for the order
of performance. Before the first performer mounted the
stage the judge made it abundantly clear that the War
Regulations imposed a heavy penalty on any press re-
porter found within the precincts of the mess room. The
only record of the contest is thus contained in the judge’s
notes, which were afterwards found in the canteen and
handed to us for publication:—
No. 1, Professor Cardston.—Col. Ingersoll at
Napoleon’s Tomb: —Opening excellent, declamation very


fine, rather hurried in his flight over the Alps. Pronuncia-
tion faulty in one or two places, notably at the end of the
Emperor ’s triumph. His climax was weak. He does not
believe what he says. This man was word perfect, but his
pronunciation was a little provincial in places. 874-
marks.
No. 2, Q.M.S. Clements. —Casablanca: —Singularly apt
selection. Pity he did not take the trouble to learn the
words; lost thread of his story. Result, stammering. He
introduces too much facial gymnastics into the pathetic
portions. Gesture good, intonation excellent, where words
are known. A fortune on the comic stage. 494 marks.
N. 3, Lieut. Carnahan. —Gungha Din:—Slightly ner-
vous at start —reference to “gin” and “bier” somewhat
husky. Gradually warms to it. Pace and gesture splen-
did. Kipling would have loved this. Unfortunate stumble
on the Hindu words. No need for prompter here. Has
captured the audience too —no peanut shells heard now.
The words have a real meaning to this man —he has lived
them. Must have been to Gallipoli. 95 marks.
No. 4, Lieut. Gillingham.—Wolsey’s Farewell to Crom-
well:—Began too hurriedly. Wolsey was more deliberate
and dignified. Pronunciation faulty; he is not in
sympathy with his theme. Like a Glasgow man trying to
speak French. Attempt to introduce a quiver in his voice
poor. He slurs the end of his words, except when
thoroughly wound up. He should have chosen something
more energetic and soul-stirring. Lament is not his
forte. 544 marks.
No. 5, Lieut. Adeane. —Edinburgh After Flodden: —
Appearance somewhat diffident—lacks energy and should
remember he is not in church. Obviously a first perfor-
mance. He is good where he forgets himself, as when
Murray tells the story of Flodden field. Relapses again
and fails to finish. Counted out by the audience—per-
haps justified under the circumstances.
No. 6, Lieut. Hosie.—Henry V. at Agincourt:—Very
energetic opening, voice somewhat shrieky. Audience
springs to attention —great tribute to the performer. I
65


have always held that elocutionists should shave off their
beards—their enunciation is then much clearer. Plenty
of fire in his exhibition—no milk sop curate this, but a
fighter. (N.B. —I must mark him for promotion by
express route). A little coaching would mend his awkward
gestures, but full of promise. 90 marks.
8008 l of tlbe CS Camp
Competitions
Prizes for the competitions in connection with this book
were awarded as follow: —Best Descriptive Article,.
‘ ‘ Fatique, ’ 7 by Pte. Holder; Best Descriptive Poem, ‘ ‘ Tent
Eleven/’ by Pte. Holder; Best Pen and Ink Sketch, Pte.
Griffin; Best Humorous Article, Pte. E. J. L. Payne.
M.C.O. Promotions
44 All Rising to great place is hy a winding stair.” —Bacon.
Many of the N.C.O.’s who steered the first draft to the
perfection of reinforcement soldiers, were promoted when
the second draft arrived. Sergt. Clements, who had enter-
tained JNo. 2 Platoon with his breezy manner, was made a
Q.M.S., and as such he has distributed jam and candles
with ail the stubborness characteristic of the Q.M. Stores.
Similarly Sergt. Barker was advanced, and as Q.M. for B
Company he keeps issue biscuits in his tent as a badge of
seniority. Sergts. Fawcett and Aylett, having developed
wrinkles, were made C.S.MCs, and since that date both
have ruled the wayward corporals with an iron rod. Of
No. 1 Platoon, Corporals Costelloe and Geddes were pro-
moted to the rank of three stripe artists, and transferred,
to new companies. Corporal Wotton and lengthy Corporal
Revell were made sergeants, and similarly Corporal Tolmie,
whose worth obtained notice. Sergts. McMurtrie and
Harvey were given crowns, and are shedding their know-
ledge in D and C Companies respectively. The last pro-
motion on record is that of Sergt. Snadden, who is now
discharge Q.M.S. for the Cl Camp.


Anticipating! Ctiristmms
“ ‘Philistine’’
It is amid the exactitude of life in a military traming
camp that one anticipates Christmas most intensely. This,
season of festivity has passed to the average soldier more
than a score of times, without creating more than interest.
After a few months under canvas the season becomes a time
to hope and live for. When the fatigue becomes strenuous,
and the route march tiring, one can look away from it in
mind, and, seeing the holiday not far distant, work with
renewed vigour. Civilians have passed through so many
months of war that they take our camps for granted, and
similarly the reinforcements of men who pass through their
training organisation. But to the recruit the camp is a
real and vivid thing, and no matter how he loves the new
life, he draws inexhaustible pleasure from the hope of
Christmas leave. The soldier realises the value of simple
pleasures, those which become mere stepping stones in the
way of civilian life. A hot bath*, clean sheets, or a spring
bed become luxuries to him. As the time of leave ap-
proaches the recruit becomes more excited, and like a child
he packs his kit several days before he departs. Soon the
leave becomes a time of preparations—of stowing of kits
and emptying palliasses, and then the sentiment at which
we so often scoff creeps in. He will remember home;
pictures of rooms in which he lived, books he loved, will
flash before him. He will remember a garden-walk among
trees, where, perhaps, a path is worn by the feet of those
he loves. All the true happiness of home presents itself
as he leaves the camp and its associations. The realm of
tea-dixies, mess orderlies and fatigues is a washout, and
he takes to the road with light heart and willing feet.
sg A O9 C©sapaß7 Motes
“A” Company officers and N.C.O.’s trained the first
Cl draft to enter camp in New Zealand.
The original officers and N.C.O.’s of the Company were:
Major Mackesey (commanding), Lieut. Lewis (attached),


2nd Lieuts. Gillingham, Dower, Jackman and Raines,
C.S.M. Fawcett, Q.M.S. Wilkins, Sergts. Bnrdekin, Hill,
McDavitt, Clements, and Corporals Geddes, Costelloe,
Hewitt, Hewlett, Jones, Revell and Houghton. Lieut.
Clark and R.M.S. Brown supervised the physical
instruction.
The majority of these officers and N.C.O’s had pre-
viously gone through a month’s special training to fit them
for the work.
The first draft of men for the company, about 240
strong, arrived at Featherston on 26th September, and was
quartered in Canvas Camp.
The recruits arrived during a severe gale, and spent
most of their first night in looking for fresh sleeping
quarters, as the tents were one by one blown down or
lifted bodily away.
Aided by splendid weather, the men in no time began
to assume a healthy appearance. By the end of the first
month a number were ready for reinforcements, and about
74 men were carefully examined by a Medical Board and
passed as fit.
Since that time several smaller drafts have gone to
reinforcements which means that over 60 per cent, of the
men became fit to go on active service, a much bigger
percentage than was expected.
A number of men have also been “ boarded ” out as
unfit, and at the time of writing, as the third draft comes
into camp, the first draft of A Company Cl is practically
a “ washout.”
The instructional staff has also undergone some changes.
2nd Litut. Raines (N.Z.R.8.), the popular commander of
No. 4 Platoon, transferred to E Company 33rd Reinforce-
ments, and was succeeded bv 2nd Lieut. Evans (also of
“ the Dinks ”). Q.M.S. Wilkins and several other
N.C.O.’s have transferred to other companies.
Captains Rogers and Rust and Lieuts. Baxter and
Fisher are attached to “A” Company.
Smiler ” Smyth bids fair to beat Hewitt for the title
of “ The Leave King.”


The F \r T Cl 1 to »r>
Private Reed (No. 4 Platoon) now sports a stripe. 110
is with A Company 35ths.
We hear that “ Lou ” Mendelssohn intends spending
his Christmas in the back yard under canvas. Please deny
this, “ Lou! ” “ Lights out.”


IT ati^«e
‘By the ‘Professor.
As a privileged visitor to the Cl Training Camp at
Tanherenikan I strolled around in the boiling sun inter-
estedly watching the various stages in the manufacture of
soldiers from the very raw material, and making mental
notes of the how, the why, and the wherefor. This sort
of thing was not new to me. There was a time when I
watched this same process in operation in Teuton territory,
when the shaping, milling, and polishing of rough
humanity was carried out with greater thoroughness and
speed, and the results were the shattering of the honour
of nations, and wholesale pillage and destruction. Here
the system make for honour, for freedom and peace; yet
it is said to be half-hearted, and “ swinging the lead, 77 a
cancer eating the heart of it.
But I am wandering from my subject, and perhaps
abusing the kindness of my hosts. I apologise, and return
to the path of duty.
The heat was real heat, and I was glad to take a seat
Teneath the shade of a manuka shrub and watch a company
of recruits near by digging what seemed to be a trench.
At first I imagined that they were the Engineers training
for service, but a closer look at the amateur “ banjo play-
ing ” soon convinced me of my error. I was on the point
of making further investigation when some of the party
approached me and were soon seated close to me, having
a “ spello. ” Someone made a remark which I did not
quite catch, but the answer was enlightening.
“ You don’t want to take no notice of him; he’s not
one of us. He don’t count in the Great Scheme, boys.
We’re the fellers —B Company Cl.”
“ Give it a rest,” growled another.
“ Two blisters in two hours, mate, that’s me,” the voice
had a broad Yorkshire twang. “ Pick and shovel, chuck-
ing rocks and dirt for His Imperial Majesty, and me been
used to ‘ Yes, madam, three yards of gingham, two packets


of pins, yes; and—will yon have ’em sent! ’ If it wasn’t
for my love of stew and bread and jam I’d go home.”
There was a pause for a few seconds, while they watched
their mates leisurely “ gardening.”
“ Hey! Cinquevalli! What have you done with the
arrows off your pants! ”
The answer was about two shovels full of stones and
seven choice adjectives—high explosives.
“ What’s the idea, any way! ” asked another.
“ There ain’t no idea, mate: we’re starting a market
garden; can’t you see! ”
As the hole, about 30 feet long and 5 wide, was already
some six feet deep, the remark was ignored and another
silence ensued, broken by—
“ Soakage pit, you fathead; where they soak things.”
“ Get your head read! Soaking things in! It’s a
drain.” The voice had an authoritative ring. “ It’s got
to be filled in with these stones we ’re collecting. The water
soaks through ’em, and the grease and stuff sticks round
’em. No mud or bog-holes when you do that.”
The question was settled.
“ No wonder they call it fatigue.”
“ Fatigue! ” The Yorkshire voice again presided.
Fatigue! Look ’ere, mate, this is the easiest job you
ever ’ad in your life. Two hours’ work and five spells!
Fatigue! You’d get palpitation of the heart if you had to
shave the hair off eggs, you would! ”
“ Shut up, Jarge; I’m resting.”
“ You’re having a holiday, mate, that’s what you’re
having. Bill Massey has invited you to his country seat,
and you do nothing else but sitting! ’ ’
“ And gargling, ” said one.
“ And forming fours,” said another.
‘ ‘ One, one-two! ’ ’ said a third.
“ Squad, ’shun! Standat—hease! Shunt! Form
fowers! Right! Quick —maaarch! ’Old your head
up, you! Swing your arms! Left! right! left! right! left!
left! left ”


The orders came with a muffled sound from under a hat
covering the face of a horizontal delver in the soil. The
rest of the boys gazed apathetically into the distance. Then
“ Grand-dad/’ the boy from Leeds, asked:
“ Did ya’ see the sergeant? ”
“ Who? ”
, “ The Sergeant; Sergeant Smith.”
‘‘ Did I? ” The prone warrior sat up suddenly. ‘ ‘ See
him ? I did see him! Whanging a pick around as though
he liked it. I could feel the draught he made, right
through me pants. He wasn’t digging the rocks out; ’e
was punchin ’ ’oles in ’em! ’ ’
“ He doesn’t have to do it, does he? ” asked Grand-
dad.
“No mate,” answered Jarge. “He does it for fun.
Sooner do that than play cards, he would. Setting you an
example, mate, not digging out a spoonful at a time like
you do.”
* i Aw! Shut your mouth, and give somebody else a go,
J arge. ’ ’
“ Righto, mate, go ahead, you were sayin’ ? ”
“ What’s the name of the corporal who was doing a
bit? ” asked “ Levinsky.”
“ Cote—Cotes ; Corporal Cotes—him with the Huia
feather badge on his hat; some boy, ainff he? Give him
a job digging spuds for me when I get out of here.”
“ He don’t dig spuds when he’s in civvies, I’ll bet,”
said Bill. “ You only ’ave to listen to him talk.”
‘ ‘ Seems a decent bloke. ” “ Midland ’ ’ rubbed his
“ sore ” leg as he spoke and tried to look like an invalid,
more or less successfully.
“ Yes, he’s alright, mates.” Jarge had come to light
again. “ We’ve got the pick of the officers and N.C.O.’s.
Algie is a decent sort of gink, too! ”
“ He’s what you might term a very considerate gentle-
man ! ’ ’ quoth ‘ ‘ the Reporter. ’ ’
‘ ‘ Algie ? Is that his name ? I thought it was Leslie. ’ *
The speaker was a small man with a retrousse nose and
projecting ears, who was carefully scraping the soil off his
pick with a piece of bark.


“ Better wash them wings of yours, mate. Lieutenant
Algie! Algie! Algernon! Now have you got it? and
when you speak to an officer halt two paces from him, come
to attention and salute smartly, cuttin’ the hand to the
side the shortest way. When you see me in Willis Street
in civvies next week you needn’t salute me.”
“ What’s the matter with Jarge this morning?
Haven’t been down to the ' Tin Hut,’ have you? ”
“ Don’t talk like that, mate; don’t, if you love me.
Beer! A good long Speights! ” and the conversation
drifted into a discussion on the relative merits of beers of
various makes, and waxed noisy in a very short time, and
as suddenly died to the accompaniment of deep-drawn
sighs.
“ What’s good for sunburn, mates? ” asked Jarge, bar-
ing his inflamed chest, and carefully tucking the neck of
his shirt inwards. '' I feel like a mustard pickle in hell! ’ ’
“ Try cocoanut oil, Jarge.”
“ And go out in the sun and let it boil on you? Not
me, mate; I’m a Presbyterian, not a blooming rasher of
bacon! ’ ’
“ A good wind will settle it, ” said a very brown indi-
vidual who had just joined the group. “ Get a good wind
on it, and if you should And a stray wind knocking about
lead me to it! ”
“ Smoke, Sergeant? ”
“ Thanks,,” and the Sergeant lit up and joined in the
conversation, which grew animated and merry. Evidently
Sergeant Smith was popular.
“ What’s this we’re doing, Sergeant? ” asked “ Cin-
que valli.”
“ Soakage pit—army gardening—hardens you up and
puts muscles on you like leather,” and he proceeded to
discourse on soakage pits, much to everybody’s edification
—even mine.
The lieutenant who had been walking up and down
on the brink of the pit gave an order, and several shovels
flew up on to the heaps of spoil, followed by as many heads,
trunks and legs.


“ Pick-men! ” his voice came in the direction of the
mannka bush.
“ Get to it, boys, ” and the sergeant set an example
by setting off to the pit with a pick in his hand.
“ Come on, mates,” Jarge rose and threw a pick over
his shoulder amid a storm of u Go easy with that bent-
pin,” “ Look out for my head,” “ Use your nut,” etc.,
and followed the sergeant. ‘ ‘ More fatigew! Shake your-
selves, you lazy lot of cold-feet; you’re not working for
yourselves now, you know. Get to it. Put your hearts
into it! Not so much of the lead-swinging. Come on;
hop your frames! ■■’
The rest of the group were not so energetic as Jarge,
and no doubt were longing to return to their office stools
and silk counters, but they straggled towards the pit and
presently a sound of steel meeting stone reached my ears,
and the officer’s quick commands reminded me that I had
to see the Major at eleven, and punctuality is the politeness
of kings, they say.
Anyhow, fatigue in the Cl Camp is, I am satisfied, “not
true to label! ’ ’
The expression “ A Rough Diamond ” does not neces-
sarily apply to our classification patches.
Medical Officer to Leadswinger: “ Well, my man, what
is the matter with you? ”
Leadswinger: “ Sir; I have aches in all my bones.”
M.0.; “ Rejoice, then, that you are not a herring.”
It never rains but it pours. Recently Private Jones,
of A Company, put up a camp record. He was drawn in
the ballot, his name cabled through from England as
killed in action, and he was detailed as one of the sanitary
fatigue all in one day!




Innocents Abroad
Being the Adventures of Four New Zealand Soldiers on
Leave in Pans.
Lieut. J. tMitchell.
‘ ‘ Would you care to have three days’ leave in Paris,,
Sergeant-Major! ”
These were the words that greeted me one morning,
on my arrival at Battalion Headquarters. “ Would I
care! ” Well, I leave it to you. Three days away from
the shells, the mud and the Thousand and one little things
that go towards making one’s life in trenches unpleasant.
And those three days to be spent in the gayest of all gay
cities! Just then it did not seem such a dreadful war.
The appointed day in December rolled round at last,,
and in company with three others I paraded at Divisional
Headquarters to obtain the passports and warrants neces-
sary for the journey. After visiting the pay officer and
squeezing the last franc possible out of the Paymaster, we
boarded a ’bus for the nearest rail-head. The trip was
now fairly begun, and very soon we had settled down to
a long railway journey. At about midnight we reached
Boulogne, unfortunately five minutes too late to
catch the night express to Paris. It was hard luck,
but there was no way out of the difficulty, so a move was
made to the nearest hotel, and after a much-needed meal
we all turned in for a few hours’ sleep. An early break-
fast next morning, and by 8 a.m. we were on the road once
more.
Paris was reached that night by 6.50, and after having
our passes checked by the British Military Police at the
station gates we reported to the police officer at the Caserne
Popinora, Place St. Augustin, and received our local pass-
ports, in addition to all sorts of instructions and warnings.
Arrangements had been made for our accommodation at
the Hotel Britannia, 24 Rue d’Amsterdam, about five
minutes’ walk from Place St. Augustin, but that little trip
took us about an hour. After asking the route from


several people, who could not speak a word of English, we
finally had the good luck to meet an English lady who very
kindly diiected us to the hotel. Once there our troubles
were over for the meantime, as the manager could both
speak and understand a little English.
After a bath and a top-hole dinner we set out to ex-
plore the city by night. Naturally enough our steps led to
a place of amusement of some description, and we finally
came to a halt at the Follies Theatre, one of the popular
playhouses of Paris. All this time we were attracting no
small amount of attention from passers by, more especially
as one of our party was a young sergeant somewhere in
the vicinity of 6ft. Sin. With a peaked felt hat on the
top of all this he looked a veritable giant. Some of the
speculations regarding our nationality were very amusing,
many suggesting that we were Russians or Roumanians.
Inside the theatre one individual plucked up enough cour-
age to ask us for himself, and judging by the stare he gave
when we told him, I do not think he had ever heard of
New Zealand in his life.
After experiences, many and varied, we wandered back
to our hotel, some time not very far off day-light.
Arrangements had previously been made with Thos.
Cook & Sons for a guide to show us round, and shortly
after breakfast this gentleman put in an appearance. Then
began a day sight seeing that would take page upon page
to describe, but the principal event was a visit to the
Palace at Versailles.
Situated in a lovely forest, about twelve miles from
Paris, this beautiful building, with a frontage of a quarter
of a mile, needs a day set apart to look over it alone. One
of the most striking features about it is the ballroom, over
a hundred yards long, and lined from one end to the other
with tremendous mirrors. The floor was like glass, and
we took no unnecessary risks when crossing it. Our guide
kept an ever-watchful eye on us the whole way through,
as there were, numerous articles lying about that would
have made splendid souvenirs.
Once again back to the City and dinner, and then the
guide left us with strict orders to be ready for the trail
again by 8 a.m. the following morning. The evening was


again spent in exploration by gaslight, accompanied by
experiences similar to those on the previous night.
The following day was spent visiting the Markets,
Palaise de Justice, Notre Dame, Luxembourg Museum and
Gardens, Napoleon’s Tomb, and many other places of note.
Our guide now had to leave us for good, and from then
on it was a case of paddle our own canoes. Fortunately
for us, that evening at dinner, we met an English gentle-
man, who had been a resident of Paris for over ten years,
and he undertook to amuse us on the following day.
A visit to the Eiffel Tower, and a trip on the Big
Wheel, caused the morning to pass away very pleasantly
and after a slight break for luncheon we started on our
rambles again. This time it was to one of the big whole-
sale and retail businesses in the city. Seven stories high,
and a thousand girls employed on each floor, was what it
amounted to. Hardly a dozen male hands were employed
in the whole building.
On every floor we were shown round and offered after-
noon tea. To refuse meant to offend, so by the time the
top floor was reached everyone of the party was feeling
very much “ fed up.” Our badges were greatly sought
after, and to make one girl a present of a single badge
meant that you had to stand being kissed by a dozen girls
in return. I often think that we were lucky in getting
out of that building with the buttons still on our tunics.
Not a badge was left on us, and some of the party even
went with a spare set in their pockets. If I have the luck
again to visit Paris I shall pay that establishment a visit
the day I arrive.
Next morning we were due to start our journey back
to the trenches, but owing to a small accident en route to
the station we missed the train, and had to put off our
departure until the evening. Finally, by 6 p.m., we had
started our two-days’ trip back to the line. This time
Boulogne was passed by and the night spent in Calais.
The following evening we were back with the guns, the
mud, and the boys, stoney-broke and dead weary, but with
many pleasant memories of our holiday in the Gay City.


SS B B9 Compaßy Notes
Our company is a composite one, made up in part of
transfers from reinforcements or various Borne Service
branches, and in part of Cl patients coming in direct from
their group areas. The former class comprise chiefly,
therefore, old soldiers, and if any long-service “ Tommy
can teach them anything in the fine arts of soldiering we
should like to meet him.
Nevertheless we have at the date these notes were com-
piled had over fifty men passed fit for reinforcements, and
from the way the present personnel is shaping, we con-
fidently hope to send a large percentage of them in their
footsteps.
We reluctantly left behind at Canvas Camp, Feather-
ston, many monumental works of art which adorned the
entrances to our tents. From our glimpse of our successors
to these quarters, E Company 34th Reinforcements, we
doubt if they possess tastes sufficiently aesthetic to prize
them at their true worth.
Fortunately No. 5 Platoon’s coffin was left without an
occupant, and No. 7 Platoon’s Corpse Corps are as unlike
as possible the grisly vision which stood guard over their
tent door.
It has been suggested that the physical training period
might occasionally be enlivened by a lecture from Gin-
ger ” on “ How they do it at Sling. ’ ’
Why is the popular toast to Sergeant Goudie “ Here’s
to the skin off your nose ”?
The company sports meetings are being taken up with
much enthusiasm, and the creditable performances that
have been put up indicate that the company teams will
have to be reckoned with in the combined sports which we
understand are shortly to become a feature. Private
Hogan will act as manager, trainer, and barracker-in-chief.
It was that canny Scotsman, Private M of No. 8
Platoon, who when told one Sunday evening to hold him-
self in readiness to act as an escort to ‘ ‘ an awful snag,


murmured as he gazed pensively at his civilian clad feet:
* ‘ Dear me 1 Dear me! And 1 hav ’na my Bill Massey’s
on! ”
The “ previous performances ” of the following officers
and N.C.O.s of the Company Instructional Staff seem worth
recording:—
2nd Lieutenants Adeane (now O.C. D Company),
Murrell, Courtney and Shearme have seen considerable
service in Gallipoli and Prance, the last-named also hold-
ing the South African War Medal.
Quartermaster-Sergeant Barker has performed in
Bgypt, and with Sergeants Cecil, Jensen and Wotton and
Corporal McLean goes to swell the total of our South
African War veterans. Sergeant Cecil, in addition to hold-
ing both the King’s and Queen’s South African Medals,
wears the Natal Native Rebellion Medal of 1906, having
served as a sergeant in the Durban Light Infantry Natal
Field Forces in the latter campaign.
Sergeant Jensen not only emerged scathless from the
disaster which overtook the 42nd Highlanders at Modder
River, but came through the San Francisco Earthquake of
1904, if not unshaken, at least undisturbed.
Odds aimd Ends
Sergeant-Major (to young recruit who has just saluted
him) : “ Now, Jones, you ought to know better than salute
me. I’m not an officer. ’ ’
Jones: “ ITn sorry, sir; but you’ll do to practise on.”
Conundrum. —If bread is the staff of life, what is the
life of the staff at Peatherston?
Answer: One long loaf.
Parade states are the bane of the Orderly Room clerk’s
life. The columns to be filled in are many. Those absent
with leave, absent without leave, in detention, in cells, all


occupy places on the form, but there is no place for the
dead. Recently there was a death in “D ” Company, and
the O.R. clerk was in despair as to where to record the fact.
Finally he decided upon the column marked ‘ ‘ absent with
leave ’’! On presenting the state at Headquarters this
-entry was challenged.
“ Why have you placed him there! ”
“ He’s absent with leave all right.”
“ How do you make that out! Who gave him leave! ”
“ The Doctor.”
This did not satisfy Headquarters, and the O.R.C. was
sent away to amend the state. This time the dead man was
accounted for as absent without leave! The Headquarters
man accepted this!
Query: Has the dead man been posted as a deserter
yet! If not, why not!
Conundrum. —Which of Lord Lytton’s books do the
Third Ballot men of Class A, Second Division, recall to
your mind!
Answer: “ The Last of the Barons.”
0.C.: “ Sergeant-Major, what is that man in the front
rank doing scratching his nose!
S.M. (saluting) : “ Scratching his nose, sir.”
Officer (to Q.M.S. Clem) : “ A cat has just had kittens
in my tent.”
Q.M.S. Clem: “ Dam! And I haven’t drawn rations
for them! ’ ’
A quartermaster-sergeant in camp has a grievance with
one of the physical drill experts. The sergeant has a pic-
ture gallery in tattoo done on his manly bosom. While on
physical training one day it was exposed to view, and this
is what fell from the Instructor:
“ Gawd! What a lovely jig-saw puzzle you will make
when they’ve blown you to pieces! ”


- ' ' f r - '• •■ - .
r i£&'
Milton wrote “ Paradise Lost/’ but he didn’t write any
of our routine orders despite the impression abroad.
(Editor: We suggest that they are a missing number
of Dante’s “ Divine Comedy.”)
AT TAUHERENIKAU
Some Poisats iia lEateiPEaaftiosa&l Law
fty Corpl. C. G. E. Marker.
It is an old adage that all is fair in love and war, but
as we generally find that the lover who quotes it seeks to
excuse in his own eyes some deceit or stratagem unworthy
of a gentleman, so do we also find the nation citing it


seeking to excuse some moral turpitude unworthy of a
civilised country.
But do the nations at large accept as truth that all is
fair in war? Emphatically no. Since the days when
nationalities were first able to make their voices heard
through some ruler or constituent assembly there has
existed a continuously growing body of rules, at first
shadowy in outline, but later assuming clear-cut propor-
tions, for regulating their* inter-relations, which, for want
of a better term, I shall call the Law of Nations.
As the history of mankind is, unfortunately, coincident
with the history of war, these rules deal to no small degree
with methods of warfare and acts arising therefrom.
Until recent years these rules were of an anomalous
nature, and perhaps somewhat ill-defined. The student
of the Law of Nations had to seek his knowledge in the
writings of the authors of various nations dealing with the
subject, and in the reports of such legal proceedings as
were available to him. On the whole, however, the results
were not unsatisfactory. In the nineteenth century, how-
ever, serious efforts to codify at least some portions of In-
ternational Law were attempted, resulting in the Geneva,
Llague and other Conventions.
In 1863, as the result of the efforts of the great French
humanitarian, Henri Dunant, there sat in Geneva an un-
official international conference, which was followed in the
succeeding year by an official conference called the
Swiss Government, which later body evolved the Red Cross
Convention, known as the Geneva Convention. The ob-
ject of the rules drawn up and agreed upon was to ame-
liorate the condition of the sick, wounded and prisoners,
and to extend and unify the rules already recognised as
in existence. In 1906 the Geneva Convention was generally
overhauled, made up to date, and adopted by all the nations
claiming civilisation. In 1899, by one of the Hague Con-
ventions, the Geneva Convention was adapted to meet the
requirements of maritime warfare. 1 his latter Conven-
tion was in turn overhauled in 190 /.
The St. Petersburg Convention of 1868 dealt primarily
with the use of explosives and flattening, or “ dum-dum ”
bullets, when the contracting Powers agreeing absolutely


to abstain from the use of these devastating projectiles
when at war with civilised countries. There is no doubt
that individual soldiers have in the course of the present
struggle converted their bullets into a species of dum-dum,
but the writer knows of no evidence which can convict any
Power of issuing them to its troops.
In 1874, at the instance of Czar Alexander of Russia,
a conference of the Powers was held at Brussels to con-
sider the whole question of the conduct of war. The Con-
ference drafted a Code of Rules which, although forming
a useful groundwork for subsequent conventions and dis-
cussions, was never ratified by the Powers.
In 1899 was held the first of the Hague Conferences,
when much ground was covered and much good work done.
The Code of Rules drafted in Brussels 25 years previously
formed the basis of the Regulations drawn up at this Con-
ference. Amidst many other conventions dealing both
with land and maritime warfare there were drawn up
three declarations regulating methods of slaughter to which
I now desire to draw especial attention, viz: for the abso-
lute prohibition (1) of the launching of projectiles and
explosives from balloons or by other similar new methods;
(2) of the use of projectiles the only object of which is the
diffusion of asphyxiating or deleterious gases; and (3) of
the use of bullets which expand or flatten easily in the
human body, such as bullets with a hard envelope, of which
the envelope does not entirely cover the core, or is pierced
with incisions. Prohibition No. 1 was adopted for five
years only, and re-adopted at the Hague Conference of
1907, but of the great Powers only Great Britain and the
United States ratified it. The effect of this is that only
in a war between these two Powers is the prohibition ab-
solutely binding. Prohibitions Nos. 2 and 3, however, were
ratified without duration by all the Powers.
But as war is slaughter, some one may ask, why try and
regulate the method of the killing? Because every step
towards more humanitarian methods of warfare is one step
nearer the abolition of the anomalous barbarism of war,
and one more pace down the long lane which shall lead to
the ideal civilisation. We cannot leap to a millenium, but
must fight our way foot by foot down the corridors of the
centuries. That these objects have inspired the various


Conferences in their humane labours is evidenced by the
preambles to the various Conventions. That to the 1907
Convention claims to be inspired by the desire to serve the
interests of humanity and to lessen the rigours and dis-
asters of war.
While in an article of this nature we can no more than
raise the fringe of the wide subject opened up, there are a
few principles regulating maritime warfare which I shall
enunciate to show how flagrantly Germany in the present
momentous struggle has violated, not only the humane
principles adopted by the Powers in the preambles I have
referred to, but also the letter of the Regulations them-
selves ■when it has suited her policy of the moment to do
so. In the Convention of 1907 we find that the contract-
ing parties consider it of importance to subject bombard-
ment by naval forces to general provisions guaranteeing ■
the rights of the inhabitants and ensuring the preservation
of the principal buildings. The same Convention as re-
gards the employment of submarine mines acting auto-
matically by contact upholds the principle of the freedom
of sea routes open to all nations, and declares that if in the
present state of things the nse of submarine mines with
automatic contact cannot be forbidden, it is important to
limit and regulate their use in order to restrict the rigours
of war and to give to peaceful navigation the security it
has the right to claim in spite of the existence of a war.
And lastly I will define briefly the old established principle
dealing with blockades and the sinking of vessels belonging
to the mercantile marine and so employed.
(a) No blockade of a coast-line or any part thereof is
a lawful blockade unless the belligerent claiming to set it
up has the power of effectively enforcing. Any alleged
blockade not answering to this requirement is known as a
<< paper blockade/’ and all acts committed in the exercise
of this pretended power are also absolutely illegal.
(b) No vessel of the mercantile marine while so engaged
may be sunk without warning.
(c) No such vessel may be sunk where captured unless
the captor is prevented by a real danger to himself from
taking his prize to a home port to be adjudicated upon by
a properly constituted Prize Court.


At the various conferences I have referred to, and upon
all like occasions Germany has, by the mouth of her re-
presentatives, been as zealous and pious an upholder of the
rights of neutrals, the civilian population of belligerent
countries, and generally the rights of mankind, as the
latest peace advocates proclaim her to be. But what is
the history of her conduct since August, 1914?
We have seen her tear up as a “ scrap of paper " the
treaty whereby she guaranteed Belgium's neutrality; we
have seen her pour on our troops poison gases not only of
asphyxiating and deleterious nature, but bringing its vic-
tims to an agonising death; we have seen her strew the
ocean highways with contact mines; we have seen her
under the cover of a paper blockade ruthlessly and without
warning sink passenger and commercial vessels leaving
their innocent passengers and crews to the mercy of the
waves; we have seen her pour from naval and air vessels
tons of projectiles on undefended towns; we have seen
hospital ships torpedoed; and we have seen the Red Cross
violated. When we find that for the pious talk with which
Germany regales the world at large she substitutes for
home consumption and education such phrases as “ the
sparing of human life and property can only come into
play in so far as the nature and object of war permits,"
and that “ a warring state may employ all methods which
promote the attainment of its object, subject only to such
restraints as it imposes on itself in its own interests," we
can better realise how it comes about that a country rich in
superficial “ kultur " can perpetrate atrocities which
would disgrace wild beasts of the jungle.
German's name stinks in the nostrils of reputable na-
tions, but for this moral obloquy she cares not at all. Brute
force must be conquered by brute force, and the Central
Powers must be taught by force of arms that who sows
the wind reaps the whirlwind, unless the clock of progress,
civilisation and Christianity is to be set back nigh on 2000
years. To do this, the Entente Powers (in this struggle the
champions of democracy and all that makes the life of the
individual worth living) require man power and the will
to win. This is why in this far Dominion we have set up a
Cl Camp to produce fit men, and a contemplation of these


facts should be more than sufficient to induce every poten-
tial soldier within its confines loyally to co-operate with his
instructors to bring about the consummation desired.
la Memory
(Reprinted ly permission.)
No line-spun shroud has clasped its clinging folds
Across your breast. No deep-carved coffin-lid
Lies between you and the chill earth which hid
For years the shroud that now your body moulds.
No marble form its tall dark image holds
The Turkish night, to mark the host amid
Your resting place. No Pharoah’s pyramid
Can boast that it your sacred ashes holds.
Death’s cunning hand can still man’s measured breath
And toss him like some many-figured dice.
But not the ages nor the walls of death
Can hide from us the high-built edifice
Of love for those who fell the shot beneath,
With duty done and noble sacrifice.
PHILISTINE.”
A (Soldiers 9 Epitome
I heard the bugle ring out at morn,
And I listened to the song it sung:
Of hope as bright as a summer dawn
And duty to be done.
I heard the bugle again at eve
When the sun his course had run,
And it prayed for those who would not more grieve
Their duty nobly done.
“MAC.”


AT CANVAS CAMP
Tlaaiafes
We thank the following gentlemen who contributed
to the success of our Book by offering prizes for the
literary and photographic competitions:—Lieut. Harland,
Mr. C 4. W. Mitchell, Mr. J. J. Cameron, Messrs. Kendall,
Holmes, Davis Clater and Page. We appreciate especially
the kindness of Mr. Cameron, who gave several of the
group photographs published in this book, and who made
it possible for us to include several subjects which would
have otherwise not been available. Captain Rust,
Messrs. Mence and O’Halloran and Pte. Harris very
kindly placed several fine prints at our command.


INSTRUCTIONAL STAFF TENT
(Musketry Ground)
BOXING DAY, December 26, 1917, at 6 a.m.
Fine Day Orders. (Under dintinguished patronage of
Flaps Rolled.
By
Camp Commandant (5)
C 1 and Continental Vocal Artists
With suitable Orchestral Accompaniments
Followed by
A POWERFUL and PAINFUL PHOTO-PLAY
entitled —
“ The Tin Hut
Or “ WHEN THE CLOCK STRUCK SIX.”
(NON—SENSE—ORED).
A Play of Character and Characters.
Has a tremendous bearing on the present International Situation
Of Discipline
Discipline is a word of which the new recruit will no
doubt hear much, but it is also one the importance of which
absolutely cannot be exaggerated. It is the moral force
which creates the essential difference between an army and
a collection of men with rifles. Without it genius, hardi-
hood and endurance would be wasted.
Discipline is the sense of duty, the instant obedience to
orders, irrespective of punishment, and the realisation that
only one man can be master. It was discipline which
enabled the British Expeditionary Force to get back from
Mons.
In a well disciplined unit men find it almost impossible
not to obey their commander's voice, however tired they
may be, or however terrible the ordeal. They thus work
as one man.
Napoleon said that the moral is to the physical, as is
three to one, and among moral forces none is for the sol-
dier more important than discipline. ' —“ANON.”


Programme.,
Part I.
Trumpet Solo “ Christians Awake *
ORDERLY BUGLER
Hymn “When the Roll is called up yonder ’
PLATOON SERGEANTS
Action Song “ Pack up your troubles in your old kitbag’
NEW RECRUITS
Hymn ‘ Yield not to temptation 3
CAPT. PETTIT, M.O.
Accompanied by the Barbed Wire Orchestra
Sacred Song “ Come unto Me ’
CAPT. WHEELER, M.O.
The audience is requested to remain seated during
this item, as otherwise the singer may be compelled
to send to Ellerslie for assistance to cope with the
rush
Rag-time Chorus ‘ ‘ Come, labour on
FATIGUE PARTY
Pathetic Song “Pass me not’
The LEADSWINGERS
Song “ Ho ! fill me a tankard
C.Q.M.S. BARKER
Chorus “ If all the stars were mine
The CORPORALS
Hymn “Lead, kindly light
SANITARY FATIGUE
Comic Song “A little bit off the top
SERGEANT WELLWOOD
Hymn. “Art thou weary
“Z” CLASS INSTRUCTORS


PROGRAMME -Continued
Song “ Roamin in the gloamin ”
MAJOR BRUNT
Action Song “A wee doech an’ dorrach”
The GARGLE ARTISTS
The audience take the hint while the spool is being
wound for the next part.
Part 11.
“THE TIN HUT,”
or
“ When the Clock struck Six”
A PHOTO PLAY IN SEVERAL PIECES
(Non —sense —ored)
Produced by the “ X Y Z” SWINDLECATE
Features OLGA PETROLOFFSKI. ‘-JOCK” CHALMERS, JACK DOWER,
JIMMY GOW, MARY PICK-ME-UP, and other well-known “X Y Z” and local
Star Artists and Characters
A STORY with an unexpected ending. Throbbing with tense situ-
ations in an atmosphere of stale beer and tobacco smoke. At
times the soda is fiat, but the end makes you sit up and take
notice.
SYNOPSIS. Part I.
On Saturday, Ist December, 1917, the Apollo-like Capt. Heavens
of the “ Dinks,”" is lounging in an easy chair in the Sergeants’ Mess at
Tauwharehereherenikau, smoking a “ Clarence,” borrowed from a
fellow-corporal, and reading “ Yellow Peril, 1916 ” (Lieut. Clark).
Suddenly he glances up at the venerable grandfather clock standi ner in
the corner of the room. For a second he sits spell-bound. Then
with a cry of “ Hell ! five minutes to six ! ” he springs to his feet,
snatches up his combination tooth-pick-and-fire-escape, and rushing
out into the wind-swept plain, wends his way slowly towards that
stately mansion known as “The Tin Hut.”


PROGRAMME —Continued
Part 11. will follow next week.
POPULAR C 1 PRICES. Dress Circle £ 1 Is. Denim Circle 6d.
Orchestral Stalls Free. Boxes may be reserved
at the Incinerator. Tickets obtainable at the
Canteen.
NOTE. —In order that the whole show may go without an itch
the management requests patrons to bring their own insect powder
Scene-shifter and Chucker out—MICK HOGAN
Musical Director—LlEUT. FRANK ADCANE
Lieut. Adcane will make a special trip from Auckland to be present—we don’t think !
Business Manager—Professor O’CARDSTON
McCaffrey, C.B.
' vl w b* 1
Complete War Novel in condensed
form owing to shortage of paper.
CHAPTER I
2 M.B.
3 Cl
4 A.M.
5 E.F.
6 T.A.B.
2
7 O.A.S.
8 V.C.- R.I.P.
By JN.


The Ideal Summer Beverage.
HANCOCKS
PEP
ALWAYS IN P
Liyj
CONDITION
Brewed and Bottled by
HANCOCK <3? CO. (N.Z.) Ltd.
AUCKLAND, N.Z.
For Daintiest Results
YOU
MUST USE
OAK’’ Jams
The
Very Best!


E 0 and OeEo
Tho’ man, to judge from his pedigree,
Has surely fallen from high degree,
Since he stole the fruit from off the tree
That knocked his apple cart all agee.
Tho’ woman is “ semper mutabile,”
And according to many “ ions mali,”
The rich and poor, bond and free
We are none of us good as we ought to be.
Wouldn’t it be best if we all agree
Just to take one another E. and 0.E.?
E. and O.E. seem to me
The very essence of charity;
And won’t it be jolly for you and me
If just sink into Eternity
Passed by a guard with a golden key
As fit for the angels—E. and O.E.
Now, if it should happen you don’t agree
With the thought expressed in this “ Jeu d’Esprit/’
But, inclined to stand on your dignity,
Term it irreverent foolery,
The moral is plain as A B C,
Just take it or leave it—E. and O.E.
—W. A. WHEELER, Captain.


'V r -
As it Builds Bonnie Babies so it
Builds Soldiers for the Empire
The phrase “Glaxo Builds Bonnie Babies’ 7 has
become familiar in most homes throughout our
Empire, but it may be a surprise to many that Glaxo
is also used in considerable quantities by the armies
of Great Britain and our Allies.
forms part of the regular diet of our wounded boys.
Thousands of cases of Glaxo are used by the Eed
Cross and Army Medical organisations of New Zea-
land, Australia, Britain, France and the Allies. In
the Mesopotamian, Egyptian and Palestine cam-
paigns Glaxo is also used—it makes fresh, pure,
germ-free milk available quickly and at any time.
For Infants, Invalids, Convalescents, for every-day use —GLAXO
the Pure Milk Food
IN MILITARY HOSPITALS


Printed by
WHITCOMBE <32 TOMBS LIMITED
Auckland, Christchurch, Dunedin, Wellington.
Melbourne *3? London




