

Thousands of correct replies received. As your
share of the Two Hundred, we send you this wonder-
ful Book of Secrets, &c.
Book of Secrets
I '4 M
HOW TO GET RICH
iVLagic iVlgsteries and
Vaudeyille 3Fekes,
Sncient and NLod IWLaxntes,
TOASTS, IRISH YARNS, WIT
and HUMOR,
«
Should you not care to destroy this book, by cutting
out the Coupons contained in the advertisements, copy
same on letter or postal card, and mail direct to
advertisers.
Price, 2s, 6d.
NATIONAL PUBLISHING CO.,
SYDNEY, N.S.W.


Let us Reason Together
INTERESTING FACTS
Regarding our Modern Merchandising
Method of Selling direct
From Factory to Buyer.
most noteworthy trade development of recent years has been the bringing together
I of manufacturer and consumer, eliminating the profits of the middlemen who make their
living out of the consumer. Articles bought from the retailer pass through se\eial
hands-from the factory to the sales agent, from the sales agent to the from the
wholesaler to the retailer, from the retailer to the consumer. Each middleman adds his
expenses, his losses, his profits. All these are piled up in the retail price and must be paid
by YOU.
In trading with the retailer you are spending much money needlessly ; buying from us is true
economy, as you keep in your own pocket all the intermediate profits. We save you all cost that
adds no value.
Thousands are taking advantage of the economy of our methods, and make our place the
base of supplies for iheir Watches. You will find our Watches of the highest class in quality,
style, durability and finish, and our variety large enough to suit all tastes.
In one bound we have secured the confidence of the people, foi our gieat factory-to-consumer
plan is sound, based on business principles, and means a saving to our customers of. about 50 %
of retail prices. We, therefore, earnestly request you before purchasing elsewhere to compare
our prices, quality for quality, with those offered you elsewhere. Your decision will undoubtedly
be in our favor, and you will be convinced that it will be to your advantage to favor us with your
patronage.
Our motto is not " How much we can get/' but, 44 How little we can afford to ask for our
goods." Theie are no expensive methods connected with our system of selling, as a result we
economize greatly to the benefit of our customers. You pay just one small profit between
manufacturer and consumer.
We hope you will look carefully through this little advertisement, and we extend to you a
cordial invitation to pay us a visit, not that we may importune you to buy, but that we may
exhibit for your pleasure our handsome and extensive line of Watches.
: . f
Every Man Wants to get the
Worth of his Money.
I ONCE heard of a millionaire who lived on ten pounds a month because he was sure for that
sum to get the full value of every penny he spent. 44 I could easily spend one thousand
pounds a month," he would say, 44 but a lot of people would get a part of my money
without giving me anything in return. For example, one day while stopping at a city hotel I
sent a shoe out to be fixed. The shoe was brought back by the cobbler's boy who said to the
clerk, 44 Here's a shoe for No. 29, it's sixpence." The clerk handed it over to the porter, saying,
44 Send this shoe to No. 29. It's one shilling. Pay me and collect." The porter gave the shoe
to the elevator boy. 44 Shoe for No. 29. Two shillings due." The elevator boy in turn gave
the shoe to the bell boy for my floor. 4 4 Shoe for No. 29, pay me two shillings and sixpence."
And the bell boy came to me with : 44 Here's your shoe. It's three shillings." A few days later
I met the cobbler. 44 By the way," I asked, 44 How much did you charge for fixing that shoe of
mine?" "It was a small job, sixpence," was his reply.
The millionaire was paying for the service, not the shoe. And here is where you come in
if you buy direct from Factory-to-Pocket. Do you see the point ? When you go into a Jewellery
Store and buy a watch, How much do you pay for service? How much do you pay for the watch ?
Do you realise that you are paying the clerk, the porter, the elevator and bell boy, acting in the
capacity of the Jobber, the Salesman, and the Retailer? Would it not be more profitable to
come or send to us, and buy your watch where you pay just one small profit between manufacturer
and consumer? 44 Think it over."


A Request
PLEASE don't ask us to make discounts, or to take a lower price than the Factory prices
quoted. If you buy a dozen or a hundred watches from us, we cannot take one penny
less for them.
We want to be fair with every customer. We sell on as close a margin as possible, and can
only do this by adhering strictly to our Factory Prices.
We do not sell our Watches on Credit or Instalments. We have made the very lowest
Factory Price on our goods, and do not desire to add to our selling price a sum sufficient to cover
losses which all Credit Houses must suffer.
To our Mail Order Customers.
UPON receipt of the price of any Watch here advertised we will be pleased to send the
article to you all carriage paid, and guarantee safe delivery and satisfaction. If upon
receipt of your order it is not satisfactory return it at once and we will cheerfully
exchange it or refund the amount of purchase, as you wish. Send money by Registered Mail
or Post Office Money Order, We take all the risk, which we are quite willing to do, as we have
perfect confidence in our ability to satisfy the most critical buyer.
The Non-Magnetic Watch
Is not only an Evolution but a
Revelation in Watch Construction.
IT IS SIMPLY WATCH
PERFECTION.
THE movement is fully covered by Patents, and is made
by the latest improved Automatic Machinery. Com-
bining this with the very best material and highest
skilled labour in the finishing and regulating department makes
It the most perfect and reliable timekeeper obtainable. It is the popular, thin model 16 size,
and the shape of the movement is new and unique. This watch is fitted with our new patented
Ferro Nickel Brequet Hairspring, which we have tested for years and found entirely satisfactory.
It has been proven beyond question to be superior to the tempered steel or Palladium Hairspring
used by other watch manufactureis, and we guarantee its results to the fullest extent. The Fork,
Escape-wheel and Balance are also made of the same metal, which forms by its own nature the
only really non-magnetic movement. This movement is not affected in the slightest in its
time-keeping qualities by the proximity of electric motors or electrical plants ; which is a great
advantage now that electricity is so generally used. Owing to there being no expansion or
contraction of this metal in extreme changes of temperature it has enabled us to dispense with
the split balance, which is another great improvement over other watches. Our watches
will stand the test of being placed in an oven brought to an extreme heat and then placed in the
coldest refrigerator, which will not affect their time keeping in the slightest. These are all
improvements worthy of serious consideration to intending watch purchasers, and they prove
conclusively that our watches possess distinct advantages over all others, and is the most perfect
watch at a moderate price made. It is right on the crest of fashion's wave, and will appeal to
buyers who appreciate elegance of design, beauty of finish, and fine workmanship. With the
distinct improvements the Watch possesses over all others it would be very easy for us to sell it
at an exorbitant price, but by our direct factory-to-pocket plan of selling, you pay just one
small profit from the manufacturer to the wearer, which gives you the highest-grade watch
at the p«ce usually asked for the most inferior and unreliable time-keeper.


A Non-Magnetic Watch Frozen
in Solid Ice Keeps Perfect Time.
DOES NOT VARY A SECOND A MONTH.
Your jeweller has a costly chronometer which he expects to keep
absolutely perfect time.
He places this chronometer under glass in a perfectly horizontal
position and at an even temperature. He disturbs it just as little as
possible, because he knows, probably from experience, that it would be
easily affected by change of conditions, and such a chronometer, care-
fully guarded and cared for WILL keep time to the minutest
fraction of a second, but it must
be so guarded to do it.
Every adjusted Non-Magnetic
Watch must, before it is sent out,
keep perfect time second for
second with one of these master
timepieces —BUT —it must keep
this chronometer time under the
conditions of every-day life. In-
deed, it must stand, befolte leaving
the factory, without failure in the
slightest. It is baked in an oven
heated to 100 degrees Fahrenheit
and kept for hours in a refrigera-
tor at freezing point, and must not vary even a second.
You might freeze it in a block of ice without affecting its time-
keeping qualities in the slightest degree.
Of course such care is expensive for us. It requires the most
costly workmanship.
It pays because we know that our watches will be accurate to the
second at all times.
Non-Magnetic Watches must also keep perfect time in every
position, and not be affected by the jars and jolts of railway trains,,
horseback riding, automobiling, etc. We guarantee them to be perfect
v timekeepers.
Non-Magnetic Watches are sold only by reliable agents or direct
from us. You can get them nowhere else.
■' - *
•' ' ' >.
I H.
v wv-
m*
t
FROM FAQTORY TO BUYER.


Regarding Our Guarantee.
WE give a printed 10-year guarantee with each Watch, during
which time any defect in material or workmanship will be repaired free of charge.
Every part of our watch is perfectly interchangeable, and by its simple construction the
necessity of repairs has been reduced to a minimum, and are inexpensive. After your ten years'
guarantee has expired, should repairs at any time become necessary, they will be done by us at
less than half the price usually chaiged for watches of other makes.
The great accuracy of our Watches is due to the original patented
non-magnetic movement, and their low price is possible only through
our method of selling direct from Factory to Pocket, adding just one
small profit between maker and wearer.
HUNTING OR OPEN FACE.
N.M.WAT C »
w
2*
New Thin Model.
Showing a combination of letters
made as a monogram, either on
plain or polished surface or engine
turn as shown. Monograms made
large or small.
When you buy a Non-
Magnetic Watch, the
First Cost is the Last
Cost, as it lasts a
Lifetime.
-rc
/A
Capital, labor, and ceaseless effort have made these Watches the most perfect
Watches in the world.
Price of Non-Magnetic Watches.
Factory
Price.
99
n
n
»»
99
99
»»
11
11
91
11
99
19
99
99
18 6
17 6
35/-
90/-
Full Jewelled Escapement, in Hunting Case, or open Face Case, Solid Silveroid
Gun Metal- •
Solid Silver -
20-Year Gold Case
Your Choice of Plain, Engine Turned, or Engraved Cases.
■
Ladies' Sizes, same Movement and Cases, 9d. extra.
wr;/. Wmi y4>;
1 =—
We have many other watches, both cheaper and more expensive. We can
ell watches from 5/- to but the watches here illustrated we would recommend
s well worth the money. Should you wish a watch for more or less money, send
post card, and we shall be pleased to forward you full description and illustration,
hould you care to purchase a watch here described and illustrated, read
istructions under the heading of Our Alail Older Customeis.


If you are Interested, write us, and we
will tell you
HOW TO MAKE MONEY
Big Cash Profits on Little Investments.
MEN AND WOMEN TELL THEIR STORIES OF
HOW THEY MADE MONEY.
MOST of the great fortunes of this world were made by men who started on
nothing. Rothschild, the founder of the famous commercial house m
England, began as a pedlar of old coins and curiosities. John L.
Rockefeller, the vStandard Oil King, the richest man in the world, was a clerk m a
country store. Jay Gould was a pedlar, and Andrew Carnegie, the famous
millionaire, was a telegraph messenger at a salary of lof- per week ; while Russell
Sage, now worth his millions, started as a clerk. We could tell you the story of
hundreds of men and women whom we have started 011 the road to riches who may
in a short time rate their fortunes in the millions.
Without capital, and without any special gift, we can show you how to make
from £lOO to £6OO annually. The business can be carried on without interfering
with your present occupation. Own your own home, bend the ooys and guis to
college. Hire someone to do the work around the farm. Pay off the old mortgages
and start life anew with a big fat bank account, is an opportunity for wide-
awake men and women to become rich from small beginnings.
THE CHANCE OF A LIFETIME.
The Non-Magnetic Watch Co. come to you personally with a straight-
forward business proposition. Our plan of money making is not for general
distribution, but is gotten up for the purpose of enabling one person in each locality
to become a money-maker, influential, and well-to-do.
Are you interested? If so, read carefully our system as explained in the four previous
pages, then write us at once, enclosing stamped and addressed envelope tor reply and full
particulars. Remember, it costs nothing but the asking to get these particulars, and you may
make from to £6OO a year if you are bright : at any rate, it is at least worth investigating.
All we ask you to do is to read carefully and study well the particulars which we send.
THE NON-MAGNETIC WATCH CO.,
Warehouse: rear Paling's, George Street, Sydney, N.S.W.
T 7OU will win our sincere gratitude and benefit your friends and neighbours if
\ you will call their attention to this Advertisement. The more people we
reach the stronger we grow. Our profits on each article being small, our
trade thrives not so much on the limited number of very wealthy people, as upon
the multitudes who have moderate means and refined tastes which they seek to
gratify by expenditures that are reasonable, but not extravagant.
To THE NON-MAGNETIC WATCH CO., George Street, Sydney, N.S.W.
Gentlemen —Please send me full particulars on "How to make as stated in y out-
advertisement. lam enclosing a stamped envelope addressed to myself for reply. Thanking
you in anticipation,
Name and Addrees iu full.
1


of
HOW TO GET RICH.
A compilation of Secret and Known Facts in every
branch of Business, Science, and Art, enabling" the
possessor to avoid the rocks and shoals of
life and secure much wealth.
"There is a tide in the affairs of men, which,
taken at the flood, leads to fortune."
"He that by the plough would thrive,
Himself must either hold or drive;
For age and want save while you may,
No morning's sun lasts a whole day;
Get what you can, and what you get, hold,
'Tls a stone that will turn all your lead
into gold;
Therefore be ruled by me, I pray,
Save something for a rainy day."
Remember, that time Is money, for he that
can earn four shillings a day at his labour,
and goes abroad, or sits at home one-half of
that day, though he spend but threepence
during his diversion or idleness, he ought not
to reckon that the only expense; he has really
wasted, or rather thrown away, two shillings
besides.
Remember, that credit is money; if a man
lets his money lie in my hands after it ia
due, because he has a good opinion of my
credit, he gives me the interest, or so much as
I can make of the money during that time;
this amounts to a very considerable sum
where a man has large credit and also makes
a good use of it.
Remember, that money is of a prolific or
multiplying nature; money will produce money,
and its offspring will produce more: and so
five shillings turned is six, being turned again
is seven and threepence, and so on, till it
becomes a hundred pounds; and the more there
ia of it, the more it will produce on every
turning, so that the profits rise quicker and
quicker; and he who throws away a crown
destroys all that it might have produced, even
some scores of pounds.
Remember, that six pounds a year is a groat
a day, for this little sum (which may be daily
wasted either in time or expenses unperceived),
if a proper use be made of it, he may, on his
own security, have the constant possession and
use of a hundred and twenty pounds. So much
in stock, briskly turned by an industrious man,
will always produce the greatest advantage to
the tradesman. Remember thisi proverb, that
the good paymaster is lord of another man's
purse, for he who is known to pay punctually
and exactly at the time he promises, may, a*t
any time, and on any occasion, raise all the
money his friend can spare. This is something
of srreat use: next to industry and frugality
nothing can contribute more to the raising of
a man in the world than punctuality in all his
dealings. Therefore, never keep borrowed
money one single hour beyond the time pro
mised, lest the disappointment should shut up
your friend's purse for ever, as the most
trifling actions that affect a man's credit ought
always to be avoided. The sound of the
hammer at five in the morning, or at nine at
night, being heard by a creditor, makes him
easy six months longer; but if he sees you at
a gaming table, or hears your voice in a tavern,
when you should be at work, he sends for his
money the very next day and demands it
before it is convenient for you to pay bim
Beware of thinking all your own that you
possess and of living accordingly. This is a
mistake that many people of credit fall into;
but m order to prevent this, always keep an
exact account both of your expenses and also
of your daily income and profits. For if you
will only just take the trouble at first to
enumerate particulars, it will discover unto
you how wonderfully trifling expenses mount
up to a large sum; by vvliich you will also
discern what might have been, and also What
may for the future be saved without causing
any great inconvenience. In short, the wav to
obtain riches, if you desire it, is as plain as
the way to the market, which,- depends chiefly
on two things, viz., industry and frugality; and
take care that you waste neither time nor
money, but daily make use of both; if you take
care of the hours and days, the weeks, months
and years will also take cave of themselves Con-
stant experience proves that any business being
first well contrived, is more than half done—
for a sleeping fox catches no poultry; there
wiH be sleep enough in the grave, and also,
that lost time is seldom found again, for that
which we generally call time enough, alwavs
proves littie enough; for sloth makes things
difficult while industry makes them easy He
that rises late must trot hard all day" and
shall scarce overtake his business at
for laziness travels so slow that poverty "soon
overtakes him. Drive your business, but let
not that drive you; for early to bed and earlv
to rise, is the way to become healthy, wealthy
and wise. Industry need not wish, while lie
who lives on a vain hope will die fasting; for
we find that there is nothing to be done or
accomplished under the sun without labour
He that hath a trade, hath an estate, and be
that hath a profession, hath an office and profit
with honour; but then the trade must b-
worked at, and the profession well followed
or they will not enable you to pay rent ml
taxes. At the working man's house hunger


looks In but dares not enter; for industry
pays debts, while despair increases them.
Diligence is the mother of good luck; as
Solomon saith: "The diligent hand maketh
rich, w T hile he that dealeth with a slack hand
becometh poor; for God gives all things to
industry." Then plough deep while the slug-
gards sleep, and you shall have plenty, while
others have reason to complain of hard times.
Therefore, keep working while it is called
to-day, for you know T not how T much you may
be hindered to-morrow; and never leave that
business to be done to-morrow which you can
do to-day; for since you are not sure of a
single hour, throw not that away. How many
are they who live daily by their wits, and who
often break from w T ant of a stock in hand,
while industry gives comfort, plenty, and
respect. Keep your shop well and then your
shop will keep you. For it sometimes happens
that the eyes of a master will do more work
than both his hands, and more especially if
his head be any reasonable length; for the
want of care doth more damage than the want
of knowledge. If you do not overlook your
workmen, you may just as well leave them
your purse open; the trusting too much to the
care of others has completely ruined many a
man. If you would be wealthy, think of being
careful and saving, for
"Women and wine, game and deceit,
Make the wealth small and the wants
great."
That which maintains one vice, would bring "
up two children. And if you wish to know the
value of money, only just go and try to borrow
a little; he that goes borrowing, goes sorrow-
ing, and, indeed, so doth he who lends it unto
such people, when he goes to try to get it back
again Pride that dines on vanity, sups on
content and often breakfasts with plenty, dines
with poverty and sups with infamy, creates
envy and hastens misfortune; for it is hard
for an empty bag to stand upright. Creditors
have generally much better memories than
debtors, who are also a kind of superstitious
set, great observers of set or appointed days
and times; so that those have but a short Lent
who owe money to be paid at Easter, for ex-
penses are always so constant and certain, thai
it is much easier to build two chimneys than
to keep one in fuel. Rather go to bed supper-
less than rise in debt. Always do onto others
as you would wish to be done by, is the first
fundamental law of natural justice.
Recipes for Making Money with Small Capital,
If you desire to commence business, select,
one of these recipes, one you think would be
most saleable in your locality, and manufacture
it in small quantities. As your sales increase,
invest more capital. Sell to families and
stores. As soon as your means will allow,
advertise it in every way possible. Whatever
you choose to manufacture, give it a name
—one that will at once attract attention and
that you think will help the sale.
AUSTIN'S PERSIAN STARCH ENAMEL.—
Melt over a slow fire five pounds refined
parrafine, and when it is all melted add two
hundred drops oil of citronelli. Place several
new round pie pans, well oiled with lard, oil,
or sweet oil, on a level table, and pour about
six tablespoonfuls of the Polish into each pan.
Let them stand until they are cool enough to
lift into a pail or basin of water; let the pan
float on the water a moment so> as to cool the
bottom, and then submerge or preSs the pan
into the water, until it is cool enough to stamp
the Polish out into cakes. This) must be done
before it gets too hard, and therefore it will
require close watching. Have a round tin
stamp made to cut cakes about the size of a
candy lozenge. Stamp them out, and let them
cool well before taking them out of the pans.
Put it up in square paper boxes (nine cakes in
each, retail at 3d. a box). Thirty cakes in oval
boxes, 1/-. The cost of 1/- boxes, filled, ready
for market, is about or 4d.; the small size
boxes about Id. They are also put up in fid.
boxes, which is a very saleable size. Direc-
tions.—To a pint of boiling starch stir in two
of the cakes or tablets, or three cakes to a
quart. This gives an elegant lustre to linen or
muslin, and imparts a splendid perfume to the
clothes, and makes the iron pass very smoothly
over the surface. It requires but half the
ordinary labour to do an ironing. It is ad-
mired by every lady. It prevents the iron
from adhering to the surface, and the clothes
remain clean and neat much longer than by
any other method known. Over six thousand
stores are selling this article in New York and
Brooklyn. For Ladies, we know of no business
so suitable and pleasant to engage in.
DR. PARKER'S GREAT CURE FOR DIAR-
RHOEA AND CRAMPS IN STOMACH. —Two
parts tincture camphor, tincture opium, tincture
African Cayenne, essence peppermint, one part
tincture rhuharb, Mix. Dose. —Half teaspoonful
for an adult, and from five to ten drops for a
child. Repeat the dose in fifteen minutes if the
patient is not relieved. Bathe the boweis w J^ a
strong vinegar. This is one of the most valuable
Secrets that this book contains. It has saved
hundreds of lives. If you manufacture this
article and sell a few bottles in any locality, its
great virtues will soon spread far and wide, and
you will have orders from families, druggists,
and others.
TO REMOVE GREASE OR STAINS FROM
CLOTHING. —Ordinary benzine is as good a
grease eradicator as is now used. Put up in
4-ounce bottles and label it "The Nation's Grease
Extractor," and sell for 1/-. Benzine generally
costs about 9d. per gallon. Dip the corks in
wax.
POMATUMS. —For making pomatums, the
lard, fat, suet, or marrow used must be care-
fully prepared by being melted with as gentle a
heat as possible, skimmed and cleared from the
dregs which are deposited on standing. Take
mutton suet, prepared as above, one pound ; lard
three pounds; carefully melted together, and
stirred constantly as it cools, two ounces oil
bergamot being added just after lifting the
pomade from the fire. Hard Pomade. —Mutton
suet and lard each one pound ; white wax, four
ounces ; oil of bergamot one ounce. Put in short,
large-mouthed bottles, and sell at 1/-.
INDELIBLE MARKING INK WITHOUT A
PREPARATION. —Dissolve separately one ounce
of nitrate of silver, and one and a half ounces of
sub-carbonate of soda (best washing soda), in
rain water. Mix the solutions,' and collect and
wash the precipitate in a filter ; while still moist
rub it up in a marble or hard wood mortar with
three drachms of tartaric acid ; add two ounces
of rain water, mix six drachms white sugar,
and ten drachms of powdered gum arabic, half
an ounce of archil, and water to make up six
6
BOOK OF SECRETS.


ounces in measure. It should be put up in short
drachm bottles, and sold at 1/-. ' This is
the best ink for marking clothes that has ever
been discovered. There is a fortune in this
recipe, as a good marking ink is very saleable.
TO MAKE AND APPLY GOLD-PLATING
SOLUTION. —Dissolve one half ounce of gold
amalgam in one ounce of nitro-muriatic acid.
Add two ounces of alcohol, and then, having
brightened the article in the usual way, apply
the solution with a soft brush. Rinse and dry
in sawdust, or with tissue paper, and polish up
with chamois skin.
LAVENDER PERFUMED WATER. Two
ounces oil garden lavender, one drachm essence
ambergris, six drachms oil bergamot. Mix with
two quarts and a pint proof spirits.
FLORIDA WATER.—HaIf-pint proof spirits,
two drachms oil lemon, half drachm oil rose :
mary—mix.
ALMOND SOAP.—Best white tallow soap, 50
pounds; essence of bitter almonds 20 ounces;
melt by the aid of a steam or water bath.
IMITATION PURE SILVER.—So perfect in
its resemblance that no chemist living can detect
it from pure virgin silver. It is all melted to-
gether in a crucible. Quarter of an ounce of
copper, two ounces of brass, three ounces of pure
silver, one ounce of bismuth, two ounces of salt-
petre, two ounces of common salt, one ounce of
arsenic, one ounce of potash. Add a little borax
to make it run easy.
WINDSOR SOAP.—This is made with lard.
In France they use lard with a portion of olive
or bleached palm oil. It is made with one part
of olive oil to nine of tallow. But a great part
of which is sold is only curd (tallow) soap, and
scented with oil of caraway and bergamot. The
brown is coloured with burnt sugar or umber.
HONEY SOAP. —White cured soap 1 % pounds,
brown Windsor soap half pound. Cut them into
thin shavings, and liquefy as directed above for
scented soap; then add four ounces of honey,
and keep it melted till most of the water is
evaporated; then remove from the fire, and
when cool enough add any essential oil. Accord-
ing to Piesse the honey soap usually sold con-
sists of fine yellow soap, perfumed with oil of
citronella.
MARTIN'S SPLENDID BLACK INK.—Boil
logwood, twenty-two pounds, in enough water
to yield fourteen gallons decoction. To a thou-
sand parts of this decoction, when cold, add one
part chromate of potash. The mixture is to be
well stirred. The proportions are to be carefully
observed, and the yellow chromate, not the
bichromate employed. This ink possesses some
great advantages, to adhere strongly to paper,
so that it can neither* be washed ofl by water,
nor even altered by weak acids, to form no de-
posit, and not to be in the least acted upon by
steel pens.
RED WRITING INK.—Best ground Brazil
wood four ounces, diluted acetic acid one pint,
alum half an ounce. Boil them slowdy in a
covered tinned copper or enamelled saucepan
for one hour, strain, and add one ounce gum.
YELLOW INK.—Gamboge triturated with
water, and a little alum added.
GREEN INK. —Rub three and a half drachms
Prussian Blue and three drachms of gamboge
with two ounces of mucilage, and add half a
pint of water.
GOLD AND SILVER INK.—Fine bronze pow-
der, or gold or silver leaf, ground with a little
sulphate of potash, and washed from the salt,
is mixed with water and a sufficient quantity
of gum.
TO DRIVE COCKROACHES FROM YOUR
DWELLINGS,—Strew pulverized hellebore' root
on the hearth, floor, or places they frequent at
night. In the morning the roaches will be found
either dead or dying, for such is their avidity
for this plant, that they never fail to eat it
when they can get it. Black pulverized helle-
bore may be had at all herb shops. Put up in
small tin boxes and retail at 1/-.
SILVER PLATING FLUID.—Take one ounce
of precipitate silver to half an ounce of cynate
of potash and a quarter of an ounce of hypo-
sulphite of soda, put all in a quart of water,
add a little whiting, and shake before using.
Apply with a soft rag. Put up in ounce bottles,
and retail at 1/-. This secret is worth £25 to
an agent to sell to families.
THE EGYPTIAN PERFUME.—In manufac-
turing this article, follow the same directions,
and use' the same ingredients as are used in
Austin's Starch Enamel published on another
page of this book, with the simple alteration of
using the oil of jassemine instead of the oil of
citronella. In perfuming, use one ounce of oil
of jassemine to every pound and a half of par-
rafine. Stamp out in cakes one inch long, half
an inch wide, and one-eighth of an inch in
thickness. Put each cake into a small sliding
box, and sell at 6d. each. It is very -saleable,
and you can make money fast by putting this
up. Tt is new and has not been introduced as
yet in many localities, and if you are first in
the field you are sure to do a large business at
it. Give it a trial.
LIQUID GLUE. —The following recipe for
"Prepared Glue," the discovery of a French
chemist, is selling about the country as a secret,
for various prices, from 4/- to £l. It Is a handy
and valuable composition, as it does not gela-
tinize, putrefy, ferment, or become offensive,
and can be used cold for all the ordinary pur-
poses of glue in making or mending furniture,
or broken vessels that are not exposed to water,
etc.:—ln a wide-mouthed bottle'dissolve eight
ounces of best glue in half-pint of water/by
setting it in a vessel of water and heating till
dissolved. Then add slowly, constantly stirring,
half an ounce of strong aquafortis (nitric acid).
Keep well corked, and it will be ready for use.
ZIGURA OIL. —One half ounce pulverized salt-
petre put in half-pint sweet oil. Cures inflam-
matory rheumatism. Bottle and label. Pays
well.
PREMIUM TOOTH POWDER.—Six ounces
prepared chalk, one-half ounce cassia powder,
one ounce orris. Mix well, put in small pots
and label.
HONG WONG STARCH POLISH. This
article has undoubtedly had a more extensive
sale through agents than any other article used
in the household. It is a meritorious one, and
will always find sale if our directions are fol-
lowed. Care must be taken to procure the ingre-
dients marked as we give it.
/
Directions and Recipe.—Procure from your
druggist an article of commerce called and
marked A 1 (not B 1), but A 1 parafline wax. It
must be the hardest wax made. If an inferior
grade is used it will not produce the same re-
sult as the best A 1 wax. Place your parafline
in a tin boiler or pan, or pail, or kettle, as is
most convenient. Melt it over a slow fire Use
care in melting. When melted thoroughly re-
move the vessel from the fire; cover it to keep
the liquid hot. Take some round tin pie pans
and oil them with sweet oil as you would for
pie baking, but do not use lard. Put these pans
on a level table, and pour in enough of the hot
wax to make a depth in each pan equal to about
the thickness of one-eighth of an inch. While
hot glance over the pans to see that they are
As this is very essential, please remember
1 « A. pans are not ievel, the cakes will be
all thicknesses, which should not be so. Let them
cool, but not too fast. Watch them closely, and
7-
BOOK OF SECRETS.


have a tin stamp ready to stamp the cakes out
about the size of an ordinary candy lozenge. This
stamp shonld be about eigbt inches long, larger
at the top than at the bottom, so that the cakes
can pass np through the stamp as you are cut-
ting them out of the pans. Lay the cakes in
another pan to cool. Before they become very
hard, separate them from each other; if not, it
will be difficult to do so when they become very
hard. Do not neglect this. Have boxes raade
at any paper boxmakers in any large city. They
cost about from to Id. sliding boxes
are the best.
CANCER.—The following is said to be a sure
cure for cancer: —A piece of sticking plaster is
put over the cancer, with a circular piece cut
out of the centre, a little larger than the can-
cer, so that the cancer and a small circular rim
of healthy skin next to it is exposed. Then a
plaster, made of chloride of zinc, blood root,
and wheat flour, is spread 011 a piece of muslin
the size of this circular opening, and applied to
the cancer for twenty-four hours. On removing
it, the cancer will be found burned into and
appear of the colour and hardness of an old
shoe sole, and the circular rim outside of it will
appear white and parboiled, as if scalded by hot
steam. The wound is now dressed, and the out-
side rim soon separates, and the cancer comes
out in a hard lump, and the place heals up. lne
plaster kills the cancer, so that it sloughs like
dead -flesh, and never grows again. The
remedy was discovered by Dr. King, of London,
and has been used by him several years with
unfailing success, and not a case has been
known of the re-appearance of the cancer when
this remedy has been applied.
SOOTHING SYRUP.—Alcohol, oil of pepper-
mint, castor oil, of each one ounce; mix, add oil of
anise, half drachm; magnesia, sixty grains; pul-
verized ginger, forty grains; water, two ounces;
white sugar to form a syrup.
ANOTHER RECIPE.—Take one pound of
honey; add two tablespoonfuls of paregoric, and
the same of oil of anise seed; add enough water
to make a thick syrup, and bottle. For children
teething, dose, teaspoonful occasionally.
BALM OF BEAUTY—Pure soft w*ater, one
quart; pulverized Castile soap, four ounces:
emulsion of bitter almonds, six ounces; rose and
orange flower water, of each, eight ounces; tinc-
ture of benzoin, two drachms; borax, one
drachm; add five grains bichloride of mercury
to every eight ounces of the mixture. To use,
apply on a cotton or linen cloth to the face, etc.
LIQUID FOR FORCING THE BEARD.—
Cologne, two ounces; liquid hartshorn, one
drachm; tincture eantharides, two drachms: oil
rosemary, twelve drops; lavender, twelve drops.
Apply to the face daily, and await results. Said
to be reliable.
BEAUTIFUL CARMINE WRITING INK.—
To make one gallon—Take an ounce of carmine
aniline. Dissolve it in one gill of hot alcohol.
Stir in a few moments. When thoroughly dis-
solved, add one gallon boiling water, and the
ink is made. This ink is usually sold in cities
at 8/- per pint bottles, 4/- for half pints, and 2/-
for gill bottles.
Caution.—As the aniline colours of commerce
vary a great deal in quality, the anionnt of dilu-
tion must vary with the sample used, and the
shade determined by trial. The above recipe
is for the very best first quality carmine ani-
line. In some localities it may not be easily
obtained. If you desire to make one gallon
from the best carmine aniline, we will get it
for you from an importer of colours in New
York. It costs us 2/- an ounce. That makes
one gallon. We will send it to you at 2/- an
ounce, by express. It cannot go by mail.
N.B.—Violet ink is also made as above, only
use "violet" aniline instead of carmine.
A FIRST RATE STOVE POLISH.—Grind
any non-combustible black pigment with a
sufficient quantity of silicate of potash, or
Liquid Glass," to make it of a proper con-
sistency for application. When the polish
becomes dry, it will be found to be smooth
and shining, wholly without odour and very
durable, while it will not soil the whitest
cambric if applied to it. The materials are
easily obtained, inexpensive, readily mixed and
applied, and the article will amply repay one
for the small amount of trouble and outlay
it involves.
AXLE GREASE, TO MAKE-Take one part
srood plumbago (black lead), sifted through a
coarse muslin so as to be perfectly free from
grit and stir it into five quarts of lard, warmed
so as to be stirred easily without melting, stir
vigorously until it is smooth and uniform.
Then raise the heat until the mixture melts,
stir constantly, remove from tire fire, and keep
stirring until cold. Apply cold to the axle
or any other bearing with a brush. If intended
for use where the axle or bearing is in a
warm apartment, asi the interior of mills, etc.,
two ounces of hard tallow or one ounce of
beeswax may be used to every ten pounds of
the mixture. This grease is cheaper in use
than oil, tallow, or tar, or any compound of
them.
TO MAKE REFINED OIL FOR WATCHES,
SEWING-MACHINES, &c. Take sweet oil
one pint, put into a bottle and then put into
the oil two ounces of thin sheet-lead, in coils.
Set the bottle where it will be exposed to the
sun for a month (shaking it up once a week);
then strain through a fine wire or cloth sieve,
and keep tightly corked.
DIAMOND CEMENT, so useful for repairing
broken china, ornaments, jewellery, nicknacks,
etc., is made as follow r s. —Take half an ounce
of gum ammoniac and a tablespoonful of
water; melt them together until they form a
milky fluid. Then take one ounce of isinglass
and six wineglassfuls of water; boil together
till the quantity is reduced one-half; then add
one wineglassful and a half of strong spirits
of wine. Boil this mixture for five minutes,
and then strain it through muslin, adding
afterwards, while hot, the ammoniacal fluid
formerly made. Finally, add half an ounce
of mastic resin dissolved in alcohol. The
cement thus made is best preserved in small
bottles, in which it sets when cold. When
required for use, it can be liquefied by placing
the bottle in a cup of boiling water.
ANOTHER EXCELLENT DIAMOND
CEMENT.—Take gum mastic one ounce, gum
ammoniacum one ounce, isinglass two ounces,
distilled vinegar eleven ounces. Mix
thoroughly.
THE NEW FRENCH CEMENT.—An excel-
lent cement may be made by dissolving one
part of amber in one and a half parts or
sulphide of carbon. This liquid should be
applied w-ith a brush to the surfaces it is
desired to unite, and, on pressing them firmly
together, the cement dries almost immediately.
USEFUL CEMENT FOR MANY PUR-
POSES.—Mix ground litharge with glycerine to
the consistency of dough. Thus prepared it
will resist the action of common acids, hydro-
carbons, and water, and a very considerable
degree of heat without decomposition. Electro-
type casts may be taken with it by stirring
the litharge into the glycerine until it is so
thick as just barely to pour. The article from
which the cast is to be taken should be thick y
coated with sweet oil, before the composition
is applied. The cast will be "sharp cut' and
well defined.
CEMENT FOR FILLING TEETH.—One part
pulverised borax, nine parts freshly calcined
oxide of zinc, two parts finely powdered snex.
Mix them well and use like amalgam or any
plastic filling.


GLYCERINE SOAP.—Take 100 parts oleine
or commerce (winter-strained lard oil will
answer), and add 314 parts of heavy glycerine.
Heat to 50 degrees, and then add 56 parts
of aqueous solution caustic potassa (specific
gravity 1.34), and stir the mixture well. This
soap exhibits the consistency of honey in
which state it remains.
SHAVING SOAP.—Six ounces white Castile
soap, sixteen ounces Cologne spirits, eight
ounces distilled water, two drachms carbonate
of potash. Scent with essences to suit the
xt SSOlve the soa P without heat, and
then add the potash and scents.
r t r™< RL -n, , CHEMICAL WASHING
RECEIPT.—'The following receipt has been sold
for some time as a great secret. It is so
excellent that we consider it worthy of a place
in this book. Take half a pound each of soap,
sal soda, and quicklime. Cut the soap into
small pieces and dissolve it in two quarts of
boiling water. Pour two quarts of boiling
water over the soda, and six of boiling water
upon the quicklime. The lime must be quick
and fresh. It it is good, it will bubble up
on pouring the water upon it. Each of the
named ingredients must be prepared in
separate vessels. The lime must settle so as
to leave the water on top perfectly clear; then
strain it carefully (without disturbing the
settlings) into the wash-boiler with the soda
and soap; let it scald long enough to dissolve
soap; then add twelve gallons of soft
water. Ihe clothes must be put in soak over
night, after rubbing soap upon the dirtiest
parts of them. After having the cleansing
preparation above given, in readiness, wring
out the clothes which have been put to soak,
put them on to boil, and let each lot boil half
an hour. The same water will answer for the
whole washing. After bailing each lot of
clothes the prescribed time, drain them from
the boiling water, put them In a tub, and pour
upon them three or four pailfuls of clear hot
water. After this they will require but verv
uttAe rubbing, but rinse them through two
waters, blueing the last. When dried, the
clothes will be a beautiful white. After wash-
ing the cleanest part of the white clothes,
tane four pailfuls of the suds in which they
have been washed, put it over the fire and
scald, and this will wash all the flannels and
coloured Clothes, without any extra soap. The
white flannels, after being well washed in the
suds, will require to be scalded in turn by
having a teakettleful of. boiling water poured
over them.
THE GRAND SECRET.—A. new saponaceous
process of cleaning clothes of every descrip-
tion. Dispenses with rubbing, pounding, and
boiling, saves half the labour and costs much
less than the ordinary process.—Take two
ounces of spirits of turpentine, and one-fourth
or an ounce of spirits of sal ammoniac, and
nux well together. Then put the mixture
into a tub of warm water, in which half a
pound of the best quality hard soap has been
dissolved. Into this the clothes are immersed
during the night, and next day rinsed, the
dirtiest clothing being freed from dirt, and fine
linens much longer preserved.
To make the spirits of sal ammoniac, dissolve
«al ammoniac in 92 per cent, alcohol.
TO MAKE HARD WHITE SOAP.—Take
pounds lard or suet; make boiling hot and
mix with it slowly, three gallons of hot ley, or
solution of potash, that will float an egg so *.s
to leave a small portion of it above the surface
ihen take out a small quantity of the mixture
and let it cool. When no grease appears, the
soa/p is done. If any grease appears, add lev,
Pi until the grease ceases to rise. Then
acid three pints of fine salt, and boil again. If
the soap does not harden well on cooling, add
more salt. If it is to be perfumed, melt it the
next day, add the perfume, and run it into
moulds or cut into cakes.
GENUINE WINDSOR SOAP.—Slice the best
white soap as thin as possible, melt it in a
saucepan over a slow fire, scent it well with
oil of carraway, and then pour it into a frame
or mould made for that purpose, or a small
drawer, adapted in size and form to suit the
quantity. When it has stood for three or four
days in a dry situation, cut it into square pieces,
and it is ready for use. By this simple mode,
substituting any more favourite scent tor that of
carraway, all persons may suit themselves with
a good perfumed soap at the most trifling ex-
pense. Shaving boxes may be at once filled
with the melted soap, instead of the mould.
LIQUID BLUING FOR CLOTHES.—Take of
soluble Prussian blue two ounces, oxalic acid
half an ounce, water one gallon. Mix.
CAMPHOR LAVENDER, for keeping moths
from woollen goods, &c. —Take of lavender
flowers, juniper berries, and gum* camphor each
one pound. Mix and grind.
BEAUTIFUL ANILINE BLUE INK.—Take
of aniline blue fifteen grains, alcohol one ounce.
Dissolve, and add water six ounces. Boil until
the odbur of the alcohol is dissipated. Then add
powdered gum arabic three drachms, dissolved
in four ounces of water; finally strain.
TO REMOVE STAINS FROM VIOLET SILK.
—lf the colour has been extracted bv acid or
fruit juices, brush the spots on the fabric with
tincture of iodine; then, after a few seconds,
saturate the place with a solution of hyposul-
phite of soda, and dry gradually, when the
colour will be perfectly restored.
AND OTHER INSECTS
x ROM DOMESTIC ANIMALS.—Mix ten parts
benzine, five parts common soap, and eighty-five
parts water. Generally one or two applications
are enough,
WATERPROOF DRESSING FOR SHOES,
vl* Common castor oil five ounces, Burgundy
pitch two drachms. Melt together, and when
nearly cold add half an ounce spirits of turpen-
tine. Apply until the leather is saturated.
T P. C^P AN GILT JEWELLERY.-Take half
a pint of boiling water, or a little less, and nut
it into a clean oil flask. To this add one ounce
of cyanide of potassium, shake the flask and
th ?* cy£ K l( L e , win di .ssolve. When the liquid is
cold, add half a fluid ounce of liquor ammonia
and one fluid ounce of rectified alcohol. Shake
the mixture together, and it will be ready for
use. Gilt articles which have become discoloured
may be rendered as bright as when new by
brushing them with the above mixture. It
must be borne in mind, however, that the cya-
nule of potassium is a deadly poison, and should
be used with caution. u
EXCELLENT HOUSEHOLD SOAP.-Wn-n
the boiling ley wiil strip a feather clean, put
!,mi W °Rnii °' ley f louuds of clean
grease. Boil it (trying whether it has enough
WI S a feather), until it becomes very
.thick., then throw in one pint of salt and five
pounds of borax to every four gallons of soap
5?,! 1 8 while longer, and set it off to cool.
\\ hen hard, cut it out in bars, scrape off the
sediment from the bottom, and put it on a shelf
l? *V aln ' ley. etc., at the bottom of the
kettle ..nswers for rough scouring, but it is
more useful 011 the garden.
LABOUR-SAVING SOAP. —Take four pounds
of sal soda, four pounds of yellow bar SOHD and
five quarts of water. Slice the soap in' tWn
pieces, and boil it for two hours. Strain and
it is ready for use. When used, put the clothes
to be washed in soak the night before washinir
and to every pail of water in which they are to
be boiled, add one pound of the soap. Thev will
require 110 rubbing. Merely rinse them out'wMl
wbiw 67 WiU bC foand perfectly "clean


MATCHLESS SOAP.—Take two gallons soft
soap, and add to it half a pint °f com:mon
salt. Boil one hour. When cold, separate tli.
ley from the crude. Add to the Matter
pounds of sal soda, and boil in four gallons soit
water until the mass is .dissolved. If a stm
better article of soap is desired, slice four
pounds of common bar soap, and dissolve in i t e
above. Should the soft soap make more than
six pounds of crude, add a proportionate qaai
tity of sal soda and water.
TO MAKE PAINT FOR HALF-PENNY A
POUND.—To one gallon of soft hot water, add
four pounds sulphate of zinc (crude),
dissolve perfectly, and a sediment will settle a.
the bottom. Turn the clear solution into
another vessel. To one gallon of paint (lead
and oil), mix one gallon ot the compound. Stl
it into the paint slowly tor ten or .hfUti
minutes, and the compound and paint wi P-
fectlv combine. If too thick, thin it with uu-
pentine This recipe has been sold to painters
as high as £2O for the privilege to use the same
in their business.
RUBBER HAND STAMPS.—Set up the de-
sired name and address in common type, o
the type and place a guard about one-half inch
high around the form; now mix plaster oLlaiis
to the proper consistence, pour in and allow it
to set. Have your vulcanized rubber all ready,
as made in long strips three inches wide am
one-eighth of an inch thick, cut oft the size ot
the intended stamp, remove the plaster cast
from the type, and place both the cast and the
rubber in a screw press, applying sufficient heat
to thoroughly soften the rubber, then turn down
the screw hard, and let it remain until the IU >-
ber receives the exact impression of the cast
and becomes cold, when it is removed, ueatly
trimmed with a sharp knife ana cemented to
the handle ready for use.
APPROVED FRICTION MATCHES.—Ab9Ut
the best known preparation for friction
matches is gum arabic, sixteen parts by
weight; phosphorus, nine parts; nitre, fourteen
parts; peroxyde of manganese, in powder, six-
teen parts. * The gum is first made into a
mucilage with water, then the manganese,
then the phosphorus, and the whole is heated
to about 130 degrees Fahr. When the phos-
phorus is melted the nitre is added, and the
whole is thoroughly stirred until the mass is
a uniform paste. The wooden matches pre-
pared first with sulphur are then dipped :n
this and afterward dried in the air. Friction
papers, for carrying in the pocket, may oe
made in the same manner, and by adding
benzoin to the mucilage they will have an
agreeable odour when ignited.
HORSE TRICKS. —HOW TO MAKE A
FOUNDERED AND SPAVINED HORSE GO
OFF LIMBER.—Take tincture cayenne, one
ounce; laudanum, two ounces; alcohol, one
pint; rub tbe shoulders well with warm water,
then rub the above on his shoulders and back-
bone* give him one ounce of laudanum and one
pint 'of gin; put it down his throat with a
pint bottle; put his feet in warm water as hot
as he can bear it; take a little spirits o* tur-
pentine, rub it on the bottom part pf his
feet with a sponge after taking them tut of
the water; drive him about half a mile or a
mile until he comes out as limber as? a rag.
If he does not surrender to his pain, tie a thin
cord around the end of his tongue.
HOW TO MAKE OLD HORSES APPEAR
YOUNG.— Take tincture of assafoetida, one
ounce; tincture cantharides, one ounce; oil
cloves, one ounce; oil cinnamon, one ounce;
antimony, two ounces; fenugreek, one ounce;
fourth proof brandy, one half gallon. Let it
stand ten days, then give ten drops in one
gallon of water.
HOW TO MAKE A TRUE-PULLING HORSE
BAULK. —-Take tincture of cantharides, one
ounce and corrosive sublimate, one drachm.
Mix and bathe the shoulders at night.
„ A . V r rn mSTINGUISH BETWEEN DIS-
TEMPER AND GLANDERS.— The discharge
from the nose, if glanders, will sink in water;
if distemper, it will not.
TO MAKE A HORSE FLESHY IN A
SJWORT TIME. — Feed with buckwheat bran, to
which add a little of the shorts; keep in a
dark stable. Half a day's drive will make a
horse fatted in this way poor.
HOW TO MAKE A HORSE STAND BY
HIS FEED AND NOT EAT IT.—Grease the
front teeth and roof of the mouth with
common tallow, and he will not eat until you
wash it out.
HOW TO MAKE A HORSE APPEAR AS IF
HE HAD THE GLANDERS.—MeIt fresh butter
and pour in his ears.
HOW TO MAKE A HORSE APPEAR AS IP
FOUNDERED.—Take a fine wire or any sub-
stitute, and fasten it around the postern joint
at night, smooth the hair down over it nicely,
and by morning he will walk as stiff as if
foundered.
DR BROWN'S CELEBRATED CHOLERA
MIXTURE.—Take half a pint of the best
French brandy, one ounce of laudanum, one
drachm each oil of peppermint and oil of
cinnamon, half a pound of sugar, or its equiva-
lent. Dissolve all together and use as
follows:— For ordinary diarrhoea, one teaspoon-
ful* for violent cramps, one tablespoonful.
This is the receipt of a very eminent physician,
who used it in his practice with great success.
CURE FOR SICK HEADACHE.—Take
alcoholic extract of nux vomica, using at the
commencement pills containing one-twelfth of
a grain, and gradually increased to one-nourth
of a grain. These pills taken for two weeks,
and then stopped for the same length of time,
materially diminish the susceptibility of % the
brain to attacks of this distressing complaint.
QUICK CURE FOR EARACHE.—Take a
small piece of cotton batting, or cotton wool;
make a depression in the centre with the
finger, and fill the indentation with as much
ground pepper as will rest on ,a threepenny
bit. Then gather it into a bail and tie it up;
dip the ball into sweet oil, and insert it into
the ear. covering the latter with cotton wool,
using a bandage to keep it in its place. Almost
instant relief will be experienced, and the
application is so gentle that an infant win
not be injured by it, but soothed at once.
CORN REMEDY.—Soak a piece of copper in
strong vinegar for twelve or twenty-four hours.
Pour the liquid off, and bottle. Apply fre-
quently, till the corn is removed.
2. Supercarbonate of soda, one ounce, finely
pulverised, and mixed with half an ounce of
lard. Apply on a linen rag every night.
HOW TO GET SLEEP.—How to get sleep
is to many persons a matter of high import-
ance. Nervous persons who are troubled with
wakefulness and excitability, usually have a
strong tendency of blood on the brain With
cold extremities. The pressure of blood on
the brain keeps it in a stimulated or waketui
state, and the pulsations in the head are often
painful. Let such rise and chafe the body ana
extremities with a brush or towel, or rub
smartly with the hands, to promote circula-
tion, and withdraw the excessive amount or
blood from the brain, and they will fall asleep
in a few moments. A cold bath, or a sponge
bath and rubbing, or a good run, or a rapiu
walk in the open air, or going up and down
stairs a few times before retiring, will aid in
equalising circulation and promoting sleep.
These rules are simple, and easy of applica-
tion in castle or cabin, and may minister to
the comfort of thousands who would freeiy
expend money for an anodyne to promo e
"Nature's sw T eet restorer, balmy sleep.


WHOOPING COUGH.—Mix a quarter of a
pound of ground elecampane root in half a
pint of strained honey and half a pint of
Z*}Z' tbe ? in a £ lazed earthen pot,
and place it m a stone oven, with half the heat
required to bake bread. Let it bake until
about the consistency of strained honey, and
take it out. Administer in dose; : i of a tea-
spoonful before each meal, to a child; if an
adult, double tne dose.
CHOLERA MORBUS.—Take two ounces of
*1 nint V n? of , t , he P |aut > Put them in half
P' t of cold water, and let them soak an
,? r i . vive two tablespoonfuls hourly, until
relief is experienced.
LOTION FOR WEAK AND SORE EYES.—
lake one quart of rose water, and add to it
two teaspoonfuls each of spirits of camphor
and laudanum. Mix, and bottle. To be shaken
and applied to the eyes when necessary. Per-
fectly harmless.
SURE CURE FOR ITCH.-Take of quicklime
ualf a pound, flowers of sulphur one pound
water five pints. Mix, boil, stir by means of
i C c Q U h n a l m *? n tak es place, and strain.
Uoe as a bath. A single application will cure.
CURE FOR WARTS.—Caustic potash two
ounces, gum arable half an ounce, flour and
water sufficient to make a stiff paste of the
whole mass.. Cut a hole in a piece of court
plaster, through which let the wart protrude.
Apply the paste just given, over the plaster,
and let it remain for a few hours.
AN EXCELLENT CURE FOR PIMPLES
lake one ounce of each, liver of sulphur, rocfae
alum and common salt. Mix, and add two
(iiachms each of powdered rock candy and
and sift them together
% \ e bole 111 a bottle , and add half,
a pint of brandy, and three ounces of white
lily water, and pure spring water. Shake it
for five or ten minutes and it will be fit for
use. Bathe the afflicted part with the liquid
freely and frequently, after which the pimples
will rapidly disappear, and the skin be left
clear and smooth. Ten or twelve days' use of
this lotion, at farthest, is generally sufficient
to eradicate the annoyance. Nothing in this
preparation can possibly prove prejudicial.
INFANT'S SYRUP.—The syrup is made thus:
one pound best box raisins, half an ounce of
anise-seed, two sticks licorice; split the raisins,
pound the anise-seed, and cut the licorice fine;
add to it three quarts of rain water, and boil
down to two quarts. Feed three or four times
a day, as much as the child will willingly
drink. The raisins are to strengthen, the anise
is to expel the wind, and the licorice as a
physic.
COUGH SYRUP.—Put one quart hoarhound
to one quart water, and boil it down to a
pint; add two or three sticks of licorice and a
tablespoonful of essence of lemon. Take a
tablespoonful of the syrup three times a day,
or as often as the cofigh may be troublesome.
The above recipe has been sold for £2O.
Several firms are making much money by its
manufacture.
RHEUMATIC DROPS.—Tincture of black
snakeroot one ounce, iodide of potassium two
drachms, syrup of ipecac one ounce, spring
water two ounces. Mix. Dose, a teaspoonful
three or four times a day.
BROWN'S BRONCHIAL TROCHES.—Take
half a pound of pulverized extract of licorice,
three-quarters of a pound of pulverized sugar,
two ounces each of pulverized cubebs and gum
arabie, and half an ounce of pulverized extract
of conium.
CRAMP REMEDY. —Ten drops of the oil of
lavender, taken in a gill of French brandy, and
repeated hourly, if necessary.
BOlLS.—These should be brought to a head
by warm poultices of camomile flowers, or
boiled white lily root, or. onion root by fer-
mentation with hot water, or by stimulating
plasters. When ripe they should be destroyed
by a needle or lancet. % But this should not
be attempted until they are fully proved.
BUNIONS.—May be checked in their early
development by binding the joint with adhesive
plaster, and keeping it on as long as any
uneasiness is felt. The bandaging should be
perfect, and it might be well to extend it
round the foot. An inflamed bunion should be
poulticed, and larger shoes be worn. lodine
twelve grains, lard or spermaceti ointment half
an ounce, makes a capital ointment for
bunions, it should be rubbed on gently twice
or three times a day.
CAUTION IN VISITING THE SICK.—Do
not visit the sick when you are fatigued, or
in a state of perspiration, or with the stomach
empty—for in su'ch conditions you are liable
to take the infection. When the disease Is very
contagious, take the side of the patient which
is near to the window. Do not enter the room
the first thing in the morning before it has
been aired; and when you come away take
some food, change your clothing immediately,
and expose the latter to the air for some days.
Tobacco smoke is a fine preventive of malaria,
BALD HEADS.—A most valuable remedy for
promoting the gro\yth of the hair is an applica-
tion once or twice a day of wild indigo and
alcohol. Take four ounces of wild indigo, and
steep it about a week or ten days in a pint of
alcohol and a pint of hot water, when it will be
ready for use. The head must be thoroughly
washed with the liquid, morning and evening,
application being made with a sponge or soft
brush. Another excellent preparation is com-
posed of three ounces of castor oil, with just
enough alcohol to cut the oil, to which add
twenty drops tincture of cantbarides, and per-
fume to suit. This not only softens and imparts
a gloss to the hair, but also invigorates and
strengthens the roots of the hair.
HOW TO RAISE A MOUSTA CHE.—Tinc-
ture of benzoin compound two drachms, tincture
of Spanish flies two drachms, castor oil six
ounces, oil bergamot one drachm, oil of ver-
beena fifteen drops, strong alcohol nine ounces.
Circulation should be stimulated first by
friction with a rough towel. Apply to the
whiskers and moustache morning and evening.
DYSENTERY.—In diseases of this kind, the
Indians use the roots and leaves of the black-
berry bush—a decoction of which in hot water,
well boiled down, is taken in doses of a gill
before each meal, and before retiring to bed.
It is an almost infallible cure.
DRIED HERBS.—AII herbs which are to be
dried should be washed, separated, and care-
fully picked over, then spread on a coarse
paper and kept in a room until perfectly dry.
Those which are intended for cooking should
be stripped from the stems and rubbed very
fine. Then put them in bottles and cork tightly
Put those which are intended for medicinal pur-
poses into paper bags, and keep in a dry place.
GREAT PAIN EXTRACTOR.-Spirits of am-
monia, one ounce; laudanum, one ounce; oil of
organum, one ounce; mutton tallow, half-pound;
combine the articles with the tallow when it is
nearly cool.
DIGESTIVE PlLLS.—Rhubarb, two ounces;
ipecacuanha, half an ounce; cavenne pepper,
quarter of an ounce: soap, half an ounce; gin-
ger, quarter of an ounce; gamboge, half an
ounce. Mix, and divide into four grain pills.
ANTI-BILIOUS PlLLS.—Compound extract
of colocynth, sixty grains; rhubarb, thirty
grains; soap, ten grains. Make into twenty-four
pills. Dose, two to four.


2. Compound extract of colocynth, two
drachms, extract of rhubarb, half a drachm;
soap, ten grains. Mix, and divide into forty
pills. Dose, one, two, or three.
3. Scammony, ten to fifteen grains; compound
extract of colocynth, two scruples; extract or
rhubarb, half a drachm; soap, ten grains; oil or
caraway, five drops. Make into twenty puis.
Dose, one or two, as required.
ARNICA LINIMENT.—Add to one pint of
sweet oil, two tablespoonfuls of tincture or
arnica; or the leaves may be heated in the on
over a slow fire. Good for wounds, stiff joints,
rheumatic, and all injuries.
AYER'S CHERRY PECTORAL—Take four
grains of acetate of morphia, two fitiid drachms
of tincture of bloodroot, seven fluid drachms
each of antimonial wine and wine of ipeca-
cuanha, and three fluid ounces of syrup of wild
cherry. Mix.
BALM GILT3AD. —Balm-gilead buds, bottled
up in new rum, are very healing to fresh cuts
or wounds. No family should be without a
bottle.
BLACKBERRY CORDIAL.—To one quart of
blackberry juice, add one pound of white sugar,
one tablespoonful of cloves, one of allspice, one
of cinnamon, and one of nutmeg. Boil all to-
gether fifteen minutes; add a wineglass or
whisky, brandy, or rum. Bottle while hot.,
cork tight and seal. This is almost a specific in
diarrhoea. One dose, which is a wineglassful
for an adult—half that quantity for a child-
will often cure diarrhoea. It can be taken three
or four times a day if the case is severe.
BRANDRETH'S PILLS.—Take two pounds of
aloes, one pound of gamboge, four ounces or
extract of colocynth, half a pound of castile
soap, two fluid draclims of oil of peppermint,
and one fluid drachm of cinnamon. Mix, and
form into pills.
FOR TETTER, RINGWORM, AND SCALD
HEAD—One pound simple cerate; sulphuric
acid, one quarter of a pound. Mix together, and
ready for use.
TINCTURE FOR WOUNDS.—Digest flowers
of St. Johnswart, one handful, in half a pint of
rectified spirits, then express the liquor and
solve in it myrrh, aloes, and dragon's blood, oi
each one drachm, with Canada balsam, half an
ounce.
AYER'S SARSAPARILLA.—Take three fluid
ounces each of alcohol, fluid extracts of sarsapa-
i ilia and of stillingia; two fluid ounces each,
extract of yellow dock aud of podophyllin, one
ounce sugar, ninety grains iodide of potassium,
ii nd ten of iodide of iron.
RADWAY'S READY RELIEF.—An ethereal
tincture of capsicum, with alcohol and camphor.
ANTI-FAT DlET.—Lean mutton and beef,
veal and lamb, soups not thickened, beef tea
and broth; poultry, game, fish, and eggs; bread
in moderation; greens, cresses, lettuce, etc.:
green peas, cabbage, cauliflower, onions; fresh
fruit without sugar.
BATHING RULES.—Avoid bathing within
two hours after a meal.
When exhausted by fatigue or from any other
cause.
When the body is cooling after perspiration.
Altogether in the open air, if, after having
been a short time in the water, it causes a
sense of chilliness and numbness of the hands
and feet.
Bathe when the body is warm, provided no
time is lost in getting.into the water.
Avoid chiiling the body by sitting or standing
undressed on the banks or in boats after having
been in the water.
Avoid remaining too long in the water, leave
the water immediately there is the slightest
feeling of chilliness.
The vigorous and strong may bathe early in
the morning on an empty stomach.
The young and those who are weak, had bet-
ter bathetwo or three hours after a meal; the
best time, two or three hours after breakfast.
Those subject to attacks of giddiness or faint;
ness and those who suffer from palpitation aim
other sense of discomfort at the heart, should
not bathe without first consulting their medical
advisor.
BAD BREATH-THE REMEDY THERE-
FOR.—Take eight drops of muriatic acid in
half a tumbler of spring water, and add a little
lemon peel or juice to suit the palate. Let this
mixture be taken three times a day, and, if
found beneficial, then use it occasionally.
BAD BREATH—To relieve.—Bad breath from
catarrah, foul stomach, or bad teeth, may
temporarily relieved by diluting a little bromo-
chloialum with eight or ten parts of water, and
using it as a gargle, swallowing a lew drops
just before going out.
CHLORIDE PA STILES FOR DISINFECT-
ING THE BREATH—Dry chloride of lime, two
drachms; sugar, eight ounces; starch, one ounce;
gum tragacanth, one drachm; carmine, two
grains. Form into small lozenges.
2. Sugar flavoured with vanilla, one ounce;
powdered tragacanth, twenty grains; liquid
chloride of soda sufficient to mix; add two
drops of any essential oil. Form a paste, and
divide into lozenges of fifteen grams each.
REMEDY FOR LOVE OF STRONG DRINKS
—Sulphate of iron, five grains; peppermint
water, eleven drachms; spirit of nutmeg, on<r
drachm. To be taken twice a day in doses ol
about a wineglassful or less, with or without
water. This recipe is not only an estimable
boon to the victim of strong drink, but pro-
perly pushed is capable of yielding a handsome
income from its manufacture. This remedy is
prepared by different persons under different
titles, and sold from 4/- to £1 per bottle.
TO WASH FLANNEL WITHOUT SHRINK-
ING. The great secret is quick drying.
Whether washed in scalding, lukewarm, or cold
"water, flannel if properly handled, the water
thoroughly squeezed out, and shaken until it
ceases to emit spray, then dried right off in
a hot sun or before a quick fire, will not shrink.
Make a lather of good castile soap; shake the
garment in this for some minutes. Rinse in
several waters. Squeeze out, shake as de-
scribed, and dry quickly. It is needful to turn
the garment inside out and to expose it all by
turns to the sun or the fire.
OLD ORCHARDS MADE NEW.—The reason
w r hy peach, apple, quince, and pear orchards
gradually grow poorer and poorer until they
cease to produce at all, is because the potash
is exhausted from the soil by the plant. This
potash must be restored, and the most effective
way to do it is to use the following compound,
discovered by a distinguished German chemist:
Thirty parts of sulphate of potash, fifteen parts
sulphate of magnesia, thirty-five parts salt,
fifteen parts gypsum (plaster of paris), five
parts chloride of magnesia. This should be
roughly powdered and mixed and then mingled
with barnyard manure, or dug in about the
roots of the tree^.
LIEBIG'S GREAT FERTILIZER.—A very
judicious and sensible combination, easy to
prepare, and cheap. It will prove serviceable
for corn, wheat, and other cereal grains, and
also for grapes. This amount will do well ap-
plied to one or two acres, and will cost not
far from £5: —Dry peat, twenty bushels; un-
leached ashes, three bushels; fine bonedust,
three bushels; calcined plaster, three bushels;


nitrate of soda, forty pounds; sulphate of
ammonia, thirty-three pounds; sulphate of soda
forty pounds. Mix numbers 1, 2, and 3
together; then mix numbers 5, 6, and 7 in five
buckets of water. When dissolved, add the
liquid to the first, second, and third articles
When mixed add fourth article.
TO TAME HORSES. lake finely grated
horse castor, oils of rhodium and cumin; keep
them in separate bottles well corked; put some
of the oil of cumin on your hand and approach
the horse on the windy side. He will then
move towards you. Then put some of the
cumin on his nose, give him a little of the
castor on anything he likes / and get eight or
ten drops of oil of rhodium on his tongue. You
can then get him to do anything you like. Be
kind and attentive to the animal and your
control is certain.
SHOEING HORSES. When driving the
nails, merely bend the points down to the
hoof, without twisting them off: then drive the
nails home and clinch them. Then twist off
the nails, and file them lightly to smooth them,
thus making a clinch and a rivet to hold the
nails.
ACCIDENTS.—Tn all recent wounds, the first
consideration is to remove foreign bodies, such
as pieces of glass, splinters of wood, pieces of
ftone, earth, or any other substance that may
have been introduced by the violence of the
act which caused the wound. Whefl? there is
much loss of blood, an attempt should be made
to stop it with dry lint, compressed above the
part wounded, if the blood be of a florid colour;
and below, if of a dark colour. In proportion
to the importance of the part wounded, will be
the degree of the discharge of blood, and the
subsequent tendency to inflammation and its
consequences.
ACCIDENTS WAYS TO PREVENT.—As
most sudden deaths come by water, particular
caution is therefore necessary in its vicinity.
Stand not near a tree, or any leaden spout,
iron gate, or palisade, in time of lightning.
Lay loaded guns in safe places, and never
Imitate firing a gun in jest.
Never sleep near charcoal; if drowsy at any
work where charcoal fires are used, take the
fresh air.
Carefully rope trees before they are cut
down, that when they fall they may do no
injury.
When benumbed with cold beware of sleep-
ing out of doors; rub yourself, if you have it
in your power, with snow, and do not hastily
approach the fire.
Beware of damp air vaults; let them remain
open some time before you enter; or scatter
powdered lime in them. Where a limited
candle will not burn, animal life cannot exist;
it will be an excellent caution, therefore,
before entering damp and confined places, to
try this simple experiment.
Never leave saddle or draught horses, while
m use, by themselves; nor go immediately
behind a led horse, as he is apt to kick.
Be wary of children, whether they are up or
in bed; and particularly when they are near
the fire, an element with which they are very
apt to amuse themselves.
Leave nothing poisonous open or accessible;
and never omit to write the word "Poison" in
large letters upon it, wherever it may be
placed.
In walking the streets keep out of the line
of cellars, and never look one way and walk
another.
Never throw pieces of orange-peel or broken
glass bottles into the streets.
Never meddle with gunpowder by candle
light.
In opening effervescing drinks, such as soda
water, hold the cork in your hand.
Quit your house with care on a frosty
morning.
%
Have your horses' shoes sharpened when
there are indications of frost.
In trimming a lamp with naphtha, never fill
it. Leave space for the spirits to expand with
warmth.
Never quit a room leaving the poker in the
fire.
BABIES. HOW TO PUT TO SLEEP.
A baby is the most nervous of beings, and the
tortures it suffers in going to sleep and being
awakened by careless sounds when "dropping
off" ase only comparable to the same experience
of an olaer person during the acute nervous
headache. Young babies ought to pass the first
months of their lives in the country, for its
stillness no less than its fresh air. But where
silence is not to be commanded, baby may
be soothed by folding a soft napkin, wet in
warm water, lightly over the top of its head,
its eyes, its ears. It is the best way to put
nervous babies to sleep. It has often been
tried for a child so irritable that paregoric and
soothing syrup only made it wide awake. A
fine towel should be wet and laid over its head,
the ends twisted into a sort of skull cap; baby
will sometimes fight against being blindfolded
in this way, but within a few minutes it will
send him off into deep and blissful slumber.
The compress cools the little feverish brain,
deadens the sound in his ears, and shuts out
everything that attracts his attention, so that
sleep catches him unawares. Teething babies
find this very comfortable, for their heads are
always hot, and there is a fevered beating in
the arteries each side.
BABY FOOD.— Put one teacupful of oatmeal
in two quarts of boiling water, slightly salted.
Let it cook two hours and a half, then strain.
When cpol, to one gill of gruel add one gill of
thin cream and one tea spoonful of sugar. To
this then add one pint of boiling water, and it
is ready lor use. This can be digested w T hen
milk and all else fails.
HUNTING AND TRAPPING.—Strong smell-
ing substances are the best baits, other things
being equal; and if the smell of the kind of
animal to be caught can be given to the bait in
any way, it will be sure to lure the animal to
the trap. If a fox skin be dragged along the
ground in the direction of the trap, every fox
striking the trail will follow it up. So it is
with other animals. Beaver bait is made thus:
The castor or barkstone, which is found in the
male beaver, is pressed from the bladder-like
bag which contains it into a vial with a wide
mouth. Five or six of these stones are taken,
and a powdered nutmeg, a dozen or more cloves,
a teaspoonful of ground cinnamon, all mixed
with alcohol or whisky until it is about as thick
as good syrup; cork the bottle and keep three or
four days. In using this it should be employed
for attracting the beaver toward the trap, but
not be put into it, for the beaver has a habit
when he smells the baikstone of another
beaver of covering it with leaves and twigs and
then voiding his own barkstone or scent upon
it. Doing this, he would be more likely to
coyer the trap than to be caught. What the
object of this is, is of course unknown; but it is
similar to the voiding of urine by dogs foxes
and wolves in spots already used by another
animal for the same purpose.
But the beavers will take any fresh root or
sapling for bait. The muskrat will take car-
rots, potatoes, apples, or any similar food. Ail
ol the weasel tribe—the mink, sable, fisher,
skunk, ordinary weasel, etc.—will take fish
fresh or salt. When using the latter, it should
be toasted, so as to emit more smell. Old
hunters to get a good "fish smell," cut up anv
fresh fish, put the pieces into a bottle, and let
it be in as warm a place as convenient for seve-
ral days. As it decays the fish fill rises, and


this Oil they put on any bait they happen to
have. All of the weasel tribe, as well as foxes
and wolves, are fond of any kind of fowl. 1
heads and legs and any other parts of both
wild and domestic fowl are the best o, ha.t.
Even feathers scattered around a trap make
the thing more attractive and real. A little
musk mixed with assafoetida, or mixed like the
barkstone, or even a muskrat skin fixed so as
to drag along the ground toward a f/np. w >
make most of this tribe, as well as the fishei
follow it up to the trap. A strong piece of
codfish will do the same. Some old bunteis
just keep one of these trail-bags tied by a stu. „
to their belt and let it drag as they go fiom
trap to trap. This multiplies their chances of
having something in them next morning. An-
other secret of old hunters is to take the pa • •
peculiar to the sex of the female wolf, fox, 01
dog, and preserve it in alcohol or whisky fo
use. A small piece of this is used m drawing
either fox or wolf to traps, and proves jU
sistible to the male, and no matter from which
species it is taken, it proves alike attractive
to either fox or wolf. It is not used as a ban,
that is, as food, but as the trail or drag is to
bring the animal toward the trap. Ike tiap
may be baited as usual, or this substance miiy
be suspended over the trap; in trying to
it to smell at it, the animal steps into the tiai •
Foxes, wolves, and all the weasel tribe wii.
take flesh and fish of any kind with this
exception; foxes, wolves (and dogs) will not eat
their own kind; weasels of every kind wnl.
Toasted cheese forms a strong allurement foi a
fox. The bear will go anywhere for honey, and
it is usual to smear this over a piece ot pork
or beef, or even upon an ear of corn, 01 just
to smear it on the tree or stump near wheie
the trap is set. The skunk considers mice a
daintv, and racoons will travel fai tor ti
fish (broiled), salt or fresh; but an ear of corn
is not disdained by him. Squirrels take Indian
corn, nuts, &c. Woodchucks will take roots,
corn and bread. Wild cats take flesh or fish
of any kind. In the north-west they are also
taken with the barkstone bait previously de-
scribed. In arranging traps for small biids
hemp seed will be found more attractive than
any other. Buckwheat is perhaps more attrac-
tive for quails than any other gram.
CONFECTIONERY —As to materials. Of
course the larger the quantity of sugar, &c.,
bought at one time, the cheaper the needed
articles can be got. But the best way is to get
the things required from some respectable
house, paying a fair price. This, ensures your
receiving just the quality of gram and colour
that you desire. For it is not only essential
that your candy should be generally well made,
but you should have it the same in taste and
appearance at all times.
Use wax paper about every kind of candy that
i« at all apt to stick to anything it touches; it
is much more suitable than the oiled or buttered
papers formerly in use. It can be bought
cheaper than it can be made.
In all our directions for making candy, it will
be seen by the quantity of the different ingre-
dients for each kind, that we are supposing tnat
the maker is manufacturing for sale; but when
a lesser quantity is to be made for home use.
it w r ill be necessary only to use, say, one-halt
or one-quarter of the quantity of each article
enumerated.
BUTTER SCOTCH.—Two pounds of bright
New Orleans sugar, two pints of water; dissolve
andboil. If it is done properly it will be mode-
ratelv crisp when dropped into water. Then
should be added two tablespoonfuls of butter,
and sufficient lemon juice, oil of lemon, or othei
flavouring extract to suit the taste.
MOIJASSES CANDY. —Boil molasses over a
mnderateiv hot fire, and stir it constantly.
when it is supposed to be done, which may be
known when $ becomes bard if dropped into
cold water then add a little vinegar to make t
brittle, and such flavouring ingredient as may
ho nreferred. Pour off into buttered tin pans.
If the candy is to contain nuts of any kind,
tbey should be placed in the pan before pour-
ing the candy.
ANOTHER WAY. —Mix one pound of sugar
with two quarts molasses, boil in preserve
kettle over moderate Are, for four hours.
When' done, it will cease boiling Stir fre-
quently After it has boiled two hours and a
haff st r in juice of two lemons. When quite
done butter a square tin, and pour the mix-
ture upon it. To pul! it, begin as soon as it
can be handled; take bold with the tips of the
fingers, until it grows cool. Make it in sticks,
TWIST CANDY.—BoiI six pounds of common
sugar and one quart of water over a slow tire
for half an hour without skimming. When
boiled enough take it off; then, with clean
hands rubbed with butter, take that which is
partially cooled and pull it the same as
molasses candy, until it is bright; then twist
or braid it and cut into convenient lengths.
WEST INDIA TOFF.—Take two quarts of
West India molasses, one pound of brown
sugar, the juice of two large lemons, or a tea-
spoonful of strong essence of lemon Mix
together the molasses and sugar, and boil the
mixture in a preserving kettle for three hours
over a slow fire. When it is thoroughly done,
it Will, of itself, cease boiling. If not boiled
enough it will never congeal, and must be
boiled over again. While boiling, stir the mass
frequently, and take care that it does not
burn. After it has boiled about two hours and
a half, stir in the lemon juice. If the lemon is
put in too soon, all the taste will be boiled
out. When the candy is done, pour it into
square tin pans, previously rubbed with fresh
butter or the best olive oil.
CHOCOLATE CREAM CANDY.—Chocolate,
finely scraped, half an ounce; thick cream, one
pint; refined sugar, three ounces; heat it. to
near boiling, then take from fire and mill it
well; when it is cold, add whites of four eggs;
whisk rapidly, and take up froth on a sieve.
Should be served on glasses with froth on top.
COCOANUT CANDY.—Take the white meat
of cocoanuts, grate coarse until you have half
a pound; dissolve half a pound of refined sugar
in two tablespoonfuls of water; put it over the
fire, and as soon as it boils stir the cocoanut
in. Stir till it is boiled to a flake, pour it on a
buttered pan or marble slab, then cut 111 forms
to suit when it is nearly cold. Lemon flavour.
LEMON CARAMELS.—Grate the yellow rind
of a lemon with a lump of sugar; add a few
drops of lemon juice with water enough to
dissolve the sugar; stir all the ingredients in
the boiled syrup a short time before taking
from the fire.
CHEWING GUM.—Prepared balsam of tulu,
two ounces; refined sugar, one ounce; oatmeal,
three ounces. Soak the gum in water, then
mix all the ingredients; roll in powdered suga*
to make the sticks.
LEMON CANDY. —Six pounds of "B" sugar;
add to it three pints of water, and put tne
mixture over a slow fire for half an hour,
clarify with a little dissolved gum arable.
Skim off the impurities as rapidly as they rise
to the surface of the boiling sugar. When it
becomes perfectly clear, try it by taking a
spoonful and dropping it into cold water,
where, if done, it will become immediately
hard, clear, and, when broken, will snap ike
glass. Flavour with oil of lemon, and pour on:
thinly, and cut into sticks. Horehound, pepper-
mint, rose, and other flavoured candies may_oe
made in the same way as the lemon, using tin
essence of rose, peppermint, finely PQwrnnf* 1
horehound, &c., instead of lemon for flavour-
ing.


PEPPERMINT LOZENGES. Three and a
half pounds of best powdered white sugar, half
a pound of pure starch, and enough oil of
peppermint to flavour. Mix into a stiff paste
with mucilage and cut into such shapes and
sizes as may be desired.
DYSPEPSIA LOZENGES.— Prepared chalk,
four ounces; prepared crabs' eyes, two ounces;
bole ammoniac, one ounce. Mix into a paste
with dissolved gum arabic. Use by permitting
them to dissolve slowly in the mouth, when
they will afford sensible relief in heartburn,
sour stomach, dyspepsia, &c.
LICORICE LOZENGES OR DROPS.-Pure
concentrated extract of licorice, four pounds;
powdered white sugar, eight pounds. Mix with
mucilage made w T ith rose water, and form the
mass, when of the proper consistency, Into
lozenges or balls.
CANDIED POPPED CORN. Boil good
molasses for twenty-five or thirty minutes; dip
the corn into it, and press together in balls
or cakes.
FIG OR RAISIN CANDY.—Take three pounds
of sugar and 3 pints of water, which put over
a slow fire. ' When done, add a very little
vinegar and a lump of butter, and pour into
pans where split figs or seeded raisins have
been laid.
ANOTHER KIND OF BUTTER SCOTCH.—
Refinery syrup, one pint; white sugar, half
pound, and butter the like quantity. When
boiled to the crack, stir well, and run in
buttered pans, then roll out even.
Scotch and taffey cannot be too thin.
PEANUT CANDY.—Take freshly-roasted pea-
nuts, carefully cleaned of their thin husks, by
throwing them about in a sieve. Put them
Into a pan, and pour over them enough of either
sugar or molasses, boiled as in the everton
taffy recipe. After stirring well, pour into
pans about an inch and a quarter deep. Before
it is entirely cool, cut into the required strips
with a large knife or candy cutter. Requires
no flavouring.
WALNUT CANDY.—Take out the kernels of
black walnuts, clear them of their skins, and
treat them exactly as directed for peanut
candy.
POP CORN BALLS.—Four quarts of popped
corn will need two-thirds of a pint of molasses.
The latter should boil for twelve minutes; put
the corn into a pan, then pour the boiling
molasses over it. Mix well. Roll into balls to
suit.
LEMON DROPS.—Grate the outer rind of a
lemon; mix the gratings with refined sugar; add
five grains of tartaric acid to each pound of
sugar; use saffron to colour; proceed as in fore-
going.
CHOCOLATE DROPS.—Take five pints of
chocolate to each pound of refined sugar; after
pulverizing, mix it into a paste, as before
directed; take great care not to boil too long,
or it \iill granulate.
ICE CREAM AND ITS FLAVOURS.—Con-
fectioners, generally, add ice cream saloons to
their stores. The additional expense is small;
the relative profit quite large. Apart from the
direct sales, it leads indirectly to the purchase
of large quanities of confectionery by ice cream
customers.
Following we give some of the most popular
recipes for well-liked ices:—
Ice Cream—No. 1.
10 quarts pure cream,
Sy 2 pounds choicest refined sugar,
y 2 gill extract of vanilla.
Stir the mixture thoroughly, then pour it into
a can, much larger than the mixture; the can
must be packed hard in ice. Let it freeze—over
half an hour.
Ice Cream—No. 2.
6 pints of cream,
6 pints fresh milk,
y 2 pound of sugar,
2 eggs. N
Having given the eggs a good beating, renew
the beating in can, and stir. Flavour, and
freeze.
To either of these recipes add a half-pint of
any kind of fruit .juice liked to each quart of
the mixture. No additional flavour.
Coffee flavour is given by mixing half a pint
of very strong fluid coffee to a quart of cream;
for chocolate, five ounces scraped, worked
smooth in milk, to each quart of mixture. No
other flavour.


AfV
5»
*>>*** -v
*N<
-5^
7
sc^y
%C*%
S-^,
? Vki
.A
LV
1 »
*. x
Hi
rt^
x
'//IL|/HSA^
Chained to
•§•
!1-Hea
Electine New Life Little Liver Granules positively cure Liver Compiaints.
Kidney Beans positively cure Kidney Diseases.
Blood Tonic and Nerve Pills build up a Run-down System.
Cold and Headache Tablets will cure a cold in one day,
and instant relief for Headache.
99
99
»»
?»
M
99
99
THAT the merit of our four famous New Life Electine Vegetable
Pills may be favorably and well known to all, we will send free
and postage paid, one of our Genuine Fountain Pens to the
purchaser of a single i/- box of either —
Electine New Life Kidney Beans.
Liver Granules.
Cold and Headache Tablets.
Blood Tonic and Nerve Pills.
9 9
9 9
9 9
9 9
9 9
9 9
We have confidence in the merit of our preparations, and we
publish the Formulas of all our Remedies on the label of each box.
Show our Pills to any Doctor or Chemist, and ask his professional
opinion as to the merit of our Formulas.
To ELECTINE MEDICINE CO., 10 Street, Sydney.
Please send me one box of your.
{here state what Pills you want)
also a Genuine Fountain Pen, Free, and Carriage Paid, for which
find enclosed a Postal Note for 1 /-.
Sign Name and Full Address plainly.
Only N.S.W. Id. Stamps will be accepted.


Magical Mysteries
GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS.
The first rule to he borne in mind is: Do not
tell the audience beforehand what you propose
to do. By a little thought you will see the vir-
tue of this maxim. To begin with, there isn't
anything superhuman about modern magic, and
as the intelligent portion of your spectators
know this, they will be unceasingly on the look-
out for the modus operandi , and if they do not
know what to expect, they are less likely to
discover the means by which you accomplish a
mysterious result.
Another maxim, which is only an addendum
to the above, is to avoid performing at the
same exhibition a certain trick twice. It may
be easily noticed that if a feat has already been
performed, and you propose to do it again the
same way, the observers, knowing what result
you intended to accomplish, are very likely to
"put two and two together" and discover at
least a portion of your secret.
The artistic effect as well as the surprise, are
not half as great upon repetition.
The "patter" or talk which accompanies the
performance of a trick should be carefully re-
hearsed until it flows from the lips without
hardly a thought on the part of the conjurer.
In order to aid the amateur, various speeches
are given in following chapters, accompanying
a few of the leading tricks. Professionals
generally construct their own speeches, pre-
ferring not to imitate others in this respect.
Many tricks can be performed with sirpple
objects, such as coins, cards, or handkerchiefs,
which are manouvred in a deceptive way by the
dexterity of the operator. Other tricks require
considerable apparatus. The outfit of a pro-
minent magician usually costs from £2 to
£5,000. Wealthy amateurs, specially in England,
sometimes procure paraphernalia costing several
hundred pounds. While this volume is not
written in the interest of any manufacturers of
magical supplies, it is nevertheless true, that
only in rare instances can a novice make ap-
paratus for himself. Even if he succeeds, the
expense will be greater than he could have pur-
chased the same thing for had he gone to a
regular dealer in such goods. However, great
care should be exercised in selecting the dealer,
as there are numerous alleged magic supply
firms w 7 ho ar nothing more nor less than im-
postors. The first article that comes under our
consideration is
THE MYSTIC WAND.
The wand is usually made of wood, and is
twelve to fifteen inches in length. It should be
made as light as possible, and although the
colour is subject to the fancy of the owner, it is
usually black. Some of the greatest of modern
wonder workers have recently adopted an all
nickel-plated outfit, and the wand is included.
There are glass wands sometimes used, but 1
do not recommend them, because even the best
of performers occasionally drops his emblem of
mystic power, and under such circumstances a
glass wand doesn't stand much of a chance of
remaining intact. There are various mechanical
wands used for certain tricks which are de-
scribed later.
A person having but a slight insight of the
secrets of conjuring might suppose that the
wand is a mere affectation, and so It is, in
some instances, yet it is a necessary adjunct
to a magical performance. I have known a pro-
fessional conjurer (who shall be nameless) who
would no more think of going on the stage with-
out his wand than he would without his coat The
wand affords a plausible pretext for various move-
ments which might otherwise be regarded with
suspicion. For example, if you wish to hold a
coin in your hand fo** some time, it will not be
noticed if you grasp the wand in the same
hand. The use of the wand should be culti-
vated by all means. In going to a table to
take up or lay down the wand, an opportunity
comes whereby one article can be substituted
for another when your back is turned. If you
were not using this mystic stick, there might be
no excuse for turning your back to the audience,
and your substitutions would be clumsy or sus-
picious. We next refer to
THE MAGICIAN'S CLOTHES.
Ail professional magicians wear, upon the
stage, clothes which are made for that purpose.
The usual style of dress suit is employed, the
only alteration being in the pockets. Instead of
the small coat tail pockets, there are two large
pockets, one on each side, with openings across
the tops. These openings should be made at
such a height that when the arm falls naturally
any article which the hand holds may be easily
dropped in one of the "profondes," so called.
Another set of pockets, known as "pochettes"
is made in the pantaloons at the thighs. These
apertures are large enough to contain a pack of
cards, handkerchief, or wooden egg, and are in
such a position that they are concealed by the
tails of the coat. Deolta and Kellar have re-
cently produced tricks wherein it has been
found necessary to use small "pochettes" on
the sleeves, just at the crease made by the in-
side of the elbow. These are used only for
small silk handkerchiefs or a flag. It will also
be found desirable to have a band of elastic,
about an inch vnde, stitched around the lower
edge of the vest inside. This will hold a small
article such as a handkerchief, and is first rate
for effecting substitutions. Any tailor can make
these arrangements in a dress suit.
__i
!
MAGIC TABLES.
Almost every good trick requires the use of
a "Wizard's Table" made especially for the pur-
pose. I will not refer here to the elaboratelv-
construeted furniture of traps and pistons but


to a simple table which will serve most pur-
poses. I describe the idea; the expense depends
upon ; the taste of the performer. The top or
the principal table should be about two by two
and a half feet, actual depth about seven inches,
legs of any style. The top of the table should
be covered by a cloth, and around the edge
should be a line of plush or other material
about eight inches deep, with a fringe. Instead
of a drawer on the back, there should be a
shelf, such as outlined here:
This shelf is known as the "servante," and is
the wherewithal of the whole affair. If side
tables are employed, they may be built smaller,
with single legs and a small shelf at the back,
the tops being perhaps more shallow than on
the centre table.
The height of the tables should depend upon
that of the performer. They should be made sd
that when he stands behind one and drops his
arm naturally* his hand can pick up, say, an
egg from the shelf without its being necessary
for him to stoop.
While the "servante" usually used is merely
a wooden shelf covered with cloth, there, are
variations. Sometimes they are made of wire,
at other times cioth cups are used, the choice
of these depending much upon the repertoire of
the conjuier. Another application of the "ser-
vante" is to the back of a chair, where it is
frequently used with satisfaction in such feats
as the production of articles from a hat.
SIMPLE TRICKS WITH CARDS.
The magic of cards is the most popular, and
usually most interesting. Playing cards are
commonly known; in themselves are innocent,
but in the hands of a conjuror or card sharper
they seem to become "possessed of the devil.
Many of the feats require considerable skill,
and in some instances specially-prepared ap-
paratus. I will devote this chapter to such as
can be performed without much practice and
under almost any circumstances where a pack
of ordinary cards can be produced. It is very
essential that the reader study the instructions
very carefully. Do not undertake to* produce
even the simplest illusion until you Irave first
practised enough to fully understand it.
UNITED BY A SINGLE CUT.
Take the four kings (or four other cards), and
display them fan-wise, concealing at the same
time two court cards behind the second card
in your hand. The audience being satisfied
that the cards are the four kings and none
other, fold them together and place them on
top of the pack. Ask the audience to notice
that you place the cards in different parts of
the pack.
Take the top card, which being a king, you
mav display without apparent intention, and
place it at the bottom. Take the next card,
which should be one of those which was con-
cealed, the spectators supposing that to be a
king place it in the middle of the pack and
the next in a like manner in a different place in
the pack. Take the fourth card, which being
actually a king, you may show and place back
ou top of the pack. You have now one king at
the bottom and three at the top, while the
•nidience suppose them to have been distributed
through the pack, and of course surprised when
the cards are cut to find the four kings together.
It is advisable to use knaves or queens for
the extra cards as they are less easily dis-
tinguished, should one of your audience catch
chance glimpse at their faces.
TO DISCOVER THE VALUE OF CERTAIN
CARDS ON THE TABLE.
Use a piquet pack of thirty-two cards in per-
forming this trick. Invite one of your audience
to select privately any four cards, and to place
them face dowmward on the table, separately.
Then, counting an ace as eleven, a court card
as ten, and any other card according to the
number of spots, to place upon each of these
four a sufficient number of cards to make the
added value of each amount to fifteen. (It must
be remembered that value is applied only to the
first four cards—those placed upon them count-
ing only as one without regard to their spots.)
Meanwhile, you can retire, and when the four
packets are complete, return to the table and
observe how many cards are left over, not
being required to complete the four packs. To
this number mentally add thirty-two, the total
will give you the value of the four lowest cards
calculated as above.
You should not let your audience perceive
that you count the remaining cards, as it will
give them an idea that the trick depends on
some mathematical calculation.
You may call attention to the fact that you
do not look at the remaining cards, and in so
doing throw them on the table carelessly. They
will fall sufficiently scattered for you to count
them unobserved.
i
CARDS CHANGE PLACES AT COMMAND.
Exhibit fan-wise in one hand the four kings
and in the other hand the four eights. Hold
the four eights in such a manner that the lower
centre spot on the foremost card is concealed
by the fingers.
The same spot on the other cards being con-
cealed by card before it, so the four cards ap-
pear to the audience equally alike —sevens.
Place the pack face down on the table, calling
attention to the fact that you hold in one hand
the four kings, and in the other the four sevens
(really the eights). Place the supposed sevens
on top of the pack and the kings on top of the
supposed sevens. The real sevens being on top
of the kings are now on top of the pack.
Deal off the four top cards carefuly, face
down, on the table, calling attention to the
fact that you are dealing off the four kings, ami
ask one of the audience to place his hand on
the cards, holding them firmly so that they can-
not be seen. Repeat this with the next four
cards, which are really the kings.
Ask the persons under whose hands they are
if they are sure the cards are still there, and
on this assurance to that effect command the
cards to change, wffiicli they will be found to
have done.
TO NAME SUCCESSIVELY ALL CARDS IN
PACK.
To perform this trick it is necessary to have
a whist pack (52 cards), the cards of which
have been arranged according to a certain
order previously. There are several forms used,
and the following one is simple and easily com-
mitted to memory:—
"Eight kings threatened to save
Ninety-five ladies for one sick knave.
These words suggest, as you will easily see,
eight, king, three, ten, two, seven, nine, fire,
queen, four, one, six, knave. You must also
have determined the suits which should be red
and black alternately, say hearts, spades, dia-
monds, clubs. For your own convenience, sort
the pack into the four suits, then arrange the
cards as follows: Lay on the table, face up
wards, the eight of hearts, on this place the
king of spades, on this the three of diamonds,
then ten of clubs, then two of diamonds, and
so on until the whole pack is exhausted.
The cards must be arranged in this way
beforehand, and you must make this the first


of a series of tricks, or, what is a better way,
as it gives less idea of pre-arrangement, have
two packs of the same pattern, and at a favour-
able opportunity exchange the pack which you
have been using for the prepared pack.
Spread the cards and allow one to be drawn,
at the same time glance quickly at the next
card above the one that has been drawn, which
we will suppose to be the five of hearts. You
will remember that five is followed by ladies
(queen); you will then know that the card
drawn was the queen. You also know that
clubs follow hearts, therefore the card drawn
was the queen of clubs. Name it, and request
that it be replaced.
Ask some one to cut the cards and again re-
peat the trick, but this time pass all the cards
that were above the card drawn to the bottom
of the pack. This is equivalent to cutting the
pack at that particular card, and you can then
name the cards that follow, taking them one by
one and showing that they are named corectly.
TO TELL WHETHER THE NUMBER IS
ODD OR EVEN WHEN CARDS ARE OUT.
This is another trick that is performed by
the prepared pack of cards just described.
Notice whether the card at the bottom of the
pack is red or black. Place the pack on the
table and ask someone to cut the cards, ex-
plaining that you will tell by the weight of
them whether the number is odd or even.
Take the cut, that is the cards taken from the
top of the pack, balance them carefully in your
hand, notice the bottom card.
If it is the same colour as the bottom or
lowest card in the other portion of the pack
the number is even. If it is the opposite
colour, the number is odd. This trick, though
a good one, is comparatively little known even
among professionals.
TO MAKE A CARD VANISH FROM THE
PACK AND BE FOUND IN A PERSON'S
POCKET.
Slightly moisten the back of your left hand.
Offer the pack to be shuffled. Place it face
downward on the table, and request one of the
company to look at the top card. Request him
to place the back of his left hand upon the
cards, and press heavily upon it with his right.
In order that he may the better comprehend
your meaning, place your own hands as de-
scribed and request him to imitate you. When
you remove your left hand, the back being
moistened, the card will stick to it. Put your
hands carelessly behind you, and with your
right hand remove the card. All will crowd
round to see the trick.
Pretend to be very particular that the
person who places his hand on the card shall
do so in precisely the right position. This will
not only give you time, but will draw all eyes
to his hands. Meanwhile watch your oppor-
tunity and slip the card into the tail pocket of
one of the other spectators. Now say that you
are about to command the top card, which all
have seen and which is being held so tightly,
to fly from the pack to the pocket of Mr. A.,
makng the choice with apparent carelessness.
On investigation it will be found that your
order has been fulfilled. When practicable, it
is effective to slip the card into the pocket of
the person holding the pack.
SIMULATION OF MIND READING.
The following described trick is so simple
that it seems ridiculous to suppose any intelli-
gent person could be deceived thereby, yet by
it even some of the most scientific spectators
have been puzzled, for instead of being above
their comprehension, it is below it.
Before commencing to operate, have placed
at the back of the room a mirror, in such a
position that, by standing in front of the
spectators, you can see your face therein. This
is all the preparation necessary. The audience,
of course, must not know that the mirror is
there for your especial use.
When you are ready to perform the feat,
take a pack of cards and say to the spectators:
"Now I propose to perform a feat which you
may perhaps consider more wonderful than that
of the greatest of mind readers. I w T ill take these
cards (here produce a pack of ordinary cards)
and allow you to examine them. You will
observe that there is no deception about them,
being simply an ordinary pack of playing cards.
With these cards I propose to show you how
it is possible to see the faces of them, even
though I do not see the faces. This is a
paradox, but only one of the few that I pro-
pose to propound this evening. I. will allow the
cards to be thoroughly shuffled. I will next
(after taking the pack) place these cards upon
my forehead, facing yourselves. The first card
is," &c., &c.
In order to read the cards, you, of course,
merely glance into the mirror. Notwithstand-
ing the secret is so simple, considerable tact
should be used. For instance, instead of staring
directly at the looking-glass (which is liable to
lead to discovery of your method), you should
roll your eyes in an absent-minded manner, to
convey to all the idea that you are waiting for
an impression upon your mind. In the course
of the meandering of your gaze "take in" the
reflection on the mirror, then continue to gaze
for a moment or so before stating what the
name of the card is.
To complete the effect, it is desirable to make
mistakes occasionally, saying the card has six
spots instead of four, or something of that
sort. It is not best to be too correct at all
times, especially in a "fake trick." When you
have studied the principles of magic more
thoroughly, you will have learned that it is
advisable to cause the audience to think that
you employ some entirely different process than
that which you are really using.
SIMPLE CARD TRICKS FOR PARLOURS.
The card sleights which are here described
are more especially adapted for use in the
parlour, or in the presence of a small party.
They are not difficult to perform, and if
ordinary shrewdness is employed in performing,
detection is no easy matter. Do not try to
show one of these mysteries, no matter how
easy it may seem, until you are sure that you
understand it.
A very surprising, and, to some, apparently
supernatural feat is that of telling beforehand
what cards will be selected from a pack by
those present, although they do not themselves
know what cards they will take. Of course,
the experienced conjurer who happens to read
this will at once remark that the trick is per-
formed by forcing. It is true that surprising
effects are attained by forcing, but the one
described below is not done that way and re-
quires but little skill.
PREVISION WITH CARDS.
To begin with, allow the pack of cards to
be thoroughly shuffled.
When the pack is returned to you adroitly
notice the value (suit and denomination) of
the bottom card, which we will suppose
happens to be the four of spades.
Now, with apparent carelessness, throw the
cards face downward on a table and scatter
them about with your fingers. However, you
must not lose sight of the bottom card, and
wherever your fingers may push it your eyes
should follow also, in order that you may know
exactly where it lies. The spectators, mean-
while are unaware of this knowledge on your
part.


Say to those present: "I will now present to
you a mystery which is apparently very simple,
yet to my mind is a profound problem. It is
one of those mental wonders that cannot be
readily understood, and the deeper we study
into them the further we seem to be from the
truth. You will therefore observe closely and
see what you see."
You continue: "I* have, as you probably
noticed, allowed Mr. to shuffle the cards
thoroughly, and they have been scattered over
this table at random. I shall allow five cards
to be selected, and I shall endeavour to name
each one before it is taken up. In order that
nobody's attention may be detracted, I shall
hold the cards taken up until the entire five
have been selected. To prevent any mistake,
let some person write the names of cards upon
a paper as they are called and see if I am
correct."
You will then remark: "I will now call for
cards, one by one, and shall ask Mr. Brown
(any person desired) to make the first selection.
Mr. Brown, you will please find for me the
four of spades, without turning the card over."
Naturally Mr. Brown smiles and says that
such a thing is impossible. You ask him, how-
ever, to simply rest his fingers upon the back
of any card his fancy may dictate. Having
touched a card, you carefully draw it away
from the table, making sure that its face
cannot be seen. Hold it in your hands, close to
your body, in an easy, unsuspicious manner,
just as if you were confident the four of spades
had been selected. Let us suppose, however,
that the card is the seven of hearts. You re-
mark: "I will next ask Mr. Jones to touch a
card in the same manner as did Mr. Brow T n,
but I predict beforehand that it will be the
seven of hearts." The card is tapped, and you
pick it up, as before. Let us suppose this
second one is the ace of diamonds. If so, you
ask Mr. Smith to touch a card, which you
expect to be the ace of diamonds. lhis, you
notice, happens to be the queen of hearts. You
then ask Mr. Robinson to touch a card, which
you intend shall be queen of hearts, and after
he does so you secretly ascertain that it is the
eight of clubs.
Up to the present moment, four cards have
been chosen. For the fifth time you are to
have a card selected "by chance." You decide,
however, to save time, that you will try your
own luck and see if you can pick out the eight
of clubs. In doing this, you allow your fingeTS
to rest, with apparent carelessness, upon the
real four of spades, the position of which you
have known all the while. Having picked up
the four of spades, you place it with the others
in your hand.
You are now able to produce the five cards
you have named beforehand, viz.: hour of
spades, seven of hearts, ace of diamonds,
cueen of hearts, and eight of clubs. Ihe eftect
upon spectators is indeed surprising.
Much depends upon the tact which you em-
ploy in executing this trick. You should first
impress it in an indirect way upon the minds
of those present, that your experiment is one
of actual prevision. It is one of the rules of
magic to lead the thoughts as well as eyes in
a wrong direction. Be careful in picking up
the cards*. Do not let some "smart aleck who
is to touch a card, get ahead of you by turning
it over and thus exposing your trick. In look-
ing at a card, after having taken it into your
hand, do so adroitly; don't stare at it. As the
success of the feat depends upon knowing the
location of one card, do not make a mistake on
that one.
REPAIRING PAIRS.
After allowing the cards to be shuffled, deal
off twenty cards, face upward, placing them
by twos Ask any of the company to notice
and remember any two cards. This being done
gather up the cards, being careful cLat no p«t-
£*"pts separated Deal them out again in four
fows of five each after this formula: Mutus
Dedit Nomen Cocis. You will observe that this
sentence has ten letters only, each one being
repeated. This will give you a tell-tale as
to the arrangement of the cards, which will
be as follows:
mutus
1 2 3 2 4
DEDIT
5 6 5 T 3
N O M E N
8 9 I^B
C O C I s
10 9 10 7 4
Dealing your cards out in this fashion, you
have only to ask in which rows two cards
appear to tell which two they are. Thus,
the person says first and .third rows you know
that it is the card appearing on M. If he says
both are in the last row, they are the cards
representing the two C's.
You may repeat this trick, naming three
cards instead of two, by pealing twenty-four
cards in threes, and using the following to give
you a clue to which ones were selected:
L I V I N I
L A N A T A
L E V E T E
N O V O T O
Making four rows of six cards.
TO TELL WHICH CARDS HAVE BEEN
TURNED AROUND IN YOUR ABSENCE.
If you examine your pack of cards carefully,
you will find a difference in the width of the
margin at the ends of the court cards. This
difference is very slight and not noticeable
unless attention is called to it. Take the four
kings, placing them face up on the table with
the narrow margin all at the top. Then allow
your audience to turn one or more of the cards
around during your absence from the room.
You can of course tell on your return which
card has been turned, by noticing the margin.
While this trick is very simple and can be per-
formed without special practice, there is little
or no danger of discovery.
TO NAME A CARD CHOSEN.
This trick is done with the aid of an acknow-
ledged confederate. Allow one of the audience
to shuffle the cards, then deal sixteen of them
in four rows on the table. They may be face
up or not, as you choose. Then agree
with your assistant that the numbers one, two,
three, four, shall be represented by animal,
vegetable, mineral, verb. Leave the room
while a card is being chosen, your assistant
remaining.
On your return your confederate shows you
a passage in any book which the audience may
name. The sentence selected must have two
words, of which the first shall tell the row
and the second the number of the card in that
row. Supposing the quotation to be "a
pendulum 'twixt smile and tear." Pendulum
in this case would be the tell-tale for mineral
and smile for the verb. Thus you would know
that the card chosen was the first card in the
fourth row; or for another example, "earths
noblest thing, woman perfected." Earth repre-
senting the mineral, woman the animal, show-
ing the card to be the first in the third row.
Or, again, supposing the sentence to be ram
would I climb, yet fear to fall." In this case
both words are verbs, showing the card to oe
the fourth one in the fourth row. lhis experi-
ment can be repeated a number of times
without fear of detection, and m J s t lJ ;y
the audience, as the sentences may he of a y
length and chosen from any book.


A. CARD CHOSEN BY ONE PERSON AP-
PEARS AT NUMBER NAMED BY
ANOTHER.
Allow the cards to be freely cut and shuffled,
then offer the pack to one of the audience, ask
him to look them over and remember one,
noting its number, counting from the bottom
of the pack. Call attention to the fact that
you have asked no questions, stating that you
already know the card. Ask someone to give
a number at which they wish it to appear, so
that you may cause it to change to that place.
Request them to arrange between themselves
to have the number higher than its original
position. Supposing the number chosen to be
eighteen, remark carelessly that it is not even
necessary for you to see the cards. Placing them
under the table or where they will not be
visible, deal off eighteen cards from the bottom
of the pack; if the number called amounts to
more than half the number of cards in the pack,
count the difference in the numbers from the
top of the pack; that is, if the number called is
twenty-seven in a piquet pack of thirty two
cards, count five cards from the top and put
them at the bottom. This is equal to putting
the twenty-seven from the bottom on top.
You can then continue by saying that as the
card has already changed places, you may ask
what its original number was. Supposing the
original number to have been five, deal the
cards off the top of the pack, commencing to
count from the number named, that is five, six,
seven and so on until eighteen is reached, which
should be the card called for. Ask the first per-
son to tell what the card was before showing it
in order to avoid appearance of confederacy.
TO NAME FOUR CARDS WHICH HAVE
BEEN SELECTED.
Have some one shuffle the cards thoroughly,
then take the four top cards from the pack,
asking one of the audience to note one of them
and return them to you. Hold these four faces
down in your left hand and take the next four
cards from the pack. Pass these to some one
else who, after noticing one, will return them to
yoa. Repeat this twice more, then take the
sixteen cards and deal them into four packs.
Ask the person selecting the first card which
pack his card is in. This will be the top one
of the pack named, the second will be second
in the pack named, and the tnird and fourth
the same in their respective packs.
SCIENTIFIC MANIPULATIONS WITH
CARDS.
If you wish to become recognized as an ex-
pert at card conjuring, it will be necessary to
learn various scientific movements, the most
important of which is known as sauter la coupe,
or the "pass.' 1 This means to cut the cards,
but in a secret manner. There are various
methods of making the pass, both single and
double-handed. The latter are the easiest to
execute, although uot simple to the comprehen-
sion of the learner at first. I will in this
volume describe the most practical pass known.
It is executed with both hands.
The cards which can most conveniently be
used in sleight of hand practice are known as
"squeezers." They are of a thin, pliable, spring-
like stock. If too stiff when new, they should
be handled some before being used in an exhi-
bition. French-made cards are always the most
satisfactory to the performer, because they are
smaller than the American. It is advisable,
however, to acquire an ability to handle cards
of any size or quality.
TO PALM A CARD.
It is essential that a magical performer be
able to palm one or more cards successfully.
The art of palming is not as difficult as may at
first appear. Lay a card upon the palm of your
hand. Bend your fingers slightly so that the
card will be covered also. Turn your hand over,
and it will remain where you have placed it.
To retain several cards or a full pack in this
manner is not so easy, but is possible after
practice.
An important feature is to hold the hand as
naturally as possible without its having a sus-
piciously stiff or cramped appearance. This
seemingly unavoidable effect can be disguised
by holding your wand or some other object in
the same hand, which gives you an opportunity
of doubling your fingers. Care should be taken
to flatten the card or cards again when replac-
ing on the pack afterwards.
TWO-HANDED PASS.
Hold In your left hand the pack of cards;
notice that the cards are divided by the inser-
tion of the small finger.
Next cover the pack with your other hand in
such a manner that you can grip the upper and
lower ends of the undermost division; you are
now ready to make the manipulation.
Tighten the fingers (but not the thumb) of your
left hand so that the upper division of the pack
is firmly held between them. Carefully move
the upper portion away from its position, at
the same time using the, fingers of your right
hand to tilt the lower division upwards. This
will enable you to readily place the upper sec-
tion undermost.
The pass has then been made. To learn to
execute this movement successfully and in-
visibly will require considerable practice. No
learner can hope to acquire it without much
study. I should judge that a practice of two
hours a day for a month would result in fair
proficiency. The writer required daily rehearsal
for nearly a year before he could make the pass
so that it would be absolutely invisible even
to an adept. As the pass is the very non sinegus
of card magic it will be well, if possible, to
receive instruction from a competent teacher of
legerdemain.
TO FORCE A CARD.
To compel a person to select from the pack
any card which you may want him to, seems
rather a bold proposition to the uninitiated, vet
to do this is possible. I venture to say that
the average skilled magician can, under ordi-
nary conditions, force nine cards out of every
ten attempts. By following the directions faith-
fully you can, after practice, do as well as any
other performer.
Let us suppose you waut to force the card
which is on the bottom of the pack, for
instance, the ace of spades. First make the
pass which will bring this card to the middle
of the pack. When the pass is made, place
your little finger again between the upper and
lower divisions so that the ace of spades will
rest upon the back of the finger. Now spread
the cards fan-wise, but.still "know" the card
in question by the little finger. You can now
hold the cards before a spectator and request
him to select a card. Run the cards over quite
slowly until the spectator is about to pick one
out, then move them in such a manner that
the particular card appears prominently before
him just as he is reaching to take one. He
will naturally select the card which you intend
he shall. Of course, some practice Is necessary
before you can do this well, but from the start
you will be well pleased with your success in
forcing.
After you have had some experience you will
be able to ascertain at a glance who are the
best persons to allow to select in order to force
successfully.


-o
Ir-
rf
<r
o <=?=>
!»i ?
£desai
< \/? \\ /v v
» v&^?E
•iw \ *
Y
w/wvs
/jX
Me»,
-v
1
*)
• o-Wr,
iV./:v s «,\ y,/f
*>
)<.*
N>>
;jjk
\1
IS
3/
8
MA
V
rv»- £
W
%
&
ft
y
vyhfc
WHY WORK FOR A FORTUNE
WHEN YOU CAN WIN IT?
The great men and the wealthy men ol all ages
have used their brains. You can never get rich on a
salary of 8/- per day, but you can become wealthy
and happy by using the brain power with which you
have been endowed.
Learn to Think. Don't wear out your
muscle and bone slaving for someone who earns a
living by the use of his brain ; use your brain and be
independent. We have an opportunity whereby you
can share in the distribution of £3,000 in cash anu
merchandise without costing you a penny oi your
own money. But this is not all : you can
and furnish your house with many beautiiul things.
Can you use your brains? If you can, money and
merchandise may be yours for the asking. <*e want
a name for ou/new preparation (an Asthma cure)
which we intend putting on the market siortly.
Can you suggest one? You can readily understate
we can easily afford to give £5OO for a good name for
our preparation, as all the people who answer t us
advertisement will be interested in watching dor our
new advertising matter ; they will also be continual y
asking their friends if they have seen the Electme
Medicine Co.'s Asthma Cure yet. Now you can see
that for the sum of 00 we have created a name tor
our new preparation, besides having it thorough y
advertised before it is even on the market. There is
just one simple condition. Duriug the past few
years our friends have shared in the distribution of
over /12,000 in prizes; the coming year the puises
are greater than ever. When you send us the name
you suggest for our new preparation (the Asthma
cure), we require you, in order to be a contestant
for the to agree to try to sell five boxes of
our preparations at IJ~ each, that is
1 Box Electine Liver Granules
2 . • > Kidney Beans
~ Cold and Headache Tablets
, ff Biood Tonic and Nerve Pills
for this simple service we reward you with a lovely
Solid Gold Shell Merry Widow Ring.
These Rings are entirely new, only just arrived from
home. Now, we mean to force the sale of our Pdls, and
to make your work easy, we enclose with each box of
Pills a Coupon which you give to each purchaser. I his
Coupon entitles the person to whom you sell a single 1/- box
of Pills to a Genuine Fountain Pen, iree Now, it will only
take vou a few minutes to dispose of five boxes of oui
Pills, as the people will buy the Pills to get the Fountain
Pen. Thus you earn your Beautiful Merry Widow
and have your chance of winning the £5OO. we mean
business; if, after selling the 5/- worth of Pills, and you
then think the Merry Widow Ring is not worth very much
more than the whole amount we receive, please let us
know and we will willingly return you your money. We
also give Ladies' and Gents' Solid Suver Watcnes for
selling Pills.
your brain power against others ! Be a winner!
Be out of the ordinary ! Win a fortune and enjoy the
..... 1 I it- TTrtn
lie OUt 01 tne ordinary i v» *** ~ ,
days allotted you by your Creator! If you can suggest a
good name for our Asthma Cure, write us at once! Dont
wait until others have the prizes ! It will pay you, because
lost opportunities are seldom regained.
Continued on page 23.
U 1,
. f y
A
33
&
Vl
a
7/
'p
wz
V/
M
t
DRY
-o~
p LAT£
<■ v '
\ 1/
%
v
5^3
&
'/V
♦ m
v..
4
|


HOW OUR
MERRY WIDOW RINGS ARE MADE
t
/S
/
0
FROM A SOLID GOLD BAR
TO A JEWELLED RING.
UPON sixth floor, away from the noise and bustle, and under the most
congenial conditions for turning out perfect work, our Jewellery is made.
Large, bright and airy, these workrooms contain the most modern and
improved devices used in jewellery-making, machines that now do in a few minutes,
and in the simplest manner, work formerly of the most fatiguing kind, which
required several men to do, such as forming the gold into sheets and wire sticks,
preparatory to cutting it; machines for making tools; machines for forming the
gold into a Ring—one man can stamp several gross in a morning—and every
machine operated by a man long experienced and skilled in his work.
You see heavy bars of the finest gold, ready for melting, and, though a soft
metal, with a small percentage of pure silver and copper, it becomes almost
unbendable.
,■ . >'' V t '■' ■'" ' : ■■ •' ' ■ . ' '•
From the furnace, through the hammer, under the ponderous stamper —which
holds the required design, on to the solderer, then through the fire bath, back to
the polisher, and from one specialist to another goes each piece until the beautiful
shining finished article lies in its plush-lined case ready for the department. The
illustrations show the different stages in making a ring.
To THE ELECTINE MEDICINE CO., Ash Street, Sydney. New Gisborne, March 4th, 1909.
DEAR SlRS— This is to certify that the Gold Watch and Chain that you sent me for selling 1 the Electine Pills
is still going after three years' testing ;itis a perfect timekeeper. It is as good a Watch as what you would pay
€3O for. I was living in Ballan when I received the watch, but I now reside in New Gisborne.
I am, yours, &c- f HUGH BUCKLAND,
c/o Mrs. H. Bertram, New Gisborne, Vic.
P.S.—Write by return of post and let me know if you still give the Phonograph for selling 24 boxes of Pilla.
Cut this Coupon out, till in, and mail direct to
THE ELECTINE MEDICINE CO., 12 Ash Street, Sydney.
9s& *V-:
t-M P
I suggest.
(Jill in your suggested nameJ
as a name for your new preparation
(The Asthma Cure)
Please send me 5 Boxes of your Electine Fills and the 5 Coupons entitling the purchasers to
agreed by the Electine Medicine Co. that 1 can have one of their fully guaranteed Watches for
selli7ig the worth of their Pills.
Fill in your full Name and Address.
Name.
Address
/


OTHER MOVEMENTS.
There are numerous other movements, such
as changing a card, ruffling, springing from
hand to hand, &c., which are usually known
to professional conjurers, but are not described
here for lack of space. To those who are
desirous of becoming familiar with all the
sleights and intricacies of card magic, as well
as a large number of other magical matters
not described herein, we refer to those excellent
volumes entitled "Modern Magic," and "More
Magic," which can be obtained at 9/- each
from Henry J. Wehman, publisher, 130 and 132
Park Row, New York. Another interesting
volume, "Hoffman's Tricks with Cards," can
be secured of Mr. Wehman for 2/-. These
• volumes are of real value to all students of
the magic art, and I can highly recommend
them. Having learned the foregoing manipu-
lations, the student is now prepared to perform
some very startling tricks.
CARD TRICKS REQUIRING SKILL.
A great many surprises can be effected by
simply forcing a number of cards. Tell the
spectators that you propose to name the cards
which they may select from a pack even
though you do not know them.
Produce or borrow an ordinary pack and
allow them to be shuffled by one who is
present. Notice the bottom card, bring it to
the middle by a pass, then force it. After
having the cards shuffled again, repeat w T ith
another person, and then a third. You are
now aware which card each person holds. Re-
quest these assistants to take care that you do
not have the slightest opportunity to see what
cards they hold.
Next allow the three persons to replace their
cards, each in turn shuffling them so as to
preclude any possibility of your knowing in
what position they may be placed. You state
that you will take the cards, backs upwards,
and turn over one at a time. As you reach the
cards which were selected, you announce that
you are able to vdstinguish them by the sense OL
touch. Suiting the action to the word, you hold
the pack in your left hand, turning over one at
a time. As yod know just what the cards are,
you can readily sort out the three particular
cards in question. If this little feat is cleverly
done, it will cause a great wonderment.
The reader will naturally remark: "Suppose
I do not suceed in forcing three cards, but that
one or two of the spectators insist on taking
different cards." For all such emergencies as
this, the magician should always be prepared
to change his tactics without the slightest
delay. For instance, we will assume that No. 1
takes a card different from that which you
want to force, No. 2 takes the card you offer,
and No, 3 selects an indifferent card.
You are not baulked by any means. After
the three cards have been taken out and are
held in the hands of the three spectators, you
take the remaining cards and aliow them to
be shuffled. Ask each person to bear in mind
the name of his card. Now approach the first
person (No. 1) and, spreading the cards fan-
wise, request him to place his card in the
pack. As you hold the pack open, backs up-
wards, the fingers of your left hand should
remain under the pack in such a manner that
when the card is placed therein, you can
detect it at once with your fingers. Then close
up the pack, but at the same time manage to
slip your little finger under the card in question.
You can now make the pass, bringing the par-
ticular card to the bottom of the pack. It will
thus be an easy matter to observe what the
card is.
In the instance of the second card (although
you know its name), it will be well to tender
the cards fan-wise to No. 2 and allow the card
to be placed in the pack. It will uot be
necessary for you to make the pass in this
Instance, and you can proceed to No. 3 (whose
card you do not know), and, once more spread-
ing the cards, have him place his among them.
Make the pass and get sight of the card. You
now know the cards, and can afterwards
announce their names in the manner previously
described.
There are other methods of naming the cards
selected and replaced. For example, you can
pretend to read the cards by glancing at the
eyes of the persons who selected them, de-
claring that you can, by magical power, detect
their knowledge as you handle the cards. In
doing this you merely glance at each card as
you turn it over, and immediately turn your
eyes upon the spectators. A most excellent
version of this trick is known as
MILLER'S SWORD TRICK.
Assuming that you have allowed three cards
to be selected and that by one or the other
methods described in the foregoing explana-
tions you have become aware of the names
of the three cards.
Now produce an ordinary military sword, or
in lieu thereof, an open pocket knife. Borrow
a handkerchief.
Throw the pack of cards, face upwards, on
the floor, with apparent carelessness. If, how-
ever, you are using a knife, throw them upon
a table. Allow the sword and handkerchief to
be examined. Taking the corners of the hand-
kerchief fold it into a bandage not over two
inches wide. Request somebody to blindfold
you. To the spectators it will appear that the
blindfold is a veritable blindfold, yet it is not.
for you can see what is directly beneath your
eyes. The cards being on the floor or table,
by standing close by, you can look directly
down upon them. Of course, only yourself
knows this.
Holding the sword or knife in your hand,
you will first scatter the cards. While you are
doing this, get sight at each of the three and
bear in mind their locations. While scattering
the cards, do not be too precise, as a clue may
thus be afforded to those who are watching
you. Occasionally let your instrument snatch
the floor or table, without touching cards, to
give the impression that you are "groping in
the dark."
You are now ready to effect the climax of
the trick. Keep your eyes upon the card of
spectator No. 1. State to the audience that
you will wave your instrument over the cards,
and that when No. 1 says "stop" you will then
stop on the instant, and after lowering your
sword or knife, vertically, the tip will rest
upon the card which had been previously
selected by that person.
While your instrument is encircling the cards
(which should not have been scattered beyond
reach), the person says "stop." You wiil be
able to stop immediately, and yet the tip of
the instrument will be just over the proper
card. To be able to do this requires con-
siderable practice, as do the other portions of
the trick, yet you can so train your muscles
that when the spectator starts to pronounce
the word "stop" your sword (or knife) comes
over the card you desire it to, so that within
a fraction of a second after the word has been
spoken j r ou are ready to lower the tip upon the
card. The same process is to be repeated in
arriving at the second and third cards that were
chosen.
The sword trick, first performed Dy an
English mystifier named Miller, is one of the
best card illusions that I have ever known. The
blindfolding arrangement is, in itself, a great
deception, and has frequently been the means
of puzzling even expert card conjurors who
would otherwise have been able to discover the
modus operandi of the trick. Do not attempt to
do this in public until you have devoted enough
time to its practice to enable you to feel sure
that you will succeed. If you can do this feat
of sle ; ght of hand successfully, I am willing te


guarantee that you can learn anything in the
line of card conjuring. Another trick that is
usually well appreciated is
TO NAIL A CERTAIN CARD TO THE DOOR.
This requires both sleight of hand and the
assistance of a sharp tack, which may, before
beginning, be concealed either in your hand or
some other convenient place where it may be
readily secured when wanted.
After allowing the cards to be examined and
shuffled, allow any person to select one at ran-
dom. You now tender the pack, spread fan-
wise, and request that he insert his card. Make
the pass, thus bringing the card to the bottom.
If desired, you can make a false shuffle. In
order to do this, let the pack rest loosely in
your left hand and do the shuffling with your
right, in the same manner that cards are
usually shuffled in the hands, except that you
grip the bottom card (which is the one selected)
between the thumb and forefinger of your right
hand, and while shuffling, never allow this cer-
tain card to depart from your finger tips. In
this way, by a little practice, you apparently
mix the cards thoroughly while, as a matter of
fact, you retain the particular card at the bot-
tom of the pack when your shuffle is concluded.
Of course, the faces of the cards should be kept
towards yourself. Having done this, you now
palm off the bottom card into your right hand,
between fingers of which is the tack. By a little
pressure, push the point of the tack through
the face of the card, so that it will stick out
at the back. While you are doing this, you can
to a certain extent detract the eyes of the
audience from you by requesting them to keep
their eyes upon a certain spot on the door,
where you aver the chosen card is likely to
appear. You have laid the pack upon a table
after palming off the card, and after sundry
movements with your wand (for instance, tap
the spot where the card is to appear) you pick
up the pack.
It is now necessary to get your palmed card
on the top of the pack, and as it is palmed face
inward, you will have to exercise some dexterity
in placing it there. This can be done by care-
lessly shuffling the cards after you pick them
up, while you are talking. An opportunity is
thus afforded to get your card on top. In this
part of the trick you must hold the backs of
the cards toward yourself, to conceal the tack.
To produce the result, approach the door.
Suddenly lift * the pack, and throw it against
the door, face outward. Naturally, the top
card will become fastened to the woodwork, the
tack being driven in by the force of the other
cards. Care should be taken in throwing, so
that the particular card will strike flatly against
the door. The effect will be quite startling to
the spectators if this trick is well dope.
CARD IN A BOY'S POCKET.
Allow a card to be selected at random, then
have it replaced, make the pass and bring it to
the bottom. Make a false shuffle if you can.
Call for a boy, the younger the better.
Place the pack in one of his inside pockets
where the cards will be out of sight of all. As
you place the cards there, lift the under card
(the one selected) and bend it over so that it
will protrude above the others, yet should not
be visible. On this account a deep pocket
should be chosen, or a vest pocket which is
screened by the boy's coat. t
Take hold of one of the youth's hands and
ask him to keep it above his head until you
count three. When you have said ''three," he
is to place his hand on the pack and "remove
one as quickly as possible." Tell him that this
must be done in the fiftieth part of a second
and otherwise excite him, so that when he
reaches for the card he will take the one that
his fingers first touch, which will of course be
the card originally selected.
When the lad shows the card, he, as well as
the spectators, will be greatly surprised. This
trick ought to be well practised before you at-
tempt to execute it in public, and when you
perform it with an interesting talk and vivacity,
its effect is really wonderful.
CARD TRICKS REQUIRING APPARATUS.
There are numerous card tricks which may be
performed with specially constructed apparatus,
but nearly all such require more or less dex-
terity. You can make some of the contrivances
yourself, and buy the more expensive supplies
of a manufacturer of such articles.
THE INDEPENDENT CARD.
This is not usually shown as a trick by itself,
but as a predecessor to some other feat. Have
concealed about your person a small piece of
tin, about half an inch wide, bent like this:
Upon the two outer sides of the tin adhere a
little wax. While handling the cards it will not
be a difficult matter to get the piece of tin con-
cealed behind them, just before you are ready
to introduce the illusion. With your thumb
you can press the piece of metal against the
lower back side of the last card. You can now
take that card away from the pack, the piece
remaining attached thereto, and if the face of
the card is kept tow r ard the audience, they will
not be aware of the existence of the mechanism.
Stand the card upright upon the table, at the
same time pressing the lower side of the tin
against the surface of the table. This will en-
able the cards to stand upright without sup-
port. It will be quite an easy matter to get
the piece out of the way after you are done
with it.
TO CHANGE THE ACES.
To perform this illusion you must have a card
prepared beforehand. Carefully cut the ace of
clubs from a card and rub the back of it with
soap, sufficient to attach it to the ace of dia-
monds, which it will cover entirely. Place the
card on your table so as to have it convenient.
Ask one of the audience to draw a card—forcing
the ace of clubs. Show this to the audience.
Place it again in the pack, making the pass to
bring it to the top, then palming it. Pass the
cards to some one to be shuffled, and while this
is being done walk to your table ostensibly to
pick up your wand, but in reality to quickly
drop the real ace and palm the prepared card.
Take the pack from the person who holds it,
with your left hand, covering it quickly with
your right; in this way the prepared card comes
on top of the pack.
Apparently cut them and show the prepared
card, asking if that was the one selected.
Place the pack upon the table, still holding the
ace in your hand, face down, and tell your
audience that you intend to change the card
you hold, showing it, from the ace of clubs to
the ace of diamonds by merely touching it with
your wand.
At the same time, with the ends of your
fingers, remove the ace of clubs. Then lightly
touching it with your wand, command it to
change, which the audience will see is done
when you show it to them.


TO TELL COURT CARDS WHEN
BLINDFOLDED.
This trick requires the assistance of a con-
federate behind the scenes. You will also re-
quire a small hook attached to a long black
silk thread.
Ask one of the audience to shuffle the cards,
and while this is being done seat yourself in
a chair as near as possible to the table, which
should be near the curtain at the back of the
stage. When seating yourself atach the small
hook to your coat.
Ask the person who has the cards to bring
them to you, also to blindfold you. Request
him then to seat himself near you. Commence
by taking the cards one at a time from the top
of the pack on the table, holding them in such
a position that your confederate can see them;
feel each one carefully. When you reach a
court card your confederate will give you the
signal by pulling the thread. It is well to hold
the card slightly above your head as your
audience is less likely to be supicious and your
confederate can see them better.
FLYING CARDS.
In order to perform this trick, you must first
take two cards, say the ten of spades, covering
the back of them with black paper. You will
also require two boxes the right size to lay
the card in the bottom. These boxes must also
be lined with black paper, and so made that
the cover is of the same size and not dis-
tinguishable from the box itself.
Shuffle your cards and ask one of your
audience to select one, forcing the ten of
spades in your pack. After having forced your
card, have it returned to the pack, which you
place on the table.
Open your boxes and show the audience that
they are (apparently) empty, in reality showing
them the backs of the cards lying in the bottom
of the boxes.
Return them to the table, and in doing so
turn them so that your cards will be face out.
Place the pack of cards between the boxes and
ask the audience to watch, as you intend to
pass the card from the pack into the box
nearest you.
Passing your wand over them at the same
time, you now open the box, showing the face
of the card. Close the box and turn it again
so as to bring the back of the card uppermost,
and with your wand pass it into the other
box, opening the first box to prove that it is
empty, and showing the card in the second
box.
Close the box again, turning it. Tell your
audience you will cause the card to return
to the pack. Show them again that both boxes
are empty. Pass the pack to the party who
first selected the card, allowing him to satisfy
himself and your audience that the card is
really in its original place.
THE WALKING CARD.
Procure a very long hair or fine strong black
silk thread and attach a small piece of wax to
one end. Allow one of your audience to select
a card and return it to the pack. Make a
pass, bringing the card to the top of the pack.
Shuffle the cards, being careful to keep the one
selected on top.
Put them on the table, at the same time
pressing the wax on to the top one firmly.
Step back from the table a few steps, holding
the other end of the thread carefully. Com-
mand the card selected to leave the pack, at
the same time making a quick natural move-
ment with the hand. The card will fiy from
the pack and fall to the floor. Pick it up, at
the same time detaching the wax; show your
audience that it is the s#ine card as selected.
"LA HOULETTE" -RISING CARDS.
In performing this trick you will require two
packs of cards, one of which must be prepared
beforehand.
Select three cards.
A knot is made in a silk thread which is
fastened into a notch in the sixth card from
the top of the pack. This thread is arranged
to go under the cards selected and over the
top of the alternating ones, the top card of the
pack being the first card selected.
Take your pack, asking the audience to
examine the cards. Have three cards drawn.
These three you must of course force, as it is
necessary they should be duplicates of the
three previously arranged. When the cards
have been drawn and replaced in the pack
return to the stage, lay them on the table,
asking the audience to notice an ordinary glass
goblet in which you will place the cards, at
the same time placing in it the prepared pack
to which the thread is attached. The other
end of the thread should be drawn through a
small hole in your table and carried behind
the scenes, where your assistant can, by pulling
lightly at the word of command, cause each
card in turn to arise.
Having placed the cards in the goblet you
can ask the person selecting the first card to
name it, and on the name being given you can
command it to arise, which it will do. Each
being called in turn until the three selected
have appeared, when you can take the goblet
and cards and allow the audience to satisfy
themselves again that there is no concealed
mechanism.
Another mode of doing this trick is to have
only one card selected, and on its being re-
turned make the pass to bring it to the top of
the pack. Holding the cards face to the
audience, you can with your first two fingers
cause this card to rise when called by the
person who selected it.
SIMPLE TRICKS WITH COINS.
Illusions with coins, like those with cards,
when well done, before small audiences, are
always pleasing. There are only a few sleight
of hand feats in which pieces of money are
used, that can be very effective in large halls
on account of the fact that such objects, being
small, are not easily seen, and at a distance of
twenty feet it is frequently difficult to dis-
tinguish the difference between a halfpenny
and a penny. There are various methods
of making ''passes," palming, etc., a few of
which I will first describe.
TO PALM A COIN.
Open your hand and place in the palm thereof
a shilling piece. Now slightly close the
hand, which will push the coin into the proper
position, so that by slightly compress'ng the
muscles you can hold it quite tightly, and if
you turn your hand over it will not fall out.
This is the usual method of palming. It should
be practised so that you can swing your arm
carelessly or pick up other objects, such as your
wand or an orange, without dropping the coin.
When studying sleight of hand I used to carry
a coin palmed in my hand for hours at a time,
while attending to other matters. You should
practise with coins of various sizes; the smaller
the piece the less easily you can palm it unless
your hand hapens to be a small one. Another
thing to be acquired is the knack of palming
quickly.
You should learn to catch a coin on the fly,
yet have it immediately rest in the proper posi-
tion. Do not imagine that it is necessary to
keep your hand flat; this is a mistake frequently
made by amateurs. The hand should letain its
natural position at all times. Another method,


not exactly "palming," Is to bold a coin be-
tween two fingers. This way is sometimes use-
ful. Sometimes the coin is held between the
thumb and forefinger, where a tight pressure
Is possible if necessary. This latter method is
desirable for secretly holding two or three coins.
If it is desired to hold a number of pieces,
say twerty sixpenny pieces, they should be tied
by a thread then held in the palm of the hand,
but in such case a tight and even pressure is
needed to prevent an accident.
k
"LE TOURNIQUET''—THE PASS.
A very simple yet perplexing (to spectators)
pass is performed as follows:
Hold the left hand, palm upwards, with the
coin resting bv the edge, horizontally between
the thumb and second finger.
Next move the right hand toward the left,
passing the thumb to the right, under and the
fingers over the coin, closing them just as they
pass it. At the same time let the coin drop
into the palm of the left hand. It will appear
to the spectators as if your right hand had
grasped the coin. You should then carry the
right hand (closed) upwards, at the same time
letting the left arm to drop naturally. Follow
your right hand with your eyes. If you execute
this pass well, the audience will firmly believe
that you are holding the coin in your right
hand, when, as you of course know, it is in your
left. If you wish, you can, at a moment of in-
adventure on the part of the audience, drop the
coin from your hand into your ''pochette," thus
enabling you to say: "I will now open my right
hand and it is gone," and if anybody challenges
you to open your left hand, you can do that
also, showing that the money has disappeared
entirely.
THE RING OF MONEY.
This is a parlour trick, requires no skill, and
is quite surprising to those who do not know
how it is done. Here is the modus operandi—
Take a quantity of coins and place them in a
circle as shown in the illustration, leaking a
"tail." Ask some person to think of a number
and to count up that number, beginning with
the end of the tail and counting around the
circle. Then from the coin on which he stops
he is to count back, but this time ignoring the
tail and following the circle.
O
o o
o o
o o
o o
o o
o
o
o
o
To a can leave the room while he does the
counting, and can correctly tell where he finally
stopped, no matter what number he thought of.
The secret is: The final stopping place is de-
termined by your first secretly counting the
number of pieces in the tail, then secretly count-
ing up from the head of the tail, to the right,
the same number as there are pieces in the
appendage. For instance, with the circle and
tail here shown, no matter w T hat number is
selected, the stopping point will alwmys be the
fourth to the right from the top of the tail.
The trick should not be repeated more than
once or twice, and each time you should alter
the number of coins in circle and tail, so that
the stopping point will be changed. Lay some
coins on a table, try this yourself, and you will
see how easily it is done.
TO STICK A HALFPENNY TO THE WALL.
This is a very simple trick, but one that will
cause considerable amusement. Take two com-
mon halfpennies and nick the edges of one of
them with a knife, when by pressing it hard
against the wall it will remain there. Take
your two halfpennies in one hand, with only
one visible, perform the trick, then ask some
one else to do it, giving them of course the
other halfpenny. The writer has had lots of
amusement watching the ineffectual attempts,
by w r etting and otherwise, to make a perfect
halfpenny stick to the wall.
TO CHANGE ONE COIN INTO ANOTHER.
You may perform with an old shilling a trick
which, if well executed, is very amusing. You
exhibit the shilling in the hand; then only just
shut and open the hand, and it changes itself
into a halfpenny. You only need to shut and open
the hand a second time to change it back into a
shilling; the third time it disappears altogether,
and the fourth it reappears again. These four
tricks, altogether, should occupy less than half
a minute.
To do this you must have a shilling (which
is precisely the same size as a halfpenny),
filed down and flattened to half its thickness.
The halfpenny must be treated in the same
way; and they are then soldered together, so as
to appear but one piece, which is either of cop-
per or silver, according to which side is upper-
most. You begin by exhibiting the piece on the
ends of the fingers.
Closing the hand you naturally reverse the
coin, and it reappears as a halfpenny about the
middle of the hand.
If you then allow it to glide gently towards
the ends of the fingers, it is clear that you
only need to shut and open the hand a second
time to make it reappear as a shilling.
Then make the coin disappear by palming,
and it is very easy to make it appear again.
If you are not an adept at palming, this part
of the trick can be omitted.
TO TELL WHEN BLINDFOLDED WHICH
SIDE OF A COIN FALLS.
Borrow a half-crown from someone in the
audience, and on returning to the stage ex-
change it when not noticeable for one which
you have previously prepared by having cut
in the edge a small notch. This notch should
be very minute and cut in such a way that a
very small point will project from that side of
the coin.
When the coin is spun on a table, which
should be without cloth, if it falls with the
notched side up it will run down gradually.
If it falls with the notched side down the
slight projection caused by the notch will inter-
fere with the continued spinning and the coin
will drop without the slowly decreasing rolls.
The difference in the sound is not sufficient
to be noticeable by the audience, but is readily
distinguished by the operator, after a little
practice.
TO PASS MARKED COINS INTO TWO
ORANGES IN SUCCESSION.
Prepare beforehand by making a slit an inch
and a half deep and of sufficient size to admit
a half-crow T n in tw T o oranges. In one of these
place 2 half-crown, which we wull call number
1 to distinguish it from the other. Leave these
behind the scenes until wanted.
Palm in either hand another half-crown
(number 2). Borrow a third half-crown (num-
ber 3) from one of the audience, number 3
being first marked by the owner.
Call attention to the fact that throughout
the experiment the coin is not to be removed


from sight, and accordingly placing it (in
reality substituting number 2) in full sight
on the table. Having placed the half-crown
where the audience can see it, go after an
orange, making this an opportunity to place
the marked coin in the second orange. Bring
out this orange openly and place on the table
at your right hand. The other orange should
have been placed in the right hand secret
pocket, when it can he palmed at a moment's
notice.
You then say, "I think we may as well use
two oranges instead of one, can anyone in the
audience lend me one." No one offering one,
you can step forward and take from the
pocket of some gentleman near you the secoqd
orange, which contains the half-crown (num-
ber 1). Place this orange on the left-hand
table; standing behind the table ask into which
orange the coin shall be passed first.
As the right of the audience is your left,
you are at liberty to interpret their reply as
you please. Thus, if the audience say, "The
left," you can say, "on my left, all right," if
the audience say the right, you can say, "on
your right, very well."
Taking coin (number 2) in your left hand
you pretend by the tourniquet to pass it to the
right hand and thence passing it to the orange.
Meanwhile drop it from the left hand to the
table.
Showing your hands empty, you cut open the
orange and show the unmarked coin.
Call the attention of the audience to the fact
that they chose the orange themselves, but to
satisfy them that it made no difference which
orange was used you will repeat the experi-
ment with the other orange.
Take the second orange containing the
marked half-crown, and run a knife through it
at the opening made to admit the half-crown.
Pass the knife with the orange to someone to
Mold, and then, standing some distance away,
take up coin number 1, and, showing it in the
left hand, pretend to take it in the right,
making one of the passes to retain it in the
left hand. Make a motion as if to throw it
from the right hand to the orange.
Ask the person holding the orange to cut
it open himself, which he does, showing the
marked coin, which w T ill of course be identified
by its owner.
Should the audience insist on the wrong
orange, you cannot easily avoid using it. In
this case pass the coin to it as previously de-
scribed, allowing some one in the audience to
cut the orange.
Have the coin fully identified, and the
audience being fully satisfied that this is the
genuine half-crown, you can repeat, using the
second orange and cutting it open yourself,
changing the coin contained therein for the
marked one before returning it to the owner
for identification.
If you are not sufficiently experienced to
palm the second orange successfully, you can
omit that, and bring both oranges out, stating
that you will use both.
TO MAKE TWO COINS CHANGE PLACES.
Borrow from the audience a shilling and a
penny piece, requesting that they first mark
the cofns, also borrow two pocket handker-
chiefs. While these articles are being col-
lected in the audience, you can, unobserved,
palm a penny piece of your own in your left
hand, receiving the borrowed coins in your
right hand.
This being done, you pretend to put both
coins into your left hand, in reality retaining
the penny piece in your right hand and passing
only the shilling to your left, where you already
hold the penny piece of your own.
Place the marked shilling and your own
penny piece on the table, calling the attention
of the audience to your not removing the coins
from sight. Take the shilling in the fingers
of your right hand, throw over it one of the
borrowed handkerchiefs and take in your left
hand apparently the shilling covered by the
handkerchief, but in reality the marked penny
piece which you had palmed in that hand.
Palm the shilling and ask someone to hold
the handkerchief and coin by taking the penny
piece covered by the handkerchief between the
lingers in such a manner that the shape of the
coin is easily distinguished through the folds
and in such a way that the audience can easily
distinguish the shape of the coin which they
suppose to be the shilling, but which is in
reality the marked penny piece.
Now take your penny and apparently wrap
it in the handkerchief iir the same manner,
in reality palming it and using the shilling.
Take your wand, and in so doing drop the
substitute penny piece on your table. Ask a
second person to hold the other handkerchief,
and request the two persons holding the hand-
kerchiefs to stand facing each other. Touch
the coins lightly with your wand and com-
mand them to "change." This they will have
done, as will be discovered on investigating.
A variation of this trick may be performed
without the aid of handkerchiefs, by having
someone hold one of the coins tightly closed
in his hand, holding the other in your own
hand, compel them to change places.
"HEADS" OR "TAILS."
To perform thig trick it is necessary to have
one prepared coin, which is made by joining
two similar halves of shilling or two shilling
pieces together, so that both sides are "tails."
Borrow from the audience four shillings
which all are satisfied are genuine shillings.
Substitute quickly the prepared coin of your
own. Pile the four coins on the table, "tails"
upward, and ask someone to turn the pile over
without disturbing their relative positions. You
now announce that they are all heads up, which
will appear to the audience a natural conclu-
sion.
Tell them the matter is not as simple as they
suppose, and pile the coins up again "tails"
up; turn them over and ask what are they
now, to which the general response will be
"all heads," but on examination it will be
found that there are three heads and one tail.
Arrange them again, placing them alternately
head and tail, and on turning them there will
he one head and three tails. Placing them head
and three tails, they will be found to be when
reversed, heads and tails alternately.
You can vary this trick indefinitely, but if
repeated too often is likely to result in dis-
covery. The fourth borrowed coin should be
held in the left hand when it can be substi-
tuted at once when necessary.
INTELLIGENT COIN.
To perform this trick you wiH require a coin
which has been prepared beforehand by being
a tacked to a long black silk thread. Lay the
coin on your table where it will be easily
picked up when wanted. The other end of the
thread should be carried behind the scenes,
where it can be held by your assistant when
wanted.
When ready, borrow another Similar coin
from the audience. An easy way to exchange
the coins is to lay the borrowed coin on the
table and bring forward an ordinary tumbler
for examination. On returning with the glass,
pick up the prepared coin instead of the bor-
rowed one.
Make a few passes with your hands, stating
that you intend to mesmerize the coin suffi-
ciently to make it answer questions. Having


-SSsMer^
mesmerized it sufficiently, drop it into the
glass, where it will immediately commence to
fly about. Care should be taken not to pull
the thread sufficiently to break it or make the
coin fly from the glass.
A hole in the table through which to pass the
thread w r ill be of great assistance, and, when
that is not practicable, a small ring attached to
the top of the table behind the glass will
answer the purpose very well.
Questions may be asked the coin, and replies
made by its rising twice for no and three times
for yes. It can also be made to tell the hour
of day, day of the month, and similar questions.
If you prefer, you can use the borrowed coin
by having the silk prepared as before and at-
taching to the end of it a small piece of wax.
If care is taken to press the wax firmly against
the coin it answers quite as well as the method
just described.
ILLUSIONS WITH RINGS.
We will now devote a little space to aiT ex-
planation of some interesting and attractive
sleights in which ordinary finger rings play a
part. Probably the greatest of all tricks of this
kind is the one performed by Kellar, which is
explained in detail, so that with some practice
even an amateur can become quite adept in its
presentation. A great deal of skill is necessary,
to which must be added the assistance of an
expert ''property man," and well-made ap-
paratus.
In all tricks where possible the articles to be
used should be borrowed from the audience, as
it is less likely to give an idea of previous pre-
paration. Such articles as coins, rings, hand-
kerchiefs, and hats are readily borrowed, and
can if necessary be substituted for like articles
which have been prepared beforehand.
In performing tricks with rings, it is always
best to borrow wedding rings, which are most
common, and the substitute is less easily dis-
tinguished.
THE MYSTERIOUS RING.
To perform the trick known as the flying or
vanishing ring, it is first necessary to have a
plain gold or gilt ring which may be used as
substitute when required; have attached to this
ring a fine white silk thread, which should be
attached to a piece of white elastic, four or five
inches long.
The silk thread and elastic should be, fastened
inside the coat sleeve at the top and of suffi-
cient length to let the ring hang loosely an inch
or two from the bottom, inside the cuff. It
will be easily seen that a ring fastened in this
manner is readily reached by the performer,
and will at once fly back out of sight when
released.
A ring arranged in this way may be of assist-
ance in performing several tricks with rings.
Take an ordinary piece of paper, and state to
your audience that a ring wrapped in the paper
cannot be taken from it without your consent.
Pull the substitute ring, which should be in
your left sleeve, into your fingers, dropping the
borrowed one on to the table where it cannot
be seen. Take the piece of paper before re-
ferred to and lay it on the table, placing on it
the substitute ring; fold the paper in such a
manner as to show the shape of the ring, but
before folding up the fourth side release the
ring so that it will return to your sleeve.
Having continued to fold the paper carefully,
you again assert that the ring cannot be re-
moved without your permission, and on asking
one of the audience to undo the paper and try
it. The reason why it cannot be removed will
be seen as the paper will be empty.
Having gained possession of the borrowed
ring, you can find means to convey it to your
assistant, who can arrange so that it may be
made to appear in various ways. As pretty a
way to end it as any is to have the assistant
place it in the centre of a nest of boxes, which
you bring forward when prepared, and touching
them with your wand, command the ring to
appear in the centre one, where it will be found
when } T ou or the audience investigate.


Vaudeville Jokes
What is the difference between a grocer who
uses false weights and a highwayman?
The tradesman lies in w r eight, while the
highwayman lies in wait.
I saw Romeo and Juliet in a restaurant last
night. Juliet ordered some soft-shelled crabs
and Romeo ordered a cup of tea. Now, the
question arises, does Rome-o for what Juli-et?
You know my girl? Her name is Plaster.
I go to court Plaster every night. She is a
poor girl, but there are lots of other girls as
por-ous as Plaster. I took her out riding the
other day, when the horse ran away and threw
her out and broke her leg in four places, and
her arm in three places. I got some sticking
plaster and put on her leg and arm, and then
carried her home. Next morning she wouldn't
speak to me.
Why not?
She was too stuck up.
• \ —•
How old did you say your daughter was?
Twenty-two.
Gracious, but she's young for her age.
George Washington was the bravest man In
the world. He was never licked in his life.
Oh, yes he was; he was licked on a postage
stamp.
Then they had to do it behind his back.
It has been asked, when rain falls does it
ever get, up again?
Of course it does, in dew time.
I dared to go up on Broadway to-day and a
team ran over me. Just as I was getting up,
the driver shouted; "Look out!"
I said; "Are you coming back?"
I went to church last Sunday and lost my
umbrella. I got up in the congregation and
said if I didn't get my umbrella I would come
here next Sunday and mention the party's
name that had it. Next morning when I woke
up my back yard was full of umbrellas.
If your stomach continues to trouble you
you will have to diet.
What colour do you prefer?
When you put on your stockings, why are
you sure to make a mistake?
Because you put your foot in it.
Did I ever tell you the story about the empty
box?
You did not. Tell me about it.
No use—there's nothing in it. ( j .
The President is going to have his name
stamped on eighty million toothpicks.
Yes. He wants his name in everybody's
mQjuth.
When I die I'm going to take all my gold and
silver with me.
Don't you do it.
Why?
Because it will melt where you are going.
Oh, I'm the flower of my family all right.
I wonder if that's what your brother meant
yesterday when he said you were a blooming
idiot?
The young man in love doesn't care so much
about -having a yacht at sea as having a little
smack ashore.
How do you spell mule?
M-l-e.
That isn't right; you left something out.
Yes. I left £ou out.
How are you today?
Oh, I can't kick.
Thought you were ill.
I am—l have the gout.
A little girl went to the drug store for some
pills.
"Anti-bilious?" asked the clerk.
"No, sir. It's my uncle," replied the little
girl.
That's my umbrella you have there.
Well, I got it in a pawnshop.
Yes), I soaked it away for a rainy day.
Yes, I have seen the day when Mr. Rich, the
millionaire, did not have a pair of shoes to
cover his feet.
And when was that, pray?
At the time he was bathing.
How do you like my suit?
A beautiful suit; who made it?
Carrie Nation.
Why, is she a tailor?
Yes, she made all the saloon-keepers close.
What are you crying about?
A horse ran away with my brother, threw
him out of the carriage, and he has been laid
up for six months.
Why, that's nothing. My brother had a
terrible accident, too; only his was different;
he ran away with the horse. He's laid up now
for six years.


What are you doing now?
I'm brakesman on a canal boat.
What are the duties of a brakesman on a
canal boat?
Breaking up wood for the cook.
I see they are going to have umbrellas made
square.
What for?
Because they are not safe to leave a-round.
Corbett, the prize-fighter, has sold the right
to a whisky firm to name a new brand after
him. No doubt it will be a good liquor to make
strong punches with.
And now that we are married, dear, how do
you think I will strike your mother?
Good gracious, Reuben! You're not going to
begin abusing mother right away, are you?
Did you hear about it?—my wife is married.
To whom?
Why, to me, pf course.
Why is a woman's knee and a Jew alike?
I don't know.
They are both sheerieys.
Doctor, said the friend, stopping him on the
street, what do you take for heavy cold?
A fee,' replied the doctor, softly, and he
passed on.
Mrs Peck (hearing a racket in the hay)— What
are you up to now, Henry?
Mr. Peck (feebly)—l'm not up to anything,
my dear. I just fell down stairs.
I got on a train to-day and rode as far as
Yonkers, and the conductor came around and
looked at my ticket and said: "Young man, you
are cn the wrong train." I had to get off and
walk all the way back to New York again. I
got on another train and went out thirty miles,
and the conductor came around and looked at
my ticket and said: "Young man, you are on
the wrong train." I had to get off and v r alk
back to New York again. I got on another
train, and, of course, was mad and began to
swear. A minister, sitting in a seat behind me,
said: "Young man, stop your swearing; do you
know you are on the road to hell?" I said:
"Here I am on the wrong train again," and I
had to get oft.
You would be a good dancer but for two
things.
What are they?
Your feet.
Gas Man—Hello! Tom, what are you doing
these days? m
Pork Packer—l'm in the meat business. What
are you doing?
Gas Man—l go you one degree better. I'm in
the meter business.
I went fishing to-day.
What did you catch?
I caught a good eel.
While I was fishing to-day I was standing in
water six feet deep.
Oh, come off the perch.
I see your sister is getting quite stout now.
Yes; she is working in a studio.
What has that got to do with it?
Why, she works in the developing room.
Who was George Washington's father?
Who?
Old man Washington, of course.
I'm surprised at you squandering so much
money on a phonograph.
Well, money talks, you know.
Well, well, the greed of these policemen!
What's the matter now?
Why, haven't you heard about this new Cop-
per Trust.
Do you attend the bicycle school now?
No. They're havmg a terrible falling off o*.
pupils up there.
If a man should cut off his knee, where would
he go to get another one?
Where?
To Africa.
Why?
That's where the ne-groes.
How is your wife now?
Oh, she's all right, I guess.
She's got you guessing, eh?
Witness, did you ever see the prisoner at the
*> ar ? . , i-tt
Oh, yes, that's where I got acquainted with
him.
I sat before a great artist to-day for my
picture.
What did he say?
Wanted to know what colour I wanted my
nose painted.
Benedict —I've been carrying the baby around
the floor for a week back.
Bachelor—Carrying the baby for a week back?
Pshaw! That's no remedy at all. What you
want for a weak back is a porous plaster.
I went black-berrying to-day.
You did?
Yes, I went to a coloured funeral.
What did de lady do when yer asked her for
an old collar?
She gave me a turndown.
The owner says if we don't pay our rent he
will make it hot for us.
Tell him to go ahead. That's more than the
janitor has ever done.
I went out to feed the horse this morning,
and he had his bridle on and couldn't eat
a bit.
I never play whist except for fun.
Neither do I; only somebody else generally
has the fun.
Billy, does your mother give you anything
if you take your medicine without crying?
No; but she gives me something if I don't.
What if I were one of those husbands, my
dear, who get up cross in the morning and
bang things about because the coffee is cold?
Wife: I would make it hot for you.
So you asked old Crusty for his daughter*,
eh? How did you come out?
Through the window.
SI
VAUDEVILLE JOKES,


I wish you'd pay a little attention to what
I say.
I am, my dear—as little as possible.
Emmy: I've got an invite to the Charity
Ball, but not the least idea what I am to go
in. What would you wear if you had my
complexion ?
Fanny: A thick veil.
I have got a brother that hasn't slept a night
in two months.
How is that?
He is a night watchman and sleeps day
times.
Were you moved when the old gentleman
said you could never marry his daughter?
Yes; I was moved half way across the side-
walk.
I hear you had some money left you.
Yes; it left me long ago.
What makes that fat boy talk so much?
Oh! can't you see he's got a double chin?
What is the height of your ambition, dear?
Oh, something between five and a half and
six feet.
How do you make chickens good fighters?
Feed them on scraps*.
A man thrown from a horse the other day
said, as he picked himself up, that he thought
he had improved in horsemanship, but, instead,
had fallen off.
Noah, when he lit a candle, made the first
Ark light.
What did you have at the first saloon you
stopped at? asked a lawyer of a witness in an
assault and battery case.
What did we have? Four glasses of beer, sir.
What next?
Two glasses of whisky.
Next?
One glass of brandy.
Next?
A fight.
"I'm up against it," said the wall-paper.
"Hard luck," replied the horse-shoe over the
door.
"Cut it out," cried the scissors.
"Well, I've been walked on lately, too," re-
marked the carpet.
"I'll get someone to look into this," said the
'mirror.
"Needn't," said the desk, "I haven't any kick.
Everything is all write for mine."
"Oh, shut up," shouted the window shutters.
Whereupon the gas became very angry, and,
after flaring up, got hot under the collar, and,
saying that he refused to throw any light on
the matter, went out.
So you were only seventeen when yon
married? Well, you didn't have to wait long
for a husband, did you?
Not then, but I do now. He's at the club
five nights a week.
4
There was an epidemic of measles at our
county jail last summer and all the prisoners
"broke out."
At dinner the other day there was a young
lady dining opposite me. I asked her to pass
the icecream. She did so. and 1 took one big
spoonful. I cried like a child. It was horseradish.
The young lady asked me the cause of my
grief. I told her I was thinking of old times,
and a brother who was hung in Montana. I
passed her the "cream." She took a spoonful
and wept copiously. I inquired why she was
crying, and she said: "I'm crying because you
weren't hung the same time your brother
was."
An acrobat practising a "backward spring"
had an "early fall."
Is your father still running a bunco game?
My father runs a hotel.
Well, that's the same thing he's bunking
people.
My son is an acrobat; he tumbled on a
banana peel yesterday.
What is a strait?
A rubber-neck.
No, it is a neck running out to sea.
Well, ain't that a rubber-neck?
Two dentists had a fight the other day, and
the result was a "draw." A man who was
doing some "bridge work" near by saw the
fight and had them arrested. One was dis-
charged because he had a "pull" with the
judge; the other dentist is now "filling" in
time.
I don't like the way Mr. Jones kisses you.
Don't find fault, papa; remember he's only
just begirmiug.
A man stole ten thousand dollars in New
York and settled in Canada.
, My dear, why are you saving those old fly-
papers ?
Why, you said you always have to buy file®
when you go fishing.
A church choir played a game of ball the
other day. The preacher came out to the
ground to compare "notes," but made a "short
stop," and when the "tenor" got put out on
"first bass" they went home "alto"-gether.
My husband has given up smoking.
It must have taken some will-power.
All I had.
"Its my treat to-night," said the summer
youth, as he bought the ice cream for the girls
on the piazza.
"That's all right," said the doctor. "I will
treat to-morrow."
Did you ever hear about the egg in the coffee?
No.
That settles it.
What's the difference between the mumps and
the measles ?
Why, in the mumps you shut up and in the
measles you break out.
Inventor—lf this invention doesn't work,
I'll—
Wife (alarmed)—W-hat, Frank?
Inventor—Have to!
What drove you to drink?
Thirst.


A coloured man by the name of Berry was
working for a farmer (who was somewhat of a
wag). Addressing him one morning, he said,
"Go gather in the straw. Berry, and tell the
young boys to pick the goose, Berry: the older
ones the elder. Berry; the girls the black,
Berry; and don't look so blue, Berry."
I guess your wife made a deep impression on
you."
Oh, yes, twice.
Twice?
Yes, once when we first met, and another
time she hit me on the head with the rolling
pin.
I suppose she has something saved for a
rainy day?
Oh, yes; an umbrella and a mackintosh,
Two young ladies took a long tramp through
the woods. Who brought liim back?
Hello! waiter, where is that ox tail soup?
Coming, sir—half a minute.
Confound you! How slow you are.
Fault of the soup, sir. Ox tail is always be-
hind.
Were you cool in battle?
Cool—why I shivered.
I went out to the races and bet.
How did you come out?
At the gate.
ITow old are you?
Some take me for fifteen.
Street cars take me for five.
Brown has seen many a man in a tight place.
What is lie, a pawnbroker?
No, he's a bartender.
Who is that woman you tipped your hat to
this morning?
Ah, my boy, I owe a great deal to her.
Oh, your mother?
No, my washerwoman.
Say, do you want to get next to a scheme for
making money fast?
Sure I do.
Glue it to the floor.
If I ever hit you, you will never forget it.
If I ever hit you, you will never remember it.
Why is the ankle between the foot and the
knee ?
To keep the calf from the corn.
Can't you read that sign up there? Ten dol-
lars fine for smoking.
I am noi superstitious, and don't believe in
signs.
I fell asleep in the graveyard last night.
On the dead?
What are you doing now?
I'm wording on the town clock.
If that's so you must be working overtime.
A girl goes into a store to buy garters.
What kind?
Rubber.
I'd lose my job if I did.
I hear your uncle died and left liis fortune to
an orphan asylum.
Yes.
What did he leave?
Fifteen children.
Do you know ping-pong?
Sure! He washes my shirts.
There was a German friend of mine who was
quite sick for some time. The doctor told him
he might eat anything he wanted. He told his
wife he believed he would like some Limhurger
cheese. His wife was a good-hearted woman;
she went out and got twenty pounds of this dis-
tinct cheese, and put some in every room in
the house, that he might get a nip whenever
he wanted it (you can imagine the aroma in
that house). The doctor called the next morn-
ing, and rang the bell; when the servant opened
the door, the doctor paused a moment, then
said, "When did he die?"
I guess I'll go out and get the air.
If you do I'll put words to it.


Toasts, =—
Maxims, Proverbs
HERE'S TO THE MAIDEN.
Here's to tbe maiden of bashful fifteen;
Here's to the widow of fifty;
Here's to the flaunting extravagant queen,
And here's to the housewife that's thrifty!
Let the toast pass;
Drink to the lass;
I'll warrant she'll prove an excuse for the glass.
IRISHMAN'S TOAST.
Liberty all over the world, and everywhere
else.
May every patriot love his native country,
whether he was born in it or not.
Saint Patrick was a gentleman,
Who, through strategy and stealth,
Drove all the snakes from Ireland-
Here's a bumper to his health.
But not too many bumpers,
Lest we lose ourselves, and then
Forget the good Saint Patrick,
And see the snakes again.
He was a man of twenty-pne, and he had
been three times disappointed in love. He pro-
posed the health of the ladies thus:—
This wine we quaff with eager sips,
This wine we hold so dear,
Though not so sweet as maiden's lips
Is a darned sight more sincere.
The man of experience knows better:—
O! the neatness of their neatness when they're
neat,
O! the fleetness of their fleetness when they're
fleet,
But the neatness of their neatness
And the fleetness of their fleetness
Is as nothing to the sweetness when they're
sweet.
"Go to father," she said when I asked her to
wed,
For she knew that I knew that her father w r as
dead,
And she knew that I knew what a life he had
■ led > Si ■ 1 1
So she knew that I knew what she meant
when she said,
"Go to father!"
Woman needs no eulogy; she speaks for herself.
May we never condemn that in a brother which
we would pardon in ourselves.
Clean glasses and old corks.
More men would go to church if there were
a law against it.
The Frenchman loves his native wine,
The German loves his beer.
The Englishman loves his 'alf-and-'alf,
Because it brings good cheer.
The Irishman loves his "whisky straight"
Because it gives him dizziness;
The American has no choice at all,
So he drinks the whole darned business.
There are giris whom we fool with,
And girls whom we're cool with,
And girls whom we spoon with for fun;
There are girls whom we kiss.
And there's girls whom we'd miss,
But we never can love more than one.
May we always look forward to better things,
but never be discontented with the present.
May poverty always be a day's march
behind us.
To all who steer their course by the three
lines of Masonry.
The three great generals in power general
peace, general plenty, and general satis-
faction.
Cheerfulness in our cups, content in our minds,
and competency in our pockets.
Uneasy looks the face that wears a frown.
May we never be drunk at night nor dry in
the morning.
. I • - Ji / "
May the thorns of life only serve to give zest
to its flowers.
Virtue for a guide, fortune for an attendant.
May the morning have no occasion to censure
the night spent by freemasons.
Long may every foe tremble and every friend
rejoice at the arrival of our fleet.
May the boat of pleasure always be steered
by the pilot reason.
May every worthy brother, who is willing to
work and labour through the day, be happy
at night, with his friend, his love and a
cheerful home.
The unconquered navy of America and success
to its champions.


A good horse, a warm house, a snug estate, and
a pretty wife, to everyone that deserves
them.
Refinement without dissimulation or honesty
without rudeness.
Drink to me only with thine eyes,
And I will pledge with mine;
Or leave a kiss but in the cup,
And I'll not look for wine.
May we be happy when alone and cheerful
when in company.
May the lover of harmony never be in want of
a note, and its enemies die in a common
choid.
Here's to the bachelor, so lonely and gay,
For it's not his fault he was born that way.
And here's to the spinster, so lonely and good,
For it's not her fault—she hath done what she
could.
Mav friendship be the seed of kindness, anl
passion the sun which ripens it into love.
A freehold in happy land, untaxed and
unmortgaged.
May hope be the physician when calamity is
the disease.
May we never find danger lurking on the
borders of security.
May we be roused, but not rendered desperate
by calamity.
/ May we treat our friends with kindness and
our enemies with generosity.
Here's to those who love us,
And here's to those who don't,
A smile for those who are willing to,
And a tear for those who won't.
Everything of fortune but her instability.
To the honest fellow that loves his recreation
at night and his business in the morning.
The sweets of sensibility without the bitters.
May we fly from the temptations which we
cannot resist.
May we never desire what we cannot obtain.
May virtue be our armour when wickedness is
our assailant.
The riotous enjoyment of a quiet conscience.
Here's to matrimony—the high sea for which
no compass has yet been invented.
Here's to the press, the pulpit, and
coat, the three ruling powers
The first spreads knowledge, the second
spreads morals, and the third spreads
siderably.
May our faults DG written on tne seasnore, ana
every good anchor prove a wave to wash
them out.
May we laugh in our cups and think when we
are sober.
May the desires of our hearts be virtuous, and
those desires gratified.
Dignity and swelled head are kindred vices.
May we never get into a bad cause, and never
fly from a good one.
May we always part with regret and meet
again with pleasure.
A hearty supper, and a soft bed, to the man
who fights the battles of his country.
People seldom want your advice when they ask
it; what they really desire is, that you
should agree with them upon the thing
they wish.
Riches without pride or poverty without
meanness.
May we draw upon content for the deficiencies
in fortune.
May our virtue be healthy without the physic
of calamity.
May young married men raise volunteers for
the service of their country, and old
bachelors only be pressed.
May we learn to be frugal before we are
obliged to be so.
May the feeling heart possess the fortune
which the miser abuses.
History is only a collection of crimes and
misfortunes.
Here's to you, old friend, may you live a
thousand years,
Just to sort of cheer things in this vale of
human tears;
And may I live a thousand, too—a thousand-
less a day,
'Cause I wouldn't care to be on earth and
hear you'd passed away.
May w r e live as well as we can and die as we
ought.
The honest-hearted girl who owns that she has
passions, but has the prudence to govern
them.
May we always forget, when we forgive, an
injury.
Beauty is only skin deep. But it takes some
time to get through the preliminary enamel.
Match-making is an amiable trait with a touch
of brimstone about it.
I drink to the general joy o' the whole table.


Here s to the prettiest,
Here's to the wittiest,
Here's to the truest of all who are true.
Here's to the neatest one,
Here's to the sweetest one,
Here's to them all in one—here's to you!
May we breakfast with Health, dine with
Friendship, crack a bottle with Mirth, and
sup with the goddess of Contentment.
Ask me no more —the moon may draw the sea,
The corkscrew from its lair extract the cork,
A pickle may be fished out with a fork,
But four small words are all you'll draw from
me, Ask me no more.
A wife is a woman who is expected to purchase
without means, and sew on buttons before
they come off.
Marriage is man's after-thought, but woman's
intention.
Marriage is like a beleaguered fortress; those
who are without want to get in, and those
who are in want to to get out.
Here's to all of us!
For there's sio much good in the worst of us,
And so much bad in the best of us,
That it hardly behooves any of us
To talk about the rest of us.
To the honest fellow that stands upright in the
presence of a great man.
Here's to a long life and a merry one,
A quick death, and a painless one,
A pretty girl, and a loving one,
A cold bottle, and another one!
You will never miss water while the champagne
runs dry.
A QUESTION.
Fill all the glasses there, for why
Should every creature drink but I?
Why, man of morals, tell me why?
A cup of wine that's brisk and fine,
And drink unto the leman mine;
And a merry heart lives long-a.
TILL THE WORLD GO ROUND.
Come, thou monarch of the vine,
Plumpy Bacchus with pink eyne!
In thy fats our cares be drown'd,
With thy grapes our hairs be crown'd;
Cup us, till the world go round,
Cup us, till the world go round!
THE FIVE REASONS.
If on my theme I rightly think,
There are five reasons why men drink-
Good wine, a friend, because I'm dry,
Or else I may be by and by,
Or any other reason why.
MUSICIAN'S TOAST.
May a crochet in the head never bar the utter-
ance of good notes.
BAKER'S TOAST.
May we never de done so much as to make us
crusty.
SURGEON'S TOAST.
The man that bleeds for his country.
Her Ladyship.
Actresses will happen in the best regulated
families.
Somehow a woman with short hair always
makes a man wonder how he would look in
petticoats.
*
To love is the least fault of the woman who
has abandoned herself to love.
Drink ye to her that each loves best!
And if you nurse a flame.
That's told but to her mutual breast,
We will not ask her name.
Money talks but nobody notices what kind of
grammar it uses.
It is easier to love some women than to have
to tell them why you do.
You could not get a girl with freckles to worry
about such trifles as consols.
Some are born widows, others achieve widow-
hood, whilst others have widows thrust
upon them.
Dolls are made for girls to play with, not for
men to marry.
Marry in haste and repent in the Divorce
Court.
We pass often from love to ambition, but we
seldom return from ambition to love-.
The man who thinks he loves his mistress for
her sake is much mistaken.
A man's home is his wife's castle.
What could have been the use of Eve's wear-
ing clothes when there were no other
women to be jealous of them?
Women don't dress to please the men, but to
worry other women.
A bird on a bonnet is worth five on a plate.
It was Sir Frank Lock wood who sang:— .
The fee simple and the simple fee,
And all the fees entail,
Are nothing when compared with thee,
Thou best of fees—female.
Women in love more easily forgive great indis-
cretions than small indelicacies.
Women have so much heart that they don't
need any conscience.
When a woman has nine children she begins to
have suspicions about some of the beautiful
passages in love stories.
Birds of a feather flock together—on a theatre
hat.


We had better appear to be what we are, than
affect to be what we are not.
Be the same thing ye wa'd be ca'd.
It is better to be made a fool of by women
than to be ignored by them.
There are many women who never have had
one intrigue; but there are few who have
had only one.
After fifty virtue becomes almost a habit.
It takes nine tailors to make a man and one
woman to break him.
A widow's advantage is that she can give
references.
Marriage for love is risky, but it is right.
THE WAY TO BE WISE.
If wisdom's ways you wisely seek,
Five things observe with care;
Of whom you speak, to whom you speak,
And how, and when, and where.
Ancient & Modern Maxims.
If a donkey brays at you, don't bray at him.
To have a thing is little, if you're not allowed
to show it,
And to know a thing is nothing, unless others
know you know it.
What can't be cured must be insured.
The law has no penalty for stealing a heart
because the punishment of having it left
on your hands is enough.
Don't take the will for the deed—get the deed.
Save your pennies, and your wife's dressmaker
will take care of the pounds.
The greatest possession is self-possession.
LAUGHING AND WEEPING.
Laugh and the world laughs with you;
Weep, and you weep alone;
For this sordid old earth must borrow it®
mirth,
It has troubles enough of its own.
Sing, and the hills will echo it;
Sigh, and it's lost on the air;
For they want full measure of all your
pleasure,
But nobody wants your care.
Feast, and your halls are crowded;
Fast, and they pass you by;
Succeed and give, and they let you live;
Fail, and they let you die.
Tell the truth and shame the —family.
The hand that cooks the meal is the hand that
rules the world.
Handsome is as the photographer does.
The best thing in the world is joy, but only the
sorrowful know it.
Everybody takes pleasure in returning small
obligations; many go so far as to acknow-
ledge moderate ones; but there is hardly
anyone who does not repay great obliga-
tions with ingratitude.
A bad compromise beats a good lawsuit.
In writing a patent medicine advertisement,
first convince the reader that he has the
disease he is reading about; secondly, that
it is curable.
Knowledge consists in having a secretary to
delve the information.
There's a pen for the wise, but, alas! no
pound for the foolish.
Moderation is a dread of incurring that envy
and contempt which attend upon intoxicated
prosperity; it is an ostentation of the
strength of the mind. Moderation in an
exalted station is the desire of appearing
superior to fortune.
Repentance is not so much a remorse for what
we have done, as an apprehension of conse-
quences.


Irish Yarns, Wit & Humour.
The captain of the schooner was lounging on
the dock whilst the cargo was being taken
aboard. - • i
An Irishman stepped up and asked for a 30b
before the mast. ,
"Well," said Captain Light wind, "where are
your recommendations?"
"Sure, an' I haven't anny, Cap."
"Don't want you, then. Got a German here
with fine recommendations; have to give him
the job."
Mike pleaded so hard, however, that the
captain finally agreed to take him and the
German both on a trial trip, the best man to
get a steady job.
They were well out to sea when a storm
came up suddenly whilst Mike and Dutchy
were swabbing the deck. A big wave came
along and swept the Dutchman overboard with
his bucket. Mike immediately picked up his
bucket and started after the captain.
"Well, Mike, what's the matter now? in-
quired the captain. r
"Begorrah, sur, ye know that Dutchy what
had such foine ricommindations?"
"Well, what of him?"
"Faith,, sur, an' he's gone off wid wan 0
your buckets."
A week previous to the return of the 69th
Regiment, N. G., of N. Y., from Chickamauga,
an Irishman connected with one of the promi-
nent Irish organizations went to a telephone
and called up the well-known firm of horse
dealers, Dorr & Carroll, of New York
City and the following conversation ensued:
"I am Tom Gallagher, one of the Committee
of the A. O. H., and we want you to sind up
to the headquarters of our association, on
Monday morning next, Twinty-five Milk M'hite
Horses, as we are going down to the Hoboken
ferry to receive the gallant 69th boys. One
of the firm answers back: "We have only ten
White Horses on hand at present, but we ex-
pect about three hundred Green Horses m a
day or two and possibly will be able to select
the balance from that lot." Gallagher became
excited and says: "Well, if that is the case
cancel the order for the Twinty-five White
Horses and sind us up Fifty Green Horses,. ,
"Pat " said a gentleman who is fond of using
higb-so'unding phraseology to his man-of-all-
work "I am going to town at ten o'clock, and
shall' weed out the cucumber-beds in the
Interim/' "Interim," thought Pat. "That's a
mighty quare name for a garden, anyhow.
"Is Mr. Smith at home?" asked a visitor, who
called shortly afterwards. "Yis, sorr; ye 11 find
him at work in his interim there beyant.
Three Irishmen had four guineas to be equally
divided among them. After several unsuccess-
ful efforts by two of them, the third settled
the business thus: "There are two for you
two, and here are two for me, too.
"Barney, my darlint," says the ould woman
to me when I was leaving her after lnlisting
In the 69th Regiment, "take this umbrella wid
ye as ye may need it, as I do. be reading in
the newspapers that they are raming bullets at
the front."
Droll, though not very logical or conclusive,
was the reply of the tipsy Irishman, who, as
he supported himself hy the iron railings of
Union Square, was advised by a passer-by to
take himself home.
"Ah, now, be aisy; I live in the square; isn't
It going round and round, and when 1 see my
own door come up, won't I pop into it in a
jiffy?"
As the St. Patrick's Day parade turned the
corner an electric car came clanging down the
street. The gallant captain knew that the
proper manoeuvre under the circumstances was
"open order," but not knowing the exact word
of command for the occasion he turned to
his followers and shouted in martial tones:
"Attintion, min! Here comes the car-ri!
Company, sphlitt!"
""
'Jf-% I
A poor Irishman, who was on his death-bed,
and who did not seem reconciled to the long
journey he was going to take, was kindly con-
soled by a good-natured friend with the com-
mon-place reflection that we must all die once.
"Why, my dear, now," answered the sick man,
"that is the very thing that vexes me; if I
could die half-a-dozen times, I should not
mind it." j
\
An Irishman, in telling how he met with the
accident, said: "Hinnessey belongs to the wind-
lass men's union. The walking delegate was
watching him work. Hinnessey was histin'
me out of the well in the bucket. Jist when he
got me half way up the twilve o'clock whistle
blew. Hinnessey is no scab."
In a certain church in Ireland a young priest
was detailed to preach. The occasion was his
first appearance, and he took for his text "The
Feeding of the Multitude." He said: "And
they fed ten people with ten thousand loaves
of bread and ten thousand fishes." An old
Irishman said: "That's no miracle; begorra I
could do that myself," which the priest over-
heard.
The next Sunday the priest announced the
same text, but he had it right this time. He
said: "And they fed ten thousand people on
ten loaves of bread and ten fishes." He waited
a second or two and then leaned well over
the pulpit and said: "And could you do that
Mr. Murphy?"
Mr. Murphy replied: "And sure, your rever-
ence, I could."
"And how could you do it, Mr. Murphy?"
said the priest.
"And sure, your reverence, I could do it with
what was left over from last Sunday."
General Phil Sheridan was at one time asked
at what little incident did he laugh the most.
"Well," he said, "I do not know, but I
always laugh when I think of the Irishman
and the army mule. I was riding down the
line one day when I saw an Irishman mounted
on a mule which was kicking its legs rather
freely. The mule finally got its hoof caught
in the stirrup, when, in the excitement, the
Irishman remarked, 'Well, begorra, if you're
goin' to git on I'll git off.' "


I heard that Dan and James Monahan are
rery lucky; they are all the time tumbling into
luck. James fell into a lot of property about
a week ago—"an ould cellar."
Pat Shields, a smooth-faced young man, left
home to seek his fortune. He was gone two
vears, and when he returned he had grown side
Whiskers (side burns). His mother failed to
recognize him when he came to her door. He
cried, "Mother, don't you know your son
Patrick?" She exclaimed: "Patrick!* I hardly
knew you with the two moustaches on your
Jaw."
A member of the Ancient Order of Hibernians
wooed, won, and married a lovely German
girl, and to bless their happy union came seve-
ral lovable children, who grew up and learned
to love, honour, and obey their parents. They
called their father papa and their mother
mamma. To make the long story short—in
other words, to be brief—papa died.* Delegates
from the several clubs and societies came and
escorted the remains to the grave. At the
grave the flowers were placed on the little
mound which told the sad story, when one of
the members of the Ancient Order of Hiber-
nians roared out, with a not-to-be-mentioned-
liere remark, "Look at that floral piece over
there! It has A.P.A. on it! Boys, come, can
you believe it, be me soul, that McGuinness
was a traitor and joined the A.P.A.'s?" "Why,
no," replied one of his sons, "you are mistaken;
that doesn't stand for A.P.A. It stands for
papa, only the P dropped out on the way over."
An old Irishman was engaged in the business
of chicken-raising near Princeton. One day a
travelling man expressed surprise at the use of
so much cornmeal at feeding time, and sug-
gested that the meal be mixed with sawdust,
insisting that the hens would not know the
difference. A few months later the travelling
man was again in the community, and he asked
if the new diet had been tried, and what the
result had been. "It works beautifully," was
the reply. "See that old yellow hen?" Well, I
tried her on half-and-half and she liked it so
well I changed to all sawdust, and the last
time she hatched three of the chicks had
wooden legs and the fourth was a woodpecker."
"Patrick, did you steal the widow Maloney's
pig, and, if so, what did you do with it?"
"Killed it and ate it, yer honour."
"Oh, Patrick, when you are brought face to
face with the- widow and her pig on judgment
day, what account will you be able to give of
yourself when the widow accuses you of steal-
ing?"
"Did you say the pig would be there, yer
riverence?"
"To be sure I did."
"Well, then, I'll say: 'Mrs. Maloney, there's
yer pig.'"
The cousin and myself went up to see
McManus to collect a bill. He owes me money,
and he promised to pay me in a week. As he
was closing the door me cousin heard him say
something about a pig's eye. Now, I wonder
if a pig's eye has got anything to do wid that
debt.
An Irishman sees a Chinaman coming up out
of coal hole. "Look at the heathen coming
through the earth. T Begorry, I knew if they
passed a law to keep them yellow divils out
of the country they'd get in some way."
An Irishman doing lookout duty on board
ship: "Hello, officer." Officer saysr. "What's
the matter? What do you see?" "There s
something ahead, sir, and it has red and green
bghts. I think it must be a drug store."
Ail Irishman, walking down the street, sees
in front of a hardware store the sign, "Patent
Skylights," only the word "patent" was spelled
"Pat" for brevity's sake. The Irisnman
stopped, looked at the sign, and says, "That's
the first time I ever knew of an Irishman by
the name of Pat "Skylights."
A revenue officer was sent into an illicit
whisky distilling district in Kentucky. He
knew illicit distilling was going on, but he
could get no basis to work upon. Coming to an
Irishman who was tolerably drunk, the officer
tapped him on the shoulder, and said "My man,
do you want to make ten dollars?" "Is it ten
dollars ?" said Pat. "Sure and I do." "Then,"
said the officer, "show me a private still."
"I'll do the same; follow me, your honour."
The officer followed across lots and fields to the
camp of a company of soldiers, which had
been sent there to aid the revenue officers.
The soldiers were in line —dress parade. "Do
you see that red-haired man?" asked Pat,
pointing to one of the soldiers. "Yes," replied
the officer. "He is," said Pat, "my brother.
He has been in the service twelve years. He'll
be a corporal after a while, but he is a 'private
still.'"
"Ten dollars gone, and no illicit whisky
found," moralized the officer, as he wended his
way back to the hotel.
Two sailors, one Irish, the other English,
agreed reciprocally to take care of each other,
in case of either's being wounded in the action
then about to commence. It was not long
before the Englishman's leg was shot off by a
cannon-ball, and on his calling Pat to carry
him to the doctor, according to the agreement,
the other very readily complied. He had
scarcely got his wounded companion on his
back when a second ball struck off the poor
fellow's head. Pat, who, through the noise and
disturbance common in a sea engagement, had
not perceived his friend's last misfortune, con-
tinued to make tho best of his way to the sur-
geon. An officer, observing him with a headless
trunk upon his shoulders, asked him where he
was going.
"To the doctor," said Pat.
"The doctor?" rejoined the officer. "Why,
you blockhead, the man has lost his head."
On hearing this Pat flung the body from his
shoulders, and, having looked at it very atten-
tively, said: "By my soul, he tould me it was
his leg!"
An Irishman on landing at New York and
seeing a boatload of tomatoes tied up to the
wharf, exclaimed: "My, what nice red apples
they are." Reaching over he took one, and
when he bit into it the juice flew all over him.
He threw the tomato in the street and said,
"The d d thing is too mellow for me."
Bridget was hired in a female boarding-school
and was told to ring the first bell at six o'clock
in the morning. At half-past six o'clock the
pupils were required to attend prayers; but for
several mornings after Bridget commenced her
labours many were unusually tardy, giving as
an excuse that they did not hear the rising-
bell. "Sure, marm," she replied, "I never rings
it very hard, for fear I might wake the young
ladies!"
An Irishwoman, meeting a neighbour on Gold
Street, was glad to see her friend wearing a
happier face than usual.
"What do you think, Mrs. Grady? My
husband has got a job."
"I am just delighted to hear you say so, and
what is he doing?"
"Faith, he tells me he is feeding the press
in a printing office."
Feeding the press? Go on, now; why,
Murphy's not been able to feed himself for the
last two Feeding the press, indeed.
I'd teach him to bring the food home to his
poor wife!"
39
IRISH YARNS, WIT AND HUMOUR.


There is a good old story told of ail Irish-
man, who, years ago, worked for a man named
Morrison, who kept a retail coal yard in a
New England city. Pat was continually making
mistakes, which exasperated his employer,
until finally, after a week of unusual stupidity
on the part of the son of Erin, when Saturday
night came, the boss paid him off, and re-
marked that he would not need his services
any longer.
An' how's that?" queried Pat.
"Well, the truth of the matter is, you're so
stupid; it's impossible for me to teach you
anything."
Pat thought a moment: "Sure, there's wan
thing Oi've l'arned since Oi've been wid yeez,
Mister Morrison," he replied.
"And what is that?" asked the proprietor.
'"That seventeen hundred make a ton."
The boss reconsidered the matter, and told
Pat he'd better report for work Monday
morning as usual.
An Irishman, looking over a physician's bill,
said he had no v tffijection to paying for the
medicine, but his visits he would return.
An Irish farmer went into an ironmonger's
shop to buy a scythe. After serving him, the
shopman asked him if he would buy a bicycle.
''What is that?" queried the Irishman.
"It's a machine to ride about the town on."
"And, sure, what might the price ov it be?"
"Fifteen pounds."
"I'd rather see fifteen pounds in a cow."
"But what a fool you would look riding
around the town on the back of a cowl" <
"Sure, now." replied the Irishman, "not half
such a fool as I'd luk trying to milk a bicycle!"
An enterprising insurance agent induced an
Irishman to take out an accident policy for his
wife. A few days later, while conversing with
a friend in his office, he was startled to see the
Irishman rush in, brandishing fiercely a stout
cane.
"Ye rascal!" he yelled, springing toward the
agent, "ye wanter cheat me!"
Fortunately the enraged man was disarmed
and held fast by the agent's friend, who was
a powerfully built man. The Irishman,
struggling to get free, shouted:
"Let me get at the spalpeen! Think ov it,
chargin' me foive dollars fer an accident
ticket fer me ole woman, an' she jest broke
her leg a-fallin' downshtairs! Wot's the good
ov the ticket, anyhow-?"
Pat, looking through a lot of bricks: "Last
night my daughter told me that ice cream came
In bricks, but the devil a bit can I find in this
pile."
In jovial company each one asked a question.
If it was answered he paid a forfeit; or if he
could not answer it himself he paid a forfeit.
An Irishman's question was: "How does the
little ground squirrel dig his hole without show-
ing any dirt about the entrance ?
When they all gave up. Pat said: "Sure, do
you see, he begins at the other end of the
hole." ~
"But how does he get there," said one.
"Ah," said Pat, "that's your question. Can
you answer it yourself?"
An Irishman had a dream which taught him
the danger of delay. "I dreamed," said he,
"I was wid the Pope, who was as great a
lintleman as any one in this district, an' he
axed me wad I drink. Thinks I, wad a duck
swim, and seein' the whisky an' the lemon an'
sugar on the sideboard, I told iiim I didn t
care if I tuk a wee dbrap of punch. Cowld or
hot axed the Pope. Hot, your Holiness, I
replied, an' be that he stepped down to the
kitchen for the bilin' water, but before he got
back, I woks straight up, and now it's dis-
tressin' me I didn't take it cowld.
A wealthy Irish contractor died, leaving to
his wife a good-sized fortune in real estate
and bonds. Both had come to this country
many years ago, and he had begun work as a
day labourer. Gradually, by saving and good
sense, he came to own a cart, and in the
course of time blossomed out as a politician.
He made monev fast, but as he ascended the
social ladder his wife turned away from her
former friends as not being fit companions tor
her increased importance.
This was finally demonstrated when he died,
The room in which the coffin lay was filled
with flowers and mourners, but Mrs. S. did
not appear for some time. When she did enter
she was heavily veiled. She looked neither
to the left nor right, but walked straight to
the casket. A large floral anchor stood
prominently out among the other pieces. As
the widow saw it, with flashing eyes, she
raised her veil, and, turning angrily on the
company demanded, with as much hauteur as
she could summon:
"Who th' divil sint that pick?"
A story is told of a doctor who was much
concerned at the drunken habits of his coach-
man, whom he had tried in vain to reform.
One day he came upon a story so gruesome
that it must, thought the doctor, make Mick
a teetotaller for life. It was that of an old lady
who had so saturated herself with spirits that
her breath caught fire in blowing out a candle,
and the flames, striking inwards, burned her
in a moment to ashes.
Having read this frightful story to Mick with
due melodramatic emphasis, the doctor wound
up with the solemn admonition:
"Mick, Mick, let this be a warning to you!
Let this be a warning to you!"
"Oh, begorra, it will, sir," answered the
awestruck Mick; "I'll never blow a candle out
again the longesht day I live!"
A certain judge was once obliged to sleep
with an Irishman in a crowded hotel in Ame-
rica, when the following conversation took
place between them: —
"Pat, you would have remained a long time
in the oid country before you could have slept
with a judge, would you not?"
"Yes, your honour," said Pat; "and I think
your honour would have been a long time in
the ould country before ye'd been a judge, too."
An Irishman was seen in the upper part of
the city with the words "A Tenant Wanted,"
painted in large letters on pasteboard, and sus-
pended around his neck. Patrick was asked,
"Who wanted the tenant, and where?" "And
it's me, meself," he replied, "that wants a
tenant." "Well, for what house?" "House!
and do I care what house, so long as it be a
dacint and respectable place and sure wages?"
"l'ou're a fool, Paddy, or somebody has been
making a fool of you—for if you have a house
to rent, then you want a tenant, but if you
want a situation, why don't you say on your
showbill 'A Situation Wanted.'" "Aha, my dar-
lint," replied the Irishman, "and is it there ye
are? And perhaps ! ain't a fool! Sure, I want
to be occupied, and can I be occupied unless I
have a tenant?"
An Irishman, while on his passage to this
county in search of harvest work, was observed
to walk up and down the deck at a brisk pace,
occasionally giving a look at the captain when
he came in sight, as if to attract his observa-
tion. On being asked by the steward for his
passage-money, when nearing the port of desti-
nation, Pat replied, "Arrah, honey, be aisy,
now; sure the master won't do such a dirty
trick as charge a poor shearer who has walked
the whole way."
A ship from Port Glasgow was recently lying
in the harbour at New Orleans, when an Irish
emigrant one day came aboard and thus ad-
dressed the cook, who was also Irish: "Are
you the mate?" "No," said he, "but I'm the
man that boils the mate!"


A mofherly old Irishwoman was endeavouring
to persuade an ambitious young man to give uf>
his nightly post of duty and secure a dav job
vigorously maintaining that day sleep was of
little benefit and that night work was generallv
deleterious to health.
"Quit it, me b'y," she pleaded, "quit it. Me
fond husband wurrked nights fer fortv venrs
but It finally killed him." y y aiS '
During a recent visit to one of my east-side
customers I overheard a bit of interesting con-
versation of which the following is an extract-
"How is Moike this mornin', Mrs. Kerrigan?
I hurd he was suiferin' from sum onheard of
complaint."
"Yis, dear. Shurr the doctor wus here a while
ago an' descroibed fur him; an' said he wus
suiferin' from 'various-potations/ an' devil a
one av me ever hurd av such a disease in me
loife."
An Irishman, who was very nearsighted,
about to fight a duel, insisted that he should
stand six paces nearer to his antagonist than
the other did to him, and they were both to
fire at the same time.
Mike, digging a sewer while the thermometer
was in the nineties, was wiping his brow on a
bandana when a Sister of Charity approached
and whispered some thing to him. He dug
down into his jeans, took out a well-worn purse
al & extracting a cein, handed it to the sister,'
with the remark: "Aisy come, aisy go!"
An amusing incident occurred at one of the
large new London hotels. One of the chamber-
maids, Bridget Maloney, in writing to her
friends in Ireland, used the hotel letter-paper
Imagine the surprise of the manager on find-
ing a letter by return addressed:
"Bridget Maloney, care Hotel—all modern
improvements—lift. Tariff on aplication; terms
moderate.—London, England."
It was evident Bridget's Irish friend was de-
termined the letter should not miscarrv for
want of full directions.
Walking along a street one day, Patrick and
his wife Nora passed by a window where a
handsome silk dress was exposed to view.
"Ah Patrick," said Nora, "do ye remember
ye I was to have the silk dhriss, when ve
had the money to buv it?"
"Did I say that, Nora?"
"Indade ye did, Patrick. An' ve have the
money in yer pocket to buy me the dhriss this
day."
"That I have, Nora; but I don't buy you the
dhriss."
"An' why not, shure?"
'y? that I kape the money in me
pocket for the day whin we haven't got it."
, °* °. ur well-known contractors and
builders, while superintending the erection of
a large brick building, was approached one day
by a late arrival from Ireland, who applied for
a job, and was employed as a hod-carrier, after
being instructed that he must always carry a
certain number of bricks In his hod.
One morning the supply of bricks ran out,
and, although doing his best, the man could
P®* * ,n d the usual number to make up his
load. After gathering every brick in sight, he
tound he was still one brick short of his usual
number.
In answer to a loud yell from the street, one
or the workmen on the fifth story staging
shrieked down:
;;Wbat do you want?"
r row me down wan brick," said Pat, pomt-
mg to his load, "to make me number good!"
A poor Irishman offered an old saucepan for
sale. His children gathered around him and in-
quired why he parted with it. "Ah! my
honeys," answered he, "I would not be after
parting with it, but for a little money to buy
something to put in it."
"See there!" exclaimed a returned IHsh
soldier to the gaping crowd, as he exhibited
with some pride his tall hat with a bullet hole
!? u'* : Look at that hole > will yon? Ye see, if
it had been a low-crowned hat. I should have
been killed outright."
An Irishman a short time ago offered an
extraordinary price for an alarm clock, and
gave for a reason, "That as he loved to rise
early he had nothing to do but pull the string,
and he could wake himself."
At an excellent hotel in New York, they
were one day short of a waiter, when a newly-
arrived Hibernian was hastily m-ade to supplv
the place of a more expert hand. "Now,
Barney, said the proprietor, "mind you serve
every man with soup, anyhow." "Bedad I'll
do that same," said the alert Barney. Soup
? n start, and Barney, after helping
• all but one guest, came upon the last one.
•5 u ?V Sir? said Ba rney. "No soup for me,"
said the gent. "But you must have it," said
Barney, it is the rules of the house." "D—n
exclaimed the guest, highly exas-
perated; when I don't want soup, I won't eat
a l lon « l wlth < you." "Well," said Barney,
f ?^ SOlemn t £' a " 1 can sa y jest this:
it s the regulations of the house, and the divii
a drop else ye/11 get till ye finish the soup!"
gebb led Y tben gave in, and the soup was
J^in tropolitai i housekeeper advertised re-
y a wet nurse. A young Irish girl
offered herself. "How old are youf Bridge??"
said the dame. "Sixteen, plaise, ma'am."
Have you ever had a baby?" "No, ma'am
but lam very fond of them." "Then I'm
afraid, Bridget, you will not do for me 'it is
a wet nurse I want." O, please, ma'am I
know I 11 do; I'm very aisy to teach."
Among Daniel O'Connell's professional re-
miniscences was the following unique instance
s -gratitude. He had obtained an
acquittal; and the fellow, in the ecstacy of his
joy, exclaimed: Och, counsellor! I've no way
here to show your honor my gratitude! but I
wish I saw you knocked down in my own
to the rescu™!*" C 1 woul(in,t brin S a fac « aa
Pat Murphy, my footman desires to suit
And so quick of his errands to go;
a TTfii tU L h , e f airly had worn in his boot
A little round hole in the toe.
Next morning I saw him intently at work
t ; sca rcely could ask him for laughter;
he £ l J?, e was boring a hole with a fork;
'♦virh ' * S m ? what are you after?"
' said he, "you quickly shall
, rr v?he cailse I don't wish to conceal,
lis to let all the wet that comes in at the toe
Hun immediately out at the heel."
An honest Hibernian had come far to see
a * ara \ an ?> while he gazed upon it, a friend
asked him if it was not the most wonderful
thing he had ever seen. To which he replied-
Never a bit man; never a bit. Sure, it's no
wonder at all that the wather should fall
down there; for I'd like to know what could
£. er J but it's mighty quare though, I'm
thinking, how the mischief it ever got up."
4 A twopenny loaf," said an Irishman. The
loaf was placed before him. As if suddenlv
changing his mind, he declared he shouldpre
fer twopenn'orth of whisky instead. This he
j/ 111 oft, and, pushing the loaf towards the
shopkeeper, was departing, when demand of
payment was made for the whisky "Sure and
t J JTiven you the loaf for the whisky" '
\\ ell, but you did not pav for the loaf
know." "Thrue, and why should I? Don't von
see I didn't take the loaf, man alive?"" And


Of IjELECTlNE
AID THE NEW LIFE STAHOABD ,M|s
R£U£DY PiltS . I FOB
AN0 C0MPU,MTt
Dear Sirs,-After suffering for two years
and being under the treatment of several Perth
doctors, also Verbalists and chemists, without
any relief whatever, in fact, they do not under-
stand my complaint, 1 called in a doctor last
month, and he could not locate where the
trouble was. He told me I had a small lump
on the back of the throat, which was from the
spine or 011 the spine bone, about the size of
a sDlit nea which wanted operating on. ±±e
gave me medicine to take, but it did me no
food, so I tried a box of your Liver Granules,
which gave me splendid xelief.
Send me eight boxes by return of post, as
I cannot get your liver pills here. Rease send
them by return post.—Mrs. E.
c/o Mrs. Willis, Lawlers, W.A.
Watchanny, Franklin Harbour, S. Aust.
Dear Sirs,—Enclosed please find cheque for
16 6. I want you to send me per return ten
2/6 boxes of Kidney Beans and six boxes of
Red Blood and Tissue Builders.
I received the eight boxes, and bad no trouble
in selling them, especially the Kidney Beans.
I myself find them to do me far moregood
than Doan's much-advertised piLs. 1 expert
I shall be sending order soon *
Yours faithfully, J. W. DAYIES.
Sirs —Will you please forward me one box
of Blood Tonic and Nerve Pills, as my aunt
that I to get them from has moved to
I feel run down, and your pills are
thp onlv thing I have ever tried that build,
ml uv quickly. I get quite well .and strong
again after a'few doses. By sending pills as
.mm as Dossible you will oblige, Miss ALICE
DENNIS, Outtrim Street, Maryborough, Vic.
39 Elizabeth Street, Waterloo, N.S.W.
T-.„ rr Qirss Owing to sickness in the house,
I h'tve not been able to thank you, but I now
L take Pleasure in thanking you for your
«nleudid phono., also the beautiful mizpah
brooch more so, because the brooch was quite
imoxnected I was surprised when, on caking
out the phonograph, the brooch M out on to
4.y.p table Please accept of m> } eL y ocst JJL
thanks My daughters are fairly in love wl th
It and take it about with them every day to
show their friends.
T must say in sincerity, that I do not know
. L ® caii give sucii beautiful and expensive
things away for so little trouble as the selling
°%ii!Uikin> r you again for your splendid
and wishing vou every success in your business,
in Dear Sirs, yours sincerely,
I remain, lttar aire, m HBJN RY REBS.
Copies of a few of
the many
UNSOLICITED LETTERS
which we are
receiving daily from
grateful Users of
ELECTINE MEDICINES.
Dear Sirs,— Having tried all sorts of Paten.,
medicines, I find there is nothing
market like your Little Liver Pills and Kidney
Beans. X have done harder work and feel less
tired since I took them; they act like magic.-
Yours faithfully, L. E. TORJCTCR.
P_G_ i give the children the New Life and
Blood Pills with good results.
Please send my friend, Miss Johnson, twenty-
RIT boxes of vour Electine Pills.
* South Yarra, Melbourne.
Dear Sirs,-As I had a severe headache I
took two of your Tablets, and tound relief
quickly. —I am, MARION A. I.AUDER, Blackal..
St. Mary's, Tas.
Dear Sirs,—After taking only one box of your
Liver Granulates, I have got great relief.—
Yours respectfully, G. HAYES.
Dear Sirs,—l have purchased a box of your
Blood and Nerve Pills, and can highly recom-
mend them to any one requiring the same, as
I believe them to act as magic on the system.—
I remain, your faithfully, Mr. ALEX. EI 1 S,
Bolivar P. 0., South Australia.
Pine Street, Prospect, Victoria.
Dear Sirs,—Your pills are the best I have ever
tried; they have given me great relief. Several
to whom I have sold the pills have been coming
back to me for further supplies. Kmdly for-
ward me six boxes of red pills for the blood
and six bottles of kidney beans by return mail.
Yours faithfully, Mrs. H. STEWART.
-i % '
Glen Road, Warick, Queensland,
20th May, 1908.
Dear Sirs, —I herewith enclose postal note for
5/-, for which please send me as soon as
you can five boxes of your Kidney Beans,
have taken two boxes that a friend gave me,
and felt much better after taking them.— Yours
truly, SAMUEL WEAVER.
Ilopetoun, Victoria.
Dear Sirs,—l have decided to keep your medi-
cines for my own household use, as I have
tried them before and found them as good, so
lam sending the money along at once. After
using them they did me good. T am only too
pleased to do all in my power to recomnouiu
them to my friends. —Yours respectfully, Mrs.
H. FINNEMORE.
Dear Sirs,— Kindly forward me by return of
mail three boxes of your Electine New Lite
Blood and Tissue Buliders, and you will oblige.
Will not be without them.—Mrs. F. M.
BROWN, c/o MT. J. A. Dietrich, Hunt's Grove,
Keepit, New South Wales.


Sirs,—l enclose 2/- by postal note, wishing
you to forward me as soon as possible two (2)
boxes of your Kidney Beans. Trusting to re-
ceive the pills. I like your kidney beans.-
Yours, etc., Mrs. W. T. STEPHENS, Stephen
Street, Hamilton, Victoria.
Wallenbeen, Dec., 1907.
Sirs—Enclosed please find post notes for 6/-,
balance on pills, and thank you very much for
the very nice tea set. It is well worth the
small trouble of selling the pills. I will sell
more pills if you send them.—Yours faithfully,
Mrs. E. HARDING.
St. Mary's Tasmania, 7th March, 1908.
Dear Sirs,—Herein please find postal notes
value 26/-. Your medicines are indeed all you
Bay, and I am sure will command a ready sale.
I shall be able to dispose of them freely. I
shall not fail to advertize them throughout.—
Yours faithfully, W. M. McHUGO.
*
Sirs,—l enclose you postal note for £1 for
pills sold, for which I am entitled to a dinner
set as prize. I sold twenty boxes in two days.
I am keeping the other six |or my own family
use, as I bought some from Mr. W. Craig in
Glen Innes, as my husband has been suffering
with his back for some time. Since taking your
pills he is much better, for which I am very
thankful. I will forward balance when I re-
ceive my prize.—l am, your faithfully, Mrs. T.
T. CRAIG, P. 0., Deepwater, N.S.W.
347 Riley Street, Surrey Hills, N.S.W.
Dear Sirs,—l found it very hard to dispose of
your pills at first. The people used to say they
never heard of thera, so were dubious about
taking them, but I have taken two boxes my-
self for liver complaint, finding them superior
to the pills I have been in the habit of taking,
"Indian Root."—l remain, yours truly, E.
PHILLIPS.
Zeehan, Tasmania, 3rd Feb., 1908.
Dear Sirs,—l received the gramophone safely
on the Ist inst., and I am very much Obliged
for your kindness. I am sending for some more
of your wonderful pills. Thanking you very
much—l remain, Mrs. J. T. POWELL.
Dear Sirs, —I have taken the Electine Kidney
Beans and find great relief. Please send
another supply.—LYDlA COLE, 102 Wyndham
Street, Sydney.
Bredlo River, N.S.W.
Dear Sirs, —I received the tea set; many
thanks for your kindness,. It is a lovely set,
everyone who sees it is fairly surprised. I
wrote to you for four boxes of the Red Blood
and Tissue Builders. Send them at once.
Please send as quickly as possible as I want
them for a sick friend who has previously used
them with marvellous results. Yours truly,
Mrs. SAY. SUTTER.
Gentlemen,—l have kept the Kidney Beans
for myself. I have used the second box and
am almost cured. I will send for more later.
My daughter got. one box of headache pills,
and when I was at her place last week, my
head being very bad, I tried one of your pills
and got almost instant relief. lam sure it
will be the same with your many patrons. I
will do my utmost to forward your interest.—
Yours very sincerely, Mrs. E. PARKS, Princes
Street, Bexley, N.S.W.
P.S.—I must apologise for this not being s nt
before, but I have been sick in bed and i£ was
overlooked.—E. PARKS.
Dear Sirs, —I hope you will excuse me for not
letting you know * I received the talking
machine, spoons, and brooch three weeks ago.
I am well pleased with them. We have tried
the phonograph, and it is a good-sounding
machine. Many a sufferer was relieved by
your pills on the Concession, especially the
headache and cold pills; the pink pills for the
wind at the heart are worth their weight in
gold. I suffer very much with my heart; for
days I could scarcely breathe, and two doses cf
your pink pills put me all right. I will sell
your pills again; their quality is excellent, and
the .reward is well worth the trouble. I want
to show my gratitude for the wonderful relief
I have had by using your pilis.—l remain, yours
truly, Mrs. WILLIAM CHAPMAN, Collie,
Western Australia.
Mt. Dangar Street, Via Bowen,
N. Queensland.
Sirs, —I received the box of chinaware safely;
am very pleased with them. I am now sending
you down postal notes for the 6/- for more of
your excellent Electine Headache Tablets, and
oblige.—Yours faithfully, Miss L. M. LEITZEL..
Gentlemen, —I again saw your advertisement
of your Electine Pills, and as I am in a new-
district and not too busy, I will do my best to»
introduce your medicine. I acted as an agent
to you before, when I was living at Gerogerv.
some two or three years ago, and I *used to
get good reports from buyers of the medicine,
which gives me confidence in trying to set?
them for you again. I used them myself, and
found them very good. You can send eight-
boxes of the pills for a start.—l remain, G uP-e
men, yours respectfully, WILLIAM KELTON,.
Senr., Matong, via Junee, N. S. Wales.
Busselton Post Office, W.A.
Dear Sirs,—l sold two boxes of your pills,
and I bought the rest myself. I have taken
one box of your Headache and Cold Tablets
and found them to give me great ease, and I
am now taking a box of your Blood and Tonic 4
Pills. I find a wonderful improvement in
myself already.—l remain, yours truly.
Miss IVY SUTTON.
Bangerang N., via Warracknabeal,
Victoria, 7th February.
Dear Sirs,—l have tried your New Life Tonic
Pills, and think they are very good. I am send -
ing for eight boxes, and I am sure I will be*
able to sell them easily. I am trying for the
gold watch and chain prize. I will send the
money as soon as I haVe sold them. Hoping to
introduce your pills, which I can always
mend,—l remain, your truly, MAGGIE BURKE.
Would you please send me one box of Electine
Blood and Tonic Pills. I enclose postal note
for 1/1. If they are any more I will send
by return mail. I trust you will send the bov
at once, as I have derived much benefit by using
them and wish to continue using them.— Your
sincerely, Mrs. W. RANTALL, P. 0., NaroghicL
near Camperdown, Victoria.
Dear Sir,—l sold your twenty-four boxes of
Electine Pills in four da vs. In this short
time the people that bought them have found
a deal of relief. The public at large say that
these pills are what they are represented to be.
I can get testimonials from many who have
bought the pills from me. There is a good
demand for them here. I enclose 24/- for pi leu
—Yours truly, ERNST 111 ED EL, Kolern River
South, via Bundaberg, Queensland.
Continued on back cover outside.
43*
TESTIMONIALS.


sra.no tot J 1 •-* . , *-* . , ' . - -, , -, .
from the many letters we receive exp essing del it with the splendid results obtained
by the use of our Egg Separators, and thank us for our excellent premiums. It
will be to your advantage to reply at once. Don't put it off until to-morrow, but write
now before you forget it. Be first in all things ! The Merry Widow Brooch, which we
give you entirely free, is in itself a princely gift, being finely gold-finished, and it is the
embodiment of artistic skill and beauty. Were you to purchase to-day one of these
lovely Merry Widow Brooches in the regular way from your local jeweller, it would cost
you at least 3/-. Remember, all you have to do to get it is to sign and return the
attached request to-day : the Merry Widow Brooch and the Egg Separators will be
promptly mailed, post paid, and, even if you do not sell the Egg Separators you will at
least have the Brooch for making the effort. Minors must not answer without first showing
this advertisement to their parents or guardians and getting their consent.
To assist you in your sales, we send twelve coupons with the Separators one to be
given to each purchaser, entitling them to a useful prize.
i
i
r
ik
&
Front View of Separator.
r
Request for Merry Widow Brooch and
12 Egg Separators.
Lay down
this
Advertisement
and
Write us
Now!
ALUMINIUM MANUFACTURING C 0352%, George Stmt, Sydney, NS.W.
Ship immediately by mail one Merry Widow Brooch, also 12 Egg Separators . I
agree to make an earnest effort to sell the Egg Separators and r turn you the money
with the understanding that I am to receive for this service a Solid Gold Shell Cameo
Ring, or a Solid Gold Shell Signet or Monogram Ring, on which I can have my
initials or monogram engraved, or, should I wish after receiving your list of prizes to
earn the combination —Solid Gold Shell Ring and Watch, 1 may do so. Should I fail
to sell the Separators, I will return them to you within thirty days, and retain the
Merry Widow Broo.h as a gft pom you.
Name
Address in full
Write your Name and Addrews very plainly, and, when posting, see that your letter
has sufficient postage.
Showing Egg separated.
y w v A jrare v ▼ arv ** r /"» /x 1" SCtOrv 21 lid Ofi iCCSj rear Lfllhv Of Au.st»
ALUMINIUM MANUFACTURING CO., 352-4 GEORGE sr., SYDNEY, N.S.W


e
- V
■V. . T
VN\
■w<r
that we want to send you an Absolute
Gift, you would read every word
of this Advertisement, and
answer it at once.
This Beautiful Merry Widow Brooch is a Gift to every person
Reading and Answering this Advertisement.
SEND us your name and address on the below r tr on a post card, and we will take pleasure
in sending you, free of any charge, this exquisite Gold Finished Merry Widow Brooch.
The gift is unconditional, it being a bid for your friendship and good-will. With the Merry
Widow Brooch we will send you twelve everlasting Egg Separators, to sell, if you can, at 6d. each,
then return us our money, and we will give you, absolutely fiee, the following magnificent premiums .
A Solid Gold Shell Cameo or Crest Ring
Signet or Monogram Ring,
c
99
99
99
May We
Hand You
One of
These ?
on which any initial or monogram may be engraved. We also give combinations of Watches and Rings—each prize is guaranteed.
We also give many other valuable prizes which we cannot describe here for want of space. Never before has theie been
gathered together such an array of beautiful and distinctive premium. f or so light a service. Our Egg Separators are not like
many articles put on the market in this way. This Egg Separator is made ol that lightest of all metals—Aluminium It is just as
necessary in the kitchen as a saucepan or any other cooking utensil; it will always retain its silvery brilliancy without any polishing—it is
clean quick, and economical. It has excellent value for 6d., has a beautifully chased design; every '^usewife will want one and will
buy one on sight. After receiving the twelve Egg Separators, leave one with each of your twelve neighbours, h them to try it, and you
will call next°day. If they find it satisfactory they will buy one ;if not, they return it to you. In this way 7 ou will have no difficulty
in disposing of a good many, as the Separator sell.- itself on its without any arguments for or against from our •' y cr {,9, Do not be
afraid, using will in no way damage it, T ust was*"*- it well before showing to your next neighbour. Our E-
oremiums
•d?'


TESTIMONIALS.
Wolfram Camp, Dimbulah,
vid Cairns, N.Q., 12tli March, 1908.
Please find enclosed 1/- in stamps, for which
kindly send me a box of your New Life Blood
Tonic and Nerve Pills. I bought a box from
your agent, and I can say they done me a lot
of gcod. They seem to clear the head, and are
wonderful as a nerve tonic.—l remain, yours
faithfully, Mrs. J. McLEAN.
Sirs, —Will you be so kind as to forward me
two boxes of your Blood and Nerve Pills, for
which I am enclosing stamps and stamp for
postage back to me. 1 have been using them
for my nerves, and I get great benefit from
them. —Yours, etc., Mrs. J, DIMMOCK, Or-
chard, Abermain, N.S.W.
Clifton, Darling Downs, 16th March, 1908.
Sirs,—l have been absent from home and was
unable to attend to the sale of the pills, and
since I returned I have disposed of the lot.
A good few of my father's men purchased pills,
and father wishes me to let you know that his
men speak very highly of the pills.—Yours sin-
cerely, EILEEN RUNGE.
Heatherton, Yic.
Dear Sirs, —I received the watch safely last
month. It has kept good time, as you said it
would. Thanking you very much, I remain,
yours truly, FRANK EBSARY.
f
Broken Hill, N.S.W.,
31st March, 1908.
Sirs, —I have much pleasure in taking the
opportunity of thanking you for the- watch,
which I received in good working order, and
I am more than satisfied with it. Trusting
you will send the New Life Electine Vegetable
Pills by return of post, as mother is anxious
to try them.— L. McCUBBIN.
Wattainandara, N.S.W.
Dear Sirs,—l received your parcel of delf
yesterday, 40 pieces, for which 1 am most
grateful; also a blouse set, for which I thank
you very much. Am sending a postal note
to-day for the remaining 6/-. Trusting to hear
from you soon again, I remain, yours sincerely,.
M. C. ANTHONY.
• Flowerdale, Tas.
' Dear Sirs,—l am writing to thank you for
the watch I received last week; 1 was much
surprised and also very pleased with it. I
tested it with another watch, and it kept good
time. I am also sending for eight more boxes
of pills to sell for you.
Mrs. FRED. BASSETT.
Williamstown, Vic.
Dear Sirs,—l now have the pleasure of
writing to let you know that I received the
box on Monday, 23rd March, and was
well pleased with the dishes and also the
brooch. I am sending the 6/- to you for more
pills.—Yours truly, Miss LUDWIG.
Dear Sirs,—l here enclose the 6/- for the re-
mainder of the pills. I received the dishes
auite safe and was well satisfied with them.—
Yours truly. Miss E. L. HARRIS, Bleak
House, via Nhill.
Spring Hill, Meningie, S.A.
Dear Sirs,—Please find enclosed 3/- for more
of your Blood Tonic and Nerve Pills. I nave
taken two boxes and find them very good.
Please send soon as possible, as I want, the
pills.—Yours respectfully,
Miss AMY SULLIVAN.
Petina, S.A.
Dear Sirs,—l have entertained my friends
with the phonograph which I got from you,
and I am very pleased with it. Wishing you
every success, I & am, « ALLSOHUTZKY
Dear Sirs,—l received watch and chain and
brooch for selling twelve boxes of your Electine
Pills, and I am very pleased with them, and I
thank you. I used the pills and I find they
have done me good, and I hope soon to send
for more, as I don't like to be without them. —
Yours faithfully, Mrs. D. G. ROD WELL, Percy-
dale, near Avoca, Victoria.
Ellerslie, Nyrang Creek,
Canowondra, N.S.W.
Sirs,—l herewith enclose postal note for the
8/- f • the eight boxes of Electine medicines
whic 4 ' have sold. I have purchased some re-
r the phonograoh which you gave me
mle of twenty *our boxes of pills, and I
£ 11 pleased with it. It sings and plays
v tinctly.—Yours respectfully, EDITH B.
Wx AM SON.
Sirs,—l received the premiums, and I am
delighted with them; they are very pretty.—
Yours respectfully, EDITH B. WILLIAMSON,
Ellerslie, Nyrang Creek, Canowondra, N.S.W.
15 Brown Street, Long Gully,
Bendigo, Victoria.
Dear Sirs,—l received yesterday through Per-
mewan, Wright & Co., Melbourne, one box for-
warded by you to me for which I thai k you. I
am pleased with the quality of the tea set
which the box contained. Again thanking you
for the tea set sent me,—Yours respectfully,
JAS. H. ELLIS.
2 Vale Street, St. Kilda, Victoria.
Dear Sirs, —I am forwarding you the amount.
I used two boxes of your Kidney Pills myself,
and I got wonderful relief. Hoping to do fur-
ther business with you,—Yours faithfully, T.
COREY.
Dear Sirs,—l am sending the cheque for 8/6.
I have been taking the Blood and Nerve frills
and find they did me a lot of good; will sCnd
for more when these are done. —Yours faith-
fully, Mrs. H. LLOYD.
Bimbi, 29th March, 1908.
Dear Sirs, —My mother wishes me to mention
that she never took better medicine in her life
than your Please send me another six-
teen boxes of your New Life Electine Vege-
table Pills —I am, yours, in haste,
DORA TOMS.
Dear Sirs, —Please send me one dozen boxes
of your remedies—six boxes of Kidney Beans
and six boxes of Liver Granules —for which,
with the eight I have had, I here enclose
postal note for one pound. I will send you a
big order later on, as I have had a good
account of what I have sold. I used them
myself and have derived great benefit from
tnem.—Yours faithfully, W. FRANCIS, Pea-
chester, via Beerwafi, N O. Line, Queensland.
