

BOROVANSKY
BALLET


Borovansky Ballet
in
AUSTRALIA and NEW ZEALAND


//
(*=y or a brief space we have known a
cessation of the outward life of the world.
SHELDON CHENEY
h.ditor, Theatre Arts Magazine. NA .




THE STUDIO, ROMA HOUSE, MELBOURNE
From the Oil Painting by
DARYL LINDSAY


BOROVANSKY BALLET
in
AUSTRALIA and NEW ZEALAND
By
NORMAN MACGEORGE
Assisted hy
ARTISTS. MUSICIANS and DANCERS


THIS BOOK WAS FIRST PUBLISHED IN AUSTRALIA
BY F. W. CHESHIRE PTY. LTD., MELBOURNE, WHOSE
LONDON AGENTS ARE WADLEY & GINN. DOMINION
HOUSE. BARTHOLOMEW CLOSE. LONDON. E.C.I
Registered at the General Post Office,
Melbourne, for transmission by post
as a book.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia, by
Arbuckle Waddell Pty. Ltd., 20-22 McKillop Street, Melbourne.
1946.


CONTENTS
Cover Design by M. Napier Waller.
The Studio Roma House, Melbourne, by Daryl Lindsay Frontispiece
Introduction 9
Portraits of Madame & Edouard Borovansky 10-11
“Studio Days,” from material supplied by Anne Mackintosh 12
Stories of the Ballets
Performed by Borovansky Company —
Les Sylphides 14 Scheherazade 68
Giselle 26 Capriccio Italien 71
Facade 32 Fantasy on Grieg’s Concerto
Autumn Leaves 38 in A Minor 72
Le Spectre de la Rose 40 Vltava 91
Swan Lake 42 Terra Australis (Musical
Le Beau Danube 45 notes by G. Joffe) 92
Russian Dances 52
Camaval 54 Performed by Visiting Companies ——
En Saga 58 Petrouchka ... 64
Sea Legend 59 Le Manage d’Aurore 94
Sigrid 63 Les Presages 95
L’Amour Ridicule 66 Graduation Ball 96
Pictures and Drawings
Les Sylphides Wash Drawing by Daryl Lindsay 16
Les Sylphides Oil Painting by Norman Macgeorge 17
Before Facade Pastel by Len Annois 31
Crayon and Wash Drawing by Roy Hodgkinson 41
A Study Backstage Pastel by Daryl Lindsay 44
Russian Dancers Wash Drawing by Alan McCulloch 52
Russian Dances Crayon & Wash Drawing by Roy Hodgkinson 53
Sea Legend Oil Painting by Norman Macgeorge 61
Decor and Costumes for Pen and Wash Drawing by W. Constable 69
Scheherazade
Crayon Studies by Daryl Lindsay 70
Mara North Pencil Drawing by Roy Hodgkinson 74
Backstage Drury Lane Wash Drawing by Daryl Lindsay 82
Dancer Posing Oil Painting by Bernard Lawson 89
Pencil Studies by Daryl Lindsay 97
Portraits of the Principals and Soloists 19, 75
Photograph of the Company 81
Portraits of Conductors and Pianist 82, 83
Great Masters of Ballet 85
Important Dancers invited to join the Company 86
The Coming of Ballet to Australia 98
The Future of Ballet in Australia 99


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The Author wishes to express his gratitude and thanks for the assistance
given in the preparation of “Borovansky Ballet in Australia and New
Zealand.”
Mr. Theon Mirfield, by granting the use of his photographs of the
Ballets in action and acting in friendly collaboration, has been of invaluable
assistance to me.
Mr. Daryl Lindsay’s pictures and drawings, many of which appear in
these pages, would be outstanding features in any Art book and greatly
add to the interest of this publication. A reproduction of his large picture
(Frontispiece) has been made possible by the generosity and patience of
the owner, the late Mrs. W. J. Grassick.
Mr. and Mrs. Llewellyn Lewis, Mr. and Mrs. C. E. Davies (Hobart
“Mercury”), Mr. Charles Wheeler, Mara North (of the Company), Mr.
Alan Henderson and J. C. Williamson Theatres Ltd., have all kindly allowed
their pictures to be reproduced.
Other helpers have been Miss Janet Thomas, Mrs. W. Merewether,
Jonet Wilkie (of the Company); and Winifred McDonnell (of the Company),
whose annotations of the music of the Ballets have added greatly to their
interest; Mrs. John Elder (Anne Mackintosh) and Lieut. Laurie Thomas,
R.A.N.


INTRODUCTION
By EDOUARD BOROVANSKY


MADAME BOROVANSKY
MADAME BOROVANSKY was born in Moscow. She began to learn Ballet while still a child
at a private school for Ballet in her native city and from her mother, the famous dancer known as
Nicolaeva. Her interest in Ballet was hereditary, as her mother was not only famous as a dancer,
but also as a teacher, under whose guidance her daughter was trained at her school for Ballet
in Berlin.
Before beginning her teaching career, Madame Borovansky was dancing for many years under
famous Ballet Masters in well-known companies, one of which included Anna Pavlova, to whom
she is related. After Pavlova’s death, Madame Borovansky decided to devote all her knowledge and
experience of Ballet to the training of students, her ability as a great teacher being recognised
throughout Europe and especially in Australia. She has successfully developed many dancers in
the present Borovansky Australian Ballet Company to international standards for which Australia
is much indebted to her.


EDOUARD BOROVANSKY
Born in Czechoslovakia, M. BOROVANSKY began his training in Ballet at the Prague National
Theatre under the famous Ballet Master, A. Berger. Later he left Prague for Paris, studying under
Russian teachers until he joined the Pavlova Company with which he toured the world. After the
death of Pavlova, he joined the Monte Carlo Ballet Russes, later known as the Covent Garden
Ballet, which toured Australia in 1938.
M. Borovansky’s decision to remain in Australia has resulted in the foundation of the
Company which bears his name. His creative vision and devotion to the art of Ballet have been the
chief means by which this has been accomplished.


STORIES OF THE BALLETS
STUDIO DAYS
SHORTLY after the conclusion of their contract
with the Covent Garden Russian Ballet Com-
pany in Australia M. and Mme. Borovansky came
to Melbourne to settle, and opened an Academy of
Dancing at Roma House. Among their first pupils
were Edna Busse and Rachel Cameron in the special
professional morning class held for those who
were already dancers of some experience and who
Intended to make dancing their career. Classes
were also held at night for business girls and boys
and very soon were well attended. Special even-
ings were set apart for Classical Ballet, Pas de
Deux and Character and National Dancing. Among
the first to join were Grace McLean and M. La
Gruta, both afterwards to become professionals.
The first public performance given by members
of the studio classes was in July, 1939, when the
National Theatre movement held its first season
of ballet of two nights, various teachers of dancing
presenting items. For this performance M. Boro-
vansky composed a “period piece” a drawing
room scene to the music of Mozart entitled
PETITE MOZARTIANA, in which he and Mme.
Borovansky took part with their pupils and Serge
Bousloff. Another item on the same programme
was ETUDE, with music by Debussy.
In November, 1939, the morning professional
class was joined by Laurel Martyn at the conclu-
sion of her term as teacher for Jennie Brenan, and
also by Anne Mackintosh, a pupil of the Jennie
Brenan Academy.
ENGAGEMENT BY de BASIL
Following an audition by de Basil, who had
brought his Russian Ballet Company to Australia
and was seeking local talent, Edna Busse, Laurel
Martyn, Anne Mackintosh, Rachel Cameron,
Phillipe Perrotet and others accompanied M. and
Mme. Borovansky to Sydney in December, 1939.
They continued with their classes while some of
them were doing “super” work with the Russian
Ballet in Sydney. Here they were joined by Dorothy
Stevenson, who had come out from England with
the Russian Ballet Company, and also by A. Munro,
who, with the other dancers, returned to Mel-
bourne to resume work at the Roma House Studio,
PREPARING THE FIRST FULL-SCALE BALLET
Rehearsals had begun in 1939 for the first major
ballet, AUTUMN LEAVES, and continued until
November, 1940, when it was performed for the
first time at the National Theatre and for one
night at the Princess Theatre with M, Borovansky,
M. Bousloff and Rachel Cameron as soloists.
MUSIC; NEW BALLETS
During 1939 the Studio was a hive of activity,
both for the leading dancers and beginners in the
evening classes. Mara North, pupil of Madame
Saronova, joined the professional classes, together
with Jonet Wilkie, pupil of Igor Schwezoff in
London, Corrie Lodders, from the Jennie Brenan
Academy, and Laurie Rentoul, a fellow-pupil
there.
The music for both classes and rehearsals was
provided by Eric Clapham at the piano.
The first Studio evening performance, which was
given to friends and parents of the dancers, con-
sisted of class demonstration, solos and pas de
deux. More ambitious works were then embarked
upon, including VLTAVA, PAS CLASSIQUE and
L’AMOUR RIDICULE, with a view to their future
production. A ballet was also put on at the Prin-
cess Theatre as an item in a programme of
“Pageant of Empire,” to typify Australian bush
and flowers.
PREPARATION FOR A “BIG SHOW”
The costumes for the first big event were made
in the Studio by Edna Busse, assisted by Mme.
Borovansky, Laurel Martyn and pupils. This took
place in December, 1940, and was a two nights’
season at the Comedy Theatre. The programme
consisted of PAS CLASSIQUE, AUTUMN LEAVES,
VLTAVA, L’AMOUR RIDICULE, and there was a
small orchestra conducted by Eric Clapham and
four guest pianists.
This venture was a great success, as shown by
the crowded theatre at each performance, indicat-
ing that there was a public demand for Ballet
produced in Australia by Australians. A group of
enthusiasts, headed by Mr. Roger Raine, Mr. Mac-
kintosh, father of the dancer, and others, had
guaranteed the funds to cover possible loss, but
there was never any doubt of the result.
The soloists in this short season were Edna
Busse, Rachel Cameron, Laurie Rentoul, Corrie
Lodders, Laurel Martyn, Edouard Borovansky,
Serge Bousloff and Anne Mackintosh.


MELBOURNE BALLET CLUB
The constructive year was 1940, marked by an
important event the forming of the Melbourne
Ballet Club, which built a small stage and fitted
part of the large Studio for a series of cabinet
performances for members of the Club and friends,
who filled it to capacity.
The first of these Saturday and Sunday evening
programmes took place early in the year, when
solos were given taken from AURORA’S WEDDING,
ETUDE, BACH SUITE, SUBMERGED CATHEDRAL
(Debussy).
A DANCER’S IMPRESSIONS.
The Studio in these times of earnest preparation
must indeed have presented a busy scene. One of
the girls writes: “Imagine the Studio as it looked
almost any evening of the week a class proceed-
ing in one of the studios (see Frontispiece), a
rehearsal in another, artists sketching vigorously
in attempts to catch the fleeting movements of
the dancers, the stage littered with bright cos-
tumes and gay scraps, with Edna presiding at the
sewing machine, M. Borovansky in the office
thrashing out with his secretary (Madge Lynch)
some new scheme for a ballet, Madame here, there
and everywhere, dancers waiting in practice cos-
tumes for their turn or helping with the dress-
making. The excitement of it all kept us going,
although most of us had put in a hard day’s work
at a war job before snatching a hasty evening
meal and, in spite of feeling tired, throwing our-
selves into dancing tights and joining in the
exhilarating delight which ballet gives to those
who love it.”
CREATIVE EFFORT
Several short ballets suitable for Club perform-
ance were composed at this time by Dorothy
Stevenson and Laurel Martyn, whose experience
with professional companies both in England and
Australia proved invaluable. SIGRID, by Laurel
Martyn, was one of them, which was produced
at the first Club performance in 1940 and has
been performed many times since.
LINK WITH CAMARGO SOCIETY, LONDON.
The movement so far had proceeded on much
the same lines as in England in 1920-1930, where
Marie Rambert and Ninette de Valois had founded
in London a school of English ballet based upon
the Russian tradition and a club to support it.
This club afterwards became the Camargo Society
and associated with it were many famous dancers,
artists and musicians.
It was a centre of intense artistic effort and
achievement, such as the Studio at Roma House
became ten years later in Melbourne. The theatre
used in London was very small with a stage not
much larger than that built by the Melbourne
Ballet Club, the ballets produced at first being
also on a modest scale. Janet Leeper, in her book,
“English Ballet,” records that these performances
“were never amateurish; they were always com-
plete, artistic and with a fine sense of style.
Because of the small size of the stage no compli-
cated choreographic effects were possible, but the
restricted canvas meant that every detail had to
be perfect.” This might well describe what was
being done at Roma House, Melbourne, with per-
haps a far smaller circle of supporters, but with
equal enthusiasm.
THE COMPANY IS FORMED
It now became evident to those who had attended
the Saturday and Sunday evening monthly per-
formances at the Studio that a rapidly expanding
artistic force was developing which soon must
break the limits of a “restricted canvas” and
demand a wider field. A great ambition hitherto
nursed in secret or spoken of only in whispers
was about to be realised here, before the eyes of
the Club members and their friends, a fully-
fledged Ballet Company, soon to be accorded
professional status and public recognition, was
spreading its wings and taking flight.
Even then there were a few doubters not yet
convinced that, although J. C. Williamson Theatres
Ltd. had arranged an Australian tour, the general
public would respond to this unfamiliar art, the
appreciation of which had hitherto been confined
to a comparatively small number of enthusiasts;
this art offering as it did a challenge to the
picture theatres whose patrons, accustomed not
to the living beauty of movement by actual per-
formers, but, as Prince Levien says in his book,
“The Birth of Ballet Russes,” “to that ‘art’ where
personal contact between the artiste and the audi-
ence has been replaced by a soulless image upon
a screen.”
The crowded theatres which greeted the appear-
ance of the new-born Company and the intensity
of interest in this to many new art form, have
shown that Ballet as a living force in theatrical
life has at last come into its own and is firmly
established in the national consciousness.


STORIES OF THE BALLETS
LES SYLPHIDES
IT has become a convention to open a new season
with this classic romantic Ballet which dates
back to the first half of the nineteenth century,
Its fairy-like charm and romantic symbolism
providing the right atmosphere for a performance
of Ballet and at the same time an indication of
the quality of the company presenting it. Although
often faultlessly danced by both soloists and corps
de ballet as far as technique is concerned, the
spirit of an “enchanted glade peopled by bodiless
spirits” is often wanting. No decor which is quite
satisfactory has yet been devised —not even that by
Benois, who designed the setting for it when it was
added to the Diaghileff repertoire in 1908 and re-
named. The de Basil Company revived it in 1932
and the Blum Company in 1936, both using the
well-known picture by Corot, “Souvenir de Morte
Fontaine,” as a background. An easel picture,
however good, can never be adapted for the stage,
nor the art of a realistic landscape painter pro-
jected into the severely formal atmosphere of
LES SYLPHIDES, for which it is entirely unsuit-
able. This principle has fortunately been recog-
nised by modern enlightened designers of stage
settings for such Ballets as GISELLE, FACADE and
others. LES SYLPHIDES, less fortunate, however,
is still the Cinderella among the sisterhood of the
Ballets in this particular, even in its latest pro-
ductions in Australia, when any sort of stock
“drop-scene” background seems to have been
considered suitable for a Ballet which, of all others,
is dependent upon the creation of an atmosphere
of romantic mysticism, in which decor and lighting
are almost as important as good dancing.
The origin of LES SYLPHIDES dates back to
1830 when the actor Taglioni, appearing in a set
of romantic plays at the Paris Opera House, devised
a short dance for his daughter, a talented dancer,
based upon the poetical writings of Heine. It
was named “La Sylphide,” the motif of the com-
position being a young lad’s mischance to meet, on
the eve of his wedding, a fascinating sylph who,
by her airy grace and delightful dancing, lured
him into a forest from whence he never returned.
For his inconstancy to his betrothed he was con-
demned forever to pursue “bodiless spirits who
know neither fiery embraces nor the ecstasy of
kisses, for whom all passion is replaced by sad
caresses and tremulous flitting.” Mile. Taglioni
danced this with a very small corps de ballet as
a sideshow for other larger compositions and made
her great reputation as a ballerina largely by its
popularity in those days of romanticism in the
Arts.
It was not until this miniature ballet had lain
dormant for about eighty years that Fokine, the
great choreographer, resurrected and re-cast it to
the music of Chopin. He enlarged the corps de
ballet and transformed it into a full-scale Ballet,
naming it CHOPINIANA, it being known by this
name, or as the “White Ballet,” until it was
included in the 1910 Diaghileff season at the
Chatelet Theatre in Paris, when it was re-named
LES SYLPHIDES, and the costumes re-designed to
the inverted tulip form they now have. Its success
in Paris was immediate and phenomenal, all the
more so as the two greatest living dancers,
Pavlova and Nijinsky, were in the cast and
were able in their solos to give that impression of
“noiseless flight” which is associated in our minds
with beings in a world of spirits. .
More than any other Ballet LES SYLPHIDES
depends upon a perfectly trained corps de ballet,
every member of which, to use Diaghileff’s words,
“must be a serious interpretative artist.”


LES SYLPHIDES AT THE STUDIO
From the photograph by
HUGH P. HALL
THE MUSIC
The orchestration of a series of compositions
written for the piano presents certain difficulties,
chief of which is the possibility of some of the
composer’s musical expression being lost. This
danger was pointed out by Benois at the time of
the Diaghileff 1910 production of LES SYLPHIDES
in Paris. He said; “Our first-class composers,
Liadov, Glazunov and Tcherepnine had not wished,
or had been unable, to preserve Chopin’s mood,
and in solving the problems of orchestrating piano
pieces they stamped them too obviously with their
own style; perhaps it would have been more in
harmony to have kept to the piano, increasing its
effectiveness by a delicate accompaniment of
flutes, violins and bassoons the atmosphere that
I wished to evoke in my decor.”
AUTHOR S NOTE ;
This lack of atmosphere has been commented
upon in regard to the decor.
The following are the Chopin compositions used
in the Ballet:
Prelude Overture
Nocturne in A Flat Corps de ballet and soloists
Waltz in G Flat Solo for Ballerina
Mazurka in D Solo for Ballerina
Mazurka in C Solo for Male Dancer
Prelude in A Solo for Ballerina
Waltz in C minor Pas de deux
Grand Valse Brilliante in E Flat Finale


LES SYLPHIDES (Backstage)
by DARYL LINDSAY
PEN & WASH DRAWING


LES SYLPHIDES
By NORMAN MACGEORGE
OIL PAINTING




LAUREL MARTYN
Born in Queensland, LAUREL MARTYN began her career at a very early age. After learning
the rudiments of her profession in Australia, she developed them by study abioad.
Having won the Adeline Genee Gold Medal offered by the Royal Academy of Dancing,
London, she joined its classes and was awarded a scholarship which enabled her to study under
Ninette de Valois of the Vic-Wells Ballet, afterwards becoming a member of it. After fuithe
dancing experience in Paris and London, Laurel Martyn returned to Australia eventually jommg
M and & Mme. Borovansky at their Roma House Studio. Her wide knowledge of the art of Ballet
and her abilities as a dancer have made her famous as one of Australia s leading ballerinas.


DOROTHY STEVENSON
Beginning to show promise while still at school in Brisbane, DOROTHY STEVENSON
developed her talent under local teachers until she was able to proceed to London for further study.
After experience as a dancer in both Grand Opera and Pantomime, Dorothy Stevenson’s
chief ambition to become a member of the de Basil Russian Ballet Company was satisfied in the
year 1939, when she joined the corps de ballet under an assumed Russian name. While dancing
with this Company in Sydney, Dorothy Stevenson met Laurel Martyn, who had also returned to her
native land, and it was decided by both to join M and Mme. Borovansky in Melbourne.


EDNA BUSSE
By hard work and invincible determination EDNA BUSSE has achieved her childhood’s
ambition —to become a leading ballerina. Paying for her early lessons from her scanty pocket
money, Edna Busse has had no opportunity for foreign study, but has developed her talents entirely
in Australia, first under Eunice Weston and afterwards with M. and Mme. Borovansky. Her strong
technique and intense enthusiasm for her chosen art are among the chief factors of her success.
Beginning with small solo parts, she soon graduated into leading roles in most of the Ballets pre-
sented by the Borovansky Company, which she has invested with her own virility of style.


SERGE BOUSLOFF
Of Russian nationality, SERGE BOUSLOFF has been a member of many European Ballet
companies and performed with them in leading parts both in Europe and America, including the
de Basil Company, which eventually came to Australia. Upon the conclusion of the de Basil Com-
pany’s tour in 1939, M. Bousloff joined M. Borovansky, appearing in many Studio productions at
Roma House. His polished style and professional artistry have been invaluable to the Borovansky
Company, of which he is one of the most important members.


MARTIN RUBINSTEIN
Of Polish parentage, MARTIN RUBINSTEIN was born in Australia and received his early
training at the Borovansky Academy, where he made his first appearances in Studio productions.
His skill as a dancer has given him a leading place among the male performers of the
Borovansky Company, of which he is one of its youngest members. He has taken part in most of
the Ballets produced and has made for himself a position as a dancer of exceptional brilliance.


TAMARA TCHINAROVA
One of the most experienced dancers in the Company, TAMARA TCHINAROVA has
roamed the world over in her career as a ballerina. She has been a member of many famous com-
panies with which she would still be dancing had not the war intervened to render her return to
Europe impossible.
Beginning her career in Russia under the famous ballerina, Preobrajenska, of the old Imperial
Russian Ballet, Tamara Tchinarova is a product of the true classical Russian tradition. Her
experience and knowledge of her art and vitality of style are too well known to need mention. Her
presence in the Company is a source of professional strength to it.


CORRIE LODDERS
Well known as a leading soloist in many Ballets, CORRIE LODDERS has danced m stage
productions of many kinds, including Grand Opera. Although awarded a scholarship by the
Royal Academy of Dancing, London, she was unable to avail herself of it owing to the outbrea
the Y world wa/ Her preference for Ballet and her professional ability led eventually to her inclusion
in the Borovansky Company, with which she has danced since its first season in Australia as one
of its principal soloists.


STORIES OF THE BALLETS
GISELLE
THIS romantic Ballet, which dates back to 1841,
is based upon the poet Heine’s description of
the legend and adapted from it by Theophile
Gautier with choreography by Coralli. The first
production took place at the Theatre de 1’ Academie
Royale de Musique, Paris, to the music of Adolphe
Adam, with choreography by Jules Perrot, husband
of Carlotta Grisi. After a long period of oblivion
it was revived by the Diaghileff company in Paris
in 1910, and in London in 1911, with scenery and
costumes by Benois. It was again neglected
until the Vic-Wells Company produced it at the
Old Vic. Theatre, London, in 1934, with scenery
and customes by W, Chappell.
The Ballet is in reality a choreographic drama
of the human emotions of love, hate and despair,
accentuated by the music which, though common-
place enough, was written by Adam to enhance the
carefree gaiety of the first act, turning to tragedy
as the story is developed.
The part of Giselle, originally created by Grisi,
has been performed by many famous dancers, in-
cluding Karsavina and Pavlova, whose interpreta-
tion of it established a standard of dramatic power
and expression in dancing never surpassed.
The story is centred about a rustic maiden,
Giselle, and her love affair with a young Hungarian
noble (Count Albrecht) who, leaving his feudal
castle, seeks amorous adventure among the village
folk, whose dress and manners he adopts as a
disguise. By his personal charm and skill as a
dancer he attracts Giselle, the village beauty, also
a devotee of the dance, and wins her love, being
known to her as “Loys.” The Forester (Hilarion)
is also in love with Giselle, but finds little favour
with her as he is rough and uncouth and “dances
like a bear,” Torn with jealousy and unrequited
passion, he reveals to Giselle that her lover is no
villager but the Lord of the Castle and its domains,
betrothed to a lady of high degree. The shock
of this discovery drives Giselle insane; she dies
of a broken heart and is buried in a nearby forest.
The curtain rising on the second act shows the
stricken Count Albrecht on a pilgrimage by moon-
light to the grave of Giselle, upon which he lays
a wreath. It is the hour of midnight when, accord-
ing to the legend, the spirits of young girls who
have died before their wedding day rise from their
graves seeking for the love they lost in life and
would regain. These are the “wilis” whose passion
for dancing still pursues them. Giselle is among
them and is perceived by her lover, with whom
she dances until, as daylight approaches, she fades
away and he realises that she is but a spirit.
Meanwhile, the luckless Forester (Hilarion)/over-
come by remorse and grief, is wending his way
through the forest towards the grave. He is caught
by the dreaded “wilis,” who roughly handle him,
partly because of his share in the tragedy which
has overtaken the lovers and partly owing to his
lack of skill in the dance. He is thrown into a
nearby marsh and drowned.
THE MUSIC
The sprightly overture to GISELLE anticipates
the gaiety of the peasant dances in Act I, which
are numerous. Adam uses the leit motif freely
throughout the Ballet. The happy tunes to which
Giselle and Loys dance in the early part of
Act I have an underlying plaintiveness suffi-
cient to suggest the change to the mad scene, when
they are used again to convey quite a different
impression. In Act II one of these melodies is
used as a reproach to the half-crazed Hilarion.
Another motif, occurring in both Acts, is that which
accompanies the mime scene performed by the
mother of Giselle, and recurs again in the grave-
side scene, Act 11.
A feature of the music is its complete identity
with the story of the piece and with the movements
of the dancers. Consequently, taken by itself, the
music for GISELLE is apt to lose its effectiveness
when deprived of its significance as background
to the story for which it was written.


From the photograph by
THEON N. MIRFIELD
GISELLE
ACT I


From the photograph by
THEON N. MIRFIELD
GISELLE
ACT I


From the photograph by
THEON N. MIRFIELD
GISELLE
ACT I


From the photograph by
THEON N. MIRFIELD
GISELLE
ACT II


BEFORE FACADE
PASTEL
By LEN ANNOIS


STORIES OF THE BALLETS
FACADE
YODELLING SONG
From the photograph by
THEON N. MIRFIELD
''■pHlS witty and amusing burlesque of dancing
* resembles a surrealiste picture in which noth-
ing is explained, nor is any explanation required.
It is a satirical commentary upon dancing by both
choreographer (Frederick Ashton) and the com-
poser of the music (William Walton). Thus we
find two eminent composers making delicious fun
of themselves in a Ballet which exists for no other
reason.
It was received with delight at its first Studio
performance in Melbourne and has proved to be
one of the most popular numbers in the Company’s
repertoire. Its production for the first time in
Australia by the Borovansky Australian Ballet
Company was due to Laurel Martyn’s association
with it in London.
In designing the decor William Constable has
entered into the absurdity of the thing with
evident zest. His decorations to the piece seem to
suggest that, when put to it, stage designers can
make fun of themselves as well as other people.


POPULAR SONG
From the photograph by
THEON N. MIRFIELD
THE MUSIC
As originally composed by Walton, the music of FACADE was played to the Camargo Society,
London, as an accompaniment to verses composed by Edith Sitwell, Frederick Ashton afterwards
devising a series of parodies of dancing to make a Ballet.
The separate numbers are:
Fanfare Overture
Scotch Rhapsody Pas de trois
Swiss Yodelling Song Pas de trois
Polka Solo
Popular Song Duet
Waltz Pas de quatre
Country Dance Pas de trois
Tango Pas de deux
Tarantella Finale


WALTZ
From the photograph by
THEON N. MIREIELD


COUNTRY DANCE
From the photograph by
THEON N. MIRFIELD


TANGO
From the photograph by
THEON N. MIRFIELD


TARANTELLA
From the photograph by
THEON N. MIRFIELD


STORIES OF THE BALLETS
AUTUMN LEAVES
From the photograph by
HUGH P. HALL
TNCLUDED in the Borovansky Company’s reper-
toire during its 1945 Season, this Ballet is one of
those which, for various reasons, were not revived
until they had been laid aside for some years.
Perhaps this was due to a feeling that it belonged
to Pavlova and to her alone, since it was she who
originated and danced it as no one could hope
perhaps to dance it again.
AUTUMN LEAVES, as revived now, is necessarily
very different, though still retaining its elemental
character as a manifestation of the forces of
Nature ever building, destroying and building
again. This is the essence of this difficult Ballet
which, if missed by those performing it, fails to
carry conviction to the audience. The story is a
mere thread which binds the action together. It
tells of a chrysanthemum, the last of the season,
which, flowering alone, is caught by the autumn
winds foretelling the approach of winter and decay,
which cast it among the swirling leaves where it
lies on the ground bruised and broken. A poet,
strolling by, regards the fallen flower with pity
and sorrow and, picking it up, presses it to his
lips. At this moment, as if in remorse, the autumn
gale abates its fury and there is a lull, but not
for long. Returning with re-doubled force it
snatches the flower from the poet’s hand, dashing
it finally to the ground, where it slowly fades and
dies.
When performed by the Pavlova Company in
Melbourne, the part of “Autumn Wind” was danced
by M. Hitchins, who was ideally suited to it, his
magnificent figure and forceful dancing providing
an effective foil to the fragility of Pavlova. The
effect of the whole production was emphasised in a
dramatic sense by real autumn leaves being blown


AUTUMN LEAVES
From the photograph by
THEON N. MIRFIELD
about the stage by some invisible contrivance —
a touch of stage realism popular in those days,
which would now probably be received with smiles
of superior modernity. Considering this question
of stage realism, it would be well perhaps to
emphasise that a sharp line divides what is accept-
able in realistic treatment and what is not. There
have been occasions even in Ballet when this has
been forgotten. In 1910, when SCHEHERAZADE
was being rehearsed in Paris, an elephant was
brought from a nearby circus and led upon the
stage to try the effect of a touch of oriental
“colour,” with the result that the corps de ballet
fled shrieking from the theatre and the principals
into the safety of their dressing rooms! Now that
Ballet has regained its status as one of the Fine
Arts modern designers have come forward with
decor which, co-related with the productions to
the fullest extent, aims at the creation of a set of
tonal and colour values and costume designs in
true harmony with the piece presented. An example
of this is Constable’s design for GISELLE, Act I,
in which the feudal castle dominates the stage
picture, emphasising the story and its part in the
tragedy enacted.
THE MUSIC
(CHOPIN)
Nocturne in F Mime scene for old man, children
and students
Etude in C Minor The Wind and whirling leaves
Nocturne in D Flat Chrysanthemum and leaves
Fantasie Impromptu in C Minor:
(1) The Wind and the leaves.
(2) Pas de deux for Poet and Chrysanthemum.
(3) Finale.
As an overture to AUTUMN LEAVES, the Ballade
in G Minor is sometimes used.


STORIES OF THE BALLETS
LE SPECTRE DE LA ROSE
From the photograph by
THEON N. MIRFIELD
THE theme of this Ballet is taken from a poem
by Theophile Gautier and was first suggested
to Diaghileff by a young man of letters, Jean
Vaudoyer, then almost unknown, as a subject for
a Ballet to the music of Weber’s “Invitation a la
Valse.”
The sentimental story is sometimes described in
theatre programmes rather colourlessly. Perhaps
the best description of it yet written is by Prince
Peter Levien, a writer on Ballet, who was present
at the first performance. He describes it as fol-
lows: “A young girl, returning from her first ball,
recalls in her bedroom the events of the evening,
falls into a reverie and kisses the rose given her
at the dance. Tired and happy, she sits down in
an armchair and falls quickly asleep. From the
moonlit night there flies through the open win-
dow into her room the incarnation of the spirit of
this rose. This is her dream. The Spirit of the rose
hovers about and floats through the room around
the sleeping girl, approaches her and finally draws
her, still asleep, into aerial dance with him. The
dance of the pair is the expression of a pure and
virginal love. At the end of it, the Spirit of the
rose gently sets the girl back in the armchair and,
when she lies still in a quiet dream, he gives her
a light pure kiss and flies through the window into
the moonlit night. The vision is over, the girl
wakes and, as she remembers her dream, her face
is lit by a serene smile, she lifts the fallen rose,
presses it to her lips, and the curtain falls.”


By ROY HODGKINSON
CRAYON ft WASH DRAWING


STORIES OF THE BALLETS
SWAN LAKE
THIS Ballet may be classed as one of the classics.
In its original form it was a four-act Ballet.
The music for it was written in 1876 by Tchai-
kovsky and a comparatively unsuccessful per-
formance given in Moscow in 1877. The book was
the joint work of Begitchev and Geltser. The
choreography by Petipa and Ivanoff was devised
for a new version of it in 1894, the same Ballet
being performed again eleven months later. The
Diaghileff Company produced it in London in 1911,
retaining Acts II and 111, and part of Act IV,
the scenery and costumes being by Korovine and
Gorovine. A similar version was given in London
from 1935 to 1937 by the Markova-Dolin Company.
The de Basil Company included it, in an abbre-
viated form, in their repertoire in their first London
Season in 1932. Act 11, with new scenery by
Korovine, was the version given by the Blum
Company with fresh scenery by Emile Bertin. It
was again produced by the Vic-Wells Company in
London from recollections of it by Markova and
Dolin. In 1934 the complete Ballet was revived
by N. Sergueeff, costumes and scenery being re-
designed by Hugh Stevenson. Thus this Ballet,
like GISELLE, has passed through many vicissi-
tudes. At one time unwieldy and over-lengthy, it
has survived the test of time, even though it has
been shortened from its original four acts to one.
In its abbreviated form the story is as follows:
A young Prince and his friends come with their
cross-bows to hunt by the shores of a lake where
they know swans are to be found. Engrossed in
their search they are overtaken by darkness. The
moon rises and, lighting up the lake’s shore, dis-
closes the figures of beautiful girls dancing in the
moonbeams. These are the spirits of the swans,
which assume human form at dusk. The Prince
loses his heart to the Queen of the Swans, he and
his courtiers joining in the dance, which continues
until the first streak of dawn. With the coming
of daylight the maidens are changed again into
swans and, spreading their wings, are soon lost
to sight. The Prince wishes to pursue them, but
an Evil Genius appears who renders his efforts
powerless. He makes a despairing attempt to
follow, but falls dead as he realises that he has
been bewitched.
There are many people to whom SWAN LAKE
does not appeal, its slender story being found un-
convincing and the dancing mostly academic. This
feeling will not, however, be shared by those who
regard Ballet as a serious art and not merely an
entertainment. Classical pieces of this kind are
necessary if the traditions of Ballet are to be main-
tained. Tradition and background exist in all
forms of Art and must be kept alive as standards
by which modern compositions are judged. SWAN
LAKE, one of the oldest Ballets which provide this
background, is so rich in classical dancing that it
survives the test of time, even in its abbreviated
form. It is for this reason, as well as for its lyrical
quality, that it is still performed. The Dance of
the Little Swans is a delightful feature, providing
a welcome lighter touch to the composition.
THE MUSIC
For the romantically-minded, SWAN LAKE
carries with it enough of the fairy-tale atmosphere
to furnish the subject of a Ballet. It makes no
claim upon credulity, nor does the music seek to
explain anything as in GISELLE. Tchaikovsky,
the composer, provides a background of mystic
suggestion and atmosphere suitable to the picture
created in the imagination with here and there
more lively melodies for the dancers, such as the
Waltz and Galop rhythms for corps de ballet and
beautiful pas de deux for the Swan Queen and
Prince, accompanied by the well-known violin solo
and violin and ’cello duet. The staccato air for the
Little Swans to dance to provides a lighter touch
where required. There are also solo numbers for
the Queen of the Swans to dance with the Prince.
The music thus conforms to the atmospheric effect
of the theme without attempting to parallel any
particular movement.


From the photograph by
HUGH P. HALL


A STUDY BACKSTAGE
by DARYL LINDSAY
PASTEL


STORIES OF THE BALLETS
LE BEAU DANUBE
THE gaiety and exuberance of this favourite
make it an exciting and stimulating number
on the programme of any performance of Ballet.
It was the creation of a great dancer and choreo-
grapher, Leonide Massine, who first devised it for
the de Basil Company, of which he was a member,
at Monte Carlo in 1933, adapting it from a previous
production in Paris nine years earlier, entitled
SOIREE DE PARIS. The music of Johann Strauss
was arranged and orchestrated by R. Desormiere
for the Monte Carlo production. The intriguing
backcloth, adapted from the drawings of Constan-
tin Guys, was the work of V. and E. Polunin, who
introduced with telling effect the stilted pomposity
of that artist’s work with its top-hatted carriage
folk and prancing horses; in fact, it is difficult to
imagine LE BEAU DANUBE with any other setting.
This decor has been used again by M. Borovansky,
whose intimate knowledge of the Ballet enabled
him to score in many countries one of his greatest
successes as the “Strong Man” a part created by
him in the original production. The part of the
Hussar, as danced by Massine, is perhaps the most
notable of his career. With him were associated in
the same Monte Carlo Season Riabouchinska, as
the Hussar’s fiancee, and Danilova in the part of
the Street Dancer.
The story of LE BEAU DANUBE is a slight one,
the action taking place in a Public Garden where
a holiday crowd is enjoying itself. Shop girls, work
people and a group of young men of fashion are
all infected with a spirit of gaiety, heightened
by the music of a band which is playing Strauss.
A young, handsome Hussar arriving on the scene
is at once attracted by a charming girl and a love
scene ensues between them. While this is in
progress a band of street players arrives to give a
performance, among them being a dancer, who
recognises the Hussar as a former lover. A violent
quarrel follows between the soldier’s new “flame”
and the Street Dancer, who reduces her rival to a
fainting condition and she is carried away by her
parents. The fickle Hussar drifts back to the Street
Dancer, but the girl, recovering from her faint,
returns and another scene takes place between the
two rivals. This pertinacity and determination
convince the Hussar that the girl really loves him
and he returns to her again. Her parents are not
at first inclined to regard their daughter’s choice
with favour, but eventually relent and bestow their
blessing. A general scene of rejoicing now takes
place and a quadrille is danced in which the happy
couple join. The Street Dancer resigns herself to
the inevitable and is reconciled to the two lovers,
all dancing happily together.
THE MUSIC
Numerous waltzes, polkas, galops, mazurkas and
can-cans are welded together to produce this merry
Strauss frolic. Inevitably, the obvious Die Fleder-
maus and Blue Danube waltzes are the most
popular part of the music with the public. Of all
these dainty trifles, perhaps the most attractive
are the little mazurkas danced by the Young Girl
with the Hussar. If the whole composition has a
somewhat “brass band” effect upon the listener,
this may be due to the air of gaiety suggested by a
holiday festival in a Viennese park where a band is
actually playing.


From the photograph by
THEON N. MIRFIELD


From the photograph by
THEON N. MIRFIELD


From the photograph by
THEON N, MIRFIELD


From the photograph by
THEON N. MIRFIELD


From the photograph by
THEON N. MIRFIELD


From the photograph by
THEON N. MIRFIELD


STORIES OF THE BALLETS
RUSSIAN DANCES
RUSSIAN DANCES
By ALAN McCULLOCH
medley of Russian national and folk
dances is another of those entertaining trifles
with which M. Borovansky in his lighter moments
has presented us. It is a piece with a laugh in
every situation which develops between a Russian
Moujik and his amply-proportioned spouse, who
entertain us by their antics. Presented at the end
of an evening of more serious Ballet, it provides a
welcome touch of light relief.
THE MUSIC
The music consists mainly of compositions by
Moussorgsky (Gopak and Une Larme) with, in
addition, a selection of folk dances, including the
Postillion’s Song (arr. Schindley) and a traditional
Russian polka.
The Moussorgsky Gopak is from the Opera “The
Fair at Soritschinski,” a well-known and popular
number.


RUSSIAN DANCES
by ROY HODGKINSON
CRAYON & WASH DRAWING


STORIES OF THE BALLETS
CARNAVAL
From the photograph by
THEON N. MIRFIELD
'“p'HIS popular “pantomime” Ballet is compara-
tively modern, its first performance being
given in the Pavlova Hall, St. Petersburg, in 1910.
It was afterwards added to the repertoire of the
Diaghileff Company at the Theatre Nationale de
I’Opera, Paris, in 1910, and, after being laid aside
for twenty-three years, was revived by the de Basil
Company, and by the Blum Company in 1936. The
Vic-Wells Ballet produced it three years before in
London (1933).
Although many of the Ballets were the product
of a number of stage producers working in colla-
boration, CARNAVAL belongs to Fokine alone. It
is the brightest star in his constellation of Ballets,
his interpretation of the music of Schumann being
so perfect that, in terms of dancing, the great com-
poser seems to have been reincarnated in the
person of Fokine.
There is here no story to tell; the scenes and
characters are from the Commedia dell’ Arte, in-
cluding the woebegone Pierrot, mischievous
Harlequin and fickle Columbine. Pierrot pursues
Butterfly, Harlequin and Columbine tease and
make fun of Pantalon, until the Philistines —
spoil-sports appear upon the scene, only in their
turn to be infected with the carnival spirit, and
join in the dancing.
THE MUSIC
Schumann’s liking for a number of short descrip-
tive pieces strung together to form a musical
composition sets a problem in choreography, which
perhaps only a master such as Fokine could hope
to solve. Each dance is almost miraculously en-
dowed by him with the true spirit of the composer’s
meaning, thus bringing the art of Ballet to its
truest artistic expressiveness.


From the photograph by
THEON N. MIRFIELD


From the photograph by
THEON N. MIRFIELD


From the photograph by
THEON N. MIRFIELD


STORIES OF THE BALLETS
EN SAGA
From the photograph by
THEON N. MIRFIELD
'TnHIS Ballet is essentially an expression of hatred
and rebellion against war. It was inspired
by a Finnish poem and composed by Laurel
Martyn.
Two Finnish peasant women are the central
figures; each has been deprived of a lover or hus-
band who has gone to the wars and, though the
older woman accepts her fate with resignation, the
younger is filled with rebellion and hatred. She
rails against fate and is reproached by her com-
panion for her want of self-control, but in vain—
war to her is a man-made curse that nothing can
justify. After a long period of anxiety and mental
suffering, the soldiers return, among them being the
husband of the older woman. Half demented with
disappointment at her lover’s non-arrival, the girl
is prostrated with grief and at first refuses consola-
tion. Resigned at last to a longer period of hoping
and waiting, she renews her vigil and one day, while
working in the fields, hears in the distance a
familiar step. Her heart wildly beating, she
realises that her betrothed has returned. They
rush to greet each other, her companions in the
harvest field gathering round to express their joy,
but in the distance there is heard the throbbing of
a drum. It is the call to war once again, which
woman hates, but man responds to as in ages past.
THE MUSIC
The music of Sibelius is almost invariably ex-
pressive of the Finnish national character and of
Finland itself. En Saga, one of his Tone Poems,
reflects the philosophy of the inevitable and a
certain bleak vastness associated in our minds
with the frozen North. This sombre and yet
attractive quality is expressed in the Ballet.


STORIES OF THE BALLETS
SEA LEGEND
THIS romantic allegory of the sea was one of a
number of Ballets composed by Esther Rofe,
when she and Winifred McDonnell, the Company’s
pianist, were fellow-students at the Royal College
of Music in London, Its first production took place
in Melbourne in 1944 at His Majesty’s Theatre —
an event of no small importance as it was the
first Ballet to be produced in Australia for which
Australians had written the music, composed the
dances, designed the decor, costumes and head-
dresses, the latter being by Jean Oberhansli. The
decor, showing the Sea Maiden and her lover sink-
ing through a labyrinth of kelp and undersea
caverns, was by Alan McCulloch. The choreography
and, indeed, the production of the whole Ballet,
was the work of Dorothy Stevenson, who herself
performed the part of the Sea Maiden, investing it
with vitality and distinction. In spite of the high
level of the dancing, SEA LEGEND was lacking in
effect as a stage picture, the figures of the per-
formers being often lost in the too similar tonality
of the backcloth. Needless to say, Ballet must
produce a satisfactory pattern, this being of the
same importance as the music and choreography.
In the Ballet “Man” is represented by a youth
whose passion for the sea leads him to forget that
he is “earthbound.” In this mood, while wandering
idly by the sea-shore, he meets the “Woman from
the Sea.” Fascinated by her beauty and strange-
ness, he woos her and she responds. They enjoy
their love for a brief space, but the Sea, ever
jealous of its power, rises in anger and demands
the return of the Sea Maiden who, though loth to
go, is drawn back into the depths. Overcome by
his desires, her lover attempts to follow her; he
rushes into the swirling waters in a mad attempt
to reclaim her, but in vain. The waves close over
him in vengeance and triumph.
THE MUSIC
A turbulent overture to this tragic Ballet pre-
pares the audience for what is to come, followed by
a robust dance by the Man, whose passion for the
sea is expressed in it. The music then settles into
a tender, undulating rhythm as the Woman
emerges from the waves, casting, as she does so,
her spell over the earth-bound Mortal. Responding
to a mutual attraction, the pair dance a rather
formal gavotte together, indicative of natural
restaint. As the two overcome this feeling and
yield to the glamour of love, the ocean protests by
surging arpeggi of sound, accompanied by snatches
of melody. Little 3-note figures conjure up visions
of sea-spray dashing against the rocks. With
growing anger the music expresses savage resent-
ment at the situation developing between the Sea
Maiden and the Mortal who dares to woo her, which
is expressed by a barbaric war-dance of the waves.
A fiendish jarring chord announces the end; the
Sea Maiden is reclaimed by the surging waters
into which her lover plunges to destruction. Here,
as if in sorrow at Man’s untimely fate, an epilogue
develops which is one of the loveliest melodies of
the Ballet. It is in the form of a sarabande lament
combining a wailing, haunting movement with a
restless percussion undercurrent of defiance and
indifference to suffering. The use of percussion in
announcing the final triumph of the sea is one of
the finest features of Esther Rofe’s music.


From the photograph by
THEON N. MIRFIELD


SEA LEGEND
By NORMAN MACGEORGE
OIL PAINTING




STORIES OF THE BALLETS
SIGRID
From the photograph by
"STEELE." Auckland, N.Z.
'"'pHIS Ballet was composed to the music of Grieg
by Laurel Martyn and was produced by her
several times in England with costumes designed
by Hugh Stevenson of the Vic-Wells Ballet Com-
pany, London.
The story, or legend, tells of a village maiden
who died of a broken heart, but was permitted to
return once a year accompanied by the guardian
of her soul, a ghostly figure who watches her every
movement. The village maidens long for Sigrid’s
guardian to dance with them, as they believe they
will then be lucky in love. The situation is
developed in a series of expressive dances which
continue until Sigrid returns with her companion
to the realm of shadows.
THE MUSIC
For this composition the Lyric Suite No. 5 by
Grieg is used, but not in its entirety, nor in its
original order, the sequence being:
Nocturne. Shepherd Boy.
Dance of the Dwarfs. Norwegian March.
A few bars of the Nocturne precede the rising of
the curtain.


STORIES OF THE BALLETS
PETROUCHKA
7\ LTHOUGH it cannot be denied that Benois had
Tx been shabbily treated in being deprived by
Diaghileff of the authorship of SCHEHERAZADE,
no one has ventured to dispute that PETROUCHKA
was entirely his own even though inspired by
Stravinsky’s music. At the same time, it must be
admitted that it was Diaghileff who first heard
Stravinsky play his new compositions, “Petrou-
chka’s Cry” and “Russian Dance,” and who
arranged that Benois should hear them. Diag-
hileff, as every student of Ballet and its history
knows, had an extraordinary faculty for discover-
ing talent in almost any medium and making use
of it for his theatrical schemes. Although unable
to originate anything himself, in spite of his pro-
found knowledge of the Arts, he was able to bring
together those who, powerless if left to themselves,
were able to create when brought into contact with
others. Thus the ideas which were forever fer-
menting in Diaghileff’s mind and which would
otherwise have been still-born, were given shape
and direction. Benois, with his technical know-
ledge of music and ability to read and play from a
score, added to his gifts as a first-rate painter and
stage designer, was just the one to provide the
link between Diaghileff, the dreamer of dreams,
and the technical efficiency with which Benois was
plentifully endowed.
The music of Stravinsky, already referred to,
seems from the first to have suggested to Benois
the idea of a Russian Fete with its booths, merry-
go-rounds, side-shows and paraphernalia of a
festive carnival and, most important of all in the
artist’s mind, the Russian “Petrouchka” or “Punch
and Judy” show, as we know it, with its dancing
puppets. The scene of the Ballet is laid in
Admiralty Square, St. Petersburg, in 1830, where
a carnival is taking place. An old Magician appears,
who produces his three puppets, Petrouchka or
Punch, the Dancer and the Moor, who all perform
a brisk dance. The Magician, by his mystic arts,
has endowed his puppets with human attributes,
so that they can love and hate as humans do.
Petrouchka, in spite of his ugly face and grotesque
figure, is very susceptible and makes love to the
Dancer, who is repelled by his unprepossessing
appearance and uncouth manners. She is attracted
instead by the Moor who, though stupid and spite-
ful, is richly dressed and glamorous and he re-
sponds to her approaches. Petrouchka, upon
finding himself outdone by his showy rival, falls
into a paroxysm of jealousy and throws the Moor
aside. Meanwhile, the gay carnival goes on; a
rich merchant strolling by with two gypsy girls,
tosses bank notes to the crowd, coachmen and
nurse-girls join in a dance, a dancing bear appears
and round it masked revellers frivol and prance.
The Magician’s booth with its half-human pup-
pets is almost forgotten until loud cries are heard.
Petrouchka is being pursued by the Moor, who
fells him to the ground with his scimitar and he
dies in the snow in the midst of the crowd. A
policeman brings the Magician forward, who
declares that Petrouchka is after all only a puppet
with a wooden body and a head of sawdust. The
crowd laughs and disperses, but Petrouchka returns
to life and climbs to the roof of the booth where he
defies the Magician and laughs at the people below,
who had thought him only a puppet.
Benois, the author of this dance drama in four
acts, intended it to reflect a purely Russian atmos-
phere. The original decor, as designed by him,
showed merry-go-rounds and stalls where sweets
are sold; even a steaming samovar (a real one)
stood in the corner. In spite of all these realistic
odds and ends, it is the music of Stravinsky which
makes the piece this and the opportunity the
Ballet gives for expert dancers to show their powers.
THE MUSIC
It was Stravinsky’s first intention in composing
PETROUCHKA to name it Konzertstuck, which
may explain why the piano part of the score is
made so prominent. As the composition developed,
the music seems to have become impregnated with
the spirit of the Russian Fair and with Petrouchka,
the tragic puppet.
The music has been organised by Stravinsky to
form a symphonic suite, which includes the follow-
ing selections used in the Ballet: Carnival, the
Magician’s Dance, Russian Dance, Petrouchka, The
Arab, Dance of the Ballerina, Carnival, Nurses’
Dance, the Bear and the Peasant, Men and Grooms,
The Masqueraders, The Quarrel, Death of Pet-
rouchka.


PETROUCHKA (Col. W. de Basil’s Ballet)
From the photograph by
THEON N. MIRFIELD


STORIES OF THE BALLETS
L’AMOUR RIDICULE
ACT II
From the photograph by
THEON N. MIRFIELD
TJ OTH the story and choreography of this light
Ballet were devised by M. Borovansky, who
used a Spanish setting for it in harmony with
music by Albeniz.
The story, laid in Northern Spain, concerns itself
with a pair of lovers, a mercenary father and a
middle-aged but wealthy suitor, with ensuing
complications, a plot dear to the heart of play-
wrights.
It tells of the predicament of a young Spanish
girl, whose indigent parent wishes her to marry an
elderly roue in the hope of sharing in the latter’s
wealth. The young lady, running true to tradi-
tional stage form, refuses this disposition of her
fate and prefers a young man of her acquaintance
who, though poor, is expecting an inheritance. This
classic situation results, as might be expected, in
strained relations between all concerned, culmin-
ating in an exchange of blows between the two
rival claimants for the young lady’s hand. The
young lover is eventually driven off by the enraged
father amidst the lamentations of all present,
except the roue, who rejoices, but not for long.
Soon the course of true love re-asserts itself by the
arrival of a messenger with the news that the
impecunious lover has come into a fortune. These
tidings completely alter the situation. The villain
of the piece is discomfited and retires to ponder
upon his “I’amour ridicule,” while the happy couple,
now completely acceptable to the mercenary
father, dance joyfully with their companions.


ACT II
From the photograph by
THEON N. MIRFIELD
THE MUSIC
A number of Spanish pieces and a Jota finale
provide the music for this Ballet. Many of the
Albeniz items are well known as violin, piano and
’cello solos.
They form a fascinating set, each number being
in excellent contrast with the one following it. All
contain enticing Spanish melodies and rhythms
enhanced by the use of castanets in the Sequidillas
and Jota, by which the dancing is stimulated.
A list of these is given in the order used in the
production.
ACT I: Cordoba, Tango, Prelude.
ACT II: Malaguena in A, Sevillanas, Malaguena
in B (Ist Section), Orientale, Tortzilo, Malaguena
in B (2nd Section), Sequidillas, Jota (Gitanerias
by Lecuona).


STORIES OF THE BALLETS
SCHEHERAZADE
THIS exotic choreographic drama is related to
the “Thousand and One Nights” tales, which
include “Sinbad, the Sailor,” “Ali Baba and the
Forty Thieves,” and many others.
The story chosen for SCHEHERAZADE by
Benois, who originated and designed the Ballet, is
that which describes the tragedy of Shah Riah and
the unfaithful Zobeide. For this story, part of the
Scheherazade Symphonic Suite by Rimsky-
Korsakoff was adapted by Benois.
Theatre programmes and various writers on
Ballet have for years given the authorship of
SCHEHERAZADE to Bakst, whose part in the pro-
duction was confined solely to the designing of the
highly realistic scenery and costumes, but who
took no part in the libretto.
The story upon which the Ballet is based is as
follows:
A Persian monarch, Shah Riah, is deeply in love
with Zobeide, one of the ladies of his Harem, but
suspects her of unfaithfulness to him. With these
suspicions in his mind he proposes to set a trap
for her and pretends to organise a hunting expedi-
tion with his brother, Shah Zeman, who aiso has
his suspicions. They leave the Palace with their
retainers, but no sooner are their backs turned
than the ladies of the Harem bribe the Chief
Eunuch to open the doors of the slaves’ quarters
and the negroes rush to join the sultanas. At this
moment Zobeide appears and compels the Eunuch
to open another door from which steps her
favourite slave, a handsome negro dressed in a
dazzling costume of cloth of gold. Slaves and
serving men, bearing food and wine, are called to
the scene of festivity and soon all are dancing in a
whirl of abandoned and guilty revelry. Suddenly,
without warning, the two Shahs return with their
armed retainers; Zobeide is in the arms of the
Golden Slave, and the ladies of the Palace are
responding to the temptations of the moment.
His worst suspicions confirmed, Shah Riah orders
his soldiers to instant action, swords flash from
their scabbards and soon all the culprits lie dead
upon the luxurious divans of the apartment.
Zobeide has, however, hidden herself in a corner
of the Seraglio and, creeping out, casts herself
weeping at the feet of the Shah, begging for
mercy. Enraged, but hesitating to kill the woman
he loves, he is inclined to relent, until his brother,
placing his foot upon the body of the Golden Slave,
whom he has decapitated with one blow of his
sword, points him out as the cause of Zobeide’s
dishonour. With a swift gesture Shah Riah orders
the soldiers to kill Zobeide, but, snatching a dagger
from one of them, she stabs herself and falls at
the feet of Shah Riah, who hides his face in his
hands to cover his tears.
The Persian classic, “Arabian Nights’ Entertain-
ment,” gives the history of Shah Riah as that of a
beneficent and humane potentate until the episode
of Zobeide occurred. This so preyed upon his mind
that he became a savage misogynist with so little
trust in women’s fidelity that he commanded his
Grand Vizier to procure a bride for him each night
who would be beheaded at dawn. This holocaust
of young, marriageable women seems to have con-
tinued for three years until Scheherazade, daugh-
ter of the Shah’s Vizier, decided to attempt the
rescue of the “loveliest maidens of the State” from
the cruelty of the tyrant. This young lady was, it
seems, a clever storyteller who had “perused the
books and annals of Kings and Princes, and had
collected a thousand books of history, of poets, and
knew them by heart.” She was also “witty, wise,
well-read, and well-bred.” Begging her father to
give her to the Shah for one night, she said “I
shall live to be a ransom for the daughters of
Moslems and the cause of their deliverance.”
Though in deadly fear for his daughter, the Grand
Vizier consented and she became a Queen for one
fateful night. As dawn approached, the girl asked
permission to tell one of her tales, which so en-
tranced the Shah that he postponed her execution,
commanding her to continue the story the follow-
ing night. Having contrived to leave each tale
unfinished so that it would be continued the next
night, Scheherazade managed to escape the
executioners until the Shah became so interested,
not only in the stories, but in the girl herself, that
his savage hatred of her sex was forgotten and
eventually she became his Queen.


DECOR AND COSTUMES for SCHEHERAZADE
Executed for 1946 Season of Ballet
Pen and Wash Drawing by
W. CONSTABLE
THE MUSIC
The parts of Rimsky-Korsakoff’s descriptive
symphonic suite, which are used in the Ballet,
are impregnated with the spirit of oriental romance
suggested by the Arabian Nights’ Tales. The
despotic rule of the Shah is suggested by the
opening theme of the music, which is loud and
arrogant, growing ever more peremptory as the
story progresses. This first motif recurs in various
guises throughout the piece. The other important
motif is a typical Rimsky-Korsakoff “spiral”
melody for solo violin, representing one of the
“Tales” being told to the Shah. These two
principal motifs appear frequently throughout the
suite, either alone or weaving in and out of each
other with telling effect.


By DARYL LINDSAY
CRAYON STUDIES


STORIES OF THE BALLETS
CAPRICCIO ITALIEN
From the photograph by
THEON N. MIRFIELD
npHIS gay and sparkling Ballet was evidently
designed by M. Borovansky to provide light
relief to the more solid Ballets presented in the
usual theatre programmes.
It does not tell a story, but just carries itself
along by a series of entertaining and amusing
dances arranged to the music of Tchaikovsky.
Peasant girls, flsherwomen, washerwomen and
their male opposite numbers attired in gay cos-
tumes flit to and fro in the measures of the dance.
This scene of revelry takes place in an Italian
town, where there dwells a “Gay Lady” and a
rather blase officer. Dispensing with the formality
of an introduction, these two perform a series of
vivacious dances, apparently merely for “the fun
of the thing.” The same spirit infects the washer-
women, who, only too ready to be diverted from
their mundane occupation, perform a charming
dance. The fisherfolk and peasants also make their
contributions to the gaiety of the scene.
THE MUSIC
The first movement is slow with a gypsy-like
flavour almost funereal in effect. This is soon
forgotten in the gaiety of the succeeding tune,
which recurs frequently throughout the Ballet
and to which the washerwomen dance, — a rather
ribald air in Italy, it is used by Tchaikovsky with
good humour and vigour. This and two other
sections of the music are the principal themes used
in the piece. One of these is the air to which the
officer and “Gay Lady” dance, the other being the
Brilliante Tarantella.


STORIES OF THE BALLETS
FANTASY
ON GRIEG’S CONCERTO
IN A MINOR
From the photograph by
HUGH P. HALL
nnHIS Ballet was designed by M. Borovansky to
T express the temptations with which Man is
beset. Gaiety, Desire and Remorse are represented
by the movements of the dancers. Grieg’s music
was chosen by M. Borovansky as expressive of the
central idea of the Ballet. It was written by the
composer while on his honeymoon and in this
concerto he reviews his past life in terms of music.
There are three separate movements in the Ballet,
each of which portrays the struggle against
temptation, ending finally in the triumph of good
over evil and in the safe haven of true love.
The costumes and scenery were designed by K.
and F. Martin, the former being made at the
Borovansky Academy by members of the cast. In
many respects it is one of the best of M. Borovan-
sky’s compositions, both as regards the choreo-
graphy and as a vivid expression of the composer’s
intention.


From the photograph by
THEON N. MIRFIELD


MARA NORTH
ROY HODGKINSON
PENCIL DRAWING


SOLOISTS
MARA NORTH
Joining the Borovansky Academy in 1940,
MARA NORTH has followed the fortunes of
the Company from the Studio to the public
stage. She has appeared in most of the
Ballets, first as a member of the corps de
ballet and later in solo parts. Her chief
parts include “Scotch Rhapsody” in FACADE,
“Prelude” in LES SYLPHIDES, solo in
CLAIR DE LUNE (Debussy), “pas de trots”
in SCRIABINS PRELUDES, “Princess Bat-
hilde” in GISELLE, “Discontented Woman”
in EN SAGA, and “Chiarina” in CARNAVAL.
JONET WILKIE
Leaving her native city of Wellington, New
Zealand, for England to study Dramatic Art,
JONET WILKIE became interested in Ballet
and decided to join the Borovansky Studio
in Melbourne. Her dramatic training and
ability were shown in a dance of her own
composition entitled RHAPSODY, to Brahms’
music, performed at the Studio before mem-
bers of the Melbourne Ballet Club. As a
member of the Company, she has danced
many parts, including the “Mother” in
GISELLE and “Woman” in FANTASY ON
GRIEG’S CONCERTO.
Page Seventy-five


NOEL MURRAY
One of the first to join the Borovansky
Academy of Ballet, NOEL MURRAY has
appeared in many of the Ballets given at the
Studio and in public performances. Her
chief parts are the “Woman” in FANTASY
ON GRIEG’S CONCERTO and “Spirit of the
Sea” in SEA LEGEND.
GRACE McLEAN
Joining the classes at the Borovansky
Academy in 1939, GRACE McLEAN first
danced in a Studio production in that year
entitled MOZARTINE. She has appeared in
all the Studio Ballets and afterwards with the
professional Company as a member of the
corps de ballet, and has been given a number
of solo parts in all the productions staged.


ALFRED ROSS
Before joining the Borovansky Company,
ALFRED ROSS had danced in various pro-
ductions presented by J. C. Williamson
Theatres in 1943, including Tyrolese Dances
in “White Horse Inn.” In the same year he
joined the classes at the Borovansky Academy.
After a period of service in the army he was
given his discharge and became a member
of the Borovansky Australian Ballet Company
during its season in Sydney.
ALFRED ROSS inherits his talent from his
mother, who was a celebrated Scottish dancer.
LESLEY SEXTON
Showing ability in dancing as a child,
LESLEY SEXTON joined the Borovansky
Academy in 1940, attending the night classes
after her daily employment in a city business
firm. Her first important part was in
FACADE in the “Country Dance,” which she
took when Dorothy Stevenson was unable to
appear in it and in which she has alternated
with her in subsequent performances.


VASSILIE TRUNOFF
Of Russian parentage, M. TRUNOFF was
born in Melbourne and is the Company’s
youngest male dancer. Joining the Borovansky
Academy in 1941, he later became a member
of the professional Company and one of its
soloists. His performances in the 1946
season have been notable, especially in
SCHEHERAZADE, LE SPECTRE DE LA ROSE
and TERRA AUSTRALIS.
JOAN POTTER
Joining the elementary class at the Boro-
vansky Academy at the age of twelve under
the tuition of Miss E. Weston, JOAN POTTER
continued her training until she became a
member of the corps de ballet in the profes-
sional Company. Her solo parts are in
CARNAVAL (Estrella) and LES SYLPHIDES;
she is also one of the four “Little Swans” in
SWAN LAKE.


MAX COLLIS
This young soloist in Ballet inherits his
talents for music and dancing from his
parents. He developed his gifts in the Arts
by becoming a mural decorator and designer
of interiors before joining the Borovansky
Academy. After a comparatively short ex-
perience of dancing in the classes there, he
was made a member of the professional Com-
pany, with which he has danced ever since
its formation. Taking at first small parts,
such as the “Squire” in FACADE and the
“Artist” in LE BEAU DANUBE, he is now
dancing the “Tarantella” in CAPRICCIO
IT ALIEN as understudy to Martin Rubinstein.
PHYLLIS KENNEDY
PHYLLIS KENNEDY received her first
lessons in dancing at the Jennie Brenan
School and later from David Lichine. After
a few years of professional dancing experience
with various J. C. Williamson Companies, she
joined the Borovansky Ballet Company. Her
solo parts include the “Polka” in FACADE
and the “Spirit” in VLTAVA. She has danced
in the “pas de trois” from GISELLE with
Corrie Lodders and Martin Rubinstein, and
in L’AMOUR RIDICULE.


BOROVANSKY AUSTRALIAN BALLET COMPANY
EDOUARD BOROVANSKY
LAUREL MARTYN
DOROTHY STEVENSON
TAMARA TCHINAROVA
EDNA BUSSE
JONET WILKIE
MARA NORTH
CORRIE LODDERS
GRACE McLEAN
NOEL MURRAY
JOAN POTTER
LESLEY SEXTON
RITA BANKS
SHIRLEY HANCOCK
STRELSA HECKELMAN
PEGGY CAMPBELL
GILLIAN LOWE
VALDA JACK
AVONNA JAMES
NGAIRE HARRISON
PEGGY SAGER
kay McClelland
HELENE FFRANCE
PHYLLIS KENNEDY
JOAN GADSDEN
ZELL SANDERS
DEARCY SMITH
JOAN HALLIDAY
PAMELA WYATT
JUDITH BURGESS
SERGE BOUSLOFF
MARTIN RUBINSTEIN
VASSILIE TRUNOFF
ALFRED ROSS
KEITH SINCOCK
MAX COLLIS
WILLIAM HUNT
WILFRED STEVENS
ST. JOHN FINLAY
LENNARD GODDARD
CHARLES LISNER
PAUL CLEMENTIN
KURT HERWEG (Conductor)
WINIFRED McDONNELL (Pianist)
FREDERICK P. STENNING
(Stage Manager)
ORCHESTRA
Conductors:
GABRIEL JOFFE KURT HERWEG
Pianist :
WINIFRED McDONNELL


AT REHEARSAL, Sydney, 1945
THE COMPANY


PIANO
BACK STAGE—DRURY LANE, LONDON
By DARYL LINDSAY
Winifred McDonnell
Having had the advantage of a scholar-
ship at the Royal College of Music, London,
Miss McDonnell became associated with the
London Art Theatre Studio and studied
Ballet performances at the Old Vic. Theatre
in the company of Esther Rofe, a fellow-
student at the College, composer of SEA
LEGEND and AUSTRALIAN BALLET. These
experiences were the basis of her subsequent
work in Australia as a pianist for Ballet, for
which her high musical attainments and
experience specially qualified her. Asso-
ciated with Mr. Eric Clapham in the early
Studio performances of the Company, she
has played, since it became professional, for
most of the Ballets presented.
Miss McDonnell’s talent for improvisation
has proved of great value in the preparation
of new Ballets,


ORCHESTRA
KURT HERWEG
Beginning his career as an orchestral con-
ductor at the age of nineteen, M. Herweg
has been associated with many musical and
theatrical companies in Europe, including
Grand Opera, Operetta and Symphony Con-
cert organisations. In England M. Herweg
was pianist for a time for the Rippman School
of Dancing, Composer for the Pepler Mime
Group, Teacher of Singing, and Arranger
for the 8.8. C. He has been on tour with
many famous dancers in Europe, and in
Australia has become well known as a con-
ductor of orchestra for performances of
Ballet by various companies.
During his association with the Borovansky
Australian Ballet Company M. Herweg’s
musical knowledge and ability have played
an important part in its development.
GABRIEL JOFFE
Born in Riga, M. Joffe has had a wide and
varied experience of music in many parts of
the world. He is an expert player of many
instruments. As a member of orchestras in
Europe, he has played for Grand Opera, Musi-
cal Comedy, Symphony Concerts, and Ballet,
eventually becoming Conductor for the de
Basil Company during its last season in Aus-
tralia. Since 1942 M. Joffe has conducted
orchestras in Australia. His expert knowledge
of the organisation of musical composi-
tion for Ballet plays an important part in the
the productions.
M. Joffe is the holder of a University Degree
in Law and speaks many languages, including
Russian, German, Estonian, Latvian and
English. His association with M. Borovansky
and his Company in their seasons of Ballet in
Melbourne has made him an enthusiastic
admirer of Australian talent, which he con-
siders the equal of that to be found in many
countries he has visited.


PAVLOVA
“BALLETOMANIA”
Arnold Haskell
KARSAVINA "L'ILLUSTRATION"
NIJINSKY "L'ILLUSTRATION”
FOKINE
“FOKINE”
Lincoln Kirstein


GREAT MASTERS OF BALLET
ANNA PAVLOVA was born on 31st January, 1882,
at St. Petersburg. Finishing at the Imperial
Ballet School at the age of seventeen as a “first
dancer,” Pavlova made her debut at the Marinsky
Theatre. She studied her first roles with Petipa
and became the supreme interpreter of the part
of “Giselle.”
In a continual search after perfection in her
art, Pavlova took lessons in Milan from the Italian
ballerina, Beretta, and later became the pupil of
Eugenie Sokolova. In 1905 Cecchetti became her
teacher and, with another maitre de ballet, I.
Clustine, played an important part in her career.
In 1907, born of a mutual admiration, Fokine’s
composition for Pavlova, THE DYING SWAN, to
music by Saint-Saens, was danced for the first
time by her. It has since passed into the history
of Pavlova Ballet as a perfect example of the art
of individual expression in ballet and Pavlova’s
memory is enshrined in it.
Pavlova joined Diaghileff for the first season of
Russian Ballet in Paris in 1909. Then followed
Pavlova’s many tours which, managed by her
husband, M. Dandre, took her and her company
to all parts of the world, including Australia.
Pavlova died in January, 1931.
TAMARA KARSAVINA’S first dancing lessons
were given her by her father, who was first dancer
and mime at the Imperial Ballet in St. Petersburg.
Her dramatic ability was evident early in her life
—that ability which later made it possible for
Karsavina to realise and express so perfectly the
delicate romanticism of the Girl in LE SPECTRE
DE LA ROSE and, at the same time, the fantastic
creation of the FIREBIRD, which are her supreme
achievements.
Karsavina made her debut at the Marinsky
Theatre in 1902. Her teachers at the Imperial
Ballet School, and the critics, expressed their faith
in her and were enthusiastic about her future.
Karsavina accompanied Diaghileff to Paris in
1909 and he offered her an engagement for two
years. During this time she remained permanently
attached to the Marinsky Theatre as ballerina and
travelled from Western Europe to Russia and back
to dance in both places. As the Queen in
THAMAR, a role created for her by Fokine, and the
Dancer in PETROUCHKA, she has no equal.
Karsavina was later to prove again her extreme
versatility by dancing successfully in the newest
choreographic experiments the ballets of Leo-
nide Massine.
VASLAV NIJINSKY came of a family of dancers
and received his training at the Imperial School
of Ballet in St. Petersburg. His dancing was bril-
liant from the beginning, and he quickly became
famous throughout Russia, partnering Kches-
sinska, Pavlova and Karsavina.
Nijinsky was the first Russian male dancer to
be seen in Western Europe when Diaghileff took
him to Paris in 1909. Here his genius was acclaimed
in LES SYLPHIDES, as the Golden Slave in
SCHEHERAZADE, as Harlequin in CARNAVAL,
the Prince in GISELLE, as Petrouchka, and in LE
SPECTRE DE LA ROSE, in which ballet he literally
“leapt” to fame.
In 1912 Nijinsky made his debut as Diaghileff’s
choreographer with his ballet L’APRES-MIDI
D’UN FAUNE, which is his only composition to
survive. His collaboration with Stravinsky and
the painter Roerich in LE SACRE DU PRINTEMPS
resulted in a ballet received sensationally in Paris
in 1913.
Nijinsky’s phenomenal career ended tragically in
a mental breakdown.
MICHEL FOKINE was born in St. Petersburg on
26th April, 1880, and entered the Imperial School
of Ballet in 1889.
His choreograpic activities began in 1894, when
he conceived a plan for a Ballet based on the
Greek legend of Daphnis and Chloe, and those
ideas which were to affect so vitally the whole
development of Russian Ballet began to take
shape.
Fokine’s theory of Ballet as an art form, with
freedom for expression and allied to the sister arts
of music and painting, was magnificently appa-
rent in his compositions during the period of
Fokine Ballet, works which established his repu-
tation in Russia CARNAVAL, CHOPINIANA,
UNE NUIT D’EGYPTE, PAVILLON D’ARMIDE
and PRINCE IGOR.
In 1909, the year of the first Diaghileff season
of Russian Ballet in Paris, these ballets were
presented to Western Europe for the first time
and during his association with Diaghileff Fokine
produced his other masterpieces —LE SPECTRE
DE LA ROSE, THE FIREBIRD, NARCISSE, SCHE-
HERAZADE and PETROUCHKA. He returned to
the Marinsky Theatre in 1913 as maitre de ballet
and, on joining Diaghileff again later, COQ D’OR
was among the ballets he composed.
(Janet Thomas)


STRELSA HECICELMAN
Beginning to study the
art of Ballet in her birth-
place, Brisbane, Queens-
land, STRELSA HEC-
KELMAN’S first activities
were in connection with
the Royal College of
Dancing Examinations.
Her success in these,
although then only four-
teen years of age, led to
her inclusion in the
corps de ballet of the de
Basil Russian Company,
then on tour in Australia.
Upon the conclusion of
this engagement, she be-
came a member of the
Kirsova School of Ballet
in Sydney, being asso-
ciated with it for four
years, including perfor-
mances in the Australian
capital cities.
Important Australian Dancers Invited to
Join the Company:
PEGGY SAGER
Known throughout Australia as a
ballerina of talent, PEGGY SAGER re-
ceived her early training in her birth-
place, Auckland, N.Z. Having won the
Gold Medal Championship Competition
for Ballet Dancing at Wellington, she
came to Australia, joining the Kirsova
Ballet as one of its principals.
Her most notable successes have been
in classical Ballets, including the part
of the “Swan Queen’’ in LE LAC DES
CYGNES, dancing the Prelude in LES
SYLPHIDES, and other important solos.


KATHLEEN GORHAM
KATHLEEN GORHAM received her first
lessons in dancing from Lorraine Norton. Her
first important public appearance was as solo
dancer in “Peter Pan’’ at the Minerva
Theatre, Sydney.
As a protegee of Leon Kellaway, her pro-
gress continued, eventually leading her to
further studies under Mme. Borovansky at
the Studio, Roma House, Melbourne. Her
abilities being recognised by Mme. and M.
Borovansky, she was offered a place in the
Company, with which she has been dancing
during its season of 1946.
HELENE FFRANCE
Beginning her training for Ballet in Sydney
at the age of thirteen, HELENE FFRANCE
two years later joined the Kirsova Company
as a member of the corps de ballet.
As her powers developed, she was given
various solo parts and in 1945 joined the
Borovansky Company, with which she toured
Australia and New Zealand.
Her grace as a dancer has been shown in
many Ballets in which she has appeared.


JUDITH BURGESS
Born in Sydney, New South Wales, JUDITH
BURGESS, at the age of sixteen, began her
studies by joining classes formed in connec-
tion with the examinations held by the Royal
Academy of Dancing. After a three years’
course her abilities led to an engagement with
the Kirsova Ballet Company for a five months’
tour of Australia. Joining the Borovansky
Company in 1944, as a member of the corps
de ballet, she is now appearing in Ballets
produced during its season of 1946.
JOAN GADSDEN
Beginning her career as a dancer by joining
classes doing a three-year course in Ballet in
Sydney, JOAN GADSDEN further developed
her powers as a member of the Kirsova Ballet,
with which she toured the Australian States.
Upon the conclusion of this engagement, she
was invited to become a member of the
Borovansky Company, appearing in its latest
productions at His Majesty’s Theatre, Mel-
bourne, 1946.


DANCER POSING
By BERNARD LAWSON
OIL PAINTING




STORIES OF THE BALLETS
VLTAVA
From the photograph by
THEON N. MIRFIELD
TN adapting the second cycle of the Symphonic
Poem by the Bohemian master musician, Sme-
tana (1824-1884), M. Borovansky has created a
poetic Ballet expressive of the great river Moldau
as it flows from its source to the sea. It is the
Bohemia of old that he presents to us with its
woods and cultivated plains, its romantic castles
and ancient legends.
THE MUSIC
The music of “Vltava,” known also as the Moldau,
was written by Smetana as part of a cycle of
compositions entitled “My Country” and is re-
garded as one of his finest creations. The first
movement begins with two of the wood-wind
instruments playing little runs as if in answer to
one another, creating the effect of bubbling
brooklets. Soon these are absorbed in a broad-
ened 6-8 rhythm, the melody becoming stronger
and more definite. This indicates the union of
smaller streams to form the river Moldau, which
is announced by the violins. Here the human
element is introduced by the calls of hunters,
which slightly affect the previous rhythm without
interfering with the underlying structure of the
music, which throughout emphasises the flowing
of the stream. A Czech polka is introduced,
reminiscent of the composer’s “Bartered Bride”
polkas, but the change is only temporary, as after
this interlude, the dominating rhythm re-asserts
itself. Harps and cantabile sound as night falls
and moonlit fairies emerge. As the river nears
the rapids, the tympani announce it with strident
notes of splashing waters. The 6-8 rhythm now
dominates the composition as the final majestic
sweep of the finale approaches, celebrating the
union at last of the river with the sea.


STORIES OF THE BALLETS
TERRA AUSTRALIS
First Production His Majesty’s Theatre, Melbourne, May, 1946.
Story by Thomas L: Rothfield. Music by Esther Rofe. Choreography by E. Borovansky.
RIGINALLY a two-act piece, this symbolic
Australian Ballet has been condensed into one.
The second act was to have introduced the second
phase of Australian development after the coming
of the white man, including the gold rush era and
the capitalist settler. This was found to be too
lengthy and perhaps unsuitable as a sequel to the
abstract treatment of the first act.
The rising of the curtain displays a scene shown
in two levels, background and foreground. In the
background is a primitive bush scene with cave
representing age-old Australia, while the fore-
ground shows the scene of its future destiny. The
corps de ballet symbolising “Earth” enters, ex-
pressing by a sombre dance the fate which hovers
over the ancient continent, about to pass from its
sleep of many thousand years to a new awakening.
When this prophetic dance is concluded, two
figures appear in the bushland of the upper stage
—“Australia” and her lover, the “Aboriginal,” who
dance a pas de deux together. “Australia” is beau-
tiful in form and feature and, although so far
satisfied with her primitive lover, is by no means
free from a weariness and boredom which she ex-
presses in her dance and her readiness for any new
adventure. Not so her lover, who for ages past has
been content with her; nor does he realise how dear
she is to him until he sees in the distance a
being of unknown form the “Explorer” who
approaches the pair in their bushland paradise,
both “Australia” and her primeval lover hiding
in fear in their cave. Here “Earth” appears
again; she represents the element from which
continents spring, indifferent to those who woo
her not, but ever ready to welcome the new-
comer as one who may make her fruitful.
Intrigued and excited at these new and fateful
happenings with which she feels her future is
concerned, “Australia” ventures forth from her
leafy bower, gazing in wonder upon the strange
white man, — it is the fateful moment when
“Australia” must choose between the old love and
the new. The music now enters upon the “Aus-
tralia” theme, heralding the dawn of a new era.
“Australia” and the “Explorer” are drawn together
by an irresistible force, which is expressed by the
music and dance which interpret it.
Meanwhile, the “Aboriginal” who, with jealous
hatred has been watching this scene from his
hiding place, now steps forth and is about to inter-
vene when “Australia” soothes him with a lullaby,
by which he is calmed into sleep. Awaking from
this fatal slumber, he realises that he has been
duped. Furiously he throws himself upon the
“Explorer” only to be struck a mortal blow, which
fells him to the ground where he is mourned
over by “Earth,” who lays him to rest. Deeply
moved, “Australia” and her new-found lover watch
this final scene, then turn away together towards
their future destiny.
THE MUSIC
The music of TERRA AUSTRALIS follows very
closely the evolution of the story, the main
characters being “Earth,” “Aboriginal,” “Explorer”
and “Australia.” Each of these has a musical
theme which, developed in the score, mirrors the
choreography and story, knitting the whole Ballet
together in a remarkable unity. The scoring is
full and at times complex, contrasting moods of
character being ably handled, — the “Explorer’s”
strong westernised theme, musically, is well con-
trasted with the primitive harmonies of the
“Aboriginal.” The dignity of “Earth” and the
richness and beauty of “Australia” make moving
and lovely sections of the work. The passion and
intensity of the drama of the conflict between the
“Aboriginal” and the “Explorer” is particularly
exciting and the Ballet, which began with a serene
pastoral section, closes with a triumphant “fate
theme” in which the “Explorer” leads “Australia”
into the future. —(Analysis by Gabriel Joffe.)
AUTHOR S NOTE:
In spite of the spirited and accomplished dancing
by the principals in this Ballet, the use of two stage
levels can scarcely be regarded as a successful expedient
—especially when combined with a naturalistic decor.
The effect of a raised backstage is to upset the scale
of proportion and destroy the “third dimension’’
which, though not inseparable from pictorial art, is
a logical necessity in stage setting.


From the photograph by
THEON N. MIRFIELD


STORIES OF THE BALLETS
LE MARIAGE D'AURORE
From a photograph of Covent Garden Ballet by
THEON N. MIRFIELD
LOVERS of classical ballet look forward to the
appearance of LE MARIAGE D’AURORE on
their programmes and are not disappointed, for
this one act from THE SLEEPING PRINCESS has
been included in the repertoire of Ballet companies
since it was first given in this form by Diaghileff
in Paris in 1922. The original four-act ballet was
the result of a close collaboration between Petipa
and Tchaikovsky and was produced at the Mary-
insky Theatre in St. Petersburg in 1890 in a lavish
fashion. THE SLEEPING PRINCESS made ballet
history in Russia and was revived by Diaghileff on
a grand scale in an important production at the
London Alhambra in 1921. The names of many
great dancers are associated with it.
Against the splendour of Bakst’s decor, in gor-
geously-coloured costumes designed by Benois and
Gontcharova, a series of disconnected dances or
divertissements, presumably taking place at the
marriage feast of Aurora, are performed. Pre-
ceded by a Prelude and Polonaise, the Dance of
the Seven Ladies of Honour and their Partners
culminate in six Variations danced by each Lady
in turn. After the Scene and Dance of the
Duchesses and a Farandole, the delightful episode
of Little Red Riding Hood occurs, to be followed
by the brilliant Blue Bird, so exhilarating in its
effect. The dance of the Porcelain Princesses and
that of the Three Ivans (an addition by Nijinska)
the one charmingly circumspect, the other care-
lessly abandoned has each its special appeal.
The Ballet has its climax in the pas de deux danced
by Aurora and her Prince. Here the principles of
classicism in Ballet enable the ballerina to make
her particular contribution to the art of the
dance through the medium of her artistry and
personality.


STORIES OF THE BALLETS
LES PRESAGES
From a photograph of Monte Carlo Ballet by
THEON N. MIRFIELD
r ~pHIS Ballet is one of Leonide Massine’s three
“choreographic symphonies,” whose appear-
ance gave rise to controversy over the use of
symphonic or abstract music to serve the ends of
Ballet. In it movement and sound coincide with
magnificent effect, contributed to by the surrealiste
backcloth and costumes of Andre Masson.
The expressiveness of the music of Tchaikov-
sky’s Fifth Symphony led to its attachment to a
definite programme in LES PRESAGES with its
theme the struggle of man against destiny. The
introduction gives out the “Fate” theme and
“Action” appears swirling round the stage alone,
and then she unites with the corps de ballet in a
group movement. Accompanied by an exquisite
flowing melody, the entry of the lovers (“Passion”
and “The Hero”) is one of the great moments of
the Ballet. This scene works up to a struggle
against temptation and desire and for a time the
lovers seem unable to resist “Fate” and the “Des-
tinies”; finally, they are re-united and leave the
stage in the manner of their slow and beautiful
entry. The dancing in the third part is allied to
the Valse in the Symphony and executed by
“Frivolity” with Variations by the corps de ballet.
The last scene is dominated by “Fate” and the
introductory theme—the men, led by “The Hero,”
aroused by evil to war, the women at first restrain-
ing them and then compelled to follow. But the
spirit of war is conquered and to the last trium-
phant notes of the music “The Hero” is held aloft
by the corps de ballet en masse with “Action,”
“Passion” and “Frivolity” at the foot.


STORIES OF THE BALLETS
GRADUATION BALL
From a photograph of Col. W. de Basil's Ballet by
THEON N. MIRFIELD
7\ SERIES of hitherto unpublished MS. melodies
'L* by Johann Strauss, discovered by Lichine
and Dorati in the State Opera House Library,
Vienna, led to the composition of this gay ballet
by Lichine two years before he produced it for the
first time in Sydney in 1940, when on tour with the
de Basil Company.
Written in the romantic spirit of the early 19th
Century, the scene is laid in the Rococo hall of a
Viennese girls’ school, where the pupils are giving
their annual ball, to which the cadets of a nearby
Military Academy have been invited. As the girls
flit excitedly about putting final touches to their
party frocks, a burst of martial music announces
the arrival of the young soldiers, headed by their
Governor, whose stiff military air and resplendent
uniform indicates that he is not a man to be trifled
with. The girls’ school-mistress is evidently of
quite another opinion, as she immediately begins a
violent flirtation with him. Making the most of
this unexpected lapse on the part of their usually
sedate chaperone, the girls turn the occasion into
a wild revel, leading to one divertissement after
another, finishing with “Mazurka Flirtation,”
danced by the mistress and her General, who
betrays an astonishing agility in spite of his
elderly appearance. This brings the festivities to
a close and a sharp order calls the platoon together.
The cadets depart save one, who lingers with his
school-girl companion. The mistress, however,
is now herself again and, after sending the cadet
to join his detachment, she leads her charge away.


by DARYL LINDSAY
PENCIL STUDIES


THE COMING OF BALLET TO
AUSTRALIA
npHE credit of introducing Ballet to Australia is
- due to the enterprise of J. C. Williamson
Theatres Limited, which brought to this country
many famous dancers and their companies.
The first celebrated dancer to visit Australia was
Adeline Genee, who came in 1913 and was followed
in 1926 by the incomparable Pavlova, then at the
zenith of her powers. After this season she again
visited Australia with her company in 1928. In
1934 the Dandre-Levitoff Company, with Anatole
Vilzak as its principal dancer, gave a series of
performances, the success of which led to the
engagement of the Monte Carlo Russian Ballet for
an Australian season in 1936. Many famous
dancers were then seen in Australia for the first
time, including Woizikowsky, Blinova, Yousskevitch
and Helene Kirsova, all of whose classical dancing
gave a foretaste of what was yet to come.
It was in the years 1938, 1939 and 1940, however,
that Australian audiences were to enjoy to the
full the development of the “Golden Age” of classi-
cal Russian Ballet, which had already conquered
Europe, by the visit to this country of the Covent
Garden Russian Ballet. Among its members were
many youthful dancers whose fame is world-wide,
including Baronova, Riabouchinska and Shabe-
levsky, whose inspired dancing as the Golden Slave
in SCHEHERAZADE will long be remembered.
Early in 1939 the great choreographer and maitre
de ballet, Fokine, visited Australia, and in the
same year Riabouchinska, Toumanova, Lifar,
Lichine, Petroff and Dolin, all of them of equal
celebrity, and members of Col. W. de Basil’s Ballet
Company, which at His Majesty’s Theatre, Mel-
bourne, achieved a record season of ten weeks.
The distinguished dancers, Nemtchinova and
Tchernicheva, and a youthful corps de ballet of
surpassing quality added to the strength of the
combination, which performed many Ballets new
to Australia, including GRADUATION BALL,
PAGANINI, CHOREARTIUM, and SYMPHONY
FANTASTIQUE.
The outbreak of world war in 1939 brought this
rich period of Ballet to an end, not only in Aus-
tralia, but also in Europe and later in America.
M. and Mme. Borovansky were then in Australia
and, finding their return to Europe impossible,
decided to form an Australian Ballet Company of
their own with, as its nucleus, a number of dancers
of international repute, who, like themselves, were
unable to leave. The success of the Company
formed is recorded in these pages from its first
Studio productions to its eventual engagement by
J. C. Williamson Theatres as a professional com-
pany, which, under its auspices, has performed
five seasons of Ballet in Melbourne, two each in
Sydney, Adelaide and Brisbane, one in Perth, and
one in New Zealand and Tasmania.
ART AND FINANCE
In every large city the problem of how theatres
can be made to pay and yet produce good art is
one that managements have to face. On the one
hand is the mere amusement-seeking theatre-goer
and on the other the critic of better judgment who
is apt to regard existing theatre organisations with
hostility. There can be little doubt, however, that
the public gets what it wants. This being so, the
obvious remedy is to improve the quality of stage
art (which is being done by many of the smaller
theatre companies) and thus set a higher standard
in the community.
Should a good Australian dramatic company be
formed which could both pay its way and stage
productions comparable with world standards, it
would doubtless be given a chance to make good.
The stage entrepreneur is not necessarily a profit-
seeker. The box office, which is the first considera-
tion if theatre doors are to remain open, is his
limitation.
European traditions in stage art are the found-
ation on which its highest forms have been built.
In order to achieve success on the basis of such
traditions, the experience of professional artists
must be added without whose guidance and trained
taste all effort will reach only to the point of
amateur performance.
The public theatre is the true testing place of
theatrical performance, it being to the actor or
dancer what the concert hall is to the musician
and the picture gallery to the painter. Whether
the standards of these are to be high or low is
determined by the average rather than specialised
taste. Much, however, can be done by the theatre
organisations to encourage the latter so that a
higher level can be attained without danger of a
decrease in revenue.


THE FUTURE OF BALLET IN
AUSTRALIA
TT is difficult to foresee the future line of develop-
ment of Ballet in Australia.
The Melbourne Ballet Club of more than four
hundred members still holds its monthly meetings
in spite of having no dancers to perform for it,
these having been absorbed by the Borovansky
Australian Ballet Company. Thus, by a curious
irony of fate, the Club’s success in fostering
dancers of talent has deprived it of its chief reason
for existence. Dismayed yet undefeated, it carries
cn with lectures on Art and Music with occasionally
moving pictures of Ballet from overseas or a party
to welcome home wandering ballerinas. Led by its
resourceful and energetic President, Lady Best, the
Ballet Club awaits the day when once more it will
have a troupe of dancers under its wing, which can
only be brought about by the forming of a new
group under an efficient teacher using the Club as a
preliminary training centre for the public stage.
In this way only can the Club carry out its true
purpose.
The Melbourne Ballet Season of 1946 proved
convincingly that the Australian public has taken
Ballet to its heart, every performance having been
greeted by a crowded house and an appreciative
audience quick to realise its artistic significance.
This ready response to Ballet as a comparatively
new art form is not confined to Australia it is
world-wide. In America the art of the theatre in
general is also on the up-grade, as Sheldon Cheney,
founder of the Theatre Arts Magazine, New York,
writes in his book, “The Theatre”: “For we are
at the breaking of a new era after the decline
into the commonplace, the gross and commercial,
fineness inevitably re-asserts itself. The theatre
as a temple of art is regaining control over it, not
as a literary exercise or the spectator’s means of
escape from living, or to a super-photograph, but
as an activity sufficient unto itself.”
The association of the Borovansky Australian
Ballet Company with the musical play, “The
Dancing Years” (1946), does not imply, as some may
think, a step down from the purist point of view.
Even if the music is light and the dancing less
interpretative than in some of the more serious
Ballets, the Company is being kept together and
in practice a consideration which the manage-
ment of J. C. Williamson Theatres has, no doubt,
had in mind in combining it with Ivor Novello’s
production. Painters often have to leave their
own creative painting for other work that offers,
without loss of prestige, returning again to their
own line of development in due course.
The future of Ballet in Australia seems to be
fairly well established. Young dancers will doubt-
less be found to carry on the fine tradition already
created by M. and Mme. Borovansky and those
experienced dancers with whom they have been
associated. Madame Kirsova, in Sydney, has also
played an important part both in giving per-
formances of Ballet and training dancers of talent,
many of whom are now members of the Borovansky
Company.
THE AMATEUR IN BALLET
There exists in this as in other countries a desire
for self-expression through the dance and for
creative composition either based upon existing
choreographic forms or entirely independent of
them.
In this field of activity open to the amateur
dancer of talent much may be done to impart
new life to the rigid methods of the purely
classical school provided these have been studied
and understood. Sooner or later the dancer of
ambition and talent will look to the public stage
where the true verdict of comparative criticism
free from friendly partisanship will be given.
While there is room for the originator in Ballet,
as in the other arts, it is with the intelligent
theatre-going public that the verdict rests. It will
in the end decide whether the dancer or prac-
titioner of any other art is to be regarded as a
serious exponent of it or merely an amateur.


Colour Plates and Half-tone Blocks:
BEN JORDAN-DOLPHIN PTY. LTD.
PATTERSON, SHUGG PTY. LTD.


NORMAN MACGEORGE was born in
South Australia and educated at St.
Peter’s College, Adelaide. He first
studied art at the Adelaide School of
Design under Harry P. Gill, later joining
the National Gallery School, Melbourne,
where he studied for two years.
His best known large pictures afe
“Mother of Pearl,” now in the Melbourne
National Gallery, and “River Depths,”
purchased by the Commonwealth of
Australia for Government House, Can-
berra. During a painting tour in Europe
he became influenced by the modern
school, developing the broader technique
shown in later works.
Both as a critic and lecturer in art at
the Melbourne National Gallery and for
the University of Melbourne Extension,
Mr. Macgeorge has covered a wide field
of art in its historical aspects, and has
lately been drawn to the art of Ballet,
which has led to the authorship of
“Borovansky Ballet in Australia and New
Zealand.”




