

Sy
fern
, V> ? c
t x /tH t TRe. tr te wy l/,fL XX/\ V 7 f I
>: ?


.
: .fo '


Art. IV. 1. Letter to Lari Bathurst , by the Honourable H.
Grey Bennet, M. P.
2, Report of the Commissioner of Inquiry into the State of the
Colony of New South Wales. Ordered by the House of Com-
mons to be printed, 19th June, 1822.
IX/Tr Bigge?s Report is somewhat long, and a little clumsy;
but it is altogether the production of an honest, sensible,
and respectable man, who has done his duty to the public, and
justified the expense of his mission to the fifth, or pickpocket
quarter of the globe.
What manner of man is Governor Macquarrie ??ls all that
Mr Bennet says of him in the House of Commons true ? These
are the questions which Lord Bathurst sent Mr Bigge, and very
properly sent him, 28,000 miles to answer. The answer is, that
Governor Macquarrie is not a dishonest man, nor a jobber;
but arbitrary, in many things scandalously negligent, very often
wrong-headed, and, upon the whole, very deficient in that good
sense, and vigorous understanding, which his new and arduous
situation so manifestly requires.
Ornamental architecture in Botany Bay! How it could en-
ter into the head of any human being to adorn public build-
ings at the Bay, or to aim at any other architectural purpose
but the exclusion of wind and rain , we are utterly at a loss to
conceive. Such an expense is no lonly lamentable for the
waste of property it makes in the particular instance, but be-
cause it destroys that guarantee of sound sense which the Go-
vernment at home must require in those who preside over dis-
tant colonies. A man who thinks of pillars and pilasters, when
half the colony are wet through for want of any covering at
all, cannot be a wise or prudent person. Pie seems to be ig-
norant, that the prevention of rheumatism in all young colo-
nies, is a much more important object than the gratification of
taste, or the display of skill.
? I suggested to Governor Macquarrie the expediency of stopping
all work then in progress that was merely of an ornamental nature,
and of postponing its execution till other more important buildings
were finished. With this view it was, that I recommended to the Gover-
nor to stop the progress of a large church, the foundation of which
had been laid previous to my arrival, and which, by the estimate of
Mr Greenway the architect, would have required six years to com-
plete. By a change that I recommended, and which the Governor
adopted, in the destination of the new court-house at Sydney, the ac-
commodation of a new church is probably by this time secured. As


I conceived that considerable advantage had been gained by inducing
Governor Macquarrie to suspend the progress of the larger church,
I did not deem it necessary to make any pointed objection to the
addition of these ornamental parts of the smaller one; though I re-
gretted to observe in this instance, as well as in those of the new
stables at Sydney, the turnpike gate house and the new fountain
there, as well as in the repairs of an old church at Paramatta, how
much more the embellishment of these places had been considered
by the Governor, than the real and pressing wants of the colony.
The buildings that I had recommended to his early attention in Sid-
ney were, a new gaol, a school-house, and a market-house. The
defects of the first of these buildings will be more particularly point-
ed out when I come to describe the buildings that have been erected
in New South Wales. It is sufficient for me now to observe, that
they were striking, and of a nature not to be remedied by additions
or repairs. The other two were in a state of absolute ruin; they
were also of undeniable importance and necessity. Having left Sid-
ney in the month of November 1820 with these impressions, and
with a belief that the suggestions I had made to Governor Mac-
quarrie respecting them had been partly acted upon, and would con-
tinue to be so during my absence in Van Dieman?s Land, it was not
without much surprise and regret that I learnt, during my residence
in that settlement, the resumption of the work at the large church
in Sydney, and the steady continuation of the others that I had ob-
jected to, especially the Governor?s stables at Sydney. I felt the
greater surprise in receiving the information respecting this last men-
tioned structure, during my absence in Van Dieman?s Land, as the
Governor himself had, upon many occasions, expressed to me his
own regret at having ever sanctioned it, and his consciousness of its
extravagant dimensions and ostentatious character. ?Report , pp. 51,
52.
One of the great difficulties in Botany Bay, is to find proper
employment for the great mass of convicts who are sent out.
Governor Macquarrie selects all the best artisans, of every de-
scription, for the use of Government; and puts the poets, at-
tornies and politicians, up to auction. The evil consequences
of this are manifold. In the first place, from possessing so
many of the best artificers, the Governor is necessarily turn-
ed into a builder; and immense drafts are drawn upon the
Treasury at home, for buildings better adapted for Regent
Street than the Bay. In the next place, the poor settler, find-
ing that the convict attorney is very awkward at cutting timber,
or� catching kangaroos, soon returns him upon the hands of
Government, in a much worse plight than that in which ho
was received. Not only are governors thus debauched into
useless and expensive builders, but the colonists, who arc schem-


ing and planning with all the activity of new settlers, cannot
find workmen to execute their designs.
What two ideas are more inseparable than Beer and Bri-
tannia? ?what event more awfully important to an English
colony, than the erection of its first brewhouse??and yet it
required, in Van Dieman?s Land, the greatest solicitation to
the Government, and all the influence of Mr Bigge, to get it
effected. The Government, having obtained possession of the
best workmen, keep them; their manumission is much more
infrequent than that of the useless and unprofitable convicts ;
in other words, one man is punished for his skill, and another
rewarded for his inutility. Guilty of being a locksmith?
guilty of stone masonry, or brick-making;?these are the se-
cond verdicts brought in, in New South Wales; and upon
them is regulated the duration or mitigation of punishment a-
warded in the mother country. At the very period when the
Governor assured Lord Bathurst, in his despatches, that he
kept and employed so numerous a gang of workmen, only be-
cause the inhabitants could not employ them, Mr Bigge in-
forms us, that their services would have been most acceptable
to the colonists. Most of the settlers, at the time of Mr
Bigge?s arrival, from repeated refusals and disappointments, had
been so convinced of the impossibility of obtaining workmen,
that they had ceased to make application to the Governor. Is
it to be believed, that a governor, placed over a land of convicts,
and capable of guarding his limbs from any sudden collision
with odometrous stones, or vertical posts of direction, should
make no distinction between the simple convict and the double
and treble convict ?the man of three juries, who has three
times appeared at the Bailey, trilarcenous?three times driven
over the seas ?
* I think it necessary to notice the want of attention that has pre-
vailed, until a very late period, at Sydney, to the circumstances of
those convicts who have been transported a second and a third time.
Although the knowledge of these facts is transmitted in the hulk
lists, or acquired without difficulty during the passage, it never has
occurred to Governor Macquarrie or to the superintendant of con-
victs, to make any difference in the condition of these men, not
even to disappoint the views that they may be supposed to have
indulged by the success of a criminal enterprise in England, and by
transferring the fruits of it to New South Wales.
? To accomplish this very simple but important object, nothing
more was necessary than to consign these men to any situation ra-
ther than that which their friends had selected for them, and dis-
tinctly to declare in the presence of their comrades at the first mus-
jter on their arrival, that no consideration or favour would be shown


to those who had violated the law a second time, and that the miti-
gation of their sentences must be indefinitely postponed. ? ? Report ,
p. 191
We were not a little amused at Governor Macquarrie?s lau-
reate ?a regular Mr Southey?who, upon the King?s birth-day,
sings the praises of Governor Macquarrie. * The case of this
votary of Apollo and Mercury was a case for life; the offence
a menacing epistle, or, as low people call it, a threatening letter.
He has been pardoned, however?bursting his shackles, like Or-
pheus of old, with song and metre, and is well spoken of by Mr
Bigge, but no specimen of his poetry given. One of the best and
most enlightened men in the settlement, appears to be Mr Mars-
den, a clergyman of Paramatta. Mr Bennet represents him as a
gentleman of great feeling, whose life is imbittered by the
scenes of horror and vice it is his lot to witness at Paramatta.
Indeed he says of himself, that, in consequence of these things,
? he does not enjoy one happy moment from the beginning to
the end ol the week ! ? This letter, at the time, produced a
very considerable sensation in this country. The idea of a
man of refinement and feeling wearing away his life in the midst
of scenes of crime and debauchery to which he can apply no
corrective, is certainly a very melancholy and affecting picture;
but there is no story, however elegant and eloquent, which does
not require, for the purposes of justice, to be turned to the o-
ther side, and viewed in reverse. The Rev. Mr Marsden (says
Mr Bigge) being himself accustomed to traffic in spirits , must
necessarily feel displeased at having so many public houses li-
censed in the neighbourhood, (p. 14.)
? As to Mr Marsden?s troubles of mind, ? (says the Governor), ? and
pathetic display of sensibility and humanity, they must be so deeply
seated, and so far removed from the surface, as to escape all possible
observation. His habits are those of a man for ever engaged in some
active, animated pursuit. No man travels more from town to town, or
from house to house. His deportment is at all times that of a person the
most gay and happy. When I was honoured with his society, he was
by far the most cheerful person I met in the colony. Where his hours
of sorrow were spent, it is hard to divine ; for the variety of his pursuits,
both in his own concerns, and in those of others, is so extensive, in
farming, grazing, manufactories, transactions, that, with his clerical
duties, he seems, to use a common phrase, to have his hands full of
work. And the particular subject to which he imputes this extreme
depression of mind, is, besides, one for which few people here will
give him much credit. ? ? Macquarrie's Letter to Lord Sidmouth, p. 18.
There is certainly a wide difference between a man of so
Vide Report, 146.


much feeling, that he has not a moment?s happiness from the
beginning to the end of the week, and a little merry bustling
clergyman, largely concerned in the sale of rum, and brisk at a
bargain for barley. Mr Bigge?s evidence, however, is very much
in favour of Mr Marsden. He seems to think him a man of
highly respectable character and superior understanding, and
that he has been dismissed from the magistracy by Governor
Macquarrie, in a very rash, unjustifiable, and even tyrannical
manner; and, in these opinions, we must say, the facts seem to
bear out the report of the Commissioner.
Colonel Macquarrie not only dismisses honest and irreproach-
able men in a country where their existence is scarce, and their
services inestimable, but he advances convicts to the situation and
dignity of magistrates. Mr Bennet lays great stress upon this, and
makes it one of his strongest charges against the Governor; and
the Commissioner also takes part against it: But we confess we
have great doubts on the subject; and are by no means satisfied,
that the system of the Governor was not, upon the whole, the
wisest, and best adapted to the situation of the colony. Men
are governed by words; and under the infamous term convict ,
are comprehended crimes of the most different degrees and
species of guilt. One man is transported for stealing three hams
and a pot of sausages; and, in the next birth to him on board
the transport, is a young surgeon, who has been engaged in the
mutiny at the Nore; the third man is for extorting money; the
fourth was in a respectable situation of life at the time of the
Irish Rebellion, and was so ill read in history, as to imagine
that Ireland had been ill treated by England, and so bad a
reasoner as to suppose, that.nine Catholics ought not to pay
tithes to one Protestant. Then comes a man who set his house
on fire, to cheat the Phoenix Office; and, lastly, that most glar-
ing of all human villains, a poacher, driven from Europe, wife
and child, by thirty lords of manors, at the Quarter-sessions,
for killing a partridge. Now, all these are crimes no doubt?
particularly the last; but they are surely crimes of very different
degrees of intensity, to which different degrees of contempt and
horror are attached, ?and from which those who have commit-
ted them may, by subsequent morality, emancipate themselves,
with different degrees of difficulty, and.with more or less of
success. A warrant granted by a reformed bacon stealer, would
be absurd ; but there is hardly any reason why a foolish hot-
brained young blockhead, who chose to favour the mutineers at
the Nore, when he was sixteen years of age, may not make a
very loyal subject, and a very respectable and respected magis-
trate, when he is forty years of age, and has cast his Jacobinc


teeth, and fallen into the practical jobbing and loyal baseness
which so commonly developes itself about that period of life.
Therefore, to say that a man must be placed in no situation of
trust or elevation, as a magistrate, merely because he is a convict,
is to govern mankind with a dictionary, and to surrender sense
and usefulness to sound. Take the following case, for instance,
from Mr Bigge.
? The next person, from the same class, that was so distinguished
by Governor Macquarrie, was the Rev. Mr Fulton. He was trans-
ported by the sentence of a court martial in Ireland, during the re-
bellion ; and on his arrival in New South Wales in the year 1800,
was sent to Norfolk Island to officiate as chaplain. He returned to
New South Wales in the year 1804, and performed the duties of
chaplain at Sydney and Paramatta.
? In the divisions that prevailed in the colony previous to the ar-
rest of Governor Bligh, Mr Fulton took no part; but, happening to
form one of his family when the person of the governor was menac-
ed with violence, he courageously opposed himself to the military
party that entered the house, and gave an example of courage and
devotion to the authority of Governor Bligh, which, if partaken either
by the officer or his few adherents, would have spared him the hu-
miliation of a personal arrest, and rescued his authority from the dis-
grace of open and violent suspension. ? ? Report, pp. 83, 84.
The particular nature of the place too must be remembered.
It is seldom, we suspect, that absolute dunces go to the Bay,
but commonly men of active minds, and considerable talents
in their various lines, ?who have not learnt, indeed, the art
of self-discipline and control, but who are sent to learn it
in the bitter school of adversity. And when this medicine
produces its proper effect, ?when sufficient time has been
given to show a thorough change in character and disposi-
tion, ?a young colony really cannot afford to dispense with
the services of any person of superior talents. Activity, re-
solution and acuteness, are of such immense importance in
the hard circumstances of a new State, that they must be
eagerly caught at, and employed as soon as they are discovered.
Though all may not be quite so unobjectionable as could be
wished?
? Res dura, et regni novitas me talia cogiunt
Moliri r
as Colonel Macquarrie probably quoted to Mr Commissioner
Bigge. As for the conduct of those extra-moralists, who come
to settle in a land of crime, and refuse to associate with a con-
vict legally pardoned, however light his original offence, how-
ever perfect his subsequent conduct?we have no toleration for*
such folly and foppery. To sit down to dinner with men who


have not been tried for their lives, is a luxury which cannot be
enjoyed in such a country. It is entirely out of the question;
and persons so dainty, and so truly admirable, had better settle
at Ciapham Common than at Botany Bay. Our trade in
Australasia is to turn scoundrels into honest men. If you come
among us, and bring with you a good character, and will lend
us your society as a stimulus and reward to men recovering
from degradation, you will confer the greatest possible benefit
upon the colony; but if you turn up your nose at repentance,
insult those unhappy people with your character, and fiercely
stand up as a moral bully, and a virtuous braggadocio, it
would have been far better for us if Providence had directed
you to any other part of the globe than to Botany Bay,?which
was colonized, not to gratify the insolence of Pharisees, but to
heal the contrite spirit of repentant sinners. Mr Marsden, who
has no happiness from six o?clock Monday morning, till the
same hour the week following, will not meet pardoned convicts
in society. We have no doubt Mr Marsden is a very respect-
able clergyman ; but is there not something very different from
this in the Gospel ? The most resolute and inflexible persons
in the rejection of pardoned convicts, were some of the march-
ing regiments stationed at Botany Bay,?men, of course, who
had uniformly shunned in the Old World, the society of
gamesters, prostitutes, drunkards, and blasphemers?who had
ruined no tailors, corrupted no wives, and had entitled them-
selves, by a long course of solemnity and decorum, to indulge
in all the insolence of purity and virtue.
In this point then of restoring convicts to society, we side, as
far as the principle goes, with the Governor; but we are far from
undertaking to say that his application of the principle has been
on all occasions prudent and judicious. Upon the absurdity of
his conduct in attempting to force the society of the pardoned
convicts upon the undetected part of the colony, there can be
no doubt. These are points upon which every body must be
allowed to judge for themselves. The greatest monarchs in
Europe cannot control opinion upon those points,?sovereigns
far exceeding Colonel Lachlan Macquarrie, in the antiquity of
their dynasty, and the extent, wealth, and importance of their
empire.
* It was in vain to assemble them (the pardoned convicts) even on
public occasions, at Government House, or to point them out to the
especial notice and favour of strangers, or to favour them with
particular marks of his own attention upon these occasions, if they
still continued to be shunned, or disregarded by the rest of the
pompany.


* With the exception of the Reverend Mr Fulton, and, on some oc-
casions, of Mr Redfern, I never observed that the other persons of
this class participated in the general attentions of the company; and
the evidence of Mr Judge Advocate Wylde and Major Bell, both
prove the embarrassment in which they were left on occasions that
came within their notice.
? Nor has the distinction that has been conferred upon them by Go-
vernor Macquarrie, produced any effect in subduing the prejudices or
objections of the class of free inhabitants to associate with them.
One instance only has occurred, in which the wife of a respectable
individual, and a magistrate, has been visited by the wives of the of-
ficers of the garrison, and by a few of the married ladies of the colony.
It is an instance that reflects equal credit upon the individual herself,
as upon the feelings and motives of those by whom she has been so
noticed; but the circumstances of her case were very peculiar ; and
those that led to her introduction to society, were very much of a
personal kind. It has generally been thought, that such instances
would have been more numerous, if Governor Macquarrie had al-
lowed every person to have followed the dictates of their own judg-
ment upon a subject, on which, of all others, men are least disposed
to be dictated to, and most disposed to judge for themselves.
? Although the emancipated convicts, whom he has selected from
their class, are persons who generally bear a good character in New
South Wales, yet that opinion of them is by no means universal.
Those, however, who entertained a good opinion of them, would
have proved it by their notice, as Mr M?Arthur has been in the habit
of doing, by the kind and marked notice that he took of Mr Fitz-
gerald ; and those who entertained a different opinion, would not have
contracted an aversion to the principle of their introduction, from
being obliged to witness what they considered to be an indiscreet and
erroneous application of it. ? ? Report, p. 150.
We do not think Mr Bigge exactly seizes the sense of Co-
lonel Macquarrie?s phrase, when the Colonel speaks of restoring
men to the rank of society they have lost. Men may either be
classed by wealth and education, or by character. All honest
men, whether counts or cobiers, are of the same rank, if classed
by moral distinctions. It is a common phrase to say, that such
a man can no longer be ranked among honest men; that he
lias been degraded from the class of respectable persons; and
therefore, by restoring a convict to the rank he has lost, the Go-
vernor may very fairly be supposed to mean the moral rank. In
discussing the question of granting offices of trust to convicts,
the importance of the Scelerati must not be overlooked. Their
numbers are very considerable. They have one-eighth of all the
granted land in the colony ; and there are among them individu-
als of very large fortune. Mr Redfern has 2600 acres, Mr Lord
4-665 acres, and Mr Samuel Terry 19,000 acres. As this


man?s history is a specimen of the mud and dirt out of which
great families often arise, let the Terry Filii, the future
warriors, legislators, and nobility of the Bay, learn from what,
and whom they sprang.
* The first of these individuals, Samuel Terry, was transported to
the colony when young. He was placed in a gang of stone-masons
at Paramatta, and assisted in the building of the gaol. Mr Marsden.
states, that daring this period, he was brought before him for ne-
glect of duty, and punished ; but, by his industry in other ways, he
was enabled to set up a small retail shop, in which he continued till
the expiration of his term of service. He then repaired to Sydney,
where he extended his business, and, by marriage, increased his capi-
tal. He for many years kept a public house and retail shop, to which
the smaller settlers resorted from the country, and where, after intoxi-
cating themselves with spirits, they signed obligations and powers of
attorney to confess judgement, which were always kept ready for
execution. By these means, and by an active use of the common
arts of over-reaching ignorant and worthless men, Samuel Terry has
been able to accumulate a considerable capital, and a quantity of
land in New South Wales, inferior only to that which is held by Mr
D?Arcy Wentworth. H,e ceased, at the late regulations introduced
by the magistrates at Sydney, in February 1820, to sell spirituous
liquors, and he is now become one of the principal speculators in
the purchase of investments at Sydney, and lately established a water-
mill in the swampy plains between that town and Botany Bay, which
did not succeed. Out of the 19,000 acres of land held by Samuel
Terry, 140 only are stated to be cleared ; but he possesses 1450
head of horned cattle, and 3800 sheep.?? Report , p. 141.
Upon the subject of the New South Wales Bank, Mr Bigge
observes, ?
? Upon the first of these occasions, it became an object both with
Governor Macquarrie, and Mr Judge Advocate Wylde, who took an
active part in the establishment of the bank, to unite in its favour the
support and contributions of the individuals of all classes of the colony.
Governor Macquarrie felt assured, that, without such cooperation,
the bank could not be established; for he was convinced that the
emancipated convicts were the most opulent members of the com-
munity. A committee was formed for the purpose of drawing up the
rules and regulations of the establishment, in which are to be found
the names of George Howe, the printer of the Sydney Gazette, who
was also a retail dealer; Mr Simon Lord, and Mr Edward Eager,
all emancipated convicts, and the last only conditionally.
? Governor Macquarrie had always understood, and strongly wish-
ed, that in asking for the cooperation of all classes of the community
in the formation of the bank, a share in its direction and management
should also be communicated to them.'? Report, p. 150.
In the discussion of this question, we became acquainted with
7


a piece of military etiquette, of which w T e were previously igno-
rant. An officer, invited to dinner by the Governor, cannot
refuse, unless in case of sickness. This is the most complete
tyranny we ever heard of. If the officer comes out to his duty
at the proper minute, with his proper number of buttons and
epaulettes, what matters it to the Governor, or any body else,
where he dines ? He may as well be ordered what to eat, as
where to dine, ?be confined to the upper or under side of the
meat, ?be denied gravy, or refused melted butter. But there is
no end to the small tyranny, and puerile vexations of a military
life.
The mode of employing convicts upon their arrival, appears
to us very objectionable. If a man is skilful as a mechanic,
he is added to the Government gangs; and in proportion to
his skill and diligence, his chance of manumission, or of re-
mission of labour, is lessened. If he is not skilful, or not skil-
ful in any trade wanted by Government, he is applied for by
some settler, to whom he pays from ss. to 10s. a week ; and is
then left at liberty to go where, and work to whomsoever he
pleases. In the same manner, a convict who is rich is applied
for, and obtains his weekly liberty and idleness by the purchas-
ed permission of the person to whom he is consigned.
The greatest possible inattention or ignorance appears to have
prevailed in manumitting convicts for labour, ?and for such la-
bour 1 not for cleansing Augean stables, or draining Pontine
marshes, or damming out a vast length of the Adriatic, but
for working five weeks with a single horse and cart in making
the road to Bathurst Plains. Was such labour worth five
pounds? And is it to be understood, that liberty is to be re-
stored to any man who will do five pounds worth of work in
Australasia ? Is this comment upon transportation to be cir-
culated in the cells of Newgate, or in the haunts of those per-
sons who are doomed to inhabit them ?
? Another principle by which Governor Macquarrie has been guided
in bestowing pardons and indulgences, is that of considering them as
rewards for any particular labour or enterprise. It was upon this
principle, that the men who were employed in working upon the Ba-
thurst road, in the year 1815, and those who contributed to that
operation by the loan of their own carts and horses, or of those that
they procured, obtained pardons, emancipations, and tickets of leave.
To 39 men who were employed as labourers in this work, three free
pardons were given, one ticket of leave, and 35 emancipations ; and
two of them only had held tickets of leave before they commenced
their labour. Seven convicts received emancipations for supplying
horses and carts for the carriage of provisions and stores as the party
was proceeding; six out of this number having previously held tick-
ets of leave.


? Eight other convicts (four of whom held tickets of leave) re-
ceived emancipations for assisting with carts, and one horse to each,
in the transport of provisions and baggage for the use of Governor
Macquarrie and his suite, on their journey from the river Nepean to
Bathurst, in the year 1816 ; a service that did not extend beyond
the period of five weeks, and was attended with no risk, and very
little exertion.
? Between the months of January 1816 and June 1818, nine con-
victs, of whom six held tickets of leave, obtained emancipations for
sending carts and horses to convey provisions and baggage from Pa-
ramatta to Bathurst, for the use of Mr Oxley, the surveyor-general,
in his two expeditions into the interior of the country. And in the
same period, 23 convict labourers and mechanics obtained emanci-
pations for labour and service performed at Bathurst.
* The nature of the services performed by these convicts, and the
manner in which some of them were recommended, excited much
surprise in the colony, as well as great suspicion of the purity of
the channels through which the recommendations passed. ? ? Report ,
pp. 122, 123.
If we are to judge from the number of jobs detected by Mr
Bigge, Botany Bay seems very likely to do justice to the mo-
ther country from whence it sprang. Mr Redfern, surgeon,
seems to use the public rhubarb for his private practice. Mr
Hutchinson, superintendant, makes a very comfortable thing
of the assignment of convicts. Major Druit was found selling
their own cabbages to Government in a very profitable manner;
and many comfortable little practices of this nature are noticed
by Mr Bigge.
Among other sources of profit, the superintendant of convicts
was the banker; two occupations which seem to be eminent-
ly compatible with each other, inasmuch as they afford to the
superintendant the opportunity of evincing his impartiality, and
loading with equal labour every convict, without reference to
their banking accounts, to the profit they afford, or the trouble
they create. It appears, however (very strangely), from the
Report, that the money of convicts was not always recovered
with the same readiness it was received.
Mr Richard Fitzgerald, in September 1819, was comptroller
of provisions in Emu Plains, storekeeper at Windsor, and su-
perintendant of Government works at the same place. Tie was
also a proprietor of land and stock in the neighbourhood, and kept
a public-house in Windsor, of which an emancipated Jew was
the ostensible manager, upon whom Fitzgerald gave orders for
goods and spirits in payment for labour on the public works.
These two places are fifteen miles distant from each other, and
convicts are to be watched and managed at both. It cannot be


imagined that the convicts are slow in observing or following
these laudable examples; and their conduct will add another
instance of the vigilance of Macquarrie?s government.
? The stores and materials used in the different buildings at Syd-
ney, are kept in a magazine in the lumber yard, and are distributed
according to the written requisitions of the different overseers that
are made during the day, and that are addressed to the storekeeper
in the lumber yard. They are conveyed from thence to the build-
ings by the convict mechanics ; and no account of the expenditure
or employment of the stores is kept by the pverseers, or rendered to
the storekeeper. It was only in the early part of the year 1820,
that an account was opened by him of the different materials used in
each work or building; and in February 1821, this account was con-
siderably in arrear. The temptation, therefore, that is afforded to
the convict mechanics who work in the lumber yard, in secreting
tools, stores, and implements, and to those who work at the different
buildings, is very great, and the loss to Government is considerable.
The tools, moreover, have not latterly been mustered as they used
to be once a month, except where one of the convicts is removed
from Sydney to another station. ? ? Report, pp. 36, 37.
If it was right to build fine houses in a new colony, common
sense seems to point out a control upon the expenditure, with
such a description of workmen. What must become of that
country where the buildings are useless, the Governor not wise,
the public the paymaster, the accounts not in existence, and all
the artisans thieves ?
An horrid practice prevailed, of the convicts accepting a sum
of money from the captain, in their voyage out, in lieu of their
regular ration of provisions. This ought to be restrained by
the severest penalties.
What is it that can be urged for Governor Macquarrie, after
the following picture of the Hospital at Paramatta ? It not
only justifies his recal, but seems to require (if there are any
means of reaching such neglect) his severe punishment.
* Ihe women, who had become most profligate and hardened by
habit, were associated in their daily tasks with those who had very
lately arrived, to whom the customs and practices of the colony were
yet unknown, and who might have escaped the consequences of such
pernicious lessons, if a little care, and a small portion of expense,
had been spared in providing them with a separate apartment during
the hours of labour. As a place of employment, the factory at Pa-
ramatta was not only very defective, but very prejudicial. The in-
sufficient accommodation that it afforded to those females who might
be well disposed, presented an early incitement, if not an excuse,
for their resorting to indiscriminate prostitution; and on the evening
of their arrival at Paramatta, those who were not deploring their
state of abandonment and distress, were traversing the streets in


search of the guilty means of future support. The state in which
the place itself was kept, and the state of disgusting filth in which
I found it, both on an early visit after my arrival, and on one pre-
ceding my departure ; the disordered, unruly, and licentious appear-
ance of the women, manifested the little degree of control in which
the female convicts were kept, and the little attention that was paid
to any thing beyond the mere performance of a certain portion of
labour. ? ? Report, p. 70.
It might naturally be supposed, that any man sent across the
globe with a good salary, for the express purpose of governing,
and, if possible, of reforming convicts, would have preferred
the morals of his convicts to the accommodation of his horses.
Let Mr Bigge, a very discreet and moderate man, be heard
upon these points.
? Having observed, in Governor Macquarrie?s answer to Mr Mars-
den, that he justified the delay that occurred, and was still to take
place, in the construction of a proper place of reception for the fe-
male convicts, by the want of any specific instructions from your
Lordship to undertake such a building, and which he states that he
solicited at an early period of his government, and considered indis-
pensable, I felt it to be my duty to call to the recollection of Go-
vernor Macquarrie, that he had undertaken several buildings of much
less urgent necessity than the factory at Paramatta, without waiting
for any such indispensable authority; and I now find, that the con-
struction of it was announced by him to your Lordship in the year
1817, as then in his contemplation, without making any specific allu-
sion to the evils which the want of it had so long occasioned ; that
the contract for building it was announced to the public on the 21st
May 1818, and that your Lordship?s approval of it was not signified
until the 24th August 1818, and could not have reached Governor
Macquarrie?s hands until nearly a year after the work had been un-
dertaken. It appears, therefore, that if want of authority had been
the sole cause of the delay in building the factory at Paramatta, that
cause would not only have operated in the month of March 1818,
but it would have continued to operate until the want of authority
had been formally supplied. Governor Macquarrie, however, must
be conscious, that after he had stated to Mr Marsden in the year
1815, and with an appearance of regret, that the want of authority
prevented him from undertaking the construction of a building of
such undeniable necessity and importance as the factory at Paramat-
ta, he had undertaken several buildings, which, though useful in
themselves, were of less comparative importance ; and had commenc-
ed, in the month of August 1817, the laborious and expensive con-
struction of his own Stables at Sydney, to which I have already allud-
ed, without any previous communication to your Lordship, and in
direct opposition to an instruction that must have then reached him,
and that forcibly warned him of the consequences.?? Report, p. 71.
It is the fashion very much among the Tories of the House
VOL. xxxviii. no. 75. G


of Commons, and all those who love the effects of public li*-
berty without knowing or caring how it is preserved, to at-
tack every person who complains of abuses, and to accuse him
of gross exaggeration. No sooner is the name of any public
thief, or of any tormentor, or oppressor, mentioned in that Ho-
nourable House, than out bursts the spirit of jobbing eulogium,
and there is not a virtue under heaven which is not ascribed to
the delinquent in question, and vouched for by the most irre-
fragable testimony. If Mr Bennet or Sir Francis Burdett had
attacked them, and they had now been living, how many honour-
able members would have vouched for the honesty of Dudley
and Empsom, the gentleness of Jeffries, or the genius of Black-
more ? What human virtue did not Aris and the governor of
Ilchester jail possess? Who was not ready to come forward to
vouch for the attentive humanity of Governor Macquarrie? What
scorn and wit would it have produced from the Treasury Bench,
if Mr Bennet had stated the superior advantages of the horses
over the convicts??and all the horrors and immoralities, the filth
and wretchedness, of the female prison of Paramatta ? Such a
case, proved, as this now is beyond the power of contradiction,
ought to convince the most hardy and profligate scoffers, that
there is really a great deal of occasional neglect, and oppression
in the conduct of public servants; and that in spite of all the
official praise, which is ever ready for the perpetrators of crime,
there is a great deal of real malversation which should be
dragged to the light of day, by the exertions of bold and virtu-
ous men. If we had found, from the Report of Mr Bigge, that
the charges of Mr Bennet were without any, or without ade-
quate foundation, it would have given us great pleasure to have
vindicated the Governor; but Mr Bennet has proved his indict-
ment. It is impossible to read the foregoing quotation, and not
to perceive, that the conduct and proceedings of Governor
Macquarrie imperiously required the exposure they have re-
ceived; and that it would have been much to the credit of Go-
vernment, if he had been removed long ago, from a situation
which, but for the exertions of Mr Bennet, we believe he would
have held to this day.
The sick, from Mr Bigge?s Report, appear to have fared as
badly as the sinful. Good water was scarce, proper persons to
wait upon the patients could not be obtained; and so numerous
were the complaints from this quarter, that the Governor makes
an order for the exclusion of all hospital grievances and com-
plaints, except on one day in the month ?dropsy swelling how-
ever, fever burning, and ague shaking, in the mean time, with-
out waiting for the arrangements of Governor Macquarrie, or
consulting the Mollia temporafandi.


In permitting individuals to distil their own grain, the Govern-
ment of Botany Bay appears to us to be quite right. It is impos-
sible, in such a colony, to prevent unlawful distillation to a con*
siderable extent; and it is as well to raise upon spirits (as some-
thing must be taxed) that slight duty which renders the contraband
trade not worth following. Distillation too, always ensures a
magazine against famine, by which New South Wales has more
than once been severely visited. It opens a market for grain
where markets are very distant, and where redundance and fa-
mine seem very often to succeed each other. The cheapness
of spirits, to such working people as know how to use them
with moderation, is a great blessing; and we doubt whether
that moderation, after the first burst of ebriety, is not just as
likely to be learnt in plenty, as in scarcity.
We w r ere a little surprised at the scanty limits allowed to con-
victs for sleeping on board the transports. Mr Bigge (of whose
sense and humanity we really have not the slightest doubt)
states eighteen inches to be quite sufficient?twice the length
of a small sheet of letter-paper. The printer?s devil who car-
ries our works to the press, informs us, that the allowance to
the demons of the type is double foolscap length, or twenty-
four inches. The great city upholsterers generally consider six
feet as barely sufficient for a person rising in business, and as-
sisting occasionally at official banquets.
Mrs Fry?s * system is well spoken of by Mr Bigge; and its
useful effect in promoting order and decency among floating
convicts fully admitted.
In a voyage to Botany Bay by Mr Read, he states that,
while the convict vessel Jay at anchor, about to sail, a boat
from shore reached the ship, and from it stepped a clerk of the
Bank of England. The convicts felicitated themselves upon the
acquisition of so gentlemanlike a companion; but it soon turn*
* We are sorry it should have been imagined, from some of our
late observations on prison discipline, that we meant to disparage the
exertions of Mrs Fry. For prisoners before trial, it is perfect; but
where imprisonment is intended for punishment, and not for deten-
tion, it requires, as we have endeavoured to show, a very different
system. The Prison Society (an excellent, honourable, and most
useful institution of some of the best men in England) have certainly,
in their first Numbers, fallen into the common mistake, of supposing
that the reformation of the culprit, and not the prevention of the crime,
was the main object of imprisonment; and have, in consequence,
taken some false views of the method of treating prisoners?the ex-
position of which, after the usual manner of flesh and blood, makes
them a little angry. But, in objects of so high a nature, what mat-
ter* t vko is right ??the only question is, What is right ?
G 2


Ed out that the visitant had no intention of making so long a
voyage. Finding that they were not to have the pleasure of
his company, the convicts very naturally thought of picking
his pockets; the necessity of which professional measure was
prevented, by a speedy distribution of their contents. Forth
from his bill-case, this votary of PJutus drew his nitid New-
lands; all the forgers and utterers were mustered on deck;
and to each of them was well and truly paid into his hand, a
five pound note; less acceptable, perhaps, than if privately re-
moved from the person, but still joyfully received. This was
well intended on the part of the Directors: But the consequences
it is scarcely necessary to enumerate; a large stock of rum was
immediately laid in from the circumambient slop boats; and
the of constant intoxication secured for the rest of
the voyage.
The following account of pastoral convicts is striking and
picturesque.
? I observed that a great many of the convicts in Van Dieman?s
Land wore jackets and trowsers of the kangaroo skin, and sometimes
caps of the same material, which they obtain from the stock-keep-
ers who are employed in the interior of the country. The labour of
several of them dilfers, in this respect, from that of the convicts in
New South Wales, and is rather pastoral than agricultural. Permis-
sion having been given, for the last five years, to the settlers to avail
themselves of the ranges of open plains and vallies that lie on either
side of the road leading from Austin?s Ferry to Launceston, a dis-
tance of 120 miles, their flocks and herds have been committed to
the care of convict shepherds and stock-keepers, who are sent to
these cattle ranges, distant sometimes 30 or 40 miles from their mas-
ter?s estates.
? The boundaries of these tracts are described in the tickets of
occupation by which they are held, and which are made renewable
every year, on payment of a fee to the lieutenant-governor?s clerk.
One or more convicts are stationed on them, to attend to the flocks
and cattle, and are supplied with wheat, tea and sugar, at the month-
ly visits of the owner. They are allowed the use of a musket and a
few cartridges to defend themselves against the natives ; and they
have also dogs, with which they hunt the kangaroos, whose flesh
they eat, and dispose of their skins to persons passing from Hobart
Town to Launceston, in exchange for tea and sugar. They thus
obtain a plentiful supply of food, and sometimes succeed in culti-
vating a few vegetables. Their habitations are made of turf and
thatched, as the bark of the dwarf eucalyptus, or gum-trees of the
plains; and the interior, in Van Dieman?s Land, is not of sufficient
expanse to form covering or shelter.? Report , pp. 107, 108.
A London thief, clothed in kangaroo?s skins, lodged under
the bark of the dwarf eucalyptus, and keeping sheep, fourteen
thousand miles from Piccadilly, with a crook bent into the


shape of a picklock, is not an uninteresting picture; and an en-
graving of it might have a very salutary effect, ?provided no
engraving were made of his convict master, to whom the sheep
belong.
The Maroon Indians were hunted by dogs?the fugitive
convicts are recovered by the natives.
? The native blacks that inhabit the neighbourhood of Port Hun-
ter and Port Stephens, have become very active in retaking the fugi-
tive convicts. They accompany the soldiers who are sent in pur-
suit, and, by the extraordinary strength of sight they possess, im-
proved by their daily exercise of it in pursuit of kangaroos and
opossums, they can trace to a great distance, with wonderful accu-
racy, the impressions of the human foot. Nor are they afraid of
meeting the fugitive convicts in the woods, when sent in their pur-
suit, without the soldiers ; by their skill in throwing their long and
pointed wooden darts, they wound and disable them, strip them of
their clothes, and bring them back as prisoners, by unknown roads
and paths, to the Coal River.
? They are rewarded for these enterprises by presents of maize
and blankets; and, notwithstanding the apprehensions of revenge
from the convicts whom they bring back, they continue to live in
Newcastle and its neighbourhood ; but are observed to prefer the so-
ciety of the soldiers to that of the convicts. ? ? Report, p. 117.
Of the convicts in New South Wales, Mr Bigge found about
eight or nine in an hundred to be persons of respectable cha-
racter and conduct, though the evidence respecting them is not
quite satisfactory. But the most striking and consolatory pas-
sage in the whole Report, is the following.
? The marriage of the native born youths with female convicts
are very rare ; a circumstance that is attributable to the general dis-
inclination to early marriage that is observable amongst them, and
partly to the abandoned and dissolute habits of the female convicts ;
but chiefly to a sense of pride in the native-born youths, approach-
ing to contempt for the vices and depravity of the convicts, even
when manifested in the persons of their own parents. ? ? Report,
p. 105.
Every thing is to be expected from these feelings. They
convey to the mother country the first proof that the founda-
tions of a mighty empire are laid.
We were somewhat surprised to find Governor Macquarrie
contending with Mr Bigge, that it was no part of his, the Go-
vernor?s, duty to select and separate the useless from the useful
convicts, or to determine, except in particular cases, to whom
they are to be assigned. In other words, he wishes to effect
the customary separation of salary and duty?the grand prin-
ciple which appears to pervade all human institutions, and to
be the most invincible of all human abuses. Not only are


Church, King, and State, allured by this principle of vicarious
labour, but the pot- boy has a lower pot-boy, who, for a small
portion of the small gains of his principal, arranges, with in-
exhaustible sedulity, the subdivided portions of drink, and,
intensely perspiring, disperses, in bright pewter, the frothy ele-
ments of joy.
There is a very awkward story of a severe flogging inflicted
upon three freemen by Governor Macquarrie, without com-
plaint to, or intervention of, any magistrate; a fact not de-
nied by the Governor, and for which no adequate apology, nor
any thing approaching to an adequate apology, is offered.
These Asiatic and Satrapical proceedings, however, we have rea-
son to think, are exceedingly disrelished by London Juries. The
profits of having been unjustly flogged at Botany Bay (Scarlett
for the plaintiff) is good property, and would fetch a very consi-
derable sum at the Auction Mart. The Governor, in many
instances, appears to have confounded diversity of opinion upon
particular measures, with systematic opposition to his Govern-
ment, and to have treated as disaffected persons those whom, in
favourite measures, he could not persuade by his arguments, nor
influence by his example, and on points where every man has a
right to judge for himself, and where authority has no legitimate
right to interfere, much less to dictate.
To the charges confirmed by the statement of Mr Bigge, Mr
Bennet adds, from the evidence collected by the Jail Commit-
tee, that the fees in the Governor?s Court, collected by the au-
thority of the Governor, are most exorbitant and oppressive;
and that illegal taxes are collected under the sole authority of
the Governor. It has been made, by colonial regulations, a
capital offence to steal the wild cattle; and, in 1816, three per-
sons were convicted of stealing a wild bull, the property of our
Sovereig?i Lord the King. Now, our Sovereign Lord the King
(whatever be his other merits or demerits) is certainly a very
good natured man, and would be the first to lament that an un-
happy convict was sentenced to death for killing one of his wild
bulls on the other side of the world. The cases of Mr Moore
and of William Stewart, as quoted by Mr Bennet, are very
strong. If they are answerable, they should be answered. The
concluding letter to Mr Stewart, is, to us, the most decisive
proof of the unfitness of Colonel Macquarrie for the situation
in which he was placed. The Ministry at home, after the au-
thenticity of the letter was proved, should have seized upon the
first decent pretext of recalling the Governor, of thanking him
in the name of his Sovereign, for his valuable services (not omit-
ting his care of the wild bulls) and of dismissing him to half
pay?and insignificance.


As to the Trial by Jury, we cannot agree with Mr Bennet, that
it would be right to introduce it at present, for reasons we have
given in a previous Article, and which we see no reason for alter-
ing. The time of course will come when it would be in the highest
degree unjust and absurd, to refuse to that settlement the benefit
of popular institutions. But they are too young, too few, and too
deficient for such civilized machinery at present. ? I cannot come
to serve upon the Jury,?the waters of the Hawksbury are out,
and I have a mile to swim, ?the kangaroos will break into my
corn, ?the convicts have robbed me, ?my little boy has been
bitten by an ornilhorynchus paradoxus,?l have sent a man
fifty miles with a sack of flour to buy a pair of breeches for the
assizes, and he is not returned. ? These are the excuses which,
in new colonies, always prevent Trial by Jury; and make it
desirable for the first half century of their existence, that they
should live under the simplicity and convenience of despotism,?
such modified despotism (we mean) as a British House of Com-
mons (always containing men as bold and honest as the Member
for Shrewsbury) will permit, in the Governors of their distant
colonies.
Such are the opinions formed of the conduct of Governor
Macquarrie by Mr Bigge. Not the slightest insinuation is made
against the integrity of his character. -Though almost every body
else has a job, we do not perceive that any is imputed to this
gentleman; but he is negligent, expensive, arbitrary, ignorant, and
clearly deficient in abilities for the task committed to his charge.
It is our decided opinion, therefore, that Mr Bennet has render-
ed a valuable service to the public, in attacking and exposing
his conduct. As a gentleman and an honest man, there is not
the smallest charge against the Governor; but a gentleman, and
a very honest man, may very easily ruin a very fine colony. The
colony itself, disincumbered of Colonel Lachlan Macquarrie,
will probably become a very fine empire; but we can scarcely
believe it is of any present utility as a place of punishment.
The history of emancipated convicts, who have made a great
deal of money by their industry and their speculations, neces-
sarily reaches this country, and prevents men who are goaded
by want, and hovering between vice and virtue, from looking
upon it as a place of suffering?perhaps leads them to consider
it as the land of hope and refuge, to them unattainable, except
by the commission of crime. And so they lift up their hands
�t the Bar, hoping to be transported,?
? Stabant orantes prirni transmittere cursum
Tendebantque manus, ripae ulterioris amore. ?
It is not possible, in the present state of the law, that these


enticing histories of convict prosperity should he prevented, by
one uniform system of severity exercised in New South Wales,
upon all transported persons. Such different degrees of guilt
are included under the term of convict, that it would violate
every feeling of humanity, and every principle of justice, to deal
out one measure of punishment to all. We strongly suspect
that this is the root of the evil. We want new gradations of
guilt to be established by law?new names for those gradations
?and a different measure of good and evil treatment attached
to those denominations. In this manner, the mere convict , the
rogue and convict , and the incorrigible convict , would expect,
upon their landing, to be treated with very different degrees of
severity. The ffrst might be merely detained in New South
Wales without labour or coercion ; the second compelled, at all
events, to work out two-thirds of his time, without the possi-
bility of remission; and the third be destined at once for the
Coal River. If these consequences steadily followed these gra-
dations of conviction, they would soon be understood by the
felonious world at home. At present, the prosperity of the best
convicts is considered to be attainable by all; and transporta-
tion to another hemisphere is looked upon as the renovation of
fallen fortunes, and the passport to wealth and power.
Another circumstance, which destroys all idea of punish-
ment in transportation to New South Wales, is the enormous
expense which that settlement would occasion, if it really was
made a place of punishment. A little wicked tailor arrives, of
no use to the architectural projects of the Governor. He is turn-
ed over to a settler, who leases this sartorial Borgia his liberty
for five shillings per week, and allows him to steal and snip,
what, when, and where he can. The excuse for this mockery
of all law and justice is, that the expense of his maintenance is
saved to the Government at home. But the expense is not
saved to the country at large. The nefarious needleman writes
home, that he is as comfortable as a finger in a thimble !
that though a fraction only of humanity, he has several wives,
and is filled every day with rum and kangaroo. This, of course,
is not lost upon the shop-board; and, for the saving of fifteen-
pence per day, the foundation of many criminal tailors is laid.
What is true of tailors, is true of tinkers and all other trades.
The chances of escape from labour, and of manumission in the
Bay, we may depend upon it, are accurately reported, and per-
fectly understood in the flash-houses of St Giles; and, while
Earl Bathurst is full of jokes and joy, public morals are thus
sapped to their foundation.
/S>23




-
>
i
'
.
