

/
/
'
>
•
■
•
1
4
/
BOTANY.
(PHANEROGAMS AND VASCULAR CRYPTOGAMS).
By Bakon F. von MUELLER, K.C.M.G., M.D., F.R.S., &c.,
and Professor RALPH TATE. '
' Reprinted from Transactions Royal Society, South Australia, vol. xvi.




BOTANY.
(PHANEROGAMS AND VASCULAR CRYPTOGAMS).
By Baron E. von MUELLER, K.C.M.G., M.D., F.R.S., kc. y
and Professor RALPH TATE,
Despite the fact that a very large tract of the country traversed
by the Eider Exploring Expedition had been previously investi-
gated for its botany, the collection made by Mr. Richard Helms,
the Naturalist to the Expedition, assisted by his colleagues,
contains a relatively large number of new species, has consider-
ably augmented the list of West Australia plants and furnished
material for the better definition of some species hitherto incom-
pletely described.
The numbers of new species are for South Australia one {Cap-
sella villosula), and for West Australia eighteen.
The addition to the South Australia flora is one {Cyperus laevi-
gatus), in addition to the new species.
The additions to the list of species inhabiting the Province of
West Australia, less those descriptively new, are the following
thirty-five: —With two exceptions, Canthium oleifolium and
Schoenus aphyllus, all are characteristic Eremian plants having
their metropolis in the dry interior of South Australia ; Kennedya
prorepens, Anthobolus exocarpoides, Tecoma australis, and
Eriachne scleranthoides are saxatile species of the basin of the
Upper Finke, extending to the botanical outlier of Barrow
Range ; the low-land species, Phyllanthus lacunarius, Polycarpaea
Indica, Euxolus Mitchelli, Brachysema Chamhersi, Acacia patens,
Didiscus glaucifolius, Podolepis canescens, Helichrysum Ayersi,
Solanum Sturtianum and Teucrium grandiusculum extend be-
yond the confines of South Australia to Cavenagh and Barrow
Ranges ; but Sienopetalum velutinum, Euphorbia eiythrantha,
Thryptomene Maisonneuvii, llelipterum Fitzgibboni, H.stipitatum,
Dicrastylis ochotricha and Eremophila Gibsoni reach into the
Victoria Desert ; whilst Dodonaea fill folia, Saponaria tubulosa,
Ghenopodium rhadinostachyum, Muehlenbeckia polygonoides, Gly-
cyrrhiza psoraleoides, Loranthus gibberulus, llelipterum Troedeli,
Daemia Kempeana, Solanum eremophila, Teucrium sessiliflorum
'and Eremophila Paisleyi extend to Fraser Range or a little
beyond.


The collection submitted to us contains about 800 species, but
the material available has in many instances among the larger
genera not been adequate for specific determination, hence the
number of actually recorded species is only about 700. A few
presumable novelties are reserved for further study.
Where no collector’s name is appended to a geographic record,
that of Mr. Helms is to be considered to have been omitted.
The names of by-workers are however given, of these may be
mentioned Mr. P. A. Gwynne, who collected from Fraser Range
to Esperance Bay and to whose zeal we owe an interesting sup-
plementary collection, and to Mr. D. Gumming, who accompanied
Mr. Wells on a flying-survey from Annean Station on the Upper
Murchison-river to the eastward as far as long. 124° 31', and
gathered 55 species, but of these only three are supplementary to
the main collection.
The geographic positions of the recorded stations are indicated
on the geological map accompanying this volume. The word
“ Camp ” is generally abbreviated in the text of this report to
“ C,” thus C. 22 stands for Camp 22.
DILLENIACE^I
Hibbertia glaberrima, F. v. M. S.A., Everard Range, at
2,000 ft. elevation.
Hibbertia rostellata, Tarcz. W.A., near Boorabin. The
stamens are disconnected, but by gradual turgescence of the
maturing fruitlets, may be pushed into clusters of threes, yet
without forming real bundles by any concrescence of filaments.
Ovularies occasionally only four. To judge from the very im-
perfect but authentic material in the Melbourne Herbarium,
Candollea uncinata , Bentham, belongs to this species. The
externally very similar H. recurvi/olia, Bentham, has lately been
found inland as far as Youndegin by Miss Alice Eaton, and near
Parker’s Range by Mr. Edwin Merrall.
Var. rectipolia. W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 59), on sandhills.
This plant has almost straight or only slightly curved leaves, and
with peduncles about as long as the calyx, but otherwise not
different from H. rostellata; the mature carpels are smooth
and shining, each with one ripe reniform seed. Precisely the
same form was gathered in Giles’Third Expedition near Victoria
Spring.
Hibbertia glomerata, Bentham. W.A., between Red Hill
and Yilgarn.
Hibbertia Huttii, F. v. M. W.A., between Red Hill and
Yilgarn.


LAURACEjE.
Cassytha glabella, R. Brown. W.A., near Karoling.
Cassytha melantha, R. Brown. W.A., Victoria Desert
(C. 56).
CAPPARIDEiE.
Cleome VLSCOSA, Linne. S.A., Warrina. W.A., C. 24; lat.
27° s', long. 119° 15' (D. Gumming).
CRUCIFERA).
Sisymbrium trisectum, F. v. M. S.A., Cootanoorina; Upper
Arkaringa Creek, with large white flowers ; W.A., Fraser Range.
Sisymbrium nasturttoides, F. v. M. S.A., Cootanoorina;
Arkaringa and Upper Arkaringa Creeks.
Erysimum brevipes, F. v. M. S.A., Arkaringa Creek ; W.A.,
Fraser Range.
Erysimum Blennodia, F. v. M. S.A., near Arkaringa Creek.
Stenopetalum velutinum, F. v. M. A nearly glabrous
variety, with shorter pedicels and pinnatifid leaves. W.A.,
Camps 53, 54; near Mount Squires; also at Pidinga, S.A. (R.T.).
Stenopetalum line are, R. Brown. W.A., Fraser Range.
Stenopetalum F. v. M. W.A., 80 miles south
of Victoria Spring (C. 64).
Menkea spHjEROCARpa, F. v. M. S.A., Cootanoorina and
Arkaringa Creeks. Some of the plants have white petals. The
fruits are too young for determining absolutely the specific
position. Mr. Merrall has sent this species from the vicinity of
Parker’s Range; pedicels occur hardly twice as long as the
matured fruit.
Capsella cochlbarina, F. v. M., var. ociirantjia. S.A.,
Arkaringa Valley.
Capsella villosula, sp. Nov. S.A., Arkaringa Creek.
Annual, dwarf, erect; much beset with simple, very spreading
hairlets ; leaves nearly all radical, broad-linear or narrow-elliptic,
but gradually attenuated into the petiole, entire, or some slightly
denticulated, always blunt; flowers corymbosely crowded, “emit-
ting a perfume like hawthorn, mixed with heliotrope;” pedicels
soon longer than the flowers ; sepals spreading, outside pilosulose;
petals bright-yellow, longer than the calyx; anthers yellowish,
ellipsoid recurved ; style conspicuously longer than the stigma ;
ovulary pubescent; fruit small, ellipsoid-oval, lobeless ; the valves
boat-shaped, the septum in the narrow diameter; two or three
seeds in each cell. From two to five inches high. Stem usually
simple. Radical leaves to one and a half inches long and quar-
ter-inch broad, less pubescent than the stem and pedicels ; stem-
leaves diminutive, usually narrow, often undeveloped. Petals
hardly one-eighth inch long, elliptic-cuneate. This species stands


nearest to C. Andreanct , but differs in much longer hairlets, in
almost leafless stem, in larger radical leaves, in color and size of
petals, in anthers proportionately less broad, and in conspicuit}
of style.
Lepidium phlebopetalum, F. v. M. S.A., Cootanoonna and
Arkaringa; W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 53), Victoria Spring.
Lepidium papillosum, F. v. M. S.A., Cootanoorina, Arka-
ringa 5 W.A., near Mount Squires.
Lepidium leptopetalum has been sent by Mr. Streich from
Nannine, Murchison Gold-field, W.A.
VIOLACE^E
Hybanthus floribundus, F. v. M. W.A., Victoria Desert
(Camps 57, 58), Fraser Range.
Hybanthus enneaspermus, F. v. M. S.A., near Arcoeillina-
Well; W.A., near Mount Squires.
PITTOSPORE^E.
Pittosporum phillyroides, DeCand. S.A., Upper Arkaringa
Valley. “ A tree of exceptionally fine growth, attaining to a
height of 30 feet, with a trunk of 12 inches in diameter and of
about five feet to the branches. It resembles a weeping-willow,
and covers an area of 20 feet diameter.” W .A., 30 miles S.S.AV .
from Mount Watson, Fraser Range and Murchison district.
Var. Young foliage silky-pubescent, leaves shorter, broader,
obtuse, and stiff; a small tree up to 15 feet high. S.A., Upper
Arkaringa Valley.
Bursaria spinosa, Cavanilles, var. incana. W.A., near Lake
Deborah. “A shrub 10 to 12 feet high.”
Marianthus lineatus, F. v. M. W.A., Victoria Desert (C.
54,64). “ Climbing Bto 12 feet on mallee.”
Sollya heterophylla, Lindley. W.A., Mount Ridley,
between Fraser Range and Esperance Bay (P. A. Gwynne). The
fruit, called “gurnu,” is eaten by the natives of Hampton Plain
(D. Lindsay).
ELATINEA3
Elatine Americana, Arnott. W.A., between Red Hill and
Yilgarn.
HYPERICIN A3.
Hypericum Japonicum, Thunberg. W.A., between Red Hill
and Yilgarn.
POLYGALE A3.
Comesperma scoparium, Steetz. W.A., Warangering.
Comesperma INTEGEREIMUM, Endl. W.A., Quardanoolagin
near Yilgarn.


TREMANDRE^E
Tetratiieca efoliata, F. v. M. W.A., near Warangering.
RUTACE^E.
Boronia ccerulescens, F. v. M. W.A., Victoria Desert
(C. 54); between Red Hill and Yilgarn.
Variety. Branches very slender, branchlets subspinescent, and
with very small and few leaves. W.A., near Warangering and
70 miles east of Mount Churchman.
Eriostemon linearis, Cunningham. S.A., Everard Range,
at 3,000 feet, on granite.
Eriostemon tuberculoses, F. v. M. W.A., near Victoria
Spring (C. 59).
Leaves proportionately broader than usual. This is the true
Phehalium microphyllum of Turczaninow, as is clear from the
original description, but the specific name given by him was pre-
occupied in the genus Eriostemon for the P. brachyphyllum of
Bentham, from near the Southern shores of St. Vincents and
Spencer’s Gulf. The Phehalium tuberculomm of Bentham seems
to have always the leaves longer and nari’ower, with their mar-
gin involute instead (as in the genuine E. tuberculosus ) revolyte.
It is however sometimes difficult to perceive this, as a slight
twist of the very short petiole would reverse the surface of the
leaves. This particular plant, with almost terete and channelled
leaves, was collected during Giles third expedition towards
Ularing. Drummond’s specimen has some of the leaves fully
one inch long. The species has now received the name
E. canaliculatus. To this plant was referred in the Fragm.
Bhytogr. Austr. IX., 108, by a note under E. jilifolius.
Philotheca Hasselli, F. v. M. W.A., Between Red Hill
and Yilgarn.
Geijera parviflora, Lindley. W.A., near and at Fraser
Range.
ZYGOPHYLLExE
Nitraria Schceberi, Linne. S.A. Cootanoorina.
“A shrub 2 to 3 ft., fruit red.”
Zygophyllum apiculatum, F. v. M. W.A., Victoria Desert
(C 59).
Zygophyllum glaucescens, F. v. M., small-flowered variety.
S.A. Cootanoorina.
Zygophyllum iodocarpum, F. v. M. S.A. Cootanoorina.
Zygophyllum ammophilum, F. v. M. S.A., Camp 22.
Zygophyllum fruticulosum, De Candolle. W.A., a small-
flowered variety, with some fruits ripening, only one seed; Vic-
toria Desert (C. 54).
Var. aurantiacum, F. v. M. S.A., Warrina.


Tribulus terrestris, Linne. S.A., Warrina (C. 11) ; W.A.,
near Mount Squires.
Tribulus hystrix, R. Brown. S.A., Warrina.
If T. occidentalis, R. Brown, can be upheld as a distinct species,
then the Warrina specimens belong to it—having the large petals
(one inch or more long), numerous leaflets (9 to 12) and subulate
spines on the fruit, which are attributed as distinctive characters
by Mr. Bailey. But a re-examination of copious material con-
firms the decision arrived at, and promulgated by one of us
(F. v. M.) in the Essay on the Babbage-plants, and subsequently
adopted by Bentham, that T. occidentalis has no claim to specific
rank ; an analagous case is with T. cistoides, which represents a
large-flowering state of T. terrestris.
The following localities of T. hystrix, as represented by
authentic specimens in our herbaria, serve to define the
geographic distribution of this characteristic Eremian plant:—
N.W.A., Yule Gorge, Pyramid and Sherlock Rivers (Hon.
Sir J. Forrest); Roebuck Bay (A. Forrest); Dampier Archi-
pelago (Walcott, Hughan); Port Walcott (Harper) and interior
from Nichol Bay (F. Gregory); Fortescue River (Carey, also J.
Forrest); Gascoyne River (Bunbury, Survey Exped., also J.
Forrest); Menilyalka River (J. Forrest). C.A., Barrow Creek
(Chandler); MacDonnell Range (Flierl); Rawlinson Range (E.
Giles); Lake Amadeus (E. Giles); Finke River (R. E. Warbur-
ton, McDougall Stuart); Eyre’s Creek (Kayser); Cooper-Creek
(Howitt, also McLeod); Stevenson Creek and Charlotte-Waters
(Dittrich); towards Spencer-Gulf (Warburton), Strangway-
Spring (Dr. Cleland).
Tribulus macrocarpus, F. v. M. W.A., near Mount Squires.
Tribulus platypterus, Bentham. W.A.; lat. 26° 49', long.
123° 30' (D. Gumming).
GERANIACEAE.
Erodium cygnorum, Nees. S.A., Cootanoorina, Arkaringa
Valley ; also at these localities a variety with pinkish flowers and
slightly lobed leaves; Everard Range. W.A., Fraser Range.
Oxalis CORNICULATA, Linnd. S.A., Arkaringa Valley ; W.A. r
Fraser Range ; native name, “mulda mulda."
MALVACEAE.
Lavatera plebeia, Sims. W.A., Victoria Spring, Fraser
Range.
Malvastrum spicatum, A. Gray. S.A., Arkaringa Valley,
Mount Watson.
Plagianthus diffusus, Bentham. W.A., near Hunt’s Well,
Hampton Plains. Leaves seemingly never much cuneated, in the


present specimens blunt or rounded or even cordate at the base ;
the crenillation often extending all round. The P. densijlorus
(Edm. Baker, in Britten’s Journ. of Bot., XXX., 72) is more
closely related to P. glomeratus. Mr. Isaac Tyson found it also
on the Upper Murchison River. Calyx-lobes shorter than the
tube. Petals almost scarious. Anthers at first pure white, finally
yellowish. A more glabrous form was collected by F. v. M. at
Hamelin Harbor.
Plagianthus Berth.®, F. v. M. Near Fraser Range (C. 68),
only the pistillate plant. A fragment of this species occurred in
James Drummond’s collection. It is now also known from
Parker Range (Merrall), Katanning (Mrs. M. Heal), towards
Lake Lefroy (Cronin). In South Australia this plant is usually
more glabrous, and its flower-stalklets are more elongated.
Plagianthus Helmsii, spec. Nov. W.A., Lake Lefroy; Mur-
chison district ; native name, “ dunna-dunna .” Also Lake
Annean (Mr. S. Dixon, 10/’93).
Stem robust, branchless or few-branched, all over closely beset
with fascicles of minute, mostly oval lanceolar, pale-lepidote,
somewhat canaliculate leaves ; stipules conspicuous, truncate or
outward acuminate, ciliolate, adnate to the broad petioles;
flowers very small, each solitary, sessile within a leaf-fascicle;
calyx lepidote, almost semiellipsoid, but its lobes extremely
short ; petals delicately membranous, glabrous, extensively
transparent, almost colorless or brownish towai’ds the summit,
less than half-exserted; staminal column very short, anthers
whitish, not numerous (pistillate flowers and their fruits
unknown).
This shares with P. micropliyllus in the characteristics of
leaves and flowers, but with P. spicatus in the simple-manner of
growth. The leaves are quite entire, often folded from the sides
inward, and sometimes arched-curved.
Sida corrugata, Lindley. W.A., Mount Squires, Fraser
Range. Var. pedunculata, S.A., Arcoeillina Well.
Sida intricata, F. v. M. S.A., Nilpena.
Sida virgata, Hooker. S.A., between Nilpena and Coota-
noorina.
Sida calyxhymenia, Gay. S.A., Arcoeillina Well; W.A.,
Camp 61, Fraser Range ; lat., 27° 3', long., 124° 6' (D. Gumming).
Sida petrophila, F. v. M. S.A., Upper Arkaringa Valley;
West from Wawee waterhole ; Everard Range at 3,000 feet;
Peculiar Hill (C. 15).
Abutilon tubulosum, Hooker. S.A., Warrina; near Turner
Hill (C. 10); Peculiar Hill (C. 15).
Abutilon cryptopetalum, F. v. M., variety with large white
petals. W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 53).


Abutilon oxycarpum, F. v. M. S.A., Arkaringa Creek.
W.A., Fraser Range.
Abutilon Fraseri, Hooker. W.A., near Mount Squires.
Abutilon halophilum, F. v. M. S.A., Warrina; Arkaringa
Valley.
Hibiscus Pinonianus, Gaud. S.A., Everard Range (leaves
narrow-oblong, with or without basal lobes) ; Mount Goolwa
(C. 6); Coffin Hill; Pingegurrina Hill; Birksgate Range (leaves
orbicular, without lobes). W.A., Near Mount Squires ; Victoria
Desert (C. 53); 30 and 60 miles N.W, from Fraser Range.
Hibiscus brachysiphonius, F. v. M. S.A., Warrina.
Hibiscus Krichaupfii, F. v. M. S.A., Warrina.
Hibiscus Farragei, F. v. M. W.A., Fraser Range.
Hibiscus Sturtii, Hooker. S.A., between Arcoeillina and
Wawee Waterhole; eastern edge of Everard Range.
Hibiscus hakeaefolius, Giordano. W.A., Fraser Range;
about 36 miles N.W. of Southern Cross ; 100 miles N.E. of
Geraldton. “ The flowers never open properly, and they seem to
be fertilised by ants, which infest them in great numbers. The
scent of the flowers is very pleasant, though faint, and resembles
that of the tulip.”
Gossypium Sturtii, F. v. M. S.A., Everard Range; near
Mount Watson ; Mount Sir Thomas ; C. 22.
STERCULIACEA3.
Brachyciiiton Gregorii, F. v. M. S.A., about 25 miles N.W.
of Camp 9; a tree 40 feet high. W.A., near Skirmish Hill
(Camps 26, 28), Victoria Desert (C. 49, C. 50, C. 62), 75 miles
N.W. of Fraser Range, as a stunted tree; between Red Hill and
Yilgarn. With the normal fruits collected at various places in
the Victoria Desert are others nearly two inches long and much
pointed, possibly indicating another species. “ The inner bark
of the stem and the bark of the roots are extensively chewed
by the natives of Victoria Desert. There are thin layers of a
glutinous substance between the layers of bark, with a taste like
that of cocoa-nut. The seeds are roasted and eaten by the natives.
Commerconia cinerea, Steudel. W.A., near Yilgarn.
Commerconia Kempeana, F. v. M. W.A., Victoria Desert
(C. 40, C. 44), a shrub of one foot high.
Commerconia magniflora, F. v. M. In a varietal form with
more acute calyx-lobes ; moreover, the color of the calyx is red-
dish. S.A., near Mount-Ibillie soakage, a shrub from four to
eight feet high; Everard Range, at from 2,000 to 3,000 feet
elevation; Birksgate Range.
Commerconia rotundifolia, F. v. M. A form with more
oval leaves than the typical plant. W.A., near Lake Deborah.


a shrub from two to five feet high ; about 36 miles N.AV. of
Southern Cross. .
Commerconia melanopetala, F. v, M. AV.A., Victoria Desert
1C 54).
Commerconia craurophylla, F. v. M. W.A., Victoria Desert
(C. 54, C. 56, C. 61), near Fraser Range.
This species was originally described from specimens with only
young flowers. ,
Hannafordia Bissilli, F. v. M. AV.A., between Red Hill
and Yilgarn. , „
Seringea integrifolia, F. v. M. W.A., Victoria Desert
(C. 44, C. 45, C. 54, C. 57, C. 59), a shrub from one to three feet
high ; near Lake Deborah, on granite rocks, to about five feet
high; lat. 26° 30', long. 120° 52' (D. Gumming).
EUPHORBIACE^E.
Calycopeplus Helmsii, spec. Nov. W.A., 36 miles N.AA
from Southern Cross. A shrub, branching from near the base to
from 5 to 12 feet high ; the stems have a diameter of from 1| to
4 inches, the bark is longitudinally wrinkled ; the young branches
of one inch diameter have a grey, slightly and flatly longi-
tudinally ridged bark. For description see Appendix.
Euphorbia erythrantha, F. v. M. W.A., near Mount
Squires; Victoria Desert (C. 53).
Euphorbia Drummondii, Boissier. S.A., Nilpena; Coota-
noorina. AV. A., A 7 ictoria Desert; near Yilgarn.
Euphorbia eremophila, Cunningham. S.A., Cootanoonna ;
Arkaringa Valley. AV.A., near Mount Squires ; Victoria Desert
(C 53 C. 54).
Porantiiera MICROPHYLLA, Brong. AV.A,, Karolin ; Victoria
Desert (C. 53).
Alonotaxis grandiflora, Endlicher , var. obtusifolia. W.A.,
Gnarlbine and Warangering. The only differences from the
legitimate plant seem shortness and bluntness of the leaves, and
although the calyx-lobes are less acute, this character is shown
to be variable in Drummond’s and Preiss’s plants. The rudimen-
tary pistil in the staminate flowers has been recorded by Nees. _
Monotaxis luteifolia, F. v. M. S.A., Yeelunginna Hill
(C. 4), on granite. AV.A., near Gnarlbine and Victoria Desert
(C. 54). .
Monotaxis gracilis, Baillon. AV.A., near Gnarlbine.
Beyeria viscosa, Miquel. AV.A., Var. angustifolia, Fraser
“ A shrub two to four feet high. By the natives of the
Hampton Plain called warril; by those of the Fraser Range,
bawit,
Beyeria brevifolia, Baillon. AV.A., near Lake Lefroy. “A
shrub froln three to five feet high.”


Ricinocarpus velutinus, F. v. M. W.A., Lake Deborah, a
hrub three to five feet high; 30 miles N. W. from Southern Cross;
100 miles N.E. from Gerald ton. The petals of the staminate
flowers are somewhat longer than the calyx and more glabrous.
Bertya dimerostigma, F. v. M. W.A., Victoria Desert (C.
54, C. 59).
Phyllanthus thesioides, Bentham. S.A., Arcoeillina Well.
Phyelanthus lacunarius, F. v. M. W.A., near Mount
Squires.
Adriana tomentosa, Gaudichaud. W.A., Victoria Desert (C.
54), two feet high.
Adriana quadripartita, Gaudichaud. S.A., Arkaringa Creek.
URTICACEyE.
Ficus platypoda, Cunningham. S.A., Arcoeillina, Upper
Arkaringa Valley, Birksgate Range.
Parietaria debilis, G. Forster. S.A., near Everard Range ;
W.A., near Mount Squires.
CASUARINEyE.
Casuarina cornicueata, F. v. M. W.A., near Boorabin, four
to eight feet high.
Casuarina glauca, Sieber. S.A., Everard Range, five to
twelve feet; near Ferdinand River, 30 feet. W.A., Victoria
Desert (C. 53, 54), 25 to 30 feet.
These specimens include the ordinary desert form, and one
with more slender branchlets.
Casuarina humieis, Otto & Dietrich. S.A., Everard Range ;
W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 56, two to five feet), near Fraser
Range, near Gnarlbine (five to eight feet). Rudimentary leaves
deltoid, not rarely six in a whorl (as stated by Miquel); strobile
slightly sericeous.
Var. ? S.A., Moolalpinna Hill (C. 7). Has the foliage almost
of C. humilis, but the whorls are mostly seven-denticulate, and
the spikes rather long and quite slender; fruits unknown.
Casuarina acutivalvis, F. v. M. W.A., Victoria Spring,
12 to 15 (feet. Fruit-valves slightly carinate, they might be
considered rather sepaline than bracteolar in some analogy with
the staminate flowers, the envelope of which is considered
bisepalous. The seed-like fruit of this species, inclusive of its
terminating appendage, attains a length of rather more than half-
an-inch, but it is narrow in proportion to its width.
Casuarina bicuspidata, Bentham. W.A., near Victoria
Spring. Appendage of each fruit-valve long-exserted, subulate,
slightly curved. Seed-like fruits, brownish-black outside. In
the collection the strobiles of C. bicuspidata are mixed with


others in -which the fruit-valves are devoid of appendages, unless
this should prove a variable characteristic ; therefore, the accom-
panying flowering specimen may belong to another congener.
The remarkable organisation of the anthers for fecundation,
recently discovered by Dr. Treub, has subsequently also been
discovered in some Amentacese; hence on that account the
Casuarineae need not be kept far distant from the Amentaceous
order. Moreover, as regards foliage, we have in Exocnrpos
similar extreme diminution of the foliaceous organs along with
the development of large leaves in E. latifolia. Furthermore,
leaves as minute as in some cupressinous genera occur also in
Choretrum, Leptomeria, Tamarix, Calycothrix , Melaleuca ,
Styphelia and many other genera with highly developed floral
structure, though not connately decurrent.
SAPINDACEiE.
viscosa, Linne. S.A., Arcoeillina, eastern edge of
Everard Range, Everard Range; W.A., Barrow Range.
Yar. attenuata. W.A., Hunt’s Well, Hampton Plains.
DodoN/EA lanceolata, F. v. M. S. A., eastern edge of Everard
Range; W.A., Yenumba.
Dodon/EA filifolia, Hooker. W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 40),
“ a shrub from three to four feet high.” Known also from the
Upper Murchison River (Weston).
lobulata, F. v. M. W.A., Victoria Desert (40
and 60 miles south of Victoria Spring) ; lat., 27° 53', long., 123°
45' (D. Gumming).
Dodontba hexandra, F. r. M. W.A., 85 miles N.E. by E.
from Esperance Bay (P. A. Gwynne).
DoDONiEA microzyga, F. v. M. S.A., Arkaringa Valley,
Camp 4, and forty miles south of Camp 4.
Variety. W.A., Fraser Range, native name, marganyindi.
stenozyga, F. v. M. W.A., Victoria Desert (40
and 60 miles South of Victoria Spring); near Fraser Range.
FRANKENIACEjE.
Frankenia l.evis, Linne. S.A., Cootanoorina ; near Ferdi-
nand River. W.A., 56 miles IST.W. of Fraser Range; near
Hunt’s Well, Hampton Plains. Collected in various varieties.
Frankenia tetrapetala, Labill. W.A., Camp 64; Southern
Cross.
PORTULACEiE.
Portulaca oleracea, Linne. W.A., near Mount Squires.
Claytonia polyandra, F. v. M., var. monantha. W.A., Vic
toria Desert (C. 49).


Claytonia Balonnensis, F. v. M. W.A., Victoria Desert
(C. 51); Victoria Spring; capsule oval, hardly half-exsert.
Claytonia volubilis, F. v. M. W.A., Victoria Desert
(C. 51), with petals longer than usual.
Claytonia ptyciiosperma, F. v. M. W.A., near Mount
Squires ; a rather large form, with broader leaves and propor-
tionately shorter peduncles.
CARYOPHYLLE.E.
Saponaria tubulosa, F. v. M. W.A., Fraser Range.
Spergularia rubra, Camhessedes. W.A., Victoria Spring.
Polycarp.ea Indica, Lamarck, W.A., near Mount Squires;
a form with leafy inflorescence.
AMARANTACEA3.
Alternanthera triandra, Lamarck, S.A., Arcoeillina Well.
Ptilotus latifolius, R. Brown. W.A., near Boundary Hill.
Ptilotus obovatus, F. v. M. “ Met with everywhere, and in
all kinds of soil and situation.” S.A., Arkaringa ; Eastern edge
of Everard Range; native name, purarpurar. W.A., near
Mount Squires, Victoria Desert (C. 48), Fraser Range.
Ptilotus incanus, Poiret. S.A., Warrina and Cootanoorina.
Ptilotus alopecuroideus, F. v. M. S.A., Cootanoorina and
Arkaringa Creeks, near Camps 20 and 21, near Ferdinand River;
W.A., Mount Squires ; Victoria Desert (C. 51, C. 53).
Ptilotus hemistbirus, F. v. M. S.A., Everard Range;
W.A. Victoria Desert (C. 53); Fraser Range.
Ptilotus exaltatus, Fees. S.A., Arkaringa Valley; W.A.,
near Mount Squires ; Victoria Desert (C. 53, C. 57, C. 58), near
Southern Cross.
Ptilotus hblipteroides, F. v. M. S.A., Arkaringa Valley,
Everard Range, Camp 10; W.A., near Barrow Range, Mount
Squires,
Ptilotus striatus, F. v. M. W.A., near Knutsford, between
Red Hill and Yilgarn.
Ptilotus Drummondii, F. v. M. W.A., Victoria Desert (C.
53, C. 54, C. 58, C. 59), Fraser Range, Karolin.
Ptilotus spathulatus, Poiret. W.A., Fraser Range.
Ptilotus iiolosericeus, F. v. M. W.A., Victoria Desert (C.
61, C. 66).
Euxolus Mitchelli, F. v. M. S.A., between Everard and
Birksgate Ranges ; W. A., near Mount Squires.
SALSOLACEiE.
Atriplex velutinellum, Fv. M. S.A., Warrina.
Atriplex elachophyllum, F. v. M. S.A., near Birksgate
Range, C. 22.


Atriplex prostratum, R. Brown. W.A., near Mount Squires.
Atriplex Quinii, F. v. M. A broad-leaved variety. S.A.,
Arkaringa Creek. .
Atriplex stipitatum, Bentharn. S.A., AVarnna ; AA .A., near
Townsend Ridge (C. 38), Victoria Desert (C. 61, C. 64, C. 6<),
Fraser Range, Lake Lefroy. ..
Atriplex nummularium, Bindley. Camp 64, forty miles
N.AF. from Fraser Range; “ called malloiyi by natives ot
Hampton Plain.
Atriplex halimoides, Bindley , var. conduplicata. S.A.,
Cootanoorina. . . .
Atriplex spongiosum, F. v. M. S.A., AVarnna ; Arkaringa
Crook.
Rhagodia crassifolia, K. Brown. AV.A., Victoria Spring;
Fraser Range ; between Red Kangaroo Hill and Yilgarn.
Rhagodia spinescens, R. Brown. S.A., between AVarnna
and Nilpena ; Upper Arkaringa A 7 alley. AV.A., A r ictona Spring ;
Camp 64 ; Fraser Range (wandundant).
Rhagodia nutans, R. Brown. S.A., Cootanoorina.
CIIENOPODIUM NITRARIACEUM, F. V. M. AV.A., lat. Lb 4L ,
long. 122° 58'; (foliage only, D. Gumming)
CIIENOPODIUM carinatum, R. Brown. S.A., Everard Range.
W.A., near Mount Squires; Victoria Desert (C. 53).
CIIENOPODIUM RHADINOSTACYHUM, F. v. M. S.A., near Camp
23. near Mount Squires; A T ictoria Desert (C. o3). \ ar.
paniculatdm. AV.A., A ictoria Desert (C. 53).
Dysphania litoralis, R. Brown. S.A., Camp 4 ; AV.A., near
Mount Squires. r . . ■ n i
Kochia loriflora, F. v. M. S.A., Cootanoorina Creek ;
Arkaringa A r alley; Upper Arkaringa Valley; Everard Range
(C. 2).
Kochia lanosa, Bindley. S.A., Nilpena ; Turner Hill (C. 9).
AV.A., Camp 63.
Kochia triptera, Bentham, var, erioclada. vV .A., Lake
Kochia villosa, Bindley. AV.A., 20 miles South of Victoria
Spring (C. 61); lat. 26° 30', long. 120° 52' (D. Gumming).
S.A., AVarrina ; near Arcoeillina.
Kochia aphylla, R. Brown. S.A., Cootanoorina Creek. V ar.
W Kochia sedifolia, F. v. M. S.A., AV.A.,
ATctoria Spring; Fraser Range, “ native name huddani.
Kochia ciliata, F. v. M. S.A., Cootanoorina Creek.
Kochia eriantha, F. v. M. S.A., Arkaringa Creek.
Kochia glomerifolia, n. sp. W.A., North of Fraser Range ;
also near ARctoria Spring (Giles), and on the Upper Murchison
River (Tyson).


Shrubby; branches very spreading, densely beset with very
small glomerules of leaves, always tomentellous, sometimes
getting spinescent; leaves very minute, closely crowded in each
glomerule, from lanceolar verging into an ovate or rhomboid
form, concave, partially lanuginous, some shortly petiolate; flower-
ing calyx whitish-velutinous, its lobes inflexed-appressed, but
soon erect and irregularly elongating into somewhat spathular
crisped membranous appendages; stigmas two; fruiting calyx
almost flat below and there radiatingly ten-streaked, slightly
elevated above, horizontally expanding into a lobeless or slightly
interrupted broadish membrane ; fruit depressed, outside
brownish ; albumen of the seed scanty.
Attains a height of two feet. A remarkable plant, the fruit
of which now only known through Mr. Tyson’s collection.
Although systematically allied to K. aphylla, it is by the in-
numerable, mostly globular, clusters of leaves, so different in
aspect from any other Kochia, as to appear quite strange in that
genus; indeed, seen in foliage only, the plant rather reminds of
Aster lepidophyllus, so far as Australian forms of vegetation are
concerned.
Babbagia dipterocarpa, F. v. AI. S.A., Cootanoorina.
Bassia carnosa, F. v. Af. W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 63).
Bassia eurotioides, F. v. AC. W.A., near Hunt’s Well,
Hampton Plain.
Bassia sclerolasnoides, F. v. AC. W.A., Victoria Desert
(C. 53, C. 55, C. 56); Camp 66.
Bassia Birciiii, F. v. AC. A remarkably dwarf form, although
copiously fruiting. S.A., between Everard and Birksgate Ranges.
Bassia uniflora, F. v. AC. W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 53).
Bassia diacantha, F. v. AC. S.A., Upper Arkaringa Valley;
W.A., Victoria Spring, Fraser Range.
Bassia lanicuspis, F. v. AC. S.A., Arkaringa Creek.
Bassia bicornis, F. v. J C S.A., Warrina.
Bassia paradoxa, F. v. AC. S.A., Arkaringa Valley.
Bassia bicuspis, F. v. AC. S.A., Upper Arkaringa Valley.
Bassia echinopsila, F. v. M. W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 54).
tomentosa, F. Broivn. S.A., Cootanoorina;
eastern edge of Everard Range.
Salicornia arbuscula, F. Brown. S.A., Cootanoorina.
Salicornia leiostaciiya, Bentham. S.A., Cootanoorina.
Salicornia bidens, Bentham. W.A., Lake Lefroy.
Salicornia tenuis, Bentham. S.A., Nilpena.
bALsoLA Kali, Linne. S.A., Warrina, Cootanoorina; W.A.,
Camp 26, Fraser Range.
Var. strobilifera. S.A., Warrina.


FICOIDEAE.
Tetragonia expansa, Murray. W.A., Fraser Range.
Aizoon quadrifidum, F. v. M. W.A., near Knutsford.
Z aleya decandra, Burmann. 8.A., Warrina.
Trianthema crystallina, Vahl. W.A., near Mount Squires.
POLYGONAC.E.
Mueiilenbeckia adpressa, Meissner. W.A., Warangering.
Mueiilenbeckia polygonoides, F. v. M. W.A., near Fraser
Range, C. 68.
Muehlenbeckia Cunningsamii, F. v. M. S.A., Cootanoorina;
W.A., Fraser Range.
PHYTOLACCEAE,
Gyrostemon ramulosus, Desjont. S.A. ; W.A., Arkaringa
Creek and other wet places as far as Barrow Range; locally
known as “ native pepper.”
Codonocarpus GOTiNiFOLius, F. v. M. Native poplar, “a tree
12 to 15 feet high.” S.A., Arkaringa Valley, and sparingly to
W.A., Mount Squires and Victoria Desert (C. 56).
NYCTAGINEAJ.
Boerhaavia diffusa, Linne. W. A., near Mount Squires;
lat. 27° s', long. 119° 15' (D. Gumming).
THYMELE7E,
Pimelea angustifolia, B. Brown. W.A., Victoria Desert
(C. 56, 0. 57), near Warangering.
Pimelea nervosa, Meissner. W.A., 85 miles N.E. by E. from
Esperance Bay (P. A. Gwynne).
Pimelea ferruginea, Lahil. W.A., 85 miles N.E. by E. from
Esperance Bay (P. A. Gwynne).
Pimelea trichosta'ciiya, Bindley. S.A., Arkaringa Creek ;
W.A., near Barrow Range, Victoria Desert (C. 53, C. 54).
Pimelea microcephala, R. Brown. S.A., Warrina, Nilpena,
Upper Arkaringa Valley; W.A., Fraser Range; lat. 26° 39',
long. 120° 34' (D. Gumming).
Var. glabra. S.A., Cootanoorina Creek, eastern edge of
Everard Range, near Mount Illbillie Soakage at 2,000 feet,
Birksgate Range; W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 54).
Pimelea villifera, Meissner. W.A., between Red Hill and
Yilgarn.
LEGUMINOSiE.
Brachysema Chambersii, F. v. M. WA., 28 miles S.W. of
Camp 31, near Barrow Range.


Brachysema aphyllum, Hooker. W.A., 35 miles N.W. from
Fraser Range, three to six feet high, without flowers.
Oxylobium obtusifolium, Sweet. W.A., 85 miles N.E. by E.
from Esperance Ray (P. A. G Wynne). Ovules numerous.
Gastrolobium graxdiflorum, F. v. M. W.A., Victoria
Desert, C. 53. A shrub three to four feet high. Probably re-
presents the small-flowered state of this species; fruits not
collected.
Gastrolobium trilobum, Bentham. “ Kite-leaf poison plant.”
W.A., near Brood’s Station.
Gastrolobium spinosum, Bentham. W.A., Victoria Desert,
C. 56. “ Poisonous to camels.”
Gastrolobium bilobum, R. Brown. “ Heart-leaf poison-
plant.” W.A., Mount Ridley, 3to 5 feet; near Esperance Bay
(D. Lindsay).
Gastrolobium seorsifolium, F. v. M. W.A., Victoria Desert
(C. 54) ; near Gnarlbine ; about 15 miles W. of Red Hill.
Isotropis JUNCEA, Turcz. W.A., 36 miles N.W. from
Southern Cross; near Lake Deborah. Fruit imperfectly
sericeous, when ripe about one inch long to one sixth inch broad,
conspicuously compressed, short stipitate; seeds ripening to five,
oblique, roundish renate, about one-tenth inch long.
Isotropis caxescexs, F. v. M. W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 54)
Petals purplish, the upper and lateral conspicuously dark-streaked,
the two lower quite dark-colored.
Mirbelia micropiiylla, Bentham. W. A., 36 miles N.W.
from Southern Cross.
Mirbelia aphylla, F. v. M. W.A., near Mount Churchman
(C. 94). Externally this plant is much like Jacksonia stricta,
which species received its name probably through a typographical
error, as the ramification is the reverse of strict; the name in-
tended by Meissner was evidently J. striata , on account of the
streaks on the branches; the phyllode- or spinule-like ultimate
branchlets are compressed and mostly quadrangular, in which
respect this Jacksonia is also very similar to Mirbelia aphylla.
Burtonia gompiioloides, F. r. M. W.A., Victoria Desert
(C. 56) [Yerdanie and Warangering]. Fruiting at a height of
nine inches. Leaflets conspicuously margined. Ripe fruit quite
turgid.
Burtoxia simplicifolia, spec. Nov. W.A., Victoria Desert at
Camp 54. Densely beset with minute grey spreading hairlets ;
leaves crowded, very small, simple, sessile, elliptic- or broad-linear
bluntish, revolute at the margin ; flowers small, sessile between
the uppermost leaves, crowded into headlets few in each; calyx
deeply cleft into almost equal lanceolar lobes ; petals deep-yellow;
anthers roundish-cordate, pale ; style upwards glabrous ; ovulary
densely beset with hairlets.


Branchlets copious, spreading, or at first curved downward..
Leaves one-sixth to one-quarter inch long. Bracts almost leaf-like ;
bracteoles short. Calyx measuring only one-quarter of an inch
in length, before expansion somewhat pyramidal and prominently
angled. Petals not much extended beyond the calyx, the upper
orbicular, slightly lobed at both extremities. Style when young
strongly incurved. Ovules two. Fruit unobtained.
The only other Burtonia with simple leaves, namely
B. conferta, is very different, already in want of indument, less
ramification, longer leaves, larger flowers on well-developed
stalklets, color of petals, form of anthers and most likely also in
fruit-characteristics. In general aspect, as well as smallness of
leaves and flowers, our new species approaches B. gompholobioides,
but that plant is otherwise widely distinct.
Jacksonia foliosa, Turcz. W.A., Victoria Desert (C, 48,
C. 54, C. 58) ; near Knutsford. A plant collected at Camp 58
seems a more ramulose variety of this species; but as yet no
fruits are known from any of the localities.
Jacksonia nematoclada, F .v. M. W.A., near Gnarlbine.
Professor Greene has recently proposed, that the Australian
genus Jacksonia should be superseded by Piptomeris , because
Rafinesque utilised some few years before R. Brown the name
Jacksonia, giving it generically to a species of Cleome, which
appellation, however, he subsequently changed to Polanisia.
But that genus became suppressed for Australia many years ago,
and subsequently for Africa by Prof. Oliver. As the one
American species, on which Polanisia was founded, differs only
in trifling respects from other Cleomes, it seems best to restore it
(perhaps sectionally) to its original systematic position. -
Daviesia brevifolia, Bindley. W.A., near Gnarlbine ; Vic-
toria Desert (C. 54).
Daviesia pachylina, Turcz. W.A., Fraser Range (1 ft.) •
Warangering, a glabrous state with much longer leaves. The
acuminate long calyx-lobes are characteristic for this species ; the
form now mentioned reminds, as regards leaves, much of
D. longi/olia, in which species sometimes also acuminate leaves
occur; if specific differences should exist between the two, then
ripe fruits (unavailable here) must show this. The long-lobed
calyx separates this plant from D. polyphylla.
Daviesia aphylla, F. v. M. Young fruit flat, semiorbicular-
deltoid, on a very short stipe. W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 56);
near Fraser Range (C. 68); 20 miles N.W. from Fraser Range,
rnori of the natives of Hampton Plain.
Daviesia acanthoclona, F. v. M. W.A., Victoria Desert
(C. 54) and near Gnarlbine. Fruit (hitherto unknown) only
about one-third of an inch long and broad, rhomboid-orbicular.


but slightly inequilateral, considerably compressed, short-
acuminate, the stipes shorter than the calyx ; one seed ripening,
roundish, moderately compressed, greyish-brown, hardly one-
twelfth of an inch long, about twice as long as its narrow slen-
der strophiole.
Aotus passerinoides, Meissner. AV.A., near Warangering.
Aotus Tietkensii, F. v. M. W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 57).
Phyllota Luehmanni, F. v. M. W.A., Victoria Desert, C. 58.
Templetonia egena, Bentham. W.A., Victoria Desert, C. 48,
two to three and a-half feet, C. 54.
Templetonia sulcata, Bentham. W.A., 30 miles N.W. from
Southern Cross, five feet high.
Crotalaria Cunninghamii, R. Brown. S.A., between War-
rina and Nilpena, Upper Arkaringa Valley, near Blyth Hill ;
W.A., near Barrow Range, three to four feet.
Crotalaria dissitiflora, Bentham S.A., Warrina.
Psoralea eriantha, Bentham. W.A., near Gnarlbine.
Psoralea patens, Bindley. S.A., Birksgate Range.
Indigofera brevidens, Bentham. S.A., Cootanoorina and
Everard Range; AV.A., Barrow Range, about 20 miles west of
Red Kangaroo Hill, Victoria Desert, C. 54; long. 122° 30',
lat. 27° 40' (D. Gumming).
Tepiirosia purpurea, Per soon. S.A., near Mount Watson,
C. 17 ; W.A., Mount Squires.
Ptychosema trifoliolatum, F. V. 21. W.A., near Mount
Squires.
Clianthus Dampieri, Cunningham. AV.A., Elder Creek,
Warburton Range (Dr. Elliot).
Swainsonia colutoides, F. v. 21. AV.A, Victoria Desert,
C. 54.
Swainsonia microphylla, A. Gray. S.A., near Everard
Range; AV.A., near Barrow Range.
Swainsonia campylantha, F. v. 21. S.A., Arkaringa Creek.
Swainsonia piiacoides, Bentham. S.A., Warrina, near
Yeelunginna Hill, C. 4; W.A., Fraser Range.
Swainsonia stipularis, F. v. 21. S.A., near Mount Coolwa,
C. 6 ; near Turner Hill, C. 10.
Glycyrrhiza psoraleoides, Bentham. AA T .A., near Hunt’s
Well.
Glycine clandestina, Wendland. S. A., Birksgate Range;
AV.A., Eraser Range.
Glycine tabacina, Bentham. S.A., AVarrina.
Kennedya prorepens, F. v. 21. AV.A., near Barrow Range
(C. 33) and Victoria Desert (C. 57). Flowers purple.
Kennedya prostrata, R. Brown. W.A., between Red Hill
and Yilgarn. The specimens are without flowers, but in fruit.


K. parvijlora, which is in West Australia far more frequent, can
in the fruiting state be best distinguished by the pod being very
blunt at each end.
Cassia Sopiiera, Linne. S.A., near Mount Ibillee.
Cassia notabilis, F. v. M. W.A., near Mount Squires.
Cassia pleurocarpa, F. v. M. S.A., Birksgate Range. W.A.,
near Mount Squires ; Victoria Desert (C. 49); between Red
Hill and Yilgarn ;40 to 50 miles West of Knutsford; long.
122° 30', lat. 27° 40' (D. Gumming).
Cassia eremophila, Cunn. W.A., Fraser Range.
Cassia artemisioides, Gaud. S.A., Arkaringa Valley ; W.A.,
Victoria Desert (C. 58).
Cassia Sturtii, R. Brown. S.A., Upper Arkaringa Valley.
Cassia desolata, F. v. M. S.A., Warrina ; Arkaringa
Valley. W.A., Barrow Range ; Fraser Range.
Petalostylis labiciioides, R. Brown. S.A., Everard Range.
W. A., Cavenagh Range, at 2,000 feet 3 Warangering.
Labichba lanceolata, Bentham. W.A., Victoria Desert
(C. 44).
Acacia patens, Meissner. S.A., Cootanoorina; 70 miles
SW. of Birksgate Range. W.A., Barrow Range.
Acacia tetragonophylla, F. v. M. S.A., Arkaringa ;
Everard Range.
Acacia restiacea, Bentham. W.A., 30 miles N.W. from
Southern Cross.
Acacia triptycha, F. v. M. {?) W.A., Victoria Desert
(Camps 56, 59, 61).
Acacia off. gonopiiylla, Bentham , with long phyllodes. W.A.,
near Barrow Range.
Acacia Extensa, Bindley. W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 42).
Acacia ulicina, Meissner. W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 56).
Var. oxyclada. W.A., Skirmish Hill.
Acacia erinacea, Bentham. W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 61)
and Fraser Range.
Acacia acanthoclada, F. v. M. W.A., Victoria Desert
(C. 54, 56).
Acacia lachnophylla, F. v. M. W.A., near Fraser Range.
Acacia Mbissneri, Lehmann. W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 63),
Fraser Range and N.W. of
Acacia sclerospbrma, F. v. M. W.A., Mount Squires.
Acacia leiopiiylla, Bentham. W.A., Fraser Range, Hunt’s
Well.
Acacia notabilis, F. v. M. W.A., Cavenagh Range.
Var. S.A., near Boundary Hill; 25 to 30 feet.
Acacia salicina, Bindley. S.A., Cotanoorina ; W.A., widely
distributed throughout the Victoria Desert and generally affect-
ing the crown of sand-ridges ; Fraser Range.


Acacia homalophylla, Cunningham. S.A., Warrina and
Arkaringa.
Acacia leptopetala, Bentham. W.A., 50 miles S.E. from
Mount Churchman.
Acacia subcoerulea, Bindley. W.A, Fraser Range.
Acacia steonqylophylla, F. v. 31. S.A., Birksgate Range.
Acacia aff. stronglophylla. W.A., Fraser Range.
Acacia pyrifolia, DeGatid. W.A., Cavenagh Range.
Acacia estropiiiolata, F. v. 31. S.A., Arkaringa Valley
Acacia stenophylla, Cunningham. S.A., Cootanoorina and
Arkaringa.
/^ A o° ACIA sclkr o pi iylla, Bindley. W.A., Victoria Desert
(C. 3/).
Acacia dictyophleba, Fv. M. S.A, Upper Arkaringa
V alley, Birksgate Range.
Acacia cyperophylla, Fv. 31. S.A., Warrina and Arka-
ringa Valley.
Acacia aneura, F. v. 31. S.A., Arkaringa Valley : W.A.
long. 121 30, lat. 2G° 30' (D. Gumming).
Acacia doratoxylon, Gunn. S.A., Mount Tllbillee.
CRASSULACEiE,
TiLL/EA verticillaris, DeCand. S.A., Blyth Hills. W.A,
Mount Squires, Victoria Spring, Fraser Range.
Till.ea pedicellosa, F. V. 31. W.A., Warangering.
HALORAGEiE.
Haloragis Gossei, F. v. 31. S.A., between Camps 10 and 11.
VV.A., Mount Squires; Victoria Desert (C. 53, C. 54). Petals,
3 ; stamens, 6 ; stigmas, 3. Unrecorded localities are :—Nickol
River (Hon. A. Forrest); Fortescue River and Exmouth Gulf
(H. S Carey); Glaring (J. Young); Upper Murchison (S.
Dixon); Rawlinson Range (E. Giles).
Haloragis confertifolia, Fv. 38. W.A., near YiUarn.
Haloragis xodulosa, F. v. 31. W.A., Karolin.
Loudoxia aurea, Bindley. W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 54);
near Fraser Range and towards Esperance Bay; near Gnarlbine."
STACKHOUSIE^E.
Stackiiousia pubescexs, A. Richard. W.A., Fraser
Stackhousia Huegelii, Endlicher. W.A, Lake Deborah •
between Red Hill and Yilgarn.
Stackiiousia muricata, Lindley. S.A., Arkaringa Valley.
Stackiiousia vimixea, Smith. W.A., between Red Hill and
Yilgarn.
Stackiiousia megaloptera, F. v. 31. W.A., Barrow Range
and Gnarlbine.


Stackhousia Brunonis, Bentham. W.A., Wangering (with
four-winged fruits).
MYRTACEiE.
Darwinia Luehmanni, spec. Nov. Glabrous throughout;
branchlets numerous, whitish ; leaves short, crowded, linear-
trigonous, bluntish ; flowers crowded into small, almost hemis-
pheric headlets; inner involucral bracts mostly ovate, membran-
ous towards the margin ; pedicels undeveloped; bracteoles nearly
elliptic; lower part of the calyx transversely rugular and slightly
squamulous - papillular, thence the calyx-tube much extended
beyond the ovulary; calyx-lobes semi-orbicular; petals almost
lanceolar, several times longer than the calyx-lobes ; staminodes
subulate-linear, towards the base broadish; stamens slightly sur-
passing the staminodes; style capillulary, near the stigma
minutely barbellate ; ovules two.
Eighty-five miles N.E. by E. from Esperance Bay (P. A.
G wynne).
Leaves generally about quarter-inch long. Headlets half to
two-thirds inch broad. Inner bracts to half inch long, truncate
at the base; bracteoles similar, exceeding somewhat the flowers.
Calyx five-streaked. Petals white, about one-sixth inch long.
Stamens nearly half as long as the petals; anthers quite dark,
globular. Style measuring fully half-inch in length. Ripe fruit
not obtained.
Nearest in affinity to D. virescens, which, however, is more
decumbent, has the leaves darker green and more prominently
dotted, larger flower-headlets, distinct pedicels, though short;
calyx smoothish all over, its lobes almost semilanceolar (but
originally described by Meissner as ovate), petals towards the
base thicker, staminodia somewhat clavellate.
The species has been dedicated to Mr. G. Luehmann, Assistant
at the phytologic establishment of Melbourne, who in the pre-
liminary examination of the Helms-collection has on many
occasions given valuable aid.
Darwinia diosmoides, Bentham. W.A., near Warangering,
one to two feet; also Esperance Bay (Dempster), Israelite Bay
(Miss Brooks).
Verticordia Brownii, Be Cand. W.A., between Red
Kangaroo Hill and Yilgarn.
Verticordia ciirysantha, Endl. W.A., near Gnarlbine and
Warangering; between Esperance Bay and Fraser Range
(Gwynne).
Verticordia iiumilis, Bentham. W.A., 15 miles West of
Red Kangaroo Hill; near Gnarlbine.
Verticordia multiflora, Tnrcz., var. W.A., between Red
Kangaroo Hill and Yilgarn.


Verticordia insignis, Endl. W.A., between Fraser Range
and Esperance Bay (P. A. Gwynne).
Verticordia Rennieana, sp. now W.A., between Red Hill
and Yilgarn.
Rather dwarf, glabrous except the flowers ; leaves short,
linear-semi-cylindric, slightly acute, dorsally beset with promin-
ent oil-glandules; pedicels about as long as the leaves, shorter
than the expanded flowers; bracteoles very broad, whitish, only
short-apiculate ; calyx-lobes three-seriate, the upper white except
at the base, with moderately ciliar-pennate segments ; calyx-lobes
of the middle series minute, recurved, fascicular-fimbriate ; those
of the lowest row repressed, semiorbicular, much adnate, entire,
hyaline, forming basal appendages to the upper lobes ; calyx-tube
short, glabrous, unfurrowed; petals pale, obovate, somewhat sur-
passing the upper calyx-lobes, entire; staminodes fringeless;
fertile anthers cordate-ellipsoid, opening by rather long slits ;
style quite short, the summit papillular-fringed ; stigma incon-
spicuous ; ovulary depressed-globular, but attenuated into the
style.
Height, so far as observable from the transmitted specimens,
up to about one foot. Branchlets whitish. Leaves one-quarter
to one-third of an inch long, erect or slightly spreading, more
prominently glandular than those of most other congeners, re-
minding thus of those of several Eriostemons. Flowers rather
small, some scattered, some in separate pairs, some racemosely
approached among leaves. Petals about a quarter of an inch
long. Ripe fruit not obtained.
This species is dedicated to the meritorious Professor of
Chemistry in the Adelaide University, Dr. Rennie, who dis-
tinguished himself also by phyto-chemic analyses, and who has
added here to the scientific obligations which we owe him by
carrying on with particular effectiveness the secretarial duties at
the recent Adelaide meeting of the Australian Association for
the Advancement of Science.
This species differs from V. picta in smaller flowers, in the
presence of refracted accessory undivided calyx-lobes.
It is distinguishable from V. Drummondii and V. pennigera
by longer leaves, the presence of fringed accessory calyx-lobes,
and by undivided not distinctly striate petals.
Incidentally it may here be observed that V. Roei constitutes
a species distinct from V. insignis ; it belongs more particularly
to the upland region, from where, indeed, the Hon. Cant Roe
brought also his plant, while V. insignis pertains to the litoral
tracts; the staminodes are certainly fringeless, as Endlicher
pointed out; the coloration of the flowers is sufficiently different
to allow of distinguishing these two plants at a glance when
once rightly understood.


We have V. Roei from beyond the sources of the Tone River
(Muir), the Upper Gordon River (Mrs. Knight), the Upper.
Blackwood River (Webb), sources of the Pallinup River (Miss
Cronin), Mount Caroline (Miss Sewell). ,
Yerticordia picta, Fndl. W.A., near Gnarlbine; Red
Kangaroo Hill.
Calycotiirix tenuiramea, Turcz. W.A., between hraser
Range and Esperance Bay (Gwynne). Leaves thicker than usual,
bracteoles broader, petals more acute. _
Calycothrix Watsoni, n. sp. W.A., 53 miles N.W. trom
Fraser i^.<xr\° r G.
Erect shrub, two to three feet high. Branchlets puberulous ;
leaves distinctly petiolate, very short, from ovate- to narrow-
elliptic, flat or somewhat concave above, turgid beneath, soon
glabrous; flowers rather small, nearly sessile, mostly scattered ;
bracteoles almost cuneate-ovate, apiculate, but otherwise very
blunt, deeply disconnected, outside puberulous; calyx-tube soon
longer than the bracteoles, rather turgid, near the summit
attenuated, prominently five-streaked ; calyx-lobes comparatively
short, nearly lanceolate-linear, narrowed gradually and hardly
setular upwards, about as long as the petals, outward as well as
the tube much beset with hairlets; petals whitish, blunt,
stamens numerous, their anthers ovate-ellipsoid, pale; style
glabrous ; fruit narrowly fusiform-ellipsoid.
This species differs from C. plumulosa in shorter, broader and
more angular leaves, in smaller flowers, in neither long-setular
nor towards the base suddenly dilated calyx-lobes, and in much
less slender calyx-tube. From C strigom it is distinguished at
once by the broader leaves, the smallness of flowers, the almost
truncate bracteoles, the much shorter and more turgid calyx-
tube, the upwards broader calyx-lobes, the more obtuse petals,
pale not bright-yellow filaments.
Our new plant shows also some affinity to C. brachychaeta,
which, however, is a species confined to Arnhem’s land.
Named in honor of Professor Archibald Watson, M.D., of the
Adelaide University, who, amidst other researches, aided also the
expedition, during which this evidently rare plant was dis-
covered..
Lhotzkya violacea, Lindley , var. Merrelliana, nov. W.A.,
between Red Hill and Yilgarn. Also sent by the late Mr. Merrell
from near the eastern sources of Swan River. The leaves shorter,
the flowers fewer, the petals pale. The typic form was brought by
the Hon. W. M. Parker from the vicinity of Mount Stirling.
Thryptombne stenocalyx, F. v. M. W.A., Victoria Desert,
C. 54. .
Thryptomene Maisonneuvii, F. V. M. S.A., Cootanoonna,


Arcoeilhnna, near Ferdinand River (“Desert ti-tree”) • W 4
Victoria Desert C 45. Occurs also at the sources of the Ash-
burton River and beyond the Marie-Alfred Range (Giles)
Thryptomene flaviflora, FV. M. S.A., Cootanoorina;
W.A., Victoria Desert, C. 54. ’
C. T “™ hymenonema, FV. M. W.A, Victoria Desert,
De^aTriS™"’ F -* and r “ fe - w - a -
A shrub, three to five feet, almost glabrous; branchlets very
\ ea l e J closel y a PP r oximated, obovate, and somewhat
enHrP gH y - conca ™’. but otherwise flat, pointless, quite
entire the conspicuous oleigerous glandules particularly visible
beneath; flowers short-pedicellate; bracteoles soon much shorter
than the flowers cymbous-ovate, fugacious ; calyx-tube turbinate-
semiovate, ten-striate and five-plicate; calyx-lobes nearly thrice
shorter than the petals, semiorbicular, entire or nearly so •
petals almost orbicular, imperfectly denticulated; stamens about
seven much shorter than the petals; anthers roundish, dark-
colored, opening by slits; filaments at least twice as long as the
ovuli rS sevS mUC Shorterthan stamens; stigma depressed;
i fro “ {' saxico J a in shc "' ter pedicels, in upwards less
dilated calyx-tube in denticulated petals, which reach further
eyond the calyx-lobes, and in proportionately shorter stamens,
t is separated from T. Ellxottii by less thickness and more
broadness of leaves by much more disproportion between the
length of the calyx-lobes and petals, and by not absolutely defin-
ite number of stamens.
Thryptomene imbricata, Fv. M. W.A, between Fraser
-tvange and Esperance Bay (P. A. Gwynne).
Thryptomene obovata, Turcz ; (syn, T. Drummondi). W.A.
near Gnarlbine, two feet high, flowers white.
n I^ I -J HRi 7 TOMENO i I)E s, F. v. M. Victoria Desert (C. 54,
U Ob, G. 57) and near Warangering; flowers magenta.
\ar. with narrower leaves; near Gnarlbine, three feet.
Ihe same species was collected near Lake Brown bv Mr E
Merrall; beyond Youndegin, Mrs. Heal; near Lake Deborah!
non. feir John Forrest ; eastern sources of Swan River, Miss G.
Sewell. A variety with longer leaves, distinctly pedicellate
flowers, and broader petals was gathered near Mount Moore bv
Messrs. King and Lefroy. J
Kunzea sericea, Turcz. W.A, about 20 miles W. from Red
Hill; five feet, flowers red.
Balustkin pulcherrimum, Hooker. W.A, between Red Hill
and Yilgarn.


Leptospbrmum Roei, Bentham. W.A., near Gnarlbine ; three
to five feet, with rather acute leaves.
Melaleuca elliptica, Labil. W.A., Fraser Range; four
feet.
Melaleuca uncinata, R. Brown. W.A., Victoria Desert
(C. 59, C. 63) and Warangering.
Melaleuca parviplora, Lindley. W.A., Victoria Desert
(C. 62), five to seven feet; Gnarlbine, the leaves with a more
distinct furrow beneath.
Melaleuca macronychia, Turcz. W.A., about 36 miles N.W.
from Southern Cross; four to five feet, a form with smaller
leaves.
Melaleuca cokdata, Turcz. W.A., 45 miles N.W. from
Mount Churchman ; three feet.
Var. ovata. This form indicates an approacli to M. pentagona.
Similar variability of leaves may be seen in M. squarrosa and
some other species. W.A., on granite rocks west from Red
Kangaroo Hill and at Warangering.
Melaleuca glomerata, F. v. M. At the boundary of S.A.
and W.A.
Melaleuca quadrifaria, F. v. M. W.A., Fraser Range;
12 to 15 feet.
Beaufortia intkrstans, F. v. M. W.A., between Red Hill
and Yilgarn ; also near Lake Deborah (Mr. Edwin Merrall).
Beaufortia elegans has been collected near Eucla by Mr. G. R.
Turner, and seems to occur also at Eyre’s Sandpatch, according
to Mr. J. B. Batt’s collection; this demonstrates for the first
time the occurrence of the genus outside of West Australian
territory.
B. macrostemon and B. heterophylla have been traced eastward
as far as Coolgardie by Mr. Edw. Cronin.
B. Schaueri was gathered at Youndegin by Miss Alice Eaton,
near Mount Caroline by Miss Geraldine Sewell, and between
Mount Rugged and Victoria Spring by Mr. Brooke. It occurs
rarely with whitish filaments.
B. squarrosa was brought by Miss A. Eaton from Youndegin.
Calothamnus blepharospermus, F. v. M. W.A., 140 miles
N.E. from Geraldton.
Eucalyptus uncinata, Turcz. W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 56),
shrub, 12 feet; about 50 miles N.W. from Knutsford, 20 feet.
Eucalyptus pyriformis, Turcz. S.A., near Everard Range
and sandhills towards Birksgate Range ; W.A., sandhills S. of
Victoria Spring.
Eucalyptus oleosa, F. v. M. S.A., between Everard and
Birksgate Ranges (C. 9), 70 miles S.W. from Mount Watson ;
W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 56) and Depot Hill, 70 miles N.W.
from Fraser Range.


Eucalyptus cjssia, Bentham. W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 63),
20 to 30 feet; 40 miles N. W. from Fraser Range; known also
from Mount Stirling and about 50 miles east from York (Hon.
W. M. Parker).
Some of the leaves verge into a lanceolar-ovate form. Flowers
(hitherto undescribed) when expanding sometimes less than a
quarter-inch long ; calyces just before opening measuring in total
length from two-thirds to one inch ; tube turbinate-semiovate,
often dilated near its edge, somewhat striate; operculum about
as long as the tube, hemispheric, suddenly terminating into a con-
spicuous narrow conic protraction ; stamens inflected while in
bud, all fertile; filaments rigidulous, dull-yellowish when dried,
some attaining a length rather above half an inch ; anthers pale,
cuneate-ellipsoid, broader towards the base, but pendent, bursting
by longitudinal fissures ; style prominent, but considerably
shorter than the stamens ; stigma hardly broader than the sum-
mit of the style.
The examination of the flowers now shows that this species
should take its systematic place near E. incrassata.
Eucalyptus incrassata, Labil. W.A., throughout the Vic-
toria Desert, Fraser Range.
Var. dumosa. S.A., seventy miles S.W. of Pernamo Hill.
Eucalypus salmonophloia, F. v. M. W.A., Victoria Desert
(C. 63) and 40 miles N.E. of Fraser Range.
Eucalyptus Oldfieldii, Fv. M. S.A., from Everard Range
to near Birksgate Range (C. 4, C. 9, 10), lo feet; W.A., Mount
Cooper in Cavenagh Range, a dwarf state at 2,500 feet eleva-
tion.
Eucalyptus terminalis, Fv. M. S.A., Mount Goolwa (C. 6),
Everard Range and Wa-wee Rockhole; W.A., Cavenagh and
Barrow Ranges, and between them in patches.
Eucalyptus rostrata, Schlechtendal. W.A., Skirmish Hill.
Eucalyptus occidentalis, Endlicher. W.A., Warangering.
Var. Victoria Desert (C. 61, 63).
Eucalyptus gamophylla, F. v. M. S.A., near boundary of
W.A., Mount Cooper in Cavenagh Range.
Eucalyptus eudesmioides, Fv. M. W.A., near Barrow
Range, Victoria Desert (C. 45, 60); “ Desert-gum,” 30 to 45 feet;
var. with ovate leaves, S.A., 25 miles S.S.W. from Mount
Watson.
Eucalyptus largiflorens, F. v. M. S.A., Mount Ilbillee,
Mount Watson; var., Yeelunginna Hill (C. 4).
Eucalyptus obcordata, Turcz. W.A., 40 miles KW. from
Fraser Range.
Eucalyptus redunca, Schauer. W.A., Knutsford ; 20 feet.


RHAMNACEvE.
Cryptandra tridentata, Steudel. M.A., Victoria Desert
(C. 43).
Cryptandra n. sp. W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 06).
UMBELLIFERAS.
Hydrocotyle callicarpa, F. v. M. S.A., near Everard
Range. Leaves less deeply slit tlian usual, and the keel of the
fruitlets rather more prominent.
Didiscus eriocarpus, F. v. M. W.A., 60 miles south from
Victoria Spring, C. 63.
Didiscus glaucifolius, F. v.
M. Var. with less divided
of peduncles. W.A., various
leaves and viscid hairs at base
places in Barrow Range.
Didiscus cceruleus, De Cand.
from Esperance Bay (Gwynne).
Trachymene effusa, Turcz.
Geraldton.
W.A., 85 miles N.E. and E.
W.A., 100 miles U.E. from
Actinotus leucocephalus, Benthcnn, var. humilis. W.A.,
Warangering; also Mullewa, Upper Murchison (S. Dixon).
Plants not exceeding 4 inches high, usually from U to 2 ; umbel-
stalks almost all radical, involucral bracts bearing far less vesti-
ture ; some of the inner flowers only bistaminate, a characteristic
observed by ML. L. Rodway also in A. bellidzo'ides.
Daucus brachiatus, Sieber. W.A., near Mount Squires;
Eraser Range.
SANTALACEAI.
Exocarpos spartea, R. Brown. W.A., 30 miles north of
Mount Churchman ; 8 to 10 feet.
Exocarpos apiiylla, R. Brown. W.A., Fraser Range; “5
to 12 feet, trunk 4 to 7 inches diameter up to 3 feet from the
base, then branching.”
Antiiobolus exocarpoides, F. v. M. M .A., Skirmish Hul;
a shrub 3to 5 feet high, with divaricate branchlets. Female
flowers, solitary or rarely two together, subtended by two in-
volucral bracts; calyx-lobes four, yellow, longer than the short
tube, oblong-linear, reflexed ; ovulary broadly conical, not quite
so long as the calyx; stigma large, sessile; drupe ovoid 6by 4-5
mm., to nearly globular, succulent; endocarp hard and smooth.
Male flowers not seen.
Leptomeria Preissiana, A. De Cand. vv.A., Lake Betioy
and about 15 miles west of Red Hill; 4 feet; flowers white,
about 10 in a raceme.
Santalum lanceolatum, R. Brown. S.A., near Arcoeilhnna ;
W.A., Cavenagh Range.


Santalum acum.natum A. Be Cand S.A., Cootanoorina.
Plato ’ V “ DeSert <C ' 48) ’ Fraser Ran « e and Hampton
PE,tSICARIL,,, > * ’■ M - W.A., Warangering.
LORANTHACEjE
Loranthus Murrayi, S.A, Upper Arkaringa Valley
on Acacia sahcma and A. aneura.
Loranthus Exocarpi, Behr. S.A., Arkaringa Valley on
Lassia Sturhi and Eremophila Freelingi, Arcoeillinna on Acacia
aneura; W.A., Von Truer tableland (D. Gumming).
Var. lutea. S.A., Cootanoorina on Acacia sp. &
Loranthus linophyllus, Fenzl. S.A, Upper Cootanoorina
Greek on Acacia aneura ; W.A., Ernest Giles f D Gum-
ming). ° v
Loravthus i gibberdlus, Tate. W.A., Cavenagh Range on
Hakea lorea, Mount Squires.
Var. About 36 miles NW. from Southern Cross on
Eakea sp.
Loranthus pendulus, Sieher. W.A, near Mount Squires,
Victoria Desert (C. 36) on Eucalypti.
Var. amplexipolius. W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 62) on
Brachychiton Gregorii.
Var. canescens has a superficial resemblance to L. Quandanq,
the leaves and flowers hoary petals ; red inside, not green ; flowers
stalked. S.A., Cootanoorina and Arkaringa on Acacia homalo-
phylla.
Loranthus Quandang, Lindley. W.A., Victoria Desert (C.
« h j on Acacia aneura.
Isopogon Drummondii, Bentham. W.A., near Boorabin : two
to five feet high.
Simsia tenuifolia, R. Brown. W.A., between Fraser Range
and Esperance Bay (Gwynne). Persoon’s genus Simsia forms
17(n \ S6Ctlon . ° f Encelia , Cavanilles, described and figured in
17J1, hence Simsia of R. Brown becomes restored and Stirlinqia
as a generic name must be abolished.
Conospermum Toddii, E c. AI. W.A, Victoria Desert
(C. 54).
Var Gwynnr. About 85 miles E.N.E. from Esperance Bay
(R. A. Gwynne). Differs from the plant originally described in
having more numerous leaves of less length and straightness, in
less acuminated bracts, in a less slender and more deeply lobed
corolla, almost glabrous outside. Should, from an ampler suite
of specimens at any future time, when fruits may have also be-
come available, it be deemed desirable to keep Mr. Gwynne’s


plant apart as a species, then the variety-name should be raised to
specific rank.
Bentham’s variety leianthum of C. polycephalum belongs also to
C. Toddii. The genuine C. polycephalum is much more rigid, its
leaves are longer, less slender and less numerous, and the
corolla is bluish and outside somewhat sericeous, whereas that of
C. Toddii seems more whitish from the commencement. More-
over C. polycephalum belongs to the western fall of the country
from the dividing range towards the west, while C. Toddii is
restricted to parts of country stretching eastward from the
watershed.
Conospermum DiSTiciiUM, R. Brown. W.A., Esperance Bay ;
three feet, “smoke plant” (I). Lindsay). Also at Israelite Bay,
Miss Brooke ; between Swan River and King George’s Sound,
Hon. Sir John Forrest; Box Vale, Miss Julia Wells.
Conospekmum stoechadis, Fndlicher. W.A., Karoling.
Persoonia, sp. W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 54), a low shrub
growing on sandhills.
Xylomelum angustifolium, Kippist. W.A., 140 miles N.E.
from Geraldton.
Lambertia inermis, R. Brown. W.A., between Fraser Range
and Esperance Bay (Gwynne).
Grevillea pterosperma, F. v. M- W.A., Victoria Desert,
Camps 54, 59.
Grevillea eriostachya, Bindley. W.A., near Skirmish Hill
and Barrow Range; stigma almost terminal, broadly margined.
Grevillea juncifolia, Hooker. S.A., Arkaringa to Everard
Range; Ferdinand River, with more glabrous inflorescence.
W.A., Mount Ilbillee.
Grevillea Huegelii, Meissner; var. glabriflora. - W.A.,
Esperance Bay (P. A. Gwynne).
Var. simplicifolia. W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 53, C. 59) and
near Hunt’s Well.
Grevillea teretifolia, Meissner. W.A., Boorabin. Fruit
very turgid, obliquely oval, one-third to one-half inch long,
slightly rough outside; pericarp crustaceous; seeds elliptic,
devoid of any conspicuous marginal dilatation.
Grevillea eryngioides, Bentham. W.A., Mount Churchman.
Fruit oblique-ovate, two-thirds to one inch long, much compressed,
minutely acuminated by the remnant of the style; pericarp
crustaceous. Seeds ovate, hardly above a quarter of an inch
long, dark-brown, only slightly convex outward, their narrow
marginal membrane wearing away.
Grevillea nematopiiylla, F. v. M. W.A., near Mount
Churchman, and in the Murchison District; “ a tree up to 30
feet high.”


Grevillea acuaria, F. v. AT. W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 54,
C. 56, C. 59).
Agrees in every respect with Drummond’s plant, except that
most of the leaves are twice as broad, unless the fruit (still un-
known) should reveal specific differences. The corolla is red. In
the greater width of the leaves it reminds of G. sparsijtora.
Grevillea Helmsiaxa, spec. Nov. Branchlets thinly grey-
tornentellous; leaves pinnatisected, on short petioles, greyish,
segments 14 or less, more erect than spreading, linear, pungent-
pointed, refracted along the margin, but slightly invested with
appressed hairlets beneath ; racemes hardly longer than broad ;
flowers comparatively large ; pedicels conspicuous, as well as the
rachis densely beset with short appressed hairlets ; corolla rather
scantily provided with vestiture outside, bearing scattered hairlets
up to the middle inside ] pistil quite glabrous, hypogynous glan-
dule hippocrepic, torus almost horizontal, laterally divergent;
stipes free; ovulary very gibbous; style long-exserted ; stigma
laterally descendent.
Near Fraser’s Range at Camp 71.
Total length of leaves, three inches or less ' segments hardly
one-tenth inch broad ; bracts very fugacious; total longitudinal
dimension of the coralla about three-quarters inch, but appearing
less from the terminal curvature, the petals probably reddish,
unless yellowish; hypogynous glandule much compressed, very
prominent, the base very blunt. Fruit unknown.
Ihis species differs from G. stenomera in more pointed leaf-
segments, broader, never almost pendently recurved racemes,
longer flowers, thicker, quite glabrous style, more angular ovulary
on comparatively shorter stipes, more patent glandule, longer
stigma; and the fruit characteristic, as yet inascertainable, may
be also different.
This new Grevillea shows some affinity to G. longistyla , par-
ticularly in reference to aspect of the racemes; but the stipes
adnate to the descending torus and the vestiture of the ovulary
distinguish it also from the form with smaller leaves.
G. leucophris and G. tripartita come also in some respects near
our new species.
Grevillea Treuriaxa, F. v. M. W.A., Victoria Desert
(C. 59). This species differs from G. asparagoides besides the
characteristics originally indicated (Fragm. Phyt. Austral., IX.,
p. 123) in the color of the floral vestiture, grey not brownish,
unless at the summit of the flowers.
Hakea lorea, R. Brown. S.A., Arkaringa Valley and near
Everard Range ; W.A., Cavenagh and Barrow Ranges. “ Cork-
bark tree,” attaining to 20 feet; bark corky, deeply fluted, three
and a half inches at most, half-inch at least in thickness.


Hakea Roei, Bentham. W.A., near Boorabin; four to six
feet. The fruit is similar to that of H. incrassata , but is more
oval, with the pointed apex more terminal and the surrounding
seed-membrane is quite pale.
Hakea Preissii, Meissner. W.A., Murchison district; petals
yellow inside ; also on the Irwin River.
Hakea platysperma, Hooker. W.A., between Boorabin and
Guardanoolagin, two to seven feet.
Hakea falcata, R. Brown. W.A., near Boorabin ; Waranger-
ing, two to five feet.
-rv ITT a O/? . XT I*7
*Hakea glabella, R. Brown. W.A., 36 miles N.W. from
Southern Cross, five to ten feet.
Banksia prionotes, Bindley. W.A., 140 miles N.E. from
Geraldton.
Banksia Elderiana, n. sp. W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 54).
Branchlets grey-tomentellous; leaves on short petioles, rigid,
much elongated, but rather narrow, flat, serrate-pinnatitid, on
their upper side the venulation concealed, on their lower side
faintly reticulated, the foveoles there slightly whitish-tomentel-
lous; lobes of the leaves semicuneate-deltoid; inflorescencence
oval-ellipsoid; petals very narrow, outside to about the middle
almost sericeous, their upper portion glabrous or glabrescent,
canaliculate-linear, blunt; anthers quite narrow; style only
towards its base beset with short hairlets ; fruitlets densely
pubescent at their lower portion, glabrescent towards the some-
what acutangular summit; seeds cuneate-deltoid, terminated by
a membranous appendage quite as long and considerably broader.
Well-developed leaves seven to ten inches long, hardly ever
exceeding half-inch in breadth, almost of equal colour on both
sides, downward gradually narrowed, also upwards less broad
than near the middle. Flowers only seen as remnants among the
fruitlets, thus the colour unascertainable ; the styles all broken,
so that no stigma remained. United mass of fruitlets four to five
inches long; individual fruitlets two-thirds to nearly one inch
broad. Seeds-testule and its appendicular protraction black.
Bears some resemblance to B. laevigata , though the leaves are
much longer and not truncate, besides having far longer lobes,
while also the indument of the petals is very different. From
B. media it is similarly distinguished, as mentioned above, by the
form of the leaves, which moreover are not much paler under-
neath, but the characteristics of the petals are almost the same.
What Sir Joseph Banks for material support has been to the
science of Britain at his time, that Sir Thomas Elder has been in
promoting scientific knowledge for South Australia at our period ;
hence this plant is chosen to connect his honored name with that
of the British Maecenas in a genus, which was named already by
Linnaeus —the younger.


This species seems to form one of the eastern outposts of the vast
mass of western Banksias, and may be still more limited in its
range than B. ornata. The celebrated and very venerable Edw.
J. Eyre (Journ. of Discovery—Expedit., 11., 14) met the first
western Banksia, perhaps B. media , at Point Dover; therefore,
still a degree further east than the longitude in which
B. Elderiana appears. B. marginata does not seem to penetrate
westward beyond Marble Range, 30 miles N.W. from Port
Lincoln.
The following notes on the geographic distribution of some
Banksias may not be inopportunely offered :
B. sphcerocarpa at the Irwin and Arrowsraith Rivers, F v. 3d.
B. occidentalis at Wilson’s Inlet, F. v. 3d.: petals yellow, style
bright-red.
B. attenuata extends with B. prionotes northward to near
Shark’s Bay, F. v. 3d.; flowers yellow.
B. Menziesii at G reenough River, F v. 31.; bark verrucose,
petals yellow, style red and just below the stigma remarkably
constricted.
B. nutans at Greenough River; petals beset on the outside
with silver-grey hairlets.
RUBIACE^E.
Oldenlandia elatinoides, FV. 31. W.A., Karolin.
Canthium latifolium, F. v. 3d. S.A., Upper Arkaringa
Valley, near Wa-Wee Waterhole, Everard Range. W.A.,
Ernest Giles’ Range (D. Gumming).
Canthium oleifolium, Hooker. W.A., Victoria Desert.
Opercularia scabrida, Schlecht. W.A., Victoria Desert
(C. 57), with shorter peduncles than usual ; Yerdanie, and near
Red Kangaroo Hill.
Pomax umbellata, Solander. S.A., near Mount Watson.
W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 54).
CUCURBIT ACEAE.
Melothria Maderaspatana, Cogn. S.A., Everard and
Birksgate Ranges.
COMPOSITE.
Brachycome ciliaris, Lessing. S.A., Warrina ; W.A. Vic-
toria Desert (C. 53), Fraser Range.
Brachycome Muelleri, Bonder (?). W.A., Victoria Springs.
Minuria leptopiiylla, DeCand. S.A., Arkaringa Valley.
Minuria Cunninghamii, Bentham. S.A., Arkaringa.
Minuria Candollei, F, v. 3d., forma denticulata. S.A.,
Cootanoorina.


Minuria sttaedifolia, F. v. M. W.A., near Fraser Range
(C. 65), Southern Cross.
Calotis erinacea, Steetz. S.A., Upper Arkaringa Valley;
var. with profusedly divaricate ramification and minute leaves.
W.A., Cavenagh and Barrow Ranges.
Calotis cymbacantha, F. v. M. S.A., Warrina and between
Nilpena and Cootanoorina ; W.A., long. 122°, lat. 26° 30' (D.
Gumming).
Calotis latiuscula, F. v. M. and Tate. S.A., Upper Coota-
noorina Valley and along Arkaringa Creek.
Calotis plumulifera, F. v. M. S.A., Upper Arkaringa
Valley; W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 53, C. 54).
Calotis hispidula, F. v. M. S.A., Cootanoorina, near
Mount Watson, and Birksgate Range; W.A., near Mount
Squires.
Aster Mitchelli, F. v. M. S.A., around Everard Range;
W.A., Victoria Spring and Lake Lefroy.
Aster exiguifolius, F. v. M. W.A., between Red Hill and
Yilgarn.
Aster Muelleri, Sonder. W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 59,
61 )‘ '• „
Aster megalodontus, F. v. M. S.A., Everard Range; W.A.,
near Mount Squires. The leaves are more elongated and, there-
fore, proportionately narrower than those of the plant as
originally described. As regards aspect, it is not dissimilar to
Pterigeron dentatifolius , but in floral characters very distinct.
Vittadinia australis, A. Richard. S.A., Arkaringa Valley ;
W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 53) and Fraser Range.
Pluchea conocephala, F. v. M. W.A., Victoria Spring,
thence to Fraser Range and Lake Lefroy; var. microphylla,
Lake Lefroy; var. subspinescens, near Hunt’s Well.
Pluchea dentex, R. Brown. S.A., Everard and Birksgate
Ranges. Known also from the Finke River (Rev. H. Kempe),
near MacDonnell Range and Mount Olga (E. Giles), pre-
viously recorded as P. Eyreana ; also near the Isaac’s River (P.
O’Shanesy). In the “Botany of the Horn Expedition” this species
is quoted under P. squarrosa. Irrespective of other characteris-
tics already promulgated, the leaves are narrower than those of
P. squarrosa , and the headlets generally on longer stalks. As in
the closely allied species, the corollas are purple.
Pterigeron liatroides, Bentham. W.A., near Hunt’s Well.
Pterocaulon sphacelatus, Bentham & J. Hooker. S.A.,
Cootanoorina Creek.
Var., W.A., Cavenagh Range. “The plant emitted a scent
like that of ripe apples, even a long time after being dried.”
Gnaphalium japonicum, Thunberg. W.A., Fraser Range and
near Lake Deborah.


Gnaphalium indutum, J. Hooker. S.A., Arkaringa Creek.
Ixiohexa leptolepis, Bentham. S.A., Arkaringa Valley;
W.A., Fraser Range.
Ixiol.exa tomextosa, Bonder & F. v. M. S.A., Arkaringa
V alley.
Podolepis caxescexs, Ciinningham. S.A., Everard Range.
Var. apfixis, Bonder. W.A., near Mount Squires, Barrow
Range, Victoria Desert (C. 50, C. 53).
This plant differs from P. pallida in not distinctly rugulose
involucral bracts and pronounced yellowish peripheral corollas.
The specimens from Victoria Desert show the ligules excep-
tionally deeply slit.
Podolepis rugata, Labil. W.A., near Fraser Range (C. 65)
and towards Esperance Bay.
Podolepis Siemssexii, F. v. M. S.A., Upper Arkaringa
Valley and Arcoeillina. W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 53) and
Fraser Range.
Athrixia tenella, Bentham. W.A., near Fraser Ranee
(C. 66). s
Waiizia corymbosa, Wendland. W.A., near Mount Squires,
Victoria Desert (C. 50-54), Fraser Range.
Hblipterum floribuxdum, De Cand. S.A., Arkaringa and
towards Everard Range. W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 53, C. 54)
and Fraser Range.
Helipterum Fitzgibboxi, F. v. M. W.A., Mount Squires
and Victoria Desert (C. 40, C. 53).
Helipterum stipitatum, F. v. M. S.A., Arkaringa Creek
and Upper Arkaringa Valley. W.A., near Mount Squires and
Barrow Range, also a variety dwarfed to one and a-half inches ;
Victoria Desert (C. 50, C. 53).
Helipterum Humboldtianum, De Candolle. W.A., Fraser
Range.
Helipterum texellum, Turczaninow. W.A., Fraser Range
and near Lake Deborah.
Helipterum strictum, Bentham. W.A., near Mount Squires
and Barrow Range, Victoria Desert (C. 53).
Helipterum pygmasum, Bentham. W.A., near Fraser Range
(C. 66), Karolin.
Helipterum moschatum, Bentham. S.A., Birksgate Range.
Helipterum Bentham. S.A., Arcoeillina, 15
miles W. of Wa-wee waterhole; W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 53).
Helipterum dimorpiiolepis, Bentham. W.A., Fraser Range.
Helipterum Troedelii, F, v. AI, W.A., near Fraser Range.
Helichrysum cassinianum, Gaud. W.A., near Mount
Squires, Victoria Desert (C. 51, 53), Fraser Range.
Helichrysum Lawrexcella, F. v. M. S.A., towards Everard


Range; W.A., near Mount Squires, Victoria Desert (C. 54),
with glabrous achenes and with a pappus transitory to that of
Helipterum.
Helichrysum ambiguum, Turcz. S.A., Arkaringa Creek,
Everard Range. W.A., near Barrow Range, with narrower more
ciliolated involucral bracts; Victoria Desert (C. 50), Fraser
Range.
Helichrysum apiculatum, De Cand . S.A., Warrina to
Everard Range; W.A., near Mount Ilbillee soakage, Fraser
Range.
Helichrysum Ayersii, F. v. M. S.A., towards Everard Range;
W.A., near Mount Squires.
Helichrysum adnatum, Bentham. W.A., 85 miles N.E. by
E. from Esperance Bay (Gwynne).
Headlets in an unopened state almost globular, or verging into
an ovate-ellipsoid form as also in H. lepidophyllum ; but like-
wise probably when fully developed campanular-hemiellipsoid.
The latter species, however, has its leaves always bent downward,
never erect; they are moreover usually shorter and always pro-
portionately much broader. In the Elder-Expedition plant the
leaves are adnate at and near the median line of upper side to
their middle or even beyond, towards the margin free. It
differs mainly from H. diotophyllum in having the leaves more
adnate, and not conspicuously and suddenly dilated at and near
the base and in having the floral bracts not yellowish. It is
distinct from the genuine H. decurrens in, though adnate, yet
not really decurrent leaves, which have an acute apex. From
//. retusum it is removed by the form of the leaves and the color
of the flower-headlets.
Unrecorded localities of the several closely-allied plants here
alluded to are
Helichrysum adnatum, Wimmera (Matthews) ; between the
Darling and Lachlan River (G. Day).
Helichrysum diotophyllum , near the Lachlan River (G. Tucker),
near Darling River (G. Day), Upper Balonne River (Scortechini),
Helichrysum decurrens, Fowler’s Bay (Mrs. Richards).
Helichrysum lepidophyllum, Upper Kalgan River (F. v. M.),
Tone River (Muir).
Rutidosis helichrysoides, De Cand. S.A., between Wa-wee
waterhole and Everard Range.
Hume a gracillima, n. sp. W.A., Victoria Desert (C, 44).
Annual, very small, somewhat rough from minute glandules;
stems one or more, extremely slender, often unbranched; leaves
very short, filiform-linear, blunt; headlets quite small, terminal,
solitary, almost hemispheric; involucral bracts comparatively


broad, glabrous, hardly acute, the outer dull-purplish, the inner
yellow, with deltoid-orbicular radiating plate on a broad trans-
parent stipes; flowers scarcely exceeding the involucre, numerous ;
tube of the corolla beset with glandules ; achenes ellipsoid-ovate,
glabrous, somewhat pellucid.
The specimens gathered from one and a half to five inches
high; leaves one-eighth to half-inch long, those at the root
crowded; headlets one-quarter to one-third inch broad, the in-
volucral bracts appressed; corolla-lobes conspicuous; anthers
partly exserted; achenes many times shorter than the corollas,
hardly seen ripe. Resembles strikingly Helipterum Jesseni, but
trace of any pappus does exist. The plant is also closely
allied to Acomis rnacra.
Humea tenerrima, n. sp. S.A., near Mount Ilbillee.
A minute and remarkably delicate plant, but in incipient in-
florescence only. It is scantily pubescent, the leaves are very
small, thinly petiolate, ovate-lanceolar, pellucid; the headlets are
scattered, extremely small, with white broadish involucral bracts
and with but few flowers, one of which occasionally very slender
and bearing an exserted bifid style. No pappus could be dis-
cerned, owing perhaps to the very young state of the specimens.
If it is really absent we would have another Humea , but perhaps
this curious plantlet may belong to Helichrysum or some other
allied genus. It resembles somewhat Ruiidosis Pumilio, but the
leaves are as delicately membranous as those of Stellaria media.
Millotia Kempei, V. v. M., var. Helmsii. S.A., Birksgate
Range to the border of W.A.
Procumbent to the breadth of nearly one foot; headlets often
as broad as their length ; involucral bracts only bearing a slight
glandular-viscid vestiture, not a lanuginous indument as in the
type. Ripe fruit not known. A similar variability has been ob-
served in M. Greevesii. This species brings the genus Millotia
into close contact with Toxanthus.
Toxanthus perpusillus, Turcz. S.A., Everard Range at
2,000 ft.; also W.A., at Yilgarn (Mr. Merrall).
Toxanthus major, Turcz. W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 54).
Myriocepiialus riiizocbphalus, Bentham. W.A., Cavenagh
Range, Victoria Desert (C, 53), Fraser Range.
Myriocephalus Stuartii, Bentham. S.A., Cootanoorina and
Birksgate Range.
Angianthus tomentosus, Wendland. W.A., Fraser Range and
near to (C. 64).
Angianthus pusillus, Bentham. S.A., Arkaringa Valley;
W.A., Mount Squires, Victoria Desert (C. 53, 60), Karolin.
Angianthus strictus, Bentham. W.A., Victoria Spring,
Fraser Range, Quardanoolagin.


Gnephosis . W.A., Fraser Range ; Camp 64.
Gnephosis . W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 53).
Cephalipterum Drummondii, A. Gray. W.A., Fraser Range.
Gnaphalodes uliginosum, A. Gray. W.A., Fraser Range.
Gnaphalodes condensatum, A. Gray. W.A., Victoria Desert
(C. 53) and near Fraser Range (C. 66). A small but caulescent
form.
Siegesbeckia orientalis, Linne. S.A., foot of Everard
Range.
Flaveria Australasica, Hooker. S.A., Arkaringa Valley.
Senecio Gregorii, F. v. M. S.A., Cootanoorina, Upper
Arkaringa Valley. W.A., Fraser Range.
Senecio magnificus, F. v. M. S.A., foot of Everard Range.
Senecio lautus, Solander. W.A., near Mount Squires and
Fraser Range.
Senecio brachyglossus, F. v. M. S.A., Arkaringa; W.A.,
near Warangering.
Erechtites quadridentata, De Cand. S.A., Arkaringa;
W.A., Fraser Range.
Erechtites lacbrata, F. v. M. S.A., foot of Everard Range^
CAMPANULACEjE.
Lobelia heteropiiylla, Labil. WA., Fraser Range and be-
tween Red Hill and Yilgarn.
Isotoma PETRiEA, F. v. M. S.A., Arkaringa Valley, Everard
Range. W.A., Fraser Range ; Yerdanie (with white flowers).
Wahlenbergia gracilis, De Cand. S.A., Arkaringa Creek.
W.A., Mount Squires, Fraser Range, Karolin, &c.
CANDOLLE ACE^E.
Candollea pilosa, Lahillardiere. W.A., 85 miles N.E. by E,
from Esperance Bay (Gwynne).
Candollea limbata, F. v. M. W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 57-
59), near Gnarlbine.
Candollea breviscapa, F. v. M. W.A., Victoria Desert (C.
54, 56), Karolin.
Leuwenhoekia stipitata, F. v. M. W.A., Karolin.
GOODENIACE^).
Brunonia australis, Smith. W.A., near Mount Squires and
Barrow Range.
Dampiera lutbiflora, F. v. M. W.A., near Warangering.
Dampiera alata, Lindley. W.A., between Red Hill and
Yilgarn.
Several other species of this difficult genus, mostly without
ripe fruit, are reserved for critical examination.


Leschenaultia heteromera, Bentham. W.A., near Gnarl-
bine and between Fraser Range and Esperance Bay ; var. with
longer, less-pointed leaves, the corolla blue, and to one inch long :
Victoria Desert (0. 42, 44, 58).
Scasvola spinescens, R. Brown. S.A., Wa-wee waterhole;
W.A., near Mount Squires, Victoria Desert (C. 53), Fraser
Range, Von Truer tableland (D. Gumming).
Scmevola oxyclona, F. v. M. W.A., Fraser Range, a low bush,
hemispherically spreading to three feet diameter.
Sgevola depauperata, R. Brown. S.A., about Mount
Watson, on sandy soil; branches shortly hairy or scabrous.
SCiEVOLA FASCICULATA, Bentham. W.A., near Yerdanie and
Gnarlbine.
SCiEVOLA Reinwardtii, De J riese. W. A., near Warangering.
Goodenia scapigera, R. Brown. W.A., 85 miles N.E. from
Esperance (Gwynne).
Goodenia Ramelii, F. v. M. W.A., near Mount Squires.
The style is villous, and the stigma-cover is distinctly ciliolate;
the calyx-lobes are rather longer than usual.
Goodenia pinifolia, De Vriese. W.A., near Southern Cross.
Goodenia Elderi, n. sp. W. A., on sandy places near Gnarl-
bine and Warangering.
Erect, somewhat lignescent, stems and branches bearing a
thin whitish tomentum; leaves mostly rather short, very slender,
filiform, as well as the inflorescence almost glabrous ; peduncles
terminating branchlets, bearing few or several racemose panicu-
late flowers; bracts leaflike; pedicels mostly longer than the
flowers, bearing midway two linear bracteoles; lobes of the calyx
at first much longer than the tube, narrow-linear; lobes of the
corolla all expanding into whitish upward-narrowed membranes;
anthers narrow, blunt; style beset with short spreading hairlets;
stigma-cover except its base glabrous; fruit oval-ellipsoid ; dis-
sepiment high ; seeds several in each cell.
Height of plant to two feet, as far as seen ; its taste bitter.
Root perpendicularly descending, unbranched, scantily fibril-
iferous. Ramification upwards short. Longest leaves measuring
one and a-half inches ; length of most less than an inch ; many
of the leaves by abbreviation of branchlets somewhat fasciculate.
Tube of the corolla unilaterally protruding to a slight extent;
somewhat beset with hairlets along the sutures. Membranous
lobe-expansions of inconsiderable width; stigma-cover longer
than broad, even at the orifice, glabrous. Ripe fruit not avail-
able. Seeds imbricate in two rows within each cell.
This rich-flowering species approaches in some of its charac-
teristics to G. pinifolia, in others to G. scapigera. With the
former it agrees much in foliage, but the calyces are much larger,


the fruits many-seeded and of different structure, though the
membrane of the corolla-lobes is also white in that plant. The
analysis by Yer Huell, given for the fruit in De Vriese’s Goode-
noviese, shows ripe seeds as ample as the fruit cavity; we find
them much smaller and rather numerous, but in the present
species they may not be fully ripe, though already quite dark.
With G. scapigera our new plant shares in the shape of the
calyces and fruits, size of dissepiment and number of seeds,
differing, however, extremely in foliage, much closer inflorescence,
and much longer pedicels.
Goodenia Watsoni, n. sp. W.A., near Gnarlbine.
.Perennial, herbaceous, almost glabrous; leaves nearly all
radical, narrowly lanceolar or elliptic-cuneate, gradually
narrowed into their petioles, remotely denticulated from the
middle upward or only towards the summit ; axils of petioles
lanuginous ; stems peduncle-like; panicle rather long but con-
tracted ; flowers small; pedicels short, most of them minutely
bibracteolate about the middle; expanding membranes of the
corolla-lobes white, narrow without terminal dilations ; anthers
blunt; style beset with minute hairlets ; stigma-cover glabrous
except with a hardly perceptible ciliolation at the orifice ; fruit
very small, globular-oval; dissepiment reaching to beyond the
middle of the cavity ; seeds several in each cell, minute, dark-
brown, flat, devoid of marginal expansion.
Here again we have a combination of characteristics of
G. scapigera and G. pinifolia, but reversedly as compared to
those of G. Elderi. Thus G. Watsoni has the leaves like those of
G. scapigera , but the small flowers and fruits quite similar to
those of G. pinifolia , though in much less spreading panicle.
The species name is in compliment to Professor Watson, of the
Adelaide University, who as Sir Thomas Elder’s representative
has so largely identified himself with the organisation of the
Expedition.
Goodenia strophiolata, F. v. M. W.A., 30 miles N.W.
from Fraser Range, Karolin. Also found at Parker’s Range
and Yilgarn by Merrall, between the Great Bight and Victoria
Spring by Crawford, and near Youndegin by Miss A. Eaton.
Goodenia xanthospeema, F. v. M. W.A., Victoria Desert
(Camps 44, 50, 54). The radical leaves provided only with very
short petioles, the thick portion of the corolla-lobes thinly
pubescent on the outside.
Goodenia incana, R. Brown. W.A., near Warangering.
Goodenia ccerulea, R. Brown. W.A., between Red Hill and
Yilgarn, and near Warangering.
Goodenia heterochila, F. v. M. S.A., Arcoeillina Well and
Upper Arkaringa Valley; near Mount Watson (C. 17). A


small-leaved variety, with larger seeds. W.A., Barrow Range,
Victoria Desert (C. 50); var. angustipolia.
Goodenia pinnatifida, Schlecht., var. minor. W.A., Fraser
Range. The seeds are pale brown, but not matured.
Goodenia concinna, Bentham. W.A., near Mount Squires ;
a tall variety, with roundish-oval fruits, and larger, more mem-
branously-margined seeds, Victoria Desert (C. 54). The corolla
in typical specimens is minutely puberulous externally, and its
lobes are almost truncate, not as in G. Jiliformis anteriorly bi-
lobulate.
Goodenia microptera, F. v. M. W.A., Victoria Desert (C.
53), offers an approach to Calogyne Berardiana.
Velleya connata, F. v. M. W.A., from Skirmish Hill to
Victoria Desert (C. 53); a form with somewhat pinnati-lobed
radical leaves and with indented bracts.
Velleya discopiiora, F. v. M. W.A., near Gnarlbine, two
feet high, radical leaves elliptic-spathulate, three inches long,
somewhat serrulate; also Annean (S. Dixon).
Velleya cycnopotamica, F. v. M. W.A., Victoria Desert
(C. 53, 62); flowers pink.
Velleya paradoxa, R. Brown. W.A., near Barrow Range
and Victoria Desert (C. 41, 51, 53).
GENTIANEA3.
spicata, Persoon. W.A., between Red Hill and
Yilgarn.
LOGANIACEiE.
Logania stenophylla, F. v. M. W.A., Victoria Desert
(C. 59).
Logania nuda, F. v. M. W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 59);
flowers pale-yellow.
Logania flaviflora, F. v. M. W.A., near Gnarlbine; a
dwarf state, flowers primrose-yellow.
PLANTAGINEA3.
Plantago varia, R. Brown. S. A., Cootanoorina, Arkaringa;
W.A., Fraser Range.
JASMINE^E.
Jasminum lineare, R. Brown. S.A., Everard Range.
Jasminum calcareum, F. v. M. W.A., Victoria Desert
(C. 54).
APOCYNEvE.
Alyxia buxifolia, R. Brown. W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 54)
Fraser Range.


ASCLEPIADEA3.
Sarcostemma australe, R. Brown. S.A., Upper Arkaringa
Yalley; W.A., Von Truer Tableland (D. Gumming).
D/EMiA Kempeana, F. v. 21. S.A., Upper Arkaringa Valley ;
W.A., Fraser Range.
Marsdenia Lbichardtiana, F. v. 21. W.A., eraser Range,
near Mount Kenneth.
CONVOLVULACEA3
Convolvulus erubescens, Sims. S.A., Upper Arkaringa
Valley, Everard Range; W.A., Fraser Range.
Ipomcea iieterophylla, R. Brown. S.A., Cootanoonna
Breweria rosea, F. V. 21. S.A., between Peculiar Hill
(C. 15) and Mount Watson (C. In). W.A., near Barrow R.ange,
Victoria Desert (C. 54).
Evolvulus linifolius, Linne. W.A., Mount Squires.
Wilsonia HUMiLis, R. Brown. W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 68)
and between Red Hill and Yilgarn.
SOLAN ACEAS.
Solanum simile, F. v. M. W.A., Lake Deborah.
Solanum ferocissimum, Lindley. S.A., Ferdinand River;
W.A., Mount Ilbillee. .
Solanum orbiculatum, Dunal. W.A., Victoria Desert
(Camps 45, 53, 61), Fraser Range, Lake Deborah. Berry whitish,
with green stripes.
Solanum esuriale, Lindley. S.A., Arkaringa Valley. W.A.,
West of Ernest Giles Range (D. Gumming).
Solanum Sturtianum, F. v. M. S.A., Warrina; W.A., near
Mount Squires.
Solanum Oldfieldii, F. v. M. W.A., near Barrow Range,
Victoria Desert (C. 50-59), Fraser Range.
Solanum hystrix, R. Broivn. W.A., near Fraser Range
(C. 67-68), near Gnarlbine.
Solanum eremophilum, F. v. M. S.A., Everard Range, at
2,000 feet; W. A., 25 miles N.AV. from Fraser Range.
5 Solanum petrophilum, F. v. 21. S.A., Mount Watson.
Solanum lasiophyllum, Dunal. W.A., Victoria Desert (C.
53), Fraser Range, near Mount Churchman (C. 94); Von Treuer
Tableland (D. Gumming).
Solanum ellipticum, R. Brown. S.A., Lpper Arkaringa
Valley; W.A., var. pannifolium, Victoria Desert (C. 53 and 54).
Nicotiana suaveolens, Lehmann. S.A., Warrina, Arkaringa
Valley, near Ferdinand River, Birksgate Range, Blyth Hills ,


W.A., near Mount Squires, Victoria Desert (C. 53-61), Fraser
Range.
Anthotroche Blackii, F. v. M. W.A., Victoria Desert (C
54, 56). V
Duboisia Hopwoodi, F. v. M. S.A., Arkaringa Creek and
Upper Arkaringa Valley (8-10 feet); W.A., Victoria Desert
(C. 40, 43 (3-5 feet), 59) and Fraser Range.
SCROPHULARIN^E.
Stemodia viscosa, Roxburgh. S. A., near Mount Watson and
Birksgate Range; W.A., 100 miles KE. from Geraldton.
Peplidium Muelleri Bentham. S.A., Arkaringa Valley.
Limosella aquatica, Linne. W.A., Karolin.
BIGNONIACE^E.
Tecoma australis, R. Brown. S.A., Everard Range, at 2,000
feet; W.A., Barrow Range.
ACANTHACE^E.
Justicia PROCUMBENS, Linne. S.A., Arkaringa Creek.
LABIATvE.
Plectranthus parviflorus, Henckel. S.A., Everard Ran°- e
at 2,000 feet. & r
Prostanthera Wilkieana, F. V. M. S.A., near Coffin Hill
and near Mount Watson. A small-dowered state, with silky
pubescence.
Prostanthera Baxteri, Gunn. S.A., 70 miles S.W. from
Mount Watson ; W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 61), near Cnarlbine,
50 miles N.N.E. from Knutsford.
Prostanthera striatiflora, F. v. M. S.A., Arcoeillina;
Arkaringa Valley, var. with long silky leaves; Everard Range,
up to 2,500 feet.
Prostanthera coccinea, F. v. ]\l. M.A., near Gnarlbine.
Westringia cephalantha, F. v. M. W. A., near Gnarlbine,
two to four feet.
Westringia rigida, R. Brown. S.A., Arkaringa; W.A.,
Victoria Desert (C. 54, 56, 57), a form with longer leaves and
larger dowers.
Teucrium sessiliflorum, Bentham. W.A., Fraser Range.
Teucrium fililobum, F. v. M. W.A., Fraser Range, an
undershrub, one foot.
Teucrium racemosum, R. Brown. S.A., Arkaringa Valley,
the form with narrow leaf-segments.
Teucrium grandiusculum, F. v. M. and Tate. S.A. and
W.A., an undershrub, one and a half feet; also Ooldea, Great
Australian Bight (R.T.).


VERBENACEvE.
Spartothamnus teucriiflorus, F. v. M. S.A., Arkaringa
Valley; W.A., Skirmish Hill, near Mount Squires, Victoria
Desert (C. 40) ; Ernest Giles Range (D. Gumming).
Lachnostachys Cliftoni, F. v. M., a var. with closer vestiture
and smaller leaves. W.A., 20 miles N.W. from Lake Lefroy.
Lachnostachys verbascifolia, F. v. M., a var. with thinner
tomentum and more compound inflorescence. W.A., near Esper-
ance Bay (Gwynne).
Newcastlia bracteosa, F. v. M. S.A., 70 miles S. v\ . from
Mount Watson; W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 53, 54).
Newcastlia chrysotricha, F. v. M. S.A., 70 miles S.W.
from Mount Watson, Birksgate Range ; W.A., Victoria Desert
(C 54)
Newcastlia spodiotricha, F. v. M. S.A., Pernamo Hill
(C 22)
Newcastlia cephalantiia, F. v. M. S.A. Upper Arkaringa
Valley and to towards Everard Range ; in these specimens the
corolla is larger and somewhat exceeded by the stamens; the
upper part of the corolla-lobes, as well as the filaments and style,
are blue. W.A., near Mount Squires, near Barrow Range, Vic-
toria Desert (C. 53) ; also now known from the Georgina Ri\ er
(Alfr. Henry) and the Alfred and Marie Range (E. Giles).
Dicrastylis ociirotricha, F. v. M. S.A., Mount Watson and
70 miles S.W. ; W.A., Barrow’ Range (two to three and a half
feet), Victoria Desert (C. 53).
Dicrastylis Niciiolasii, F. v. M. W.A., Victoria Desert
(C 57)
Dicrastylis parvifolia, F. v. M. W.A., near Gnarlbine, 20
miles N.W. from Lake Lefroy.
Chloanthes stackyodes, F. v. M. W.A., near Warangering.
Chloanthes loricata, F. v. M. W.A., Victoria Desert (C.
41), near Gnarlbine.
Chloanthes Teckiana, F. v. M. W.A., Knutsford.
Chloanthes ccerulea, n. up. W.A., near Gnarlbine (Helms),
also near Parker’s Range (Edwin Merrall).
Leaves much crowded and often ternately or quarternatelj
verticillate, sessile, broad-linear, revolute at the margin, above
scantily lanuginous and somewhat rugulose, beneath as well as
the branches white-tomentose; flowrers blue in a contracted leafy
panicle ; lower bracts foliaceous; calyx small, deeply cleft into
narrow semi-lanceolate lobes, stellately-tomentellous outside;
corolla wider than long, deeply-lobed, its tube broad, outside
intricately pubescent, inside glabrous, the lowest lobe the largest;
stamens considerably shorter than the corolla, their filaments
rather thick, glabrous to the base; anthers unprovided with


appendages ; fruit quite small, globular, black, pitted or irregu-
larly reticulate-ridged, with a very narrow basal cavity seceding
into its tour partitions, each one-seeded.
Well-developed leaves about one inch long, seldom more than
one-eighth inch broad, mostly erect. Lower bracts to one-half
inch long. Inflorescence two to five inches long, terminating
branchlets. Calyx one-eighth to one-sixth inch long. Corolla
deep-blue at least towards the base, measuring about half an inch
diametrically; filaments yellowish, fixed near the base of the
corolla, attenuated towards their lower end. Anthers dorsifixed
yellow when expanded roundish; style, one-quarter inch long,’
capillulary, glabrous; stigma very minute, acutely bilobed
* ruit measuring only one-eighth inch. Nearest to C. halganiacea.
H EM I p „°EA Elder,. Fv. M. W.A., Victoria Desert (0. 67,
bo), between Red Hill and Yilgarn. V
Cyaxostegia Tubczaxixowii, F. v. M. W.A., var. dentata,
near Gnarlbme; var. axgustifolia, between Red Hill and
xilgarn.
MYOPORINiE.
Eremophila leucophylla, Bentham. W.A., Victoria Desert
(w. 04).
/n V r Jurtoxi W.A, near Barrow Range, Victoria Desert
(C. oO), two to three feet.
Eremophila eotuhdipolia, _E v. M. S.A., Arkaringa Valley,
three to four feet; flowers lilac, rarely white.
Eremophila oppositifolia, R. Brown. S.A., 30 miles S W
from Yeelugmna Hill (C. 4); W.A., Victoria Desert.
Eremophila Paisleyi, F. v. M. W.A., near Gnarlbine.
Eremopihla Dempsteri, F. v. M. W.A., Victoria Desert
(C. 61), 4to 10 feet; flowers lilac.
Eremophila Gibsoxi, F. v. M. W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 48
4J); leaves much recurved at the apex, corolla bluish.
Eremophila Clarkei, F. v. M. S.A., Arkaringa Valley ; a
variety, flowers lilac, rarely pink. J
ti LAT rf’ K V * M ■ S - A -> Arkaringa
(C 40) aiK Va 6y; W A ' 5 near Mount Squires, Victoria Desert
Eremophila loxgifolia, F. v. M. S.A, Arkaringa Valley,
near Everard Range; W.A, Victoria Spring, Fraser Range.
Eremophila Freelixgii, F. v. M. S.A, Cootanoorina to
Arcoeillmna.
Eremophila Macdoxxelli, F. v. M. S.A, Warrina to Arcoe-
illinna.
Eremophila Willsi., F. ■o. M. S.A, Upper Arkaringa
Valley, a variety with somewhat narrower and less-crowded
leaves. W.A, near boundary and Barrow Range.


Eremophila Brownii, F. v. M. S.A., Arkaringa Valley ;
W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 53), Gnarlbine.
Eremophila latifolia, F. v. 31. S.A., Arcoeillinna, Everard
Range; W. A., Victoria Desert (C. 54), Fraser Range
Eremophila Duttonii, F. v. 31. S.A., Upper Arkaringa
Valley.
Eremophila alternifolia, R. Brown. S.A., Arkaringa
Valley ; W.A., Fraser Range
Eremophila Hughesii, F. v. 31. W.A., near Barrow Range;
also now known from Mount Narryer (Isaac Tyson).
Eremophila scoparia, F. v. 31. W.A., Victoria Desert (C.
54, 61), Fraser Range
Myoporum Dampieri, Gunn. W.A. Victoria Desert (C. 49).
Myoporum deserti, Gunn. W.A., Cootanoorina.
Myoporum platycarpum, R. Brown. W.A., Victoria Desert
(C. 54, 65), Fraser Range.
ASPERIFOLI^E.
Cynoglossum Drummondii, Bentham. S.A., Arkaringa.
Lappula concava, F. v. M. W.A., near Mount Squires,
Fraser Range.
Eritrichium Australicum, DeCand. S.A., Arkaringa Creek.
Pollichia Zeylanica, F. v. 31. S.A., on sandhills from
Warrina to Everard. W.A., Cavenagh Range, near Barrow
Range, and in many places in Victoria Desert.
Halgakia cyanea, Bindley. S.A., Cootanoorina; W.A.,
Skirmish Hill, Victoria Desert (Camps 42, 50, 54, 58), Fraser
Range, near Gnarlbine, between Red Hill and Yilgarn; Von
Treuer Tableland (D. Gumming).
Halgania lavandulacea, Endl. W.A., 20 miles N.W. from
Fraser Range.
Heliotropium Europium, Linne. S.A., Warrina.
Heliotropium asperrimum, R. Brown. S.A., outskirts of
Everard Range; W.A., near Mount Squires, Fraser Range.
Heliotropium tenuifolium, R. Brown. A paniculate form,
W.A., Mount Squires.
EPACRIDEA3
Lysinema ciliatum, R. Brown. W.A., between Red Hill and
Yilgarn, near Mount Churchman.
CONIFERA2.
Callitris verrucosa, R. Brown. S.A., 60 miles S.W, from
Mount Watson. W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 41), 56 miles N.W.
from Fraser Range.


Var. a. W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 62), 40 miles N.W. from
Fraser Range.
Var. b. S.A., near Arcoeillinna. W.A., near Cavenagh and
Barrow Ranges.
Callitris Actinostrobus, F. v. M. W.A., 140 miles N.E.
from Geraldton.
ORCHIDEiE.
Dibris emarginata, R. Brown. W.A., between Red Hill
and Yilgarn.
Microtis media, R. Brown. W.A., between Red Hill and
Yilgarn.
An impel feet specimen of a Thelymitra also occurs in the
collection from Victoria Desert (C. 57, 58).
IRIDE^E.
Patersonia lan at a, R. Brotvn. W.A., between Red Hill
and Yilgarn. A more silky form.
HiEMODORACEiE.
Anigozanthos rufa, Lahil. W.A., between Fraser Range
and Esperance Bay (Gwynne). Nearly as dark-flowered as
A. fumosa.
LILIACE^E.
Dianella revoluta, R. Brown. W.A., Victoria Desert
(G. 51), Fraser Range, and 56 miles N.W. of Quardanoolagin:
Lake Darlot (D. Gumming).
Wurmbsea dioica, F. v. M. S.A., near Wa-wee Waterhole.
Thysanotus Patersoni, R. Brown. W.A., Victoria Desert
(C. 54), Fraser Range.
Thysanotus dichotomus, R. Brown , var. Lindleyanus. W.A.
between Red Hill and Yilgarn.
This is the slender-branched form, kept specifically distinct by
ndlicher, it agrees precisely with an authentic specimen from
Preiss; no differences are observable in the seeds of this variety
in comparison with the typic form; the root is not available for
examination.
t The collection contains also from the same locality a twinm®
Ihysanotus , not dichtomus, but the material is too imperfect for
accurate naming.
Corynotheca DiciiOTOMA, F. v. M. W.A., near Barrow
Range.
Tricoryne elatior, R. Brown , var. tenella. W.A., near
W arangering.
Stypandra glauca, R. Brown , var. imbricata. W.A.
Warangering.


Arthropodium Preissii, Endlicher. W.A., between Red Hill
and Yilgarn.
SowERBiEA laxiflora, Bindley. W.A., near Warangering.
Bartlingia grandiflora, F. v. M., var. paleacea. W.A.,
near Warangering; between Fraser Range and Esperance Bay
(Gywnne) ; between Red Hill and Yilgarn.
Borya nitida, Labillardiere. W.A., Karolin.
Xeroxes fimbriates, F. v. M. W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 59),
between Red Hill and Yilgarn.
Xeroxes leucocephala, R. Brown. S.A., 70 miles S.W.
from Mount Watson; W.A., Victoria Desert (Camps 44, 61).
Xanthorrhcea Preissii, Endlicher. W.A., near Boorabin.
A variety with short fruiting spike, but with the robust stalk
of X. Preissii ; no leaves obtained.
Grass-trees with trunks up to 15 feet high were observed on
sandhills in the Victoria Desert (C. 55).
FLUVIALES.
Triglochin calcitrapa, Hooker. W.A., near Mount Squires.
Triglochin centrocarpa, Hooker S.A., Upper Arkaringa
Valley, Mount Ilbillee.
JUNCACEAS.
Juncus pallidus, R. Brown. W.A., 20 miles X.W. of Red
Hill. It is not easy to distinguish between J. pallidus and J.
communis ; but Professor Buchenan, the monographer of Juncus
and Luzula, after lengthened study of the large Australian
material submitted to him by one of us (F. v. M.), does not
admit J. communis as a genuine Australian species.
RESTIACEAS.
Lepidobolus Preissianus, Xees. W.A., Victoria Desert (C.
56, 57).
CYPERACEAS.
Cyperus LjEvigax’us, Linne. S.A., Nilpena, a slender form,
with some of the spikelets solitary.
Cyperus vaginatus, R. Brown. S.A., Nilpena, near Mount
Ilbillee.
Cyperus subulatus, R. Brotvn, var. confertus. W.A., Von
Treuer Tableland (D. Gumming). The flower-bearing bracts are
greyish, whereas in the plant from Alice Springs they are pale-
brown. This has also some relation to C. Gilesii. As the typical
plant is of littoral habit, it seems very doubtful whether the plant
of the interior areas is actually the same. No ripe fruits are yet
available.


Cyperus Ikia, Limit. S.A., near Arkaringa Creek.
Cyperus rotundus, Linne.. S.A., Warrinaand Cootanooriha.
The tunicate conns of this species are roasted for food by the
aboriginals. The native name is yalpa.
Fimbristylis communis, Kunth ., var. gracilis. S.A., Warrina
to Cootanoorina.
Scirpus cartilagineus, Sprengel. S.A., between Red Hill
and Yilgarn.
Schoenus aphyllus, Boeckeler. W.A., Victoria Desert
(C. 56, 58). Stems finely, but distinctly, furrowed.
Schoenus hexandrus, spec. nor.
Rather dwarf; stems very slender, smooth, but distinctly
striated, leafless, except at the base ; leaves rudimentary, com-
pressed-subulate; cylindric petioles close, at the orifice densely
barbellate; fascicles of spikelets capitular, solitary, terminal,
small, often undeveloped; floral leaf solitary, diminished to a
bract, provided with a barbellate elapsing stalk; spikelets few or
several, small, ellipsoid-lanceolar; floral bracts about seven to
nine, brown, with narrow pallid margin, glabrous, acutely
pointed, usually one of the lower only maturing fruit; stamens
six, all with very narrow anthers ; stigmas much shorter than
the style; hypogynous setules absent; fruit pale, orbicular-
ovate, evidently compressed, devoid of lustre.
W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 57).
Stems numerous, variously less than one foot high. Spikelets
one-quarter to one-third inch. long. Fruit slightly pointed,
scarcely one-tenth inch long.
This species is in its alliance nearest to S. pleiostemonens and
S. deform is, differing from both already in the inflorescence, in
which respect our new plant is nearer to S. aphyllus.
Schoenus Armeria, Boeckeler. W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 58).
Lepidosperma leptostachyum, Bentham. W.A., Karoling.
• Lepidosperma resinosum, Bentham. W.A., Victoria Desert
(C. 59).
Lepidosperma gracile, R. Brown. W.A., Fraser Ranee
Karoling.
Lepidosperma canescens, Boeckeler. S.A., Mount Ilbillee, at
3,000 feet elevation, attains to rather above three feet high.
Lepidosperma viscidum, R. Brown. W.A., 50 miles S.E. from
Mount Churchman. (C. 93). The identical plant was brought
from between Fraser Range and Esperance Bay by Mr. Dempster,
and east of Ularing by Mr. J. Young. The plant varies much
in height,
Caustis dioica, R. Brown. W.A., 85 miles N.E. by E. from
Esperance Bay (Gwynne); probably also Victoria Desert (C. 54),
but only received in a flowerless state.


GRAMINEiE.
Panicum leucophaeum, H. and K. S.A., Warrina, Arkaringa
Valley, outskirts of Everard Range, near Ferdinand River.
Panicum GRACiiiE, R. Brown. S.A., Arkaringa Creek; W.A.,
Victoria Desert (C. 53); Bubba-ngundi Creek (D. Gumming).
Panicum effusum, R. Brown. S.A., Cootanoorina.
Panicum decompositum, R. Brown. S.A., Warrina, Arka-
I’inga Creek, about Everard Range; W.A., Lake Way (D.
Gumming).
Tragus racemosus, Haller. S.A., Cootanoorina.
Neurachne alopecuroides, R. Brown. S.A., outskirts of
Everard Range ; W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 58); Lake Way (D.
Gumming).
Neurachne Mitchelliana, Nees. S.A., Upper Arkaringa
Valley.
Neurachne Munroi, Fv. M. S.A., Upper Arkaringa
Valley.
Erianthus fulvus, Kunth. S.A., Arkaringa Creek and
Valley, Pernamo Hill.
Andropogon sericeus, R. Brown. S.A., Arkaringa Creek.
Andropogon bxaltatus, R. Brown S.A., outskirts of
Everard Range.
Andropogon bombycinus, R. Brown. S.A., Arkaringa Creek
and Upper Arkaringa Valley; W.A., 25 miles N.E. from Fraser
Range.
Anthistiria ciliata, Linne. W.A., near Lake Deborah.
Aristida arenaria, Gaud. S.A., Warrina to Everard Range;
W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 53), Fraser Range ; long. 121°, lat.
26° 31' (D. Gumming).
Aristida ramosa, R. Brown. S.A., Cootanoorina.
Aristida calycina, R. Brown. S.A., Cootanoorina Creek,
Arkaringa Creek, Everard Range. W.A., Victoria Desert
■(C. 40), Fraser Range.
Stipa elegantissima, Labill. W.A., Victoria Desert, (C. 61),
Fraser Range.
Stipa setacea, R. Brown. S.A., Upper Arkaringa Valley;
W.A., Victoria Desert (0. 53, 58), Fraser Range.
Stipa semibarbata, R. Brown. S.A., Upper Arkaringa
V alley.
Stipa scabra, Bindley. S.A., Arkaringa Creek; W.A.,
Fraser Range.
Amphipogon strictus, R. Brown. W.A., Victoria Desert
<C. 50, 53).
Pappophorum commune, F. v. M. S.A., Warrina to Arka-
ringa Creek ; W.A., near Mount Squires, Fraser Range.
Sporobolus Virginicus, 11. &K. S. A., Cootanoorina; W.A.,
Victoria Desert (C. 40).


Sporobolus Lindleyi, Bentham. S.A., Cootanoorina to
Arcoeillinna.
Sporobolus actinocladus, Fv. M. S.A., Cootanoorina and
Arcoeillinna.
Agrostis Solandri, F. v. M. W.A., Victoria Spring.
Eriachne aristidea, F. v. M. W.A., Skirmish Hill and
near Mount Squires.
Eriachne scleranthoides, F. v. M. S.A., Upper Arkaringa
Valley; W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 40).
Eriachne mucronata, R. Brown. S.A., near Ferdinand
River, Pernamo Hill.
Dantiionia bipartita, F. v. M. S.A., Arkaringa Creek and
Upper Arkaringa Valley, near Ferdinand River. W.A., Victoria
Desert (C. 51).
Dantiionia penicillata, Fv. M. W.A., Fraser Range.
Astrebla pbctinata, Fv. M. W.A., Von Treuer Tableland
(D. Gumming).
Chloris acicularis, Lindley. S.A., Arkaringa Creek, near
Mount Watson; W.A., Fraser Range; Von Treuer Tableland
(D. Gumming).
Eleusine cruciata, Lamarch. S.A., Warrina to Upper
Arkaringa Valley; W.A., Lake Darlot and Newland Range
(D. Gumming).
Poa nodosa, Nees. W.A., Fraser Range.
Poa ramigera, F. v. M. S.A., 50 miles S.W. of Mount
Watson ; W.A., near Ernest Giles Range (D. Gumming).
Festuca scirpoidea, F. v. M. W.A., Elichaputten (C. 93).
Diplachne loliiformis, F. v. M. S.A., between Nilpena
and Cootanoorina.
Diplachne Muelleri, Bentham. S.A., Cootanoorina.
Triodia pungens, R. Brown. S.A., Arkaringa Creek.
A variety remarkable for the bluntness of the lateral lobes of
the grain-supporting bract.
Bromus arenarius, Labill. W.A., Victoria Spring, Fraser
Range.
Eragrostis tricophylla, Bentham. S.A., near Mount
Watson.
Eragrostis pilosa, Palisot. S.A., Cootanoorina to Arcoel-
linna.
Eragrostis eriopoda, Bentham. S.A., Upper Arkaringa
Valley, outskirts of Everard Range; W.A., Fraser Range.
Eragrostis setifolia, Fees. S.A., Warrina to Arkaringa.
Eragrostis falcata, Gaud. S.A., Nilpena to Upper Arka-
ringa Valley
Triraphis mollis, R. Brown. S.A., Warrina to Ever&rd
Range.


Triraphis bromoides, F. V. M. S.A., Everard Range
W.A., Victoria Desert (C. 54, 57).
Agropyron scabrum, Palisot. W.A., Fraser Range.
RHIZOSPERMiE
Marsilea quadrifolia, Linne. S.A., Warrina ; W.A., near
Mount Squires, Fraser Range.
FILICES.
Ophioglossum vulgatum, C. Bauhin. S.A., near Wa-wee
Waterhole, Vuluginna Hill (C. 4).
Ciieilanthes vellea, F. v. M. S.A., Arcoeillinna Well,
Turner Hill (C. 9); W.A., Cavenagh, Barrow and Fraser
Ranges.
Ciieilanthes tenuifolia, Swartz. S.A., Oootanoorina, Turner
and Coffin Hills (C. 9, 12) • W.A., Fraser Range, Lake Deborah,
&c.
Grammitis Reynolsdii, F. v. M. S.A., Pingegurrinna Hill
(C. 14), Birksgate Range; W.A., Cavenagh Range.
Grammitis rutifolia, R. Brown. S.A., Everard Range at
3,000 feet; W.A., Fraser Range, Lake Deborah.
Grammitis leptophylla, Swartz. W.A., Lake Deborah.




;
3 1508 00246525 5
%
\
(
« V
I-.
I


I
V
\
' V
#
'•
/
,
(
