



&IShE Auctioneers confidently recommend this Beautiful Estate to the consideration of Land Buyers,
(sLj. as one of the best speculations ever offered. The Estate is all First-class Land, consisting of a beauti-
ful hill sloping gently on all four sides, and the soil is really splended, and will grow anything.
It - is convenient to both Hurstville Railway Station and the Proposed Platform at Laycock k
Hoad—a Platform which ' has been asked for by the people of the district, and which is
sure to be granted. The Vendors (City and County Investment, Land and Building
Company, Limited) being desirous of seeing buildings on the Estate, will lend
liberally to build, to the extent of 90 per cent, of approved value, to
buyers desirous of erecting their own homes. With a view to meeting
the circumstances of all, the terms of sale are the easiest ever ij/ xj*
offered within.the same distance of Sydney, viz:—Only £3 per
Free Tickets may be obtained from the Auctioneers, and from the Vendors.
Hot and Cold Water provided Free. Take your families and Pic-nic on the ground.
TEITDOBS:
& IjjWNtj Iniwstitwnf, | and & Ijmldinjj | omjjmtg, | imifed.
327 PITT STREET, SYDNEY.
W73PFKIN § TracTieNEßi®.


COHEN & MACKENZIE
PROPERTY A.UCT£Oia XSJQHS
AND
Have for Private Sale several Choice BUILDING
SUES and Blocks of LAND at Lady Robinson’s
Beach, Botany, Hurstville, and surrounding districts.
Parties seeking to obtain a good Residence Site,
or large Blocks for Sub-division ; would do well to
obtain one of our Property Circulars, issued gratis,
or forwarded by post to any address.
OPPOSITE GUNSLER’S CAFE.


The Equitable Life Assurance Seelelj
OF THE UNITED STATES.
HEAD OFFICE: 120 BROADWAY, NEW YORK.
Sydney Branch Office
AT CORNER OE
O’Connell
Hunter Stieets
"(sp- ’
Head Office Building.
LOCAL DIRECTORS.
Chr. Roller,ston, Esq., C.M.O
Hon. Thomas Cadell, M.L C
Thomas Cadell, M.L C.
Hon. Henry Mort, M.L.C.
'(Sr‘
Assets over £12,117,000. Annual Income over £3,131,000. Surplus over
Liabilities exceeds £2,839,600.
ASSURANCE IN FORCE EXCEEDS £64,460,000. NEW ASSURANCE 1 884, EXCEEDED £17,682,700
The New Business of the Equitable for the past 20 years has exceeded that of
any Life Company in the World.
The Business of the Society is Conducted upon the Mutual Plan,
ALL PROFITS BELONG TO THE POLICY HOLDERS.
Cash Bonuses Declared Annually. Ordinary Policies One Year Old Participate
in Profits.
TONTIHK POLICIES,
Issued by this Society offer Extraordinary Advantages.
R. HOPE ATKINSON, Manager.


NATIONAL MUTUAL
JJile ol j|iftnlafia,
ESTABLISHED 1863
SYDNEY OFFICE - HUNTER STREET.
Directors
EDWARD CHISHOLM, Esq. (Chairman).
ALFRED C. GARRICK, Esq. | CHARLES T. GEDYE, Esq
Dr. ANDREW HOUISON.
Accumulated Funds Exceed ~
£500,000.
Annual Income *
- 200,000.
Assurances effected on first-class lives up to
m 5,000.
pROFITS divided every j years , and the BONUSES allotted by this
Office are greater than those of any Life Assurance Society
established in Australia during the last jy years.
Age of Proponents taken at nearest Birthday , thereby giving to
many Members a larger Assurance for the same premium than most other
offices do.
The new business for the year ending goth September , iBBy,
was largely in excess of the previous year , and the new Policies issued
were 4512, Assuring upwards of One Million Sterling.
—£ y*—
All information afforded on avvlieation to
H. C. EVANS, Resident Secretary .


C, q, lit Buz cf
6S\^ X 'Vi
The Royal Furnishing Arcade
our Extensive Showroom will be found a
Drawing-room Furniture
Dining-room Furniture
Bedroom Furniture
Library and Office Furniture
Crockery and Glassware
Cutlery and Ironmongery
Carpet and Furnishing Drapery of Every Description-
In fact everything required to furnish your house throughout.
In our FANCY DEPARTMENT will be found a nice collection
of useful articles suitable for
BIRTHDHY SND WEDDING PRESENTS.
WRITE OB SEND FOR ONE OF OUR ILLUSTRATED HOUSE FURNISHING GUIDES WHICH WILL BE FOUND
VERY USEFUL TO INTENDING FURNISHERS.
BROTHERS,
ROYAL FURNISHING ARgADE
iS** t 0 B°r al &ota.) 426 §£SS§(S MBBMB


:« M a / 1/
8 K ) /J A Jl r I
t ?. ( AAT/M\ c i r-r/nn/ i/ vum'h ~(>•» a noo// /.ih i


Preface
Some History
The Story of Halls
The Routes
The New Water
The New Townships
The Southern Shores
Public Parks and Pleasure Grounds
Pish and Pishbrmen
Some Industries of Botany ..
The Future


BOTANY BAY
PAST AND PRESENT
FRANCIS MYERS
Sgirntj:
JOHN WOODS & 00., LIMITED, STEAM MACHINE PRINTERS,
13 Bridge Street.
1885.




X A aa A a «!.'I aa'aC.
TTtTtTtTtTtTTtTI TtTmTTtTtlT^
j 3 REFACE.
|jJ|OTANY BAY has conveyed more and more misapprehensions to
ordinary minds perhaps than any other name or term in the
language. To English speaking people it has been synonymous with
all the curse of the elder days of the colony. To Botany Bay, was to
the very inferno of convictism. Strange that convictism just planted
its foot upon the shores of the bay and departed for ever.
But the taint of convictism being removed, and the first life of
the colony starting from another point. Botany Bay fell into a contempt
scarcely less fatal to its full and fair development. People of Australia
said, “ It’s no man’s land, a place where no wise man would dwell.”
People of the old world, “ It is a cursed place, to be ignored by all
who would find and know the true Australia.” The following pages
are written with intent to introduce the true Botany to those who
hitherto have only been instructed by tradition. The measure of the
success of that attempt will also he the measure of the Author’s
satisfaction in his work.




SOME HISTORY.
HT was many and many a year ago, as far away it seems to us as
t the destruction of the Temple or the Deluge to the Jews, that
tjj some stout ships came sailing, sailing into Botany Bay. Never
deem that they were the eleven of the first fleet, nor yet the little
Endeavour of 370 tons, which brought out the good Captain Cook.
These are but moderns in the art of exploration, the true pioneers,
date back to a remoter eld. Heavens, how far away in the past they
seem! We turn back the record of Nepoleonic and Imperial and
Mediaeval times in Europe ; we pass beyond Norman conquests even ;
we look back to the fables of Alexander the Great, to Pliny of the
Historia Naturalis , to Ptolemy, a.d. 150, each of whom had something
to say of the Great South Land, the Great Island south of the Equator,
whose central parts were occupied by an inland sea. We do not suppose,
however, that any one of them entered Botany Bay, nor would we
award that honour to Khubla Khan, who, in the year 1293, despatched
a great fleet from China, with the Venetian Marco Polo, on board.


These bold voyageurs had not that grace or luck, nor yet had any
Spaniards or Portuguese, who, baptising everything in the name of
the Blessed Trinity, made far out in all seas. I had rather give the
honour to Jan Edels, who certainly in his good ship Leeuwin did make
round the South Coast, or to Dirk Hartog, a mariner of the old sort,
who, over his strong water, would boast how he had
Singed the beard of the King of Spain,
And carried away the Dean of Jaen,
And sold him in Algiers,”
or to Dampier, that British buccaneer who got amongst the people
of the continent, and learned something of their ways, during the
nineties of the seventeenth century, in the reign of King William
the Third. I think that some bold adventurer of the buccaneering
sort must have put into the broad bay and have landed on some
of its w r hite shores, and given his crew a wild license amongst the
people, for the sting remained in their nature when good Captain
Cook came; and, morover, there are stories. There is a story which I
learned not long ago of a something which happened in the days when
white men did not go out chiefly to colonise. It is a story very well
known to the Southern blacks. Hear an old blackfellow, one of the
few remaining, tell it. You have to draw him on.
“ Blackfellows never kill white fellow down here ?”
“ Not many/’
“ All the time good friends, eh ?”
“ Oh, yes !”
“ You see any killed ?”
“ No.”
“ Your father ?”
“ Plenty.”
“How ? You tell.”
“ Long time ago—hundred years. Oh, plenty blackfellows killed
then !”


“ Where ?”
“ Botany.”
“ You sure ?”
** Yes, plenty sure, Botany.’
“ Well, how was it ?”
“ Like-a this: Whitefellow he kill all blackfellows’ kangaroos,
O ”
fish, ’possum ; blackfellow, he kill one, tAvo Avhitefellow —not many.
Then white fellow he put flour, meat, rum, tobacco on beach and
blackfellow run there. A hundred go down; all eat, all drink, all
good friends ; when bang, bang—underneath big felloAV gun. Poor
black fellow, all killed ! More than a hundred all killed !”
He’s quite consistent in his story; he will tell it again. He
believes—they all believe —that somewhere on one of these beaches, a
many years ago, a party of white men planted barrels of gun powder
under the sand, baited them well on the surface, and then fired the
infernal trap with deliberate intent and fearful effect. If so, ’tis no
wonder that they were shy of the good Captain AAdien he came into
the broad, bright bay on that day late on in the April of 1770.
A hundred and fifteen years ago and there was the same blue
depths, green shallows, and silver sands, backed by the tall or bowery
trees ; there by Woniora, the broad estuary of George’s Elver ; there
beneath the rocky headland the placid Bay ; there the two bold
headlands north and south, and at low water the broad flats with
their tens of millions of oysters, cockles, and crabs. Good Captain
Cook was not disappointed with it. He learned far more from his
first glance than the great majority of the people of this colony know
to-day. They nurse crude ideas of mud and malaria, and noxious trades
and low monotonous bush lands., or scrub-cohered flats no more
like the Botany that really lies cradled in the fair land arms down there,
than the blackfellows’ Mumbo Jumbo is like the true genius of Aus-
tralia. We have much to teach these people in this little book.


But Captain Cook went away —sailed away in the good ship En-
deavour (you could have slung her on the davits of an Orient liner), but
took with him strange freight and strange seed to take root, and in
season bring forth marvellous fruit. Mr., after Sir Joseph Banks, and
Dr. Solander were with Captain Cook on that trip, and they were
amazed, as any creatures of ordinary intelligence must needs have
been amazed, at the wealth of floral beauty all around. You remember
they had pulled up George’s Biver; they had roamed upon all the
hills; they had gathered heath and heather, and fringed violets and
bottlebrush, and flannel flowers and lily-pillies. Bemember, it was
in the end of April, a very fair month for wild flowers, and they
wandered amongst bush which had remained unexplored through
all the centuries. Botany Bay they called the place. Had they been
artists or naturalists, instead of botanists, they would have called it
Plora’s Harbour. But they went away, sailing —sailing again in the
little Endeavour , though not before they had given three cheers, and
fired three rounds, and hoisted the King’s colours, and proclaimed the
authority of Mother England over all the wild land—its bays, its
bowers, and its flowers. Mr. Banks, we know, became Sir Joseph
Banks, and never forgot the land. He sent out Governor Bligh (may
Heaven forgive him), but he was to rule the men, and not the flowers.
Next to come was “The Eirst Elect”—His Majesty’s ships
Sirius and Supply, with three victuallers and six transports. They did
not enter altogether, they had been beaten much about the ocean. In
eight months they had sailed round by Teneriffe to Bio, thence to the
Cape, and had parted company in the blustering southerlies, so that the
Supply with a detachment came in first on the 18th of January, the Sirius
two days later. Altogether they lay there, and all around the shores, says
Captain Watkin Tench, of the Boyal Marines, who, in the year 1789,
published the very first Australian book and narrative of Botany Bay,
the boat cruised, and the “Indians” (like Cook, he called these blacks
always Indians) followed. They did not, however, like the bay. A


boat went out exploring, and on the 23rd of that same January
returned with a cheer for the newly-discovered harbour of Port
Jackson. Yes, Botany Bay overflowed into Port Jackson even in
these early days, just as poor, overcrowded Port Jackson begins to
overflow into big, broad, bright, beautiful Botany now. And even
before that overflowing we have one or two little pictures by that
Captain Tench whose little book well repays perusal. Here is one.
The reader can look over to the south side of the harbour, and
imagine it to-day. “ I went with a party to the south side of the
harbour, and had scarcely landed five minutes when we were met by
a dozen Indians, naked as at the moment of their birth
Both parties were armed, yet an attack seemed unlikely on their part,
as we knew it to be on our own. I had at this time a little boy of
not more than seven years of age in my hand. I advanced with him
towards them, at the same time baring his bosom and showing the
whiteness of his skin. On the clothes being removed they gave a loud
exclamation, and one of the party —an old man with long beard,
hideously ugly —came close up to us. I bade my little charge not to
be afraid, and introduced him to the acquaintance of this uncouth
personage. The Indian, with great gentleness, laid his hand on the
child’s hat, and afterwards felt his clothes, muttering to himself the
while. 51 ... Pity we have not the name of that little boy at
Botany —the first, perhaps, to receive formal introduction to an
Australian “ Indian.”
Very graphically also does Captain Tench paint another little
incident of that time. Let him tell it in his own words : “ They had
next decided on leaving the bay for the harbour, and in consequence of
this decision, the few seamen and marines who had been landed from
the squadron were instantly re-embarked, and every preparation made
to bid adieu to a port which had so long been the subject of our
conversation—which, but three days before, we had entered with so
many sentiments of satisfaction ; and in which, as we had believed,


so many of our future hours were to be passed. The thoughts of
removal banished sleep, so that I rose at the first dawn of the*
morning. But judge of my surprise on hearing from a sergeant, who
ran down almost breathless to the cabin where I was dressing, that
a ship was seen off the harbour’s mouth. At first I only laughed,,
but knowing the man who spoke to me to be of great veracity, and
hearing him repeat his information, I flew upon deck, on which I
had barely set my foot, when the cry of “another sail” struck on
my astonished ear. Confounded by a thousand ideas which arose in
my mind in an instant, I sprang upon the barricade and plainly
descried two ships of considerable size standing in for the mouth of
the bay. By this time the alarm had become general, and every one
appeared lost in conjecture. Now r , they were Dutchmen, sent to
dispossess us, and the moment after storeships from England, with
supplies. It was by Governor Phillip that this mystery was at
length unravelled, and the cause of the alarm pronounced to be tw o
Erench ships which it w r as now recollected were on a voyage of discovery
in the Southern Hemisphere. Thus were our doubts cleared up and our
apprehensions banished; it w T as, how r ever, judged expedient to post-
pone our removal to Port Jackson until a complete confirmation of
our conjectures could be procured. Had the sea breeze set in the
strange ships would have been at anchor in the Bay by eight o’clock
in the morning, but the wind blowing out, they w ere driven by a.
strong lee current to the southward of the port. On the following
day they re-appeared in the former situation, and a boat was sent to
them with a lieutenant of the navy in her to offer assistance and
point out the necessary marns for entering the harbour. In the
course of the day the officer returned and brought intelligence that
the ships were the Boassole and Astrolabe , sent out by order of the
king of Prance and under the command of Monsieur La Perouse.”
What a gateway it has been, that old gap between the two heads.
England and Prance both entered there to the new r world. Had it.


"been a dozen years later how they would have shocked ! What heating
to quarters there would have been, what new thunder through the
primaeval forest, what amazement amongst the “ Indians,” what a
baptism of blood for the new world ! Of course the Frenchman would
have been beaten off—this broad land was ordained for the propagation
-of the Saxon race; but still it is pleasant to think of the cordial
greeting on that first encounter, of the pleasant intercourse, of the two
nations mourning over the Abbe’s grave, and the English Governor
baking very great care that the place should be properly marked. Aye,
so it seems fated—there the Englishman landed and left seed of life,
there opposite the Frenchman, where now lie his hallowed bones.
A strange parable is there, if it be sought out and interpreted,
a marvellous illustration of the mission of the nations in this new
south world. That first French visitation struck the keynote of kindly,
tender, pathetic sentiment, gave the first colour of hospitality and
courteous entertainment to our infant life. The Yorkshire man’s
broad footstep cut the first sod in the railway track of progress, the
track that has since gone ploughing its practical way over mountains
and valleys, taking, mastering, developing marvellously. Still let us
not forget that a similar act of consecration was sadly performed on
the first visitation of England as of France. On the first of May of
that year, 1770, Captain Cook wrote in his journal, “ The body of
Forby Sutherland, one of our seamen, avlio died the evening before, was
buried near the watering place, and from this incident I called the
south point of this bay Sutherland Point.” Sutherland Point and
Sutherland County. That mariner has a very great and noble monu-
ment upon whtch our extending civilisation is just now beginning to
make permanent inscription. Of that first burial, Baron Field,
.an almost forgotten or unknown name, but one of the few who should
live at least by virtue of his good intent, wrote —
“ The round
Of Christian burial better did proclaim
Possession than the flag of England’s name.”


A good and beautiful thought surely, and worthy of that act of
consecration it commemorated. The grave and the name of Suther-
land have not been forgotten, hut the gracious influence of snnny
France died. Ah, yes ! I think it died, or never would all
the foreshores of the beautiful hay have been left so long in
their natural wildness, or used so badly by their few tenants.
If the spirit of sunny France, of Southern Europe, the natural
spirit of this our adopted or our native land, had received
development proportionate to the vigorous growth of our too
practical civilization, all Botany Bay should he bright with gleaming
sails to-day, and all Botany beaches should long ago have been merry
with laughter of children brought out to a larger, if not a fairer,
playground than Sydney affords. And all Botany heights should
have been crowned with chateaux, villas, or fair home places, sur-
rounded by beauties which have but to be seen to be understood and
appreciated and coveted; and by virtue of the marvellous prosperity
of the Colony, which renders all things possible to the determined
will, possessed. It is somewhat disheartening to think of the history
of Botany through all its hundred years ! What has ailed the place,
what ban has been upon it ? or, rather perhaps, what has ailed the
people by whom the place has been so long neglected and despised ?
Ignorance ! nought else, whatever. Ignorance now about to be
effectively broken through, and not, good critic, by the power of this
small work, but by the railway, which, within a very few weeks, shall
open the only natural and proper landward gates of Botany at some
of its fairer bays and rivers.
And now, perhaps, it may be as well to answer the question—
What is meant by Botany ? What country is taken in by the
description ? And the answer is easy. All the watershed of Botany
Bay lying fairly within the suburban areas of Sydney. All to the
south of that stunted backbone ridge of the city and its suburbs which,
starting at Ben Buckler, fairly divides the waters, sending this to Port


Jackson with its various affluents, that to the hay with its unknown
rivers. La Perouse is ours, and backward on the coast line to Long
Bay, and we take in all the Bunnerong Plats, the meadows of Captain
Cook, but the great park of the city in the future; and we have Sir
Joseph Banks with its gardens and bowers, and Sandringham with its
glorious beach, and Sans Souci, and Woniora and the George’s Hiver as
far inland as we please, and all the southern shores and beaches down
to Kurnell, where is the first mark of the white man’s foot. We shall
discover ample space and abundant beauty here. Anew land, indeed,
which will call with an all-persuasive voice to a new people —that
great, new, ever-increasing people which Sydney and New South
Wales are perpetually summoning from all parts of the world, and
increasing of their own strong vitality, and enriching by their own
abundant resources, and preparing for the performance of that first
great human duty and privilege—the establishment and maintenance
of home.
Very slowly| [indeed did that work of establishing homes begin,
and very little result had it for many years. A few fishermen
went down and settled about the beaches, and made great hauls
at times, and] carried them with difficulty over the swampy
road to Sydney; and a Mr. John Connell, grandfather of that Mr.
Elias Laycock, whose fame as a sculler is well known, settled down
upon some height south from Kurnell, known now as the old farm,
and with help of Government men began to clear and cultivate. Mr.
George Bedford] also dug a well, and expressed his willingness to
build houses {for any who might he disposed to settle in so pleasant a
district; and very shortly after these pioneers came, Mr. Laycock,
senior, father oCthe sculler, and Mr. G. Simpson, father of the present
proprietor of the romantically situated and well provided accomodation
house on the Hacking waters; and of both these there are stories quaint
as authentic. Mr. Laycock, when anxious to get to town, would not
lake the long road round about by Georges’ Hiver, hut getting into


iiis boat tied the horse astern, and forced that good brute to swim while
lie pulled right over to La Perouse; thence he would ride roun d by Long
Bay and across the swamps to Randwick, and make back by the same
route on his return. But the wildness of the country would seem to
have been almost too much for dairying, as more than forty years ago
we hear of the late Mr. George Simpson purchasing from Mr. Laycock
all the wild cattle and horses in the district for the sum of £3O.
There were a great number of them at that time, and a great many
men were employed in catching them. They killed the cattle for
beef, and having tamed the horses, drove them down to the Horse
Rock, and swam them across to Tom Ugly’s Point. The Horse Rock
is now Sylvania, and a remnant of the old horse yard is still to be seen
there. But whether the cattle and horses had all become wild, or
■whether the business of dairying ceased to pay is so far unknown;
only this is clear—that the farm fell into desuetude, the buildings to
ruins; the wattle took possession of the wheat fields, and only an
occasional human voice was heard in the forest. The district may
almost have been said to have relapsed into barbarism. Nor was there
through many years much life or progress on the opposing head of
La Perouse. True, in early days a customs office was established, there
a sort of coast guard station, and the first officer being provided with
half-a-dozen government men to pull his boat and attend to his wants,
became so terrified of them that he got a tower built to his house,
and to the tower would ascend every evening and draw up the ladder
after. Government men, however, became things of the past, and
"till exports and imports did not so increase as to justify a larger
customs establishment; the old tower house was still sufficient, and
now it looks a very small affair indeed by comparison with the depot
and station of the submarine cable, and the splendid fortifications of
Bare Island. Very, very slowly grew Botany; searching into its
past is like groping across some ford by aid of guide posts nine-
tenths of which are decayed. There have been homes where now are


mins, and round about those ruins of homes there is still
something of legend, something of romance; and just for the sake
of completeness, of adding the charm to the book which should not
he lacking in the home, let us break the thread of description here
for a single chapter by a little tale of tragedy, true in all its det ails,
though so slightly modified as not to he applicable to any particular
case.


OHJLIPTIESIR, 11.
THE STORY OF HALLS.
■OU can never drive along that road from Sydney, which passes
through Newtown and across Cook River and finds the Bay at
Tom Ugly’s Point, without noting many signs of old life, ruins
of homes which needs must he shrines of strange memories. Look there
at the shuttered windows, the barred doors, the cracked tile roof, the
blistered paint, the very creeper which once covered the walls, rotted
away; and the moss which overgrew the shingles black with age; the
fine Norfolk Island pine of giant growth shutting the house off from the
street, veiling it darkly as a sister of an order of perpetual repentance.
Do you think that house is empty ? There is not a Rhineland Castle,
not a Border Tower that holds more history and more tragedy. Look at
these other ruins—strong stone walls that seem to have been built for
ages, and yet are crumbled down in a century. What are they trying
to bury ? What is it they would ask us to forget ? Shall we
endeavour to dig out the skeleton buried beneath them? Not with
any unholy desire or idle interest. I will not “ bowk the dead ”or vex
or disturb the living. I will not willingly turn the key of any
cupboard which has been locked by the living on the ghost of their
dead. The dead past has very well buried its dead. Let it rest in
peace. The one or two stories here set down are true as to their main
facts. Such things certainly did happen, and many men now living
will recognise them in their new dress. Let those who doubt


endeavour to realise all the circumstances of the time, the marvellous
possibilities for romance, the peculiar, the varied humanity by which
the bash was sparsely peopled and poorly controlled in that time of
near a hundred years ago; the unreclaimed, half-reconciled savagedom,
the fettered villainy and strength and craft of the convict population;
and if they would really understand they must not fail to recognise*
■what strength and craft really were lettered there, what sterling
ability fell through vice to convictism, what cunning hands bore the
ch ains, what depths of villainy simulated virtue, and what proud, called
hearts, victims of errors of justice, fretted away or broke in ineffectual
revolt against unmerited doom. Think of all this and then of the little
circle of cultured disciplined aristocracy by which all Avas governed,
and say is anything too strange, too romantic to have grown from it ?
Place yourself fairly back in the past before you venture upon incred-
ulity as to any portion of its record, and the more you learn and know
of actual facts the less will you be disposed to doubt or to question
my tradition. Strange it may be, hut never quite so strange as the
conditions from which it grew r . And this is a story gathered from
half-a-dozen traditions, founded, as I have full reason to believe, upon
half-a-dozen w T ell-authenticated facts, true as the life history of any
man in the community, and yet to he applied to no man and no
family. The facts as stated did all occur; but names, dates and
places are all changed. This is the story :
In the year Captain Walden had obtained a grant of
country with a frontage to George’s Elver, near down to the Bay.
He had built a house there, he had planted a garden, he used to come
doAvn and fish, he was a bold sailor and a good Avaterman, he loved
the feather white north-easter over the broad water, and the strong*
J O
jerk of the big schnapper—light horsemen they called them in those
days—on his lines, he loved also to Avait for the vrallahy on the rocks,
or to fill a hag with Avonga, or to bring home a lyre bird’s tail. He


was friendly, too, with the blacks, and trusted himself farther
with them than some sage men of the time approved. Captain
Walden had, after the fashion of the times, numerous assigned servants ;
one of them, Halls, a man who, however he had lived, was evidently
born and trained for better things. One of the men yon may discover
in great prisons on rare occasions now, one of a tolerably common
class in that time, hated by his immediate superiors, because he could
not possibly cloak his contempt, and by reason of that hate, suffering
much, and at times undeservedly. This Halls, Captain Walden took
as his own servant, found the road to his better nature, and so worked
it, that he obtained from him good and faithful service for Wo years.
He was a trusted man then. Walden was accustomed to say, “ I would
go anywhere with him and alone, and tell him first that I had a
belt packed with dollars and dumps on my body; ” and perhaps he
could, for it was not by money that the devil had on any occasion
sought to buy Halls. Once the wife and daughter of another officer
came down to stay for a couple of days with Walden, and Halls was
the only other man on the place. There were two women servants.
They had hardly arrived when a courier came down post haste from
the Governor, summoning the Captain to a council. What should be
done ? “ Will you stay P Halls will take you out in the boat and you
may trust him implicitly, I shall return early to-morrow.” The elder
lady was weak, the journey was rough. They both knew Halls : “You
will certainly be back early to-morrow ?” “ Yes.” “ Then we will
stay.” That was in the afternoon at three. Halls summoned im-
mediately, took charge of the place, and the Captain went back to
Government House. Later on we quote from the narrative of the elder
lady : “He took us out in the boat, and in the evening he cooked the fish
we caught and made us an excellent tea.” Thenceforward each party
concerned must tell the tale of what happened; the two women first.
Their story is brief. “We had supper,” they said, “and Halls came
in and brought a bottle of rum and we drank, but it was no good


liquor, we were drugged. We went down upon the floor stupid in
half an hour, and awoke the next morning with splitting heads and
memories of had dreams. It was daylight and there was nobody
moving. could not see Halls; we did not hear the ladies. We
waited till nine o’clock, and then, hearing some strange sounds, we
went into the room and found Mrs. X. hound and gagged in the bed.”
Wfliat further they had to say matters none. Mrs. X. will tell her
tale : “ I went to sleep with my daughter at half-past nine. It may
have been an hour later when I was awakened by a noise, and looking
up, saw, or rather felt, that some one was in the room. I lifted my
head and called out, Mary, and instantly felt a blow' that stunned me.
After that I have faint and horrid memories of hands and ropes on me,
of Mary screaming, and of pain and torture indescribable, and then of
wakening to find Mary gone and myself hound to the bedstead and
gagged. The women released me in the morning, and Captain Walden
arrived at eleven. Halls had gone then, and Mary; the boat was gone
also. Captain Walden hurried hack to town, returned with a sergeant
and ten men, and went down the river in search of Halls. I have not
seen Captain Walden or my daughter Mary since.”
Bronx official records of the time the following is gathered:
Captain Walden on the sixth of February, 18 —, reported at Govern-
ment House the abduction of Miss X. from his house on Botany waters
by the convict Halls, and applied for search parties to he immediately
sent out. He himself took Sergeant K. with ten men and left for the
scene of the outrage. He has not since been heard of, nor have any of
the men who accompanied him been seen, bergeant L. weat with a
party up George’s Biver, and after an ineffectual search of seven
days returned. Lieut. M. with a party of marines went round
to Hacking Biver with intent to search the country between
that harbour and Botany. He, five days out, came upon the convict
Halls heavily ironed and weak through lack of food. Halls offered no


resistance and was brought into the settlement. He was charged
with the abduction of Miss X., but made no statement, nor could
any course, subsequently pursued, induce him to explain how
he had been taken and how he had escaped, or what had become
of his victim and captors. He was brought to Mrs. X., but refused
to give the poor lady any information as to the fate of her
daughter. He was promised lenient treatment and ultimate pardon,
if he would make such confessions as might lead to the recovery of
Miss X. and of Captain Walden and his party. But he had one
answer to all, “ You may kill me at pleasure, but I will not speak.”
He was treated with severity, receiving in all 800 lashes, but to no
purpose, and was ultimately hanged, obdurate and unconfessing on
Gallows Hill. Miss X. has never been seen, nor has Captain Walden
or any of his search party. Such are the bare facts of this most
remarkable case, which we will now attempt to fill in by some
surmisings based upon other facts recently disclosed.
Out in that same stretch of country, I quite recently talked with
an old black gin, fairly intelligent, and with a good memory for all
the traditions of her race. She pointed one day to a huge piled heap
of rocks, the trunk of a tree amongst them, long buried and dead.
She said, “Plenty of blackfellows there.” “How?” “Camp there
in big rain long ago; good cave there; and in night all come down ; all
buried; all sleep there long time very well.” Now let the reader try
to realize that scene; the overhanging shelf, the dry cave beneath,
the sleeping party and the sudden fall and secure burial. It is
beyond doubt that such an event has occurred, and therefore quite
possible that it might have occurred in the manner to be set
forth in this narrative, which will be based upon a supposition of
knowledge of all that occurred from the time of tne departure of
Captain Walden from his cottage until the capture of Halls manacled
in the bush.


Halls, be it understood, was not a martyr. He had earned his
sentence of transportation by a course of reckless, thriftless life,
which culminated in forgery. He had never worked for himself,
never established any ideal of life upon a foundation of labour, and
thus in circumstances where labour could be the only possible
foundation o: any permanent comfort he found building impossible.
“Work,” said the law to him, “work or suffer;” and slowly
and painfully he came to work, only to escape suffering. The conditions
of the convict settlements approximated the conditions of his ideal of
hell, and the cunning and craft and wickedness of hell grew in him
while he toiled and endured. He would at any time, through the
worst years of his servitude, have taken a life for a day’s rest or a
comfortable meal; he would indeed, had it been possible, have sunk
the continent and all upon it to the nether flames if by so doing
he could have procured six weeks of comfortable life; but fortunately,
perhaps, his capacity was small, and his opportunities for evil were
narrow. He could purchase indulgence occasionally by petty acts of
treachery, and he never let chances of that sort slip ; but still he
purchased always contempt with indulgence, and grew to be detested
and feared by his associates. Never a more miserable man than Halls
toiled in a chain gang at the time when Captain Walden had first to
try him on a charge of insubordination, and, struck by the dejection, the
absolute helplessness of the man, the apparent absence of motive for his
•crime, resolved to minimize the punishment, and if possible give the poor
wretch a help towards a more endurable condition. “ See here, Halls,”
•said he, “you ought to have more sense than to kick against the
pricks, though I expect they close on you painfully at times. Now
they all speak badly of you; overseers say they would not trust you
again ; and your mates in the gang pray the Lord that you were hung;
but lam not afraid of you, and I will help you if I can. I will get
you assigned to me, and will make you my own servant, and will put
my life in your power, but if you take it you will destroy your own


chance, and if I smell danger I will shoot you like a dog, do
yon see?” Halls said, “Yes, I see, and I accept, and you need not
fear.” “ I never did fear, ’’said the Captain; “but I watch always.”
The assignment was in due course made. Halls’ chains were knocked
off, and he had wit enough to become a useful servant. His
labors were light, his duties simple. He performed them through
three years faithfully enough, and the Captain, somewhat elated at the
apparent success of his experiment, exaggerated his oAvn obligations to
the man who was really his very great debtor. “ Splendid fellow,” he
would say, “ can trust him anywhere, and they were just torturing
him to death.” So things went on for three years, and Halls became an
expert cook, valet, and bush companion. And thus they stood at the
date of the visit of Mrs. and Miss X. to the quarters on the river.
And when Captain Walden went back to the settlement Halls had no
notion whatever of any treachery or crime. He thought of nothing but
his ordinary little round of duty. He would catch fish; he would
satisfy his little vanity by winning their praise for his skill in
ministering to their pleasure and comfort; and so he went down the
river with them, and dropped a kellick, and baited hooks, and
took off the bream as they pulled them out. But in some fashion,
while they were all busy with good sport, Miss X. got a hook fixed in
her finger. The little pain caused her to cry out and extend her hand
with the hook dangling, and her mother, submitting to the dictates
of weak nerves, said : “ Oh, 1 cannot touch it; you, you take it out;
take the dreadful thing out.” The younger lady sat down
upon the thwart, and Halls beside, and, first time through seven
long years, he felt a soft white hand in his own, and a woman’s
breatli upon his cheek; and suddenly he realised that the woman was
in his power. The thought, the realization, sent a storm through all
his being. He quiversd with passion. The caged and harmless tiger
had suddenly tasted blood. But he had taken the hook away, and the
girl was grateful and the mother thankful, and “ Surely,” both said,


“So clever, so tender, so sensitive a man can never be bad; be looks
as though he had been a gentleman.” They talked to him kindly;
and again he was permitted to bind up the little wound, to
touch the soft white flesh, to feel the passion-inspiring breath, to
have the overmastering desire so enkindled as to consume in
a moment all the gratitude and duty years of kindness had
bred. The woman could not understand, could not be expected
to understand, that she was giving herself willingly to feed a more
than Moloch tire; that every kind word, look and gesture, was the
deadliest possible weapon she could forge against herself. She must
needs take an oar as they pulled up the smooth and narrow water
home, and as her body swayed too and fro in time with his own, he
felt impulse, passion, irresistible as cruel. He was all aflame with
desire, and all his capabilities were quickened to a diabolical
acuteness. Across the shelving beaches, up through the shadows of
the woods be saw avenues to scenes of a satyr’s paradise. His eyes
glowed, his teeth were set, he scarcely spoke, but tugged on his oar
till it bent as a bow and sent the heavy boat through the water like
a racing skiff. “What splendid devotion, said the ladies;” “how
the poor fellow is touched by a little kindness.” And all the time
he plotted. He had resolved to drug the two women servants with
tobacco and rum, before they reached the little home beach, and as he
handed Mrs. X. ashore, he realized how easy it would be to silence
her for a while by one blow on the head ; and as the daughter leaned
upon his shoulder while stepping from the gunwale to the sand, he
could hardly forbear from seizing her, forcibly dashing her down in the
boat and pulling right out to sea, to death and damnation—so it came
with satisfaction of bis desire, what matter. But the moment passed,
the ladies were temporarily out of his power and on their way to the
house. He went fiercely to work cleaning and cooking fish, then
hurried down to the boat and put food and water into her enough for
a week’s journey, stowed the sails down beneath the thwarts.


fitted and greased the r >wlocks, shoved out into two feet of water
and shipped the rudder, put five hundredweight of rock in for
ballast, and let down false kellick lines ahead and astern, fixed
a stout piece of rope about the forward thwart with two long ends to
be used as ties; then went up and prepared a bottle of rum
with tobacco juice for the stupifying of the women. He went to
them in the rude kitchen; he gave them drink; he drank with them ;
what did it matter, laudanum would not have affected him then. He
saw them roll on the floor. Had he suspected for a moment that
either would awake too soon, he would have brained both with the wood-
axe. When they were safe as if dead he went round to the front of
the dwelling-house and watched the light he longed to see extinguished.
How the moments seemed hours; the one hour an eternity ! He was
minded a dozen times to dash through the window, to stab the mother
to death, to take the girl in his arms and bear her away ; but some-
how he had not schooled himself for such deliberate murder, and he
said, “ I will wait, wait.” Ten of the night came, and the light went
out, and all was still. Then he crept up and up, put his face to
the window and tried to get in, but the curtains were closely drawn.
He felt the casement —it was fast. Should he put his body against
it and dash it in ? No, not yet; he Avould try another way. He had
helped to build the chimney of that room; he knew there could be
nothing easier than to enter its capacious mouth and come down
softly on the saplings of which the upper flue was built. This he
did, and the noise of his descent awoke the elder lady. It was the
thud of the short stout stick upon the mother’s head, and the stifled
shriek which followed, that awoke the daughter, who. in a second, was
gripped in the merciless arms, held vice-like, till bound and gagged
and flung upon the floor. He was eager and mad, but still consistent
in his plot; which was to run out to sea and make north and east
for some imaginary island, where he would live his life and realize his
dream. Straight for this realisation he went, regardless of all present


•satisfaction. He bound the mother upon the bed; he took the girl
in his arms; he bore her down to the beach, placed her upon the
thwart of the boat and hound her securely ; and then took the oars
and pulled down swiftly and silently towards the Heads. He knew
the danger, hut he trusted to get through all. He was conscious of
the prize behind him as he pulled —he did not care to look on her.
All his mind was set upon the great future —liberty, the island, and
the woman he had taken as prey. He pulled the eight miles between
the Point and the Heads by an hour after midnight; and he went
right out to sea for yet two hours more, right away for the rising
stars upon the eastern horizon. Then conscious of some slight sea-
breeze, he stepped the mast, set the sail, and steered eastward. He
knew that for safety’s sake he must make out beyond the ordinary
course of ships going to the coal river; and he knew that before
daylight he must take down his sail and tarn to the oars again. But
wind and current favoured him, and when he had got down every-
thing at dawn and looked across with the first low sun rays to the
land, he saw but a very faint and hazy line, and no sigajwhatever of
any sail upon the sea.
The woman, with closed mouth and hands and feet bound, sat
speaking at him with her eyes. He went to her and removed the gag,
and cut the ropes and strings. She started towards the side of the boat—
she would certainly have gone overboard, but her legs were cramped and
powerless—she fell again and fainted. He knelt over her tenderly
•enough, put water to her lips, chafed her wrists and ankles, and smiled
in her face as she revived. He had never conceived of the loathing
•she must naturally feel for him, had never indeed thought of anything
but his own mad dream. She shrank from him and closed her eyes
again. He made a rope fast to her waist and secured it again to the
thwart, so as to prevent escape, but still to leave her at reasonable
liberty. He placed bread and water beside her, andjwent aft to eat
und drink himself. She began to think as she lay still and suffering,


and slowly an idea came to her that she was not quite lost. Her mother
might not he dead; Captain Walden would arrive in the morning
they would miss the boat; and vessels avouM put out from Sydney and
Botany in chase. She would wait and watch. He ate and drank, and
looked furtively at her as she lay, and at length came forward and
stood awhile. He did not know what to say. He was a wild beast,
now, but he had been a man, and some dregs of natural shame'
fettered his tongue. At length—■
O O
“ Ho you hear me ? ”
Very faintly, “ Yes ! ”
“You are in my power.
No reply.
“ I shall take you to a northern island; you will live with me
you can never escape.”
Still silence.
“The sea is full of sharks here; if I am pursued I shall throw
you over.”
A little shudder, and then a little poor weak woman’s pleading
“ If I promise you pardon and all the money I can—and I am rich—
will you take me hack ? ”
“No ! you will never get away.”
“ I will try —God help me ! ”
“ Very likely.”
She crouched closer to the Avet grating and sobbed
He saAV signs of a northerly Avind and took to the oars again, and 1
pulled away till ten in the morning maybe; and then there Avas no
sign of land, and the caps of the big waves were feathered by the
increasing Avind. The motion of the boatAvas painful and the Avoman
was sick, but her mind quickened under this physical affliction, as is
very frequently the case. Lord Byron confessed that some of his*
finest verse Avas the result of stomachic irritation consequent upon a
dose of salts. She began to think, to reckon the chances of the future.


She was certain that they would he pursued, probably captured;
but her captor was desperate. He would kill her—kill himself.
Could she find any means of protection ? She looked about, and right
up in the nose of the boat she saw a long sharp knife —the knife he
had brought on board and used to cut the kellick in] escaping from
the river. She reached it and thought first to cut the rope and
liberate herself; but then came the idea, “ Could she save herself
even if free; would it not be better to wait ?” The answer was,
“ yes,” and the knife was secreted in her dress. More and more rolled
the boat, and the breeze freshened from the north-east. He came
forward again, “Will you help me to sail the boat; you will not be
so sick when she is moving ?”
“Yes.”
“Will you take the tiller ? I will get up the sail.”
“ Yes.”
He loosed the rope and with some difficulty she got]down to the
stern and took the tiller. He had the very vaguest idea” [as to where
he should ultimately make. An island somewhere. One tiling was
sure, he dared not attempt to beat up against that wind, so he would
take the chance it’gave him and make south with a little east,
perhaps. He ran up his jib and made the jib sheet fast, set the
mainsail and kept the mainsheet in hand, and then steered south.
The great blue lazy seas rolled beneath them ; the big gulls flew
closely around; and mental anguish and desperate fear and need, and
the fresh breeze and the horrid presence near, combined to drive her
to desperate thought. The soul of Jael and Judith stirs in every
mother when her child is imperilled; and maiden honour foully
menaced will instruct a maiden to strike, and at need, to slay. She
felt the knife and looked at the man before her, and she thought
quietly: “ Can I kill him ? and if I kill him can I escape?” Her
body quivered witli the emotion of the thought, and her eyes burned
so, that looking at her he was puzzled and half afraid. What was


moving in the woman ? Be said nothing, and the first passion of her-
thought passing left her weak. “ Give me water,” she said;, “ I:am.
faint.” With difficulty he reached it; and she drank. And still the
boat sailed on for an hour, and another, and another. But aboutthree *
in the afternoon there was a blackness in the southern sky and the'
north wind failed. The heat was intense; a change was nean ‘‘ It'
will blow hard,” he said, “before night; may blow' all night'; we
have a good offing; we may make right north out of all danger
before morning.” He seemed to think that the news- should
give her pleasure. She was silent. “We will strike the sail
and put her about,” he said again, “and I will keep* the jib in
hand, so that immediately it is on to us we can let her drive.” Still
she was silent and took his instructions mechanically. The - change
did not come instantly, and they lay for more than an hour lazily rolling.
“ Will you eat ?” he said. She could not eat, but watched him devour
the victuals with unutterable loathing. Evening was very near when
at length it did come, and not as he had expected,, southwest s or south>■
but with fury and from the east; with a shriek and a roar that filled
the handful of a sail and buried the bows of the boat, and dragged the
sheet almost from his bleeding hands. It blew the great'waves down ;.
it covered the whole surface of the sea with a yeasty foam.. The boat
drove before it, and, mastered by the fury of nature, he was content'
to let her drive. He knew that they were nearing the shore ;, knew
that 1 hey could not head off ; and the one thing; lie desired was to-
escape death on those black cliffs he knew so well. Very well he
knew all the coast; he guessed they would touch before nightfall.
WTiere then would they touch ? It was only a question now of sandy
beach or black cliff foot. He watched long for the-shore line, and it
rose sudden and grim just before sunset. The high black cliff with the
waves leaping almost to its crown. He knew the high head of Port
Hacking, far away from whose feet the huge bumborah’s were lifting,
and breaking, the long beach farther north, and the cruel point facing.


all the stress of weather. He knew they could never reach the one,,
never round the other. There was but one hope —to beach her, run
her right in at all risks in the little Wattarnola Bay. He thought they
were heading fairly straight for it, and he watched for the gap in the
cliffs and the white roar of water on the patch of beach, as though
beyond it was certain safety. They were on a wave-crest, as it
appeared. She knew her duty by instinct—put the tiller up ever
so little, and trembled as they drove straight for the roaring foam. It
was but the work of a moment when once within the heads. She was
caught upon the ninth great wave ; she was lifted high right
over the bar and launched fairly upon the fresh water pool, into which
the ocean was now pouring roaring floods. She touched bank amongst
a thick growth of rushes and ferns. He sprang out and held her fast.
Everything seemed forgotten but ordinary duty under the peculiar
circumstances. “Come out,” said he, “and I will make the boat
fast.” And she came out, but her hand was upon the knife. He
made fast to a tree and began to take the provisions out. She saw him
enter the boat, and then fled, with a vague idea that in that way lay
safety, northward along the beach. He saw and suddenly realized all
his folly. With a fearful oath and a fierce resolve he started in
pursuit. She reached the cliff on the other side and then faced round.
He was close to her. He was afire with lust and murder then, but he
halted, as if struck bv lightning, when that long knife flashed out
before his eyes. Her back to the black, wet wall, against which her hair
was wildly blown ; the blue steel in her bare hand ; white-robed and
white-faced ; she looked more like an avenging angel than a wronged
woman; and he stood like a hound cowed by a stag at bay. He
gnashed his teeth with rage; he advanced and retreated; he looked
about for a mass of rock; he would slay her if he could not possess
her.
So they stood there while a ray of low light struck the wild water,
and the yeasty, creamy, spumy wave took a crimson tint, and the wet


crags seemed to glare at the breakers, as if they, too, were menaced
and at hay. What might have been the end ’tis impossible to say.
She would not, martyr-like, have been stoned to death ; she might
have sprung tiger-like upon, as, fawn-like, she fled from him. But
they were not alone; a party of blacks had come down to Wattamola
to camp and to fish. They had seen the boat nearing the shore ; they
had watched her cross the bar into the lagoon ; they had noted the
strange flight —the wild pursuit; they saw that the man was unarmed ;
and they scented easy prey. Rather by instinct than plot they came
down by two ways; one party by the little gully where, upon the
northern head of the lake, parties camp now often enough ; the other
stealthily out from the land. The one down to the rocks, the other
out to the sand. And when they saw that their net was fairly
spread they set up a yell. Halls looked round and saw at least a
dozen armed blacks behind him; looked along the boulder track and
saw more; he coudd not say how many; he did not trouble to count how
many. All fear and reason were lost in anger against that fair white
prey escaping him. With set teeth and clenched lists he dashed at her,
and she, having lost desperation in hope, dropped the long knife and
fled; rushed into the cave beneath the cliff; cowered in its extremity;
nor thought that she might possibly have thus given herself to death.
She would have died, but that stooping to pick up the knife he fell
over a spear which, aimed at his body, struck the ground between his
legs; and before he could rise again heavy blows were raining upon
him and half-a-dozen black hands had seized every limb. He was
captured-—he had lost.
Recognising friendliness in the savagedom which protected
her against her most dreaded enemy, the woman came out, and
they brought her the blanket she had dropped by the boat, and
soon understood by broken words and signs, that there was much
to be gained by taking her in safety to the settlement at Port Jackson
or Botany. Then Halls was securely bound, and Miss X. treated


kindly enough by the gins who were cooking for the camp. But that
night all the rain which the fierce gale had brought in from the east
began to pour down, and by morning all the hillsides were streaming
and all the swampy plateaux saturated like sponges ; and the blacks
cowered round the trees and showed little disposition to stir. It was
with difficulty that they were persuaded to make over to the Hacking
waters. A big fire lit there might attract attention. Yes, they would
do that; and by noon they arrived there; and soon their fire was lit
where now stands Simpson’s well-known accommodation house; and
Halls was tied to a tree; and the woman was watching the opposite
shore.
What did she see in the late afternoon as in the dripping blanket
she paced up and down by the sobbing sea. Surely there were
moving figures and the gleam of arms, and then a shout that was not
of a black. She let the blanket fall instantly; she waved her arms
and shrieked; and down came all the blacks in haste. Then shots
were fired from the other shore, and shouts given from another party
on the beach, who had come for fishing. And Halls saw and
understood it tied to the tree.
Before dusk he was in the centre of that sergeant’s party on the
north shore of Port Hacking heavily ironed hands and feet; and
there were about thirty blacks around; and the captain said to all,
“ Come, come Sydney; plenty mutton, tobacco, rum.” But they were
a little dubious and said, “Make to big cave to-night; all dark, all
wet; no track in bush.” It was still raining, and the Captain did not
know where better to pass the night. “We will make to the big cave,”
he said, “and we will chain him to a tree, and in the morning early
start for Sydney.” Thus through the bush towards the big cave they
marched, and then the Captain explained to his recovered guest how
he had reckoned with tolerable surety that Halls would make to some
of the fishing grounds or camping places ashore, never deeming that
he would face the open sea; how he had determined to hunt down the


coast far as they had ever gone fishing, while other parties would
search farther inland, and a good cutter would put to sea. To Halls he
did not speak; he had nothing to say to him, only to surrender him to
the hangman when arrived at the stockade.
So they reached the big cave. Now that big cave was nothing
more than a huge projecting shelf of sandstone rock. Centuries of age
had worn away a softer stratum beneath and left a cavern of a size
very rarely seen —full fifty yards in length and reaching backward a
hundred feet. Generations of blacks had camped there and cooked
their’possums and wallabies; and heaven knows what other strange
creatures, now extinct, had left their bones there. There this
strangely-assorted party halted, and at the one end the blacks kindled
little fires within, and in the centre the soldiers made a great fire
without, and at the other corner Halls was chained to a tree in the-
rain. Por still it rained, and as darkness grew, heaven and earth
seemed met in one continuous flood. All in the cavern were dry
enough, for they had a roof above them of full fifty feet of sandstone
with gums and oahs growing—a mountain indeed with a forest.
Halls without was wet and cold, and hungry, and wounded, and sore,
but it did not matter; he knew that he was only waiting to be hung.
The sentry told off to watch him was wet also, and to him, having no near
prospect of hanging, the cold and rain were at least inconveniences. An
hour before midnight this sentry crept under the ledge saying to him-
self, “ How can a man chained to a tree escape ? ” Thus Halls stood alone
at midnight and felt the rain pouring upon him and the wind hitting
him with continuous blows, and the wet iron freezing his wrists and
ankles, he heard the roar of the sea on the cliffs not far below
and the answers of waterfalls and mountain torrents; with the
occasional crash of a tree whose roots had been lightly wrenched from
the soaked soil. Standing thus he was numbed into a half-unconscious
state and suddenly roused by one of those mysterious sounds, which,
like the first pulse of an earthquake or the premonitory roar of a


volcano, stir unfamiliar depths in all nature. It was a sound as of a
rending world. Louder, deeper it came, as of the jar of worlds
colliding. And what did he see now through the darkness—the whole
mountain advancing to cover him ? No, it veered away. But it was
surely moving—a great, vast, shadowy bulk—and towards him, right
upon him, with a whish like ten thousand swinging cats, an oak fell.
He sprang, and the chain snapped. With whish and crash, here and
there fell other trees, and dislodged boulders thundered down the hill-
side, hut the mass of the mountain had simply settled down, grinding,
doubtless, all beneath it to powder. The cave was in reality a mined
mountain, and wash and soakage of floods had aided the mine in its
work. The mountain fell as the earth’s surface falls upon old
workings in mines, and all those beneath were as securely buried.
And he was free ; free with feet chained and hands iron-bound
behind his back. Free to do what ? To creep beneath the shelter of
a rock and thin k first; to wait till morning and see the graves of all his
enemies, and then to die. To die? Yes ! for could a man pick chains
to pieces with his teeth ? And he lay still, and wet and cold till
morning, and then, not without some secret satisfaction, he dragged
his clanking chains up the hill-side and saw where the hill-cap had
slipped and how it[had fallen. A mass of mountain of a million tons
maybe, had slid a [space of fifty yards ; a dozen greater or less
avalanches had thundered down the gorges ; but the main bulk had
been arrested on the flat under stratum. And beneath were the forty
dead, crushed, buried there with a more gigantic monument above than
ever was raised by hand of man. He felt some grim satisfaction as he
clanked his chains above the tomb ; he was conscious even of some
sense of comfort as in the morning the sun came out and set free more
of the dormant life within him. And then he shook himself, and with
a steady resolute energy tested the strength of every link in the
chains that bound him and finally arrived at the conclusion, “ I cannot
by myself become free.” And how was it possible to obtain help ?


He knew the bloodhounds would be on his track ; he knew that hope
would be shut out from him for ever the next time lie looked upon a
white face. He thought of the blacks and knew that help from them
could not reasonably be expected. And then he became conscious of
a new possession—a tremendous secret. He himself, he only, knew
of the fate of those forty, of the Captain, the soldiers, the lost lady.
It pleased him; it possessed him; he would keep it for ever; lock it
in his own heart; die with it; carry it over the cliffs or unto the
'Scaffold. Ah, ah ! he had something they could never wrest from him
now, and he was merry at the thought and walked away with a smile
on his face through the wet woods and down to the verge of the
roaring sea. Should he carry it down there ? Should he give his
treasure to the breakers, the rocks, the horrible, boiling, surging
death ? No ! he would keep it; he would hold it so long as he could.
Thus he walked inland again and roamed about hither and thither;
now kneeling and gnawing the gum from the wattle boughs ; now
stooping and drinking the abundant water; now lying upon his back
and enjoying sun and shade; and always thinking of those forty
enemies he himself—yes, so he grew to believe—he himself had shut up
beneath a mountain. Six days thus, and then, as the records tell, he
was found by the other search party and became, perhaps, the greatest
mystery the Colony had ever known. “Where was Miss X.?” He
smiled a tiger-like smile and said nothing. “Where was Captain
Walden ? ” His sphinx-like smile said plain as words, “ I know, but
what I know I will never reveal. “ How were you ironed ? ” He
shook the irons and laughed at the clank for reply. They heaped
question on question, conjecture on conjecture; they found the boat—
it helped them nothing; they searched the bush for months, but
nothing was found. They tried him for his assault on Miss X. and
flogged him; tried him for the burglary of his master’s house and
flogged him again ; and all the time gave vague promises of
consideration, of pardon, if he would but unlock the door of the


mystery, of which they knew so well he held the key. But he laughed
at cells and chains and lash ; laughed as he stood on the scaffold; and
took that tale to eternity, which here has been pieced together from
some few shreds of fact joined by much conjecture; and is given, not
as a record of things which can be proven, but as a reasonable guess
at an unexplained mystery, one of many which the strange beginnings
of this strange country afford.
tffMjM" HI
ik| I*l N A 1 io< J


CHAPTER 111.
THE ROUTES.
■HE road to Botany Bay is no more by the old Government tram
than by the ocean route via Tenerriffe, Bio, and the Cape,
which Captain Phillips took. You may get to Botany that
way, coasting round by the slums of the city and driving along through
the busy, dusty flats of Waterloo, but it is not fair to Botany so to ap-
proach. If you desire to reach that end o: the bay, and to see it at its
best, drive out by way of Band wick down that bowery avenue of a road
between the Cricket and the Eootball Beserves; turn off before you come
to the Bacecourse and bowl along through the flowering scrub of the
Water Beserve and the Cooper Estate, and come on to those splendid
meadow flats by the tram terminus below the village proper. That is
one way—and a good and pleasant —but not a cheap or expeditious way
Probably the tram will always be the people’s way of reaching that
end of the Bay, but, if so, the trams must be better. Why should not
trams be clean and cushioned, and free of dust and wet ? Why cannot
the managers of the trams master the problem which omnibus
iproprietors solved so long ago, and carry their passengers with a
moderate degree of cleanliness and comfort ? “ Don’t know,” replies


the public, and “Don’t care,” replies the Department, and never
considers that a lion of public discontent is as assuredly preparing to
swallow up all recalcitrant and incompetent departments as were the
she hears ordained for the mocking children or the very resolute beast for
T. Doyle’s bad boy. The tram will surely be better some day ; in the
interval we must commend its regularity. Excepting on holidays, its
punctuality is not to be called in question. The tram, as is well
known, leaves Bridge Street, and the times of its departure may he
learned from the time tables. The tram, with the aid of a few ’buses,
does all the work to the northern end of the Bay, but the train has
■topped the southern end, and by train the great majority of people now
flock down. Before the train ran there was a very pleasant way to
Botany by road, and the pleasant way still remains, despite the
thunder and the speed of the trains. You may still drive out
by the old Parramatta and Newtown Roads, branch off to Cook’s
River, and enter the forest at Arncliffe Heights, which, so far. has not
been fatally broken up. And even before reaching Yrncliffe you may
obtain a view which will well repay the looking. ’Tis not so fair now
as it used to be; works of utility and convenience have broken it up a
little. The railway embankment is an ugly line across the picture,
and down below there are too many monumental chimneys. They
blur, they mar, but they cannot destroy the beauty —the beauty
which at morning or eventide a few brief years ago struck all men of
artistic mind with delight. Does it seem strange tojtalk of beauty on
‘Cook’s River ? —for that is the scene of the picture. will not if ever
you have stood upon the bridge when the tide was full, the*sun low, and
the winds still. Seawards then, in long, faint, hazy perspective, may
be seen the blue water, the dark mangroves, the tall, feathery oaks,
and the black forest upon the hills of the southern bank. It stretches
away to the mist which hides the broad water. It is full of light and
colour, and shadow, and reflection, so strangely and delightfully
blent and interwoven that the artist looks upon it as the uneducated


eye upon the intricate mystic pattern of some Moorish fabric.
It is beautiful as inexplicable ; at least, we must say so, for
though many artists must have seen it, it is certain that none
have yet reproduced it on canvas. Nor less beautiful is, or was, the
landward view from that old bridge. With full tide there is broad clear
water there, a peifect mirror for the sky, the hills and the trees, and
very frequently down in that water’s depth appears first, the rose of the
evening sky, then the black crowns of trees upon the hills, and through
the trees —the glamour of evening giving it the grace of centuries —that
great mansion, the Warren, which still overlooks all neighbours. The
embankment of the railway has barred the river now, and the grace
and hope of home have left the mansion, but still the picture is fair,
and at eventime, over fast growing trees and railway roar and ever
increasing traffic, comes the Angelus or Ave Maria from the Warren
towers—for the Warren is a convent now.
Grey rocks and gums on the road at Arncliffe, bolder
rocks and higher trees as Arncliffe is passed, rich forest
at Eockdale, high breezy downs at Kogarah, from which glimpses
of the deep blue Botany waters are frequently obtained,
while backward all the city is seen with its smoke shroud,
pierced by innumerable spires, and shafts, and towers. And about
Kogarah the roads divide for three points of the Bay. Here, towards
Sandringham, down through forest and swamp, rich, dense and
luxurious, to the broad, well-kept pleasure grounds, the broad, white
beach, the bathing and fishing, and rest and pleasure of the well-known
hotel; there to the long point of. Sans Souci; and right on to
Woniora by one of the most delightful bits of road about the city.
Magnificent forest growth is passed on the Woniora road, and for the
last mile just the narrowest space of forest, the most perfect fringe of
nature divides the land from the water —the broad high road from
the blue and pleasant bay.
Pleasant enough are all those roads, long known to all who


have been in any way familiar with the surroundings of this city,
but ail unknown to the great increasing, ever expanding multitude.
There was no practicable route for them till the railway opened, and
at the cost of a shilling it became possible to travel right down to
the shores of George’s River at the landward gate of the bay. The
railway will be the one great route of the future; and, looking at that
railway, the wonders it has already performed, the blessings it has
bestowed upon the city, the opportunities it has afforded to thousands
to whom outlet to fresh air and grand scenes of natural beauty
was practically denied by prohibitory prices in railway-traversed
suburbs, the puzzle to stranger as to citizen is—Why was it delayed
so long ? Certainly no railway line was ever opened in the colony
which will do more to increase the resource, develop the natural
wealth, and serve the people of the colony. It enters into competition
with no other line; it clashes with no great colonial or continental
routes; it dashes straight into the heart of a new and beautiful
country, unlocking and unfolding it to the city. And to aid the
railway, in effective as legitimate fashion, the tramways come. The
first by a most commendable private enterprise from Rockdale to that
magnificent reserve of Lady Rnbinson’s Beach—of which more bye-
and-bye. Holiday traffic already taxes the tramway beyond its
powers, and very shortly its cars will be filled with travellers who
day by day will journey from their city toil to their pleasant
suburban homes, for it is a very beautiful country which this tram-
line explores, terminating at the site of a future city, which has well
been named New Brighton. Fairly in the centre of that fair white
beach, fairly also between the heads, in the most beautiful sweep of
the bay—
A. jewel set in the tide of the wide
Sea-current's eddying ring—”
the New Brighton of the future should be a terminus of importance,
large enough and populous enough to require a tram-line for its own


service. And Sans Souci must also have a tram-line in the near
future; and Sandringham also; and many and many a forming suburb
running to westward of the railway line. These are the legitimate,
the proper places for trams, which are monstrous nuisances, if vast
conveniences, in the crowded streets of the city. They would be
proper feeders to the railway here ; direct contributors to the revenue ;
and, whether constructed by private enterprise or paid for by the
public funds, good servants of the State, and routes to the New Water.


CHAPTEB IY.
THE NEW WATER.
jHHHE term is not ill-fid vised or hurriedly chosen, for Botany Bay
may he fairly named as the least understood, though the first
W discovered, of all the inland waters of Australia. Is it generally
understood ? Let us with perfect accuracy paint a series of pictures
and ask if they will he generally recognized. We are out on a breadth
of water —a deep blue basin to left, with here a rocky position, there
a shelving beach ; here a tableland upon a bold cliff, there a
grassy meadow where once stood a pleasant home. On the beach
a braid of foam; beneath the cliffs the band of emerald green, or
the opaline tint we are so familiar with in Sydney Harbour; a fisherman
drifting for whiting in the still water ; a pleasure party scudding along
with a full white sail, where the nor’-easter just ripples the open blue.
On the point to the left, amongst grey rocks and many-tinted green of
scrub growth, a wealth of flannel flowers, and above them a great gum
with its crown, as a single snowball, with this year’s exceptional wealth
of bloom. Bight in front, massive and grand, built for ages, and not
without regard to beauty—though it may be that lines of beauty were
also lines of strength —the railway bridge. Through the arches, long


vistas, with here and there a jutting cape, one of the most perfect of
land and water perspectives which the inland running seas about Sydney
afford. It is not like any pre-conceived ideas of Botany Bay. It is
fairly new water, is it not? You must acknowledge so; and yet
it is uncertain if it should be regarded as within or without Botany
Bay. I would be disposed to place the railway bridge as the
landward boundary of the Bay, though in old days there would
appear to have been other bounds, for on the Woniora hank, a little
down, are marks which are sometimes supposed to have been
set as divisions between Bay and River tribes—handmarks on the
rocks, hold impressions of blackfellows’ hands, like the handmarks of
bold but illiterate mediaeval barons upon their deed of transfer or
bequest. How long these hands have remained there no man knows,
but the mystery of them is this —they show no signs of passing away.
They are graven in the sand-stone rock, clear now as a hundred years
ago. They only puzzle you, and the blackfellow who tries to explain
puzzles still more, because he does not understand, and so lies. But
the land and the water. All these lines of beauty —capes, plateaux,
bays, beaches to the left—are upon the fair territory of Oatley’s Grant.
Marvellously lucky man must this Oatley have been in days gone by;
though common sense and fair appreciation of natural beauty might
have taught any man to prize, and, if possible, to possess, such a land
tongue as that with deep water all round about, and from the heights
an outlook of infinite variety. But had the original owner of the
grant a prophetic vision to forsee that down through the centre of the
land tongue would some day run the railway line; that the bridge
across the river would start from the very tip of the tongue, and that
he should be bound by that bridge to that lovely hay upon the
opposite bank which now hears the name of Como. Yes, that is
Como which opens to you now as you round the point stretching inland
there, blue and calm as the lake which first bore the name. That is
Como, the chief entrance to the great Holt-Sutherland Estate, which in


a near future shall have as many villages as thirty years ago it had
sheep-folds or cattle-camps. You may look long and longingly at
Como as you looked long and longingly at O’Connel’s Bay, and
you may find some difficulty in realising that both are corners of
the historic and so-called monotonous Botany. And then you
may shoot the arches of the bridge and take your choice of two
water ways. George’s Eiver runs right ahead, winding away for
four-and-twenty miles. As you drift along here on the rising tide
you have a solitude about you deep as in any Hawkeshury creek;
you are surrounded by a scarcely inferior beauty. Yet, listening at
times you may hear the faint whistle of the train at Kogarah or
Hurstville, and you know that as the crow flies you are not more
than half-a-dozen miles from the centre of the city. Have you ever
pulled up that George’s River ? Have you or you ? But the
question to ten thousand people in Sydney, and not ten shall answer
“Yes.” They know there is such a place as George’s River ; they have
heard that it comes past Liverpool; that it meets Botany
somewhere ; but that it is destined to become as well known and as
accessible as Lane Cove or Parramatta within a very few months—
they do not know that, and until they have seen, they will not believe it.
Winding here and there in serpentine course goes this River George,
the main river of out Cumberland county, carrying the fresh tides
inland, and meeting far inland, with a shudder of disgust surely, the
polluted stream which an important industry of Liverpool supplies.
Let us hope that the important industry, with all its nuisance, will be
sent down to the noxious trade reserve before long, and that the old river
may reclaim and maintain its original purity. And let there he more
than a passing thought with all those who have any real concern for
their own interest in or about Botany waters, or for the health of the
people who will shortly reside upon them, or for the beauty which
Nature bestowed upon the town. It is a vile and a horrid and
altogether unreasonable and abominable thing that even 20 miles of


progress should be stayed by the unspeakable nuisance caused by the
industry which, to enrich one man, and employ a couple of
may pollute and poison a beautiful river. It would be a proper thing
in the present—it will be an imperative thing in the near future —
to sweep every cause of pollution from the banks of the river to
enable the canoe to paddle upon its upper waters as comfortably as
the pleasure boat sails below.
It is not only George’s Elver that invites inspection from this gate-
way of the bridge. Into the left, then southward goes the little fairy
river Woronora, round by a mangrove swamp goes the channel and into
the heart of the bills. New water this, indeed, which be who would
see at its best, must take upon a pleasant October day, with a tide
which shall carry him up in the morning and drift him down in the after-
noon. That is the only easy, and therefore, to to the ordinary human
being, the only pleasant way, for to most folks surely there is abun-
dant labour in life without bending oars against an opposing current
for pastime sake. And those who are never happy unless in the
fierce contest with some opposing forces might do far better to go and
fight nature on the lower waters. All idlers, and lovers, and dreamers,
and painters, and poets, all rest seekers, all careworn toilers in dusty
ways of the city, should start with a flowing tide and drift round by
the mangrove flat, which marks the opening of the Woronora. Drift
leisurely, and look well at the mangroves; they are not common or
mean creatures. The strength of the sea is in their luxuriant growth,
and the shine of the sea upon all their upper leaves. In form they
are perfect; in colour they contrast most happily with the blue of the
water, and the dark greens, and greys, and russets of the shore. It
would he difficult to name their colour—green of course—but ask a
painter to define what green P M. Piguenit—in, perhaps, the best
picture of any living Sydney artist, which now hangs in the National
Gallery —has given his answer to the question—a sunset ebb tide
answer, where all light, life, and colour seem drifting out together


upon the ebb tide, till only the peace of night remains. Not thus
will you see those mangroves on the Woronora in the morning. They
are bright then as ever were laurel or bay. They shine with a more
vivid green than any other tree of the bush. Even pittisporum and
lily-pilly and young shoots of native fig, growing down on the rock
face a little further on, lack the burnish of the mangroves, whatever
they may possess in more tender hues and softer effect. Very still
becomes the water as you enter the hills; you feel the motion of the
tide which you cannot seey the light dip and slight touch of the oar
seems to have a marvellous effect, and the ever-varying shores glide
past, and how marvellously do they change. See, there is a little
gully, down which, if October showers have not been lacking, a little
stream trickles ; here, a waterfall; there, a rivulet; and farther amongst
obstructing rocks a mimic torrent or cascade.
There frowns a bold cliff wall, seen above the water and below, and
opposite, one of those strange Australian flats where the oaks wail,
and the rushes hiss, and the reeds rustle and rattle, and all sounds
blend to an indescribable melody, like the mother of all snakes
soothing her progeny to rest. Possibly she soothed them to death,
for I never saw a snake on the Woronora, the most formidable creature
being a great Jew lizard who looked as wicked as he was known to be
harmless.
Pulling along, beneath you goes the tide like the spirit who, some
fathoms deep, propelled the Ancient Mariner with all his spirit crew.
And past you go the hills, beaches, and the bold cliff fronts, and the
wooded vales, and the gullies with water and ferns, and quaint studies
of colour upon the lichen-covered rocks. Easily, lazily you drift till
noon, and then choose your dining - place, your resting - bower,
according to the desire of your heart. You may not find a bank
where the wild thyme blows, nor yet shall ox-slip or nodding violet
greet you, nor shall you be
“ Quite o’er canopied with bush woodbine,
With sweet wood roses and with eglantine.”


But whether it he mad Australian prejudice or true discrimination, I
care not to enquire. Tis true that to me there is no odour in all the
woods of England to equal the strong balsamic fragrance of the blos-
soming Australian busb; no canopy to excel that of the blooming wattle;
and no shade more grateful than that of the dense growing tig, or the
lily-pilly fragrant with bloom in October, as beautiful with wealth of
berries all shades, from snow-white to purple, in all the months of
winter. And for the Elora of the turf: Can English meadows or
woodland banks show any beauty to compare with our fringed violets ?
Or may we not for heaths challenge all the downs of Devonshire or the
highlands of Scotland ? Best amongst them then for a pleasant hour
or two; listen to the murmurous hum of the varied life of the bush,
punctuated at times by a little shrill plaint of some lonely bird ; and
when the tide has well turned, drift down again lazily, easily,
enjoying as ample a Sabbath as tired mind or wearied body could
desire.
So when the sun is very low* come out once more upon the broad,
new water, and see some notable effects of the alchemy of nature. The
solid pillars of the great bridge shall seem in some strange fashion
changed, as the hills seem molten in the marvellous depth of lucent
atmosphere which enfolds them. Where you saw the emerald or the
opal at their feet in the morning, it is now deepest indigo, and all the
mid-channel is sapphire engrained with gold. Boat sails are angel
wings in the sunlight, grey ghosts in the shade; and out on the broad
bay below they flit and fade, all passing homeward. You listen,
and there is thunder in the hills for a moment, and then a roar upon
the bridge that vibrates through all the water to the ocean and the
remotest river bends. Away through the hills goes the white pinion
of steam still lit by the glow which lingers in the upper air like some
guardian spirit of the fast and furious thing that thunders along
below. By the time its light is lost, all the world about you has but
two colours, two tones. There is indigo on the hills; there is grey


upon the water. Those colours that remain accompany you home
as the tone of a Gregorian chaunt. They accompany you out of the
church you have visited, they close your Sabbath, and they are at
last unfolded in the deep night through which comes the sound of
the lap of waters on inland rocks and beaches, and the distant roar
of the waves on the rocks of Kurnell or the long roll of the
on Corunulla Beach without the heads.


CHAPTER 'V.
THE NEW TOWNSHIPS.
SpHESE now townships may be said to begin on the eastern bank
of Cook’s River. Eollowing the Southern Railway line and
the Marrickville tram, the even tide of population pushed out
so far before the Illawarra line was begun ; and as the Western shores
of the river are fiat and dreary and not easy of satisfactory drainage,
the population which settled upon them was of the poorer order,
pitching their own poor cots upon the only bits of land accessible to
the scene of their labours, or renting the terraces put up by specula-
tors, whose thoughts did not go much beyond the Monday morning’s
collection. The poor man’s settlement drew a sort of bar across the
IllaAvarra country. People in search of sites for suburban homes
turned back from it and went away to Burwood, to Homebush, to Par-
ramatta, or some other locality—a solid hour’s journey from the city.
There was no knowledge of the advantages of that great expanse of
country, with George’s River to right and Cook’s River and all the
foreshore of the historic bay on its front. When Arncliffe began to be
advertised there was much puzzledom. “Where and what is Arncliffe ?”
asked many folks, who imagined they had done all that was possible


in securing a mean and meagre patch in some desolate area towards
Parramatta, and they were too frequently answered, “ Down amongst
the Botany swamps.” They did not know —they had not been taught —
that the swamps end absolutely with Cook’s Diver; that thencefor-
ward a pleasant country begins, flat at first, but healthily flat; flat of
a clear bright sand, with a fair slope to the sea, whose abundant tide
rises four or five feet perpendicular, scours all drainage away twice on
each day and night; and changing from flats to gently sloping
downs, or rising in places, as at Arncliffe, to a new, hold, sandstone
formation, with all its bright and healthy flower and forest growth.
Arncliffe is the first of these new suburbs, certainly not farther from
Sydney than Stanmore. A suburb first opened with a few scores
of houses dotted about, and acres upon acres of fine building
land lying vacant, all within a stone’s throw of the train.
It is difficult to discern that this country is more accesible to the
metropolis than those near and crowded townships on the lino
towards Parramatta. We only understand so much by studying the
two lines from some hill-top near to the city or by comparing the
actual time taken on the two journeys. If the latter course be
taken, Arncliffe, and any suburbs on the Illawarra line, will be found
to be nearer Sydney in the matter of time than stations corres-
pondingly distant on the old suburban line, for on this line there is,
as has already been mentioned, no great intercoloninl traffic to
contend with, no halting required while an express train in or out
rushes past. In years to come there may —there certainly will—he
excursions. Pull trains will push out to National Park and the glories
of the marvellous southern district upon all the sunny days of the
year, but what chance of enjoyment will these excursion routes open
to all permanent residents on the lines ? They will not he bothered
with any tedious journey to Sydney, with any troublesome change from
train to tram, and tram to boat. With the city extension completed,
they will be within a quarter of an hour of the heart of the city; with


the line opened to Illawarra, they will he not more than an hour from
a strip of country which all who have seen declares to be unexampled
for beauty in Australia. Any one of those townships will hye-and-hy e
he within an easy hour of Wollongong, of the marvellous
Illawarra country, unknown now because so jealously guarded by
the rugged mountain pass, and the difficult and dangerous sea
journey. And what a prospect is there ? Imagine a holiday where-
on, by eight in the morning, you should he landed amid all these rare
productions of the vegetable kingdom, which, in other countries, are
not produced except within the twenties north and south of Equator,
but here flourish most luxuriantly in 30 south. The gigantic lily
first; then the tall cabbage palm, at least a hundred feet in height;
the seaforthia elegans , with its cocoanut leaves, from which the natives
in old times used to make their buckets, and the very early farmers
their milk-pails and cream-pans; the cedar, red and white, the myrtle,
the sassafras, and the woodland beauty which seems impossible
to those familiar only with ordinary Australian vegetation. The
little man of Bottle Eorest is said also to haunt the same locality.
Well sheltered from south and westerly winds, this marvellous strip of
country has clothed itself with a wealth and grace of foliage, which,
contrasting with its green fields, bright bays, harbours, lakes, and
beaches, forms a picture indeed—a whole glorious gallery of pictures
which, hitherto, have never been unrolled to the multitude. It is
not, however, these distant pleasures which lend the chief attraction
to home. A man will hardly buy a garden plot for the blue mountain
which overtops it, or build a cottage for the pleasure of a charming
picnic once a year. We seek chiefly in establishing homes, the fresh
air, which we must breathe on every day; the pleasant walk we may
take on every evening; the beautiful play-grounds always accessible
to children; and the conveniences which do so much to lessen all the
trouble of life. If these can be found in these new suburbs, their
future is beyond doubt. It is not diflicult to find the fresh air now,


once upon these heights ; the smell and the sense of the city is lost i
and, rising higher and higher, we are conscious of larger, fuller
inhalations, as drawn from the broader, fairer prospect. Tor Arncliffe
is but at the foot of the rise, which attains a far superior height at
Rockdale, where the tram starts for that beautiful reserve of Lady
Robinson’s Beach, of which we shall have much more to say bye-
and-bye. Broad building lands lie George’s riverwards from Rockdale,
which, so far, have hardly been explored; square miles of country
which have already grown grapes and orchard fruit without end; which
have through decades been owned by old-fashioned people, living
in old-fashioned stone cottages ; far from the madding crowd ; far
as they deemed from the busy city ; awakened to the reaping of a
golden harvest by the appearance of the long-expected line. These
divided hoi dings, not, as we may hope, into insignificant patches, but
fair garden blocks, will shortly form some of the most pleasant suburbs
of the city. And right alongside the line runs similar country,
to Kogarah and to Hurstville ; fair hill sides, where any aspect may
be chosen, where sea air or landward breeze may be courted, and the
rising or the setting sun may be faced. Kogarah is destined perhaps
to become the commercial centre of this district, its railway station
standing upon the crown of a rise that overlooks the whole of the
bay, and commands all its points and beaches. Right down from
Kogarah lies Lady Robinson’s Beach, though Saywell’s tram for the
centre of that promenade starts from Rockdale. From Kogarah go
now the present ’bus routes, and must go the future tram routes to
Sandringham, Sans Souci, and Woniora; and within easy walking
distance lie at least a dozen estates already subdivided and to a large
extent sold, and within the fast-forming township not only villas and
cottage residences, but a branch of the Bank of Australasia and one
or two good stores are already seen. Hurstville, farther on, has
advantages of another sort, a greater retirement, easier access to more
secluded waters, and a larger area perhaps of country suited to


suburban settlement. At Hurstville is the subdivision of the City
and County Building Society, shortly to be sold—a beautiful
tract of country, with all the surroundings requisite for the formation
of beautiful homes. But Hurstville seems also to be the site of one
of those peculiar and inexplicable errors we occasionally see in the
railway construction of the colony. To Hurstville comes the double
line of railway from Sydney, but from Hurstville proceeds only the
single pair of rails. Now it is notdifhcult to understand why a double
line of road should be carried to Hurstville—Hurstville will certainly
within the present decade become a very considerable suburb. But
why did it change then ? Why not run right down to the water at
George’s Eiver, where most certainly another township and general
halting place will be required when once the line is so far opened ?
Hurstville is not a natural or proper terminus It differs in this
respect from Kogarah as from the township as yet unnamed, as
unformed, on the river’s bank. Kogarah as the terminus of at least
three tram lines, to be shortly constructed, would have been an
eminently suitable place for the double line to have made a tempo-
rary halt; but once beyond Kogarah, common sense and public
necessity seem to agree that no change should be made until the
bridge had been reached. Beyond Kogarah lies Peakhufst, and from
Peakhurst to George’s River a fair succession of rolling downs as land
auctioneer or surveyor could have desired. Some settlers of very old
times pitched their tents here, and relics of their encampment still
remain there, upon a patch of ground now owned by Mr. Sydney
Want, a fair site for country residence, or farm, or vineyard, or subdi-
vision into some scores of suburban homes as could be imagined, are
some blackened ruins and signs of a fierce fire. Ask how it occurred,
and the historians of the place will tell you, that in days gone bye
some bold bushranger made things hot and unpleasant thereabouts, and
the owner of the house valuing the deeds of his estate more than any-
thing else he possessed, hid them in the heart of the oak planted


years before, and grown to an ample bulk ; but one night the hut
took fire, and utterly demoralised by the incontinent Australian
climate the oak tree, and also the house, with the deeds by which it
was held, was burned. One, however, was in due course restored, and
the other remedied by a sensible Government, and so the estate passed
down to its present holder.
At the foot of the bridge, the top of that promontory called
Oatley’s Grant, there should, and some day there will be a
station, with the double line of rails running right through its
yard. And upon some near height above one of the little shining
beaches there will doubtless, on some near day, be one of those many
grand hotels which have so long been wanted in all Sydney’s more
attractive suburbs. Tor never was, and never will there be. a more
attractive site for a pleasant rather than popular suburb, than the
broad area fairly divided by the railway, known as Oatley’s Grant.
There are foreshores, with water about them, blue and deep as any in
Port Jackson, water which so far has escaped all pollution, and which,
with a little care, may be kept pure for all ages.
The waters of two rivers and of one great inland sea; the breezy
breadth below, the blue river, full twenty miles in length, above,
and the ever placid Woronora before. It is absurd to suppose
that the double line of railway can halt anywhere short of the water
gate which adds to all the charms of ordinary harbour environment
those of immediate proximity to still, river water, and public reserves
and broad, unoccupied forest lands, whose beauty increases with every
southward mile.


CHAPTER VI.
THE SOUTHERN SHORES.
|||pLONG all the southern shores of the hay, to the west of the
p||| Woronora river, lies the Holt-Sutherland estate, which, with
its two gates of Sylvania and Como invite the people of the
metropolis to a marvellous inheritance. A many years ago when
the Warren was a fair country residence, indeed, it may be
said, before the first foundation of the Warren had been laid,
this tract of country was held by the Hon. Thos. Holt, and
rather as an encumbrance than a source of profit. Mr. Holt
tried to breed sheep and grow wool upon it, but, without much
success; went from sheep to cattle, and, after many years of
unprofitable labour, came to the conclusion that the estate was
destined not to provide mutton or beef for the Sydney market,
but homes for the Sydney people. It was not a small idea, nor
calculated to enter easily into the mind of any man, and then take
such practical shape as to be ultimately evolved in a plan which
renders it easy for any man to secure the site at a home for himself
and the generation which will succeed him, without any inordinate


pressure, or crippling tax upon his present resources. Mr. Holt
projected the Holt-Sutherland Estate Company, and the system upon
which all that broad area will ultimately be settled. We are not
strictly concerned here with a history of the Company, or with any
eulogy of its efforts, which doubtless have followed as careful a study
of self-interest as those of any other intelligent and conscientious
capitalists who have suh-divided lands about Sydney; hut the
magnitude of their undertaking, and the breadth of opportunity it
offers, renders a little special notice essential to the completeness of
this book.
Como is the railway gate of this Estate. Como is situated just at
the junction of the Woronora and George’s River, fairly above an
inland-reaching hay, which in form and colour is by no means unlike
that fair Italian water after which it is named. A good deal of the
foreshore of this lake has been reserved, and a little hill also, from
which a fair view is obtained; and near to the beach and back from
the hill there are already signs of building. An hotel offers accommo-
dation, and one or two cottages show signs of future homes. Only the
beginnings ; the place was, and will be, practically inaccessible till the
railway bridge —now completed, and soon to be tested—is thrown
open. Then Como will be within ten miles of Sydney—somewhat
nearer than Granville. Yes, Sutherland will be at least as near as
Granville —Sutherland, which now we reach by a walk through the
bush or along the railway line, where the station-houses are already
building and the fetlers are putting the last touches to the ballast and
the rails. Even upon a hot summer’s day there is pleasure in this
woodland walk, so frequently are gullies crossed, covered with rich
o>rowth of vine and fern, and so often are wild flowers met with,
o
unfamiliar as welcome to those wdmse only bush travels are in and
about the well-plucked voodlands of the older suburbs or reserves.
Here in an hour you may gather a bunch of the famed fringed violets,
and if you desire to take them home to the city you must wrap them


in wet leaves or moss, for their dainty texture will endure but a very
brief space if subjected to any wind or beat. And somewhat more
robust than the violets, now in the Christmas time are plentiful enough
the gorgeous Christmas bells—bright crimson, with orange tips—and
the flannel flowers, everywhere abundant, but drooping slightly for
lack of more abundant rain; and always beside the springs or in any
patch of morass about a spring-head, is the crimson tuft of the bottle-
brush, and over all the crowns of the gums is that marvellous,
exceptional crown of bloom. You must not expect to see the
same show of bloom in every year. I have talked with many
an old resident who has known the forest for more than twenty
years, and can find no memory of any such gorgeous harvest
of gum tree bloom before. What is it ? —The welcome of the wood-
lands to the railway, and the people it brings, may we say ? Nobody
can deny the saying, for certainly it is one of the things which nobody
knows.
If walking beside the line on this southern route, he who hopes
to build in the future may note with pleasure and satisfaction
the solid stone which on every rise has been with difficulty hewn
through. No lack of building material here, though the Government
engineers have sought and found those of a cheaper sort near by, as
their brick kilns and station plans attest. Excepting the railway
buildings, there is yet no sign of building at Sutherland. The
primaeval forest seems pierced by the railway ; and it might almost be
supposed that when the tents of the men engaged in the work of
railway construction had been cleared away, the primaeval solitude
would return. But other expectations are evidently held by those
more immediately concerned, as the clearances on the old Illawarra
road, and the numerous sign posts of the various streets attest. It is
anticipated that a very considerable suburban village will, within a
few years, be established at Sutherland, and why not ? How long
should it take to cover thirteen miles upon a railway line ? Half-an-


hour should surely he a sufficient period. And who cannot afford
half-an-hour twice daily (less than the Waverly and Eandwick train
time, he it remembered !), to escape from the city to such fresh air and
fair surroundings as are found here ? Sutherland is on the heights
of a forest-covered hill, and all the southern woodlands and all the
northern land and water views, will be unfolded to its future
inhabitants. The Hacking Eiver at the National Park will he five
miles to the south; and Como will be backward just three miles
along the line; but pleasantest walk, or ride, or drive, of all to the
waters’ edge, will be down the broad avenue to Sylvania, opposite
Woniora. This splendid road runs two chains wide, from Sutherland
to the Botany waters, and along the greater part of this distance great
broad crowned gums have grown, and have been so left as to form a
natural avenue, to right and left of which branch the various streets,
none less than a chain in width, hounding allotments of a depth never
less than 250 feet. What pleasanter drive to Sydney can be imagined
than that from the Sutherland village ? Two miles by the Illawarra
avenue ; then the passage over by the steam punt, and the twelve
miles from Woniora, by all the new forming suburbs, and the constant
succession of magnificent views ? It is only too long for those to
whom time is a commodity of value ; only too short for those who
desire to reap all the pleasure which every opportunity affords.
Beyond Sutherland this broad estate stretches out to the boundary of
the National Park, with which it marches till the Hacking Elver, or,
rather, the tidal waters of Port Hacking make a broad division. It is
scarcely proper to deal with these waters here, or to touch upon that
broad, public inheritance which is in itself well worthy of a thick
book of description; but that it must be apparent to all how
peculiarly accessible are all its advantages to dwellers on this line.
An hour’s walk from Sutherland ; a half-hour’s ride from Oatley’s
grant, or Hurstville, or Kogarah, and there is the fairest reach of
inland water, and the most perfect fresh water giver which the


country about Sydney affords. There by the still, clear depths, the
cedar, the palm, the luxuriant festoons of tropical creepers, and the
broad wilderness which will lie preserved now and ever to the people of
the metropolis and colony. Eor about four miles the Holt-Sutherland
Estate marches with this park of the future, then takes the water for
a boundary, and ultimately the ocean and the sanitary belt, reserved
by the Government between the noxious trades reserve on Cape
Solander, and the population area. Its frontage on the Port Hacking
waters —except to some few adventurous spirits and lovers of beau-
tiful solitude—is so far a terra incognita , but there is near to that road
which leads down to Port Hacking a broad and beautiful country,
whose existence is not even suspected by any but the few who have
made it a matter of duty to become acquainted with whatever of
beautiful or fair surrounds their native city. It is the Old Earm,
a tract of country across the summits of two hills, standing south and
east from Cape Solander, and west of the Illawarra Boad. It was a
real farm in days gone by. In the year ’3B, by aid of Government
men, these hilltops were cleared and ploughed, and farms and stables,
and places of human abode were there ; but some way, in some
mysterious way—in accordance with the curse against agriculture,
which seems to have rested upon all the seaboard of the home country
of the colony—the old farm fell out of tillage and out of use; the
grass grew upon the furrows, and the wattles upon the fallows ; and
all around, the ironbarks, freed from the rivalry of neighbours, shot
up loftier trunks and spread broader crowns. And by degrees the
furrows were filled; and the fallows became breadths of splendid
sward; and the wattles grew from low bushes to great shady trees,
filling all the air with perfume whenever their blossoms were spread;
so that now the old farm is the most delightful park upon which the
eye can rest in or about any suburb of Sydney- the ideal place for
picnics, shady as Epping Eorest or Bushy Park, and with an outlook
whose beauty and variety can well be imagined when it is stated that


these hills overlook all neighbours. Their northern slopes drain to the
Bay, their southern to Port Hacking ; and southward from them but
two or three miles is the picturesque Dent Creek, far down in which the
boring for coal proceeds, and will continue till the plain teachings of
geology assert that further search is useless. Down on the shores of
the bay, right below the old farm, is a broad strip of foreshore
reserved by Mr. P. S. E. Holt around his present residence of
Sutherland House, A test has here been given to the present
capabilities of the land for crop-bearing. A paddock of five acres was
cleared on the edge of one of the swamps, and ploughed, and sown
with oats; the result being a hay crop of two-and-a-half tons to the
acre.


CHAPTER VII.
PUBLIC PARKS AND PLEASURE GROUNDS.
■®OTANY in the course of a very few years will possess the finest
park, promenade, boulevard, and marine parade in Australia.
What a rash assertion it seems! What can the man he
thinking of who makes such a confession of ignorance ? Does
he know nothing of Sydney Domain; of Hyde and Moore
Parks; of Boyal Park, Melbourne ? "Where is there anything
amongst the scrub and mud of Botany to compare with these. We
must go and look if we desire to know, for we shall learn very little
indeed from columns of notices in Government Gazettes , dealing with
acres, links, chains, and various magnetic hearings. We must go and
look carefully, and with one who has already studied the matter, who
can set us upon a hill and show us all the possibilities, if not all
the glories beneath; who can paint for ns the Scarborough and the
Brighton, and the honlevarde, and the beach that will be.
Take your station then upon one of the heights of Bockdale or
Kogarah, as yon please, choose a good height —and you may choose
from amongst many —and look down below where the sea roads rim


through the hush, and the green trees fringe the beach. If on Rock-
dale, the tramway will he right beneath you ; and a couple of miles
off you will see a road running down from the Kogarah township to
Sandringham. Between the Sandringham road and the Rockdale
tram is a broad area of country, covered with a fairly dense forest
groAvth, with clearing here and there marking far-out suburban homes
or market gardens. Eairly in the centre of this area a greener patch
of denser growth with signs of water in the centre : That is the site of
the future Scarborough Park. In and about the centre was in old
time a swamp, marked on Government maps as of no value. Some
far-seeing man, however, with a good knowledge of the locality and a
strong belief in its future, saw an especial value in thit swamp, and
thus applied to the Minister for Lands that with some surrounding
country, it might be dedicated to the public service. Mr. Garrett was
Minister for Lands at the time, and he, with his characteristic
astuteness resolved, that if Government did so much, private land-
owners should do a little more. He therefore stipulated that,
Government agreeing to resume certain areas, and to dedicate others
not yet alienated, the Hon. Thomas Holt should surrender to the
public certain lands held by him adjacent to the proposed park. The
condition was somewhat onerous, but to Mr. Holt’s lasting honour, be
it recorded, he at once accepted it, surrendered his freehold, and thus
enabled the trustees to secure and proceed with the formation of the
park. How well they worked in the reclamation of that original
wilderness, a little perception will show, hut with that we are not
immediately concerned. It is enough just now to tell the tale of the
dedication of the park; to fix the fact of the existence of the park in
the public mind, and then to proceed to further description. The
park was about half-a-mile from the beach. There should be a broad
boulevard leading to the beach. There shall he! said Mr. Holt,
proprietor of the intervening land, and forthwith surveyed and set
apart a three-chain road. A three-chain road from the Scarborough


Park to Lady Robinson’s Beach. “ The Seven-mile Beach,” it was
called, and a fair seven miles it extended from Rocky Point to Webb’s
grant. But of what use was or could it be when one man
ran his fence down to high water-mark and another reserved
a dozen chains of frontage for the use of as many tenants. There
could he no public drive or walk there—no pleasure-ground for the
people worthy of the name. The beach, and a good strip of the land
adjoining the beach, ought to he reserved in the public interest. This
was the idea which occurred naturally to any man who concerned
himself at all with the public weal, and the idea not only occurred
to Mr. Samuel Cook, but received his prompt and practical attention.
He took the idea in, and entertained it with thoughtful attention.
He dressed it in proper form, and presented it to the Minister for
Lands, at that time Mr. J. S. Parnell, and that gentleman at once
saw that it should he acted upon. In the very last days of his late
administration he wrote a minute expressing his opinion that the
reservation and dedication requested should be granted. Mr. Abbott,
succeeding him, endorsed his action, and thus the resumption and
reservation were ordered, and the grand fact accomplished; and,
Avrote Mr. Abbott, “in notifying the park, it is to be called Cook
Park, after Mr. Samuel Cook, who was the first person to ask for
it, and doing so has rendered good service to the colony, and more
especially to the people of Sydney and the suburbs,” which also will
he generally and heartily endorsed by those to whom the park is
given.
Thus the most perfect park was obtained; and now, to justify
the term perfection, we will jump five years, and endeavour to realise
the park that will he. Pive years hence will bring us to 1890, and,
as we may suppose, to the last year of the governorship of Lord
Carington. We shall have passed over the great centennial celebra-
tion by that time; we shall have begun to render our agricultural and
pastoral prosperity more certain by the great work of water-conservation


and irrigation which we now contemplate; we shall have passed the
threshold of a great and permanent prosjjerity, shall have become men in
the broadest sense, and have put away the childish things which now
cumber and vex us, the antediluvian wrecks who essay to still hold the
reins of Government, and the jejune aspirants who vainly seek to grasp
them; we shall have become fit people for the enjoyment of our broad
inheritance. And we shall be prepared to enter into our portion of that
inheritance which by that time will be just about complete. We will
imagine a day in the year of 1890, whereon the trustees of tbe Cook and
the Scarborough parks, have sent an invitation to the Governor to be
present at the formal opening of a temple upon the central island of
Scarborough Lake. His Excellency accepts. His Excellency proceeds*
The four bays quit Government house, with the outsiders in advance,
and followed by other bays and greys, and drags and coaches rattle
over all the wood-paved streets and the asphalt or tarred metal
which covers the whole breadth of the country road; past Arncliffe,
which but for its superior architecture and broader breathing spaces,
might well pass for the Ashfield of to-day; past Rockdale, whose
residents fill regular trams, running to and from the beach ; past
Kogarah, a city with suburbs of its own stretching from George’s
river to the sea, and down through the broad avenue to the park. A
splendid stone archway opens to the park, gift of a resident who
appreciated its pleasures and blessings; and through the gate, the
avenue continues still, with grassy lawns on either side to an open
space fronting the lake. The lake is not very broad or deep,
and is spanned in a dozen places where points of the island
approach the shore, with light rustic bridges leading to the narrow
entrances of the pagodah, the triumph of art and pleasure. There are
a dozen courts to the temple, beneath whose central dome, beside an
ever flashing fountain, a band plays. East and West are open courts
where a thousand people may dance. North and South entrances,
through passages carefully curtained and guarded, galleries of art


pictures of all the scenery of Australia, interspersed with decorations
and purchases from other lands; statuary and all manner of quaint
carving, fabrics of all kinds—results of Australian looms ; of all
things, in fact, that the cultured eye desires to see,or tbe reasonable mind
to understand. In various little nooks and corners, alcoves and bowers,
are specimens of the flora and fauna of Australia. Here, with abundant
light from above,and no chance of approach of any cold wind, great lilies
and orchids from Clarence and Pichmond rivers. There, upon a bed
of mountain soil, cooled by the mimic glacier near by, edelwiess and
mountain lily. Some relics and mementoes of the poor blacks, in another
place, and upon a broad platform the anchor of the old '‘Endeavour,”
with Captain Cook in marble above. Easy enough to imagine such a
place if natural instincts and teachings be only followed, and easier
still perhaps to imagine the opening ceremony, and the further pro-
cession by the boulevard to the beach, and the marine promenade.
Scarborough, with every street an avenue, with every house set in a
garden, with every garden abloom with roses, and pansies, and pinks.
And then the well-formed drive, and the well-kept walk by village,
and garden, and mansion, by all the long curves of the bay. Then,
close beside the tramway, propelled b electric motors, with
cushioned seats, and cars planned to keep out both sun and rain, the
village of New Brighton. A subdivision only, we know it now, a
liberally planned, excellent building place, looking straight
out to sea, with the tram close alongside, and the white beach close
before, and an unimpeded view through the distant heads to the
ocean ; with the baths rapidly progressing, inviting to a safe morning
plunge in the fresh strong brine. But accompanying his Excellency
what do we see. A hundred villas, where are now a thousand
pegs, a hundred houses, bedecked with flags and streamers in
honor of the great occasion. Ten thousand people on the beach,
and ten thousand more lining the road, as bays and greys and coach
and carriage rattle along, and Excellencies bow right and left, and


Mayor and Aldermen and Ministers and Members smile broadly on all.
Through the trees, beside the beach and the sea, can we not imagine
the merry procession coming and going, and then —our good custom
having suffered no change —the gathering around the festive board,
and His Excellency’s kindly congratulations upon all that has been
accomplished and bestowed. Taught by his experience of climate and
the wants and wishes it breeds, I imagine His Excellency would wax
eloquent over the careful provision which had been made in the way
of bathing accommodation; the good secure baths of the present
extended to a twenty-acre space staked in, where men and women and
children may revel through all the hot summer in simple, natural joy;
the broad, free gardens—shady and cool by day, brilliantly illuminated
by night; the wise and requisite, though stern law, which renders
any outrage of the established order, any offence which we should now
term larrikinism, as grave a crime as forgery or burglary ; the
evening, the holiday, the Sunday liberty and opportunity, which leave
no honest natural want of any dweller in any adjacent suburb without
full and fair means of satisfaction. “ These are things,” His Excellency
might well say, which, more than cell, or lash, or scaffold, and scarcely
less than school and church, tend to maintain amongst a people body
and mind sound and pure, and these with full joy and most cordial
congratulations and honest wishes for perpetual maintenance, I
dedicate now and for ever to the people who live and enjoy life to
the full upon the shores of Botany Bay.
It is easier though to dream about the future than to plan and to
work for it, and present inspection shows no less how much is to be
done, than how much may be enjoyed. The broad, fine beach is
thrown open to all now, and the tram runs down to the beach from
the station in quick time, and with ease, comfoit, and cheapness , and
the baths arc preparing fast as man-power and steam-power can give
them shape ; and there is ample shade in the unfenced forest; and as
lovely a sea-side walk as could be desired along the beach. It is only


the advance of the multitudes thaPwill enable the larger projects to he
completed, and how rapid is that approach all who have eves, and use
them, may see, and all who have ears, and do not close them, may hear.
There is another park at Botany not yet dedicated, though most
surely to be demanded, and in such a manner as not to brook denial
by the people of the city. It is the present water reserve —all
that wilderness lying round about the various dams between
Bandwick and the beach. It is high time that reserve was handed
over to trustees on behalf of the people; high time that the tempta-
tion to any hard-pushed Government to purchase temporary relief by
its alienation was removed. Often, surely, I and you, and all who
look into the future with any large hope, must have had a dream
which indeed is not, and must not, be all a dream, of that future park,
which is in some way connected with the great Centennial Exhibition.
There is but one place in or about the city for that exhibition
building, which is the heights of Waverley, the dividing ridge
of the Botany and Port Jackson watersheds, overlooking all the
city and all its reserves, and, most particularly and immediately,
that reserve of Botany now dedicated to the conservation of those
swamps and ponds which supply the city’s water. In between that
all-commanding hill and the flat, which is public estate, there is a
gulf of private property fixed, which could not well be passed with-
out such an act of arbitrary power or private beneficence as can
hardly be contemplated or expected. True, the public spirit exhibited
by Mr. Holt, at Scarborough, might be emulated by Messrs. Cooper
at the water reserve, but it is not one of the things to be reckoned
upon. We may hope for it, but we must prepare to manage without
it. We shall doubtless find good roads through the gulf, and, having
dedicated, may well begin to work upon the public freehold beyond.
But how can we work without a plan, and what should the plan be
but a maintenance of all that can be kept of the present natural
beauty—a transformation of swamps and ponds into lakes, of cattle


tracks into carriage drives, of low flats into meadows or cricket
grounds, of preservation of all shade and all pleasant life of bird
and beast, of banishment of all noxious reptiles, of steady progression
towards the formation of such a health and pleasure ground as the
city of a million inhabitants will require ? That must be Sydney’s
great park of the future—a proper continuation of the rifle reserve,
the cricket grounds, and Moore Park—a great, open lung, in fact,
whereby pure air may be drawn into all the arteries of the city from
the open sea. It is but three years to centennial time. Surely it is
time, if we have any earnest interest in the matter, that we began
centennial work; at least, we might begin the only sure foundation
by the dedication of the grounds.
The Sir Joseph Banks Hotel may as fairly be termed the pioneer
of rational, natural, legitimate amusement about the bay, as is the far-
famed man whose name it bears, the father of the science of botany
in the colony and continent. In many respects this establishment is
in advance of any other hotel in the country. It has a garden, just a
simple matter surely ; but in such a climate as this, what an im-
portant matter and how generally neglected ! And further, this
garden is such as suits the country well, gracious with green lawns,
grateful with shady bowers, ample for promenade, and with seclusion
enough for rest —quite away from all the roar of the town and near to
the lap of the waters seen beyond the dark green of the trees. Adjoin-
ing the garden are broad spaces of pleasure grounds, which may well be
termed parks, covered with the fine, green, native grasses peculiar
to the district, or the thick, soft buffalo, shaded by gums, which doubt-
less seemed pleasant trees in the days when Captain Cook first
landed, or figs and pines which Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander
might have planted. The main front of the new hotel looks
direct upon one of these park-like spaces, while its backward balconies
overlook the the well-known garden, the broad bay, and the Pacific
beyond. This new hotel, but recently completed, is of the style we


have long desired to see at the watering places of Sydney—a really
good, luxurious, and well-appointed building, where comfort is
secure, and even the most fastidious taste may obtain satisfaction. It
is, doubtless, the first of the new houses which will bye-and-bye sur-
round the bay. But whatever of luxury and comfort may be provided
within, the larger pleasures of the Sir Joseph Banks will always be
found without —in the gardens, grounds, and pavilions, with their
many means of diversion. It is there that the true, and at times
daring, pioneering work has been done, most notably in the inaugura-
tion and establishment of those Sunday afternoon concerts which have
most certainly supplied a want, and more, opened a gate to national
enjoyment, thoroughly consistent with the natural teaching of our
semi-tropical climate. There were many angry murmers when these
concerts were first begun, and not a few threats of summary suppression,
but they have continue 1 for years now, their popularity constantly
increases, and their offence against a proper order is with the things
yet to be discovered. There is much hope from a successful inaugura-
tion as this in our peculiar city. It is earnest, surely, of a time when
we shall follow the simple commandments of God as written clearly
and deeply enough in natural desires and climatic influences, but too
often rendered of no avail by reason of the abitrary sway of inherited
tradition. Sunday concerts at Botany will, doubtless, seem very small
when we have concerts in every public garden on Sunday afternoon,
and every week-day evening; music taking the place of violent abuse,
or at best, senseless declamation, lager beer of bad grog, and full
enjoyment of ineffectual restraint; but still we shall always think
kindly of them as a beginning. The business of providing the
entertainment proper to Sydney has been carried nearer
perfection at this than in any other suburb. The gardens and grounds
favour the out-door entertainment, and pavilions have been erected
sufficient for the accommodation of any multitude. It is no unusual
thing to see from four hundred to a thousand people seated here with


a dinner of eight courses before them, and afterwards to find them
spread over all the grounds ; here, a worshipful mayor and a portly
alderman riding on the toy railway; there, a half-dozen venerable
senators exerting themselves at quoits ; wise folk stretched upon the
grass beneath the trees ; young folks dancing vigorously; and enthu-
siastic sportsmen fishing from the pier, or strolling round by that
very pleasant four-mile walk to La Perouse, or looking pensively
across to the monument and the pines upon the farther shore. Variety
of amusement is seen ; even if there be no foot-races upon that
particular day. Foot-races, it may be said, have recently become a
specialty of the Sir Joseph Banks, a perfect course being provided
for the competitors, and a good stand for spectators, which,
with higher prizes than are usually given for this class of sport,
bring together such a crowd of athletes as are very rarely
seen in Australia or elsewhere. Looking right out from the
balconies of this new hotel, recently built upon this old site,
we have a near and pleasant view of La Perouse, a broad green
plateau, with trees arranged pleasantly for shade, now luckily held by
the State for customs and telegraphic and defence purposes, hut
ultimately, with some additions, to become one more public park.
The South Head, Kurnell, is also reserved, hut not for a park ; that is
destined to become the home of industry, the scene of all these
elaborate manufactures, which in or near a crowded city become
noxious trades. Nearer, however, in that southern view, is the long
white beach before mentioned, with the swimming baths slowly
pushing out to deep water, and a little farther the pleasant and still
secluded hotel of Sandringham, with its own grounds, and practically
its own water. Sans Souci, a little farther, a very pleasant point,
which has not yet received the full development of which it is
capable ; and then Woniora, the bold point which marks the
division of the bay from the estuary of the river. Woniora
is also a public pleasure ground, with ample opportunities


peculiarly its own. It may lack the invitation to doles far nienet
so pleasantly felt at Sir Joseph Banks, for it is a place of
hold Welter, of rugged cliffs, somewhat grand in its own bluff intrusion
into the bay, and commanding views of greater breadth and equal beauty
to anything in Sydney Harbour. Boats are here, and oysters and fishing
and camping places enough. Then, further, it is hut an easy quarter
hour pull into George’s River, whose beauties we have already explored,
and the steam ferry runs constantly to the opposite point of Sylvania,
keeping open way to all the country between the bay and the Hacking
River. Woniora is the proper headquarters for all explorers in that
direction, and as comfortable quarters as explorers or residents could
desire. In some fashion it has always been connected with the oyster
fishing, its present proprietor being a well known oyster merchant of
the city, and oysters fresh from the brine, with all the piquancy
and delicacy of their original condition, are served at call in
its many little arbours and pavilions overlooking the upper waters of
the bay. Holiday people, who have studied all resources of holiday
amusement, know Woniora well; and those who look for a little fresh
ocean air, or good fishing or boating, apart from the crowd, find full
opportunity If they establish themselves for a week in this newly-
erected hotel. Little by little we advance towards perfection in all these
hotels, Woniora leading the way in the matter of bathing, salt water
baths being provided within the house, good comfortable baths where
the fresh sea bubbles up from beneath, and the clear rain water
plashes down from above as desired. All the broad area on this long,
fair point, the pleaure grounds visitors know so well, are the property
of the Sydney Permanent Freehold Land and Building Society, and
will very shortly he sub-divided into large building sites and offered
for sale, affording opportunities for home-making such are not often
found now-a-days in any suburb of Sydney.
Other pleasure grounds about the bay do not at present call for
special notice, though patches here and there and broad tracts yet to


be resumed or reserved, will in a near future become beautiful and
prominent. At present the bush hides them, the great, wild, fast-
disappearing bush which, while yet it remains, is, to those whose
ordinary life is in the city, the most desirable pleasure ground of all.


CHAPTER VIII.
FISH AND FISHERMEN.
■IOTANY BAY was noted for fishing from time immemorial.
The blackfellows prized its opportunities so highly that they
A" 9 built something like a village, and dwelt there, generation after
generation, catching schnapper off La Pereuse, and whiting and
flathead about the silver sanded beaches. Captain Cook’s men fished
also, and with such abundant success that, but for the botanists on
board, and the successful search after new plants, the place had doubt-
less got the name —Great Pish Harbour. Then came the First Fleet,
who also had abundant sport during their temporary stay; and the
Frenchmen who made a sort of miraculous draught off Kurnell. Those
were the days when the schnapper were termed Light Horsemen, from
their helmet-shaped head, when the flathead was despised some-
what—by reason of his venomous looking head, and uncanny tail,
when the harvest of fish looked much more promising than either
wheat or wool, and Mr. Banks, not yet made Sir Joseph, was accus-
tomed to counsel all colonists and colonial governors to stick
fast to the things they had if they really desired to do well, and to
quit all fantastic dreaming of growing wool in a country where such


a thing was too absurd to be seriously entertained by sensible men,
or cultivating wheat largely when it could be much better imported
from the Cape, or from Europe, in exchange for the whale and seal
oil, and the cargoes of dried fish. Mr. Banks bad doubtless seen
great whales spouting fairly within the Heads, and seals in abundance
upon Corunulla Beach, where even now they are occasional visitors;
and though, beyond all doubt, a most excellent governor of the royal
demesne of Kew, we may be thankful perhaps that he always con-
sidered the Governor-Generalship of the colony as just a little beneath
him.
Very early, indeed, a race of wdiite fishermen began to settle
upon the bay, building their huts, where some of them still remain,
in the fishermen’s village, and carrying their baskets over to the
settlement, whose outermost limits were then about Prince Alfred
Park; and more than fourscore years ago probably the beginning
of that village was made, which is to-day utterly unlike any-
thing else in the colony or continent. The site is romantic;
just seaward of the great dam of the waterworks, and south
of the Sandgate estate, which lies upon the high, healthy ground
adjacent to Botany proper, is a low Dutch-like fiat, with tall oaks
overlooking the mangroves which grow in the tidal creek a hundred
yards from the shore Little coves and creeks run in here through
the mangroves and oaks ; and up them on the full tide the boats are
drawn, the cargoes landed, and the nets spread to dry upon the grassy
plots alongside. Here upon a Saturday afternoon or Sunday morning
a dozen boats may be seen, and twice that number of men lounging
about in true fisherman style. Men and boats as houses and villages
alike different to anything you are familiar with in colonial life.
Men though each and all now of the second colonial generation, with
nothing colonial about them, no red sashes, or cabbage-tree hats, or
befrosjsed coats, or hammer-heeled boots ; but big, brown, brawny
uu '
fellows, with the strong, salt brine worked into their faces and hands


and chests, so deeply that no process of washing or bleaching could
bring them again to an ordinary white man’s colour. Not men,
as you would judge, with any particular love for fresh water
or soap, however plentifully washed by the waves, ruddy and
rugged and rude on the surface, as honest and brave, and true within,
according to their own ideas. Singular in their ideas of course, you
must not judge them now by ordinary standards, you must consider
their education, and the moulds in which their minds and bodies have
been formed. I note now one such man, as I have not before seen in
Sydney, camped by his net on the southernmost street of the village.
The patch upon which he lies is probably a fragment of one of Captain
Cook’s meadows, and the long, broad, smooth grassy street is another
strip, the creek beside the dam is near dry, for it is low water,
and down its long channel is an indiscriminate collection of
broken crocks and cracked pots, and other debris, the waste of
the life of the village, or the jetsam of the sea. It is a creek
where anything might come to sight, a dead dog or a dead Quilp,
an oozy, sludgy, unhealthy looking place, as the doctors would say,
hut with no power whatever upon the people round about; none,
certainly upon the old dame who sits with eighty years upon
her shoulders by the cottage porch, nor yet upon the mariner
who lies beneath the oak upon the grass. He is fifty perhaps, the
result of fifty years of Botany life—a study in iron-grey and red and
brown. He has not many clothes, and they have not much colour*
all of a decided neutral tint; a pair of old slippers are hung upon his
toes, not that he requires them for ordinary use, but that civilization
scatters broken bottles and nails and other things dangerous and sharp
about, against which the best tanned human hide is too soft and thin.
Except by the sea it would he unwise to say where either the man or
his clothes were washed. He is thoroughly pickled by the sea ?
redolent of the sea and the fish. He will talk with you beneath the
oak there as long as you please. He was horn there ; he remembers


the time when the sea was as full of fish as the land was empty of
people. But he was not one of the first. All the fishermen died
out. Puckeridge—the name still lives there —was the last; he died a
few months ago, and he had lived on the hay for eighty years. What
killed him ? Old age killed him of course; old age kills all the
fishermen, unless they get had luck in the boats. And
is there much had luck? “Not much; the boats are good, and
we understand them. Potter had an accident a good many years ago
(you can’t always jibe safe in a gale), and Bandy Peter, his boat
went over, hut he stuck to the keel all night. And then, only a
month or two ago, Johnny Bucket got drowned, but he must have
got a crack on the head, or otherwise the hay never held water enough
to drown him.” Johnny was a hlackfellow. You feel that fishing for
adventure is tedious and slow work; all you get from the ancient
mariner is some bait, which may he used on another occasion. But
if you want to understand the real fishing life—the work that heats
that hard and healthful colour into cheeks and chest—take a turn with
some good fisherman when he makes down to a southerly ground, —
for schnapper to the Bumhorah, just south of Hacking Heads
or to Wattamola, or Wollongong, for they work right down that
coast at times, lie out there all night, or drift along by the long
roll or the back wash from the cliffs, the great, black seas heaving
beneath you, the huge cliff front handed with foam beside,
and red and green lights of passing ships rising and falling
upon the waves at sea. It is then that you begin to learn
something of the influences which keep a broad and unpolluted
manhood strong in these men. They arc bent on catching fish, of
course, and a very serious and solemn business they understand the
catching of fish to be. You may smoke and think, but you must not
talk, and if you get five hundredweight of schnapper in the bottom of
the boat you may up sail with the first puff of wind at dawning and
make for the hay. Only five days out of six the strong wind of the


day is the nor’-easter, and the nor’-easter, if it blows stiff, is a wet
wind, and you must thrash right up against it hour after hour. You
will be cold enough, even upon a bright December day, when all the
broken caps of the waves come on board, hitting you in the
side or back at times with flail-like strokes, working into you
until you feel that if you should die on reaching port no process
of embalming would be necessary for preservation. Hour after
hour you work thus, from morn to weary night, if you have
gone thirty miles down the coast, drinking in enough of the “ strong,
salt brine,” to satisfy a crew of Swinborne’s, and baling out enough
to bathe a city. A good deal will certainly come into the boat, no
matter how well she rides ; and a Botany fisherman will never put to
sea a second time in a boat with even the slightest tendency to bury
her nose. Hence you may be very sure that all well-used boats are
good. How good you will better understand if you see them turn out
for a race—such a race as that which last Prince of Wales’ Birthday saw
—a different affair altogether to the thoroughbred race in Port
Jackson waters. Every boat entered here must be earning a living for
her owner; he runs with the same brown sails he uses in fishing, and
he heats into or drives before the gale, over the big waves which any
fresh breeze raises upon the broader waters of the bay. There is no
gliding over sapphire seas, or seas at rest here. They all lie inland
from Woniora, up the rivers and creeks. Knowledge, pluck,
skill, hardihood, are essentials in the race on the bay, and these
are all found amongst the fishermen crews. If you could make a
muster of all these fellows, you would be lost in wonderment at any
scarcity of fish in the Sydney market. They seem fit to fill the
market every day in the week, but they lack unity. They have a
score of ordinary fishing boats, each with a perfect crew, but they
make no progress in union or amalgamation. One night out is quite
enough in an open boat, and so well are all the fishing-grounds anywhere
near Sydney harbour gates worked, that this one night out will not


always secure a haul. Bigger boats, larger crews are wanted, and
thoroughly organised work upon the larger, better grounds farther
afield. All the muscle and technical knowledge requisite for a
successful fishing company is to he found at Botany; whether they
can he wedded with capital and worked under control is a question
which some adventurous organiser must attempt to answer.
A very patient and well-organised and at last successful effort
at one style of fishing has been made by Mr. Holt in the long half-
tidal bays adjacent to Sutherland House. This is in oyster cultivation,
a business which, though new to Australia, has long been followed in
England and America.
Mr. Holt began this work years ago in a thorough and scientific
fashion, sinking oyster claires in the flat lands of his estate adjoining
the tidal reaches of Gawley Bay, and planting there all small oysters
dredged up by fishermen, or procured by his own men specially
employed to gather seed. The planting did not yield immediate
results, but was continued all around the shores and in the shallow
waters of the bay. Millions are there now drifting about in the mud,
or moored to the dead timber which is plentifully distributed all over
the beach, and slowly they develop and fatten, and are at length
gathered for the market. Very different oysters these to the sweet but
scant morsels gathered from the rocks. They have all been down three
years; they have developed marvellously in those quiet mud
pastures, where, without dread of stingaree or star fish, each can
put out his head and take in material for formation of
either shell or body. He does not however run to shell as on
the rock, he becomes like the English native fat and indolent,
household cares do not trouble him, he takes his ease through his
comfortable life, and comes to table a well-conditioned aristocrat. In
years to come, possibly Gawley Bay oysters may be as well known in
Sydney as Whitstable natives in London. Certainly there will be
demands for cultivated oysters in a very near future, for we are


stripping away the true natives by miles in every year. How difficult
it is for any pic-nicers now to find a patch of rock, which will supply
their wants, anywhere about Sydney Harbour, and even in Botany and
far np George’s Biver, since the formation of navvies’ camps, it is by
no means easy to till a basket, Mr. Holt is only a pioneer in this tilth
of the broad sea fields, but he has begun so early and so well that he
may have reasonable hope of a constant and lucrative harvest, when
others are but putting down seed.


CHAPTER IX.
SOME INDUSTRIES OF BOTANY,
|j|F, in very early years, it had been resolved to tap the rivers rather
Ip than drain the swamps and sand-hills for the supply of Sydney,
# Botany would have become, ere this, a great manufactory only,
a true noxious trade site probably, a scene of fell-mongering, and
tanning, and boiling down, and meat preserving, a place for the
rendering and utilising of all the offal of the City, and also for the
deposit of the rubbish and refuse of the City; and for the growth of
vegetables under Chinese superintendence, which would not perhaps
have satisfied the scrutiny of the scrupulous. We were saved from
such an undesirable lot by the water reserves, which rescued an area
of 1600 acres against any possibility of pollution, and caused
a careful watch to be kept on all the surrounding country.
Nevertheless, certain industries did establish themselves, and have
grown and flourished, and generally without much nuisance. One
O
whose offence was beyond doubt was removed, others, by careful
management, have kept themselves in every sense clean, and others
ao-ain are clean in their nature, and under proper management could
be conducted in the very heart of the city. Chief perhaps amongst


the more elaborate manufactories are the N.S.W. Shale Oil Works,
which are on the Waterloo side of Botany proper, the meat preserving
and wool scouring of Messrs. Walsh, Elliott, and Rennie, and the
manufactories of bricks and tiles which are still carried on ; but next
to the waterworks, whose importance cannot be over estimated, the
great works of the Botany districts are the wool-scouring establish-
ments of Messrs. J. H. Geddes and Co We may glance first at the
waterworks, a marvellous example of adaptive genius, under peculiar
circumstances. An ordinary hydraulic engineer would laugh at the
idea of such a watershed as lies between Rand wick and Botany,
supplying such a city as Sydney with all the water necessary
for domestic use and manufacturing purposes, and after a
glance at the works would ask how many days the ponds visible would
stand the drain. And indeed the way in which the drain is maintained
may fairly be described as marvellous. You may form a fair idea of
it by taking a bird’s eye view of the city, and realising the marvellous
reticulation, and the innumerable streams of ever running water, but
it is not properly understood until the works are inspected, the two
huge pumps making their regular strokes, each lifting, with every
pulse, 144 gallons of water, and never ceasing day or night, Sunday
or weekday. They throw an average of nearly six millions a day
into the city, and still the lagoon holds out. The engineer loots at it
at times with fear and trembling, knowing that no single drop has
passed over the waste weir for more than ten years, and doubting if
the sand sponge, which looks so dry on the surface, will not begin to
show symptoms of drying all through, before the Nepean water flows
in. The preliminary stream from the Nepean is now, however, very
close, and the great dam, which is to store supplies for the main scheme,
slowly approaches completion.
Down here, amongst these luxuriant swamps, it is easy to
enlarge upon the idea already mooted of transforming the water
reserves into pleasure grounds, easy to glance across to that insignifi-


cant Billy Goat swamp, already transformed into an altogether in-
adequate zoological garden, and to imagine what lakes for the swans,
what parks for deer and buffaloes we might have here; with, possibly,
a new idea in the shape of an actual jungle patch fenced in for the
tigers. These, however, are not manufactures. There is a manufac-
turing work going on across that estuary of Cook’s River. The
syphon sewer, which is presently to drain all the southern
suburbs, is in construction there. Another costly and foolish
mistake : the working out of an idea conceived more than ten years
ago in utter ignorance of the marvellous suburban expansion which
has since taken place. Webb’s grant, the Southern head of Cook’s
River is the place of deposit for this system. Poor old Cook’s River,
that nature made so beautiful, and man has resolved to so
constantly pollute, and mar and spoil.
But we must turn to the other main water using works, which
fairly divide with the city the drainage of the watershed, which in the
beginning might all have been reserved. There are the wool scouring
works of Messrs. J. H. Geddes & Co., beginning at Waterloo Mills,
by old Waterloo House, and extending to Spring Vale, close down on
the beach at the tram terminus. There is a good deal of peculiar
history about these old Waterloo Mills. A Cooper of three generations
back, and a Levy, uncle of the late Montague Levy, started here to
grind wheat, and supply flour to this colony in the days when the
county of Cumberland was fertile and free of rust. This was as far
back as the twenties, for about 1830 we find woollen and blanket
manufactories, though generally unsuccessful, at Waterloo ; and in
the year 1834 Mr. Thos. Buckland shifting the woollen machinery
and setting up the mill-stones again, which ran merrily
and profitably enough until 1850, when the work of wool-
scouring began. Por wool-scouring, as distinctly apart from
fellmongery, the works are used now, and a very pleasant
break in the unpleasant monotony of Waterloo does this well-


managed establishment make. The broad drying green, fresh and
cool looking on Sundays and holidays, becomes brght in all working
hours with snow white fleeces spread, and gathered again by two
score of busy youths and men. The pressing and storing rooms with
the high loads of bales passing in and out are like a woolshed of some
inland station, and on the high ground behind is seen the lately reno-
vated old Waterloo House, with its half century of memories and tall
fair shady trees, which seem the only abiding place of all the song birds
left in this district. . These Waterloo mills, however, are very small by
comparison with the Buckland Mills, held by the same firm, just
beyond. Buckland Mills claim a leading place amongst the
first wool-scouring establishments of the world. Their capacity
is eighty bales per day, eighty bales be it remembered, each
averaging three hundredweight taken into the store, all greasy, and
dark, and dirty as shorn; and eighty others, snow white, perfectly
cleansed for the markets and the loom, turned out. It is big work,
performed by a staff of eighty men, with the assistance of an engine of
35 horse power, pumps of 18 inch cylinder, and a drying machine
built specially to suit the capacity of the establishment. There is
abundance of land and water about these mills : a great grassy knoll
catching the earliest glimpses of the morning sun, and a lake behind
the buildings of twenty acres in extent —a broad sheet of water with
a larger supply than is contained in any Botany dam; not available
for city purposes of course, having so long been used in connection
with this industry, but still fairly clear, and free of any offence to
the most sensitive olfactory nerves. The water from this dam is used
again and again for scouring. It is pumped into the twenty
overshot tanks where the steeped wool is cleansed, and drawn
out again by wooden shoots to the dam, or lake, tawny in colour
as the water that drains from red soil country in a flood. The big
lake, however, suffers no visible pollution. Its general surface is
bright and clear, should it ever become otherwise it is needless to say


it would be useless for the work of the establishment. That possi-
bility has, however, been foreseen, and will be provided for should the
danger ever appear imminent, by the construction of filter beds, by
which the marsh water would be thoroughly cleansed before re-admis-
sion to the lake. In early morning this lake may fairly be described as
beautiful, stretching away almost a mile in length into the grassy
margin of scrub-clothed hills it reflects ail its surroundings, and fairly
mirrors the clear blue sky above. In a soft hazy distance there are
seen the sand hills of Moore Park and the pines, above which rises
the tower of St. Jude’s Church at Kandwick, and ’tis difficult indeed
to believe that you stand but on the margin of a wool-scouring dam,
within one of the least lovely suburbs of the city.
Plood Yale lies far down beyond Waterloo, near indeed to the
margin of the bay, and presents features very similar to those of the
establishments already described. With a staff of thirty-five men and
boys it turns out its thirty bales of snow white fleeces per day, and
completes the actual working establishments of the young and
energetic firm, whose ever increasing operations must have large
interest for all the wool-growers of the colony. The magnitude of
their operations will he better understood if briefly summarised. We
do not get a very clear idea of the great work by stating that one
hundred and fifty bales per day are scoured by the assistance of one
hundred and sixty-five men and adequate machinery ; but how much
larger does it seem when we begin to estimate that each of these bales
will contain, at a moderate calculation the wool of fifty sheep, that
50 times 150 makes 7,500. Sevm thousand five hundred sheep
per day, and if there are three hundred working days in the year,
two million and a quarter of fleeces will be accounted lor. The wool
of 2,250,000 sheep scoured snow-white ! Suppose now that we had
woollen mills ready to take these fleeces in to transform them into
tweeds, and flannels, and blankets, and all the varied fabrics into which
the sheep-coat enters, what a busy scene would there be at Botany or


elsewhere ; what scores and hundreds of cottages surrounding the lofty
mills; what a source of wealth and prosperity and increasing power to
the colony. And why have we not such mills ? Why do we halt so
resolutely and so long with the scouring and packing of wool ?
Springvale completes this scene of wool-scouring works, but this
establishment is held by Mr. J. Geddes, who buys when opportunity
offers, and scours at his own risk. J. H. Geddes & Co. do not buy
under any circumstances ; whether selling at their sales in town, or
scouring at their works, on commission only. Springvale is of very
considerable extent, and, as evidence of the value of land in this
neighbourhood, we may mention that a portion of the Springvale
property —about 48 acres in extent —was sold four years ago for the
lump sum of £22,000.
There is no reason to doubt that, under good management, which
takes advantage of every new invention, and expresses its willingness
to follow the teaching of all sanitary laws, and rather to sacrifice its
own interests than annoy any neighbours, these industries will make
steady progress ; the only regret being that it is the final, and not as
it should be, the initiative, step of industrial progress; that, however,
the great, and possibly the near future, at which we will now briefly
glance, may mend.


G lEI .A. IP TIE IR, XI.
THE FUTURE.
■ BOLD hand is necessary in sketching the future of Botany Bay,
for indeed it is infinitely more difficult to give shape to the large
shadows the future already casts, than to weave any fair fabric
of history from the few broken threads of the past. We cannot think
intelligently upon the matter until we get some clear ideas of the
possibilities of development of Sydney, and all that tremendous extent
of country of which Sydney is not the political capital, or the m tro-
polis, but the natural port. We can let the trade of Eiverina go,
wherever nature ordains that it shall go, and only concern ourselves
with the country that can have no other possible port than Sydney.
We can imagine, if we like, the Clarence Eiver taking in big ships,
and Trial Bay protected by a breakwater, Eden, the seaport of Monaro
and Newcastle, doing all the work of which she is capable, and still
what a length and breadth of territory focuses naturally on Sydney.
Look at them upon the map, and take then any other map, and study the
resources oi any other capital, and you will come to understand the
inevitable greatness of Sydney’s near and distant future. Nor if
properly instructed will you be deceived by any contemptuous talk of
the barrenness of that territory, of the lack of those resources which


keep great populations busy, and give wealth to skilful labour. Sheep
are only the toys of the childhood of the colony, and that g*eat staple
of our present commerce—wool —is but the pap of our infancy Surely
as the child approaching manhood takes to manhood’s tools of labour
and sport, this colony, in process of its certain development, will take
to bolder projects, to manlier toil. Wool is the result of the first
effort, the first crop of the virgin soil. We find the country, and, as
the next thing we see is its grass, our first idea is naturally enough that
the grass should be eaten and converted into wealth. The grass cropped
down, the sheen of the few specks of gold are seen. They are dug
out, and then appear the lodes of copper, and silver, and lead. All are
proved to exist, but, unless of marvellous richness, they will not pay
for the working, the human energy is too precious. But deeper,
vaster, grander than any of them, wedged away amongst the blue
mountains, or lying in vast seams along all those southern hills
southward from Botany, towards Illawarra, are great bands of iron-
stone and thick seams of coal. Very frequently they are found
side by side, built in together in the days of the making of the
world, stored away for the service of the strong white race
even then ordained to be masters in the southern world. These are
the sure foundations of our future —foundations which would long
since have been laid, had we, since we acquired strength for any great
purpose, been led by statesmen capable of more than corklike motion
upon the head of any flowing tide. It is a pitiful thing to see so-
called statesmen staring aghast because the first grass crop is nibbled,
the few specks of gold gathered, and two or three bad seasons cripple
the one industry upon whose clay seamed feet we have determined to
stand. Where is the initiation never lacking in truly great men—the
far outlook, the strong resolve ? Here in the coal and the iron is
wealth for thousands and for millions. Here is the strong seed from
which grow Birminghams, and Pittsboroughs, and Sheffields and Glas-
gows, but not to be nibbled up by sheep, not to be reaped by a poor


laissez fairs existence and a drifting policy. All the strength and all
the patriotism, with a strong savour of self-sacrifice, which the makers
of England knew, will be requisite for the development of these
resources; and when they get to the work, what a future opens. Are
not China and Japan just opening their country to railways? Shall
we not within the century see tens of thousands of miles of lines put
down through all the long closed Fast? And who will supply the
plant, the material ? We have it here ; Between the National Park
and Wollongong the coal and the iron which should make the rail-
ways of all the East. But fast locked up. Hills lie upon it; moun-
tains cover it; hills of ignorance, mountains of prejudice, far more
serious obstacles to progress than any of the superimposed burdens of
nature. We lack will, courage, energy, which private enterprise
failing, the State might well supply. Yes, it would be highly proper,
and very profitable, State work to open up an iron yard down there, to
vote half a million for such a work, to freight a ship, not with rails and
engines, but with black country muscles and brains, with the very
latest of labour-saving inventions, with all the plant and skill and
organising capacity necessary to bring to birth the foundational iron
works of the Colony. There could he no fear of failure in such enter-
prise. The materials are there; and are we foolish beyond all the
people of the world that Ave cannot utilise them ? If we did but make
legitimate use of our undoubted opportunities, in ten years we should
not be making contracts with English firms for the furnishing of our
o\A r n railways, but shipping tens of thousands of tons of railway plant
annually to all the ports of the East.
And how might that affect Botany, or lioav does it possibly
come within the scope of this present Avork ? In this Avise :
That lllawarra railway line runs out, thirty miles from Sydney,
to the very heart of that great coal country, and midway between the
black cities which the near future Avill see there; and the ever-
growing metropolis Avill be the pleasant suburbs of the upper waters


of Botany Bay. Back to Sutherland, and Como, and Sylvania,
will come the people of the mining cities a little further on, and out-
ward to Kogarah, and Hurstville, and Peakhnrst, and that fairest of
all townships—yet to be named —on Oatley’s grant, will come the
people of Sydney. East and West, right and left, of that railway-line
you may see them spreading now ; and if you have any eyes at all, not
only for the possibilities, but the certainty, of the next decade, you
must see the houses clustering, the suburbs filling, and the new
Botany forming of which the majority of folks are just about as
conscious as of the New Jerusalem.
Now and again, once in four years or so, our governors were
led by some strange impulse, to so arrange matters as to leave
room for the developments of the future, as in the reservation of that
fine tract of land at Kurnell for the accommodation of noxious trades.
We are rather in a condition of craze and fog about noxious trades,
laudably anxious to purge our present city as far as possible, but
not quite sure where the true bounds of possibility may end, and the
squeamishness of ridiculous Quixotism begin. It was in the acute stage
of this fever that the large reserve on the South Head of Botany was
partially dedicated, and thereby an opportunity made for a manufac-
turing city in the future. This great reserve contains 1500 acres
of the Eastern, or ocean, side of the Kurnell Peninsula, and
another area of about equal size fronting Botany Bay.
All the ocean breezes sweep this peninsula, and the prevailing
north-easter would draw its smoke and odour far away south from
the land. It is the proper site for the trades which cannot be con-
veniently located in the city ; the smelting, dyeing, tanning works;
the great chemical laboratories, which great manufactures
require. The branch line of railway will make it accessible
to the black country as to the metropolis, and the sanitary
zone to be laid off between Quilbray Bay and Coronulla Beach,
will make a pleasant belt of park land between the works


bf the peninsula and the residents of the mainland. Kurnell we shall
call that great manufacturing city, probably, whose thousand shafts
will tower above the little obelisk which marks the first impress of the
white man’s foot. And how many men will its work employ, and how
many homes will they require ? A little reflection upon such matters
leads to very vivid realizations of things to be. What shall we say of
the year 2000, only fifteen years ahead ? Ten thousand men finding
work in Kurnell ! If so, we must anticipate a population of
50,000 souls within five miles of the sanitary zone. Twenty thousand
men in the coal and iron works between Sutherland township and the
heights where the railway will descend to the Ilia war ra flats. It so, there
must he room found for another hundred thousand about those pits
and works and northward towards the city. Nature has found room
for them all, no doubt of that; but not such a superabundance of room
that the wise man can afford to wait and rest upon the opportunities
of the future; for so long as there is health in the ocean breeze, and
pleasure in cool, clear water, with all its opportunities of bathing,
boating, fishing, the majority of metropolitan dwellers, whose circum-
stances enable them to secure suburban homes, will make down to the
sea. The sea is an everlasting, free, unfettered heritage. The plains
are monopolised ; the very mountains are fenced in and shut up from
the people; the sky becomes darkened with smoke and blocked out by the
crowding roofs ; but the sea remains the same —unpolluted and free ;
and wherever a glimpse of blue sea is found there is a heritage which
cannot be taken away. The law of nature maintains the ocean purity,
and human laws, dating from time immemorial, originating surely in
some divine inspiration, secures all running water against any private
encroachment or monopoly. Therefore does special value attach to
whatever land remains about the city fronting on or adjacent to ocean
or river waters. Wave upon wave the tide of progress and development
may roll inland, but the one wave which comes seaward fills in all the
little capes, peninsulas and broad flats verging on the sea, and then is


stopped. No matter how many miles of frontage you count, they are
very few when compared with the city of a million; or how many
acres of uplands whence sea views are obtained, they are only as the
few small loaves and fishes to the multitude; and the most skillful
suhdivider cannot repeat the miracle of Scripture Luckily, also, the
powers of subdivides have been curtailed.
The curtailment of the powers of too eager subdivides, the
resumption of some acres for boulevards and parks are, however, but
stepping stones to the great works which must be attempted and accom-
plished if a Botany Bay city worthy of the growth of the Nineteenth
Century is ever to be formed upon the shores of Botany Bay. Sydney,
beautiful as it is, may well be called a city of stupendous errors.
What greater error can be conceived of than the pollution of the har-
bour, which, so near the close of a whole century of life is not, and will
not be finally ended ? Who can conceive of a community of civilzed
folk, educated, enterprising, true heirs of all the ages, with deliberation,
wilfully, constantly pouring all their filth into the beautiful blue
basin which nature has provided at their doors, making of Circular
Quay a pestilent sink, of Darling Harbour a jeculent swamp, fouling,
polluting, slowly destroying every cove about the North Shore, and
actually permitting one manufacturer, condemned for his nuisance-
breeding upon the shores of Botany, to establish himself on Lane Cove.
These things seem incredible as they are actually and painfully true.
They are instances of how lightly men regard the great foundational
facts of true civilisation. We build exhibition palaces to advertise
ourselves to the world, and sjjend vast sums on forts and batteries to
keep a belligerent world from our gates, and we stand quite unpro-
tected from most deadly foes, and in a condition which should cause us
to blush for shame if ever it should be recognised: We are,indeed, in
much the same condition as some newly enriched and half-reclaimed
savage, who would put on abundant purple and fine linen and
neglect the primary duty of washing. Is there any doubt about the


truth of such statements as these ? Look, then, at North Shore, with
a considerable city already formed and as vile and unwashed
a condition as could he imagined. A few paltry pipes,
each one a sin against the community, running down to the
harbour, hut the hulk of the filth streaming out into the
gutters of the main roads and dessicating upon the surface.
Houses by the score and the hundred there, with silken hangings,
and velvet upholstery, and all the luxuries of life within, and the
unutterable foulness without. And to what result? Is not typhoid
now at our throats ? Is not a far more fearful assailant now grin-
ning down upon us from a not too distant Northern gate ? Statistics
tell us that we are healthier in the very heart of the city than on
the heights of those beautiful suburbs, the end of whose ill-health
has not yet been recorded. But what can they do to be saved ?
What remedies have one against typhoid, which may increase ten-
fold ? What against cholera, which may any day intrude ? What
can health officers, nuisance inspectors, and doctors do against any
actual plague ? The answer is simple as painful: Nothing, absolutely
nothing! It would he as impossible to abate existing nuisances at
St. Leonard’s, or Ashfield, or Paddington within two or three years,
as to shut the tide out from Sydney Heads. The very essentials of
a true civilization have been forgotten in the foundations of these
places, as it seems their lessons and examples, are being for-
gotten in the greater Botany that is shaping now. For let us just
glance for a moment at the matter of sewage. The only sewer yet
contemplated in connection with the whole of the Botany water-
shed, which takes in—be it remembered —Alexandra, and Waterloo,
and Marrickville, and portions of Newtown, and Stanmore, and
Ashfield is that Shea’s Creek pipe, which now at vast expense, and
a very doubtful utility, is being laid across Cook’s Elver to Webb’s
grant. What is it by comparison with the population even now
settling in the district ? Will it serve them ? Is it planned to serve


them ? Did a Botany population ever enter the mind of
clever engineers who first designed that sewer P Those who
are familiar with its inception know that such a thing was
was unthought of. All the villages on the road to the bay, and to any
portion of George’s River, are new creations since that time, and yet
there is no thought about any further measure of permanent and
effective sanitation. Why, unless the projects of all speculators, or the
dreams of all theorists be thoroughly out, the continuous wave of
population must roll out ere many years to Capes Sutherland and
Solander. And what about the health of that population ? Shall we,
untaught by the example the history of old Sydney affords, permit
Cook’s and George’s Rivers to become filthy sewers, the bay to be
transforme 1 into one huge sink, with filth beds where now are shallows ?
Or shall we, with a proper resolution, begin to work as the realisation
of great and national conceptions of public duty ? It is y if natural
teachings be followed, a matter of as clearly imperative duty to put
down proper drains to every new city extension, as proper foundations
to every house. Wherever proper drainage is impossible, anything
like city subdivision, should be prohibited by law. If an allotment
cannot be connected with a main sewer, that allotment should be of
sufficient size to properly decompose, dessicate, render innocuous all
the filth and refuse naturally cast off by those resident upon it. But
all along main lines of settlement, which are easily enough defined, pro-
vision should be made now before houses are built and nuisances
created, for the health of the present and the future. This can only
be accomplished by the construction of one main sewer of a capacity
to drain a great city, and the only place where such a sewer can be
properly and safely led to a discharge is in the open ocean south of
the Heads. The cost would be enormous, but is not the value of the
area to be drained enormous, and do we usually count cost when
human lives are in the other column.
Then, further, as to water supply. Can the Botany of the future


depend upon the Nepean scheme, now approaching completion. Why,
it is doubtful if that scheme will supply Sydney ten years hence.
The rivers come down to rivulets so rapidly in any season of even
temporary drought, and big as the lake behind the dam will be
when full, it must be remembered that the drainage made hy Mel-
bourne on her Yan-Yean Reservoir now would drain our full Prospect
dry in four months. What, then, must we look to for Botany ? If
we only do look, and with intent to make practical use of the in-
formation gained by looking we shall discover that nature has been
both provident and kind. In that long canon of the Woronora river
we have a natural reservoir capable of storing marvellous supplies, a
huge cleft in the sand stone rock, which, dammed at its northern end,
would become a perfect tank, and be at least a great subsidiary supply
in the future that will tax all effort and draw upon all resouroes to
their full yielding capacity. And in addition to the Woronora there is
George’s river, a possible supply which might, by far-seeing and leading
minds, be very seriously considered, and at least kept scrupulously
clean in view of any possible future demands.
And what of the bay maintained thus free from any pollution ?
Is it all that might be desired ? Do we see no large possibilities of
improvement upon any of its shores ? A very cursory inspection,
indeed, discloses gigantic needs, vast areas which should be reclaimed,
and great stretches which might be reserved for such purposes as
oyster culture, some channels which might be allowed to silt up,
others which should be dredged, work in abundance for two or three
generations; but work that can never proceed satisfactorily without
plan. Through lack of plan grows all the muddle about Sydney Har-
bour. For, can we doubt what great works would have been accom-
plished had a Harbour Trust been formed in Sydney twenty years ago,
and plans been prepared and adopted for the perfect harbour to be
slowly prepared, the wharfage adequate for all time, the half tide flats
transformed into gardens, recreation grounds, or sites for manufactories


necessary for works. Under wise control the work might almost have
boen accomplished ere this, and so managed that its revenues would
find means for further progress. Such a trust should now at once be
appointed for Botany, and, taking an intelligent view of the great
future, and calling to their aid the best engineering skill the world
affords, should begin boldly to plan and slowly to work. So only
the breadth of opportunity and duty be covered, and those pleasures
be secured and penalties avoided which are now so sorely missed and
dearly paid in Sydney.


1 Soifitcu J[i|cc()o(il Thiiil | Ituiltliitg
SOCIETY,
313 PITT STREET
■ «>: ♦ ■!■■!■ -
Paid up Share Capital, £80,390. Beserve Fund, £33,000.
ESTABLISHBn 1875.
Board of Management. — IfruAtceA:
Hon. J. F. BURNS, M.P. | JAMES GREEN, J.P. | Alderman GEORGE WITHERS, J.P.
girectorA :
J. P. WRIGHT, J.P. | S. T. WHIDDON, J.P.
J. W. WATKIN ( JOSEPH MITCHELL | WILLIAM HEZLET, J.P.
Secretary: J. W. BIBBY.
Since its formation in 1875 this Society has made steady and solid progress , as
will be seen by the following figures shewing the amount of receipts for the
respective dates named :
1876— £16,200- 1878-£60,345- 1882-£255,143- 1884- -£325,120-
The receipts for the year ending December 31s/, 1884, were £325,120.
The amount then held on deposit was £215,064, and the amount then owing by
Members to the Society was £315,259.
Choice Building Allotments at Hnrstville, Parramatta Elver, Burwood,
Arncliffe, &c., and 1 to 10 acres blocks at Canley Yale, Liverpool,
Banlkham Hills, at very reasonable prices, on extremely easy terms.
The famous Woniora Pleasure Grounds,Tom Ugly’s Point, George’s Eiver,
are the property of this Society, and will shortly be subdivided into large
Eesidential Sites.
Money received on deposit to any amount at current rates of Interest.
Advances granted on very Liberal Terms.
Savings Bank Department open Daily. No Notice required for Withdrawals.
“ Owing to its solidity, and the equitable and liberal manner in which its business is
conducted, the Sydney Permanent Freehold Land and Building Society is deservedly popular.”
[See Press].
Copies of the Annual Report, and every information, will be given on application.
SI 3 Pitt Street. J. W. 818 BY, Secretary.


H. J. LYONS & SON,
71 REGENT STREET, near Railway Station.
ILLAWARRA PEOPLE, as well as all p rs ns who 1 ravel by Hail,
should take particular notice that the Railway Furnishing Arcade
is so convenient to the llcdfern Station— in fact, by using the Foot
Fridge it is within 2 minutes walk,
We invite all parties about to furnish to come and inspect our
large and varied stock, which we sell either for CASH or on a liberal
TIME PAYMENT SYSTEM.
RAILWAY FURNISHING
71 REGENT STREET, ARCADE. 71 REGENT STREET ,
Opposite Mortuary. At Redfern Station.
RICHARDSON & WRENCH,
Established 1860.
AND APPRAISERS,
Utoek % ilillii iltHi,
WOOL BROKERS,
OFFICES: 98 PITT STREET.


From ROCKDALE
LADY ROBINSON'S BEACH,
MEET EVERY TRAIN.
jdfc jAc iiilßir. al!li«:jJ!feji#ir .iiifflk.iiilffliinjiitPltnr.jiiltlic.iiiftir .iiiftir jnlflk a!k.nßk itkjtkj&k. jfk. .inlPlk .mlPlk jiilHlnt. jiiHk
FARE, 3d. THREEPENCE.
L J| i|iili' L J J ' , Jiiil !,L l, lliil l,r
Rockdale to Lady Robinsons
MEETING EVERY TRAIN on the lUAWARRA UN
SAY WELL’S TEAM


I wmi m waim l
JOHN W. AND JOSEPH H.
ji l
m* ,'§\
pW
HI ImrlwHfwpl
il 111. l lUllVl’ I
281 PITT ST.,
(Between Market and Park Streets.)


THE MUTUAL PROVIDENT
La ml Investin| % BiiildiMKl ||®@||l|f s
XiIHVLITDIEID,
98 MARKET STREET, SYDNEY
(Two doors from Elizabeth Street).
BEGISTEEED T’HS COXJ:^ :,^.3^TI3ES, ACT OP 1374.
(JA-JAIEMIIL e* EAoO b ()QQ (with power to increase to £100,000.)
PircctorA :
J. F. SMITH, Esq
M.P. (Chairman).
JOHN McEVOY, Esq.
JOHN A DRAIN, Esq.
THOMAS RENN, Esq.
SAMUEL PAYTEN, Esq.
RATSS el HIT SB IST ALLOWEP m DEPOSITS,
For 12 Months ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 per cent, per annum.
For 6 Months ... ... ... .. • ... ... ... 6 per cent, per annum
SAfllgg BANK DEPARTMENT
Interest is allowed on the Daily Balances, and no notice is required for Withdrawals.
fa BORROWERS.
Liberal Advances made to Purchase or to Build upon approved Freehold Property.
In the case of Advances TO BUILD, interest is only charged on the amounts as they are
actually drawn.
tJfjHIS Society owns the magnificent MIR.
|k Kogarah Bay, which comprises some of the finest water
frontages and water views in that superb district.
Send to the Office for an Illustrated Book of the
Kstate, and a Plan of the unsold allotments.
95 Market Street .
E. W. FOX ALL, Manager.


The Mwantile, Hiiilding, land I Investment impujf, United,
AKDfSAVINGS BANK.
Temporary Head Offices—City Chambers, 243 Pitt Street, Sydney; Permanent Head Offices (in course
f erection)— corner Park & Castlereagh-sts; Branch Office—Smith Street, Hempsey. Agencies are also
established at Newcastle, Maitland and Bourke. CAPITAL : £ioo,ooo.
Head the opinions of the Dress, vide "Sydney Dally Telegraph'’—
“At the present time, there is a financial revolution going on in Sydney, which is proving of
incalculable benefit to the people. The revolution consists in the successful working of those institutions
which come in between the banks and the people, conveying to the latter the Made benefits previously
enjoyed by the large capitalist and the bank shareholder. Institutes like The Mercantile Building,
Land, and Investment Company, transact business in estates of proven value, and, while giving
shareholders and investors good returns for their money, they assist materially in the building up of those
vast new residential suburbs which are fast making Sydney a city of colossal proportions.
“Their capital, together with the money of the general investors, is devoted to the purchase of large
Estates, near Sydney, notably the famous Kockdale, on the new SydneyTllawarra Railway Line, the West
Kogarah, Mountain View, &c., &c., and now the Company advertise they are disposing privately of the
balance of the great Carlton Estate, having over hale a mile frontage to the Railway line,
seven miles from Sydney, commanding exclusive and lovely view's, and in the centre of which a Railway
Platform is to be erected. This property is exceedingly suitable, being the most elevated land so near
Sydney; it also has a good frontage to the well-known Webber’s Road, which leads to the charming, and
now fast becoming fashionable watering places—Lady Robinson’s Beach, Sans Souci, Sandringham, Woniora,
&c , &c. The Company’s exceptionally easy terms are so well known that they hardly require repeating,
viz.—only £5 per lot deposit, balance 4s. 9d per week per £lOO, and the Company advances the principal
portion of the money required to build, w'hich is repaid by the borrowers upon such long and easy terms that the
instalments only eqdal to rent until the land and building become the property of land buyer and borrower.
“All the Company’s estates are divided into convenient blocks insuring prosperous suburbs, and the.
Company's sales result in huge investments of money. Thousands of people who previously had not had the
opportunity of securing a pleasant and healthy suburban home at something like a cheap figure, and on terms
to suit the smallest waige, salary, or income, became holders of good blocks of land in the adjacent suburbs of
this wonderfully fast-growing metropolis. And these vast areas, unoccupied yesterday, are to-day being
decorated with beautiful villas and other residences. The return in the shape of profit to the Company, as
we gather from their authenticated balance-sheet, enables them to divide amongst the shareholders during
the past twelve months no less a sum than £23,300, and the reserve fund, we learn, will be increased to
£12,500 this half-year, in addition to paying the usual handsome dividend. These figures speak volumes,
and reflects the highest possible credit upon the able and energetic manager, Mr. Edwin J. C. Bryant, who
himself launched the Company, and to whom mainly is due the unprecedented success of this progressive
undertaking, Quite recently the Company determined, as allowed by their charter, to double their capital,
bringing it up to £lOO,OOO. This has been done w'ith a view to extended operations, so that the future impor-
tance of The Mercantile Building, Land, and Investment Company can hardly be over-estimated. The
Company gives 5 per cent, interest upon money at call, 6 per cent, on deposits at 6 months, and 7 per cent,
for twelve months.
“ Without notice deposits at call can be withdrawn up to any amount, and accrued interest paid to
date of withdrawal. For the past year an additional bonus of per cent, has been paid to depositors,
making 8J per cent, for twelve months. This at once proves the soundness of the Institution, and the
advantageous opening it oilers to depositors. Money is being invested with the Company from all parts of
the country, and the New' Issue of Shares is adding to the Register the names of many residing in the
most distant parts of New South Wales and Queensland, thus showing how widely the Company s operations
are known. The Branch established in Kempsey, the flourishing district of the Macleay, w r e are pleased to
learn, is proving a source of considerable wealth to this enterprising Company.
“It is notified that a few £1 shares are still available, and the public cannot do better than subscribe
for them. 2s. on application and allotment, &c., and seeing the extraordinary progress the Company has
made, and its great promises of success in the future, we have no doubt the shares wall be rapidly taken up.
Photographs of the new premises show r what an ornament they will be to our city, as well as forming a highly
remunerative investment for the shareholders. The Directory consists of Messrs. Angus Cameron, M.P.
(Chairman of Committees in the New South Wales Parliament), the Hon. Robert Wisdom, M.P. (ex-Attorney
General), W. C. Proctor, M.P., E. J. Gibbes, M.P., Jas. Fletcher, M.P., Jas. 11. Saunders, Jno. F. labrett,
and Dr. Bestic. The General Manager is Mr. Edwin J. C. Bryant, to whom, at 243 Pitt Street, all com-
munications may be addressed.”


ATJCTIO^BBR,
M 10 f| i
A fhJ f I i
96 PITT STREET.
FIRST FLOOR.
Out-door Sales of Subdivided Estates on Saturday
Afternoons
Wwwi® & ’
LITHOGRAPHIC AND LETTERPRESS PRINTERS,
►hc liiiiiiii mm smn mmmmm® *♦


BOYD & XING,
PROPERTY
* Ui ' mnjiji^ x - U 1 -i ' rLri mij^j ' Lnj^ p ' j^, 7 j .
lj' | ■’ , ■... o
#> &Mhuor. ■; 'it ,_'J v-0; g
—a -*<
ScLle Room-
SYDNEY
—-f^4-
SUBDIVISION OF ESTATES
£L SPECIALTY.
5™ fW? ILLUSTRATED PAMPHLET


THE PURE OZONE COUNTRY,
ON THE ILLAWARRA RAILWAY.
The Great Outlet of the Future, with Thousands of Healthy and
Happy Homes.
©HH WE 1W mwr&TMv
BROWN’S ROAD, KOGARAH*
BEAUTIFULLY ELEVATED! SWEET BALMY AIR! PARK SCENERY.
This Estate needs only to be seen to be appreciated. It is nicely timbered, the
soil is rich, and there are no rocks there.
The allotments are 50 feet by 140 feet, and the terms within the reach of all—viz.,
£3 deposit, and the balance in weekly instalments of 4s. 6d. for each £lOO worth of land.
The estate is only 10 minutes walk from Kogarah Railway Station, for which a
FREE TICKET will be given for ONE YEAR, on condition that a residence be erected
worth £5OO.
N.B. —Liberal assistance to build.
HTJHSTTILLE HEIG-HTS ESTATE,
(Late Milsop’s Park) FOREST ROAD, KOGARAH HEIGHTS.
217 feet above sea level. Nothing like it on the Western Line till you reach the Zig Zag.
Only a few of the best allotments left. 50 feet frontages by 150 to 200 feet deep. £5 per
lot deposit. The balance can remain from Ito 12 years at the option of the purchaser.
Assistance to build if required. Only 7 miles from Sydney ; time by rail 27 min.
Convenient to Saywell’s Tramway to Lady Robinson’s Beach on the one hand, and
to the Grand National Park on the other,
THE HHIHELAnDS ESTATE,
FOREST ROAD, KOGARAH HEIGHTS.
A splendid vineyard in the old times. Views right through Botany Heads to the
blue Pacific beyond. Convenient to both Rockdale and Kogarah Railway Stations, and adjoins
The Hurstville Heights Estate. A portion of this subdivision remains for sale in allotments,
50 feet by depths varying from 145 feet to 200 feet,
Deposit, £5 per lot. The balance can be paid at any time from 1 to 12 years,
when interest will immediately cease and the title (Torrens’) immediately secured by the
Purchaser,
Nothing more need be said of these splendid Estates and the advantages
offered, they must be seen in order to be fully appreciated.
Plans and all information may he obtained from the Vendors :
ASSOCIATION LIMITED.
MINERVA CHAMBERS, 126 PITT STREET, SYDNEY (Near G.P.0.)
S. H. LEWIS, Manager.


ANDERSON & CO.’S
SEEDS
FOR ALL CROPS. GENUINE & RELIABLE.
Anderson’s
SEEDS
For the Farm*
Anderson’s
SEEDS
ForVegetahle Garden
Anderson’s
SEEDS
For Flower Garden.
Anderson’s
SEEDS
are specially selected
Anderson’s
SEEDS
are of reliable growth
Anderson’s
SEEDS
are true to name*
Write for our LARGE REVISED CATALOGUE, beautifully illustrated, just
published. The most complete SEED Catalogue in the Colonies Post Free.
ANDERSON & CO.,
SEEDSMEN & PLANT MERCHANTS,
216 & 218 PITT STREET, SIDNEY.
