

BOTANICAL GARDEN.
MR HORNE’S REPORT
ON HIS VISIT TO CEYLON.
DR. MELLER'S REPORT FOR 1866.




Royal Botanical Gardens,
14th December 1866.
The Honorable
The Colonial Secretary.
Sir,
On arriving atGalle on the morning of the
18th August last, I proceeded to the Colombo
Coach-Office, and engaged a seat in the coach
leaving Galle that night at 6 p.m., and arriv-
ed in Colombo at 6 a. m , the next morning,
Sunday.
On Monday, 1 delivered in Colombo tbe
letters of introduction that I brought from
Mauritius, and engaged a seat in the Kandy
coach for that night, and left Colombo by the
train at 9 10 p. m., and arrived in Kandy at
6 a. m the next morning.
As early as possible on that day, I went to
the Royal -Botanical Gardens at
and on acquainting the director Dr. Th waites,
with the nature of my visit, he entered into it
with zeal, and gave me every assistance in his
power.
&
1 remained at Peradfnia for two days to
engage Coolies and make arrangements to
carry the Cinchonas from Hakgalle, 60 miles.
Having arranged at Galle that the wardian
cases should be forwarded to Perad/nia
haste, I expected them to arrive in about 7 or
8 days after me, hut it took them 15 days by
“bullock bandy/’ to reach Peradjnia i\oxi)/£
Galle, a distance of about 144 miles.
Being anxious that the Chinchonas should
be planted in the cases some time before they
were shut up, and the Coolies having
gone before me a day, I took the mail-coach
at Kandy for Rainbodee on the morning of
the 23rd August, and arrived there at 2 p, m.
Finding that a conveyance of any sort was
very expensive at Rambodec, 1 started with
the Coolies to shew me the road, and arrived
at Newer a Elba (14 miles) at 8 i\m.
Early, the next morning, 1 took the road
for Hakgalle (6 miles), where the Cinctiona
plantations are.
During the day, I had the plants dug out j
and carefully packed in boxes in damp moss.
lhe boxes were covered with gallipot |
leaves to shade the plants from the sun and J
protect them from the w'eather; each box was
on a pole and carried on the shoulders
of two Coolies. The Coolies arrived at Pera-
dfniu (nearly 50 miles) in four days, and did
not lose a plant.
I he Cinchona plantations arc G miles
from New era Elba, on the road between it
and Badulla, and ate about 4.500 feet above
the level of the sea.
They are surrounded on three sides by high
hills, which open out towards the east and
south-east; in which directions a beautiful
view ie obtained of the mountains about Ba
dulla, and the intervening grass covered hills
(Patna) with patches here and there of Rho-
d<xlendron K scrub, and jungle in the ravines
between the hills.
The plantations face the north or north-
east, and are partly sheltered from the south-
west monsoon by the mountains, on the slope
of which they are situated, and which rise in
towering precipices for about 2,000 feet above
and behind them, and are covered with jun-
gle to their summits.
I Prom north to east, they are protected from
the dry north-east monsoon by high hills,
which are also covered with jungle to their
tops.
Notwithstanding those natural protections,
they do occasionally suffer from the wind
which comes sometimes with almost hurricane
force down the hills on which the plantations
are and along the pass through which the
road from Badulla to Newera Ellia passes.
A fortnight or so previous to my visit, the
plants had suffered severely from a gale, but
were beginning to recover from its effects when
I saw them.
Ihey had the appearance of being in good
health and vigour, and were sending forth
most luxuriant leaves and young wood.
Ihe soil in which they are growing is de-
cayed vegetable matter, mixed with a
quantity of disintegraded gneiss.
The surface is everywhere abruptly undulat-
ed and cutup with little ravines, which se-
cure good drainage, a most essential point in
Chinchona cultivation, for their hair-like and
delicate roots soon rot, and the plant dies,
when they get into a marsh or badly drained
soil.
Across the slopes at short intervals, canals
aie cut to carry of! the water before it accu-
mulates during heavy rains, and prevents it
from carrying away the surface soil.
Large blocks of gneiss are laying every'-
where on the surface, which assist greatly in
preventing the soil from being carried off,
and prevents evaporation in dry weather.
When the plantations were first made, the
plan adopted in Java had been followed :
clearing a place in the jungle for each plant,
and planting them in the shade.


The plants so situated grow well, but are
lanky and drawn to reach the light and air,
which are partly excluded below by the leaves
and branches of the under scrub, and above
by the leaves and branches of the trees.
Not feeling satisfied with the appearance
of the plants in the shade, a portion of ground
(about 8 acres) was cleaved and planted and
the result is very gratifying indeed.
In the ground so cleared, the plants are
planted in row's, about eight feet a part, and
about six feet from plant to plant.
The cleared ground has been planted about
four years, and the following is about the
average height, &c., which the plants have
attained :
Cinchona fjcinallis is eight feet; growing
vigorously, flowering and producing quantities
of seed. Dr Thwaites says that this kind
would grow better in a colder climate than
that of Hakgalle, and a few plants of it were
tried at Newera Elba, but they were killed
by the frost in February 1864.
Cinchona Succirubra is about ten feet in
height, in and excellent health. Some of the
plants of this species have attained a height
of about 15 feet, and have stems of about 4
inches in diameter at the base; one or two
plants of this species are, 1 am given to un-
derstand, coming into flower for the first
time in Ceylon.
i .
Cinchona Pajuidiana has attained an ave-
rage height of about the plants;,
being as much in diameter base,,
anP pyramidal shape and i*covered with beauti-
ful luxuriant fuliage and young wood, a
number of them are coming into flower.
This and the next kind are not much cul-
tivated in Ceylon.
rrw>
Cinchona Mticvantha has in two years
attained a height of about four feet, and are
all in good condition.
The plants of the above species that were
planted in the wood about seven years ago,
have grown well, and have attained a height
of about 20 feet, with a stem about 4 inches
thick at four feet from the ground.
These plants, from circumstances, are lank
and drawn, and do not have the robust,
healthy and hardy appearance of those that
are growing in the open ground.
The favorite kind of Cinchona in Ceylon,
4 i* 'he $ uccirubva, which is planted to the extent
0 of i h ree to one of tire Cinchona ffficinallis and
the other kinds. It grows at a much lower
elevation than any of the others, is hardy,
easily propagated and transplanted, and yields
a good percentage of Alkaloid, It grows well
, from Peradfnia (1550 feet above the sea), to
Hakgalle, aiul perhaps also beyond it.
The climate of Peradinia as regards tem-
perature, is similar to that of Pamplemousses,
but is not so scorcbingly dry.
- Considering the elevation that Cinchona
mfnccirvbra will grow at, and the high tempe-
rature which it will hear, success in cultiva-
tion is more certain with it in Mauritius than
with the other kinds. The cultivation of tilt*
other kinds can at the same time be tried.
J
The only drawback to Cinchona succiruhra
is its large thin leaves, which would be da-
maged during a hurricane, when the small
leaved kinds would, comparatively speaking,
receive little injury. However, by selecting
sites that are protected bv nature from the
prevailing winds and storms, and having
recourse to artificial means of protection,
where the others fail, at present I see nothing
to fear, providing that the climate is cool
and moist, the soil free, and well drained,
and the sub soil free from clay and stagnant
water.
All the kinds of Cinchonas that are in
Ceylon, are easily propagated by cuttings. At
Hakgalle, they lay out the cutting-ground in
beds, three to four feet wide, in which the
cuttings are thickly planted, and are protec-
ted from the wind, at the sides of the beds,
by twigs stuck into the ground as thick as
they will stick, and tied together at the top,
about two feet from the ground between two
bamboos. They are protected from the sun
by mats or palm leaves.
In this manner, cuttings carefully selected
from hardy but not luxuriant grown plants,
root and grow as freely as those of either ge-
raniums or verbenas.
With these simple means, plants are fur-
nished to the extent of about thirty thousand
a month. .
~r
The Cinchonas are gratuitously distributed,
ou applying for them in a certain form ; some
of (tie applicants request to have as many as
a hundred thousand at one time, if tin plants
can be spared.
It is highly gratifying to hear that the
plants are well taken cave of, and are grow-
ing vigorously. Dr Thwaites says “ that
not a single report of. an opposite character
has reached me.”
The gardens at Hakgalle are not only
famous for Cinchonas and Tea, of which there
are about three acres planted, but also for
the fine collection of Plants, —natives of tem-
perate climtf that cannot be grown at Pera-
— ajti-o
In front of the superintendent's house,
there arc about four acres which arc being


yearly added to, covered with plants from the
Australian Colonies and the Cape of Good
Hope, &c. They are growing so beautifully
and vigorously, that there can be no doubt in
saying that they arc not to be excelled by-
others of the same kinds in their native coun-
tries.
When tlie jungle was cut down, it was
allowed to dry and then set on fire, which
destroyed all hut the trunks of the large trees,
A few r walks were then made, the plants
planted and seeds of the choicest annuals
sown. No other attention, except hoeing
and weeding, was bestowed on either the
plants or the ground.
Blocks of gneiss, trunks and roots of trees
are laying on the surface in every direction.
These partly covered and mixed with the
gay flowers of the annuals and roses (the best
I have seen any where), add a rustic beauty
to the scenery, seldom equalled by art.
The mean temperature of HakgaUe for
1861 (I have the observations for that year
only), is 64° 6 Fall 4
Highest temperature .... 86° 0 ~
Lowest temperature 48° 0 ~
Greatest difference of temperature during
the day 20°
Haiti fell that year on 198 days, but I have
no register of the quantity. The rainy days
were pretty equally distributed over each
month of the year.
In Ceylon, the Tea plant grows well, from
the Botanical Gardens at 1,550 feet above the
sea to beyond the coldest coffee regions, and
from what I was informed Tea will soon be-
come an article of export from Ceylon. There
are, I believe, about a hundred acres under
cultivation ; and an increasing demand for its
seeds and plants, and information regarding
its cultivation and manipulation. So much is
this the case, that the Planters’ Association
is willing to bear one half of the expense of
sending a man to India, if' the Government
will grant the other half, in order to obtain
the desired information.
Owing to the great demand for its seeds, 1
could not obtain more than 10 lbs, of them,
which were the last of the season. I arrang-
ed with Hr. Thwaites to obtaiir a quantity of
them next year.
At the Botanical gardens, there is nearly
an acre of it planted, besides the large num-
ber of plants that are growing 6u the borders
among the flowering shrubs. At the Cin-
chona plantation, three acres were planted
w ith it about two years since; the plants are
healthy and growing well, but are not heaving
seed.
When tho act'ds arc gatheredi it is a good
plan to throw them into a heap, and mix them
with a little damp soil and allow them to
slightly ferment. As there are from 1 too
seeds in a capsule, fermentation rots it and
saves hand-pecking to separate the seeds.
The seeds may he either sown at the stake,
where the plants are to grow, or in nursery
beds prepared for them, and the plants after-
wards transplanted.
If the former of these methods is adopted,
on a large scale, the labor in watering is very
great, even were they sown at the commence-
ment of the rains; whereas hv the latter
method, it the plants are planted when tin
rainy season has commenced, little watering
is required, except in very dry seasons or sites.
The ground for the nursery beds should he
trenched to ttie depth of one foot and a half,
to allow the “ tap root ”to descend freely :
the soil ought to be of such an adhesive nature
as to admit of the plants being lifted with
balls of earth at their roots. The beds should
not exceed four feet in width for convenience
in watering &e., and ought to be raised above
the natural surface of the ground to prevent
their being Hooded during heavy rains. The
most convenient distance for the seeds to be
planted apart is about (J inches, which will
allow the plants to he lifted without injuring
their roots. The place selected for the beds
should have a free exposure to the sun and
wind which will make the plants hardy in
growth, and they can then be freely handled
when being transplanted. The seeds should
not be covered with earth beyond an inch,
and if a little litter is spread thinly over the
beds it will prevent evaporation and save wa-
tering, but it must be removed when the
seeds begin to germinate.
The most convenient mode for a Tea planta-
tion, is to have the plants planted in rows,
hut the distance between the rows and the
plants in them might he regulated by the na-
ture of the soil and the situation, five feet by
four will I think, bo found convenient for
most situations. At such a distance apart,
holes should be dug at least two feet square,
which will freely admit the roots of tire plant
without doubling them, which is injurious
especially when it is the “ tap root ” that is
doubled.
if the soil be poor, a little decomposed ilia*
nutc or crushed bones might be, with advan-
tage, added.
When the seedlings have attained a height
ot four or five inches, they may be transplant-
ed, but if allowed to be a little older and
stronger, they will not require so much atten-
tion and caie.
The best seasons for transplanting in Mauri-
tius, are about the beginning of May, when


the ground is damp from the rains that will
have fallen, and warm, the weather cool, and
the sun not scorching, or in December when
the rainy season has set in. Nevertheless, it
may, with labour and care, he safely done here
at any season.
The best way of lifting Tea plants from the
nursery beds is that generally adopted for all
tap-rooting plants, by digging a trench at the
end of the bed beyond the depth of the tap
roots, and with care removing the plants from
behind, row by row', always clearing the earth
well away in front of each row, before com-
mencing to lift the plants from it. •
In India a semi-circular spade is used for
lifting the plants, which form of spade is
well adapted to preserve the earth at their
roots.
Being anxious to receive information re-
garding the cultivation of the Coffee, I visited
the Estates belonging to General Sir J. Cheap,
and having been previously acquainted with
the manager of two of them, Mr W. Cameron,
I resided with him for a few days, and made
enquiries into the particulars regarding its
cultivation, &c.
The clearing of the ground of the jungle
for a Coffee estate is generally done by con-
tract. When the trees are felled those th a f
are required for building purposes arc select-
ed and cut according to the size required, the
others are allowed to remain on the ground
until they dry, when they are set on fire.
After all is consumed and the ground cooled,
it is then jaid out in rows and holes are made
to receive the plants. The distance between
the rows varies from 6 to 8 feet, and between
the plants in the rows from 4 to G feet.
Sometimes, hut I believe seldom, the seeds
are sown at the stake, and sometimes they
are sown in nursery beds, and the plants are
transplanted when they have grown four or
more leaves.
These means are seldom resorted to when
“ stumps ” from the jungle can be obtained
in sufficient quantities. The ripe berries
being carried to the jungle by birds, hats and
squirrels, and the pulp generally being the
only part devoured, what with the shade, and
moisture of the woods, the seeds quickly ger-
minate and thence young plants (stumps) can
be obtained, in most of the jungles, in the
neighbourhood of the Coffee plantations
The times selected for planting are at the
breaking of the monsoons, when the rains be-
gin to fall, and cloudy damp weather can be
(comparatively speaking) depended upon, to
start the plants into growth.
When young plants from the nursery are to
be planted, the extreme points of their roots
are cut off, wffiich rqntLcg them easy to be*
plants, and there is no danger of their roots
being doubled in planting, which is generally
done bv a large dibble like cabbage'?. When
plants from the jungle are to be planted, their
tops are cut down to within four or six inches
of the ground. Hence the term u stumps ; ”
their roots for the above mentioned reason are
j closely cut. These plants from being cut
down send out a number of “ leaders, ’* which,
excepting the strongest one to form the plant,
are all broken off at an early age.
Weeds after the ground has been cleared,
come up in abundance and must be attended
to to prevent their seeding. Weeding is ge-
nerally done by contract at from 2s. to Bs. per
acre and is on some estates a very expensive
item
When the plant has attained a height of
feet in exposed situations/ and 3 5 feet in
sheltered ones, the leading shoot is then
stopped and the plant is made to develop
itself laterally. The Sinhalese, about their
houses, generally allow the plants to grow up
as they would, I presume, in nature ; this is
seldom seen on the estates.
At three years the plants begin to bear,
and the yield annually increases, until the
plants are about twelve years o’d» If well
treated they will annually yield heavy crops
for a long time. I was informed that some
of the plants on Sir J. Cheap’s estate,
yU (l Galaja, ” had been planted 25 years. They
had no appearance of decline, on the contrary
they were in good health and bearing crops
on an average of about eight or nine hundred
wpight to an acre, which is said to be a very
good yield. The average yield of Coffee per
acre in £eylon is said to be between five and
six hundred weight, the latter figure is said
by some to be too high an average.
Care has to be taken of the as it
grows, to keep it inj*. proper shape, and
pruning has to be attended to at an early age.
The Coffee plant, like the Peach, as a rule,
bears its fruit on the wood which it has grown
during the previous year. The pruning is
done by the malabars on the estate, imme-,
diately after the crop is gathered ; the uptight
and cross growing shoots are generally all
that require to be cut out.
In pruning, care has always to be taken
not to cut off too much wood, or the crop
for the ensuing season will be short; and if
too much is left, a heavy crop is obtained,
which exhauts the plant; little or no young
wood is made and a light crop for the next
season is the result.
The points of the lateral branches are never
cut, and a well fonned Coffee plant should
have, let us say, the form of a circle, with all
its branches growing straight from the cen-
tre and filling the space as they grow.
The gathering of the crops (“cherry,” as
the berries are called), is generally done by
task work. Every adult, male or female, has


to gather two bushels a day and carry it to
the store ; all above the task is paid for at the
rate of 4s. per bushel. If the distance from
the extremities of the estate to the store be
great, and if the nature of the ground will ad-
mit of it, a shed is built, in which the Coffee
collected is measured. Spouting is laid down
from the shed to the store, and the “ cherry ”
is run in the spout with water from the shed
to the pulpers.
The pulpers which 1 saw used in Ceylon,
were of two different kinds. The first of
these is a cylinder of three feet long and about
fifteen inches in diameter, covered with sheet
copper, which is roughened on the outside by
being punched about half way through ; two
square iron bars of the same length as the
pulper are placed one above the other behind
it. Between these two bars, the coffee passes
from the pulpers ; and space to pass the lar-
gest bean has to be left when the bars are set
for that purpose. The lower bar is fitted
close to the pidper, but does not touch it,
nothing passes beneath this bar, except the
pulp which is carried below by the water and
the pulper. The upper bar is so fitted as to
admit the largest l< cherry ” without break-
ing the bean between the bar and the pulper,
and to take the pulp off the smallest one.
The other pulper, (Walker’s, I think,)
might be described as the end of a cylinder or
a flat disk, and has a diameter of about eigh-
teen inches, and a thickness of two and a half
inches. Both its sides are covered with sheet
copper punched half through, a bar of iron is
fitted close to each side, but does not touch
them. These bars are hollow and have a
moveable sole with which, when they are
“set,” they form three sides of a square each
1 °P en side is towards the
{ 116 _J pulper, the hollow, which is
wide at the mouth gradually decreases in size
until nearly the middle of the nulper is
reached, there and for more than one half the
pulper’s diameter, the hollow .is of such a size
as to admit of the largest “ cherry ” going
through without breaking the bean. These
bars are set on a slope and the “ cherry ” is
always passed with water and the pulpers are
fed from above.
After passing the pulper, the Coffee beans
(parchment then called) fall into a sieve set
at an angle and wanting an end. The sieve
is shaken by a connection with the pulping
machinery which gives it a motion similar
to the sieves in a Flour Mill.
All the unpulped “ cherries ” which have
escaped the pulper run off at the open end of
the sieve at the lower part; they are then col-
lected and passed again.
After passing the sieve, the “ parchment ”
falls into a spout, and is run with water into
a cistern where it is allowed to lay for twenty
four hours. From that cistern it is run,
in small quantities at a time, into another
one, where it is drilled backwards and for-
wards until it is cleansed of all pulpy matter.
The water is then drained off and the parch-
ment ”is spread out to dry, generally oil
driers similar to those in use in Mauritius for
wheat. On some estates the “ parchment ”
is dried on trays, with wheels set on rails,
which are run in and out from beneath the
store in dry and wet weather.
When dried, the parchment is measured or
weighed, put into sacks and despatched to
Colombo to a Coffee curing establishment.
The “ curing ” of Coffee is to thoroughly dry
it, take the parchment off, clean and size it
into four different qualities, and pick out any
damaged beans, weigh and pack it into casks,
and ship it to England or elsewhere.
There are now no new Cinnamon planta-
tions laid out in Ceylon, and judging from
what I saw and the information I obtained
from reliable sources, the greater part of
the old ones are going to ruin.
The soil in which the Cinnamon is grow-
ing, is almost pure sand, of a greyish colour.
The plants are planted in rows about eight
feet apart.
It is cultivated and cut down in nearly a
similar manner as oak copse in England.
The cutting season happens twice a year at
the breaking of the monsoons, only such
suckers as have a light brown colour are cut,
which might’ be termed thinniug out. When
cut the sticks are conveyed to the peelers who
take the bark off with a scimitar-shaped knife,
round and blunt at the point for raising the
bark, and sharp on the convex side for cut-
ling the bark longitudinally on the stem.
From the peelers the sizers take the bark and
put the small pieces into the large ones, until
they have an almost solid stick about three
feet long. The bark passes from the sizers
to the store where it is laid out, one stick
thick, to dry in the shade, on racks made of
coir to freely admit the air all round it; the
next process is to sort it into three qualities
and then make it up into bundles of about fifty
pounds each.
I have heard it mentioned that it would
probably be the best method to cultivate the
Cinchonas in the same manner as the Cinna-
mon and oak copse are.
The Royal Botanical Gardens at Peradi-
nia are about four miles from Kandy, and
they occupy a site which is said to have been
a hunting ground of the Kandyan kings.
They are about 150 acres in extent, and are
bounded on three sides by the Mahawella-
ganga, which has, at the Gardens, a width of
about forty ov fifty yards.


The surface of the Garden is beautifully
undulated, which gives a variety of scenery,
and is sloping from the centre towatds the
river, the banks of which, in some places, are
very steep. The soil of the gardens is gene-
rally very poor, almost gravel, but they enjoy
a delightful climate for p’ants to grow in,
which may he said to do every thing for them,
the vegetation is beautiful and grand.
On one side of the drive from the main
road to the garden gate, are some splendid
India rubber trees, some of which are a hun-
dred feet in height, and there are several
other trees.of the same sort in the gardens,
larger in the trunk and taller.
On entering the garden, attention is called
to a matchless group of palms, conspicuous
among which is the “ tallipot,” (Jorypha um-
braculiferri), with its enormous leaves. The
Singalese make mats of them useful for con-
structing temporary dwellings, and for other
purposes. It is a most beautiful palm, attain-
ing a great height, and when its leaves are
fully developed, it will have a diameter of
about thirty feet.
Oreodoxa regia is here nearly forty feet in
height, and hearing large quantities of seeds.
Borassus jlabellifommt {palmyra), second only
to the cocoa-nut in value to the native
population, every pirt of the plant being made
available for some useful purpose.
Next in height is caryota ureMs “ Kittool-
gass,” of the Cingalese. From the flowering
stems of this plant, toddy is drawn, from
which a coarse kind of sugar is made by the
Singalese. The wood is useful for building
purposes. A good specimen of Livistonia Man-
ritiana (the “latanier” of Mauritius), is also
to be found there, as well as others of gt eat
beauty and rarity.
To the right and left of the palm group are
beds of scitamfneous plants; behind them
there are large flowery shrubs and trees, and
in front of them, showy leaved Marantas,
Caladiumsand a few beautiful annuals.
Leaving the palm group and taking a walk
turning to the right which leads to the
“ potting ground. ” the visitor passes through
the spice garden, w 7 here there are some fine
specimens of nutmeg, clove and allspice
trees. In the potting ground, besides the
necessary store and seed rooms, there are, the
Assistant Director’s house, and sheds, where
all newly imported plants and collections
from the Ceylon jungles, arc potted and
prepared for planting in the ground.
The collections of plants for exportation,
which consist chiefly of the rarest and most
beautiful of the Ceylon flowering plants and
ferns, are kept here (in the potting ground)
in pots, as well as those plants, which are
tender and difficult to transplant, for distribu-
tion to the inhabitants.
Leaving the potting ground and passing
several very large India-rubber trees, before
alluded to, the orchard is on the left. It is
well stocked with trees of tropical fruits The
trees generally bear well, but the birds, bats,
and squirrels take their share of the fruit.
There also are a number of Mandarin and
Orange trees of the best varieties bearing lar-
ge quantities of fruit. The Ceylon oranges
are green when ripe, and lam told that they
commence to decay when they begin to turn
yellow, even if allowed to remain on the trees.
To the right of the orchard, on a slope, is
the Tea garden, where, I believe, the Tea tree
was first planted in Ceylon. It grows well ;
even at that low elevation the plants are of a
considerable size, are in good health and
annually bear large quantities of seeds.
Leaving the orchard and Tea garden, we ar-
rive on the right bank of the Manawellaganga
and enter the nursery ground which is several
acres in extent. —It is well stocked with
young plants for distribution, especially the
kinds that are popular. Here also about
an acre is planted with Pine apples, which
are grown to obtain young plants for distri-
bution ; —a large quantity of cotton of the
best sorts is grown, and their seeds are also
distributed.
After passing the nursery ground keeping
on the walk, by the river side, on the left,
there is a large young plantation of sheo-„
broma coma (chocolate) growing in the shade ;.
—on the right between the walk and the ri-
ver, there is a plantation of Cardamons (JElet-
teria Cardamomum). —A little further on the
left, there is a quantity of musa lextilis which
yields a fine flax, with which some of the
finest muslins of India are prepared. Besides
this species, most of the cultivated musa (ba-
nanas), yield a fine and strong fibre.
From the musa plantation, for nearly a
mile, the walk by the river side is through
what has recently been a jungle, and all that
is to be seen for that distance may be thus
described. All the under scrub has been
cleared out, and only the good specimens (one
or two of each kind of the trees) have been
left. Some of these are noble trees, and the
most of them are covered with pipers, ferns,
orchids and some climbing avoids. The open
ground caused by the thinning out, is being
filled with other kinds of trees and shrubs,
natives and exotics.
At Hr. Gardner’s monument, which stands
on a knoll, overlooking the river (the Maria-
wellaganga), are some fine fradcarias , doubt-
less as beautiful and as graceful as they are to
be found in Australia, and far excel those of
the same kinds that are growing in Mauritius.
There are also some fine plants of different
kinds of y/upressus fhujas fmmias and gre-
villeas around the monument.
<■/


Not far from the monument, there is a fine
clump of bambusa gigantea , which has canes
about nine or ten inches in diameter. Arriv-
ing again at the entrance gate and passing the
palm group, we enter the main walk, in the
borders of which there is a fine display of
flowers. The borders arc backed by trees
that have beautiful flowers, and are planted
with the choicest flowering tropical shrubs,
caladiums, roses and showy annuals, which
make them look very gay.
Passing along the main walk, for about
four hundred yards, we arrive at an unpre-
tending shaded path, paved with stones, from
the river, which leads to the Fernery. There
are a great many things to admire in the
Ceylon Botanic Gardens, but none are more
worthy than the Fernery. It is about an
acre in extent, and has been so well planned,
laid out and planted, that it looks as if it
were six The greater part of the ferns are
planted in beds, through the centre of which
a caral passes, that keeps Uie soil always
moist. There is also a small rock work for
the kinds that grow either among stones or
on them, or on trunks of trees. The canal,
as it passes over the rock work, has been so
arranged that the water constantly trickles
over the stones, which is highly beneficial for
the ferns that grow upon them. The walks
are four feet wide, and are all paved with
stones from the river and are edged with
square stonps. None of the beds exceed six
feet in width, and the walks wind around
each of (hem, by which means the plants are
seen and easily examined* The Ceylon
Ferns aie chiefly cultivated, some of which
are beautiful and rare, with a good sprink-
ling of exo[ics.
The plants are distributed from the Ceylon
Botanic Gardens by sale; four pence each is
charged for common tdants, which are dug
out of the gvound on demand, and others are
charged according to their rarity and diffi-
culty of propagation.
The yearly average value of the plants sold
during the last four years, is £ 186 19 B£.
There is an excellent library of Botanical
books, and a very extensive herbarium at the
garden*! They have both been got tip en-
tirely by the peiseverance and intelligence
of the present Director, I)r Thwaites.
The gardens are every day open to the
public from 6a. m. to 6p. m., and visitors are
allowed either to drive or ride round them.
The garden is all laid down in grass, which
being pastured by cattle, and with the mag-
nificent trees which it contains, has the ap-
pearance of a nobleman or gentleman’s Park
in Fmgland,
I have, &c.
Signed :
JOHN HORNE.




Botanical Gardens,
February 3rd 1867.
The Honorable
The Colonial Secretary,
&c., &c., &c.
Sir,
I have the honor to submit for the conside-
ration of Ilis Excellency the Governor, the
Report on the Botanical Gardens for 1866.
My direction having only embraced the
last half of the year, I would beg to refer to
the Report for 1865 to show how far progress
has been made in the improvements then com-
menced, or projected. These were the forma-
tion of anew Fernery, Rosary and Herbal
ground, with levelling different pans of the
grounds, labelling plants, etc., all of which,
with the exception of the Herbal ground,
have been carried forward as rapidly as cir-
cumstances would allow, at the same time
that old work, such as the .blasting, and
transport of rock from parts to be levelled,
and macadamising paths, has not been ne-
glected.
A great deal of labour was expended over
the new Fernery, which has been made with
a view to exhibit our ample' set of foreign
ferns, and orchids, hitherto too closely con-
gregated in an inconspicuous and (for the
public) inconvenient spot, and a full set of
indigenous ferns and orchids now being ob-
tained from the woods.— Proper soil is being
brought from Fressanges and Cluny, and in
a shori time tins part of the Gardens, will
have assumed, it is hoped, an attractive ap-
pearance, and will prove a convenient place
of study for those interested in this speciality.
Close to this part of the Gardens, between
the long and round lakes, a sufficiently large
space of ground, formerly covered with scrub,
and useless trees, has been cleared, and the
soil freed of rock for the commencement of
the Rosary, and as a stock of roses has been
prepared, it only remains to the Sub-Direc-
tor to plan out the grounds, and plant them,
to complete this part of last year’s pro-
gramme.
The transport of excavated rock, and tim-
ber, in the preparation of the sites for the
Fernery and Rosary, with macadamising
6000 yards (superficial) of paths have been
sufficient to fully occupy the 23 prisoners
employed in the Gardens. •
The absence of the Sub-Director in Ceylon
somewhat retarded the commencement of the
Herbal ground, until which be completed,
the gardens cannot properly b? called Bota-
nical. This, however, will suffer no longer
delay, and as the results of the mission to
C eylon have met with Ilis Excellency’s ap-
proval, 1 trust they will be held to out-ba-
lance our short-coming on this head.
A great many packets of scuds have been
received for this Herbal ground, the object
in making which is to provide the visitor
with a ready reference to the natural system
of classification of plants, and to provide also
the means of illustrating lectures, in the
event of it being considered advisable to in*
stitute a course.
This, with a Guide to the Gardens, would
render them much more attractive, and va-
luable to the public, and especially to the
youth of the Colony.
As the Surveyor General has lately caused
a survey to be made of the gardens, there
would be no difficulty in producing a guide,
with map, to be sold at a trifling cost, —and
should Ilis Excellency think it desirable to
have this done, 1 should be able in a few
months to lay the materials before him for
approval.
Whilst on this subject, 1 may add that 1
have received letters from the Director of
Kew Gardens, urging the desirability of mak •
ing these gardens of practical utility, not
only for the introduction, distribution, and
study of plants, but for the formation of a
museum of Economic products, with a Her-
barium, and library, and promising a large
contribution of valuable duplicates at present
in the stores at Kew, in the event of such an
institution being commenced, and 1 am hope-
ful that Ilis Excellency may so far approve
the project, as to authorise me to make ex-
changes in plants and specimens of the island,
not only with a view to the foimation of a
Herbarium, but to commence a collection of
rare and useful specimens, which might form
the basis of a museum of Economic Botany.
The position of Mauritius, with respect to
its free communication with all parts of the
world, and its extensive shipping relations,
particulaily with India, and Australia, would
render it an easy matter to procure speci-
mens from these countries, and I have no
doubt that were the project entertained,
valuable contributions would be immediately
obtained from the Directors of Museums and
Gardens in Melbourne, Calcutta and the
Cape, and this, with a small, well selected
library, an instalment to which has already
been received, would place at the convenience
of the public great facilities for study, and go
some way to render the Gardens more at-
tractive, and really botanical.
Of other improvements begun by the Sub-
Director, l would wish to point to the large
number of newly introduced plants, above
1000. planted bv the central palm alleys,
and the extent of grass plot in the same
localities, in place of the disfiguring scrub,
and debris, formerly possessing them.
Of the Correspondence with Colonial, and
European Botanical Departments, much has
been with the. view to the introduction of


planls that may prove suitable for parts of
the island suffering from drought, or where
the soil has been more or less exhausted by
one product, for whilst the physical construc-
tion of the island would point to the never
ending supply of rain that may be expected
for those parts where the trade-wind meets
the mountains, there is mnch to the N. E.
and N. \V. that can only get rain by happy
accident, and for the sterile spots of these,
something is wanted hardy enough to with-
stand ihe worst droughts, and afford a profit
on labour ; and as the fibre-yielding families
are for the most part those suitable to such
places, it has seemed to me to be a proper
object to try and introduce them in order that
some experiments may be made.
The common Agave, Sidas and other
plants of the island, representing these fami-
lies, grow so well, that it may be fairly-
expected that other more valuable species,
such as the African Buaze, the different Cot-
tons, paper plant (Brousonettia ) &c., &c.,
would grow equally well ; and when it is
remembered that some of these yield fibre
worth from £ 15 to £ 20 per ton, it is not
too much to expect that one or other may be
rendered of profitable cultivation in many
places at present waste and profitless.
As the mission of the Sub-Director to Cey-
lon had in view the introduction of whatever
useful plants beside Cinchonas, could he
found, I may be allowed to comment on that
part of the report he has furnished, which
bears upon the present subject.
Although the Cinchonas are not to he
counted among the plants that could be
grown in places unfit for sugar, the best Qui-
nine yeilding have of late years become so
valuable as to be worth cultivation on the
best soil, and as that which would suit them
in this island can only be obtained at the
greatest heights, and in certain positions,
it is a question to be settled how far more
remunerative it may prove than the cultiva-
tion of other plants, such as tea , coffee, &e.,
which would grow on the same lands without
detriment to the advance of the sugar cane.
The species introduced has not disappoint-
ed expectations, the plants thrive, and reports
received on such as were distributed are very
satisfactory.
The greatest height to be had for growing
Cinchonas in this island being perhaps not
more than 1560 feet, and the majority of
species requiring more than the double of that
to grow well, the oue seh cted was the C. Suc-
cirubra which, according to some authorities,
yield the largest quantity of Alkaloids] it is
hardier than the rest, and grows to be a tree
even at the Peradinia Gardens, Ceylon, at a
height of 1500 feet, which allowing for dif-
ference of latitude would (theoretically) redu-
ce the height required in Mauritius very
much, so that with proper care and selection
of site, this species might be expected to
grow at mid-heights of the island. By compar-
ing the thermometer reading of Hakgalle
(4500 ft,) for 1861, with those for the past
year at Cluny, it is found that the mean read-
ings of both maximum and minimum for the
year, almost agree, and the only difference
to plants should he in the move equal distri-
bution of rain, and perhaps move suitable soil
of the former, so that the removal of C Sue-
cirubra, the hardiest species, from Hakgalle
to the higher parts of this island, should not
necessarily subject it to a disadvantage, so far
as climate is concerned, though I am unable
to say how far a ratio may be drawn between
a given difference of height for latitude.—
TheThermometrical observations atPeradinia,
Ceylon, (1500 ft.) in 6° N. Latitude, are
found to correspond very closely to those
taken at Pamplemoussos (200 ft.) Lat 20°
S., so far, that is to say, as regards the means
of heat and cold, the differences in the clima-
tes of the two arc referable to the excessive
moisture of Peradinia, and perhaps the cha-
racter of the soil. At Peradinia, the species C.
Succirubra grows to he a tree 12 f« j et high at
7 years of age, cwteris paribus, it should not
need a much greater height than that of Pam-
plemousses to grow here.
Leaving these considerations entirely out
of the question, (as the Cinchona plantations
in Ceylon are 2500 ft. above Peradinia, and
no other species than Succirubra will grow at
1500 ft. above sea in Ceylon,) the satisfactory
progress of the plants at Cluny, (where they
have been kept by the kind permission of
Mr. Mackintosh) aud at other places to which
they have been distributed, leaves nothing to
be desired.
As the conclusions to be drawn fiom com
parisons of the climate of Peradinia and Pam-
plemous'es cannot, however, be lie Id of prac-
tical value, it remains to cornua re the climate
of Hakgalle (the site of the Cinchona plan-
tations in Ceylon,) with that of the highest
parts of th : s island, in order to show the rela-
tive advantages of each
Observa'ions for the year 1861 at Hakgalle
give it a mean temperature of. . . 64° 6.
Highest 86°
Lowest 48°
and greatest diurnal range. . . . 20°
T am unable to find any accredited tablps
for the greatest heights of this island ; a rough
estimate, however, has bepn made from obser-
vations taken at Cluny during the past year,
which shows a slight difference in favour of
Hakgalle. To render comparisons complete,
the rainfall for the year should he given. This
(which is well tabulated for different parts of
Mauritius) has not been done at Hakgalle,
where, however, rain is said to have fallen on
198 days of the year 1861.


The best authorities say that at least 100
inches of rain should fall and be pretty
equally distributed through the year.
This desideratum to a great extent, and
most others to a greater, can be very fairly
met in different parts of the island, of which
I may instance those lying between Phoenix
and Curepipe, and Cluny and Curepipe, Gros
Bois, Vacoa and Grand Bassin.
Of the other plants and seeds brought from
Ceylon, most are doing well, and Tea plants
will shortly be ready for distribution.
Of the gross number of plants introduced
during the year, from all sources, most have
been of an ornamental character, amongst
them, however, were 5 species of sugar cane
from Java, said to he new to the island. It
remains to be seen whether they are better
than those at present under cultivation. Of
the whole number for the year (4831 against
3068 for 1865,) a very large per centago of
those from temperate clime'’, are found dead
on arrival, or die soon after.
The proportion of death for plants from
cold latitudes is about cent per cent, and for
temperate, but little less.
It is not possible to say how much this
might be lessened, were the plants to be at
once removed on arrival to a higher site than
that of Pamplemousses, but that the imme-
diate cause of death is the excessive dry heat,
inducing, if I may be allowed the expression,
a hypercrisis in the circulation of the plant,
cannot be doubted, and it may be infened that
a temporary suspension of the exhaustive in-
fluence to which plants from temperate or
cold climes are subjected at Pamplemousses,
would give them the rest they want, in order
to become accommodated to the change.
This view seems to be confirmed by ob-
serving that newly introduced plants from
cold climates lose the season of flowering,
and take the character of indigenous plants,
which are fo be found in bud, flower and
fruit at the same time, and by this want of
rest they soon lose strength and die from
exhaustion. In fact the plethora induced by
exalted circulation from heat, ends in the
same way as repression of it, by frost or
sudden cold, and rupture of the vessel and
death follow in both instances
The process of labelling plants has been
commerced, and 1000 labels obtained from
the Powder Mill Orphan Asylum, will shortly
be distlibuted through the gardens. Here,
however, it will have to cease for awhile,
unless specially' provided for, as that part of
the grant for tools, &c., which was to have
paid fur the labels, has been lost, the order
for the labels not having been completed in
time to send in the bill by the end of the
year.—This work will be much facilitated by
the kindness of the Acting Inspector General
of Police., who has put the use of the printing
machine of his Establishment at the disposal
of the gardens, in the intervals of the Police
work. It remains only for me to bring for-
ward statistics corresponding to those fur-
nished on former occasions.
1. The abstracts of Expenditure for the
year, which show a total of £ 1805 against
the vote of £ 1873 giving a balance of £ 68.
This difference arises from the grant for tools
and obtaining plants not being expended, and
for workmen’s broken time ;
2. A list of ihe plants sent away, amount-
ing to 2 461; exceeding the number sent away
in 1865 by 383 ;
3. A list of those introduced, being 4831,
against 3068 for 1865.
4 A table showing the number distributed
in the Colony 54,834, against 57,247 for
1865 ;
5. A list of the police cases. These are of
the usual character but less numerous, 13
against 22;
6. A: table shewing the number of visitors
for the year. The total being 37,669 against
42040 for 1865 ;
In the remarks of the last page of this list
will be found an abstract of the greatest and
least numbers for each day, week, and month.
7. Meteorological;
The lists for rainfall, geo-thermal, and
air thermometer readings, are incomplete ; but
comparing the greatest and least rainfall
with 1865, the former is found in January,
10 inches against 23 inches for December
1865; and the least in June, 14 inches,
against 19 inches of June 1S65.
The geo-thermal readings compared with
readings for the air, show that during the
months composing the hot season the air is
hotter than the earth, and during the cold,
the reverse.
I have also abbreviated the tables 2 and 3,
detailing the number of eases and packets of
plants and seed received and sent away ;
No. 4. A return of plants distributed in
the Colony ; and
No. 6. A return of the number of visitors
for the year, in order that if the report be
printed, the tedious and perhaps useless de-
tails may be omitted.
T have, &c.,
CHARLES MELLER,
Director,






