

A * Jr
* W0f - W%& :: ii?& *
x
. *;. iL . _ _ ._ _ _
TTufMoa*
•i rn»
o • v




BOXING
Australian and Marquis of Queensberry
Rules
A Complete Instructional Course
in the Art of Boxing
WILL LAWLESS
("Solar Plexus")
Published and supplied by
MICK SIMMONS LTD.
SYDNEY and NEWCASTLE


INDEX
A Right, to block or
defeat 30
Back Move 27
Blows, declared foul 15
Blows, to be barred 13
Body, Right to the 41
Body, to attack with left 40
Boxing Lessons 17
Boys, should they learn to
box? 51, 52
Championships 10
Clinching 14
Decisions 13
Feinting 40
Figg & Broughton 5
Fist Fighting, home of 4
Foul Blows 14, 15
In Fighting 49
Knockout, the Double 15
Left Counter 26
Left Hook 24
Left for the Body 34
Lett Shift 42
Left Shift, block for 42
Left Swing to Body 36
Methods of Scoring 13
Must retire to Corner .... 16
Points, how counted 13
Right Cross, to beat a .... 30
Right Cross Counter 27
Rules Governing Austral-
ian Boxing 8
Rules, Marquis of Queens-
berry 6
Rules, Old Time 6
Solar Plexus Punch 22
Stadium, the first 4
Uppercuts 43
Uppercut, Block for left 45
Uppercut, Right 45
Weight Limits 9


INTRODUCTION.
As almost weekly some trivial question concerning rules in
Boxing is asked by the correspondents, I have arrived at the
conclusion that the general run of those who follow the boxing
game are not “au fait” with the standard arrived at by the con'
ference of 1913, or with what the meeting of referees of that
period agreed to. I, therefore, decided to publish them in book
form, and preface them with a brief history of the pugilistic
calling from the time when the Greeks and Romans indulged
in the then not'too'gentle art of fisticuffs.
The boxing those worthy ancients knew was of a much
more strenuous and hazardous form than that we know tO'day.
Indeed, they were often wont to fight to the death.
We of the present day regard bouts under the old English
Prize Ring rules, that called for bare-knuckled fighting, and to
a finish, as being brutal, and who will argue otherwise? Still,
was not that form mere child’s play in comparison with the
methods previously employed, when the cruel, death-dealing
weapon called the “Cestus” was added as an additional means
of offence.
There were various kinds of Cestus, one being of the kind
sometimes used by present-day footpads, and known as “knuckle-
dusters.”
It is generally made of brass, has roughened and raised
rings that fit the fingers, and contains a short bar, or grip for
the cruel user. But the more popular was the one made of
greenhide, and which was fastened round the wrist, hand and
forearms, studded with metal; while a third variety was made
of hardwood and iron, and so constructed as to act as a pro-
tection against injury to the user’s hands.
No matter what style, however, they were all deadly
weapons.


THE FIRST STADIUM.
The first Cestus was founded at Herculaneum, at the foot
of Vesuvius, and not far from the ruins of Pompeii. Here
many a horrible and barbaric battle was decided. However,
when little rays of intelligence began to illumine the minds of
those barbarians, and they began to realise that matters were
becoming “too hot,” it was decided to temporise by using some
means of protection, with the result that a head-guard was
introduced.
This protective agent was called the “Samphotides. It
was made of leather, and fitted the head closely, and, as a
further protection for the temporal bones and arteries, it was
thickly quilted inside, thus dulling the concussion of the other
fellow’s blows.
HOME OF FIST-FIGHTING.
That England is not the home of fist-fighting is shown by
a glance through ancient works on the custom of the day, at
a date long before the time when knuckle-fighting under rules
in England was indulged in. It was practised in Italy; but it
was not very popular, for the majority of folks favoured the
more deadly method of settling disputes—the use of the knife
or stiletto.
Boxing for the youthful Greek or Roman was an essential,
incidental of their educational curriculum, as its practice
strengthened the body, dissipated fear, and infused a manly
courage into the system. But the fact that the main idea was
to see how great an amount of punishment one could give and
receive, makes it hard to believe how such a cruel method of
fighting benefited mentally or physically those who practised
it, or that it would in any way edify those who witnessed such
an insane and barbarous way of doing things.
But, in season and out, to England is due praise for this:
that her sons, whether fighting men or otherwise, always depend
upon nature’s weapons to resent insult.


Though there were many brave old English fighters who
performed heroically on the green fields in battles with fists, no
record can be found of doings prior to those of James Figg,
who had evidently proved his superiority over all other con-
tenders with “all-in” fist-fighting, the broadsword and cudgel.
FIGG AND BROUGHTON.
Figg was recognised champion from 1719 to 1734. In
those dim and distant days, men fought until one gave in
through sheer exhaustion. There was no minute spell; they
fought to a “semi-finish.” I write “semi-finish” because often,
after a rest, and if both were well enough and willing, the
battle was continued, each man armed with a broadsword.
Even then they were not always satisfied. If possible, winner
and loser of the two previous rough and tumbles met with
cudgels.
However, the coming of Jack Broughton, the father of
fights under his own rules, soon placed matters on a better and
a more humane footing, with the result that fighting became
a most popular sport; although, like a lot of other good th/ngs,
it was spoiled by the blackguards, who at times figured in the
ring, and their gangs of hangers-on. Though the second recog-
nised champion knuckle-fighter of England, it is doubtful if the
very pick of those who followed Broughton were his equal in
intelligence, or more popular than he.
With such a man at the head of the fistic game, it is not
at all surprising to find that a way of making the game more
interesting and free, as far as possible, from fatal results, was
thought out and put into practice.
This grand old-time champion succeeded in arranging the
compilation of common-sense rules that were approved by the
“gentlemen,” meaning those good sports who paid all training
expenses and found the backing. These rules found favour
with fighters, and on August 18, 1743, became law—if not by
legal process, certainly by token of the approval of all con-
cerned with the welfare of fighting.


They read as follows:
1. That the space of a year be chalked in the centre of the
stage; and every fresh set-to after a fall, or being parted from the
rails, each second will bring his man to the side of the square, and
place him opposite to the other; and till they are fairly set to at
the lines, it should not be lawful for one to strike the other.
2. That in order to prevent any disputes as to the time a man
lies after a fall, if a second does not bring his man to the side
of the square within the space of half a minute, he shall be deemed
a beaten man.
3. That in every main battle, no person whatever shall be on
the stage, except the principals and their seconds; the same rule to
be observed in bye-battles, except that, in the latter, Mr. Broughton
is allowed to be on the stage to keep decorum, and to assist
gentlemen in getting to their places; provided always he does not
interfere in the battle; and whoever presumes to infringe these
rules, to be turned immediately out of the house. Everybody is to
quit the stage as soon as the champions are stripped, before they
set-to.
4. That no champion is deemed beaten unless he fails coming
up to the line in the limited time; or that his own second declares
him beaten. No second is to be allowed to ask his man’s adversary
any questions or advise him to give in.
5. That, in bye-battles, the winning man to have two-thirds of
the money given, which shall be publicly divided upon the stage,
notwithstanding any private agreement to the contrary.
6. That to prevent disputes, in every main battle, the prin-
cipals shall on the coming on the stage, choose from the gentle-
men present two umpires, who shall absolutely decide all disputes
that may arise about the battle; and if the two umpires cannot
agree, the said umpires to choose a third, who is to determine it.
7. That no person is to hit his adversary when he is down,
or seize him by the ham, or any part below the waist; a man on
his knees to be reckoned down.
MARQUIS OF QUEENSBERRY RULES.
Even to-day the rules under which the boxing is conducted
are called by the big majority those of the Marquis of Queens-
berry; but as that nobleman, with the able assistance of a
gentleman named Chambers, revised the old Broughton rules to
better govern amateur boxing with gloves, our present set are
really amended Broughton rules to suit the professional glove
contests, and are different in many ways from the code respected
by amateurs.
Everywhere it was the custom to have glove fights to a
finish, but later on the Marathon journey was limited to twenty-
five rounds, making it possible for the referee to better arrive


at a decision should an even battle of twenty rounds be fought,
for he could then order extra rounds to an additional five. Our
limit now, of course, is twenty.
It is a nerve-wracking bus.ness that should not be tolerated
in this country, where so many lads have burnt themselves out
in their early manhood through undergoing the training neces-
sary to fight so long. It is my profound convicfon that we
should follow in the footsteps of America, where a more humane
rule prevents contests be ng over fifteen rounds for champion-
ship battles, and more often than not, these important events
are limited to ten and twelve rounds; and it was over tire
shorter distance that Tunney defeated Dempsey.
Early in the history of pugilism, different fight centres had
d fferent rules, but by degrees they all fell into line, with the
result that by 1912 a universal code of rules governed world-
wide boxing.
But there still remained a wide difference in the various
weight limits, for whilst the lightweight limit in America was
9st. 71b., and in England 9st. 91b., ours was set at 10 stone.
Our middleweight limit was list. 41b., as against list. 61b. of
England and America, where they fought the welter limit of
lOst. 71b., as against our lOst. 101b., which was a poundage
between our lightweight and our middleweight limits.
In an article written for “The Globe in April, 1913, it
was pointed out that whilst it may have been possible for an
Australian weighing 9st. 71b. to go to England and America
and defeat the champion of each country, he might be beaten
by the Australian champion because of the latter’s half-stone
advantage in weight. But it could not be said that the winner
was a world’s champion because of his not complying with the
weight limits of other parts. The article had its desired effect,
for shortly after it appeared, Mr. R. L. Baker, then managing
director of Stadiums Ltd., called a meeting of all concerned.
At the Hotel Australia the following scale of weights and
set of rules were agreed to:


RULES TO GOVERN AUSTRALIAN BOXING.
1. All contests to be decided in a roped ring, not less than
16 feet or more than 24 feet.
2. Contestants to box in shoes, or light boots (without
spikes), or in socks.
3. In all contests the number and duration of rounds must
be specified. The limit shall be twenty three-minute rounds:
;he interval between the rounds shall be one minute. All charm
pionship contests shall be over 20 three-minute rounds. The
gloves to be used shall be of a minimum weight of eight ounces,
and shall be provded by the promoter.
4. The contestants shall be en'.'tled to the assistance of not
more than four seconds, who are to be approved by the pro-
moter; and no advice can be given by the seconds during the
progress of a round.
5. In all contests the decision shall be given in favour of
the contestant who attains the greater number of points. The
points shall be for: ATTACK —Direct clean hits with the
knuckle part of the glove on any part of the front, or sides of
the head or body, above the belt. DEFENCE —Guarding, slip
ping, ducking, or getting away. Where points are otherwise
equal, the preference to be given to the contestant who does the
most of the leading off, or displays the best style.
6. The referee may disqualify a contestant for delivering a
foul blow, intentionally or otherwise; for holding, butting, palm-
ing, shouldering, falling without receiving a blow, wrestling, or
for boxing unfairly by hitting with open glove, the inside or
butt of the hand, with the wrist or elbow, or for roughing.
7. If. in the opinion of the referee, a deliberate foul has
been committed by a contestant, such contestant shall not be
entitled to a prize.
8. The referee shall have power to stop a contest if, in his
opinion, a man is unfit to continue, and that man shall be
deemed to have lost the contest.
9. No second or any other person will be allowed in the
ring during the rounds. Each contestant shall be entitled to
the assistance of not more than four seconds, who must take


8
6
Feather
9
0
Lightweight
9
9
Welterweight
1 0
7
Middleweight
II
6
Mid Heavyweight
12
7
Heavyweight
Any weij
?ht
up position outside the ring, under pain of disqualificat on of
their principal by the referee, and may not coach, or assist in
any manner, or advise their principal during the progress ot
a round, or enter the ring during the progress of a contest. A
second refusing to obey the orders of the referee shall be
removed from the position and be replaced by another approved
by the referee.
10. The contestant failing to come up when time is called,
or refusing to obey the referee, he shall lose the contest. A
man on one knee, or on the ropes with both feet off the floor,
shall be considered down.
11. If a contestant slips down he must get up again im-
mediately. His opponent must stand back out of distance until
the fallen man is on his feet, when the contest shall he resumed.
A contestant who has knocked down his opponent must immedi-
ately walk to his corner; but should the fallen one be knocked
down in that corner, the contestant delivering the knock-down
shall retire to the farthest corner. A man knocked down must
rise unassisted in ten seconds, or lose the contest.
12. The contestants shall not hit while in a clinch. A
clinch shall be constituted by both men holding ether with one
or both hands.
13. The referee shall decide: (i) any question not provided
for in these rules; (ii) the interpretation of any of these rules.
WEIGHT LIMITS.
The weight limits agreed upon for the various divisions
were; —•
It was also decided that the weighing for all contests shall
be at ringside, and with n an hour of the advertised time foi
commencing the contest.


CHAMPIONSHIPS.
The Australian contests shall be contests decided in Aus'
tralia, and that where a boxer from any other country having
a twelve months’ residential qualification defeats an Australian
in an Australian championship, he shall be the holder of the
championship only when resident in this country, and that on
his departure the championship shall revert to the former holder.
In the event of the death of the holder of any title, such title
shall revert to the previous holder. In the event of the holder
of any title not engaging in a contest for six months, or should
such holder announce his retirement from active boxing, any
titles held by him shall revert to previous holders.
Here are further decisions of the important conference:—
In the event of the holder of any title being absent from the
district, Stale, or country for a longer period than six months, he
shall forfeit such title, which will revert to the previous holder.
In the event of the holder of any title winning a more important
championship in the same division, he shall cease to hold the
former title, which shall revert to the previous holder. A cham-
pionship contest shall take place within the boundaries of the
district, State, or country to which such title applies.
The principals in all contests shall undergo a medical examin-
ation within forty-eight hours of the starting of such contests,
and shall produce to the promoter a certificate from a medical
practitioner certifying to his physical fitness to engage in such a
contest „
In the event of a contestant being "counted out as the result
of a blow which, in his opinion, was a foul, or which was delivered
when the referee was not in a position to see the blow struck, the
referee, on the claim of foul by the contestant, shall have the
power to have the contestant medically examined as soon after
the occurrence as possible.
Should the medical examiner’s report uphold the claim, the
tontestant shall be awarded the contest.
No in-fighting shall be allowed, and the interpretation of the
word "in-fighting” shall rest entirely with the referee.
In the result of any contest a knock-out shall be counted:
(a) when contestant is knocked down, and is not on his feet and
ready to resume boxing in ten seconds from the time he was
knocked down; (b) when a contestant’s towel is thrown in while
he is taking the count; (c) should a contest be stopped by a
referee, or any official, owing to a contestant not being considered
to be in a fit condition to continue as a result of punishment he
has received.


Stars of the "Squared" Ring
The
Peerless
‘Lightning’
GLOVES
Used by Australia's
leading Stadiums and
supplied to the Aus-
tralian Naval Depart-
ment and Military
Forces. Australia's
finest glove, crafts-
man-made down to
the minutest detail*
STADIUM PROFESSIONAL MODEL—Highest grade napa leather,
laced palm, padded wg'st, 6 to 8 ozs.
INSTRUCTOR'S GLOVES . . . BOXING BOOTS . . . HEAD
GUARDS . . ...FOUL-PROOF SHIELDS . . . ATHLETIC SUPPORTS
PUNCHING .BALLS . . . PUNCHING BAGS . . . PUNCH'NG
BAG GLOVES ETC., ETC.
Mick Simmons Ltd. are Suppliers of Gloves and Material to
Leading Stadiums. „ „
MICK SIMMONS LTD.
HEADQUARTERS: 712-722 GEORGE ST., HAYMARKET, SYDNEY
Branches: CITY, SUBURBS and at 109 HUNTER ST., NEWCASTLE


SERVICE
as interpreted by the
Mich Simmons Organisation.
The House of Mick Simmons has been faith-
fully built on the pillar of Service; the founda-
tion stone of which was laid 70 years ago.
And this guiding principle ... so zealously
laid down by the founder ... is still the
unremitting policy of both Management and
staff to-day. At the outset it was realised that
the retailing of quality sporting merchandise
demanded specialisation ... in other words,
it demanded that the merchandise be not only
good, but had to be handled and sold by
specialists in each particular field, it was for
this reason the Mick Simmons Organisation
conceived the idea of attaching to a depart-
ment an acknowledged expert or sporting per-
sonality to give the ultimate in service to
discerning sportsmen and sportswomen. Whilst
the idea has been followed to a small degree
by other firms, Mick Simmons Ltd., as the
Premier Sports House of Australia, still have
the first choice of Australia's most prominent
sporting stars and experts in each particular
field. This specialisation idea of Service has
been closely followed in the new departments
that have been added to the Organisation in
recent years. Thus has Service been truly
symbolised. When you make a purchase at
any Mick Simmons' department do not over-
look the tact that you are dealing with a firm
that has behind it 70 years of honest trading
and faithful public service.
MICK SIMMONS LTD.


It was also agreed that the proper place for the referee is
in the ring. It was also agreed, subject to approval by a sub-
committee to be formed, that what is known as the light-heavy-
weight division shall be named sub-heavy.
METHODS OF SCORING: BLOWS TO BE BARRED.
At Mr. Baker’s suggestion, the question of the barring of
certain blows, and the best methods to employ in the direction of
awarding points by referees, were allowed to stand over for a
conference of referees, to take place at a later date. Conse-
quently, on July 31st, 1914, at tbe Hotel Australia, this confer-
ence was held, when the following thoroughly representative
gathering cleared the air of certain matters in dispute. For a
time the beneficial results of these conferences were not notice-
able.
With the Great War, however, and the influenza epidemic,
causing the shutting down of all boxing resorts, the good inten-
tions to follow in tbe lines set down for clean sport, by the rules
already referred to, seemed to be forgotten, and even to-day, sad
to relate, foul work is more prevalent in Sydney than ever before.
Among those present at the conference were the late Mr.
L. H. Nathan, who was voted to the chair; Messrs. R. L. Baker,
Director of the Stadium in Sydney, Melbourne and Brisbane:
Jack Munro, manager, and Wally Weekes, referee of the
Olympia Stadium, Newtown, Sydney; Mr. Vic Newhouse, repre-
senting Victoria; Mr. Mick Dunn, representing Queensland;
and Messrs. Clem Stynes, Les. Corbett, Fred Baker, Sid Storey,
and Harry Keesing (Secretary); whilst Mr. Arthur Scot repre-
sented the governing body of amateur boxing.
THE DECISIONS: HOW POINTS ARE TO BE
COUNTED.
After discussing whether the maximum points per round
be five or three, the conference agreed upon the first number.
A man scoring the maximum number of points did not neces-
sarily mean that the other man did not score some. As a . mat-
ter of fact, it is quite possible for each to have five alongside
his name for any session, and in a short distance in every
session fought, but, of course, highly improbable.


CLINCHING.
As to what constituted a clinch was left to the discretion
of the referee, but it was agreed to that the man who indulged
in too much of that kind of work might be penalised to the
extent of disqualification, or at least he might not receive points
for any good he might otherwise do in the way of attack or
clean defence.
FOUL BLOWS.
At the suggestion of Mr. Baker, it was agreed that referees
should insist upon all boxers wearing protective shields. But
as there are shields and shields—those that might protect and
those that surely injure when an accidental blow does land- —
that matter is not now enforced by the referee.
In the event of an accidental foul taking place, and it does
not injure the opponent, the boxer who delivered the blow should
not be disqualified. This will, no doubt, surprise not only many
present-day followers of the game, but also some referees, too,
judging by the prompt manner in which they act when a foul
of the description happens. But in the event of a referee not
being in a position to see a foul blow struck, and the boxer
is injured, he will give his decision according to the medical
examination.
The conference agreed that a knock down blow does not
necessarily mean an additional number of points, but is equiva-
lent to any ordinary well-placed and played for blows.
It was decided that when a man is knocked down, and
falls through the ropes, or is disabled in any way, the count
should be put on him, and if the second of any boxer enters
the ring during the progress of a round, the boxer shall be
disqualified; but in matters of this kind it was left to the dis-
cretion of the referee.
This was, indeed, a wise precaution, as to make it absolutely
compulsory would be playing into the hands of an unscrupu-
lous second, who, after backing the man at the other end of
the fistic argument, could enter the ring and make a certainty
of collecting his money. Or it might so happen that boxer and
second might be in the swim, and so the doing of wrong would
be made very easy.
14


BLOWS DECLARED FOUL.
Both kidney blows and the “occipital” punch, known bet'
ter as the “rabbit killer” —a blow which lands on the back ot
the neck, and not infrequently with the edge or the butt ot
the hand, were declared foul.
THE DOUBLE KNOCKOUT.
The question of the duty of the referee, in the case of a
double knockout arose recently between a New Zealand visitor
and myself. The man from the Dominion, who is a member of
the National Sporting Club of London, and who had refereed
for that world'famed institution, stated that the third man in
the ring was by duty bound to give the decision to the man who
was leading on points at the time when fists simultaneously
crashed, and rendered both boxers hors'de'combat. According
to our rules, the verdict in such a case would be a draw.
A boxer going to the floor without receiving a blow should
be ordered to rise instantly. A boxer sitting on the ropes with
both feet off the ground should have the count put on him.
The boxer who could balance himself on the ropes, as
they are now fixed, would have to be a tighprope walker, or
an exceptionally clever balancer.
Using the ropes for the purpose of getting more power
into the swing with the other hand, or for the purpose of assist'
ing to rise, were actions ordered to be barred.
Another rule was, a boxer indulging in any irregularity
for which he has already been reprimanded, shall be finally
cautioned, with a threat of disqualification. Should he again
offend, he shall be promptly disqualified.
It was also agreed that aggressiveness without effect be not
considered, and the same applied to defence without motive.
That means the boxer who is trying to make a fight of it,
while the other fellow, by far the better boxer, indulges in
nothing but defence, the aggressive one should be declared the
winner.
Offensive behaviour by a second, by loudly or otherwise
giving advice, was made punishable by his removal from the
corner, and the disqualification of the principal.


This was not a wise suggestion, as it savoured of inflicting
undue punishment on the boxer, who has plenty to do in mind'
ing his own business without being saddled with the response
bility of his second’s actions.
Blows not struck with the knuckle part of the hand were
not to count as points, or they may bring about disqualification,
especially when the butt of the hand be used.
Talking to each other whilst the fight is in progress was
also declared a breach, necessitating a caution from the referee.
The decision to go on; “If a boxer in a contest has any
part of his body other than his feet on the floor, he shall be
considered down, and the count shall be put on him.
If a boxer, therefore, is on his feet, and bent over with
his hands on the floor, he shall be considered down, and it will,
therefore, be a foul should his opponent strike him in that
position.
This will come as a surprise to many who were conversant
with rules before 1914, for then, if such a circumstance arose,
the man standing erect could strike his opponent on the plea
that the other fellow was on his feet.
MUST RETIRE TO CORNER
It was unanimously agreed that when a boxer is knocked
down, the other man must retire to the farthest corner, and if
a boxer refrains from doing so, the referee is empowered to
stop counting until the rule is carried out.
Some little time back. Referee Major Craig, at the Brisbane
Stadium, exercised such right, and he was abused by the on'
lookers, and soundly rated by the local Press. And for taking
sides with the third-man'in'the'ring, I was also written of in
anything but a friendly way by some scribes.
The “Shamrock” punch was also barred. This is a blow
used in close range fighting. It is brought up in a back'hand
fashion, and more often than not the wrist or forearm is used,
and, therefore, the right thing to do was to prohibit its use.


BOXING LESSONS.
Having satisfied those who were not hitherto conversant
with the rules governing the game, I am desirous of enlighten'
ing youthful boxers in the best methods to employ to assist
them towards the goal of every young boxer’s ambition—the
championship.
Though many of the moves suggested, and illustrated, are
not practised in their entirety by present day champions, it is
not to say that they are not the very best of all times, as in
almost every instance they were those of the great Australians
of the past, who wanted but the chance to prove their superior'
ity, in every division, against the best of all other parts.
Fig. 1
The learner should never lose sight of the fact that his left
is by far his best hand, and by using it in the way in which I
will describe it will prove a defensive as well as an offensive
weapon. The student should adopt the stand explained and
shown in Fig. 1, and when in distance should shoot out his


left with a turn so that it will land as in the next illustration,
Fig. 2, making contact with the knuckles, the palm facing down'
wards. By this means the blow will be heavier than if struck
in the generally accepted method —i.e., palm side on, and the
small finger facing the ground. It will also act as a guard for
the right cross, as I will proceed to show.
Fig. 2.
In delivering the left so that the third joints of the fingers
land, and the thumb is on top, and the little finger below, there
is naturally a slight bend downwards at the elbow, a bend that,
no matter how small, is sufficient to permit an opponent to cross
his right to the jaw, or sufficiently close to that vulnerable spot
to give one a dazed feeling. the hand in the proper
position, according to my idea, as shown in Fig. 2, the slight
upward bend in the arm above the elbow joint will be the
means of protecting the boxer from the dangerous right cross
counter. In order to thoroughly grasp my meaning, the learner
should request some of his acquaintances to slowly cross the


right to his left lead, using the latter in each of the two ways I
have mentioned, and the strength of my argument will be easily
seen.
If the learner delivers the left in the fashion that I have
described, he will find that the right, as a guard, will naturally
take on that half turn, if both weapons are used simultaneously
on their mission of offence and defence. A trial will demon'
strate this conclusively.
Fig. 3.
In blocking the left lead on the right forearm, or palm, the
boxer should throw off the punch to the right. This will tend
to put an opponent off his balance, when he will prove an easy
mark, probably for both hands. If a novice should be boxing
a man who uses the left hand only as a means of offence, for
once or twice he should block and counter. Then in, say, the
third attempt, he should duck his head to the right. The oppo-
nent’s left will go over his left shoulder, and he will bring the
other in close enough to permit a forceful blow being landed


with the left to the nose, as in Fig. 3, and Fig. 4 shows also what
will happen against such an opponent.
Another successful method, after blocking and countering
with his left for a few times, is to suddenly back'move the oppo-
nent’s attempt. This will cause him to over-reach himself, and
give you the chance for the use of the right, or both hands, with
damaging effect.
Fig. 4.
Fig. 5 shows another good way of beating a straight left.
It has been back-moved, and with left pressing hard against
left, by giving an opponent a slight turn inwards, the boxer is
in an excellent position to drive a hard right to the body.
By jumping back nimbly on both feet, as the left lead comes
his way, the learner will cause his opponent to over-reach him-
self, and thus leave an opening to land a right upper-cut under
the chin. This is demonstrated in Fig. 6.


Fig. 5.


m
“SOLAR PLEXUS” PUNCH.
This blow won the first world’s heavyweight championship
for Bob Fitzsimmons when he defeated James J. Corbett on
March 17, 1897. American scribes referred to it as having
been originated by the winner, who put it into practice for the
first time on that occasion, whereas, in point of fact, it was
known to Larry Foley more than forty years previous, and was
taught by him, and many others who followed that greatest of
all instructors.
Fig. 7.
This famous blow is yet another good way of defeating a
left lead, and simultaneously scoring with one’s own left to the
body. Until Fitzsimmons used it w'th such damaging effect
on the date named, it was known as the “left to the mark,” a
name given to that portion of the body beneath the chest and
just where the ribs part —the stomach really. But as it was
called by the proper professional term, solar-plexus, by a doctor
who was present at the Fitzsimmons'Corbett contest, it has
ever since been known by this designation. When delivered


helpless.
properly, this is not only one of the most severe blows known
in the game, but, strangely enough, it is the safest.
The head is ducked well to the right, and at the same time,
the left is driven shortly, but stiffly, to the stomach, and the
opponent, as shown in Fig. 7, is in a position that makes him
Fig. 8.
Beginners, as a rule, are inclined to use their left in a
chopping manner. This should be avoided at all costs. No good
can result from it, as it not only shortens the reach, but by
back'moving, the other man creates a splendid opening for his
own right, or it is easily crossed by the latter weapon. Should
the learner find himself getting into this bad habit, he should
keep on practising until he has succeeded in delivering his
punch straightly and correctly. .


LEFT HOOK.
As every follower of boxing is aware, the left hook is a
hard and solid punch. Countless K.O. victories have been
achieved by its agency. As the fist is in exactly the same posh
tion when landing as it would be in my way of delivering a
straight left, with palm of hand downwards, its merit amply
proves the correctness of my method.
Fig. 9.
L ; ke the swinging punch, generally speaking, the left hook
is easy to block. It can be done by catching an opponent’s
left wrist with the right hand open, and by giving it a twist
outward, as in Fig. 8. This will probably bring the other off


his balance, when the boxer can then operate with his own left
by hooking or driving it, and following quickly a short right
to the chin.
Fig 9 shows another way. The right blocks the offending
weapon further up the arm, thus bringing the other man closer
in; a desirable way of performing the trick should his height
and reach be greater than that of the man on the defence.
Fig. 10
In Fig. 10 can be seen a still better way of defeating the
left hook. The learner should step lightly to the left on the
left foot, and whilst ducking his head in that direction also,
send the right straight out to the face; really an inside right
counter.


LEFT COUNTER.
Fig. 11 shows a neat way by which a boxer may get the
better of a left counter, provided, of course, he is matched
against a man about his own equal in height and reach. The
boxer on the left side has kept both feet flat on the ground
with his weight mostly on the right leg, thus bringing himself
Fig. 11.
far enough back to make the other man's left miss by an inch
or so. The fact that the latter has raised himself on his right
foot brings him sufficiently forward to bump his nose against
the left that has been sent out stiffly and to its fullest length.
Then by slightly raising himself on the toes of the right foot
(he defender will add force to his own blow and greater dis*
tance to his reach.


BACK MOVE
In back-moving, as in retreating, many boxers make the
grave mistake of over-doing it. They either bend their bodies
too far back, or skip so far away as to cause the intended blow
to miss by even feet in some instances. This is an absurd move,
because they fail to be in a position to take advantage of what-
ever opening has been created when they have caused their
opponent to miss.
Fig. 12.
Fig. 12 shows the correct way of back-moving. The boxer
on the left has bent his right knee, and thus brought himself
far enough back to make the blow just miss. It is apparent,
therefore, that he is in an excellent position to retaliate with
either, or both hands.
RIGHT CROSS COUNTER,
This blow, when properly executed, invariably spells dis-
aster to the other fellow if the latter leads with the thumb of


his left hand uppermost instead of downward. To do it pro-
perly one should wait for the opponent’s lead with the left, and
the instant it comes let go with the right for the jaw, at the
same time ducking slightly to the left. If one happens to strike
at the psychological moment, he will cross just over the bend in
the arm above the elbow, to the jaw, or near enough thereto
to do damage. The fact of one’s opponent coming forward at
the moment the right makes contact will add considerably more
force to the blow.
Fig. 13.
For the various reasons already explained by me in dealing
with the position of the left at the moment of landing, it is as
well to strike with the right in a similar fashion, with the back
of the hand uppermost, at the same time raising one’s self on
the toes of the right foot, as shown in Fig. 13. This will not
only add inches to one’s reach, but will also lend greater force
to the blow.


Fig. 14.
Fig. 15


cross.
TO BLOCK OR DEFEAT A RIGHT.
There are many so-called authorities who have peculiar
ideas of what a right cross really is. One realises that, when
one, in reading an account of a fight, is told frequently how So-
and-so crossed his right to the jaw, and hey, presto! the deed
was done—the recipient was knocked out. As a matter of fact,
the blow that caused the sudden cessation of hostilities was not
a right cross at all. According to these people, every time a
right is used it is a cross. This, of course, is far from being the
case. The right must cross outside, or inside, an offensive
weapon.
For instance, if a boxer back-moves, retreats, or side-steps, a
left lead, and comes in quickly with his own right to the head,
it is a common, ordinary, every-day kind of right, but not a
Fig. 16.
TO BEAT A RIGHT CROSS.
The boxer who leads with the right invariably swings, and
thus makes his blow the easiest to defeat. In describing the


first, and perhaps, the simplest and most effective way, one
should study Fig. 14. Prompt action is imperative when a right
swing has been let loose. One should drive his left straight to
the face, as shown in the illustration, stepping in with the
punch.
In the next plate, Fig. 15, can be seen the splendid open'
ing that has been created for the use of the right to the head or
body. If the right is sent out straight the left foot should be
a little to the left, and the body inclined in the same direction.
Fig. 17.
In Fig. 16 the defensive move is different. The blow is
ducked and the defender then steps well forward on his left
foot, gripping the body of his opponent with his right, thus
placing him in an entirely helpless position. If the other fellow
has managed to get his left in a position to jolt to the body,
one must grip the biceps of that arm, and by pressing it closely
to the side, make it impossible for the attacker to use it. (See
Fig. 17).


Fig. 18.
Fig. 19


KA
If one’s opponent, in order to get his left home solidly,
performs what is known as “the shift,” that is, if he quickly
alters the position of his feet by placing the right instead of
the left foot forward, the defender should jump back rapidly;
then return immediately the other man’s blow has expanded
itself, and land his right to the nose. (Fig. 18).
Fig. 20.
The illustration, Fig. 19, shows the very best stop of all. It
consists of the simple process of putting the left up, blocking the
lead when half on its way, and then shooting one’s own right
to the head or body. The other man, as can be seen in this
illustration, is off his balance, and is not, therefore, in a position
to defend himself.


Fig. 21.
LEFT FOR THE BODY.
By slightly dragging the left foot back, conclude the move-
ment hy a stiff left to the nose. By folding both arms across
the spot aimed at as in Fig. 21, an impenetrable block is made.
Fig. 22


Fig. "
Again, as shown in the illustration, Fig. 22, the left may be
chopped down sharply on the opponent’s forearm, thus clearing
the way for a right to the head.
Fig 24.


The next illustration, Fig. 23, shows how the left is blocked
by placing the right glove on the body, and at the same moment
shooting the left to the face. The next plate. Fig. 24, describes
the best of all ways. By blocking the lead, as in the manner
here shown, it is possible to bring one’s opponent nearer, and
that downward wrench with the right will cause him to lose his
balance. Then one’s own left
head, an action that adds very
comfituie.
should be driven hard to the
much to the other man’s dis-
Fig. 2?.
LEFT SWING TO THE BODY.
The defender should jump back on both feet, when he will
find that the offending left will either miss altogether, or, if
landed, will have no sting, for the reason that the punch has
reached the end of its limit. Fig. 2? will show how, after this, it
will be easy to deliver a powerful uppercut to the chin, and
this being followed up with a right to the jaw, might win the
battle by a K.O.
The benefit to be gained by
fairly close together, as compared
who spreads- them widely apart is
standing erect, with both feet
with the attitude of the man
shown in Fig 23 and Fig. 26.


Fig. 26.
Fig. 27


A slight backward movement by the left foot, whilst the right
remains stationary, will not permit of one’s opponent's left being
able to do much damage. One’s own stiff left to his nose will
meet him coming in, and as a result of the movement, much
weight will be added to the blow.
Fig. 28.
If one is pitted against a swinger, his blow should be
blocked, as in Fig. 27. Then return with the left jolt, upper-
cut or hook to the right side of his jaw. By referring to Fig.
6 one will find a damaging and a masterly move for combating
a left swing to “down below.” It requires a deal of practice,
however, to do the thing properly. Stepping back a little to
the right will cause one’s opponent to hit short, and then a
right uppercut does the rest.


Another effective way of blocking this blow is shown in
Fig. 28. The right arm is sent out in a slanting manner so as
to stop the other man’s blow halTway. Then one has an oppor'
trinity of jolting the right under the chin, or slamming the left
to the other’s unprotected head or body. The right swing that
invariably follows, will, therefore, be immediately beaten; or,
better still, the left may be shot out to the face or right shoulder.
Fig. 29
Fig. 29 shows another way of doing the trick. It can be
observed that the defending party has dropped his right arm close
to his side, thus making a perfect defence of his body from a
left swing, and creating openings for his own left, in a manner
already explained in the previous lesson.
I will now proceed to describe what are the best means to
adopt when one’s mission is the offensive.


FEINTING.
It is first of all necessary to say a few words on the art of
feinting. Although this was one of the most important tricks prac-
tised by the clever students of the Mace and Foley schools* it is
never used to-day. The feint is a cunning device, its object
being to deceive an opponent as to one’s intentions, and at the
same time find out what mode of attack he may be likely to
carry out.
A short, sharp, jerky movement with the left is really the
best feint of all. A shake of that fist, so to speak, is sufficient.
Never, as I have seen second-rate boxers do in the olden times,
should the attacker bring his hand back when feinting, because
the other fellow might be wise enough to hit from wherever
his left or right might be. If so, he will surely score, because it
will take him only as long to send his left or right out as it
would be for his antagonist to bring his back. In short, you
would be making two movements against his one.
TO ATTACK THE BODY WITH THE LEFT.
When facing his opponent the attacker should give a sharp
feint as if he intended driving his left to the nose. The other
man will, more than likely, put up his right forearm to defend
and shoot his left out to counter. Directly he does, this is the
time to step forward with the left foot close to his, and on the
outside simultaneously drive the left to the mark, or solar
plexus.” Be sure to duck one’s head to the right, however, be-
cause this movement not only gets the top-piece out of danger,
but also lends power to the punch. Although the left hand is,
as I have said before, the best weapon, its use alone, without
having the right in proper position to block, might be dangerous
to attempt, because it will afford an opponent an excellent
chance of ducking the lead, driving right to the short ribs, fol-


lowing quickly with his left to the mark. If necessary, he may
finish one right off with the same hand to the chin. (See Fig.
Fig. 30
It might be necessary here to digress still further for the
purpose of impressing on the learner the incorrectness of keep'
mg his right guard arm up whilst leading with his left. In
such a position his opponent would not think of attacking a
part so fortified, but would direct his attention elsewhere. Be-
sides, such an attitude would prevent the full power of the left
arm from landing. The right should be held loosely across the
chest, the glove just in front of the left nipple, and the elbow
close to the short ribs on the right side. It is then in the proper
position to rise or fall in blocking blows aimed at the head or
body.
RIGHT TO THE BODY.
To land the right to the body, the boxer should put his
head slightly forward as an inducement to an opponent to


punch at the face with left or right, and directly he does so he
should throw his left forearm across his face, about eight to ten
inches out, with the palm turned slightly outward, and drive
his right to the body. Should the other man follow on with a
right uppercut, swing or drive, the left will be there to block
any of these attempts. It acts splendidly as a block against the
man who uses his left in a chopping way, or whose right is the
busiest weapon.
BLOCK FOR THE ABOVE BLOW.
The advisability of having one's right arm in the position
previously explained is here shown, for in the event of one’s
opponent trying to work in this punch after having the left
lead blocked, one is in a position to lower the right forearm
to catch the intended drive for the solar plexus or short ribs.
LEFT SHIFT.
The left shift is undoubtedly a wonderful punch, but the
continual use of it is dangerous if the man at the other end ol
the argument possesses a good right. The reason is that in
executing this move the boxer may leave himself open to be
inside crossed by the other man’s right. It must be done with
the speed of thought, and, therefore, requires a deal of prac-
tice. I would recommend that it should only be brought into
play in case of emergency.
BLOCK FOR LEFT SHIFT.
Should a boxer be “wise” to his opponent’s intention of
working this shift, he can beat it in many ways. One is to step
forward with a right rip to the body, or a right jolt or upper-
cut to the jaw. Otherwise block it as described in Fig. 31.


M
UPPERCUTS.
Fig. 31.
Left Hand.—ln explaining the many ways in which a
left lead to the body may be defeated, I described how to
bring about a left uppercut. The position that hand should be
in when making contact is the most important factor in connec-
tion with this particular blow. A left uppercut is a punch that
is not used in contests to-day. By twisting the hand on its way,
so that when it lands the big knuckles find the resting place,
the boxer will be able to deliver a blow perhaps hard enough
to down his opponent.
I would like the reader to place himself in position to
deliver this blow at an imaginary opponent, and he will readily
understand my meaning. The opponent must, of course, be in
the act of ducking, otherwise he does not give an opening for
an uppercut by left or right.


your query may be
it possible for me, a man
with an average income, to
be as well-dressed as the
other fellow?" Mick Sim-
Payment Plan and satisfaction
guarantee ... is the complete
answer.
Select your cloth from e
quality range of latest designs
Country clients! Write for
patterns and perfectly-fitting
Self-Measurement Chart.
MICK SIMMONS LTD.
712-722 GEORGE STREET, HAYMARKET, SYDNEY


BLOCK FOR LEFT UPPERCUT.
The wisdom of having the right in the proper position is
manifested in this line of defence. If the reader looks at Fig.
23. he will see the attacking party had only one aim in view,
that was to get h s left home, for his right hand is hanging
listlessly by his side. Had the weapon been in the position pre-
viously mentioned, he, more than likely, would have stopped
the other fellow’s left.
RIGHT UPPERCUT.
I have advised the use of a right uppercut as one of the
many ways in which to beat an attempt with the left to the
body. In the majority of instances when the last-mentioned
blow is attempted the head must be in a ducking position. To
use this blow to the best purpose the body should move simub
taneously with the shoulder and the right hip, and the hand
should be slightly turned so as to land with the big knuckles of
the first and second fingers.
THE LEFT HANDED BOXER
The boxer who stands with right foot and right hand fore-
most is referred to as being a left-hander.
Speaking generally, left-handers are awkward. Their work
is performed quite the other way around to what an opponent
expects, but a little common sense reasoning will show how
easily the attempts of the average left-hander can be thwarted.
The reason that they adopt this style is, in almost every in-
stance, due to the fact that these men are naturally left-handed.
For some unexplained reason their left is the stronger and more
dexterous hand. They probably write with it, and have
a left-handed way of doing everything. If they play cricket,
they stand the other side on at the stumps, and at football, more
likely than not, they would boot the ball with their left foot.
In opposing a left-hander, the boxer should work as much
as possible to his right. By this means, so to speak, he will be
on the other fellow's blind side.


Fig. 32.
Fig. 33


When an antagonist drives his right, one should duck well
inside and swing the left hand in the short ribs as in illus-
tration 32. One may then be in danger of being struck by a
jolt or uppercut from his left, but with one’s right in its proper
position, one will be able to prevent such a punch.
In Fig. 33, the right lead is slightly ducked, and the left
swung to the jaw. The best counter of all, however, is shown
in Fig. 34. As before mentioned, the left-hander’s right lead is
Fig. 34.
never a hard punch; therefore, one can afford to take a risk
by sending one’s own right out for the face. It is very neces-
sary to practise boxing with the right foot and right hand for-
ward, as one never knows when one may be called upon to
meet a boxer of this particular style. When boxing with the
latter in his own style one will bother him very much.
Perhaps the safest method of dealing with the right lead is
to adopt the defensive attitude shown in Fig. 35, giving it a
push outward from the right. This will make it impossible for
the other man to get in his dangerous left. In the event of the
left-hander leading with the left, block with the right, simul-
taneously driving the left to the nose as in Fig. 36.


Fig. 3?.
Fig. 36


INFIGHTING.
A very good move on the defender’s part is, when within
reach, to grip the other’s left wrist with his left, and with the
right under his elbow he will then be able, by pulling down with
the left, and pushing upward with the right, to at least send
the other staggering. Then one can swing the right to his body
or head. The opportunity will be offered for this move as the
in-fighter comes in with a crouch, left forearm across his fore-
head.
Another way is drag the in-fighter’s forearm down with
the left, and swing the right to the side of the head. The
clinching stylist will, in the majority of instances, when he has
rushed on to the ropes, swing under and cover with his right.
In this case the defender should not attempt to block, but, with
the left hand free, push it out with all possible force to the
right shoulder. Hitting whilst in such a position will avail no-
thing. When one succeeds in driving off the other man he
should follow up quickly with right and left.
A favourite grip of the in-fighter is with his left round
one’s neck. When in this position he will try to uppercut one
under the chin. How to beat the attempt is easily performed.
The chin should be pressed hard against one’s own chest, and
the left used to stop the right uppercut. After this duck one’s
head quickly, and at the same time, with the palm of the right
glove under the opponent’s gripping forearm, get into a posi-
tion to be easily able to push him off. As he staggers back, as
a natural consequence, swing for his jaw with the right.
Another way to beat the grip round the neck is to pull
one’s head against the embrace, thus giving hitting space for
your right uppercut to the ribs and a left swing for the body.
(See Fig. 37).
Should one succeed in forcing the in-fighter to slacken his
grip round the neck, one should then jolt the left to the chin
and swing the right to the other side as in Fig. 38.


Fig. 37.
Fig. 38


SHOULD BOYS LEARN TO BOX?
LIFE IS A BATTLE.
Harald Bjelke-Pefersen.
Life is, for most men, a constant battle and struggle for
existence.
The strong wins, the courageous succeeds; the man with
presence of mind, physical courage, grit and alertness comes out
on top every time, whilst the timid, physically weak and faint'
hearted man goes to the wall.
The youth of to-day is the bread'winner of to-morrow.
For this reason every youth should learn to fight (take) life
standing; should cultivate “backbone,” quickness of thought and
action, and great power of endurance, and strong, vigorous
health. And last but not least, to keep cool and collected in
moments of great excitement.
One-sidedness of Educational Systems.
It is a sad fact that our present educational system is too
one-sided; there is too much cramming and too little attention
paid to the formation of character, high moral qualities and
robust health. Education and polish without a corresponding
development of character and a strong, sound, perfectly con-
trolled body is but of little use.
How to Make Life a Success.
To win in the battle of life a man must be more than
educated. He must be made a man in the truest sense of the
word. He must also be of vigorous health, have a rich supply
of vital energy, presence of mind, quickness of action, a great
power of endurance, besides the qualities of self-control and
self-reliance.
So many men fail in life through lacking one or more of
these physical and moral qualities which our present system of
education had failed to develop in them.
What the School Book Cannot Give Your Boy.
In order to qualify a youth all round for the strenuous
battle of life, and in order to add to his character various quali-
ties which the school book cannot give him, we must adopt other
methods.


SR -4-6 6
It is in this respect that physical training and boxing
lessons become such excellent adjuncts to modern education,
because not only do boxing and physical training help to
strengthen the body and to promote health, vigour and agility,
as well as helping in the forming of a fine, manly character, but
also by adding many fine physical and moral qualities, which
are not easily developed by the ordinary methods of education.
Therefore, besides being a valuable art of self-defence and
splendid pastime, boxing, when taught properly, becomes, indeed,
a means of bringing out many of the noble and manly qualities.
Why Boys Should Learn Boxing.
Usually there is a time in every small boy’s life when he
will have to attend a school in which there are a number of
larger boys.
Now, a boy who can take his place, stand on his own, and
who can defend himself against bigger boys will always be re-
spected and treated as someone of importance by the other boys
at school. For this reason, if for no other, everybody should
learn at least some of the more important hits and blocks at an
early age before going to a school for larger boys.
But there are other reasons. Here are some: The nervous
and timid youth, for instance, who lacks the “push” and “go,”
who needs self-reliance and physical courage, will find a course
or two of boxing will do him the world of good.
In a similar way, the hot-headed boy who cannot control
his temper will benefit, and in time learn to keep cool when
being irritated or in trouble.
The slow boy is made quick and active, and the physically
weak strong and robust, etc., etc.
Now, while the opinions about pugilism may vary, yet
there is only room for one on boxing as an art—that boxing is
a most wholesome, fascinating form of exercise, giving mental
relaxation and recreation, while it in the young becomes a valu-
able educational means, as well as a good physical exercise.
That is, when taught under proper guidance. It may, indeed, be
said that but few forms of exercise help to form such a varied
combination of qualities as the art of boxing.


31508023314049


