

Brahms—My Demi-God.
A Sermon on a Text from Schumann.
By BRYCESON TREHARNE
Reprinted, from “The Advertiser.”
Haec deorum immortal) am vox, litec psene oratio judicanda est, cum
ipse niundus, cum aer atque terrse, motu quodarn novo contremiscunt
et inusitato aliquid sono iucredibilique prsedicuut.”— Cicbbo.
ADELAIDE:
J. L. Bonython & Co., “ The Advertiser ’’ Office, King William Street.
1900.




BRAHMS-MY DEMI-GOD.
A SERMON ON A TEXT FROM SCHUMANN.
By BKSTCESON TREHARNE.
1. “There must alt last, all on a sudden, ap-
pear one whose mission it ■will he to utter
the highest expression of his time in an
ideal manner, one who will attain mastery,
not by degrees, but, like Minerva, will at
once spring, completely armed from the
head of Cronion.”
2. “HE is come, a youth at whose cradle
the Graces and Heroes kept watch. He
bears the name of JOHANN Eb
BRAHMS.”
3. “Salute him! Make him welcome, for
every generation is linked together by a
secret alliance between the spirits of the
same family. You who form part of it
draw up your ranks with energy, so that
the truth of art may always shine with a
bright and clear light, shedding joy
and blessing on all around.”
Certain people exist in every society who
are endowed with a peculiar sensibility,
who do not experience the same emotions
as others, and for whom the exception
makes i/ti© rule.
They create their own destinies and lives
by the peculiarities of their dispositions.
Now it is the exceptions who rule, the
world, and justly so, as it is to their in-
tense temperamental activity that hu-
inanity owes its enlightenment and pro-
gress.
When these forerunners of intellect die,
worn out by the hardships of the course
they have chosen for themselves, then come
Panurge’s flock, enchanted at finding every-
thing re'ady prepared, and taking to them-
selves the credit of having caused the re-
volution to triumph.
“I have done so much, that the path is
now made easy for others!”


Brahms was —like Beethoven —one of the
illustrious victims of this mournful privi-
lege—being an exception.
Dearly did he pay for the heavy respon-
sibility. . _ ,
Terribly do exceptions suffer; and they
cause suffering as well.
Do you think the crowd (that profanuin
vulgus, which Horace so abhorred) feels
grateful, or would confess itself to be in-
competent, before that audacious personage
who dares to make a stand against old-
fashioned customs and established routine ?
Has not Voltaire himself said that no-
body was as clever as everybody ? And uni-
versal suffrage—that grand victory of
modern times —is it not the verdict of this
collective sovereignty, against which there
is no appeal ? Meanwhile, history, which is
ever moving, onwards, and which from
time to time deals out justice to a good
many counterfeits of truth —history teaches
us that everywhere, in every instance,
knowledge is given by the individual to 'the
multitude, and not by the multitude
to the individual; by the wise to the ig-
norant, and not by the ignorant to the
wise; by the sun to the planets, and not
by the planets to the sun.
You ask, is the voice of the people not
also the voice of GOD? .
What! you would make thirty-six millions
of blind people represent a telescope—
—and thirty-six millions of sheep make a
shepherd? And it is the crowd which has
created the Raphaels, JVlichael .Angelos,
Mozarts, Beethovens, Wagners, Brahms—
the Newtons and Galileos. The . crowd.
It spends its days in judging and rejudging,
and takes turns in condemning its infatua-
tion® and i'ts dislikes —'and you would make
the crowd a judge?
That wavering and contradictory jurisdic-
tion— would you make of it an infallible
magistracy ? The idea is absurd. i-ho
“owd scourges and CRUCIFIES at first,
with the certainty of reversing its decision
bv a tardy repentance—a repentance which,
as often as not, is the work of the succeed-
ing generation, and not of the
porary one \ and it is on the tomb of genius
that the wreaths of immortelles are
showered, which were refused i)t during its
Posterity, the real judige, is only an amal-
gamation of successive .minorities; the ma-
jorities are conservatories of the Status quo.


I do not blame them. They were ordained
to be dormant and stock-stall- —-it is their
natural function in the appointed order of
the universe; they keep back the chariot
of progress; they do not allow it to ad-
vance; they act as curbs, when they will
not give up the opinions they hold, and for
the suppression of which they cannot give
a good reason. There is no occasion to feel
much pride in a contemporaneous success,
Winch is frequently a mere question of
fashion, proving that the work is on a par
with —and not that it will survive—‘the
age.
For -a long time the music of Brahms was
“caviare” to the general, so far from pleas-
ing the millions it may be said to have
touched only a few hundred believing dis-
ciples.
The majority found it stiff, austere, and
serious, and seriousness of expression does
not usually attract.
But -have not all geniuses their asperities?
The painting of Turner, Browning’s poetry,
the prose of Meredith, Irving’s acting—
citing modern instances alone, though the
list could be multiplied indefinitely by re-
ferring back to the files of bygone ages.
Over that art which yon say adds to
nature, is an art that nature makes —but
which seems very often to stand between
the artist and his public. And Brahms is
an instance in point. His thoughts are of
the noblest, but he expresses them occa-
sionally, although a consummate master of
the art in all its technical aspects, in a
fashion Which repels the unsympathetic
hearer. Is this result not due to the
novelty of the message? Your prophet is
seldom popular! “Conservatism,” says
Emerson “is debonnair and social; reform
is individual and imperious.”
A passage from one of Hr. Hueffer’s
essays deserves quotation. He says:—“A
greht original creator is necessarily a man
of very individual stamp, and one Who is
engrossed by his idea, and therefore little
in sympathy with other individualities of
an entirely different stamp and equally
engrossed.”
Brahms, perhaps, belongs to both camps
classified by Emerson. Profound respect
for well-grounded law is joined in his case
with utter disregard for merely arbitrary
restrictions. Examples of his conservatism
you may find in any work you like to name;


of his contempt for mere formula, and con-
vention in almost any other. And to this
latter quality no doubt is due a certain
amount of that difficulty which is experi-
enced in approaching his works. For a
composer to be accepted without question
by his own generation is perhaps the surest
sign of mediocrity in music. It is only the
second-rate men who conquer without op-
position. Mendelssohn, that gentle blame-
less soul, who would not offend the sus-
ceptibilities of a single hearer, whose com-
positions are the incarnation of smoothness
and correctitude, was one of these. Al-
most alone among the greater men, he was
accepted with undiluted enthusiasm by his
contemporaries. And to-day? Not all his
polished form and finished workmanship
and elevated sentiment have availed to
avert the disesteem into which his works
have fallen. Even Chopin, the most winning
of the immortals, had his critical obstruc-
tionists to overcome, and Brahms had oniy
to expect a like experience. His thougnts
are much too original and independent to
win immediate acceptance.
But there—popularity is NO test of art.
The quality that makes for the popularity
of an artist is a thing apart from the
quality which crowns him with his artistic
title.
You would not say that the accident of
popularity ascribed any essential vulgarity
to the build of any given intellect; but it
is clear that a communication has passed
from such an intellect into the home of
essential vulgarity.
The most unknowing, the most thought-
less, the vulgarest type of sentimentalist
confesses to emotion in company with the
musician. The fact comes near to demon-
strating the nature of that quality which—
apart from art, apart from knowledge,
apart from nobility of culture —dowers
sometimes the artist, sometimes the man
in the street, with the perilous reward of
popularity. If the popular idol t>e in
touch an artist, his sympathy touches
artist' and mob alike; if he be a mere char-
latan, the mob alone is his precious acqui-
sition. In Brahams’ case, even the exclu-
sive fraternity of critics failed to discern
the innate beauty and unending inspira-
tion of his works—how could they be so
blind? They bludgeoned his writings with
the iron knob of crass ignorance.


He, like most wise men, found restful
tranquillity in the velvety insinuations and
rock-like expression of would-be detractors.
His was evidently a nature that loved to
be dominated —yet the dear “thongers of
the press,” as Meredith says, should bear in
mind that violence can never dominate.
For most of us, the critic creates an oc-
casional powerful peace.
Just sometimes, lie is divine! But his
divinity is by no means illimitable; indeed,
aloof from the pretty trick of combining in-
sult with a subtle undercurrent of flattery, I
must still declare that -the critic has his
limits. And, alas! ’the critic often misses
the saving grace of exclusiveness, which
should accompany and sanctify limitation of
any kind —his catholicity of sympathy has
a dangerous trend towards philanthropy.
It is often a mystery that certain produc-
tions of the human brain are able to com-
mand an extensive and exciting popularity
upon the moment of their publication, and
that, after a brief lapse of years, they are
permitted to fall, as Jeremy Taylor has it,
into a lot of outworn faces. In nearly every
such instance it will be found that the
popularity that encompassed their few
hours of triumph was due to a certain
quality which appealed to the vulgar heart,
or to the heart of the elect artist, but
which, dying out with the minutes that
move like the waves upon the pebbled
shore, has left it pale, bloodless, shorn of
vitality and staying power.
As a general rule, art, regarded as a oe-
lief, implies an implicit surrender, not
because it is reasonable, but because the be-
liever knows himself to be right. 'The ar-
tist, let me say, is aware of the beauty as
the devout Mussulman is aware that Mo-
hammed is the Prophet of Allah.
There is, indeed, a strong analogy be-
tween the credo of art and the creuo of a
definite religious faith. An artist is into-
lerant, he is exclusive, and his mind is
fixed.
Just as an infallible source of religion for-
bids so much as a question upon its pro-
mulgations, so the artist, himself an infal-
lible source, allows no doubt on the doc-
trines that he has sanctioned by his word
of decree.
He knows, because he believes.
There is, indeed, no such possibility as
an artistic axiom.


The collection of 'the world’s loveliness is
there for him, even as the collection of a
church’s dogmas is there for the religious
'believer.
There is to me a close relationship be-
tween the music of Brahms and the poetry
of Browning.
With both of them, the thought is of pa-
ramount importance, the manner of its ex-
pression a secondary thing.
The idea or notion of the poem, the
theme of the music, are nearly always of
great and incontestable beauty: but some
rhyme or turn of expression that seems
clumsy to ears accustomed to the honeyed
cadence of Tennyson, some harmonic or
rhythmical change that strikes admirers of
Mendelssohn as ungainly, comes in almost
as if intent on preventing the piece from
making a completion of connected beauty.
There is beauty there, if we will but see
it; but it is not of a kind that wins our
heart at once, nor is it easy to grasp the
general drift of the poem or the musical
creation at first, or, indeed, until after they
have been assiduously studied. If there is
no parallel among the musician’s produc-
tions to the poet’s virtually insoluble rid-
dle of “Sordello,” there are many com-
positions more or less like it, in that pass-
ages of exquisite and easily intelligible
beauty are continually jostled by others of
less clarity and comprehensibility.
To push the analogy further would be to
lose sight of the thousand melodies of per-
fect symmetry and haunting beauty that
pervade Brahms’ music, and find only rare
counterparts in Browning’s lyrics. Of both,
one thing is certainly true —that the better
they are known the more deeply they are
loved, and the more extraordinary it seems
that any person of normal intelligence and
the usual educational endowment should
fail to understand and admire them.
Both, again, have the priceless quality
that you never leave off delighting in them,
when once you have learnt to love them.
“How they brought the good news to
Ghent” might be constantly recited at vil-
lage entertainments, or Brahms’ cradle
song might be as incessantly performed as
Mascagni’s intermezzo; one could never
lose the sense of graphic power in the vig-
orous poem, or of perfect beauty of expres-
sion in the simple song.
Brahms does not wear his heart on his


sleeve, neither does he appeal to the frivol-
ous or indolent —there never was a com-
poser who paid less regard to the most
sweet voices of the multitude or conceded
less to the idols of the market-place.
Nobility of thought, grandeur of utter-
ance, depth of feeling—-these are the quali-
ties which preeminently distinguish his
music; he expressed himself with uncom-
promising sincerity, and gave full vent to
the truest cravings of his innermost nature.
He possessed equally character and talent
—the latter amounting to genius, and the
former to heroism. Say what sophists and
sellists may, I am convinced that genius is
in proportion to goodness; the better you
are, the ‘better your work will be; every
word, every thought, every act —for all you
do and say is the expression of what you
are.
If you are not pure, your poetry will not;
be pure—more than that it will not be
mighty. If you wish to be great, first be
good.
A man can only utter what is in him—ex-
press what he is. Since, then, the good
affects us most, how can a not-good man
affect us?
Striking as a Byron, for example, may be,
he is but theatrical to a Milton or a Shakes-
peare. Volcanic glare and mud-bath are
not to be confounded with solar fire.
The secret reason for the LIFE of
Brahms’ music lies in the fact that it is
profoundly good.
I cannot imagine purely instrumental
music—or, shall I say, pure music—written
greater than Brahms’ any more than I can
ever imagine Job or Homer surpassed, or
Shakespeare rivalled.
I don’t see how his music can be tran-
scended, embracing a? it does tne wnole
compass, from angelic delicacy to god-like
might.
But the last and dearest thought of all is
—Do the works predicate immortality? We
love to draw our intimations of immortal-
ity from the present—from the good and
beautiful now. For instance, can anything
but an immortal soul really love? °
Surely a lovely spirit ought to go on, af-
ter having shuffled off the mortal coil of
this chrysalis life!
We feel the unconscious reason why we
bow down before a perfect woman is, be-
cause we feel her to be immortal.
Assure us she is mere clay, and how the


magic vanishes! Casting a glance upon
the starry heavens, we cannot express how
utterly miserable, what a stupendous mock-
ery, _ it seems if, once having evolved into
realising them we are never to see them
again or know more of them.
So, too. with music—lf it does not hint
immortality, what is the secret of its
power? If it fails to convey that secret,
then the divinest chord in us, and faculty
of it, vanishes.
We are only eating sugar. An idle belief
in immortality is of no value; it should
show itself in conduct, though not be the
spring of it. THAT should be the love of
goodness for its own sake; but without its
eternal background the heart of man is
like earth without heaven.
It seems the inevitable corollary of hope.
But yet, again, an indiscriminate or uni-
form immortality is improbable; to be im-
mortal hereafter, you should be so now—
that is, of similar character and quality; in
short, you should deserve it.
But surely it is a faith as legitimate as
sublime that our beloved Brahms, a mark
of the eternal, here having delivered his
message unto us, should pass on into a
higher life whence he had come, or whither
from that countless age he had been tend-
ing; while, unto us who adequately receive
that message, “He that hath ears to hear,
let him hear,” it wafts the assurance and
whispers the promise that the ideal world
it represents shall be REAL; wherein we
shall not, as now, merely take refuge from
this painfully real one, the slave of drud-
gery and theatre of pain, full of pitfalls and
crosses, freezing. the smile on the lip of
happiness and blighting the heavenly cheek
of goodness itself with the pale cast of
thought; but wherein we shall live and
move and have our being, and which time
shall no more scar than the meteor doth
the eternal heaven.




