

BRAYE, STEADFAST AND FAITHFUL.
A SERMON
PREACHED BY
THE VERY REV. WILLIAM M. COWPER,
DEAN OF SYDNEY,
&u ISarnafcag Cfmrd), £a&iwat
©n the p>unday felievi/inj) funeral @f
THE BEY. JOSEPH BAENIER,
INCUMBENT OF THE PARISH,
Hflj® bhfc tm l4*ft, 1889.
Published at the request of the Congregation.
Syduetj:
Joseph Cook & co„ Printers, 490, Kent street south




BRAYE, STEADFAST AND FAITHFUL.
A SERMON
PREACHED BY
THE VERY EEV. WILLIAM M. COWPER,
DEAN OF SYDNEY,
St* 2Sarnafcas CJmrri), Sg&tug,
©n the plunday folloVinf tlqe funeral of
THE REY. JOSEPH BARNIER,
INCUMBENT OF THE PARISH,
HBja fcfyfc tin lBB9.
Published at the request of the Congregation.
SyArreij;
JOSEPH COOK & CO., PRINTERS, 490, KENT STRE ET SOUTH.


Note. —This sermon was written under the pres-
sure of many engagements, without any thought
whatever of its being printed; and it is only published
at the earnest solicitation of those who heard it. If it
shall have the effect of strengthening the faith, or
quickening the spiritual life of any of them, or of
stimulating them by God’s grace to imitate the life of
the beloved Pastor for whom they mourn, the Author
will be thankful. Imperfect therefore as it is he complies
with their request, knowing that God often uses the
weakest instruments for the accomplishment of His
gracious purposes. One or two passages have been
added to make the sense more clear.
Sept. 24it7i.


SERMON.
“ I have fought the good fight, I have finished the course, I have
kept the faith. Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, shall give me at
that day.”—2 Timothy iv. 7, 8.
These words suggested themselves to my mind, with
reference to your late beloved Pastor, a few days ago,
after I had engaged to address you this evening. They
seemed to me to be specially appropriate to him, now that
he is gone from us, and has entered into rest.
They are, you know, the words of the great Apostle St.
Paul, written at a time when he was looking forward to
his own departure and expecting that it would not be long
deferred. “I am now,” he says, “ ready to be offered and
the time of my departure is at hand.” And it was as he
looked back upon the period which had elapsed since his
conversion up to that time, including the period of his
Apostleship, with all its labours, and trials, all its difficul-
ties and successes, all its toils and struggles and hardships,
and all the grace and mercy which had been vouchsafed to
him, it was in the recollection of all this that he wrote—
“ I have fought the good fight, I have finished the course,
I have kept the faith.” It was an expression of his serene
satisfaction and holy joy that he had been so engaged. It
was in no proud or boasting spirit that he said it; for that
was wholly foreign to his renewed nature. It was rather
in the tone of thankfulness to Grod, who had enabled him
thus to fight, and thus to run, and thus to keep the faith.


It was the language of the soldier rejoicing in the victory
which he had won after a long and arduous conflict with
the enemy. It was the language of the runner in a race
who has secured the prize. It was the language of one
who had had a trying conflict with falsehood and error,
and had through all, maintained the faith intact and pure
to the end.
In these respects our departed friend was a true disciple
of St, Paul. And had it been permitted him to speak in
his last illness and to give utterance to his thoughts, I feel
sure that he would have said it was a good fight in which
he had been engaged in this city against sin and Satan,
a good race which he had been running as a Christian
athlete and a Minister of Christ, and that he rejoiced in
having been able to keep the true faith of Christ unsullied
and entire.
When I spoke to you last Sunday morning, I en-
deavoured to show you that, though we could not but
mourn over the great loss which we have sustained —by
that we I mean not only you, but his brethren in the
Ministry and the Church generally—yet to him the transi-
tion was infinite gain. For “to depart and he with Christ
is far, very far, better ” than the most privileged state
on earth. And I tried to lead you to think of the glorified
spirit in that world of light and joy and gladness at home
with the Lord, filled with the bliss of seeing Him there as
He is, and rejoicing eternally in the sight. This evening
I shall recall your thoughts to his work amongst us, and
to some features in his noble, but at the same time, simple
character.
1. Of him then we say with thankfulness to God who
gave him grace to do so, that he fought the good fight.
How early he began I have no means of knowing ; but
this I do know that for about thirty years of his life until its


close lie was manfully engaged in the conflict. Going
back to his earlier days, we see him displaying many of
those fine qualities which marked his maturer years. He
had not been favoured with such educational advantages
as his elder brother, Dr. Barnier, who was for some years
a Minister of the Church in the Illawarra district. And
having devoted himself to agricultural pursuits, he had no
small share of labour and toil to undergo. But during all
that period he availed himself of every opportunity of
self culture and mental improvement. Beading, studying,
attending lectures and discussion classes, he was ever
aiming at the acquisition of such knowledge and ability
as would enable him to live a life of usefulness in the
world and to benefit mankind. He had a thirst for all
true and useful knowledge, and a noble ambition to fill
his place in the social system well. What an example in
this respect to all young men ! And to such let me here
say. —Imitate that example. Realize that God has placed
you in the world to do some good in it; to make it better
than you found it. Cultivate the talents which He has
given you, so that you may be able to fill well the niche in
which you may be fixed by His Providence whatever that
may be.
After some years spent in this way—in honourable toil
by day and in study by night, he attracted the notice of
that eminent servant of God, Bishop Barker, and was
accepted by him as a candidate for the Ministry to which
his longing desires were bent. After some preparatory
work he was sent to Moore College, and trained under the
Rev. William Hodgson, to whose wise and faithful guid-
ance and instructions he always acknowledged his deep in-
debtedness. In those days it was too often found necessary
to send young men, as soon as they were ordained, to take
charge of large and scattered districts. And it fell to his


lot to be appointed to an extensive district called the
Lachlan, with the township of Forbes as its centre, where
he laboured with incessant diligence, earnestness and
devotion for about four years, and won for himself the
esteem and affection of those to whom he ministered.
At that time the former Minister of this Church, the
Eev. Thomas Smith, on account of ill health, obtained
leave to withdraw from duty for a year and to visit Eng-
land : and Mr. Barnier was chosen by the Bishop to
supply his place during his absence. On Mr. Smith’s
return, he was appointed to the district of Waterloo, where
the same spirit animated him and the same devotedness to
the work of God. Having laboured for three years in that
populous district, where he was highly appreciated by the
people and his ministry far from unfruitful, this Parish
became vacant through the acceptance by Canon Smith of
the Parish of All Saints, Bathurst. And your late Minister
was then appointed by Bishop Barker to the vacant
Incumbency. And it is not too much to say that he filled
the position to which he was called with remarkable success,
dispelling the fears of some, and not only justifying but
largely exceeding the expectations of those to whom he
owed his appointment.
It were needless for me to tell you, my friends, in what
manner he fulfilled his ministry amongst you during those
17 years that it lasted. You knew the man, as he went
in and out among you day by day. You knew his thorough
reality, his oneness of purpose, his straight-forwardness in
all that he did, his affectionate spirit, his loving desire for
your spiritual welfare and the salvation of your souls, his
faithfulness in preaching to you the Grospel, his earnestness
in trying to win your hearts for Christ, his bold and un-
flinching denunciations of every kind of sin, his fearless
exposures of every sort of hypocrisy and sham, his perfect


sincerity and candour, his wide and catholic spirit towards
all who love the Lord Jesus, and his earnest desire to
promote unity, peace and concord, upon the foundations of
truth and righteousness.
You know with what energy and zeal he threw himself
into the battle against the gigantic and wide spread evils
of Intemperance, and how he strove with all his might
to uproot and destroy it. You may know also how he
mourned over the godlessness which is often so manifest
in the public life of the Colony, the licentiousness and
impurity which are destroying both the bodies and souls of
vast numbers of our people, the increasing desecration of
the Sabbath, and the neglect of Public Worship —with the
pursuit of pleasure and amusement on the day which
God claims as His own. Against all these evils he set his
face like a flint, he looked upon them as undermining the
religion and morals of the people and preparing the way
for the inroad of greater infidelity and vice in the future.
His life from the day when he first gave himself to God
was a fight against all these enemies : a bold and uncom-
promising warfare. Clothed in the panoply which God
supplies, he went forth against them and struggled man-
fully and fearlessly for their overthrow. He knew that
he was in the right, that he was serving a King under
whose standard he had enlisted, and whom it was an honour
and a glory to serve. And he gave himself up wholly to
the war until death should come to release him.
It came at length, for his Master wanted him elsewhere ;
and now he looks down with joy upon the finished conflict
—saying to us to day —“I have fought the good fight,”
and it is ended.
2. But there is another thought with regard to the life
we are considering, it was a race. “I have finished the
course.”


This was a favourite figure with St. Paul to pourtray the
Christian life —what it is, and what it requires.
It is a course of life clearly laid down, marked out and
defined within certain limits ; and it demands earnestness,
steadfast perseverance, and unflagging efforts to gain the
prize.
{a.) One thing which marks it is that it is a life of faith
in Christ; of faith in Him as Redeemer, Saviour, Example,
and the Fountain of life and grace. The Apostle says ;
“ By grace are ye saved through faith ; and that not of
yourselves; it is the gift of Giod, not of works, lest any man
should boast.” And then speaking of himself ; “ the life
that I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son
of God, who loved me and gave Himself for me.” (Gal. ii,
20.)
fb.) Another thing which marks the course is that it is a
way of holiness.
“ Shall we continue in sin,” asks the Apostle, “that
grace may abound ? How shall we that are dead to sin
live any longer therein? We are buried with Christ by
baptism unto death, that like as He was raised up from the
dead by the glory of the Father even so we also should
walk in newness of life.” (Romans vi. 1-4.)
(c.) And another mark of the course is that the law of love
prevails there. “Be ye therefore imitators of God as dear
children, and walk in love as Christ also loved you, and
gave Himself for you.”
Thus it is well and clearly defined ; and none truly run
the Christian race who attempt it outside these bounds of
faith, holiness and love. But who that knew your beloved
Pastor would doubt that such was his course ? Who that
knew him would not assert with the fullest confidence that
he ever ran on these lines ? His was a life of clear and
unmistakable faith in Jesus Christ as his all. To Him he


had given himself up, and on Him he rested all his salvation.
Pardon, acceptance with God, justification, peace with God,
strength for duty, power to live a holy life, to do battle
against sin and Satan, to face the world and all its oppo-
sition, all its taunts and sneers, its scoffs and hatred, for all
he looked to Him. And out of His fulness he sought
every grace to meet the needs of every day and every hour
of trial, of weakness or difficulty. Holiness was his con-
stant aim. He hated sin in every form and under every
disguise in which it met him. And you know he was a
man of love, even to those who hated him and spoke evil
of him—if such there were. It was his aim to obey the
command of Christ “Love your enemies, do good to them
that hate you and pray for them that persecute you.”
And then those qualities which I said were necessary in
running were his—earnestness, steadfast perseverance and
untiring effort. Every one who knew him knows that he
was a man in earnest. Every one who saw him, as he went
in and out among you, was witness to the unwavering stead-
fastness with which he pursued the track marked out.
Every one who watched him knew that he never ceased his
efforts but ran strenuously to the end. Whether it were
as regarded his own salvation, or the fulfilment of the
responsibilities which weighed upon him with reference to
the souls committed to his care, these were the features
which distinguished him in the career which has so recently
closed. And now we may say with admiring gratitude to
Him who gave him his work to do —“ He has finished the
course.”
3. There is the keeping of the faith.
The faith which was once for all delivered to the Saints,
the faith which teaches that there is one God in Trinity
and Trinity in Unity, One and only One Mediator between
God and man, One Great High Priest over the house of


God, One All-sufficient Sacrifice and Atonement for the sins
of the world, made and finished on the Cross, and never
repeated, free access thereby at all times by faith to the
Father in heaven, salvation by grace through faith in Jesus
Christ, and a glorious resurrection to eternal life; these
are the great facts which that faith includes, its grand and
essential principles. Now your beloved Pastor was very
jealous of all perversions of the truths handed down in the
Inspired Word of God ; and of all additions to, or sub-
tractions from it. On the one hand there was Tradition
overlaying it with subtle and plausible reasonings, bring-
ing in under the guise of Revelation what were merely
human inventions and superstitions. On the other, was
Rationalism, seeking to undermine the authority of Scrip-
ture, and to reduce it to the level of human authors, to be
criticized and cut up according to the judgment of fallible
men. Against both these foes to the truth he was ever on
his guard. Against them he protested with all the energy
of his character, and all the righteous indignation of his
soul. He was a faithful Protestant alike against Romish
errors and superstition, and against Infidelity in all its
forms, and everything which was at variance with the true
faith of the Gospel. But if that had been all, it could not
have been said of him that he had kept the faith. For to
keep implies that he had received and embraced it heartily
and conscientiously. And it means that he held fast that
which he had received and guarded it as a precious
treasure entrusted to him to preserve. This he did with
all fidelity, earnestness, and resolution.
And in this respect again we bless God for the grace
given to His servant, by which he was enabled thus to live
and thus to die. None would be more ready than himself
to say; “By the grace of God lam what I am.” “ Not I,
but the grace of God which was with me.” (1 Cor. xv. 10.)


We turn then lastly to the joyful expectation which the
Apostle had, and the reward which awaits those, who like him
11 have fought the good fight, have finished the course and kept
the faith.” “Henceforth,” he said, “there is laid up for me
a crown of righteousness which the Lord, the righteous
Judge shall give me in that day.”
A crown of righteousness. A crown is the emblem of
Royalty :it is the badge of kings. Those who are saved
are made kings and priests unto Giod, as St. John declares
—“ Unto Him that loved us and washed us from our sins
in His own blood and hath made us kings and priests unto
God, unto Him be glory for ever and ever.” The crown
which they will wear will be a crown of righteousness. It
will consist of righteousness. And this will be their glory
and their reward for ever. They shall be endued, clothed
and adorned with eternal righteousness within and without.
They will be thus made like unto the Son of God Himself.
Every attribute they possess, every faculty, every power,
every thought and desire and purpose will be righteous.
Does.this seem to any of you to be a light reward for all
their toil and suffering in this world of sin and woe ?
Why, nothing can be greater than to be thus made like
unto God Himself and to be capable of seeing Him as He
is ; capable of the highest worship and service in Heaven ;
capable, if one may with reverence say it, of being in full
sympathy with the All-Holy One and all His vast designs
through the ages of eternity. Do not measure the glory
of Heaven by earthly standards. If you do, you will never
understand it. One of the grandest pictures which we
have in Scripture of God Himself is “ that He is the Holy,
Holy, Holy Lord God Almighty ;” “ glorious in holiness.”
A crown of righteousness will therefore be a reward of
infinite glory to the faithful warrior of Christ in that day.


Remember however that it is not the day of death which
is spoken of but the day of Christ’s appearing as the
Righteous Judge, when He will put His faithful ones in
possession of their full and final glory both in body and in
soul.
That day will be the day of our perfect consummation and
bliss, the inauguration of the Kingdom of Glory—the
manifestation of the sons of God, and their acknowledge-
ment by Him in the presence of angels and men.
To that day, my brethren, we must all look forward ;
for we shall all be there, to witness and to hear its
wondrous revelations. Let me ask you whether you are
prepared for it. Your loved Pastor will be there to
receive his Crown. What reason have you to believe that
there will be one for you ? Are you now fighting the good
fight as he did ? Are you running the Christian race as
he ran it ? Are you keeping the faith as he kept it ?
Oh my friends do not deceive yourselves. Do not
imagine that all will come right at the last, however you
live now. All will undoubtedly come right at the last to
those who love God. For His Word assures us that “ all
things shall work together for good to them that love
Him.” But tell me not that it shall be so to those who
do not love Him, to those who live as if He were not; the
prayerless, the careless, the indifferent, the giddy and
thoughtless souls that one sees on every side. Tell me not
that it shall be so with the Sabbath breakers, the licentious,
the impure livers, with those who make light of the most
solemn verities, and jest concerning the filthy and corrupt-
ing literature which is debasing and demoralising the land.
No : to such as these Heaven itself would be an intolerable
Hell. And we are expressly told that “there shall enter
into it nothing that defileth nor worketh abomination or


maketh a lie ; but those that are written in the Lamb’s
book of life.”
If then you wish to meet your beloved Pastor there,
tread in his steps, do as he did, surrender your hearts
to Christ, fight the good fight of faith, give no quarter to
sin, but utterly renounce it in every form and guise ; run
the race which is set before you in the way laid down, and
hold fast the faith. Then eternal life and the crown of
righteousness shall be yours. Grod grant that every one
now who hears me may so live and so die!


