

Bread
and
Biscuits
SUPPLEMENT TO THE “AUSTRALIAN HOME JOURNAL ”


Coconut Biscuits.
Half lb. each of butter, sugar, desiccated
coconut, S.E. flour and cornflour, 4 eggs, a
pinch salt, grated lemon rind or lemon
essence.
Cream the butter and sugar and add
gradually the well beaten eggs, then the
flavouring and coconut. Sift the flours with
the salt, and add gradually. When thor-
oughly mixed, drop spoonsful of the mix-
ture on cold oven trays. Bake in a moder-
ate oven till done, about 15-20 minutes.
Should the dough become rather soft in
the making, put it away in a cool place to
firm before baking it.
Sour-milk Biscuit.
Two and a-half cupsful sifted flour, |
teaspoonful salt, | teaspoonful baking-soda,
1 teaspoonful baking powder, 2 tablespoons-
ful shortening, about f cupful sour milk or
buttermilk.
Sift together the flour, salt, baking pow-
der and soda. Cut or chop in the shorten-
ing, add the sour milk, and mix as usual.
Bake thoroughly in a hot oven about 10 to
12 minutes. Be sure that the milk is suffi-
ciently sour to neutralize all the soda. If
desired, a drop-biscuit may be made, using
about 1 cupful of the sour milk for mixing
and i teaspoouful of soda.
Swedish Rice Biscuits.
Cream together 4 ozs. butter and 2 ozs.
sugar; add 2 well-beaten eggs, and 1 table-
spoonful of milk. Sift together 1 cupful
of ground rice, 1 cupful of flour, packet
mixed spice, a pinch of salt, and 1 teaspoon-
ful of baking powder.
Mix the beaten egg mixture into the
sifted dry ingredients, making it into a
stiff paste. Roll out thinly, cut into fancy
shapes, and bake in a hot oven for 10 min-
utes. If liked, sandwich with jam and ice
the tops. Delicious for afternoon tea.
Wine Biscuits.
Rub into 1 lb. of sifted self-raising flour
4 ozs. of butter. Add 4 ozs. castor sugar, 1
egg, and enough cream to mix into a paste.
Lastly add i cupful of currants, which have
been cleaned and picked over, and bake in
small tins.
Brown Munchers.
Four ozs. butter, 6 ozs. S.R. flour, 2 ozs.
all bran, 4 ozs. brown sugar, 1 egg.
Sift the flour with a good pinch of salt,
rub in the butter, and add the all bran.
Beat together the egg and the sugar for 3
or 4 minutes. Add the first mixture to this,
then take small pieces and form into balls.
Place on cold greased oven trays, and bake
in a moderately hot oven till done, 12-15
minutes.
Carisbrooke Biscuits.
Half lb. flour, 2 ozs. rice flour, 5 ozs. but-
ter, i lb. castor sugar, 1 egg, a little icing
sugar, greengage, apricot and raspberry
jam, pinch of salt.
Mix together the rice and flour, add the
sugar and a pinch of salt. Then well rub
in the butter until there is no dry flour left.
Form into a stiff dough with the beaten
egg. Roll out on a floured board and cut
into biscuits. In half the biscuits punch
out three holes with a small sweet cutter.
Brush the plain ones over with beaten egg
and place the others on them. Bake in a
slow oven a pale biscuit colour. Then put
a little of each kind of jam in the holes
and sprinkle with icing sugar.
Iced Biscuits.
Half lb. butter, \ lb. castor sugar, 1| lbs.
flour, 2 eggs, gills milk, royal icing.
Beat the butter and sugar to a cream,
then beat up the eggs and add them. Next
stir in the sieved flour very lightly, and
lastly the milk and a few drops of almond
essence. If the mixture seems too dry, add
another egg or a little more milk, or if it
seems too soft to roll out, put it in a cool
place for the butter to harden. Roll it out
barely \ inch thick, then stamp it into
rounds or fancy shapes, put them on a
greased tin and bake them in a moderate
oven. Then leave them until cold. Spread
a thin layer of white Royal icing on some
of them, then in pink icing pipe the names
of some of the little guests. Then spread
pink icing on the rest and pipe the names
in white. These are very effective and will
give untold joy to youngsters.
Scottish Biscuits.
One breakfastcupful of rolled oats, J tea-
spoonful salt, i teaspoonful ratafia, 4 ozs.
granulated sugar, 1 oz. butter, 1 egg.
Beat the egg well, add the sugar and beat
again. Stir in the salt, ratafia, the butter
melted, and the oats. Drop in spoonsful on
a greased baking tin and smooth them out
with a knife, dipped in cold water. Bake
a golden brown in a moderate oven.
Cinnamon Fruit Snaps.
One and a-half cupsful sugar, 1 cupful
butter, i cupful golden syrup, 3 eggs, 1 cup-
ful raisins, 1 teaspoonful cinnamon, 1 tea-
spoonful carbonate soda, i teaspoonful all-
spice, pinch salt, 3£ cupsful plain flour.
Cream butter and sugar. Add eggs one
at a time, mixing well; add spices, golden
syrup, and raisins. Sift the soda and flour
together and mix all ingredients. Drop
teaspoonful of the mixture on a well-
greased slide. Flatten with a floured knife
and bake in a moderate oven for 15 min-
utes.


Cheese
Wafers.
Eight ozs.
plain flour,
1 egg, 3 ozs.
butter, 3 ozs.
dry grated
cheese, salt,
pepper,
water.
Rub the
butter into
the flour and
add about a
saltspoonful
salt and lib-
eral dash of
pepper. Mix
in cheese,
then beat up
egg and cut
in with a
knife. Now
add suffici-
ent water to
make a firm
dough, cut-
ting it in
with aknife.
Roll out to
wafer thin-
ness (divide
into four or
five pieces
for this, as
there is too
much to roll
out in one
piece), cut
into squares
and bake in
a moderate-
ly quick
oven till
light brown
and crisp.
Cheese Wafers. Almond Shortbreads. Bran Biscuits.
Almond Shortbreads.
Four ozs. butter, 6 ozs. plain flour, 1 oz.
arrowroot, 2 ozs. castor sugar, 1 egg yolk.
For Marzipan: \ lb. icing sugar, 2 ozs,
almond meal, 1 egg white.
Cream butter and sugar, add yolk and
beat well. Sift flour and arrowroot and
add. Knead. Roll out fairly thin and cut
into rounds. Mix almond meal and icing
sugar and add sufficient egg white to make
a soft paste. Put in little lumps on top of
the biscuits and decorate with a piece of
cherry. For variety, some of the rounds
can be left plain and decorated with a
blanched almond, or part of the shortbread
can be cut into strips, covered with marzi-
pan and decorated with chopped almonds.
Cook in a moderate oven until lightly
browned.
Bran Biscuits.
Three cupsful bran, 1 cupful plain flour,
1 cupful light brown sugar (not packed
down), 2 tablespoonsful butter, 1 teaspoon-
ful bicarb, soda, hot water.
Mix bran, flour and sugar. Melt butter
in about I cupful water and add soda. When
it foams add to dry ingredients. Mix well
and if more water is needed add until you
have damped all the bran mixture. Do not
make mixture too wet, however. Use just
sufficient water to bind it. Take pieces of
the mixture about the size of an almond
and flatten on the biscuit trays with a fork
into round biscuits. Cook in a quick oven
until browned and dry.
No fruit is more friendly to other fruits
than lemons. Especially in hot weather.


Southern Tea Biscuits.
Three tablespoonsful butter, 2 cupsful
flour, 4 teaspoonsful baking powder, tea-
spoonful salt, 1 tablespoonful sugar, f cup-
ful milk or water.
Measure dry ingredients and sift together
into mixing bowl. Measure butter and cut
into flour with two knives and work in with
fork until well distributed. Add liquid,
mixing with a knife or spoon until a soft
dough is made that can be handled on a
board lightly floured. Handle and work as
little as possible. Eoll the dough | inch
thick and cut with small cutter. Place on
greased baking sheet and bake in hot oven.
Put together with jam.
Southern Tea and Honolulu Biscuits.
Honolulu Biscuits.
Pour ozs. plain flour, 2 ozs. each of mar-
garine, sugar and ground almonds, 1 beaten
egg, % teaspoonful baking powder, a few
drops of almond essence, some desiccated
coconut.
For the Butter Filling: 3 ozs. of icing
sugar, 2 ozs. butter, a little carmine, and a
few drops of vanilla essence.
Eub the margarine into the flour, and
add the baking powder, sugar and ground
almonds. Beat the egg with the almond
essence, then bind the flour mixture to a
stiff dough, turn on to a floured board, roll
out thinly, and cut into rounds. Well
grease a baking tin, place the rounds on
it, mark with knife on tops, and bake in a
moderate oven for 15 minutes. For the
butter filling, mix the butter and sifted
icing sugar to a cream, add a few drops of
hot w T ater, the flavouring, and a little car-
mine. When the biscuits are quite cold,
spread each with the filling, and place two
together.
Coffee Cookies.
Beat 1 cupful sugar and 2 tablespoonsful
butter to a cream. Add 2 eggs and beat.
Mix in 1 tablespoonful coffee essence, |
teaspoonful vanilla, 1 cupful coconut, 2
cupsful rolled oats, 1 heaped cupful flour
and 2 teaspoonsful baking powder.
Mix until rolled oats are brown. Put in
teaspoonsful on a greased tray with a sul-
tana in the middle of each. Bake in a
moderate oven till golden brown.


Date Crackers.
One cupful brown sugar, a bare cupful
butter, 2 cupsful rolled oats, \ cupful plain
flour, i cupful cornflour, 1 teaspoonful bak-
ing powder.
For the Date Mixture: 1 lb. stoned dates,
i cupful sugar, $ cupful cold water, juice
of a lemon.
Put the dates, sugar and water into a
saucepan and cook slowly till dates are soft.
When nearly cold, add the lemon juice and
mix well. Sift the flours with the baking
powder and a pinch of salt, rub in the
butter. Add sugar and rolled oats, and mix
to a firm dough with about | cupful hot
water. Turn on to a floured board and roll
out rather thinly. Cut in halves, spread
one part with the date mixture, lift the
other part on top. Cut in fingers, put a
half date on each, and place on cold greased
oven trays; bake in a moderate oven till
done, approximately 20 minutes.
Shortbread Sandwich Biscuits.
Take 3 eggs, \ lb. butter, \ lb. castor
sugar, 1 lb. S.R. flour, lb. ground rice.
Cream butter and sugar, add beaten eggs,
and lastly flour and ground rice. Roll out
thin, cut into fancy shapes or fingers. Bake
in a moderate oven for 10 minutes.
Filling: Mix \ lb. icing sugar with a little
lemon juice and 1 tablespoonful melted
butter. Spread on biscuits, and put
two together. This mixture will do for the
biscuit forcer, also for pencil biscuits to
serve with ice cream.
Yeast Biscuits.
One and a-half tablespoonsful shortening,
i tablespoonful salt, 1 cupful scalded milk,
1 yeast cake, £ cupful lukewarm water, 1
tablespoonful sugar, 3 cupsful sifted flour.
Put shortening and salt in large bowl
and add milk. Dissolve yeast cake in luke-
warm water, add sugar and when milk is
lukewarm add yeast with 2 cupsful sifted
flour. Stir until thoroughly mixed, using
mixing spoon. Add 1 cupful flour, mix
with knife and turn out on floured cloth,
leaving bowl clean. Knead thoroughly
until mixture is smootli and bubbles may
be seen under the surface. Return to bowl
and let rise until light. Turn out on cloth,
shape into small round biscuits, place close
together in greased dish, let rise until
nearly double in bulk. Place in a cold
oven, turn on heat and allow oven to get
very hot. Bake 15 to 20 minutes.
Sultana Biscuits.
Pour ozs. self-raising flour, pinch salt, 2
ozs. butter, 1 oz. sugar, 4 ozs. sultanas, rind
of 1 lemon, juice \ lemon, 1 egg.
Cream butter and sugar, add egg whole,
add sifted flour and salt. Knead on floured
board, and roll into thin sheet. Add rind
and juice of lemon to sultanas, and stir
over fire until a mash. Add a little water
if necessary. Spread on one half of pastry,
and fold the other half over, making a
sandwich. Cut into oblong lengths about
3 inches long. Bake in moderate oven for
12 minutes.
Date Crackers, Shortbread Sandwich and Sultana Biscuits.


Meringues.
Meringues.
Four egg whites, 1 cupful whipped cream,
\ cupful icing sugar.
Beat egg whites till they begin to stiffen,
then stir in the \ cupful of sugar passed
through a sieve. Keep on beating until
eggs are stiff. Press through a forcing bag
and pipe into round nests on a baking slide.
Bake in a cool oven for about 30 minutes.
Special Biscuits.
One cupful flour, \ teaspoonful salt, i
teaspoonful soda, 1 teaspoonful baking
powder, | to % cupful sour cream, 1 table-
spoonful water (or more for drop biscuits).
Measure the dry ingredients and sift
them together. Add the cream and enough
water to make the dough soft enough to
drop or roll, handling lightly and as little
as possible. Eoll and cut, or drop by tea-
spoonsful on a greased baking slide. Bake
in a hot oven for 8 to 10 minutes.
Por afternoon tea, make scones of this
mixture by adding J cupful of cream, then
divide the dough in half. Pat each piece
out and cut it into four pie-shaped wedges.
Brush over with egg yolk and sprinkle with
sugar. Bake as biscuits until a delicate
brown. These scones are ideally tender and
perfectly delicious.
Honey Biscuits.
Four ozs. butter, 3 ozs. castor sugar, 1
egg yolk, 6 ozs. S.E. flour, 1 level teaspoon-
ful ground cinnamon, 2 ozs. honey (approxi-
mately a large tablespoonful).
Beat the butter and sugar to a cream,
add the egg yolk, and when thoroughly
beaten in add the flour (sifted with the
cinnamon and a pinch of salt) and the
honey, which has to be warmed to make it
run. If the mixture is very soft, put in a
cool place until it becomes firm. Take small
pieces of the dough and form into balls
about the size of a walnut. Mix together
a tablespoonful of castor sugar and i level
teaspoonful ground cinnamon, and coat the
balls with this. Place some distance apart
on a greased oven tray and bake in a mod-
erate oven for about 15 minutes.
Cream Biscuit.
Mix and sift 2 cupsful flour, 1 teaspoon-
ful salt, and 4 teaspoonsful baking powder.
Add 1 cupful thick cream, and i cupful
milk. When well mixed, turn out on lightly-
floured board, pat, and roll out. Shape with
small cutter. Bake in quick oven.
Caraway Biscuits.
Eub 3 ozs. butter or margarine into 1 lb.
flour, 2 ozs. sugar, and i oz. caraway seeds;
moisten with a little water or milk, cut
with a small round cutter, prick them and
bake in a quick oven.


Butter Biscuits.
Mix J lb. butter with 1 lb. flour sifted
with a teaspoonful salt. Moisten to a stiff
dough with a cupful of buttermilk and mix
it well. Toss the dough on to a floured
board and knead it thoroughly. Eoll into
a large, thick sheet and beat the dough hard
on both sides with a rolling pin, then cut
into small round thick cakes with a tin
cutter. Beat each cake on both sides, place
them in greased tins and bake until a light
brown in a slow oven.
Maple Biscuit,
Mix 1 cupful shaved sugar, teaspoons-
ful all-spice, 1 cupful thick, sour cream,
and 1 beaten egg. Mix and sift 2 cupsful
pastry flour with 1 teaspoonful soda, and
combine with first mixture. Turn out on
lightly-floured board. Pat and roll and cut
out with small cutter. Bake in a moderate
oven.
Biscuits with Ginger.
Six ozs. butter, 4 ozs. sugar, 1 egg, 4 ozs.
preserved ginger, 6 ozs. plain flour, 1 tea-
spoonful baking powder, a pinch salt, corn-
flakes.
Beat the butter until soft, add gradually
the sugar and, when creamy, add the well-
beaten egg. Add the ginger, chopped up
finely, then the flour,, sifted with the salt
and baking powder. When well mixed,
take small teaspoonsful of the mixture and
roll in cornflakes. Place on cold greased
oven trays a little distance apart, as they
spread. Bake in a moderate oven until
done, about 15 minutes.
Cinnamon Biscuits.
One cupful S.E. flour, 1 cupful ground
rice, 1 cupful sugar, 2 ozs. butter, 2 eggs, a
pinch of salt, 1 dessertspoonful cinnamon.
Cut out and, when baked, stick together
with jam, icing the top. These biscuits will
keep for weeks, if only put together when
needed.
One cupful sugar, 1 cupful butter, beaten
well together; add 3 eggs, beat again. Mix 1
good teaspoonful baking powder, 2 cupsful
flour, and stir into other ingredients. Eoll
out and spread with cinnamon, roll up again
like roly poly, cut with knife j inch thick.
Bake in moderate oven.
Dreams.
Six ozs. butter, 4 ozs. sugar, 1 egg, 10 ozs.
flour, 1 teaspoonful baking powder, 1 pinch
salt.
Cream the butter and sugar, and add the
well-beaten egg. Sift the flour with the
baking powder and salt, and work it in well.
Knead lightly and roll out fairly thinly.
Cut with a plain round cutter, brush the
biscuits over with a little white of egg, and
sprinkle over cinnamon, sugar and chopped
blanched almonds. Bake in a moderate
oven for 15 minutes.
Chocolate-coated Biscuits.
Half lb. flour, 4 ozs. butter, i teaspoonful
vanilla essence, 1 egg, a pinch of salt, 3 ozs.
castor sugar.
For the Chocolate Icing; 4 ozs. icing
sugar, 3 ozs. plain chocolate, 1 teaspoonful
water.
Mix the salt with the flour, rub in the
butter, add the sugar and vanilla essence
and well-beaten egg. Eoll out thinly and
cut in rounds with a biscuit-cutter or small
wineglass. Bake to a pale biscuit colour
in a slow oven. Leave until cold.
Grate the chocolate, and rub the icing
sugar through a sieve. Put them in a
saucepan with the water, and melt over
gentle heat. When quite dissolved, cool a
little, then pour gently on each biscuit and
leave until dry and set.
Brandy Snaps.
Four ozs. butter, 4 ozs. castor sugar, 4
ozs. treacle, 4 ozs. flour, 1 teaspoonful
ground ginger, 1 dessertspoonful brandy.
Melt the butter in a small saucepan, stir
into it first the treacle, then the sugar, and
finally the brandy. Stir the ginger into the
flour and, when the treacle mixture is hot,
take it from the fire, sift into it the flour
and ginger, and beat thoroughly till the
batter thus formed is smooth. Grease a
baking slide, drop the batter in large tea-
spoonsful upon it, keeping the rounds well
apart from each other. Bake for about
four minutes in a hot oven. When they are
of a bright golden brown, remove from the
oven, let them cool a little, and wind them,
while still pliable, round the handle of a
wooden spoon to curl them.
Good-Morning Biscuits.
Four tablespoonsful melted butter, 3
cupsful bread flour, £ cupful sugar, 1 cupful
raisins, \ teaspoonful salt, 6 teaspoonsful
baking powder, | cupful milk.
Melt 4 tablespoonsful butter while you
wash and drain raisins. Sift together flour,
sugar, salt and baking powder. Add fruit.
Add enough milk to melted butter to fill
cup, and mix with dry ingredients. Dust a
sheet of oiled paper with flour, spoon out
the dough and pat it with floured hands to
about \ inch thickness. Cut into small
rounds, lay on greased tin, brush tops with
milk to ensure golden browning, and bake
in hot oven for about 15 minutes.


Ginger Nuts.
One lb. plain flour, a pinch salt, 1 tea-
spoonful carb. soda, 1 teaspoonful mixed
spice, 4 teaspoonsful ground ginger, \ lb.
treacle, | lb. clarified dripping, 3 ozs. brown
sugar, 2 tablespoonsful milk.
Sift together the flour, salt, soda and
spices. Put the dripping, treacle and sugar
into a saucepan and heat until all are
melted. Knead well, roll out thinly, stamp
out with a plain round cutter. Place on
cold greased oven trays and bake in a mod-
erate oven until done, about 15 minutes.
This mixture works up easier while it is
warm; as it cooks it becomes firmer and
rolling is more difficult.
Ginger Nuts and Cheese Rubble Biscuits.
Brazil Nut Fingers.
Quarter lb. short pastry, 3 ozs. shelled
Brazil nuts, 3 ozs. castor sugar, the white
of an egg.
Roll out the pastry, sprinkle over it some
finely-grated nut and a little castor sugar,
fold, and roll out again. Repeat this once
more. Cut the pastry into strips and bake
in a moderate oven. When done, ■whip the
white of an egg to a crisp froth, fold in
the remainder of the sugar (about 2 ozs.)
and a tablespoonful of grated Brazil nut.
Spread this on the fingers, sprinkle the top
with grated nut and sugar, and dry in a
cool oven.
Venetian Biscuits.
Tour ozs. butter, 4 ozs. castor sugar, yolks
of 3 eggs, 4 ozs. almonds, vanilla essence,
7 ozs. flour, 1 flat teaspoonful baking pow-
der, 1 pinch salt.
Cream the butter and sugar. Add the
yolks of the eggs, one at a time. Add half
the almonds, blanched and chopped, and
the flavouring. Sift the flour, salt and
baking powder, and mix well. Take small
portiams of the dough, form into balls, and
roll in sugar. Put on cold scone trays, with
half blanched almond on each. Bake in a
moderate oven for about 15 minutes.
Cheese Rubble Biscuits.
Six ozs. plain flour, 1 teaspoonful salt, £
teaspoonful cayenne, 4 ozs. grated cheese,
2 ozs. butter and water.
Sift the flour, salt and cayenne and rub
in the butter. Add the grated cheese and
mix to a fairly stiff paste with water. Roll
out to paper thickness. Line greased patty
tins with same, and when cooked in a fairly
hot oven, add lemon or black currant jam
for filling.


Finnish Bread.
Almonds play a large role in all Danish
cooking. When they are not mixed into
the dough, then they are usually minced
and sprinkled on top of the cookies, as in
this recipe for Finnish Bread —the tiny
breads no doubt getting their name because
they resemble loaves of bread in miniature.
These are rather rich and quite delicious.
Cream i cupful of butter with | cupful
of sugar, J cupful of shortening and 3 cups-
ful of flour. Knead as little as possible
and place in the refrigerator for an hour.
Roll into two or three slender rolls of an
inch in diameter (use no flour on the board
while forming the rolls), cut in inch
pieces, brush the tops with a beaten egg,
and sprinkle each with minced almonds.
Bake in a moderate oven until a very light
brown.
Braided Rolls.
One cupful scalded milk, 3 tablespoons-
ful fat, 2 tablespoonsful sugar, f teaspoon-
ful salt, 1 yeast-cake softened in cupful
lukewarm water, white of 1 egg, 4 cupsful
flour.
Add the sugar, salt and fat to the milk.
Cool to lukewarm, add the softened yeast
and the white of the egg beaten stiff. Stir
in cupsful flour and knead, using the
other \ cupful of flour on the board. Let
rise until double in bulk. Cut in 24 pieces.
Roll each piece into a long stick. Braid
3 of these sticks together and cut into
lengths of about 4 inches. Brush over
with melted butter and let rise until double
in size. Bake in a hot oven. Because of
their unusual shape and lightness these al-
ways please.
Holiday Bread.
Three lbs. pastry flour, 1 lb. butter, 2 lbs.
sugar, 2 lbs. seedless raisins, 1 lb. currants,
6 eggs, | lb. sliced citron, \ lb. mixed sliced
orange and lemon peel, 1 cupful milk, 4
teaspoonsful baking powder, 2 teaspoonsful
nutmeg, \ teaspoonful cinnamon, \ tea-
spoonful all-spice, 1 teaspoonful salt.
Cream the butter, add the sugar gradu-
ally and add the well-beaten eggs. Sift the
dry ingredients and add them and the milk
to the egg mixture and lastly fold in the
fruits. Pour mixture into four bread tins
lined Avith paper and bake in a moderate
oven for 2 hours. Store in a stone crock.


Dried-pear Raised Bread.
Soak 1 cupful of dried pears over-night,
then stew them until soft and rub them
through a sieve. Into a bowl pour 2 cups-
ful of scalded milk; add i cupful of honey
and 1J teaspoonsful of salt. When luke-
warm, add the pear puree, \ yeast cake dis-
solved in f cupful lukewarm water, 3 cups-
ful flour and 3 cupsful stone-ground white
corn meal. Mix well, let rise until double
its bulk; beat down; divide into 2 greased
round bread tins and let rise until double
its bulk; brush with milk; bake 1 hour in
a moderate oven. When cooked, run a thin
layer of icing on top, and decorate with
jam and chopped nuts.
Caramel Fig Bread.
Sift together 2 cupsful of pastry flour, 4
teaspoonsful of baking powder and 2 table-
spoonsful of sugar; rub in 2 tablespoonsful
of butter and moisten with 1 cupful of milk
to which you have added 2 tablespoonsful
caramelized sugar and 1 beaten egg. Beat
all well, then add \ cupful of finely-chopped
figs, lightly floured. Turn into a well-
greased bread tin and let stand 10 minutes,
then bake in a moderate oven about 1 hour.
To make the caramelized sugar, place 2
tablespoonsful of sugar in a heavy sauce-
pan and melt without water; then add 4
tablespoonsful of water and cook to a rich
deep brown syrup. Cool before using.
Johnnybread.
Scald a pint of milk, or you may use half
milk and half water, and pour it over 3
heaping teaspoonsful of corn meal sifted
with teaspoonful of salt. Cook for a few
moments, then add a level teaspoonful of
butter, a little sugar if you like it, the
yolks of 2 eggs beaten to a froth, and last
of all the whites of the eggs whipped stiff
and dry. Pour into a buttered baking dish
and bake in a moderate oven 20 to 30 min-
utes. Serve immediately in the dish in
which it was baked.
Custard Johnnybread.
Beat 2 eggs, and add to them 2 table-
spoonsful of sugar. Sift together If cups-
ful of corn meal, f cupful of flour, 1 tea-
spoonful of salt, i teaspoonful of soda and
1 teaspoonful of baking powder; add 1
cupful of sour milk or buttermilk and the
eggs and sugar. Beat vigorously. Melt 2
tablespoonsful of butter or butter substi-
tute in an iron frying pan, taking care that
the sides are well covered with it, and,
when hot, pour in the batter. Then, just
before placing the bread in the oven, pour
a cupful of sweet milk all over the top. The
batter will seem very thin, but that is quite
as it should be. Bake for 40 minutes in a
moderate oven.
Dried-pear Raised Bread.


Wholemeal Nut and Raisin Dread.
Wholemeal Nut and Raisin Bread.
One lb. wholemeal flour, 2 teaspoonsful
cream of tartar, 1 teaspoonful carb. soda,
\ teaspoonful salt, 2 ozs. chopped walnuts,
| pint milk, 1 tablespoonful treacle, 2-4 ozs.
seeded raisins.
Mix well together the treacle and milk.
Sift the flour with the cream of tartar, soda
and salt. Do not discard what will not pass
through the sifter, but tip it into the bowl.
Add the chopped nuts and raisins, and mix
fairly wet with the treacle and milk. Half
fill well-greased tins with the mixture; put
the lids on, and bake in a hot oven. This
mixture is sufficient for two 1-lb. coffee
tins, and will take f hour to bake. The nuts
may be omitted. Wholemeal S.R. flour may
be used instead of the plain with the cream
of tartar and soda.
Bishop’s Bread.
Two and a-half cupsful bread flour,
cupful butter, 1 teaspoonful cinnamon, 2
cupsful brown sugar, i teaspoonful salt, 1
teaspoonful baking powder, 1 egg, i tea-
spoonful soda, | cupful sour milk.
Mix flour, sugar, salt and butter. Save
f cupful of mixture for top crumbs. To re-
mainder, add baking powder, egg, soda,
sour milk and cinnamon. Beat briskly until
batter is smooth. Pour into 2 greased cake
tins and scatter crumbs of original mixture
over tops. Bake for about 25 minutes in
hot oven. If you want a richer bread, add
chopped nuts and raisins to batter, and
sprinkle extra cinnamon on top before
baking.
Chocolate Nut Loaf.
One cake compressed yeast, cupsful
liquid (milk or water), \ cupful sugar, 1
teaspoonful salt, cupsful flour (sifted),
i cupful cocoa, i cupful melted fat, 1 cup-
ful nuts.
Crumble the yeast into the bowl, gradu-
ally add the liquid of the correct tempera-
ture, then add the sugar, salt, flour, and
cocoa. Work in the melted fat and work
into a smooth dough. Cover with a cloth
until the dough is doubled in bulk. Add
the chopped nuts, mould into a loaf, put
in a bread tin, and let rise again until
double in bulk. Bake 50 minutes in a
moderate oven.
Steamed Bread.
Put 1 lb. of wholemeal flour, 1 table-
spoonful of brown sugar, a good pinch of
salt, a dessertspoonful of cream of tartar
and a teaspoonful of bi-carbonate of soda
into a basin and mix well. Add \ pint of
milk and mix well. Put into a greased 4
lb. jam jar, cover with greased paper and
steam for 2 hours.


Honey Bran Bread with Dates, Raisins and
Nuts.
Make by mixing together cupsful of
bran, cupsful of whole-wheat flour,
cupsful of pastry flour, 4 teaspoonsful of
baking powder, 1 teaspoonful of salt, and
2 tablespoonsful of granulated sugar. To
these ingredients add \ cupful each of
chopped pitted dates, chopped seedless rais-
ins and broken walnuts.
Moisten the mixture with 1| cupsful of
sweet milk, mixed with 1 beaten egg, 1
tablespoonful of melted shortening and i
cupful of honey. Beat hard, pour into well-
greased shallow bread tins and bake in a
moderate oven for 1 hour, or as much
Honey Bran, Milk, and Fig Breads.
longer as required. Rub the crust over with
melted butter when removing from the tins.
This bread, spread with quince honey and
chopped nuts, makes delicious sandwiches.
Milk Bread (with yeast).
One and a-half lbs. flour, 1 teaspoonful
salt, 1 tablespoonful compressed yeast, f
pint milk, 1 teacupful melted butter, 1-2
teacupsful sugar, 1 teacupful warm water.
Mix the yeast with the warm water. Sift
together the flour and the salt, stir in the
yeast, and add the milk. Knead lightly
until the dough sticks neither to the fing-
ers nor the bowl. Let stand in a warm
place till twice its bulk, about 1 hour. Add
the melted butter and 1-2 cupsful sugar,
according to sweetness desired. Knead
these ingredients well into the dough, using
more flour. Form into loaves, put into warm
greased tins, and leave for about i hour to
rise. Bake in a moderate oven.
Fig Wheat Bread.
Mix and sift cupsful of whole-wheat
flour and cupsful of pastry flour with |
teaspoonful of baking soda, 2 teaspoonsful
of baking powder and 1 teaspoonful of salt.
Add i cupful of brown sugar, \ cupful of
chopped peanuts, 1 cupful of chopped figs;
mix well. Whip 1 egg, stir into cupsful
of milk, | cupful of honey and 1 tablespoon-
ful of melted shortening or cooking oil.
Beat these liquids into the dry ingredients
well, turn into a well-greased bread tin, let
stand 20 minutes, to permit the leaven to
penetrate the rather stiff flour mixture;
then bake hours in a slow oven. When
done, brush the crust over with melted but-
ter to make it more tender and tasty.
Bran Bread.
Two cupsful flour, 2 cupsful bran, 2 cups-
ful buttermilk, 1 cupful treacle, 1 teaspoon-
ful soda, and 1 teaspoonful salt.
Sift soda, salt and flour. Combine all in-
gredients. Bake hours in a slow oven
in oblong bread tin.


Dutch Apple Bread.
One cake compressed yeast, 1 cupful
scalded milk, 2 eggs, \ cupful sugar, J tea-
spoonful salt, 3 cupsful flour, J cupful but-
ter, i cupful sugar, \ teaspoonful cinna-
mon, 5 sour apples, raisins.
Crumble the yeast into a bowl; gradually
add the milk, cooled to the correct tempera-
ture. Then add the beaten egg, sugar, salt,
and flour. Mix and work in the melted
butter and mix thoroughly. Knead into a
smooth dough, cover with a cloth, and let
rise until the dough has doubled in bulk.
Turn on to a bread-board and make up in
form of a loaf. Let rise about 15 minutes,
then roll and fit to baking dish. Be care-
ful to pinch ends up at the edge of the dish
to avoid shrinkage. Allow to rise 15 to 20
minutes, then place the apples, which have
been pared and cut into eighths and cored.
Press the sharp edges of the apples into the
dough in parallel rows lengthwise of dish.
Sprinkle with sugar mixed with cinnamon
and sprinkle with raisins. Cover, let rise,
and bake in a moderate oven 30 minutes.
Cut in squares and serve.
Santa Joan Bread.
Boil 4 or 5 large potatoes until well done.
Measure 1 large cooking spoonful of flour,
1 of sugar, 1 of salt, and a tablespoonful of
fat. Moisten with cold water. Stir smooth
and scald with the boiling potato-water.
Stir well and cool with cold water until
lukewarm. Add to this 1 cake of dry yeast,
previously moistened, 2 cupsful of mashed
potatoes, and let stand until morning. Sift
4 sifters full of flour (hard wheat pre-
ferred) and warm through. Stir into this
the liquid yeast made lukewarm and mix
stiff. Let rise in a warm place and make
into loaves when raised double size. Bake
in moderate oven until done.
Date Bread.
Eye date bread with caraway seeds is
novel and usually very popular. Make it
by sifting together 2 cupsful of rye flour
and 1 of bread flour with 1 teaspoonful of
salt, i cupful of sugar, 4 teaspoonsful
of baking powder and add a cupful of
chopped dates. Beat 1 egg, add it to
cupsful of milk, and stir into the dry in-
gredients, with 2 tablespoonsful of melted
shortening. Beat hard, turn into greased
bread tins, let stand 10 minutes, then brush
with cold water and sprinkle with cara-
way seeds and bake in moderate oven about
hours. Do not slice until 5 to 6 hours
old, to avoid crumbling.
Cheese Bubble Bread.
Eight ozs. plain flour, 1 egg, water, 3 ozs.
butter, 3 ozs. grated cheese, salt and pepper.
Rub the butter into the flour and add
about a saltspoonful salt and a liberal dash
of pepper. Mix in the cheese, which should
be dry and well flavoured, then beat up the
egg and cut into the dry mixture with a.
knife. Now add sufficient water to make a
firm dough, cutting it in lightly with a
knife. Sprinkle a board with flour and roll
out very thin. It is important that the
dough should be of water thinness; roll it
until it is so thin it starts to have breaks
in it. Cut into squares and put on to un-
floured scone trays and bake in a quick
oven until brown and crisp. The time taken
will vary with the heat of the oven, but 1(1
minutes is the average. If the biscuits are
not rolled thin enough, they will not dry
out thoroughly in the oven and so will not
be crisp when cold.
Walnut Bread.
Five ozs. flour, | teaspoonful salt, 2 ozs-
chopped walnuts, i teaspoonful baking-
powder, 3 ozs. granulated sugar, | gill milk,,
i an egg.
Put all the dry ingredients together, mix
well, and then add the beaten egg. Lastly
add the milk, and mix to a stiffish dough-
Grease a tube tin, roll the dough so that
it will fit into the tin, put on the lid and
bake on its side in a hot oven for 40 min-
utes.
Tiny Yeast Breads.
One lb. flour, 3 ozs. Demerara sugar, f oz,
yeast, \ teaspoonful castor sugar, a pinck
of salt, a little loaf sugar, \ teaspoonful
mixed spice, 2 ozs. currants, 2 ozs. candied
peel, 1 egg, i pint milk, 2 ozs. lard.
Mix the salt with the flour, and sift it
into a warm bowl. Rub in the lard, mix
the castor sugar with the yeast, and stir
until it is creamy; then add it to the milk
made just warm and the well-beaten egg-
Pour this into the centre of the flour, and
mix in the flour very gradually. Cover
with a cloth, and leave in a warm place for
1 hour. Then add the finely-sliced peel,
clean, dry currants, Demerara sugar and
spice. When evenly mixed, form into small
buns, place them on greased tins, sprinkle
the top of each with finely-powdered loaf
sugar. Leave in a warm place for 20 min-
utes, then bake for about 15 minutes in a
moderate oven.
Prune Bread.
One-third cupful sugar, 3 tablespoonsful
fat, 1 cupful milk, 1 teaspoonful salt, 1J
cupful meal flour, cupful sifted white
flour, 4 teaspoonsful baking powder, 1 cup-
ful prunes.
Mix sugar and melted fat. Add milk and
salt, meal flour and sifted white flour, and
baking powder. Wash and cut up dried
prunes, and add to batter. Bake in an oiled
bread tin in a moderate oven for 1 hour.


Potato Scones.
Six ozs. cold potatoes, 9 ozs. flour, 1 tea-
spoonful baking powder, 3 ozs. margarine,
pinch salt, milk and water to mix.
Mash the potatoes finely, sieve flour and
salt and baking powder, next rub in the fat.
Add potatoes and mix together; add a small
quantity of milk and water and mix to a
stiff paste. Eoll out to only pinch thick,
cut into rounds, place on greased tin and
bake in a hot oven for about 10 minutes.
Highland Scones.
Two cupsful bread flour, 5 tablespoonsful
butter, | cupful milk, 4 teaspoonsful bak-
ing powder, \ teaspoonful salt, 2 eggs, 2
tablespoonsful sugar, jam or marmalade.
Blend butter with sifted dry ingredients.
Stir in milk and eggs. Spoon dough on to
oiled paper dusted with flour. Pat with
hand to \ inch thickness. Spread jam or
marmalade over half the dough, cover with
other half and press gently together. Cut
into squares and then crosswise to form tri-
angles. Brush with milk to give a rich
brown glaze, and bake in a hot oven from
10 to 15 minutes. Serve while hot for tea
or breakfast. (Omit sugar from recipe and
spread dough with f cupful grated mild
or pimento cheese instead of jam or mar-
malade and you’ll have a delectable scone
to serve with salad).
Oatmeal Scones.
Half lb. medium oatmeal, i lb. flour, 2
ozs. margarine, a saltspoonful salt, a tea-
cupful milk and water mixed.
Mix salt, oatmeal and flour. Eub in the
margarine, add milk and water to make a
stiff dough. Knead this dough for 8 min-
utes. Eoll out, form into scones, and bake
on hot tins in a good oven, about 20 min-
utes. Serve hot, split, and buttered. Cur-
rants may be added to recipe if liked.
Cheese Scones.
Half lb. plain flour, a pinch salt and cay-
enne pepper, 2 level teaspoonsful cream of
tartar, 1 level teaspoonful earb. soda, 2 ozs.
grated cheese, 1 oz. butter, about \ pint
cold water.
Sift flour with salt and rising. Eub in
butter, add cheese and cayenne and enough
cold water to make a soft dough. Knead
well, roll out, cut with a small round cut-
ter, place on cold oven trays, glaze and bake
in a hot oven till done.
Oatmeal Scones.


Teboller (Tea-Buns).
Mix \ teaspoonful of salt with a packet
of yeast and blend with the following in-
gredients, in the usual manner: J lb. butter,
1-J tablespoonsful sugar, 3 cupsful sifted
flour, f cupful cream, 2 teaspoonsful pow-
dered nutmeg, eggs (save the other
i egg to brush the tops of the buns), and
lastly, fold in \ cupful of softened currants.
The cream must be lukewarm, not cold,
when added. Knead thoroughly, let rise
in a warm place for 2 hours. Then place
on a buttered cookie sheet, after forming
into small fancy shapes, let rise another
hour, and the buns are ready to bake.
This mixture is often baked as a whole
Tea Buns.
coffee->cake, instead of as individual buns.
If it is used as a coffee-cake, the top should
be garnished with a glaze made of 2 table-
spoonsful of powdered sugar made into a
paste with 1 teaspoonful of boiling water.
Sprinkle the top generously with halved or
minced browned almonds.
Doughnuts a la Supreme,
One cake compressed yeast, 1 cupful
scalded milk, 6 tablespoonsful sugar, tea-
spoonful salt, 3 eggs, 4 cupsful flour, £ cup-
ful butter.
Crumble the yeast into a bowl, gradually
add the milk (cooled to the correct tem-
perature), sugar, salt, and well-beaten eggs,
and then the flour. Mix and work in the
melted butter (lukewarm). Set in a warm
place and cover with a cloth until the dough
doubles in bulk. Turn the dough on a
floured bread-board and roll out in a rec-
tangular shape, \ inch thick. Cut the dough
in half, and on one-half drop prune filling
(recipe follows) by the teaspoonful at 3-
inch intervals. Fold the second half over
the first. Cut out with a round cooky-cutter
and let rise until double in bulk. Fry in
deep fat until brown. Drain on unglazed
paper and roll in a mixture of powdered
sugar and cinnamon. These are very popu-
lar for luncheons, teas, and parties. They
are not only attractive and out of the or-
dinary, but their delicious taste immedi-
ately wins the approval of everyone.
Prune Filling: Soak \ lb. of prunes for
several hours, and cook until soft. Remove
the stones while hot and run through a
meat-chopper. Sweeten to taste and flavour
with the rind of 1 or 2 lemons.
Honey-Bran Muffins.
Four tablespoonsful melted butter, 1 cup-
ful whole wheat flour, 1 egg (beaten), i
cupful bread flour, teaspoonful salt, cup-
ful honey, 2 cupsful bran, \ teaspoonful
soda, cupsful thick sour milk, 2 tea-
spoonsful baking powder, | cupful raisins
or chopped dates.
Have oven ready at a medium heat. Melt
sufficient butter for recipe and to brush
into muffin tins. Beat the egg, stir in the
honey and sour milk. Sift the two kinds of
flour with soda, salt and baking powder,
mix with the bran and stir into the first
mixture. Add raisins and melted shorten-
ing and beat well. Fill buttered muffin tins
half full with batter. Bake in medium
oven from 20 to 25 minutes.
Lemon Yeast.
Use a seasoned bottle. Mix well together
the juice of 1 large lemon, 3 tablespoonsful
moist sugar, and 1 pint of boiling water.
Bottle while warm.


Doughnut Delights.
Three tablespoonsful butter, | cupful
sugar, 2 eggs, 3| cupsful flour, 4 teaspoons-
ful baking powder, J teaspoonful cinnamon,
1 teaspoonful cloves, £ teaspoonful mace, 1
teaspoonful salt, | cupful milk.
Beat butter, sugar and eggs. Add sifted
dry ingredients alternately with milk. Div-
ide dough. Pat out one portion inch thick
on floured board and cut out doughnuts.
Melt enough clear fat to fill deep flat-bot-
tomed saucepan § full. Heat until fat
browns inch-cube of bread in 1 min. Raise
heat 1 minute each time you put in raw
doughnuts. When brown, drain on absorbent
paper. When cool, dip doughnuts into glaze.
_ Vanilla Glaze: Blend 2 cupsful confec-
tioners’ sugar, 1 teaspoonful vanilla, 3
tablespoonsful hot milk.
Chocolate Glaze: To above, add 1 square
chocolate dissolved in 1 tablespoonful boil-
ing water.
Doughnut Delights.
Printed by John Sands Pty. Ltd., Druitt St., Sydney, and published
bv the "Australian Home Journal." 407-409 Kent St., Sydney, N.S.W.
