

Breakers
innwstit, Storial, an & fnlilkaL
THE KEY. A. J. CAMPBELL,
Of St. George's Church, Geelong.
PUBLISHED AT THE REQUEST OF THE YOUNG MEN’S
CHRISTIAN ASSOCIATION OF GEELONG.
profits to be btboftb to % guilbing
f
GEELONG : George Mercer, Malop Street.
MELBOURNE : Robert Mackie.


BREAKERS AHEAD:
DOMESTIC, SOCIAL, AND POLITICAL.
A few weeks ago, on the road from Kew to Melbourne, a little girl came
into the omnibus and sat down beside me —a neat, tidy little child, who
had lived in the world, I should say, eleven or twelve years. She had a
dish covered with a napkin in one hand, and a tin can in the other,
which she held away from her, at arm’s length. It was full of tea, and she
was evidently desirous not to lose a drop. I saw that she could not hold
it long in that strained position—you could not holdout your empty hand
for five minutes —and I was considering whether it would be consistent
with my dignity to hold it for her, when a working man stepped in, and,
without wasting time in thinking about his dignity—without even saying
a word —he took the can out of her hand, and held it, not straight out —
mark this—but straight down. I don’t think that the child khew him,
but she trusted his kind face. She wasn’t afraid that he would drink up
her father’s tea, or spill a drop of the precious treasure.
The next person who came in was a young lady, who sat down on
the other side of the little girl, edging off from her somewhat —for she
was too finely dressed for an omnibus. She was carrying a very small
white dog in her arms, of which she was very fond. She had a very
pleasant countenance, but with an unutterable look of silliness upon it
arising, as it seemed to me, from the crosscut fashion of her hair. As I
looked at the two I had no difficulty in choosing which I would like
for my daughter —the girl who loved her dog, or the girl who loved her
father—the girl with the hair, or the girl with the heart.
By-and-by my young friend went out with Eer dish, and the man
2


handed her the can, and got a very pretty smile and “ I thank you, sir,”
for his pains.
“ I like that girl,” I said to him. “ She must be very fond of her
father.”
“ Yes,” he said, “ and he must be a good father to her.”
“What a happy country this would be, if all fathers and daughters
loved each other that way.—Things would go well with us then.
“ Things would go well with us now if we were better governed.”
My Interlocutor was a Richmond tradesman, a politician—a Protec-
tionist, and and an unbeliever in the Powers that be at present. So we
launched for a few minutes into the sea of politics.
“ I wish,” he said when I got out, “ that we could have had a longer
talk.”
And I often wish that all the good men here could have a long talk —
a quiet and serious talk over the affairs of this Commonwealth. I wish
that laymen and clergymen, statesmen and tradesmen, rich and poor,
old and young men, could meet—not once, but often—and speak over
those questions that are so hotly debated amongst us —speak quietly and
kindly. I am sure that a great deal of good would come out of such
friendly conferences, and that a great deal of mishief would be pre-
vented.
I have put clergymen among the rest. I know, however, that
there is a sort of feeling that they should not meddle with politics.
They are too high for them—some people think—quite above the range
of their minds ; while others think that they are too low for them —not
to be meddled with without getting some of the mud of the black sea
upon their cloth.
I dislike exceedingly either Christian ministers or Christian churches
involving themselves in party questions of any kind, and especially I
deprecate their going down into the arena of secular politics and joining
in the actual struggle. I remember how earnestly the first planters of
Christianity refused to employ that heavenborn power in any direct way
for overthrowing Paganism. Upon the other hand, I have seen —we have
all seen —how Rome has marred and corrupted the spiritual life that was
in her, by prostituting her sacred functions to earthly ends, and claiming
to be a territorial sovereign as well as a spiritual power. What the Church
has to do is to exhibit God’s truth in its universal and very practical
bearings upon things civil and sacred. Her duty is to sow the principles
of Godliness, Justice, and Brotherly Kindness, and to watch and assist
their growth.-—Then she is to let them operate freely, according to their
heavenly nature, but without clerical direction or control.
At the same time, as I count it one of the heresies of the day, that
the State has nothing to do with Religion, I hold that the Church is
abdicating one of the highest parts of her vocation, if she does not ex-
hibit to the kings and rulers of the earth the duties which they owe to
God and to their fellowmen. The State does render worthy service to
the Church. It keeps the ground where she is working in peace it de-
fends her in the enjoyment of her civil rights; and if by wise legislation


it increases the wealth of the community, she shares the benefit. State
aid of that kind I am sure none of us will repudiate. For which benefits
the Church is bound to make just recompence—which she does when
she succeeds in building the people up in noble beliefs, and in sober,
righteous, and godly living. But further, —inasmuch as the outward
prosperity of the Church is interwoven with that of the State, —she is en-
titled, and she is bound, for her own sake as well as for its sake, to shed
over the field of affairs such lights of Divine wisdom and human experi-
ence as the Word of God supplies; and to give such help and heavenly
counsel to those who are holding the helm of authority, that the needle
and compass of our statesmanship may speak truly, and that in the State
as well as in the Church God’s will may be done on earth as it is
done in heaven.
But even while I argue for that right, I would not have spoken to
you to-night upon the subjects that are to occupy us, if other men—
whose work it is more than mine—would come out of the shell of their
modesty, and speak to you out of the fulness of their experience and
ability.
Mr. Wrixon has spoken out, and has spoken well, upon the responsi-
bilities of the Franchise. More recently, Sir Charles Gavan Duffy has
pointed out to us the many natural resources of this country which we
are allowing to lie idle —which might furnish healthy industrial employ-
ment to thousands of our population—has spoken wisely on //Wsubject,
but upon another subject not so wisely, as it seems to me. Professor
Pearson has also said what he thinks about the Taxation of the people.
And among ourselves—in a becoming way, and to orderly audiences—
Mr. Langton and Mr. Graham Berry have descanted on the comparative
blessings of Freetrade and Protection —with this result, I suppose, that
we find it rather hard to say on which side the greatest blessing lies, and
are inclined to propose the compromise, if it were possible, that if Mel-
bourne wants Freetrade it should have it, and if Geelong wants Protection
it should have it too; unless we adopt Sir Anthony Musgrave’s more
feasible suggestion, and throw the four Australias into one fraternal and
federal trade-union.
However, it is not in that line of thought I am going to lead you.
My Title indicates that in my opinion there are dangers gathering round
the path of this colony—some deteriorating influences at work, which
will greatly mar its progress, if they do not wreck its prosperity. I am
not going to speak of possible disasters that may befal us, for which (if
they come uncaused by us) we have no responsibility, and need have no
fear; but of those evils which are rooting themselves in our soil—which
are tainting the breath of society—and which, when they have filled the
atmosphere with their poisonous odours and the earth with their prolific
fruit, will make it much more difficult for our children than it has been
for us, to walk in truth and honour, and to keep themselves unspotted
from the flesh.
We spend our lives here in three relations: We \wt, first, in the
family ; secondly, in the neighbourhood; thirdly, in the nation. There
is a fourth and still higher relation—that which unites us to the Church ;
but I cannot embrace that relation in the field of these observations.
Horae Life—Social Life—and Political Life—these three relations, and


the dangers that threaten them, are the subjects on which I am (God
helping me) to speak to you to-night.
I.— Home Life.
The domestic constitution is one of God’s most wonderful and
beautiful works. So far as we can see, it belongs to man alone. It
seems to have had no existence before he was made, and when he has
finally quitted this earth it seems that its existence is to terminate.
Each kind of life on this earth has its own social law—its own method
and style of society. Insects go in swarms, fish in shoals, birds in
flocks, beasts in herds, men only in families.
Man’s high distinction —the possession of Reason for the discovery
of truth, and of Conscience for the discernment of good and evil,
would have been a burden to him, not a blessing, if provision had not
been made for his training in the use of reason and the moral sense.
The family order is the Divine provision.
In this grand device for securing man’s welfare there are four ties
which, while they bind the family into unity, develop four principles or
habits of high moral value : There is (i) the Conjugal tie, which de-
velops the habit of mutual trust; (2) the Parental tie, which demands
the exercise of a restrained authority; (3) the Filial tie, which requires
the display of a ready obedience; and (4) the Brotherly and Sisterly
tie, which calls for the recognition of equality, and a just respect to the
rights of each other.
Thus the family is a school for the higher education, not of the
children merely, but of the parents as well; “ How am Ito train this
child ? I have authority over him, but on what ground does it rest ?
On my power—l am stronger than he ? No ; authority comes from
author. lam the author of his being—bound therefore to supply him
with the means of healthful growth in his whole being, body and soul.
I must train him—not indulgently, for that would pamper the flesh—
not sternly, for that would petrify the heart. And first 1 must govern
myself —and 1 must govern myself by the will of God. When he sees
that I too am a man under authority, and that I am obedient to the will
of Another, who is higher and better than I am, he will the more readily
obey me ; and thus his obedience to his earthly father, whom he has
seen, will prepare him for obeying his Father in Heaven, whom he has
not seen.
Like a garden of sweet perfumes—like a well of clear water in the
desert —is the home in which the parents thus speak and act; in which
they feel that no monarch upon earth holds a higher sovereignty, nor
occupies a loftier throne, than they do —who live and reign in the hearts
of their children. Norman McLeod has told us what it was in his home
and in his parents’ training that did all the children so much good. It
was the love and truth that shone round them. Father and mother were
both so real and human—no cranks, twists, crotchets—there was liberty,
but not without wise restraint. It was an intensely happy home—where
Christianity was taken for granted, and was not forced on them with
scowl and frown. “ I thank God,” he cries, “ for my father’s free, loving,
sympathising, honest heart. He might have made me a slave to any ism.
He left me free to love Christ and Christians.”


You see what blessings flow through the golden pipes of parental and
filial love, and not less valuable are those which spring up round the
relationship of brothers and sisters. The habit which that relation in-
culcates is the feeling of equality—for all are equally united to the parent
stock and equally united to each other. But that feeling of equality is
modified by an endless diversity, arising from difference of age, of sex,
of physical strength, of temper, of talent. The members of the little
community have their rights, their possessions, their opinions. They are
continually debating questions about the right and wrong of things, and
passing judgments on things that lie within their jurisdiction with as much
rectitude, and with a great deal more promptitude, than the judges on
the bench. Thus the practical work of education and preparation for
the duties of citizenship are going on continually under every roof tree.
We boast of our xooo State schools. Why, God has in this land 10,000
Home schools, where the best teaching is being given—the duty of loving
their neighbour, i.e ., their brothers and sisters, as themselves —the duty
of doing as they would be done by—of dealing justly with each other
and dividing justly. And all this teaching does not cost the State a
penny.
Such is the Divine institution of the family, and its Divine intention.
It lies at the foundation of human society. It is older than the Nation
or the Church j and as it was anterior to them in its origin, so is it more
permanent in its form. You may alter a political constitution, or the
organization of a church ; but you cannot alter the family order. If you
do—and I don’t deny that it has been attempted—you will miserably
fail. Men may thrive under a monarchy or a republic—they may serve
God in an Episcopal or a Congregational church —but they cannot grow
up into a pure, healthful, righteous people under any other training than
that of the family. All ancient and modern history bear witness to that
fact. They testify that where the family order has been reverently ob-
served, the result has been domestic peace and national prosperity;
where it has been violated the result has been domestic misery and na-
tional disaster.
Dangers from various sides are threatening the interests of the family
among us.
1, Parents among us do not exercise the authority which belongs to
authorship. They do not train their children in the habit of obedience.
They break in their horses better than they break in their children.
Children are allowed to choose their own companions, their own books,
their own hours, their own Sunday-schools, and their own trades. In
fact, they are allowed to do pretty much as they please. There is un-
speakable cruelty in this. The untamed will grows into an obdurate
force. The passions become ungovernable. The home is filled with
angry strifes, and by-and-by is broken in pieces. We cannot too earnestly
press upon all parents how sadly they are ruining their children’s happi-
ness by their indolence and indulgence —letting them take their own way
and, like old Eli, “ restraining them not.” A few weeks ago, a girl
seventeen years of age, whose unbroken will had gained the mastery of
her, was thwarted by her father. She could not tolerate the opposition,
and, in a paroxysm of passion, threw herself down a coal-waste. And a
few years ago, a poor child of twelve years of age, who had enjoyed little


parental control, drowned herself in a fit of anger when rebuked for some
illdoing.
2. There is a deeper evil springing up in some families. Indolence
runs into absolute neglect. Children are a burden. —They tie the mother’s
hands, restrict the circle of her pleasures, and withdraw her from the
haunts of gaiety. “And won’t a mother make such sacrifices for her
children ? ” Thank God, many will. But some will not. They have
been trained up in a poor way —in the love of themselves and the worship
of the world, and in that poor way they will go, even when they are
married. The ties by which God seeks to bind them to their homes are
untied, and put into the hands of servants, who may be worthy of such a
trust or utterly unworthy of it. A sensational novel is preferred to the
children’s merry talk, and a visit to the theatre to a visit to the nursery.
This evil operates, of course, chiefly among the rich. At the same time,
there are parents among the working classes who go as far as they can in
that direction. I have known of a mother who used to take her children
to the theatre about every week, till she and they came to beggary ; and
there have been several instances —I recollect one here, and there was
one in Ballarat the other day—in which children have been left to look
after themselves while the parents have gone to some place of amuse-
ment. In the one case, the house was burned ;in the other, both house
and children were burned.
This burden of children does not press upon us' so heavily as in
Europe, and we are not so strongly tempted to get rid of them by un-
lawful means. We know that in France these are so frequently resorted
to as seriously to retard the growth of the population. I hope that we
are guiltless in that thing. But whether or not, it is necessary that we
should remember that children are an heritage of the Lord, and the fruit
of the womb is His reward; and that to frustrate His purpose is a vile
abomination and a monstrous crime.
Let me relieve these dark pictures by a brighter one. A few years
ago, a worthy couple gave up an excellent situation in the country and
came to town. In a money point of view, it seemed a foolish thing to
do. But they had three girls there, in service. Who was to look after
them ? Who ought to do it, if their parents didn’t ? Who was to take
them in when they were out of place, and nurse them when they were
sick ? They thooght that they were doing right, and trusted themselves to
God ; who has not suffered them to want, and has given them the reward
they coveted more than gold and silver —a happy, well-doing family.
I have alluded to Sir Charles Gavan Duffy’s lecture. He wishes us
to conform our habits to the climate, and to seek our amusements much
more in company and in the open air—gathering in the gardens, as they
do in Paris, or in brilliant clubs and cafes, with gay lights, music and
dramas, and cool refreshing drinks. I would go very far with Sir Gavan
in any scheme for lifting people out of their drinking habits, and
contributing to their wholesome recreation. But we must be very careful
that we do not trench upon the prerogatives of the family. To assemble
the women under the trees to sew and gossip, and send their husbands to
their haunts of politics or pleasure, while the children —who ought to be
preparing their lessons for to-morrow —are left to their own sweet will,
does not seem to me to be so wholesome an arrangement as that which


gathers the scattered members of the family together in the evening, and
gives them the opportunity of coming to know and love each other.
The best recreation for the working man is to play with his children at
hide-and-seek, or to do some tidy job for his wife, or to go out among the
flowers of his garden—where he will learn many a useful lesson.
“ How dearly God must love you, and this poor world of yours,
To spread blue skies above you, and deck the earth with flowers.”
I may be prejudiced in favour of the old home life of Britain in com-
parison with the more public life of the Continent; but Ido think the
one is more natural—the other more artificial. The one, I know, has
its root in the Word of God —the other, I believe, is a creature of State
policy. “The Church of Rome,” Hallam writes, “had for many ages
perceived and acted upon a principle that it is the policy of government
to encourage a love of pastime and recreation in the people—both be-
cause it keeps them from speculating on religious and political matters
and because it renders them more cheerful and less sensible to the evils
of their condition. The opposite system, so long pursued in Britain, has
no such grounds of policy to recommend it.” I grant that. But Britain
is not less prosperous and stable than France. Napoleon 111., we are
told, could not have ruled a day without the priest and the play-actor.
Queen Victoria does not require such adjuncts to buttress her throne.
Queen Victoria! —may God bless her, and may He write on the hearts
of every parent in her dominions these golden words which she wrote
with regard to the education of her daughter ; —“ lam quite clear that
she should be taught to have great reverence for God and for religion ;
but that she should have the feeling of devotion and love which our
Heavenly Father encourages His, earthly children to have for Him, and
not one of fear and trembling; and that she should be made to know as yet
no difference of creeds, and not to think that she can only pray on her
knees, or that those who do not kneel are less fervent and devout in
their prayers The greatest maxim of all is—that the children
should be brought up as simply, and in as domestic a way as possible;
that (not interfering with their lessons) they should be as much as possible
with their parents, and iearn to place their greatest confidence in them
in all things.”
I must advert to one other point. The State has taken in charge the
work of national education. Ido not question the necessity of our na-
tional system ; but the entire exemption of parents from all payment on
the one hand and all control upon the other, seems to me a fatal blot.
Not that I grudge the working class the pecuniary relief; but I would
infinitely rather have given it in some other form —have abolished tea and
sugar duties, for example. When the State comes into my house and
offers to bear a burden which I feel morally belongs to me, and which
furnishes one of the strongest inducements to thrift and industry,
the State is undertaking a duty which it has no call to undertake ;
in which it ought only to give encouragement and assistance —and it is
deteriorating and weakening the moral energy which is gendered in the
family. Then, there is a danger of its going further; —there is a danger
of the State coming to imagine that it ought to spread its wing over these
children—provide amusement for them —tree trips in the railway—gather-
ings and processions to do honour to the Minister of the day, and so


on ; which may produce very little mischief at present, but which is a
function which the State has no right to assume. It cannot play the
parent, and it should not try.
Then there is the religious danger. —Not from the adoption of a
secular system, which perhaps was necessary at the outset —but from the
unfriendly attitude which has been assumed towards the subject of moral
and religious training—as if it were a matter of very secondary im-
portance —as if it were, indeed, a root of bitterness, to be cast out and
got quit of. I cannot pursue that topic. But we must do what we can
first to uphold and then to amend the national system. We must claim
on behalf of Protestant and Papist alike, a recognition of the Bible in
our schools; and we must remind the State that, if it does not wish to
make itself a laughing-stock to men and devils, it will seek to defend
itself against Immorality as vigorously as against Ignorance. The three
R.’s are needful; but there is a fourth R.—Righteousness —which is quite
as needful. And the State must be told, with all respect, that it has not
exhausted the duty which it owes to God, when it has “ snubbed ” the
Ministers of Religion, and denounced them as sowers of discord and
sectarian strife; —which I, after eighteen years work and travel among
the churches of Victoria, declare to be an untruthful accusation, and
therefore an unjust one. Finally, inasmuch as for the present the Bible
is excluded from the school, we must seek to raise it to higher honour
in the home.
ll.— Social Life.
Although each family is a unit, it does not remain so. The
branches spread out, and, like the branches of the Banyan tree, take root
all round. Thus the family becomes a community—bound together by
the double tie of neighbourhood (nearness of place) and of kindness
(nearness of kin, or kind, or kindred).
Now, it would be unfair to look, in this new country, for the same
strong associations of interest and affection which are to be found in the
villages and parishes of Britain, where successive generations have been
born, and lived and died, in sight of each other ; —where the poor become
venerable by antiquity; —and a man’s honesty, like that of David Living-
stone’s ancestors, becomes hereditary.
At the same time, although the ghastly spectre of selfishness does
make frightful exhibition of itself here at times, I think that I am saying
what is true, when I say that there is a large and delightful play of kindly
feeling among the people of this land. Those who hail from the same
parts at home are kind to each other here. Shipmates, who have no other
tie but that which has sprung up during the outward voyage, are very
kind to each other; and so are diggers and others, whose work has
thrown them much together. Then the sick, the destitute, the helpless,
are kindly cared for; —too well cared for, Mr. Trollope thinks, who tells
us that if a pauper were suddenly removed from an English workhouse
to the Melbourne Benevolent Asylum, he would fancy that he had
emigrated to Buckingham Palace. And why shouldn’t we make the old
people comfortable ?
But now, this kindly feeling doesn’t flow over the whole surface of
society. It flows in certain channels, and confines itself too much to


certain classes. These it irrigates —the rest it leaves high and dry.
I am not going to quarrel with these channels. They are not of man’s
making. “He sendeth the springs into the valleys, which run among the
hills,” —full of beauty and blessing. I wouldn’t hdve these streams
diffused and lost. And yet, they do invisibly diffuse themselves as they
run—moistening the air and covering their banks with verdure. I don’t
want to break down classes, but class antipathies. I don’t want men to
be going out of their place to help—the rich the poor, or the poor the
rich. I don’t want the acts of kindness to be universal, but the feeling
of kindness. If I have a running stream, I can collect it when I like,
and water my meadow or drive my wheel with it. And if we had a river
of brotherly-kindness running down Elizabeth-street, and streams of it
reticulating the country, we could run it where it was needed —into the
cellars of the miser and the homes of the hardhearted. And lam sure that
when we had got among even the most selfish of our fellow-colonists, and
when we saw how miserable they were among their golden piles, for want
of human sympathy, there is none of us who would not carry them a cup
of this cold water —who would not, if we could, even bathe them in these
waters of kindness, that their flesh might come to them again as the flesh
of a little child.
I told you that the Richmond tradesman didn’t know the girl with
the Can —neither did he know the young lady with the dog. Why did
he offer his help to the poor girl, not to the rich ? O she didn’t want
any help.” That was not the only reason. The girl was a working man’s
child—and plainly a good and loving child. Suppose she had been his
own, the man felt he would have been proud of her. But he did’nt
know what he could have done with the other, who had been guilty of
two faults—of disfiguring the face which God had given her to look well
in, and of laying out upon a dog the love of the heart which God had
given her to love things human and Divine with. Now, this is one great
reason why the stream of kindness flows away from the uplands of so-
ciety. “ These people don’t need our help, and don’t want our sym-
pathy. They would take the offer of it for a mockery.” Now, if I were
a rich man, I would count that very hard. I would feel it to be a serious
drawback to my wealth, that I held it at the cost of the goodwill of my
fellowmen, so that they would not speak a kind word to me, nor credit
me with a good intention, nor suffer me to do them a good turn. I
would count that a tremendous price to pay for my position; and probably
would yield to the temptation of going elsewhere, where my riches
would befriend me —not isolate me and make me an alien to my fellow-
men.
Of course I shall be told that it is the rich man’s own fault. “ What
right has he to raise himself above the common level; and to take possession
of that green hill; and to build himself up there in ease and contemptuous-
ness ? He is setting at naught the sacred laws of Fraternity and
Equality, He ought to be pulled down.” —That you may go up your-
selves ? But take care how you use that word ought —the word of
strongest force (Maurice says) in the English language; to be used only
in God’s name —never in the Devil’s, —who it seems is to be Master
of Ethics in our new economic school.
There was a day when people in Victoria were glad to see old


settlers like the Hentys making their way across from Tasmania with
their flocks and herds ; —very thankful that anyone would face the
dangers and privations of life in the lonely country of the blackfellows.
And now, if their flocks have multiplied and their riches increased,
that was no fault of theirs. Is it wrong to be rich ? Abraham would
not take from a thread even to a shoelatchet from the king of Sodom.
Why ? Because he despised riches ? He was the richest man of his day;
but he had got his wealth from God —from God’s earth and increase,
and he wouldn’t take Sodom’s gold, lest the king of Sodom should say,
“ I have made Abraham rich.” Now, our early settlers got their riches
as directly from God as Abraham did —God blessed their skill, and per-
severance, and industry.
“But look how they got their lands.” Well, how did they get them ?
By law, or against law ? If you, with universal suffrage, make laws that
are intended to be broken, can you wonder that men break them ? If
you make blundering laws that cannot be enforced, is it wonderful that
that you should suffer for your stupidity. If these men have violated the
law, let the law punish them. If they have got their lands by dishonesty
and fraud, and false swearing, and if their dishonesties and perjuries are
inaccessible to the law and to you, leave them to God —He will punish
them. You acknowledge that you cannot do it in the way of law, —and
so you will do it in the way of hate and injustice.
Well, I would let you hate the evildoer, and his evil deeds, if you
were sure of him. But what right have you to make charges against men
in the bulk ?—What right have you to charge the crimes of the guilty
upon the innocent and the honourable ? If ten men out of a thousand
fired the Parliament House, would the Crown Prosecutor put the whole
thousand at the bar ? And if some of them could prove that they had
exerted themselves in extinguishing the fire, would he charge them with
also igniting it ?
There are men among us who, though they have committed the un-
pardonable sin of becoming rich, are laying out their lives and their
means for the benefit of this country. Through a thousand streams of
trade —building, planting, &c., —they are distributing their wealth, for
public and private uses, for charities and churches.
I don’t deny that we have some misers—men with a mania for hoard-
ing, and a horror at spending. But even these men may be left alone.
What the fathers gather the children will scatter. There are some
millionaires in Melbourne. If a few of them were to die this year, they
would contribute to the treasury —five shillings a head for
for every man, woman, and child —twenty-five shillings for every family
of five. Don’t you see that even the misers are working for the working
man, and are paying so much of his taxes for him ? Why, if we had
thirty of them, they would pay all our taxes. But then, they would have
to die every year—which, to a miser, would be hard.
But as I said at the beginning, I wish that we could have a talk all
round. I wish that the rich men would put away their suspicions and
their pride of wealth, and that the working-men would put away their
suspicions and their pride of independence, and that they would
sit down and tell each other their stories—and how they have got on by
God’s blessing, or how they have got down by their ill-luck, or ill-doing,


and that they would try to convince each other that they are doing the
best they can—each in his own place—for the good of this country.
For now I do think that not you nor I, nor any man in particular,
but that the God of Heaven has a right to expect that those men whom
he has raised to high positions here, shall use their commanding influence
and extensive means for the benefit of their fellowmen. I do not say
in what precise way. But I have no doubt that it is the will of God
that they should use their means in the enrichment rather than in the
enlargement of their lands —and in the employment of all kinds of la-
bour, and the encouragement of all willing labourers.
“ But that is benevolence—not business—and won’t pay.” It is
benevolence. Good feeling, I admit, lies at the bottom of it, and I hope
that the hearts of our rich men have not grown too shallow to hold that
most delicious kind of feeling. But it is business as well —and there
are some among us who will tell you that they never did a better stroke
of business than what they have done in that line. I know men who
have settled down on the kindliest terms with the selectors on their runs.
They find that they are useful to them, and there is a constant stream of
helpfulness always flowing between them.
And I am sure that if the owners of our landed properties would
bear in mind that, in the jurisprudence of Heaven, they to whom much
is given,—of them much shall be required, and would set themselves to
prove, not their legal title to their lands merely, but the beneficial uses
to which they were turning them; —if they would show how much they are
spending on men who work in wood, and stone, and iron—on the garden—
and the stable*—on books and pictures—and all the endless things by
which civilization helps us to get rid of our money ; —and if they would
make it plain, moreover, that they have a thought beyond the comfort
which these things bring to them, and the embellishment of their own
home life—and that they have a care for their neighbour, and are
anxious to promote his wealth and outward estate as well as their own ;
*Racing expenditure excluded ; which —with all deference to our Governors
and the Mayor of Melbourne, and the Rev. William Peter Pearce —I must put down
as a demoralising expenditure. Racing may exist without gambling and without
cheating. But where does it exist without a prodigious development of these
low vices ? A friend of mine broke up his stables and sold his racehorses, because
he knew that he could not keep his boys clear of the jockeys—and he didn’t fancy
that companionship for them, —which is no better than it should be ; although, if
we knew the tremendous pressure that is brought to bear upon their honesty at times,
we would not be surprised at the acknowledgement of a gentleman (who doesn’t
exercise the liberty of betting even to the extent which Mr. Pearce accords to him, —of
backing his own horses) that he did not know a thoroughly honest jockey. Mr. Pearce
thinks that the rearing of fine horses is “ a thing of the first importance in a country
like this.” So is betting a thing of the first importance to the bookmakers. I wish
that we could rear honest men and women here, who would give their labours to some
sort of useful work, and amuse themselves in some sort of rational enjoyment. As to
“ fine horses,” my experience is that they are a nuisance—getting lame continually
when they are wanted. I remember the case of a British officer, who prided himself
on the high breeding of the horse he rode during a campaign on the continent.
On one occasion, he and two or three of his brother officers were chased across
country by a squadron of the enemy. They came to a stiff fence, which the other
horses took easily enough; his “fine” but illtempered horse refused it twice—and
he was cut down.


I am sure that, if these things were made plain, the outcry that has
risen—not here only, but everywhere—against wealth, would altogether
die out.
But even although this fair picture should not be realised, we must
resist all attempts to interfere with the just rights of men—or even, I
may add, with the silent course and operations of Nature. In this
country estates will be disintegrated faster than at home. And yet, when
I look back upon the fifty years which come within my recollection, I am
surprised to find how many of the landed properties of Scotland have
changed hands. It was but this last mail that brought me news of the sale
of one of the oldest family estates in Fifeshire, which a thriftless heir
has disentailed and sold to a worthy maker of wax-cloth in Kircaldy.
There are many other ways in which the rich might prove—and,
thank God, are to some extent proving—their usefulness to the com-
munity. There are large foundations wanted for halls of learning connected
with our churches, schools, and universities. Let every rich man choose
some special work ; —let him identify himself with it—and throw himself
heartily into it. Such magnificent chances as a new country gives for
doing great things for God and man ought not to be allowed to
slip away. Mortuary gifts are very good—by all means let us have them ;
but living gifts, from men who can see the good they are doing, and
whom we can thank, are infinitely better. Besides, I want men to show
that they are useful —everybody knows that their money is.
And then, let them condescend to men of low estate, and show a
kindly concern in the poor. Our public charities are generously sup-
ported ; but I am thinking how I can suggest means of personal well-
doing to those who move in the stately but rather frigid circles of
society ; —who need something to thaw the silver frost that is apt
to gather round the heart that is at ease ! And the best thing I can
say to them is,—“ Get a few poor friends —one or two at a time-good
worthy people;—l don’t make that condition; —but men and women in
the flesh like youiselves—whom you may go to now and then, and sit
down beside them, and cheer them up if they need cheering, and help
them if they need help, and read them a verse or two from the Words of
Christ. And if you don’t know how to go about the work, read Miss
Cotton’s “ Our Coffee Room,” where you will find a splendid com-
mentary on the maxim—“ Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so
fulfil the law of Christ.” Rogers, in his “Italy,” gives us this illustration
of that text: “ I was weary of my life,” an Italian nobleman said to him,
“ and, after a miserable day, was hurrying along the street to the river,
to put an end to my existence, when I felt a sudden check. I turned and
saw a little boy who had caught the skirt of my cloak. He looked up into
my face, and said, ‘There are six of us, and we are dying for want of bread.’
I said to myself, ‘ Why shouldn’t I help this wretched family ?—I have
money —it won’t take long.’ The scene of misery he conducted me to I
cannot describe. I threwthem my purse, and their burst of gratitude over-
came me. —It filled my eyes—lt went as a cordial to my heart, ‘ I will call
again to-morrow,’ I said. Fool that I was, to think of leaving a world
where such pleasure was to be had, and so cheaply,” Remember that
story. Remember that sovereign antidote for suicide. Life becomes a
burden when it is concentrated upon self—a shroud and grave, like the


silkworm’s unpierced cocoon. Wind out the golden threads—fling them
abroad upon God’s world —they will catch some strays. You will make
some souls happier. Only, that you may do it effectually, do it in the
name of Christ, —do it with His help ; so shall you fulfil His law and
walk in His steps, who —though He was the Man of Sorrows, Bearer of
our great burden —went about continually doing good.
lll.— Political Life.
And now I come to the last sphere of life—the National—which in-
cludes in it the black sea of politics, into which, as I have said already,
some kind friends would say, You had better not venture. But we all
live on the borders of that sea ; —we are affected by its agitations ;
sometimes sickened by its exhalations. And I confess that lam going
home just now with a sense of shame, on account of the humiliating
spectacle which this colony has presented to the world during the last
eighteen months. What am Ito say ?If we were done with it—if, like a
ship that had just grazed, but passed, a sunken reef—l could believe
that we were over it, and in the deep sea again, I would say nothing
about it.—l would say let it be blotted out from the page of history.
But I hear the Breakers still—not behind me, but Ahead—and right in
our course. Therefore, you must let me say a few words to you upon
this, by no means unworthy or insignificant, Subject.
The Home, we have seen, spreads out into the village, and the
village grows into the city. The aggregation of these homes and
villages and cities constitutes the Nation.
Like the home, the nation has its rights and duties. Its supreme
Right is the right of being well governed; its supreme Duty is the
duty of seeing to it that it is well governed.
I. The Right. —The right of being well governed is to be main-
tained against three parties.
(x). Against the Heavens. We know, what Nebuchadnezzar took
so long to learn —what he didn’t learn among the splendours of his
palace, but down beside the ox that eateth grass—we know that the
Heavens do rule—and we have a right to expect that they shall rule us ;
and that, not only through the forces of nature, which are stored up
round us and within us, but through the constant machinery of Provi"
dence. And we have a right to expect, moreover —we have been taught
by our Lord to ask—that we shall be ruled upon no lower principles,
but upon the same principles of everlasting righteousness as those upon
which the Heavens themselves are ruled.
{2). Against the British Throne ; which is bound to protect us —not
only against hostile invasion, but against internal anarchy. I know how
morbidly sensitive some men are on this point. They talk of Britain
as if she were a foreign power, jealous of our liberties and watching for
an opportunity to humble us. Nothing can be farther from the truth —
nothing can be more ungenerous and unjust. I don’t know what
Colonial Ministers in London and Melbourne have written to each other,
and I don’t care. Great Britain acknowledges the substantial benefits
which she derives from our gold and our wool; she is proud of the ap-
pearance and the purchases which we make in her markets ; and, with
very sincere warmth of admiration, she watches the development of these


Australian Provinces. To me it is a source of calm satisfaction that,
although I have come to the antipodes, I have not got outside the warm,
strong wing of British power. I remember, on the first journey I took
into the bush, when the feeling of separation and banishment was upon
me, the delightful sensation that thrilled me as I passed a police station
and read the sign-royal, ‘ V.R.’ It seemed as if the distance had been
obliterated. I felt that I was still a member of the Biitish family, and
a subject of the British Queen—whom she would care for, even at these
ends of the earth. And I have no hesitation in affirming, that we who
have settled here under this Constitution have a right to insist that we
shall be kept in quiet possession of this land by the British Crown. It
has no right, I grant you, to interfere with us in governing ourselves, but
it is bound to prevent us from ruining ourselves.
(3). Then our third claim to be well governed is to be maintained
against those who take the work in hand —the work of the Legislature
and the work of the Executive. We are entitled to insist that those who
accept the trust shall show that they consider it a very onerous duty—
that they shall show some sense of responsibility, not to us merely, but
to Him who is the Fountain of all power—and that they shall discharge
their duties with dignity, fidelity, and prudence. And inasmuch as it is the
Heavens that rule, we are especially entitled to insist that they shall not
set up the throne of iniquity in fellowship with the throne of God, and
make mischief by a law, but shall bring their rule into harmony with the
rule of Heaven. For we know that if we do not ally ourselves with it,
and do not govern ourselves by God’s righteousness, His movements
will not be retarded, but our wicked devices shall be broken in
pieces. ,
11. The Duty. —Our duty, upon the other hand, is to see to it that
we are well governed ; which duty has been put upon us—with our will
or against it, does not matter; —and must be dealt with like every other
important question —earnestly and Christianly.
“We would do very well,” said the Richmond politician, “ if we
were better governed.” Whose fault is it that we are not better governed?
What is the use of universal suffrage to the working man if it is to leave
him still grumbling that he is ill-governed ?
However, let us see what we have to do.
First, we must get Rulers who know something about the business—
experts, not empirics—men who have learned state-craft, —for it is a craft,
and a very noble one too —not quacks and charlatans. Just fancy the
passengers on board a ship passing a vote of want of confidence in the
captain who has been twenty times across these seas j and then,
according to the absurd etiquette of Parliament, the spokesman
land-lubber though he be —would be sent into the captains place!
A pretty government for the ship. And do you think that a State
is much easier to navigate than a ship ? Do shipowners take no
account of the man they choose ? Do they choose a man they know
nothing about, because he talks grandly of his seamanship ? And if he
tells them that he has got ahead of the old nautical lore and navigation
books, and has found out new methods of guiding a ship, of course they
will trust him ?—Of course they will do no such thing. And do you
think that this colony is not affected by the character of its governments ?


Does it make no difference to men in the old country who are seeking
new homes, —and to men who are seeking outlets for their capital,—and to
lenders on the Stock Exchange, whether we are governed under the old-
fashioned ways of a Constitutional Parliament, or under the lively
and eminently scientific way of Tea Meetings outside Parliament, and
Stone Walls inside of it ? Very well. We must see to it that we have
men to govern us who have skill to guide the ship.
But they must have Character as well. They must be upright men,
who can speak with their enemies in the gate ; —men of truth, who hate
and abhor lying ; —men of honour, who do not scorn the purity of do-
mestic life, nor live in swinish ways. I know how difficult it is for some
men to decide between character lacking ability, and ability lacking cha-
racter. The Christian should never hesitate. How can base men govern
us well ? Will men who indulge in vice put down vice ? Let the drunkards
and adulterers ; —let the liars, gamblers, and dishonest persons, go down
from our platforms, and disappear from our Parliaments, and show them-
selves no more in God’s daylight until they have got themselves washed
from their filthiness.
It is the Heavens that rule. Every Sunday, in every sanctuary when
we repeat the Lord’s prayer, we ask them to rule us. But will evil men
offer themselves to the Heavens—to be God’s ministers, doing His
will ? True, they get sworn in when they take their seats. In whose
name do they swear ? What do they swear to ?
I wish that this community would ponder this matter. I wish
that they would look back upon the history of the nations which have
passed away from the earth, and ask themselves —What was the cause of
their ruin ? What was it that destroyed the Roman Empire ? Old Salvian
tells us —It was not bad laws, it was bad men. And what is it that
has brought the United States to its present state of political degradation?
Is it not that they have been so utterly careless as to the moral character
of their representatives ? “Did you ever hear,” (Mr. Lowe asked on
the floor of the British House of Commons) “ of a man who was ostra-
cised from public life in America, in consequence of having committed
a murder, a forgery, a perjnry, or anything of the kind ? Things which
would not be tolerated for an instant in England, are passed without
notice in America.” Not without notice, here—but without punishment
by Parliament;—which,however (I entreat you to remember) by a definite
judgment, has declared that it lies with constituencies to satisfy themselves
as to the moral character and antecedents of their representatives.
Secondly, When we have chosen our representatives we must not
hamper them. We must recollect what we have been so often told, that
they are Representatives, not Delegates—bound to carry out not your
will or mine, but to legislate for the whole constituency and the whole
country. I hope you have not embraced the political heresy that we
are to govern our governors —that we, the people, are the true rulers—
they our servants, to register our decisions. The Representative, once
he is chosen, supersedes the people. For the time being they have no
parliamentary existence—no governing power, except through him ; and
as he cannot vote according to the separate wills of all his constituents,
if he is a wise man, he will vote according to none of them, but ac-
cording to his own judgment, and take the consequences; one of which


at least is certain—he will retain his own self-respect. What kind of
notion could that elector have of his member, who telegraphed to him on the
eve of an important vote —“ Vote for the motion, or I will make your
seat too hot for you.” Men say that that is true democracy. It may be
so —but it is not our democracy, which is, —Election by the people,—
Government by the Parliament. I entreat you to oppose that fallacy.
It will work no end of mischief. —It will transfer legislation from a de*
liberative assembly to the declamations of the Eastern market—it will
take the government of affairs out of the hands of responsible and
capable men, and put them into the hands of demagogues, pretenders,
and broken-down traders in politics.
Thirdly, We must see to it that our rulers govern us—not our Rail-
ways and Roads only—our Lands and Customs—but ourselves. I don’t
care so much about their being a praise to those who do well, but I wish
very much that they would make themselves a terror to those that
do ill. I know that they can’t make men righteous by Aqt of Parliament
But, First, they can make them quiet by the power of tbe police.
It may seem a little matter to some persons that a public meeting cannot
be held in Collingwood or Richmond, except to hear one set of politicians
and one set of opinions. It seems to me a very serious matter indeed.
In a free country, where every man is elevated to the rank of an elector,
and is, therefore, bound to inform himself about the truth of things—it
is intolerable that men who do wish to hear both sides of a question
should be precluded from doing so. And it is an utterly disgraceful
thing that so staunch a friend of the working men as Henry Taylor
should be smitten on the mouth because he won’t say what some men
want him to say. lam astonished beyond measure, that respectable
men who wish to address their fellow-citizens, should allow themselves
to be howled down. If these disturbers of the peace are allowed to blow
up their passions in that way, you may depend upon it, they will proceed
to still more brutal exhibitions of their power when occasion offers.
What is the Commissioner of Police about ? if I were in his place, and
if I had the half of his portly presence, I would show myself at one of
these meetings, and intimate, once for all, that every man who made any
clamour would spend the rest of the evening in the lock-up.
1 went one night with a friend to a politico-ecclesiastical meeting in
Fife. It had been rumoured that there was to be a row —some weavers
from Buckhaven and Dubbieside were coming to mob the lecturer. My
friend was moved into the chair —a very good move, in the circumstances.
For he was a six-feet-three man, an old Life Guardsman—the strongest
man 1 ever knew. “My friends,” he began,“we are met to hear Mr. Leckie,
and Mr. Leckie we will hear, and no one else ; and if any one tries to
put him down, or to do him any harm, I give him fair warning, he shall
feel the weight of this hand,”—which he brought down upon the table
with a blow which made everyone quiver, and say to himself, “ I would
not like to feel that.” The business went on without disturbance, and
when it was over the lecturer went out behind the chairman, through a
lane of people, in dumb silence. I wish that we had a few men like him
here, morally as well as physically strong.
Secondly, Our rulers can’t make men sober by Act of Parliament;
but to a considerable extent they can prevent them from drinking and from


becoming drunkards, by taking the opportunity and the temptation out
of the way. But then, we are told, —If we stop the flow of drink, we
stop the flow of revenue. But, now, just fancy that a proposal weie
put forward, to kill so many hundred persons in Melbourne every year
by some less hideous way of death than that of drink, and that the
revenue was to reap a golden harvest, wh.it an outcry would be
raised against the revolting barbarity of that proposal. And yet we al-
low that poison stream to flow down our streets—maddening so many
of our brothers and sisters every year, and sending them to the asylum—
and killing so many more, and sending them to the grave —But we must
not forget to thank the late session of Parliament for thedetermination with
which they pushed through the Licensing Bill. It is a partial measure,
but it carries in its bosom a promise of endless good. It will be closely
watched—overset if possible, it must be as closely watched on the other
side, and established; and then, like an old battering-ram, run closer to
the walls. You should have a Vigilance Committeej to see to the execution
of the Act. I read this the other day : —A poor woman came to a pub-
lican, and begged him not to supply her husband with more liquor—it
might be the death of him. And it was. He committed suicide the next
day. But what was that to the publican ? He was there—licensed to
sell. If the man drank himself to that was no fault of hip.
However, it can be made a crime now. Under this Bill magistrates can
inhibit publicans from selling drink to any notorious drinkers. They did
so at Hamilton the other day, and a woman was fined £b for violating
the interdict. There are a number of poor victims of intemperance here,
who should he placed under the guardianship of that prohibition.
Thirdly , Uur rulers cannot make men and women live pure lives;
but we ought to insist upon their sweeping the streets of Melbourne of
the profligacy that flaunts itself there in the daylight as well as in the
dark. Protestations against this unblushing iniquity are coming from
the Pulpit and the Press every day. Still the evd goes on, —till, “J he
Vagabond” tells us to our face, that the vile things done in Melbourne
exceed those that are done in Paris. This is a dismal outlook. Ihe cry
of Sodom which is going up from our splendid capital may he unheeded
by us, but the God of Heaven will hear it, and He will sweep the city
if we will not, and will cleanse and purify it.
Could we not anticipate the judgment of Heaven ?
Would it be altogether a strange or unseemly thing for His Ex-
cellency to gather his advisers ronnd him and say to them,
“Gentlemen, —Our gracious Sovereign has sent me here to govern the
country, and I mean to govern it. I have been attending to the works
of the country —your Railways, Music Halls, Shows, Races and Theatres.
I have been addressing you on important topics on public occasions.
These things I have been doing abundantly. But Government has
higher functions. I want to govern the People as well as the Country ;
not the good only—who need little guidance at my hand ; but the evil,
and those who have gone out of the way. These may he very poor
creatures indeed—yet they are subjects of the Queen ; who has a pitiful
woman’s heart for them —and would have them lifted out of the mire if
it is possible. Gentlemen, you must try —you may not he able to turn
them from their wickedness j but you must give them fewer chances of


doing it. You must tell them that the streets of Melbourne were not
built to be Doors and Avenues to Hell—and that from this day they
must go out of Heaven’s sight and mine.” I
It would be childish to say that this could not be done—and sdltf
more childish to say that no good would come of it. Whether Iniquity
be ashamed or not, it is an unspeakable boon to the community whea
she is obliged to hide her head. ’ /
But now, finally, while we see to it that we are well governed, we
are to take care that we are not over-governed. Let there be as little
interference as possible with the liberty and industry of men. Don’t
let men lean on Government as their Patron and Provider. In this
great moot question, for example, between Protection and Freetrade, it
was right, perhaps, that the experiment should be made. But I never
considered it anything else but an experiment; I never considered that
the country was committed to the principle of Protection without return,
whether the results were good or bad. We never can denude ourselves
of the right to think, and learn, and change. Vested rights must be
justly dealt with, but wrongs never can become vested. But what I
want to say on this point is, that while the experiment is continued it
ought not to be pushed further, till we find out where the true principle
lies for us. To me, the experiment really seems to be very much the same
as that which the girl was making with her Can, which she was holding
so uneasily—because she was holding it unnaturally; and I believe that
it will be a relief to this country when she gets her arm straight down
again, instead of straight out—which is not Nature’s “ easy unencum-
bered plan.”
I acknowledge.however,that this town has derived great present bene-
fits from the establishment of our woollen factories. The employment which
they give has brought comfort to many a poor family. If you were cross-
ing the Chilwell flats before sL\in the morning, you would be pleased
with the healthy and respectable appearance of the workers on their
way to the Barwon. I hope that these works will live and thrive.
But I cannot express the same wish for those establishments in
Melbourne which are crowded with girls—who, to my mind, would be
infinitely better employed in domestic service. There is a crying need
for them in that occupation. They could get excellent wages, and the
best training for their future homes. lam afraid to tell you how many
of these girls go wrong. And if they were thrown idle for a length of
time by the stagnation of trade, they would be placed in great jeopardy.
r ihis is a prodigious evil, and must be set down as a serious drawback to
these industries.
I hen we must bear in mind that Christianity has something to say
to us even in the adjustments of trade. It requires that we shall make
them in a large and generous spirit. It requires that nations, as well as
individuals, shall love their neighbours as themselves. So that
we have not decided any question when we have decided what
shall be most agreeable or most gainful for ourselves. There are other
selves in the world whose interests must be taken into the account. For
us there is that nation of which we are proud to call ourselves a part,
'lo Britain we owe a filial regard. We are her offspring. Her greatness
is our glory. And we repose on the assurance that she will not abandon


-TAfe (slt, il 5
&I6UD ' . ,ul "
FTSbo 20
her children in the time of need. I should consider it a grievous
thing, if by any fiscal policy ot ours we should check the flow of her
goodwill to us. While, therefore, we'give the encouragement which we
have promised to true native industry, we must see to it that we give no
encouragement to mere native selfishness.
And now I have done—but this I must say before I close. Re-
member that the eyes of many persons are turned upon this country. It
is named continually in conversation. It is introduced into every book
of fiction. It is qnoted in every constitutional debate in the British
Parliament. The fluctuating nature of its governments, and the fickle
temper of its constituencies, are generally held up as an argument and
a warning against a wider extension of the franchise.
Therefore, if the men of Victoria have any care for their fellow
workmen in Britain—if they really wish to see them rise in the scale of
citizenship —let them look well to their behaviour in this political crisis.
Let them disappoint the sinister predictions that are hoarded concerning
us. Let them show that they can look calmly at two sides of a question;—
that they can exercise self-control; —that they can,judge men without
passion and measures without prejudice ;■ —that th er can select competent
men; —that they are very jealous of their moral chqfacter;—a'nd that,when
they* have selected them, they can and do maintain them in honour and
political independence. Let them show further that they are determined
to uphold the authority of Parliament, —accepting its judgments without
demur and without resistance. Let them follow that course, and in the
great drama of this age we shall play a useful and noble part.
But if this vision seems too^bright—(and even I can scarcely bring
myself to hope that it shall be realised) —Remember that, after all, it is
not the people that rule—nor Queen Victoria; it is the Heavens that
rule T—it is He who has passed into the Heavens that rules, and shall rule
till He has subdued all things to Himself) and put all enemies under His
feet. Then don’t be afraid of the future —don’t go about asking, What
shall the end of these things be? Never mind what it is to be. Attend
to present dnty. —Attach yourselves to Christ’s throne. Submit to His
authority. And when He comes to still the tumults of the people and to
settle equity upon the earth, you will find that the end is something in-
finitely better and infinitely grander than you conceived; —and you will
discover how even the dark and sorrowful things of this world’s history
have been turned to -high account) and have been made to work out
eternal good to God’s creation.
Printed by George Mercer, Malop Street West, Geelong,
