





"B ribie-the Basket Maker"


( Photo, by G. Campbell).
S.S. “Koopa” in Brisbane River, 1912 .


“BRIBIE—
T he Basket Maker”
By
THOS. WELSBY
Barker’s Bookstores
Adelaide Street
Brisbane
1937


INDEX TO CHAPTERS
CHAPTER PACE
Foreword ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9
I—“Bribie” the Basket Maker 11
ll Bribie and Skirmish Point ... ... ... ... 25
lII Bribie the Island. First Visit by Whites ... ... 35
IV — Bribie Island Becomes Noted ... ... ... ... 41
V—More Atrocities ... ... ... ... ... ... 58
VI — The Island Itself ... ... ... 67
VII — The Town of Woorim ... ... ... ... ... 87
Vlll—General-
Part 1 91
Part 2 98
IX —Bongaree, the Native ... ... ... 11.5
X —Native Nomenclature 127


Facing
PAGE
Frontispiece — S.S. Koopa in Brisbane River, 1912
Fixing Site of Bribie Island Jetty, 1912 ... 41
Bribie Jetty, showing part of Bongaree Township ... 59
Welsby Lagoon ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 66
First Truck to cross to Ocean Beach ... 73
Coochin Creek Sawmill, 1882 ... ... ... ... 78
Mermaid Lagoon ... ... ... ... ... 91
Norfolk Lagoon ... ... ... 114
Stirling Creek 127
North Arm of Mermaid ... ... ... 134
INDEX TO ILLUSTRATIONS


Dedication
To
My Friends the Bribie-ites not forgetting those at
Caloundra.
And
Thanks to my daughter, Mrs. Colin Clark, for
the checking of manuscript, and the reading of
proof sheets.
The Reverend V. W. Thompson, of H.M.A.S.
Penguin for valuable matter regarding Bongaree.
Mr. William Main, of Ocean Beach, Bribie for
early Woorim history . . . also photos.
Mr, G. P. Campbell, for pioneer account of the
Campbell family at Coochin Creek . . . also
photos.
Mr. W. Cran, of the Survey Office.


Foreword.
What I have herein written has been with one
object ... a desire to gather together as much as
possibly could be done of the history of Bribie Island
and its surroundings. History alone has been the
inducement or persuasion to action.
Queensland is still yet young. As time goes on-
ward, it will be surely interesting to some, inclined
for knowledge of that nature, to have before them
something of the pioneer doings of first the Colony,
then the State. Two of the islands of Moreton Bay
have historical imprintings, strongly marked, some
of which are worth relating. Students and writers
will require some data, some facts, and some parti-
culars to go by, and it has been my desire to place
together something I trust upon which they can rely
. . . facts and particulars conned and noted by those
of much earlier birth than myself, prior to separation
in 1859.
The turning up and perusal of the many pages
of many books has been to me a real pleasure. I
do not consider myself an author; merely a collector
of occurrences and of events; such that I may have
deemed worthy of recognition, also my own ex-
periences.
Bribie Island was the first island in the Moreton
Bay waters to see the impress and mark of the white
man’s foot. Matthew Flinders was that person. He
who navigated the whole extent of the Bay, and so


well charted the six islands from Bribie to Russell,
near Karra Garra.
With naturally but little reference I have gone
back to Captain Cook in 1770. The actual and true
date of Bribie and its history making commences with
Flinders, 1799 . . . then passes on to John Oxley,
1823: the introduction of the convict settlement, 1824.
Thence it proceeds to the period of Commandants and
of rifle-bearing soldiers. The cessation of the convict
settlement is dated 1839: the first land sales of Bris-
bane town were in Sydney, 1842; and finally separa-
tion from New South Wales takes place in 1859, and
Sir George Bowen is Queensland’s first Governor.
There is an immense amount of history hidden
away during the period 1799—1859. What I have
gathered of Bribie to Caloundra will, I do trust (little
additional as it is indeed), be accepted as a small
contribution to past events of those days.
There was much that I could have touched
upon not applicable to “Bribie the Basket Maker.”
No doubt there have been many happenings on and
about Bribie Island that, not being made aware of,
or imparted to me, are not chronicled in the pages of
this book. For these omissions I seek pardon, but,
having done my best, can only ask that this little
work may be added to the historical collections of
Queensland.
Thos. Welsby.
“Amity” New Farm,
1937 .


CHAPTER I
“BRIBIE—THE BASKET MAKER”
Yes, it is of “Bribie” the Basket Maker, to
whom I refer. Bribie the merry Moreton Bay fish-
hawking convict of the time of Governor Sir George
Gipps, who held office in Sydney from the 24th Feb-
ruary, 1838 to the 11th July, 1846, long before
Queensland was separated on the 10th December,
1859 from that vast area of country known as New
South Wales. Also during part of the time when
Commandants ruled and held sway in Brisbane in
convict settlement periods: when merciless overseers
kept guard upon men and women felons alike: when
the latter toiled with pick and drill on the Hamilton
roadway.
In the month of March, 1842, the last of the
Penal Commandants had departed from Brisbane.
His name. Lieutenant Gorman. In November of 1842
Commander John Clements Wickham, R.N., was ap-
pointed to the position of Police Magistrate of the
Moreton Bay district, at a salary of £3OO per annum.
In the year 1853 Captain Wickham became Govern-
ment Resident at the same salary, but later it was
raised to £SOO, then to £7OO. On the establishment
of the Colony of Queensland in 1859 the office of
Resident was abolished, and Captain Wickham, after
47 years in the service of his country, 17 of which
had been passed in Moreton Bay, was thrown out


of employment. He returned to England in 1860,
and died suddenly at Biarritz, in the South of France,
on the 19th March, 1864.
But it is of “Bribie,” as indicated, I want to
write about. It is my desire to tell his story, or as
much as I can of the convict man himself. For
“Bribie the Basket Maker,” was, in my opinion and
that of others, the person after whom Bribie Island
was named. If any one dare say me nay, let him
come forward and historically correct me: umbraged
I will not be. I will be gladdened and satisfied for
in all my humble attempts in recording early Queens-
land history, or rather of Moreton Bay district my
endeavours have ever been to be as correct as possible.
History of the State in which I was born is almost
sacred to me. Not so much that I am obsessed with
it. I want to be reliable in that which I set down,
and unless I touch upon events that have occurred
during my own span of life, and of which not only
have I stores of my own memory, but of actual con-
tact, I am compelled, at times, to look up and study
earlier day writers, and from them make and give
extracts. These extracts, may, to some, bear a sub-
jective uncertainty. That cannot be avoided, and,
giving my authorities from which they are drawn,
I will allow excuses to pass their way along. The critic
must remain satisfied so far as I am personally con-
cerned.
That Bribie was a convict there is a positive and
historical fact. Whether that was a Christian or a
surname I cannot tell. His general character and
behaviour may have earned him this soubriquet, given,
may be by his fellow prisoners; by the soldiers; or
even by the officers who held him in surveillance. The
actual years of his incarceration are not known. I
have searched The Historical Society of Queensland
“BRIBIE — THE BASKET MAKER'’


for information. Have looked up the names of those
unfortunates who came to Botany Bay in the First
Fleet vessels, up to the very time of the cessation of
convict importation here in 1839, and can find no
name bearing alliance with that of Bribie. It is most
certain that he was not among the first comers of 1788
under Captain Arthur Phillip. He belongs to the time
of events of Queensland’s introduction and supply
of the convicts sent up from Sydney. This convict
system operated during a term of fifteen years, viz.,
from July, 1824 to the 20th May, 1839. There is
evidence and probability of his having arrived here
somewhere about 1830. Andrew Petrie came to the
Moreton Bay Settlement in 1837, coming from the
South in the James Watt. The convict system was
abandoned in Brisbane, or rather in the settlement
in the year just mentioned, 1839.
In Captain Logan’s term as Commandant—lB2s
to 1830 —this system must have been at its very
worst, that is, if my reading of the then historical
events, is correct. Looking carefully into all sur-
rounding facts of what I can gather, I am inclined
to say that Bribie was here during Logan’s regime,
and almost coincident with the year Andrew Petrie
became a resident, and- these two must have been
known to each other for a lengthy period. A very
significent fact, however, comes before me. Suppose
we take the advent of Bribie here in say 1830: his
becoming known to Petrie in 1837: the cessation of
convict importation to the Moreton Bay Settlement
in 1839 being also recognised, then Petrie’s writings
or correctly speaking that of Constance Campbell
Petrie, daughter of Thomas Petrie, of “Murrumba,”
North Pine, the son of Andrew Petrie, would evidence
that Bribie the Basket Maker was living amongst the
natives on that island we now call Bribie between the
“ BRIBIE—THE BASKET MAKER ”


years 1839 and 1842. This latter year saw him per-
manently there. That being so, I take it upon myself
to chronicle that “Bribie” as a name to the present
island known as such, must have been recognised as
“Bribie Island” in the year 1842, and still remains
so appellated. Also this must be the year or very
near to it when the Basket Maker lived there with
his lady love of more than ruddy-brown colour.
Let me see if I can delineate this man Bribie,
tell of his temptation and capitulation, and the selec-
tion of a peaceful island home with others not of
his own nationality and colour. I can only do so
taking into account the nature of those convict days:
the vigilance over the ironed men busy at roadmaking:
the varied class of character they would reflect, and
all general environment. Blending all these with Miss
Petrie’s account of the man as described to her by
her father, in the words of Portia I will “level at my
affection.”
He could not have been in 1842 more than 40
years of age. The reader must recollect that mere
lads were sent to Botany Bay from the Thames Hulks;
lads of 14 years or more, for crimes then committed
that nowadays would be pardoned on first asking.
There were three terms of imprisonment, or rather
banishment to Botany given by London magistrates,
viz., seven years, fourteen years and life. This Bribie
was not a lifer, of that I feel sure. That he was not
in all reality a criminal, of that I am convinced.
Whether he had been in the home land a Don Juan,
or a gay Lothario, or became either one of these, or
both, I leave to the reader’s own judgment.
Whilst here in the settlement, with as much
freedom as a Ticket of Leave Man, there came in his
pathway a black-eyed dusky-coloured inamorata.
“ BRIBIE—T HE BASKET MAKER ”


Events proved that she, evidently, was his downfall,
if such you may designate the manner and the end-
ing of their novel personal introduction. Or did be,
as belonging to the stronger or superior sex take her
in true aboriginal fashion. She belonged to the tribe
of that island on which was spoken the nhulla lan-
guage . . . the island divided from the mainland by
the Pumice Stone River of Flinders.
When Surveyor-General John Oxley visited this
place for the first time, then unnamed, in December,
1823, in His Majesty’s cutter Mermaid , he was shown
the Brisbane River by one Finnegan, one of the
cast-a-way convicts who were endeavouring to get to
the Illawarra islands, and in an open boat were driven
northward. John Uniacke was with Oxley on the
cutter, but did not join the party in the seeking of
the river. Whilst Oxley was on his way to Termina-
tion Creek, this Uniacke remained at Pumice Stone,
and there awaited in the Mermaid the return of the
officer in charge. Under the shade of the awning on
the cutter he heard the full story of the privations
and sufferings of the three convicts, and wrote down
in leisurely manner all that Pamphlet imparted.
Pamphlet’s story is, however, not for me to record
here.
Uniacke, in quieter moments and alone had writ-
ten of the coloured people he had seen hereabouts—
they had been called Indians by Captain Cook—in this
manner:
“I had an opportunity of becoming acquainted
with the natives, who are both in their dispositions
and manner far superior to those in the neighbour-
hood of Sydney, and in any that I have seen.”
Oxley himself had previously written: “The
natives in the intercourse we had with them appeared
“ B RIB lE THE BASKET MAKER”


to possess a most friendly disposition. They are very
numerous and are, to a certain extent superior in
their domestic habits to the savages inhabiting the
more southern coasts.”
Uniacke again takes up the running and pens:
“The women that I saw were far superior in personal
beauty to the men, or indeed to any natives of this
country whom I have yet seen. Many of them are
tall, straight, and well formed, and there were two
in particular whose shape and features were such as
no white woman need have been ashamed of.” (See
Barron Field’s Memoirs, etc., 1825, pages 22, 57, 66).
So, I ask, can you wonder at the doings of Bribie
as you further read. Poor Bribie!! You know the
Yeoman of the Guards, do you not? And loving Jack
Point, and his companion Elsie Maynard. Just call
back to memory Point’s sad and sorrowful refrain:
“All for the love of a lady.”
My mind, as I so write, goes back to the days of my
youth, to a poem I used to read in my school book,
running somewhat in this strain:
“I’m the Chief of Ulva’s Isle
And this Lord Ullin’s daughter”
It may be said, may it not, that Bribie ran away
with his beloved lubra in similar manner as Ullin’s
daughter ran away with the Chief of Ulva’s Isle.
But I am anticipating,
I again locate myself in Brisbane in the time of
Logan as Commandant, 1825 —1830; Captain Clunie,
1830 —1835; Captain Fyans, 1835—1837; Major
Cotton, 1837 —1839, and presume that this man
Bribie, as I must still continue to call him, was a
prisoner under all these stem officials. Andrew Petrie
in 1839 had been in Brisbane two years, and did
“BRIBIE THE BASKET MAKER”


during these two years, most undoubtedly come in
contact with the convict. Petrie, when he came here
had two sons, John, and Thomas the father of Miss
Constance Campbell Petrie, from whose pen came the
volume of her parent’s reminiscences. Her father, so
she wrote, was a mere boy when he came here. It was
Tom who mingled with the piccaninny, and, as he
grew older with the more mature men of the native
tribes. From them he learned much of their lore
and superstitions. He too, with his older brother
John must have known and conversed with the Basket
Maker.
Bribie’s term of expatriation was nearly expired.
He was allowed certain freedom, not as a Ticket of
Leave Man, but as one who could be well trusted, and
who so near the expiry of his sentence would not con-
sider it worth while to go away into the bush, like
many a poor deluded soul before him. His liberty
was assured, and would indeed be welcome.
Kangaroo Point, New Farm, South Brisbane,
and a portion of North Brisbane were all under cul-
tivation in these early mentioned years, all worked
under convict labour. There were many swamps in
and about the penal settlement in which useful rushes
for basket making purposes grew, all necessary for
Bribie’s craft and handwork. He seems to have been
a merry making soul, friendly with the officers in
command; with the white free inhabitants, and also
with the dark coloured, the true and real landowner.
Alas! he held no title deed. He carried in the free-
dom of liberty no hand iron, no leg chain; was
allowed to move at free will during daylight hours
whersoever he wisted. As well as basket maker he
was the sole fisherman of the settlement. When not
engaged in gathering rushes he would use fish and
crab pots of his own manufacture at likely places,
“BKIBI E T HE BASKET MAKE ”


chiefly at the mouth of the creek running then into
the river at the end of, that street we now know as
Creek Street, just adjacent where the steam ferry used
to run to Kangaroo Point, Crabs were plentiful
there. I quote from Miss Petrie’s book:
“At the mouth of the creek which formerly ran
up Creek Street, just where the steam ferry landing is
now (written in 1904), a place was built by the
prisoners for the catching of fish and crabs. Two
beams were put side by side across from bank to
bank at high water mark. They were flat on top so
that one could walk upon them. Between these beams
slabs were supported which extended down into the
mud. They were close together, but in the middle
an opening was left about six feet wide, which was
bound by two piles standing some nine feet above
the beams. These piles were joined across the creek
with a piece of timber, and this had a ring bolt in the
centre for a block and tackle, by which a light frame
work made of wood was worked up and down. To
this frame was attached a large basket —Bribie’s
handwork—made so that the fish and crabs which
entered were caught. It had a square hole, with a
cover, on top, by which they would be taken out.
When the water was high and just on the turn, the
basket was lowered, then, when the tide had gone
down it was hoisted up level with the beams. Fish
were plentiful in the river then, there being nothing
much to disturb them, and sometimes the basket con-
tained a great supply. Old shank bones with a little
meat attached were thrown into the creek to encourage
the fish to come in, and the basket trap was only
worked two or three times a week, so that the fish
did not grow afraid, having several days of undis-
turbed coming and going. A prisoner (sure to be
Bribie) had charge of the working of this trap, and
“B R I BIE THE BASKET MAKER”


he took the fish to the Commandant, to Mr. Andrew
Petrie, and all the officers in turn.”
Bribie did more than this. When the quantity
caught was more than usual in his own made basket,
he would carry fish and crabs up Queen Street to the
Commissariat Quarters, and general police cottages,
whereat, no doubt, he received good payment in coin
and in kind. To the military hospital would he also
make his way. This hospital was just around the
comer, near the present Victoria Bridge, in Queen
Street, leading to the North Quay. If his supply lasted
he would visit other areas where business he thought
might be done . . . and finally he would proceed to
the Reservoir, where the City Hall now stands, and
there gather rushes for his evening work. He seems
to have been well liked, his cheerfulness being a
pleasant break amongst the general sad surroundings.
Not alone did he make baskets for fishing and
other purposes. At this time—lß39—the Brisbane
River was shallow in many places from the Hamilton
to Luggage Point, notably at the entrance from the
Bay. Long poles or tea tree saplings were erected in
these places right up to Breakfast Creek. They were
marked with letters and figures denoting the state of
the tide, and the depth of the waters.
Something more serviceable and practicable was
required. Bribie hit on the idea of making a light
cane globe, with a fairly wide hole in the middle, a
light piece of wood being interwoven in the bottom
of these floatable makeshifts. Then over these figured
posts denoting a fair way and safe passage these cane
contraptions were placed, light enough to float with
the rise and fall of the tide. Naturally there were
no lamps or lights supplied, shipping was not so
plentiful as to require that. These wicker work con-
“BRIBIE THE BASKET MAKER”


trivances were more observable on a dull and cloudy
day than were the bare sticks. For this simple and
serviceable arrangement Bribie received much praise.
Even long after the cessation of the convict system,
even up to the time of separation in 1859 these
wicker globes were in use.
We here leave Bribie and his inventions and
come to the time of his love adventures and escapades.
In and around Brisbane in those early days and dur-
ing our hero’s compulsory residence there, were hun-
dreds of natives from all places. From the plains:
from the near and far away hills: from the islands
of the bay, they wandered and made their land and
waters voyages to “Meginchin,” their native name
for Brisbane. The gay-coated soldiers and men in
arms were a novelty and an attraction. From Amity;
from Dunwich; from Nerang Creek they came; men,
women and children, and—many dogs, the companion
of the black and bed mate for warmth.
From Maroochy and Bribie they came, that un-
named place as yet, some by the calling of Pumite
Stone.
Let us see what Oxley and Uniacke had written
of this Pumice Stone tribe as far back as 1823.
“The women were far superior to the men,”
wrote the one . . . and the other said: “Many of
them are tall and straight and well formed . . .
whose shape and features were such as no white
woman need have been ashamed of.”
Alas!! Our good friend, the genial Bribie,
Bribie the Basket Maker—“fell.”
How it did actually occur no one ever knew,
but many suspected. This Cleopatra had come from
Pumice Stone with many of her tribe, and had marked
“BRIBIE—THE BASKET MAKER’’


Antony as her own. Her tribe made their gunyahs
in the Valley, and wandered at will through the
Settlement. They lived well, for they had their tow-
rows with them, likewise the circling boomerang for
the kangaroo and wallaby; their dogs for iguanas
and possum; their spears for protection, likewise
their shields. One can visualise this fair to look
upon, dark and dusky lady with her dilly bag and
blankets thrown over her shoulders, and loosely car-
ried at that. Surely we cannot see her with clay pipe
in heavily lipped mouth, asking “gib it bacca?”
She must have had her early morning bathe in
the creek, and was donned in all her native robing
when first she had come, with searching eye, upon
the basket maker as he made his way through the then
tree-lined streets.
Whatever it may have been —they met, and
that was the beginning—but not the ending—yet.
Again they meet on Bribie’s return from Mr. Petrie.
Looks were exchanged, and a smile returned. Were
these, may I ask, amorous, or libidinous? Did these
fitful glances cause a disturbance of their hidden
innermost feelings? She thought, no doubt, that this
basket-of-fish carrier was a “turrwan,” a great man,
for a “kippa” a young man would be passed by un-
noticed by her. For was she not herself a woman, a
“jundal,” and had she not the years before her to
become a “puddang”—a mother. Bribie was to be
hers and no one of her own tribe would possess her.
She would again meet her Antony and in time they
would depart—not to the banks of the Nile, but to
the shores and waters of Pumice Stone.
Another day they met and passed each other
with encouraging looks. Their “njil” (eyes) beamed
satisfactorily and returned pure love.
“BRIBIE—THE BASKET IMAKER”


The days sped quickly, and the intimacy of meet-
ing and sending side glances to each other continued.
Then came a gentle stoppage and a converse. This
continued now almost daily, and Bribie was chaffed
at by the soldiers, whilst even some of the working
convicts sniggered as he passed them by at their work.
But there came a time when he missed his fair
one in the streets. The tribe had departed quietly
one morning, and she—his lady love —must perforce
accompany them back to their tribal haunts and
grounds at Pumice Stone. Bribie lamented, and was
sure of her return. And when early summer set in
she and her companions were back at Meginchin.
Again the lovers gave glances of fidelity, and many
were the talkings together in town and Valley. For a
while these natives were in and around the Settle-
ment with their customary beggings from the whites.
Their camping near the main offices did not, this time,
last long. A very animated and lengthy conversation
was one morning seen being held by the now deter-
mined couple, and much comment made. How it
was; what had caused it, when the sun was just over
the horizon the dark lubra and her companions had
gone.
The mornings tide was at the full. The fish
baskets had been down for three days, and it was
time they were hauled up and emptied of their con-
tents. They were Bribie’s baskets, and no one but
he should take them from out the creek. His name
was called at the barracks —no reply. His room was
looked into. No one there, and above all the bed
had never been rested upon since the previous even-
ing. Yes. He was absent from his fish pots, there
was no round to the officers’ quarters; Petrie had not
seen him, and gradually it dawned upon those so con-
cerned that Bribie the Basket Maker had levanted.
“BRIBIE—THE BASKET MAKER"


No fuss was made. The Commandant took no
action for the time of the now known missing con-
vict had hut a week to run, and there was nothing
to be gained by finding and bringing him back to
justice. Now where had he really gone to. The
gardener of Fyans alone knew, for Bribie had made
him his Fidus Achates, and had been advised and
urged by him to accompany the lubra back with her
companions to Pumice Stone. Bribie complied with
the instructions of his mate, had fled in the darkness
of the night and was by now nearing the home of his
desire, and where he now would forever remain.
He returned to Brisbane in a month’s time, and
with just a little inkling of fear faced the Comman-
dant. Fyans understood human nature, gently ad-
monished, and then terrified, the love sick runaway,
next returned to calmer mood, called in an official
and bade him write out such release as he was em-
powered to for a prisoner convict, a release from his
London sentence, and Bribie the Basket Maker walked
out into the clear sunshine—and—Liberty. His stay
was brief in the Settlement. Then away to Pumice
Stone. His visits to the town became irregular, then
they ceased altogether.
There came a day that the gardener was missing.
Search was made. He had followed in the footsteps
of his mate, and was welcomed by the tribe who had
made Bribie their chief. Later another man was
missing from the Settlement. He, too, had gone down
to the pleasant haunts of clear and running waters.
This disappearing lulled for a while, but occasionally
as men became free they followed where others had
gone.
When some of the tribe came up for a visit, and
staying only a few days a native would ask, “Wunnar
inter Yurranyah?” and the reply would come in
“BRIBIE—THE BASKET MAKER"


broken English: “Alonga Turrwan Bribie,” meaning
that they were going back to Pumice Stone where
Bribie held command. The repeated asking and
answering of this question became wearisome to many.
Should any one be on holiday or absent in bay
waters, and their absence queried, the reply would be
shortened into: “Down with Bribie,” meaning they
were on the island, discovered and landed upon by
Flinders in 1799. So gradually whenever any one
was known to be away and down at this particular
place it was said: “He was down at Bribie.
Thus, my dear reader, did the island receive its
name as you now know it. But I cannot tell you how
the convict basket maker received his name, whether
by and at birth, or by any other means.
What I have written of the man is true. There
is nothing on record to tell how long he lived on the
island; whether he attended the Bunya feastings in
their periodical recurrences; whether he met his
death in tribal warfare; nor can I say where his
bones are resting. He may be at peace near where
some tall cypress pine spreads its ever green branches;
or near some spotted gum. Maybe he sleeps under
the shadows of the Glass Houses, as lonely there as
all his tribe, for they too have disappeared into the
unknown, and are as silent as their White King.
“BRIBIE—THE BASKET MAKER ”


CHAPTER II
BRIBIE AND SKIRMISH POINT
Now that I have dealt with “Bribie the Basket
Maker,” whose cognomen has been lured into and
linked with the island, itself for all time, I want to
deal with “Bribie the island and Skirmish Point” as
we know the island to-day, the island of twenty miles
in length, whose first white man’s tread was that
of Matthew Flinders on the 16th July, 1799. With
him on that memorable occasion was a native named
Bongree, born on the north side of Broken Bay, pos-
sessed of a kindly disposition combined with open and
manly conduct. This manner of the spelling of his
name is by Lt.-Colonel Collins. Flinders proclaimed
and published it as Bongaree. Other writers of many
years afterwards, copyists only, have merged the
spelling into Bungaree. I have mentioned that I
like history to be correct as possible, so therefore
accept the Bongaree of Flinders himself. This man
Bongaree accompanied Flinders in many navigations
after this year of 1799. Flinders had a wonderful
confidence in and appreciation of the services of this
New South Wales native, for in all navigating and
exploring voyages he was accompanied by this in-
dividual.
From reading Flinders’ journal there is positive
evidence of his having been on the Porpoise, when in
company with the Cato, Sydney Harbour was left in


August, 1803 for the homeward journey in quest of
a newer and better craft than was the Investigator.
The Porpoise and Cato came to grief on Wreck Island
on Wednesday, the 17th August, 1803. I regret that
this melancholy story cannot be told here. It will be
remembered that after days of anxiety on Wreck
Reef, Flinders left that lonely sandy island to pro-
ceed in the cutter Hope, to Sydney, some 750 miles
away southward. Bongaree had left with Flinders in
August, and no doubt may have accompanied him to
London in the Cumberland. And when the Hope was
making this voyage for aid the name of the faithful
Bongaree is mentioned. See Flinders Journal, volume
2, page 319. I really do think that he was in the
Cumberland when Flinders sailed on his last and sadly
eventful trip to England, the day of leaving Sydney
being Wednesday, 21st September, 1803. Flinders
was imprisoned at Mauritius for six and a-half years.
After reaching London he commenced the re-writing
of his diary, and even as it was completed and pub-
lished he died on the 19th July, 1814. I can find
no mention of Bongaree’s name, except with the ad-
mission herein given, but feel certain he reached the
Old Country, as the first mention of his name again
is not dated until he settled at George’s Head, the
year given as 1815. Ernest Scott, in his life of
Flinders—published 1914 —uses this native’s name
on page 159, as having been in the IS or folk. Then
again in the same volume, on page 266, we read:
“Flinders also took with him his old friend Bon-
garee,” who had accompanied him in the Norfolk’s
voyage in 1799. He, Scott, is here referring to the
Investigator in the circumnavigation of Australia.
Bongaree, the dark-coloured faithful friend of
Flinders, as was Jackey Jackey immortalised in con-
BRIBIE AND SKIRMISH POINT


nection with the Kennedy exploring trips of 1848!
We take off our hats to both of these faithful souls.
Bongaree and his actions are missing from 1803.
Certain faith he must have been in the Cumberland,
for from the wreck of the Porpoise in this year, 1803,
there is no trace or tidings until we find him settled
at George’s Head, near Sydney, and that was in the
year 1815, a year after Flinders’ demise. Bongaree
died in November 1830, and on the 24th of that
month was laid to rest on Garden Island, Sydney
Harbour. Is it not a pleasant feature to acknowledge
that the little group of houses on Bribie, just ashore
from the jetty of the Tug Company, is built upon and
about a plot of ground, named, charted, and known
as Bongaree? It takes away the taste of atrocities
committed on the island, and leaves pleasing
memories.
Archibald Meston, in a work published by him
in the year 1895, states that Bribie Island is about
20 miles long, and from one to three miles wide,
consisting chiefly of ti-tree swamps, salt flats, low sea
sand ridges, and slightly raised patches timbered by
bloodwood, gray gums, and turpentine. There is not
an acre of good soil on the island. He gives the
native name of the White Patch as Taranggeer. Tom
Petrie gives it Tarrang-giri. May I say that I prefer
and accept this latter spelling. Its meaning is “leg.”
Now I am about to write of something that may
perhaps cause a storm of argument about my ears.
May I enquire of old Bribie-ites on what portion of
the southern end of Bribie, is “Bribie Nose”; and
where is “Point Skirmish” to be found?
Some little time back whilst on the Koopa when
entering Pumice Stone passage, I very quietly and
gently asked a friend standing by my side . . . asked
him for a reason.
BRIBIE AND SKIRMISH POINT


“Where is your best summer whiting ground?”
The steamer was then just at the moment coming
abeam of the extreme end —southern —of the island.
His reply was, “Skirmish Point.”
“Over there,” I queried, pointing to this near
side, southerly end. “Oh, no,” he retorted, apparently
amazed at my ignorance, “the point away round on
the ocean side.” “And where is Bribie Nose?” “Just
yonder,” he said, denoting the sandy foreshore a
little below The Amateur Fishing Association’s home
—the Douglas Ogilby hut. I did’nt pursue the con-
versation further . . . but ... I ruminated, was
just wise enough to know that when in Rome one
should do as Rome does. Besides, he was a much
younger and heavier man than I was.
I think that I had better deal with the island
proper in another chapter, and confine my writing now
to the settling, I hope, of the real location of Bribie
Nose and Point Skirmish. I say that Skirmish Point
is the inner extension just as you enter Pumice Stone,
and that the Nose is on the outside beach, looking to-
wards Moreton.
No navigator, or cartographer, to my knowledge
has ever recorded in his diary or chart, or log book,
such a place name as Bribie Nose. Let me deal
with Flinders and his visit here in 1799. In the pub-
lished report mentioned at length in Collins’ edition
of 1804, Flinders distinctly says that on the 15th
July he hauled in his vessel, the Norfolk, round Cape
Moreton to go into Glass House Bay. This Glass
House Bay was pricked on Captain James Cook’s
chart on the 17th May, 1770, he showing the bay in
question a little to the westward of what is now Bribie,
and over towards Deception Bay.
Naturally he could know nothing of Skirmish
Point, as that place was named years afterwards.
BRIBIE AND SKIRMISH POINT


and when Cook was not alive; twenty-nine years after
he had passed along the eastern side of Australia.
Let us look at Flinders’ chart. I have all his charts
in my library. What do we find? Point Skirmish
is mapped on the inside of Bribie Island, not far from
the present Toorbul headland, and not on the outside
Ocean Point, where it would have been charted had
the conflict with the blacks taken place there.
Seeking no further assistance from Cook, for
there is none to find, or give, we lay open fully the
charts of Flinders before us and peruse the context
and writings of the latter in respect to that portion
diaried when he had entered Glass House Bay. He
wrote that having hauled in round Cape Moreton at
8 in the evening of the 16th July, he anchored about
two miles from a low sandy shore on the west side
of the Bay. (Please note the word “west”). On the
17th Flinders went towards the shore taking Bon-
garee, the native, with him. Bongaree on the boat
grounding, was the first overboard in the shallow
water, and made his way to some Indians as Captain
Cook had called the blacks, Flinders joining him
almost immediately. The Bribie natives were not
afraid of these two men and were inclined to be
familiar, and almost aggressive, too much so for
Flinders’ liking, so he made a retreat movement
towards the beach, and his boat. One native threw a
piece of firewood at him, then another followed suit.
Again a native showed no fear for rushing into the
water up to his middle he hurled a spear, narrowly
missing the navigator. Flinders, upon this provoca-
tion snapped at the man who had thrown the spear,
but the gun missed fire. A second time he pulled the
trigger . . , again it missed fire. The third attempt
was effective. Most of the natives fell with fright in
the water, and hastily made for the shore. One darky
bribie and skirmish point


walked as though he had been hurt, for his progress
in the water, and on the sand of the shore was slow,
one of his hands being strongly held to his back,
Flinders concluding that he had been wounded on
that part of the body. To give these natives some
idea of the wonder, to them, of firearms two shots
were fired over the heads of those on shore, no one
being touched thereby.
Here we approach something very plain and
emphatic, and making no comment thereon I give
Flinders own words as they appear in his diary:
“From the low sandy point where this affair
happened and which obtained the name of Skirmish
Point, we proceeded up the opening which proved
to be the river leading to the Glass House Peaks.”
Is that not plain enough? Could anything be more
definite and emphatic?
Flinders by this time was under the impression
that he had found the river that Captain Cook thought
flowed into Moreton Bay. So on the morning of the
21st July, he went to examine “Pumice Stone River,”
as he had named it himself. He again writes on
this date: “On approaching Point Skirmish, five or
six natives came down to the boat unarmed.”
Here it is interesting to note that Flinders went
up the passage —as we now know it to be—not a river,
and climbed one of the nearer and smaller Glass
Houses. The navigator then determined to put to
sea, and as he got under weigh many of the blacks
followed along the shore as the Norfolk made her
course in the shallow waters towards the outer en-
trance. He did not get out of the “river” that day,
and had to wait another tide. The weather turned so
bad that he was compelled to anchor for a couple of
days, during which delay the natives came down both
sides of the “river” and entertained the white men
BRIBIE AND SKIRMISH POINT


with singing and dancing. Flinders by this time had
passed fifteen days in Glass House Bay.
From these excerpts the reader may be inclined
to admit that Point Skirmish is in all truthfulness that
point immediately on the southern left of Bribie,
when Pumice Stone passage is being entered. Per-
sonally I think that it is. Is it likely that Flinders,
when making his first entrance to Glass House Bay,
would deliberately anchor his vessel near the out-
side ocean beach of the island? He remarks in his
diary:
“We anchored on the west side of the bay.” This
would show that he had left the outside waters —the
Pacific Ocean —for the calmer anchorage of the inner
depths, and by so doing had found his Pumice Stone
river, and ere he had made this discovery had been
engaged in conflict, or say a skirmish at the inner
point and which point he entered in his log and diary
as “Skirmish.”
Let me once more refer to chart No. 7, North.
At the spot I am inclined to say is Point Skirmish
there on this chart is marked “South Point.” But as
an argument against me, the chart shows Skirmish
Banks and Skirmish Pass almost directly outside the
ending of the Tug Company’s road on the ocean
beach . . . then away to the near southward one
can observe the words “Skirmish Point,” this being
the spot I should name as “Bribie Nose.” Flinders’
own chart shows distinctly the Skirmish Point as
being on the inside part of the island, not on the
ocean, and his own descriptive writing gives evidence
that this is correct. There is a mistake somewhere,
an error made in charting by the authorities that has
never been rectified. Who, may I ask, gave the name
of Bribie Nose to any portions of the southern end?
BRIBIE AND SKIRMISH POINT


Having written thus far, and still wanting a
cleaning up of the place names I resolved to go deeper
afield, and to make assurance double sure hied me
to the Survey Department.
There I had the pleasure of an interview with
Mr. W. Gran, in whose careful possession are the
original plans of Queensland made not very long
after separation. To my surprise and pleasure, on
my asking this gentleman at what part of the south-
ern end of Bribie was to be found Skirmish Point he,
without hesitation, said the inner portion leading in
to Pumice Stone. The old charts were presented to
me by him for examination, and there most plainly
could be seen Skirmish Point at the very spot and
place I have indicated in these writings. He, too, was
aware of the wrongful location of this historic place
as shown by charts issued in later years, long before
he was placed in his present important position. He
was very pleased to find me so anxious to be correct
in what I informed him was my purpose to write.
The plan put before me was the first one ever
made of Bribie, and although bearing —unfortunately
—no year mark, had all and every evidence of its
originality. I copied down the identification of that
chart, and willingly now produce it for those who
may be interested.
The following is the exact wording on this too
surely original and correct chart:
“Map of the Colony of Queensland
Constructed by Leopold Tranz Landsborg.
Lithographed in Sydney
by
J. Degotardi.”
There is not, and cannot be, the slightest doubt
in the world of the chart being the first one made of
BRIBIE AND SKIRMISH POINT


Bribie Island, and so lithographed. As Separation
from New South Wales by Queensland was in 1859,
as repeatedly stated by me, it is looked upon amongst
the Survey Office files as Number One.
Contemporaneous writings accompanying it prove
to me that the chart was compiled in 1861.
In the charts prepared by Cook and Flinders a
study of them will show that all named places marked
by them on coast lines facing the ocean are given
at right angle to the sea. If any doubting or want-
ing to be convinced reader, will examine the chart
of Flinders, 1799 —1803, he will see in bold letters
on the island we now know as Bribie the words, “Pt.
Skirmish,” running parallel with the inner shore. Had
his skirmish been on the ocean side of the land he
would undoubtedly have followed his usual custom,
and have marked the name of Pt. Skirmish in his
always adopted parallel style.
In the further strengthening of my case regard-
ing this location of Skirmish Point I now make refer-
ence to the report of John Oxley, Surveyor-General
to the Territory, under date 10th January, 1824, and
addressed to Frederick Goulbourn, Colonial Secretary,
Sydney. It will be remembered Oxley came north-
wards in the Mermaid towards the end of November
and part of December, 1823, was shown the Brisbane
River by Finnegan, and was for a while in Pumice
Stone River. I do not intend making comment on
his report, but will give the exact wording of his
writing.
“Pumice Stone River affords good anchorage for
vessels not drawing more than twelve feet of water.
There is plenty of water in the vicinity of Point
Skirmish, and though the soil is poor and sandy, the
country is covered with good timber.”
BRIBIE AND SKIRMISH POINT


John Uniacke who was on the Mermaid with
Oxley, passed in a supplementary report, more parti-
cularly dealing with the three convicts, Parsons,
Pamphlet, and Finnegan, also tribal and native cus-
toms on the island, as well as on the mainland of
Toorbul, I quote from this report;
“So that at six o’clock p.m. (Nov. 29th, 1823)
we came to an anchor in Pumice Stone River, Moreton
Bay, within 150 yards of the shore in the very place
where Captain Flinders had anchored twenty-two
years (?) before on discovering the harbour which,
I believej has not been visited by Europeans.”
With the exception of another excerpt from Ox-
ley’s report I will not touch again upon the subject,
being convinced that the general context of both
Oxley and Uniacke in their writings bring to my
mind a firm belief that Skirmish Point, as now named,
is wrongly situated on present-day charts and maps.
John Oxley, in the Mermaid, spent some days at
Port Curtis, and then made his way to the South, and
on the 29th November, 1823, passed into Cook’s
Glass House Bay, Outside Bingle in the “Sally” this
place had not been visited by navigators since 1799.
Only a little over twenty-three years had divided the
visits of Flinders and Oxley, and as it was impossible
for others (seeing that there were none) to write
“Bribie” history, I am compelled to assert no errors
in historic writings could have crept in in so short a
time, and am assured Oxley wrote correctly in regard
to Flinders and his naming of places. I conclude
this chapter with Oxley’s own words:
“I therefore returned to the southward and
entered Moreton Bay on the 29th November (1823),
anchoring the vessel close to Point Skirmish at the
entrance of Pumice Stone River.”
BRIBIE AND SKIRMISH POINT


CHAPTER III
BRIBIE THE ISLAND. FIRST VISIT BY WHITES
Who were the first white people to visit what I
will from now onwards designate as Bribie Island?
I look up all records in my possession, and emulating
Truthful James, will endeavour to tell in as simple
language, and as truthfully as I can the records of
the island question even from the days of Captain
Cook in the year 1770. This great navigator and
recorder passed northward from Cape Moreton on the
17th May of that year, but did not land on Bribie,
nor did he give it a name in his journal.
Captain James Cook, or rather to give him his
proper title in the Endeavour as Lieutenant Cook,
Commander of his Majesty’s Bark Endeavour, only
landed on the shores of Queensland twice, viz.. Bus-
tard Head on the 24th May, 1770, and Cooktown on
the 17th June of the same year. A monument to
Captain Cook was erected many' years ago at Cook-
town, and it is pleasing to record that mainly
through the efforts and instrumentality of The His-
torical Society of Queensland and certain influential
gentlemen at Bundaberg, an obelisk was built and
unveiled at Round Hill Head in Bustard Bay, the first
landing place of the British on the Queensland coast,
on the 12th June, 1926. Arrangements had been
with the Naval Authorities for the unveiling of the
memorial by Commodore George F. Hyde, command


ing His Majesty’s Australian Fleet. This gentleman
in H.M.A.S. Sydney, anchored in Bustard Bay on Fri-
day, 11th June, 1926. On the following morning
Commodore Hyde drew the lines which secured the
Union Jack covering the cairn. The cairn, or obelisk,
is made of concrete, having a base six feet square. It
is four sided, and is eight feet six inches in height.
On the seaward side is a bronze tablet bearing the
following inscription;
“Under the lee of this Point
Lieutenant James Cook
landed on the 24th May, 1770.”
Memo . —For further and full particulars see
pages 159 —188, volume 2, of The Historical Society
of Queensland.
So it will be seen that Lieutenant Cook had
nothing to do with Bribie Island beyond making
coastal lines for his chart, showing Cape Moreton
and Glass House Bay. The merest school boy knows
that he named the Glass Houses.
We now return briefly to Matthew Flinders.
There is little, if any need for me to enlarge upon
what I have already written re this navigator —a
navigator whom I do not even rank second to Captain
Cook. Had Flinders been allowed the same attrac-
tions, and unknown waters to explore, as did his pre-
decessor, even on the Queensland coast, he would
have been equally successful. When Flinders left
Bribie and proceeded up Glass House Bay in the
direction of what we now know as Deception Bay,
he anchored the Norfolk about half past ten on the
morning of Wednesday the 17th July, 1799, a mile
and a half from a fairly prominent point with red
cliffs. This pi ace he named and charted as Red Cliff
BRIBIE THE ISLAND. FIRST VISIT BY WHITES


Point —now known as Redd iff. He then proceeded
on his southern bay voyage, reaching Karra-Garra,
between McLeay and Russell Islands, On the 22nd
July he returned to Pumice Stone River.
Here we leave Flinders recognising him as the
man who first sailed over that large expanse of water
named Moreton Bay. May I be allowed to add that
Redcliff was known in native lingo as Gowan Gowan.
After the departure of Flinders Pumice Stone waters
and the adjacent land, both main and island, re-
mained entirely in the possession of the natives, un-
disturbed until another white man visited them in
1822. The Norfolk of Flinders was merely a small
decked boat put together at Norfolk Island by one
Captain Townson of that place, and was built of local
pine. I cannot find any particulars regarding her
dimensions.
Lest I forget . . . the native tribe of Bribie were
cannibals, and were known by the title of “Joondoo-
barrie.”
Yes. Twenty-three years do these natives re-
main unvisited by white men. Sir Thomas Brisbane
wants more information re Cook’s Moreton Bay, and
in April, 1822 the sloop Sally , under the command
of John Single, of Sydney, enters the still named
Pumice Stone River. His commission was dated 2nd
January, 1822, issued from the Colonial Secretary’s
Office, Sydney. On his return South Bingle sent in
his report to the Chief Secretary’s Office. The papers
were duly recorded but unfortunately when looked
for in later years, this report, together with records,
maps, and charts could neither be traced nor found —
nor have they, so far as I know, ever come to light.
Private papers, when examined show but a meagre
account of this visit to Pumice Stone. An old manu-
script was unearthed some years ago, containing a
BRIBIE THE ISLAND. FIRST VISIT BY WHITES


very brief account of Bingle’s visit to Moreton Bay,
and a little fresh account of the natives there.
The Sally came through the South Passage—the
first ever to pass these waters. This passage was
really not known as a passage until 1824 when the
brig Amity sailed through it seaward on her return
voyage to Sydney. Captain Penson was in charge.
There is nothing of any particular interest in
this manuscript to dwell upon. It deals chiefly with
the natives of Pumice Stone, their habits and their
customs. Captain John Bingle being the first man
to pass through the surf breaking waters dividing
Moreton Island from Stradbroke Island I think that
he is deserving some little mention. He was born
in Gillingham, Kent, England on the 15th May, 1776,
and became in after years an officer in the East India
Company’s service; and was afterwards in the Navy.
On his arrival in Sydney, Sir Thomas Brisbane com-
missioned him to take command of H.M.S. Cutter
Sally, and survey the Eastern Coast. She arrived in
Moreton Bay in January, 1822. Hence Bingle’s visit
to Bribie. He next became a squatter at Scone, New
South Wales, and was instrumental in bringing bush-
rangers to justice. He claimed to have been the first
white man on Liverpool Plains. He sold out his
station property and started business as a merchant
and tug owner at Newcastle. He remained in New-
castle until his death at the age of 86, and was buried
in the Cathedral graveyard. Scores of his descendants
are scattered all over Australia, many holding high
positions in trade, banking and commerce. A grand-
daughter is Mrs, Hugonin, of Raby Bay, near Cleve-
land.
Surveyor-General John Oxley next appears on
the scene of Bribie events. Oxley was bom in Eng-
BRIBIE THE ISLAND. FIRST VISIT BY WHITES


land in 1781, entered the Navy as a youth, was ap-
pointed Surveyor-General of New South Wales on
January Ist, 1812, became a member of the Legisla-
tive Council on the 11th August, 1824, and died on
the 25th May, 1828. (Vide Henniker Heaton). His
visit to Moreton Bay was in pursuance of the recom-
mendation of the Commissioner of Enquiry in the
Colony of New South Wales, with a view of forming
a convict penal establishment; the commission being
dated 19th September, 1823. He left Sydney on the
21st October, 1823. With Lieutenant Stirling of the
Buffs on board the colonial cutter Mermaid, Charles
Penson, master, he first went northward to Port
Curtis and Bowen. He left Port Curtis on the 15th
November, and on the 29th November he came to
anchor at six in the evening in Pumice Stone River.
It was here that he encountered the three castaways,
Parsons, Pamphlet and Finnegan. Correctly speaking
Parsons was not at Bribie when Oxley arrived there.
He was away at the feast of the Bunyas, in the Mary
River district. He returned to Bribie after his two
companions had left and eventually made his way
back to Sydney.
Oxley was taken to, and up the river as shown
him, by Finnegan, and on the 3rd December, 1823
he named the stream the “Brisbane” in honour of
His Excellency Sir Thomas Brisbane, Governor of
New South Wales. Oxley had seen the Red Cliff of
Flinders on his way towards the entrance to the river
he was in quest of, and being satisfied with his find-
ings left for Sydney on the 6th December. Full and
deeply interesting particulars of this voyage, together
with the story of the three convicts —the real dis-
coverers of the Brisbane River —may be found in
Barron Field’s Geographical Memoirs of New South
Wales, published in 1825.
BRIBIE THE ISLAND. FIRST VISIT BY WHITES


With Flinders in 1799: Bingle in 1822: and
Oxley in 1823, is here recorded by me as the first of
the white men to visit Bribie Island, and to become
associated and acquainted with the black race there.
It is not necessary to refer to John Oxley’s return, and
speak of it at length. In September of 1824 he
sailed from Sydney in the brig Amity with a civil
establishment, prisoners, and stores to plant a new
settlement somewhere in Moreton Bay. (I am quoting
from Henry Stuart Russell, and his Genesis of Queens-
land, 1888, page 26). The King’s botanist, Cunning-
ham, accompanied him. Upon John Oxley was placed
all the responsibility of fixing upon a site most
eligible for this new dependency —in other words a
convict settlement. This new settlement was for a
while on the very shores of Moreton Bay, at a spot
called Red Cliff Point. It had been deemed suit-
able although it had its drawbacks from want of a
safe anchorage.
The Amity returned through the south passage,
hence the name of Amity Point. It is an old story,
repeatedly told, so why should I dwell upon it?
Red-Cliff or Humpy Bong, whatever name you select
as your choice now was not the proper and orthodox
place for a convict settlement. And in November of
1824 this unsatisfactory selected place was aban-
doned. All the staff, with prisoners, etc., were re-
moved to Edenglassie or Brisbane as it was eventually
named.
Governor Sir Thomas Brisbane made a visit to
this new selected site in the November of 1824.
BRIBIE THE ISLAND. FIRST VISIT BY WHITES


(Photo, by V. Campbell)
Fixing site of Bribie Island Jeny, 1912.


CHAPTER IV
BRIBIE ISLAND BECOMES NOTED
Bribie Island became historically noted, and
partially charted by Flinders: then came Bingle in
the Sally with a brief description of the coloured in-
habitants. Next in train we have Oxley who rescues
castaways, and of whom Uniacke wrote a deeply in-
teresting account of their wanderings and of their
sufferings. Oxley, who came along in 1823, and
names a river, which he by his silence in his report
to Sydney officials, would make believe that he dis-
covered and named; then he comes again in 1824
and the first batch of convicts from Sydney are planted
down at Redcliff, or Humpy Bong, whichever place
you choose to accept, from which place they are
removed to Brisbane. From now onward, until the
tribe of Joondoobarrie welcome the white man’s
civilisation, and his rum, and gradually pass away
westward, and the sound of their voices is no longer
heard, and the bunya feasts have faded —never again
to return, this is what I have called upon myself to
write. The island becomes, for a while, the place
of rest and peaceful existence for our friend the
Basket Maker. Who knows? There are scenes of
murder, and of the dark man hiding from the hands
of the law. These have I to chronicle from the
scattered sources of information at my command.


I commence such notings with the run away con-
vict James Davis, or if you want his aboriginal name,
“Duramboi” —the “Kangaroo Rat.” This James Davis
was the son of a Scotch blacksmith, was transported
to Botany Bay per ship Minstrel in the year 1824,
being then only sixteen years of age. For some
minor offence in Sydney he was sent to the Moreton
Bay Settlement. Shortly after his arrival here he
made his escape from the vigilance of Captain Logan’s
57 Regiment, and took to the bush. After living
with the Mary River blacks for fourteen years, he
was found by Mr. Andrew Petrie, and was returned
to civilisation in 1842. So now we will see what I
can record of this self same individual. En passant,
may I say that in his old age I knew Davis well. In
1875 I was a clerk in the employ of the Bank of
New South Wales, holding the position of ledger-
keeper. James Davis kept an account with this bank,
and as his transactions came under the ledger A to D,
which ledger I daily entered up, naturally such duties
gave me some opportunity of having converse with
him. He was then keeping a china goods shop in
George Street, adjacent to Gray the bootmaker, not
many feet distance from Trittons business place there
now. Prior to coming there he lived in Burnett Lane,
almost immediately behind the old Town Hall, Bronzed
wrinkled, and wizzened, he would sit just outside the
doorway of his shop, always smoking a clay pipe, with
never a word, never an acknowledgment from or to
the passerby. Never a friendly bidding of the day.
His wife remained indoors in the shop doing the
selling. Look up Miss Petrie’s book, and on page 139
you will see his picture, a picture just as I have
described him. The portrait in question was painted
by Oscar Tristrom, and is exact to a degree. He died
in Brisbane on the 7th May, 1889, aged 81 years,
and rests now in the Toowong Cemetery. To give
BRIBIE ISLAND BECOMES NOTED


you some idea of the man and of his character allow
me to quote from Miss Petrie’s book, page 139, of an
interview with this man,
“To show how stubborn (or had it not be better
written —reticent) Davis was I said to him some time
after his return (Tom Petrie was the questioner);
‘Davis you ought to get some one to write your life
among the blacks—you could make a lot of money.’
Note the reply.
“I don’t want money. I get enough to keep
myself. If anyone wants to know about the blacks
let them go and live with them the same as I did. I’ll
tell you a thing that happened the other day. A swell
who lives in this town brought another swell with
him to me and said: ‘Mr. Davis, allow me to intro-
duce you to So and So, from Sydney. He has come
all the way to see you to get some information about
the blacks.’
“Do you know what I said to him? Do you see
that door? Well the sooner you get out ot my shop
the better, and if you want any information about
the blacks, take off your coat and go and live with
them as I did. And off they went with their tails
between their legs, and I saw nothing more of them.”
Being ledger keeper at the Bank of New South
Wales I had occasional words with him when he came
into the offices, often would I write out a cheque for
him to sign. He could not write himself, but managed
to learn how to make his own signature. He always
came to me for this cheque business. He would
hand me his cheque book, and I would ask what
amount I should make out the cheque for. He would
(the written worded cheque being spoken by me)
look at the figures denoting the amount, and then
with a very tremulous hand affix his signature. Be-
yond a “good day,” or a “thank you,” he never
BRIBIE ISLAND BECOMES NOTED


spoke more. On one occasion when the late Mr,
Alexander Archer —drowned with his beautiful and
sweet-natured wife (she was a daughter of Sir Robert
Ramsey Mackenzie, Bart) in the Quetta on the 28th
February, 1890, was inspector of the Bank of New
South Wales, and Edward Denny Day, manager, I
was requested by the former named to interview Davis,
in some matter regarding Gympie and the Mary River.
I went down George Street, and saw the old gentle-
man sitting in his accustomed chair, and smoking his
same old cuddie. Politely I bade him the time of
the day. He made me no reply. Standing for some
moments and gazing through the window at the
merchandise displayed therein, I casually remarked
with my eyes on the window: “Mr. Davis, Mr. Archer
wants to know if you can give him particulars re-
garding the Mary River.” He made no reply. Know-
ing him so well as I did no hurry was displayed by
me ere I repeated the remark. As I write I can
visualise that hard brown and wrinkled face as he
sat there, with one hand on the bowl of his pipe,
and staring sternly across the street, taking not the
slightest notice of me, treating me with the utmost
indifference. Again was Mr. Archer’s request made
by me to him. Not a movement of his lips, no sign
of replying. For a while I stood by his side, then
with a touch of my hat I gave him good morning.
Mr. Archer was at once informed of the result. A
smile and a “thank you, Mr. Welsby,” and I returned
to my desk.
He, so far as is known, never spoke to anyone
regarding his fourteen years in the bush. He may
have imparted something to the Gray family who
were his friends throughout the remainder of his life
and were with him at the end, lam not aware of any
papers, or documents left by him, in relation to his
BRIBIE ISLAND BECOMES NOTED


history, and am inclined to think and say that his
life’s story went away, in the silence of his living, as
silent as the poor soul as he entered the gates of the
Toowong Cemetery on the 7th May, 1889.
I am not quite certain of the year, but it could
not have been very long after Andrew Petrie’s arrival
in Brisbane when a boating party was arranged to
go Maryborough way, through Bribie Passage. It
had been discovered that the Pumice Stone River of
Flinders was not a river, after ail, but that it was a
passage running between the island and the mainland
for some twenty miles, until it debouched into the
Pacific Ocean at Caloundra.
This party of adventurers numbered seven in all,
amongst them being Andrew Petrie, and Henry Stuart
Russell, their objective being to ascertain more of the
wrecked Stirling Castle, also to find out if any escaped
convicts were in and about the Maryborough district.
Reaching Bribie they decided to take the outside ocean
waters, and not pass through the passage. On reach-
ing Noosa they landed at the heads, and were here
surrounded by a mob of blacks. These natives spoke
a little English, and, after being questioned, conveyed
the fact that a white man was living with a neigh-
bouring tribe not a two days march away. Petrie
wrote a note to this white man, a darky carrying it
to the distant tribe. A few days passed and this
person—Bracefield by name—came to Noosa Heads.
He was a runaway convict and had been living with
the coloured people who had taken a murderous part
in the massacre of the crew of the Stirling Castle.
Bracefield said that he had seen Mrs. Fraser with the
natives. The party endeavoured to bring this man
Bracefield back to Bribie Island, thence to Brisbane.
They had almost reached Bribie when more blacks
were encountered ; amongst them being another white
BRIBIE ISLAND BECOMES NOTED


man, a convict, who turned out to be James Davis,
otherwise known as Duramboi. Petrie knew that a man
named James Davis had cleared out from the Convict
Settlement some years before. The two convicts then
held conversation together, Davis being convinced
that this boating party had been sent from Brisbane
to capture him and return him to the chains. He was
almost naked, his chest being all tattooed with hori-
zontal scars parallel to each other. When spoken to
he became enraged and displayed temper. Calming
down on being informed that they were not seeking
his apprehension, he became inclined to carry on a
conversation. He had almost forgotten his native
tongue, and it was some time before he became really
intelligible. Petrie and his friends heard then of
the poisoning of many members of the tribe, now
around and about the party, at a certain cattle station.
Davis describing the horrible scenes of death in a
most frantic and theatrical manner. Gently they as-
suaged him, and learned that he had been with this
tribe for nearly fourteen years. The story is too
lengthy for me to continue.
On Petrie informing Duramboi that a new order
of things prevailed in Brisbane since Logan’s death,
he agreed to return, signifying that he would look to
them for protection. Davis then told his tribe that
he was going away from them, but would return in
three moons time. The parting of Davis, their chief,
is very pathetically told in Russell’s Genesis of
Queensland.
So “Wandi,” “Bracefield” and “Duramboi” Davis
were returned to Brisbane and were leniently dealt
with. They came via Bribie, staying there for a few
days, and here my brief account of these two unfor-
tunate men must end. Bracefield found employment
with Dr. Simpson at Goodna, and was killed by a
BRIBIE ISLAND BECOMES NOTED


falling tree. Davis lived in Brisbane for many years.
How he received his first start in his renewed and
liberty-free life is, and never will, perhaps be known,
but that he made good and prospered is borne out
when I tell you that he left real and personal property
to the extent of £IO,OOO. The whole of this, with the
exception of £750 to the Brisbane Hospital and £SOO
to the Catholic Church, went to the daughter of a
well-known man in George Street, not for me to
name, but not very difficult to consider and locate
the person.
Coming now nearer home we approach the more
tragic side of the historical events of Bribie Island.
In the year 1849, there lived in Brisbane a well-
up in years man, named Charles Gray. Previous to
the year given he had been a ferryman running his
boat across to Kangaroo Point to what we now know
as the Custom House ferry steps. Andrew Petrie’s
house in Queen Street was not very far distant. This
house was a brick one and was on that portion of
land adjoining Queen Street, Wharf Street, and Ade-
laide Street. This area, large for town property resi-
dence, was sold in the late seventies, I think that was
about the time, to the late William Perry, who in
turn sold to Lumley Hill for something like £BO,OOO.
This Charles Gray was well known to the Petrie
family. Gray became tired of this continuous cross-
ing and recrossing the Brisbane River, built himself
a small ketch which he named the Aurora. With this
craft he started an oystering business, and traded to
and from Bribie, as well as other bay islands, for
the succulent bivalve. Believe me oysters were
oysters in those days, and for some years longer. For
a while there had been no license fee to part up to the
Government, the banks and beds were plentiful, good
business could be done in their disposal in Brisbane.
BRIBIE ISLAND BECOMES NOTED


It will be remembered that I have written of the
Bribie blacks as being fine, big and strong fellows.
The kippas, or young men, budding into manhood,
were active and fairly willing to work on oyster
banks and fill the bags for a very small sum. A
couple of the Bribie tribe of blacks worked in this
wise for Gray at Toorbul Point. On one of his visits
from town to this place he apparently was not in the
best of humours. It is a long and weary thrash from
the mouth of the river to Bribie Passage against a
head wind (don’t I know it). Perhaps Gray had
met with this opposing wind, or he might have been
having a bad time in Brisbane and was suffering a
recovery. Rum—Jamaica —was a fashionable and
customary beverage in those days, as I believe it is
to-day.
However Gray was not satisfied with the work
done by these boys since his last visit, not enough
bags picked, the culling was not up to the mark. A
heated argument took place between the master and
the employed boys, one lad in particular receiving the
full benefit of Gray’s burst of passion. From this
battle of tongues came blows. One of the oyster
pickers ran away leaving his companion the full
brunt of the affair to get on as best he could. Gray
almost maddened with rage most unmercifully
thrashed the lad who had stood his ground, marked
and bruised him terribly on the body, amongst other
epithets calling him a nigger. That name hurt
in those days equally as it does nowadays to any
dark-coloured person in Moreton Bay,
The boy swam over to Bribie and informed
those of his tribe then dwelling there of all that had
happened. The king and many followers canoed
across the passage to interview Gray and give him a
belting. This individual seeing them coming, hastily
BRIBIE ISLAND BECOMES NOTED


put himself on board the Aurora, hoisted his sail, and
made down the passage for open water, and . . .
safety.
This made the tribe more angered and the more
determined to have revenge. So they calmly awaited
the assailant’s return, for return they well knew he
would. Gray did not return for a couple of months,
thinking that the affair would by that time be blown
over and forgotten. Not so. Natives in those early
days, once offended or insulted rarely forgave. They
wanted to get even with the white intruders who
had come in amongst them, and were taking their best
hunting grounds from them. They were determined
to kill Gray. Gray came in his sailing craft, ran
up the short distance of the passage to the Toorbul
oyster banks, anchored his boat in deep water, and
pulled ashore in his dinghey. All his actions were
watched from the Bribie shore. A couple of men went
over to the banks and gave Gray a hand at picking
the oysters for the market. Then came more, and
more, until the town man became suspicious. And
at last came the badly-thrashed and knocked about
boy. He and all the others showed no resentment,
no desire to quarrel —but they were awaiting their
opportunity. Gray, thinking that nothing was going
to be said or done about the beating of the lad, seeing
them all so cheerful and pleasant, was bending down
to lift a small bag of oysters into his dinghey to
take out with other bags to the Aurora, when down
came a nulla-nulla on his head causing him to drop
the bag and fall into the water himself. It did not
then take long to, in the words of the natives “finis-
im.” The body sank, was pushed out in the deeper
waters of the channel, then went away with the out-
going tide —-and never again was seen.
BRIBIE ISLAND BECOMES NOTED


Many who took part in this murder—for murder
it was —went away up the passage to Caloundra, and
with that secrecy of the tribal ways possessed by
them, their action in the killing of Gray was silenced
and never referred to. Gray was supposed to have
been drowned by falling over from the Aurora. The
blacks had taken the precaution to lift the anchor,
shove the craft out into midstream, the easterly wind
however, blowing her ashore further down towards
the opening. Nothing was done by the Brisbane
authorities save making a few verbal enquiries. He
was supposed to have fallen overboard and with them
there it ended. Missing men in the Moreton Bay
Settlement and district was of no consequence, nothing
new, one more man off the roll, and “missing” was
placed against his name. This murder took place on
the Toorbul oyster banks, the date being about the
10th July, 1849. That old time saying, “murder will
out,” generally comes true. Some little remarks
dropped by one of the Bribie blacks when in the
town some time after aroused a certain amount of
curiosity, and cause for enquiry. The belief then
spread abroad that Gray had been killed, not
drowned, but of this more anon.
Miss Petrie in her publication of her good
father’s reminiscences says that the man killed was
very well known to her father and all the Petrie
family then existent. The younger man, Tom, on
first hearing that Gray had not returned from Bribie
and was long overdue, was said to have remarked in
the hearing of the Commandant; “Well! well! I knew
the poor old chap most intimately. He was a very
cross and bad tempered old fellow. Many a slap
on the head and a kick has he given me when steal-
ing oysters out of one of his bags on the Aurora.” He
had a very good idea as to the manner in which this
BRIBIE ISLAND BECOMES NOTED


owner of the oyster sailing boat had departed this life
—and—said not one word.
There is an episode of some little interest which
here might be recorded, although I wrote about it
some few years ago—as it partly concerns the island
of Bribie and Ninghi Creek. There lived at Amity
Point in my early days of sailing two very dark
coloured natives, the one Toompani by name, the
other Tommie Nuggin, both of the tribe of Nooghies
on Moreton Island. They have been said to have seen
the wreck of the Sovereign on the South Passage bar
on the 11th March, 1847, and I can believe it. Natur-
ally they were fairly young at that time. They were
advanced in years when I first met them, but much of
their life’s history was imparted to me, not only by
the men themselves, but by their relatives. Toom-
pani was drowned whilst attempting the rescue of a
coloured woman near the black beacon at Myora.
It is of Nuggin that I want particularly now to
write about. When Nuggin was about getting beyond
his teens, then living at times at Moreton, he became
very fond of a girl named Sarah by the white people,
and he was desirous of wedding her either in native
or other fashion. Amongst the tribes of the three bay
islands Bribie, Moreton and Stradbroke, there were
very strict regulations regarding matrimony, and all
particulars pertaining thereto, these regulations or
customs making it almost impossible that they should
become man and wife. Nuggin then joined the native
police, in Brisbane, and was for some years absent
from the bay, Sarah mourned the absence of her
lover, yet ever remained true to him.
He next returned to Amity Point and renewed
his love making with this girl or woman, he was
determined to have as his partner in life. They de-
fied custom, despite all conventionalities and agree-
BRIBIE ISLAND BECOMES NOTED


ing very well, lived together in their own gunyah for
a while at Moongalba —commonly and to this day
termed as Myora. Tommie was a fine type of char-
acter, for I knew him well, and can so faithfully
chronicle. I had the pleasure of introducing him to
Sir Hamilton John Goold-Adams during the Great
War period, when a great patriotic gathering was
being held in the city. Tommie came up in the
Otter, and when I met him at the Queen’s Wharf he
was the very picture of dress etiquette in his full
policeman’s uniform—he held this position as the
custodian of the peace at Myora—and when later on
in the day he met His Excellency he was the proudest
person in the whole gathering. My sorrow ever since
has been that I did not have him photographed in
the attire he was so fond and proud of.
He had given Sarah his own choice of native
naming, viz., “Kinterribah,” its meaning being
darling. He was again called back for police ser-
vice and once more poor Sarah was nigh broken-
hearted.
In Brihie Passage in and about Ninghi Ninghi
Creek, there lived at the time of Tommie’s youthful
wooing and later when the Brayden family were in
charge of the Cape Moreton Lighthouse (built in
1858), a certain body of dangerous warriors, known
as the Ninghi tribe. Their language was somewhat
akin to that of the Bribie race. The king and leader
of this Ninghi crowd was a very fierce native called
Adam. The natives of Bribie and Moreton had never
been on friendly terms, even from the time, so I was
informed by the old hands of the bay, of Oxley in
1824. The Ninghi and Bribie people were, I am
sorry to relate, cannibals. The others were not. The
Ninghi-ites were good canoe men, and occasionally
when good weather permitted would row over to
BRIBIE ISLAND BECOMES NOTED


Comboyuro on Moreton, and then from there go
around past the Yellow Patch to the lighthouse. Sarah
was employed by the Braydens at the Cape. It was
on one of these visits that Adam saw Sarah, who in
his eyes “was fair to look upon,” and he desired to
possess her for himself alone away over at Ninghi
Creek. Tommie Nuggin was in town. Adam wooed
Sarah in cunning native manner and requested the
good woman to come and live with him at Bribie.
Sarah would not, and told him nay. Was not she the
wife of turrwan Nuggin; should she not be true to
him, for soon he would return, and then they would
go away to Amity Point and live there in comfort
and in peace. Adam tried force, assistance coming
just in time, and he returned to Bribie alone.
A month or so went along. One dark, windless
night, when the ocean seas and the bay waters were
in calm a canoe with four men aboard left Bribie,
and arrived at Moreton unnoticed in the early dawn.
They hid themselves and the canoe in the long swamp
at the back of Comboyuro, remaining there for a day
or more. On the second night of darkness they went
inland along this swamp leading to the Yellow Patch,
and amongst the hills again hid themselves awaiting
their opportunity to meet and abduct Sarah. The next
evening of their ambush they perceived Sarah on her
way to the North Point with no companion by her
side. She was “waddied,” and in an insensible con-
dition was carried back to Comboyuro, put in the
canoe and taken to Bribie.
Nuggin, in town, was in due course made aware
of what had happened, of her disappearance, and
suspected Adam.
He went to Cape Moreton, and in a silence almost
of despair waited to take action. Twice was he
stopped in taking a small boat and paddling across
BRIBIE ISLAND BECOMES NOTED


the waters to the opposite island. Eventually he es-
caped from the vigilance of those at the lighthouse,
and reached Brihie. Another man accompanied him,
but Nuggin would never tell me who he was. They
made their way along the island on the ocean side,
then crossed until they could see Ninghi Ninghi Creek
opposite on the mainland. The two men swam over
that night and saw the Ninghi blacks around their
camp fires, but neither Adam nor Sarah were amongst
the number. Hearing the cry of a beaten woman
they crawled back upon their hands and knees and
saw Adam beating Sarah with a nulla-nulla.
What happened next, no one will ever know,
for all participants have gone. One can only sur-
mise, for up to the time of his demise Nuggin never
spoke of that deed at Ninghi Creek. Personally I
never had the heart to question him, friendly as we
were. They returned to the passage beach, and with
the help of a log managed to get Sarah away over to
Bribie, and ere morning they were well on their
way to Moreton, and beyond pursuit or capture.
The reason of that silent hiatus in the life story
of Nuggin and Sarah from now onwards, and the
cause so well known, never became divulged to any
one. The tribes of the three islands knew that Adam
had been killed, that Sarah had departed, that the two
were living together at Amity, Nuggin and his faith-
ful spouse. No questions were asked. No desire to
know was evinced. Greater was the respect shown
to Tommie, for they knew of his sorrow when Sarah
had been stolen by the bad Bribie man, and they
now knew of the happiness of their sojourn and
general life on Stradbroke Island. Amongst them
all the silence was held and respected; they need ask
no questions, there would be no reply. Enough for
the Stradbroke and Moreton tribes living at peace with
BRIBIE ISLAND BECOMES NOTED


each other at Amity and Moongalba to know that
Adam no longer lived.
During the remainder of Nuggins life on Strad-
broke Island he always carried with him a flat headed
waddy. It was his companion night and day, and
only when on police duty was it placed on one side.
When in contemplative mood sitting of an evening
on the outside of their gunyah, I should write house,
for the Government had provided him with such a
dwelling, his waddy companion in his hand, his eyes
would wander to the north-west in the direction of
Bribie; he would be seen to smile just the slightest
and pat his ironbark wooden friend in playful man-
ner. Those who might be watching him knew.
He died at Myora and was buried there on the
hillside. He was not confined to his bed for very
long. When he became conscious that his end was
not so very far away, he confided to a coloured friend
that he would like Mr. Welshy to have possession of
this self same waddy. He and I were always very
friendly. This token of such a gift was sufficient for
me to understand even if I had ever doubted that
friendship. And so it came into my hands. I have
it still with me at Toorbul, where I occasionally spend
a week or more, and it is guarded carefully.
Adam! Yes that name comes to my pen once
more ... at the termination of Nuggins existence.
Sarah knew. Tommie knew. It had long been known
at Bribie that Adam had mysteriously disappeared. In
what manner they could only guess, and very wisely
they did not want to know the manner of his disap-
pearance.
Had Sarah, at Bribie at the time of her release
from the Ninghi man’s hand, signified Nuggin of
her whereabouts when she so loudly cried aloud.
BRIBIE ISLAND BECOMES NOTED


knowing that he was at hand to rescue? Did they,
and the companion of Nuggin know of the waters of
the passage and its strong currents from the creek,
and also know that once a body was in those strong
running waters it would be swept seaward never to
return? Of course they were —and from that night
henceward and forever their tongues were silent.
And ofttimes I wonder as I handle that blackish
piece of flat-topped fairly-thickish wood; wonder and
almost ask for its story. lam sure it could tell a tale
of victory. But it, too, is as silent as that dark old
friend of mine who has gone to the kingdom of
Ponemah.
I had perused in quiet and observant manner
the proof slips of chapter two, and was awaiting the
arrival of chapter three, when it suddenly dawned
upon my mind that I had omitted mention of a very
old and dark-coloured lady familiar in the streets
of Brisbane in the middle seventies. There was no
need for me to seek page 46 of Miss Petrie’s book,
for so often had I as a lad spoken to her, Catchpenny.
So often had I searched my pocket for the brownie
or penny, to be thrown into the huge, open almost
toothless maw cavity of “Catchpenny,” that I visual-
ised her in a correctness of impression that even a
camera could not have bettered. So Catchpenny, be-
ing native born of Bribie, must be chronicled. She
was of the “Gwai-a” tribe on that island, and in her
younger days must have been a tall and well-
developed woman, for even her broad and stooping
shoulders had evidence of that. As I knew her she
must have been sixty years of age, perhaps eighty for
all I knew. She was generally well clad, that is her
woman’s garments were many, a long dress to her
feet, and always a large dilly bag around her
shoulders. That dilly was always full as the de-
BRIBIE ISLAND BECOMES NOTED


dining sun sent the shadows along and upon the
street. And those shadows foretold the departure of
all the blacks beyond the city boundary, their camp-
ing grounds being what I remember called “Frog’s
Hollow,” in the gullys running towards the Exhibi-
tion buildings, and across the Breakfast Creek to a
gunyah-covered place which is now a racecourse.
As they departed they were a noisy and jabber-
ing mob, the men often with their spears and
waddies; the womenkind with their dillies, and much
disarranged body blankets, and the yelping mongrel
dogs. But the early morning saw them back again, first
loitering in the Valley, thence to Queen Street.
Catchpenny was a favourite with us all, and if
her wrinkled and furrowed face was not her fortune
in its entirety her mouth most certainly was. Mouth,
did I say. It wasn’t a mouth. It was a deep yawn-
ing rent in her frontal head structure. Not only we
bank clerks, but many others, would bid her stand
against the shop windows, open her mouth to its
fullest extent, and standing on the kerbstone we would
throw copper after copper into her facial abyss. He
was a very poor thrower who missed that opening.
Sometimes more than one thrower would toss the
coin, and as she laid her huge tongue out over her
chin to hold any coin that might fall from her mouth
her eyes beamed with fun and good nature. So for
further information, as they say in the classics, look
up page 46, of Miss Petrie’s book, and there behold
Catchpenny*
BRIBIE ISLAND BECOMES NOTED


CHAPTER V
MORE ATROCITIES
Naturally it can be quite understood that in the
preparation of these writings I am compelled to pub-
lications and manuscript of those early pioneers who
possessed the forethought to record some of their
experiences. What a pity more of us do not emu-
late them! Tom Petrie’s recollections are becoming
more and more valuable every day, and it is a bless-
ing to those of us who may be historically inclined
to know that his daughter has placed in print her
father’s telling of early days, even when the Convict
Settlement besmirched this land of Queensland. Most
interesting, and to a certain extent instructive, are his
narrations of those bad old days of convict life, of
anecdotes of the early and uncultured natives, their
habits, ways, and their superstitions, in those days
when his “untutor’d mind saw God in clouds, and
heard him in the wind,” to slightly misquote Alex-
ander Pope.
Unfortunately there is not too much extant for
me to fall back upon, and from which to make refer-
ences, so from Tom Petrie’s book I am gleaning what
I can, adding to it from other early authors and
supplying a little of my own remembrances. For I
have loved history from my very boyhood, and have
made diary collections of cuttings which I am sure
will prove such labour’s recompensive.


(Photo, by V. Campbell)
Bribie Jetty, showing part of Bongaree Township.


Bribie Island in about 1842 had very dark
coloured inhabitants, ferocious to a degree, and be-
ing courageous as well as well proportioned, sought
a contest when in warlike mood. Killing among
themselves was not infrequent, and “long pig,”
though not called by that name was occasionally part
of their diet. When the three year bunya feast and
gathering took place up in the Mary River district,
there would always be trouble at its conclusion, and
boomerang, spear, waddy, and nulla nulla were handy
weapons of combat. This feast had its one virtue.
The gathering consisted of various tribes from various
districts from Bundaberg to Bribie, and in the Bunya
Mountains where hundreds of these blacks gathered
to feast and gorge themselves, there was an un-
declared, but accepted armistice during their holiday,
and during which time no fighting took place. It is
not very difficult to state that generally the cause of
trouble was that related to a lubra or woman. When
their tummies were full, and the bunya tree showed
signs of a scarcity of ripened nuts the tribes would
begin to disperse and return to their own particular
land holding destination. It was then the “tun-wan,”
the big man; the “mallard,” the grown man, and
even the “kippa,” the young man became bombastic
and war inclined ... it was then the gin and the
“puddang,” the mother, wanted the warriors to give
the corroboree, so that in the firelight darkness of
the evening they could croon their voices, clap the
hollow of their thighs, as the painted and chalk-
marked men made their hideous gambols. As the
hours passed on and the performers became tired and
wanted rest the lubras incited the men and youths to
do battle with some distant tribe they disliked. From
this weird and uncanny dancing came much bad blood,
and often killing took place.
MORE ATROCITIES


On one occasion after a bunya feast had ended,
and the tribes were on their homeward tracks, a Mr.
Andrew Gregor and a Mrs. Mary Shannon, the hired
servant of Gregor were murdered at the North Pine,
on the Gympie road. The date, 20th October, 1846.
Four blacks, viz., Jemmy, Millbong Jemmy, Dick Ben
and Jackey had been sent by Gregor to cut bark
in the bush. Whilst these four were away a mob of
returning bunya blacks gathered around the dwelling
house, clamouring for food, and were refused. For
an hour or more they insisted, sat themselves down in
angry mood, and awaited the return of the bark
cutters. On their return Mr. Gregor examined the
bark they had brought in, and whilst putting a bundle
on one side, Dick Ben and Jackey dealt him heavy
blows with their waddies, killing him almost in-
stantly. Mrs' Shannon was killed outright in almost
the same manner as Gregor, the natives who dealt her
the blows being Moggy Moggy, and Millbong Jemmy.
The greatest villain of them all —so wrote J. J. Knight
in his Early Days—was Millbong Jemmy. This in-
dividual went a few days afterwards to Doughboy
Creek and attacked a sawyer who had refused him
food. The sawyer went indoors, and as the black
grappled with a standing by bullock driver the saw-
yer shot Jemmy through the head. This native was
then put into a cart for conveyance to the Settlement,
but died on the way in.
About this year, 1846, many murders and atro-
cities were committed by the blacks, and on not be-
ing pursued for capture they gained strength in the
belief they could rob, murder and kill as they liked.
On the 11th September, 1846, three sawyers
named James Smith, William Boiler and William
Waller were at work at the North Pine, the first two
falling timber in the scrub, Waller acting as cook.
more atrocities


Smith and Boiler were in the saw-pit. Boiler was
speared and ran into his hut with five spears sticking
through his body. Smith was next attacked, he
managed for a time to dodge the spears. Striving to
make his way out of the pit a notorious native named
Dundallie hit him upon the hack of the head with
a waddy, and knocked him senseless back into the
pit. He managed to get up and out, and make his
way to the hut where Boiler stood with pointed gun
towards the molestants. Showers of spears were
thrown. Two natives made for the scrub, others
followed.
Waller’s lifeless body was found later on in a
sitting posture in the branches of a tree that had
been felled. The two living men were taken into
Brisbane to the hospital there, Boiler dying ere the
town was reached.
Why bring to memory these terrible atrocities.
As it is of Bribie I am writing, I want it to be known
most of the miscreants were from that island.
No reprisal came for this killing of these men.
The blacks involved in the attacks made for other
localities, and the authorities could not, apparently,
supply men to follow. Officials were getting used to
attacks and killing by this class of men. Let the out-
country settlers and timber getters do their own fol-
lowing on and “disperse” where and when as they
pleased.
All this leads me up to one dreadful man, and
also a native of Bribie, a robber and murderer when
so e’er he felt inclined. He was feared in many dis-
tricts, not alone by the white folk, but also by the
natives, those of his own colour. He knew, and had
many hiding places on the island, where he was bom;
was fleet of foot and as cunning as a native could be.
Neither afraid of the dark, or of travelling by night
MORE ATROCITIES


as nearly all of the Australian aborigines are. He
was like unto the Arabs of that wonderful personage,
Lawrence. An escapade here, a murderous attack there;
a robbery at another place ... and a day or two after-
wards he would be miles away, amid his own known
haunts, and as he thought places of security. The
troopers and soldiers were, however, after him—he
was a wanted man. After one daring daylight rob-
bery at Caboolture he made himself scarce, and,
keeping quiet could not be found. He made his way
to Bribie, and took charge of the tribe. Nothing be-
ing apparently done by the soldiery for his arrest. He
began to become more imperious and daring. Officials
were playing their own game, known by the soldiers,
in fact, were laying low or abiding their time. By
their inaction they wanted to draw Dundallie into
the open and they eventually did. One morning near
the place now called Bongaree, he called his crowd
around him, and said he was going to Meginchin
(Brisbane), and would dare the soldiers to arrest or
shoot him. The old men of the tribe warned him,
persuaded him in vain not to go. He went. On his
way through Caboolture and North Pine he was very
quiet and subdued—all put on—stayed awhile here
and there, until the men of other tribes marked him
as a changed man, and were not afraid of him. They
became much easier in mind when in his company.
He arrived at Meginchin, and was engaged by a
bricklayer named Massie, not for brick work assist-
ance, but for cutting down trees on land whereon
Massie had a contract for building. The place was
at the corner of Ann and Wickham street, where the
old Union Hotel once stood. He worked there for
some days, when he was recognised by a blacktracker
named Wumbungur of the Brisbane tribe. This darky
hung low for a time, then informed the police. A
couple more days of quietness was allowed Dun-
MORE AT ROCITIES


dallie, then one morning whilst he was sitting on a
log of his own falling he was surrounded and cap-
tured.
Many other blacks saw and recognised him, then
gradually it came from the lips of many that this
self same man was one of those who had taken a
hand in the killing of Gregor and Mrs, Shannon, and
was also present when the sawyers were attacked at
Doughboy Creek.
He was tried, sentenced to death, and hanged
on what was at that time a little ridge in Queen
Street, and where the present G.P.O. stands. That
was on the sth January, 1855. Miss Petrie says that
her father was among the crowd in Queen Street, and
saw this hanging. This method of despatching Dun-
dallie was a terrible and bungled business, so much
so that I have no desire to describe it here. See
Petrie’s book if you are desirous of more particulars
than I have given you. See page 175.
Bribie Island was thus well rid of this sanguinary
gentleman. It may be fitting, perhaps, to hear what
another writer has said of Dundallie, so I betake my-
self to J. J. Knight’s book, entitled “In the Early
Days,” published in 1895, See pages 335-336.
“The 25th May, 1854 saw the capture by the
native police, aided by the well-disposed blacks, of
one of the greatest scoundrels of his time —Dundalli.
Dundalli seldom ventured near the Settlement. Gener-
ally he remained about the Pine, or on Bribie Island,
but one day deeming it safe to visit Brisbane he
came over and camped in the Valley. He was seen
by blacks who were afraid of him, so they quickly
gave the police the hint, and after a desperate re-
sistance he was captured. His had been a merry life
of depredation extending over eight years, his name
being connected with nearly every native murder or
more atrocities


outrage perpetrated. He belogned to the Bunya dis-
trict, but for years had been associated with blacks
on the coast over whom he possessed great influence.
On being arrested he denied that his name was Dun-
dalli, saying he was known as Wilson, but he was
too well known to be able to deceive the authorities.
On the 2nd June he was brought up and committed
for trial for robbery with violence at the Revd. J. G.
Haussman’s station in 1845; for the murder of Boiler
and Waller in 1847; for the murder of Charles Gray
near Bribie Island; and for the murder of Mr.
McGrath’s shepherd. Although heavily ironed he was
most violent while awaiting trial, so much so, indeed,
that steps were taken —without success —to obtain a
special commission to try him at once.
There was a great gathering of the Ninghi Ninghi
tribe from the Northern coast of the bay (Pumice
Stone Channel), with Billy Barlow at their head, who
swore revenge on whites generally, and on those
blacks who had assisted in Dundallie’s capture in par-
ticular. On the 21st November Dundalli was found
guilty at the Circuit Court, and was sentenced to
death. Up to the last he would not admit that he
was likely to suffer death, asserting that when “the
whiteman (the hangman) arrived he would take him
to Sydney, but would not hang him up.”
On the fatal morning, sth January, 1855, Dun-
dalli did not express any fear until the executioner
went into his cell to pinion him. Then he cried and
wailed piteously to all around to save him. To avoid
the possibility of escape, the gallows was surrounded
by police, while a rope was passed through the cord
that pinioned the prisoner’s arms. He went up the
rude ladder without any force but continued to call
on all who knew him, and then, as if recognising that
his entreaties were unavailing, be shouted in his native
MORE ATROCITIES


tongue to the crowd of blacks who lined Wind Mill
hill. This it was afterwards ascertained was an ap-
peal to his wife and other members of his tribe to
avenge his death.”
Yes. This is what J. J. Knight, at one time
editor of the Brisbane “Courier,” wrote in his book,
published in 1895. If this book is in your possession
you may read the remaining part of the story to know
more.
Brief as I have been I am of opinion that I
have written enough about these “atrocities,” and
must not further besmirch this island of Bribie to
a greater degree. But why write so much about them
as you have done, I fancy I hear some supersensitive
reader remark? Well, it is easily explained. It is
history, is it not? It may not be flavoured with the
good deeds and actions of early times and pioneers.
It might well have been best to forget them. From
many authors have I culled these records of past events,
and in endeavouring to make summary abbreviations
of them all I have tried to condense them sufficiently to
make one short complete story. In my own case of
reading far back history of nations, cities and nota-
bilities, I have missed much salient and important
matters, and the older I grow I appear to know so
little. There is no doubt of the correctness of the
topics mentioned in foregoing pages. Their inscrib-
ings were nearer the time and scene of the events
touched upon, and coming from writers of repute I
accept what they have sent down to a later generation
with perfect confidence.
We cannot forget the brave and intrepid Mat-
thew Flinders, nor can we dismiss from memory Sur-
veyor John Oxley, who gave no honour to the con-
victs who discovered the Brisbane River, taking all
that credit himself and the naming of it also. We
MORE ATROCITIES


pass to the philandering lady who lured away the
innocent Basket Maker to the fair realms of her tribal
abode, and we look upon Bribie Island as one of
the charming, inviting spots of Moreton Bay. What
a paradise it must have been before the white man
came and the pellets of his gun dispersed the numer-
ously named birds that frequented it; birds that made
their nests on tree and bush and amidst the blue laked
rushes, with never a fear amongst themselves. I well
remember my first boating trip through the passage
to Caloundra, and will never forget the beauty of
that jaunt. The Glass Houses, seen at various angles
as we made our way! They were inspiring in their
beauty and grandness. It was in the morning early,
with a gentle southerly sending us along. As the sun
came out from the ocean these Glass Houses glistened
in their loveliness. A magnificent sight! Their
charms are still there to behold. Bird life is not
what it used to be, and the noisy motor launch has
almost banished the white sail. I say this with sad-
ness, but is it not true? From my long knowledge of,
and sojourn at Amity Point, I am of one opinion that
no one will ever shake, and that is, civilisation has
always killed nature’s beauty spots of silence and
adornment.
MORE ATROCITIES


(Photo, by W. Main).
W elsby Lagoon.


CHAPTER VI
THE ISLAND ITSELF
In the month of February, 1928, my friend, Mr.
William Main, of Ocean Beach, who has been for
many years a resident there, wrote a very interesting
account of Bribie as an island. He mentioned the
advent of the Brisbane Tug Company, their enterpris-
ing efforts, not alone with steamer traffic from Bris-
bane, but motor transport across the island to the
outer beach. And he wrote of Pumice Stone Chan-
nel wending its twenty miles away to Caloundra, and
where the island terminates in this northern extremity,
a narrow opening to the Pacific Ocean there to be seen.
He spoke of the road across the island from the Tug
Company’s wharf at Bongaree. One can quite appre-
ciate his poetic fancy of the flowery banks and braes
of Caledonia when you read the description of this
road. It runs through a timber growing and lined
pathway all the way. Somewhere about three miles
north of the road he writes “the thick scrub forms
but a narrow belt, and beyond for many miles, the
island is open country like a Scottish Moor covered
with heath, with occasional clumps of Banksia and
tea tree.” He speaks of the wily dingo, the macropus,
the eagles in their nests of sticks and bramble, within
one, two weeny, tiny, eaglets ensconced therein. Of
the outside beach he is proud, for he maintains it is
the finest surfing beach in Queensland. Mr, Main
should know and I do really believe he is right. The


lagoons are not omitted for he has seen and photo-
graphed them. all. How many pictures of these did
he send to “Amity,” my New Farm abode? Let me
see. One, two, three —why he has forwarded me the
lot, nine in all —not nine lagoons, but nine photos of
them.
It must now be some thirty years since I viewed
those self same ponds and lakelets he has had under
the camera. And would you believe it —he has actu-
ally called and named a lagoon after me —or is it two
he has chosen. lam not quite sure. Anyhow I wrote
and thanked him very kindly.
For me to say I do not know Slradbroke Island
would be an untruth. I know it thoroughly —the
whole island. Almost over it all have I ridden and
walked, and have taken ducks —in season of course
. . . wouldn’t do otherwise —from the lagoon at
Fern Gully right away down to Swan Bay. The wild
flower spots are known to me equally as well as the
tree and branch hidden among silent waters where
the floating lily hides its fragrance and beauty.
Where are the orchid valleys, where grow,
chiefly, on tall Cyprus pines, the staghorns and the
elkhorns. Where is the climbing maiden hair, the
mountain heather, and the fringed hillsides with the
clinging sarsaparilla plant? That is not for me to
say, for the vandal does not love or admire the
scented, aye, if the unscented flower is found, like I
do, and I will not divulge. In my searchings for
these and when after the raacropus I have often been
lost, but the planets of the night, and the sound of the
continuous rollers of the Pacific on the outside beach
have given me my location and direction of travel.
And why am I adopting this strain and manner
of writing? It is because my envious nature goes
out towards Mr. William Main and his knowledge of
THE ISLAND ITSELF


the contents of the length and breadth of Bribie Is-
land; and I know so little. Should the years be
allowed me, I will out-emulate him, and make my
knowledge equal to his. All the quiet, and I hope
unvisited and undisturbed localities where the wild
flowers grow, will be visited and viewed by me —and
I will be alone in my company.
To those of the present day times it might not
here be out of place to mention that so far back as
the year 1877 there was a movement made to succour
and aid those of our native race who were inclined to
adopt some of the white man’s desires to ameliorate
the conditions of their fast disappearing numbers.
The Hon. John Douglas was in this year Premier of
Queensland. He was a most sympathetic gentleman,
and was inclined and willing that something should be
done for these coloured people. So he decided upon
forming a settlement for them somewhere about the
White Patch on Bribie. In June of 1877 he, accom-
panied by several of his Ministry, journeyed by
steamer —it must have been the Kate, the Government
vessel run down by the Burwah in the Francis Channel
in November, 1890 —to the island mentioned to choose
and establish a place whereupon to settle and educate
them. Mr. Tom Petrie accompanied them. Petrie
had an early and intimate knowledge of those the
Premier was desirous of assisting, and upon being
asked, replied that he was quite agreeable to super-
vise the workings and control of this proposed Native
Settlement. On the island Petrie called the dark men
around him and in their own native language told
them of the proposals of the Government. They
cheered loudly, and expressed their thanks to Mr.
Douglas through Petrie. The establishment being
formed, a fishing boat, with necessary nets, was
THE ISLAND ITSELF


handed over to them, and all and everything done
for their comfort and living.
When all had settled themselves down in the
homes of their abode, their number including men,
women and children was somewhere about fifty. Tom
Petrie visited them once a month, and made himself
satisfied with what the residents were doing for them-
selves. All went swimmingly for many months, the
mullet season giving ample sport and food for all.
For two years it went along well, was commencing to
pay and become self-supporting. A change of Gov-
ernment took place, the Palmer Ministry of 1879
doing away with the entire habitation. The blacks,
sorely disheartened, scattered and went away in all
directions. The Church of England took up the
cause, and made strenuous endeavours to have the
place kept going. All this was of no avail, and sadly
the place was closed down —went “Bong.” Just be-
fore its closure a Presbyterian minister named McNab
intervened. He went to Bribie with Mr. Petrie, and
with good intentions no doubt, brought religious teach-
ings somewhat too prominently forward. This was
too much for the blacks. They wanted tucker and
clothing, and too plainly could see that Bible teach-
ing alone would not supply these. Hunting for food
in their manner prior to these days of solemn prayer,
and holy teaching—the drawing of the seine for fish
—if these were not properly regarded they would
starve.
Parson McNab preached, prayed and per-
severed. It was useless, so the beloved and no
doubt well-meaning gentleman called a halt —and
there ended the last lesson. I am of the opinion most
of the coloured people made their way to Humpy
Bong.
THE ISLAND ITSELF


Here they were visited by a black called Piper,
of the Maroochy tribe. This unwelcome individual
had murdered, so it was understood, a white man, a
botanist at Mooloolah. His presence at Woody Point
was not desired, so it was arranged quietly among
them that a Bribie man called “Dangalin” should
sneak upon Piper whilst he was asleep and do away
with him. Something went wrong, the intended and
attempted despatch failed, and Piper cleared quickly
for Maroochy. Staying there for a time he again
became adventurous until news of a big corroboree at
Brisbane soon to take place, lured him to that town.
He camped at Kedron brook with some Durundur
natives, regarding himself safe among them. He
was not. These fellows knew the man. Sambo, one
of the tribe knowing that Piper liked his rum —all
natives did I should imagine from what I know of
them—had obtained poison from somewhere and
secretly conveyed a small portion thereof into a rum
bottle carried by Piper. Piper going into his gunyah
at eventime, took with him another darkie. They
both partook of the fire water, and were found dead
in the morning, lying side by side on the sand. Sambo
cleared well away into distant bushlands, was pro-
tected where he sojourned, but was never known to
visit Brisbane.
There came another attempt to form a native
settlement at Bribie. It lasted but a few years. The
occupants were from distant places, as well as from
the bay islands, the number of tribes were many,
and dissatisfaction and jealousy prevailed. It was
no good—too much bickering, and at times fighting,
so the Aboriginal Department closed the place down.
No progress whatever had been made here, so Peel
Island was next selected. This island was also a
failure, and very wisely, I think that well-known
THE ISLAND ITSELF


“Myora was fixed upon. These mission blocks at
the various spots named were, and had been always,
called “Myora.” This “Myora” in Moreton Bay lingo
means “Mission.” The place last established and
still in operation on Stradbroke Island has a native
name of “Moongalba,” having nothing akin with
mission. For years past I have endeavoured to find
out its meaning in English, but have never been suc-
cessful. Nor will I now ever be, for everyone of the
old native bom on Stradbroke have gone, to the
beyond, or rather nearly all.
Myora has turned out well. For years most of
the Moreton natives lived there, or at the Two Mile,
or at Dunwich, those living at this latter named, be-
ing mostly in the employ of the Old Age Depart-
ment there. A fair-sized school was built by the
Education Department, qualified teachers were in
charge, and there is no doubt much benefit for the
many children attending was derived. The school is
still there, but the Mission Establishment is now very
quiet, nothing like it used to be. School attendance is
very limited, whilst many of the original homes are
vacant. Of all the tribes of the island located in
Moreton Bay waters, and of all those who made Moon-
galba their home, and who were actually bom on
the island there are but two alive this very day.
Again—so-called civilisation —for them! When the
soldiers, the pilots and the convicts were on Strad-
broke from 1825 to nearly 1855, the natives num-
bered almost a few hundred. Then they were happy
and contented, and were a good living community.
Religious teachings of all kinds were tried amongst
them. This, too, was a failure. Yet, and I do ask
you to believe me—l know it well—there were not a
few of them, had not their colour been what it was,
who would have been a credit and an example to some
THE ISLAND ITSELF


(Photo, by V. Ca mpb ell)
First Truck to Cross to Ocean Beach


of the highly cultured individuals who regarded them
as niggers. Shades of Ahraham Lincoln. Am I not
forgetting the heading of this chapter: “The Island
Itself,” and apparently running away from it alto-
gether? So here we are, and I commence:
Brihie Island is about twenty miles long, with
varying widths from one to five miles. Moreton is
twenty-four, and Stradbroke thirty-eight.
Starting from the lower southern end of the
island at the entrance into Pumice Stone passage, and
passing the black beacon on the port hand, the first
beginning of the little township adjoining the Tug
Company’s wharf is noticed. That part where dwell-
ing houses have been erected is known as the “Town
of Bongaree.” Some little distance further along
some twenty years or so ago a fish curing and tinning
establishment had been erected by Mrs. Sarah Balls,
a Mr. Crouch being, if I remember aright, its first
manager. Later a Mr. Harry Wright from Brisbane
occupied the same position. A very considerable
amount of money was invested in this venture, and
every effort made to cause it to be a dividend paying
concern. It has been closed down now for many
years, and machinery removed. The immediate
holders of land a little way to the north of Bongaree
were A. T. Hall and A. H. Bestman, 321 acres; no
distance further along James Clark, 132 acres; with
Tripcony next with 210 acres.
Over Cobbler’s Peg Creek Harold Wright and
Harry Wright held respectively 230 and 227 acres
of Bribie Island land. Then came land marked on
the map as “Bribie,” with ten sections of surveyed
land, one to ten in proportions, totalling some seventy
to eighty small areas. This land was surveyed in
1886. The sale results were poor.
THE ISLAND ITSELF


White Patch —Tarrangiri—is some two miles,
perhaps a little further* more from the Tug Com-
pany’s jetty. In this vicinity various foreshores, and
oyster banks were at one time held by William Moore,
ex-M.L.A., and Joe Gallagher. The former died a few
years ago, Mr. Gallagher but recently. Comes, now,
the Lower Light House. There are two structures of
this nature on the island used as leads for deep sea
vessels seeking the North West Channel into More-
ton lights. They were built in 1896, one being called
the front light, the other the back light. These houses
contain fixed white lights, the nearest giving a front
of 12 nautical miles, the back one fifteen. The
structures are built and known as skeleton towers. The
outer or ocean light has a height of 62 feet, as a build-
ing, from base to vane, with 56 feet height of light
above high water, whilst the inner or back light is 98
feet in height from base to vane, and is 95 feet
above high water mark.
On Bribie Island, opposite Bell’s Creek on the
mainland, a little above, where it begins to narrow,
Mr. Thomas Maloney, some twenty years ago had a
fish canning factory. On operations being commenced
there, so he informs me (Mr. Maloney is my neigh-
bour at New Farm) the Commonwealth Government
gave him half a penny per lb. for all fish cured and
tinned. He carried on this business for nearly four
years, the principal fish so tinned being mullet, with
occasional supplies of whiting. Tins contained one
and a quarter pounds of fish, and a fair sale had been
reached when he closed down. Tailer, also found
their way into the tins, as their seasonal visits came
around. There was, however, not a fortune to be
made at this business, so he closed down, and buying
a ketch went north to Mackay.
THE ISLAND ITSELF


There are two small islands in the passage op-
posite Bell’s Creek. Here Mr. Maloney and Sam
Leach, Junior owned oyster banks. Leach also held
banks over near the mainland.
From here onward Bribie narrows until we
reach Galoundra. The passage way running out to
sea between this place and Bribie is also very narrow.
I once had a very nasty experience on this bar that I
am not likely to forget in a hurry. We were out-
side after snapper in an eighteen-footer named Lottie,
Bill Tutty, of the Mavis , in charge of the tiller. Com-
ing in to the bar with a fair catch, the second roller
caught us —and over we went. Luckily the wind was
due east, and as the craft only swamped, did not
sink, these self same rollers brought us towards the
shore. Whilst clinging to the water logged boat we
undid the throat and peak halyards and making them
as one rope, when near enough to the land, I swam
ashore with an end tied about my waist. Luckily the
boat and crew were soon in safety. But sharks! It
was a nasty experience.
Taking the foreshore on the inside from Bon-
garee to Caloundra the island is not a very inviting
one. Governmental charts show mangrove shores,
with unwelcome mud, mangrove islands and mangrove
swamps. Taken as a whole the island will never be
of any value commercially, whilst agriculture or
grazing is completely out of the question. These re-
marks apply to Moreton, and partially so to Strad-
broke.
Opposite Glass Mountain Creek on the mainland
is “R. 232
Reserve for Camping.
For the use of Licensees of Oyster boats.”
I do not think much advantage was ever taken
of this. Oystering nowadays has gone off very much.
THE ISLAND ITSELF


The days of dredging as of old times, too, has gone.
The golden lipped beauties of the lagoon on Moreton,
near “Clohertys” . . . Alas! Where are they?
Having written briefly of the starboard inside of
the island of Bribie, let us return to Toorbul Point,
on the mainland and from there trace our way up
past Landsborough holding, a little to the south of
Caloundra. The map which I must needs consult is
marked, “Parish of Toorbul,” commencing and run-
ning northward at the Caboolture River. The ex-
treme southern point on this mainland, a little further
up from opposite Bongaree, is known as Toorbul
Point, and in one ownership alone contains no less
than 1,280 acres. This property, so I am informed
was the first surveyed portion of the nearby land not
very long after Separation in 1859, and still bears
the chart ownership of the first purchaser, Mr. D. D.
Hamilton. This man appears to have been the first
occupier. Many years went by until ray very old
friend, George Markwell, purchased it. Mr. James
Clark, of New Farm then became the owner. It still
remains in the James Clark estate.
Toorbul Point land history is as follows: The
1,280 acres of land was purchased by Douglas Doug-
las Hamilton for £370, on the 31st May, 1872. It
was sold by the mortgagees to George Edmonstone
Markwell on the 26th September, 1889. It again
changed hands on the 11th January, 1900, when the
mortgagees sold the property to Mr, James Clark.
Almost all the land from here going further to
the north has been taken up, and used for many
purposes. Beekeeping, grazing, and agriculture
chiefly. Between Toorbul Point and Ninghi (spelt
also Ningi) on the said chart can be seen the well-
known names of pioneers of over fifty years ago.
Let me name some.
THE ISLAND ITSELF


First there is Thomas Hussey, whose father burnt
oyster shells at Toorbul long syne; Godwin, Bestman
the bee king; in fact, the names of Bestman and
Hussey are printed all over the map at the Toorbul
end right up to Ningi. G, E. Markwell is then down
for 640 acres on Ningi, so are several names of
Bentley under more than one different initial. The
total holding of land under all these various names
must amount to hundreds of acres, nay thousands. A
fair amount of land was taken up between Ningi
Creek and Elimbah Creek, Carnegie and Freeman be-
ing the more prominent. In the passage, sand and
mud banks are very numerous, as also are the man-
grove foreshores and islands. In writing of the main-
land, I am so constrained, as Pumice Stone passage,
dividing it from Bribie, brings it under the require-
ments of description as regards the island opposite.
Besides, Bribie was never in any way properly in-
habited until the Brisbane Tug Company commenced
running steamers there, and the land sales at Bon-
garee were made. The opposite mainland had as
tillers of the soil, if I may so designate the raisers of
herds of cattle, and even horses, pioneers who, in a
very large way, were associated with Bribie, when
the country around was recognised or spoken of.
We slip past the foreshores still northward, in
the distance seeing the opening of Elimbah Creek
until we come to what is marked on the map as the
Town of Toorbul, marked with the names of Stephen-
son, Matthews, and Furlong as owners of land. Then
Glass Mountain Creek comes to our view with Donny-
brook close at hand. Donnybrook was, in the year
of which I write the camp of the Moreton Bay Oyster
Company.
We are still in the Pumice Stone Channel, and
next see Cowie Bank, the old-time residence of the
THE ISLAND ITSELF


Tripcony family. I knew Cowie Bank well. When I
wrote “snappering” in 1905, I gave full particulars
regarding this place, and the grand old man, Thomas
Tripcony, the soldier man who fought with Chinese
Gordon, and I also wrote of his three sons. His good
wife was one of the most stately women it has ever
been my good fortune to meet. This family had a
great amount of acreage hereabouts, something like
3,000 acres. In the passage, close by, there is an
island of 140 acres bearing their name. At the old
gentleman’s death the property was divided amongst
his three sons, Andrew, Con. and Tom, at least so I
was informed. Two of these sons are still alive, Con.
having passed away in 1936.
We are now approaching the Parish of Beerwah,
pass by Long Island, Mangroves thereon, until we
reach Coochin Creek.
This place is historic, and I must tell of its
old time patronage as best I can, for here I see the
name of J. D. Campbell, the owner of 898 acres of
land. This J. D. was the son of James Campbell the
pioner father of James Campbell and Sons, which
firm still carries on business in Creek Street, Bris-
bane. This James was another grand old man, for
knowing him so well as I did no better words can
be used by me. He came to Brisbane on the 28th
May, 1853.
In the early eighties this firm built a sawmill at
Coochin Crek, on a site known as Campbell Ville.
Pine, cedar, beech, in fact all scrub timbers were
obtained from the Blackall Ranges. Hardwood was
obtained from the forest country at the foot of the
range even as far north as Eudlo. The sawn timber
was placed on pontoons at the mill, and taken to
what was called the loading ground'—down the pas-
sage—and from there placed on steamers and
THE ISLAND ITSELF


(Pho to, by I.H. Preston).
Coochiw Creek Saw Mill 1882.


freighted to Brisbane. Log hardwood was obtained
from Creeks on Bribie, and on the foreshores, in-
cluding Ningi, Elimbah and Glass Mountain, and
about Coochin. In the year 1885 the barque
Deodarus loaded 50,000 feet of cedar logs from the
Blackall Ranges, at Bribie passage, consigned to
Harrold Brothers, Adelaide. When the North Coast
railway was completed, the sawmills were removed to
their present site, namely, the Albion. Year 1890.
Leaving historic Coochin we go on our journey
to Caloundra passage, at the north end of Bribie, R.
Westaway, with his 920 acres, is perhaps, with Lands-
borough, the oldest pioneer land owner at this end
of Bribie waters. The island has here began to nar-
row ere its final point is reached. Bell Creek, of
which I have spoken, adjoins the property of the late
William Landshorough, the Explorer. When he passed
away, Mr. W. L. G. Drew and H. W. Radford became
his executors, and map No. 8 north, if consulted, will
show that 2,451 acres stand to their credit. A small
creek, called Landshorough Creek, is about a mile
further onwards. Then we reach the end of Flinders’
supposed Pumice Stone River, and note the strong
current of waters passing out into the Pacific, giving
its “sum of more to that which had too much.” Here
mainland and Bribie Island part company.
I remain, however, with the name of Lands-
borough trickling adown by pen handle, and of him
I give a little further account.
William Landshorough was the third son of the
Reverend David Landshorough, a Presbyterian Min-
ister, and naturalist of much fame. He was bom at
Stephenstone Manse, Saltcoats, Scotland on February
the 21st, 1825. He died on the 16th March, 1886,
aged 61, at Caloundra, and at that place his remains
THE ISLAND ITSELF


were first interred. Later they were removed to the
Toowong Cemetery.
A fitting monument, the cost of which was borne
by a few friends and admirers, was placed over his
grave at this God’s acre, and a brief description of
his life’s work engraven thereon.
At thirty years of age he had been a small pas-
toralist in the New England district, and came to
Queensland about 1855 to better himself, taking up
an area of ground on the Kolan River, west of Bun-
daberg. In 1856 he discovered and named Mount
Nebo, also Fort Cooper. In 1860 he traced the head
of the Thomson River, and in the following year he
made his explorations to the sources of the Gregory
and Herbert streams. In 1861 he was one —and the
leader—of four distinct parties to go in search of
the missing explorers, Burke and Wills, starting from
Brisbane for the Gulf. It was Howitt, making from
Melbourne, who succeeded in ascertaining the melan-
choly fate of the men so many were in search of. It
is not here necessary for me to dwell upon the explor-
ing expeditions of Landsborough, but should any one
desire to know of this fine and stalwart gentleman,
an article written by me, can be found, with many
incidents and particulars in the records of The His-
torical Society of Queensland, volume two, pages 296
to 303,
In recognition of Landsborough’s services to
Australia, a collection of plate, valued at £SOO, was
presented to him in Victoria by Governor Sir George
Bowen—at one time Governor of Queensland (1859 —
1868). He was entertained at a public dinner given
in his honour in Sydney, and a gold watch was pre-
sented to him by The Royal Geographical Society,
for finding a route, a practicable one, from North to
South Australia. The Queensland Government voted
THE ISLAND ITSELF


him £2,000, and gave him a seat in the Legislative
Council,
Again I turn to sheet 8, North of Bribie. There
can he seen an area of ground, to the north of Bell
Creek, No. 27, and not so very far distant from
Caloundra Heads, containing 2,451 acres, under the
names of his executors already mentioned. This area
was ex esplanade, roads and reserves. This land
was the gift of the Queensland Government, at least I
have been so informed. He had previously been
made Inspector of Stock in the East Moreton dis-
trict, and at one time had lived between Redcliff and
Scarborough, the area being known as the Lands-
borough Estate. Resigning from his position as In-
spector he took up this property in the Bribie Pas-
sage, built thereon a comfortable dwelling, amongst
pleasant surroundings, stocking it with cattle, horses,
sheep and angora goats. And it was here he fell into
his last sound sleep in March, 1886.
This little booklet would have been incomplete
without this insertion, brief as it may be; incomplete
without reference to an explorer of the type of Wil-
liam Landsborough, one of Queensland’s own. Aus-
tralians are too apt to forget the lives and doings of
our early pioneers who were the makers of history.
How often has Sir Leslie Wilson deplored the fact
that not enough has been written of Queensland’s
earliest history, of the men who blazed and marked
the hinterland; of the courageous womenfolk who
stood by all the dangers and difficulties of distant
faraway places; where neighbours were, maybe a
hundred miles apart; of the Christmas goods ordered
when the year itself was but young, ordered long
before the ever memorable day was due; how the
womenfolk eagerly looked forward to a visit to the
metropolis, when journeying was made by buggy.
THE ISLAND ITSELF


spring cart or bullock dray? On one occasion when
I was present at a social gathering, presided over by
Sir Leslie, the question of Pioneers—the capital is
mine—came up. His Excellency with that pleasant
smile of his, remarked at the end of his speech:
“I take off my hat to the Pioneers.”
And, may I say it: “So do I.”
Having written thus far in memorative mood, is
it not time I proceeded to the real and historic tell-
ing of Bribie Island? Seeking to be correct in what
I should pen I sought the aid of the Survey Depart-
ment, and was more than pleased in meeting Mr. W.
Gran, whose name I think has already been mentioned,
finding him, like myself, eager for reliable historic
information. He willingly obliged. So what I now
tell can be regarded in the light and size of full
truth.
The area of Bribie Island is about 37,760 acres:
it is not particularly arable, but with spots here and
there worth observing with camera eyes. The lagoons
are interesting and, alone in their silent composure —
shall I say —are indicative of the beauties of nature
when she desires them not to be intruded upon, save
by the wild duck and kindred bird companions. I
have written in other pages than these those pleasant
lines of Sydney Smith. I give them again:
“It is good for any man to be alone with nature
and himself, or with a friend who knows when silence
is more sociable than talk ... It is well to be in
places where man is little and God is great.” And
surely on Bribie Island there are many nooks and
corners amid the little hills and pine trees, sufficient
to make one consider the real beauty and truth of
these very lines.
THE ISLAND ITSELF


The width of the island at Bongaree near the
Tug Company’s jetty is about two or three chains over
three miles. The reader with a plan before him can
see this much for himself. The plan of 1912 was
made by Surveyor J, E. G. Stevenson, that plan
showing the proposed—long since completed —tram
line across the island to the ocean beach. Towards
the north the island is inclined to widen from the
lagoon, “Welsby” lagoon, named after myself by Mr.
Main—the lagoon is on the Pacific side —to the
Oyster Company Reserve opposite Glass Mountain
Creek on the mainland the distance across is about
five miles. The length is in the vicinity of twenty
miles. The first survey of the town of Bribie was
made in June, 1886, the first land sale taking place
on the 3rd May, 1887.
The first sections of the town of Bongaree were
surveyed in the year 1912.
Having given these interesting, I trust, particu-
lars, let us paddle across the divide to the mainland
and make mention once more of Toorbul Point. The
large area of land right on the hilltop, with a per-
fect and full view of Moreton Bay bears a somewhat
historic imprint. Toorbul Point is in the Parish of
Toorbul, the whole area of 1,280 acres of land—the
portion known and charted as No. 2 was surveyed by
Surveyor William Fryar in 1868, a Mr. D. D. Ham-
ilton —I think he held the title of captain, whether of
sea or land I know not—applying for this section in
1872, in May, the lease being granted to him on the
31st July of the same year, ’72.
What happened during the next five years I can
find no trace. It is on record that a deed was issued
to Hamilton in December, 1877. I can only pre-
sume the lapse of time of lease and deed had some
THE ISLAND ITSELF


connection with Hamilton’s right out purchase, for
the 1,280 acres have been freehold for many years,
and direct purchases were made by the various owners
from time to time.
I shall conclude this chapter with one more refer-
ence to Mr. Main. He has lived at Ocean Beach since
1927, and knows the Woorim Parish well. He speaks
with pleasure of the whiting fishing down as far as the
(misnamed) Skirmish Point, saying this class of fish
bite well during their summer visitation. On Ocean
Beach in 1927 the Government of Queensland built
some ten small cottages on the Main Beach, and five
at the back of the kiosk. In one of the Ocean Beach
houses Mr. Main resides. He secured some time ago
the freehold of No. 1 section 6, area 31.7 perches, and
in December, 1931 had a small cottage erected
thereon.
The cottage is named “Colfin,” and is usually
occupied by visitors during holiday time. He knows
where the Boronia flower grows, and speaks of them
being plentiful in the spring season.
I have visited this outside ocean retreat. It is
most attractive. The full Pacific is right in front,
Moreton Island can be seen in the south-east, and
in my opinion Ocean Beach should be a flourishing
little township.
Another historic—to me —matter came answered
at a certain interview with a friend. I had always
wondered why, so far away as Currigee, on Strad-
broke, a little island there received its name of Little
Bribie, my mind being cleared and set at rest by the
following;
Before the Government brought into force a
license fee on oyster banks and beds, Brisbane and
the South received its supplies from Toorbul and
THE ISLAND ITSELF


Pumice Stone passage. A bed was accidentally
found in this passage, which turned out to be very
lucrative for the finder. The oyster business was
then brisk, and Currigee was looked upon as a likely
place to obtain the article. Dredging was found near
the small islands in that vicinity, and as the shell
was exactly the same in almost every respect as that
away at the northern Bribie, one island in these south-
ern parts was named “Little Bribie,” which name it
bears to this day. It is said that in one day alone,
as many as 40 sacks were dredged. No wonder it
paid.
TELEPHONE COMMUNICATION
Prior to 1922 there were difficulties which could
not be overcome, the principal reason was that the
Postal Department would not erect the line at Bribie
unless the residents paid £360, which was quite im-
possible. The directors of the Brisbane Tug and
Steamship Coy. Ltd., decided on trying another way,
and offered the following inducement to the telephone
people: The Tug Company to supply all the poles
placed on the line; provide pontoon and launch and
men to assist in laying the cable across the opening—
take to Bribie, cable, wire, all material plant and men
by the s.s. Koopa , free of all and any charge, and
when the work was completed bring back the labour
and plant also free. The offer to remain open for
two weeks only. The Department accepted these con-
ditions promptly. Early in September, 1922 the
construction of the line was commenced, and before
the end of September of the same year was com-
pleted.
The Tug Company were greatly indebted to the
selectors along the line, who unhesitatingly supplied
poles; to the late Mr. Jas. Clark for the use of his
launch and pontoon; also to Mr. Joe Campbell and his
THE ISLAND ITSELF


sons for their generous and valuable help. Had it
not been for the kindness of these good people, the
construction of the line would have been delayed for
years.
It was suggested that this line follow the Cabool-
ture River, and thence along Deception Bay to Toor-
bul Point . . . the reason being that there were fewer
large trees, therefore less risk of breaks or interrup-
tions. This mode of track was adopted and carried
out by the Department, and has been a great success.
THE ISLAND ITSELF


CHAPTER VII
THE TOWN OF WOORIM
For most of this chapter I am indebted to Mr.
Main.
When the Brisbane Tug Company determined to
obtain a safe and permanent place in Moreton Bay
for pleasure excursions, Bribie Island and passage
was decided upon. By a strange coincidence I hap-
pened to land with the directors on the very spot
almost where now the jetty ends. I think that Mr. A.
B. Webster, of Webster and Company, was then chair-
man. Well, on one occasion he made up a private
snapper trip on the Beaver. The party was a small
one, and yours truly was of the number. We first
fished at Spitfire buoy, had a good haul, then ran
early in the afternoon into Bribie Passage, and the
directors went on shore to select a spot whereat they
would build a jetty, and if possible form a township.
The place chosen is now known as Bongaree. Not
long afterwards they secured leases of land—Grown
—at this Bongaree spot, and a lease for a road across
to the Ocean Beach, to what is now the town of
Woorim.
It was about a year after the road was opened
that the company built a kiosk, and that was the real
beginning of the township. North from the road
the crown land facing the sea was subdivided into 25
perch allotments in four sections, Nos. 1,2, 6 and 7.


Behind the kiosk were sections Nos. 3,4, and 5. Each
section consisted of ten frontage blocks, and ten back
blocks. The map shows avenues dividing the sec-
tions, and, at the back, North Street connects with
the road. On boat days the company arranged a
motor car service to the ocean beach, and the public
can use the road on foot, but it is a private property,
and is not available for trading purposes.
The first sale of crown land was about 1924. It
proved a great success, and some of the portions ad-
joining the car road brought up to and over £SOO.
The conditions of sale were: The lease will be a lease
in perpetuity. The annual rent will be an amount
equal to 3 per cent, on the capital value bid at auction,
subject to appraisement every fifteen years. Within
two years purchasers had to make improvements to
the satisfaction of the Minister of a value of not
less than twenty-five pounds. The first year’s rent,
with survey fee and stamp duty must be paid at the
time of the sale.
It is generally understood that the purchasers
of the higher priced sections bought with a view of
building a residential hotel, which, no doubt, would
have been the making of Bribie Ocean beach. It
was then discovered that Bribie Island was attached
to the Shire of Gaboolture, and that the “no new
license clause” in force in Gaboolture Shire applied
to the Bribie Island. The island is still without hotel
accommodation.
The next step was the removal of fifteen cot-
tages from Beerburrum soldiers’ settlement to Bribie
Ocean Beach. The sale took place at the Lands Office,
Brisbane, on Friday, the 22nd April, 1927. The first
lot on the list was No, 1 allot. 4, section 6, 25.6
perches, upset price £IOO, house improvements £250.
It was sold at upset price, and . . . that finished the
THE TOWN OF WOO RIM


sale. All the allotment values were high, from £3O
to £l5O. There were no roads to the cottages, which
were just built in small clearings and bush fires, at
intervals ran right over the sections. The houses were
on high stumps, and the few inhabitants then there
prevented damage to the houses. The shire, as the rate
revenue was paltry, made no roads, and North Street
is still a street of the future. Next the Department
arranged with Mr. Shirley to clear a road along what
is named on the map, the Esplanade. In return for
his work he was to get a few cottages. Thus the
only road was obtained, but the houses did not sell
and many allotments were surrendered simply by not
paying rent. Naturally the land then reverted to the
crown.
About seven of the original purchasers at the
high rate, built cottages. It is said that the sur-
veyor of the blocks valued the allotments at from
£ls to £25, and when such high values were re-
ceived at the first sale, he refused to alter his valua-
tion. On the Moore Government coming into power
the holders of land at Ocean Beach asked for a fresh
valuation of their allotments. The matter was sub-
mitted to the Lands Court, and the holders were asked
to put in their own valuations, which varied from
£27 to £4O per allotment. Those values were ac-
cepted. The general valuation of the various open
allotments was made at £3O for frontage blocks, and
£2O for those at the back. At a subsequent sale Mr.
Main secured allotment No. 1, section 6, at the upset
price of £30 —old valuation, £l5O. The price of
the houses was reduced to £175, and the land values
were on the reduced scale. All the houses have been
sold, and in this year of 1937 there are upwards of
40 houses paying rates, all situated within half a
mile of the Kiosk.
THE TOWN OF WOO RIM


The Moore Government gave the option of buy-
ing the freehold, and practically every holder changed
from lease to freehold. Under the government of to-
day—l937—this option was withdrawn and settle-
ment has very evidently stopped.
In the general number on Ocean Beach very
few houses are occupied permanently. That number
is about five. The balance of non-residential are
houses for letting to visitors. There are some half-
dozen of houses for sale on the frontage areas, and
many more of the back blocks have notices of a like
nature.
So apparently household properties are not a
paying proposition on Ocean Beach. It is a great
pity, for as quiet as the place may be there are
pleasant surroundings, and the Pacific Ocean, with all
its variable moods is worth admiring, morning, noon
—and specially night, when the moon is at its full.
It may be interesting to some readers to know
that the Government of 1922 on the Ist August of
that year opened a banana nursery on Bribie on the
right hand of the road running out to Woorim, On
the 31st May, 1929, the Government of the day de-
cided that the nursery had served its purpose and
closed it down. I make no comment. It is not
needed.
Bongaree was declared a township on the 23rd
December, 1912.
THE TOWN OF WOORIM


(Photo, by W. Main)
Mermaid Lagoon.


CHAPTER VIII
GENERAL—PART ONE
Bribie has a value, like all others in the bay,
that is bound to come, and in time to come also, to
be well and truly appreciated. The western islands of
Scotland are numerous, some five hundred of them
so I understand. In many cases they are almost
isolated. Their charm and beauty is always acknow-
ledged by visitors even outside Great Britain. The
monetary value of these places has increased much
during the past few years, and for many reasons.
It will be said, look at Britain’s population and com-
pare with ours. Now is there anything better than
outdoor life, with the quiet, keen work of nature,
nature with her water falls, her flower life and the
primitive growth of all around. Interest in Moreton
Bay islands will some day—soon let us hope—
quicken, and something for our good will eventuate.
Why St. Helena has remained idle so long since its
freedom from prison life has puzzled me. It will
come to its own as a pleasure resort . . . maybe not
in my time . . . but, it will come. And Bribie will
do the same. Manly, that open ocean facing resort
near Sydney remained almost silent and dormant
for years, and not so very far back from 1937. A
movement took place, attractions were made and
given, and I know for a positive fact that some
buyers of idle and vacant land there but twenty
years gone by have made small fortunes.


Give inducement and the crowd will follow.
Australians are as a rule lovers of the open spaces.
They are advocates of sport, pastime, and Dolce far
niente, sweet-doing-nothing: sweet idleness. May I
ask how long was the Barrier Reef of Queensland
almost unknown? There are no better coral islands
and beauties in the whole world than are to be found
on the eastern coast of Queensland. Now it is visited
by the southerners during winter months in numbers,
and if our Government continue with their good work,
as I know they will, its value of attraction will greatly
increase. Time alone is the essence of this visiting
contract, and I am well aware of what will be the
result.
Bribie Island so far is unspoilt. Please heaven
it will always remain so. It has full twenty miles
of ocean frontage; its beach is a safe one; the fish-
ing is plentiful and good, and, 10, it is but little over
three hours steam from Brisbane. The island is
crown land, and cannot be taken up, and held for sale.
On a transfer only can the improvement be sold.
There are no land jobbers there, or commission agents
to make profit out of sale —and of re-sale, and it does
not matter to the officials of the Lands Office whether
one takes an allotment or leaves it.
There are many houses and homes on Bribie that
receive weekly and holiday visitations. For the latter
the business man, tired of figures, cost, and taxation,
can rest in quietness, and in peace, with the sound of
the rolling in of the sea waters for his musings of
the afternoon, and his dreams of evening. It is an
island of rest for those who are desirous of rest. And
the picture shows are only those of nature.
The rent of an ocean beach front allotment pay-
able to the Crown is one pound per year; a back one
only requiring twelve shillings to be found. The shire
GENERAL—PART ONE


rates for each of these is fifteen shillings, general
cleaning rate by motor service, thirty shillings; loan
rate is two shillings and sixpence—in all two pounds
seven shillings and sixpence per year. And for this
small annual sum you can take up an area, and
build according to your pocket.
During winter time the main beach is well pro-
tected from the western wind. The climate and sea
breezes are all that a sybarite could wish for. In
the summer season a steamer runs to Bribie on Tues-
day, Thursday, Saturday—in the afternoon—and on
Sunday. Winter time does not see its visitation on
Tuesdays.
I now go back to many years ago, to the days
when steamer communication was made with Woody
Point; go right along the trail of history until we
find Bribie land offered by certain conditions of sale
to the public, and when the Brisbane Tug Company
made means of transport to that place.
Everything does and must have a beginning. That
of any importance, came to Bribie in 1883, when
the little Garnet plyed for passengers to what is oft-
times termed Humpy Bong. This small unobtrusive
craft was in reality the Phoenix of the Brisbane Tug
Company. Yes, a very small steamer was the Garnet,
yet when she commenced her life in the year men-
tioned Woody Point residents were very proud of her.
She suited them well. She was in charge of a Cap-
tain Bengston, with whom I was well intimate. A fine
type of skipper he was. On New Year’s Day there
was always a pleasant gathering on the boat; his
health was most cordially proposed and drank; he
was amongst true friends, and these assemblages
were sincere. A glass or two of beverage, one or
more short speeches, and then a monetary gift was
made him. Then would the captain take his pipe
GENERAL—PART ONE


from his mouth —a most inveterate smoker was he —
and with honest tears in his eyes, he replied in a
little broken English and the ceremony ended. He was
master of the Garnet from 1883 to the year 1900,
that being the period when the Emerald started run-
ning. This much-admired—at the time —Garnet was
but 50 tons, and very small, one might consider, those
days for the purpose of the bay trips she was called
upon to make, but she served her passengers with
content. For seventeen years did Bengston stand at
the wheel, relinquishing her to take command of the
Emerald. This vessel’s tonnage was 183, and a com-
fortable steamer she proved herself. She ran the
Woody Point and Redcliff trips until 1912. During
her early career Captain Bengston obeyed the Great
Call, and passed away, a Captain Farmer filling the
vacancy. Farmer retired in 1909, and then Captain
J. S. Johnston was appointed to the position, holding
the same until 1911. The Koopa next appears on the
scene, this self same J. S. Johnston commanding. This
steamer proved a great boon to the travelling public.
She was vastly superior to the two previous crafts,
and she extended the mileage trips by going over to
Bribie. Tonnage 416. Her initial trip was on the
26th December, 1911, and still she proudly runs
under the able command of Captain Johnston.
More passenger accommodation being required the
Doomba was purchased by the Tug Company, and
commenced running, in conjunction with the Koopa
on the last week in November, 1923. Her tonnage
was 750. Captain Johnston was placed in the wheel
room, and Captain J. S. Gibson ran the Koopa.
All went well for a time, but when business was
not sufficient to keep both boats in service, the Doomba
was laid on one side for a time, and skipper John-
ston went back to his first love —the Koopa.
GENERAL—PART ONE


It says a lot for the capabilities, as well as for
the personalities of these mariners when we consider
how long they were in command of the vessels run-
ning to Woody Point, Redcliff, and Bribie. Captain
Bengston crossed the bay waters in the Garnet and
Emerald until early in this century, somewhere about
1907 or so, when at his demise Captain Farmer op-
erated. Then Captain Johnston holds command
1909 —1911, and then from the 26th December, 1911
we find him on deck of the Koopa, and is still there
as I write these lines in 1937. And Gibson was on
the Koopa for two years or more.
On perusing these records of masters, but more
especially that of the Koopa, I could scarce believe
mine eyes when I read, Koopa, 1911. For twenty-six
years Captain Johnston has virtually been in com-
mand, always at his post. There you will still find
him if you board the vessel at Circular Quay, Petries
Bight. Long may he still be spared is the wish of his
numerous friends. I have been on board the Koopa
with him when beastly south-easters have ripped the
bay. Have been with him when the waters have
rolled and broken heavily on Redcliff beach; when
the same waters and spray have deluged onlookers on
the jetty, and yet with all the angry defiance of these
south-easters —how I as a bay man know, and love
them —the cool-headed skipper has conquered and
berthed his charge in safety.
This chapter is headed “General” is it not?
For a long time I was perplexed and dubious as to
the manner in which it should be titled. How would
“Jumble” or “Hotch Potch” have looked and been
regarded? It is very hard to gather historical facts
and information and put it all in proper chronological
order, especially when the hypercritical gent, wants
to be satisfied. As I have elsewhere stated I am not
GEN ERAL P ART ONE


an author in its true representation and meaning, and
am in no way worried how any chapter should be
headed or named. In what this chapter yclept
“General” contains there may be repetitive telling.
The same reading in different and more varied man-
ner may perhaps be seen on earlier pages. Surely
you do not want me to go back and dovetail here
and there part of what I am now penning, more es-
pecially when my manuscript has been scanned by
critical eyes. I read a lot. It is one of my most
beloved pastimes. One thing that does really get on
my nerves is to find an asterisk or other symbol, or a
beastly number marked in any part of the page of a
book I am deeply interested in. I know it refers to
something at the foot of the page, whereon I must
cast my eye, and when I have done so, and am maybe
none the wiser, trace upwards to the very line that
has caused this distraction and cannot find whereat I
had ceased proper reading, I really feel annoyed.
Would it not have been just as well for the author of
the book I was reading to have continued right on
without numbering or marking or “see note at bot-
tom of page?” I do really think it would have been.
So, if there is anything here or further on as
you read, anything that has already been touched
upon or referred to—do—please keep your remarks
in as kindly a manner as you can, and —well —just
read on. All of that which I am herein telling and
recording for the sake of history is not from my own
knowledge. Surely you must agree with that. I have
had to make enquiries, hunt up here and there; seek
information from those who may have had contempo-
raneous knowledge with mine, and better means of
knowing and gathering it. If they told me what I
already knew, and had already noted in previous
pages—now, what could I say? Willingly have I
GEN ERAL P ART ONE


received what they have imparted to me; have
thanked them for their kindness; and have accepted
all in good faith.
Shakespeare in his “King John” mentions
something as being “as tedious as a twice told tale.”
Then if I am repeating myself, little or other-
wise, please let me ask that you read it again without
comment, good or bad. It may have one good effect
■ —that of strengthening your memory.
GEN ERAL P ART ONE


GENERAL-PART TWO
I had almost completed chapter eight, marked
“General,” and was under the impression I would
end with “Finis,” when, letting my intended purpose
to write up Bribie be known to Mr. Geo. P. Campbell,
of the firm of James Campbell and Sons, I decided
not to do so, but continue. Mr. Campbell most
kindly volunteered further information regarding the
island and its very early days. Therefore, I straight
way determined to make “General” Chapter 8 into two
parts, that which is now being read coming under the
title of “Part Two.” It traces the commercial history
back to its primitive days, and will add much value
of historic connection regarding it. First of all
reference will be made to the names of those steamers
plying to the island parts of the northern extremity of
Moreton Bay. I am sure some of my readers will
recollect the Mavis, Captain William Tutty in charge.
William and I were friends, and although he went
away to the North, and for many years we had not
seen each other, that friendship lasted until his death
in Townsville somewhere about 1934. With him I
once had a very nasty experience on the Caloundra
bar. A party had engaged the Mavis for an Easter
trip from Brisbane to Caloundra. I was in that party.
Tutty piloted the boat right from Skirmish Point to
Bulcock’s jetty, with heavy dark clouds obscuring the
moon, manipulating the narrow and shallow “W.s’
without mishap, and at break of day we had reached


our objective. If ever man knew the Pumice Stone
Passage, Tutty did. At Caloundra was moored an
eighteen-foot sailing craft, the property of some
campers there. Tutty obtained permission to use the
Lottie, for such was the boat’s name. She was decked
from a little aft of the mast right up to the stem
piece. Breakfast over Tutty asked for a crew to man
this Lottie, as he purposed going out over the bar to
the fishing grounds for snapper. There were four
volunteers, viz., G. P. Campbell, Phillips of the
Queen’s Hotel, a man called Jim, myself, and with
the skipper in charge we made a total of five. The
weather was fine, with little, if any, wind, and but
a small break of water on the bar. Soon we were
near Bray rock, and down went some of the lines.
But in passing over this bar, and meeting the last
outward breaker, the little craft falling heavily in the
trough of the sea, had unknown to us at the moment
split her garboard strake near the step of the mast.
I was on the jib sheet, and, whilst preparing my lines
as we neared the fishing ground, noticed water under-
neath the boards of the cockpit where I had not seen
it before.
I mentioned this to Tuttty, who replied, “it may
be rain water, or a bit of the sea that came in over
the stem. Bale her out and I will fix up your line.”
I put ray hand on a tin pannikin—no enamel in those
days—and proceeded to do as I was told. I could
make no apparent lessening of the water, and again
spoke to the captain informing him of this fact. He
was always a cool soul, this same gentleman, and as
he dropped his sinker overboard, made a quiet re-
mark, as follows; “Well, she did hit a bit hard after
that last roller, lift up the flooring boards inside and
have a look.” I did so, and then perceived water
coming in through a crack or split some two feet or so
GEN ERAL P ART TWO


aft of the mast step, the split apparently inclined to
open wider with the rolUof the boat. I ripped a small
piece of cloth from my jersey, and with my sheath
knife rammed it in with my hand. Caulking is never
effective from the inside, but what else could I do.
Certainly I could not go overboard to do the job.
Forcing the sheath knife with my closed hand, the
split widened and water squirted in from a foot length
as high as ray stooping body. I told Tutty. Then he
and I baled together. No use, no effect, the water
was gaining on us. The wind was beginning to come
in from the south-east, and our position was not too
pleasing.
“Set the mainsail, and then up with the anchor,”
came the command. Soon the peak and throat hal-
yards were belayed by the other three. Tutty and I
still baled. But 10, the anchor was foul and after
five minutes hauling we were compelled to cut the
rope, and let it go. The Lottie was headed southward
and towards the bar. The wind was increasing, and
with the flood tide the bar from the outside looked
very uninviting. We could see no opening for the
run in and over. For half an hour we skirted the
outer rollers. Nothing doing. So Tutty very calmly
said; “Well, boys, this is no good, I’m going to have
a shot in the middle of the opening and chance it.
Haul your mainsheet in taut.” We then headed for
where we thought the channel should be. Being on
the jib I determined to sit as close as possible to the
man at the tiller, so that in case of pooping, our com-
bined backs would stop a portion of the intake. Up
on the first roller we started, carried along with the
wave, and as it broke ahead of us down in the trough
we were placed. Here the sail flapped and my heart
was in my mouth so to speak, as I saw another roller
coming astern and at us. It caught us, and broke
GENERAL—PART TWO


amidship, and half swamped the Lottie. In this half
swamped condition Tutty still kept the craft’s head
for the shore. Luckily for us the tide was flood.
Another roller did us very little harm, but as the
tide carried us almost to the last inner one a sea
crashed on board and the gunwales were awash. The
Lottie had no ballast, and again it was lucky for us
she did not turn turtle. “Keep in hoard, boys,” cried
Tutty. Don’t lose your heads, the tide will set us
in,” as indeed it was doing. Obeying further orders
we undid all halyards, made one long line of the
peak, throat, and jib ropes, and as we neared the
shallows one of us swam to the land. There assist-
ance was awaiting us, and many hands hauled the
eighteen-footer ashore. The Caloundra passage from
shore to shore is a narrow one. But! Those sharks!
No more Caloundra bar for us was the verdict of us
all. We much preferred the one owned by Phillips
at the Queens.
This Mavis I have mentioned was 47 tons gross
measurement, and was the first steamer to run to
Bribie. She was built in 1883 by J. W. Sutton and
Coy., Kangaroo Point for James Campbell and Sons,
and was used to convey timber from the Coochin Saw-
mills to Brisbane, taking back general cargo and
supplies for residents in the Bribie district. Tutty
was famed for navigating the Bribie Passage, includ-
ing the “W.s” (this name being derived from the
twisting nature it had). It is no distance in length,
and does in all reality assume the letter “W” in ap-
pearance.
This Brisbane-Coochin service was maintained
for seven years, a weekly trip keeping the boat fairly
busy. Sometimes business required two journeys, and
Tutty was always in command. He, during these
seven years trading was never known to “stick” the
GENERAL—PART TWO


Mavis on any bank inside or outside the passage.
These were no lights or leads for him. He steered by
self known landmarks and his well-known local know-
ledge. He knew the southern end of the bay equally
as well as the north.
The little steamer Mavis made her first trip on
the 26th January, 1883, and with regularity and
punctuality, be the tide ebb or flow, continued her ser-
vice until the year 1890 when the Coochin sawmills
were closed.
A double-ended boat had been built at Coochin
Creek, and started running between Brisbane and
Caloundra in the early part of 1883. She, like the
Mavis, was a paddle wheel steamer. She had been
named the Bribie. This Brisbane —Caloundra running
was in no way remunerative, and doing but six months
work the service was discontinued. She was after-
wards used for towing pontoons laden with logs, or
sawn timber to the Coochin Creek or to the steamer
Mavis.
In the early eighties a very well-to-do chemist
named James C. Moffat, imported a fine steam launch
from England to run a service between Coochin Creek
and Caloundra, thereby relieving the Mavis of the
journeying to and fro. The venture was not a suc-
cess, and the bqat was sold to a Brisbane man, whose
name I cannot here call to memory.
This Moffat took up a large area of land at Cal-
oundra, including that prominent and well-known spot
termed Moffat’s Head. About 1887 he formed this
Caloundra land into a syndicate. After a small sale
the balance of allotments were raffled amongst the
members of the syndicate, areas going in proportion
to individual capital invested. Moffat’s high point
overlooking the ocean was the most desired one to
win, and naturally much speculation was ventured as
GENERAL—PART TWO


to whom the lucky marble would go. How do I know
all this, you may ask? Well, the writer was one of
that syndicate and has reason to remember. The draw-
ing took place in due course, and Moffat himself was
the winner. My own small area that became my lot
was held by me for many years. Subsequently it
went to assist the funds of a school to be opened at
Caloundra.
Moffat and his wife died many years ago, the
good wife passing away first. On the husband’s de-
mise probate duty was paid on a very large sum,
and to the credit of Moffat, be it known, the great
bulk of the money went to the Sick Children’s hospital.
Moffat owned a fine brick house in Wharf Street, not
so very far from Queen Street, Dalkeith was its
name, and here the couple resided for a long time.
There was no family.
Although I have dealt elsewhere with steamers
it was very interesting to learn from Mr. Campbell
that to the Greyhound goes the honour of opening up
the Bribie excursion service. She made trips to the
island on Sundays and holidays and was well pat-
ronised. She carried on this service from 1901
until 1912. During these visitations to the island
there was no jetty, and excursionists had to be ferried
to and fro in a large punt in charge of one, H. Best-
man.
I have written on other pages of the Koopa and
Doomba, so they need no further reference from me
now. The year 1912 saw the present jetty at Bribie
completed by the Brisbane Tug and Steamship Com-
pany.
This Tug Company has maintained a continuous
service from the city to Bribie since the year 1912,
and has, most undoubtedly been responsible for the
building of the two townships “Bongaree and
GENERAL PART TWO


“Woorim.” This latter is situate on the Pacific Ocean
side of the island. The road between these two
places named was built by the same company in 1924,
at a very considerable expense. All the material
(metal, etc.) used in the construction was brought
from Brisbane by small lighters the s.s. Porpoise,
however, transporting the most of it. On the com-
pletion of the road a motor bus service to the main
beach was at once organised, and it is still operating
successfully.
The original directors of the Tug Company were:
A. B. Webster, J. D. Campbell and F. D. Phillips.
These gentlemen are all departed hence, their posi-
tions now being occupied by Messrs. G. P. Campbell,
V. F. J. Campbell and F. H. Webster. At the
moment of this writing the last three are still on the
board of directorate.
The respect which I have always evinced towards
the pioneers of our State is well known, I think,
amongst my friends. Of early squatters, as far back
as 1842, and of explorers from the 1845 time of
Ludwig Leichhardt, have I written much, and also
have lectured about them. (Vide Historical Society’s
Journals), and although the first settlers of Bribie,
and its vicinities, do not take me back so far as the
years I have noted, yet as settlers and pioneers I deem
it my bounden duty to chronicle them in this small
historical venture of mine—all the individuals whom
I name below, maybe, nay are not, still in the land of
the living. Perhaps to those relatives who have sur-
vived them it will be pleasing, let me hope, to see
herein their names mentioned:
1. Hamilton, Captain D. D. (Military), 1881,
Toorbul Point.
2. Hussey, T., Parish of Toorbul.
3. Mills, H., Parish of Toorbul.
GENERAL—PART TWO


4. Freeman, S. H., 1877, Parish of Toorbul.
5. Carnegie, J., 1880, Parish of Toorbul.
6. Bishop, J. and W,, Ninghi Creek.
7. Freeman, W., Freeman’s Crossing.
8. Perry, F., 1885, Toorbul.
9. Matthews, G. W., Parish of Toorbul.
10. Hamilton, E. H. D., 1885, Parish of Toorbul.
11. Furlong, T., 1884, Parish of Toorbul.
12. Tripcony, T. M., 1877, Parish of Beerwah.
13. Westaway, W., 1879, Parish of Bribie.
14. Roberts, H., 1885, Hussy’s and Coochin Creek.
15. Lander, J., 1885.
16. Campbell, J. D., 1883, Coochin Creek.
17. Westaway, R., Westaway’s Knob and Caloundra
Passage.
18. Eglinton, A. M., Bell’s Creek, Bribie,
19. Hall, C., 1886, Bell’s Creek, Bribie.
20. Leach, S., Bell’s Creek, Bribie.
21. Bell, Miss, 1882, Bell’s Creek, Bribie.
22. Landsborough, W., 1882, Bell’s Creek and Black
Flats.
23. North, F. L., 1884, Bell’s Creek and Black Flats.
24. Bulcock, R., Caloundra.
25. Moffat, J. C., Caloundra.
Let me hark back to number sixteen, showing
the name of J. D. Campbell. He was the son of
James Campbell—the pioneer of James Campbell and
Sons, and became the member for Moreton in the
year 1899, and was in Queensland’s thirteenth parlia-
ment, remaining in the Legislative Assembly until
1907, in which year he was appointed Minister for
Railways in the Philp Cabinet. Philp on this occa-
sion held office for but a short period, as in Novem-
ber, 1907, a dissolution of the House took place,
William Kidston being returned as Premier on an
GENERAL—PART TWO


appeal being made to the country. J. D. Campbell
passed away on the 19th June, 1909.
This Campbell family was indeed of the pioneer
type. They lived for a time at the “Bar House” at
the mouth of Coochin Creek a long time ago; this
house having been built for them as a residence. The
Bar House was a noted land mark for early day
yachtsmen using the Pumice Stone, or as it is now
called, the Bribie Passage, and marked the junction
of Caloundra and this passage with the entrance to
Coochin Creek. When the Campbell family left and
came to Brisbane the house in question was sold to
the late W. Westaway, and removed to Caloundra.
At this juncture I find my mind reverting to
the succulent bivalve, the oyster, the ostrea if you
would have me so name it. The foreshores of Toor-
bul, Bribie, and the upper reaches of the Pumice
Stone in the “good old days,” sent many thousands of
bags of these to Brisbane and the South, and much
money was made by the holders of the various banks.
A large number of men were engaged in the indus-
try, finding constant employment for them in picking
and bagging. These oyster banks covered an area at
Toorbul, and continued to within a mile and a-half
of Caloundra. One of the richest dredge sections in
Moreton Bay was situated between Bribie Island and
Donneybrook—thousands of oysters being taken
therefrom during a short space of years. In 1909
or somewhere thereabouts came the now detested
Worm—a thin little black crawler it is—the conse-
quence being that dredge sections and practically all
the banks were destroyed. The oysters from the
localities named were freighted to Brisbane in vari-
ous cutters. Well did I know them all, for in my
holiday times I visited the northern end of the bay
muchly. I give the names of these vessels so em-
GENERAL—PART TWO


ployed—give them almost with reverence, for many
times have I travelled on them, laden with bagged
bivalves for the markets, thrashing across the bay
against heavy south-easters to Luggage Point.
Here they are:
Artemus Ward, Rip, Charm, Lord Byron, Charles
Dickens, Harriet, Bret Harte.
One trip in the Artemus Ward I must mention.
Frank Watts, the father of the noted Lance Watts,
whose tiller handling in the restricted class is so well
known, was in charge, and I, T.W., made up the
“crew.” An ugly south-easter was blowing when we
entered the bay at the lower black beacon almost op-
posite Skirmish Point. The Artemus was heavily
laden. Three bushel bags, each containing picked
were in numbers in the little cabin and in the
cockpit. There was but little moveable space in the
boat. Frank had put in one single reef, the only
reef points the sail contained. He, of course, had
the tiller. I worked the jib, seated most uncomfort-
ably on the protected though sharp-edged oysters.
Continual seas came on board, and we were both
drenched. Some three miles out from Deception Bay
a hummer of a squall struck us, and as the Artemus
was being brought up in the wind a broken topped
wave threw itself right at us amidship, and some-
thing black in appearance came with it. It fell from
half way up the mast and dropped on the oyster bags
on which I was seated. Quickly I threw my body
towards the counters, and lifted my legs just in time.
Getting over the squall trouble we both looked at our
most unusual visitor. Nigh to the legs of us both with
a long swishy tail lay an enormous ray. It was a
spotted ray, a ray that carries a very long slender
whip tail, sometimes called parrot-billed ray, although
I am inclined to write it as Spotted Eagle Kay
GENERAL—PART TWO


(Aetobatis narinari). By this time its pancake body
had become jammed amongst the bags until we
reached calmer waters in the river—then overboard
it went. This episode may seem and sound untrue,
but for reference of a good character and likewise of
veracity I would ask you to mention the adventure
to Dick Watts, owner of the Mariner, and you will
receive his endorsement. Not that he saw the oc-
currence, but he will inform you he has often heard
his Uncle Frank speak of it in fishing and boating
company.
Amongst those engaged in this oyster industry
were Captain Hamilton, Fred Turner (what a fine
type of character his good wife Alma was. She was
one in a thousand and deservedly respected by every-
one).
Also J. Carnegie, Hussey and Mills, E. H. D.
Hamilton, Perry and Griffin (did not this firm own
the Day Dawn and the Dawn of Day?), W. Free-
man, T. Furlong and J. Pollack,
The late Mr. James Clark after acquiring the
Toorbul headland property —it is still in the estate
—took up this oyster industry and culture in a
thorough businesslike and skilful manner. His chief
holding at the first covered an area of foreshore
round to Cook’s Head. He also took up banks in
Pumice Stone, and was instrumental in successfully
forming many artificial oyster banks, this being done
at considerable expense. Hundreds of tons of ashes
were conveyed by steamer to Bribie for utilisation
on the banks and flats.
This lets me out on the ostrea subject and I now
turn my attention once more to timber, but only
slightly dealing with it. In 1881 James Campbell
erected a large sawmill at Coochin Creek, about eight
miles up the mangrove-lined banks. A little town-
GENERAL PART TWO


ship followed this venture, the place in a little time
taking on the name of Campbell Town. The mill
drew its supplies —there were virgin forests in those
days in many places, viz., from Bribie Island, Ninghi
Creek, Elimbah Creek, Bullock Creek, Glass Mountain
Creek, Bell’s Creek, and also from in and about Cal-
oundra. Cedar, pine, beech and other softwoods
were obtained from the famous Blackall Ranges. The
sawn timber was conveyed to Brisbane by the cutters
Sabina, Alice, Cleveland and others until 1883, when
the freightage was taken over by the Mavis and the
Leonie.
It is to me very pleasing to here record a kindly
action made by James Campbell to some of the col-
oured people at Coochin. A presentation was made
to a native called King Fred, of a Crown on which
was inscribed: “Presented to King Fred, and his
Queen Ellina, and their two daughters Johanna and
Rosie, of Coochin Creek, by James Campbell.” This
presentation was typical of the man, and was made
to King Fred on account of some meritorious deed
done by him. This crown is now in the possession of
the Philp family at “Mallow,” Toowong, Brisbane.
Thousands of pounds in worth of log cedar, pine,
and a fair amount of beech, were drawn from the
Blackall Ranges by bullock teams, taken through the
heavy country to the rafting grounds of Mellum and
Coochin Creeks. From here it was floated to deep
water, loaded into steamers, taken to Brisbane to be
cut up and sawn into lengths at the mills. Harrold
Brothers, of Adelaide, a firm well known as billiard
table specialists, purchased the whole of the cedar
logs, as such timber was required for their particular
class of work.
Fish Canning. A factory was built in the year
1898 on the Deception Bay side of Toorbul by Messrs,
GENERAL—PART TWO


Godwin and Day, about four miles from Toorbul
Point. Mr. James Clark took much interest in this
and watched the growth of the industry with a keen
eye. Sea mullet and tailer were the principal fish
treated. The method of preparation was successful,
and the tinned article found a ready sale. The busi-
ness was carried on for some time, but eventually
had to close its doors on account of the lack of regu-
larity of fish supply.
Later a fish canning plant was purchased by
Mr. T. Maloney, and suitable buildings were put up
on Bribie Island some miles up the passage towards
Caloundra. The tinning of fish was carried on with
good results, but I am informed that the place was
compelled to cease work on account of similar reasons
applying to the Godwin combine. A portion of Mr.
Maloney’s career has already been touched upon.
About the year 1910 the late Mrs. Sarah Balls,
who at one time was the licensee of the Exchange
Hotel in Queen Street, purchased an up-to-date fish
canning outfit, and made extensive working accommo-
dation on Bribie Island, some little distance to the
north of the Tug Company’s jetty. Real first-class
products were turned out, all finding a ready sale.
Notwithstanding the addition of further improved
machinery and plant, the existence of the commercial
operations could not give satisfaction to the good
lady. Battling bravely she spared no expense, but
seeing that the task was costly and hopeless she with
deep regret closed down. Another example of failure
caused by like manner and incidence as the others
just written about.
Dugong and Turtle were, in the early eighties,
treated by a man named Foster, his location being
on a hill close by where the Bribie Bowling Club is
now situate. This hill was known as Foster’s Camp.
GENERAL PART TWO


Foster worked up quite a profitable business with
dugong and turtle. Eventually, I understand, it
passed over to Peter Tasken, now of Cleveland.
Ordinary net fishing was also carried on, very ex-
tensively, by a number of licensed fishermen, their
hauling spots being throughout the length and breadth
of Pumice Stone. Great hauls at times found their
way to Brisbane housewives, nearly all the catches
being sold at an old jetty at the mouth of Breakfast
Creek. The fish were sold according to requirements,
or in baskets, and house to house hawking was pre-
valent and appreciated by Brisbane folk. No cold
stores in those days, and the good housewife, knowing
the fish, its state, and appearance, did her own con-
demnation. They don’t get that chance nowadays. But
advanced civilisation, and controlling boards are
making a fine improvement. Now really what do you
think?
A Mr. T. Tri peony plied a motor boat service
between Brisbane and Caloundra for a time, carry-
ing up to the city fish, oysters and shell grit, returning
with general stores. This was, however, some years
after the Mavis had been taken off the route. Then
a number of settlers engaged themselves in fruit
farms, growing pineapples, grapes, bananas, and
citrus fruits, also vegetables. All this produce had
to be conveyed to the Big Smoke by cutters. Amongst
the many who indulged in this business were Messrs.
Bestmann —who fof a while tried his hand at wine
making—J. Carnegie, and the Bishops. These two
brothers purchased the yacht Medea for the purpose of
running their fruit and produce to the city.
Having written thus far from the notes so kindly
supplied me by Mr. G. P. Campbell—and no doubt
having slightly repeated myself—l cannot pass by the
opportunity of again referring to land sales, chiefly
GENERAL PART TWO


areas at Caloundra. The first public land sales at
this fine ocean water resort is dated 9th April, 1883.
But right here I stay my pen and think. To-day as I
pen these lines, is Wednesday, the 21st July, 1937,
and I remember reading something in the issue of the
“Courier-Mail,” of the like date. It refers to Cal-
oundra. Now I always liked this place, especially
in the primitive days when flora and fauna were at
their very best, when the city vandal did not roam
afield, and the motor car was unknown—thank
heaven—and when one did visit nature’s beauty spots
there was always something to enlighten the mind
and comfort the soul. And I have not seen Caloundra
for nigh on twenty-five years. Let me give the ex-
tract from the “Courier-Mail” in full. So I do and
here it is;
“The Beaches in Winter.
Surfers’ President Enthusiastic.
“Your beaches at Caloundra and Maroochydore
are splendid, and if the others are as good then
Queensland has a wonderful asset,” was the parting
comment made by the president of the Surf Life
Saving Association of Australia (Mr. A. H. Curlewis)
before his departure for Sydney yesterday.
“Mr. Curlewis was taken by car by Mr. T,
Thynne to Caloundra and Maroochydore, and enjoyed
the surf in the genial warmth of the sun. It was his
first ‘dip’ in Queensland surf, and he was surprised
that Queenslanders did not make more use of surfing
advantages in the winter which, he thought, was not
winter at all.”
Is that not a tribute, you Caloundra-ites?
In connection with this sale of 1883, there is
one small historic event that needs must be chronicled
by me in these collections of olden days events. Dur-
ing a time when Sir Thomas Mcllwraith was in power
GENERAL PART TWO


here in Queensland, some members of his cabinet
chartered the s.s. Mavis from Messrs. James Camp-
bell and Sons to convey the Hon. Patrick Perkins —
then Minister for Lands —and Mr. B. D. Morehead,
and some of their friends to Caloundra. Mr, R. J.
Smith, Commissioner for Lands, I think, was with the
party. The Mavis left Brisbane on the evening of the
Bth April, 1883, reaching Caloundra by way of Bribie
Passage the next day at 1,30 p.m. The party left for
the return to Brisbane on the 10th April, crossing the
Caloundra bar, running down the ocean coast line of
Bribie Island, and was berthed at her wharf in the
city at 10 p.m. the same day. Knowing the s.s. Mavis
so well as I did, all that can be said by me regarding
this bar harbour exploit in so small a steamer is—
that the weather must have been good and the bar
remarkably sound asleep.
Caloundra in the year given was indeed a pretty
place. The Heads and adjoining slopes and inclines
were covered with green grass, with no undergrowth.
Trees were sufficient in number and in foliage to
give the hill tops and inclines and dales, a thorough
park-like vista.
Caloundra lay dormant for many a long day.
Now it ranks as one of Brisbane’s favourite ocean
side resorts, and is rapidly making progress, Wick-
ham Point, or Head has not the rugged, rocky ravined
attractions of Point Lookout on Stradbroke, but its
charms are its own, with the great Pacific Ocean in
full view, and its white topped paralleled line of
breakers miles away to the northward. In years to
come it must, and surely will, rank as one of Queens-
land’s very best, and will be attractive the whole year
round.
The late Mr. J. C. Moffat —whose name I have
written before—being a land owner, extensive too, at
GENERAL — PART TWO


that, at Caloundra, spent much capital in searching
and sinking for coal. Up to the time of his demise
he never gave up hope of finding it in payable com-
mercial quantities. Results taken from many places
were continually disappointing, the shafts, and trial
sinkings never giving any real indication of worth.
It is not generally known that coal—and kerosene
leakages or seepages —can be found on Bribie, and its
inside passage. I could tell a story re a proposed
coal venture here on the island, but these pages are
not the place to mention it. Some day it will be
divulged.
A finale should be cheerful, should it not? And
I am ending now chapter eight, part two, with some-
thing that may be regarded as gruesome. Never mind,
my readers. You want history, do you not? So
here goes the fall of the hammer, and the placing
aside of the pen.
My “conclusion” says that even at the time when
Flinders visited Bribie in 1799, the natives on the
island were cannibals. They held the early primitive
ideas and habits of the inland blacks, and their mode
of living was not dis-similar. From the birth of a
child to the death of an old man or woman, they
adopted and carried out customs and mannerisms not
known on Moreton or Stradbroke. Their mode of
burial was different. In the not very “far” back,
skeletons of natives were found in the forks of fair-
sized trees on the island. It was their mode of burial.
Many a skull from off the tree, or on the ground,
many a part of the human frame have I known to
be taken away by university, medical and anatomical
students.
That is another story.
GEN ERAL P ART TWO


(Photo, by W. Main).
Norfolk Lagoon,


CHAPTER IX
BONGAREE, THE NATIVE
I have always had a respect for this native, even
from the date of my earliest recollections of reading
Flinders journal. And even a higher respect than
that given to Bongaree went to that coloured in-
dividual Jackey-Jackey, who was one of the party
accompanying Mr. E. B. Kennedy in that disastrous
Northern Expedition towards Cape York in 1848. Let
any of my readers peruse Carron’s account of the
journey, or better still, Mr. H. M. Suttor’s Australian
Milestones, published, 1925. Turn up in volume
two, pages 401 to 409, and read for yourself. Ken-
nedy’s companion, lackey, was a far superior man to
Flinder’s Bongaree, better in intelligence, demeanour,
and application. As I cannot deal with him at
length here, let me quote Mr. Suttor’s words on page
408;
“Has a more beautiful story ever been told of
the great devotion and loyalty of a servant to his
Master? At this time tribes had been so largely ex-
terminated that thousands of Colonists knew but little
of the blacks. To them it was a surprise that a
black boy could be so affectionate, brave, truthful,
pitiful, provident, clever and enduring. We must all
admire Jachey. He had a black skin but otherwise
he was ‘a white man.’ ”


On a memorial tablet in St. James Church, Syd-
ney, can be seen at the terminal part of the wording;
“And Jackey-Jackey
An aboriginal of Merton District who was Mr. Ken-
nedy’s sole companion in his fight with the savages,
and though himself wounded, tended his leader with
a courage and devotion, worthy of remembrance,
supporting him in his last moments, and making his
grave on the spot where he fell.”
I have met similar men to these two in Moreton
Bay, but to compare would be unacceptable. There
was Toompani, a man well past the seventies who
lost his life at My ora in saving that of a coloured
woman. Johnnie Lifou was another good man, as
was Sam Rollins, who did my dugong work. Also
Gurriwurriba, otherwise “Gurrie,” still hale and
hearty although aged.
So having gathered more valuable information
re the volatile Bongaree I have decided to give him
a chapter on his own.
Luckily for me during the last couple of months
I have been favoured with a letter corresponding in-
troduction to the Reverend V. W. Thompson, of
H.M.A.S. Penguin , Garden Island, Sydney. Mr.
Thompson possesses a keen mind wherein he stores
Australian pioneer history, and has very kindly
favoured me with interesting subject matter regarding
Bongaree, gathered from many sources. This with
other material enables me to enlarge upon this native
from the time of his visit to Bribie in 1799 with
Matthew Flinders, up to his death in 1830. Wrong-
ful printed data, ofttimes copied, makes incorrect
history, much to be regretted. In what I now pen
the source from which my information has been ob-
tained is given, together, where possible, the day of
the month as well as the year. In the earlier pages
BONGAREE, THE NATIVE


of this work it will be remembered I have dealt with
the manner in which Bongaree’s name has been spelt.
Personally 1 still adhere to the spelling of his name
as given by Flinders. In what follows, I give the
orthography as used at the time of publication. The
reverend gentleman’s notes on Bungaree are most
copious, and from most of these notes sent on to me
this chapter is now written. And our little island of
Brihie has a little township named after Bongaree.
These notes record that on the 24th November,
1830, there passed away on Garden Island, Sydney
Harbour, a familiar and celebrated figure of the early
nineteenth century in Sydney. This was Bungaree,
chief of the Port Jackson tribe of aboriginal blacks.
His name is variously spelled. Professor Ernest
Scott in “The Life of Matthew Flinders,” perhaps
following Flinders spelling uses the form Bongaree,
though Lieutenant Murray, commanding the Lady
Nelson, which accompanied the Investigator , spells
the name Bungaree. Lieutenant-Colonel Collins of
the Royal Marines favours Bong-ree; Dr. John Dun-
more Lang prefers Bungary; while the newspapers
giving an account of his death have still another
variant, Boongarie.
The “Sydney Gazette,” of Saturday, November
27, 1830, gives the following account of Bungaree
and his death:
“Death of Boongarie.
“We have to announce the death of His Abo-
riginal Majesty ‘King Boongarie,’ Supreme Chief of
the Sydney tribe. He expired on Wednesday last at
Garden Island, after a lingering sickness of several
months. A coffin has been despatched thither from
the lumber yard, and he will be interred at Rose
Bay, beside the remains of his late Queen (Goose-
berry) this day.”
BONGAREE, THE NATIVE


The facetiousness of the sable chief and the
superiority of his mental endowments over those of
the generality of his race obtained for him a more
than ordinary share of regard from the white in-
habitants of the Colony, which was testified by fre-
quent donations suited to his condition not only from
private individuals, but from the Authorities. At the
commencement of his last illness the Hon. Mr.
McLeay procured his admission to the General Hos-
pital, where he received every necessary attention,
and remained there some weeks; but becoming im-
patient to return to his “people” he was, of course,
permitted to depart, and the Government allowed him
a full man’s ration to the day of his death.
Boongarie was remarkable for his partiality
for the English costume, and it must be confessed
that his appearance was sometimes grotesque enough,
when he had arrayed his person in such “shreds and
patches” of coats and nether garments as he could by
any means obtain; the whole surmounted by an old
cocked hat. The late Commodore Sir James Bris-
bane was particularly partial to him, and on one
occasion presented him with a full suit of his own
uniform, together with a sword, of which he was
not a little vain.”
In a periodical called the “Australian Home
Companion,” on pages 359-360, there appeared in
the year 1859 the following anonymous contribution;
“Bungaree, King of the Blacks.
“There are few old Australian Colonists to
whom the name of Bungaree is not familiar. King
Bungaree and myself were contemporaries, but there
was a vast difference in our ages. When I first knew
him he was an old man over sixty, and I was a boy
■of twelve. In person King Bungaree was about sft.
Sin. in height, not very stout, and not very thin, ex-
BONGAREE, THE NATIVE


cept as to his legs. His dress consisted of the cocked
hat and full dress coat of a general officer or colonel;
an old shirt and no pantaloons.
As the king was a person of irregular habits, he
generally slept as well as fished in his clothes, and
his tailor’s bill would have been enormous, even if
he had a tailor, but as he “borrowed” his uniform,
as well as his money, bread and rum, his finances
were in no way embarrassed. Every new Governor,
from Macquarie down to Gipps, supplied him with
an old cocked hat and full dress coat; and almost
every colonel commanding a regiment, instantly com-
plied when his majesty pronounced these words:
“Len’ it cock-’at; len it coat; len it old shirt.”
Round his neck was suspended, by a brass chain, a
brass plate. On this plate which was shaped like a
half moon, were engraven, in large letters, the words:
“Bungaree, King of the Blacks.”
On the plate was also engraven the arms of the
colony of New South Wales—an emu and a kangaroo.
Bungaree, like many of the aborigines of New South
Wales, was an amazing mimic. The action, voice,
bearing and attitudes, the walk of any man, he could
personate with minuteness. It mattered not whether
it was the Attorney-General stating a case to a jury;
the Chief Justice sentencing a criminal to be hanged;
a Colonel drilling a regiment in the barrack square; a
Jew bargaining for old clothes; a drunken sailor re-
sisting the efforts of the police to quiet him. King
Bungaree could, in mere dumb show act the scene in
such a way as to give you a perfect idea of it. Now
as the Governor for the time being was the first and
most important person in the colony, it was from
that functionary that King Bungaree took his cue.
After seeing the Governor several times, and talked
to him, Bungaree would adopt his Excellency’s
BONGAREE, THE NATIVE


manner of speech and bearing to the full extent of
his wonderful power. When first I knew Bungaree
General Darling was Governor of New South Wales.
Bungaree then walked the streets with his arms folded
across his breast, his body erect, his pace slow and
measured, with something of the military swagger in
it, and the only salute he vouchsafed was a dignified,
but very slight, inclination of his head. Even when
his “Majesty” was so intoxicated that he could not
walk straight, it was impossible not to recognise the
faithfulness of the copy to the original. His mode
of speech was curt and somewhat abrupt. Even the
words: “Len’ it glass o’ grog,” came forth rather in
the tone of a command than of a request. But when
Darling left and Bourke became his successor, how
very different was the demeanour and the deportment
of King Bungaree. He walked briskly up George
Street, with his left hand on his hip and his right
arm moving to and fro; took off his cocked hat
periodically in recognition of salutes (most of them
imaginary), and when he neared the Guard House at
the bottom of Church Hill he would raise his right
hand in the air, and shake it as a signal to the sentry
not to turn out the guard to present arms to him.”
That Bongaree was known to Dr. John Dunmore
Lang is in evidence when reference is made to vol. 1,
4th edition, page 350, of the History of New South
Wales. This is the reverend gentleman’s own story as
it appears therein:
“I was walking with my late brother, Mr. George
Lang, on the banks of the Parramatta River, one
beautiful evening in the year 1824, when the late
Bungary, chief of the Sydney tribe of the black
natives, was pulling down the river in a boat which
he had received as a present from the Governor, Sir
Thomas Brisbane, with his two jins or wives. My
BONGAREE, THE NATIVE


brother accosted Bungary on his coming up with us,
and the good natured chief immediately desired his
jins to rest on their oars. During the short conversa-
tion that ensued, my brother requested Bungary to
show us how Governor Macquarie made a bow. Bun-
gary happened to be dressed at the time in the old
uniform of a military officer, and accordingly, stand-
ing up in the stern of his boat, and taking off his
cocked hat with the requisite punctilio he made a low
formal bow with all the dignity and grace of a
general officer of the old school.
“My brother then requested him to show us how
Governor Brisbane made a bow, to which Bungary
very properly replied in broken English: ‘Bail me
do that yet; top nudda Governor come.’
“Bungary could exhibit the peculiar manner of
every Governor he had seen in the colony; but he
held it a point of honour, and perhaps a measure of
sound policy, never to exhibit the reigning Governor.”
The Revd. V. W. Thompson wrote me and said
that nearly all the later references to Bungaree per-
petuate the mis-statement that he was buried on Garden
Island. So I again refer to J. H. Heaton, who said:
“Page 6. . . Boongarie was buried at Garden Island,
November 24, 1830.” Perhaps I had better give the
exact wording contained, inter alia, in one of Mr.
Thompson’s letters to me. This is what he wrote:
“How he came to be on Garden Island at the
time of his death is not clear. J. H. Heaton says he
‘settled at George’s Head in 1815.’ Collins says he
was ‘a native of the northside of Broken Bay.’ This
was in July, 1799. Ida Lee mentions him, the con-
text having reference to June, 1801, and speaks of
him as “a native Rose Bay named Bungaree.”
(The Log Books of the Lady Nelson, page 61),
and again referring to July, 1802 (page 160), she
BONGAREE, THE NATIVE


makes mention of “Bungaree, the Rose Bay native.”
I suppose the truth is that Bungaree had all the
nomadic characteristics of his race, and had no settled
abode as regards locality, but moved from place to
place, wherever food was most plentiful. It is evi-
dent that at some time he had resided at Rose Bay, if
his “late Queen” was buried there. Bungaree had a
plurality of wives, and I am not quite sure which one
this refers to. The best known one rejoiced in the
name of “Gooseberry.” But if J. H. Heaton’s note on
Queen Gooseberry is correct, she must have survived
her royal spouse. Heaton says; “Gooseberry, Queen
wife of King Boongarie, was one of the last if not the
last, of the Port Jackson tribe.”
However, I venture to suggest that it is possible
that Bungarie was allowed the use of Garden Island
during the naval regime, as a concession and mark
of appreciation for the services he rendered to the
Navy, in accompanying some of the coastal explora-
tions. As far as I can find, his first voyage was
with Matthew Flinders in the Norfolk, which sailed
from Port Jackson on the Bth July, 1799, to examine
the coast from Moreton Bay northward to Hervey Bay.
Professor Scott (Life of Flinders, page 159) quotes
Flinders estimate of Bungaree, “whose good dis-
position and manly conduct had attracted my esteem.”
Later, when taking him on another voyage Flinders
refers to him as the “worthy and brave fellow” (Scott
Life of Flinders, page 266).
Again I resume my own telling of Bongaree. If
any student of history not fully acquainted with
Flinders visit to Brisbane waters in 1799 desires a
very full and concise account of his stay and ex-
plorations in Moreton Bay, I would kindly refer him
to Lieutenant-Colonel Collins work published in 1804,
more particularly to page 497, and thence onwards
BONGAREE, THE NATIVE


to page 514, Flinders had spent fifteen days in Glass
House Bay, had rowed up many miles in Pumice
Stone River, and had journeyed down the waters of
the bay as far as Russell Island. During all this
time Bongaree was with him. Excerpts from Collins
need not be given by me.
I now return to Mr. Thompson. He writes me;
“Bungaree was not deterred by the risks of his
first trip from making another. This time he sailed
with Lieut. Grant in the Lady Nelson to examine the
Hunter River. They started on the 10th June, 1801,
and the following day, mistaking the entrance to
Lake Macquarie for the Hunter, Dr. Harris was sent
ashore in a boat. Harris discovered the error and
brought back a native called Budgeree Dick. Ida
Lee (Logbook of the Lady Nelson, page 62) says: ‘ln
order to find out his meaning he was introduced to
the Sydney native Bungaree, who was directed to
question the visitor. Bungaree, by signs, invited him
to sit down, an invitation, observes Grant, which, ac-
cording to native ideas “implied that a stranger was
received with friendship.” But it was useless to ask
Bungaree to proceed with his enquiries, for another
etiquette demanded that a profound silence should
follow, which lasted twenty minutes. By degrees the
two blacks entered into conversation, drawing nearer
to one another as they began to talk. The informa-
tion sought was not obtained, and it was inferred that
they did not well understand each others language.”
A little over twelve months later Bungaree again
went with Flinders, this time in the Investigator. They
sailed on the 21st July, 1802 to examine the north-east
coast more carefully than Cook had been able to do;
explore Torres Strait and the East side of the Gulf
of Carpentaria. This voyage was a big event for
Bungaree. For if Flinders was the first man to cir-
BONGAREE, THE NATIVE


cumnavigate Australia, as he did on this voyage,
Bungaree was surely the first aboriginal to sail round
Australia.
From the “Narrative of a Survey of the Inter-
tropical and Western Coasts of Australia,” by Captain
Phillip Parker King, R.N., we learn that Bungaree
sailed on one more voyage of exploration, for he
accompanied P. P. King on the first voyage of H.M.
Cutter Mermaid. King also mentions Bungaree’s
good qualities. After speaking of the establishment
of the Mermaid, he continues —vol. 1, page xxxix:
“In addition to this establishment I accepted the
proffered services of Boongaree, a Port Jackson
native, who had formerly accompanied Captain Flin-
ders in the Investigator, and also on a previous occa-
sion in the Norfolk. This man is well known in the
colony as the chief of the Broken Bay tribe; he was
about 45 years of age, of a sharp, intelligent and
unassuming disposition and promised to be of much
service to us in our intercourse with the natives.”
The Mermaid left Port Jackson on the 22nd
December, 1817. Forced by bad weather to put into
Twofold Bay, King landed at Snug Cove. He says
—vol. 1, page 4 —“Boongaree also accompanied us,
clothed in a new dress, which was provided for him,
of which he was not a little proud, and for some
time he kept it clean.” But there were occasions
when policy demanded that for Bungaree the “dress
of the day” should be “negative uniform.” On one
occasion, King said, he landed “taking Boongaree
with me, divested of his clothes” —vol. 1, page 45.
Though Bungaree was inordinately proud of his uni-
form it is not recorded that he raised any objection
to the dishabille.
Among other qualifications Bungaree was an
expert fisherman. At Oyster Harbour King says—
BONGAREE, THE NATIVE


vol. 1, pp. 15-16 —“Boongaree speared a great many
fish with his fiz-gig; one that he struck with his boat
hook on the shoals at the entrance of the Eastern
river weighed twenty-two pounds and a-half and was
3J feet long.”
Bungaree’s bush craft enabled him to find water
in places where others had little success. He seemed
also to keep a watchful eye for any signs of hostile
intent on the part of the natives. Here is an instance;
“The next day whilst the people were at dinner
Boongaree, whose eyes were constantly directed to-
wards the shore, espied five natives among the grass,
which was so high as to nearly conceal them, walking
towards our wooding place; and, as they proceeded it
was perceived that they had stolen one of our station
flags.”
King took three more voyages in the Mermaid,
but as he did not mention Dungaree it is to be pre-
sumed that he did not accompany him on these occa-
sions. King’s last voyage was in the Bathurst, com-
menced on the 26th May, 1821. Dungaree offered his
services, but at the very last moment withdrew and
did not go. A little over nine years pass away, and
Bongaree is laid to rest at Rose Bay, Sydney.
And as I finish chapter nine I am thankful to be
able to give the concluding paragraphs of Mr. Thomp-
son’s last letter to me in regards to this native Bon-
garee.
“We gather from these records that Dungaree
was popular with very many people, not only on ac-
count of his facetiousness, but because of his manly
bearing. And it is not unfitting that Dungaree, who
assisted the Navy in the infancy of the colony, should
end his mortal career on Garden Island, which was
the early home of the Royal Navy in Australia, and
BONGAREE, THE NATIVE


destined to become the nursery of the Royal Austra-
lian Navy in the infancy of the Commonwealth. And
I suppose Bungaree was proud of his connection with
the Royal Navy; and perhaps there was no prouder
moment in his life than that in which he donned the
full uniform, complete with sword, that was given to
him by Sir James Brisbane.
BONGAREE, THE NATIVE


(Photo, by W. Main).
Stirling Creek.


CHAPTER X
NATIVE NOMENCLATURE
There have been no gathering, no collection, or
no compilation of the words and language of the
Moreton Bay natives with perhaps that little to be
seen in Tom Petrie’s book. On the three islands:
Stradbroke, Moreton and Bribie there were distinc-
tive vernaculars, different in many parts yet suffi-
ciently alike to be understood when meeting each
other. On Strakbroke particularly, there was a curi-
ous alteration in some words that often caused me
to wonder. Two tribes even but a little distance apart
had a different name for an animal or bird. Like
the Maori, and the Polynesians, the letter wording as
made from pronunciation was composed of vowels,
making the utterance pleasant to listen to. In home
conversation it was distinctly so, and when seated
around the dining board or table it was almost a
charm to hear the merry chatter that always accom-
panied. Some of my white friends whose acquaint-
ance I made years ago could speak the noon-nuckle
language quite fluently. The natives of the largest
islands when not in the presence of the white man
spoke in their own tongue. And even so well as I
knew them it was but on rare occasions they spoke
otherwise.
Gradually their own talk is dying out, and in a
few years to come it will almost have disappeared.


I knew the Stradbroke islanders well, and often have
they confided in me their trials and troubles. They
looked upon me as a friend, and I knew that they
trusted me. And trust to them was everything. To
make them a promise, and not keep it was distasteful,
and to go back on your word was not forgotten or
forgiven. They would tell their friends, if the latter,
happened, and it took a long time to regain caste.
Knowing them so well as I did I am now sorry that I
cannot speak their language to keep up an uninter-
rupted conversation. Ofttimes I would make diary
notes, and would jot words and sentences down on
my return from bay trips. On revisiting I would
place these before my friends, and be corrected where
I was in error. How they enjoyed it, and laughed at
my mistakes. Perhaps the wrong utterance of a
vowel would completely destroy the intended meaning,
and then their merriment would be loud and long.
Always did I find them true hearted souls, and I am
indeed sorry they are passing altogether away.
What I have now written is completely apart from
Bribie the Basket Maker, that I know. However, the
following may not be uninteresting:
BIRDS.
Black Cockatoo:—Bullum.
Curlew: —Gurrell.
Crow: —Warcum.
Chicken Hawk:—Mingel-Mingel
Crane:—Gurreeargan.
Duck:—Nara.
Flying Fox: —Gurranum.
Land Curlew: —Buelgum.
Leather Head:—Gulcoolung.
Laughing Jackass: —Gookgogun.
Magpie:—Churwung.
NATIVE NOMENCLATURE


Parrot: —Billem.
Pheasant (Swamp):—Boon-boon.
Owl:—Dooreebung.
Redbreast: —Ghen-Ghen.
Wag Tail: —Imgeria —lingeria.
Swan;—Murroogilchi.
TREES.
Blackbutt: —Geregurt.
Bloodwoo d:—Bunna.
Box:—Dobil-N ulla.
Cabbage Tree: —Mungur Kail.
Cotton Tree:—Duiburpin.
Fig Tree: —Gunnin.
Gum Tree: —Munguree.
Honey Suckle: —Bumbaree-or Dungil Nut.
Iron Bark:—Jundoor.
Mangrove:—Junchee.
Orange Mangrove: —Gowenchar.
Oak: —Billa.
Silky Oak: —Unnagurgunpin.
Tea Tree: —Noojoor.
Wattle: —Gugarkill.
Pandanus: —W ynnum.
FISH.
Black Bream: —Dungellar.
Bream: —Mulung.
Bullrout: —Billouga.
Crab; —Waynum.
Carpet Shark:—Gunbing.
Diamond Fish: —Dulpung.
Dugong: —Yungun.
Eel:—War gun.
Flathead; —Duggen.
Jew Fish: —Bigoon.
Johnny Dory;—Gunambarag.
NATIVE NOMENCLATURE


King Fish; —Deerumbilla.
Mullet: —Nundarill.
Prawn: —Booting.
Pearl Shell: —Quampie.
Porpoise: —Booangun,
Rock Cod:—Goojung.
Snapper: —B imbah.
Sting Ray: —Bunkoo.
Sole: —Noogoonchara.
Shark: —Gurra gur r agan,
Tailor: —Poonbah.
Toad:—Wookoolurnbah.
Turtle:—Boonbiah.
Trevalli:—Junbillpin.
Whiting: —B oorong.
Wh ale: —Y ulli ngb ilia r.
Stone; —Mudlo.
Sand:—Yarrong.
Mud;—Dulturee.
Coral:—Culture.
GENERAL.
Black hair:—Mugool-gurong.
Bully Frog:—Wogull.
Boys:—Boojaree.
Cloud: —Garlen.
Cheeks:—Jargool.
Chin:—Waooroo.
Chest:—Dundarra.
Ear:—Binna.
Eyes:—Mill.
Evening: —Noolpoo-Noolpoo.
Feet:—Jinna.
Frog:—Jaragill.
Firestick:—Jarlowdeer.
Forehead: —Yillim.
Fingers:—Murra.
NATIVE NOMENCLATURE


Finger Nails:—Giilin.
Fire; —Jarlow.
Gold: —J unchun.
Head: —Boompum.
Kangaroo: Murry.
Kangaroo Rat: —Woogelpun.
Mouth: —Doombooree.
Man: —Mullar.
Morning: —Gooj oonchebba.
Mussell: —Nyoong.
Nose: —Murrow.
Neck: —Gilleng,
Native Bear: —Doombearpee.
Night: —Goojoon.
Old Man: —Begar.
Old Woman: —Wullingoor.
Rat: —Gurrall.
Rain: —Yurrow.
Red Hair:—Mugoobgowen-gowen.
Sun: —Beegie.
Moon: —Gelen.
Sholder:—Gityure.
Seaweed; —N ar oong.
Star: —Mirrigen.
Shade: —Goongul.
Thumb: —Mukool.
Tongue:—Jurgan.
Teeth: —Deer.
Wallaby:—Boogool.
Woman or Girl; —Gin.
Water: —Dubbeel.
Wind: —Goobie.
White Hair: —Mugool-boopa-bundal.
W oman; —Jundool.
Storm: —Moogar.
For “where are you going,” say Wunnar inter
yurranyah.
NATIVE NOMENCLATURE


Growing on the islands of the bay, chiefly Strad-
broke and Bribie, there is to be found a certain fern
with a root of a little length that when dried and
opened produces a certain substance which was made
by the natives into a powder resembling flour. This
flour in their own rough way was converted, with
water, into what I might term as a very poor sub-
stitute for Johnny Cake. In drawing attention to this
I deem it necessary to say something regarding those
three convicts who discovered the river, afterwards
named Brisbane, in the year 1823. It is not neces-
sary to deal with their sad sea journey from the
South until they landed on the ocean side of More-
ton Island at the very base of those two high ridged
sand hills somewhere to the south of the island named.
The native name of these white ranges of sand seen
from every point of the bay is Gheebellum. After so
landing for much wanted water, these unfortunates
were still under the impression that they were to the
southward of Sydney, and continued their northern
pilgrimage. Without detail, briefly their foot journey
was this: From the sand hills they reached the first
rocky headland of Cape Moreton —thence round to
Comboyuro and back on the bay side to Cloherty’s.
It was here they first encountered the natives,
and by them were taken across the South Passage to
Amity Point. When they had left Sydney on the 21st
March, 1823 for the Five Islands, about fifty miles
on the south of Port Jackson, they were in search of
cedar. Their cutter was a fairly large one, and they
had with them a considerable quantity of provisions,
viz., flour, pork, etc., and the necessary implements
for the falling of timber. When wrecked on More-
ton Island much of the provisions and implements
came on the beach, and ere they commenced their
long walk they carried with them as much of these
N ATI V E NOMENCLATURE


provisions, etc., as they could with comfort do. But
this food could not last for ever, so that when they
reached Amity Point they were near to starvation.
From this Point they made Peel Island, across the
waters to Ormiston; away up and along the Brisbane
River to Oxley Creek, which they named as Canoe
Creek, then on the northern side away right down to
Toorbul Point. Most of this time they were scarce
clothed, natural food had all gone, and they subsisted
on such that had been shown and given them by the
natives of Amity. At Toorbul they ended their wan-
derings in search of Sydney, determined to live with
the blacks there, and at Toorbul they were found by
Oxley’s party.
Pamphlet informed Uniacke they were some
weeks at Amity Point, were well treated by the natives,
these bringing them certain food daily, as well as
much fish. The desire to get onward was always
manifest. They determined to make a canoe out of
standing timber. They consulted amongst themselves,
and decided to commence this canoe building purpose.
Pamphlet’s words re this are given to Uniacke:
“We now consulted whether we had better to take
one of the canoes (native) by night or endeavour to
make one themselves; and having decided upon the
latter, we made choice of a tree, and immediately fell
to work to cut it down and form a canoe. We worked
from sunrise to sunset for nearly three weeks, having
no other tool but the hatchet, and during the whole
time the natives brought us food where we were at
work, and likewise left fish in our huts. The fern root
from which the rough flour was made by them they
called ‘dingowa.’ ”
Throughout their enforced journey of many weeks
and right up to the time they reached the huts and
camps of the blacks at Toorbul, it was almost solely
NATIVE NOMENCLATURE


on this fern root they lived. Natives, however, were
always to be found on their march, and from them
they learned of the berries that could be eaten with
safety, but fern root was ever their main food.
Pamphlet stated that he and his companions had kept
as well as could be done the number of the days of
their tramping, from the time they came ashore on
Moreton, and estimated they reached that place we
now know as Toorbul on the 101st day after they
had left Sydney. So we make a calculation. One
hundred and one days from the 21st March —the
day they had left Sydney—would take them to the
30th June. From then until the 29th November,
when Oxley found them, would give them 152 days,
equal to five months. The various tribes were kindly
disposed towards the three men, and fed them well.
Much of the fern root was found prepared and eaten.
At Amity Point it was named Dingowa, at Bribie
Bungwall. And besides this fern root they had been
shown other resources for food. There was that fat,
Juicy (so am I informed —and I take my coloured
friends word for it—for I have never tasted it) tree
grub known as the “Jubbum.” This grub can be
found almost anywhere, chiefly in all eucalyptus trees,
wattle, and sometimes Cyprus. Even to-day, in the
year 1937, it is sought for and eaten by the children
of Stradbroke, these children being more than one
generation moved from their sable and darkish fore-
bears.
Bribie and the mainland was a paradise for these
coloured race of people. Kangaroo, Wallaby and
many other mammalia were in hundreds. Duck,
swans, pelicans, cormorants were secured by the swirl-
ing and circling boomerang. Mullet came in their
seasonal time, as did many other fish, and dugong,
weighing up to half a ton, could be taken by canoe
NAT IVE NOMENCLATURE


(P hoto, b y W. Ma in).
North Arm of Mermaid.


and spear. Blue Mountain parrots, accompanied by
the swift flying greenies, came in the fall of summer,
and lazy life for man could be lived with but little
work. Turtle too, could be had in the passages of
many waters. Then Parsons, Pamphlet and Finnegan
settled down, took unto themselves, I suppose, lubras
to their liking, preferring such freedom and comfort
to the one-time cruel lash when they were numbered
amongst the chain gangs of the coal river at New-
castle. These men were the witnesses of many tribal
encounters, no doubt saw corroborees, and who knows
but that in time, had they not been found, would have
lived and loved, their lives amongst these then owners
of Queensland, possessing, however, no Real Property
Office, if we except the waddy, spear and boomerang.
Parsons was away at a Bunya feast when Oxley ap-
peared on the scene. He turned up some weeks later,
and then made his way to Sydney whither his two
pals had gone.
And so closes the little work written and entitled
by me as, “Bribie the Basket Maker.”
The End.
NATIVE NOMENCLATURE


INDEX
PAGE
Amity Point 40
Archer, Alex. ... 44
“Aurora” 47
Balls, Mrs. S. ... 110
Bengston, Capt. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 93
Bingle, J 37
Bongaree 25.105
Bracefield ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 45
Bungwall 134
Bustard Head ... ... 35
Campbell, J. D 78
Catchpenny 56
Clark, J 78
Clunie ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 16
Collins ... ... ... ... 28
Coochin Creek ... ... ... ... ... ... 78
Cotton ... ... ... ... ... 16
Cran, W 82
Cunningham, A. ... ... ... ... 40
Day, E. D 44
Dingowa ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 134
“Doomba” ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 94
Douglas, Hon. J ... ... ... 69
“Duramboi” (Davis, J.) ... ... ... ... ... ... 42
“Emerald” 94
Finnegan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 132
Flinders, M. ... ... ... ... 25
Fyans ... ... ... 16
“Garnet” 93
Gorman ... ... ... ... ... 11
Gray 47
“Greyhound” ... ... ... 103
Jackey-jackey ... ... ... 115
Johnston, Capt. J. S. ... ... 95
“Koopa” 94
Knight, J. J. ... ... 63
Landsborough, W ... 79
Lang, Dr. J, D, ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 120


PACE
Logan, Capt. ... 16
Main, W. ... ... ... ... ... ... 67.84.87
Maloney, T. ~ ... ... ... ... 74.110
Markwell, Geo. ... ... ... 77
“Mavis” 98
“Mermaid” 33
Moffat, J. C 102
Myora 72
Nuggin, Tommie ... ... ... ... ... ... 51
Oxley, John ... ... ... ... 15.20.33.38.39
Pamphlet ... ... ... ... ... ... 132
Parsons ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 132
Petrie, Miss ... ... ... ... ... ... 13
Petrie, Andrew 13
Petrie, John ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 17
Petrie, Tom ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 69
Piper ... ... ... ... ... ... 71
Redcliff 36
“Sally” 37
Scott, E. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 26
Telephone ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 85
Thompson, Revd. V. W. ... ... ... ... ... 116
Tripcony, T. ... ... ... ... ... ... 11l
Turner, Fred. ... ... ... ... ... ... 108
Tutty, Capt. W ... ... ... 75
Uniacke, J. ... ... ... ... ... ... 15.20
Webster, A. B. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 87
White, Patch ... ... ... ... ... 27.74
Wickham, Capt. ... ... ... ... ... ... 11
Woorim ... ... ... ... ... 87
INDEX
