

Autobiographical
Fragments.


0$^/^






BRIEF DOTTINGS
OF
MY LIFE
FROM
RICHMOND HILL, NEAR LAUNCESTON,
TASMANIA,
MY FIRST RESIDENCE IN THIS ISLAND IN 15265 AND
MY PRESENT ONE IN 18S2.
FOR PRIVATE CIBCVLATION OSLT.-
TASMANIA :
PRINTED AT THE “LAUNCESTON EXAMINER" OFFICE.
1882.


TO
J. D. TOOSEY, ESQUIRE,
OF
CRESSY HOUSE, TASMANIA,
THIS BOOK IS INSCRIBED
BY
HIS AFFECTIONATE FATHER,
THE author;


BRIEF
DOTTINGS OF MY LIFE
FROM
RICHMOND HILL, NEAR LAUNCESTON,
TASMANIA.
My first residence in this Island in iSa6; and nor
present one in 188 s.
This castle hath a pleasant seat; the air
Nimbly and sweetly recommends itself
Unto our gentle senses.
—fitais to—telle chose m'admnt.—hA Fontaine.
tAM (or was, as the case may be to the future
reader) a Norfolk man, bom March, 1801, at
& the seaport town of Lynn Regis, opposite the
* “Old Town Hall," in the Saturday Market
Square; and in Queen-street where, under an old


Gothic archway, my uncles, under the firm of “ Den-
ton and Co. ,with my father a junior partner, I believe,
carried on business for many years as corn merchants
and shippers of grain, &c., to foreign ports. Before
settling down as a merchant (and subsequently as a
farmer) my father had been in Canaia, in the Duke
of Kent’s regifnent there for some three years, and
afterwards went through his terms at Trinity College,
Cambridge, with the view of entering the Church, so
that his course, like mine since, has been very varied.
I only mention these details because I am writing
this memoir principally for the information of my sur-
viving and‘younger relatives; indeed more so than for
any other purpose. My early life up to the age of
18 was spent almost entirely between holidays and
school time, with scarcely a variation worthy of note,
except in locality, for we seem to have been a very
migratory family at this period, sometimes residing in
Lynn, and when the business there was abandoned at
Fincham, then at Brandon, and next at Feltwell. At
the above age, or somewhere thereabouts, I left North
Walsham school, near Norwich, where I had been for
the last eight years under the Rev. Mr. Spurdens,


daring the early part of which the Duke of Wellington
was gloriously carrying on the Peninsula war, and
siding with Spain and Portugal against the unscrupu-
lous oppressor of mankind, the First Napoleon, beating
all his celebrated generals—Soult, Ney, Massena, and
many others, with their immense armies, and finally
crowning his brow with the viftory of Waterloo.
These events with ns boys were duly rejoiced over by
many holidays and innumerable bonfires. Neverthe-
less school days were not all sunshine with me,
for I was too often in trouble, and flogged continually
in the early part of my career. The instrument used,
I remember well, was a little sliding whip which,
when drawn out of Mr. Spurdens’s pocket, assumed
formidable dimensions. Whether I was always justly
or unjustly punished I will not pause to enquire of
myself, although I fancy I could conscientiously give
a few verdids in my favour. Suffice it to know that I
came off with flying colours at last, and in asking my
old master, whom I began very much to like when he
left off Hogging me, as I was about to leave him
finally, for a holiday in order to give my schoolfellows
a treat in my study (for a few of the upper boys had
3
DOTTINGS OF MT LIFE.


studies or rooms apart from the house) —“ Take the
‘ Tessaris’ (a square of ivory, with the motto— Neque
semper oreum tendit Apollo ) Mr. Toosey,” replied
Mr. Spurdens, “ I cannot refuse a boy who has been
with me so long and behaved so well,” and the shout
and the feast of course soon followed; aye, and the
breaking up song, still in part familiar to my ear:—
Old hie, haec, hoc we now may mock.
And qui, quae, quod’s declension;
Sternhis way may go,
Nor longer claim attention.
Should Homer seek, noth zigzag Greek,
To spoil our jovial revel,
With Pehon rage a war well wage,
And kick him to the d—v—3.
Whilst on this subjed I may remark in passing, as a
singular circumstance, that 1 occupied for along while
the same desk (they were double and placed vis-a-vis)
that Lord Nelson (a Norfolk man like myself) had
done before me. “Horatio Nelson” cut in large
letters upon it, and gimlet holes bored on the side and
top filled with slate pencil scraped fine to fire at his
opposite enemy. How gloriously the bud produced
the fair and full blossom in after life at the battle of
Trafalgar!
i
My education finished, a desultory year or two


followed. It was spent principally, as I had no fixed
employment, in the sports of the field—hunting and
shooting, coursing and skating, which latter was a
favourite amusement with us all, and with which,
during two severe winters, we combined business with
pleasure in a very novel and satisfadory manner. We
had a fen farm some ten miles from our residence at
Feltwell, and my brother and I used to walk down to
the edge of the overflow of the low ground before it
was properly drained, put our skates on (on one occa-
sion my father accompanied us), and after following
the wide ditches, and making innumerable right
angles, we arrived at last at the field where our sheep
were folded, feeding on cole seed, and we could lean
over the hurdles on our skates, leisurely survey them
in different directions with the shepherd, and then after
a while wend our way home again, rejoicing in this
strong and exhilarating exercise—truly it could be
called a strong and lengthened exercise, for there was
no following “as the crow flies,” the fields were in-
variably laid out in square ditches, for the easier pur-
pose of draining the boggy, peaty ground (which was
effeded by windmills and sluice-gates discharging the
5
DOTHHB3 OF Hr MFB.


water into the River Ouse at low tide), so that we
had continually to sweep round the comers of these
squares, steering quite in an opposite direction from
our destination, considerably multiplying the distance.
The country was as flat as a pancake for miles and
miles around, and too low and unsound generally for
the erection of any homesteads; knowing, therefore,
pretty well the position of our farm (which was not
inconsiderable) in relation to Ely Cathedral, standing
out conspicuously on an eminence, though far, far
removed, we took “our bearings,” as the sailors say,
accordingly, and that magnificent structure was the
beacon star to guide us safely over the dreary waste,
and made our Arftic travels less circuitous. Circuitous,
however, as they unavoidably were, they were “ red
letter” days to us.
Upon two occasions at this period of my life
I accompanied my father to the Holkham annual
sheep show. Mr. Coke, before he took the title
of Lord Leicester, kept open house for three days, and
gave rich prizes to his numerous tenants and the
neighbouring farmers for the best stock of eveiy sort
exhibited. The Duke of Sussex at these times was a
6
DOTTINQS OF XT LIFE.


constant visitor at Holkham, and so genial in dis-
position that he was at home with everybody, withont
any of the hauteur and pride which too often are
attached to royalty. As an instance: —“ Young gen-
tleman, your curb chain is loose,” were once his words
to me as I was riding past his carriage, moving on
with the crowd of guests assembled. I was young
then, and therefore too much flattered to forget
even this simple and kindly remark from so high a
quarter.
The Holkham Sheep Show was originated by Mr.
Coke, and was looked forward to for many years as
the grand event of the neighbourhood, was conducted
with princely magnificence, and was attractive alike to
foreigners, as well as the gentiy and yeomen of all
England. Arthur Young in his “Annals of Agricul-
ture ” alludes to it. Mr. Coke was married late in
life to Lady Anne Keppell, daughter of Lord Albe-
marle, after which this glorious gathering was dis-
continued.
About the year 1820 I was educated still more ex-
pensively and at a heavy cost to learn larming, by
being placed with Mr. Charles Champion, of Blyth,
7
DOTTINGS OF MT LITE.


Nottinghamshire, a very celebrated Shorthorn and
improved Durham breeder. Mr. Champion exported
some of his best cattle on several occasions to Charles*
ton and other United States of America, which I
shipped for him at Liverpool, and was famous for his
Leicester sheep, holding periodical sales of them at
home. He took a great many over to Ireland, and I
accompanied him to Ballinasloe Fair, in Roscommon,
which were sold at high figures. This fair is the
largest in Ireland, and in Lord Clancarty’s Park there
have been often 100,000 sheep kept in small mobs
together without pens of any sort and without a single
dog! The next year (1821) I undertook charge of a
valuable quantity by myself (Mr. Champion dreading
the sea too much), following the canal from Dublin
through the bog of Allan to Shannon harbour, and
wheels conveyed them the other fourteen miles to their
destination. I was equally successful upon both
occasions, for the management in either fell principally
on me. After this business was over I enjoyed myself
exceedingly for a while, partaking of the unbounded
hospitality of the many friends (alas 1 doubtless long
passed away) to whom I was introduced. I often
8
DOTTINGB OF MY LIFE,


think of the pleasant days I spent with a Mr. Craise,
of Rahood, near Nobber, County Meath, and with Mr.
Fitzgerald, of Phane Valley; they are long fled, but
not the memory of them. With the exception of these
short intermixtures with the outside world and a yearly
visit to Doncaster to see the St. Leger run for, I am
afraid I did not derive much benefit from my Notting-
ham or Yorkshire training, and was more inclined to
steal covertly away after Lord Scarborough’s foxhounds,
which bunted over the immediate neighbourhood, than
attend to the old women of the parish burning twitch
grass or the every-day dull work of the farm. Mr.
Champion was a kind, good man, and a thoroughly
praftical farmer, but he had a very hard, pharasaical
landlord to deal with, which drove him into utter
despair at last and to a sad end. There are few un-
acquainted with Outer's “Every man his own Cattle
Doftormany a time have I fetched the venerable
old gentleman (so much respefted by all around him)
in the gig from Retford, where he lived, about six
miles distant from Blyth, to administer to the ailments
of Mr. Champion’s valuable cattle. In 1821 I left
him and the north of England to rejoin my father, who
C
9
DOTTINGB OF HT LIFB.


had now become joint proprietor with my uncle, Mr.
James Denton, of a large landed property under the
name of “ Feltwell Place,” in Norfolk; my uncle re-
siding at the same time at the extreme end of the
estate, about two to three miles distant from us, at
"Feltwell Lodge,” which he had built, and where,
having improved it by extensive plantations for many
years, he died in 1817, aged 69.
The next four years of my life were spent at home
and at Feltwell, assisting my father .in the manage-
ment of this extensive and valuable form, the monotony
of which was very agreeably varied in the season by
plenty of partridge and pheasant shooting amongst the
preserves (which is a misnomer, for strictly speaking
they were not really preserved). My father, in the
days of his prosperity, had a large circle of friends,
many of whom, of a sporting character, used to come
down to us annually to enjoy the shooting; although
amongst them were some who cared but little for game,
but rather sought a change of scene and country air.
It was a geat treat upon these occasions to have
Charles Young, the celebrated tragedian, of world-
wide fame, with us. A finished gentleman, and one
10
DOTTXNGS OP MY LIFE.


who always carried with him his fondness for theatrical
aftion, whether on the stage or off it; it seemed to
be a fixed habit. How well I remember (how shonld
I forget it ?) the droll scene between him and his
friend, William Rix Beloe, who was an ardent
sportsman, when once upon a shooting excursion. The
dogs were with eyes intent and stems straight as the
unbending arrow, drawing steadily up to their game,
with slow and stealthy steps, guns pointed and pre-
pared, and expedation at its highest point. In a
moment the dead silence was broken into and dis-
turbed by Charles Young thus haranguing his friend
with a loud and flattering voice:—“ 1 know that
virtue to be in you, Brutus, as well as I do know your
outward favour.” The tranquillity of the scene was
over —the dogs ran in—the birds flew off—and a very
angry ebullition of feeling was very naturally displayed
by Mr. Beloe for such an unseemly interruption under
the exciting circumstances. The quarrel scene, how-
ever, of Bratus and Cassius was soon over, good
humour restored, and the covey, which had been
marked down, followed into the next field and deci-
mated. These pleasant passages in my young life
c 2
11
DOTTINGB OF MY LIFE.


were very, very exhilirating, and more, too, of a similar
congenial nature were conneded with them; for at
this particular period I enjoyed a good deal of hunting
with the harriers of Mr. Edward Dewing, of Guist,
near Fakenham, Norfolk, a very fine old sportsman,
who for long kept that neighbourhood in merry
humour. lam proud to say he was fond of us “young
chaps ” because we were fond of riding at what, in
those days of “ the formidable," it might be we were
careless about. Much of the leaping over part of the
country which be used to hunt consisted of double
ditches with high banks. In taking them we managed
to land midway on the bank, and scramble by force of
muscle up to the top, theJanding from which eminence
afterwards on the opposite side was a work of time,
and what our worthy sporting fair on and pattern was
wont emphatically to call “hanging out a drying”
Ned Dewing (for we were so allowed to call him) did
not consider it necessary (as I fear too many do) to be
an habitual blasphemer because he was a sportsman;
and in moments of severe irritation, in consequence of
“greenhorns "overriding the hounds or riding upon
them, and spoiling the day’s diversion at times when
12
DOTTINGS OP MY LIFE.


it was most exciting, he adopted a very harmless sub-
stitute for an oath. I even now fancy I hear his
stentorian voice addressed to the unruly: —“ Dash—
my—sister's—tafs—tail—do—hold hard—gentlemen”
By the time he had uttered each word, with emphasis,
of this Alexandrine line, his anger was appeased, and
he was as mild again as mother’s milk. His objeft
was completely gained without violating the sacred
injunction “ Swear not at all.” The reminiscence of
many an anecdote like this makes, as it must have
done surely to many others of the same age, still
dearer the memory of one who with most of his
generation has now for long passed away. Peace to
his manes /
But I have digressed—
“ There came a sound from heaven that awoke my soul;
it was the voice of days gone by, and which now rolled before
me in all their glory.”
About this period of time we became intimate with
Captain, afterwards Rear-Admiral, Manby, of notoriety
in old Queen Caroline’s trial to assert ha conjugal
rights, who shot over our grounds for years, and who,
with his young and pretty wife, was very fond of the
enjoyment of hawking, and we used to join in their
13
DOTTHfGS OF MX LIFE.


parties for the purpose. I will endeavour to describe
this novel amusement, as it is only confined to a few
parts of England, hemeries being very scarce. There
happened to be one in our immediate neighbourhood,
at Colonel Wilson’s estate, of Didlington Hall. The
Colonel took delight in having Germans over in the
season of the year with falcons; and they alone seem
to be able to train them to the work and bring it to
great perfection. The Germans in the evening take
t heir hawks perched on their hands, jessed and hooded,
to an open country, but where they can be concealed,
and a little distance from the hemety to which the
herons are returning slowly and heavily laden with fish
from the neighbouring pools; and when they are seen
wending their way homewards (they generally travel
singly) die falcon is unshackled and liberated, and
immediately soars high above his prey and comes down
rapidly upon it; and rapid as is the descent so is the
disgorgement of all the little fish the poor heron has
been sedulously collecting all the day, and he returns
home, lighter certainly in one resped, but heavier in
heart that bis nestlings must go supperless to bed.
They are scarcely ever injured, for the moment the
14
DOTTINGS OF UT LIFE.


two fall to the ground together the falconer, on horse-
back, is at hand, recaptures his bird without any
trouble, rewarding him for his good conduct with a
tempting morsel of raw meat. The most attractive
feature of this chase is to witness the wonderful per-
fection with which the falcon is trained, quickly obeying
the voice and coming to the caller when he is poised
up in the air (even before seizing his prey) and hears
the peculiar hallos that summon him to captivity
again. Mr. Edward Fowell, whose esteemed father
had a fine property adjoining Admiral Manby’s at
Northwold, in Norfolk, was often my companion upon
these occasions, and he left sons and a daughter in
this colony, where he himself died many yeais ago.
To return to Feltwell. I had only one regret in
leaving it, and that was of a veiy painful character, as
it must have been to us all, to part with old and valued
servants who had lived with ns many more than
twenty, and some more than thirty years I And I be-
lieve the eleCtric chain that bound us in affectionate and
kindly remembrance of their long and faithful services
(almost feudal in their nature) “ vibrated (as Cowper
says) in unison, and their hearts replied.” However,
15
BOOTINGS OF UT LIFE.


it was imperative to leave it and them, for the pro-
perly over which I was jointly presiding and nursing
was deeply involved in debt and under a mortgage
incurred by my hither’s predecessors to the fearful
amount of some .£40,000 (forty thousand pounds),
besides an annuity fixed upon it of £2OO (two hundred
pounds), so that my father often used to observe that
it would be as difficult “to resuscitate a dead horse ”
as to redeem and recover it from the hands of the
Philistines; and, together with all the stock, it was
wound up and went into other hands, when it might
truly be said the whole family of the Tooseys were
afloat in the world without a single prosped before
them. Tis well the crash came at last, for our posi-
tion had long been a very false one indeed, living in
splendid poverty (from hand to mouth so to speak),
with servants in livery waiting upon us. Luckily we
had a good aunt (Mary Denton), an excellent lady,
my mother’s aster, who resided with us, and who
having carefully saved her portion in early life from
the family wreck, kept ours afloat whilst in deep
waters, and was not unmindful of us all when she left
us for a better world. This was in 1825, at which
16
Domiras of ut life.


particular time a new era of life opened to me, which 1
eagerly embraced—that of going abroad. It was pro-
vidential, and 1 have so regarded it ever since, for thus
cut off from my paternal estate I had a sorry chance
as an impecunious wanderer in effete old England of
well-doing. My hither had given me a good educa-
tion, which is the best wealth one can have, and he
could do no more. My new destiny led me under a
lucky star to this beautiful island, which was then a
penal settlement, and the spirit of man was not
altogether divine. Our labourers were almost entirely
prisoners supplied plentifully by the mother country,
and were assigned (without wages) to settlers upon
application for certain periods of time, according to
the durrtion of their sentence; and they cleared the
forests, made the roads, and cultivated the soil. More
of this anon. But let me observe in passing that the
nature and effefts of transportation to this colony are
fully entered upon and ably described in “ West’s Tas-
mania,” an excellent work in two volumes, which I
strongly recommend for general perusal, in which the
reader will find that the transportation of criminals to
all the colonies was discontinued finally in 1853, after
17
DOTTINGS OF MT LIFE.


many years of violent agitation by the colonists to
effect it with the Home Government The coup-de-
grace was at length given by the formation of the
‘'Australasian League,” a noble band of almost
universal brotherhood under the banner of “the Aus-
tralias are one.” Sydney was the headquarters, where
the respective delegates from each colony assembled,
and the numerical and moral force of these gatherings,
and their unmistakable utterances, could no longer be
resisted by the English Parliament The continent of
New Holland and its surrounding appendages have
advanced steadily since they have exchanged prison
for free labour both in respectability and prosperity,
although as to the latter the advancement of Tasmania
may be materially attributed to the late discovery of
rich gold, tin, and other minerals.
On November 17th, 1825, then, commenced my
entrance into public life, when I left England in com-
pany with Captain Thomas, the attorney for, or repre-
sentative of, six gentlemen in the first instance, viz.:—
Colonel Labour, Colonel Gibbs, Colonel Elphinstone,
Mr. Robert Keate, Mr. Stewart Majoribanks, and Mr.
Wm. Kershaw, who had received from Lord Bathurst
18
DOCTINGS OF MY LIFE.


an order to locate twenty thousand acres of land in
Tasmania (then called Van Diemen’s Land), and
twenty thousand acres at Western Port, now known as
Victoria. The grants were given upon the condition
that a large capital should be expended in the impor-
tation of thoroughbred and other horses, cattle, sheep,
and indented servants, and the'objed was the cultiva-
tion of wool, flax, tobacco, com, and such other pro-
ductions to which the soil and climate were best
suitable, passing under the name or style of the “ New
South Wales and Van Diemen’s Land Establishment;”
and accordingly some (fifty thousand pounds)
were idly sunk in this adventure for some considerable
length of tune. On the 17th of November, 1825 (to
repeat the date) we embarked on board the ship
Albion, of 320 tons burthen, Captain Prodor the able
commander, at Gravesend, taking with ns 17 (seven-
teen) indented servants—grooms, shepherds,. &c.; 28
thoroughbred English, Flemish, and Cleveland horses;
20 neat cattle of the Hereford and improved Durham
breed; 97 Merino, Leicester, and Southdown sheep;
and also several dogs, pigs, and farming implements.
The Albion touched at the Cape of Good Hope (23rd
19
BOOTINGS OF MY LIFE.


February, 1826) for a few days for provisions and
horse forage, &c, where a pleasant addition was made
to our society by Lieut. and Mrs. Lloyd, from India,
in the native service, on leave of absence from ill-
health, who afterwards took up their residence at Bryn
Estyn, New Norfolk, Tasmania, where he died in
1879. Lieutenant (subsequently Major) Lloyd was a
most agreeable companion, a gentleman of a most
refined mind, and my early intimacy and friendly cor-
respondence with him, with the exception of a few
breaks when he temporarily visited India, was steadily
continued till the day of his death. On board ship a
“ Literary Club” was established, and be was our
worthy and able president; but as a body we were not
literary, nay, most distinguished illiterate ; and it,
after a while, fell to the ground in the absence of
sufficient force and power to maintain it. At the
Cape we shipped seven more horses, eight Merino
sheep, and two pigs. We put to sea again on sth
March.
A word about our visit. Cape Town is prettily
situated at the foot of Table Mountain, and sloping
gradually down to the sea shore, the houses low
20
DOTTINGB OF MY LIFE.


(seldom if ever so much as three storeys high), with
flat terraced roofs, each having a stoSp, as it is termed
in Dntch—that is, an elevation from two to six feet in
front, forming a pleasant evening promenade; each
white-washed or stuccoed, reflecting the heat most in-
tolerably. The streets unpaved, but good and regular,
intersecting each other at right angles; but S.E.
winds generally prevailing volumes of dust are ex-
tremely troublesome, but little rain falling except in
the winter months. May, June, and July. It is now
here about the middle of autumn, and the heat very
oppressive, the thermometer varying from 80 ° to 85 °.
The public buildings consist principally of the Com-
mercial Exchange, the Town Hall, the prison, or as
it is termed the “Trunk,” and the Barracks. There
are also two churches, one of which we attended, a
square, neat building, and possesses a well-toned
organ, which adds to its interior beauty. It has very
few pews, the body of the church and the recesses
being filled with old-fashioned chairs for the general
accommodation of individuals, a novel scene to a
British auditor. The service was performed most
devoutly, and a sermon preached, one of the best 1
21
Domnas OF MT LIFE.


ever heard; the reading desk, elevated higher than
usual, served for both purposes. The Dutch service is
performed here previous to ours commencing. An
avenue of oaks leads you to the Governor's (Lord
Charles Somerset’s) house, very tasty and cottage-like.
At the extremity of the walk is a menagerie, free of
access to anyone. We rode ime day to Constantia.
about twelve miles distant hence, and which was the
only opportunity 1 had of seeing a little of the interior
of the country. It was extremely wild and beautiful,
but fertile only in spots; many of what we should call
prized and valuable plants growing wild and neglefted
here, such as the myrtle, geranium, &c., &c., and
innumerable bulbous roots. I thought of Gray’s lines
then —
Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,
And waste its sweetness on the desert air.
The vineyards appeared to be the chief cultivation,
which were certainly throughout very luxuriant, though
they then looked to disadvantage, much of the fruit
having been gathered; the field vines were low and
standards , not a single prop in support to be seen
amongst them, the trunk being generally veiy old
22
Domnas OF XT LIFE.


(from 100 to 150 years), at least many I saw were
thus ancient. Great care is always taken to allow
only the youngest branches to remain. Spaces of
from 25 to 30 acres thus occupied are very common.
We had an introduction to a Mr. Colyn, of Constantia,
who is famous for making a particular sort of wine
named by him after his place of resilence ; it is more
as a cordial and much imported into England. It is
of two colours, the red and white Constantia, but
similar in flavour, the price not exceeding 18s. per
gallon. We sipped a little of both and wrote our
names in a large book, a universal custom observed
by all visitors. He treated ns most hospitably, and
his gardens, grounds, taste, and the scenery around,
amply recompensed us for our tedious journey. I say
tedious because we found the roads horribly bad, and
of course they were the more so the more inwardly we
travelled. In the commencement of our trip we .break-
fasted with a Mr. Van Reenan, of Wynburgh, a Dutch
settler, about five miles from Cape Town. It was a
curious set out, consisting of buttermilk, eggs, apples,
grapes, and preserved fruits, two black boys in con-
stant attendance fanning us with oaken boughs to
23
DOmifGS OF MY LIFE.


drive away the mosquitoes. The inhabitants are ex-
ceedingly friendly and social throughout, and seek
the society of new comers. They are principally com-
posed, and about equally, of English and Dutch; but
alas, slavery and the lash exist, and thus the fair face
of the country loses much of its attraction.
As aforesaid, we sailed again on the sth March,
1826, I ought to have mentioned perhaps earlier that
besides myself, Captain Thomas was accompanied by
a Mr. Widowson, who was to have charge of twenty
thousand acres of land in Tasmania, whilst I was to
proceed to Western Port (across Bass Straits) to take
up the same area there. A Mr. Martin was also on
board as an assistant, a feeble old man, who died soon
after landing. A Mr. M'Carthy, a distant relation of
Captain Thomas, came out with us, but for what
purpose I never could divine. He soon returned,
however, to his Emerald Isle.
We cast anchor in the Derwent on 4th May, 1826.
Before quitting this subjeft I give below a more par-
ticular account of the increase and decrease of the
stock shipped:—
24
DOTTINGB OF MY LIFE.


STOCK IMPRIMIS SHIPPED AT BLACKWALL, LONDON, OH
BOARD THE ALBION, —PROCTOB, THE COMMANDER,
NOVEMBER, 1825.
28 Horses
20 Neat Cattle ( 2calves
97 Sheep \39 lambs } * mn S the ™7*B e
2 Pigs
SHIPPED AT THE CAPE OF GOOD HOPE.
7 Horses
8 Merino Sheep
2 Pigs
TOTAL AMOUNT.
35 Horses
20 Heat Stock
105 Sheep
2 Calves
4 Pigs
DISEMBARKED AT HOBART TOWN.
12 Horses
11 Heat Stock
71 Shew
7 Lambs
1 Calf
4 Pigs
TOTAL MORTALITY.
23 Horses
9 Heat Stock
34 Sheep
32 Lambs
1 Calf
So terminated a voyage complete with nothing bnt
misery and misfortune. It was, however, only what
might have been expeded, the natural effect of mis-
management and overstrained economy. Only
D
25
DOTTINGS OF MY LIFE.


imagine 147 head of stock squeezed into a vessel ill
calculated to hold half the quantity: hay of a bad
description, partly stowed upon deck, with no covering
to proteft it either from above or below, and partly
between decks and in the hold, so as to allow the poor
animals but just space enough to breath the breath of
life; a long tedious passage of nearly six months,
attended with much rough weather, besides the usual
annoyance of quarrels and unsociability, especially with
the commander of the vessel, who was one of the ablest
seamen that ever walked a quarter-deck—and a toler-
able idea may be formed of the discomfort on board.
It was my painful task to be an eye witness of the death
of many of the horses, some of which may literally be
said to have expired by inches, others dropping
momentarily from thorough exhaustion or acute in-
flammation. Three of the best were insured to their
utmost value (two of which died), the remainder only
against the risks of the sea. Three thoroughbred
horses fortunately survived the voyage, and were
landed in a very emaciated state, viz.:—Buffalo,
Bolivar, and Aladdin, and their importation has
materially contributed ever since to the improvement
26
DOTTINGB OF KT LIFR.


of the Colonial breed, either as racers, roadsters, or
carriage horses. Waterloo and Whizgig, both also of
high caste, were sent out a year or so afterwards and
added to the Cressy stud; they were also highly
thought of and sought after, and all the above names
are familiar as favourites of the turf still with the
general public.
We remained on board the Albion for two days after
arrival with the stock, and whilst arrangements could
be made for tbeir landing. On the first morning upon
our coming on deck about the first sight that caught
our eyes was the hanging from the gaol wall of the
notorious bushranger Brady and four of his gang;
and the next morning witnessed seven more despera-
does hanging in a row, all for murder. The greater
part of these men had been holding the country in
terror for the last two or three years of their lives, and
fortunately for us, therefore, it became in consequence
much more safe to travel over, at least for some little
time to come, and until fresh outbreaks took place.
Captain Thomas proceeded at once to Sydney, when
the vessel was unloaded, to confer with the then
Govemor-in-Chief (Sir Charles Darling, I believe) and
P 3
27
DOTTIKGB OF MY LIFE.


to ratify bis grants of land. The Albion was after-
wards bound for India, and Lieut, and Mrs. Lloyd
proceeded thither in her. After Captain Thomas’s
return to Hobart Town a little vessel was freighted to
proceed to Cape Portland, situated on the north-
eastern side of the island, with the view of taking up
the Company’s grant of land there, Mr. Widowson
embarking in it with several indented servants and
prisoners, and a complement of all necessary stores.
The crazy craft (the Sally, Captain Crabb) was
wrecked at Waterhouse Island with a serious loss of
life (including the captain, I believe), and amongst
those drowned were a blacksmith’s wife and his five
children, all of whom we had brought with us from
England. The locality was then abandoned, and Mr.
Widowson shortly afterwards retired from the Com-
pany and returned to England. During this period
Duncan’s farm of 1,200 acres, with a large frontage
on the Lake River, was very judiciously purchased by
Captain Thomas for £1,200, and the remainder of
the establishment was moved up from Hobart Town
and from other places where it had been scattered, to
take possession of it, occupying for about twelve or
28
DOTMNGB OF JIT LIFE.


eighteen months a vacant unfinished house, by the
kind permission of Mr. Brumby, on his adjoining pro-
perty called “ Richmond Hill,” whilst buildings and
fencing were being effected on Duncan’s farm ; and
this purchase most fortunately led at last to the final
seleftion of 20,000 acres of a fine trad of country con-
tiguous and in one continuous block, extending to the
Pennyroyal Creek or Liffey Rivulet at the back.
About the year 1828 I temporarily left the estab-
ishment, tired of the inactivity then prevailing and the
excess of officers and men unnecessarily attached to
it, and unwittingly and unwisely rented a farm of the
late Mr. Barnes, now called Trevallyn. The less said
about this step the better. I got away from it as soon
as I could, involved in debt and difficulties. I then
proceeded to Sydney (to seek my fortune, as it were),
taking with me several letters of introduction, which
were but of little avail. After travelling about
wearily and alone in the world, no employment and no
friend—and a more desolate life than this cannot be
imagined—l finally was introduced to Messrs. Berry
and Woolstoncraft, merchants, and undertook the
management of their large agricultural farm at Shoal-
29
DOTTLNGB OF MY LIFE.


haven, on the eastern coast of New South Wales and
below Illawarra, or the Five Islands, where a large
body of prisoners, principally Irish, were employed to
look after the stock, cultivate the soil, and raft cedar
from the mountains to the shipping place. A very
fertile country, but lonely. The aborigines were my
principal companions, and with whose assistance I
made at all my leisure time a very extensive collection
of the rare and most beautiful birds that abound in
that neighbourhood, which would have been a valuable
presentation to the British Museum, and perhaps im-
mortalised my humble name, for they were very choice
and a very large colleftion. However, their distri-
bution amongst my friends in Tasmania was highly
prized, and created from their variety much astonish-
ment and delight; but without my sable brethren 1
could not have collefted a tithe of them; and as I
have spent some careless happy days amongst them,
I will before passing away from the subject dwell a
little upon their habits, customs, and weapons of de-
fence. The latter are not very numerous but in-
geniously made. Their spears are about 12 feet long,
which they impel under unerring aim with the
30
DOTOIfGS OF MY LIFE.


womera attached to the end. Their boomerang is a
very effective weapon of attack and defence; they
throw it high in the air from them, and after hammer,
able evolutions it returns to the feet of the thrower.
Their waddy is for close combat, so also is the wom-
bombetha, both heavy and very formidable. Their
heeliman is for the defence of the head against the
two latter, and to ward off the spears they have an oval
shield behind which, when objects of attack, they
crouch themselves up so as scarcely to be visible, and
protected by it they often stand punishment, as it is
termed, when they have transgressed against their
tribe. Their barbarous language is uninteresting, but
one soon picks up enough of their jargon to make
oneself understood.
CORROBOREE OR DANCE OF THE ABORIGINAL NATIVES
OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
June 20th, 1828.—Taking a solitary walk fell in
with Paddy Gaily with his two gins (for polygamy is
encouraged), who was going with a companion to a
corroboree at Tom Thumb’s Lagoon, given by the
Five Island blacks in honour of a visit paid them by
another tribe from Liverpool. As it was not far I


accompanied them. They’ “ opened the ball ” about
sunset, the men previously painting their breasts and
backs with red ochre and pipeclay in various forms and
figures, also their eyebrows and cheeks. In doing this
they always retire from their gins in small parties, each
having a fire, and assist each other most assiduously
to beautify. They then assemble in an open and
sheltered spot close by; a fire is lit. They then form
themselves into a body making three sides of a square,
with the front open, and converse. The women, who
paint themselves but little, are not admitted into the
square, but form a straight line each side of it in about
equal numbers. The figure is somewhat similar to
Both men and women bear in their left hands a branch
of a green shrub, emblematic of peace, as the olive of
old. The men have also some a spear and some a
waddy. An old chief of the tribe and his gin or gins
act as musicians, striking upon a waddy guard with a
thick stick, and accompanying the noise with his voice.
The gins assist in this operation or vociferation by
32
DOTTIN&B 07 MT Lli'E.


dapping their hands upon an old bundle, producing
a hollow sound—call it music if we will, but of the
vilest charafter. To such, however, the men dance
with much glee, and slowly advancing in a body they
occasionally change sides, and take it by turns to come
forward singly in front, or upon the arena as it may
be termed, and exhibit the mimicry of warfare. After
many have advanced thus, imitating battle or the ehas» ;
and they do both well, they come opposite their guests,
who are seated in a half-circle, each family round its
respective fire. Here also are assembled “ the lame,
the blind, and the halt ” of their own tribe, and such
as are incapacitated from “ tripping the light fanfoctfr
toe.” They continue their dancing, advancing rapidly
and so retreating on the same spot, with great energy,
but with very little variety in their movements than
above described, sometimes to a very late hour, sing-
ing occasionally when resting from their terpsichorean
labours. The “ladies” are not treated with that
marked resped which they invariably command in the
English ball-room. They form, as they do upon all
other occasions, but a second feature in the scenes of
barbarous life. They never mix with the men or in
33
DOTTIIfGS OF MY LIFE.


the body nl the dance, but continue on each side, ad-
vancing upon one foot, throwing their bodies forward
and singing and holding the green bough already
alluded to in their right hand, taking care to keep the
same straight line with the main body; they retire long
before the men. I left them about 4 o’clock in the
morning. The circumstance of their invariably choos-
ing the time when the moon is at the full for holding
their corroborees and other games and ceremonies
would induce one to suppose that they worship that
luminary.
These poor benighted brethren of ours are very
friendly to and fond of the English in the neighbour-
hood I am writing about, and many a day throughout
many a month have I passed with these faithful fellows
up the high cedar mountains; and I have sat down
for hours upon a log of wood, under a canopy of para-
sitic plants which completely shaded me from the sun
under the hottest day (these arabesque bowers extend
for many miles), giving my loaded gun to an expert
marksman (they are all mbre or less good shots) to
shoot me the maneura superha, wonga-wonga, green
pigeon, and other rare birds, whose notes they alone
34
DOTTINGB OF HT LIFE.


could hear and distinguish at a long distance, and steal
upon with silent cautious step over the carpet of dead
rustling leaves which there bestrew the barren ground.
I had not the smallest fear though unarmed and alone.
During a long sitting sometimes a little book became
my pleasant companion, and when my first ones re-
turned I was generally rewarded with a few of the
choicest specimens of the feathered tribe laid down
at my feet uninjured in their plumage. These were
careless, romantic days. Upon one occasion they
brought me a native dog of very large size. These
brutes ate very destruftive among sheep, and have the
combined appearance of both the fox and the wolf,
though not particularly resembling either. I have seen
in England Scotch shepherds’ dogs somewhat similar
to them. They have a wiry coat, short pricked ears,
and a brush tail. The colour of this was a dingy
yellow, but in this respeft I understand they vary.
They are stupid animals, not formidable to meet, and
always inclined to retreat from you ; a domestic dog
will generally overtake and overpower them. I gave
to the blackfellows the one shot, which they roasted
whole, and it made them an excellent feast.
35
DOTTING# OF MY LIFE.


The following is another of their customs which is
interesting:—
CEREMON AND MEANING OF KNOCKING OUT THE
FRONT TOOTH OF THE ABORIGINAL NATIVES OF
NEW SOUTH WALES.
The singular ceremony the black fellows have of
knocking out one of the front teeth of the black boys
is performed at about the age of 12 to 14 as near as
can be ascertained, for they have not the remotest idea
of age, at least seemingly so. It is done with a view of
making them valiant and brave in battle, besides
qualifying them for marriage and for mixing in every
mystery of their lives. When the stated time arrives,
all the black fellows in the neighbourhood assemble
together and receive from their mothers the black boys
appointed to undergo the ceremony, who with their
mothers, friends, and acquaintances, resort to a certain
spot, when they all dance round an immense fire, sing,
and corroboree, for two or three days previous to the
operation, and all the preceding night, as if it were to
drive away the terror of the pain to come from the
minds of the mothers and boys. The boys are then
removed to another place a short distance off, and the
36
DOTTINGB OF MT LIFE.


gins (wives) and piccaninnies (children) cover them*
selves over with green boughs and creep slowly and
stealthily away until they are out of sight, when they
rise up and retire far away from the scene. After
this an old black fellow, commonly called by them
“ crodjey,” or doftor, performs the operation on each
boy by turns. It is effefted by two pieces of stick,
one much smaller than the other, similar to the aft of
punching. The boys have each a stone in their
mouths, put in by a black fellow, and supposed by
them to have grown in the stomach. This stone is
afterwards carried about by them and held sacred as
an antidote against wounds or injury in their fights.
It is superstitiously kept from the sight of all black-
women, as otherwise it would make their enemies
viftorious as well as create private feuds amongst the
neighbouring clans. After the extraction has taken
place an assistant surgeon, if he may be so called, is
in attendance on each boy, and removes him to a still
more retired spot on his shoulders, first blindfolding
him with the most convenient covering at hand. The
night afterwards, still blindfolded, they are brought
each to their mothers, who with the other black women
37
DOTTINGB OF MY LIFE.


and piccaninnies have resorted to the same spot again
and covered themselves up again with green boughs.
They, however, all continue covered for some time,
except the respective mothers, who stand up and
receive each her son from the attendant black fellow.
They then caress over them, sing, clap their hands,
and shout, constantly handling and pressing them with
the view to make them well-formed, strong, and war-
like. This is repeated the next morning, after which
neither the mother nor any of the black women see the
boys, or at least very rarely, for nearly twelve moons
(I imagine they mean the changes of it). From the
time the boys’teeth are knocked out they, as well as
the father and mother of each, invariably cany a fire
stick. This is with a similar notion of making them
valiant. The black fellows bring the boys food, &c.,
as they are not allowed themselves to walk about for
fear of seeing the black women, in which case they
would be supposed to die, or the tribe they belonged to
conquered. During the lapse of the twelve mooas
the boys are not allowed to eat any animal food, such
as birds, wallaby, kangaroo, opossum, &c., &c., neither
is the father or mother of each, but confine themselves
38
DOTTIKGB OF MY LIFE.


principally to fish and “ parabin ” (herbs). At the ex-
piration of the time the boys are delivered up to their
fathers and mothers by the crodjey,” or doftor who
knocked the teeth out, and who receives them from
their attendant black fellow. They are then allowed
to eat “ old man ” kangaroo and “ old man ” wallaby,
afterwards the female of each, when they are not re-
stricted in any way—are allowed to wear ornaments
peculiar to their tribe, and may be considered fully
qualified for even’ privilege of a man.— Gleanings
from a Gin.
1 have never seen but one who had not had this
ceremony performed upon him, and he appeared to lie
quite an outcast of their society.
A DAY AMONG THE BLACKS SPENT BY ME AT SHOAL-
HAVEN. NEW SOUTH WALES.
April 27th, 1829. —Went to Worriga upon a visit to
the blacks to prevail upon them to pull the maize crop ;
they are much more expert at this work than the white
men. The pulling and cutting it down with hoes is
performed by black fellows, whilst the “gins,” or
the women, with equal celerity are husking it. The
blacks are generally eager to assist in this operation.
39
DOTTINGB OF MY X.IFK.


as well for the liberal hire they receive as for the
opportunity that is afforded for pilfering, to which they
are exceedingly addided. I was doubtful in my present
excursion of prevailing upon them to comply with my
wishes, in consequence of one of their tribe having
been shot last Saturday by a small settler adjoining
for having been deteded in the ad of stealing his
maize. I met them, however, all coming (in number
about 500) for the express purpose. I was induced to
extend my ride to the spot where a few of the relatives
of the deceased and the most decrepid gins were left
in charge of the body, and were encamped at a little
distance from it, in woeful mood, many of them in
tears, and at intervals bursting out into bitter lamenta-
tions. (1 inwardly breathed a hearty curse upon the
savage who had created such a world of suffering.)
Two very old men were watching over the dead, who
was carefully bound up in two sheets of bark and
placed dose to the fire, though the weather was in-
sufferably hot. I bribed them with a fig of tobacco
to allow me to see him, which they acquiesced in,
much against their usual custom. They had placed
him in a singular position, bending his legs completely
40
DOTTIKGB OF I£Y LIFE.


underneath him, which I understand is their general
way. At the expiration of a few days, and when
mourning for him was exhausted, they intended to
bum him and bury his bones; but until that time
came one or other of the attendants were constantly in
office fanning him with green boughs, and singing
coronachs over him. The blacks nevertheless seem,
after they have removed themselves from the objeft,
to be [quite careless about it, but they have a
great objection to the subjeft being named, and when
catechised as to their burial ceremonies they reply in
English sorrowfully and feelingly, “Massa, don’t
mention.” Returning home I set the whole tribe
gathering and cutting down maize (a large crop); they
cleared about 30 acres in a very short space of time.
Two cobs of com and a small piece of tobacco to each
is ample daily payment
I now take leave of this particular subjeft, which,
however, supplies ample room to moralise upon. It
was my good fortune* as I have already narrated, to be
thrown amongst friendly, and in some respefts not
uninteresting, aborigines of New Holland, useful to
wholesome progress to a limited degree if their habits
S
41
DOTTINGS OF MY LIFE.


and quaint customs are respefted. But many hostile
tribes exist over the length and breadth of that immense
continent, rendered so, I much fear, in too many in-
stances by the inhuman and relentless treatment they
have met with. Might overcomes right, and with but
little, and often not any, attempt on the white man’s
part to establish a good understanding amongst them.
The fatal gun is doing its deadly work, and the
primeval race are being gradually exterminated before
the footsteps of the Christain (?) invader. “The
poor blacks ” are now suffering (have long suffered)
the “blackness” of wretchedness. And why ? Because
they have occasionally and very naturally risen up in
defence of their native soil, and have committed,
under the ferocity of uncultivated nature, intensified
t oo frequently by persecution, a£ts of unnecessary
violence. Granted this. Nevertheless “ retaliation ”
is the banner under which they have mainly fought
and are fighting, and as a punishment, which is not
even awarded to the conquered nations of the civilised
world, they are no longer allowed “to live under the
shade of their own fig tree or drink the juice of their
own grape.” Alas! how universal is this war of races.
42
DOTTIKOS OF MY LIFE.


Let us look around us, not only upon this hemisphere
but upon almost every other portion of God’s fair
earth, and we must draw our own conclusions that
blood blots the escutcheon where the Englishman
treads, and the “ bend or ” of ancient heraldry is
obliterated.
To resume my tale. I soon became disgusted with
my life at Shoalhaven, where I remained but little
more than twelve months. It seemed to me like being
buried alive, for the spot (a rich trad of alluvial soil)
was a very lonely one, with no society except upon
rare occasions when settlers or surveyors crossed my
path. Prisoners and black fellows were my principal
surroundings. The proprietors, Messrs. Berry and
Woolstonecraft, visited the place now and then alter-
nately, and remained awhile; but this was no relief to
my monotony —our then relative positions forbidding
“ the feast of reason and the flow of soul ” which I
had always been accustomed to, so that I cared but
little, and sought not the occasion that intervened.
Mr. Berry was a Scotchman, shrewd and .intelligent,
an old colonist, and for long a member of the Sydney
Parliament. Mr. Woolstonecraft was an English
K 2


gentleman, of a high culture of mind, but a martyr to
constant illness and consequent capriciousness of
temper: both now gone to their long account I was
very glad to separate myself from two such eccentric
char afters, and I left them and their fine property in
1830, and early in that year I sailed in the ship Lang,
Captain Sutherland, from Sydney for Hobart Town,
simply with the view of saying good-by to my early
friends in Tasmania before I proceeded to India,
having received, through my father’s influence, strong
letters of introduction to Sir Edward Barnes, then
Governor of Ceylon. It appears to me often, when I
reflect, that I was again directed to this beautiful little
island by the interposition of a kind Providence to
shield me from jungle fever and all the numerous
ailments incidental to the unhealthy climate whither I
had made up my mind to go. When I landed at
Hobart Town it was almost emptied of its male
population, and most accessible to capture by an
enemy. The town was guarded nominally by a few
old servants of the Crown and pensioners, who
leisurely paraded the streets with a few muskets over
their shoulders as ancient seemingly as themselves.


The bulk of the inhabitants were in the interior en-
gaged in what was then erroneously called the “ black
war,” which was instituted by that humane man and
most excellent Governor Colonel Arthur, with the view
to capture the aborigines of the island without blood-
shed, and remove them to a convenient spot or island
in Bass Straits, where they could not molest the settlers
nor be molested by them, and be promoted to a
greater degree of comfort in every way under the
auspices of the Colonial Government The attempt,
however, was a failure under the best intentions. Hie
crafty blacks, cherishing their liberty above all price,
easily avoided the extensively concerted cordon that
was formed to surround them by crawMg and creep-
ing through it and escaped with one or two exceptions,
and only an old woman or two, I believe, were taken.
The scheme was very costly and followed out for some
length of time, and I am afraid, from all I have learnt,
did not end without some sacrifice of human life on
the part of the pursued. A brave man, however, was
at hand soon after, a Mr. Robinson, who went fearlessly
amongst them at the constant and imminent peril of
his life for some years, and won their confidence by


conciliatory and friendly measures; and after much
perseverance and personal exposure pbilanthropically
devoted to this arduous and interesting subjecft,
succeeded in withdrawing them from their bush haunts,
and they were removed to several safe localities, their
different tribes not being separated. The objeft was
gained, the interior clear of them and safe, but under
their loss of freedom and deprived of their old hunting
grounds, they have gradually died off, and the race is
now extinft. A fuller account of their history is em-
bodied in “West’s Tasmania,” to which complete
work I again refer my readers.
It so happened that at the particular time of my re-
visit to this island (from which I now write) that Mr.
Dutton, the then manager of the New South Wales
and Van Diemen’s Land establishment in succession
to Captain Thomas, had received letters from the pro-
prietors of the establishment to seek me out and invite
me to return to my original position in it, and I re-
ceived a written request from Mr. Dutton to do so.
Just then I was the guest of Mr. Joseph Archer, sen.,
of Panshanger (the adjoining property), who was a
warm friend of mine and very much attached to me.


and communicated to Mr. Dutton my acceptance of
his offer. After dividing a little leisure with my early
friends, Mr. George Hobler, of Killyfaddy, and Mr.
Thomas Fletcher, of Tallentire, and in consequence
of this unexpected invitation, I abandoned my con-
templated trip to India, and crossed over the Lake
River with my carpet bag in my hand from Panshanger,
returning to the seat of my former and first labours in
the year 1830 as aforesaid at Cressy House, which
Mr. Dutton had partly built during my absence. It
was at the end of this year, or early in 1831, that
Captain Thomas was speared to death by the blacks
at Port Sorell, where he had located himself; and in
the same year Mr. Dutton was superseded from home
by Mr. Louis Beauvais, who, quite unaccustomed to an
aCtive country life and fond of pleasure, left from the
first the management of affairs to me, and was generally
absent. His unfitness for business and want of
punctuality in money matters (for of course he held
the purse strings), placed me often in a very unpleasant
and extremely helpless condition; and finally, owing
to so many overdue bills and interest money being
entirely disregarded by Mr. 8., an execution was put
47
DOTMNGS OF MY LIFE.


on the stock and land and a sheriff’s officer took
possession of the place. In consequence of this I rode
down to Hobart Town in May, 1833, and had an' in-
terview with Colonel Arthur, who received me very
kindly, advised with me, and promised to represent
the state of matters to the gentlemen at home. At
the same time I had a long conference with Mr.
Beauvais, who came to the arrangement of tem-
porarily putting me in charge of the estate, and pro-
posed going to England. This the public were
informed of by a public notice to that effeft Very
soon afterwards, however, in the same year, I received
a power of attorney from the proprietors to supersede
him. Time then rolled on evenly and without much
change, and the estate yearly improved, and the stock
and Socks increased in number and value. To
accomplish this increase, as I had not the means to
purchase, I obtained sheep from Mr. Lawrence, of
Formosa, Lake River, for a certain period on the
halves, and a large herd of improved cattle from Mr.
Thomas Archer, of Woolmers, Longford, upon the
same conditions. I sold all the imported horses and
their increase by annual periodical sales, as they were
48
DOTTINGS OF MY LIFE.


of much less value than any other property on the
establishment, and the growth of wool for the English
market was my chief consideration. Thus I was
enabled by slow degrees to retire all the outstanding
bills and engagements which existed, as well as a
mortgage incurred by my predecessor of
borrowed from a Mr. Thomas Scott, of Launceston, at
15 per cent. I was also further enabled to purchase,
under a certain credit, a giant of land from Mr. W.
G. Sams, consisting of 1,200 acres for £ 1,200, which
intersefted the Company’s property at the back, to
which it was added after a lengthened correspondence
with the proprietors. About this time (1833) a Mr.
Thomas Winter brought me letters of introdudion
from the proprietors, and conferred with me in a very
pleasant way upon the affairs of the estate, rode over
the property, and stopped some days. Soon after-
wards (1834) Mr. T. D. Edwards came for the same
purpose, and was of material assistance to me in
arranging for the liquidation of the debts and making
an estimate of the value of the whole estate and stock
for transmission home, which occupied several weeks,
busily but agreeably spent. In these matters and in
49
dottings of my life.


my official communications I had already received,
and long afterwards continued to receive, much
literary assistance from my old friend Mr. Robert
Pringle Stuart, whose friendship, together with that of
many others I could boast of, viz.—Mr. Joseph Archer,
sen., Charles B. Hardwicke, Thomas Fletcher, George
Hobler, Dr. Gaunt, George Cathcart, Alfred Home,
and other kindred spirits. Nor must I forget Alexander
Patterson, who was one of the merriest of all the merry
fellows I have mentioned, who had the humour of a
Garrick,|and like him could keep “ the table on a roar.”
These jolly companions (alas! all gone from my side
now) made my leisure hours, at this period of my life
and for some years, pass as happily as the days were
long, refreshed in the proper seasons with a little snipe
and quail shooting, an occasional spurt, too, with my
old friend Mr. James Cox’s hounds at Clarendon, and
Mr. James Lord’s at Campbell Town, in company
with Sir Richard Dry and Mr. Hardwicke—all in their
turn richly enjoyed.
Just about this time Western Port, or Port Phillip,
across Bass Straits, and where it was originally in-
tended that I should take up a grant for the proprietors
50
DOTTINGS OF MY LIFE.


of 20,000 acres (the negleft of which was a great loss),
was visited by a few enterprising men—Messrs.
Fawkner, Batman, Sams, and others—where they
selected large trafts of land and depastured them
with sheep. They founded their claim to it by a
curious purchase from the poor ignorant aborigines,
who were quite willing to bargain away their territory
for blankets, clothes, axes, &c., &c., which were
offered to them in exchange. Of course such a
ludicrous arrangement was not countenanced by the
Home Government, but they still remained andacquired
a settlement in their new country under more legitimate
means. Others from our island (some crossing over
in open boats) soon followed these hardy pioneers,
taking with them large flocks of sheep to occupy the
waste lands, renting them from the Government at a
very cheap rate indeed under what is called the
“squatting system;” and others came to ns from
thence to purchase sheep also. This “ cross firing,”
if I may so say, raised their price exceedingly for some
time, and until their increase made them independent
of ns; but I was enabled whilst the demand existed to
dear off a great many obligations and heavy debts of
51
Domnas of my life.


the establishment. Since the discovery and the taking
possession of this new country, now known as Victoria,
its importance and population have astonndingly in-
creased; the large city of Melbourne has sprung up
and has become the rich emporium to which all
nations flock; steam vessels plying about in its
capacious harbour from every quarter, bringing with
them merchandise and loading back with the golden
ore and the golden fleece. Towns and townships far
and wide and in every direction have risen around this
metropolis, as in Sydney, Adelaide, and Queensland,
over the immense continent of New Holland, and
human foot continues still to penetrate into the remote
wastes. Pastoral pursuits in the interior are the main
occupation of the landowner and squatter, who from
its unbounded extent have in some few instances
become, under their arcadian and primitive life,
possessors of millions and billions of sheep and almost
countless herds of cattle and horses. Thus the wool-
growers and the stock holders, besides a host of those
who have for years speculated in the gold mines, have
in innumerable instances become immensely rich
citizens of our southern hemisphere, who to this day
52
Dormras of ut life.


purchase by hundreds annually our fine-woolled
Merino sheep, having a much longer staple than they
can produce under the influence of a dryer climate, at
almost fabulous prices, ranging from 100 to 500
guineas apiece.
In 1836 I left Mr. Fleming, my storekeeper and
factotum, in temporary charge of the establishment,
then entirely free from debt, and revisited England,
and in April of this year sailed from the Tamar river,
Launceston, in the bark Crusader, M. N. M'Donnell,
commander, taking home the annual clip of the
Cressy wool and some beautifully varied specimens of
the blackwood tree of this country. The voyage was
long, lasting till September 3rd, more than 130 days,
and very tedious and monotonous—the captain not a
congenial companion, and only one cabin passenger,
an old man. a Mr. Vince, formerly I found out to be
my uncle’s (Mr. James Denton, of Brandon, in Nor-
folk) gardener —so that I rejoiced when the voyage was
over. After the first day we had to put back to land
three prisoners who had stowed themselves away in the
ship. In rounding Cape Horn we were surrounded
for many days by formidable icebergs, and were steer-
53
DOTTIIfOS OF HT LIFB.


ing in all directions to avoid them, some of an im-
mense height. Spoke a French vessel (whaler), the
Josephine, Captain O’Haux, from Nantes; we boarded
her and breakfasted there, which was a pleasant
change to me. I was much pleased with Captain
O’Haux and his hospitality; he had rounded Cape
Horn six times. I landed at Deal September 3rd.
When at home this time, and in London, I took the
opportunity of suggesting to the proprietors to urge
their claim with the Home Government to take
possession of their 20,000 acres in Western Port as
originally granted to them, and so long neglected. I
accompanied them in their interview with ixnrd
Glenelg, then Secretary for the Colonies. It was un-
satisfactory; so much time had elapsed since the order
of location bad been issued that the resumption of the
grant was not sanctioned. This disappointment re-
minds me of an almost similar one, and exactly to the
same extent, which was experienced in our own family.
My grandfather, the Reverend Philip Toosey (spoken
of several times in Arthur Young’s “Annals of Agricul-
ture”) was in 1784 reCtor of “Stonham Parva,” in
Suffolk, but was induced to leave England upon being
54
DOTTXNGS OF KY LIFE.


appointed Ecclesiastical Commissary in Canada
(Montreal), and received a grant from the Home
Government of 20,000 acres near Quebec; he had
possession of it several years, clearing and making
many improvements on the land, and died there about
1798. This most valuable property might have been
in the possession of our family to this day, but like
the Company’s claim I have just alluded to, several
years elapsed without any addon being taken in it by
my father in England, and it was in consequence re-
sumed by the Government and otherwise disposed of
with the exception of a very small grant given to a
distant relation of ours, as seemingly a sort of recom-
pense for the resumption of the far greater portion of
it.
During this year (1836) I married, and visited the
Continent and stopped a week or two in Paris to see
the usual sights, which would occupy too long a space
to describe. Crossed the Rhine at Mayence, then to
Metz and Frankfort, a very clean and important town,
boasting of much that is worth seeing. Saw the figure
of Ariadne upon a panther, cut in marble, an exquisite
piece of workmanship and the lion of the place.
55
Doirnros of my life.


Journeyed then through Saalmunster, Fulda, Asanach,
Gotha, Erfert, Saxeweimar, Wisenfells, Lutzen, and
arrived at Leipsic, where we remained a few days in-
specting Saxon sheep; then on to Dresden, where I
bought fine-woolled sheep of both sexes, some from
Mr. Gaddergast, of Ochatz, and from Baron de Krause,
of Weistropp, the latter a very nice old gentleman , who
sold sheep to all parts of the world, and when I visited
him at his country seat was conversing fluently in five
different languages to foreigners who came to purchase
from him, some from Siberia, conveying them away
for hundreds of miles in covered wagons. I also met
two gentlemen from Russia at the Baron's; they had
been purchasing a considerable number of sheep from
him, which were to be conveyed also by wagons into
the south part of Russia, a distance of 1,200 miles.
Dresden has a gallery of pictures, the finest in the
world. Went to the green vaults, which contain a
collection of curiosities from all parts, and imitations in
brass of different figures (the figures beautifully
wrought), a great deal of ancient mosaic work, and a
variety of polished and precious stones; the king’s
diamonds are also kept in these vaults, and the
56
DOTTINGS OF KT LIFB.


armoury, too, which is well worth seeing. I walked
with a young gentleman to see Moreau’s tomb, about
a mile and a half from Dresden, and from there I then
started my sheep, 22 in number, in a covered boat for
Hamburg, following the course of the Elbe all the
way, upon which river the town is situated, the dis-
tance about 300 miles. Left Dresden for Berlin, a
clean town, with a picture gallery, a museum, and
possessing many fine buildings; from thence to Ham-
burgh, where I found that my sheep had arrived from
Dresden the day before me. Hamburgh is not very
interesting—a bustling seaport town of business; left
it by the steam vessel Countess of Lonsdale, the
sheep on board, and arrived after a quick passage of
48 hours in London. I then purchased Hereford
cattle in that shire, and some Southdown sheep for ex-
portation from Mr. Elman, of Sussex; and as a finish
to my English visit I went for a week in June, 1837,
with my father’s family, from Levens, in Westmore-
land, where he lived, to the English lakes and also to
Scotland, which latter, as being most interesting, I will
describe as
THE EDINBURGH TOUR.
June 19th, 1837. —We left Levens, posting it,
F
57
DOTTINGS OF MT LIFE.


passed through Kendall to Shap Penrith, Carlisle,
Longtown, Longholme to Hawick, where we stopped
the night. It is a very ancient though not an attraftive
town.
June zoth. —Left Hawick and on to Selkirk, from
thence to Abbotsford (about three miles distant from
the latter), the late residence of Sir Walter Scott. It
is a small farm in the highest and neatest state of
cultivation and improvement I ever witnessed. The
house, situated in a hollow, and in the Gothic style,
apparently imitative of Melrose Abbey ; the ceilings
and painted windows of the hall were adorned with
the family coats of arms as far back as could be traced
by Sir Walter, and the walls hung with a variety of
curiosities, old armour, swords, &c., &c. We observed
here amongst other relics the keys of the old Tolbooth
of Edinburgh, which he alludes to in his “ Heart of
Midlothian.” I admired Sir Walter’s snug study ex-
ceedingly, where he wrote all his novels. It has a
direft communication by a small private staircase with
his dressing-room, and it has another entrance from the
hall most admirably planned to be free from interrup-
tion as well as convenient internally, having a balcony
58
DOTTINGS OF MY LIFE.


projecting all round from the walls to reach the upper
books, and to which there is communication by a
small staircase. Here, then, the great poet and novelist
wrote, and here for the time I felt his presence. His
house and small estate are not ancestral, but were pur-
chased and brought to their present perfection entirely
by himself. It suits my ideas exaftly of a poet’s resi-
dence —nothing on a large scale, though everything
remarkably snug and neat, and so retired in its natural
position, and from judicious planting, that you almost
fancy there is not a world beyond it. The door that
was broken open in the oldTolbooth at Edinburgh, to
which he often refers in his writings, is preserved here.
His favourite dog Bevis is buried to the right of the
entrance door, and the spot marked by a stone
sculpture representing the animal. I was struck with
the neatness and taste displayed in the laying out of
the garden, and particularly with a massive arch thrown
over the centre of the main walk, and on a tablet above
was carved the appropriate scriptural quotation:—
"Et cum audissent vocem Domini Dei deambulantis in
paradise, ad auram post meridiemabscondit se Adam,
et uxor ejus, a facie Domini Dei in medio ligni
parodist.”
7T
59
DOTTINGB Ot XT LTFX.


This allusion to the transgression of our first parents
in such a spot was characteristic of so great and good
a man, and conveys a salutary admonition to the
reader to walk humbly and circumspectly before God,
and sin not in this probationary world, or, as the poet
has it, in
A wild, where weeds and flowers promiscuous shoot;
A garden, tempting with forbidden fruit.
From Abbotsford proceeded to Melrose Abbey, a fine
mass of ruined antiquity of the Gothic order; thence to
Torsoace, to Fushie Bridge, the landlady of which is
alluded to by Sir Walter Scott as “ Luckie Dodds ” in
“ St. Ronan’s Well,” and arrived at the Royal Hotel,
Edinburgh, at 6 o’clock.
June 21 st. —Visited the Castle, from whence we had
a very commanding view of the town, and where we
saw the Scottish regalia, a Highland regiment re-
viewed, and heard the band. Visited Herriott’s institu-
tion for the maintenance and education of about 300
boys. The whole system is admirable, being cleanly,
comfortable, and economical. Inspected the gaol,
thence to Holyrood House, the former seat of royalty,
the chapel of which is completely in ruins, and the


house itself very much dilapidated. It contains
numerous apartments once occupied by the Kings of
Scotland, latterly the nobility of France (Charles X.
stopped here some time), but now it is seldom or never
used. We visited the apartments of Mary Queen of
Scots, saw her bedchamber and the bed she slept in,
her dressing-room and ante-room where she was dining
when Rizzio was seized by Darnley and the conspira-
tors, who entered by a private staircase and, in spite
of her entreaties, wounded, dragged down stairs, and
assassinated him. The spot is deeply stained, or rather
the floor, where it is stated he breathed his last. The
banqueting room in the Palace is also shown, where
the paintings of all the Kings of Scotland, and an
original one of Queen Mary, are hung round, and
which the soldiers of Oliver Cromwell in their drunken
revels much defaced.
June 22nd. —Walked down to St. John’s Church,
at the end of Prince’s-street, to visit the burial spot of
Dr. Fletcher; went to the Blind Asylum, afterwards
to where the old Tolbooth stood; ascended Nelson’s
Pillar, from whence we commanded a magnificent view
of the city, the Firth of Forth, and the country around,
61
dottinos of my life.


also of Leith, about two miles distant, and the seaport
town of Edinburgh. News arrived here to-day that the
King (William IV.) died on the 20th inst., and the
Princess Viftoria was proclaimed Queen of England.
June 23rd. —Left Edinburgh about 9 o’clock, passed
through Dalkeith, Fallen, Wynburn, and to Kelso,
where we dined. The scenery here is very beautiful,
the Tweed and Teviot meet at the foot of the town.
Proceeded then to Jedburgh, a sweet little town
through which the latter river flows, and then to
Hawick, where we again slept.
June 24th. —From Hawick to Mosspaul, to Long-
holme, to Longtown, and Carlisle, where we dined ;
afterwards to Penrith, to Shap, to Kendall, and home
to Levens by 10 o’clock —a very interesting trip.
In 1837 1 left England with my wife and several
passengers —Mr. John Raven, Mr. Bloomfield, and
Mr. Newton amongst the number —on board the Bar-
daster, Captain Virtue commander, with the sheep I
bought and the Hereford cattle, and half a dozen fallow
deer, to continue my agency for what in Colonial
phrase had now assumed the appellation of the “Cressy
Company.” The word “ Cressy,” or “ Crecy,” derives
62
DOTTINGS OF MY LIFE.


its name and origin from Captain Thomas, one of
whose ancestors was made a knight banneret by
Edward 111. on the day of that celebrated battle against
the French. From 1837 to 1855 the affairs of the
Company progressed satisfactorily, and a good annual
return, principally of wool, was made to the absentee
proprietors, and the grant for 20,000 acres was issued
by (I think) Sir John Franklin, the then presiding
Governor, after many years of vexatious delay caused
by one of the early partners, Colonel Latour (who had
sold his share for full consideration and beyond),
throwing his claim into the Court of Chancery with a
view to reinstate himself in the adventure, which had
now become very remunerative. Of course he did
not succeed, but caused an immense expense by the
institution of a Commission, which was held in Hobart
Town, and Captain Swanston and T. W. Rowlands
(solicitor) were the Commissioners, and I was de-
tained there for weeks together, with a host of other
witnesses, to answer innumerable interrogations,
mainly respecting the value of the property and stock
in the years previous to 1836, when Colonel Latour
sold his interest in the concern. His suit was thrown
63
DOTTINGS OF MY LIFE.


out, and the rightful owners, which were about this
time reduced to three, viz.—Mr. Marjoribanks, Colonel
Elphinstone, and Mr. R. Keate, were put in possession
at last of an undisputed property, to which was added
between the above periods of time by purchase the
estate of Chatsworth from Dr. Richardson, containing
400 acres, on the eastern boundary, for 6,000 sheep
by payments of 2,000 each year; and Richmond Hill
from Mr. James Brumby, containing about 250 acres,
for £l2 per acre, on the western side of the estab-
lishment. This latter from its eligible situation was
bought as a homestead for the surrounding grant.
In 1841 a Mr. Rose, a purser in one of Mr. Marjori-
banks’s ships in the tea trade with India and China,
at that time a very remunerative business, came out,
accompanied by his daughter, and paid me a lengthened
visit, deputed by the proprietors of the Cressy establish-
ment to see how things in general were going on. to
make many enquiries, and to arrange a system of
accounts and half-yearly returns for my future guidance,
which, although they gave me much additional work,
were excellent in themselves and carefully followed
out by me each year and until the winding up of the
64
DOTTINGS OF MY LIFE.


establishment. Mr. Rose was a very morose, un-
pleasant, and suspicious man, and although I opened
my house voluntarily to him and his daughter, in which
ad there was no compulsion whatever placed upon me
from home, he did not acknowledge my invitation, as
I fully expeded, in a gentlemanly spirit. At the ex-
piration of a time extending over three to four months
he took his departure, much to my gratification, with
his daughter homewards. I have not yet, however,
done with the disagreeables too often attendant upon
even the faithful discharge of arduous duties for
others. The principal reason, I believe, for Mr. Rose
coming out was that a Mr. Down had preceded him
two years before, another clerk in Mr. Marjoribanks’s
counting house, appointed in 1839 as my commercial
agent and to furnish the establishment with all neces-
sary supplies at the current and ordinary rates; but
these rates were extraordinary, and so high and ex-
travagant that the enquiry into them was much the
occasion of Mr. Rose’s embassy. Mr. Down’s appoint-
ment was sudden, and quite opposed to my wishes,
for it opened the door, as I knew it would, to a lavish
annual and miscellaneous expenditure, and placed me
65
DOTTINGS OF MY LIFE.


in a very invidious position to counteraft, I was sub-
ject to continual remonstrances from England and
complaints of the enormously increased charges the
proprietors were subjefl; to, under a system which they
themselves had originated, and over which, under such
perplexing circumstances, I could only have but
partial control. But as all things must have an end,
this costly connection had one by Mr. Down’s unfor-
tunate failure in business and his trying a fresh field
in Melbourne shortly afterwards.
In 1851 I became a widower, and in 1852 Mr.
Ayre came out, deputed from the owners of the pro-
perty to assist me ; and in 1853, leaving Mr. Ayre in
charge of the estate, I visited Melbourne with my son
and Dr. Gaunt, and inspected many of the goldfields
in Victoria. At Ballarat I was taken very ill, and as
Mr. Bacchus, who married the daughter of my old
friend Mr. Hobler (and she was also my goddaughter),
lived at Peerewur, only a few miles from that township,
we as a party made for his house, where I became worse
and was confined to my bed for nearly three weeks,
when Dr. Gaunt left us and returned to Tasmania. I
owe a deep debt of gratitude to Mr. and Mrs. Bacchus
66
DOTTINGS OP MY LIFE.


for their great kindness to me during my long sojourn
with them. Their hospitality and attention will never
leave my grateful memory. As my health did not
improve I left them with my son in a horse and chaise
cart of my own, accompanied by Mr. Alexander
M‘Leod as my “ guide, companion, and friend,” and
by easy stages reached Melbourne again, and took up
my quarters at the Prince of Wales Hotel, very sick
and sorry. Dr. Motherwell and Dr. Glasspoole
attended me, After a few weeks here I was so far
recovered as to be able to leave the house, and on the
23rd of April, 1853, we (my son and I) embarked for
England on board the Barrockpore, Captain Under-
wood, going on board by steamer in Hobson’s Bay.
My returning to the old country a second time was
for the sole purpose of giving my son, then about 14
years old, the advantage of a first-rate English educa-
tion. We had a tedious passage with all sorts of passen-
gers, diggers, miners, blacksmiths, inn keepers, &c.,
and only Mr. and Mrs. Thomas Reibey with whom
we were at all intimate—although be it said there was
a slight sprinkling of gentlemen amongst us, prin-
cipally confined to the two Hendersons and Mr. Wake.
67
DOTTING-S OF MY LIFE.


Having put into Bahia (a Brazilian port) for a few
days, we were much amused by being carried about
in a sort of sedan chair slung upon a long bamboo
pole, each end uplifted by a sturdy black native. We
arrived in England about September, 1853, landing at
Dover, and thence the next day by railway to London,
where through our agent in the city I received the in-
telligence of the death of my good father a short time
previous to my arrival. He died August 7th, 1853,
at Levens, where he had been living for the last
twenty years, managing the several estates in the
north belonging to the Honourable Colonel and Mrs.
Howard, with both of whom he was a very great
favourite. After a short stay in London to arrange
my public affairs and explain them to those imme-
diately concerned, we proceeded to the north, to
Levens in Westmoreland, where my younger sister
was living, and to Beetham House in the same neigh-
bourhood, the residence of my brother-in-law, the Rev.
Wm. Hutton, to whom my elder sister was married.
Harrow, Rugby, and Winchester schools were respec-
tively contemplated and canvassed for my son. I was
most anxious to enter him for the first of these three,
68
DOTTINGS OF MY LIFE.


and an enquiry for long and from many as to the
possibility of his being admitted was made, but there
were too many under promise in the lists to precede
him, extending even over years, that my great wish
had to be abandoned, and Winchester was finally de-
termined upon. To Winchester, therefore, I took him
without further delay, and where he remained for
about three years, and afterwards by the recommenda-
tion of Dr. Moberly (now Bishop of Salisbury), he
removed to Exeter College, Oxford, remaining there
for about two years, when he returned to Tasmania in
1858, having a home during his sojourn in England
in the north at his uncle’s (Rev. Wm. Hutton), Bee-
tham House, Westmoreland.
Upon this occasion of my being England for a
short period I urged the proprietors to sell their pro-
perty in Tasmania as it had risen, owing to the dis-
covery of remunerating gold, tin, and other mines, as
well as many other circumstances, very considerably
in value, in which it had attained, according to the
general opinion, to its culminating point, and they
were duly impressed with the policy of doing so upon
my strong recommendation.
69
DOTTINGB OF MY LIFE.


In 1854 I again left my native shores and embarked
in a veiy fine and powerful steamer, the Queen of the
South, Norman commander, for Melbourne, my
niece {my brother’s daughter), Maria E. Toosey,
accompanying me. Sir Charles Hotbam, the newly
appointed Governor of Viftoria, with his lady, and
Captain Kaye, his Private Secretary, and Mrs. Kaye,
were amongst the passengers, with a great many more
of every sort, as it was a most desirable vessel, afford-
ing so much room and comfort. The voyage was
speedy and pleasant. We touched first at the Cape
Verd Isles to coal and water, resorted to by vessels for
these purposes; it is not otherwise attraftive, and
being of volcanic origin and a small island it does
not boast of much fertility. I fancy, but our stay was
much too short to enable me to see anything of the
interior, the town is small and uninteresting. After-
wards we called at the Cape of Good Hope and made
a longer stay, again for coaling and provisions. From
Cape Town, already described in the early part of this
journal, and now somewhat increased in houses and
population, a party was formed and we visited (it was
my second visit) a Mr. Colyn of Constantia, residing
70
DOTTINGB OF MY LIFE.


a few miles distant from the capital, who has been
long famous for his red and white Constanda wines,
the country still beautiful, abounding in rich vine-
yards or carpeted with rare wild indigenous flowers
and shrubs. It will be seen by referring back that I
took the same journey in other, and I confess to my-
self much pleasanter, company in the year 1826. I
wrote my name again in the same large book kept
purposely for visitors, and found my first insertion still
with innumerable others most carefully preserved, the
interval between the two signatures being about thirty
years, or nearly so.
Eheu quam subito fugtt irreparabile lempus 1
I was young then, fresh, buoyant, and free from care;
but now sobered with age, and my spirits not im-
proved by its experiences: such is life. Since I first
touched at the Cape of Good Hope slavery has happily
been abolished, and the men of colour (the Africans)
set free, under which amelioration they have become
altered beings, and, upon the whole, contented, happy,
and improved in self-respeft; and many through long
industry have worked themselves into independence
and even wealth. Too many, however, on the oiher


hand are disinclined to avail themselves of the great
advantages they could now enjoy, and are idle and
dissolute; but without exception they are all more or
less addifted to finery and inordinate display of gay
colours in their dress, even to a burlesque degree—a
universal foible I fancy amongst the black fraternity
wherever we find them, and whenever they are able to
indulge in it. Let us contrast for a moment a white
shirt and a blue bird’s-eye neckcloth with a black skin
and we have a funny figure. The remainder of this
voyage was quiet and calm, and not marked by any
particular occurrence. It lasted about 80 days, and
upon our arrival in the harbour of Hobson’s Bay,
Melbourne, my niece and I boarded a small steamer
and crossed over to Launceston, remaining a day or
two with Dr. and Mrs. Gaunt, and then proceeded to
Cressy to resume my usual occupations on the estab-
lishment. My niece kept my house for some few
years, and in the year 1863 married a Mr. Basil Gray,
of Welaregang, a Viftorian settler on the confines of
New South Wales, and then left me for her new
quarters, coming across the Straits occasionally, and
latterly with her children, to pay me a visit.


Shortly after my return to my old residence at
Cressy, I received instructions from the proprietors,
agreeably to my previous advice to them, to dispose
of the whole of their property in conjundtion with Mr.
Ayre, who as already recorded had been my assistant
for some years. Accordingly it was measured and the
agricultural land divided into small farms, and the
pastoral portions of it into large and suitable sheep
runs. The first land sales took place in the year
1855, by Mr. C. J. Meedon, at his auftion mart in
Launceston, the whole area having been previously
surveyed and sub-divided by Mr, Jas, Scott. The sales
extended over three years, and the stock were sold at
intervals, as occasion required. The realisation of
the whole was highly satisfactory, netting upwards of
35,000.
The establishment was then completely broken up,
but I had previously secured to myself by private pur-
chase from the proprietors, at the estimated value
furnished them by Mr. Ayre and myself, the Richmond
Hill property, which had been newly admeasured to
contain about 450 acres, at per acre, upon which
I now reside. I also purchased two other smaller lots
G
73
DOTTINGS OF MY LIFE.


of the Company’s land under the full value put upon
them by the arbitrators. At the sale of the whole pro-
perty I arranged with the proprietors to put apart two
acres for a church and burial ground, and about the
same quantity for a school. The church (a neat
design by Bishop Nixon) and the school, now under
the Board of Education, have been built both by public
subscription, and are ornamental to the little town-
ship of Cressy (about a mile from hence), which in
consequence has much increased, and is a great con-
venience to the neighbourhood, boasting of a nice
Wesleyan Chapel, a Good Templars’ Hall, Post and
Telegraph Office, stores, a contiguous glebe, and, of
course , a public-house or two where auftion sales of
stock are held monthly.
About 1856 Bishop Nixon instituted a commission
to enquire into the state of the College affairs, which
had been for some time falling gradually into a deplor-
able condition of pecuniary embarrassment. The
commissioners appointed wefe —
The Venerable Archdeacon Tancred
The Rev. Thomas Reibey
Mr. William Henty
74
DOTTINGS OF MY LIFE.


Mr. R. W. Nutt (who did not aft)
Dr. Gaunt, M.D. (Chairman)
Mr. Charles Arthur
Mr. J. D. Toosey.
After two years’ consultation and strift examination of
the confused accounts we came to the unanimous
opinion that the College must be closed for the pre-
sent, as it was in a state of irretrievable collapse. I
copy the cause of failure from the report of the com-
missioners :• —“ This Institution was started with too
great precipitation and on a scale of expense much
beyond its means.” The Rev. P. Y. M. Filleul was
the last Warden, who, with his lady, in vain strove to
retrieve the past by the exercise of great economy,
which was duly acknowledged by the commissioners,
and he soon after returned to England with his family.
The College was accordingly closed and new trustees
appointed by Bishop Nixon, and at his Lordship’s re-
quest I afted as one in conjunftion with the Rev. Thos.
Reibey, Mr. Wm, Henty, and Mr. Charles Arthur,
from 1857 to 1871. During this period of 14 years I
derived great pleasure in co-operating with my fellow-
trustees by gradually recovering the College from its
prostrate position, and under careful nursing we
G 2
75
DOTTINGS OF MY LIFE.


succeeded in removing much of the heavy debt that
had been steadily accumulating, always strenuously
opposing every attempt that was made to re-open this
nobly-endowed institution until every shilling of the
debt upon it was paid. Far better if this healthy pro-
gress had been continued up to the present day, till a
handsome sum was at command for future adlion.
But our present Bishop Bromby desired to make
alterations in its constitution, and requested the aiding
trustees in a body to resign their trust, and having an
anxious wish at that particular time to retire, I sent in
my resignation in obedience to the call; since which
the College affairs have been the subjeft of litigation
in the Supreme Court, additional trustees have been
joined to the two original ones', and the College has
been resuscitated and re-opened under the auspices of
the Rev. J. Whall, M.A., in Hobart, who lately arrived
from England for that purpose, and most heartily I
hope that that gentleman may succeed in its complete
and permanent restoration, of which and its future
prosperity I have no doubt, if the curriculum embraces
all the concomitants with which the original design
started under the Rev. J. P. Cell, and is based upon a


theology unadulterated by ritualistic praftices. Under
these safeguards, carefully watched over by all con-
cerned in its management, this Collegiate Institution
will yet be the effectual means of enriching the colony
in a large degree, and for time out of count with “ the
ripe scholar and the Protestant gentlem.an.”
I do not deem it inappropriate here to step out of
my way for a moment in the advocacy of vital Pro-
testantism, and quote from an excellent work I have
lately read by Justin McCarthy, being “A History of
our own Times,” some valuable remarks Lord
Russell made about thirty years ago, when Prime
Minister of England, in consequence of Cardinal
Wiseman issuing a Pastoral in 1850 addressed in Lon-
don directly to the English people. Upon this Lord
Russell observed : —There was a danger that alarmed
him more than any aggression from a foreign
sovereign, and that was— the danger within the gates
from the unworthy sons 0f the Church of England
herself!’ Clergymen of that church, he declared,
“ had been leading their flocks step hy step to the verge
of the precipice. What, he asked, meant the honour
paid to saints, the claim of infallibility for the church,


the superstitious use of the sign of the cross, the
muttering of the liturgy so as to disguise the language
in which it is written, the recommendation of auricular
confession, and the administration of penace and
absolution ? I have little hope that the propounders
and framers of these innovations will desist from their
insidious course, but I rely with confidence on the
people of England, and I will not bate one jot of heart
or hope so long as the glorious principles and the
immortal martyrs of the Reformation shall be held
in reverence by the great mass of a nation which looks
with contempt on the mummeries of superstition, and
with scorn at the laborious endeavours which they are
now making to confine the intelleft and enslave the
soul.”
We may now ask the question, and easily answer it
ourselves. Have not these pradices in our church, so
justly condemned by the noble Lord in those days,
been steadily and insidiously creeping on with us up
to the present time ? and are we not still advancing
“ step by step to the verge of the precipice ?” Yes;
innovation follows innovation, and the same mum-
meries are not only continued but increased in the


services of our beautiful liturgy. And what with
crosses and crucifixes, candles and confessionals (in-
tonations inclusive), the senses which alone are
appealed to truly become dazed and awfully bewil-
dered. Music (most desirable to a reasonable extent)
aftually domineers over doftrine, inasmuch as the sober-
minded man is apt to pause and ask “the why and where-
fore for it,” and to exclaim with the Preacher “ vanity
of vanities, all is vanity.” ‘‘A ll old things are forgotten
now,” &SS we no longer pray in public with our own
lips, and the quiet primitive simplicity in the worship
of our Creator, which especially belonged to the age
of our forefathers, is well nigh obsolete. Lord John
Russell's hopes of the enduring effefts of the glorious
Reformation have not been realised, and it is noteworthy
that the plain, simple services of our church have been
more and more losing their Protestant character ever
since the late Pope Pius sent Cardinal Wiseman from
Rome to dwell permanently in England ; and although
we do not change our natures, there is imminent
danger that we shall, as a nation, soon change our
religion, if we have not done so already, for our Digni-
taries (willing as they may be as a body) seem to be
utterly unable to stem the evils of rampant ritualism
surrounding them.


I remember about thirty years ago, upon the occa-
sion of the old Pope’s delegate coming to reside with
the English, reading the following clever and pungent
distich which was written, and with good reason, too,
by, I believe, an Oxford and orthodox divine —
Cum Sapienie Pius, noslras irrupit in aras
Impius heu ! Sapiens, desipiensque Pius.
The lament may possibly have worked some good
secretly upon reflecting minds. I hope so, but to the
naked eye it is not apparent.
I now finish my own tale.
My son returning to me from England unexpectedly
in the year 1858, I was further induced to speculate
in the purchase of land with the view of wool growing,
and bought at a long credit M'Rae's Hills, containing
about 3,000 acres, and subsequently upon the same
terms the Cressy estate, about 1,300 acres, from Mr.
Joseph Archer of Panshanger. These heavy pur-
chases involved us —for my son was co-operating with
me, except for a short time when he re-visited Eng-
land, married there in iB6O, and returned with his
wife in 1861—in an enormous debt, to the amount
from first to last with principal and interest of about


£l 1,000, which has occupied many years, fully twenty,
to remove; but it has now been done by long per-
severance and assiduity, and we are left to the enjoy-
ment of a perfectly free and unencumbered estate of
a very valuable character. My son and his wife have
lived for the last three years in my old residence at
Cressy House, and he rents and occupies the bulk of
the property and stock we have acquired—all in fact
except Richmond Hill (in area about 500 acres), where
my venerable sister, who left England and joined me
in 1865, still remains with me as my only companion
to retrace the “ long ago ’’ of the present century, to
talk over the chequered days of our early life, and
bring into sober review the broken links of those
familiar faces and loved ones which have been with-
drawn one by one by God’s decree from the circle of
a decayed family once widely known and well re-
garded. Nature’s course will be obeyed, and
“ Felix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas.”
My imperfect task is done. I have no doubt that
I have, like a careless knitter, let down a great many
stitches, and it is too late now to gather them together.
I do not think it desirable, however, as this recital may


perchance give pleasure to a few to unravel, like
Penelope’s web, what has been woven, but leave it as
it really is—the fragment of a work perhaps to be im-
proved upon or added to.
An addition has occurred to me which I ought
earlier to have spoken of, for the information of my
younger relatives, viz., further advantages lost to our
family by misadventure or mismanagement; and I
may tell them of my uncle Osbert Denton, who, upon
coming into the Ladbrook property, with all its im-
mense wealth, took the family name, but under a
broken constitution, greatly caused by living under
expectancy, he only enjoyed the rich inheritance for
little more than twelve months before he died.
Another disappointment may be quoted in the instance
of the Bramall Hall estate, near Stockport, Cheshire,
with its extensive grounds and a magnificent mansion
of the Elizabethan style, in the possession of the
Davenports for the last five centuries, and from the
time of Edward the Third. My father was always re-
garded as the acknowledged heir of this property, and
his intermediate name was consequently Bramall. Mr.
Davenport, the last legitimate owner of it, married a
82
DOTTIXGS OF MY LIFE.


near relative of our name—my father's sister, I believe
—and the inheritance of the property, therefore, in the
absence of a closer heir, could not rightly be disputed ;
but our interests, as in several other cases, were not
sedulously followed out, and I could plainly perceive,
when I once visited Bramall Hall with my father, that
the ground was occupied, and that a “bar sinister ” of
female line, being always at court, had for long ob-
tained the ascendancy over the feeble old gentleman ;
and the consequence was, the whole of this fine estate,
with the exception of a legacy of five hundred pounds
to my father, was left to a Captain and Mrs. Humphreys,
who, of course, took the name of Davenport. From
some cause unknown to me, but easily guessed at, the
said estate has been lately sold to the Freeholders’
Association of Manchester, with a view to laying out
a large portion of the park as villa residences, and
realised the handsome sum of (two hun-
dred and twenty thousand pounds). Other incidents
of the same nature are attached to our family history,
but I have no desire to dwell further upon them. I
have not myself felt their shadows, for I early in life
sought happiness and iprosperity in this fair foreign
83
DOTTINGS OF MY LIFE.


island, whose fertility of soil and varied richness of
resources, combined with the recent discoveries of
mineral wealth seemingly to an inexhaustible extent,
will soon form a yet more prominent attraction to the
needy adventurer from many parts of the less favoured
world.
As an octogenarian I am not at all likely to leave
my present peaceful abode of Richmond Hill, where
I have lived so long, for any other. Here, in all
human probability, I bide for the rest of my time on
earth —under this pleasant sky, with magnificent
mountain scenery around me, and a good Providence
watching over me ; and when the sands of life are run
out, I hope they that read of me—talk of me —praise
—or censure—
Will nothing extenuate,
Nor set down aught in malice.
JAMES DENTON TOOSEY.
Richmond Hill,
Launceston, Tasmania,
September, 1881.


ADDENDA.
The Governors of the island of Tasmania from its
earliest settlement (omitting the pro iem. Com-
mandants and Administrators) to the present date are
in succession as follows:
Lieutenant-Governors. Ruled.
Colonel D. Collins ..... 1804
Colonel T. Davey ..... 1812
Colonel W. Sorell 1817
Colonel G. Arthur ..... 1824
Sir John Franklin ..... 1837
Sir Eardley Wilmot ..... 1843
Sir W. T. Denison ..... X 847
Governors-in-Chief when Tasmania became a distinct
Government.
Sir Henry Fox Young - - 1855
Sir T. Gore Brown 1861
Sir Charles Du Cane 1869
Sir Frederick Weld ..... 1875
Sir J. H. Lefroy - 1880
Sir G. C. Strahan . - ■ - . 1881
85
DOTTINGB OF MY LIFE.


My residence in the island began under Colonel
Arthur’s government, from whom, as intimated already,
I received very great attention, kindness, and advice
throughout my attorneyship in the Van Diemen's Land
Establishment, as then styled; and happening to be in
England in 1836 I called upon Sir George in London
and emphatically thanked him for the interest he
took in the affairs of the establishment, which he
occasionally visited during his periodical northern
tour.
Sir John Franklin, too, the noble-hearted navigator,
whose ultimate fate we all deplored, used to call upon
me at Cressy with his amiable lady, and it is well
remembered by him to whom this brief work is dedi-
cated the kindly nursing and tossing in infancy, about
the year 1840, that he received in the arms of the
brave old gentleman, who with the courage of a lion
combined the gentleness of the dove. A statuary bust
in marble records his memory in Westminster Abbey,
bearing the one word “ Franklinunderneath is a
marble pifture of a ship bound in the ice of the Arctic
regions, bearing above it the words:
O ye frost and cold, O ye ice and snow, bless ye the
Lord; praise Him and magnify Him for ever.
86
DOTTIKGS OF MY LIFE.


The eye then rests upon these lines by Tennyson
Not here—the white north has thy bones;
And thou, heroic sailor-soul,
Art passing on thine happier voyage now
Towards no earthly pole.
I return to our next Governor, Sir Eardley Wilmot,
a most kind-hearted gentleman, who was always very
cordially greeted by the numerous colonists whom he
visited. He was fond of country life. 1 often used
to see him, and the inspection of my Southdown sheep,
with which he was familiar, gave him a great deal of
pleasure.
Sir William Denison, also, I saw occasionally at
Cressy; a Governor ot much ability but unpopular by
his persistent opposition to the wishes of the colonists
on the subject of anti-transportation.
Sir Henry Fox Young’s rule was very quiet and
unimportant.
Sir Thomas Gore Brown and his charming lady were
very popular with us all, and with them my casual
acquaintance with the Governors of the island has
ceased entirely. Representative Government has ex-
ceedinglyaltered the relationship between them and the
settler, and less familiar intercourse exists. Our
87
DOTTINGS OF MX LIFE.


adopted land nevertheless has satisfadorily progressed
under the various Administrations which have followed,
and 1 sincerely trust that the day is far, far distant
when the separation of the colonies from the Mother
Conutry will be even contemplated. Never, I hope.
Long may we remain under English monarchical rule,
where the advantages, politically, commercially, and
socially* are so mutually great. Once disturb these
and we bid farewell for ever to the principles of Conser.
vatism, and the chaotic elements of Democracy are
sure to follow amongst ns fast and furiously. “ The
National Anthem ” should be our constant cry,
especially now at this evil time when the life of our
gracious Queen has been so fearfully imperilled.
1882.
J. D. T.
88
DOTTIKGB OF MT LIFJS.
