

TRICE OXR XUIIUNO.
•
#
V
# " Jt-
II *■
.-Jl v
» %
SYDNEY ;
<1
JOEDf L. SHERRIFF, PUBLISHER., 18, WYNYAED-SQUAEE.
' >
1870.
‘i
*
k wL #
' -4k ♦ ♦ *
♦ •
*
• ;
r •
** * m
BRIEF SKETCH
f ‘ , * * * ' • •. •>
*’ ift , •
oy mi
PARLIAMENTARY LIFE & TIMES,
FEOM Ist AUGUST, 1843, TILL THE LATE DISSOLUTION OF
PARLIAMENT.
BY JOHN T DUNMORE LANG, T) D, A M..
■&¥.( gVTT Y ONE OF THE REPRESENTATIVES OF THE CITY 0- SV.'/.’.ii: I IN xJP!
PARLIAMENT OF NEVY SOUTH WALES.




TO THE CITIZENS OF SYDNEY, AND THE ELECTORS OF
THE COLONY GENERALLY.
Fellow-citizens and Friends, —
As my political life, which has extended over a period of upwards of
twenty-six years, has now come toits close, I deem it incumbent upon me, for
reasons which it is unnecessary to state, to submit to you the following
abstract of the more important public measures, with which I have been
more particularly identified, whether as a principal or a subordinate, during
that long period; that, to make use of the sentiment of the famous cobler,
of Kingston-upon-Thames, who risked the whole savings of a long life to
contest an old right-of-way for his fellow-townsmen, with a powerful but
unscrupulous and usurping nobleman, you may know whether, in retiring
from the public stage, “I am leaving the colony any worse than I
found it."
I have the honour to be,
Fellow-citizens and Friends,
Your sincere well wisher,
JOHN DUNMORE LANG.
Sydney, 15th November, 1869.


• *v
.
■
‘ . I ! ,


BRIEF SKETCH Ac.
I was elected one of the six members for Port Phillip (now
the great colony of Victoria, which was then a mere outlying
district of JNew South Wales), in the Legislative Council of
this colony, in the year 1843. There was then only a single
house of Legislature for the colony, which consisted of thirty-
six members; of whom twelve, or one third, were Government
officials and nominees of the Crown, the remaining twenty-
four being elective members, one fourth of whom were assigned
to Port Phillip.
My first motion in the House, which was made on the 10th
of August, 1843, was that, in accordance with the bounden
duty of a Christian Legislature, as well as with the practice of
both Houses of the Imperial Parliament, the business of each
day should be commenced with prayer. This motion was met
with the previous question; the Ayes being 11, and the
Roes 19.
The first measure I initiated in the Council was a measure
for Postal Reform. I had become acquainted, when in Lon-
don, in the year 1834, with Sir Rowland Hill, the famous
Postal Reformer of the United Kingdom, and eventually of the
whole civilized world. He was then Secretary to the Com-
missioners for the settlement of the colony of South Australia;
and, on meeting him in London, on a subsequent voyage I had
made to England, shortly after he had achieved his famous
measure of Postal Reform, I congratulated him on his great
achievement, and told him I thought he richly deserved a
peerage for the inestimable service he had rendered his
country—with which compliment he appeared much gratified.
It was natural, therefore, that I should desire to follow Sir
Rowland’s illustrious example in Australia.


By the postal laws of the colony, in 1843, the scale of
charges for the conveyance of a single letter, under half an
ounce was as follows : —To Parramatta, 4d ; to Liverpool, 6d.;
to Windsor, Richmond, Campbell!own, or Penrith, 7d ; to
Picton, Bd.; to Berrima, 9d.; to Goulburn, Mudgee, or Bath-
urst, lOd.; to Yass, lid.; to Wagga Wagga, Forbes, or
Arraidale, one shilling. These rates were exceedingly op-
pressive, and they almost interdicted all epistolary communi-
cation with the interior. At the same time a long list of
Government officials, and Heads of Departments, together with
all members of the Legislature, had each the privilege of frank-
ing five double letters, and of receiving seven such letters
d a ily-^ a privilege which, it may well be supposed, was grossly
abused, to the great loss of the revenue.* The Government
of the day having therefore proposed some paltry amendment
of the existing Postal Act, but without proposing any change
in these oppressive rates, 1 moved the following resolutions, by
way of amendment, on rhe 10th of October, 1843 ; which, as
they were all virtually adopted, and became the law of the land
eventually in all the three colonies of New South Wales,
Victoria, and Queensland, I insert in full: —
Postage Act.—Dr. Lang, pursuant to notice, moved the
adoption of the following resolutions:—
1, That the general efficiency and availableness of the Post-
office establishment are of essential importance to the welfare
and advancement of this colony.
2. That in order to render that establishment efficient and
available in the highest possible degree, it is indispensably
necessary to reduce the rates of postage chargeable on letters,
to the lowest possible amount.
3. That it is the opinion of this Council, that no letters
posted in any city or town, for delivery within such city or
town, should be chargeable with a higher rate of postage than
one penny, irrespective of its weight.
4. That it is the opinion of this Council, that for all greater
distances within the colony, whether by sea or land, no letter,
not exceeding half an ounce in weight, should be chargeable
with a higher rate of postage than twopence; and that two-
pence additional should be chargeable on every letter, for
every additional half-ounce which such letter may weigh.
* The number of franked letters, averaging two ounces each, for 1844, was calculated
at 101,832 and the loss to the revenue at £4,394 B*.


5. That it is the opinion of this Council, that for all letters
to or from places beyond the limits of the colony, whether
posted or delivered in the port of entry or departure, no higher
rate than twopence each should be chargeable, irrespective of
weight; but that the inland postage to or from any other part
of the territory should be chargeable on all such letters, in
addition to that amount.
6. That it is the opinion of this Council, that the privilege
of franking should be abolished ; and that the postage of the
various departments of the public service should be chargeable
on these departments respectively, in such manner as to His
Excellency the Governor and the Executive Council may
seem fit.
7. That it is the opinion of this Council, that the postage of
the Military, Commissariat, and Convict departments, should
not be chargeable upon the colonial revenue
These resolutions were referred by the Council to a Select
Committee, of which I was appointed Chairman, and which
reported very cordially in their favour on the 27th October,
1843. But as nothing further could be done in the matter
during that session of the Legislature, I moved them again,
backed as I then was, with the recommendation of the Select
Committee, on the 18th September. 1844, when they were
carried by a majority of two ; that majority consisting of the
following members, viz.,—Mr. Cowper, (the late) Mr. VV indeyer,
Mr. W C. Wentworth, Major Wentworth, Mr. Walker, Mr.
Bowman, Mr. Robinson, Mr; Lawson, Dr. Nicholson, and
Dr. Lang.
The Government of Sir George Gipps, however, having
declined taking any action in the matter, I brought the sub-
ject under the consideration of the Legislature for the third
time in the session of 1845, in a motion to the following
effect, viz :—“ That a Humble Address be presented to Her
Majesty the Queen, transmitting a copy of the resolutions
passed by this House during the last session of Council,
recommending the establishment of a uniform and cheap pos-
tage throughout this territory ; and praying that her Majesty
will be graciously pleased to .issue the requisite instructions
for carrying the same into effect, in accordance with the pro-
visions of an Act of the Imperial Parliament empowering Her
Majesty so to do.”
After moving this resolution, however, I was induced to


withdraw it and to move for leave, which I obtained accordingly,
to bring in a bill “ to make provision for the establishment
of a uniform and cheap postage in New South Wales.”
That Bill was accordingly read a second time on the 16th Sep-
tember, 1845, but was negatived in Committee on the 23rd of
that month, through the dead weight of the Government officials
and nominees, to whom His Excellency had signified his
desire to throw it out. In short, Sir George Gipps, although
a very able, was a selfwilled and somewhat obstinate man.
He professed to have no faith in Sir Rowland Hill’s reform, as
applied to the colonies; but the fact was he was of too im-
perious a nature to accept of any measure, however reasonable
and desirable, from any member of the Opposition Shortly
after His Excellency’s departure from the colony, however, in
the year 1846, the attention of the Government of his suc-
cessor, Sir Charles Fitz Roy, was strongly directed to the
subject by a petition from the merchants and other inhabitants
of Melbourne, remonstrating against the oppressive character
of the existing postal rates, and praying for reform on the
basis of my resolutions. But nothing was done in the matter
till the session of 1849 ; the Legislative Council of 1843
having in the meantime been 'dissolved through effluxion of
time.
In the session of 1849, the Hon. E. Deas Thomson, then
Colonial Secretary, at length moved in the matter on the part
of Government and obtained a Select Committee to take into
consideration the whole subject of Postal Reform. That
Committee merely embodied in their Report and virtually
adopted and passed my resolutions of 1843 ; adding, however,
as a resolution of their own, the recommendation of a postal
rate for newspapers. On these resolutions, which Mr. Thom-
son moved should be submitted to the Governor, Sir Charles
Fitz Roy, on the 6th September, 1849, Sir James Martin,
then a member of the Council, proposed an amendment, as
follows, viz—“ That, after the word 4 effect,’ at the end of
the second resolution, there be added the words, ‘ except so
much thereof as recommends the imposition of a postage upon
newspapers.’ ” It is to be regretted however that Sir James,
who was not successful on this occasion, (the vote for his
amendment being five to thirteen,) had afterwards been making
a retrograde movement in matters of public policy; for in the
month of February, 1834, his Governmentimposed a tax upon


newspapers, which accordingly came into operation on the Ist
of April, of that year. It was scarcely to be expected that
Mr. Thomson, and the Select Committee of 1849, on whose
recommendation the present postal system came into operation
in the following year, would deem it necessary to take any
notice of my Resolutions, or of my connection in any way with
the subject of postal reform ; but as it was these resolutions
that initiated the subject in the Legislature of 1843, when
they were recommended by a Select Committee of the Council;
and as they were moved again by myself and carried by a
majority in 1844; and as the bill, in which they were
embodied in 1845, was read a second time, although after-
wards thrown out in committee by Mr. Thomson himself,
and his obedient following ofQ overnment officials and nominees,
I think I may take some credit for my connection with the
origination and enactment of one of the greatest measures of
social reform that has ever been enacted in these colonies.
I was also appointed Chairman of another Select Com-
mittee, during the session of 1843, on a petition from the
distressed mechanics and labourers of Sydney, of whom there
was a large number at that period out of employment: and
one of the measures adopted by the Government for their
relief, on the recommendation of that Committee, was the
erection of the present Custom House; of which the architec-
ture, characteristically enough, reminds one rather of a poors-
house than of the purpose for which it was intended, the
collection of the public revenue of this great colony.
The only other measure of a public character with which
I was identified during the first session of our semi-represen-
tative legislature was one combining a measure of retrench-
ment, which was then greatly needed in the depressed condi-
tion of the colony, with one of political reform. There were
various police magistracies throughout the colony which both
Mr. Wentworth and Mr. Windeyer, the leaders of the liberal
portion of the Council, regarded as entailing a needless
expense on the public, while they served chiefly as means and
sources of corrupt influence at elections in favour of the Gov-
ernment and against the best interests of the people. But
as neither of these gentlemen would take the initiative in the
measure by moving the abolition of the offices in question, I
volunteered to undertake this disagreeable duty, pro bono
publico, and was so ably seconded by both of the gentlemen I


have mentioned, that a reduction of expenditure was effected
in one evening to the amount of from £I2OO to £ISOO per
annum. It was by no means, however, the desire of those
who voted for this measure of retrenchment that the gentle-
men whose offices were thus abolished should be thrown at
once upon the world ; taking it for granted as they did, that
the holders of the offices in question would receive a year’s
salary, as is usually granted on the abolition of any govern-
ment office. But in order to concentrate all the odium of the
measure, against which the Government members and nominees
had voted to a man, upon the liberal members, His Excellency,
Sir George Gipps, refused to concede this boon of a year’s
salary, although solicited to do so in a resolution of the House
transmitted by address to His Excellency. The matter was
therefore referred to Lord Stanley, afterwards Earl Derby. How
it ended 1 have not ascertained, and it is scarcely necessary to
inquire.
During the session of 1844, after a long introductory
speech on the subject, I moved for and obtained a Select Com-
mittee on the Elective Franchise and the representation of
the colony; of which Committee I was elected Chairman.
The report of that Committee was presented to the Council
on the 27th September, 1844. It included three distinct
recommendations —1, that the Elective Franchise should be
extended to leaseholders of land; 2, that it should also be
extended to squatters, (neither of which classes possessed it at
that time); and 3, that Sydney, which had then only two
members, should have other four, or one for each ward; and
that the great electorates of Camden, Durham and Northum-
berland should each have a second member. These measures
of reform were all accorded in due time —some sooner and
some later I may mention, however, that, as it has often
been represented that I have been the enemy of the squatters,
it is evident from this historical incident that 1 was in reality
their first and best friend. Had Sir Richard Bourke remained
in office and retained the sentiments and views he held while
in the colony till these later times, he would never have
granted either the Elective Franchise or representation to
these gentlemen at all; probably foreseeing that if they be-
came possessed of these political privileges, they would
eventually become a great deal too powerful in the Hate and
would rule the colony, as they have since done for many


. ... I
years past. But I did all I could at that early period to obtain
for them their political rights at all hazards. Having been
invited by the Under Secretary of State for the Colonies —
when afterwards in London in 1847, immediately after the
{squatting Act of the Imperial Parliament of 1846 was passed,
but before the Orders in Council, which were to have the full force
of law, were appended to that Act—to offer any suggestions on
the subject, I did offer such suggestions as, if adopted, would
have reserved from the operation of the Squatting Act a very
considerable portion of the best lands in the colony for the
settlement of an agricultural population. But, through the
ignorance and presumption of the Land and Emigration Commis-
sioners of the time, who had the drawing up of the Orders in
Council entirely in their own hands, my suggestions were
partly misunderstood and partly dismissed as unworthy of
consideration; and the result was that the whole territory, from
Bass’ Straits to Cape Capricorn, was given over to the
squatters, and no provision made for the settlement of an
agricultural population, —thereby consigning hundreds of
families of industrious persons, who would otherwise have
purchased at almost any price small holdings for themselves, as
in the case of the cedar-cutters on the Richmond River, to a
life of hopeless vagabondage and dissipation, I remonstrated
loudly and long against this notorious instance of mis-govern-
ment; but the wrong that was then done to the colony, and
that had proved the ruin of thousands, was righted at length
in the famous measure of Free Selection of the year 1861.
I had visited the United States of America, and traversed
not fewer than eleven of their number in the year 1840; and
I was strongly convinced, from all I saw and heard during my
visit, that the comfort and happiness of the people of that
great country depended much more on their vast territory being
divided into manageable portions, or States, having each a separ-
ate and independent government of its own than on anything
that could be done for them by their Federal Government or
Congress. The beau ideal of an American State, in point of
extent, is from forty to fifty thousand square miles ; most of the
older States being much smaller, while a few of the more recently
formed, which, however, are sure to be eventually divided,
are considerably larger. I happened to visit Port Phillip, for
the first time, at the close of the year 1841. There was then,
as there had been for a considerable time previous, a great


agitation in the district for separation from New South Wales,
and a government of their own; and happening, at a public
meeting, convened for a different purpose altogether, to state
my cordial approval of that agitation, and my best wishes for
its success—mentioning the result of my experience and observa-
tion on the subject in America—l was afterwards pitched on by
certain friends in Port Phillip, who were exceedingly zealous
for separation, as a person likely to forward their interests in
pursuit of that great object, if elected one of the representatives
of the district in the semi-representative legislature that had
then been conferred on New South Wales. The candi-
date opposed to me was the late Sir Thomas Mitchell, who
was very popular at the time in Port Phillip; and a desper-
ate effort was accordingly made, by the friends of the other
candidates, to prevent my return. But the Geelong vote
having given me a majority of eight above Sir Thomas, chiefly,
I believe, through the exertions of the friends of separation, I
was elected accordingly.
Having made the necessary preparation for the great mea-
sure, by moving for certain returns in the session of 1843, I
announced, on the first day of the session of 1844, that I
should move, on a certairnday, that “ A humble address be
presented to Her Majesty the Queen, praying that Her
Majesty will be graciously pleased to direct that the requisite
steps may be taken, for the speedy and entire separation of
Port Phillip from the territory of New South Wales, and for
its erection into a separate and independent colony.’' I
accordingly made this motion on the liOth of August, 1844.
The Port Phillip members were unanimously and strongly in
its favour ; but with one solitary exception, the whole of the
members, both elective and nominee, for the rest of the colony
were strongly opposed to it. That exception was Mr., now the
l ight Honorable Robert Lowe, Chancellor of the Exchequer in
England, who was then merely a nominee member of theLegis
lative Council of New South Wales ; and I confess I cannot but
regard the support of ray measure, by so eminent a man, as one
of the memorabilia of my political life. The tactics of the
opponents of the measure, which was exceedingly distasteful
to all of them, were to say as little as possible on the subject —
and there was not a little chuckling over it when the vote was
declared, there being nineteen to six against it; for, as one of
the seats for Port Phillip was vacant at the time, there were
only five Port Phillip members along with Mr. Lowe.


The result of the measure gave rise to prodigious diappoint-
ment and to feelings akin to despair, in Port Phillip; and it
was industriously given out that, if it had been in other hands
than mine, the issue might have been different. It seemed to
me, however, that there was still some hope of success ; for,
as the six Port Phillip members were all in its favour, it
struck me that they might petition Her Majesty themselves,
and await the result; and the idea having been approved of
by the Separation Committee at Melbourne, I was deputed to
draw up the petition to Her Majesty, which all the six mem-
bers signed and presented to His Excellency Sir George Gipps
for transmission to Lord Stanley, then principal Secretary of
State for the Colonies, on one of the last days of the year
1844. It was transmitted to Her Majesty in the month of
January thereafter; and in October following a dispatch
was received from Lord Stanley, on the part of Her Majesty,
conceding the great boon of Separation and an independent
government to Port Phillip.
Mr. Lowe, whose zeal for education, in the mother country,
is well known, had moved for a Select Committee on Educa-
tion, of which I was appointed a member, during the session of
1844. Mr. Lowe’s report embodied most, if not all of the
great principles that characterise the present Public Schools
Act; but the Council at that period being like the Hebrew
alphabet, almost equally divided between radicals and serviles,
Mr. Lowe, whose sentiments and predilections identified him
with the former of these classes, while his position as a
nominee connected him with the latter, was so annoyed at the
taunts he was constantly receiving from the real serviles for
his alleged desertion of his proper post, that he resigned his
seat and retired from the Council. Before doing so, however,
he did me the honour to place his Report in my hands, to be
submitted to the Council for adoption. I accordingly moved
the adoption of the Report, in a speech of three hours, during
the whole of which Mr. Lowe was present behind the rails, on
the 28th of August, 1844.
Sir George Gipps was so determined an upholder of a high
duty on spirits, notwithstanding his being assured by the
Council that the system was ruining the public morals by
holding out a virtual premium upon smuggling and illicit
distillation, that he actually permitted officers of Government,
in two different instances, to pretend to accept bribes from


parties engaged in distillation, to allow them to pass their
spirits free, in order that the police might pounce upon them
immediately thereafter. Deeming this a practice of the most
unwarrantable description, I placed the following notice of
motion on the notice paper, and spoke in support of it, de-
scribing the cases that had occurred, on the 17 th of December,
1844 ; —“That in the opinion of this House, it is an unwar-
rantable and demoralizing practice, utterly unworthy of any
government professing to be guided by the principles of
Christian morals, to authorise any of the officers or employes
of such government, to pretend to receive bribes from persons
supposed to be engaged in fraudulent or nefarious practices,
with a view to criminate such persons —to substantiate charges
against them —or to involve them in deeper criminality.”
This motion, on being seconded merely pro forma, by a gentle-
man of the Society of Friends, was met by the Colonial
Secretary with the previous question, and negatived, as I felt
assured it would be, as a matter of course. But my object
was gained in exposing and denouncing an exceedingly repre-
hensible and immoral practice which, lam confident, no future
government will ever venture to repeat.
Krora the Ist of August, 1848, till the close of the first
session of the Legislative Council in 1846, when Sir George
Gipps demitted his office, and I left the colony for England,
there had been a whole series of sharp contests between the
Government and the Opposition, which was then headed
by Mr. Wentworth, and Mr. Windeyer, on a variety
of subjects bearing more or less upon the great question of
liberal government, or government by and for the people; on
most, if not all of which, I took a prominent part as a mem-
ber of the Opposition. But it is not necessary to go into
detail.
The period of ray arrival in England, in December, 1846,
was one of great importance to all these colonies. The
Squatting Act had been passed by the ’mperial Parliament;
but the Orders in Council, which were to be appended to it,
with the full force of law, and which, if they had been drawn
up with common sense and a competent knowledge of the
subject, might have in a great measure deprived it of its
sting, as far as the interests of the humbler classes were con-
cerned, were still under discussion ; and in the month of


March, of the following year, Earl Grey introduced into the
Bouse of Lords a Bill for the better government of the Aus-
tralian Colonies. Being invited as I have already stated by
the Colonial Office to offer suggestions on both of these
measures, i did so accordingly. Those on the subject of the
Orders in Council were treated as I have already shown, and I
shall not revert to the subject. I was more successful, how-
ever, at least in one most important particular, with those I
offered on the subject of the forthcoming Act of Parliament;
for after three years of correspondence on the subject with the
Colonial Office, and a whole series of disappointments, I
succeeded at length in inducing the Imperial Government to
insert a clause in that Act, which was finally passed in the
year 1850, authorising Her Majesty to separate from New
South Wales, and to erect into a distinct colony or colonies,
the whole territory lying to the northward of the 30th parallel
of latitude. This clause, which was my suggestion exclusively,
proved the Magna Charta of Queensland, and led eventually
to the formation of that colony.
I returned to the colony from England early in the year
1850; and a vacancy occurring shortly thereafter in the
representation of Sydney (which had then only two members),
through the retirement of the late Dr. Bland, I had the
honour of being elected for the first time, for the city of
Sydney, in the face of every imaginable effort on the part of
Mr. Wentworth and the squatters to keep me out. For Mr.
Wentworth, who had been a rabid radical and a professed
friend of the people during the entire administration of Sir
George Gipps, had, in the meantime, through the passing of
the Squatting Act of 1846, which gave him all he wanted as
a squatter, and of which I had openly denounced the injustice
and iniquity, turned his back upon his former self, and
become a thorough-paced conservative, and an unmistakable
enemy of the rights and interests of the people. The fact
was Mr. Wentworth had assumed the character of a patriot
during the Government of Sir George Gipps, merely to gratify
his own personal pique against His Excellency; who, when
New Zealand was under the government of New South Wales,
as it was for a short time, had refused to make over to him
and a few associates the whole or at all events the greater
part of the Middle Island of that group, which Mr.


Wentworth alleged he and his friends had purchased from the
natives for a few blankets and muskets—a claim and proceed-
ing which Sir George had very properly denounced as utterly
unparalleled in the annals of jobbery.
Mr. Wentworth’s first effort of a hostile character towards
myself, on his failing to keep me out of the House, was to
get a bill passed, “to disqualify ministers of religion from
being elected members of the said Legislative Council, or of
any other Legislative Council or Assembly that may hereafter
be substituted for the same.” This Bill, of the exclusive
reference of which to myself there could be no doubt, was
passed, on the 10th September, 1850, and was afterwards
embodied in the Constitution Act of the colony. But as it
had to be sent home for Her Majesty’s confirmation, it did
not come into operation till after the general election of the
following year.
Mr. Wentworth’s next effort in reference to myself was to
prefer certain charges against me, with a view, if possible, to
expel me from the House, on the ground of certain alleged
fraudulent transactions in which I had been engaged in con-
nection with emigration to Moreton Bay and Queensland.
These charges eventually narrowed themselves into the
question whether the property represented by a certain land
order, to the amount in value of .£BSO, was vested in myself or
in certain other parties. To understand this question, however,
afewwords of explanation are necessary. The funds arising from
the sale of waste land in the colony were appropriated at this
period to the promotion of emigration from the mother country
to Australia; but through the grossest mismanagement, on
the part of the authorities here, as well as of those at home,
these funds had been expended, for a series of years, in
inundating the colony, which then included both Port Phillip
and Moreton Bay, with Irish Homan Catholics, often of very
exceptionable character, at the public expense. It was partly
to counteract this fatal tendency of our public policy, and to
originate a stream of Protestant immigration, of a superior
character, that I had gone to England in 1846 ; and I had so
far succeeded in my object, during my stay in the United
Kingdom, as to have sent out three ships, with about six
hundred emigrants, of a superior character, to Moreton Bay,
in the years 1848 and 1849. But so great was the difficulty
at that time in inducing reputable people in England to go to


so unheard of a place, and especially to one situated in so low
a latitude, that 1 had to give free passages to so many poor
families, and passages at half price to so many more, that when
the first of the three ships reached Brisbane, there was £I4OO
due to my agent there for passage money, of which I havO had
to sustain the whole loss to the present day.
My object in the matter, besides that of promoting Protest-
ant immigration of a superior character, was to establish the
principle, which I found to be of indispensable necessity for
the promotion of immigration into these colonies, that every
emigrant, above the class of mere paupers, paying his own
passage out, should be entitled to an equivalent in land equal
to the whole amount of his passage money. But the difficul-
ties in the way of establishing this principle, through the
blindness, the indifference, and the stupidity of the Govern-
ment, both at home and here, and the jealousy of the Emigration
and Land Commissioners, were so great, that after sending out
the three ships I have mentioned, X abandoned the effort in
despair. For, whereas, if my principle had been recognised
and established, X could at that time have sent out, even to
Moreton Bay, from all parts of the mother country, twenty
thousand of as good and reputable people as ever landed on
these shores, and entirely at their own charges, the colony had
to sustain the loss of this incalculable benefit and blessing,
through the ignorance and incapacity of its rulers, while X
was treated by them almost as if I had been a common felon
for my pains.
But justice was done me at length in this matter, as far at
least as my character on the one hand, and the success of the
measure on the other, were concerned. For, as soonas Queens-
land was separated from New South Wales, which I have
shown above it was exclusively through my act and deed, the
principle of colonization, which I had recommended and exem-
plified at so much loss to myself, was established by Act of
Parliament in the new colony. And with what results, not-
withstanding the imperfect and, perhaps, faulty working of the
requisite machinery ? Why, the operation of this principle
actually quadrupled the population of Queensland in eight years
from the period of its separation, and brought into that colony,
along with this very large amount of immigration, not less than
£20,000 sterling a month of British capital, or nearly a
quarter of a million annually for years successively. And


what was doing in New South Wales all the while, where no
such principle was in operation ? Why, the immigration from
Europe into New South Wales during these eight years, merely
balanced the emigration to Queensland, California, and New
Zealand; such emigration being deemed necessary by the
industrious classes in consequence of the stagnation and want
of employment which the absence of a similar system gave
rise to here.
To return to the question to which Mr. Wentworth’s charges
had been narrowed down —certain parties, who had arrived at
Brisbane by the third of the three ships I had sent out to
Moreton Bay, had paid £BSO, altogether, to my agent in
London for their passage out. I had invested the whole of
that amount in the purchase of land at Moreton Bay; and,
desirous of ensuring the establishment of the principle-, that
each emigrant paying his own passage out should receive an
equivalent in land to the amount of his passage money, I
had given orders to these emigrants, respectively, for a portion
of land equal in value to the amount of the paid passage money.
It was taken for granted, by my opponents, that the emigrants
had paid for these portions of land over and above the amount
of their passage money. But it was not so in a single instance;
the arrangement having been made, in necessary compliance
with certain Government regulations of the time, and with a
view to the establishment of an important principle of coloni-
zation, which Mr, Benjamin Hawes, then Under Secretary
of State for the Colonies, had assured me the Local Govern-
ment would willingly assist in carrying out. I had waited
on him, personally, on the subject, at his summer-house at
Brighton, before my arrangements with the emigrants was
made. The question, therefore, for decision was, whether, on
the arrival of these emigrants at Brisbane,the land so purchased
vested in me, who had paid for it exclusively, or in those who
held the subordinate land orders. There was no intention on
my part to refuse implementing these orders ; it was merely
necessary for the carrying out of a somewhat complicated
scheme, that I should retain the proprietorship for a time.
There was a great array in the Legislative Council Chamber
when this question came up for discussion ; the gentleman
who had been selected to prefer the charges, which he did with
a notable flourish of trumpets, was backed with the whole
influence and power of the Australian Club, which then repre-


sented the might and majesty of the squatters; and every
available portion of the House was packed as full as it could
hold, to witness my anticipated defeat and expulsion. I had
made no preparations for my defence; I knew perfectly that
the gentlemen who were arrayed against me knew nothing of
the real facts and circumstances of the case they had taken up,
in mere anxiety to get rid of a political opponent, and would
therefore leave me plenty of matter for my reply. Accord-
ingly, when I was called on for my defence, I addressed the
Speaker to the following effect:—“ Mr. Speaker, if it has ever
been your fortune, in travelling among the cities and States of
the old world, to visit the ancient city of Constantinople, you
must be aware that it is customary, among devout Mussul-
men, to transact all their business, even the most trivial, in
the name of the Prophet j so that a fruit-seller, coming up to
you in the public bazaar, with his basket of fruit before him,
will accost you, with the utmost gravity and solemnity, “ In the
name of the Prophet—figs !” Now, Mr. Speaker, after all the
fanfaronade and pretension with which this charge has been
preferred, and the lack of everything like evidence to convict
me of criminalty of any kind with which it has been suppor-
ted, I cannot characterise the whole affair more appropriately
than in the words of the fruit-seller of Constantinople, in the
name of the Prophet—figs!” This unexpected exordium
so completely electrified not only the whole Council but the
whole colony for weeks thereafter that anything further on my
part was quite unnecessary, I finished my defence, however,
and Mr. Wentworth carried his motion ; but he took nothing by
it, as it was perfectly understood to be a mere political
move.
A despatch having been received by His Excellency the
Governor from the Right Honourable the Secretary of State
for the Colonies, of date 21st November, 1849, urging the
necessity for the reduction of the military force then in the
colony; and a series of mawkish Resolutions having been
adopted on the subject, on the 4t hof September, iB6O, on the
motion of Mr. Donaldson, deprecating any reduction of the
military force, and begging both more men and more money from
England, I placed upon the Notice Paper the following Resolu-
tions, to be moved on the motion for going into Committee on
the Governor’s message relating to military expenditure. On
standing up, however, to move these resolutions on the 12th of


September the Speaker ruled that they could not be put, as they
involved substantially the same argument and matter as the
question on which the House had pronounced its judgment on
Mr Donaldson’s motion. So, although I differed from the
Speaker on the subject, I bowed to the chair. I reprint these
Resolutions now, in consequence of the great change that has
since passed upon the public mind, on the relations of the
colonies to the mother country.
1. That the maintenance of a military force in this colony,
at the expense of Great Britain, is totally unnecessary for the
defence and protection of the colony, either from foreign aggres-
sion, or from internal disturbance, and is, therefore, a serious
injustice and grievous wrong to the overtaxed people of Eng-
land, who are now endeavouring, in every possible way, to
reduce the military expenditure of the empire.
2. That even if such a lorce were necessary in this colony,
the force which it is proposed to maintain is altogether inade-
quate, and, consequently, altogether useless for either of the
purposes abovementioned.
3. That if it is true, that a large military force, to be main-
tained by Great Britain, is necessary for the defence and pro-
tection of this colony; and if Great Britain is, notwithstanding,
either unable or unwilling to afford such a force, she is morally
bound to treat us as British Colonists, in precisely the same
manner in which she was herself treated as a colony of Rome,
when the Romans withdrew their troops, otwithstanding the
e most remonstrances of the colonists of Britain, and thereby
recognised their entire freedom and independence.
4. That it is a serious grievance for the inhabitants of this
colony to have their ordinary revenue now saddled for the first
time with an item for military expenditure —an item which, if
not checked at the outset, will be found to increase every year,
and for which no plea of necessity can be urged.
6. That the only conceivable use of a military force of the
extent proposed, is, to strengthen the hands of the Executive
in perpetuating a system of bad government, and in withhold-
ing those political reforms which the colonists have a right to
demand.
6 'i hat in these circumstances, this House refuses to vote
any amount whatsoever for military expenditure,
7 That an address, embodying these Resolutions, be pre-
sented to His Excellency the Governor.


But the great event of this period was Mr. Wentworth’s
insidious attempt, in conjunction with a small minority of the
Legislature, but in perfect accordance with the wishes of Earl
Grey and the Colonial Office, to effect the resumption of trans-
portation to New South Wales; which it was supposed had
been discontinued, permanently, and for ever, in 1841. Sir
Jame-i Martin was the humble follower, or rather the ardent
coadjutor of Mr. Wentworth on that occasion. But the voice
of the colony proved much too strong for the advocates of trans-
portation in 1850. In addition to a strong counter-agitation
throughout the colony, a monster meeting was held on the
subject in the Old Barrack-square, Sydney, in which I had the
honour of taking a prominent part, along with the late Captain
Lamb, R N.; and the citizens testified their strong approval
of our procedure on the occasion at the general election,
which ensued, in 1851 (when Sydney had obtained three mem-
bers), by placing me at the head of the poll for the city,
Captain Lamb, K.N., second, and Mr. Wentworth third. I
did not take my seat, however, in the session of 1851, but
resigned, and went to England again early in 1852. My
resignation was certainly one of the false steps of my public
life— although taken for the best at the time—which I had
afterwards much reason to regret. For the Legislature of
1851 was entrusted eventually with the framing of a New
Constitution Act for the colony ; and through the evil influence
of the men who were then at the head of our colonial affairs,
a character of antagonism to the best interests of the country
was given to that measure, which it required whole years of
subsequent agitation and legislation, even partially, to .coun-
teract and get rid of. For example, instead of giving us a
thoroughly representative Legislature, it gave us an Upper
House of Government Nominees for life ; and it all but sad-
dled us with that old man of the sea, the precious incubus of
a colonial nobility, 't was a narrow escape the colonyhad in
that crisis, from the Earl of Wingycarribbee and Viscount
Curraducbidgee. Mr. Wentworth would lain have been a live
Australian lord.
To return to the Anti Transportation agitation of 1850—
the popular demonstrations of the period, especially in Syd-
ney, were so offensive and so annoying to Mr. Wentworth,
particularly, that he actually threatened in the House to have
the seat of Government transferred from Sydney to Tam-


worth, on the Upper Hnnter, to be away from the Sydney
mob. “In the event,” I merely observed, “the people of
Sydney would of course insist upon separation.
One of Mr. Wentworth’s supporters on that occasion was
the late Captain (afterwards .Admiral) King, R.N. In the
course of the agitation, there had been a pro-transportation
Petition transmitted to His Excellency by certain magistrates
and other gentlemen in the far interior, couched in so abject
and servile a strain towards the existing authorities, that I
had stated, in allusion to it, at the great public meeting in
the Old Barrack-square, that it reminded me of the speech of
the prophet’s ass to Balaam, “Am not I thine ass ?” as if
they had said, treat us, dispose of us, and belabour us as you
please, are not we thine ass ? In his speech in the House,
on the great question of the day, Captain King, in alluding
somewhat angrily to this harmless comparison of mine, was
pleased to characterize my quoting the speech of the ass as
an act of sacrilege on my part. In reply, I observed that the
honourable and gallant Captain had accused me of sacrilege
for quoting the speech of the prophet’s ass. I could only say
that it was the greatest discovery he had made on the coasts
of Australia, and I hoped he.would not forget to notice it in
the next edition of his book. Captain King had made two
surveying voyages round this island continent, and had pub-
lished two volumes of his voyages and discoveries. It was
doubtless a very severe castigation for a professional, as well
as a literary man ; and 1 was almost sorry for it afterwards;
but he richly deserved it
I returned to the colony from England in November, 1853,
There was a vacancy in the representation of Sydney shortly
thereafter, through the resignation of Mr. Wentworth, who was
going to England, I was strongly solicited to allow myself to
be nominated for the city on the occasion ; but I declined the
honour, and was elected for the county of Stanley in Moreton
Bay, which had in the meantime become vacant, through the
resignation of John Richardson, Esq. in July, 1864 ; my
object in accepting that position being to hasten the separa-
tion of the future colony from New South Wales, agreeably to
the Act of the Imperial Parliament of iB6O, and to counter-
act the machinations of certain evil-disposed persons who were


anxious to turn the provisions of that Act to the worst possi-
ble account. I was also enabled, through my being a member
of the Legislature during that session, besides assisting in
carrying out certain other measures of importance, to get the
Affiliated Colleges Act, which was then under consideration,
liberalised, so as to enable all Presbyterians to take advantage
of its provisions on equal terms, in the establishment of a
college for their particular communion, which would not have
been practicable on the original platform of the Act.
But my presence in the Legislature of 1854 was chiefly of
importance, from the opportunity it afforded me of entering
my solemn protest against the whole character of the Govern-
ment of Sir Charles Fitz Roy—the worst Government, and
the most demoralising in its tendency, that we had ever had
in New South Wales. On the termination of that Govern-
ment, which had lasted, to the great calamity of the colony,
for upwards of eight years, a farewell Address, of the usual
mawkish character of such documents, was proposed to be
presented to His Excellency by the Legislative Council, on the
Ist December, 1854; in which he was extolled to the utmost
for “ the practical ability, the sound judgment, and the eminent
success of his administration of the Government of the
colony.” On that Address I proposed the following Amend-
ment —showing the real character of that Government in the
various particulars undermentioned.
“ That this Council, on the eve of its prorogation, and of the
departure for England of His Excellency, Sir Charles
Augustus Fitz Roy, desires to record its deliberate opinion,
1. That His Excellency’s Administration has, throughout,
been a uniform conspiracy against the rights of the people of
this land.
2. That, from the lamentable inefficiency of his Excel-
lency’s Government, as well as from its utter inability to meet
the wants of an unprecedentedly important crisis, this colony,
which was evidently designed by nature to take the lead in
the Australian group, has fallen from the high position which
it might otherwise have easily maintained, and become, in the
estimation of Her Majesty’s Government, of the British public,
and of the civilised world, only the second in the list
3. That in order to maintain and perpetuate the anti-popu-
lar system which has uniformly characterised His Excellency’s


Government, the funds of the colony have been lavishly ex-
pended in the maintenance of unnecessary offices and the pay-
ment of extravagant salaries, while public works of urgent
necessity to the community, in all parts of the territory, have
been postpened and neglected
4. That no such efforts, as were indispensably necessary
under the extraordinary circumstances of the times, have been
made during His Excellency’s term of office, to supply the
colony with an industrious population of the working classes
from the mother country, and that the efforts of private indi-
viduals to supply this great desideratum have uniformly been
frowned upon and systematically discouraged.
5. That notwithstanding the extraordinary interest which
is now taken in Australia by the European public, no efforts
at all worthy of the name, have been made during His Excel-
lency’s Government, in the way of geographical discovery,
either by land or by sea, with a view to the opening up of this
vast terra incognita, for the progressive settlement of a Euro-
pean population, although the able and energetic Governor of a
neighbouring colony has been gaining imperishable lauiels by
demonstrating the practicability of navigating the great
fiver which forms the southern boundary of New South Wales
ror nearly 2000 miles; and that while Great Britain and the
United States of America have been vieing with each other in
their search for Sir John Franklin and his companions in the
icy regions of the North, the lamented Leichhardt, a name not
less illustrious in the annals of geographical discovery, has
been left to perish miserably in the central desert of Australia,
and no effort, at all worthy of the colony, has been made, to
search either for himself or his remains.
6. That instead of relaxing in any way the oppressive
character of the land system, in accordance with the obvious
intent and spirit of the Orders in Council, His Excellency
has voluntarily exceeded the powers entrusted to him for the
time being by the Imperial authorities, in rendering that
system still more oppressive, and thereby curtailing unneces-
sarily the rights and privileges of a mis-governed and down-
trodden people.
7. That the moral influence which has emanated from Go-
vernment House during His Excellency’s term of office has
been deleterious and baneful in the highest degree to the best


interests of this community; and that the evil example which
has thus been set in the highest places of the land has
tended, more than anything else that has occurred in this
colony'these thirty years past, to bring Her Majesty's Govern-
ment into contempt, and to alienate from Her Majesty the
affections and respect of the Australian people.
I was not alone in the expression of opinion I thus gave of
the Government of Sir Charles Fitz Roy; and the names of
the gentlemen who voted with me in a minority of six against
twenty-eight will doubtless satisfy the public as to the propriety
of the step I had thus taken, and the worthless character of the
administration that had come to its close. The six members
who formed the minority were Mr. Covvper, Mr. Parkes, Mr.
Campbell, Mr. Flood, Mr. Bligh, and Dr. J ang. It is
unnecessary to go into details under the various forms and
cases of mis-government indicated in my amendment, or to
describe the state of things in the colony, When vice pre-
vailed and impious men bore sway.
Mr. Wentworth’s Bill of exclusion, which I have already
mentioned, and which was embodied in the Constitution Act,
did me personally, perhaps, a real service in excluding me
from Parliament, which 1 believe was its sole object till some
time after the advent of Responsible Government. But the
Donaldson and Parker Governments that were then initiated
successively, having both egregiously failed in guiding the
vessel of the State under liberal institutions —for which rare
specimens of political incapacity the chiefs of both of these
govern nents were subsequently honoured, I believe at the
instance of Sir Willian Oenison, with Knighthood, by those
eminent judges of colonial merit, the dispensers of honouis and
dio-nities at home —the Cowper and Robertson Government
that succeeded, and that passed, to its own great honour and
the incalculable benefit of the country, the present Klectoral
Act, with manhood suffrage and the ballot, in 1858, moved
the'repeal of the Fxclusion clause of Mr. Wentworth’s Con-
stitution Act, which was carried I believe, unanimously ; and
I was again returned to Parliament by the citizens of Sydney
at the General Election of 1859.
Sir William Denison, as I have just stated, was then
Governor-General—a title, without meaning, which has since
been very properly discontinued, in deference to the feelings


and wishes of the neighbouring colonies. Unexceptionable and
exemplary in his domestic relations, Government House pre-
sented a perfect contrast, under His Excellency’s government,
to what it had done under that of his predecessor. Arbitrary
in his disposition, however—as perhaps befitted the Governor
of a penal settlement, like that of Van Dieman’s Land, now
Tasmania, from which he had been transferred to New
Wales—he was scarcely the man to preside over a community
of freemen; and his very first act under Responsible Govern-
ment exhibited in a remarkable manner his unfitness for the
office he held. For instead of allowing the old political ma-
chinery of the former regime to work itself out in a regular
way, and to earn its pensions by proving its incapacity for
office under the new order of things, as prescribed in the
Constitution Act, and thereby leaving Responsible Govern-
ment to assume its proper form and character under the votes
of the representatives of the people, Sir William Denison
assumed the right to transform the old officials of the State
into public pensioners by his own authority, and placed Mr.
(afterwards Sir A. S.) Donaldson in. the premiership, as the
Turkish Sultan does his Grand Vizier, by his own act and
deed Arriving amongst us with the highest prestige as an
Engineer officer, the only exhibition of his talents he ever gave
us in that way was in the erection of certain gingerbread
fortifications in the harbour of Sydney, that cost the country
seventy-five thousand pounds, and that have since excited the
surprise and the ridicule of foreign general officers Adsiting the
colony. Conceiving himself a sort of universal genius, entitled
to speak authoritatively on every subject, he delivered on one
occasion a public lecture on the Christian Church, in which I
have no hesitation in stating he exhibited entire inacquaint-
ance with the theory and practice of the apostolic church, great
dogmatism, and great presumption. Entirely mistaking the
proper duties of his office, as the Governor of a country as
large as all Great Britain and France put together, by
traversing it in all directions, as his present Excel-
lency, Earl Belmore, has been doing, so greatly to
his credit, for a year or two past, to make himself
acquainted with its physical character and capabilities
on the one hand, and with the wants and wishes of the in-
habitants on the other, he kept himself perched up in his office
in Go\ r ernraent House—like a police-office clerk on his stool —


westering the Duke of Newcastle, who was then Secretary of
State for the Colonies, with despatches on every trifling inci-
dent in his Government, at the rate (as we were told in the
Legislative Assembly by a public functionary, who was ar-
dently wishing for a compliment for his master) of not fewer, I
think, than eleven a week. I believe I gave that gentleman
just what he required on the occasion, by expressing my
cordial sympathy with His Grace the Duke of Newcastle,
under the merciless infliction to which he was subjected, of
having eleven letters a week to read on all the petty police in-
cidents of New South Wales. At all events, we heard nothing
more of His Excellency’s interminable despatches. His pro-
pensity to shine in Dowuing-street as “ the Complete Letter-
writer of Australia,” was, in one particular instance, a very
serious matter, and no trifle to those concerned. I have already
stated that, at my suggestion and recommendation, through
the Colonial office and the Emigration and Land Cominis
sioners in London, the Imperial Parliament was pleased, in
the Act of 1850, to fix the boundary-line between New South
Wales and the future colony or colonies to the northward, at the
30th parallel of south latitude. There is a natural and well-
defined boundary-line at that parallel from the Pacific Ocean
to the westward ; and there is an equally well-defined natural
boundary (as the late Sir Thomas Mitchell declares in one of
his books) at Dawes’ Range, or the 25th parallel of latitude.
Now, if the Act of the Imperial Parliament had been carried
out, as it certainly ought to have been, and the Clarence and
Richmond River districts included in the Northern colony,
Queensland would have had a coast-line extending five degrees of
latitude from the 30th to the 25th parallel, while the city of
Brisbane—the capital—and the Parliamentary buildings of the
colony, would have been exactly in the centre of its coast linej
whereas they are at present at the southern extremity of the
colony, to the great annoyance of the Members from the Nor-
thern districts, and there is no proper natural boundary for
another colony farther north, as is now urgently required.
That my idea—as to the 30th parallel of latitude being the
only proper one for a boundary-line between the two contermin-
ous colonies of New South Wales aad Queensland—was the
right one, I appeal to the Hon. E. Deas Thomson, who, in
his letter to the Right Hon. Sir William Moles worth, then
Secretary of State for the colonies—of date, London, 27th


Sept., 1855—thus writes, in allusion to certain parties who
were then endeavouring to have the boundary-line struck still
farther south than the 30th parallel:—“l shoaid greatly
prefer the 30th parallel of south latitude as the frontier line
between the two colonies; first, because it was the most
southern boundary-line contemplated by the Act of Parliament,
13th and 14th Victoria, cap, 50; and, secondly, because any
encroachment upon that line would be received with great
jealousy and discontent by the colonists of New South Wales.
I believe, also, (hat it would form an appropriate geographical
boundary, having reference to the natural outlets of produce
and the reception of supplies, whilst for this reason, its adoption
would probably secure to each colony the collection of its ap-
propriate revenue.” How any man who could write officially
in this style, could, almost immediately thereafter, on his
return to the colony, chime in with v ir William Denison’s
absurd and iniquitous proposal to fix the boundary-line at the
28th parallel on the coast, and the 29th to the westward of
the coast-range, I cannot conceive.
The olony of New South Wales had an extent of two hun-
dred and seventy-hve thousand square miles to the southward
of the 30th parallel of latitude, that is considerably more
than double the extent of the I nited Kingdom, and more than
ten times larger than the little colony of Van Diernan’s Land
or Tasmania, of which Sir Wil iarn Denison was Governor
before he came here. How, then, he could be so insensible to
the claims of common justice, as well as to the rights and
interests of a numerous body of colonists of all classes re-
siding in the Clarence and Richmond districts, as to include
that district in New South Wales, and thereby to add to this
Mammoth colony an aiditional portion of territory forty square
miles larger than all England, I cannot conceive. At all
events, the inhabitants of the Clarence and Richmond River
districts, almost to a man, petitioned for their separation from
New South Wales and their annexation to Queensland, in the
year 1860. But justice to the people in such matters is always
the last thing to be considered, either by Lolonial Govern-
ments or Colonial Legislatures. Witness the result of my
appeal for the separation of Port Phillip, in 1844. With the
exception of Mr. Lowe, not a single representative of New
South Wales Proper would consent to do justice to Port Phillip


on that occasion. The Fob "Roy role was then, as it was
afterwards in the case of the Clarence Uiver and Queensland,
the only rule for Colonial Government, viz.:
'I hat they should take who have the power,
And they should 1 eep who can.
Unfortunately Great Britain, the great colonising power oj
the modern world, has virtually abdicated all along one of the
most important functions of such a power, that of
assigning and fixing irrevocably proper boundaries for conter-
minous colonies. The case was precisely the same in the old
British American colonies, as it has hitherto been in Austra*
lia. But when the United States were finally constiiuted and
became a great Federal power, this grand mistake of the old
regime had to be rectified, as it was in reality, by the sove-
reign people of that great country. The mammoth colonies
had to submit to curtailment, before they could be admitted
into a bond of brotherhood and union with the smaller states.
And we may rest assured that the same process will be insis-
ted on before a system of federation, so much desired and now
especially so much needed, can be effected in these Australian
colonies. Tasmania, with a territory of twenty thousand
square miles, and Victoria with a territory of eighty-five
thousand, will never consent to enter into a federal union
with New South Wales, with a territory of three hundred and
twen y five thousand. I can only say that they would be
great fools if they did. It is much too late now to speak of
the annexation of the Clarence and Richmond Rivers district
to Queensland ; but that district, having an area of forty
square miles more than all England, would form a noble
colony of itself, while Sydney, with a uniform tariff for all
the colonies, would still form its commercial port, like New
York in America.
In one word, by pretending to set aside the Act of the
Imperial Parliament, which fixed the northern boundary of
;ew South Wales at the 30th parallel of latitude, Sir Wil-
liam Denison not only did the grossest injustice to the inhabi-
tants of the Clarence and Itichmond « ivers district, but per-
petrated an enormous wrong upon the colony of Queensland,
and deranged our whole colonial system as far north es Cape York.
As the proceedings of Parliament, since the advent of re
sponsible government in i 856, are comparatively fresh in the
memory of the colonists generally, I shall only allude in


future to the more important Parliamentary struggles in
which I took a more prominent part till the close of the late
Parliament.
The Parliamentary Session of 1859 commenced on the 30th
August of that year, and was prorogued on the 4th July,
1860. 1 introduced the Triennial Bill, to limit the duration
of all future Parliaments to three years, during the session.
The second reading was carried by a majority of two, on the
27th January, 1860 ; but it was negatived on the third
reading by a similar majority, on the 3rd February there-
after. All such measures of reform are generally slow in their
progress to a successful issue. The Triennial Bill, which I
consider one of the great measures of colonial reform, would
certainly have been carried during the late Parliament, after
other ton additional years of waiting, had all Parliamentary
action not been stopped on that occasion, in a way I shall not
now characterize. The public seem quite prepared for such a
measure now.
I had adhered to Mr. Cowper, as Premier, during the earlier
part of this session ; but being unable to vote with him in his
famous measure for the establishment of the Privy Council
system of Education, I was one of the majority of fifty-seven
to eight, by which he was thrown out and resigned office, in
consequence of his defeat, on the 19th October, 1859.
I then adhered to the Ministry formed by Mr. Forster;
but on his moving the second reading of his Elective Legisla-
tive Council Bill, on the 24th February, 1860, I moved as an
amendment, that “in the opinion of this House, a second
Bouse of Legislation is not necessary in the present circum-
stances of the colony.” 1 had found a single House, consti-
tuted under Lord Stanley’s Bill of 1842, quite sufficient for
the wants of the colony, and thought we might go on very
well without a second House for twenty or thirty years longer.
My amendment was supported by Mr. Robertson, Mr. Arnold,
Mr. Wisdom, Mr. Lucas, Mr.Pemell, Mr. Garrett, Mr. Asher, Mr.
1 i oskins, and Mr. DMley. But it was negatived by a majority of
43 to 10. The second reading of Mr. Forster’s Bill, for which I
had voted in expectation of its being amended in committee,
was then negatived by a majority of 29 to 26 ; and Mr.-
Forster, proposing to continue to carry on his Government,
notwithstanding that hostile vote, was met with a motion of
want of confidence, by Mr. Gray, to the effect, that ‘‘in the


opinion of this House the further continuance in office of the
present advisers of Her Majesty would only tend to obstruct
the public business of the colony ” 1 voted with the ma-
jority of 33 to 25 on this motion, on the understanding that
it was accordant with Parliamentary practice that a ministry,
outvoted on such a question as the one then before the House,
should resign. I perceive that Mr. Piddington, a high authoiity
in matters of Parliamentary practice, was of a different opinion
on that occasion, and voted accordingly ; and when the Martin-
Parkes ministry subsequently retained office, notwithstanding
repeated adverse votes of quite as much importance as that on
the second reading of Mr. Forster’s Elective Council Bill, I
became aware that 1 had done that gentleman wrong by my vote
on the occasion in question, and that we had in the mean time
made not a few steps in advance in our Parliamentary practice.
The second session of IBt>o, commenced on the 25th of
September, but was prorogued, with a view to a dissolution,
on the Bth November following. The question before the
House, which had led, through a hostile majority, to this con-
summation, was that of Mr. Robertson’s Bill for the establish-
ment of Free Selection before Survey, and deferred payments.
I confess I was somewhat doubtful at first as to both of
these principles, but I was at length induced to give my
cordial adhesion to the measure as proposed. The cry, at the
General Flection which ensued, was Free Selection before
Survey, and the colony rang with that cry from one end of it
to the other. 1 had announced my intention of again going to
England, on certain urgent ecclesiastical business, by the Decem-
ber mail, but I was elected notwithstanding, at the head of the
poll, by the constituency of Sydney West, A public meet-
ing of friends and supporters was summoned at the Temper-
ance Hall, a day or two before my departure, to express their
good wishes on the occasion, At that meeting an incident
occurred of rather an amusing character, which served greatly
to enliven the dull monotony of a discussion about the disposal
of land. The talk of course had been all of Free Selection ;
and when I was called on to address the meeting, I told them,
evidently to their great surprise, that there was nobody in the
colony who had had more to do with Free Selection than myself.
Scarcely a week passed, 1 added, without some person, either
from the town or the country, calling upon me to inform me
that he had mace his selection ; and as I was one of the public


functionaries who were authorised to deal with such cases, I
had merely to point out the boundaries, and to notify the
selection But there was this difference between the cases in
which Mr. Robertson was concerned and those with which I had
to do, that while his were cases of Free Selection before Survev,
mine were all cases of Free Selection after Survey. The
meeting now began to perceive that the Free Selections after
Survey, to which I had been alluding, were of a matrimonial
character, and their delight at the discovery and the parallel
I had drawn was unbounded.
The Free Selection Parliament assembled on the 10th
January, 1861, and continued in session till the 10th May of
that year. The principal measures which were passed by the
Assembly during the session, were Mr. Robertson’s Land
Bills; on the passing of which, that gentleman resigned his
s°at in the Legislative Assembly, and was appointed a mem-
ber of the Legislative Council to assist in passing his bills
there. This, however, was not so easy a task as was antici-
pated. The old gentlemen of the colonial Hpper House
were principally ultra-conservatives and had but slight sympathy
with the rights end interests of the people ; and the Govern-
ment of the day had accordingly to treat them in precisely
the same manner as Karl Grey was empowered by his late
Majesty, King William the F'ourth, to treat the House of
Lords, when it became restive and recalcitrant, with a view to
the passing of the famous Reform Bill of 18S2, by introduc-
ing a sufficient number of men of liberal principles into the
House of Peers to bring their lordships into conformity w T ith
the wishes of the country as declared by the people’s House.
It is well known that this swamping process was not carried
out in the House of Lords, through the wise policy of their
lordships in absenting themselves from their House, to allow
the obnoxious measure to be passed in their absence. But it
was carried out here in real earnest; the President and his
sturdy conservatives vacating their seats and leaving their
House for good, when the Novi IlorrJnes, the new men (as if
any of them were old in the aristocratic sense), were actually
brought in to swamp them.
The second session of 1861, which commenced 3rd Septem-
ber of that year, and continued till the 20th January, 1862,
was employed chiefly in passing the estimates for the year,
together with a variety of useful measures for the time, very


few of which, however, were of peculiar importance. I re*
turned to the colony from England on the 11th of October,
1861, and as there happened to be a call of the House that
very day, on Mr. Wilson’s motion to declare the Church and
School Lands Waste Lands of the Crown, I took my seat
accordingly and voted for the motion, as I had always
approved of that mode of settling the question. I cannot
but express my surprise, however, that nothing should have
been done in this matter by Sir James Martin’s Government,
of which Mr. Wilson was an influential member, during the
whole period of its existence; for the question, which used to
be considered a vital one, has remained in abeyance—in pre*
cisely the same unsatisfactory state—to the present day.
On the 10th January, 1862, I moved, with a view to
encourage the industrial establishments of the colony, “that,
in the opinion of this House, tenders should in future bo
called for within the colony, for all railway plant, rolling;
stock, supplies and goods required for the public service.”
The motion was passed. One to a similar effect had pre-
viously been made by Mr. Lucas, of which I retained tho
principle, but merely simplified the language.
The third session of the Parliament of 1861 commenced on the
27th May, and terminated on the 20th December, 1862 On
the 17th June I brought in a Bill to abolish the Law of Pri-
mogeniture, and extend the laws of distribution in cases of
Intestacy to Real Estate. It was read a second time on
the 16th September, and passed the Assembly on the
19th of that month, after a pretty smart debate on both oc-
casions. This bill had originally been introduced by Sir T„
A. Murray, when a private member of the Assembly; but, on
his being appointed Speaker, he requested me to take charge
of it, which I did with much pleasure, as I cordially
approved both of its principle and its object. It was really
an important measure of reform, and has proved a great boon
to not a few respectable families in the colony already.
But the great measure of this session, which was otherwise
a very busy and protracted one, was the passing of an Act, at
the instance of the hon. Charles Cowper, C.M.G., for the pro-
hibition of all future grants from the public treasury for the
support of religion. There was much and long protracted de-
bate on this measure, in which I took a prominent part
throughout. But it would scarcely have met with the support


it actually obtained outside the House, had the public mind
not been educated up to it beforehand. In this necessary and
preliminary work I had myself taken the initiative, by deliver-
ing, in one of the public halls in Sydney, in the year 1842,
and afterwards publishing and circulating throughout the
colony, three lectures on u the impolicy and injustice of re-
liti'ious establishments in the coloniesfollowing up the effort
by holding public meetings and delivering addresses, from
time to time, in all parts of the colony, for twenty years there-
after. It was not to be expected that the different ecclesiasti-
cal bodies enjoying State Aid would assist in this agitation.
But for what reason 1 know not, even the Congregationalists
exhibited great apathy and indifference on the subject, and
lent very little assistance towards the accomplishment of the
object, either on the platform or through the press; while
the Free Church Presbyterians backed out of the agitation
altogether at a very early period, because their favourite
principle of its being the duty of the State to support religion
was not recognised in the original programme.
The fourth session of the Parliament of 1861 commenced on
the 23rd June, 1863, and lasted till the 22nd April, 1864.
There was much business of a routine character transacted
during its course, and there were many late sittings during
the protracted session; but there were but very few measures
brought forward of much importance to the public, and most
of these proved abortions. For, on the 7th October,
1863, Mr. Eagar having moved, in Committee of the Whole,
“ that the financial condition of the country, as shown by the
estimates of ways and means for the year 1864, was unsatis-
factory,” and the votes on both sides being equal, Mr. Cowper
and his colleagues announced their resignation of office on the
following day; and the Martin and Forster Ministry was
forthwith inaugurated;
A motion I made on the 29th July, 1862, for the virtual
extension to New South Wales of the Queensland principle of
colonization, which had proved so successful in the new colony,
by establishing a bonus in land for the promotion of Immigra-
tion, was lost by a hostile majority of fifteen to ten. For,
leaving the exceptional case of Assisted Immigration out
of the question, it is very remarkable that every Government
we have had for the last ten years has acted upon the prin-
ciple that there is no necessity for offering a bonus on emigra-


tion generally to this colony; and the consequence has been that
while the population of New Zealand and Queensland has been
quadrupling itself in eight or ten years, ours has been little
better than stationary, while the general want of employment
for the industrious classes, to which this state of things has
given rise, has been most calamitous to many.
There was a motion which I placed on the Notice paper, and
which I intended making during the session of 1863-4, but
which I afterwards withdrew, although I confess it does seem
to me peculiarly appropriate for the present time, when in
two or three months hence we shall have reached the centen-
ary of the discovery of this coast by the great English navigator,
Captain Cook: The motion was as follows :
1. That in the opinion of this House, it is expedient and
desirable, that the name of this colony of “New South
Wales,” having been originally given to it from mere
accident and caprice, and being neither historical nor appro-
priate, should now be changed, and a name at once historical,
distinctive and appropriate, substituted in its stead.
2. That the only name that would fulfil these conditions,
and that deserves at the same time so honourable a commemo-
ration, is that of the illustrious discoverer of this country,
Captain Cook; in honour and in grateful remembrance of
whose eminent and distinguished services to humanity, and to
Australia in particular, it is the opinion of this House
that this colony should henceforth be designated “Cooks
land.”
3. That the recent change of the name of a neighbouring
Australian colony from “ Van Dieman’s Land’ to “ Tas-
mania” in honour of the illustrious discoverer of that country,
Abel Jansen Tasman, after it had borne the name he had him-
self originally given it,» for upwards of 200 years, affords a
suitable precedent both for the proposed change itself, and for
the name it is proposed to honour.
The Fifth session of the Parliament of 1861, commenced on
the 18th October, 1864, and came very suddenly to its close on
the 9lh November following through a successful amendment
made by Mr. Cowper on the 3rd of that month on the pro-
posed address to His Excellency Sir John Young, in reply to
His Excellency’s speech; the vote on the occasion being for
the oaiginal motion twenty-nine and for Yr. Cowper’s amend-
ment thirty-six. This necessarily led to a dissolution, which
took place immediately thereafter, as the Martin and Forster


Ministry who were then in power were not disposed to resign.
The Parliament of 1865 commenced its first session on the
24th January of that year; and on the 27th the Martin and
Foster Ministry were ousted by a hostile majority of 42 to 14,
on an amendment by Mr. Cowper on the address to His
Excellency, it continued to sit, under the Cowper Ministry,
till the 21st June, when it was prorogued. There was much
business of the usual character transacted during its course, in
which I took a fair share; but there was no measure enacted
of great importance to the public.
The second session of the Parliament of 1865 commenced
on the 24th October of that year, and was prorogued on the
7th April, 1866. In consspuence, however, of the financial
measures proposed by Mr. Samuel, the Treasurer, having been
disayproved of by the House, that gentleman resigned his
office, which Mr. Cowper filled by appointing Marshal
Burdekin, Esq, Treasurer; but a majority of 25 to 10
havsng expressed their disaproval of that appointment, on
the motion of Mr. Parkes, Mr. Cowper tendered his advice to
His Excellency to dissolve the Assembly ; but his Excellency
declining to comply with that advice, Mr. Cowper and his
colleagues resigned, and the Martin and Parkes Ministry
came into office. Financial questions and attempts to bring
about a resumption of of the system of state aid, in opposition
to which I took my usual share, and in which the House often
sat till after midnight, occupied a large portion of this session;
but there were no measures passed of great importance to the
public. I had brought forward the Triennial Bill in the first
session of this Tarliament as well as in the second, but with-
out success in either case.
The third session of this Parliament opened on the 4th
July, 1866, and was closed on the 22nd December following.
The grand measure by which it will ever be distinguished was
the passing of the Public Schools Act, in the progress of
which I gave the measure all the assistance and support in
my power. The struggle was keen and protracted, but the
important measure was passed successfully at last. A nother
formidable but abortive attempt to ensure the resumption of
State Aid was made during this session, under Mr. Allan
Macpherson, Laird of Blairgowrie, in Scotland; and various
other measures of lesser importance in which I took an
interest—were initiated, but subsequently either negatived or
withdrawn. The session closed on the 22nd December, 1866.


The fourth session of the Parliament of 1865 was opened
on July 2nd, 1867, and was not prorogued till April 27th,
1868. It was a very remarkable as well as a very protracted
session—the Martin and Parkes’ Ministry, which I supported,
having been defeated on the three great measures of their
policy, three different times,. and having retained office not-
withstanding. The three measures I allude to were: Ist,
Their Land policy; 2nd, Their Railway Policy; and 3rd,
Their Financial policy; but, as they were not met with a
direct vote of want of confidence on any of these defeats, which
I was led to consider a necessary preliminary to a compulsory
resignation, they continued to retain their places till the end
of the session.
There were various measures of importance, however, either
passed or otherwise disposed of during this session of Parlia-
ment, in which I took a prominent part. There was the St.
Andrew's or Presbyterian College Bill, which I had originated
in the session of 1862, and which was finally passed this
session, after much and protracted discussion. The Triennial
Parliament Bill, which I had again initiated, was disposed of
on the motioo for the second reading by a count out. I was
more fortunate in the Bill which I introduced during the
previous session, and which was passed in this, to repeal the
Act to regulate and restrict the Immigration of Chinese,
That Act, which had been passed during a time of panic in
1862, had imposed a tax of £lO on every native of China
landing in the colony, from which very un-English imposition
the Chinamen were relieved by the Repeal Act which I suc-
ceeded in getting passed in their favour. 1 had also initiated
a measure, similar in principle to one which had been intro-
duced by Mr. Forster in a previous session, for the reform of
certain anomalies in the representation of the colony—divid-
ing the Clarence and Hastings electorates, and giving a sepa-
rate member to each of the four resulting divisions of both.
My Bill was negatived on the second reading by a majority of
20 to 17, on the ground that it was not sufficiently compre-
hensive, and that it had not been initiated by the Government.
The only other measure I shall mention, in which I took a
prominent part during this session, and the result of which
exhibits, in a remarkable manner, the unjust and iniquitous
character of colonial government in certain very important
respects, was a measure to authorise the construction of a
railway from Echuca (on the Murray river) to Deniliquin.


The distance between these two points, which I have traversed
repeatedly, is less than fifty miles, and quite a dead level;
and the intervening country affords no facilities for the con-
struction of a common road, while it is admirably adapted for
that of a railway, which would bring Deniliquin a centre point
for a large extent of country, in three different districts,
within ten hours of Melbourne. But Sir James Martin and
his followers would not allow any such railway to be con-
structed. He would rather compel the inhabitants of that
tract of country to bring their produce to Sydney—a distance
of upwards of four hundred miles over mountains of upwards
two thousand feet in height—merely because, through the
culpable abdication of the proper functions by the Imperial
Government, in not fixing proper boundary-lines between con-
terminous colonies on the principles of common justice and
common sense, a tract of country has been included in New
South Wales,which the Author of Nature had determined should
not have belonged to it. No such injustice, no such iniquity
could ever be perpetrated upon any portion of its population
under the more equitable government of the United States.
But, I fear greatly, that the present Government will be just
as illiberal as their predecessors; for it would seem to be the
original sin of colonial rulers not to do to others as they would
wish others to do to them. My Bill, to authorise the construc-
tion of a railway from Echuca to Deniliquin, was accordingly
thrown out, on the motion to adopt the Beport of the Select
Com i ittee.
During the recess, after the prorogation of Parliament on
the Ist of April, an incident of an extraordinary character
took place in the Cabinet, which led to very singular and
unexpected results. Mr. Duncan, the Collector of Customs,
had for some time been waging a sort of undignified warfare
with his superior officer, Mr. Eagar, the Treasurer, whom, it
seems, he had treated very disrespectfully. He had apologised,
however, and Mr. Martin and Mr. Parkes were both of
opinion that his apology should be accepted, and that the
matter should end there. But Mr. Eagar was not satisfied
with Mr. Duncan’s apology, and insisted on his immediate
and absolute dismissal, to which Mr. Parkes strongly objected.
And matters ran so high on the occasion that Mr. iVartin,
finding he had to choose between his two colleagues, as he
could not have both on the terms of either, chose to forego his
own opinion as to the sufficiency of Mr. Duncan’s apology,


and to retain Mr. Eagar in the Cabinet, allowing Mr. Parkes
to resign his office in the Ministry, which he did accord-
ingly.
This act, on the part of Mr. Parkes, proved, like the wrath
of Achilles to the Greeks, the fruitful source of all the evil,
] might rather say of all the calamity, that has characterised
the working of our Parliamentary system ever since; It was
regarded, as we are all well aware, with universal and strong
disapproval by his friends and supporters; who, for the most
part, had no confidence whatever in the subsequent move-
ments and developments of the Cabinet. The step he had
thus taken, moreover, was quite unnecessary for the vindica-
tion of Mr. Parkes’s character; for he had only to record his
dissent for this purpose from the measures contemplated in
regard to Mr. Duncan, on the Records of the Executive
Council, which would always be producible when wanted ;
and if, as was alleged, he merely meant to conciliate the
Roman Catholics through Mr. Duncan, one of themselves, he
knew well, or at least ought to have done so, that these
parties were not to be conciliated in any such way. There
was, therefore, some reason for the allegation, which was
pretty generally put forth at the time, that Mr. Parkes, fore-
seeing, as he supposed, like the late Prince Metternich, that
after him would come the deluge (Apres moi le deluge) ex-
pected —to use the famous phraseology of Louis h apoleon —
to a save society,” by standing forth as the future political
Noah of the situation. If so, he was surely reckoning without
his host.
Notwithstanding these complications, I adhered to the
Martin Ministry till the re-assembling of Parliament on the
13 th October 1868 ; and even then I had no intention of acting
otherwise, being nominated by the Premier a member of the
Select Committee to prepare an answer to the Governor’s
speech; which, as is usual in such cases, had been not only
prepared but printed beforehand, and meant nothing more than
an empty compliment. But when Mr. Robertson proposed an
amendment on the address by substituting for most of the
words it contained the following words—“ We feel that we
should be wanting in our duty, if we did not, on the earliest
opportunity of which we can avail ourselves, respectfully ex-
press to your Excellency our regret that, on the retirement of
the late Colonial Secretary, yhur Excellency did not secure an
Administration having the confidence of this House.”


When Mr. Robertson proposed this amendment, T found
that I must either support that amendment or record
my approval of Mr. Parkes’s resignation of his seat in
the Cabinet, as well as of all that had followed
that resignation, which I could not do on any account. I
voted, therefore, for the amendment; and that vote, I believe,
decided the fate of the Martin Government. For although the
votes were equal, being twenty-eight on each side, and the
Speaker gave his casting vote for the Ayes, Mr. Martin could
not in accordance with Parliamentary usage, continue to carry
on his Government in such circumstances, and* therefore
advised His Excellency to dissolve the Assembly. But His
Excellency declining to accept that advice, Mr. Martin and
his colleagues tendered their resignation, and the Robertson
Government came into office.
The fourth session of the Parliament of 1865 commenced
on the 13th October, 1868, and was prorogued on the Ist
April, 1869. It was a dreary period of sharp contention and
internecine war betwen the two parties in the Assembly—the
ins and the outs —and by no means creditable to Responsible
Government and popular institutions. Mr. Martin had pro-
mised to throw no obstruction in the way of his successors;
but he soon forgot his promise and appeared in the thickest of
the fight, while Mr. Parkes, evidently writhing under the dis-
appointment of all the hopes he had cherished on his resigna-
tion of office, set no bounds to his efforts to subvert the
Robertson Government and to oust the Ministry from their
seats. Five distinct motions, expressive of want of confi-
dence in the Government, were submitted successively during
the session—four by Mr Parkes and one by Mr. Lucas—all
urging and demanding an immediate dissolution and an
appeal to the country, while each of them occupied whole days
or rather nights of noisy and purposeless debate Each of
these attempts, or rather failures, (for they all failed) only
strengthened the hands of the Government and served to con-
solidate its power. There were not fewer than seventeen sittings
after midnight, and some of these to a late hour in the morn-
ing, during this dreary session, while the loud denunciations of
the Government and the urgent demands for a dissolution, on
the part of certain of the more prominent members of the
Opposition, present a singular and somewhat amusing contrast
with the results of the late general election. For example,
on the 24th February last, Mr. Lucas announced an amend-


meat to the following effect on the Government motion for
going into Committee of Supply ;
“ That this House is of opinion that the public interests
imperatively require that the present Parliament should be
dissolved, and a new one summoned without delay/'
I presume we are to take the result of the recent election
at Canterbury as the people’s comment on this motion. Mr.
Lucas was indebted to the very majority who rejected his
motion for a nine months’ reprieve in his own case.
It was not to be expected that any progress could be made
in carrying on the business of the country in such circum-
stances as these. The consequence was, nothing was done ;
and the political machinery of the country seemed to have
been struck with a general paralysis. There was an equal
number of votes for and against the Triennial Bill, which I
had submitted once more during the session; but the Speaker
voting with those who were opposed to it, the Bill was dis-
charged.
The fifth session of the Parliament of 1865 commenced on
the 28th September, 1869, but was brought rather abruptly
to its close on the 12th November following, when it was
prorogued with a view to its dissolution. This course had
become absolutely necessary from the persistent conduct of
the Opposition; who, finding that their only chance of office
lay in a dissolution, and affecting to consider the late Par-
liament as in a moribund condition, and incapable of Parlia-
mentary action of any kind, whether for good or evil, success-
fully resisted every attempt of the Government to proceed
with the business of the country, and at length necessi-
tated a dissolution. Whether the country has approved of
their unparliamentary and factious procedure will now be very
soon ascertained. At all events, I can distinctly trace all the
discreditable scenes—the fierce contentions, the criminations
and recriminations, the offensive charges, and the equally
offensive rejoinders, on both sides, involving as they did the
complete stoppage of all Parliamentry action for the last
fifteen months—to Mr, Parkes’s uncalled-for and unwar-
rantable resignation of his office as Colonial Secretary under the
Martin Ministry. Whatever may have been the object of
of that movement, these have unquestionably been its
results.
I have thus finished the brief sketch I proposed to give of
my Parliamentary Life and Times, extending as these have


■done over considerably upwards of a quarter of a century.
During that period the ctflony has made wonderful progress, I
have no hesitation in adding, in the right direction. We have
passed, for example, from a humiliating state of subjection to
the Autocrat of Downing-street, under a government of
virtual despotism, to a condition of perfect political freedom,
surpassed by that of no community I know of on the face of
the earth. We have established Institutions that, in some
respects, are the envy even of our fatherland, and that can-
not fail to render those who shall follow us, as inhabitants of
this noble country and dwellers in this beautiful clime, one of
the first of the nations of the civilized world. We have seen
portions of our territory separated from us both to the south
and the north, not unwillingly on my part, although very
reluctantly on that of others; but now occupied by great and
prosperous communities that are travelling onwards like our-
selves in the path where glory waits them.
I cannot conclude this brief sketch, without stating
that it is peculiarly gratifying to myself, to reflect
that, as a member of our Legislature from the com-
mencement of its existence, in the year 1843, and
especially as one of the representatives of this great
city, under three different constitutions, I have been hon-
oured to lend a helping hand, however humbly, in
effecting the great and beneficial changes in our political
system through which we have passed—in realising the con-
summation we have thus so happily achieved. The role of
patriotism I may be permitted to add can seldom be
played by any private individual without great sacrifices as
well as great and long continued exertions; and I confess I
have often been on the point of giving up the struggle during
the past ten years, as I found it had subjected me to a loss of
personal and professional income much larger than I choose to
name. But the magnitude and the transcendant importance
of the objects for which we had to contend during these past
years, induced me to waive all personal considerations and to
remain at all hazards at the post to which my fellow citizens
had called me till the close of the last session of Parliament.
Some of these objects, I regret to say, are still unaccom-
plished ; but I shall leave them with confidence to the
patriotism of those whom the constituencies have just elected
to carry on the Parliamentary war for the welfare and advance-
ment of our common country.




