

p
o
M-Slo
Hrirf iimorials
of tlrr ICtfr of
3Cat?
Em. Steginalb N. Uobaon,
HA., ra.i.


' *
‘. I
EPWORTH PRESS 447 KENT ST. SYDNEY.
. V


Irfctrattotu
In loving memory of our dear son Reginald this
Booklet is dedicated to young men and women in the
prayerful hope that its perusal may lead some to con-
secrate themselves to Christ.and His service. One
of the most precious thoughts to us in our sorrow
is that Reg. loved the Saviour's Service here, and,
that, doubtless, the Great Master of us all has trans-
ferred him to service in the heavenly places.
W. Robson.
Hornsby, April 22nd, 1907.


Hate IS. H. ißnbsutt, ICU.I.


A ifomunri*.
Mu tlir Snt. 31. (SI. HiiU.
Armibalc.
In the following pages is sketched in briefest out-
line the life, character, and work of one of whom
much might be written. With a personality rich in all
that makes for influence, qualities of mind and heart
which gave him rank amongst the truly noble of earth,
and with a devotion to the cause of Christ which
rose above the calculating thought of sacrifice,
Reginald Norman Robson stood amongst his com-
panions as one who compelled their admiration, trust
and love. He was a true Christian gentleman, whose
courtesy was not artificial, but natural,
ever marked by a thoughtfulness which
he had learned at the feet of his
Master. Manly in his view and grasp of life’s
difficulties, yet tender and sensitive as a woman in
his sympathy for others in their troubles, and never
above the rendering of the lowliest service to the dis-
tressed.
In the dedication of himself to the work of the
ministry all his splendid qualities found at last their
true place and scope, but the living and controlling
centre around which all his energies and aims gath"
ered, and which gave direction, power, and glow to
his whole life, was a personal love for his SaAuour.
What that relationship meant to him he regarded as
almost too sacred for speech, but its influence was
plainly read in his devoted life.
We leave the mystery of his removal with God,
Knowing only in part, who are we that we should
judge the All-wise and All-loving Father? Certain
it is that in taking him, God has drawn the
thoughts of all who knew him upward. The one aim
of his life to which all his powers were consecrated
was the work of saving men from sin that deforms
and darkens, into the knowledge, trust, and love of
the Saviour; and it is in the hope that by a brief
account of his life and work some may be influenced
to follow after him in the footsteps of Christ, that
this little book is sent forth.


luiorajjJ|tral (§utlut?.
ttjr Eru. i$L i>rutt 3Flrtrlirr, JH.A.
Bcurke gfirert, gutrrg ifiiUa.
The Call of God lias about it something mysterious,,
insistent, irresistible. If ever the Divine Voice was
heard by a human soul, it was heard by Reginald
Norman Robson. Thus it was that he offered him-
self for the Christian ministry. His call was the
supreme test of his life. His obedience became
life’s crowning achievement. “I am so glad,” he-
said, when death seemed inevitable and his hopes for
further service were dashed to the ground, “so glad,
that I stood the test—when the call came.” His
ministerial career as such was barely of one year’s
duration. But he had long since given full proof
of his qualifications for the sacred office by his gifts,
grace and fruits.
We may almost say that his work was done before
he began it. The formal reception of Reginald
Robson into the ranks of the Methodist Ministry was
but the Church’s official recognition of a choice-
character already attained and a rich service already
rendered. In one sense we may say with Robert
Browning,
“This high man, with a great thing to pursue,
Dies ere he knows it.”
and yet, as we shall see from the story of his life,
he was living and working for God during the great-
er part of the twenty-eight years of his brief earth-
ly existence.
Childhood. —Born at Morpeth, in this State, on
Sunday, October 27, 1878, Reginald Robson was nur-
tured in a Christian home. His father, the Hon.
William Robson, M.L.C., and his godly mother sur-
rounded him from earliest childhood with hallowing
influences, and set him a noble example in Christian
character. “There never was a time in his life,”
declares his mother, “when he was not a Christian.”
As quite a lad, at Lewisham, during a mission con-
ducted by Rev. F. Colwell, he publicly confessed’
Christ, and he never faltered in his devotion to that:
Divine Master.


School Bays. —Side by side with the graces of his-
Christian character there developed those rare gifts
of intellect which won him such high distinction in
the academic world. At nine years of age he be-
gan his scholastic career at Newington College,
Stanmore. He passed through every class from the
lowest to the highest with unusual distinction,
and won the Wigram Allen Scholarship. The
much coveted Schofield Scholarship also was gained
when he was Dux of the College. During these
schooldays he passed the University Junior Public
Examination in 1894, securing medals for Latin,
Greek, and the prize for General Proficiency. Two
years later in the senior he secured the medal for
Greek, and was proximo for the medals awarded
in Ancient History and General Proficiency. When
matriculating he was awarded the Cooper Scholar-
ship for classics. Newington College might well be
proud of such a student trained in its classes.
University Successes. —His subsequent career at
the University was no less distinguished. First-
class honours all through in classics, the prize for
history, and finally in the B.A. examination in 1900'
the University medal for classics marked the high
tide of his success. In the absence of a Methodist
Affiliated College Mr .Robson became a student at
St. Andrew’s, winning the Gordon Scholarship in
that college.
When the time came for him to choose his life’s
work he decided to study for the Bar. He entered
the University Law School, and in due course gained
the LL.B. degree with honours. Over two years
ago he was admitted to practice as a Barrister-at-
Law, and gave himself with characteristic industry
and perseverance to his profession. His prospects
from a worldly point of view were of the brightest.
Christian Work. —Honourable as his work might
be as a Barrister, God had greater work for him to
do. During all his academic studies he had been
engaged in Christian service. He became a Sunday-
school teacher and Local Preacher while at Lewisham.
At Hornsby, where the last seven years of his life-
were spent, he took up the additional work of con-
ductor of the choir and teacher of the Bible class
while continuing to exercise his gifts in the Wil-
loughby and Gordon Circuit as a Local Preacher..


He also prominently associated himself during this
time with Christian work amongst University
students and graduates. He occupied the position
of President of the Sydney University Christian
Union, and afterwards was given an honoured place
on the Executive of the Australasian Students'
Christian Union. His personal influence for good
among University men was magnetic. The highly
cultured yet fully consecrated type of Christian
character which he exhibited won many a fellow
student for the Christian life.
Call to the Ministry. —By all these various forms of
Christian service God was qualifying Reginald Rob-
son for a yet higher ministry. He attended the
various summer schools arranged by the A.S.C.U.,
and it was at one of these gatherings that the Call
of God definitely came. An address by Principal
Harper on the claims of the Christian Ministry made
a deep impression on his heart and mind, and then
the Call, deep, strong and unmistakable was heard.
It was no mere sentiment, no passing impulse, but a
'dear conviction of a summons from Heaven. His
life’s work seemed by this time quite settled, and
for a time he worked on, and that with unusual suc-
cess, at his legal practice. But the voice of God is
not to be set aside. And when the Call was still
persistent and unmistakable, he gave himself to earn-
est prayer for Divine guidance how next to act,
lie consulted with ministerial friends, and after pro-
longed and careful deliberation finally decided to
obey the heavenly mandate. He definitely resolved
to forsake all and follow Christ in the ministry of the
Gospel.
The Beginnings of his Christian Ministry.- —ln
1905 he was recommended as a candidate for the
Ministry of the Methodist Church by the September
Quarterly Meeting of the Willoughby and Gordon
Circuit. He passed the usual examination of the
ensuing Sydney District Synod, and a little less than
a year ago was cordially accepted by the New South
Wales Conference of the Methodist Church of Aus-
tralasia as one of its ministers. High hopes were
entertained that in his future ministry he would
make his mark in the Church, and through it exer-
cise a wide and powerful influence in the religious
life of the country. Already as Classical Tutor to


the Theological Students at Newington College, and
as assistant minister in the Ashfield Circuit he was
beginning to make his personality and powers felt.
But most mysteriously the expected future was not
to be realised. Even while the Conference was in
session a serious illness overtook this newly accepted
and most promising young minister. His friends
and fellow-ministers had soon to learn the will of
the All-wise and All-loving—“My thoughts are not
your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, saith
the Lord. For as the heavens are higher than the
earth, so are my ways higher than your ways and
my thoughts than your thoughts.” This saintly
and cultured minister was maturing fast for a ser-
vice higher than that of this world. He was to
serve here by a year of patient waiting and then to
be translated to the nobler service of the Unseen
World.
A Year of Suffering. —Though seriously ill strong
hopes were entertained by all that after rest Rev.
Reginald Robson would be able to take up circuit
work. Under medical skill and a change to the
country he rallied for a time. But only for a time!
Fond hopes were doomed to disappointment, and
after a short period he returned to Hornsby. His
sufferings became severe. Many times he could be
seen only by his nearest friends. But still the hope
was indulged that the complaint would be conquered
and a life so promising would be spared. Three
months ago the mitigation of his suffering and other
favourable signs revived hope as to his ultimate re-
covery. Again these hopes were blighted. Thi-ee
weeks before the end he rapidly lost his remaining
strength. On Sunday, February 3rd, the doctors
pronounced his case hopeless.
The End. —The sufferer received the information
of his approaching end with composure and com-
plete resignation to his Heavenly Father’s will.
Amid extreme weakness he spoke calmly of his de-
parture. Many times he expressed his assurance
that he was going to be with Christ. To his mother
and sister who were so much to him in those latter
days he opened his heart in. many a sacred confi-
dence of love and faith. On Tuesday, February
sth, having made known to his father his wishes in
various matters, he spoke of his short service in the


Christian ministry on earth, but clearly expressed
his expectation of continued service for God in
Heaven, quoting from John Milton’s sonnet on his
blindness the words—
“His state
Is kingly; thousands at His bidding speed
And post o’er land and ocean without rest;
They also serve who only stand and wait.”
On Wednesday the Rev. Joseph Bryant, with whom
he had laboured as colleague in the Ashfield Circuit,
administered to him with the members of his family
the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper. During the
day be asked that Paul’s words, before his decease,
should be read to him, and in wonderful peace of
mind he listened to the passage:—“l am now ready
to be offered and the time of my departure is at
hand. I have fought a good fight, I have finished
my course, I have kept the faith; henceforth there is
laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the
Lord, the righteous judge, shall give me at that
day; and not to me only, but unto all them also that
love his appearing. 2 Tim. iv. 6-8. Thereafter he
grew rapidly weaker, and could converse but little.
His last words were spoken to his mother on Thurs-
day, February 7th, in the morning. “My dear,
she said, “you are going to Heaven.” “Yes,” was
the sweet reply, “to be with Jesus.” A bright
spiritual light shone out through his face. All pain
seemed to leave him. The end drew nigh, and at
10.50 p.m., Reginald Robson breathed his last. He
gently fell asleep in Jesus.
Personal Influence. —In looking back over that
brief life we can say that his ideals were of the
highest and purest type. With all his mental gifts
and intellectual attainments Reg. Robson, as he
was always spoken of by his acquaintances, pre-
served his natural simplicity and unaffected grace of
character. There was always about him an air of
reserved strength. Into his short life he crowded
an immense amount of work. Above and beyond all
for him to live was Christ. The personal testi-
monies that have come to his direct spiritual in-
fluence upon others is somewhat of a revelation even
to those that knew and loved him best. Old
Newingtonians, fellow-students at the University,


business and professional men—ail tell gratefully of
the gracious influence of his Christian character
upon them. A mother of several sons writes to say—
“My boys are all the better for his life.” An un-
dergraduate bears testimony—“ln a time of great
perplexity his words, and, even more, his life made
my duty clear to me. Some of us whom he has in-
fluenced may do part of his work—less well—-but God
knows we will do our best.” Beneath a quiet ex-
terior there glowed in the heart of Reginald Robson
a passion for souls. He had a Christ-like tact in
guiding the intellectually distressed, in cheering on
the fainthearted, and in bringing light and gladness
into the homes of the humblest men and women.
The last verse in his favourite hymn sung when he
was near the end embodies his spirit:
“Were the whole realm of nature mine,
That were a present far too small;
Love so amazing, so divine,
Demands my life, my soul, my all.”


Appmiatunt
3% ti)p 3Kpu. lE. J. i&ubih
President of Ladies’ College, Burwoud
(Seltuerrii at tljr (Sraue).
The circumstances which have brought us here to'
day are most pathetic. We stand at the grave of
a young man, one of a singularly lovable and win-
some nature, one who possessed intellectual gifts and
acquirements beyond the common; a young man
whose previous achievements, whose ideals of life,
and, above all, whose spirit of consecration to
Christ and His service, gave promise of a career of
more than ordinary influence and usefulness. At
the threshold of that career, a career to which those
who knew and loved him best were looking forward
with hope and pride, God has removed him. To
their affections and hopes what a crushing blow!
Those to whom he was dearest are tossed and darken-
ed by the storm which has broken upon them; we
pray their souls may have firm anchorage in a sure
and steadfast hope of things within the vail.
Our dear friend’s life was a testimony to the fact
that learning and culture may exist along with a
sincere Christian faith. He was a Christian, a
genuine whole-hearted Christian. His Christian be-
lief and experience were the basis upon which his
life was built, they supplied both its motive and its
inspiration. The greater part of his life was spent
at school and college and university. Eagerly he
pursued knowledge and acquired it with distinguish-
ed success. He read in many directions and ab-
sorbed ideas from various sources. Yet, throughout
his scholastic career, and after its close, he held the
essentials of the faith that as a child he received
from his mother’s lips, and enjoyed those experi"
ences of vital religion which came to him when a
lad. In a time when it is superciliously assumed
that a genuine faith in the truths of Christianity
can be retained only by persons of inferior intel-
ligence and narrow knowledge, we thank God for
the testimony of Reg. Robson’s life. That testi-
mony has already borne fruit and will continue to


bear it. Some will always be helped in remember-
ing that one of the most brilliant University
students was one of Methodism’s most spiritual and
devoted sons.
The life of our friend witnessed also to this im-
portant fact, that the Christian ministry affords the
highest sphere of usefulness for the finest gifts and
attainments. Upon the completion of his studies
he was called to the Bar. The honourable profes-
sion of the law, some might have thought, offered all
that could be desired for the employment of his gifts,
but when he entered upon it he was pursued by the
thought that there was a still higher sphere of use-
fulness open to him. The thought of the Christian
ministry had never been far from his mind, event-
ually the thought became a conviction, and that con-
viction deepened until he surrendered himself to what
he felt to be the clear call of God. His church wel-
comed him as a candidate for its ministry, and con-
fidently set the seal of its approval upon his offer.
The pathetic story of what followed is known to all.
Scarcely was he received into the ranks of the min-
istiy when his health broke down. The active ser-
vice which he expected to render in circuit work
became instead a passive service rendered in the in-
valid s room—the patient endurance of physical suf-
fering and the suffering of quenched hopes and frus-
trated plans. The meek submission to the Divine
will is the severest form of Christian service, and in
such service he was not found wanting. That
loyalty to his Lord he would have shown in circuit
work was beautifully manifested in the experiences
of the sick-room. It was not given him to pursue
the path of his soul’s choice, but the fact that he
made such a choice stands out as a precious testi-
mony. In these days when young men of intellec-
tual promise are apt to look disparagingly upon the
Christian ministry this is a testimony to thank God
for. Our friend has set an example to young men
of gifts and culture that is already bearing fruit.
And now, as this open grave reminds us of a life
so rich in promise cut off in its opening, what shall
we say? This we can say, that his days though few
were full. Had he foreseen that his life here would


be so brief, he could scarcely have done with it more
than he did. His was an active temperament, an
intense spirit; always doing with his might what
his hand found to do. His consecration was en-
tire, all opportunities for serving Christ were eager-
ly seized and made the most of. Night fell upon
his day soon and swiftly, but it closed a day well
spent. It is not with empty hands he has gone to
meet the Taskmaster; something has been reaped for
the Lord of the harvest. The testimonies to his
usefulness which have 'flowed in upon them are a
precious source of comfort to his friends in their be-
reavement.
Yet is this all we can say—“ His life was short but
it was full?” Thank God there is more than that
to say. Our Christian faith warrants our saying,
“His life, so short here, is prolonged above.” His
life is like a bright stream which disappears into a
dark gorge only to enlarge beyond and flow onward
with increased strength and beauty What it was
in his heart to do for God in this world, in another
world he has been given opportunity for doing. He
was a piece of God’s workmanship, created in Christ
Jesus for good works ; we know God too well to
think His workmanship has been capriciously thrown
aside. You who hold him dearest will often won-
der to yourselves what he might have been and have
done had he lived. Think rather of
what he is and what he is doing in
the larger life he has entered upon. In
Christ, this life and that beyond are one. Reg.
Robson is not lost to his parents and his comrades,
not lost to the Church, nor to the service of God
and human souls.
It is this light from beyond which consoles our sor-
rows, which relieves the perplexities of the stricken
soul and silences its murmuring®. The Lord cause
that light to shine upon us and give us grace to
walk in it.


The following, by Whittier, was one of R. N.
Robson’s favourite hymns, and was frequently played
and sung by him during the course of his illness.
Irar attft 3Fatljrr.
Dear Lord and Father of mankind,
Forgive our foolish ways;
Reclothe us in our rightful mind;
In purer lives Thy service find,
In deeper reverence, praise.
In simple trust like theirs who heard,
Beside the Syrian sea,
The gracious calling of the Lord,
Let us, like them, without a word,
Rise up and follow Thee.
O Sabbath rest by Galilee !
O calm of hills above,
Where Jesus knelt to share with Thee
The silence of eternity,
Interpreted by love!
With that deep hush subduing all
Our words and works that drown
The tender whisper of Thy call,
As noiseless let Thy blessing fall
As fell Thy manna down.
Drop Thy still dews of quietness,
Till all our strivings cease;
Take from our souls the strain and stress,
And let our ordered lives confess
The beauty of Thy peace.
Breathe through the heats of our desire
Thy coolness and Thy balm;
Let sense be dumb, let flesh retire;
Speak through the earthquake, wind and fire,
0 still small voice of calm !


of iftimstnj
tn tlje (Eirnrit
ISg tljp i&m. Jnarplj Urgant,
AalffWii.
Reginald Norman Robson served for five months
as minister’s assistant in the Ashfield circuit until
sickness laid him aside. During those months his
call to the ministry received new and indubitable
sanctions. He himself felt that obedience to the
heavenly vision made the vision increasingly clear
and authoritative, and he found a deep satisfaction
in his work. He had come to his own. The con-
gregations to which he ministered recognised with
growing approval and gratitude the intellectual
ability and spiritual force that marked his preach-
ing.
His brilliant academic course had not unnaturally
created the idea that his work in the church mVht
be specially in connection with its collegiate offices.
Those who listened to his preaching soon formed an-
other estimate of his future in the church. His
rapid development of pulpit power and the clear, in-
sistent, convincing note of his preaching left no
doubt that his ministry was to be declaratory, that
of persuading men to be reconciled to God. He
began himself more and more to recognise this. The
gospel was to him first a personal revelation, and
then a message which with all his heart he longed
to deliver; and that he spoke from such an inner
impulse was instinctively felt by those who heard
him.
His sermons were, of course, thoughtful, and had
a clear and bracing mental atmosphere, but the
main impression was that of spiritual insight. With
a reasonable faith and credible teaching and sym-
pathetic outlook, there was above all the mystical
power of conviction verified in experience. Christ
was the centre and soul of his own life, and this
gave a quiet but inherent passion to his words.
It was with high hopes of a long and fruitful min-
istry that the congregations, as they became


familiar with him, looked upon the thoughtful face>
and listened to the effective voice of the young
preacher, and noted the clear intellectual perception
with its interior glow of spiritual emotion. There
was abundant scope in the sphere he had chosen at
the bidding of his Lord, and surely his was to be the
long day of service, and the far eventide should find
him with multitudinous sheaves around him in the
harvest field.
The personal influence of Reginald Robson was
immediate. His bearing was entirely and unaf-
fectedly natural and . manly; and young men, true
readers of each other, at once responded. The few
months of service in the Ashfield circuit yield a rich
testimony to the charm of his character. His popu-
larity among the young men was of the worthiest
kind; hearty respect, strong personal liking, under-
standing comradeship, and intuitive honour to lofty
character made the relationship ideal between the
young preacher and the young men of the congrega-
tion under his special pastoral care. To the min-
ister still in touch with the sphere of his young col-
league of those few months there has come repeated
testimony how school boys got a higher view of life,
how young men were steadied in life’s opening
battle, and how others who scarcely looked upon
religion as congruous with early manhood, saw the
seemliness of it as presented in the Christian manli-
ness of their young minister as they met him in
church, or in private and socially, or in the cricket
field. To not a few the path has been made straight-
er through having known Reginald Robson, for, “on
God and God-like men we build our trust.”
Thus for a few months he came to his first, and,
as it proved to be, his only brief appointment in the
vocation to which he had dedicated his life. Came
to give rare promise, and to win rare affection.
They were happy months. Having put his hand to
the plough there was no looking back, and the newly
turned furrow was steady and clean cut. He would
fain have stayed in the field, for he greatly longed to
serve. Already he had served better than he knew,
and still he serves, for it is written, yonder, as
here, “His servants shall serve Him.”—(Rev. 22:3).


Sn iflfomnmm.
tlj? Em (C. 3. Prmatt, iH.A
President of A' e winy ton Colleye. Stnnmore
(Jfrom lljp “ Nmingtunxau.”)
The death of a young man is always pathetic, but
many circumstances rendered that of Rev. R. N,
Robson, 8.A., LL.B.—or, as he was universally
known among his old chums, Reg. Robson —peculi-
arly so. After a brilliant School and University
career, he was cut off just at a time when his
talents had marked him out for a life of special use-
fulness. He entered the School when he was a
little boy, and worked his way up step by step till
he reached the top, and loaded himself with prizes
and honours. He won the Wigram Allen and Scho-
field Scholarships, and left as Dux of the School.
fHe passed the Junior in 1894, obtaining 7 A’s,.
medals for Latin and Greek, and the prize for
General Proficiency. Two years later he passed the
Senior, obtaining 5 A’s, 4 B’s, and aC. He again
won the Greek Medal, and was prox. acc. for the
general proficiency prize. At Matriculation Honours,
he won the Cooper Scholarship for Classics.
Diligently as he worked—and few knew how
methodically and continuously he stuck to his books
—he yet found time for healthy exercise. He pick'
ed up his cricket with the lower teams, and ended
by becoming Captain of the First Eleven. He took
a wholesome interest in whatever affected the School
life, and was President of the School branch of the
Christian Union.
He carried to the University a thorough ground-
ing in his work and the habits of a diligent student,
and success continued to follow him. His
strength lay in Classics, and each year he added
fresh laurels to his achievements. He was first in
Classics, and won the Cooper Scholarship in his first
and second years, and he won First-class Honours
and the Gold Medal on graduation. Having de'
cided to give his attention to Law, he entered the
Law School. In the Intermediate examination he
won the Harris Scholarship, and took his LL.B. with
Honours. He was then admitted to the Bar, and


for some time worked at his profession, having the
good fortune to receive several briefs even at that
early stage. He had every reason to believe that
a successful career as a barrister lay before him,
when a clear call came to him from another quar-
ter.
As a boy he had always been devout and re-
sponsible to the Divine touch, so much so that his life
recalls Tertullian’s phrase, “Anima naturaliter Chris-
tiana,” and the hallowed atmosphere of a Christian
home fostered the growth of an unaffected and
simple piety, as wholesome as it is genuine. This
led him to ally himself with the Christian Union,
not only at school, but at the University, and at the
summer organisation he was a constant attendant.
It was at one of these that a powerful address by
Dr. Harper on the claims of the Christian ministry
made a profound impression upon his mind; from
that time he was haunted by the impression that
his life work ought to be the preaching of the Gos-
pel. He did not yield lightly to the call so made,,
but the more he thought of it and prayed about it,
and the more he sought the advice of trusted friends,
the clearer his conviction became, and at last he
abandoned the profession he had qualified himself
for with such pains, and offered himself as a candi-
date for the Methodist Ministry. He had scarcely
done so before he was laid aside by the illness which
proved fatal. Work was forbidden and he spent a
year of sickness and pain. For a long time he
cherished the hope that his was not a sickness unto
death, but at last it became too clear that his work
was done. In one of his last conversations with hia
father, Milton’s sonnet on his blindness rose to his
lips, and he quoted some of the stately words :
“God doth not need
Either man’s work, or bis own gifts; who best
Bear his mild yoke, they serve him best; his state
Is kingly: thousands at his bidding speed,
And post o’er land and ocean without rest:
They also serve who only stand and wait.”
Milton knew he was writing for posterity, but his
wildest dreams never taught him to think that his
touching words would be the story and comfort to'


the passing soul of a young sojourner at the Antipodes
nearly three centuries afterwards.
He was borne to the grave by six Newington
cadets, and the faces of those that gathered round it
were the faces of men staggered by a mysterious and
incomprehensible Act of God.


M. N. Slobaon
at tit? Hnteraitg.
1% tlte iSru. lE. N. iKerringtmt. M.A., pi|.S.
JJrralniti'riait JHimatfr. (I be IHanar. Ktauta.
As one who entered the University with the late
R. N. Robson, I have been asked to write a few lines
for this memorial. I do so with feelings of hesita-
tion because of my inability to do justice to the char*
acter of my dear friend, whose power and influence
were so singularly inward and spiritual as to elude
the efforts of one seeking to represent them. It may
be, however, that some words of mine will help to-
wards a clearer portrait of a personality beloved,
noble, and distinguished.
As a student Robson made a very deep impression
upon all who knew him. Coming up to the Univer-
sity in 1897 as Cooper scholar in classics, he became
the leader of his year at once. This position he main-
tained unchallenged throughout the course. He was
popular in the best sense of the term. Marked as
was his scholastic ability, his personal influence was
even greater. But it was never aggressive. Robson
was absolutely devoid of empty pride or conceit. He
was moderate without becoming mediocre. He had
that spirit of genuine unworldliness which adapts
itself to the essential in every experience. His was
that “personal force,” which, as Emerson says,
“never goes out of fashion.’’ Robson lived keenly
and kindly through his student years. Every man
in the year was interesting to Robson: Dulness or
poverty were no bar to his friendship. Robson was a
prominent member of the Undergraduates’ Associa-
tion. He was senior representative of his year until
elected by the whole student body to the post of
Secretary. That he carried much weight in the de-
liberations of this committee I can testify from per-
sonal experience. There was something about his
influence that suggests to my mind the idea of “the
power behind the throne.”
It was a matter of joy to the members of the
Christian Union that Robson was able to command
the support of men of all creeds in the various facul-


ties. From the first he had become a Christian
Union man. He had come up for a full course at
the University socially as well as intellectually. But
wide as his interests were the cause dearest to his
heart was that of the Christian Union. In this work
he was quite at home. He rose year by year
through its various offices until in 1900 he became
its President. These were not easy years for the
C.U. There was a section in the University who
would gladly have blotted it out of existence. They
sought to ridicule it, and if any mud-throwing could
he done they were ready to do it. But the C.U.
was fortunate to have a man like Robson at its head.
His gifts and character, his influence and “well-
doing put to silence the ignorance of foolish men.”
And within the Union, the full benefit of Robson’s
presence was felt. He was wise and zealous in the
paramount interests of the Kingdom of God. He
worked on committees, he conducted a class for
Bible study, he presided at public meetings which
were often addressed by the professors; he attended
the Conferences and summer-schools. And in all
this work he was a power —quiet, unobtrusive, but in-
fluential. He added greatly to the prestige of the
•C.U., and upon individuals he left lasting impres-
sions of good by his efforts and example.
For one year we lived together in residence at St.
Andrew’s College. His room was next to mine, and
we often conferred about our work—and play, for
Robson loved true sport—he almost excelled at cricket
and tennis. He was highly respected, even as a
freshman at St. Andrew’s. He had the essence of
manliness, and the soul of honour. He knew how to
work. Method and system were at his command; but
he was no slave to them. I well remember how he
came to me in great glee because he had decided to
give up working for the Frazer Scholarship in
History, contenting himself with the effort to obtain
the medal in Classics. His nature was methodical
and reasonable. There was the same spirit of
thoroughness and system in his religious life. He
could do nothing by halves. He believed with all
his heart in the Christian Faith, and he lived from
•day to day in its strength and hope.
22


If I am asked to name a man who should serve as a
type for the Australian student of the future I
would mention R. N, Robson. He was a scholar,
-eminent in all his studies. He was a man; with all
the frankness and genuineness desiderated in Aus-
tralia. He was a Christian; free and earnest.
That the three aspects can be fused and blended into
one personality is evident to those who knew the sub-
ject of this memoir. And what was the principle of
harmony? It was not mere scholarship. It was
not to be found in the natural qualities of the man,
great as they were. It cannot be discovered apart
from Jesus Christ, Whose he was, and Whom he
served. It was the spiritual influence of Christ
that permeated his whole personality, illumined his
studies, energized him for Christian work, and
-enabled him to wear “the white flower of a blameless
life.”
23


The Rev. George Brown, D.D., conducted a
Memorial Service at Hornsby on February 17th.
His subject was based upon Christ’s words: Luke 20,
ch. 38th., “For I am not the God of the dead, but of
the living.” The service will be long remembered.
One of the hymns sung may suitably close this-
Memoir.
d»nh at tfyh IGtmntu
God of the living, in whose eyes
Unveiled Thy whole creation lies,
All souls are Thine: we must not say
That those are dead who pass away;
From this our world of flesh set free,
We know them living unto Thee.
Released from earthly toil and strife,
With Thee is hidden still their life;
Thine are their thoughts, their works,
their powers,
All Thine, and yet most truly ours :
For well we know, where’er they be,
Our dead are living unto Thee.
Thy word is true, Thy will is just:
To Thee we leave them, Lord, in trust;
And bless Thee for the love which gave
Thy Son to fill a human grave,
That none might fear that world to see
Where all are living unto Thee.
O Giver unto man of breath,
O Holder of the keys of death,
0 Quickener of the life within,
Save us from death, the death of sin;
That body, soul, and spirit be
For ever living unto Thee!
