

Pethencr Pam [?]
BRIEF STATEMENT
OF THE
CONSTITUTIONAL QUESTION
IN
VICTORIA.
BY
CHARLES H. PEARSON, M.L.A.
1878


BRIEF STATEMENT
OF THE
CONSTITUTIONAL QUESTION
IN
VICTORIA.
BY
CHARLES H. PEARSON, M.L.A.




BRIEF STATEMENT
OF THE
CONSTITUTIONAL QUESTION IN VICTORIA.
BY CHARLES H. PEARSON. M.L.A.
“In 1852, Sir John Pakington, as Colonial Secretary,
circulated through all the Australian Colonies a despatch,
offering to repeal the Land Sales A6t, so as to give up
altogether on the part of the Crown the amount of this
important branch of Colonial revenue, on condition that
they would establish for themselves Constitutions under the
powers given them by the A6t of 1850, on the Canadian
basis, only appropriating permanently a civil list sufficient
for their government.” ( Adderley’s Colonial Policy and History ,
p. 112.) In compliance with the suggestions in this
despatch, the Colonial Legislature of the day passed a
Constitution A 6l in 1854, which was confirmed by the
Imperial Add, 18-19 Vic., 55.
At a time when the Legislative Assembly of Victoria is
applying to the Imperial Parliament for powers to enable it
to amend the Constitution Act of 1855, it is important to
remember ;
(1) That the Home Government urged the Colony to
adopt the present Constitution at a time when there was
no particular demand for reform.
(2) That the task of framing the Constitution was
confided to a Legislature of whom one-third were nominees,
and the remainder elected by a very limited constituency.
(3) That the Home Government prescribed certain
conditions ; and
(4) That the Home Government made some changes
in the Add actually sent back from Melbourne.*
* It is not intended to imply that these changes were unwise, or have
tended to cause the present difficulties.


The following extracts from speeches in the debate on
the second reading of the Constitution Bill will show
(i) that the framers of the ACt intended to give the full
powers of the House of Commons to the House of
Assembly ; and (2) that the dangers of a collision between
the two Houses were anticipated, even at that early time,
by some far-sighted Statesmen :
Mr. Childers [then Commissioner of Customs in the Colony of
Victoria, since, the Rt. Hon. H. C. E. Childers, M.P,,] said, describ-
ing the provisions of the proposed Constitution Bill—“ According
to the provisions of this Bill, the Lower House, under whatever
name it may be called, will have the entire appropriation of the public
funds, and the passing of money bills. As in England, the Upper
House will have in these matters but a nominal voice, or, at the
outside, the power of accepting or rejecting those Bills without
amendments. And in practice, whatever in other respects may be
the power of the Upper House, the House directly elected by the
popular voice of the country will have the entire control over the
public funds; and I take it, Sir, that is the great weapon by which
they will be able to regulate and modify the government of this
Colony. The people will have the purse strings-; and with the great
example of the mother country before us, who could desire otherwise?”
Mr. Foster, then Colonial Secretary, said—“ Another principle we
have carried out in the new Constitution is that representation and
taxation should go together, and therefore it is enacted that the right
of taxation, popularly called the power of the purse strings, should
rest with the Lower House. this House,
thus constituted and elected, we propose to give all the functions and
privileges of the House of Commons, with such limitations as the
country will permit us to make.”
Mr. Griffiths, also then a member of the Government, said—
“ Now it is proposed that this Upper House, consisting of twenty-
five members (thirty,) should have the power of absolutely stopping
the whole legislation of the country, and opposing the wishes of the
whole people—that is, to thirteen (sixteen) men you delegate this
power, and if they choose to hold out against the united wishes of
the country, there is no power short of a revolution which can affect
it.”
SirFKANCis Murphy said, “ The Crown, unquestionably, should
have the power of dissolving such a House (Council,) and the
Executive government of the day should be enabled either to
increase or diminish the number that might be in an obstructing
majority, or a feeble minority, whichever course might be deemed
advisable for the interests of the Colony.”
The constitutional history of Victoria since 1855 all turns
upon the determination of the Council to claim power as a


co-ordinate House of Commons with the Assembly, and to
obtain the right of amending Money Bills which had been
withheld by the Constitution Adi, by threatening to use, or
by using, the right to rejedl them. Thus, in 1858 and 1859
it was proposed to throw out the Appropriation Bills because
the estimates had been hastily prepared, or were sent up late.
In 1859 the Council sent back the Appropriation Bill with
two amendments, and with a message stating that the first
“was merely a correction of an error in the title of an
ACt, and the second was for the purpose of furthering the
meaning of the Legislative Assembly.” The Assembly sent
back the following message in reply :
“Mr. President —The Legislative Assembly return to the
Legislative Council a Bill, intituled ‘an ACt to appropriate
the Consolidated Revenue to the service of the year 1859,
and for other purposes,’ and acquaint the Legislative Council
that the Constitution ACt having prohibited the Legislative
Council from making any alterations in the Appropriation
Bill, this House refuses to entertain the amendments, and
insists upon the Bill in its integrity, and respectfully requests
the Council to reconsider their proceedings on this Bill.
Feb. 18th, 1859. Francis Murphy, Speaker,
Legislative Assembly Chambers.”
On this occasion the Council gave way, though a strong
minority was in favor of continuing the contest.
DEADLOCKS OF 1865 AND 1867.
It is not proposed to go at length into the history of the
dead-locks of 1865 and 1867, but it will perhaps be desirable
to bring a few points which are not generally known, into
prominence.
In the first place, the Council not only threw out (or laid
aside,) the Appropriation Bill once in 1865 and twice in 1867,
but it threw out a Temporary Supply Bill for £500,000,
although the Government had pledged itself not to pay the
disputed Darling grant out of it; though it was the eve of
a dissolution ; and though the Civil Service was completely
disorganised by the inability of the Treasury to pay salaries.
Sir Charles Sladen —the present leader of the Council—
observed on that occasion :
“There is no forbearance when a man surrenders his
property to a burglar, it is owing to his weakness; and were
we to surrender, we could not claim the virtue of forbearance,
it would be owing to our weakness and imbecility.” (Vide,
Hansard, Nov. 5, 1867.)


In the second place, it seems desirable to recall the view
taken of the Darling Grant contest by the Governor of the
time, Sir J. H. T. Manners-Sutton, who has left on record
his opinion,
“ That if the House of Commons had occupied the
position (pledged to the public and Sir Charles Darling) held
by the Legislative Assembly, respecting the grant they (the
House of Commons) would have claimed the right to include
the grant in the General Appropriation Act, and that they
would not have been induced to refrain from asserting that
right by the belief that the grant would be rejected by the
Upper House if proposed in a separate measure.” Despatch
of August 27th, 1867.
Sir J. H. T. Manners-Suttons also wrote later on, —“ The
Upper House * * * not only resists the claims of the
Legislative Assembly as representing the Commons of the
Colony, but advances counter claims of almost equal extent
to those of the Legislative Assembly, in asserting, that if
any Money Bill containing an enactment (I do not refer to a
tack) objectionable to them should be submitted to them,
they are entitled to reject it for ever, notwithstanding the
deliberately-expressed opinion to the contrary of the Lower
House and of the constituencies.”
He goes on to say that his ‘ ‘recommendations of modera-
tion have been continuous, and there can be no doubt that
my counsel would have been more effectual if the Legislative
Council had assumed a less defiant attitude.” —Despatch of
October 28 th, 1867.
In the third place, it is important to observe that both
in 1865 and 1867 the Ministry of the day advised a dissolution.
In the first instance, in 1865, this was done, in the hope that
the Council would defer 'to an expression of will by the
constituencies. Mr. (now Sir) James McCulloch says, in
a minute to the Governor:
“The leading members of the Council had also announced
that were they only satisfied that the Colony at large was
favorable to the Government policy, they were prepared to
bow to public opinion, and pass the Government measure.
With this intimation frequently and in various ways commu-
nicated by the Council debates, and through the opposition
portion of the press, and the Government having been
frequently challenged to appeal to the country, we consented
to do so, entertaining no doubt of the result.” — Hansard,
March 16, 1866.


In fadt, the election closed with fifty-eight members
returned expressly to carry out the Government policy,
against twenty who were returned by the opposition. The
Council, however, in a minute presented to the Governor,
commented thus upon Mr. McCulloch’s statements :
“It is admitted on the part of the Legislative Council,
that statements have been made in this House, as set forth
in the minutes, and such statements have been approved by
the majority of the House ‘that were they satisfied that the
Colony at large was favourable to the Government policy,
they were prepared to bow to public opinion,’ but this House
deny and challenge proof of the assertion that they ever
expressed their willingness ‘to pass the Government Measure ,’
if by such designation is meant the Bill associating supply
with appropriation, or with the territorial or Crown
revenue.”— Hansard, March 21, 1861.
With the recollection of this result still fresh, it is, of
course, impossible for any Ministry to trust to informal
pledges from the Council or any member of it; and, in fadt,
the dissolution of 1867 was not advised from any hope that
the Council would yield to the opinion of the country,
but because Mr. McCulloch’s government held ‘that under
existing circumstances the differences between the Houses
could not be solved by prolonging the session ; and without
such a solution Parliamentary supplies are unobtainable.’ ”
Hansard, Nov. 8, 1867.
The following Report will show the position the Legislative
Assembly took up in 1867.
REPORT.
The Committee of the Legislative Assembly appointed to
confer with the Committee of the Legislative Council
in relation to the course of proceeding generally with
Bills for imposing any duty, rate, tax, rent, return, or
impost, and particularly with the Bill intituled, “An
Act for granting to Her Majesty certain Duties of Customs
and for altering certain other Duties ,” have the honor to
bring up the following Progress Report:—
That the Committees of the two Houses have mutually
agreed :
That the two Houses be advised that, inasmuch as doubts
have arisen respecting the form or contents of, and practice


relating to Bills required by the 56th section of the Constitu-
tion Act, to originate in the Legislative Assembly, it is
expedient that the practice of the Lords and Commons respectively
be observed as to such Bills, and as to all subjects of Aid and
Supply , and that each House should be guided in all matters and
forms relating thereto, by the precedents established by the House of
Lords, and by the House of Commons respectively.
Committee-room,
15th May, 1867.
The fate of this recommendation was thus described in an
address from the Legislative Assembly to the Queen
(February 13th, 1878).
“ To give effect to this agreement, a joint standing order
of the two Houses was suggested; and the Council have
recently pleaded, as their justification for not having carried
out the agreement, that it was not found practicable to
frame a standing order having the requisite authority.
During the present session, this House have assured the
Council that they were ready to concur in an Act of
Parliament on the subject, whose authority would not be
doubted. To this proposal the Council have made no
reply; and they still persist in desiring and attempting to
exercise a power in financial questions far beyond those
exercised by the House of Lords.”
REFORM QUESTION IN 1873 AND 1874.
In 1873, the Ministry of Mr. Francis holding office,
the Council laid aside :
(1) An Electoral Act Amendment Bill (carried by
58 to 12).
(2) A Supreme Court Bill.
And ordered to be read a second time that day six
months:
(1) A Market Laws’ Amendment Bill.
(2) A Statute of Evidence Amendment Bill.
And rejected on motion for second reading :
(1) A Savings’ Bank Law Amendment Bill.
And postponed for six months :
(1) A Labour Bill.
And allowed to lapse :
(1) Mining on Private Property Bill.
(2) Land Act Amendment Bill.


Eight more or less important measures sent up from the
Assembly having thus miscarried, Mr. Francis, in 1878,
proposed a Bill for Reform of the Constitution, by which,
in case of dispute, the two Houses were to sit and vote
together. This Bill was never sent up to the Council, as
it failed to secure an absolute majority in the House of
Assembly 5 many members in that House objecting to the
concession, that members of Council might vote on
amendments to Money Bills.
REFORM QUESTION IN 1877 AND 1878.
In 1877, the Legislative Council ordered to be read
a second time that day six months :
(1) A Railway Loan Account Application Bill.
Laid aside;
(1) A Forts and Armaments’ Bill.
(2) The Appropriation Bill.
And rejected, on motion for second reading - :
(1) International Exhibitions Bill.
(2) Payment of Members Bill.
And sent back a Bill for Mining on Private Property,
amended in such a way, that the Government could
only lay it aside.
With the exception of a Bill imposing a Land Tax, all
the most important measures of Mr. Berry’s Government,
and the Appropriation Bill for the year, were in this way
shelved or thrown out.
By its action in throwing out the Appropriation Bill of
1877, the Council practically asserted a right to dictate to
the country what Cabinet should be in powei. It has since
then re-asserted this claim in an official memorandum, in
which it states that “if the _ Council had been properly
represented in the Administration, the open contest between
the two Houses would have been withdrawn to the
confidential deliberations of the Cabinet.”* As the Legisla-
tive Council is always represented by some member of
* Memorandum from the Legislative Council, embodying the circumstances
under which differences have arisen between the Houses of Legislature on the
question of Constitutional Reform, Section 9.


Council, and as the presence of even three Liberal Members
of Council is not likely to prove more embarrassing to an
Administration than the presence of one, this undoubtedly
means, that the majority of the Council ought to be repre-
sented in the Cabinet by Ministers expressing views which
are not shared by their colleagues. Such a change would
make Government impossible in any constitutional country.
With respect to the action of the Government in dismissing
a number of Civil Servants, it ought to be borne in mind—
(l) That the Government had no right to punish the
Assembly by a dissolution when it only expressed the feelings
of the country. Two months after the crisis had occurred,
a prominent member of the Opposition admitted this.
“ There is no doubt that if a general election were to take
place to-morrow, the Government are bound to come back
with a majority on this question,” (the question of Payment
of Members). —Speech of Hon. A. Mackay; Hansard, March
yth, 1878.
Sir George Bowen expressed the same view a little later.
“It will be recollected that the present Ministry
commands a majority of at least two-thirds (or of about 60
out of 86 members) of the Victorian House of Commons,
and that it is generally agreed that the results of a dissolution
at this time, and on a question of purely local policy like
that under consideration, would certainly strengthen the
party now in power.” —Despatch of May Bth, 1878.
(2) That as Mr. Berry had pledged himself, when he took
office, to effect sweeping reductions in the Civil Service, he
could not allow its members to retain a claim to special
consideration by serving without pay.
(3) That every dismissed Civil Servant received compen-
sation, those temporarily employed being compensated on
the same scale as those on the permanent staff; and that in
no single instance has any outsider been appointed to one of
the higher salaries, over the heads of the older servants.
It seems desirable to point out also, that the compromise
which was finally adopted, was first proposed by two
members of the Assembly, (a Liberal and a Conservative,)
and was opposed by the leader of the Council, Sir Charles
Sladen, who divided the Council against it, with a counter-
proposal for a conference between the two Houses.
In consequence of the dead-lock of 1877, Berry moved
the following resolutions. (March 7th.)


(1) That in consequence of the unconstitutional action of
the Legislative Council in not passing the annual Appro-
priation Bill, an alteration of the Constitution Act is
imperatively necessary.
(2) That the Constitution be formed on the model of the
British Constitution, and that the present elective Council
be replaced by a second Chamber, so constituted, and with
such limitation of powers, as to secure to the people of this
country that full measure of parliamentary or responsible
Government enjoyed by the people of Great Britain.
(3) That the Government take all necessary steps to give
effect to the foregoing resolutions.
Later on (April 2), these resolutions were withdrawn; and
.at the prorogation (April 7), the Governor announced that
h.is advisers would “ with all possible dispatch, propose a
measure to alter and amend the Constitutional Statute.”
The Bill for reforming the Constitution which Mr. Berry’s
Government introduced, July 17th, 1878, contained the
following provisions :
(1) That the Council should be permitted to propose
amendments in Money Bills.
(2) That the Council should lose its right to reject a
Money Bill sent up by the Assembly a second time.
(3) That a Bill sent up two years running by the Assembly,
should become law ; unless
(4) The Council demand a vote of the constituencies
upon it.
This Bill was carried on its second reading by a majority
of 59 to 22; and on its third reading, by 50 to 21, in the
Assembly.
The Council has refused even to discuss it, and discharged
it from its notice paper, after it had been once read. Under
these circumstances, it was impossible for the Assembly
to consider two Bills which the Council had sent down, and
by which that Chamber proposed to consolidate and in-
crease its own powers, though they were kept on the
Assembly notice-paper till the last day.
When it became apparent that the Council would not even
consider the Bill, laboriously debated, and sent up by a two-
thirds’ majority from the Assembly, Mr. Berry took the
initiative, by proposing a conference between the two
Houses. Three members were deputed from each, and the
result is given in the report rendered by Sir Charles Sladen
to the Council. The report said :


“The following basis of negotiation was submitted and
insisted on by the Committee representing the AssembL as
the condition precedent to any scheme of Reform being
entertained, viz. :
(1) That the annual Appropriation Bill should in no
circumstances be rejected by the Council.
(2) That definite legislative finality should be provided
with respect to all other Bills.
On the other hand, your Committee refused to consider
any proposal that implied any legislative inferiority in your
Honourable House and that was inconsistent with its in-
dependence. In these circumstances, no further negotiations
were possible.”
The report then went on to suggest two schemes which
the representatives of the Council had submitted. The fiist
of these proposed that the Council should make no
concessions; that the Assembly should concede to the
Council the right of amending Money Bills ; and that
disputed points should be referred for arbitration to a
committee of Colonial Governors. This scheme was geneially
considered too absurd to be discussed, and has never been
revived even in the Council. A second scheme was revived
later on, and sent down (November 28th, 1878,) with one
important alteration (the addition of clause 2), as the
Council’s ultimatum to the Assembly.
MESSAGE.
The Legislative Council acquaint the Legislative Assembly,,
that the Legislative Council have agreed to the following
resolutions relating to the question of Constitutional Reform :
(i) That in the opinion of this House the usual Appropria-
tion Bill should contain grants for the usual and ordinary
services of the year, and for no othei purpose , and should
not contain any matter foreign to such grants.
That the Council may, under a resolution passed by an
absolute majority of its members, inform the Assembly, by
message, that in their opinion, any grant recommended in a
message from the Governor, ought not to be contained in an
Appropriation Bill.
That if the Assembly disagree with such message, the
Appropriation Bill, without such disputed grant, shall


proceed in the usual way, and the Assembly shall send to
the Council the disputed grant, in the form of a separate Bill.
If the disagreement between the two Houses continue, and
if the Governor, in consequence thereof, think fit to dissolve
the Assembly, the Governor may, at the same time, also
dissolve the Council.
(2) That the Council may amend any Bill, under the
56th section of the Constitution Act, other than an
Appropriation Bill; and if the Assembly disagree from such
amendments, the part agreed to shall be passed in the usual
way; and the Assembly may send to the Council, in a
separate Bill, the portion disagreed with.
If the disagreement between the two Houses on such
separate Bill continue, and if the Governor, in consequence
thereof, think fit to dissolve the Assembly, the Governor
may at the same time dissolve the Council.
(3) That the effects of a dissolution of the Council be
similar to those of a resignation of each member.
That no dissolution of Council take place within nine
months of the period of legal expiration of Assembly.
That a dissolution of Council, if it occur within nine
months before the periodical elections, be a substitute for
them. If it occur within nine months after such elections,
it shall not affect members when returned.
(4) That, in disputes between the Houses as to the
construction of the Constitution Act, or other Act affecting
their respective powers, either House may petition the
Queen in Council.
(5) That two responsible Ministers, at least, have seats in
the Council.
This ultimatum must be taken in connection with the two
Bills, which the Council elaborated during this session as its
contribution towards Constitutional Reform. One of these
reduced the qualification for electors to the Council, and
made a fresh distribution of the provinces, so as to diminish
the expenses of electors. It also provided for reducing the
tenure of office from ten years to six. The second gave the
Council the power of making amendments in Money Bills.
Altogether the Council’s position may fairly be summed
up by the statement that it has
Replied to all proposals for modifying its power by
counter-proposals for strengthening it.
(1) By enlarging its electoral basis i which is yet to be so
restricted as not to be popular.


(2) By giving it the undisputed right to amend Money-Bills.
(3) By providing that Appeals shall be made outside
the Colony, to the Imperial Government, in which
case it is assumed that the decision will often be
influenced by the great number of wealthy absentees,
always resident in London.
An informal scheme, involving a proposal that the Council
should be elected by rate-payers’ suffrage, was brought forward
by Mr. Reid, M.L.C., and Mr. Munro, M.L.A. Mr. Berry
publicly announced his willingness to accept it, but Mr. Reid
did not venture to bring it forward in the Council, where
he could not secure a single supporter.
Another informal scheme, comprising Mr. Francis’
proposal for a junction of the two Chambers over disputed
points, was recommended for adoption by Mr. Service.
Concerning this, it may be observed that when Mr. Francis’
Bill was brought forward, it was very unfavourably received
in the Council, and opposed by the friends of the Council
in the Assembly, and denounced with unsparing virulence
by the Conservative Press of the Colony; and that
Mr. Service could not pledge himself that such a proposal
would find a single supporter. As, however, attempts
have been made to represent Mr. Service’s revival of
the Norwegian scheme as a semi-official offer by the
Council, it seems desirable to quote Mr. Service’s
own words, simply premising that the proposal—such
as it was —was not made till within three days of
the prorogation of Parliament (Dec. 6th.) Mr. Service
said,—“ I would, with great caution, make a statement,
not either formally _or officially as an absolute fadt, but
as a statement which I have reason to believe, to hope,
and to expedt, is corredt, namely, that while this
proposal for finality is not included in the Council’s
resolutions, there is an adtual majority in the other Chamber
in favor of it. I make this statement only for what it is
worth, that if there is nothing in the way of the settlement
of the questions except this one matter of finality, there is
an adtual majority in the other Chamber prepared to vote
for a measure containing this finality. lam not speaking
without grounds for what I say, but of course we all know
that until a legislative or deliberative body has committed
itself formally by resolutions, it is impossible to say that it
will be prepared to do any given thing in any given time.” —
Hansard, Dec. 3, 1878.


With respect to this it may be noticed
(1) That although there was a debate in the Legislative
Council the evening after Mr. Service spoke in the Assembly,
on the very subjedt of the mission to England, no single
Member of Council took the opportunity of confirming what
Mr. Service had said.*
(2) That no single Member of Council has ever endorsed
Mr. Service’s statements.
(3) That much stronger assurances had been given in-
formally in 1865, that the Council would bow to the will of
the constituencies.
Technically the position of the Assembly is defined by its
Reform Bill; but as not a single dissentient voice was raised
against the principles laid down by the repiesentatives of
the Assembly at the Conference of October, 1878, it may
fearlessly be asserted that the Assembly wants only one
thing ; finality in legislation. If it can be assured that aftei
some definite interval, be it two sessions or two years, or
two Parliaments, a Bill which the representatives of the
country in the Assembly have approved by decisive
majorities is certain to become law, it is quite prepared and
even anxious to concede that no irrelevant matter shall be
introduced into the Appropriation Bill. At the same time it
is not prepared to let any power external to itself dictate
that a particular item of expenditure is a tack. The House
of Commons does not accord this to the House of Lords.
* p> r Hearn however, took the opportunity in that debate of protesting
that the principle of legal finality would never be conceded. "We do not
propose to have any legal finality: we neither claim any such power for
ourselves, nor are we disposed to concede it to other persons.


APPENDIX.
With the view of information, the following extracts
from the Victorian Hansard are re-printed and
circulated, together with certain Extracts from
important Speeches of Members of Parliament,
oil the repeated difficulties which, from time to
time, have arisen in Victoria.
Extracted from an address delivered by Mr. Balfour,
M.P., (now a Member of Council,) to the electors of
East Bomke, as reported by the Argus, December 18th,
1866 : Another and most important question which
should be settled once and for ever is, whether the right
to control and direct taxation belongs to the Council or the
Assembly to the smaller and less responsible house, representing
hut a fraction of the community, or to the larger one,
elected the body of the people, to whom it is directly amenable.
My opinion is that the written Constitution, as well as the
analogy between the House of Commons and our own
Assembly, pronounces in favour of the latter. The rejection
by the Council once and again of a tariff passed by an
Assembly elected not so much as a year before amounts to
a claim on the part of the Upper House to control the
taxation of the country a claim which ought to he resisted , and
one which, if elected, I will support the Ministry in resisting
by again sending up the same tariff, when it has been
endorsed (as I believe it will be) by the people of the colonv
at this election.” ‘ J
Sb John O Shanassy, M.P., said in 1868, being then a
member of the Legislative Council—“ It will be generally
admitted that no measure of Reform can be satisfactory
which will not provide against what seems likely to be a
continual disturbing element, viz. : a frequent recurrence of
dead-locks. We cannot shut our eyes to the fact that it is
in the power of either branch of the Legislature to pre-
cipitate a dead-lock at any time. * * * * The stopping
of supplies and the ordinary machinery of the State should
be provided against by scientific methods, as other countries
which have written Constitutions have provided T—Hansard,
June 10 th, 1868.


Sir Chas. G. Duffy, M.P., Speaker of the Assembly and
ex-Chief Secretary, urged prompt reform “ because during
this session and last session nearly every important measure
that we (Assembly) have passed, has been rejected by the
other House, or so altered that it was impossible for this
House to accept it.” — Hansard , August zyth, 1873.
Hon. James Goodall Francis, M.P., when Chief
Secretary, said—“ It is quite certain that Legislation in
the future will be impracticable unless the House and the
country sturdily manifest the determination that the amend-
ment of the Constitution shall be the earliest and gravest
duty of the new Parliament.”— Hansard, September gth, 1873.
The same authority also said, referring to the rejection of
important Bills by the Council in the preceding session :
“ These measures included a Bill which was necessary to
enable the country to deal properly with the large question
of Mining on Private Property, a Bill for the Amendment of
the Land Law, and two Bills which had been sent up —not
only in preceding Sessions, but in preceding Parliaments, —
Bills to amend the Laws relating to Fencing and Im-
pounding;” and continued : “If it (the Council) continues
to deal with measures of public policy on the assumption
that it represents only one class of the community, and that
the propertied class, as antagonistic to the interests of the
bulk of the people,—it it quite certain that legislation in the
future will be simply impracticable.”— Hansard, Sep. 9, 1873.
Mr. Justice Stephen, at the time Attorney-General,
spoke as follows: —“The present state of affairs is not a
crisis—it is very desirable that should be understood, —but
it is one link in the history of events which forces upon
all thoughtful men in the country the consideration of the
question, whether it is possible for our Constitution to go
on as it is.” Mr. Justice Stephen also expressed the opinion
that “the administration of the laws, the formation of
ministries, and the control of the public purse, rest with the
Assembly alone.” And he concluded with these words :
“ All present, whatever side of politics they may take, if
they wish legislation to proceed—if they wish that what
has been called the effective supreme power of the State
should rest somewhere or anywhere—if they do not wish
a perpetual dead-lock, —not the old-fashioned dead-lock,
connected with some particular matter of administration,
but a perpetual dead-lock on useful legislation continuing


session after session,—will admit that we must address our
minds to the difficult and important question of how to alter
the Constitution so as to subject one House to the other.” —
Hansard, August 28 th, 1873.
Hon. H. T. Wrixon, (M.P., and ex-Solicitor-General,)
speaking in the debate which arose in the Assembly on
its becoming known that the Council had rejected the
Electoral Reform Bill, said—“No one supposed that
the other House would presume to deal with a Bill of
this description—a Bill relating only to the constitution of
our own Chamber, passed by a majority of the people’s
representatives, with a view of perfecting the representation
of the country, and in no way affedting or interfering with
the rights and privileges of another Chamber —in the pe-
remptory and insolent manner they have. Such conduct on
the part of the House of Lords in the old country, would
lead either to a revolution or the abjedt submission of that
House.” — Hansard, August 2 8th, 1873.
Mr. Wrixon, M.P., also said—“l think we must all feel
that matters between this Chamber and the other are
rapidly approaching a crisis. I believe that the repeated
and very unceremonious rejection by the other Chamber,
of measures which we pass, must necessarily lead to a crisis
or the total extinguishment of self-respect in this Chamber,
because, as we are now constituted, one or other House
must be leading —must be the dominant power.”— Hansard,
August 28 th, 1873.
Hon. J. A. Macpherson, M.P., Ex.-Chief Secretary: —
<( I would not ask that House (Council) to vote for what it
did not approve, but in the case of a measure submitted to
the people, and approved of by the people at a general
election, as shown by an absolute majority of this House
(Assembly) voting for it, after the appeal to the country, I
would remove from the Council the power of veto. I would
send the measure up to that House as law.” — Hansard, June
17th, 1874.
Hon. James Service, M.P., ex-Treasurer, and at present
the leader of the opposition, spoke on Mr. Francis’s Reform
Bill, and said—“ The principle which the bill sought to carry
out was one which every member of the Assembly ought to
support. If there was anything to which the Assembly was
pledged more than another, it was to the great principle that


the Upper House had been to some extent obstructive in
years past, and that an alteration of the Constitution was
necessary, so far as would enable legislation, at a certain
given stage, to be proceeded with, even though the other
House would not consent.” — Hansard, June 2 3rd, 1874.
Hon. G. B. Kerferd, then Attorney-General, and since
Premier, said in the same debate —“ Surely no one will deny
that if there is a general desire of the part of the people—
extending over two consecutive sessions of Parliament —with
regard to any measure, it ought not to be in the power of
any body of men to resist that bill, and prevent its becoming
law. I venture to say that no Government will be tolerated
on these benches that does not undertake to deal with that
question.” — Hansard, June lyth, 1874.
Dr. Madden, M.P., said —“ Electors and members of the
Upper House having already in their external capacity a
voice in respect to Money Bills, I do not see why they
should have anything further to do with them. I would, in
fact, take their separate voice as to Money Bills away
from them.” — Hansard, June gth, 1874.
The above, selected from a mass of similar evidence, is all
from the Conservative section of the Assembly ; the opinions
only of the most moderate and experienced being given, in
order that the evidence shall have the greater weight.


