

BRIEF EXCERPTS
FROM
PROFESSOR CARL YON NAEGELI’S
RECENT WORK
ON THE MINUTEST FUNGACEOUS
ORGANISMS IN RELATION TO
INFECTIOUS DISEASES . AND
SUSTENANCE OF HEALTH.
BV
BARON FERDINAND von MUELLER,
C.M.G., M. & Ph. D., P.B.S.
c mmUM
.(' c'- l'& 'f l ! /
r v


.
f . I -i
.


From “The Australian Medical Journal ,” November 1878.
BRIEF EXCERPTS
From Professor Carl von Naegeli’s recent Work on the Minutest
Fungaceous Organisms in Relation to Infectious Diseases and
Sustenance of Health.
By Baron Ferd. von Mueller, C.M.G., M. & Ph. D., F.R.S.
A renowned observer of the simplest microscopic organisms,
Professor Carl von Xaegeli, of Munich, has recently placed his
views on the germ-theory of miasmatic and contagious diseases on
record, in a special volume of considerable extent. (Die niederen
Pilze in ihren Beziehungen zu den Infections Krankheiten und
der Gesundheitspflege. Munchen : gr. octav. 285.) In these
times, when medical science is so particularly striving to elucidate
the, (in many respects) yet obscure original causes of epidemics, a
new and extensive contribution to this branch of pathologic
literature from a masterly investigator will be hailed also by the
English reader with pleasure; and even in those few cases,
where the dicta of Dr. Naegeli may perhaps not be quite in
consonance with more generally received opinions, the enuncia-
tion of his particular views ought to be met with respect, and
ought to lead on to further independent researches. It is the
intention in these pages to give a brief resume of Professor
Naegeli’s work, especially as it does not seem, that it has hitherto
received any attention in medical journals written in the English
language. Those, who are specially interested in the subjects


latterly treated by Naegeli, will easily find means of studying his
work independently for themselves, for which very likely an
English translation of so important a work will offer early
facilities ; they will find it a fountain of original researches, which
was commenced to be opened up fully 40 years ago, and which
has gradually become a powerful stream, adding (if we may speak
allegorically) its limpid waters also to the immeasurable ocean of
science and truth.
The illustrious author, at the outset, observes that all his results
were obtained by the strictly inductive method of modern experi-
mental physiology and chemistry, and that he was never led by
mere theoretic considerations in any of his assertions. He regards
the investigation of the nature of the infectious diseases (the
expression is adopted in Naegeli’s sense) as simply within the
dominion of physiology, as they arise from the conflict between
the vital power of the minutest fungaceous beings and that of the
human organism. The physiologic treatment of this question
steps to some extent in the way of those pathologists, who
attribute to each particular infectious disease an originating
peculiar fungus, while it must shake the doubts of those, who
regard fungaceous developments in these diseases as merely
collateral or sequential. Dr. Naegeli has laid great stress in his
work on the promotion of well directed hygienic State mea-
sures, regarding many of the present methods as an enormous
waste, or even contrary to the very objects to be attained; he
contends, that an exaggerated and prejudicial importance has been
attached to the impurities of the soil, while the more dangerous
contamination of air became often comparatively disregarded.
Dr. Naegeli commences by prefixing to his work a summary of
data hitherto well established by him, to which he subsequently
and seriatim refers for further elaboration in his volumes. These
prefatory remarks are so concise and so explanatory of his views
as to be here seriatim adhered to; but additional notes, condensed
from the main text, enlarge on the views and results, to the
enunciation of which the book is devoted. Although many of the
notes on the physiology of the fungi seem at first sight irrelevant


to the object of medicine, I have deemed it best to recapitulate
these observations, as they have an important bearing on the
pathologic processes generated by fungus-development in diseases
of the human frame.
I. —The Lower Fungi and the Decompositions effected by them.
The principal lower fungi may be divided, for medical
considerations, into three natural groups :
a. The mould-fungi or mucedines, consisting of delicate
threads, often ramified, either articulated or not jointed,
at first white or pale, afterwards yellow, red, greenish,
brown or black, through the appearance of innumerable
minute spores.
b. The saccharomycetes, consisting of cells (of often only
about -j—• millimetre diameter), sometimes isolated,
sometimes arranged into the form of rosaries or some-
times connected by branches. They are multiplied by
sprouting from the surface. The yeast-fungus belongs
to this series.
c. The schizomycetes , consisting of cells, not seldom reduced
to millimetre diameter, either single or grouped
into stavelets (bacteria) or threads, seldom into tablets
or cubes. They may be recognised under the microscope
by their uniform size, their voluntary motion and their
propagation, which is effected by sub-division of the cells.
Vibrio, Micrococcus, Spirillum pertain to this series.
So minute are some of these simplest of organic forms,
that 30,000 millions are required to weigh a millegram !
It is here not the place to discuss how far the miasma and
contagium-organisms, acknowledged by Naegeli as schizomycetes,
are allied to algae and even infusoria. Modern systems place
these, the minutest and simplest of all organic beings, according to
morphologic laws, so far as schizomycetes and saccharomycetes are
concerned, into that section of protophytw which is devoid of
chlorophyll.


The decompositions effected by the mould fungi may be decay
or consumption. Under their influence for instance fruits
putrefy, or wood is converted into mould by a kind of slow
combustion, or organic substances are consumed by them and
disappear.
The decompositions to which the sprouting fungi or saccha-
romycetes give rise, are those of fermentation. By their agency
for instance sugar is converted into alcohol and carbonic acid.
The decompositions of the cleaving fungi or schizomycetes
come within mucous and acetic fermentation and also ammoniacal
putrefaction. The chemical products are amongst others
carbonic acid, ammonia and offensively smelling gases. Under
peculiar conditions they also convert sugar into lactic acid or into
mucilage, or produce butyric acid, mannit, gum. Milk, under
their influence, sometimes becomes bitter instead of acid, and
blood-red pigments make their appearance on victuals containing
starch. Lactic acid becomes finally converted into butyric acid.
Besides, saccharomycetes secrete soluble ferments, which have
the property of converting cane-sugar into fruit or grape-sugar;
while schizomycetes change some hydrates of carbon into ferment-
able sugar, and dissolve coagulated albumen or albuminates.
The above three groups of fungi are not convertible into each
other, and therefore do not represent in any case different stages
of growth of the same specific form. Different species of
schizomycetes can assume one special kind of function of decom-
position. Again, several products of putrefaction may arise from
one species or form of these organisms. Each species of
schizomycetes is able to produce several different morphologic and
physiologic forms, which, according to external influences, may
pass quickly or slowly into each other, whereby the power for
one condition may be lost, and that for another be acquired.
II. — The Conditions of Life of the Lower Fungi.
1, Growth and Increase by formation of cells. Evolution. Is
. f
always connected with an augmentation of substance.


2. Retrogression of Life. Involution. Characterised by the
slow waste of substance. In the first period of involution it is
possible to again stimulate the life and growth of the cells; in the
second period this dies slowly but unavoidably.
3. The Formation of Quiescent Spores. Analogous to propa-
gation by seed of the higher plants.
4. Latent Life. It may be induced by desiccation, freezing or
other modes, but remains capable under favourable circumstances
to resume active vitality.
5. Fermentation. It is the faculty of the saccharoniycetes and
schizomycetes to decompose : the former—sugar into alcohol and
carbonic acid ; the latter—sugar into lactic acid; glycerine into
butyl-alcohol, butyric acid, etc. ; urea into ammonia and carbonic
acid, albumen into leucin, tyrosin, volatile fat-acids, amins,
ammonia, sulphide of hydrogen, carbonic acid.
Each of the above stages of growth requires particular
conditions. For instance, the state of fermentation may be
retarded and interrupted by certain unfavourable conditions,
which, becoming intensified, will first affect the evolution of the
cells, and at last induce involution, and finally the 'death of the
organism. The six agencies on which fungus life depends may be
summed up as :
1. The nutritive substances necessary for the growth and
increase of the lowest fungi; they consist: first, of certain mineral
salts containing sulphur, phosphorus, potassium and magnesium ;
secondly, of organic compounds, containing in a higher degree
carbon and nitrogen, or again ammonia combined ■with carbon-
compounds without nitrogen. Among the best nutritive sub-
stances are sugar, many organic acids, alcohol, also those
albuminates which are best able to diffuse through membranes.
2. Free Oxygen. It is indispensable only to the growth of the
mould fungi ; while the other two groups may under otherwise
favourable conditions vegetate without it.
3. Water is necessary to the active growth of the fungi. In an
air-dried state their life becomes suspended ; if only partially
dried they often form spores. Some minute schizomycetes are


capable to re-vegetate, after having rested for centuries in a dry
condition. Fungi in contact with sufficient water, but with in-
sufficient nutriment, gradually perish.
4. Not nutritive substances soluble in water. They are all more
or less injurious to the active life of the fungi; even nutritive
substances, when too concentrated, prevent active fungus-life.
5. Temperature. Each kind and each modification of a fungus
has a particular temperature, at which it flourishes best, and
beyond which in a moist state its growth is at first checked, and
its life afterwards destroyed. Low temperatures at or below the
freezing point of water, only induce the quiescent state of life.
The temperature of the human body is for the schizomycetes one
of the most favourable.
6. Competition of different fungi. Within the same nutritive
fluid saccharomycetes and schizomycetes particularly will struggle
with each other for existence; thus those fungi, which find the
conditions for their growth the most favoiirable, will vegetate in
predominance or to the exclusion of other forms; but when one
species exists in vast majority at starting, it may suppress others,
though the constitution of the fluid may otherwise be more
congenial to the latter. For instance, a neutral saccharine
solution, to which the three classes of minute fungi obtain access,
will only produce lactic acid; if mixed with one-half per cent,
tartaric acid, alcoholic fermentation will commence, but if four or
five per cent, tartaric acid be added only mould-fungi will grow.
But the same solution containing even one-and-a-half per cent,
acid, and brought in contact with schizomycetes , will be converted
into lactic acid, though perhaps a few germs of saccharomycetes
did also get access. The former prefer a neutral solution or one
poor in salts, whereas the latter like to vegetate in a slightly acid
liquid and endure a greater quantity of salts.
111. — Anti-hygienic Effect of the Lower Fungi.
Dr. Naegeli, like so many others, is as yet undecided whether
fungaceous organisms can be regarded as originators of human


disease ; but he arrives at the conclusion, that mainly the
schizomycetes can exert a dangerous influence on man, as with
rare exceptions they are the only ones, which can penetrate living
tissues. Mould-fungi need access to free oxygen and can thus
only occupy outer surfaces ] saccharomycetes can exist and then
scantily only, when perhaps in the stomach or intestines a slight
alcoholic fermentation proceeds. Either class, however, may
assume, as well as schizomycetes , formidable proportions and
power in some diseases, for instance in cystitis, diphtheria,
&c. Schizomycetes can become highly pernicious through their
enormous vegetative power, which exceeds that of all other
organisms, and which is so great, that by the ordinary temperature
of the human body in every twenty or twenty-five minutes their
number may become doubled. The end result of this “ struggle
for existence or predominence ” is dependent on the specific
nature of the shizomycetes, on the copiousness with which these
organisms penetrate the tissues ; on the chemical condition of the
fluids which pervade the latter; on the presence of poisonous
matters of decomposition, which greatly supports the spread of
the penetrating fungi. The highly injurious or detrimental effect
of the schizomycetes, when active within the bodily substance is
produced by withdrawal of the best nutritive particles and by
depriving the blood corpuscles of their oxygen, by changing
saccharine and other nourishing fluids through fermenting
processes, by generating putrid products of decay and by creating
ferments, through which normally solid and insoluble substances
of the body are dissolved and decomposed.
IY. —Infective Substances.
Infectious matters cannot be gaseous, otherwise they would
soon expand and diffuse to such an extent as to become quite
harmless. A quantity of poison, which under ordinary circum-
stances is borne as innocuous, can if thousandfold or even million-
fold divided become readily infective. Hence it is clear, that the
infective principle can neither be of chemical anorganic nature,
but must consist of organic living structures ; because only through


them an augmentation from an infinitesimal minute quantity to
such an extent as to become dangerous or destructive to the
human body is possible. Among all the known organised bodies,
the schizomycetes alone can be identified with the subtle infective
principles, which are capable of such vast, rapid and unlimited
extension; they moreover possess the (for such functions)
requisite minuteness and diffusibility, as well as all other physical
requisites, to enter into contest with the vital power of the animal
and human constitution. The infective fungi are specifically
different, in so far as they produce distinct diseases; but this
difference may possibly rest merely in a peculiar adaptability of
the species, or it may perhaps depend on the adherence or absorp-
tion of some poisonous principle to these organisms, or it may be
peculiarised by the location of the morbid processes producing
each distinct disease.
The infectious principles of contagious diseases, which emanate
from morbid processes of the human body, and are contained in
its dejections (desquamations, perspiration, mucus, pus, vomicata,
egesta, &c.) are transferred from person to person; in them
abound peculiar schizomycetes , endowed with special adaptation
(contagium-fungi). The infectious principles of miasmatic diseases
originate either on or in soil or water, and are again replete with
schizomycetes of peculiar adaptation.
The infectious principles of septic diseases manifest themselves
through putridity, originated again by peculiar fungi, which may
be the bearers of a separate putrid matter also. It requires a
larger quantity in these cases, as compared to those of contagia
and miasmata, to bring dangerous diseases about.
The individual disposition for infectious diseases consists
herein, that locally or generally the chemical condition of the
humours becomes so much altered from the normal state, that
now the infection-fungi can overcome the resistance of the vital
power. The contagium-fungi are the most infective of all and
are transmovable to wide distances. The miasma-fungi are less
energetic and are not transportable. The putrefication-fungi
require a copious introduction to effect disease.


In miasmatic-contagious diseases—cholera, typhus, synochus
icterodes, it is requisite, as shown by Pettenkofer, that two condi-
tions should act unitedly to produce effect, one of the two emanating
from a patient, the other from the soil; two theories on the
subject are possible —the monoblastic, according to which the
germ of the disease, emanating directly from the human body, must
pass through a stadium in a soil fit for the incubation of the germ ;
or the diblastic theory must be adopted, namely, that a malarian
or any other soil not of immunity, produces a miasmatic infection,
rendering the patient susceptible to the contagium from the human
constitution ; according to the monoblastic theory, as the word
implies, only one transformed germ of disease reaches the human
body; according to the diblastic theory two separate germs unite
within the body, to produce the miasmatic-contagious disease.
Dr. Naegeli inclines to the diblastic explanation. Against the
monoblastic explication speak :
1. The course of the epidemics.
2, The longer duration of some epidemics on shipboard.
3. The manner in which some particular persons are seized
by the disease on seaboard.
4, The way in which persons are affected on soil of
immunity.
5. The non-transferability of the contagium from an infected
ship to the crew of a ship free of disease.
6. The non-transferability of the contagium from an affected
district upon the inhabitants of a soil free of malaria.
7. The exact circumscription of the epidemics within such
subsoil as is malarian.
8. The importation of small house-epidemics into otherwise
healthy localities.
The circumstances, that infection-fungi emanate from' other
schizomycetes, that they are subject to more or less alterations, and
that they finally pass again into other forms, are explanatory of
the inconsistency of the diseases during, a single epidemy, or in
the course of their whole history.


The miasmatic-contagious maladies spread from centres, where
through the action of particular fungaceous growth in the soil
they are ever anew originated. Beyond these centres the
epidemics die out, perhaps through the debilitation of the
contagium-fungi.
Contagious principles lose their infective power at once through
certain degrees of heat, through intense exsiccation in a short
time, through putrefication, i.e., through metamorphosis of a
contagium-fungus into any other form within the cyclus of life of
the particular species. They remain longest dangerous if they
become only so far exsiccated as to render their vitality merely
dormant. The infection-fungi, when touching or penetrating any
portion of the body, stand in need of vast multiplication to
initiate serious symptoms of disease ; moreover it seems likely,
that they must undergo some change of form or nature ; and to
bring the disease to a climax, they must by their decomposing
power and perhaps also by mechanical accumulation induce a
complicated series of disturbances in the system ; this is the cause
of the defined incubation time of the disease, and of some or all
its diagnostic peculiarities. After the irritation, produced by the
copious vegetation of the schizomycetes within the human
organism, follows a reaction, by which the normal chemical
condition of the humours is sought to be regained. Recovery is
only possible, if this normal chemical constitution of the fluids of
the human body is so far re-established, as to offer sufficient
resistance to renewed inroads of the fungi. This protection
against a relapse, according to its greater or lesser extent,
determines the time of convalescence. A miasmatic-contagious
disease can by vaccination only be transferred to a person
miasmatically prepared for it. Purely miasmatic maladies cannot
be propagated by inoculation. All purely contagious diseases, on
the other hand, are directly transferable through vaccination,
because the susceptibility (beyond an individual disposition) is
unconditional.
In special contagious diseases (variola, rubeola, scarlatina) the
fungaceous poison-principle passes simply and immediately from


individual to individual. The schizomycetes by themselves, after
due ablution, when entering the system in moderate numbers,
exercise but very little influence; but when very numerously
absorbed, they call forth disease. (The putridity secreted
by the vital process of these creatures of marvellous minuteness
is in all probability the very poisoning principle , adherent or
inherent or developed, which sets up the disease, and becomes in
its augmentation, corresponding to that of the schizomycetes
themselves, so dangerous. An independent poison, of which the
entering schizomycetes would only be the vehicle, can hardly be
imagined to become by mere chemical action so extensive as to
produce formidable changes in the human constitution ; hence the
fungi themselves must probably be regarded the sole contagium,
and as in any processes of life even of the minutest organic
beings assimilation must be followed by secretion, it seems to me
most likely, that irrespective of the absorption of oxygen and
perhaps other disturbances caused in the human system by the
life-process of the schizomycetes, also the secreted matter of these
creatures may contribute to the causes and courses of the
contagious and miasmatic diseases, if not indeed perhaps these
very secretions are the real principles of these maladies.—I 1 , v. M.)
In intermittent and remittent fevers, we have solely to deal
with malarian stagnations as their cause, though season and
particular localities are also main-factors in these calculations.
Dr. Naegeli found, that the miasmatic fluid acts most severely
when it reaches the circulation immediately, less powerfully when
the schizomycetes are removed from the fluid, (though of course
their morbid secretions would remain.) Dr. Naegeli however
assumes, that an independent morbid poison accompanies the fungi,
of which the latter are merely the mechanical bearers ; (but this
remains in our present state of knowledge a mere conjecture.) If
schizomycetes obtain copious access to wounds, putrescence takes
place, followed, if not timely prevented, by pysemia and septicaemia ;
but if, according to the precautions of luster’s method, carbolic
acid or other antiseptics are applied, the fungi as well as their
adherent poison-principle (which latter is probably generated by


them) are destroyed. Normally, always some schkomycetes exist
in the blood ; but in certain abnormal states of the blood they are
found enormously multiplied, especially at the height of the
malady. (In those infectious diseases, in which the fungaceous
organism have not yet been found largely concomitant to
morbid processes, they may not have been discerned, possibly
because they may be still more minute than those of some of the
simply contagious diseases which also remained so very long
unobserved. The recent discovery of the satellites of Mars
furnish an analogous example of long concealed yet anticipated
objects of nature in an analogous manner, though in another
branch of the natural sciences.—F. v. M.)
Y, —Distribution of the Infective Principles, and their Ingress.
The contagia, in the minority of cases, pass directly on to the
healthy body (e.g. diphtheria, variola). According to Dr.
Naegeli’s observations they are rarely transferred through water,
as he considers that the contagium-fungi readily succumb in water,
or undergo metamorphosis in it. As a rule the transfer of
these kinds of fungi takes place in a dry state, wafted onward by
the air, or by adherence to any sort of article. Miasmata came to us
always, according to Naegeli’s views, through the air as the
minutest dust-particles. The various degrees of the spreading of
epidemics depends on the circumstance, whether the fungi are
carried simply and free through the air, or whether they adhere
accidentally to any other substances, or whether they are
surrounded by calloid or any other matter. The infecting fungi,
under ordinary circumstances, cannot enter the unwounded
surfaces of the human body, neither through the cutis nor through
the mucous membranes ; it is only in the capillaries that they find
the conditions necessary for their life and nutrition. Even in
diphtheria, though the mucous membrane is directly attacked,
there is no exception to this rule. In the stomach and intestines
the schkomycetes are rendered inactive by the free acids, and
also the gall-salts. However, they occur always mechanically
and often copiously in the intestines, but are not absorbed into


the system, seemingly on account of their solidity, otherwise
pyaemia would ensue. Only in the lungs they may likely enter
the capillaries of the alveoles independently, as their vivid
progressive motion in a twisting direction may pierce the thin
and soft walls. But the easiest way, in which the fungaceous
infecting substance is absorbed, is through the wounds particu-
larly through the mucous membrane of the mouth, which is so
readily mechanically wounded. The contagium-fungi are more
easily absorbed than the miasma-fungi. After strong increase in
the capillaries they pass on into the general circulation and into
the lymphatic vessels. According to Professor Naegeli the
infecting fungaceous substances leave the body of the patient
neither by respiration nor by the gases emanating from the dead ;
they pass merely off in the egesta, sputa, pus and desquamations,
and from them enter the air only after exsiccation. Desert-regions
as well as larger bodies of water are free of miasmatic fungi.
The infecting fungi in a moist state do not retain their activity
longer than a few days; they may become transmuted into
harmless forms, more quickly in warm than in cold weather.
Frost and mild antiseptics are able to preserve them for longer
periods. In an air-dried state they retain their specific character
for a long time, but in strong heat they become destroyed. A
putrescent liquid, though it may exhale offensive gases, does not
infect unless by actual contact.
Vl. —Hygienic Properties of Water.
The communication of infectious diseases by means of drinking
water, even when stagnant or when taken from polluted rivers,
the author considers almost an impossibility :
1. Because any dangerous schizomycetes soon undergo trans-
formation in the water.
2. Because they lose their efficiency in the stomach.
3. Because we consume with our food daily enormous
quantities of schizomycetes in the form of cheese, curds,
cold meat, &c., without the slightest injurious effect on
our systems.


Several authorites, for instance Pettenkofer and Dr. Cunning-
ham, have recently testified to the harmlessness of drinking
water, even when taken from a river one mile downwards from
where it was used as a bathing and washing place at the time of
cholera.
Regarding the effect of the drainage of cities conveyed into
rivers, Dr. Virchow states that in Berlin, immediately at the spot
where the large drain empties into the Spree, and which there
presents a most filthy appearance, fish-life is more abundant and
more vigorous than at places above and comparatively pure.
The chemical and microscopical investigation at the present
state of our knowledge—unless in regard to chemical poisons—
gives no clue whereby to judge the suitability of water in
a sanitary point of view.
To free the water from the germs of schizomycetes, filtration
alone is insufficient, on account of the minuteness of these
organisms, but if allowed to rest for a few days, or particularly
after having been boiled, water may be considered as perfectly
harmless.
Vll.— Hygienic Properties of the Atmosphere.
The atmosphere is the medium through the agency of which
infectious germs are most generally disseminated, after they have
reduced to a state of most minute dust by desiccation. To
give an idea of the subtleness of this infectious dust, the author
distinguishes between ordinary dust, which may be seen by the
naked eye; between sun-dust, which is invisible in ordinary
reflected light, but becomes visible in the beams of the sun or
electric light, and between invisible dust, which is only perceptible
under powerful microscopes, and which contains the infectious
fungi; he further considers, that their number will decrease
inversely to the square of the distance, and that accordingly their
influence will only be felt in an immediate vicinity.
The gases originated by the putrefaction of organic bodies,
though offensive to the senses, are harmless when occurring highly
diluted with air, while the real contagia, consisting of the dry


fungi , are perfectly inodorous. Therefore, Naegeli says, “ the
sense of smell is no test for or against the salubrity of a locality.”
The microscopical and so also the chemical investigation of the
atmospheric dust, obtained by filtration of the air, does not enable
us as yet to judge of the salubrity of the air, because our
knowledge of the infectious fungi is hitherto too limited. It is
only by experimental tests instituted with the dust-fungi that we
shall be able to judge fully and finally of the extent of their
harmfulness as contagium. Our senses are in no way susceptible to
recognizing the presence of schizomycetes in the air. It is impos-
sible to guard towns or any dwellings against infection by the air,*
but persons forced to visit sick-rooms or other unhealthy localities,
may with advantage protect themselves by a respirator, kept
moist by means of water, or better still by glycerine. (In regions,
where paludal fevers rage, quinine should be taken prophy-
lactically.—F. v. M.)
Vlll.— Hygienic Properties of the Soil.
Of the conditions most favourable to the growth of the
microscopic infecting fungi, the author mentions a clayey soil ,
capable of retaining moisture for a lengthened period, but porous
enough to admit of the free access of the atmospheric oxygen;
rain or other moisture, to maintain the soil in a wet condition,
but not sufficient to wash the germs away ; a temperature of
about 37° C. (= 98° F.) ; the presence of decaying vegetable
matter in the soil • ground-water accessible to the atmosphere.
Contrarily, the conditions unfavourable are—excessive dryness,
a gravelly soil, low temperature, equable stagnancy of water,
impediment through vegetation ; in the latter case the superior
energy of higher plant-life, which through the action of the roots,
keeps up a successful competition against the infectious fungi.
The author also contends that, as the miasmatic fungi are
* Unless perhaps by extensive forest-plantations in their immediate
vicinity.—F. v. M.


different from the septic fungi, it is highly probable that in
soil, where putrefaction takes place, no miasmatic fungi will be
found, as the latter are liable to be destroyed by the former.
The conveyance and distribution of the miasma-fungi is effected
by the currents caused by the fall of rain on pulverulent soil,
by the variations of atmospheric pressure, by the wind exerting
either a current or a suction on the soil.
The entrance of the fungi into the atmosphere may be pre-
vented by filtration through a moistened layer of earth of
sufficient thickness. Even coarse gravel of twenty centimetres
(eight inches) thickness when moistened intercepts the finest
particles of dust.
All our present experience confirms the idea, that miasmata
are only bred in an inodorous soil.
Anti-malarian localities, according to the fungaceous theory,
may be either those which offer no opportunity for the growth
of the fungi, as arid deserts, land without ground-water, solid
rocks with a covering of sand or of clay or humus of little
thickness, or surfaces which prevent the entrance of the minute
organisms into the air, as the ocean, or such rivers lakes or swamps,
which never exsiccate.
The depths of the cellars of buildings, by penetrating different
strata of soil, may so far alter the immunity, that of two
adjoining houses, the one may be unhealthy, the other quite
the reverse, as seems to have been noticed in Munich. The
danger increases in proportion as the ventilation of the rooms
is less, and the more the inhabitants are compelled to refrain
from outdoor exercise.
All schizomycetes originate in moist or periodically inundated,
never in dry soil. Where permanent ground-water exists, their
development occurs in that stratum of the soil nearest the water,
and so far upwards as the moisture by capillarity is able to
penetrate. Mould and some other putrefaction-fungi overpower
the schizomycetes, whenever the soil abounds in organic matters.
Miasma-fungi originate in soil free of putrid decaying substances,
and seem to need for their nutrition ammonia and humus, which


both are not wanting in the purest soil ; hut where the humus-
soil is never flooded, the miasma-fungi perish through too powerful
oxydation. Vegetation of any kind in such soil interposes
mechanically the escape of the schizomycetes ; they are set free
in the atmosphere by the currents of air, which in various ways
may arise. In the soil, while wet, the miasma-fungi are copiously
developed, but they become only liberated when the ground dries
up. A porous soil becomes the more dangerous, the nearer the
ground-water rises to the surface. Thus it is, why in some
districts whole landscapes become miasmatic, while in others only
isolated spots, such as particular streets &c. are affected. Indeed,
only certain rooms of a dwellings may become dangerous,
particularly at night time, when a current of miasmatic air, from
the cooler strata beneath, may rise into any dry warm and
closed rooms.
In order to determine, a 'priori , for any given locality its
sanitary conditions, it is necessaxy to investigate all those causes
which influence the gi’owth of infectious fungi (in regard to soil,
moisture, tempei’ature, vegetation, currents), or their distribution,
and from these data it will be possible to draw trustworthy
conclusions and to adopt measures to counteract their injurious
influence.
Of importance in reclaiming unhealthy soils will prove :
1. The drainage of the soil and carrying off of the ground-
water, so far as this can be effected.
2. The constant and equable inundation of such portions
of the soil as cannot be drained.
3. The covering of the soil either with a dense vegetation
or with a layer of clay, humus &c., or in the case of
buildings, with cement or asphalt, to prevent the
ground-air from escaping into inhabited places.
Professor Naegeli concludes his important volume with three
lengthened chapters on the removal of egesta, on the burial of the
dead and on the preservation of health, as well in centres of
population as in any dwellings. The sanitary measures proposed


by him are either such as are recognised here as elsewhere, or
they are based on the teachings of the previous chapters, or they
are less applicable in a clime like ours, as compared to that of
Bavaria, where the eminent writer instituted his researches.
It was therefore not deemed needful to refer to these three
chapters, at least on the present occasion. One Of the main
objects of this cursory reference to Dr. Naegeli’s work will be
attained, if thereby the attention of medical practitioners and
sanitary officers in any English speaking community is more
fully directed to these extensive and largely original essays, which,
it is hoped, will early re-appear in an English translation.
STILLWELL AND CO., PRINTERS, COLLINS STREET EAST.
