









BRIEF ACCOUNT
OF THE
VISIT OF THEIR ROYAL HIGHNESSES
THE DUKE AND DUCHESS OF CONNAUGHT
TO
HONGKONG
IN APRIL, 1890,
COMPILED FROM THE LOCAL JOURNALS
AND OTHER SOURCES.
HONGKONG:
PRINTED BY NORONHA & Co.,
Governm en t Printers.
1890.




PREFACE.
SUBSEQUENTLY to the Visit of His Royal
U Highness the Duke of Edinburgh to Hong-
kong in 1869 the Revd. Mr. Beach, then Colonial-
Chaplain, published a short account of the festivities
that took place in honour of the Royal Visitor.
It may not be considered out of place, therefore,
to briefly chronicle what occurred, more than
twenty years afterwards, when Their Royal High-
nesses the Duke and Duchess of Connaught
passed through Hongkong on their way home from
India via China and Canada.
I have to express my acknowledgments to the
Editors of Jhe China Mail, The Daily Press and The
Hongkong Telegraph for having permitted me to
make extracts from their Journals which very
graphically describe the several interesting ceremo-
nies in which Their Royal Highnesses took part.
I have also to thank’ Mr. N. G. Mitchell-
Innes, who was Secretary to the Committee
appointed to arrange for Their Royal Highnesses*
reception, for the notes with which he kindly fur-
nished me in connection with the different arrange-
ments made and festivities celebrated.
The observations I have made in regard to
Canton are principally taken from a useful little
guide book to that City compiled by Dr. Kerr.
F. F.
Hongkong, June 1890.




VISIT OF THEIR ROYAL HIGHNESSES
The Duke & Duchess of Connaught.
ON the evening of the 13th of March, 1890, Their Royal
Highnesses the Duke and Duchess of Connaught
took their departure from Bombay where for the last three
years His Royal Highness had filled, to the satisfaction
of all, the important post of Commander-in-Chief.
It was not without feelings of regret that many, who
had experienced the kindness and courtesy which Their
Royal Highnesses had invariably shown to all classes of the
community, bade them farewell as they steamed away from
the shores of that great Indian Empire homeward bound
vid China and Canada.
Between Bombay and Colombo, which was reached
J J
on the 17th of March, the P. & 0. steamer Kaisar-I-Hind
in which Their Royal Highnesses had embarked, experienced
fair weather. An enthusiastic reception was accorded to
the Royal travellers on their arrival in Ceylon. On the
morning of the 17th the Royal party, consisting of Their
Royal Highnesses, Sir John M’ Neill, Colonel and Mrs.
Cavayb and Dr. Kilkelly, visited some of the sights of
Colombo and later in the day proceeded to Kandy where
they were received by the Governor, the Honourable Sir
Arthur Hamilton Gordon. The following morning they
returned to Colombo where His Royal Highness held a
reception at Queen’s House which was largely attended,
several native chiefs and headmen, arrayed in gorgeous
and costly costumes being among those who were present.
At 11 o’clock in the evening the Kaisar-I-Hind sailed for
Penang. This place was unfortunately reached so late on


the 23rd that it was impossible to celebrate such rejoicings
as had been contemplated. Their Royal Highnesses went
on shore for a short time accompanied by the Resident
Councellor, Mr. A. M. Skinner, and saw as much as cir-
cumstances would allow of. Thence they proceeded to
Singapore where they arrived early on the 25th and where
they were welcomed by the Governor, Sir Cecil Clementi
Smith and Lady Smith.
It is not my intention to describe the journey of Their
Royal Highnesses nor to enter into any details as to
what took place in Ceylon or at Singapore, but it will be
my endeavour to give a brief account of the welcome the
Royal Visitors received on their arrival at Hongkong
and of the rejoicings that took place during their stay in
that Colony which, in many respects, has become one of
the most important and most prosperous of Her Majesty’s
Colonial possessions.
Telegraph communication had been received from
Singapore mentioning the time at which the Kaisar-I-Hind
had left that port and it was expected that she would arrive
in Hongkong about 8 o’clock a.m. on Monday, the 31st of
March. Such day was consequently proclaimed a public
holyday and from early morning an anxious look-out was
kept to announce tidings of the steamer’s first appearance.
At about 7 a.m. a steamer was signalled as being eleven
miles off and when about an hour later a gun was hred to
announce the arrival of a Mail packet no doubt was enter-
tained that the Royal Visitors were approaching the Island.
The Military were got under arms, the Police were called
out and hundreds rushed to take up their respective posi-
tions when it was discovered that it was the extra steamer
Venetia of the P. & 0. Company that had been signalled
and that the gun had been fired on the arrival of the
American Mail packet China. The assembled multitude
gradually dispersed and during the morning, to the dis-
appointment of many, no other signal of an approaching


vessel was given. Some few liad been invited to meet
Their Royal Highnesses at luncheon at Government House,
but although the lunch was ready there was no one to
partake of it.
As the day wore on and there were no further signs
of the approach of the Kaisctv- f-Hind (not incorrectly call-
ed by some the “ Kaisar-behind”) anxiety began to be felt
lest Their Royal Highnesses would not arrive until the
following morning, this more particularly so as there had
been indications of boisterous weather at sea. At a little
after 2 p.m., however, the firing of a second gun announced
that another mail steamer was in view and, to the great
satisfaction of alb this was soon discovered to be the
vessel on which Their Royal Highnesses were on board.
Crowds once again assembled in the vicinity of the wharf,
at which it was arranged that the Royal Visitors should
laud, and along the route from there to the City Hall,
where His Royal Highness was to be presented witb an
address of welcome from the community. At about 2.30
p.m. the Acting Colonial Secretary, Mr. W. M. Deane,
accompanied by Lieut. Thorp urn, A. D. C. to the Acting
Governor, and Mr. F. H. May, Private Secretary, started
to meet the Steamer and were taken on hoard shortly
before she reached the Harbour. At 3 p.m. those who had
received invitations to be present at the landing stage
began to assemble and about tbis hour the booming of
guns from H. M. S. Im.perieuse (the Flag-ship of the
Station) and from the different men-of-war in the port
announced that Their Royal Highnesses were actually within
the Harbour of “ Victoria.” Vice-Admiral Sir Nowell
Salmon had kindly arranged that the Kaisciv-I-Hind should
anchor at the buoy specially reserved for transport ships
and the fairway from Green Island (the entrance to the
Harbour) to this buoy was kept clear for her to steam
along.
It was a pretty sight to watch the ship as she slowly
moved along flying the Royal Standard on her main mast


and gaily decorated with frags of different descriptions.
As the vessel approached, men-of-war, both British and
Foreign, fired forth their salutes of welcome while the
O '
crowd along the road in the vicinity of the landing pier
became denser and denser. A guard of honour, under the
command of Captain Paterson, was stationed at the wharf
while the Volunteers, commanded fry Captain McCallum,
took up their position in the same vicinity. From the
wharf to the City Hall the road was lined with troops.
A few minutes before four the Kaisar-I-Hind cast anchor
and it was announced that Their Royal Highnesses and suite
w r ould land in a short time. The Acting Governor, Mr.
F. Fleming, immediately came down to the landing stage
and Their Royal Highnesses, after a brief delay, left the
Kaisar-T-Hind and made for the shore in the Steam-
launch Victoria which had been specially decorated for the
occasion.
The route from the steamer to the wharf was lined
with gigs from Her Majesty’s Ships in Harbour and as
the launch neared the shore the crew of the Kaisar-I-Hind,
as did those of all the men-of-war in Harbour, manned
their yards while the band of H.M.S. Tmperieuse struck up
the National Anthem.
As the steam-launch came alongside the pier the Acting
Governor approached the landing stage accompanied by
Vice-Admiral Sir Nowell Salmon and Major-General
Reman Edwards. Sir John M’Neill was the first to
step on shore being followed by Colonel Cavaye, equerry
to His Royal Highness. These took up their respective
positions on either side of the gangway. The Duchess of
Connaught next landed, followed by Mrs. Cavaye and
the Duke. Their Royal Highnesses were received by the
Acting Governor with whom they at once shook hands
as they did with Admiral Salmon and Major-General
Edwards. Miss Roberson, a little girl of about seven
and daughter of Captain Roberson, Staff Commander of


H.M. Naval Yard, presented the Duchess, on .behalf of the
Deception Committee, with a handsome bouquet of flowers
which Her Royal Highness was pleased to accept.
Their Royal Highnesses then made their way to the
City Hall where the address was to be presented. Along
the route from the wharf to this Hall several triumphal
arches had been erected while many of the public buildings,
banks and private houses were gaily decorated with flags,
banners, &c.
On arriving at the Hall Their Royal Highnesses were
conducted to a dias on which they took their seats being
accompanied by the Acting Governor, Admiral and Lady
Salmon, Major-General Edwards and Mrs. Cay aye.
So soon as they were seated Mr. P. Ryrie, Chairman
of the Committee appointed to make arrangements for
Their Royal Highnesses’ reception, addressed his Royal
Highness as follows: —“Your Royal Highness, it is my
very pleasing duty to present you with an address of
welcome from the inhabitants of this Colony. Hongkong
has ever been devoted to the illustrious family to which
you belong, its founder having been your illustrious mother,
the Queen Empress, and I think I may assure you that
every signatory to this' address means what the address
says. The feeling of true loyalty which exists in this
small colony cannot be surpassed in any part of Her
Majesty’s dominions. We have heard of you and your
services and we are fully convinced that you will earn in
the future the good opinion of all, as you have done in the
past during your service in Bombay and other countries.
(Applause). We all know your good qualities, and that
they are eminently of the kind to gain for you the love and
affection of those who serve under you. (Cheers). Coming
as you do from residence in proud Bombay, perhaps at the
first glance you may not think that this colony is anything
much to speak of, but I think when you look around a
little you will see what the indomitable energy and per


severance of the European residents have done. You will
find what has been made out of the bare rocky island that
this was some fifty years ago; and although the work was
first originated by British subjects, of late years these
exertions have been ably seconded by our Chinese fellow-
citizens. We owe them much and they have shown by
what the} 7 have done here —by investing largely in property
in this Colony—the reliance they place upon the Govern-
ment of the Queen Empress. 1 hey have shown their
appreciation of the protection they have received from her
in the past and their confidence in the protection they will
receive from her in the future. I have only again to say
that this address of welcome is one that you can accept as
real and genuine, not coming from any wish to be servile,
but merely as an expression of the regard and affection of
this Colony both towards yourself and the family to which
you belong. (Cheers). You will probably pay a visit to
some of the works w r hich this Colony can show. We have
docks here which are unsurpassed by any docks in the
East. We have every convenience for shipping ; and when
you consider the enormous quantity that passes through
here every year, and when you see the many other things
that have been done, you will probably think that this
Colony, although it is so small compared with the Pre-
sidency you have left, has some good results to show and
is no insignificant part of our Empire. (Cheers). I will
now, with your permission, read the address :
“ To Lieutenant-General His Royal Highness Prince
Arthur Patrick Albert, Duke of Connaught, K.G.,
K.T., K.P., G.C.5.1., G.C.M.G., G.C.T.E., C.B.
“ May it please Your Royal Highness, —Less than 50
years ago Hongkong was a desolate and almost unknown
island with a scanty population of poor fishermen scattered
along its shores. To-day it is an important portion of the
Empire, with a varied population of over 200,000 souls ;
it is one of the busy centres of the commercial life of the
world, receiving each year into its capacious harbour


millions of tons of the shipping of all nations; it is a valu-
able military position on the frontiers of the empire and a
great naval station. Such as it is it had its origin in the
early years of Her Majesty’s reign ; it has received its
Charter as a Colony from her hands; it has risen to its
present position under her auspices; its capital city is
known by her name ; it owes to her beneficent government
its first foundations, its growth and its prosperity, and to
Her Most Gracious Majesty it has' always been most loyal
and devoted.
“ Twice in the past it has had opportunities of proving
that loyalty and devotion by the warmth of its welcome to
members of the Royal Family, and it unfeignedly rejoices
at the opportunity now again afforded by the visit of Your
Royal Highness, to give full expression to its feelings of
love and reverence for the Queen Empress.
“ Your Royal Highness and Your Illustrious Consort
are most heartily welcome to Hongkong. We regret
extremely that the Lenten Season and the shortness of your
stay among us lender it impossible for us to entertain you
as we would wish to do, but we pray you to be pleased to
accept the slender hospitalities we are in a position to offer.
“ Your Royal Highness - is, as befits the godson of the
Great Duke, a soldier, who has filled and may yet fill posi-
tions of great trust in the military service of the Crown.
We congratulate you on the completion of your tour of
service in India, we wish you all the honours and rewards
of a successful military career. We are glad that you will,
while here, have an opportunity of inspecting our fortifica-
tions and examining into our means of defence.
“ In this welcome, in these congratulations and good
wishes all ranks and classes in the colony concur. With
the native born subjects of Her Majesty are associated in
this demonstration the Americans and Europeans of other
nationalities who form so important an element in our life,
and who gladly avail themselves of this opportunity to


give expression to their respect and admiration for the
Illustrious and Venerable Ruler of a friendly nation. With
us are also associated the Chinese, by far the most numerous
and by no means the least important section of the Com-
munity, who desire to testify their gratitude to the Sover-
eign under whose just rule they live free from oppression,
happy, well governed and prosperous. They offer to Your
Royal Highnesses, through their guilds and representatives,
a special Chinese entertainment and they hope that you
will honour them with your presence thereat.
“In conclusion we sincerely hope that Your Ro}’al
Highnesses will enjoy your visit to Hongkong, hurried
though it be, that you will bear with you from our shores
many pleasant reminiscences, and that you will have a
happy and prosperous voyage from this, the most Eastern
of Her Majesty’s possessions, to the point in the west
where you will pick up again the links in the chain of
Empire that girdles the globe.
“ We pray you, on your arrival in England, to convey
to Her Most Gracious Majesty, the expression of our devot-
ed loyalty.”
The address, which was enclosed in a plush-covered
case with silver mountings, was then handed to His Royal
Highness. Accompanying the address were several pho-
tographic views of places of interest in Hongkong.
His Royal Highness, in reply, said—“ Mr. Ryrie,
ladies and gentlemen, in the name of Her Royal Highness
the Duchess and myself, I desire to thank you for the very
kind and flattering words which you have spoken. We are
both very sensible of the kindly and loyal welcome we are
receiving at all hands during our very interesting voyage.
I well know the loyal manner in which the inhabitants of
Hongkong welcomed my brother the Duke of Edinburgh
and we have also heard of the magnificent demonstrations
which took place in Hongkong on the occasion of the
Jubilee of our Gracious Sovereign. (Applause). It is a


source of the greatest gratification to myself that I should
be able to pay a visit to this, as you have justly said, most
eastern point of the Empire. I have long heard of the
energy and loyalty, not only of our own countrymen, in
this most important emporium of trade, but also of the
many other Europeans who have thought it wise and have
been willing to live under our own flag. I have also
known how your Chinese fellow-subjects have understood
the advantages of British rule and have loyally and readily
accorded support to all your undertakings. 1 hope you
will not think that because I happen to come from India,
which is a very large country, I shall not feel the same
interest or take the same pleasure in seeing the great works
you are carrying on and have accomplished here. It is to
me a source of the greatest pleasure to see how our great
Empire is extending on all sides, for it is necessary that
we should keep moving in the great race which is taking
place amongst nations. It is a great pleasure to know how
prosperous you all are and I am sure anybody, who, like
myself, sees it for the first time, must be struck by the
sight of your magnificent harbour, surrounded by beautiful
islands, covered with buildings that any city might be
proud of. It will give me the greatest pleasure to convey
to Her Majesty the Queen, how very kindly you have
referred to her both in the address and in the speech which
preceded it. (Applause). You may rest assured that
such feelings are most dear to our beloved Sovereign, my
mother, who takes the deepest interest in all portions of
the Empire. She will follow with the deepest interest our
journey here, and it will be a sincere satisfaction to myself
to assure her of the cordial feelings entertained by you
towards her personally as well as to all the members of her
Family. (Loud Applause).”
At the call of Mr. Ryrie three hearty cheers were given
for Their Royal Highnesses and the ceremony concluded.
Their Royal Highnesses then proceeded to Government
House where they were to stay during their visit to the


(’olony. On arriving there the Duchess found a beautiful
bouquet of flowers with the following inscription embroider-
ed on one of the ribbons attached to it “a welcome from
the German Ladies of Hongkong.”
o o
In the evening a dinner party was given at Government
House in honour of the Royal Visitors.
The following is a plan of the table showing the
names of those who were invited :


So soon as the dinner was over Their Royal High-
nesses held a reception at which between four and five
hundred of the community presented themselves. The
exterior of Government House as well as the grounds
thereof were tastefully illuminated; Japanese lanterns
being hung around the walls, trees and shrubs while a
number of coloured glass lamps were strung on the pillars
of the verandahs.
The reception lasted some couple ol hours when iheir
Royal Highnesses retired from the fatigues of the day and
when those who had come to pay their respects gradually
returned to their respective homes.
At an early hour the following morning the Duke,
accompanied by the Acting Governor and Mr, Mitchell-
Innks, the Acting Registrar General and Secretary to the
Reception Committee, took a quiet walk through some of
the principal streets of the town examining the triumphal
arches and other decorations, principally Chinese, that had
been erected. It had been arranged for a Chinese proces-
sion to parade through the town and to pass through the
grounds of Government House during the morning, but
the weather was unfortunately so unpropitious that this
had to be postponed until the day following.
Their Royal Highnesses were entertained at luncheon
this day by Colonel Chater and the Officers of the
Princess Louise’s (Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders )
and in the afternoon the Duke, accompanied by the Acting
Governor, Major-General Edwards and others, proceeded
to inspect the Lyemun Battery. This position was
supposed to be attacked by an incoming fleet and the
Duke witnessed, with much interest, the sham fight which
took place; the men-of-war discharging their guns as they
steamed through the Lyemun Pass while the firing was
returned from the batteries.
In the evening Their Royal Highnesses dined with
Major-General Edwards the following having been invited


to meet them. His Excellency the Officer Administering
the Government. Vice-Admiral Sir Nowell Salmon. Sir
John M’Neill, Colonel Cavayk, Hon. A. P. Mac Ewen,
Colonel Lindsay, Mr. May, Dr. Kilkklly, Lady Salmon,
Mrs. Brownrigg, Miss Salmon and Mrs. Cavaye.
When the dinner was over there was a military tattoo
the band and pipers of the Argyll and Sutherland High-
landers parading the grounds of Head Quarter House with
torches.
The weather on the morning of the 2nd of April being-
finer than that of the previous day the Chinese procession
took place and passed through the grounds of Government
House between the hours of 8 and 10 a.m. Ihe most re-
markable feature of this procession consisted of two enormous
dragons, some hundreds of feet in length, which were
supported b} ? a large number of Chinese who by jumping
and running managed to twist and wriggle the dragons
about in a most extraordinary manner. Some photographs
were taken as the procession passed along, one by his Royal
Highness himself.
Later on in the morning the Duke, together with the
Acting Governor and Admiral Salmon, visited the Hong-
kong and Whampoa Dock Company’s Docks at Kowloon
and were shown over the works connected therewith by
Air. Gillies, Secretary to the Company. 1 hese Docks are
filled with all the necessary appliances for engineering and
carpenter’s work, the Admiralty Dock being capable of
containing the largest ironclad ship. It is no less than
500 feet in length, 86 in breadth at the top and 70 at the
bottom and is 29 feet in depth.
On returning from this expedition Their Royal High-
nesses went to lunch on board H.M.S. Iwperieuse Admiral
Salmon having invited a large party to meet them.
So soon as luncheon was over His Royal Highness had
another duty to perform, viz., to lay the Memorial Stone of


the Pray a Reclamation scheme, one of the most important
works that the Colony has recently undertaken. The
object of this work is so fully detailed in the statement
made to His Royal Highness by Mr. Chater that it is
unnecessary here to describe it. So soon as the Royal
party had arrived at the pavilion which had been prepared
for them and which before they reached it was already well
filled with people the Acting Governor addressed His Royal
Highness as follows: —“May it please Your Royal High-
ness. The ceremony which Your Royal Highness has
graciously consented to take part in to-day, is the inaugu-
ration of what I may truly call the most important of the
many important public works that have been undertaken
in this Colony—a Colony which has not yet celebrated its
jubilee, although it is about to do so; a colony which,
since the time it became a British possession, has learned
how to progress and how to thrive under the august rule
of Our Gracious Queen, who has never ceased to look with
so much solicitude over the subjects of Her vast Colonial
Empire. We regret that one is not here who should
naturally be here to-day. I refer to Sir William Des
Yceux. the Governor of this Colony. But I can assure
Your Highness that there is no one who takes a deeper
interest in the progress of this' work than he does, and I
am sure that he will learn with pleasure and with pride
that this memorial stone has been laid, and that a real com-
mencement has been given to this work under such aus-
picious circumstances. When tliis scheme is completed no
less an area than 57 acres will be added to this now over-
populated town of Victoria, including an esplanade of 70
feet in width and, together with certain streets, extending
along an aggregate length of no less than 5.000 yards.
The initiation of this great work is due to the Hon. C. P.
Chater, who has for some time past been a member of the
Colonial legislature of this Colony, and whose energy,
whose enterprise and whose industry in everything con-
nected with the welfare of this Island have, to no little
extent, brought the Colony to that prosperous condition in


which it is to-day. It is he who, far better than I can,
can explain to Your Royal Highness the object a'nd the
history of this great work, and therefore, with Your Royal
Highness’s permission, I will ask him to add a few words
to what I have already stated. (Applause).”
Mr. Chater then stepped forward and said—“ May it
please Your Royal Highness,—His Excellency the Officer
at present Administering Her Majesty’s Government in the
Colony has requested me to compile a short sketch for
Your Royal Highness of the great work you have been
graciously pleased to inaugurate to-day, and in which, we
therefore assume, you are taking that interest which it is so
well known you are in the habit of taking in all public
works throughout the Empire so ably ruled over by our
august and well-beloved Sovereign.
o o
“I have endeavoured, Sir, to make this sketch as con-
cise as possible, only allowing myself to touch upon the
main features of the scheme, and omitting all allusion to
the many and vexatious little troubles that had to be gone
through, and which are perhaps naturally incidental to a
great undertaking in which many interests are involved.
“ In my frequent intercourse with the late Surveyor
General, the Hon, Mr. Price, the greatly congested state
of the inhabited part of this Island—a state of overcrowd-
ing that had naturally to increase as this Colony prospered,
and the population grew—was frequently before us and
freely discussed, and upon my suggesting the reclamation
of the foreshore fronting the main part of the City of
Victoria, Mr. Price greatly approved of the suggested plan,
provided the necessary funds could be raised, and no
engineering difficulties presented themselves.
“ His Excellency Governor Des Vceux, who took the
greatest possible interest in the scheme, honoured me by
discussing it with me almost daily, devoting a great
amount of his valuable time to considering the points of
the proposed plan.


“His Excellency, after reviewing many suggestions,
decider! upon the plan which was ultimately adopted, after
it had been approved by the Right Honourable Lord
Knutsford, whom 1 had the honour of interviewing in
London, where I went to give the Colonial Office any
assistance in my power in the way of explanation.
“ A sketch plan of the proposed reclamation was made
by the Honourable the Surveyor General, and each marine
lot owner was allowed to gain in addition to his present
holding what the Government apportioned to his marine
frontage, provided that he undertook to pay his share of
the cost of the reclamation, and subject to certain stipula-
tions made by the Governor.
“ After much discussion these propositions of the Gov-
ernment were unanimously accepted at an influential meet-
ing of the marine lot owners held on the 3rd July, 1888,
and at which our friends the Chinese were largely repre-
sented by many of the leading members of that powerful
branch of the community.
“ I will now endeavour to state, as concisely as possible,
certain statistics of this scheme which Your Royal High-
ness may find of interest. It is estimated that the pro-
posed reclamation will cost about three million dollars, and
the building area to be reclaimed will be about 31 acres,
of which 5 acres will be Government ground, and 26 will
belong to the marine lot owners —but this refers to build-
ing area alone, for there is, in addition to this, a considera-
ble amount of reclaimed area which will afterwards be used
as cross streets, as the new praya, and for widening what
is the present praya by 25 feet. It will then, as far as
width is concerned, be the main artery of the Colony, 75
feet broad, which will also be the width of the New Praya,
built with a frontage in an average depth of 20 feet of
water at the lowest tides, instead of the mud banks with
their unwholesome exhalations which exist at present.


“In addition to the streets and roadway, the Colony
will also gain the new sewers, drains, and paving' of the
whole of the reclaimed ground, without involving the ex-
penditure of any public money, with the exception of the
proportion appertaining to the reclamation in front of those
lots of ground which already belong to the Government;
and this reclamation belonging to the Government will be
worth, when carried out, about a million and a half dollars
according to the estimate of the late Surveyor General,
who also estimated the value of the reclamation belonging
to the marine lot owners at about $8,000,000.
“In March last, however, Mr. Price owing to failing
health resigned, and Mr. Brown was appointed Surveyor
General of Hongkong. He has proposed considerable mod-
ifications in the form of construction of the Praya Wall,
which have been approved by the Secretary of State.
Hitherto the foundations have been of granite masonry set
by hand, at low water. Mr. Brown proposes to adopt a
modification of the design of the similar work carried out
in Alexandria Harbour, of which he superintended the
construction. The new cpiays of that port must be familiar
to Your Royal Highness, as Her Majesty’s forces landed
on, and embarked from them during the memorable cam-
paign of 1882, immediately before the victory of Tel el
Kebir. This modification consists in employing artificial
blocks for the foundations, formed of Portland cement con-
crete. Each block will be laid by steam power, the found-
ation having been previously levelled by divers. By this
alteration the work can be carried on continuously without
the loss of time now involved in waiting for low tides, and
it is anticipated that a saving in time of two years may be
effected, which would result in a large financial gain to the
Government and the lot holders.
“ Financially the gain to the Colony will be considerable,
over $20,000 a year from the increased Crown rents and
an estimated revenue of over $65,000 a year from the
Government rates for the new buildings, although this


can perhaps hardly be regarded as being entirely profit to
the Colonial Treasury, for the new ground must naturally
entail some expenditure for lighting, police supervision, etc.
“ Lastly, Sir, I think I should draw your attention to
the fact that His Excellency Sir William Dies Ygeux has
made stipulations as to building upon tbe new ground that
from a sanitary point of view cannot but be regarded as
unprecedented in the history of this Colony—stipulations
that were somewhat fought against at first, for they un-
doubtedly do not allow the building area to be too over-
crowded, as it unfortunately is in many of the older por-
tions of this City, and they expressly provide for that free
circulation of air, which it must be admitted is so essential
in erecting healthful habitations ; and I think I am justified
in stating that every right-minded man must agree with
me in approving the firm attitude assumed by His Excel-
lency the Governor, when he insisted upon having some
personal interests slightly sacrificed to ensure a decided
advancement in the new buildings for the Chinese.
“ In addition to sanitary improvements, architecture
and other embellishments will not. be overlooked in this great
addition to our Colony, and it will no doubt interest Your
Royal Highness to learn that a site in this immediate
neighbourhood has already been selected for the ultimate
resting place of the Jubilee Statue of Her Most Gracious
Majesty, which will shortly arrive from England, and
which has been presented by the loyal inhabitants of this
far-distant little Colony. For let me, in conclusion, assure
you. Sir, that though this Colony is small in area, it is
second to none in its unbounded loyalty to our Sovereign,
whose benign sway is appreciated not only by the English
residents, but also by the many varied nationalities wdio
enjoy and appreciate the privilege of residing under her, to
all alike, impartial rule. (Applause).”
His Royal Highness replied '“Your Excellency and
Mr. Chater —I have to thank you for the words that have


fallen from you at the opening of the ceremony, to which
you have kindly asked me to take so leading a part. It is
very satisfactory to hear how warmly the work that has
been commenced has been supported by His Excellency
the Governor, Sir William Des Yleux, whose absence,
owing to ill-health, I very much regret. I feel that it is
largely due to him, most ably supported by the Honourable
Mr. Chater and by those gentlemen whose names we have
heard enumerated, that this work, which I can well under-
stand must have met with many difficulties on all hands,
has now met with the approval of those authorities without
whose sanction it cannot be carried out. I sincerely hope
that the work, which I cannot but feel will be of lasting
benefit to the town of Victoria and to the whole Colony of
Hongkong, will prove the success which it ought to be.
I rejoice to think that no question has been left out, that
the important point, sanitation, has been most strictly
adhered to, consider with you and with the inhabitants of
this Colony that they are embarking on what will prove
an immense addition to the city and to the Colony. You
referred to those magnificent harbour works at Alexandria
with which I am well acquainted, and I am sure there are
many here who know them as well as I do who will bear
witness to the magnificent works there, as works of archi-
tecture and of very great utility. I hope that this work
which } r ou have so kindly asked me to participate in to-day
will become the success it deserves, and that it will en-
hance the beauty of your splendid harbour. It will always
be a source of the greatest pleasure to myself to think that
you, Sir, and those of the inhabitants associated with you
have asked me to take a part, which I can never forget, in
helping to lay this memorial stone of the Praya Reclama-
tion Works. (Applause),”
His Royal Highness was then shown the plans of the
work by the Surveyor General, Mr, S. Brown, who assisted
him in laying the stone.
The Acting Governor then thanked His Royal High


ness for the part he had consented to take in this ceremony
and stated that, with his permission, Mr. Chater desired
to erect a statue to His R oval Highness near the site in
question which he (Mr. Chater) wished to present as a
gift to the Colony. To this proposal His Royal Highness
graciously acceded stating that he was much pleased to
accept what would be a very pleasant reminiscence of his
visit to Hongkong.
No sooner was this ceremony concluded than His
Royal Highness proceeded to the Freemasons’ Hall to
receive a M asonic address from the District Grand Lodge
of Hongkong and South China. On the Duke’s arrival at
the Hall, where he was received by a large number of
Masons, the District Grand Master, the Right Worshipful
C. P. Chater, read the following :
u To the Right Worshipful His Ro}ml Highness Fringe
Arthur William Patrick Albert, Duke of Con-
naught and of Strathearn, K.G., K.T., K.P.,
G.C.S.J.. G.C.M.G., C. 8., G.C.1.E., Provincial Grand
Master of Sussex, District Grand Master of Bombay,
Past Senior Grand Warden.
“ Right Worshipful Brother,
“ In meeting you to-day we do so with the greater
pleasure since in your person you unite alike a Sou of the
Sovereign under whose mg is we are living and a Brother
of that Order to which we belong. As the Son you recall
to ns, if that were necessary, the emblem of Great Britain’s
Constitutional Power —as the Brother you remind us of
those teachings which we profess, those tenets which we
seek to follow, and as both it is our pleasure and our pride
to greet you in the most Eastern of the Queen’s Possessions.
To us, as Masons, you come as one allied by the nearest
lies of blood to our Grand Master, the Most Worshipful
the Prince of Wales. To us as Residents under the British
Crown you approach as one who, in a yet young life, has
already attained a high position in the distinguished Service
which you have adopted as your profession.


“ To every Mason the progress of Masonry in the Colo-
nies of the Mother Kingdom can never fail to be of interest,
and we are gratified that we are able to state that its
prospects here are most encouraging. It is needless for us
to express our regret that yon cannot honour us long enough
to test for yourself the advance that has been made, but
we can assure you that in these lands Freemasonry has
lost none of its ardour, none of its vitality. Its glorious
and enlightened principles, embodying amongst them the
cause of Masonic Charity, one of the most ennobling
doctrines which Masonry ordains, have gathered in the
past, as they will hold in the future, the Masons of the
Fast in no unwilling bonds. Our Signatures alone, as
Members of the District Grand Lodge of Hongkong and
South China, of the Scottish Lodge of St. John’s, and of
all the other numerous Lodges that here have taken root,
amply attest the fact, and the Organization, whose Brother-
hood we share with you, and whose Branches permeate all
countries and all climes, will never, we feel sure, want
supporters here.
“Varying as we do in nationality, we yet have a com-
mon object, a common aim, in working under the Masonic
Constitutions of Great Britain, and, remembering whose
flag protects this Island, we accept the opportunity afforded
by your visit to Hongkong to record for your Most Gra-
cious Mother our expression of profound respect. Dis-
tance is bridged by human thought, space is annihilated
by human mind, and you will believe that, far though we
are from English shores, it is our earnest hope that the
wise and beneficent Sovereign who for so many decades
has influenced the destinies of the British Empire with
Her advice, Her judgment and Her care, will still occupy,
to the fulness of time, the Royal Throne of England.
“ We ask you to accept our kindliest welcome to Her
Royal Highness the Duchess of Connaught, wdio, with
you, is realising round the world the course and the ex-
tent of Her Majesty’s dominions.


“Our words are few, but our good wishes are many.
Id Brotherly Friendship we bid you welcome to the Far
East, in Brotherly Love we meet you here to-day, and in
Brotherly Fellowship we echo the hope that the Great
Architect of the Universe may long spare you to tender
your public services to your country, and to exemplify in
vour own life the brightest and most beautiful precepts of
our Craft.”
His Royal Highness, in reply, said— “ Most Worshipful
Sir and Brethren, I am deeply touched by the fraternal
greeting which you have extended to me in your midst
this day. Believe me when I say that among the many
cordial words of goodwill and welcome that I have received
from the loyal inhabitants of Hongkong none has been
more welcome or none will be more cherished than the
words which have fallen from you, Right Worshipful Sir,
in reading this address. In it breathes the true spirit
which should guide our fraternity. We see in it feelings
of devotion to the Almighty and respect and love to our
Sovereign 5 and we see in it kindly and brotherly feelings
extended to one whom it has been my highest pleasure and
pride to have been able to serve in different offices in Ma-
sonic Lodges. I assure you, brethren, I feel most deeply
the well-chosen words in which this address which you
have presented to me has been written. J feel most heartily
how warmly you have received me as a brother in your
midst. It is a great satisfaction to myself, as it will be to
our respected Grand Master, my brother the Prince of
Wales, to know how satisfactorily and how admirably the
Lodges in this Eastern part of Her Majesty’s Empire are
progressing. I can assure you our Grand Master takes
the greatest interest and pride in our Craft, and it is his
earnest desire to keep 'it in all its purity and in all its
integrity, and when 1 tell him on my return of the hearty
welcome which has been accorded to me, not only as a son
of our Sovereign but as his brother, and as one who has
had the pleasure, of filling offices both in England and in


the dependencies of the Crown, it will please him to know
that the same feelings of fraternity exist in the hearts of
freemasons of all nationalities here as those which exist
among the members of onr Craft at home. I will ever
remember, Right Worshipful Sir, the welcome accorded to
me in your Grand Lodge, and I will ever cherish the
kindest feelings for the brethren who have received me
with so warm a welcome amongst them on this occasion.
The District Grand Master afterwards said*— “ Light
Worshipful Brother. Before we terminate this gratifying
ceremony I feel called upon to endeavour to express to you
the great satisfaction the Brethren have experienced at the
opportunity given them to welcome in their midst the
Brother of our Most Worshipful Grand Master. As a
mason yourself, high in the craft, you will readily realize
their feeling of satisfaction and the crowded state of this
District Grand Lodge to-day bears ample testimony to the
fact. That I should point this out to you, Sir, that I should
endeavour to impress such an unimportant matter upon
your memory is however insufficient for the Brethren of
this District. It is not often that we have the honour of
welcoming in this far-off land so near a relative of our
Most Worshipful Grand Master, and we have therefore
endeavoured to perpetuate the event, to hand down the
knowledge of it to our children’s children, by deciding to
erect a new wing to this building, and we intend calling
the new lodge room in it, subject to your permission and
approved, 4 The Connaught Hall/ the donors being Bro.
Mody, Wor. Bro. Gillies and myself. 11ms, Right
Worshipful Brother, your visit to this District must
remain not only in our minds, but it will become known to
future generations and we sincerely trust that, seeing how
genuine are our feelings in this matter, you will not omit
to give our respectful greetings to our Most Worshipful
Grand Master, and if I may venture to hope so, to his
august and much respected Mother Our Gracious Queen
and. Empress.”


His Royal Highness—“ Right Worshipful Sir, you
have by what you have just said added another to your acts
of kindness and good feeling towards me, in wishing to
perpetuate my name with your Freemasons’ Hall. I need
not tell you, Right Worshipful Sir, that I accept with the
greatest pleasure, and I thank all the brethren here present
for their wish to commemorate my visit amongst them
in this manner.”
This concluded the ceremony. The Duke as he left
the Hall was heartily cheered by the brethren.
It was generally understood that His Royal Highness
was particularly pleased with the address presented to him
on this occasion which he considered one of the best
worded addresses that he had ever received.
Immediately after this ceremony was concluded Their
Royal Highnesses, the Acting Governor, Admiral and Lady
Salmon and some of the members of Their Royal Highnesses’
suite proceeded by the Tramway to the top of the Peak
which during the summer months has become the favourite
resort of most of the European inhabitants of Hongkong.
During the last few years the number of houses and bun-
galows on this mountain district has largely increased.
The Military erected a Sanitarium there in the year 1883,
and at the present time several large Hotels are in course
of construction. The difference of temperature between
the Peak and the town of Victoria, particularly during the
warmer season, is very considerable, there being many resid-
ences where the difference is not less than 8° or 10°. The
tramway, which is worked by a Company, on the wire rope
system, extends from the terminus near St. John’s Cathe-
dral in the town to the Victoria Gap, a distance of 1,660
feet the journey being accomplished in eight or nine
minutes. The trams are carried up an ascent of 1,207 feet,
the average incline being one in four while for some dis-
tance it is one in two. The weather on the afternoon in
question was unfortunately cloudy and a thick mist, such


as is but too common during this period of the year, was
making its way across the range of hills, thus obscuring,
to a considerable extent, one of the finest and prettiest
views that can be seen in any part of the world. During
a momentary break, however, His Royal Highness was able
to form some opinion of what he would have witnessed,
in greater perfection, had the day been finer. On returning
to town Their Royal Highnesses had almost immediately to
proceed to an entertainment which had been prepared
with much trouble by the Chinese community who were
desirous of testifying their good wishes towards the Royal
Visitors. The entertainment consisted of a Chinese din-
ner and a dramatic performance the latter proceeding while
the repast consisting of twenty-one dishes (excluding side
dishes ; table dishes —as they were so called—fruits and
pastry) was served. The following is the programme of
this interesting menu. As a motto of welcome the menu bore
the following inscription :
“ A good digestion to you all , and once more
I shower a welcome on you , welcome all.”
MENU.
1. Birds’ Nest Soup.
2. Stewed Shell-fish.
3. Cassia Mushrooms.
4. Crab and Sharks’ Fins.
5. Roast Beef (a l’Anglaise).
6. Roast Chicken and Ham.
7. Pigeons’ Eggs.
8. “Promotion” (Boiled
Quail, &c.).
9. Fried Marine Delicacies.
10. Roast Turkey and Ham
(a l’Anglaise).
11. Fish Gills.
12. Larded Quails.
13. Sliced Teal.
14. Peking Mushrooms.
10. Roast Pheasant (a l’Ang-
laise).
16. Winter Mushrooms.
17. Roast Fowl and Ham.
18. BfidlE-DE-MER.
19. Sliced’Pigeon.
20. Snipe (a l’Anglaise).
21. Macaroni (a la Peking).
SIDE DISHES.
Cold Roast Sucking Pig
Cold Roast Fowl.
Cold Roast Duck.
Cold Roast Mutton.


TABLE DISHES.
Cold Sausages. Prawns. Preserved Eggs.
Livers, &c., &c., &c.
FRUITS.
Preserved Apples. Citrons. Tientsin Pears.
Pomegranates. Carambolas. Greengages. Pine-apples.
&c., &c., &c.
PASTRY.
Sweet Lotus Soup. Almond Custard. Rice.
&c., &c., &c.
Champagne (Krug). Claret. Orange Wine.
Rice Wine. Rose Dhu.
“ Optimus” Wine. Pear Wine.
A Chinese dinner is no doubt very appetitious to
those who have learnt to enjoy it, but it takes some little
time to draw a distinction between the numerous dishes of
apparently the same description which quickly follow one
another as well as to appreciate their good qualities while
conveying the same to the mouth in an effective and elegant
manner by use of the chop sticks, ihe following is the
programme of the dramatic scenes and sketches that were
performed while the dinner was partaken of:
1. The Congratulations of the eight Genii,
2. Promotion,
3. The Fairy Wife,
4. A Visit to the Moon,
while the following are the arguments of these different
pieces:—
1.
THE EIGHT GENII CONGRATULATE THE GOD OF THE
PLANET “VENUS” ON ATTAINING TO A GREAT AGE.
The stage is entered by eight Genii in various cos-
tumes (such as those of a Farmer, a Prince, &c.).


Han Chung-li: —Lo, here I am from the mountains.
Lti Tung-pin -.—Behold yellow flowers in bloom all
around.
Ts £ ao Kwoh-chiu
Hau Hsiang-tzu
Li TTeh-kwai
Ho Hsten-ku
Lan Ts‘ai-ho
Chang Kwoh-lao
I A noise as of a drum has
( reached our ears.
"j We too have heard the
V strange sound and been
j attracted here.
Han Chung-li : —Hail! To-day we celebrate the
anniversary of the God. So let us away to congratulate
him and present him with our peaches and nectar, the
Elixir of Life.
The other Genii Agreed ! Agreed !
The Eight Genii together: —The ice-hills outside
sparkle like diamonds. Our golden vessels brim over with
choicest wines and fat of sheep. See a lucky cloud floats
on the horizon to proclaim our advent to the world. Here
we have a decoction of carnations, and a life-giving peach
culled from the orchard of Wang Mu, the Emperor’s mother.
The mortal P'eng Tsu celebrated his eight hundredth
year with a feast to his well-wishers, First let us break
into song shouting “Immortality! Immortality!”; and
then form in rank to offer our congratulations and perform
the appointed rites.
11.
PROMOTION !
This play, which is in pantomime, is only performed
at night when an Officer of high rank is present, and then
as a compliment to him. The Actor enters richly robed,
unfolds a scroll on which is inscribed—“ may you rise in
office and be promoted in rank,” and then points upward,
signifying —“may you rise as high as the sun when at his
zenith.”


111.
THE EAIRY WIFE.
This play illustrates a popular Chinese story. The
hero, Tung Yung, who lived about B.C. 100, was the first
scholar of his year, but was so poor that, on the death of
his father, he sold himself as a slave in order to defray the
funeral expenses. One day while tending his cows he
was accosted by a beautiful fairy, who offered to be his
wife, and told him not to heed his present misery, as all
would be well if he followed her instructions. Tung Yung
thereupon took her to his master’s house and married her.
At the end of one hundred days, his wife told him that
she was a fairy, and that the time was come for her return
to her home above the clouds. On leaving, she gave him
one hundred pieces of embroidered silk for presentation to
the Emperor. This offering so pleased the Emperor that
he at once ennobled the donor and gave him a passport
for the Royal Palaces. On his way there with his suite,
he was met by his fairy wife, who entrusted his child to
his care.
This is the point at which the play opens. The fairy
and her attendants enter and discuss their future plans.
Tung Yung and his suite enter with the umbrella of state
and other official insignia. He and his fairy wife are over-
joyed at their meeting. He receives from her his child,
and so the scene closes.
IV.
A VISIT TO THE MOON.
This is a very favourite modern play adopted from a
fairy tale. Pai Yu-yu lived about A. D. 800 and was a
great scholar. The Moon God descending to earth in
search of a hero met him at an inn, conversed with him
over their wine on the classics and other literature and was
much pleased with him. On the departure of the God,


Pai Yu-yu fell into a trance during which he was con-
veyed to the Moon, where he met a beautiful fairy. The
couple were so charmed with each other that they agreed
to marry, and lived together happily for a little time. But
such joy was not to last, and one day Pai Yu-yu found
himself returned to earth desolate. He thereupon took up
his abode in a cave where he lived as a hermit, but what
was his joy when one day his fairy wife appeared with her
attendants and placed in his arms his child. The Hare in
the Moon in a fit of jealousy descended to earth in human
shape to harm his rival’s child. He was met by Pai \u-
Yti, and the two had recourse to all the magical arts known
to them. Finally, the Moon God descending captured the
Hare, and thus the Hermit and his child were left in peace.
The performance concluded by a clever exhibition of
Chinese acrobats. During the course of this evening the
town of Victoria was brilliantly illuminated. These illu-
minations cannot be better described than by quoting an
article which appeared in The Hongkong Telegraph of the
3rd of April.
“ The scene,” says the Telegraph , “was a striking one,
especially when viewed from the water. To attempt to
enumerate the methods by which the really magnificent
tout ensemble was contrived is out of the question ; from
Murray Barracks to far away westward the heights were a
blaze of light, the Praya Central forming the base of a
perspective which only ended far up the heights. The
Praya offices were the most prominent beacon in the east,
the side facing the water being almost concealed by a
myriad lamps and lanterns. The City Hall was fairly
brilliant, but the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank far out-
shone it on all sides, with its noble columns and arches
festooned with lines of lamps. The new Victoria Buildings
lent themselves admirably to the novel decorations, which
had been lavishly bestowed. Messrs. Russell & Co.’s
premises shone like a wall of fire, a huge Union Jack,


composed of nearly two thousand coloured lanterns, forming
a most appropriate device, probably the most conspicuous
of all to be seen. The Norddeutscber Lloyd’s office front
was distinguished by large transparencies surrounded by
groups of lanterns, with the Company’s arms outlined.
Looking up Pedder Street, the Clock Tower of course com-
manded the view, but the result was somewhat disappoint-
ing. The triumphal arch over Pedders Wharf looked
pretty. The “ princely house” had not gone in very much
for illuminating, a brilliant star forming the principal ex-
hibit, but the P. & 0. office’s display was even less effective.
Douglas Lapraik’s place vied with Russell’s very success-
fully. The red cross which is the Douglas house flag shone
out in a huge cluster of lanterns, and was greatly admired.
Not only were the head quarters this distinguished, but
their 'steamship the Haitan , which lay a short distance
away from the wharf, was outlined by lamps from stem to
stern, and from truck to water-line, whilst rockets and
blue-lights were used at intervals with brilliant effect. Ihe
representative of the mercantile marine illuminations un-
doubtedly carried off the honours of the evening. With the
exception of the very fine display at the Victoria Hotel,
and a few gas-stars here and there, the rest of the Praya
illuminations were wide-spread. Looking higher, the host
of lanterns which covered the walls of the Gaol and Central
Police Station glowed brightest, but the display lacked that
ingenuity which marked the show made at the Royal Artil-
lery Mess, higher up There, an enormous field-gun, with
carriage, rammer, &c., shone out without a twinkle, and
attracted general admiration. The mansions in Queen s
Gardens showed prominently, and added a good deal to the
tableau.
But there were places not visible from the Harbour
which deserved, and obtained, all the admiration of the
multitude. In Queen’s Road Central most of the buildings
had “ illumed,” but the palm must be awarded to the Hong-
kong Dispensary. The front of their now very extensive


premises glittered with lamps, stars, transparencies, and a
score of devices, shining down on thousands of gazers.
The Supreme Court and Post Office, being illuminated at
the public expense, were “ got up regardless,” but they
lacked artistic merit. The Hongkong Trading Company,
as the Duke’s very own decorators, had marked the occasion
by hanging a host of lamps all around their premises, in
the trees, etc., and very pretty indeed was the result.
Messrs. Powell & Co., Gaupp, Falconer, etc., had
brightened the opposite side of the thoroughfare in con-
ventional style, and Messrs. Lane & Crawford made a
very good show.
The eastern portion of the Harbour was a sight worth
seeing. Besides the “innumerable stars reflected from
the dark water,” to follow our Governor’s (Sir G. W. Des
Yceux) poetic figure, the dozen men-of-war were outlined
against the clouds by lines of light; rows of lanterns
stretched across the rigging picturesquely, and all that was
lacking to complete the scene was a combination of the
electric lights. Even without that, however, the effect
was splendid.
The illumination on the opposite side of the water was
limited to one point —the Tsim-tsat-tsui Police Station.
It was a blaze of light from roof to basement, even the
winding approach being lined with lamps, and, looked at
from this side, a more striking effect could not well be
imagined.”
So soon as the Chinese dinner was over which was
not until between eleven and twelve o’clock, Their Royal
Highnesses and suite, the Acting Governor, Mr. May, Mr.
Mitchell-Innes, Colonel and Mrs. Lindsay and Mr. and
Mrs. McKenzie, the last four of whom had been fellow
passengers with Their Royal Highnesses from Bombay,
proceeded in the steam-launch Victoria to view the illumi-
nations from the Harbour, after doing so the party went
on board the steamer Hankow of the China Navigation


Company, Limited, which had been specially retained to
take Their Royal Highnesses to Canton, dhe steamer was
a fine and comfortable one of 2,235 tons, commanded by
Captain C. V. Lloyd who did his best for the comfort of
the Royal travellers. The Hankow steamed slowly along
as it was not desired that Canton should be reached until
about 10 a.m. the next day, although the actual time of
the passage is from five to six hours. The morning was
unfortunately showery and a heavy mist hung over the
town, but as the steamer approached the City several of
the pagodas, and somewhat conspiciously the Catholic
Cathedral, could be seen while it was a curious sight to
watch the many junks and numerous craft, in which fami-
lies are born, live and die, lying along the Canton River.
The City is a little less than six miles in circumference
while its population is certainly over one million some say
nearer two.
When the Hankow arrived H. B. Majesty’s Consul,
Mr. Alabaster, came on board and it was arranged that
Their Royal Highnesses and party should land at once and
proceed to see the sights of the town. So soon as the
Royal party were prepared to come on shore salutes were
fired from the British, German, and American gunboats
in the port.
The Viceroy had sent down one of his chief Military
Officers, as well as a certain number of attendants, in order
that every facility might be afforded r l heir Royal Highnesses
in passing through the narrow and crowded streets of this
Chinese city.
The Royal party then proceeded to visit such sights
as the limited time at their disposal would permit of,
among them the following: —
The Temple of the 500 Genii. This Temple was
founded in the year A.D. 503 and re-built in 1855, In
the first pavilion attached to it are three statues of Buddha.


In the second a marble pagoda of seven stories, while
behind the pagoda is the Hall of the 500 Genii or disciples
of Buddha, on either side of the Hall are rows of richly
gilt images placed on elevated platforms.
In the middle aisle of the Flail is a large bronze pagoda
while at the north end is an image of the Emperor Kien-
lung who reigned over sixty years —from 1736 to 1796.
After visiting this the party proceeded to what is
called the five-storied pagoda which is really not a pagoda
but a kind of tower built on the City wall. From one of
the upper stories there is a fine view of the City and the
country around. The examination Hall, as it is termed,
was next seen. The triennial examinations of candidates
from all parts of China for the second literary degree are
held here, the Hall being 1,380 feet long and 650 wide.
All graduates of the first degree in the whole Province aie
required to compete at this examination. Ihe enclosuie
of the building is divided into two sections, one foi the
candidates and one for the Officials. On each side of the
building are ranges of cells in which the scholars aie placed
separate from each other and where they write their essays.
The cells are 5 \ feet long by 3f feet in width and they
number 11,616. The apartments reserved for the Officials,
police, &c. number about 3,000. Ihe examinations com-
mence on the Bth day of the Bth Moon * and occupy three
sessions of three days each. Several thousand present
themselves for the examinations out of which an average
number of about 130 are passed —these subsequently com-
pete for the third degree at Peking and are noted for
promotion in the Civil Service.
The Temple of Longevity was also visited. This
Temple was founded in 1573 and occupies a large space.
In one pavilion attached to it are three statues of Buddha,
in a second a seven-storied gilt pagoda which contains 79
* Which corresponds with about the 21st of September.


images of Buddha, while in a third there is another image
of the same individual in a reclining position.
The City Temple or Temple of Horrors was then in-
spected. This Temple is more resorted to by worshippers
than perhaps any other in the City. The punishments of
the Buddhist Hell are depicted in several scenes on each
side of the principal court, among these are the following: —
1, Transmigration. 2. Grinding a culprit. 3. Boiling in oil.
4. Under a red hot bell. 5. Beheading. 6. Sawing a man
between two boards. 7. Bastinado, 8. Trial of a culprit.
It may be well to explain that in accordance with the
theory of Chinese law no accused can be convicted until he
has confessed his guilt. Theoretically this may sound very
well, but in practice if an accused declines to confess he is
tortured, as is depicted in the last mentioned scene, until
he does. He is thereupon condemned, on his own confes-
sion, either to be decapitated or undergo some minor
punishment.
It may interest the reader, although the description is
somewhat revolting, to know how public executions are
conducted by the authorities of the great Chinese Empire.
The following account of some executions which took place
at Kowloon City—on the very border of British territory
—appeared in the Hongkong Telegraph of the 2nd of May,
1890.
“Yesterday at noon a number of war junks arrived
in Kowloon Bay, and the mandarins in command visited
the Hop Toi. As a result of their interview the latter
official quickly called out his ragged army, who soon lined
the evil-smelling beach in their thread-bare array. At
3.30 the object of the turn-out became apparent, several
boats putting off from one of the junks with scores of
soldiers, guarding six dirty, unshaven wretches in bas-
kets, bound for execution. All looked emaciated to the
last degree, but none appeared to have been dosed with
opium. Their queues were braided with stripes of white
cotton, on the “tabs” of which were written their names


and crimes. The executioners —two fellows wearing white
jackets and straw hats, their queues wound the
latter to prevent them from blowing away had been waiting
on the beach for an hour or more, handing their swords
around to be examined by the crowd, an inspection which
evoked frequent jests. When salutes from the A amen
announced that the victims were coming ashore they hastily
recovered their weapons, threw away their cigarettes, and
walked to the water’s edge to meet them. The prisoners
were placed in two lines just above the high-water mark, and
each executioner took one line, first removing his broad
brimmed hat. The first head in the first line flew ofl like
lightning, but the blow at the. second was less effectual, the
neck not being quite cut through. Ihe man therefore fell
forward on his face. The swordsman passed on and lopped
off the third head, and then returned to the second man, who
was bleeding horribly. Lifting the head by its queue he
began sawing at the throat, the victim rolling his c\ es
meanwhile in a most agonised way. The verteb™ had
not been severed by the first stroke, and for fully tluee
quarters of a minute the executioner was carving the neck
all round it. At length, dropping the queue, he struck the
neck repeatedly until the head rolled off. The prisoners
in the second line, who had witnessed the horrible scene,
were then dealt with by the second executioner. Ihe fiist
and third 'were decapitated expeditiously, but the second
required two strokes. Five minutes later the beach was
deserted, the heads and bodies lying as they fell, and as
they will probably be until to-morrow, if any one cares to
go over and see for himself.
One can scarcely credit that a scene so ghastly should
be allowed to take place almost within sight of Hongkong
itself and, as I have already mentioned, on the very border
of that portion of territory* which England possesses on
the mainland of China. Tetso it is.
* The Island of Hongkong was taken possession of by the English in 1811,
hut the promontory of Kowloon on the mainland opposite Hongkong was defi-
nitely ceded by the Treaty of Peking in ISliO.


Towards the middle of the day the weather cleared up
and after lunching with Mr. and Mrs. Alabaster at the
Yamen, Their Royal Highnesses visited some of the prin-
cipal Chinese shops where they purchased articles of embroi-
dery and other Chinese work for which Canton is so
justly celebrated. His Royal Highness subsequently paid
a visit to the English Club and the day closed with a dinner
at the British Consulate followed by a reception at which
the Duke and Duchess gave audience to all the European
community of the town.
■ At about 11 o’clock the party left Canton and pro-
ceeded on board the Hankow which shortly after weighed
anchor and started back for Hongkong. This w r as reached
on the following morning. Their Royal Highnesses did
not again land but proceeded straight from the Hankow
to the P. & 0. steamer Ancona which was to conduct
them to Shanghai and Japan.
At 12 o’clock precisely the Ancona moved away. As
it was Good Friday the men-of-war in Harbour did not
fire salutes, but as the steamer passed along the English,
French and Russian men-of-war manned their yards, the
Russian band playing a few bars of “ God Save the Queen ”
which were caught up by the band of the Tm.perieuse while
three cheers were given for Their Royal Highnesses.
Thus in comparative silence, but amidst every token
of loyalty and good wishes Their Royal Highnesses bid
farewell to a Colony, small in size but large in importance,
which had done its best to offer them a cordial welcome
and to assure them of that devotion and loyalty which it
has ever borne towards a Gracious Sovereign, two of
whose sons and two of whose grandsons have now
honoured it with their presence."'
Previous to his departure, His Royal Highness de-
sired the Acting Governor to publicly make known the
* His Royal Highness the Bake of Edinburgh visited Hongkong in October,
1869 ; Prince Albert Victor and Prince George of Wales in 1881.


satisfaction that he and the Duchess of Connaught had
experienced at being able to visit Hongkong and their appre-
ciation of the welcome they had received from .different
classes of the community. This the Acting Governor did
at the next Meeting of the Legislative Council in the
following terms :
‘‘ Gentlemen, before bidding farewell to these shores,
His Royal Highness the Duke of Connaught desired me
to inform this Council and indeed the public generally,
that it was with great pleasure that he and Her Loyal
Highness the Duchess of Connaught visited such an
interesting portion of Her Majesty’s Dominions ; and that
they were both much gratified with the kind welcome
accorded to them and with everything that was done to
make their stay agreeable by all classes of the community.
To His Royal Highness the reception he received was
doubly gratifying, inasmuch as he considered it a further
proof of that loyalty and that devotion which this Colony
has ever shown towards his Royal Mother, our Gracious
Queen, to her subjects ever loving and by them ever
beloved. (Applause).”








