

fq/f-n
BRIEF SKETCH OF THE GEODETIC
SURVEY OF VICTORIA.
R. L. J. ELLERY, Esq., C.M.G., F.R.S., F.R.A.S.
Read before the Victorian Institute of Surveyors ,
September 7897.
Melbourne:
J. C. Stephens, Printer, 146 Elizabeth Street.




SSSSS/Pq^/q
/9-Pqrj
BRIEF SKETCH OF THE GEODETIC SURVEY OF
VICTORIA.
By R. L. J. ELLERY, Esq., C.M.G., F.R.S., F.R.A.S,
Paper read bejore the Victorian Institute of Surveyors , 4th
September , iBgi.
The Geodetic Survey of Victoria was commenced in September,
1858, audits operations were practically terminated in 1872.
The circumstances' that led up to this form of general or
systematic survey may be briefly summarised as follows :—The
demand for land in 1857 was generally in excess of the
power of the Survey Department to meet it, and agitation was on
foot for selection before survey. To meet the difficulty the
Surveyor-General of the time, Mr. C. W. Ligar, advised the
Minister, the Honourable Mr. Gavan Duffy, to institute a system
of meridian survey, somewhat analagous to that adopted in many
parts of the United States, by which large areas could be rapidly
included within meridians and parallels of latitude, or their
chordal lines, the areas so marked out to be let out for sub-
divisional survey by contract. The Minister adopted the
suggestion, and Parliament was asked for the requisite votes.
The original scheme was somewhat ambitious, as it contemplated
a complete survey of the Colony within a small number of years,
md required a heavy yearly subsidy for its prosecution. The
scheme did not secure the entire confidence of Parliament, and
lengthy debates took place. Eventually the Minister’s pro-
position was in part agreed to, and a very much smaller sum than
estimated was granted.
In July, 1858, I was invited by the Surveyor-General to take
charge of the Geodetic or Meridian Survey. This invitation I
accepted, and shortly had associated with me an assistant, Mr. Richard
Petty, and several survey parties in charge of non-commissioned
officers of the Royal Engineers, who had recently been drafted
from England at the instance of Captain Clarke, former Surveyor-
General. My instructions were to enclose large areas by true
meridians and parallels in the plains between the coast ranges
and the Murray, and also in the Western districts, especially in
the country traversed by the Glenelg and Wannon. To then
subdivide these larger areas into blocks of one-tenth of a
geographical degree, which would be a suitable area for sub-
divisional survey by contract. In the middle of September, 1858,
the survey was actually started, the first operation being the
determination by triangulation of the difference of longitude
between the Williamstown Observatory and a point selected in
the Royal Park, as the starting point of the first chief meridian


which was to be run from the waters of the Bay (near the Port
Melbourne Railway Station) to the River Murray. For this
purpose a base of two miles was measured on the rails of the
Williamstown and Melbourne Railway with a standard chain.
This meridian was traced, cleared, and measured as far as the
intersection of the 37th parallel of latitude, and these, with the
requisite preliminary operations, occupied till March, 1859, when
the measurement of the first standard parallel (latitude 37 0 48')
w r as commenced, starting from the first chief meridian near
Flemington. This was measured as far as the intersection of the
second standard meridian, approximately 144 E. long., near
Shelford. A most careful chain of triangulation was carried
along this parallel to fix the intersections of the secondary
meridians. The first chief meridian was meanwhile carried on
to the Murray. The second chief meridian was cleared and
traced to the northwards. By February, iB6O, besides the work
already referred to, the 37th parallel had been laid out through a
portion of Anglesey, and Geodetic blocks marked out on that
parallel as well as on the first chief meridian. The sth and 6th
secondary meridians were also run from the first parallel
northwards towards the boundary of the colony.
It will therefore be seen that up till February, iB6O, the
operations had been confined to astronomical determinations of
positions and directions, line tracing and measuring, and some
little triangulation. I will now briefly describe the methods
followed in these operations.
Meridian Lines.
These were lines run, cleared, marked, and measured,
conforming in direction, as closely as was possible with large
portable instruments, to the true astronomical meridian. The
initial point being selected, the instrument, either a transit
instrument, or the 18-inch theodolite, was mounted over it, and a
careful series of azimuth observations with selected stars obtained
from which the true direction of the meridian was deduced.
With these azimuths, points were put down north and south of
the instruments at distances seldom less than five miles, and
frequently twenty miles or more. Solid posts, firmly fixed and
surrounded at the base by cairns, or the trunk of a tree squared
with the axe, were the marks generally used for these primary
points. On these were fixed referring marks. To do this work a
system of signalling had to be adopted, which for the shorter
distances was done by flags, and for longer by help of the
heliotrope, then a new instrument in Australia. Great difficulty
was often found in accurately and finally fixing a distant mark,
especially in cloudy weather; on fine days with the heliotrope it
was rapidly managed, the heliotrope itself forming the point and
signal instrument as well. There was often great difficulty
experienced by advance or clearing parties in timbered country in
getting into line, by reason of the invisibility of the observing


station. The plan of making a smoke had then often to be
reverted to. The advance party having got as near the line as
could be estimated or by prismatic bearings, lit a fire and raised
a smoke, which could be picked up by the observing party. In
some cases a return signal could be obtained by an intermediate
signal man, but in most cases the azimuth only of the smoke
could be measured by the observing party which sent on a
messenger to give the distance the advance party had to move to
get near enough to the line to clear it, preparatory to fixing the
true point. As will be imagined, numerous devices had to be
resorted to in some places to overcome difficulties presented by
features of the country.
Between the primary points thus fixed secondary points were
fixed, varying from one to two (or in some cases more) miles
apart, according to circumstances, with a portable transit
instrument, and between these the line was traced, and in part
cleared. The lines were not cleared fully through all the valleys
and low ground when they ran through alienated or unrequired
land, and the lines were only traced and cleared completely when
the land being traversed was to be blocked out for survey. In
the latter case, in addition to primary and secondary points,
intersection points were established to mark the corners of
degree, or one-tenth degree blocks. These intersection points
consisted of squared posts well sunk in the ground, and having a
cast iron cap, with broad arrow and number (indicating block
corner) on it. Diverging from this as centre four deep trenches
were dug in the direction of the boundary lines, about six feet
long. In some cases when meridians were run from an initial
point in order to reach a distant district required for survey, very
distant primary points on ridges and high grounds were rapidly
fixed and all intermediate marking was left, in order to get the
meridian transferred as rapidly as possible on to the required
areas.
Obtaining the intersection of parallels on the meridian and
tracing them east or west, presented more serious difficulties, and
the question arose whether to trace the true curve direct, a chord
of the parallel for a whole degree, or a chord of a parallel for
one-tenth degree. And then again, would it be best to trace a
perpendicular to the meridian and measure back for the inter-
section of the one-tenth degree meridians, or run the chordal
lines at once ? In fact all methods were tried, but that of
running a perpendicular to the meridian, and measuring south to
the true intersection of the parallel at each one-tenth meridian
was preferred, although some of our surveyors, especially those
with large first-class theodolites, adhered to the method of setting
off the chord of one-tenth of a degree at once and tracing on to
the next intersection. In a few instances when a parallel ran
over land not wanted for survey a chordal line of one full degree
was run, marking only the high points and ridges as in the case
of meridians. In every case the actual measurement of the


Superintendent
... R. L. J. Ellery, from ist August, 1858
Assistants ...
R. Petty, from 20th „ „
33
A. C. Allan, from April ,,
53
E. de Verdon. from „ „
33
... P. Chauncey, from ,, „
35
... T. W. Pinniger, from 20th July, 1859
Computer ...
P. Crenion, from April „
parallel or chordal line was the laborious part. Until the
primary triangulation was commenced this was always done by a
special chain of small triangles springing from a base of a mile or
two very accurately measured. Such triangulation was always
done by specially good theodolites, generally 8" to 10". Before
triangulation the line was always measured by double chaining,
one party following another; this greatly expedited the after
triangle measures by showing approximate intersections. To
obtain the initial point of a parallel on a primary meridian, before
the trigonometrical survey had advanced, a tedious series of
astronomical observations were necessary for determination of
latitude. The methods used were prime vertical transits, ordinary
star altitude, and zenith distance differences. The astronomical
latitude of a point on a meridian being thus determined a short
measurement along the meridian to the computed point of
intersection was the only remaining operation to complete the
work, for the latitude was always approximately known before
setting up the Observatory on the line.
The Officers employed up to the end of September, 1859,
were as follows :
The total expenditure up to this date for salaries, wages, equip-
ment, instruments, building stations, &c., was
It had been early found by experience that the process of
connecting distant localities with the chief meridian by running
and measuring meridians through great lengths of country not
required for survey was not sufficiently expeditious with the
strength at command, and it was soon found desirable to push
forward a primary triangulation so as to more rapidly reach the
distant districts and connect the work generally. Already
trigonometrical points had been erected on prominent hills
northwards from Melbourne to the Murray, and a considerable
number in the Western District also, which had involved a great
amount of labour and cost in clearing mountain tops and so on.
This work had been set on foot by Captain Clarke, R.E., two or three
years previously, the party of sappers and miners from England
already mentioned having been placed in charge of the clearing
parties for this purpose.
In January, iB6O, a site for a base line was selected on the
Werribee Plains, 4-942 miles long. The one end (South end)
being within the Railway enclosure, about two miles E. of the
Werribee station, the N. end bearing 304° 36' 31", 26091’826 feet,
or 4-9416 miles, and in a direct line with a hill named Green
Hill, on the west side of the Werribee River, 5•651 miles distant


from the N. end. On this hill a permanent point was established,
and the,measured base was ultimately extended by triangulation
to this point, which was named the Green Hill extension.
The ends of the measured base were marked by solid masses
of masonry built five feet into the ground, capped by a heavy
stone with large plugs of gun metal, having platinum centres on
which was marked a fine terminal dot. Over this cap-stone was
placed a heavy cover-stone for protection, and above all a timber
pyramid with pinnacle carefully centered over the platinum point
to help in alignment and subsequent triangulation for checking,
and for extension and expansion of the base. The Green Hill
extension terminus was marked by a heavy sunk stone with
centre similar to the ones already described. The actual
measure of the base was commenced on 29th January, iB6O, and
ended 29th May. and minor triangulations for extension to Green
Hill was completed June 12th.
First a complete measurement of the mile base was
made by level bars, and then a re-measurement of 2 - ii miles of the
S. end was made with bars following the general inclination of the
ground. The apparatus used was as follows :
Three measuring bars, ten feet long, of iron lin. square,
with the ends turned round for about 4 inches in length, one end
being finished quite flat and polished, while the other end was a
polished segment of a sphere of sft. radius. Each bar was
provided with levels, thermometers, and aligning vanes, and were
encased in wooden boxes for nearly the whole length, about two
inches at each end only projecting. For supporting the bars, well-
made strong pine tripods, or trestles, of various lengths were used,
varying from 12m. to 42m. in height, the top being a triangular
frame 12m. on the side, the three feet being at the points of a
triangle of 20 inches. On these trestles were placed instruments
called camels, which consist of a heavy brass tripod with levelling
screws, through the centre of which, in a well-finished socket,
rises a stout prism of brass actuated by a strong screw underneath
for raising and lowering the prism. On the top of the prism is a
little table, or slide-rest, with rollers, and screw slow motion work
all of metal. To receive the three tripod levelling screws, metal
sockets are fixed on the top frames of the pine tripods, or
trestles. In order to place a bar two trestles are put up sor 6 ft.
apart, with a Camel on each, and the bar laid on the Camel
tables, on which they fit easily, and, resting on the rollers, can be
moved endways with facility and great smoothness. One Camel
carries a slow motion or tangent screw for moving the bar
lengthways, while both have screws for sideway motion. And
the vertical motion for raising, lowering, and levelling the bars is
given by the prism and its screw.
The line having been laid out and carefully levelled, and the
stages arranged, for although the line was apparently level there
was a difference of 14'5 feet in the five miles, the operation of
“ trestling” was first undertaken for a stage as follows :


The line being laid out, pegs were driven at intervals exactly
in the centre of where each trestle would come; around this
strong pegs were driven, projecting above ground sufficiently to
carry the trestles at the required height for that part of the stage,
the length above ground being determined previously by the
original levelling, so that a pegged stage would perhaps commence
with pegs flush with the ground, and end with some two feet long,
or vice versa. On these pegs, which were level one with another,
were laid triangles (triangular frames of pine wood), on which
again the trestles were placed.
To prevent exposure of the bars to sun or rain during
measurement a kind of tent was used, consisting of a pair of
strong but light frames, 12 feet long and 9 feet high, hinged
together at the top and covered with canvas laced to the frames,
and in vertical cross sections were like the letter A. There were
four tents, and four men could move one quickly. As soon as
the back bar was done with it was moved forward to the empty
tent in front, and the tent-bearers then carried the back tent to
the front, and so on. The party consisted of Officer in charge
and Observer, Observer of alignment, Recorder, two Bar men,
two Camel men, and four tent-bearers : eleven in all. The
trestle and staging party had generally eight men, and were
always considerably in advance of the measuring party.
To describe the method of measurement it will be best to
take the case of starting the work from one of the termini. We
suppose the first stage prepared by pegs and trestles, presenting a
line of trestles whose tops were all as nearly as possible in a level
line. The three bars were laid on the Camels with the flat or
squared ends about an inch apart; each of the bars was aligned
by an observer with a 6in. theodolite in advance by means of the
two sight vanes on the bar case, the bars were then levelled.
The base line terminal point being below the level of the ground,
and the starting end of the bars, say 4 or 5 feet above the surface,
presented a difficulty, to get over which we had constructed what
we called a referring telescope, consisting of a telescope pointing
vertically downwards, with a long range of focus, moveable
horizontally on a double slide-rest in two directions at right
angles to one another. The telescope could be rotated hori-
zontally in its vertical fitting, and carried a cross level on the
tube so that by rotation it could be collimated and adjusted to a
truly vertical position. Near the eye end of the telescope was
fixed a steel cross head with arms about an inch long, terminating
in finely polished spherical segments. This telescope was now
mounted on a trestle of such a height that the cross arms were on
a level with the bar end, the dot on the platinum terminal dot was
bisected by the spider web cross, and the cross head in a line with
the bar. The polished arm nearest the first bar formed the starting
point, as the distance from each arm to the optical axis of the
telescope was accurately known. Now the first bar was brought
back by its slow motion screw till within about one-fourth of an


inch of the cross arm of the telescope, but never to touch it.
Next the second bar was moved by its screw till it approached
the first within almost the same distance, and the third in the
same way ; the bars were finally levelled, aligned, thermometers
read and recorded. The Officer in charge then proceeded to
measure the intervals between the first bar end and cross head of
referring telescope, and the ends of other contiguous bars. For
this purpose a wedge of bell metal was used; it was about
one inch wide, 7 inches long, o‘2 inch thick at one end,
and o - 4 inch at the other, and divided on one edge into 100
parts. The Officers slid this wedge carefully between the bars,
keeping it flat against the square end and feeling immediately it
came in contact with the rounded end of the bar next it, or the
cross arms of the referring telescope, and read the divisions on
the edge corresponding to the point of contact, and had the
reading entered by the Recorder. At the end of the stage
measures had to be recommenced at a lower or higher level, and
here the referring telescope comes in again with another instru-
ment called a £- point carrier.” This was a heavy, triangular
mass of cast iron, with convenient handles for lifting, having on
its upper surface a brass box and cover containing a platinum
point and dot on a brass plate, moveable horizontally. This is
placed on the ground, the referring telescope mounted as at the
commencement, the dot set on to the cross wires by means of the
setting screws in this case, or point carrier, and the wedge
interval between cross-head and bar obtained as usual. In
beginning the next stage the point carrier gives the starting point.
The second measurement of the South portion of the base
was made by following the contour of the ground approximately,
and not in level stages as at first. This method rendered it
necessary to accurately measure the inclination of each bar at the
same time the wedge intervals were measured. For this purpose
a sensitive level was used mounted on a little mechanism, by
means of which the level tube could be raised or lowered at once
with a delicate micrometic screw. The inclination of each bar
was entered in the Recorder’s book with the other data. This
method of measurement was more expeditious than the first, as
much work in staging was avoided, and so far as the after
triangulation test showed was equal in accuracy.
The difference between the two measures on the remeasured
portion was 0-308 inches, equal to about o'ls inches per mile.
The numerical data of the base line are as follows :
Measured Base : 26,091-82 feet = 4-942 miles.
Remeasured portion ; 11174-29 feet.
Elongation of base by triangulation to Green Hill : 29839-83.
Total length ; • 55931-65 or 10-593 miles. Visible from end
to end.
True azimuth of base : 304° 36' 31". (Bearing of N, end
as run from S. end.)


B BRIEF SKETCH OF THE GEODETIC SURVEY OF VICTORIA.
The measuring bars were assumed to be 10 feet long, their
actual lengths in terms of the Melbourne edition of the British
10 feet standard were as follows :
No. i : 119-99957 inches;
No. 2 : 119-99318 inches ; and
No. 3 : 119-99997 inches, at a temperature of 62 Fahr.
The expansion of the base to points in the primary triangu-
lation was obtained without difficulty, as will be seen on the
sketch map of the triangulation station peak and Mt. Macedon
being reached in the second series of expansion triangles. The
primary triangulation was first extended Westward and North-
wards, the western boundary stations being reached by Mr. A.
C. Allan in July, 1864, the extreme western stations near the sea
being Mount Gambier and Mount Schank in S. Australia.
Between these two mountains was an admirable site for a base of
verification, and it was intended to measure one there, but
unfortunately the intention was never carried out for want of
means The sketch map of the trigonometrical survey gives
the extent of the triangulation, and the effective network. The
later operations of the trigonometrical survey were carried out in
the N. Eastern districts by Mr. A. Black, through S. and E.
Gippsland by Mr. A. C. Allan and Mr. W. Turton. And as the
necessity arose in 1870 for marking the boundary between
N. S. Wales and Victoria the triangulation was pushed into
N. S. Wales on the East to include The Pilot, Kosciusko, and
Cape Howe, and mountains in the vicinity of the supposed
boundary. This work was completed and in the hands of the
computers in 1871, the true positions of the stations having been
ascertained, the azimuth of a straight line starting from The Pilot to
strike a selected point at Cape Howe was calculated, and in
April, 1870, Messrs. Black and Allan commenced running,
clearing, and marking the boundary line and finished in March
1872, Mr. Allan taking the line from Mr. Black at Bendoc and
producing it to Cape Howe, where it struck the coast within 16'8
inches of the marked terminal, completing a piece of survey work
which for difficulties and for the requirement of skill, energy, and
endurance, as well as for the accuracy attained I believe has
never been surpassed. It is interesting to note here that the
result attained goes to show the remarkable psecision of the
elements of the figures of the earth given by Col. Clarke in his
last work, which were used in determining the true direction of
this line.
The Boundary line operation was practically the ending of
the Geodetic and Trigonometrical Survey of Victoria, all done
subsequently consisting of connecting ,up existing surveys with
trigonometrical points or lines.
During the progress of the Trigonometrical Survey, Geodetic
division was carried on in the Northern districts.




