

ifefte, itth ifete ife ifeiteifcteiteite ite A
THE ADELAIDE PROPHET
s£j
<<•
■«gA
A’,
m
Ajg)
*?G
Ag
<?G
%5
AG
**G
A'
•v.
AG
rtS&'
aSG
■
as
AiS
'td
-v
GfG
.Ay
jAS
<r;
■^e)
as
“LIFE AND MINISTRY OF DR. TALMAGE,” “LIFE AND
LABORS OF PASTOR A. J. ABBOTT,” &c., &c.
Illustrated with a Portrait and a Map of the New Jerusalem
I’rice—Threepence
&av, ft. gc Scales.
PRINTED PA' JOHN ANDREW AT THE OFFICE OF THE “RIVERINA TIMES.’
i eoi
(W-
-ttr.
w
Gty
G^
Gg*
G*~
■gfe.
G&
y.
.'fr
GW
Gjy
Wf
ff^-:
%
&gv
§5?
;>x
g&n
sv>
s>>
?ip
%
®v-
S£v
G
S&.
gfe
Sfe
gjjr
(?*r
(24>
gfe
,V>.
jslfc
%
(5^
Gt>.
W
;a
•V*
g^ t
(9^
'.•■xi.
AND HIS REMARKABLE WORK.
BEING A BRIEF SKETCH OF
m) z 3Ufe of
TfIEOPHIIifIS GUI®.
Cije t3copi)et, author, anti Ceacfjet
OF THE
ißtehj dispensation
WITH A
CRITICISM OF HIS EXTRAORDINARY WRITINGS
BY THE AUTHOR OF “POPULAR PREACHERS OF OUR DAY',”
■*•
A’
AG
-*?G
iAS
%plp Ip *p Ip «p Ip «p Ip l|(? Ip Ip «||» Ip Ip 5 Ip




THEOPHILUS GUM,
&i)e pcopftet, Eutijor, anli ®eact)er
OF THE
©ispensanou
Theophilus Gv,m.
WITH A CRITICISM OF HIS EXTRAORDINARY WRITINGS BY THE
AUTHOR OF “POPULAR PREACHERS OF OUR DAY,”
“LIFE AND MINISTRY OF DR. TALMAGE,” “LIFE AND
LABORS OF PASTOR A. J. ABBOTT,” &c., &e.
?i)ai), Males.
PRINTED BY JOHN ANDREW AT THE OFFICE OP THE “RIVERINA TIMES.”
iaoi
1




THE ADELAIDE PROPHET
HIS REMARKABLE WORK.
Part I.
THE MAN AND HIS MISSION.
PRELUDE.
THE State of South Australia has always been recognised as
one of the most religious of all the States that now cora-
KK®) P ose the Commonwealth of Australia, and its capital, Ade-
laide, has long ago enjoyed the appellation of “ The City
X of Churches.” For its population, Adelaide has decidedly
more churches than any other place in Australia, and the State has
produced many able preachers and authors of different denomina-
tions.
It need therefore be no surprising thing that South Australia
has the credit of giving birth to and educating the extraordinary
personage whose singular life and mission we now propose to review
somewhat in detail.
The subject of the present sketch bears the peculiar name of
Thbophilus Gum, and he claims to be an inspired messenger sent to
announce the nearing Second Advent of the Messiah, and the
inauguration of the Hew Jerusalem, which “ holy city” is to be set
up in Australia.
The average reader at once exclaims “Impostor,” “ Fanatic,”
and uses other opprobious epithets, but if these individuals were to
carefully read the three volumes and two pamphlets which Me Gum
has written and published, if they were to honestly study the 960


pages of closely printed matter which he has placed before the world,
they would probably be inclined to alter their opinion.
There is not in Mr Gum’s books the slightest tinge of
fanaticism, nor can any one fairly accuse this gentleman of a desire
for money making, for notoriety, or any other sinister motive. His
expensively printed and bound volumes are circulated gratuitously,
he has given away scores and hundreds of pounds in pure charity,
and he has never taken one step to secure fame. Had he devoted
his undoubted talents in other directions he would have secured
wealth and honor. Instead of this, for several years he has patiently
endured reproach, misrepresentation and calumny ; but those who
know him best respect and esteem him. To place before the
Australian public a fair idea of this remarkable man is the object of
the present publication.
EAELY LIFE.
Some 25 miles, by road, east of Adelaide, but nearly 35 miles
by rail, and one of the stations on the line between Adelaide and
Melbourne, is situated the pleasant and indeed lovely little township
of ISTairne. Here in the year 1860 Mr Gum was born. His
parents belonged to Buckinghamshire in England and arrived in
South Australia some ten or a dozen years before Mr. Gum was
born. He was educated in the State School of Nairne, where he
remained until he was 13 years of age when he began seriously to
enter into the great battle of life.
His father died in 1871, and some years later his brothers
took up land in the northern areas which were then thrown open for
agricultural settlement. They settled in the Hundred of Pinda,
near Mount Remarkable. When Mr. Gum had approached manhood
he was, according to the custom of his family, provided with a farm
of his own and in this occupation he continued, and by energy,
perseverance and hard work, he reached more than the average
success of industrious farmers. He gave up agricultural pursuits in
the year 1889 under circumstances which will be detailed later on.
DIFFICULTIES AND DOUBTS.
The family of Theopiiilus Gum were members of the
Wesleyan denomination, and the subject of this sketch underwent
the usual routine of Sunday School and Chapel experience, but it
does not appear from the many autobiographical incidents recorded
in his published writings, that the lessons he learned at the Sunday
School, or the eloquence of the sermons that he listened to week after


week, produced any powerful lasting impressions. Like millions,
before and since his time, Mr. Gum stumbled on that terrible rock,
which in theological phraseology is called “ The nature and duration
of future punishment.” He could not reconcile the teachings of the
Wesleyan Church on this subject, with any adequate conception of
the Almighty Love of a Merciful Deity, and so it came to pass that
Mr. Gum became, to all intents and purposes, an Agnostic, or some-
thing very much approaching it. He began to doubt the inspiration
of the Bible, and indeed was not absolutely convinced that there
was a God, or if there were, and the teachings of the Wesleyans
were His teachings, then God was not perfectly good, and ought not
to be worshipped as such.
But Mr. Gum’s scepticism (if it may be so called) did not
reach an absolute “ shipwreck of faith.” He appears to have
encouraged ideas that the difficulties which perplexed him, and the
knotty problems which he could not fathom, were capable of
satisfactory solution in some way or other. The solution came in a
manner that he had not been led to expect.
LIGHT!
One morning in the spring of 1889, Mr Gum was engaged in
his usual avocation, but while attending to his material duties his
active mind was not at rest and he was still pondering over the
metaphysical difficulties that assailed him. He says “ These
thoughts suddenly occurred to me ; —-Well! whether there is a God
or not; or whether He is perfect or imperfect, of one thing I am
certain, viz., That there are two mighty forces at work in the world,
the one for good and the other for evil. Then I decided I would be
on the side of the good let it lead me where it would.” Ruminating
over these and similar thoughts, he was conscious, he tells us, of the
presence of a soft, beautiful peaceful light shining all around him,
and the inspiring, elevating influences which permeated his mind
convinced him that the light was of supernatural origin ; and was a
Divine testimony that he was born again. Mr. Gum informs us
that he retired into his house and opening his mother’s family Bible
at random read the first chapters that he came upon, These were
the second and third chapters of the Book of Proverbs, in which
wisdom and all its benefits are promised to him who righteously
searches for it. He then turned to the New Testament and found
that the more he read the more he was convinced that good was the
Spirit of God and evil the Spirit of Satan.
Continuing his experiences Mr. Gum says “ When I turned
to the first chapter of the Gospel by Luke and read the preface it
was then that the true nature of that morning’s experience flashed
upon me, and I learned as plainly as God could tell me that I was
the person there addressed, and that I was called to be His prophet


and to go out in the world to do His work.” He then fell upon his
knees and humbly solicited the Almighty to guide him and give him
strength to do his duty.
Mr. Gum assures us that since that time no circumstances
have been able to shake his faith in the reality of his Divine Mission,
and he feels convinced that no obstacles will arise, and no barriers
intervene to prevent his great work being ultimately accomplished.
THE MISSION.
Ho sooner had Mr. Gum become convinced of the genuineness
of his call, than he felt it to be his duty to go out into the world to
proclaim his mission. But his farming pursuits were not that year
so successful as could be desired, the crops &c., were a partial failure,
he was in debt and desired to retire in an honorable manner. Owing
to the bountiful harvest in the following year he was enabled to pay
all claims upon him, and he finally relinquished farming, and in the
month of February, 1891, he began his work in real earnest, and
leaving his farm, with a portmanteau in his hand and firm faith in
his heart, journeyed south eu route to Adelaide. Mr. Gum lectured
at Willowie, Booleroo, Laura, Caltowie and Crystal Brook. He
eventually reached Gladstone, where he prepared and wrote his book
entitled “ The Life of God and His Children, being the prelude to
the immediate gathering of Israel.”
Mr. Gum remained at Gladstone for about eighteen months,
and having completed the M.S.S. of his largest work, removed to
Adelaide where he has since resided. His first volume was printed
in 1892. Two years afterwards appeared his second work entitled
“The Science of the Soul,”-and in 1896 he published a third volume
called “ The Hew Jerusalem.” He has also written two religious
pamphlets, one called “ A Divine Revelation ” and the other “ Two
Revolutions in the Twentieth Century.” These interesting
publications will be noticed at more length in Part 11. Besides
these publications Mr. Gum has issued some pamphlets on Social and
Economical questions of which subjects he is not only a great
student, but is widely known in Adelaide as a popular lecturer. He
is connected with the various democratic institutions of South
Australia and is always an acceptable speaker at their meetings.
For the past five years Mr. Gum has devoted his Sunday
afternoons in addressing large audiences in the Botanic Park of
Adelaide.
Politically Mr. Gum is an ardent disciple of the famous Henry
George, and strongly supports the system of Land Reform so
eloquently advocated in “ Progress and Poverty ” and other works.
Mr. Gum is also generally in sympathy with the Labor Party and
contends for the solution of labor problems by the State regulating
the hours of labor.


In Adelaide Mr. Gum is much respected as a sincere and
earnest man, and we have noticed in the Adelaide newspapers many-
kind notices of him. When he disposed of his farming property he
distributed some hundreds of pounds in works of charity and his
kindness and philanthropy in this direction deserve, as they have
received, wide commendation.
Mr. Gum has not established any Church, nor yet set himself
up as the founder of a new sect. He appears to wait until his
teachings become more generally known and appreciated, and
possibly in process of time a body of believers will be gathered
together who will recognise Mr. Gum as their Leader, and set to
work to more extensively promulgate the doctrines of that New
Dispensation which Mr. Gum claims it is his mission to establish in
Australia, which island-continent he asserts is that Holy City, the
New Jerusalem, which St. John saw descending from Heaven.
THREE EAST GATES
S3IVO JLS3/A33dH±
00
U
{—
<
o
X
h-
D
o
00
Li
LJ
q:
x
L-


Part 11.
HIS TEACHINGS AND HIS WRITINGS.
CARDINAL POINTS,
SOME time ago Mb. Gum was requested by a friend to furnish
a short summary of the cardinal points of his doctrines
and teachings. In reply he forwarded the following sixteen
paragraphs which we print just as he wrote them :—•
I.—That God is a Person and Product of Evolution.
v
i 2.-—That Life and Death are coeval in their existence •
the one being Evolution and the other Devolution.
3.—That Good and Evil in the moral sphere are sequences of Life
and Death in the Physical.
4.—That Substance in the simple form is Self-existent, Indivisible
Indestructible and Infinite, all complete forms being evolved
from the simple and original.
5. —That God is a free-agent as regards good and evil and has
become Divine by rejecting the evil and doing the good.
6.—That man was created in the original image of God, and
went wrong by neglecting the good and doing the evil; when
he reverses that process of Life he becomes Divine.
7.—That to reject the evil and do the good is the great lesson
which God has written for mankind on every page of the
Old and New Testaments.
8.-—That God is going to set up a Kingdom on the Eai’th based
absolutely upon the lines of the good.
9.—That the Divine Kingdom will first be established in South
Australia, and gradually extend itself to the New World.
10.—That the Coastal territories of Seven Australian States will be
the Twelve Gates of the New Jerusalem referred to in the
Book of Revelations.
11.—That the mode of establishing the Divine Kingdom will be
a division of the world’s population upon the lines of the
good and the evil; all who love and will obey the good
coming into the New World, and all who will not, being
driven into the old,


12.—That the first Resurrection will be a Resurrection of 144,000
of the most perfected departed souls, with human bodies
dwelling on the earth, which bodies will not then be subject
to physical death.
13. —That the soul of David, the ancient King of Israel has already
been resurrected in my body and the remaining 143,999 will
be resurrected in the same way, at the times and places
chosen by God.
14. —That the British nation are the Ten Lost Tribes of Israel ; and
the four Beasts of the Kingdom will be (1) The people of Great
Britain and Ireland, (2) The people of Australasia, (3) The
Jews scattered throughout the world, (4) The people of the
United States, and of Canada.
15.—That the test of Citizenship will be, not nationality but
conformity to the Divine Law of Good ; the Englishman,
Australian, American or Jew not conforming to that Law
being rejected, and those of other Rationalities conforming
to the Law being accepted.
16.—That the Jews will come into the Kingdom by seeing in Jesus
Christ their* true Messiah and accepting the truth of
Christianity.
REMARKS.
This compendium of Religious belief is decidedly the most
remarkable ever formulated in Australia. It has the merit of being
plain and simple, and expresses Mr. Gum’s teachings without
ambiguity. Verily he that runs may read. But is it all true 1
Before the reader answers he should procure Mr. Gum’s books, read
them carefully through, and decide after a patient study of the
author’s arguments and explanation of the Scriptures.
It is neither fair nor right to condemn Mr. Gum’s
extraordinary statements given above because the}’ are novel,
strange or remarkable. Christianity itself was equally remarkable
when it was first preached, and many scientific and other truths
were ridiculed as new and absurd when first introduced, yet
afterwards received universal recognition. Mr. Gum’s philosophy
and religion deserve to be fully investigated, and it is to be hoped
that those competent for the task will thoroughly read all that Mr.
Gum has written.


“ THE LIFE OF GOD AND HIS CHILDREN/’
Perhaps the most singular feature of Mr. Gum’s published
writings is the fact that they are composed by a man who has had
no education, excepting what he received at a small country state
school. It seems almost incredible that the profound philosophy
discovered in these works should emanate from one who never
studied the subject, who was no reader and whose knowledge of
the Sacred Scriptures was exceedingly limited. We are face to face
with the fact that a few months after leaving the plough and the
laborious work of farm life, Mr. Gum produces" a deep comprehensive
volume which would be a credit to a Divinity student or an
educated theologian. This volume is entitled “ The Life of God and
His Children,” and consists of 430 pages of closely printed matter
which is divided into a preface and thirteen chapters. The captious
critic might complain of the length of some of these chapters. This
chapter X. covers no less than 173 pages, and the following chapter
extends to over 100 pages. In other words more than half of the
volume consists of two chapters. But long though they are they are
deeply interesting. In this volume Mr. Gum writes on the Nature
and Being of God, The Trinity, the origin of Christ and Satan,
Man’s Original State, his Fall and his Free Agency, on the
Atonement and the New Birth, Heaven and Hell, Christian
Perfection, about his own call to the work, and the place of
gathering, the book being concluded with a long chapter on Natural
Philosophy and Political Economy. Besides the subjects noted
above Mr. Gum writes incidentally on all sorts of questions,’ This
volume is prefixed by a previously published pamphlet of 32 pages
called “A Divine Revelation,” which has been published separately,
but may be regarded as a useful introduction to the larger work.
“ THE SCIENCE OF THE SOUL."
This volume, the third of Mr. Gum’s publications, contains 276
pages divided into a long preface and ten chapters. From a literary
standpoint it is a decided advance on the former work. It is more
crisp in its style, more vigorous in its tone and generally more clear
than the previous book. The author sets out to discuss the Science
of the Soul, and although parts of the book are thoroughly
metaphysical, they are not by any means dry or dreary reading.
The first chapter discusses the Uncaused Cause of the Universe and
shows that God and the Material Universe were evolved from a
previously existing substance. Mr. Gum says “By the operation
of natural law vitality was first evolved, and matter out of
vitality and God out of matter, and by the knowledge of the same
laws God has evolved the Universe we see around us.” The


remainder of the book treats of the human soul, the Spiritual
Resurrection of Christ, the Spiritual Effects of the Soul, the Origin
of Evil and why it was permitted, and a multitude of other subjects
all of which are treated in a clever and intelligent manner. The
book is beautifully printed and bound in dark cloth.
“ THE NEW JERUSALEM.”
This is a small volume of about 140 pages. It was the first
of Me. Gum’s writings that came under our notice and we are
inclined to think that it is his best work, and the one most suited
for general circulation. At any rate we should recommend all
investigators to peruse this volume before reading the other books.
There are nine chapters. After writing at some length on the
origin, and nature of the Universe and on the relation which
God holds to the Universe, Mr. Gum proceeds to unfold the
prophetical system which he teaches. In substance it is this : —That
Australia is the New Jerusalem of Prophecy and that all of the
predictions of unfulfilled prophecy will be realised in “ our island
home.” The theory that Australia is destined to be the theatre of
the wonderful events of prophecy is not new. So long ago as 1851
Mrs. Hannah Villiers Boyd published an illustrated volume in
Sydney bearing the title “ A Voice from Australia, or an Inquiry
into the probability of New Holland being connected with the
Prophecies of the-New Jerusalem.” This work attracted some
attention and was reprinted in London in 1857. It is, however, now
forgotten. In 1879 a small anonymous pamphlet appeared in
Melbourne called “Australia’s Place in Prophecy,” which advocated
the same ideas, and attracted considerable attention for some
months. But neither of these writers treated the subject so ably as
Mr. Gum does, and there seems no reason why his teachings may not
be true. “The New Jerusalem” is really a valuable work and
deserves to be extensively circulated.
“ TWO REVOLUTIONS in the 20th CENTURY.”
This is a pamphlet of 72 pages. The first part is purely
political and treats of such subjects as the relation between Capital
and Labour, Land Nationalisation, &c. The second part is merely
a brief summary of Mr. Gum’s prophetical teaching. For those who
have but limited time at their disposal for reading, we should
recommend this pamphlet and also the author’s first publication “ A
Divine Revelation ” which would give them a capital idea of Mr.
Gum’s theology and philosophy.


EPILOGUE.
We have now given a condensed summary of the Life and
Teachings of the “ Latter Day Prophet of Adelaide,” and we trust
that what we have written will induce the reader to further
investigate the matter. Mr. Gum’s claims are very great and for
that reason demand investigation. Although his teachings are
different from every other system of Divinity in Christendom, they
are nevertheless drawn from the Sacred Scriptures and supported
by abundant quotations from them.
Mr. Gum has entered upon a remarkable work, which would
tax the courage and energy of any man, but he has an abundant
faith in the genuineness of his mission and believes that he will live
to see it successfully accomplished. Time alone will tell.
The extraordinary writings of Theophilus Gum are worth
studying, even by those who have no sympathy with his mission.
They afford scope for plenty of thought and it must candidly be
admitted that in many respects they shed new light upon many
complicated texts of the Bible. As they are given away to all
applicants, we may in conclusion express the hope that they will be
well read, studied and pondered over by all those who are interested
in Religious and Theological questions.
JOHN ANDREW, PRINTER, HAY, NEW SOUTH WALES.




