



“ToLondon and
The Man
Bringing Australia nearer to the Motherland
Air-Commodore Charles Kingsford Smith fully
deserves the title, “Champion of the Air.” His
achievements as a long-distance flyer are unparalleled, both
in big machines with a ‘crew’ and in small ‘solo’ machines.
Amongst his many feats are his famous flights in the
“Southern Cross,” which took him across all the great
oceans of the World, completely encircling the Globe. His
flights from Australia to New Zealand and return, and his
record-breaking dash from England to Australia in the
“Southern Cross Junior,” are still fresh in the public’s
memory. Now we see him setting out in the “Southern
Cross Minor” to beat the more recent record of Mr. James
Mollison between the latter country and the Motherland,
and to go “there and back” quicker than any man has ever
done before.
The UNDERTAKING of such an ambitious flight as that of
the “Southern Cross Minor” necessitates skilled organisa-
tion. Kingsford Smith has entrusted the vital matter of
laying down supplies of petrol and oil along the route to
the Vacuum Oil Company Pty. Ltd. He is using Plume
Motor Spirit and Mobiloil, as in other of his big flights.
The schedule includes seven big “hops” on the journey to
England, and eight on the return flight. The daily stages
(going) are: Wyndham to Chefibon (Java) ; thence to Vic-
toria Point (Malay)'; Rangoon; Jhansi (India); Jask
(Persia) ; Aleppo; Rome and thence to London. Returning,
the stages are:Naples; Aleppo; Bushire (Persia) ; Karachi;
hack in 23 days ”
The Organisation
The Machine
The “Southern Cross Minor/' the third-uf-thc
planes made famous by Kingsford Smith to bear the
emblem of his country, is a sports Avro Avian, fitted with
a “Gipsy” Mark 11. engine. This engine has four cylin-
ders —made of steel instead of the usual cast iron. A higher
compression is employed, necessitating a quality petrol
highly resistant to “detonation.” The engine will develop
120 h.p., and drive the ’plane at a maximum speed of about
118 m.p.h. Special petrol tanks are fitted to the ’plane,
giving it a range of 2,000 miles. The cockpit has been made
as comfortable as possible, and the full range of instru-
ments arranged so that they can be observed by the pilot
without strain or fatigue. The controls are so carefully
placed that in good weather it would be possible to fly for
considerable periods “hands off.”
Allahabad; Rangoon; Singapore; Grogak, and Wyndham.
In addition to these places, various emergency landing
grounds are in readiness in case of need.
At tl;c various stopping places, officers of the Vacuum Oil
Company will refuel the aeroplane, replenish the oil;
arrange accommodation, and render all necessary service, as
well ,as supply reports on weather conditions. Everything
will be done to enable the gallant aviator to have the maxi-
mum amount of rest and the greatest facilities possible for
the successful accomplishment of his speedy trip to England
and back.




NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
S~C, /»>(,! ii i/tZ.
/‘f-. 7- jo i (?
31508023395968
O W GREEN & SONS ITT. LTD
