

M.L.C., and Mr. W. J. Strike.
The Federal Council shall meet at least once in each
The conference had before it—
year, and at such other times as may be considered
advisable or circumstances demand, and shall be
1. The Melbourne scheme of Labor Federa-
constituted of delegates elected by and from the
tion drawn up by the leaders of unionism in
provincial councils as follows:
Victoria.
Members. Delegates.
500 to 2,000 .. .. 2
2. The Lallarat scheme as agreed to by a
2,001 to 6,000 .. .. 3
Trades Union Conference held there at
Over 6,000 .. .. 4
THE BRISBANE LABOR FEDERATION CONFERENCE.—MAY 4 AND 5,1899.
W. J.Ferguson, M.L.A. (N.S.W.) A. Edden, M.L.A. (N.S.W.) C. M‘Donald, M.L.A. (Q.) G. McGregor, M.L.C. (S.A.) J. G. Barrett (V.) S. Barker, J.P. (V.)
S. Smith, M.L.A. (N.S.W.) W. J. Strike (S.A.) R. S. Guthrie, M.L.C. (S.A.) W. Kewley (Q.)
A. Hinchcliffe (Q.)
J. W. Billson (V.)
The Intercolonial Labor Federation Con provinces.
ference met at the Trades Hall, Brisbane, Provinces of the Federation for the time being
shall be: The Northern Province, comprising the
on May 4 and 5. present colony of Queensland ; the Eastern Province,
J? nnr nnlnnipa were rpnrpqentpd as f comprising the present colony of New South Wales;
Pour colonies were represented as the Southern Province, comprising the present colony
lows : Queensland Messrs. L. Me Don I, 0 f Victoria; the Central Province, comprising the
M.L.A., A. Hinchcliffe, and W. Kew]cy; present colony of South Australia; the Western
New Sotlth Wales Messrs. A. Edden, Province, comprising the present colony of Western
VT T a nr T v A/T t a • tv Australia; the Pacific Province, comprising the
iM.L.A., W. J. 1 erguson, 1V1.C.A., ai o. present colony of New Zealand; and the Tasmanian
Smith, M.L.A. ; Victoria Messrs. S. Province, comprising the present colony of Tasmania;
Barker, J.P., and J. G. Barrett, and Alder- or such of these Provinces as may come under the
man J. W. Billson ; South Australia-Hon. jurisdiction of the Australasian Federation.
R. S. Guthrie, M.LC., Hon. G. McGregor, federal council.
which Intercolonial representatives of Labor Four to be the maximum number of delegates from
organisations were present. ai D provincial council.
3. Rules and regulations of the Queens- , The offic j al seal federation must *? e attached
i j r i XT' j 4-* i to every document issued by the council; and no
land Labor rederation ; and document emanating from the council shall be read or
4. Amendments on the Ballarat scheme received by the provincial councils or the district
suggested by the South Australian Trades councils unless the said seal is so attached.
and Labor Council. annual meetings.
Mr. W. Kewley presided over the meet- The annual meetings of the council shall be held at
ings, and Mr. A. Hinchcliffe acted as secre- such places as may be agreed upon, each meeting to
j. ° determine where the next shall be held, but it shall not
J ... . . assemble twice consecutively in the same place.
It was agreed that the following scheme
should be submitted to the various Labor expenses of delegates.
unions in the colonies as the report of the The expenses of all delegates to Federal Council
conference with a recommendation for its meetings shall be defrayed by their respective pro-
, .• c ~ vincial councils, and all delegates must be provided
adoption, and that in the event of three or with credentials signed by the president and secretary
more colonies accepting this Constitution of their provincial council, and shall not be permitted
the Secretary to the Conference be instructed to speak or vote upon any question until such
to call the first Federal Council together in credentials have been accepted.
Sydney in October next to inaugurate the powers.
Federation ; The council shall be invested with the under-
NAME. mentioned powers :
“ Australasian Labor Federation.” CO Control of the Federal Council hinds.
(2) To elect or remove any of its officers. All
constitution. elections to be by ballot and by absolute
The federation shall consist of all Labor organisations . . majorities. . , , . . ~.
banded together for mutual assistance, and shall be CO To decide all appeals against decisions of the
governed as hereinafter provided. / x provincial councils
° * (4) To order a plebiscite of the federation, when
OR.TF.f'TS. .1 ,—1 om- mimifimi
objects. deemed advisable, upon any question.
The following shall be the objects of the federa- (S) To institute legal proceedings on behalf of the
tion Federal Council, and direct the trustees to
(a) To improve, protect, and foster the best take action against any officer of the Federal
interests of all classes of Labor throughout Council who misappropriates its funds.
Australasia. (6) To carry out the objects of the federation in
(b) To secure direct Labor representation in the strict accordance with the general laws,
various parliaments, and to promote and CO To frame rules and standing orders for the
extend such legislative reforms as will ensure conduct of their business; such rules to be
social justice to Australasian workers. conformity with this constitution.
(c) To prevent, as far as possible, any strike or .
dispute between the members of the federa-
tion and their employers by conciliatory The officers shall consist of the president, vice-
means, and by appeal to any recognised president, treasurer, secretary, and three trustees,
Board of Arbitration. vvho shall be elected at the annual meeting in
(d) To uphold the rules of all federated bodies February of each year. All officers must be delegates
and ensure justice to all their members. to the Federal Council, and shall be eligible for re-
(e) To provide funds for the assistance of any election, except the president, who shall not hold
federated union involved in a dispute, such office for a longer period than 12 months consecutively,
funds to be used only after all conciliatory nor within 12 months of his last holding office. He
measures have failed. shall have a deliberative and a casting vote.
(f) To secure a better advocacy of the principles executive
and rights of Labor through the press, and,
if deemed necessary, to establish journals for The executive shall consist of the president, vice-
the promulgation and defence of all classes of president, treasurer, and secretary. The powers of
Australasian workers. the executive shall be limited to the superintendence
(g) To prevent the influx of colored races. of the federation in the interim between the meetings
uu a nr>TT juTifD« of the council. It shall take every means to secure
iir.ADquak i jvrs. the due observance of the laws of the federation to
The headquarters of the federation shall be situated further its objects and protect the funds. It shall
at such place as the Federal Council may from time to direct the action of the trustees and be responsible
time determine. . for the rightful administration of the council’s funds,
organisation. in accordance with the instructions of the council.
For the purpose of facilitating the working of the It shall have power to summon special meetings of
federation, its unions shall be grouped into districts the council when deemed necessan. It shall, on
governed by district councils—the district councils to request from any provincial council or district
be severally represented on the provincial council. council, determine as to the interpretation of any
“The Herald” Print, Bray Street, Adelaide.
*r 7 >
general law or decide any matter on which the laws be any surplus from the levy struck by
are silent. The decision of the executive in all such Federal or provincial councils it shall be
cases to be subject to appeal to the Federal Council, divided “pro rata” between the various
whose decision shall be final. district councils, and placed to the credit of
SPECIAL EXECUTIVE MEETINGS, (f ) in unorganiseddistricts,
Any district council may, at a special summoned and to work in unison with the district
meeting called for the purpose, summon the provincial councils in solidifying existing unions,
council to meet and consider the advisability of
calling together the executive ; and if such provincial disputes.
council deem the matter of sufficient importance, In the event of a disturbance threatening an affiliated
they shall at once communicate with the secretary, union, such union shall —
who shall call the executive together as soon as (i) Endeavor to settle the dispute peaceably ;
possible after the receipt of such notice. The secre- failing which, it shall submit the case to its
tary shall, in convening the meeting, inform each district executive, who shall act in con-
member of the executive of the special business to be junction with the committee of the union
transacted. The expenses in connection with such involved. This joint committee shall en-
gathering shall be defrayed by the Federal Council, deavor to settle the dispute in a peaceful and
unless the executive, in meeting assembled, deem the friendly manner ; failing this they shall report
object of such special gathering to be a frivolous to the' district council, who shall, without
one, in which case the expenses shall be borne jointly delay, bring the matter before the provincial
by the provincial council and the district council at council.
whose instance it was summoned. (2) In the event of an emergency or trifling dis-
pute, the district council may decide by a
trustees. two-thirds majority to take action in defence
There shall he three trustees elected by and from of the principles of the federation, without
the council. All moneys belonging to the Federal previously consulting the provincial council ;
Council shall be banked or invested in the joint hut it shall submit its action to them with all
names of the trustees, treasurer, and secretary. All possible dispatch. Under all other circuni-
cheques or withdrawals shall be signed by at least stances, before taking action, the district
two trustees, treasurer, and secretary, and shall have council shall place questions involving dis-
the seal of the Federal Council affixed thereto. putes before the provincial council, and shall
be governed in its subsequent course by their
SUSTENTATION FEE. decision.
Every provincial council shall pay to the Federal (3) Should a disturbance threaten in any pro-
Council the sum of per quarter for every financial vinCe which, in the opinion of the
member existing at the end of their financial year. provincial council, would have a tendency to
Payments to he made quarterly and in advance, from spread beyond the limits of that province,
the beginning of the quarter in which they became they shall immediately communicate with
affiliated. the secretary of the Federal Council, who
> • u n v fl ,n shall be empowered to call a meeting to dis-
Women a unions shall be admitted to full athhation the Nation. Any decision of th:
upon payment of halt the above dues Provided Federal Council involving action shall endow
always that nothing in these laws shal prevent tte that council with the following powers of
district councils from making such further financial , unity, and censure within its juris-
arrangements for internal government as may appear diction •
to them necessary, so long as such arrangements arc (a) T p levy a special contribution upon
not in contravention of these laws. every / mploy S enrolled member in its
defence fund. province, such levy to be of uniform
, * * . .. .. ~ , percentage and to be made upon all
Each affiliated union shall pay to its district earnings above 10s. per week,
council the sum of 2d. per financial member per (b) To censure, in the name of the federa-
month towards a defence fund. tion, any corporation, firm, or individual
The district councils in the several provinces shall whose conduct shall, in its opinion, show
control their respective defence funds. Each district them to be unjust, cruel, or bitter
council shall report the financial position of the fund enemies to Labor ; it shall communicate
to the provincial council when it is deemed advisable. such censure where necessary to each
The provincial council shall report annually to the provincial council forpublic notification,
Federal Council the state of the funds of all districts and it shall be obligatory upon members
within its jurisdiction. of the federation to give effect to that
provincial councils. (4) when it has been decided to assist an affiliated
There shall be a provincial council in every colony, union, the provincial council shall make
which shall consist of delegates from district councils arrangements for financial support to the
incorporated under the scheme of federation. Every extent of a sum not exceeding 20s. weekly,
provincial council shall have the power of making its Such support to be distributed as between
own laws, providing such laws do not conflict with the married and single men as the union involved
general laws of the Federal Council. Their duties may think fit, provided that in no case shall
shall be : such support be given during the first week of
(a) To take action in the event of disturbances. an .\ disturbance. In the case of women’s
(b) To organise political branches in their various x societies, half the above rates shall be paid,
provinces for returning to parliament mem- (5) The federation reserves to itself the right of
hers who will support a platform to he agreed withholding assistance from any affiliated body
entering upon a strike without having
(c) To grant charters to and define the received the sanction of its provincial council,
boundaries of any new district within their The powers provided in these rules shall be exercised
jurisdiction. The federation only to recognise only upon a two-thirds majority decision of the Federal
as affiliated districts those working under Council, which shall assume control of all disturbances
such charter. in conjunction with the provincial council and shall
(d) To act in conjunction with the executive of cease with the termination of the dispute,
the district council and the union involved district councils,
in directing operations when a strike or , , , . .
lock-out has been declared. In no case shall District councils are empowered to make laws for
the whole of the members in any province be their guidance and for the control of their business,
called out without first obtaining consent of but such laws must not be in contravention of this
the provincial and Federal Councils. constitution. The current year for district councils
(e) Should a strike or lock-out occur, the pro- shall be from January 1 to December 31.
vincial council in whose province the friction alteration of rules.
has occurred shall, if necessary, at once strike t A „
a levy of not less than one penny per week One-tenth of the members of the whole federation
upon members of the various unions in the may petition the Federal Council to frame any new
province under their jurisdiction, and shall law or rescind or alter any existing law for the better
immediately communicate with the provincial working of the federation, and upon receipt of such
councils of the other provinces, giving all petition, if the Federal Council do not agree to such
information. If the province considers the petition then a referendum shall be taken, and if the
matter too large to deal with they may sub- proposal be carried by a majority, the same shall be-
mit it to the Federal Council. Should there come law.
