

■
:.!>r *.
ii 11 ', if
, *Ck
...j»ifif)
is bans:
Printed by Watson, Ferguson & Co., Queen Street.
1888* 4


F 74 /$■
Ikislnmc literati? Circle.
President.
The Hon. Sir S. W. Griffith, M.A., Q.C.
Vice-Presidents.
S. W. Brooks.
Reginald H. Roe, M.A,
Council.
Mrs. E. Cooper.
Miss Beanland.
D. Eglinton.
J. Shirley, B.Sc.
J. Brunton Stephens
J, L. Woolcock, B.A.
Hon. Secretaries.
J. P. Thomson, M.A. (and Treasurer).
C. B. Fletcher.


teerarir (Etrrk.
A public meeting was held at the Brisbane School
of Arts on August 2, 1888, to consider the
advisability of establishing a Reading Club. After
addresses bearing upon the subject by Mr. Roe,
Head Master of the Brisbane Grammar School, and
Mr. S. W. Brooks, the following resolutions were
unanimously passed :
I. That such an organization be established, to
be called “The Brisbane Literary Circle.”
11. That the aim of the organization shall be
to promote habits of reading and study in
all departments of literature, and generally
to aid in the development of intellectual
culture.
111. That it is proposed to accomplish this by
the encouragement of individual study in
subjects, and by the help of text books,
which shall be indicated; by written
reports and examinations; and by any
other methods which may commend them-
selves to the members.
IV. That the Circle be governed by a Presi-
dent, two Vice-Presidents, and a Council
of not less than six members, and two
Honorary Secretaries.
V. That the fee of membership do not exceed
5/- a year.


These resolutions form the basis of the Circle.
(About 100 persons were enrolled within a week of
this meeting). The Executive of the Circle was
elected at a subsequent meeting of the members.
This Literary Circle seeks to be, as it were, a
school at home, a school after school, a school for
every age. It is for people who, notwithstanding
the cares of life, desire to pursue a systematic
course of instruction. It is for men and women of
every class and calling. Even the busiest of men
and women —even those whose attention is engrossed
by professional, political, or domestic duties —may,
with advantage to themselves, join in this under-
taking which cannot fail to widen the scope of their
knowledge, and, by enlarging that culture, enhance
their capacities for usefulness.
Course of Reading.
A provisional course of reading has been arranged
to take the Circle through what remains of the
present year—
Natural Science.
Astronomy Primer, Norman Lockyer (Macmillan, i/-)
Geology Primer, Prof. Geikie (Macmillan, i/-).
Shakespeare.
“As You Like It.” “Hamlet
(Shakespeare Complete, i/- ; Cassell’s National Library, 6d.
each ; Clarendon Press, with notes, 1/6).
English Literature.
Macaulay—“ Warren Hastings ” (Cassell’s National Library,
6d. each).
Macaulay—“ Earl of Chatham ” (Cassell’s National Library,
6d. each).
Sir Thomas Browne —“ Religio Medici,” Camelot Classics
(Walter Scott), i/-; (Cassell’s National Library, 6d).


For the year 1889 the scheme of reading is as
follows :
JANUARY TO MARCH.
I. J. K. Green—“ Short History of the English People.”
pp. 1 to 210 (Macmillan, 7/6).
11. Introductory Science Primer, Prof. Pluxley (Macmillan,
i/-)-
111. Literature Primer, Stopford Brooke (Macmillan, l/-).
IV. Shakespeare—“ Julius Caesar.”
V. “ Darwin,” by Bettany (Walter Scott), 1/- or 2/6 ; or by
Grant Allen (Longman, 2/6).
VI. Goldsmith—“ Vicar of Wakefield” (Cassell’s National
Library, 6d).
APRIL TO JUNE.
I, J. R. Green —“Short History of the English People,”
pp. 211 to 446.
11. Henry George—“ Progress and Poverty.” (Paper covers,
i/d-
111. Dowden’s Shakespeare Primer (Macmillan, 1 /-).
IV. Carlyle—“ Heroes and Hero Worship,” first half (Chap-
man & Hall, 6d. or 1/-).
V. Plutarch’s Lives—Camelot Classics (Walter Scott), 1 /-.
VI. Tennyson—“ Princess ” (Kegan-Paul, Trench, & Co.,
paper covers, 1/-).
JULY TO SEPTEMBER.
I. J. R. Green—“ Short History of the English People,”
pp. 447 to 616.
11. Henry George—“ Progress and Poverty.”
111. Carlyle—“ Heroes and Hero Worship,” second half.
IV. “Rousseau,” Foreign Classics (Blackwood, 2/6).
V. Lamb—selections from “Elia” (Morley’s Universal
Library, x/-).
VI. “Keats,” Canterbury Poets (Walter Scott), 1 /-.
OCTOBER TO DECEMBER.
I. J. R. Green—“ Short History of the English People,”
pp. 617 to end.
11. .Seeley—“ Colonial Expansion” (Macmillan, 1/-).
HI. Physiology Primer, by Foster (Macmillan, 1 /-).
IV. “Johnson,” by Leslie Stephens —English Men of Letters
(Macmillan, 1/-).
V. Australian Voyages, by Pinkerton; Discovery of Guiana,
by Sir W. Raleigh (Cassell’s Nat. Library, 6d. each).
VI. Landor’s Imaginary Conversations—Camelot Classics
(Walter Scott), 1/-.


The new Council\ elected August , l<S<Sg, wz'// draft
the scheme for iBgo. Members are advised to order
from their booksellers the books required during the
coming year.
Time.
It Is assumed that members will be able to give,
say, forty minutes daily, six days a week, to the
systematic reading of books entered for study in
the syllabus, as it is believed that most can find
enough spare time during each day to compass the
course if method and earnestness be united. Forty
minutes, if gathered even in fragments from the
day’s duties, will be sufficient to widen and deepen
knowledge in all directions.
Memoranda.
The examination papers or memoranda of the
Brisbane Literary Circle will consist of questions
upon the books read. They will be issued every
three months, and are to be answered, as far as
possible, from memory. When memory fails, the
students may refer to their books for help, but must
give the ; answers in their own language. While
answering the memoranda is not compulsory, it is
expected that all members of the Circle will fill in
and return each at its due date.
Meetings.
It is also proposed, in furtherance of the objects
of the Society, that social meetings be held from


time to time, due notice of which will be given to
members.
To create greater interest in the work of the
Circle, certain days throughout the year will be set
apart as Memorial Days. The principal day will be
“ Inaugural Day,” August 2nd, upon which the
Brisbane Literary Circle was initiated, when formal
certificates —setting forth that members receiving
them have handed in satisfactory memoranda—will
be presented. The remaining days will commemo-
rate the birth of distinguished men in Literature,'
Science, and Art, and upon each day will be read
and discussed the life and works of the man to be
honored. For the ensuing year it is proposed thus
to honor Shakespeare, April 23rd ; Johnson, Sept.
18th ; Macaulay, Oct. 25th; Lamb, Feb. 10th;
Darwin, Feb. 12th.
Certificates.
Formal certificates, signed by the President and
two members of the Council, will be presented to
those who have satisfied the Council of their pro-
ficiency in the branches of study taken up.
In respect of the granting of each certificate, the
sum of one shilling will be payable, to cover the
cost of the document in the first place. For every
additional entry upon such certificate the sum of
sixpence will be payable ; such sums will be paid
to the general fund, and be applied to the general
purposes of the Circle.


Local Circles.
The Council is anxious that the benefits which
it is believed will accrue to members of the Circle
should not be confined solely to the metropolis and
other large centres of population, but should be
extended to more sparsely populated districts, where
opportunities for self-improvement, and facilities
for procuring wholesome and useful literature are
comparatively small. Members from all parts of
Queensland will be cordially welcomed. It is
strongly desired that local circles should be formed
in many places throughout the colony, and the
Council will render all assistance in its power to
any who may be willing to undertake the estab-
lishment of a circle in any locality.
Extracts.
(i). General Garfield, on the Chautauqua Literary
and Scientific Circle (the largest and most success-
ful reading club in the world) ;
“ But this I say, you are struggling with one of
the two great problems of civilization. The first
one is a very old struggle ; it is ‘ How shall we get
any leisure ? ’ That is the problem of every
hammer-stroke, of every blow that labor has struck
since the foundation of the world. The fight for
bread is the first great primal fight, and it is so
absorbing a struggle that until one conquers it
somewhat, he can have no leisure whatever. So
that we may divide the whole struggle of the


human race into two chapters : first, the fight to
get leisure ; and then comes the second fight of
civilization, what shall we do with our leisure when
we get it ? And, I take it, that Chautauqua has
assailed this second problem. Now, leisure is a
dreadfully bad thing unless it is well used. A man
with a fortune ready made, and with leisure on his
hands, is likely to get sick of the world, sick of
himself, tired of life,- and become a useless, wasted
man. What shall you do with your leisure? I
understand that Chautauqua is trying to answer
that question, and to open out fields of thought,
to open out energies, a largeness of mind, a culture
in the better sense, with the varnish scratched off".
We arc getting down to the real grain, and finding
whatever is best in it and truest in it ; and if
Chautauqua is helping to garnish our people with
the native stuff that is in them, rather than the
paint and varnish and gewgaw of culture, they are
doing well.”
(2). The Brisbane Courier : —“ There are many
“who would begin to read, if only they had some
“guidance as to books, and there are many more
“who would rejoice to have their present desultory
“ and aimless reading lifted to some useful issue in
“ the adoption of method, if only they knew how to
“ secure it. It is for the furtherance of these ends
“that home-reading clubs or associations have been
“ formed both in Britain and America, and the


“ remarkable success they have achieved is proof
“ enough of their advantages. They increase and
‘‘even create the desire for reading; they guide
“this desire in the right channel by indicating the
“ best books to be read in the particular line chosen
“by the reader ; they furnish a new and most
“interesting theme of conversation and discussion
“as the readers meet in society ; they lead to a
“large and helpful increase of knowledge on the
“part of individuals; they add a new zest to life
“with many whose evenings (or even days, for we
“ are dealing with women as well as men) had
“otherwise been dull or worse; and they elevate
“the intellectual and moral tone of the general
“ community.”
The appeal then, is to all sorts and conditions of
men, to young and old, to grave and gay, to rich
and poor. Will the reader of this pamphlet aid in
life’s battle, by joining the Circle in its endeavour
to promote self-culture ?
“ Knowledge is now no more a fountain sealed ;
Drink deep, until the habits of the slave,
The sins of emptiness, gossip, and spite,
And slander, die.”
8
6(TbUO
C -lAj \
I rtl o




APPLICATION FORM.
9 ----- —
To the Hon. Secretary of the
.iiais®AWB uiiaiai
C 'Brisbane.
(L)ear Sir,
I desire to ’become a member of
/ t/
Circle., and forward herewith the sum of 2 6
as my subscription for the current year.
the (Brisbane Literary
in.
Jlame in full
Residence
,
Occupation
fige last birthday, or in decades (10 to SO, SO to etc.)
JVLarried or Single
STATE WHETHER IN POSTAL NOTE, MONEY ORDER. STAMPS, OR COIN.
:


jForm of toltfirati.
a member of the BRISBANE LITERARY
CIRCLE on the dav of
day of
and has pzirsued a
satisfactory course of. study in the subjects , and
during the periods following , that is to say :
President.
Member of Council.
Member of Council.


00873531
