

BRITISH
COASTER
1939 MN 1945
THE OFFICIAL STORY
1/6 net.






THE TRADE GOES ON


BRITISH COASTER
1939 MN 1945
THE OFFICIAL STORY
J
Prepared for the Ministry of Transport
by the Central Office of Information
LONDON: HIS MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE
19 4 7


CONTENTS
Page
Chapter I They Live by the Tides .. .. 5
Chapter 2 Ships of the Trade.. .. .. II
Chapter 3 Dunkirk 18
Chapter 4 The Indestructible Highway .. 29
Chapter 5 Danger Inshore 35
Chapter 6 The Channel Convoys .. .. 42
Chapter 7 Through E-boat Alley .. .. 53
Chapter 8 Deep Waters .. .. .. .. 59
Chapter 9 The Night Race to Sweden .. 64
Chapter 10 The Tale of the Tugs .. .. 70
Chapter 11 D-Day .. .. .. .. .. 78
Chapter 12 The Beaches and Mulberry .. 85
Epilogue .. .. .. .. .. .. 96
Map in half-tone, showing coastal routes during the war 31
CROWN COPYRIGHT RESERVED
To be purchased directly from His Majesty’s Stationery Office at the
following addresses: York House, Kingsway, London, W.C.2 ; 13a
Castle Street, Edinburgh 2 ; 39-41 King Street, Manchester 2 ; 1 St.
Andrew’s Crescent, Cardiff; Tower Lane, Bristol 1 ; 80 Chichester Street,
Belfast ; or through any bookseller. Printed in Great Britain by
Alabaster, Passmore & Sons, Ltd., London and Maidstone.
Wt. No. 3915. S.O. Code No. 55-235*


BRITISH COASTER
1939-1945
1. THEY LIVE BY THE TIDES
The coasters are the oldest of British sea services. From them the
sea power of the British Empire has sprung. Our history does not record
a time when the little ships of the trade were not using the waterways round
our coasts or making passages across the narrows to Continental ports.
Coasters were established carriers of heavy goods before the Romans built
their military roads in Britain. Until railways came and ate into their
business, coasters provided the principal means of heavy transport for these
islands. Nine hundred years ago the carrying of coal was already a large
part of their trade. It has remained so : and today coal provides two-
thirds of the total of coaster cargoes. The merchant adventurers, setting
out about their business of exploration and empire founding, recruited
seamen and ships from the coasting trade. The Royal Navy manned the
first of the King’s ships with men from the coasters. In all our wars the
coasters have played an important part. The Admiralty, in 1800, described
the men of the East Coast colliers as the finest seamen under the British flag
and their life as the hardest known to the seas. Yet coasters and their work
are, probably, the least known to the public of all our national services.
The coasters have never confined themselves to trading between the ports
and up the tidal rivers of these islands. From earliest times, some
adventurous master would seize the chance of fine weather to slip across the
narrows of the Straits of Dover and take his cargo to the near ports of the
Continent of Europe. During the Roman occupation little British ships
were doing a steady, if not quite regular, trade in wheat with the ports of
Gaul. So it has gone on. Much of the coasting tonnage is employed
continuously in the coasting trade proper—that is, between ports of the
British Isles. Similarly, there are the regular Continental traders. But
there is much interchange of employment between the coasting trade and
the home trade, which consists of all trade with Continental ports lying
between Brest and the Elbe. The term “coasters” can be used broadly
to include the ships of both, and there are few men engaged in either trade
who have not a sailor’s knowledge of the near Continental ports. For


The men of the coasters. They are men of a distinct type. Often their entire
route for ten or twenty years. And thus they acquire a specialised skill and
many centuries the coasters had been settled on their accustomed ways.
In the summer of 1940 they were driven from the trade with the Continent.
But they were not driven from the sea or from the coasting trade proper.
Through six hazardous years the coasters carried on.
The men of the coasters are of a type. Some have come in middle age
from the deep seas. Many more served their time in deep-sea ships but have
returned to the coast on which they were bred. Not a few, particularly in
the smaller tramps and estuarial craft, have served in narrow waters all their
lives. Whether they have come to it to be nearer their homes and families,
have left it only temporarily to gain wider experience, or have never left it,
the coast sets its mark on them. They think in terms of tides. Their lives
are ruled by tides. Their prosperity, their domestic plans, their standing
with their fellows, are influenced by catching tides or missing them.
At sea and ashore the master of a coaster probably has fewer people to
help him than any other master mariner. He is nearly always in waters
requiring very careful navigation. In the ports, which he enters or leaves
at intervals of a few days, his ship is commonly assigned the most inaccessible
berths, so that his ability to handle her is continually being tested. Fre-
quently acting as his own pilot, he must bring his ship up crowded rivers,
swing her in just sufficient space, and fit her smoothly—unless he is seeking
the scorn of critical onlookers—between two other ships into a space of
quay no more than a foot or two above her length. He must do this by day
and by night and very frequently. At any time the performance calls for
skill and nice judgment ; in war-time black-out conditions the dexterity
attained approached the uncanny.
Coaster wheelhouses were protected in the early years of the war by
concrete slabs, and later by plastic armour. Often this protection reduced
window space and necessarily restricted vision. There may be only one


lives are spent on the narrow seas. Sometimes they settle to the same ship and
knowledge, for which this country had good reason to be grateful during the war.
engine room telegraph on the bridge, and that outside the wheelhouse, so
that a master conning his ship to her difficult berth is called upon to exhibit
considerable physical activity. In order to maintain observation as the ship
goes ahead and astern in her complicated manoeuvres he must dash from one
wing of the bridge to the other, and must somehow contrive to be at the
telegraph when he needs, as he does every few seconds, to signal the engine
room. Being, probably, an elderly man, he may breathe a little heavily when
the ticklish operation is completed, but it is extremely rare for him to make a
blunder, although wind and tide may be doing all they can to assist the
darkness in hindering him. No man remains the master of a coaster unless
he is master of the art of handling ships.
At sea he has little leisure although, in the larger ships, he has two mates,
keeping watch and watch, to assist him in navigation. Nominally the
master keeps no watch. In normal times it may work out that way ; very
often it does not. The weather is the deciding factor. In coastal waters a
master is unlikely, in any circumstances, to risk his career by being anywhere
but on the bridge when the weather is exacting. In war, other hazards keep
him to his bridge. A tired first mate may hand over to his second, but the
still more tired master remains watching the sea—and the air.
The majority of the officers in coasting and home trade ships are not
strangers to blue water, but they prefer the narrow seas. Seeing their homes
and families at intervals which may be reckoned in days, not months or years,
attracts them. A settled life in the same ships, moving between the same
ports, is their fancy. They become settled not only to coasting but to a
particular branch of the calling. They belong to the east coast or to the
west, to the Hamburg trade, the near Continental or the North French.
They follow the sea, but they go no more a-roving. That is what stamps
them as a type.


On November 9th, 1939, on passage from the north, off the Tyne, an
elderly coaster struck a mine and sank within ten minutes. ‘ ‘ The loss of my
ship, ’ ’ wrote Captain J. O. Rowlands, master, ‘ ‘ was a severe blow to me ;
I had served in her for over sixteen years as chief officer and master. She was
well able to stand the strain of some of the northerly gales which we so often
encounter in the North Sea during the winter months. John Kerr, the
donkeyman, who was lost in her, had served with me for over sixteen years.
Mr. King, the second engineer, who was also lost in her, had served with us
for about nine years.” Two men serving sixteen years, another nine years,
in the same ship on the same trade, is evidence of the habits of the coast.
‘‘After the loss of this ship,” Captain Rowlands continued, ‘‘l was ashore
until December 14th, 1939, when I was sent to take command of this my
present ship, the s.s. Durham Coast ■ on the same trade—London to
Kirkcaldy. This vessel was built at Goole in 1912 for the London-Kirkcaldy
service. She served on this trade throughout the last war and sank an
enemy submarine off St. Abbs Head one morning, for which her captain,
W. T. King, received his D.S.C. I served as chief officer with Captain King
for a number of years in other ships of our Company after the last war. He
seemed quite proud of this vessel. Little I thought that I would be in
command of her this war. ’ ’
There is no need to elaborate Captain Rowlands’s statement; it explains
sufficiently the spirit of intimacy and loyalty between ships and the men
serving them which inspires the coasting trade.
In home waters, mates obtain in months experience of working and stowing
cargo which their fellows of the deep seas do not get in years. They are
always at it, constantly watching trim and draft in order to enter ports
where the depth of water is limited. At sea they can rarely hope for anything
better than watch and watch, for twelve hours on duty out of the twenty-four
is normal on many ships in the coasting trade. The first mate, of course, has
plenty to do when not on watch. Weather and war can easily reduce his
twelve hours off to nothing. With ‘ ‘ quick turn round ’ ’ dominating the ship,
mates do not associate ports with rest.
In a trade which demands from everybody hard work and long hours the
engineers, not usually young men, have something more than their share.
In the larger ships, carrying a chief, a second and a third engineer and a
donkeyman, there is no superfluity of leisure. Engines which are so con-
tinually stopping and starting, going ahead and astern, need attention. In
the smaller ships, and there are many, which carry only a chief engineer and
a second, no donkeyman and no greaser, there is nothing of ease at all. In
normal circumstances it is watch and watch in the engine room. Alone on
duty, an engineer must oil, grease, tend, maintain the revolutions ordered,
keep an eye on the fireman in the stokehold, and get to the controls when the
bridge signals down. At best, this work must be done for not less than twelve
hours out of the twenty-four ; but the engines must be kept turning. If
defects develop, they must be remedied ; and so it happens that the twelve-
hour working day often becomes a wry misnomer.
In convoy in war, the man on duty in the engine room is under a testing
BRITISH COASTER


strain. The engines may run sweetly, requiring nothing beyond routine
attention, yet the demand upon the lone watcher is heavy. Station keeping
in convoy is exacting ; the bridge is seldom silent for any long period. The
engineer does not know what is happening above, but he knows that much
may depend upon the promptness with which he obeys the order signalled to
him. If he is away from his controls when the bridge sends down an urgent
command, life and death may balance on the speed with which he moves in
confined and difficult spaces.
In length of working hours, firemen come off best. On other than
estuarial craft there are seldom less than three, so they can work in three
shifts, one on and two off; but the work of feeding and tending fires is
never light, and if the ship is lively in a seaway it is often intensely hard.
Ships ’ firemen are proverbially tough. They need to be. Like engineers and
The coastal seaman manifests a cheerful independence. But there is nothing wrong with
his discipline. Many were the accounts of heroism and endurance and devotion shown by
the men of the little, often unprotected ships, through five and a half years in the waters
round Great Britain —the most dangerous waters in the world during the war.
THEY LIVE BY THE TIDES


donkeymen they work at all times under trying conditions, which black-out
restrictions made worse. At night, when everything was closed down, the
atmosphere would be daunting to a nervous man. Day and night, below in
the stokehold, the firemen knew little of what was happening on deck.
Under enemy attack they continued stolidly with their job. At any moment
scalding death might burst from steam pipes or boilers ; green water might
pour through shattered plates. Despite extra emergency ladders, escape
from the stokehold would not be easy. They accepted the risks and
carried on.
Like everyone else in the trade the able and ordinary seamen work
somewhat longer hours than their fellows in deep-sea ships. They have
chosen the coast because they prefer a life which brings them home more
often. Their talk is much concerned with tides and times of arrival, and
with conjecture about length of stay in their home ports. This constant
preoccupation with the time-table and their considerable, almost family
intimacy with the other ships and seamen of the trade mark them as coasters.
For the rest, they have much the same skill and customs as other sailors.
The old men doubt whether the youngsters will ever make seamen. Those
who have seen the seven seas are not reticent in the presence of those who
have not. The young men, unable to deny their lesser experience, bolster
their pride by finding peculiarities in their elders. Often, when handling
wires and working winches, the youngsters wear gloves, accepting with
maddening indifference the scorn of the horny-handed veterans.
The coasting trade has its own ways with food. On tramps, colliers and
tankers, officers and men provide their own. In most ships there is a cook ;
often a steward, a cook and a boy are carried. The officers make their
messing arrangements with the steward or the cook, and usually the men do
the same. Provided that the cook knows his job and has the necessary time,
there is nothing wrong with the idea. The trouble arises when there is only
one cook, who is unable to prepare adequate meals for all, or when there is
no cook, or when the men choose to cook for themselves. There is an old
saying that a coasting seaman went to sea “with a pint and a pie,” which
modern opinion would hold to be an insufficiently balanced diet for a
hard-working male. Certainly, largely by their own choice, many men in
the smaller ships “lived out of a frying pan,” mainly on eggs and bacon.
In the early days of the war the catering system created difficulties.
Coasting ships arrived in port after the provision shops had closed, and sailed
again before they were open. That trouble was overcome, and some shops in
ports were allowed to supply hungry sailors with provisions at all hours.
Nevertheless, the matter of food and cooking in many coasters remained an
acute domestic problem, for there were still ships in which tired officers and
men, coming off watch, had to cook for themselves. Most sea cooks on the
coast know their job. The meals they produce are generally good, and they
produce them in the face of difficulties that would discourage many landsmen.
Hot, strong, sweet tea seems to be available in the galley at all hours.
A brass-bound stickler for etiquette will probably shudder when, in a
little ship, he hears a mate address his captain as “Skip,” or relieve him
BRITISH COASTER


at the wheel with the cheery announcement: ‘ ‘ Give you a spell, George.
Your tea’s ready.” In somewhat larger ships the spectacle of a tweed-
jacketed helmsman lounging with only one hand on the wheel will certainly
displease those who like everything according to the book. But there is
nothing wrong with discipline in the trade. Those familiar with the very
individual ways of the coasters have always known that. The Admiralty
knew it in 1800. It is made plain in the records of the war. Tales of men
standing steady in a mortally hit, sinking ship, waiting for the order to
abandon her ; reports of men returning to a foundering ship, because there
was still a glimmer of a chance of saving her, were not rare ; they were
common and normal.
2. SHIPS OF THE TRADE
The coasting trade divides its ships into five classes: liners, large
tramps, small tramps, tankers, and estuarial craft. A liner, in the sense in
which the trade uses the term, is a ship making regular passages between
fixed ports, carrying passengers or general cargo, or both. All the ships
of the cross-Channel passenger services are liners.
Many ships classed as tramps are really liners, in that they trade regularly
between fixed ports. Outstanding examples are some of the “flat-irons.”
These colliers are in a regular line service ; they do not tramp for cargo.
With almost monotonous punctuality in time of peace, seldom with
monotony and not quite so regularly in war, they carry their cargoes of coal
from north-east coast ports to their own particular wharves above the bridges
in the Port of London. To enable them to pass under bridges their funnels
are hinged and fold back flat, their masts are telescopic, their bridges, wheel-
houses and deckhouses squat and low : so the origin of their name is obvious.
Their business is on a line, a very definite line; they never tramp, but carry
coal, and coal only, to gas works and power stations ; but since they do not
handle general cargo they are officially tramps.
Generally speaking, the liners are owned by the larger companies. They
trade, in peace time, all round the British Isles, from England to the ports
between Hamburg and Brest, often farther afield to the Baltic, the Biscay
ports, the Mediterranean. Many of them carry a few passengers ; but
general cargo, consignments of mixed goods, known sometimes as parcels
cargo, constitute their livelihood. They maintain the sea links between
Great Britain and Ireland, the Orkneys', Shetlands and Hebrides, the Isle of
Man, the Isle of Wight, the Channel Isles and the Scillies. There is nothing
standard about liners ; they vary in make and shape. They range from new
motor ships with the latest fittings and carefully planned accommodation to
veteran steamships with solid panelling in their saloons, and other, not quite
SHIPS OF THE TRADE


IRISH CROSS-CHANNEL PASSENGER AND
CARGO VESSEL. Used as Hospital Ship.
LARGE COASTING STEAM COLLIER.
MOTOR COASTING TRAMP
COASTING CARGO AND PASSENGER LINER.
MEDIUM COASTING STEAM COLLIER
SMALL COASTING STEAM TRAMP.
BRITISH COASTER


SHORT SEA CARGO LINER.
COASTING COLLIER (FLAT-IRON).
SMALL STEAM ESTUARIAL CRAFT.
COASTING CARGO LINER.
MEDIUM COASTING STEAM TRAMP.
COASTING TANKER.
SHIPS OF THE TRADE


so pleasing, signs of a past age in shipbuilding. They seldom exceed 2,000
tons gross.
They are found and manned according to the ideas and finances of their
owners and in obedience to the laws governing their trade. It is rare to find
justified complaint about the way one of these liners is found. Manning
shows less uniformity. Some of the ships belonging to the larger companies
carry a master and two mates, chief, second and third engineers, a donkey-
man, a boatswain, a carpenter and four able seamen, four firemen, a steward
and an assistant, a cook and a cook’s boy ; those for a little ship around
2,000 tons. No one used to the ways of the sea would call such manning in-
adequate. At the other end of the scale of liner manning, one might find a
master and two mates, chief and second engineers, three able seamen, of
whom one acts as boatswain, a carpenter, two ordinary seamen, three
firemen, a cook-steward and a boy. That means hard work for everyone
at any time ; in war, it meant something more ; but the coaster’s is a
hard calling.
The large tramp, over 1,000 tons gross but seldom over 3,000 tons gross,
is usually a collier. Except that, almost invariably, she carries her funnel
and engines right aft, there is no more uniformity about her design than the
liners exhibit. It is her cargo which distinguishes her. She carries bulk,
or one commodity only (usually coal), whereas the liner carries general cargo.
Small tramps under 1,000 gross tons, carrying bulk cargo anywhere, picking
up trade when and where they can find it, form the largest class of the coasting
and home trade fleets. Coal is a large part of their business, but their ways
are much less fixed than those of the larger ships. Many are colliers pure
and simple ; many others may carry coal on one passage, and cement, ore,
grain or any other commodity on the next. Their knowledge of the ports
of the British Isles is extensive ; they are acquainted with many Continental
ports ; and they fit themselves into the most inaccessible berths. In a
literal sense they tramp the narrow seas.
The Diesel engine has affected them considerably, especially the smallest
tramps. The Dutchmen, developing this class of freighter, were competitors ;
but some British owners saw the way things were moving and turned to
similar little motor ships. The Dutch ships were often run by a master
owner with his family. In British ships the family relations were absent and
few are now operated by the owner-master, so familiar in the days of sail.
The future of the motor ship was proved. Larger ships were built with
Diesel engines. They spread from the small tramp class to the liner. When
the war came, the question had arisen whether, on account of economy in
running and saving in cargo space, the motor ship would replace steam on
the coast as surely as steam had ousted sail. The future may decide that
question ; the fact remains that the men serving the small tramps benefited
by the arrival of the motor ship.
A great many different companies own little ships ; there are still many
single-ship owners. The small tramp owners are very independent people,
pursuing independent ways, so there is even more variety in the small tramp
fleets and in their condition than among the large tramps and the liners.
BRITISH COASTER


They range from the new motor ship or steamship, well found and with
excellent accommodation, through the middle-aged (the largest group)
to the obsolete.
Any description covering them all is impossible, yet there is a type that
is very common. A squat, tubby little ship, somewhere between 150 ft. and
250 ft. in length, with a low fo’c’sle, bridge amidships and engines right
aft. Between the fo’c’sle and the bridge there is little freeboard. At sea,
the decks seem to be awash, and indeed, in rough weather, they are. These
ships are the colliers, and they preponderate because coal represents by far
the greatest individual commodity in the wide range of cargo carried. The
reason for their somewhat unusual construction is easy to understand. From
end to end of the gaping holds there is no obstruction to delay the stevedores
—nothing to impede the grabs with which coal is usually discharged. Great
massive things, these grabs, capable of discharging the little ships in a matter
of a few hours. Navigation is done from the bridge amidships, the upper
structure of which includes a small wheelhouse containing a very large wheel,
a large binnacle for the navigating compass, and an engine-room telegraph.
The wheel is connected direct to the steam steering engine, which is im-
mediately abaft it. It is very large because it has a dual purpose to serve.
It can be used in hand gear as well as in steam. (It is common practice to
use hand gear at sea, for it saves steam on deck.) The wheel’s great size
enables a man in the wheelhouse to secure and keep one hand on the spokes
while he works the lever of the engine-room telegraph or, when docking,
moves to the side to judge in one short glance the helm required to bring
the ship alongside the quay. Below the bridge and wheelhouse there is a
miniature chart room and, either leading from it or from a compartment next
door, a steep, narrow ladder somewhat difficult of negotiation by lengthy
or bulky men.
The ladder leads down to the officers’ cabin or saloon, a small oblong
room athwartship with small scuttles looking out forward so that the
occupants may keep an eye on what is going on outside and obtain some
daylight. The furnishing is almost standard ; wood panelling covers the
steel bulkheads ; a settee has a narrow table fixed before it, and swivel chairs
upon the opposite side. Over the table there is a hanging lamp, easily hit
by unwary heads. A cupboard or sideboard is built into one corner, a square
affair with brass rails, fiddles permanently in place, round the top. There
is a stove, capable of raising the temperature of the cabin to the altitude
beloved by sailors, with a stove-pipe in the centre of the bulkhead opposite
the settee. Somewhere on the bulkheads is fixed a clock, and probably an
aneroid barometer. At each end of the saloon a door leads to a sleeping
cabin. By tradition the master is housed to starboard, the mate to port.
Each sleeping cabin has a bunk, with drawers beneath it, against the side of
the ship ; a tiny settee, also with drawers beneath it; one of those peculiar
washstands in which the basin tips up into a species of wooden cabinet
crowned with a mirror and shelves and, in theory, ejects its contents into a
hidden container. If room permits, there are a hanging cupboard, a chair,
and even a table. In addition to the three rooms, according to the standard
SHIPS OF THE TRADE


The last of sail: Thames spritsail barges. These
of the ship, there may or there may not be a lavatory tucked somewhere
beneath the ladder. That is the navigating officers’ accommodation. Such
quarters might not suit people who demand in ships airiness and luxury to
mitigate their preoccupation with the danger and uncertain movements of
the sea. But usually these little living-places are snug enough and have the
unmistakable atmosphere of a home.
Across steel decks, abaft the after hatch, the rest of the ship’s company
is housed. The chief and second engineers have cabins furnished much
like those of the navigating officers, and a small messroom that opens direct
to the deck. The galley, situated right aft, the wash places and the lavatories
all open to the deck. The seamen and firemen are housed below, probably
on different sides of the ship and almost invariably in separate quarters.
These quarters, reached by steep, narrow ladders, are not spacious, but there
is room to move in them when men have acquired the habit of living in
confined spaces. Getting round the table in the messroom in order to sit
down may, sometimes, not be easy. Tall men must move their heads warily.
The stoves are capable of producing the temperature demanded, but in warm
weather ventilation is difficult. Such accommodation has housed sailors in
many ships, on many seas, for many years, and belongs to the age when ships’
architects were apt to fit in rather than to plan accommodation ; but it
would be grossly unfair to suggest that the majority of owners have not
attempted, by the introduction of steel-frame bunks and steel lockers, better
washing and lavatory arrangements, improved galleys, facilities for drying
clothes, and by all means possible, to bring it more into line with modem
ideas.


picturesque craft are classed as coasters , too.
Such little ships as these are often manned by a master and a mate, chief
and second engineers, three able seamen, one of whom acts as boatswain, two
ordinary seamen, three firemen and a cook. There is not much leisure,
therefore, for anybody aboard them. They are in and out of port every few
days. With so few men serving them it is not possible for them to look
anything but work-worn ; yet in the vast majority of cases there are signs
that pride is taken in the appearance of the ship. At sea, weather and
circumstances permitting, her mate, like the chief officer of some great ocean
passenger liner, will order the ship to be painted. There the similarity ends ;
for, being shorthanded, the mate will not simply order painting, but will do
his share of the work. Because all hands of the watch, and the mate, are
busy with pot and brush, making the most of fine weather, the master alone
in the wheelhouse will take the wheel. There can be scarcely anything more
illustrative of the spirit and pride of the coasters than the spectacle of mate
and crew smartening ship for the critical eyes of her fellows in her next port
of call, with the master at the wheel.
Coasting tankers, which came into service during the war of 1914-18,
are designed to carry petrol, fuel, lubricating and edible oils, molasses,
tar and the like around the coasts. Most are under 1,000 tons gross, though
there is a fair proportion of larger vessels and a very few quite large ships.
In war, the majority were allocated to special services.
The term “estuarial craft’’ covers many types of small vessels trading
in the estuaries and up tidal rivers. They range from the Thames spritsail
barge, the last of sail, to modem motor craft. The spritsail barges of the
Thames could be seen in times of peace along the south coast, as far north


as the Humber, and in some of the near Continental ports. Throughout
the war some of them continued to trade between the Thames and East
Anglian ports. Besides these more adventurous craft of the estuaries, many
power barges and small steamships of only a few tons trade in the Clyde and
the Forth, the London River and the Bristol Channel.
All the classes together form a very considerable and very mixed fleet.
To maintain that there has been in recent years little change or improvement
is surely simple ignorance of the facts. The new ships that have been built
are good ships. In most of the older ships alterations and improvements are
being made continually. Much has been done in the past decade, even
though much may remain to be done. Of course bad ships are still afloat—
but what proud city consists entirely of fine new buildings?
3. DUNKIRK
Many were the occasions in this war on which coasters, while engaged
in their normal avocations, found themselves involved in more stirring
adventure. Such is the tale of the s.s. Dotterel (Captain I. Green, master).
On May 9th, 1940, she was loading cargo in the Merwerhaven Schiedam. At
22.00 hrs. her people knocked olf and settled down for the night; but at
about 03.15 hrs. on the following morning Captain Green was awakened by
gunfire. “Never thinking of invasion,” he writes, “I was in no hurry to
turn out. I thought it was just a Dutch air-raid exercise. However, curiosity
getting the better of me, I took a peep on deck. It did not take very many
seconds to convince me that this was no exercise but the real thing. There
appeared to be scores of planes in the sky, and the Waalhaven airport was
being heavily bombed. . . . About 05.00 hrs., paratroops began dropping
just across the river Maas and planes were dropping magnetic mines in the
fairway. . . . Reports were coming through that the Germans were
advancing on Rotterdam. Under the circumstances I felt justified in making
arrangements to destroy my ship. ...”
So Captain Green destroyed all secret papers and documents, made the
12-pounder ready for destruction and the ammunition handy for heaving
overboard. In consultation with the chief engineer plans were settled for the
total destruction of the engines and boilers as well as for the scuttling of
the ship. People ashore, believed to be fifth columnists, were asking when the
ship was going to leave and were being told that she was there for the duration.
To strengthen the impression that the ship and her company were resigned to
their fate, the crew were instructed to dress for going ashore, to pack their
bags and to put them on the hatch in full view of everybody. Captain Green
was thorough in his preparations. People ashore ceased to interest
themselves in a ship so ready to be abandoned by her crew. Captain Green
BRITISH COASTER


then tried, unsuccessfully, to get in touch with the British naval authorities.
He learned, however, that Captain C. H. A. Cartwright, R.N., while
attempting to recover the striker of the Dotterel's 12-pounder, which under
neutrality rules had been impounded while the ship was in port, had been
killed by German paratroops.
All that day German planes flew low over the ship ; but they did not
attack her. News of heavy fighting around the Maas station and airport
came through ; but as the planes roared overhead continually, Captain
Green could see no hope of leaving in daylight. When darkness fell, it was
possible to judge the battle line from explosion flashes and burning buildings.
The crew spent the night, which seemed very long to them, watching. At
daylight on May 11th, the attack on the Waalhaven appeared to be ceasing.
“By 11.30 hrs.,” Captain Green’s report continues, “I was certain that
there were less planes in the sky and that they appeared to be concentrated on
the city, so at a signal the moorings were cut fore and aft and the engines
set to full speed. Before the few people on the quay had recovered from their
surprise we had cleared the Merwerhaven. The tide was ebb, so we made
good progress, and keeping out of the fairway and steering on the wrong side
of the buoys we arrived at the Hook of Holland. ’ ’ There, since he had
destroyed his own charts and signal books, Captain Green had to ask for a
route across the North Sea from one of our destroyers, which was in action
against paratroops. Before he had obtained it, a Dutch naval officer brought
instructions from the Legation at the Hague for the Dotterel, as the only
available ship, to proceed to Ymuiden to evacuate the British colony.
“Without waiting for either route or charts,’’ Captain Green writes, “we
proceeded to Ymuiden. Navigating from memory we arrived there about
20.30 hrs., and the Naval Commander berthed us close to the lock gates,
saying, ‘You can turn in, Captain. He won’t bomb you in this berth.’
And he didn’t.’’
Next morning the Dotterel prepared to receive 150 refugees. The ’tween
decks were cleared and straw was laid down ; drinking vessels were placed
at intervals; and gangways were put into position for access to the accom-
modation. Captain Green was thorough in his arrangements, but he
could not supply food for 150 people. At 18.00 hrs. that day, her prepara-
tions complete, the Dotterel moved to a berth more suitable for embarking
passengers. ‘ ‘ This new berth was soon spotted by German planes. During
the whole period of embarkation, at 23-minute intervals, the enemy planes
were overhead, while others were laying mines in the channel.” By
01.30 hrs. on May 18th, the last refugee was on board and the Dotterel
sailed. She arrived at Harwich “without further incident.” “As we
steamed towards the harbour,” Captain Green concludes his report, “the
Queen of Holland passed us, standing on the deck of a destroyer. On
arrival I handed over several packages of diamonds of great value to the
naval authorities. ’ ’
The matchless story of Dunkirk might well be called the epic of the little
ships ; spritsail barges from the Thames, small motor ships, colliers, tramps,
liners, cross-Channel packets and pleasure steamers. Some of them, when
DUNKIRK


Dunkirk: the men who waited and the little ships to which they
usually without anti-aircraft guns and, of course, without air
of the B.E.F. The coasters bore the main burden of the evacua
the order came, were already in service, carrying stores to the Army in
France ; and many continued with their jobs, taking their stores to French
ports and returning by way of Dunkirk to load troops. Others, at the urgent
summons, left their ordinary business in English ports and sailed blindly,
gallantly, on an adventure utterly strange.
On Sunday evening, May 19th, 1940, the Admiralty sent out to owners a
most urgent request that six degaussed vessels—it was stressed that the ships
must be protected against the magnetic mine—should proceed immediately
to the Downs and report to the Vice-Admiral, Dover, for orders. The
message reached the ships available within two hours. Six ships were
dispatched that night, and the last of them was in position in the Downs by
the afternoon of Monday, May 20th. That, for the coasters, was the
beginning. The thing grew and expanded. More calls were made. The
insistence on degaussing equipment was forgotten. Small Dutch motor
coasters, which had escaped from Holland, were placed at the disposal
of the Admiralty by the Ministry of War Transport, manned by naval officers
and ratings and sailed under the White Ensign. Many of the cross-Channel
packets and pleasure steamers had already been taken over. Other coasters
went independently within an hour or two of receiving the summons.


owed their rescue. Under continuous attack from the Luftwaffe ,
cover, the coasters draw into the beaches and the patient queues
tion. Stoutly they answered the call. And heavily they paid.
Like so many of her kind, the Queen of the Channel —in other days a
pleasure steamer known to many holiday-makers—had been requisitioned
for troop carrying. A fast motor ship with good accommodation, she was
for some months on daily service to Boulogne ; and once again she carried
holiday-makers. She was a leave boat. Her armament was five Lewis guns.
Then her work changed, and she carried the Irish Guards to Boulogne for the
final defence of the port. On May 27th, 1940, she was ordered to Dunkirk.
She berthed at the East Pier about 20.00 hrs. that night and began loading
troops, but, the German guns having found the range of the pier before she
had more than fifty soldiers aboard, she was ordered to move. She anchored
about three-quarters of a mile off the beach, and using four of her boats —
she dared not use them all, for she might be hit and need boats for the men
already aboard —proceeded to ferry troops from the shore. About 200 men
had been brought aboard when, shortly after 23.00 hrs., it being then dark,
the ship was ordered back to the East Pier, where embarkation would be
more rapid. Three boats were collected ; nothing is known of the fate of
the fourth. At the East Pier again the Queen of the Channel embarked
another 700 men ; and she left Dunkirk at 02.55 hrs. on May 28th with
950 troops aboard.


Captain O’Dell, the master, ordered all troops below at dawn, although
they showed no desire to obey. At 04.15 hrs. a German aircraft approached
on the starboard bow, about 2,000 feet up. It circled and dived on the
port beam, and was met by fire from the five Lewis guns. Three or four
bombs straddled the ship. Though not directly hit, the Queen of the Channel
was lifted by the explosion and broke her back. The wireless aerial was
carried away, No. 5 boat was blown across the deck, the stern dipped ; but
below there were no casualties among the troops. The wireless aerial was
re-hoisted, and an SO S call was sent out. The four remaining boats were
lowered. Captain O ’Dell ordered all troops from below to move forward in
order to lift the after end as much as possible. Pumps were started on two
after lower saloons, but the water gained. The German aircraft came in on a
second run, was met again by the fire of Lewis guns ; dropped bombs, again
missed; flew off. Captain O’Dell was faced with the prospect of
abandoning ship, with only four boats to accommodate 950 passengers and
his crew ; but the s.s. Dorrien Rose now took a hand in the proceedings.
The impossible has been achieved. The all-powerful German Army has been
ships that have done it —humble craft of a few hundred tons. Doggedly now the
troops. Often these small ships carried 1,500 troops apiece: one ship of only
BRITISH COASTER


The Dorrien Rose, an elderly tramp of 1,400 deadweight tons, was com-
manded by Captain W. Thompson. Mr. T. O’Hanlon was the mate, Mr, B.
Murphy the chief engineer, and Mr. P. McFadden the boatswain. All told
she carried a crew of thirteen, with a naval gunner, W. Watson, to handle
her twin Lewis guns. She had been engaged for some time on the business
of carrying stores to the Army in France and, on May 27th, when she received
orders to proceed to Dunkirk, had general stores in her holds and petrol in
containers as a deck cargo. She left the Downs, where she had been sent to
await orders, about midday with instructions to proceed by a certain route
and land her stores. “No one on board,” Captain Thompson reports,
“had the least idea of the momentous operation in which we and ®ur ship
had to play a part. . . . For my part, i was concerned with the intricacies
of the approaches to Dunkirk. ... I was in the chartroom laying off my
courses when it first dawned on me that there was anything unusual about
the trip. The chief officer on watch on the bridge whistled down the voice
pipe and informed me that a passing ship had signalled us, ‘Unsafe to
cheated of its mighty aim of encirclement and annihilation. And these are the
coasters head back to England. The ship in the foreground is carrying French
450 gross tons (the Bullfinch) took on 1,400 troops who waded out to her.
DUNKIRK


approach. Dunkirk in flames. ’ We were within ten miles of the port, and
being almost dark it looked and sounded appalling. So I decided to reverse
my course and to proceed seaward until daylight would present a better
opportunity of observing what was happening ashore. ’ ’
So the Dorrien Rose, with orders to take stores to Dunkirk, anchored off
Nieuport until day would let her see whether she could take her cargo of
petrol to a port that was burning. As she lay at anchor a small motor boat
approached her, hailed and asked for the course to Nieuport. The voice
calling in the darkness spoke good but not quite real English. It told the
Dorrien Rose to remain where she was until the boat returned later with
orders. Captain Thompson did not like that. Consulting them, he found
that neither the mate nor the chief engineer liked it. They were all suspicious
of the men who hailed in the dark in such very good English. The Dorrien
Rose moved. Later she spoke to two Dutch motor vessels who said that they
were making for Dunkirk. At 03.30 hrs., with the first of the day showing,
the Dorrien Rose headed for Dunkirk too. There were sounds of aerial
activity. The twin Lewis was manned by the gunner, ‘ ‘ who appeared to have
a personal grudge against Jerry, as he swore every time he fired, ’ ’ with two
seamen standing by to replenish ammunition pans. Daylight showed many
ships heading for Dunkirk, and many which looked afloat but really were
sitting on the bottom in shallow water. Enemy aircraft were busy.
Chief Engineer Murphy, going below, saw a troopship just missed by
bombs. He thought her lucky ; but later, down in the engine room, he got a
message that proved him wrong. The ship was the Queen of the Channel,
and she was sinking. The Dorrien Rose was going alongside. The two ships
were secured port bow to starboard bow to prevent troops in the Queen
of the Channel from massing at one side and listing her. The transfer of
wounded, troops and equipment proceeded. “The operation,” says
Captain Thompson, “was carried out in thirty-five minutes, despite three
attempts by Jerry to intervene ; one determined gunner cooled his ardour
with tracer bullets.” With over a thousand souls aboard—her normal
complement being thirteen'—the Dorrien Rose cast off and made for Dover,
where she arrived at 14.20 hrs. after being attacked eight times by enemy
aircraft. “We were now very well armed,” Captain Thompson states, “as
there were numerous machine-gun squads among the army units. . . .
As we passed into the comparative safety of the Downs we had the cheering
satisfaction of seeing our last attacker baling out, but to whose shot I
don’t know. ’ ’
Having discharged the troops at Dover, the Dorrien Rose took in water and
stores and left for Dunkirk again the following afternoon. Proceeding,
she struck some submerged object, ‘ ‘ apparently steel construction. ’ ’ This
delayed her, and she was making water in the engine-room bilges when she
proceeded again. She did not arrive at Dunkirk until next morning.
May 30th. There, “the prospect was far from pleasing, as the last ten miles
to the port were littered with sunken and blazing ships. . . . Bombers were
paying us frequent visits. . . . The port lay under a pall of oily smoke and
flames. There was no one to look to for instructions, so we poked into
BRITISH COASTER


This coaster has been run ashore. Her crew will suffer acute anxiety till she is
refloated. But otherwise the men on the beach could never have reached her.
Meanwhile she is a stationary target for the swarming German aircraft.
Dunkirk beach: the melancholy aftermath. A photograph by a Belgian
photographer. These Thames spritsail barges did not hesitate to match
themselves against the most modern armaments of the twentieth century.


the harbour. Someone ashore gestured us alongside a battered wall.”
For two hours, ‘ ‘ in which it seemed there were always bombers overhead, ’ ’
the Dorrien Rose remained at the battered wall, loading troops who arrived
in small parties. Other troops ran down the quay to catch food thrown to
them. During that time the chief engineer was very busy at the back end of
the boilers, fitting tube stoppers. He was anxious about his elderly engines,
that they should be ready to give their full horsepower and more in getting
away ; but at the back of the boilers he could feel the concussion of exploding
bombs. With 600 troops aboard, the Dorrien Rose was ordered to leave at
12.30 hrs. Two bombs just missed her as she left the harbour. “The
Channel was now a navigator’s nightmare, with buoys missing, wrecks and
wreckage all over the place.” The boatswain found another strangeness.
“That’s the first time,” he said, “that I’ve ever left Dunkirk without having
to round up the crew out of the cafes. ’ ’
After landing her troops at Folkestone at 20.45 hrs., the Dorrien Rose
had to anchor outside. She could not return to Dunkirk. Her elderly
engines had protested against the abnormal high pressure steaming. The
engineers spent the night in trying to repair the starboard boiler, and while
the ship lay there the Germans dropped six magnetic mines around her.
“An open-mouthed crew watched minesweepers explode these the following
morning. ’ ’ She lay all that day at the anchorage ; received orders for
Newhaven on the afternoon of Saturday, June Ist; limped off, and arrived
on the afternoon of Sunday. She had been at work for six days and nights
with a minimum of rest for everyone and none for the engineers ; she had
transported some 1,600 persons to England ; and, but for her engines, she
would have continued with the job. For their services her master, her mate
and her chief engineer received the Distinguished Service Cross ; her boat-
swain, her determined gunner and able seaman J. Upperton the Distinguished
Service Medal.
The s.s. Yewdale (Captain E. Jones, M.8.E., master), a small tramp of
823 tons gross, and the motor vessel Sequacity, a few tons larger (Captain J.
MacDonald) were sent off together from the Downs on May 27th. Their
orders were to proceed to Dunkirk ; for what purpose they were not told.
The pair left in the afternoon in choppy weather. Not far out the Sequacity
started to make water. Captain Jones, taking his ship alongside her, asked
what she would do. The master of the Sequacity answered, “Go on to
Dunkirk and get repaired.” So, in ignorance of what was happening at
their destination, the two little ships went on. During the night the Yewdale
picked up survivors from a raft, three British soldiers and two French, who
told Captain Jones that Dunkirk had been occupied by the Germans that
morning. Believing this, and as the Sequacity was in need of repair, the two
ships turned towards England, Yewdale leading.
With the dawn German aircraft attacked them, but a Gladiator appeared
and the enemy went off. The Gladiator came low alongside the Yewdale,
and the pilot signalled that the Sequacity was sinking. In the excitement of
the attack the Yewdale had not been observing her consort, which was limping
along some distance astern. Going about, the Yewdale rescued the crew of
BRITISH COASTER


the Sequacity from their boats and was there to see the bombed ship sink.
That was at 10.30 on the morning of May 28th. The Yewdale landed her
survivors at Deal about noon. She filled up with fresh water and stores and
got away again about 20.00 hrs. This time she went in company with two
motor vessels, the Beal (Captain J. W. Lily), and the Bullfinch (Captain H.
Buxton, M.8.E.), both smaller than herself. She anchored off the beach at
about 04.00 hrs. on May 29th. There, at first, she used her own boats to
ferry troops from the shore. Captain Jones reports that one of his ordinary
seamen, George Mackenzie, age 16, did such great work teaching soldiers to
row that there was never any doubt that he commanded his boat. Later,
flat-bottom motor launches, manned by the Royal Navy, helped ; but
Mackenzie still held his first command. Things were “pretty good, con-
sidering,” until about 15.00 hrs. when the bombing became serious. At
16.00 hrs. the Yewdale was ordered to leave. Normally she carried a
complement of eleven ; by then she had taken aboard some 900 troops.
Leaving, she thought she had done not too badly.
The Yewdale is a typical small tramp, with accommodation such as has been
described. Leaving the beach, she had in the master’s sleeping cabin eight
seriously wounded men. In the saloon, the mate’s cabin and the lavatory,
she packed twenty-seven officers. Wherever she could stow soldiers she
stowed them ; some were wounded, most of them were exhausted. Among
them a lieutenant of the R.A.M.C. did good work ; and he had much work
to do, for on her passage home, for approximately one hour between 17.10
and 18.10, she was attacked by enemy aircraft. Her armament was two
Lewis guns and a Bren. A sergeant of the Durham Light Infantry put in
some good shooting with the port Lewis and brought down one of the
attackers, but the Yewdale was badly hit. The wheelhouse was partly
destroyed, and the binnacle was smashed. Captain Jones had to borrow a
compass from one of the army officers. The ship’s sides were holed in
several places, and steam pipes were broken. Altogether, seven of the
soldiers were killed and seventy-seven wounded. The mate received a wound
that permanently disabled him, and others of the crew were hit. The
Yewdale limped on. From the battered bridge and wheelhouse Captain
Jones had ‘ ‘ a grandstand view of the Beal jumping out of the water, ’ ’ when
bombs straddled but did not disable her.
The Yewdale anchored off Deal about 23.00 hrs. on May 29th and signalled
ashore for medical aid, getting no acknowledgment until a lifeboat came out
at 06.00 hrs. with a doctor. At 08.00 hrs. she landed her troops at Ramsgate.
She was then leaking too badly for further immediate service, so Captain
Jones asked for another ship in which he and the unwounded members of
his crew could return to Dunkirk. Between May 27th and 30th, both
master and mate of the Yewdale celebrated their birthdays. It was a party
they will remember.
The Bullfinch, when she reached Dunkirk, was ordered to beach. Captain
Buxton did not like that order, no master does, but he obeyed it. So, being
on the beach, this small ship of 450 tons (gross) was able to take on board
1,400 troops, who waded out to her and climbed aboard. At times it seemed
DUNKIRK


unlikely that she and her crowd of soldiers would leave the beach, for she
nearly broached to. Yet eventually she was refloated and got under way.
Luckily her armament was then increased by two army Bren guns ; for on the
passage home the Bullfinch was twice attacked by enemy planes. Among
the troops was a certain Sergeant Head who came aboard with a Bren gun ;
he obtained the master’s permission to organise the A.A. defences. By
holding the fire of the guns under his command until the attacking planes
flattened out at the end of their dives, he succeeded in shooting down one
plane during each of the two attacks. When the Bullfinch reached England,
Sergeant Head walked ashore and was lost in the crowd. The owners had
great trouble in tracing him so that he could be decorated for conduct which
probably saved this ship and the lives of many of those who came in her.
There was the s.s. Fenella (Captain W. Cubbon), ordered at Dover to fill
up with oil and proceed to Dunkirk. Delay occurred in getting alongside
the oil store ship. “It seemed to me,” Captain Cubbon states, “that we
would stand a poor chance of getting any oil that day, and as my officers and
crew were anxious to make the trip to Dunkirk I consulted with the chief
engineer. ’ ’ The chief thought that he had just enough oil on board to take
the ship there and back at economic speed, so the Fenella took a chance
and sailed.
She arrived at Dunkirk about 13.00 hrs. on May 29th, was delayed in
entering the harbour to avoid a heavy bombing raid, then berthed on the
east side of the East Jetty and lay there all afternoon, loading troops and
stretcher cases. When she had taken between 600 and 700 troops on board,
about 17.00 hrs. she received a direct hit on the promenade deck, which did
considerable damage. A few minutes later part of the concrete jetty was
blown through the ship’s side into the engine room, which was flooded.
Another bomb, falling between the ship and the jetty, completed the wreck of
the engines.
The Fenella being doomed, the troops she had on board were disembarked,
while her Lewis gunners, members of her own crew and two Bren gunners
from the Army kept up fire at the attacking aircraft. Having satisfied
himself that no one remained aboard, Captain Cubbon reported to the
Embarkation Officer and suggested that, if tugs could be obtained, he would
tow the Fenella away from the jetty and free the berth. No vessel capable of
towing was available, so the Embarkation Officer told Captain Cubbon and
his officers to go aboard the Crested Eagle, which had already received the
troops and most of the crew from the Fenella. ‘ ‘ Unfortunately, ’ ’ Captain
Cubbon concludes his report, ‘ ‘ this ship was herself bombed and set on fire
within ten minutes of leaving the jetty, and had to be beached. I regret to
say this caused a number of casualties, among them sixteen of the Fenella's
crew, who lost their lives. ’ ’ So, after all, the question of whether the Fenella
had enough oil to take her home was not decided.
These are a few examples, from the many recorded, of the actions of
individual ships. Here is a story that suggests the whole picture. The
Lady of Mann (Captain T. C. Woods, 0.8. E., master) was on passage from
Dunkirk to Dover on the morning of June 4th when she ran into dense fog,
BRITISH COASTER


about a mile east of the North Goodwin light vessel, and anchored. A
destroyer took up position close under the packet’s stern and commenced
sounding her whistle. ‘ ‘She kept it going all the time the fog lasted, about
45 minutes, ’ ’ Captain Woods states. “ The fog cleared very suddenly, and the
sight which met one’s eyes will ever be remembered by those who saw it.
Two to three hundred small craft of all sizes and descriptions, laden with
soldiers from Dunkirk, had gathered round the destroyer in response to her
call.” That was Dunkirk from the coasters’ angle: hundreds of small
merchant ships doing their own work by themselves but at the call of the
Royal Navy.
4. THE INDESTRUCTIBLE HIGHWAY
Plans for the organization of transport in war did not wait, of course,
for the outbreak of hostilities. They were ready far in advance of the event;
and although they were changed and improved as circumstances demanded,
the original structure remained. For instance, the Ministry of Shipping
and the Ministry of Transport were merged under the title of the
Ministry of War Transport so as to bring all transport by land and sea
under unified control. There were other changes designed to ensure that the
various means of transport should work together as parts of a whole.
The men charged with the plans for organizing the coasting and home trade
for war had to deal with some problems which past experience enabled them
to estimate with accuracy, and with others, notably those concerning war in
the air, at which they could but guess. They need not discuss the convoy
question, for example, for the last war had settled the general procedure.
They had to judge, however, whether too much or too little was being made
of the possible effects of bombing from the air, shaping their arrangements
accordingly. The old problem of making fewer ships do more work
remained. In war the Admiralty, of necessity, would commandeer many
ships ; shipping casualties, too, were likely to be heavy. War increases the
time taken on a given passage. Admiralty routeing and the slowness of
convoys must cause considerable delay. A typical coaster voyage from the
Tyne to London and back, which in peace time would take six days, takes
twice as long on an average in war. To counteract as far as possible the
formidable lengthening of voyages, a ship must load and unload quickly,
must not sail in ballast when it can be avoided economically, must not
remain a day or an hour longer in any given port than is absolutely necessary.
Her movements must be planned in conjunction with the large movements of
cargoes. When a ship can use both sides for loading or unloading cargo,
she must not use only one.
There was, however, more unfamiliar ground to be explored. In the
THE INDESTRUCTIBLE HIGHWAY


war of 1914-18, really serious damage to the main ports had scarcely been
considered. Plans for the war that was approaching could not possibly
ignore the likelihood of widespread damage to the ports, to the railways and
to the roads. Heavy attacks from the air might affect inland transport
seriously, not only by congesting traffic but by destroying the ways along
which it moves. One answer to the menace was the indestructible highway
of the sea round Britain. If, temporarily, a port were closed by air attack,
ships could be sent to another port. If one or more of the great ports
capable of receiving the large, deep-sea ships on whose cargoes the national
life depends were put out of action or crippled, there was still an answer.
Round our coasts there are, most fortunately, many anchorages where the
big ships can lie secure from the weather, discharging their vital merchandise
into smaller ships, the coasters, which can use the smaller ports denied by
insufficient depth of water to the large vessels.
The little ships of the coasting and home trade were always important
links in the chain of transport; the menace of air attack made them in-
dispensable. Without them, in certain eventualities, the connection between
imports and their island users might snap. The men entrusted with the job
of organising the work of the little ships had, almost without exception,
spent their working lives handling and controlling the very individual
shipping of the coasting and home trade. They comprised the Coasting and
Short Sea Division of the Ministry of War Transport, which was the central
co-ordinating authority.
The coasts of the British Isles, other than those of Eire, were divided
into nine administrative areas : London, Southampton, Cardiff, Liverpool,
Belfast, Glasgow, Leith, Newcastle, and Hull. In each area, with its
headquarters in the ports named, a Coasting and Short Sea Shipping Control
Committee, composed of men professionally experienced, co-ordinated the
work of the coasters. The liner tonnage operated under requisition, and the
tramp vessels under voyage licences at controlled rates of freight. The
Coasting Control Committees administered the licensing system and had
representatives at the majority of the ports in their areas. So, from the
Ministry in London to the smallest port, there was complete and smooth
co-ordination of coastal activities.
Every voyage of every coaster was brought under scrutiny, and under the
licensing and requisitioning powers vessels could not leave port unless the
voyage, the cargo and the rate of freight were approved. Individual ships or
blocks of tonnage could be transferred from one part of the coast to another
or from one trade to another as circumstances dictated ; quick adjustments
of programmes were assured to meet sudden emergencies and priority
requirements. The control of shipping was complete.
In the grand strategy of transport in war, a movement was planned at
headquarters. It might be a seasonal movement such as the carriage of seed
potatoes from Scotland, or an exceptional movement such as the carriage of
troops and munitions. London allotted to the railways, the roads, the canals
and the sea their appropriate function for that movement. The Coasting
and Short Sea Division detailed certain of its ships for their part in it.
BRITISH COASTER


THE INDESTRUCTIBLE HIG H WAY, 1939-1945.


One of the great problems in war time was to use the ports to their full
capacity without crowding them with idle shipping, while, at the same time,
putting as much traffic on the seas as possible. The business of preventing
congestion in the ports belonged to the shore staffs—to the Ministry of War
Transport, to the port authorities, to the shipping firms, the railways, the
road hauliers and the dock workers. It involved planning, organisation,
hard work and sudden, difficult, emergency improvisation. The control of
the crowded seaways was primarily the job of the Royal Navy. Many wars
had proved the necessity for merchant ships to move in convoy, but no war
made seamen like the procedure. The coaster had to do her best to behave
in orderly fashion in the hated assembly. It was not always easy.
Not only our own ships were engaged in the waters round our coasts.
There was a whole fleet from elsewhere : ships from Norway, Holland,
Belgium, Greece, Poland, France, and from neutral countries, some three to
four hundred of them. Chartered to the British Government, and manned
sometimes by their own nationals, sometimes by British crews, sometimes
by a mixture of nationals, they gave great service. Losses on the coast were
heavy, at times grim. Damage to ports was considerable ; yet, by skilful
repair, by the restoring to activity of little seaports which had long been
asleep, by the use of anchorages, and above all, by organisation, a full tally
of cargoes was loaded and discharged. Losses were made good. Living
seamen replaced fallen comrades. By 1945, more coasters were in operation
than at the beginning of the war ; but the feat was not easily achieved.
The Battle of Britain and the months of heavy air attack that followed it
entailed much redistribution of shipping round these islands. The deep-sea
ships with their precious supplies from overseas were too valuable to be risked
on the south coast, and, for the same reason, they were able to make only
limited use of the east coast ports. They had to use to the fullest possible
extent the west coast ports and anchorages, which were farthest removed
from easy and frequent attack. The coasters were left to carry seaborne
cargo in the more dangerous waters. That was the first change. The
second was the restriction to a bare minimum of coaster traffic through the
Straits of Dover and along the south coast. That could be achieved by
sending ships northabout round Scotland. The route from London to the
Mersey or the Bristol Channel by way of the Pentland Firth is long, and in
winter unpleasant, but it was by this route that the main flow of cargo from
east to west had now to go.
There were, however, many things that had to be carried by sea to the
south, and not the least of these was coal. The railways, already over-
burdened, could not accept the additional task of carrying coal, normally
shipped coastwise, from the Northumberland and Durham coalfields.
Portsmouth, Southampton, Plymouth, and other southern towns, could not
produce gas and electricity without east coast coal. Many of their public
utility undertakings were equipped largely, if not solely, to receive coal
supplies by sea. Unless war production in the south were to be jeopardized,
coal must be sent by sea. It went in selected coasters of the Channel convoys.
Sending the deep-sea ships from the east and south tested to the utmost
BRITISH COASTER


the adaptive powers of the directors of shipping at the Ministry, and placed
a heavy burden on the west coast ports. Liverpool, for war purposes, took
the place of London as the first port of England: but, during a war, she
could neither increase her dock capacity nor enlarge her berthing space,
apart from equipping berths not normally used by deep-sea ships. She had,
in fact, to anticipate what actually happened, that her capacity would be
temporarily reduced by air attack. She had to face and make provision for
congestion. The big ships had to be turned round and got away again as
quickly as possible ; merchandise had to be removed from the sheds on the
quays, where it was vulnerable, and distributed without delay. To achieve
this end, it was necessary that all kinds of transport, inland and seaborne,
should work together smoothly. For coasting ships it meant going to their
usual berths and to unusual ones, going alongside a familiar quay to discharge
or load familiar goods, or going alongside a deep-sea ship to load tanks, guns
and ammunition. Often there would be an air raid ; plans would be
dislocated, work slowed down or stopped, emergency improvisation required.
Liverpool’s problem was also the problem of the Clyde, the Bristol Channel,
and all the ports of the west. The coasters, taking eastward cargoes that
normally would have gone in deep-sea ships, materials and goods that the
heavily burdened railways and roads could not carry, were an essential
factor in its solution.
One day two little ships, the s.s. Newminster (Captain W. W. Buck, 0.8. E.,
master) and the s.s. Thornaby (Captain T. D. Healy, master), were unloading
Sherman tanks, which they had loaded overside from a deep-sea ship in a
west coast port. They were in an ocean dock of the Port of London, and in
that great dock they were the only ships. That is an illustration of the effect
which the German occupation of Europe had on British shipping : congestion
The answer to the bombing of the ports: overside loading. The coasters
cluster round the deep-sea ship in the sheltered Clyde anchorage.
THE INDESTRUCTIBLE HIGHWAY


The cargo is swung out of the deep-sea ship into the waiting coaster. Soon
the big ship will be on the high seas again: the coaster will be making
for some smaller unbombed port which the big ship could not use,
or for dangerous inshore waters where the big ship cannot be risked.
in the west, empty ocean docks in the east —but the flow of supplies
maintained.
The ports, however willing, could not have maintained that flow without
the aid of the anchorages. In those sheltered places, where deep-sea ships
can lie at anchor and discharge their vital cargoes direct into other ships,
would be found the answer to the most savage and prolonged air attacks on
our ports. The answer was fully prepared ; it is our good fortune that it
was not fully required. Nevertheless, overside discharge at anchorages
played an important part in the delivery of goods from overseas; a part
that would have been impossible but for the coasters. The little ships,
often battered but always workmanlike, clustered round the big ship,
as many as four or five at a time. Amid a clatter of winches, the swinging


derricks transferred the cargo—meat, grain, sugar, tanks, ammunition—
from the deep holds of the ocean voyager to the impatient coasters. There
might be many such clusters of big ships and satellites, all busy at one time.
Then, in a matter of hours, at most a day or two, the sheltered water was
empty for a spell. The loaded coasters had gone off round the coasts to
distribute their freight; the big ships were on the high seas again. The
anchorage awaited the next convoy.
The defence of the coasters, as of merchant ships, was arranged by the
Admiralty through the Defensive Equipment Merchant Ships organization.
Before Dunkirk the only A.A. defence that it was possible to provide was a
shuttle service of 120 Lewis guns, manned by D.E.M.S. naval ratings, up and
down the east coast, plus a few 12-pounders in the larger ships. After
the fall of France, air attack on coastal shipping was greatly intensified,
and it was a constant struggle to distribute the few short-range A.A.
weapons, mostly light machine-guns, to the best advantage. It was not
till March 1941 that it was possible to mount one machine-gun to each
coaster. By mid-1942, Oerlikon guns were coming forward in good
numbers and the defence of coasters was rapidly improved.
In the early days, the shortage of naval D.E.M.S. gunners to man the A.A.
weapons that could be scraped together was equally acute. In fact, it
became such a problem that the Navy turned to the Army recently evacuated
from Dunkirk and asked them to help. This they did by providing machine-
gun teams of soldiers with their own weapons to work a shuttle service from
ship to ship in co-operation with similar naval teams, some of whom were
known as the A.A. Guard. So soldiers and sometimes naval ratings helped
to defend the ships, and as the situation improved mixed teams were often
embarked.
Finally, the A.A. Guard were turned over to the main naval D.E.M.S.
organisation, and the army machine-gun teams became the Maritime Royal
Artillery. The two, D.E.M.S. and M.R.A., usually served side by side in all
ships, and one might find anything from two to five men in each coaster,
according to her size and armament.
5. DANGER INSHORE
The ports and the narrow channels, such as the Straits of Dover, are
peculiarly susceptible to concentrated enemy attack ; so, being intimately
acquainted with our coastal waters, the Germans threw the weight of their
offensive resources against these weak spots. All the principal commercial
ports were more or less severely damaged. Some of them, such as London,
Liverpool and Hull, survived only because of the courage and determination
of the men who served them ; but none, however crippled, was closed by
enemy attack. In talk with the men of the coasters, and in the written reports
DANGER INSHORE


of masters, the same point is always turning up. There was a period when
being in port was very far removed from being in a sheltered place.
Captain D. F. Owens, 0.8. E., formerly master of the Ulster Monarch and
later commanding the T.S.S. Louth of the Liverpool-Belfast passenger service,
has a story to tell of the raids on Liverpool: “On the occasion of the
eight continuous night attacks on this port, the Louth had to anchor at the
bar while the channel was being swept. During the hours of darkness the
German planes were flying low over our masts, dropping flares. All our
machine-guns were blazing away, putting out flares and trying for a plane.
The chief steward came up on deck and asked permission to bring down a
plane ... he nearly brought the main mast down. We docked in
Liverpool, and during the night a bomb was dropped on the shed alongside.
The shed collapsed on the Louth. Then an ammunition ship blew up, and a
heavy piece of metal made a great rent in the Louth's forward funnel. The
next morning was spent looking for the Louth underneath the debris. When
a little semblance of order was obtained, we shifted our berth to Princes
Dock. Here history repeated itself, for the shed alongside was blown over
the ship again, and the morning found our lifeboats fully provisioned with
sides of bacon, and other miscellaneous gear which would not have been
useful at sea. ’ ’
Obviously the Germans knew all they required to know about our
estuaries and the channels in them. When France surrendered, they had
Why the big ships had to be kept away from southern ports: a
dockside cold-storage plant burns after a Southampton air raid.
By courtesy of the Southern Railway.
BRITISH COASTER


their plans already cut and dried for attacks at Hell’s Corner and in the
English Channel. They were thoroughly acquainted with the Wold Channel
before they made it into E-Boat Alley. Deep-sea ships either passed such
places only occasionally or not at all. The little ships of the coasting and
home trade used them daily. They never left the dangerous waters. The
wreck buoys, the masts and the funnels strewn in estuarial waters are
eloquent. Channels were swept, the extreme menace of magnetic and
acoustic mines countered, but there could not be security. Ships using the
channels of the estuaries were in constant danger, and a ship exploding a
mine in shallow water had small chance of survival.
On passage from the Clyde to Barry, in December 1940, in fine, cold
weather, a former Medway pleasure steamer commanded by Captain T. J.
Aldis, D.S.C., had picked up the pilot and was proceeding to the west
Cardiff buoy when, at 11.30 hrs., she exploded an acoustic mine. The pilot,
who was on his way to the bridge, was blown, together with the ship’s
telegraph to which he was still clinging when he picked himself up, to the
after end of the bridge. The wheelhouse, protected by concrete blocks,
collapsed, pinning beneath it the master, the mate and the helmsman.
The mate was killed, but the others, although injured, crawled out. The
ship was then sinking rapidly by the stern. “I managed,” the master
reports, ‘‘ to get hold of the boatswain, and the two of us got forward and
managed to let go the starboard anchor.” The boatswain, A. Webster,
had a broken arm and cuts and bruises, the master a fractured collar bone
and injuries to his hip ; but, though suffering intense pain, they did not lose
their presence of mind. By this time the ship’s stern was well under water
and the bows high in the air. The master and boatswain found the second
engineer, Mr. T. Kennedy, lying on a coil of rope, badly injured. Webster
got a lifebelt, put it on the engineer and, when the ship lurched heavily, slid
him overboard. Then he found a ship’s boy, who announced that he could
not swim. Webster did not argue. He put another lifebelt on the lad,
ignoring the fact that he was already wearing one, and threw him into the
water. There, two of the crew were astonished to see him floating well out
of the water, still protesting that he could not swim.
The water was then past the fore end of the promenade deck, and Captain
Aldis and Boatswain Webster were alone. ‘‘lt was then,” Captain Aldis
writes, ‘ ‘ that the boatswain said to me that all hands were in the water and
that we had better jump for it, the bows being at that time forty feet in the air.
We jumped together, and found when we came to the surface that the ship
was beginning to turn turtle and would have drowned a good many of the
crew had not the starboard anchor checked her. The ship then righted
herself and went down bodily. ’ ’ For some time the master, the boatswain
and the carpenter were together ; then Webster swam off to assist the second
cook, who was badly burned. While getting the cook on to a raft, Webster
says, he realised for the first time that his arm was broken. Before that,
‘ ‘ it just hurt. ’ ’
Two assistant stewards, T. Thomas and T. Mulbery, were down in their
quarters, known as the “Glory Hole,” when the ship was hit. Mulbery
DANGER INSHORE


And now Liverpool: an ammunition ship has blown up.
which played an important part in the distribution of


By courtesy of the Mersey Docks and Harbour
Another object lesson in the indispensability of coasters,
cargoes brought by the deep sea ships to West Coast ports.


received serious leg injuries. Thomas, bruised only, went to the officers’
mess, fetched a table cloth, tied it round Mulbery and hauled him to the
main dining saloon. There he pushed the injured man through one of
the windows, and followed, and swam with him to a raft. From the time
the ship struck until she sank twelve minutes elapsed. The survivors of the
crew were in the water for about an hour before being rescued by a tug
and an R.A.F. launch. Captain Aldis, Boatswain Webster and Steward
Thomas all received Lloyd’s Medal; Webster and Thomas the British
Empire Medal as well.
A small tramp of 970 tons, the Jojfre Rose (Captain W. Alcorn, master),
was on passage from Dublin to Newport on May 16th, 1941, when, at
04.50 hrs., she was attacked by a heavy four-engine bomber which, during the
attack, kept its navigation lights on. The first bomb fell astern ; the second,
on the port quarter. After that the bomber made several runs, “about
seven,” across the ship, machine-gunning her. “When the attack was
over and the crew mustered, ’ ’ Captain Alcorn writes, ‘ ‘ the chief engineer,
Mr. Roberts, could not be found. It was impossible to get into the engine-
room owing to much steam escaping, the first bomb having damaged the
engines and steam pipes. At this time the vessel was slowly settling by
the stern. At 06.00 hrs., when the steam had gone down, we got into the
engine-room and found that the chief had been badly injured. About
07.00 hrs. the s.s. Obsidian came alongside, so we transferred Mr. Roberts
and the second engineer to her, as he also was injured. I decided to get the
Obsidian to tow the vessel to Milford. When about three miles off St. Anne’s
Head, the vessel took a dangerous lurch. At this time the Milford Examina-
tion Vessel was standing by and sent a launch over to take the crew off.
When the crew were taken aboard the Examination Vessel, the launch was
sent back for the mate, Mr. E. T. Newe, and myself, but I would not leave
as I considered that the No. 2 bulkhead would hold until the vessel was
beached. At 10.00 hrs. the tug Schelde made fast alongside, took over the
towing from the Obsidian and towed us to Dale Beach, where the vessel
was beached.”
On February 6th, 1942, Captain Alcorn was commanding a slightly
smaller tramp, the Blush Rose, of 860 gross tons, and was again on passage
from Dublin. At 18.15 hrs., when about three miles south of St. Anne’s
Head, he was bombed once more. ‘ ‘ The explosion from the bombs seemed
to lift the vessel,” Captain Alcorn reports, “and caused a high volume of
water to come aboard, also damaging the concrete bridge protection,
breaking the bridge telegraph and blowing binnacle and compass to the side
of the wheelhouse.” Captain Alcorn turned the ship’s head for Milford
Haven. The engines, though damaged, were still running, but they did not
run for long. By 19.00 hrs. the water was gaining so fast in the engine-room
that they had to be stopped. The Wild Rose, another ship of the same
company, which was standing by, came alongside and took off the crew,
leaving the master and mate aboard. She then towed the sinking ship
‘ ‘ to harbour, ’ ’ when the tug Schelde took over and beached the Blush Rose
where she had beached the Jojfre Rose. Captain Alcorn, at any rate, can
BRITISH COASTER


have no doubt that in the methodical German charts which marked certain
areas of our coastal waters for attack, the neighbourhood of St. Anne’s
Head was carefully noted.
Captain T. M. MacFarlane was bringing his ship from Dublin to Liverpool
with 877 cattle and 1,260 sheep. With other vessels coming from Eire she
had to call at a port for examination. There were eight vessels in the small
convoy, and Captain MacFarlane’s ship was the last to be examined. The
inspection commenced at 06.25 hrs., the Examination Officer reached her at
07.25 hrs. and finished with her at 08.40 hrs. ; so there had been movement
in the anchorage for more than two hours. His job completed, the
Examination Officer was on the ladder going down to his boat when a mine
exploded underneath the ship at No. 2 hold. The Examination Officer was
blown into the water, and was picked up, injured, by a dinghy from his own
tender. The tender drifted astern and sank. Boatswain Leary, preparing to
pull up the ladder when the Examination Officer had left it, was blown into
the water. He was injured and in difficulties when rescued by an able
seaman who had himself been blown from the tender.
The mate, Mr. Hodgson, going to the bridge after seeing the Examination
Officer over the side, was swept by water from the domestic tanks from one
deck to another. The wheelhouse collapsed on the helmsman, Able Seaman
Boyle, who was extricated from among concrete slabs by Captain
MacFarlane. Captain MacFarlane had been in the port wing shelter of the
bridge, which had also collapsed. In the pantry, the cook was cut by his
own crockery. In their quarters aft, the watch below were blown from their
bunks. With all lights out, a considerable escape of steam and an increasing
list, the chief and third engineers had difficulty in getting to the deck. It was
complete and instantaneous wreck. All hands not blown overboard being
mustered, the starboard lifeboat, the only one seaworthy, was launched.
According to tradition the mate and then the master were last into her,
swarming down the lifelines. As the boat pulled toward Holyhead Harbour
the bulk of the crew were transferred to the lifeboat of a trawler.
“Captain MacFarlane,” the official report records, “then decided that
he would return to the ship, as he thought there might be a possibility of
beaching her, and he called for volunteers. The following returned with
him—the chief and second officers, the chief and third engineers, the
carpenter and two able seamen. On approaching the ship, the list developed
and the ship sank bows first, exactly forty minutes after the explosion had
occurred. . . . Captain MacFarlane was suffering from chest injuries, but
it was not until after the ship had sunk that he collapsed in the boat. ” In his
own report Captain MacFarlane puts this differently. “It was only when I
tried to get out of the lifeboat, ’ ’ he writes, ‘ ‘ that I found there was something
wrong with myself. I had four broken ribs.” He dismisses the matter at
that, and gives more attention to two incidents of which he learned in
hospital. The Examination Officer, in the next bed, had picked up in the
sea a cap which was not his own, as he supposed, but that of Captain
MacFarlane. A prize bull, escaping from the ship, had swum ashore and
frightened a lady who was bathing.
DANGER INSHORE


6. THE CHANNEL CONVOYS
That convoys are necessary in war, that they achieve their object of
getting large numbers of ships safely to their destinations, is not disputed ;
nevertheless, seamen dislike them intensely, and coasters are no exception to
the rule. “After a lifetime’s experience gained in many waters and many
types of ship, in war and in peace,” writes Captain D. M. Mackay,
master of the s.s. Fendris, “I have come to the conclusion . . . that of all
the many war-time conditions and activities in which merchant ships are
engaged, last of all—if my personal desires only were concerned —I would
serve in coastal convoys, especially east coast convoys.
“Imagine a convoy leaving Thames Estuary composed of, say, fifty ships—
at least five miles in length—threading its way during the night (without
lights of any kind) between sand banks, shoals and numerous wrecks, in a
narrow swept channel seldom more than six cables wide, with a strong tide
erratic in direction and rate. Navigation becomes more a matter of
intuition and chance than mathematical precision. Logs cannot be towed
but by leading ships. Compasses are not dependable because of degaussing
or of local attraction. Navigational aids (dimly lighted buoys) are difficult
to discover and, during poor visibility, have to be searched for by escort
vessels. The farther one is down the convoy, the more is one’s vision
screened by the ships in front. If, during the night, the master risks going
into the chartroom to look at the chart, on return to the bridge he is almost
totally blind for about five minutes.
‘ ‘ Convoys are very jerky in their speed of advance, and ships are frequently
overrunning each other and bunching up. Coastal convoys are, I think,
more liable to this, due to the great difference in the sizes of ships composing
them. . . . Despite the utmost care collisions frequently occur and have
given rise to the coining of the new terms ‘convoy stems’ and ‘convoy
sterns’. . . . Ships join and leave the main convoy, on its passage along the
coast, from and to the several ports passed. The joinings cause some
considerable anxiety, even in daylight. This anxiety becomes much
intensified during black-out.
‘ ‘ Dark nights with bad visibility and stormy weather are bad enough, but
our worst enemy is fog. Imagine the convoy steaming along at eight knots
on a clear night, amid the sand banks and wrecks of the east coast, and
suddenly running into a dense fog bank. Prearranged signals are given by
the Commodore’s ship for such occasions and repeated down the line.


After several ships have repeated the signals, the sounds simply merge into a
riotous uproar without meaning. Rule-of-the-road signals, ports and star-
boards and full asterns, mingle with fog signals, ships crowd on to one
another. Ships in the van going astern, taking way off and anchoring, to
the accompaniment of fog signals from ships only beginning to feel the
fog bank, who, perhaps, have not heard the reduce-speed and anchor signals
and may still be steaming at eight knots. Realization soon comes to them,
however, and they too are taking frantic action to keel out of the crowded
mass of shipping ahead. Fog bells are now mingling with action signals,
the sound of dropping anchors and the rattle of cables being paid out.
This continues until it would seem that only exhaustion brings the pande-
monium to an end, and a seemingly unnatural silence ensues. . . . Ships so
crowded are an ideal target for torpedo attack. I have had the unenviable
experience of having four of these happenings within twenty-four hours. ’ ’
About these islands there were war channels, kept constantly swept from
mines—narrow channels, marked by dimly lighted buoys. For obvious
reasons, the way of these channels varied from time to time, but there was
always danger for ships straying from them. In two columns, port and
The convoy, under a protective barrage of balloons, waits in
the estuary. The ships lie closely together. Seamen loathe
such propinquity. They loathed it most of all in the blackout.
THE CHANNEL CONVOYS


starboard, twenty, fifty, a hundred or more at a time, ships passed along
them with the utmost regularity. The Germans did their best to stop them
with U-boats and E-boats, with magnetic, acoustic and contact mines, and
with bombers. They did not succeed. The coastal convoys regularly
assembled, departed, and arrived at their destinations.
The places of assembly were, of course, in safe anchorages ; usually, for
coastal convoys, in estuaries. If a coastal convoy was due to depart about
dawn, then the ships would come down-river on the previous afternoon tide.
Masters and the Commodore’s signalmen went ashore to attend the convoy
conference. Some of the masters would be absent, because their ships were
late coming down-river or because, having attended so many similar
conferences and being supplied with written orders, they had found other
urgent business. In the conference room, decorated with posters concerning
cautions at sea, sketches of E-boats, blackboards, tables of instructions, and
the like, it was easy to pick out the masters who knew that route from those
who did not. The former had the patient look of men performing a duty
The escorting destroyer puts up a smoke screen as this Channel
BRITISH COASTER


without any expectation of being entertained ; the latter were as attentive
as model pupils. Some of the masters were ip 'uniform ; many, probably
the majority, were not, for except on his own bridge the coaster master,
even in war, is a little shy of parading a uniform.
The Base Convoy Officer or his representative, always a naval officer,
opens the proceedings. He runs through the orders, stressing certain points.
The commodore of the convoy, usually a merchant captain, follows ; he
says a word or two about the way he likes things done. There is no
verbosity ; there may or may not be questions from masters. Two points,
however, are seldom omitted: although he is in convoy and under the
commodore’s orders, “the master is held responsible for the safety of his
ship” ; and “ships must be navigated—there must be no ‘follow-my-leader
stuff’ in each other’s wake.” As the masters are taken back to their ships
in a tug, talk is concerned largely with the idiosyncrasies of that particular
commodore and, of course, with tides.
In those days the ships flew balloons, which they collected on the passage
convoy runs the gauntlet of the heavy German guns on the French coast.
THE CHANNEL CONVOYS


A British coaster seen from the attacking German aircraft. A photo-
graph published in Germany. The fate of the coaster is not known.
Hugging the friendly cliffs of Kent, this coaster survives
accurate fire from the big German cross-Channel batteries.
BRITISH COASTER


A near one ! The escorting destroyer
twists and turns to avoid German shed-fire.
Some exciting moments for this convoy. In 1941-42
one convoy out of every five was heavily shelled.
THE CHANNEL CONVOYS


down-river. Each of them had a 12-pounder, Lewis guns, Hotchkiss,
perhaps a pair of Oerlikons on the bridge, P.A.C. rockets. All were armed
and carried naval and army gunners to work or to direct the working of their
guns. At one time, some of them would put to sea with a Ross rifle as their
complete armament. They did not like that, and they made their views plain.
At another time they flew kites as protection against air attack, but the
experiment was not successful.
The convoy puts to sea. Clear of the estuary, it picks up the escort.
The rest is the luck of war. Even though the weather may be good and the
enemy absent, the passage will not be restful either for navigators or for
engineers obeying orders from the bridge and forcing engines to constant
variation of revolutions. The ships are of all sizes, shapes and ages ; some
capable of maintaining the full speed of the convoy, others less fortunate.
A loaded flat-iron, scarcely appearing above the water and like a half-tide
rock in anything but the quietest weather, may be immediately ahead of a
large tramp in ballast. At night, if the flat-iron drops astern or the tramp
forges ahead of station, the tramp will have a hard job to see the other ship
before she rams her. “Concertina-ing” is as inevitable as it is with road
vehicles in convoy or with troops on the march, but the consequences of
ships colliding at sea may be more serious.
When ships ‘ ‘ button on, ’ ’ or join the convoy from some port passed, they
may well attempt, on a dark night when the two columns of ships are straggled
out over ten miles of sea, to get into positions not assigned to them ; and
that, unless everyone is alert, may result in more than confusion and
annoyance. The day, under good conditions, is easy, although even then
some ship will leave her place, come tearing up between the columns, or
pull out. At night, nothing is easy with so many kinds of ships in close
company, with no lights showing, and with wireless and sound signals
forbidden except in emergency. To find some ship from astern creeping
alongside, uncomfortably close—all ships detest propinquity at sea—and
to learn that she is there to have a chat with her Aldis lamp about, say,
tides at Hull the following morning, is seldom pleasing to a tired navigator.
After dark, in any but the best conditions (which are rare in our coastal
waters), the meeting of two convoys involves increased strain for everybody.
Little can be seen through the small slits in the concrete wheelhouse pro-
tection. The watchkeeper and the master, for the master is seldom off his
bridge in coastal convoys at night, must go outside to obtain a clear view.
When ships for an intermediate port are leaving the convoy, there is always
some jockeying for position. Inevitably, some ship will cut across a column
regardless of everyone, concerned only with making certain of a tide that
may mean a night at home for some of her people.
The general impression given by a convoy is that ships hate each other’s
company at sea, and that in a crowd there is always somebody with bad
manners. In coastal convoys the bad-mannered ships are well known and
carefully watched, for most coasters know the ways of most others. Convoys
mean crowds, but they do not mean congestion. The long lines of little
ships pass and the sea is empty again. Coastal waters, the invaluable
BRITISH COASTER


The guns that did the damage: formidable instruments,
as is shown by this photograph published in Germany.


highway, would not be congested by a dozen times the number of ships that
sail them. The moods of the sea and the ships make certain that sailing in
convoy, always a strain, is also a high test of skill and competence. When
enemy attack develops, other qualities may be demanded.
The ships of the channel convoys had considerable prestige in the trade,
for they did what many people, even some in high authority, doubted that
they could do. After the fall of France, they used the Straits of Dover
regularly and continuously. It was not easy, nor was the cost small; but
the little ships carried their vital cargoes of east coast coal, through the
narrows which their kind has always used, to the south coast ports. Thereby
they saved an immense amount of time, for the alternative was to take the
coal, essential to many undertakings in the south, northabout almost
entirely round the British Isles.
The prestige of the channel convoys does not rest on that feat alone. They
bore the brunt of the attack in the first phase of the Battle of Britain. The
Germans were determined to drive them from the Straits. They failed to do
so. But having won their part of the Battle of Britain, the channel convoys
were not left alone.
During the following two years approximately one out of every five of the
convoys passing through the Straits was attacked, and each convoy attacked
received on the average twenty-nine rounds from the German heavy guns
ashore. Then there was a lull, and in 1943 no convoy was fired at from the
shore. But shooting commenced again sporadically in 1944 and so continued
until the German batteries were finally silenced. The time between the flash
of the German guns and the explosion of their shells was some thirty-two
seconds. Comparatively few ships of the convoys were hit by shellfire, for
small ships at long range are not easy targets ; but on their many passages
during four years, the men of the coasters experienced 1,500 flashes and
I, periods of suspense—each of thirty-two seconds duration—any of which
might have culminated in the destruction of their ships. The prestige they
enjoy has been well earned.
On July 25th, 1940, in an air attack on a convoy off Dover, five coasters
were sunk and six damaged. The Summity (Captain E. Milton, M.8.E.,
master), a small motor ship carrying cement for Plymouth, was hit three times.
The first bomb, on the port side abaft the bridge, blew a naval signalman off
the bridge ; the second, on the starboard side of the main hold, blew the
second naval signalman off the bridge ; the third landed right in the main
hold. That last one made a mess of the ship ; and the master, although he
and the helmsman had been severely wounded in the wreck of the wheelhouse,
decided to beach her. The engines were still running, but the Summity
could not be steered with her rudder. By manoeuvring the engines ahead
and astern, dropping an anchor and sheering with the tide, she was put
upon the beach under Dover cliffs.
That was the beginning. Next day, it was E-boats off Shoreham. On
July 29th the attack went to the Straits again. The s.s. Pulborough (Captain
J. A. Stark, M.8.E., master) was in that attack. She had several plates
opened up by a bomb falling close to her, and began to sink. A lifeboat was
BRITISH COASTER


launched, took off most of the crew and stood by. Captain Stark then went
round his ship to see whether any of her people remained. He found one
seaman and a fireman “about four foot nothing tall, and well over sixty
years of age.” This fireman had in his mouth, as usual, a short-stumped
clay pipe. Too heavy a sea was running to allow the lifeboat to be brought
alongside. Captain Stark therefore ordered the two men to jump overboard
with him. They jumped together, and were picked up. When hauled into
the lifeboat the small, elderly fireman still had his small, elderly clay pipe
in his mouth.
There was a lull, and then, on August Bth, the real thing began. A convoy
in the Straits that day was attacked by sixty aircraft in the morning and one
hundred in the afternoon. Seven ships were sunk and seven were damaged ;
but the convoy went through. On August 11th the attack switched to
convoys off Portsmouth and off Weymouth. On the 12th, 200 enemy
The end of an adventurous passage. The Summity, a small motor ship, after being hit
three times in an air attack on July 25, 1940, lies high and dry under Dover cliffs.
THE CHANNEL CONVOYS


aircraft were at Dover in the morning, 150 at Portsmouth and the Isle of
Wight in the afternoon. The coal position in the southern areas was then
judged to be very serious. Priority in armament and equipment was given
to coasters specially selected for the channel convoys. They were run in special
operational convoys. The steady flow of coal and other cargo—but first and
foremost, coal—was maintained. The service was never abandoned and
never broken.
The Marie flew the Belgian flag, but she was built on the Tyne in 1924, by
the builders of the old Mauretania, and went to sea under the Red Ensign as
the Tintern Abbey, a collier of 1,409 gross tons. In July 1942 she was
commanded by Captain Marcel Hanns, a Belgian. Her mate was an
Estonian, her second officer a Belgian ; her engineers one Russian and two
Belgians. The seamen were British and Portuguese, the firemen British
Arabs, the cook and the stewards Belgians. She carried four British naval
gunners. On the fall of Belgium, she was taking a valuable cargo of lead
ingots to Nantes when Captain Hanns learned of the position in France from
a small receiving set which he had aboard. He therefore set course for
Falmouth. Thereafter, under charter to the British Government, the Marie
traded on the coast, with the exception of one voyage to Portugal.
On July 9th, 1942, she was in a small channel convoy of about ten vessels
on passage from Barry with coal for Southampton. She was third in the
starboard column, with an escorting destroyer to starboard of her, when, at
00.30 hrs., in the neighbourhood of Start Point, the convoy was attacked by
E-boats. “We could hardly see anything,” Captain Hanns reports, “but
the noise of firing was deafening. The commodore ship, a Norwegian
first in the starboard line, was the first to blow up and sink. Then the Dutch
general cargo ship Reggestroom was torpedoed, blew up and sank. Then the
loaded British tanker Pamela was torpedoed and blew up. All this happened
quickly. I took evasive action in navigation, but could not use any anti-
aircraft guns against E-boats. I therefore ordered my lifeboats to be
dropped and drifted them down toward the sinking ships, collecting twenty-
seven survivors, wh© were covered in oil, many without much clothing on.
E-boats were still twisting at great speed in and around the convoy and further
explosions could be heard. ’ ’
Later, the Marie learned that those explosions marked the sinking of three
more ships. At about 03.10 hrs., that action being over, the destroyer
signalled the Marie to proceed. Daylight showed the convoy to consist of
the British collier Gripfast, one small British motor vessel and the Marie.
About 06.30 hrs., this remnant of the convoy was attacked by bombers.
“One made for the Gripfast, and the other came for my ship. I swung my
anti-aircraft guns out, but the port side jammed. I fired rapidly with the
starboard gun, forcing the attacking plane to sheer off a little, and his bombs
dropped either side of my ship. I then swung the gun across to the plane
attacking the Gripfast and continued firing. ’ ’ But the Gripfast was hit and
sunk, the destroyer collecting the survivors from her. About noon the
Marie and the small British motor vessel, the sole survivors of that channel
convoy, arrived at Southampton Water.
BRITISH COASTER


7. THROUGH E-BOAT ALLEY
In the conditions they preferred, a dark night with visibility not too
good and sufficient sea running to make their bow waves unremarkable,
E-boats were extremely hard to see. Seamen must have good eyesight;
but the best of eyes, strained to the most intent watching, can easily miss
the small craft among confused waters in black darkness. Aboard a ship,
its own engines not silent, the motors of an E-boat, unless opened full out,
were not easily heard. From the decks of even a small coaster there was
little chance of getting the enemy silhouetted against the horizon. The
attackers had big chances of remaining unseen ; our convoys scarcely any
chance at all.
Unless much valuable time was to be lost, the east coast convoys must use
the Wold Channel, which has always been familiar water to the Germans.
It is a very busy place. That, too, the Germans knew, so they concentrated
their attack upon our coasters there. With the E-boats they developed a
technique that was, for a time, highly successful. Their practice was to
come in, under cover of favourable weather, to the landward side of the
swept channel and to lurk there, often using the buoys as cover, awaiting the
arrival of a convoy. Then, selecting their targets, they attacked and made off
seaward at full speed across our protective minefields, where nothing but
shallow-draft craft could follow them. That was the plan, and for a time it
worked ; but the little ships of the Royal Navy developed a counter-
technique, and then the E-boats did not fare so well.
However, the channel earned its new name of E-boat Alley, and a very foul
reputation. Although surface craft gave their name to the unpleasant spot,
enemy aircraft played an equal or even greater part in making it un-
healthy. Despite its reputation and the heavy losses that maintained it, the
channel was used daily. There are coasters which spent the war going
backwards and forwards through it on an average of once a week. Many
cargoes went through the Alley : cement, seed potatoes, sugar, timber, grain,
munitions of war, a host of things—but mainly coal. Here, to illustrate the
ways and fortunes of the regular users of this most uncomfortable spot,
are the stories of a collier and a liner.
The Wandle is a flat-iron of 2,330 tons deadweight. She was built for and
is engaged in one particular job, the carriage of coal from north-east ports
to the London River and, under seventeen bridges, up to Wandsworth. Like
all flat-irons, she has a hinged funnel and a telescopic mast to enable her to
pass under the bridges ; and, when loaded in a seaway, she is not a dry ship.
She is the third of her name. The first Wandle, commanded by Captain


G. E. A. Mastin, earned a considerable reputation in the war of 1914-18
by engaging a German submarine. The third Wandle was commanded for
the greater part of the recent war by Captain G. A. W. Mastin, son of
the first Wandle’s master ; so both ship and master are well in the tradition
of the coast.
From the start of the war the Wandle was concerned with east coast
convoy engagements. When she was armed, with a 12-pounder and two
Lewis guns, she began to take part in actions. On August 13th, 1940, and
again on the 31st, she hit enemy aircraft but could not claim them because
they were not seen to crash. On the second occasion a fire broke out on her
degaussing cable, but her engineers repaired it temporarily so that she could
bring her coal safely through a heavily mined area. On March 23rd, 1941,
on passage from Hull to London, she was attacked by an E-boat and raked
by the enemy’s quick-firing gun, but escaped serious damage. The mate,
Mr. Edward Clarke, silenced the gun with his sixth shot from the 12-pounder.
The Wandle was manoeuvred to bring her Hotchkiss to bear and, “after a
few bursts, a water spout was seen and there was no further trace of the
E-boat.”
In bad weather, at 23.40 hrs., south of Hartlepool, the s.s. Moorwood
(Captain T. Dalziel, 0.8. E.), was hit by enemy aircraft attacking from the land
side. The crew, all but one man blown overboard, took to the boats. Going to
the rescue the Wandle picked up the man in the water first, the mate going
down a ladder over the side and making a line fast to him. Then the crew of
the Moorwood were taken from the boats under attack by enemy aircraft.
When the master of the Moorwood reported one poor fellow lost, Captain
Mastin was able to inform him that the “poor fellow” was actually in a hot
bath, drinking rum. During an aircraft attack on a convoy on September
20th, 1941, in daylight, the Wandle damaged one of the attackers. In another
attack on a convoy in E-boat Alley on October 24th, she scored another
official “ probable.” In April 1942 Captain Mastin received the 0.8. E.,
and Mr. Clarke the M.8.E., for the fine way in which, under many attacks,
the ship had been defended.
When in ballast, going north for her coal on November Bth, 1942, on a dark
night in flat calm, the Wandle was torpedoed at 21.25 hrs. She was in the
port column of a convoy which, just entering the Alley, was attacked by
several lurking E-boats. Her only warning of the danger was the explosion
of the ship abreast of her in the starboard column. A minute later, without
seeing the attackers, the Wandle got it. The forepart of the vessel was
destroyed. No one on the bridge was injured, but a gunner of the Maritime
Royal Artillery was killed aft by flying debris. Twenty minutes after being
hit, the Wandle was abandoned. The master, second officer, chief engineer
Mr. T. S. Johnson, and seven of the crew stood by the ship in the starboard
lifeboat while the remainder of the ship’s company were picked up from the
port lifeboat by a rescue tug. After some argument and a definite promise
that he should be returned to his ship if she did not sink immediately.
Captain Mastin and his party went aboard the tug, which then went to pick
up survivors from another ship which had been sunk. This job done.
BRITISH COASTER


An E-boat approaching an English port after the surrender of the German forces. Of a
sinister beauty, these highly efficient craft sank many a coaster and earned the Wold
Channel, continuously used by the coasters, its uncomfortable reputation as E-boat Alley.
Captain Mastin claimed fulfilment of the promise. The Wandle was still
floating, and burning. The master asked for volunteers, and with the
mate and second mate, chief and second engineers, donkeyman, two able
seamen and one man from the tug, boarded his ship. Climbing aboard up
the life net, the chief engineer’s imagination was stirred. Pausing, he
turned to the captain. “If,” he said, “we had only got cutlasses in our
mouths, we should be proper ruddy pirates. ’ ’
The first job to be tackled was the fire. A hatch tarpaulin had been
blown on to the funnel, and the after part of the ship was blazing, lighting
up the whole area. Sizing up the job, the chief engineer lit a cigarette.
It was the donkeyman’s turn to give his imagination play. He told off his
superior for the heinous war-time offence of smoking on deck at night. And
he was serious. The ship, when the fire had been put out, was found to be in
a bad mess. She had been hit on the starboard side, about twenty feet
forward of the bridge. The fore part was awash, the bridge and all its
fittings and armament were wrecked, the accommodation below flooded.
No. 2 hold was making water. While the chief engineer directed the job of
getting the pumps going and the dynamo running to provide lights, the
business of getting the ship into tow by the rescue tug was begun.
Just before towing began, one of the deck hands announced that the canteen
was open ; he had achieved the thing that figures so largely in life on the
coasters—hot, strong, sweet tea for everybody.
The position was serious. The Wandle dipped very steeply. She could
THROUGH E-BOAT ALLEY


not properly be said to be down by the head because she had no head. Its
shattered remnant, still attached to her, was being towed along the sea bed.
It acted as a kind of sea anchor and kept her steady ; but the men did not
forget that it might foul a mine. Apart from that, the bulkhead might go
at any moment, and the ship might founder. Progress was very slow,
about one knot.
“How,” the chief engineer asked, “will you know she is going to sink?”
Captain Mastin pointed to a ventilator. “When that dips below the
horizon, we jump. Can you swim, Chief?”
“No.”
“Then,” said Captain Mastin, “this is a damn good time for you to
learn! ”
Sixteen hours later, when in safe anchorage off Yarmouth, the ship was
again abandoned. It was feared that the fore part would not rise from the
ground and let her swing to the tide ; but within twenty minutes the
volunteers, judging the danger past, were back again. An Admiralty
salvage officer came aboard and did a good, quick job of cutting free several
hundred tons of wreckage. This relieved the strain on the bulkhead which,
in addition, was patched and shored up with heavy timber.
Just as the weather began to break, the Wandle was towed into
Yarmouth. She was delayed there for some hours ; then, the weather
moderating, she left in the charge of two tugs. Before she had been long
at sea, a northerly gale sprang up and “provided a most uncomfortable
time for those on board.” The ship swung wildly at right angles to her
course, and her movements were so violent that at times the men aboard
were giddy. She was often swept by seas. So she took refuge in the
Humber, but only for a short time. Then she found fog and had to anchor
in a bay where, for a while, one of the tugs lost contact with her. On the
fifth day after being torpedoed she and her volunteers reached the Tyne,
where she was dry-docked. Examination showed that what was left of her
had been badly twisted ; but within a few months, straightened and with a
new fore end grafted to the old after part, she was at sea again. Now, as
regularly as ever, the Wandle passes under the seventeen London bridges,
bringing her coal to Wandsworth.
The s.s. Cormorant does not claim any outstandingly spectacular
adventures, but she saw quite a bit of the war. She belongs to the not
numerous band of little ships whose business took them more than two
hundred times through E-boat Alley. In peace, she was engaged in the home
and Continental trade ; during the war she went up and down the east coast
continually, trading from London. Except when on leave, Captain F.
Wethey commanded her, Mr. A. L. Walton was her mate, and Mr. J. B.
Langlands her chief engineer. In August 1940 the Cormorant was pro-
ceeding in convoy in E-boat Alley when a single enemy aircraft attacked
during the afternoon. The Kernwood was badly hit in the engine-room,
and the escorting destroyer ordered the Cormorant to stand by her. As the
Kernwood was on fire and could not move, her master ordered her to be
abandoned. The Cormorant took her survivors aboard and brought them
BRITISH COASTER


to Yarmouth, where later, blazing like a torch in the dark, the Kermvood
herself was towed.
During the summer of that year, near the Outer Dowsing, the Cormorant
was in the port column of a convoy when the Royal Scot, in the starboard
column, blew up. It was, Mr. Walton declares, incredibly quick. The
middle of the Royal Scot simply vanished, leaving the two ends sticking up
for a moment. Then she was gone. A corvette, the Pintail, dashing across
to help, exploded another mine and was blown to bits almost as quickly.
On passage to Grangemouth in September 1941, on a dark, calm night,
the Cormorant was in the port column of a convoy attacked by E-boats.
Captain Wethey was on leave, and Captain C. Smith was in command.
Ahead of the Cormorant was the Tantallon, ahead of her the Dunmore, ahead
of her the Tetula. Second ahead in the starboard column was the Teddington.
The attack was unexpected, and the dark night was suddenly filled with
explosions, tracers and confusion. The Tantallon was torpedoed and
stopped. Avoiding her successfully, the Cormorant could not avoid the
Dunmore and the Teddington. The latter, torpedoed and out of control,
had shot across the convoy and collided with the Dunmore, holing her and
forcing her into the Cormorant, which had just scraped past the Tantallon.
It was a complete mix-up. The Teddington was on fire. She had as part of
her cargo a considerable quantity of whisky, and this was exploding.
“Big silent explosions,” Mr. Walton describes them; “great puffs of
flame without any noise. ’ ’ The Teddington was abandoned ; then her crew
went back to her. Then she was abandoned again, and became eventually
a total loss.
There was a lot of firing and the air was full of tracers, “which always
seemed to be coming at you. ’ ’ The puff’s of fire from the Teddington did not
help visibility ; but the Cormorant managed to get clear of the Dunmore
with no more damage than stove in and dented plates, a buckled bulkhead,
weeping rivets in the engine-room, a holed lifeboat and damaged belting.
She was able to see and avoid the Tetula, which had also been torpedoed and
was stopped. Within less than ten minutes after the opening of the
attack, the Cormorant was proceeding again with the convoy, but those ten
minutes had been full. The Dunmore, loaded with cement, dropped astern ;
but she managed to catch up with the convoy next day. The Tantallon,
settling by the stern, was towed into Hull. A few weeks later, in the port
column of an east coast convoy, next ship to the commodore, the Cormorant
was attacked at dusk by one enemy aircraft. It missed her but, coming in
again at the commodore ship, scored a hit in the engine-room. The
Commodore signalled the Cormorant: “Am hit. Carry on.” However,
the bomb in the engine-room did not explode, and he was able to continue
in command of the convoy.
In November 1941 the Cormorant was forced to leave a convoy ; but the
sea, not the Germans, was to blame. She was on passage from Methil to
London, and had to put into Middlesbrough for bunkers and repairs.
Soon after starting, the convoy had run into a full south-easterly gale.
“We were able,” Captain Wethey reports, “to maintain our station in the
THROUGH E-BOAT ALLEY


fast convoy, which was only advancing at about two and a half knots, but
we were constantly awash. The flap in the ash shoot was forced up the
shoot. Water entered the stokehold, and dumping of ashes became
impossible except by hoisting them up in bags and dumping them overboard.
This was dangerous at night, and wellnigh impossible without infringing
the black-out. ’ ’
Then the wheelhouse started working ; then the forepart of the bridge
started working too. The Cormorant carried on until some steel bars in
No. 3 between decks broke adrift. ‘ ‘ The weather was terrible, so we hauled
up a point or so from the convoy to minimise the rolling while we en-
deavoured to secure the steel bars. They were covered in thick grease and
could not be secured, so I considered it inadvisable to maintain station in
convoy.” The senior officer of the escort, sharing this view, allowed the
destroyer to stand by the Cormorant during the night, “for which we were
very grateful, especially as we were forced to proceed out of the swept channel.
We were very grateful to reach Tees Bay at daybreak Tuesday morning.
The distance of 130 miles had taken thirty-eight hours hard steaming and had
burnt a considerable amount of coal. ’ ’
A month later the Cormorant was prevented from buttoning on to a convoy.
The Germans prevented her. At 17.15 hrs. on January 13th, 1942, she left
the Humber for the rendezvous, escorted by an armed trawler. She cruised
about all that night, in snow and strong wind, without finding the convoy, and
next morning was ordered by the escort to return to the Humber. Next day,
January 15th, she was again at the rendezvous, escorted as before, with seven
other ships awaiting the arrival of the convoy. At 16.00 hrs. an aircraft
was heard on the port side, and all guns were manned. The aircraft was a
German bomber, and she dived for the Cormorant. The mate, at the port
Hotchkiss gun on the bridge, held his fire until the bomber was within
effective range ; then he pulled the trigger. The gun did not fire. As he
re-cocked, the plane was spraying the decks with machine-gun bullets.
The Hotchkiss jammed again. ‘‘A stick of bombs,” Captain Wethey
writes, ‘‘exploded about this time at a distance of fifty feet from port side
amidships, throwing up a huge column of water. The ship was lifted and
severely shaken, and so were we. ’ ’
The gunner at the starboard Hotchkiss got in a burst; then that gun too
jammed. As the aircraft was circling for another run in, two destroyers
appeared and the German flew away. The only man injured in the
Cormorant was the second engineer, who was flung across the engine-room
and dislocated his shoulder. Not liking the job or imagining himself to be
skilled at it, the mate reduced the dislocation. The ship had suffered.
There were holes made by cannon shells in her upper works and plating.
One shell had passed through the side of the bridge, then through the deck,
and so through the master’s overcoat, “which,” he writes, “was hanging
on a hook and not on me, thank God. ’ ’ The main trouble, however, was
in the engine-room, where the chief engineer reported the condensers leaking
badly, degaussing fuses gone, and much small damage.
At 16.30 hrs., having told the escort trawler that he thought he could
BRITISH COASTER


manage to make port, the master turned his ship for harbour, some thirty
miles away. The convoy had not then appeared. There was a strong
south-easterly wind and rough sea. At 17.15 hrs. the chief engineer reported
that the water was gaining in the engine-room, and that he must stop to
pump and to repair. This left the Cormorant lying in the dark in the trough
of the sea ; drifting on a strong ebb tide out of the swept channel toward a
wreck. By 18.00 hrs. she was so close to the wreck that the escort vessel
took a line and held her head to sea. At 18.10, when the position was
critical, the chief engineer reported that he could proceed slowly. The
tow-rope parted at 18.15, but the master informed the escort that he thought
he could manage to make port without assistance ; and at 21.30, when an
Admiralty tug arrived, he was able to say definitely that he could proceed
without help. Half an hour later the chief engineer informed the bridge
that he must stop again. Down below they were working very hard.
However, the Cormorant had reached water in which she could drop her
anchor. At 22.40 hrs. she proceeded again, passed through the boom and
anchored in safety. Next day she was towed to dock.
The Cormorant remained very busy up and down the east coast, accumu-
lating more incidents, which her people will discuss with professional interest,
dispassionately, without claiming anything unusual for them. Multiply
such records as these, not by scores but by hundreds, and you have a true
picture of the work of the coasters.
8. DEEP WATERS
At the outbreak of war many of the ships of the coasting and home trade
went off on new ways. That was to be expected ; it had happened before in
all Britain’s wars. The cross-Channel passenger ships went early. For
instance, the s.s. St. Jalien { Captain A. T. Richardson) of the Weymouth-
Channel Islands service, was requisitioned on September 9th, 1939, by the
Government and made two passages to France as a troop carrier. On
October Bth she was docked at Southampton and converted to a hospital
ship. A few of the packets, having left it, returned to their ordinary
service. There is the case of the s.s. St. Patrick, another ship of the
Weymouth-Channel Islands service, which was requisitioned as a troop
carrier on September 30th, 1939. She was in Government service only
until October 11th of that year, when she was transferred to the Fishguard-
Rosslare run. There she remained, suffering occasional enemy attacks.
Finally, in June 1941, she was bombed and sank within six minutes,
losing thirty of the ninety souls she carried—eighteen members of the
DEEP WATERS


crew, including the master, Captain James Faraday, and twelve of the forty-
five passengers.
Such short service was rare. What the Government took it tended to
hold, and to take in larger numbers. The war record of these ships is a very
fine one. In Norway, at Dunkirk, in the ports of France, ships of all
companies and all services played their parts. Besides the passenger ships,
many others were allocated to the Services. A few coasting tankers
remained on their normal trade, carrying mainly edible oils and molasses ;
but most went to supply the Fighting Services, bringing aviation spirit to
queer places for the Royal Air Force, and oil fuel and water —plenty of
water —to the Royal Navy. Then there were ships supplying the Fleet at
its bases: ships supplying the Army in Africa, Italy, France, Belgium and
Holland —wherever they were needed : examination vessels, drifters, many
others. The numbers requisitioned from the coasting and home trade
tended to increase, not to diminish. There were the rescue ships ; sturdy
little craft which could stand up to the weather, fitted with operating theatres,
their holds converted to a cross between dormitories and hospital wards,
they went with the deep-sea convoys to do their vital work. An account
of these rescue ships is given in Merchantmen at War*
An English company had two sister ships, the Halcyon and the Philomel,
in the Bordeaux trade. For some considerable time one of these ships left
London, the other Bordeaux, each Saturday ; and they used to pass each
other somewhere off Ushant. Weather permitting, it was their custom to
pass within hailing distance. They were great rivals in smartness, in
handling, and in speed of passage. Eventually, both were sold to an Egyptian
owner, renamed the Zamalak and the Zaafaran, and ceased to sail under the
British flag. At the outbreak of war they were bought back, requisitioned
by the Ministry of Shipping, fitted as rescue ships and put under the manage-
ment of their former British owners. So, once more, they sailed northern
seas together, and in those seas the Zaafaran was torpedoed and sunk ;
but, fittingly enough, it was the Zamalak that picked up the whole complement
of her dead sister.
Not only ships allocated to the Services were sent by new ways to new jobs.
There were plenty of new ways for those that remained in the trade. On
May 22nd, 1940, the Glen Tilt, a Leith ship of about 1,200 tons deadweight,
Captain George Ross Nelson, 0.8. E., master, was dry-docked at Rouen for
painting. From the outbreak of war until Norway was invaded she had
been trading between East Scotland and West Norway. After the invasion
of Norway she carried cargoes to Northern France and up and down our
coasts as required. In Rouen, confusion and rumours concerning the
approach of the Germans dominated many of the inhabitants. The agent’s
office was chaotic. Captain Nelson reports that he could find no sense in
the place at all; there was too much shouting and arm-waving for his taste.
All that he could learn was that he and his ship would certainly be captured.
So he started in to get things done. Largely by his efforts and by those of
his officers and crew, the ship was floated and got to sea. She proceeded in
* Published by H.M. Stationery Office, 1945. See pp. 45-48.
BRITISH COASTER


ballast to Boston, Lincolnshire, where again she received orders to load
coal for Rouen, and did so without fuss. More, she discharged that cargo
at Rouen and came home safely although, a week before, excited inhabitants
had maintained that it was unlikely, even then, that she could escape from
the port.
Many of the little ships were sent farther afield—from one end, as it were,
of the home trade to the other—and had as their most constant opponent
not the Germans but the sea. The normal employment of the Horsa
(Captain David Sinclair, M.8.E., master) was in the Copenhagen trade,
but after a voyage to the Mediterranean in November 1939, the luck of the
business allotted her to Iceland. “Nine months of winter gales and three
of just bad weather” is the sailor’s summing-up of the year in those northern
waters. The Horsa was settled on a regular service : Leith to Reykjavik and
back to Leith, a month on the average for the round voyage, although she is
known to have done it in eighteen days. She became a familiar sight on that
evil stretch of water where, before the war, she was not known at all. She
was often commodore ship to the convoy in which she sailed, and Captain
Sinclair was often Commodore. She carried anything and anybody for
the Iceland base : admirals, generals, civilians, sometimes children, on three
occasions actors and actresses of ENSA. The enemy was not unknown
to her, but her main struggle was with the Atlantic.
Heaving-to on account of the weather is no strange experience to regular
users of those waters. Once, the escort was compelled to heave-to before
the convoy, which managed to struggle on a little longer. Then, in darkness
and full gale, the merchantmen were forced to stop ; but, when the weather
moderated, still in darkness and without shepherding, they got under way
together, proceeding without the loss or straying of a single ship. That
required fine seamanship. In February 1943, hove-to at the command of an
Atlantic gale, the Horsa fought a small, successful action with the sea. She
had been rolling and pitching violently for twelve hours when, as dawn was
breaking, the port lifeboat, lifted bodily by a sea, was unshipped from its
forward fall and hung suspended from the after davit. Fortunately, the
trappings held ; but it was obvious that another such sea would carry
the boat away—and the boat might be needed. The ship was put before the
wind, and the job tackled at once by men in oilskins, struggling for foothold
on the boat deck.
First the empty fall, with a large and heavy block slamming about at the
end of it, had to be secured. “Not an easy task, this,” the second officer,
Mr. R. I. More, writes, “with the vessel rolling gunwales under ; but we have
almost got it when a sea ships over the starboard side. As the water torrents
over the lurching deck, we cling for dear life to anything that will give a
hand hold. With sea boots full and soaking clothes we try again and, at last,
get hold of the block of the fall. It’s a tough job to work back a treble
purchase when both blocks and rope are saturated, but with a lot of hard
pulling we eventually get sufficient slack for our purpose. There is only one
way to re-ship the fall: someone has got to get into the boat. There are no
heroics about the bosun as he prepares to do this part of his job ; and yet,
DEEP WATERS


if another sea strikes in the meantime ... As we hold on grimly to the
bosun’s lifeline, while he creeps out, we watch every sea anxiously ; but
luck is with us and in a short time the fall is attached. With just a precarious
foothold on the wet deck, which goes from under us with every roll of the
ship, we cannot get enough purchase to hand-haul. So, through snatchblock
and fairlead, the rope is carried to a winch on the after deck and, despite the
continuous sweep of the seas across this deck, necessitating our dropping
everything periodically to cling to stays and rails, the winch is started and the
boat hauled to safety. Now there is just the spar to adjust and lashings to
make fast, a comparatively simple job now that we have something to
hold on by. ’ ’
Incidentally, nothing at all —not an oar or a boathook —was lost from
the lifeboat when she hung from the after davit while the sea and the gale
played with her. In the Horsa, which has the reputation of a happy ship,
they do not forget to lash gear securely on their monthly voyages through
“winter gales and just bad weather. ’ ’
Among many small ships which, during the first phase of the war, were
engaged off their regular routes carrying stores to France, the petrol carriers
stand out. They were not tankers, though tankers carried petrol too, but
small tramps, generally motor-driven. They were loaded with petrol in
containers, the larger edition of those two-gallon tins which were a domestic
feature of the trenches in the war of 1914-18. In view of their dangerous
cargo, they were not popular companions in port or at sea. Generally they
sailed alone, crossing the Channel at night from some southern port to
deliver the petrol to army bases. They were given a route by the Naval
Control, but otherwise they were happily independent. Convoys scarcely
knew them, and disliked them when they did. Probably because of its
independence, for it is hard to think of any other reason, many masters and
not a few sailors liked the petrol-carrying job. If, as they took their own way
across the Channel by night, they happened to fall in with a convoy, it was
the habit of most of them to put on their navigation lights. Collision was a
risk which, for themselves and other ships, they must not take ; so nobody
complained when they broke the black-out. Many seamen, seeing the lights
go on and understanding the reason, were thankful when the ship was well
clear of them and glad that they were not in her.
Ships and men go where they are told. A coasting liner might have been
running regularly for months, even years, between London and the Clyde
when she was ordered suddenly to Algiers or Gibraltar with army stores.
A collier, seemingly settled for the duration to carrying coal from Newcastle
to London, might find herself taking tanks to Sicily. The crews might or
might not appreciate the change ; the Coasting and Short Sea Authorities
were certain to watch their departure with regret, for already their job was to
make one ship do the work of two ; but the ships must go where they were
needed. However, because it is their proper job, for which the ships were
built and in which their crews are expert, the coasters, so far as could be, kept
to the coast. Often they went off to carry some special cargo oversea, and
then returned to their own trade. Sometimes they did not return.
BRITISH COASTER


Captain J. W. Klemp, 0.8. E., was sailing in convoy in September 1941
with stores for the Mediterranean. Accommodation in his ship for the
seamen and firemen was in the fo’c’sle. Rumours that U-boats were about
induced the watch off duty to ask leave, one night, to remain aft instead of
going forward to their bunks. Although he saw little sense in the request.
Captain Klemp agreed. That night the ship was torpedoed without warning.
Another ship in the convoy stood by and sent off a boat to pick up survivors,
but was herself sunk while the boat was doing its job. Captain Klemp was
among the men rescued. Recognising that they might be in for a long
voyage. Chief Officer J. B. Woodhouse, M.8.E., who was in charge of the
lifeboat, invited him to share command, and after consultation a course was
set for the Irish coast.
The weather was reasonably kind ; there was wind to sail, and not too
much of it. But the boat was in the Atlantic and the men in it were always
wet and always cold. They had little room to move and none in which to
exercise themselves. Cramp, with its various effects, was their constant
enemy. Early in the voyage their feet, always in water, began to give
trouble, and that trouble grew. A Filipino was the first to die. Then an
Arab fireman collapsed from exposure. As darkness came, Captain Klemp
took the man in his arms to give him what little warmth he could from his
own body ; but with the dawn he saw that the Arab was dead, and by the
stiffness of the body had been dead for some time. Later, an English
seaman died.
Discipline was always good ; there was never any whining. They were
within sight of the finish of their water supply when they sighted another
lifeboat, empty, and went alongside her. There was a full beaker in the
lifeboat, and the water not only gave them what they could not do without
physically, it gave them stronger hope as well. It was an omen. There was
not a great deal of talk in the boat, certainly no useless pessimism. Growing
exhaustion drugged their minds. There were, however, some brighter
interludes. Many of the crew had tobacco, but only one man possessed
a pipe. At Captain Klemp’s suggestion, the tobacco—unfortunately soaked
with sea water —was pooled, and the pipe, having been got going with some
difficulty, was passed from man to man.
From the beginning of the long and difficult voyage, Chief Officer
Woodhouse kept a daily record of the track of the boat, together with a
brief log. Apart from the lifeboat compass, his only materials were a stump
of pencil and the back of an old discharge paper. On the latter he drew his
lines of latitude and longitude and the nearest points of the European coast.
Not one of the boat’s company had any previous experience of small-boat
sailing, and Mr. Woodhouse confessed afterwards that it was a source of
continual wonder to him that such a small craft could be sailed so well.
The mast kept up the whole time and the sails remained in good condition,
although at the end of the passage the jib became rather tattered and the
reef-point fastenings on the standing lug began to pull adrift. The sea
anchor, which had been extensively used, disappeared on the morning of the
twelfth day. After a fortnight the weather showed signs of changing.
DEEP WATERS


That was bitter for them all; for then, at any time, they should be smelling
the land. However, on the fifteenth day after their ships had been torpedoed,
the two officers, with eighteen survivors, made a difficult landing on the
western coast of Ireland.
In the early autumn of 1942, coasting officers, engineers and seamen
manned a special Atlantic convoy. A fleet of American river passenger
craft were required over here. The Ministry of War Transport decided that
coasting seamen would be the best to bring them over, and a coastal liner
company was requested to take the job in hand. Volunteers to man ten of
the river craft, which had never made a sea-going voyage and had not been
designed for one, were readily obtained. While the ships were being
stiffened and otherwise made ready for their ocean voyage, the complete
crews to man them, all from the British coaster service, were sent to America.
The river convoy sailed to sea, escorted by two destroyers. The Atlantic
crossing was made in moderate weather and without incident until approxi-
mately twenty-four hours before making the Irish coast. There the convoy
was attacked by U-boats. Three of the river craft were sunk. The
remainder “took such good evasive action that they were successful in
completely outwitting the German U-boats” and arrived safely in British
ports. Nine masters and chief engineers were appointed to the Order of
the British Empire, and fourteen other officers were mentioned in despatches.
It would appear, therefore, that the authorities took a favourable view of
coaster seamanship in river craft on the deep seas.
9. THE NIGHT RACE TO SWEDEN
For sheer high adventure it would be hard to surpass the story of the
little ships and their daredevil crews who ran the gauntlet of the Skagerrak to
bring vital war supplies from Sweden. The tale begins in January 1941,
when two merchant ships, under the Norwegian flag, were successful in
making a voyage from Sweden with much-needed cargo. As the war
proceeded and various Swedish products, especially ball bearings, were
urgently needed for British war production it was decided to run the blockade
with ships less liable to be intercepted.
Special craft were prepared with high-power diesel engines and shallow
draft, so that they could penetrate ordinary minefields with impunity, while
their comparatively high cruising speed and small displacement gave them
an excellent chance of evading detection both by enemy patrols and by the
radiolocation stations that guarded the Danish and Norwegian coasts.
Each ship was designed to carry some forty tons of cargo, which was
stowed in fore and after holds. Personnel accommodation was limited.
A small deckhouse was constructed amidships over the after end of the
BRITISH COASTER


engine-room to provide cabins and a saloon for the master and his
officers ; and although the entire structure measured only 36 feet by 14 feet
6 inches, it also housed the galley, the shower and the wireless cabin. An
armoured box-bridge was superimposed over the fore part of the deckhouse,
and could be reached either by ladder at the after end or through a hatch in
the roof of the wireless cabin. Within the bridge, and flush with its height,
a wooden hut was built, enclosing a small chart table at which there was just
room to sit.
A dinghy lashed on the fore deck and capable of holding ten men served
as lifeboat, and self-inflating rubber floats were carried against emergency.
Once when it was found necessary to make use of a rubber float, the launching
being made somewhat hastily, the paddles were lost. Lesser spirits might
have quailed, but the men of the motor boats are used to improvisation.
Some minutes later the occupants of the float were observed to be cheerfully
breasting the seas with the aid of two frying pans and a lengthy Swedish
sausage snatched from the galley. Armament consisted of two hand-
operated twin Oerlikons, fore and aft, and twin Vickers machine-guns
mounted on either bridge wing. Aft of the bridge on the upper deck was a
central battery of quadruple Vickers machine-guns.
A British shipping company was appointed by the Ministry of War
Transport to manage and operate the ships. “Their responsibilities,”
says the official report, “were carried through with the utmost zeal and
discretion, and contributed largely to the contentment of the crews and the
smooth running of the operation.” Commander Sir George Binney,
D. 5.0., R.N.R., was appointed Commodore of the little merchant fleet
and undertook responsibility for the operational organization. Volunteer
crews were recruited from the Merchant Navy “pool,” and engineer officers
selected carefully from the candidates put forward by several companies.
Deck officers were recruited from the British company which had supervised
the construction of the ships. First mates holding masters’ certificates
were chosen as captains, and in all cases were experiencing the thrill of their
first command. Second mates were appointed mates.
The chief and second engineers were diesel experts, and each ship carried
two wireless operators. Bosuns, cooks and stewards, though experts at
their jobs, were not chosen for their nominal abilities alone. Every man in
the round score of the ship’s company had his action station. Each member
of the crew had to fit in with the rest; discord would have been fatal to
success. It says much for the care with which the men were selected that
not more than four changes had to be made subsequently because good men
failed under the strain and discomfort to be good shipmates.
On the eve of the first voyage from Hull, the following message was
received from Lord Leathers, then Minister of War Transport; “To the
officers and men of M.V.S. Nonsuch, Hopewell, Gay Viking, Gay Corsair and
Master Standfast: You are about to embark on an enterprise which will bring
lasting honour to the Red Ensign under which you sail. The Prime Minister
has told the country that we never call on the officers and men of the Merchant
■Navy in vain. lam proud, as the country will be, of your answer to the call
THE NIGHT RACE TO SWEDEN


Under the very noses of the Germans, jealously watching the narrow waters of the Skagerrak, these
diesel engines and shallow draft for safety in minefields. Each ship held 40 tons of cargo. This
Comdr. Sir George Binney, D.S.O., R.N.R., as Commodore of the Fleet. Beyond him is Captain D.


blockade runners raced vital war supplies from Sweden. Special craft were prepared, with high-power
photograph, taken on the Nonsuch, shows Lt.-Comdr. Brian Reynolds, D.S.C., R.N.R., who succeeded
Stokes, O.B.E. Lt. Comdr. Reynolds tragically lost his life in a mine explosion shortly after V-E Day.


we have made on you and of the enthusiasm with which you have carried
through your arduous training. Your task is great, but success will add
mightily to the preparations‘for our great onslaught for victory. You have
well-found craft, a fine and experienced leader, and a well-prepared plan.
I pray God to watch over you in your adventure, and confidently rely on your
skill, your courage and your resolution, under His Providence, to bring it to a
resounding success. ’ ’
Since the ships could achieve their purpose only by escaping the attention
of the enemy in whose waters they operated, their activity was confined to the
winter months, when nights were long, and for preference to moonless weeks
and nights of heavy cloud. To be found by day or even in bright moonlight
in enemy waters was to court destruction or, at best, the prison camp. Now
the North Sea crossing in winter is seldom a picnic, as any seaman will
acknowledge ; but for these modem corsairs, the navigation of their frail,
swift craft—in daylight under continuous risk of observation and interception,
and at night without lights or other navigational aids—was a very consider-
able and noteworthy feat.
Says Commander Sir George Binney: ‘ ‘ Service with the motor boats is
essentially a young man’s operation, owing to the exceptional physical strain
and stress in rough weather. In any long spell of bad weather at sea one
must expect at least half the ship’s company, not excluding junior officers, to
be completely ‘flaked out’ (fatigue-induced sea-sickness, or vice versa) to the
point of complete physical collapse. In bad weather the ships were wet,
and in cold weather we had the usual trouble of internal condensation, but
as officers and crews shared their discomforts alike there was nothing to it.
Even in moderate weather the motion was violent and quite beyond the ken
of the trawler fishermen among our sailors.” Fully laden on their
return voyage, the ships were stiff, and life on board became even more
uncomfortable.
Throughout the entire winter of 1943-4, often sea-sick, their clothes always
wet and sometimes stiff with ice, the blockade-runners raced between Hull
and Sweden, bringing to British factories supplies of the utmost value to
our war production. The enthusiasm of the ships’ crews for their job is
exemplified by an incident that occurred toward the end of the first dash
across the Skagerrak. A hostile aircraft was seen to be approaching the
Gay Viking (Captain H. Whitfield, master), and ‘‘action stations” was
sounded. One of the Vickers guns on the bridge was manned by the steward.
As the plane roared into the attack, the optimist cuddled his gun lovingly,
and called to the master, ‘ ‘ Shall I get him down, sir, or shall I just cripple
him?”
For all on board, each voyage was a long-drawn strain ; but if the seamen
had their troubles, they were as nothing to those of the unfortunate German
consul in a certain Swedish port; for with characteristic impertinence the
little ships chose to berth under the very windows of his office-—loading
vital war materials for ‘‘verdammte England” while he fumed impotently.
His anger was not echoed by the Swedes, for, says Sir George, ‘‘without
exception our presence was genuinely welcomed by the civilian population.
BRITISH COASTER


the fishermen, the naval ratings, the customs and harbour officials, and all
the simple people." ’
In all such operations casualties must be expected. The Master Standfast
was unlucky. She ran into trouble near the Swedish coast and was captured
by enemy surface craft. Her gallant master. Captain C. R. W. Holdsworth,
lost his life. The other ships came through safely, however, and the achieve-
ments of their crews were officially recognized. The Commodore, Sir George
Binney, was appointed to the Distinguished Service Order ; the masters and
chief engineers to the Order of the British Empire. Appointments to the
Order of the British Empire, and awards of Distinguished Service Crosses,
British Empire Medals and Commendations signalized the services of many
other officers and ratings. Never were awards more thoroughly earned ;
but it would be ungenerous to close this chapter of gallantry without paying
tribute to the unnamed men ashore, on both sides of the grey North Sea,
whose unremitting co-operation made the adventure possible.
Some of the men who manned the blockade runners and ensured all-important supplies
of ball-bearings and other equipment from Sweden. The crews, who were recruited
voluntarily from coaster seamen , had to face quite exceptional strain and hardship.
THE NIGHT RACE TO SWEDEN


10. THE TALE OF THE TUGS
Apart from those craft primarily designed for inshore salvage work, there
are, broadly speaking, three classes of tugs, ‘ ‘ Ocean, ” “ Ship ’ ’ and ‘ ‘ Craft, ’ ’
or big, medium and small. During the war there were inevitable mixings of
the classes, borrowing from one and lending to another, introductions of new
types which hardly belong to any established class ; yet these three main
classes do include the bulk of the big war fleet. The work of tugs is highly
specialized, so that tug masters and tugmen are somewhat of a tribe apart
within the race of seamen. Ocean tugs are generally of 120 feet in length and
over ; they are seldom of less than 1,200 indicated horsepower and fre-
quently of much more. They are used, normally, for heavy overseas and
coastwise towage and for serving a given area of ocean from a fixed base.
So, for example, ocean tugs will go out from their bases to distressed ships
in the North Atlantic and tow them, perhaps, some hundreds of miles
into port.
At the outbreak of war there were not more than five tugs owned in this
country which could truly be described as ocean-going. Of these the largest
and most modern, the Neptunia, was almost immediately requisitioned for
rescue service on behalf of the Admiralty, and almost as quickly lost by
enemy action when out on her first rescue task. The remaining four,
Salvonia, Englishman, Superman and Seaman, were also requisitioned for the
same service. This small fleet, although augmented by a few last-war rescue
tugs drawn from H.M. Dockyards and from various ports in the Dominions
and Colonies, and later reinforced by a handful of Dutch (notably Zwarte Zee
and Thames) and other Allied tugs, soon proved inadequate to operate a
rescue tug service in the face of the growing enemy sea and air attack. The
Englishman also was lost by enemy air attack. So, in order to meet this
deficiency in the rescue tug service, the Admiralty instituted an extensive
building programme, and also secured a number of ocean tugs from the
United States on Lend-Lease conditions.
Ship tugs are commonly from 80 to 120 feet in length and of 450 to 1,200
indicated horsepower. At the start of the war there were some 350 of these
in service in the various ports of the United Kingdom. They were designed
primarily to assist shipping when docking and undocking, entering and
leaving port and, when necessary, to attend ships in estuarial waters. The
peace-time standard of tugmanship requires that, under any conditions of
wind and tide, these small craft shall take a large ship squarely through a
dock entrance, scarcely wider than herself, without inflicting a scratch on
her paint.


A rescue tug towing into port a badly torpedoed vessel.
During the war the demands upon this class of tug for Government service
were enormous. Naval dockyards and bases required them for attendance
on H.M. ships, as the existing number of dockyard and fleet tugs could not
cope with the increasing size of the Royal Navy. Because of the ease
with which these ship tugs can be laid alongside a vessel in a seaway with
less risk of damage to both boarding craft and ship, they were used in
preference to trawlers, drifters or even yachts for examination, Naval
Control and Contraband Control Services. Yet, despite the demands of the
Royal Navy, their work in and about the ports of the United Kingdom and
on coastwise towage could not be neglected. In 1940 these already great
demands were further increased. After the withdrawal from the Continent
of Europe the requirements from ports and bases abroad grew considerably.
In addition, deep-sea ships having left the east and south coasts of England,
the tug facilities of the western ports had to be reinforced. So a ship-tug
building programme was laid down, and there followed a continuous
production of tugs varying in indicated horsepower from 500 to 1,000 to
meet the growing need.
Craft tugs do not often exceed 80 feet in length and 450 indicated horse-
power. In peace time their principal job is to handle barges and lighters
in port and within smooth-water limits. Such tugs are to be found mainly on
the London River, the one important lighterage port of the United Kingdom.
THE TALE OF THE TUGS


The skill with which they tackle their job proclaims a specialist calling.
When tide and wind are strong they dive into a jostling cluster of anchored
craft and pick out without damage to themselves or to others the barge or
lighter which they require. There were in the Port of London, when war
came, some 250 of these craft tugs.
The Rescue Service in time of war was operated by the Admiralty working
through the local naval officer-in-charge at the various ports and bases
concerned. There was theoretically no reason why the tugs of this service
should not continue to work under the Red Ensign and the management of
their owners so far as the working and the general internal economy of the
ship were concerned. There were, however, many practical difficulties in
such a scheme, not the least of them the desire of the naval authorities to have
under their orders a vessel whose crew was subject to naval discipline. This
entailed operating under the White Ensign. Another practical difficulty
was that the British tug companies, generally speaking, had not the facilities
under war conditions for handling at remote ports and bases the greatly
increased number of tugs which the Admiralty and Ministry of War Transport
building programmes brought into existence. So an informal arrangement
was reached between the two departments whereby the ship tugs, which
were built by the Ministry for operation in the United Kingdom, as well as
the coastal towing service, should be operated under commercial manage-
ment and the Red Ensign, but the rescue service should as a general rule
be under Admiralty management and the White Ensign. There are
exceptional cases where Red Ensign tugs were operated on rescue service,
but for the most part these were confined to privately owned tugs where the
owners were able and willing to carry on.
The war-time business of the ocean tugs in this Service was mainly concerned
with the deep seas. Their principal duty was to tow damaged vessels to the
nearest port or sheltered anchorage and then to pass them over to other
hands, but they were also called upon to carry out ocean and coastal towages
which the fleet of Red Ensign deep-sea and coasting tugs, sadly deficient
for the task in its early stages, was unable to handle.
The harbour service tugs were concerned with all shipping in all harbours
throughout the Empire. Many of them went from the United Kingdom to
far-distant places for their war service. Others remained at home speeding
up the turn-round of shipping, helping to keep the ports in action under
enemy air attack. The Ministry of War Transport started to send the
Empire class of harbour service tug overseas in 1941. These tugs were used
for strengthening harbour service resources at such places as Iceland,
Freetown, Mombasa, and ports in the Mediterranean and the Indian Ocean.
They were also used by the Navy at its Pacific bases. Before the reopening
of the Mediterranean, tugs for the East had to proceed via the Cape of
Good Hope —a considerable undertaking for craft of this kind, which are
classed as ship tugs. They had to go when they were ready for sea. They
could not wait for the correct seasonal conditions, as such small vessels
would do in time of peace. During the summer of 1945 several of these tugs,
dispatched in haste to meet heavy demands from the South East Asia and
BRITISH COASTER


Rescue tugs refloating a damaged ship at high tide. Reeling under the strain ,
they slowly case the damaged ship off the sand into deep water. Tug service
demands a very high standard of skill and endurance , especially in war time.


Pacific Commands, crossed the Indian Ocean through the south-west
monsoon, a voyage seldom attempted at such a season by craft of only
100 feet in length. Similar tugs built in Canada to British design also made
the voyage to Australia through the Panama Canal and across the Pacific.
The war introduced a new class of craft tug, the Tid. These tugs were
designed for the Ministry of War Transport for handling barges in captured
ports and sheltered anchorages, the Ministry having particularly in mind
operations for the liberation of Europe. They are steam tugs and 200 of
them were ordered, the first ninety being coal-fired for service in Europe, the
remainder oil-fired for service in the East. In coastal waters and across
Channel they proceeded under their own power; but they were shipped on
deck on cargo ships for the East. On operations they were manned mainly
by naval and military crews, and so do not really come into the story of the
Merchant Navy. But civilian seamen crews have taken them from the
north-east coast, where they were built, to their service bases in the United
Kingdom or to west coast ports for shipment overseas. The Tids are small,
but they must not be regarded as fair-weather craft for service only in
sheltered waters. Tid 126 was delivered from Hull to Liverpool. The
voyage took seven days ; the route was via the English Channel; the
distance covered was 873 miles at a convoy speed of 7.5 knots. That was in
the month of March. On passage from Southampton to Cardiff in the
month of January, Tid 74 assisted in salving the American Liberty ship
George Hawley, torpedoed off the Lizard. She towed the disabled ship
without life on board for a distance of about thirty miles in eight hours before
reluctantly handing her charge over to one of the deep-sea rescue tugs.
Outside the harbours and anchorages as well as in them the Tids have done
notable work.
When a ship, damaged by enemy action on the high seas, had been brought
by the rescue tugs to port or sheltered anchorage, her cargo was discharged
and the inshore salvage organization put her in trim for her passage to a final
repair port. Possibly she was only half a ship by then. Certainly she would
be tender and helpless, without motive power, perhaps with no means of
steering or recovering her anchors. But she had to go as soon as possible
to the repair port which could handle her ; and that might be distant. When
she was ready, patched and tender, the coastal tugs took her over. There
might be a single tug in charge of her, or a pair towing abreast; but it was
always difficult, often very anxious work.
In coastal towing there is no wide stretch of ocean to play around in should
anything carry away. Too often there is a lee shore only a few miles distant.
Seamanship, patience and a tugman’s stomach are necessary for the job.
Seamanship not only to handle but to appreciate, frequently without the
assistance of a searchlight, how the tow is riding 150 fathoms or more astern
in the variety of weather and tidal conditions to be met with around our coasts.
Patience to jog along at slow speeds, or heave to and ride it out against a
gale, always with one eye upon the weather and the other on the towing
hawser. To those qualities the master of a tug must add tact, quite a lot
of tact. A tugmaster, thinking of his professional reputation which stands
BRITISH COASTER


on his delivery of his tow safely but as speedily as possible, will hurry when
he can, go slowly, very slowly, or stop when the sea compels him. Un-
fortunately both owners of the tows and naval authorities, since Convoy and
Routeing Officers are much concerned with fixed time-tables, may confuse
seamanly prudence with dilatoriness. So, after bringing his helpless tow safely
through difficulties to the repair port, the tugmaster may be called upon to
explain the slow passage. That, like the safe delivery, he is generally well
able to accomplish.
The tugs of the coastal towing fleet were a very mixed collection of various
sizes, ages and power. Two of them had served in the war of 1914-18 ;
one was a refugee from the Hun ; two were French ; several Dutch ; some
were on Lend-Lease from the United States ; one of the most stout-hearted
was taken over when building in this country for Sweden ; indeed the
majority of them were British-built—a number of them to the general design
of the Englishman, but oil-fired. With the exception of the Dutch tugs, they
were all British-manned and wore the house flags of well-known British
towing companies. The whole fleet was controlled by the Ministry of War
Transport and operated by the Sea Transport Division. Their work was
very far from being confined to the towing of damaged ships (or pieces of
damaged ships) to repair yards. They towed what they were ordered to tow.
They steamed considerably over a million sea miles on their job of coastal
towing.
Without question one of the finest towages was that carried out by the
deep-sea tugs Empire Larch and Empire Harry of the damaged tanker
Seminole (15,000 tons d.w.) from Gibraltar to the north-east coast of
England. Making a wide detour into the Atlantic to avoid submarines, the
tugs were sixteen days at sea before making their landfall off the convoy
anchorage bn the north-west of Scotland, when they proceeded with their
tow northabout to their destination. Empire Harry (later to be lost on
service) subsequently assisted a sister tug, Empire Sandy, and the rescue
tug Hesperia (also Red Ensign) to tow a replica of the original
60,000-ton Singapore floating dock from Bombay, where it had been built,
to Trincomalee.
Early in the war, when the deep-sea ships ceased to use the ports of the
east and south coasts, Thames barges had to be sent to the west to serve them.
More than 300 of these barges were towed to the Clyde and other ports and
bases on the west coast of Scotland, the majority by way of the Caledonian
Canal. There is nothing spectacular about this towing ; for Thames
barges are built to stand up to sea conditions. But there are points of interest
about it. The coasters, as well as the coastal tugs, played a part in the
business ; they towed twenty-four barges, with the loss of one only, to the
Moray Firth, where they were taken over by the coastal tugs for the passage
through the Caledonian Canal. When they had completed their war-time
excursion these barges had made a longer journey than their builders contem-
plated—some 1,600 miles. They have, in fact, been towed round the United
Kingdom, up the east coast, through the Caledonian Canal, and back to
London round Land’s End. Others have been towed to and from Iceland.
THE TALE OF THE TUGS


During the early stage of the war, the coastal tugs had a rush job of barge
towing. Sixty Belgian barges of the canal type, narrow craft which whipped
in a seaway, were urgently required at Loch Alsh by a given date ; without
them a mine-laying programme would be held up. The barges proceeded
from the Thames by the southabout route —Straits of Dover, English
Channel, Land’s End, Irish Sea. A spell of three months of fine weather
was required—a lot to ask of the English climate—-and each barge had to be
towed 800 miles. The towage began in the spring of the year. They
were, a report states, “old barges and in somewhat ripe condition.” Many
of them leaked so badly in the early stages of the operation that “a procession
of them was put into various ports for stiffening. ’ ’ That was accomplished
by adding a considerable layer of concrete to the bottom of the hold. ‘ ‘ Once
we had got over that trouble, ’’ the report concludes, “the towage was
relatively easy and the final pairs went up through the Irish Sea at speeds of
A floating dock under towage. Many of these highly difficult and dangerous
during the war. Floating docks, sitting targets for German aircraft, were
BRITISH COASTER


seven and eight knots. ’ ’ There again there is nothing spectacular, just good
seamanly work getting round difficulties. The last two pairs of canal
barges in ripe condition arrived at their destination on June 30th, the day on
which the towing operation had been planned to finish. The mine-laying
programme was not held up.
Floating docks, quite a number of them, were towed by coastal tugs all
round the coasts ; through the Straits of Dover, round Land’s End, or
along E-boat Alley to be nursed through the Pentland. Many went farther
afield, to Iceland, the Mediterranean, the Far East, even across the Atlantic ;
but those, of course, did not all belong to coastal towage although the
coasting tugs played their part. One of the most difficult towage operations
ever undertaken in war time was a coastal affair. A floating dock, capable of
handling the latest capital ships of the Royal Navy, had to be moved from
Devonport to the Clyde. The dock, which herself had a crew of over a
operations, which demand the most expert tugmanship, were carried out
towed all round our coasts, and some were towed far across the ocean.
THE TALE OF THE TUGS


hundred men, was in the charge of a mixed bag of four tugs, including a
representative of the coastal towing fleet. She provided obviously a large
and tempting target for enemy aircraft, and had to proceed at very slow speed:
she was escorted both by surface craft and aircraft. The voyage was without
incident and no enemy aircraft were ever sighted. Nine local tugs were
required for the final berthing, which was carried through without hitch.
A job of that sort, even though the enemy and the sea failed to interfere
with it, cannot be carried through without very expert tugmanship.
There were, inevitably, many cases in which either the enemy or the sea, or
both, did interfere. An R.A.F. floating dock —an old friend of the coastal
towing fleet —encountered a January gale when being towed from Oban to
Alness. The tow parted and the dock was left temporarily to its own
devices. No doubt profiting from the training it had received previously at
the hands of the coasting tugs (on this occasion a rescue tug had been in
charge), the dock swept majestically through the Pentland clear of everything
and, when recovered by her tug, the story has it that she had already turned
correctly into the swept channel and proceeded many miles on her proper
course.
With one thing and another, handling damaged ships, barges, floating
docks and floating cranes, all sorts and all sizes of awkward tows, the Red
Ensign tugs of the Coastal Towing Fleet were in good practice to deal with
the bits and pieces of Arromanches Flarbour with which they were so largely
concerned.
11. D-DAY
Leaving France, getting our troops and the civilians from the Dunkirk
beaches and the ports, was an affair of sheer desperate improvisation.
Sending the Allied Armies back to the Normandy beaches on June 6th, 1944,
was an achievement of planning and organization on a remarkable scale.
In the success of that achievement the coasters had a leading part. It had
been a real and bitter grievance with them that they had been driven in 1940
from their ancient Continental trade. That grievance was wiped out when
they knew that the return to France could scarcely be successful without
them. The Royal and U.S. Navies, the British and American Armies, the
Air Forces of both nations, provided the units of this attack ; supplies,
blood to keep the units alive, flowed mainly, almost wholly, until the
the operation was well advanced, through the little ships of the British Coaster
Fleet. Because of their small size and shallow draft, because they could
be and, in the event, often were, beached and refloated, the coasters could do
BRITISH COASTER


this job when deep-sea ships could not. It was their day. Without them
success could not have been achieved.
Preparation for the coasters’ part in the great adventure began some two
years before D-Day. The Ministry of War Transport, whose task it was to
provide, prepare and load merchant vessels for the operation, set up a special
section, staffed largely by coasting masters, to examine individually no fewer
than one thousand coasters. Carefully sifted, the data thus obtained enabled
the most suitable ships for the operation to be selected.
Unlike the deep-sea vessels which included considerable blocks of standard
ships such as the Oceans, Forts and Liberties, each coaster had to be regarded
as a separate problem, and in view of the number required the calculations
for each ship presented a formidable task. It was necessary to take into
consideration such matters as the trim, both loaded and light, for the ships
had to be in suitable trim not only for beaching but also for subsequent
refloating. Some would have to carry all types of stores ; others would
have to transport vehicles during the earlier stages of the operation. For the
latter purpose, about two hundred specially selected ships had their masts
strengthened and fitted with heavy derricks, and each was tested rigorously
with actual vehicles to ensure that the special equipment was fully suitable.
Extra A.A. armament had to be fitted in all ships, and additional accommoda-
tion found for the D.E.M.S. gunners.
Eventually the coasters selected for the assault stage were requisitioned,
and a period of intense activity followed. The ships were distributed to
various ports around the coasts of the United Kingdom, and detailed
instructions were issued to ensure that they would be properly made ready
for the task ahead. Many had to be fitted for the transport of packed
petrol; others for the carriage of ammunition, some of which was of a
highly dangerous type. There were cross-Channel packets to be converted
into hospital ships ; there were ships to be prepared as troop carriers.
Other vessels again were destined to become water boats and tenders.
Next, the coasters —including ships flying the Norwegian, Dutch, Polish
and Belgian flags, and manned by Allied crews—were moved to loading
ports to take in their first cargoes. These consisted of a great variety
of commodities and equipment that would be required by the Army in the
very early stages of the assault, and that called for operational stowage ;
that is to say, the supplies had to be loaded and stowed in such a way that
the first requirements of the invaders would be the most accessible. The
ingenuity involved in such loading will be better appreciated if it is borne in
mind that, throughout, the greatest care had to be taken to ensure that the
ships would arrive at their destinations in proper trim for actual beaching and
subsequent refloating.
The coaster invasion fleet finally numbered 420 ships, small, medium and
large, of 655,000 tons deadweight, plus 78,000 tons employed as naval
colliers and armament carriers. Their crews, all volunteers, signed special
“ V-articles,” under which they agreed to transfer from ship to ship or
from ship to “pool,” and to go anywhere, at any time, at a moment’s notice,
and, if necessary, to load and unload cargo. Overtime rates were waived.
D-DAY


The coasters’ hour of glory. Day by day, week by week, throughout the long years of the war,
narrow channels and estuaries: doing an all-important job quietly and unostentatiously. Little
a key part in the most spectacular operation of the war. But for them, the invasion would not he
refloated, they are essential to the transport of the Allied Armies and their supplies to


they have kept open the peril-infested coastal waters, keeping in use the vulnerable ports, the
has been the limelight they have enjoyed, great their danger and hardship. But now they take
possible. Because of their small size and shallow draft, because they could he beached and
Normandy, Here British troops move inland from one of the 420 coasters of the invasion fleet.


each man accepting in lieu a flat payment of £1 per week. Generally the
crews were young men, although there were plenty of veterans in the ships
when they sailed for France.
Personnel of the operational ships and certain reinforcement reserves were,
so to speak, “segregated” from the remainder of the Merchant Navy, and
their welfare became the concern of COMNO (Combined Office Merchant
Navy Operations). This organisation, with its headquarters in London and
out-offices at ports, in effect acted as the crew department of a huge shipping
company. Working always in close co-operation with the shipowners and
the representatives of the officers and men, it handled all questions affecting
manpower requirements, pay, board and lodging ashore, and saw to the
distribution of ships’ mail.
On the day appointed, despite all difficulties, the coasters were ready
and sailed for the various assembly points. Then, as a result of unfavourable
weather conditions, the operation was postponed for 24 hours. To officers
and men the delay meant keen disappointment; but to the shore organisa-
tion it meant further gruelling work. A coaster is not designed for long
voyages; normally she is not more than a day or two at sea between ports.
Her fresh meat and vegetable storage capacity is small, and her bunker
range is often only four to five days’ steaming. The delay meant that
stores would have to be replenished. The possibility had been foreseen, and
the War Transport Management Control, staffed by shipowners and brokers
—often working without remuneration—and grouped round the personnel of
the Coasting Control Committees, was there to meet such difficulties and
demands. At one period of the postponement there were some 120 coasters
lying in the Solent anchorages and 150 in the Thames. Most of them
required fresh food ; in many of them the bunkers had to be topped up.
Their demands came to the Management Control at all hours and were met
with the minimum of delay.
While their ships lay at anchor, cut off from contact with the land, the
masters of the D-Day ships attended conferences ashore. There they
received their orders. They learned where the invasion was to be made ;
the beaches to which their ships had to proceed. They took back with them
to their ships sealed packages containing charts with full particulars of the
sections of the French coast to which they were destined. Their job was to
deliver on the beaches each day more than 22,000 tons of stores and some
2,500 motor transport vehicles.
At last the anxious time of waiting came to an end. The weather was not
good, nor did it look like improving ; but on the evening of June 6th, 1944,
with their D.E.M.S. gun crews doubled, with soldier passengers mostly
accommodated in canvas tents rigged over the hatches, with considerable
deck cargo as well as full holds, the coasters sailed. The airborne troops and
the craft carrying the first of the land assault troops had preceded the
coasters, which were not due to arrive until the beaches had been stormed.
From the assembly points in Britain the coasters sailed in many small
convoys to rendezvous in the Channel. The rendezvous were, in effect,
movable sorting stations. The centre was a lightship or lighted buoy, and
BRITISH COASTER


there were other buoys, marked and numbered, from which the arriving
ships set new courses. To baffle German reconnaissance planes, each
sorting station was moved to a different position as occasion demanded.
At the rendezvous the convoy split up. An escort vessel would hoist the
signal “Sword ships, follow me,” another, elsewhere, “Utah ships, follow
me” ; and the ships for Sword and Utah beaches would peel off from the
main body.
Toward evening of June 6th, tfie van of the coasters arrived at the beaches
and anchored well offshore to await orders from the Sea Transport beach-
master and his assistants to go in and discharge. Going in was a tricky
business. The sea was crowded with big and small ships, many of them on
the move. Landing craft of all kinds: launches, lighters, ‘ ‘ rhinos, ’ ’
“ducks”—all much concerned with the urgency of their own jobs—were
plying to and from the beaches. Sometimes, without visible or audible
Allied coasters played their part in the invasion
fleet. Royal Engineers unload a Norwegian coaster.
By courtesy of the Norwegian Government Information Office.
D-DAY


warning, they would swing right across the bows of an oncoming coaster,
driving the master to heights of vituperation reminiscent of windjammer days.
After darkness had fallen, the navigators’ difficulties were accentuated
by the continuous attentions of German aircraft; but the coasters moved in
with negligible casualties. Some of the ships were anchored as far inshore
as was practicable without endangering them, and then discharged into
smaller craft alongside ; others were actually beached, the cargoes being
discharged direct on to the sand when the tide had receded sufficiently.
The first was the method which seamen preferred ; but off those crowded
beaches, in uncertain weather, it called for fine seamanship. The master
had to judge his position nicely: his ship must not pound in a swell, yet
she must be as close inshore as possible to shorten the journey of the small
craft taking her cargo to the land. Speed was essential; the assault troops
wanted as much as they could get as soon as they could get it; so, in deciding
the exact moment and position to let go his anchor, the coaster master had
to balance seamanly prudence against military necessity. Again, the ship
must be anchored where she would not interfere with her neighbours when
she swung. Obstacles, partly visible or wholly submerged, must be avoided.
Taken all in all, the master had a full-size job.
Beaching was unpopular. It was an abnormal procedure, and seamen
are conservative. Coasters are used to sitting on the mud in port—many of
them do it habitually—but deliberately to run a ship ashore on an un-
protected' beach is another thing altogether. It outrages a seaman’s instincts.
Not one of the men who had to do it enjoyed the experience. There was
often anxiety amounting to real unhappiness as the ship went in and
grounded, and immense relief when finally she came off again. Nevertheless,
if the fighting men were to be given the supplies they needed with the
maximum speed, the job had to be done ; and done it was.
Never very good during the first stages of the Normandy landings, at one
time the weather became almost impossible. Few coasters had the luck to
discharge under really fine conditions ; if it was not blowing, there was
nearly always a swell sufficient to make the business of putting heavy loads
from a lively ship into a livelier craft alongside an exacting affair, calling for
the wisest judgment on the part of everybody concerned. It was not
uncommon for the master to take charge at one hatch, the mate at another.
The ships discharged their cargoes principally into landing craft, ducks,
lighters and rhinos. The latter were large floating pontoons, very
manoeuvrable, driven by two or more engines, and capable of carrying a
considerable number of vehicles. Invaluable for the discharging of motor
transport, they were so large that they could receive vehicles from No. 2
and No. 3 hatches at the same time. Because the packages to be taken out
were comparatively small and required more handling, discharging stores
was a slower business than discharging motor transport. Weather conditions
and the supply of receiving craft ruled the rate for an individual ship—some
were luckier than others—but the logs of many coasters suggest that in the
first days the average discharge of stores was twenty to twenty-five tons
per hour.
BRITISH COASTER


Ships carrying motor transport generally could maintain a better average.
Each vehicle was ready ; it had only to be manoeuvred into position beneath
the hatchway and lifted out. The winches and derricks had been made
equal to the job. The weight of a fully loaded army lorry is no more than
eight or nine tons ; nothing very considerable, given adequate lifting gear.
So the coasters managed to put lorries overside into rhinos or landing craft
at an average of about two lorries every twelve minutes. Under the
conditions of the first few days, the general average for discharge of motor
transport of all sorts was in the region of sixty to seventy tons per hour. It
sounds easy, but discharging overside in a swell is not simply a matter of
lifting heavy loads out of one craft and depositing them in another. The
movements of the two vessels are not synchronized, so that without a high
degree of skill considerable damage can be done both to the load and to the
craft receiving it. However, the men of the coasters are skilled in all branches
of seamanship under all conditions. They took the work in their stride,
surprised only that the Germans interfered so little with the progress of
the job.
12. THE BEACHES AND MULBERRY
Adequately to tell the stories of the coasters and tugs engaged in the
Normandy landings, a complete book would be required. Here, the
experiences of a few must typify the spirit and endeavours of all. Loaded
with medical supplies and with petrol in jerricans, the Northgate (Captain E.
Crowther, master) arrived in the Solent on June Ist. Two days later,
fifty-seven men of the Royal Engineers were embarked. She sailed at
23.50 hrs. on June sth, and let go her anchor off Sword Beach at 19.30 hrs.
on the following day. The passage across the Channel was not eventful,
though her people seem to have been impressed considerably by the crowd of
ships at sea.
The beaches were very active when she reached them, and there were
intermittent fire and explosions. From time to time after going in the ship
moved her position. After dark, enemy aircraft came over, and the attacks
continued off and on during the night. At 23.30 hrs. the Northgate was
straddled by bombs, which shook her and caused some minor damage, but
an hour and a half later her gunners got their revenge by scoring a hit on an
attacking plane which probably destroyed it. Discharging commenced at
06.45 hrs. on June 7th, and was completed by 19.00 hrs. At 20.30 hrs. the
anchor was weighed and the Northgate left the beach for a rendezvous with
THE BEACHES AND MULBERRY


The Mulberry Harbour is taking form, and in the calmer waters sheltered hi
other coasters which had discharged their cargoes. She found no ships at
the appointed spot, but was ordered to follow a returning tank-landing
craft. The crossing was made without incident and she dropped anchor at
Spithead on June 8th —the first of the coasters to return from the operation.
Although they admit that the trip had its exciting and anxious moments, her
crew state that their main feeling was one of amazement that the operation
was proceeding so smoothly.
The Winona (Captain A. R. Lawson, master) is a 38-year-old Canadian
Lake ship, which crossed the Atlantic and made acquaintance with the ports
of France during the war of 1914-18. Navigated from the fo ’c’sle head, she
is one of those ships, designed for inland waters, which when driven into
head seas are alleged to turn round of their own accord and go the other way.
She left Southend at 16.45 hrs. on June sth, loaded with thirty-four motor
transport vehicles and six officers and 124 other ranks of the Highland
Division. She knew her job and what was ahead of her, for she had been
on the invasion exercises ; but she got a foretaste of the “real thing” on
passage through the Downs, when she had to navigate in a smoke screen
while the Cap Grisnez guns shelled her convoy.
At about 09.00 hrs. on June 7th she arrived off Mulberry beach. There
was an immense amount of activity. Shells were screaming overhead,


the line of sunk bloclships , coasters of many sizes and types lie at anchor.
both from the German gun emplacements and from the beach, which the
people of the Winona had time to watch and note; there was a certain
amount of shellfire both ways, from the Germans and from our warships
at sea, and mines were exploding on and offshore, as the Germans had
intended they should, and as they had not intended. The higher-pitched
rattle of machine-guns and rifle fire was continuous. The Winona got
her orders to go in and beach. Obeying, she twice struck submerged
objects, denting her plates. Eventually, however, she took the ground gently
and easily with a Norwegian ship a hundred feet to port of her and the
Sherwood, another British coaster, some 500 feet to starboard. When the
tide dropped, she put her motor transport vehicles over the side on to the
sand and they drove off up the beaches. The soldiers aboard were able to
walk ashore without even getting their boots wet. The Winona's people
take a pride in that dry landing for her passengers. To the immense relief
of her officers and crew, the ship came off the beach as easily as she had
grounded. That was about 23.00 hrs. on June 7th, when the Germans were
commencing their nightly air activities.
The coasters’ worst fight in the invasion of Normandy was with the
sea and the weather for the most part, though the Germans added their
meed of unpleasantness. Contrast, for example, the first and second


trips to the Normandy beaches of one of the little ships. The Summity
(Captain A. T. Fry, master) almost half a new ship after her trouble at the
beginning of the Battle of Britain, arrived off Sword beach on June 12th,
1944. She was carrying 540 tons of petrol in jerricans and drums. Anchor-
ing about a hundred yards off the beach, inside the shelter of a Mulberry, she
discharged her cargo and sailed again in one day without particular incident.
Returning to Sword on June 19th, she arrived in the teeth of a north-
easterly gale. About three miles off the beach she dropped both anchors
but had to keep her engines slow ahead to prevent dragging. On June 20th
she shifted in closer and came under intermittent shellfire from a German
long-range gun known as “Uncle Charlie.” For five days, frequently
changing her position but never escaping the attentions of Uncle Charlie,
she waited for the weather to make discharging possible. On June 24th
she saw a destroyer and a Liberty ship sunk. The latter is described by the
men who saw her hit as ‘ ‘ splitting amidships and falling apart. ’ ’ Early on
June 26th, the weather having moderated, the Summity was ordered from
Sword to Juno beach, to the extreme west of the British beaches. There she
discharged alongside a quay in the small fishing port of Port en Bassin,
having taken nine days to get through with the job that had been done in
forty-eight hours on the first trip.
A few of the coasters were not so fortunate. The Westdale (Captain W.
McKenzie, master) arrived off Gold beach on June 16th ; but the weather
was too bad for discharging and she lay at anchor waiting for better
conditions. Passing close on June 20th, a landing craft touched off a mine,
which sank her. The Westdale was severely damaged by the explosion and
lost both her anchors and all her cable. The gale drove her up the beach and
she settled, some four hours later, in about six fathoms of water. She was
abandoned. Her crew and two gunners were sent home to England after
being landed on the beach ; but her master stood by her. When the
weather moderated, she was salvaged. She was lifted on June 24th, but
the weather turned bad again and she submerged. She was lifted once more
on the 28th, and her cargo was discharged two days later. Arrangements
were made for towing her home on July 2nd, but the weather interfered.
Eventually she was taken in tow on the 4th, and arrived in Southampton
Water on July 6th. The master stayed on board for the crossing, his crew
being two salvage men to work the pumps. On arrival, Captain McKenzie
reported to the Management Control wearing army uniform and very
uncomfortable army boots.
By seamanship and sheer determination, the men of the coasters kept the
vital supplies going ashore, despite adverse weather and the fury of the enemy.
Fittingly to round off the saga of the coasters, here is the story of the Sarnia,
a vessel of 711 gross tons, as told by her master, Captain L. T. Alexander,
D.S.C. “We left the Solent on Monday, June sth, in a never-ending stream
of all sorts of craft, with the continual row of planes overhead. My orders
were to proceed to Omaha beach, about twenty miles west of Caen, and there
deliver my cargo, consisting of all sorts of ammunition, oil, cable wires,
food rations and many other things.
BRITISH COASTER




The lags play their part: one of the concrete caissons for the Normandy coast.
“I arrived seven hours after it had started. What a picnic! The coast
was being severely bombed by planes, our warships bombarding, and the
enemy’s guns which had not been put out of action . . . were peppering us,
yet we nine coasters went in, all guns mounted and everyone on top line.
We anchored about two miles offshore, and next day proceeded to within
half a mile. Once I had to shift farther off for a few hours because it was
just too hot. Each night, from 23.00 hrs. till 02.00 hrs., we had a battle
royal with enemy planes. Several were brought down ; in fact, 1 com-
plimented two of my six gunners for their good firing. . . .
“No doubt you have heard that the coast was well defended. This was
quite correct, and I am sure that when Rommel viewed same he never
thought we would penetrate it ; but we have—wonderful work, but highly
dangerous for the first to land, as the beaches, roads, fields, etc., were heavily
mined. . . . The 'ducks’ were just marvellous. They came alongside,
hooked on to a special type of rope we have, kept their engines going,
loaded up and off again ; landed on the beach, switched over their gear and


The Invasion Tug Control carried out approximately 1,000 cross-Channel tows.
went to their particular dump, and then straight into the water again.”
Of his second trip, Captain Alexander writes: ‘‘ I arrived at anchor off
the westernmost American beach at 14.30 hrs. on Saturday, June 17th .. .
had ammunition, high explosive shells, etc. Monday night, the wind
freshened from the north-east (right on the beach). Tuesday morning at
09.00 hrs. it was impossible to resume overside discharging, so picked up
anchor and re-anchored a mile farther out, using both anchors. Before the
day ended a gale was blowing, but with steaming slow ahead we managed
reasonably well, thus taking the strain off the windlass. Wednesday noon, an
American vessel came to me and asked if 1 would heave up and put vessel on
the beach, as our cargo was vital to the taking of Cherbourg. I agreed, but
unfortunately, while heaving up, the vessel took a nose dive in the sea, and
when rising again snapped the chain (although I was keeping the engines
ahead), thus losing port anchor and thirty fathoms of cable. ’ ’
Later, Captain Alexander received orders to beach at 22.00 hrs., “which I
did, but I will admit I had many misgivings. After being master of this ship


for so many years, I was deliberately putting her ashore in the midst of a gale
on a lee shore. ’ ’ Beaching proved to be no easy matter. ‘‘ At 22.20 hrs.
we first touched. The seas were mountainous (including surf) dead behind,
but I kept going slow ahead and tried to steer her so that she would not lay
broadside on ; as it was, we took very heavy seas all over her. The ship
lifted up, pounded, banged and just simply did everything except break up ;
in fact the masts shook so violently that I thought they would snap olf.
I phoned down to the Chief, and all I got from him was: ‘You seem to be
enjoying yourself up on the bridge. It is plain hell down here. If this keeps
on much longer, the engines will be through the skylight.’
“At 01.00 hrs. I considered the vessel was all right and would not now
During the invasion months the cross-Channel convoys operated with time-table
regularity. A line of coasters methodically steams towards the French coast.
BRITISH COASTER


move either way, the tide having nearly left her, so packed up and had a lie
down on the settee until 04.00 hrs., when the ducks and lorries came alongside
to take the cargo. We were all worn out ; no one had any rest for four
days.” The Sarnia returned to the Solent on Monday, June 26th, but
within a few days was back at the beaches with a fresh cargo. By October
1944 she had completed eight voyages to Normandy, few of which were
uneventful.
Following the D-Day landings it was imperative that regular large-scale
supplies of petrol and diesel oil should be available to the advancing armies.
To meet the need, a tanker base was established at Hamble, near
Southampton, with a joint shore organisation comprising representatives of
the Ministry of War Transport, the Petroleum Board, the Admiralty, and the
British and U.S. Armies. All these people were to live and work together
daily, each with his own particular job. The Ministry of War Transport was
responsible for the operation and maintenance of the tankers and their
crews, the Petroleum Board saw to the berthing and loading of the ships,
and the Naval Control was in charge of routeing and convoy equipment.
The fleet consisted of thirty Chants (channel tankers, each of about 300 tons
cargo capacity, built for the operation) ; thirteen motor tankers, each of
about 1,150 tons cargo capacity, built in America but British manned;
a few steam and motor tankers of about 700 tons cargo capacity ; and
several larger tankers, of 1,800 tons to 5,000 tons cargo capacity, which would
discharge to the British and American pipelines outside Port en Bassin from
anchorages in the open Channel.
The 1,150-tonner Rouseville (Captain A. M. Kennedy) made the first
voyage to Port en Bassin, discharged her cargo to the storage tanks in the
harbour and returned to Hamble. The other ships of this type then pro-
ceeded to ferry petrol to Port en Bassin, and at once spirited competition
developed, the vessels striving to achieve the shortest possible time for the
voyage and to deliver the greatest number of cargoes. Soon, a trophy—
the Golden Cock—appeared at the mast head of the “cock of the fleet.”
It rode first on the Rouseville , was held for a time and then transferred to the
Golden Meadow (Captain S. F. Wilson). Finally, the Darst Creek (Captain
W. B. Brett) won the trophy with the remarkable voyage time of 36 hours
58 minutes. By the autumn of 1944 the fleet had delivered 250,000 tons of
spirit and diesel oil to the far shore. Everyone worked with a will, and it
was hot long before operators and crews fell into the habit of calling the
outfit the Hamble Circus.
The tugs played a full part in the Normandy invasion. A Tug Control
had been set up at Lee-on-Solent with the liner Aorangi as depot ship ; it
consisted of a pool of tugs allocated by R.N., M.0.W.T., U.S. Navy, U.S.
Army, and U.S. War Shipping Administration, together with certain Dutch
tugs controlled by the M.O.W.T. There were practically twice as many
Red Ensign tugs as any other single command. From D-Day until August
18th, 1944, the total of cross-Channel tows carried out by the craft of the
Tug Control was approximately 1,000. Of these, Red Ensign tugs executed
425. In addition the tugs did very valuable local work off the beaches.
THE BEACHES AND MULBERRY


particularly during the bad weather at the end of June. Red Ensign tugs
also carried out the majority of the towages of bombardon units from
Weymouth to the beaches. During that bad weather the regular tug hands
in some of the tugs had a very strenuous time, since many of the remainder
of the crews, deep-sea men not possessing tugees’ stomachs, were laid out
with sea-sickness.
A Red Ensign tug, the Empire Folk (Captain A. Hall, master) one of the
smallest tugs in the operation, was the first to get over. She did not expect
to have that honour. On June sth she was ordered to a position nine miles
off the Nab tower to assist a broken-down landing craft. When, however,
she had connected with her tow and was heading for home, she received
orders to proceed to France. This she did, sometimes towing, sometimes,
when the engines of the L.C.T. would run, escorting. At 16.30 hrs. on
June 6th she let go of her tow approximately two miles off the Normandy
beaches. So she was well ahead of most of her kind.
All the world now knows that the greatest danger to the success of
Operation Overlord came not from the Huns but from the weather.
Arromanches Harbour played a large part in making sure that the weather
did not succeed in bringing operations to a halt. The tugs had much to do
with the construction of the harbour, since they were greatly concerned with
bringing over its component parts. Here is a typical example of tug work in
the Arromanches operation. The tug Empire Jonathan (Captain Wilkinson,
master), a Red Ensign tug, went over to France on June 7th with the main
troopship convoy. For the next three days, with the weather none too good
and an occasional enemy air raid, she was engaged in towing ships into
position to be scuttled to form the breakwater. In all she handled eleven
ships. Then, her departure being delayed because of E-boat activity, she
returned to Lee-on-Solent. On June 18th she left again for France, towing a
“Whale” unit. Here her log can take up her tale for itself.
June 19th Wind started to freshen from N.E. at 4 a.m. and by noon was blowing
gale force. Towing half speed, heavy following sea. Reached
Mulberry B at 18.00, heavy sea running, tow behaving very badly.
Could not go among the anchored ships with all the rope and wire out
so brought ship around to tide and wind to endeavour to shorten tow.
We were continually shipping heavy seas on board and tug was almost
unmanageable. No sooner had we turned around into the wind than
tow disintegrated and sank. We were anchored to it with our tow rope
and could not move although we tried to break free by giving the
engines every ounce of power. We were now taking heavy seas on
board at times level with the bulwarks and we were in grave danger of
being swamped. The ship could not free herself at all so with great
reluctance I gave the order to chop through the rope. I reported it to
the Commodore and we started to ride the gale out.
June 20 th Still blowing hard from N.E. and heavy seas running. At 08.00 we
contacted the Hilary and he ordered us to tow the trawler Montana
into the harbour at Arromanches. We eventually got connected up to
him and towed very easily to the harbour, which was crowded with
disabled craft. The Montana anchored in lee of the Phoenix Unit and
BRITISH COASTER


we anchored closely. A heavy swell was in the harbour, the wind being
from the N.E. was right in. At 21.00 we received orders from the
Dispatch to assist the Fury, which was being towed into the harbour by
the Thames. The Fury had been mined and was disabled. As the
Thames towed the destroyer the wind and swell proved too much and
took control of the Fury. She hit a salvage ship and the Thames'
towing wire parted. Fury dropped her anchor but continued to drift
towards the beach. We connected up to her stern but the wire parted in
the heavy swell. Got another wire off her but that parted immediately.
Empire Winnie connected up at the stern but her ropes parted. I
manoeuvred alongside and got our rope and wire connected up forward.
Could not get away from the side of the Fury to start towing so asked
Danube VI to get hold of me and pull me round. The first attempt
fractured the port hawser pipes. The next one succeeded, and we
commenced towing very easily toward the Dispatch. At midnight we
got within 100 yards of her, but as we came level with the harbour
entrance the swell and wind once again were too much and our docking
spring parted. Away went Fury cannonading off the ships which were
at anchor. By now the tide was with the wind and driving her hard to
the beach. We connected up again after a lot of difficulty dodging
ships and submerged wrecks. We started towing again toward the
Dispatch ; the Fury was to lay alongside of her.
June 21 st At 01.00 we managed to get his bow tight up so the Fury could get a
mooring aboard, but as he touched, his bow cut through our tow rope
and they failed to get a mooring strong enough to hold him. Once
more she started her voyage through the harbour and shipping.
At 01.30 I connected up again with another 8-in. manila, but the sharp
edge of her bows cut through it and we picked up the rope in our
propeller, disabling ourselves. We started to drift through the ships
ourselves, even after we had let both our anchors down. Eventually
we brought up and helplessly watched the Fury drive on to the beach.
June 22nd We sent a message requesting a diver. At 14.00 the tug Arromanches
fouled our cable and got it round the propeller. At 16.00 the trawler
Choice ran into our starboard side, causing damage to the bulwarks.
June 23 rd Tug Arromanches cut clear of our cable at 18.00.
June 24th At 19.30 we were free of rope round our propeller. Anchored in
harbour awaiting instructions.
June 25th At 14.00 we towed a coaster to the salvage ship. At 18.00 we were
ordered to Area J, where we anchored.
June 26th Ordered back to harbour at 19.00, we assisted in towing Phoenix Unit-
At 22.00 we went alongside of Dispatch for engine and boiler repair.
June 29th Repairs completed.
June 30 th Awaiting orders.
July Ist 05.00 assisted with Whale tow. 11.30 ordered to report to Southern
Prince in Area J. 20.00 awaiting barge as ordered.
July 2nd 06.00 collected Barge JXA/6 and proceeded to U.K. Arrived 23.00.
THE BEACHES AND MULBERRY


The highway round Britain, with its unlimited traffic facilities which are
so vital to us, is still there. The Germans could not remove it or destroy
it ; yet, of course, they knew all about its danger areas and how to exploit
them. With their knowledge they could make it very difficult and very
dangerous for ships to use the highway. This, for a long period, they
succeeded in doing. It was all they could expect to do but not all they sought
to do. They sought to break the spirit of the men serving the ships in those
narrow, dangerous channels. There, as is their custom, they made a cardinal
mistake. They bombed the ports, so that the seamen had little rest when they
got in from the seas. They concentrated their attacks on the narrow channels
and the estuaries. The toll which they exacted in men and ships was heavy,
at times staggering. But losses could not break the spirit of the seamen nor
close the highway to traffic.
The coasters, more than any other ships of our Merchant Navy, have had
to use this highway. They have had to use it daily throughout the war.
Many of them passed the six years in constant passages through its most
dangerous areas. ‘ Beyond that, coasters have been sent on many missions.
Both on their own service of carrying merchandise and on numerous others,
under the White Ensign and the Red, as merchantmen, as fighting and as
rescue ships, they have shown themselves wherever needed, on almost all
of the seven seas. The invasion of Europe demanded much from them.
Without the little merchant ships its success could not have been achieved.
But above so many other notable achievements the coasters’ work on their
normal and accustomed highway stands out as their peculiar contribution
to victory.
Despite losses from enemy action, despite the demands upon the coaster
fleet of the fighting services, despite the immense difficulties of organisation,
this work of carrying cargoes around Great Britain by sea did not falter.
Somehow, without fail, the little ships performed the duty set them. Yearly
they discharged in the ports, big, small and tiny, around these islands, more
than thirty million tons of vital merchandise. That they maintained this
flow, through the most war-dangerous waters in the world, is the proud
record of British coasters in the war.
EPILOGUE




