

Third Series
PAPERS FOR WAR TIME. No. 31
British and German
Scholarship
BY
JAMES HOPE MOULTON
D.D., D.Theol, (Berlin)
Price Twopence
HUMPHREY MILFORD
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
LONDON EDINBURGH GLASGOW NEW YORK
TORONTO MELBOURNE BOMBAY


PAPERS FOR WAR TIME
First Series. A Iremhj published.
1, CHRISTIANITY AND WAR. By the Rev. W.
Temple, M.A.
2. ARE WE WORTH FIGHTING FOR ? By the
Rev. Richard Roberts;
8. THE WOMAN’S PART. By Mrs. Luke Paget.
4. BROTHERS ALL: THE WAR AND THE
RACE QUESTION. By Edwyn Bevan, M.A.
5. THE DECISIVE HOUR: IS IT LOST ? By J. H.
Oldham, M.A.
6. ACTIVE SERVICE; THE SHARE OF THE
NON-COMBATANT. By the Rev. W. R. Maltby.
7. THE WAR SPIRIT IN OUR NATIONAL LIFE.
By the Rev. A. Herbert Gray, M.A.
8. CHRISTIAN CONDUCT IN WAR TIME. By
W. H. Moberly, M.A.
9. THE WITNESS OF THE CHURCH IN THE
PRESENT CRISIS. By X.
10. THE REAL WAR. By the Rev. W. E. Orchard.
D.D.
11. LOVE CAME DOWN AT CHRISTMAS. By
Professor G. Hare Leonard, M.A.
12. AN ANSWER TO BERNHARDI. By the Rev.
Professor D. S. Cairns, D.D.




Third Series
PAPERS FOR WAR TIME. No. 31
BRITISH AND GERMAN
SCHOLARSHIP
BY
JAMES HOPE MOULTON
D.D., D.Theol. (Berlin)
HUMPHREY MILFORD
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
LONDON EDINBURGH GLASGOW NEW YORK
TORONTO MELBOURNE BOMBAY
1915


BASIS OF PUBLICATION
This series of Papers is issued under the auspices of a Com-
mittee drawn from various Christian bodies and political
parties, and is based on the following convictions :
1. That Great Britain was in August morally bound to
declare war and is no less bound to carry the war
to a decisive issue ;
2. That the war is none the less an outcome and a revela-
tion of the un-Christian principles which have dominated
the life of Western Christendom and of which both the
Church and the nations have need to repent;
3. That followers of Christ, as members of the Church, are
linked to one another in a fellowship which transcends
all divisions of nationality or race ;
4. That the Christian duties of love and forgiveness are as
binding in time of war as in time of peace ;
5. That Christians are bound to recognize the insufficiency
of mere compulsion for overcoming evil, and to place
supreme reliance upon spiritual forces and in particular
upon the power and method of the Cross ;
6. That only in proportion as Christian principles dictate
the terms of settlement will a real and lasting peace
be secured ;
7. That it is the duty of the Church to make an altogether
new effort to realize and apply to all the relations
of life its own positive ideal of brotherhood and
fellowship ;
8. That with God all things are possible.


BRITISH AND GERMAN
SCHOLARSHIP
War and scholarship have not in the abstract much to
do with one another. The scholar is normally in a back-
water where the tide of public life flows past him without
ruffling his environment ; and men of affairs put him
out of their reckoning as an excellent person who may
be a national asset but is very little qualified to be
a national adviser. In this war, unique as it is in so
many directions, the scholar has become a storm centre.
The university professors of Germany are regarded in
this country as responsible beyond any single class,
except the bureaucracy itself, for the making of the
atmosphere in which the war arose; and one of their
number, Treitschke, is held accountable almost in the
first place of all. We are learning how a marvellously
efficient system of national education, in a country
where education counts more than in any other, has
been skilfully organized by the ruling oligarchy to
hypnotize a docile people into the right spirit. Very
possibly the professors are in some danger of receiving
too large a share of the credit for the figure Germany
is now presenting to the world. But the fact is clear
that the intellectuals, so far from seeing vividly and
teaching irresistibly that war is a crime against humanity,


have lent themselves to the militarist propaganda. They
contributed very largely to the development of the
temper which has been Germany’s undoing. Fatally
deficient in the saving gift of humour, the nation has
developed a megalomania which imagines civilization
destined to die with itself. And the pity of it is that
the men who must bear the blame of a terrible failure in
a crisis where ideas weighed more than in any crisis in
history, are men who in all branches of pure knowledge
have been among the leaders of the world. They could
interpret the face of the sky, but they knew not how to
interpret the signs of the times. It is to be feared that
were Plato revising his Republic with an experience gained
in modern Europe, he would think twice and thrice
before making the philosopher king.
In this paper we are not so much concerned to discuss
the past as to look forward to the possibilities of the
future. The difficulties of settlement are stupendous,
and they depend so overwhelmingly on the issue of the
war that we can hardly wonder if people turn impatiently
from any discussion as premature. At present White and
Black have alike lost a terrible number of pieces, but
we feel very sure White has the winning position. Yet
it remains wholly uncertain whether it is to be mate in
ten moves or in a hundred, and it might be stalemate
after all. Calculations based on any of these three
possibilities, putting out of sight the unthinkable fourth,
are liable to be wholly upset by the turn of events, and
we can only wait. Still, as public opinion must have
a great deal to do with the ultimate settlement, there
BRITISH AND GERMAN SCHOLARSHIP


should obviously be the most strenuous effort to prepare
opinion without hurry, even if results are only con-
tingent. And in any case there must be every effort to
cultivate the temper in which alone both justice and
humanity can operate. Indignation, stern and deep,
can coexist with unsleeping vigilance lest we should be
unjust to our enemy, or fail to allow for the forces which
have deranged his better nature. Unflinching determina-
tion to use force, since we have been forced into it, till
force is finally dethroned, is consistent with a master
passion for reconciliation. Even the rough unthinking
man of the world cannot deny that we shall have to live
with the Germans somehow when the war is over ; and
it is worth his while to ask how we can keep them from
cherishing schemes of revenge and preparing for it even
under the severest system of repression. The Christian
meanwhile —driven to make a choice of evils, in a world
where the hardness of men’s hearts is always making
the ideal impossible—will never feel that we have con-
quered Germany till we have slain the enmity. We
draw the sword with no less resolution because we draw
it with horror and loathing; but we mean Love to have
the last word when Belgium, and France, and Serbia, and
Poland, and the dominions of the Turk, are all delivered
from the god of battles into the hands of the God of
Peace.
With these objects in view, we may turn to the special
department with which this paper is concerned. German
scholarship and science are naturally being canvassed
vehemently in Britain to-day. One cannot be surprised
BRITISH AND GERMAN SCHOLARSHIP


if a general depreciation of things made in Germany ex-
tends to its hitherto acknowledged intellectual eminence.
Noisy obscurantists are thanking God that they know
no German, and declaring that the most mischievous
things in our religious life are importations from over
the Rhine. Yet it is not long since many of them were
rejoicing over a German Daniel come to judgement, who
was supposed to have seriously damaged an established
theory of literary criticism in the Old Testament. On
the other hand, we have heard first-rank scholars declaring
that we have taken the Germans too much at their own
valuation, to the detriment of our independence. It
may be so, though the extent of this servility has been
greatly exaggerated. The acceptance of German results
on the part of British scholars is far more frequently
due to the conscientious industry with which German
research has done its work. Those who know accept,
and those who do not know may cavil. It would be
more dignified and more profitable if those who are
interested simply in the advancement of knowledge would
turn from such debates, and receive for rigid testing, and
grateful acknowledgement when approved, the work of
investigators in any nation. Nothing but science and her
votaries will suffer if research ceases to be cosmopolitan,
and seekers after truth duplicate their investigations
through refusal to read work already published in a foreign
and hated tongue.
Much might be said, no doubt, of provocation that has
come from German scholarship, arrogantly ignoring the
best work of other nations, and suffering the nemesis
BRITISH AND GERMAN SCHOLARSHIP


which Science always inflicts on those who forget her first
laws. But there has certainly been a marked improve-
ment in recent years ; and a real republic of letters never
seemed nearer than it was when the great chasm suddenly
opened between us and our fellow workers. One or two
illustrations might be given from fields that are more
familiar than others to the writer himself. Comparative
Philology, a science which sprang out of an Englishman’s
daring guess, has been almost exclusively cultivated by
German research. Yet the only first-rate manual of
Greek and Latin philology produced in this country, since
the new birth of the science under great German philo-
logists thirty years ago, has been translated into German.
The later history of Greek, developed into a new science
by the pioneer work of German philologist and theologian,
has been pursued under the fullest and happiest conditions
of fellowship between British, French, German and
American scholars and explorers. In some fields, such as
that of Iranian language and literature, German workers
have little enough from Britain to quote, but use most
freely what does come. Theology, so far as one may
generalize on so many-sided a subject, is in a less happy
condition, and German thought would be all the better
for a larger knowledge of the best British work. But
even there the enormous output may well be held largely
responsible. Here, however, we may claim on this side
that our leading theologians have rarely shown themselves
ignorant of the best that has been done in Germany.
Sometimes of course there has been unwarranted haste in
accepting theories from a country whose scholars are
BRITISH AND GERMAN SCHOLARSHIP


generally stronger in collecting facts than in divining
consequences. But British theology has far more often
received and weighed to its own immense profit, proving
all things with sane and cautious judgement, and holding
fast only what is good.
Now the prominence of a number of exceedingly
eminent German theologians, scholars, and scientists in
the paper defence of their country at the present time has
started some natural problems in the minds of educated
Britons. It must be admitted that these leaders of in-
tellect show few of the qualities we should have expected
from men trained to examine evidence and decide dis-
passionately on momentous issues. The most rigidly
neutral critic might safely be invited to compare the
temper of pleas by distinguished British and German
intellectual and spiritual leaders, as printed in the three
first numbers of Goodwill. Is there anything from
the German side to compare in fairness and freedom
from bitterness with Professor Sanday’s pamphlet or
Mr. Glutton-Brock’s Thoughts on the War —to name only
two out of many ? We have Professor Wundt not only
accepting guilelessly the forged speech of Mr. John Burns,
and sundry other fairy stories which perhaps he has no
means of testing, but showing such grotesque incapacity
to read the English character that we begin to reflect
with amazement that he is the author of a notable book
on Volkerpsychologies We have the two manifestoes by
theologians and leaders in foreign missionary enterprise,
sincere and poignant in the extreme, and full of the dis-
tress which any real Christian must feel in the fearful
BRITISH AND GERMAN SCHOLARSHIP


rending of Western Christianity. But even here patent
facts are astonishingly distorted. Belgium is not men-
tioned in the first : in the second our British Reply has
brought out a defence through which a child can see—the
fact that Belgium had tried to make some provisional
arrangement for help, when faced with strategic railways
concentrated on her frontier, is regarded as cancelling her
neutrality ! Harnack makes the same point in his reply
to British Free Churchmen ( Goodwill , p. 33) ; and he
shows the same incapacity to understand our veneration
for the ‘ scrap of paper ’, which for our Government and
our nation turned the scale last August. Nor do any of
them make any allusion to Sir Edward Grey’s entreaty to
the German Government to propose an alternative course
if his own proposal of a conference were unacceptable.
These will serve as typical examples of the blindness and
unfairness of men from whom penetration and judicial
temper might have been expected. Can we explain the
failure ? A great many intelligent and serious men put
the matter away as not needing an explanation. They
simply assume that the mask of civilization has been
torn from a people who are barbarians at bottom—
Not five in five score,
But ninety-five more.
An explanation which merely falls back on original sin
gives us as little light on the past as it gives hope for the
future. We know some of these men, and we shall not be
persuaded by all the journalists in concert that such men
were insincere in their friendship, secretly toasting ‘ The
Day ’ when they pretended to desire nothing but peace.
BRITISH AND GERMAN SCHOLARSHIP


It is a truer psychology which points out that national
panic is capable of producing very strange symptoms in
men normally sober and humane. We know something
of the German public’s ignorance of events which all the
world knows, their confident belief in a whole mythology
with its scene laid in Britain : the national genius for
thoroughness has had full scope in the official news
department. Join this imperfect information with the
anxiety, public and private, resulting from the hope of
victory deferred and now becoming more than doubtful,
and we can more or less understand how men with the
German temperament should have lost in time of need so
many qualities for which they once were distinguished.
Harnack himself —to take one eminent example—whose
daughter has been widowed by a British bullet, has
evidently failed to apply to the British case against
Germany the impartiality he would show in a discussion
on New Testament criticism. Such suggestions are not
made as if they excused the violence and futility of famous
scholars who in this controversy have damaged nothing
but their own reputation. There may be other elements
in the diagnosis of which we necessarily know nothing.
But before we cast out their names as evil, let us
remember what we thought of them this time last year.
And let us reflect that they stand with men whose practical
Christian enthusiasm showed itself by many infallible
proofs, leaders of missionary enterprise who sat with us
in the World Conference at Edinburgh, influential church-
men who were labouring earnestly and successfully in the
cause of Anglo-German friendship. If the key to their
BRITISH AND GERMAN SCHOLARSHIP


present behaviour is nothing but a blind patriotism
which overwhelms both heart and head, we may well give
up human nature as an insoluble riddle.
To analyse scientifically the psychology of German
scholarship at the present time is an interesting problem,
but not the most practical to which we can address
ourselves just now. We have to ask what the future
relations will be between British and German fellow
workers. This is only a section of the general question
which will be the first of all questions when the war is
over ; but in view of the immense weight of the scholar
class in Germany it becomes a matter of the utmost
importance that Britons who come into relations with
them should have the right end in view, and pursue it
with insight, firmness, and sympathy.
First among all our duties as thinkers or church workers
must obviously be the checking of tendencies to Prussianize
our own country. These tendencies are by no means
imaginary. Among recent utterances of leading intel-
lectuals among us the fine fighting speech of Professor
Ridgeway from the chair of the Classical Association is
specially worth noting. A vigorous denunciation of mere
subservience to German theorizing leads up to a frank
acceptance of the most decadent of all Treitschke’s
dogmas. 1 A condition of unbroken peace would, it seems,
* be the greatest calamity that ever befell the human race.
Such a condition means the death of all that is noblest
1 ‘ Unconscious acceptance one should rather say: Professor
Ridgeway nowhere suggests that he fathers this dogma on its most
conspicuous advocate. He would be the first to shrink from the
logical consequences of the doctrine.
BRITISH AND GERMAN SCHOLARSHIP


and the growth and prosperity of all that is vilest.... In
a world of perfect peace humanity would perish from its
own physical and moral corruption.’ That the ideals
of the Sermon on the Mount involve such disasters had
not occurred to most of us ; and the present is not the
happiest time to preach Treitschke and Bernhardi as
nobler and more robust evangelists than the original four.
If Britain is going to win in this appalling war, it will be
through being herself, and not a debased copy of Germany.
The drill sergeant as we know him has done his own
appointed work to admiration ; and he has no ambition to
take charge of departments of our national life in which he
has no place. The invasion of the voluntary principle by
the Prussian ideal would infallibly ruin our most charac-
teristic virtues, without importing the Prussian efficiency.
In other directions, however, we shall certainly do well
et ah Jwste doceri. There is no reason why our scholarship
as well as our business life should not go much further
than ever before on the road of German industry, thorough-
ness, and tireless attention to detail. A large meeting of
manufacturers was recently told by a legal and scientific
expert that ‘ the English dislike study. The Englishman
is excellent in making the best of the means at his disposal,
but he is almost hopeless in one thing. He will not pre-
pare himself by intellectual work for the task that he has
to do.’ 1 The indictment is not without force even among
professed scholars in our country. To be lavish of pains
in order to attain perfect familiarity with that corner of
1 Speech by Lord Moulton, F.R.S., at Manchester Town Hall
December 8, 1914.
BRITISH AND GERMAN SCHOLARSHIP


a big subject in which one hopes to advance knowledge, is
a condition of success which the Germans have learnt
better than we. The learning of this lesson will not
impair but only enhance that gift of divination in which
the British scholar at his best excels the German. It will
certainly do a great deal to make the ignoring of British
work absolutely impossible in future generations.
There is no reason to fear that the collapse of the
German military conspiracy will interpose more than
a temporary check to the fellowship of research. For
a time, of course, feeling is certain to be bitter. The
study of the ‘ North American and West Swiss ’ languages
in Germany will be impeded by the sheer difficulty of get-
ting natives of Britain and France to go and live among
a deeply resentful people. But here scholars of the Allied
nations, if true to their own ideals, can pursue quietly and
tactfully the work of reconciliation. The ultima ratio
of all research is international co-operation. Never has
this been more finely shown than by the famous Berlin
theologian, Professor Adolf Deissmann, in his paper on
* International and Interdenominational Research of the
New Testament \ 1 And at the head of this most catholic
exposition, written in the spring of 1914, there stands the
significant comment : ‘ Upon the Editor’s request and
after consultation with Dr. Harnack, Dr. Deissmann has
agreed that the article shall be published in spite of the
present situation.’ A great pioneer scholar thus leaves
on record his estimate of the indispensable service that
British and German scholarship can render to one another
1 Constructive Quarterly, December 1914, pp. 786-804.
BRITISH AND GERMAN SCHOLARSHIP


and to the cause of knowledge. There must inevitably be
severe provocation for some time to come in the writings
of many German scholars, who are sure to ignore when
they can, and scold when they cannot ignore. But the
true princes of learning will most successfully resist
temptation, and on our side there should be a minimum
of reprisals. We in Britain shall necessarily be much less
isolated than in the past. National sympathies will draw
together the scholars of France, Russia, Belgium, Italy,
Holland, Sweden, America, and our own country, to the
great advantage of all ; and a country where knowledge is
so prized as it is in Germany will not long be content with
aloofness. Our own aim should be to welcome imports
from German workshops and appraise them with unfail-
ing impartiality, biding our time till the exports of British
learning are equally free in passage. When we have re-
pelled the grisly horror that threatens the world, we can
afford to be generous and tactful towards the wounded
patriotism of men by whose side we want to work once
again, as in the happier days before the evil spirit rose
from the abyss to trouble the peace of mankind.
All this our scholars will do by instinct, by the virtue
of a tradition of chivalry which our great nation has not
to learn now for the first time. But the thinkers of the
world will have a higher function yet. This war has been
influenced by ideas beyond all wars in history. A titanic
struggle, which posterity could hardly match in mere
bigness if the loathing bred by it proved insufficient to
teach the lesson of peace, has brought out with unimagined
vividness what is the meaning of the Will to Power. It
BRITISH AND GERMAN SCHOLARSHIP


has been ‘ war in heaven ’ —Michael and his angels arrayed
against the Devil of Nietzsche. Before the war on earth
began, we could see the strife in the heavenly places,
where thoughts meet in the clash of warfare before they
materialize down below. In Britain no less than in
Germany the doctrine of force was being proclaimed ; and
the right of the strong to do as he willed with his own was
set forth in our reviews with barefaced effrontery that
made old-fashioned people blush and gasp. Now the
consequences of the new morality are before the eyes of
all mankind, and men who have suffered from it will be
less inclined to regard it as an improvement on the old.
It is often said that force cannot destroy the cult of force.
But force can only reign while successful, and when de-
feated on its own field no longer commands the adoration
of its blind votaries. The world waits eagerly for the
discrediting of the grim idol before which ghastly heca-
tombs have been offered with blood and tears beyond all
thought. Soon, we believe, Moloch will be dragged from
his pedestal, and some other object of worship will be set
in the empty shrine. Can we doubt what this will be ?
The Tempter offered universal sovereignty to the Son of
Man, were He only ready to bow before him and hold the
throne in fief from the first creator of the Will to Power.
He has tempted the nations all too successfully in every
age, and in this colossal strife we see the effects of yielding.
Surely now the weary nations will turn to the only rival
claimant for that throne. Philosophers will preach
a new idealism, historians will bring new morals from the
accumulated experience of the past, biologists will show
BRITISH AND GERMAN SCHOLARSHIP


that men do not live by bread alone, or survive in the
struggle for existence by the use of the mailed fist. And
so, illuminated in heart and mind by salutary pain, the
intellectual leaders of the nations will enthrone at last the
one true Superman, and He shall reign in His own right
to the ends of the earth.
Postscript. —The above pages were passed for press
before the publication of Sir John French’s report on the
effects of the German poison-gases, and, of course, before the
sinking of the Lusitania. By these crimes , and by the
poisoning of wells in South Africa, official Germany has
shown that there is no longer a conscience to appeal to ; and
if it proves that German civilians, including the professors,
applaud these deeds, or even abstain from denouncing them,
we must feel that the gulf between Germany and the civilized
world, first opened at Louvain and Rheims, has become too
wide for us to bridge till time and God’s Spirit have brought
contrition. The writer of this paper would only urge that
the Christian attitude remains unchanged, although inde-
finitely harder for flesh and blood to attain. Our supreme fear
must be that uncontrollable indignation may sweep our own
people into acts which would be unworthy of ourselves.
May God preserve us from even the most attenuated contagion
of such foulness !
BRITISH AND GERMAN SCHOLARSHIP


PAPERS FOR WAR TIME
Second Series. Already published .
13. PATRIOTISM. By the Rev. Percy Dearmer, D.D.
14. SPENDING IN WAR TIME. By Professor E. J.
Urwick, M.A.
15. CHRISTIANITY AND FORCE. By Professor A. G.
Hogg, M.A.
16. GERMANY AND GERMANS. By Eleanor
McDougall, M.A.
17. PHARISAISM AND WAR. By F. Lenwood, M.A.
18. THE CURE FOR WAR. By A. Clutton-Brock.
19. OUR NEED OF A CATHOLIC CHURCH. By
the Rev. W. Temple, M.A.
20 WAR, THIS WAR AND THE SERMON ON
THE MOUNT. By Canon B. H. Streeter, M.A.
21. THE REMOVING OF MOUNTAINS. By the
Author of Pro Christo et Ecclesia.
22. INTERNATIONAL CONTROL. By Professor
W. G. S. Adams, M.A
23. THE PRICE OF BLOOD. By Kenneth Maclennan.
24. BIOLOGY AND WAR, By Professor J. Arthur
Thomson, LL.D.


Published at the rate of two papers each fortnight under the
auspices of a Committee drawn from various Christian bodies
and political parties,the editor beingtheRev.W.TEMPLE,M.A.
Price 2d, each; Is. 6d. per dozen; 2s. post free, each series.
Third Series. Already Published.
25. THE VISIONS OF YOUTH. By the Bishop of
Winchester.
26. BERNHARDISM IN ENGLAND. By A. Clutton-
Brock.
27. THE ONLY ALTERNATIVE TO WAR. By
the Rev. A. Herbert Gray, M.A,
28. CHARIOTS OF FIRE. By Frank Lenwood.
29. THE ETHICS OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE.
By Henri Lambert.
30. INDIA AND THE WAR. By John Matthai.
31. BRITISH AND GERMAN SCHOLARSHIP. By
Professor J. Hope Moulton, D.Litt, D.D., D.C.L.,
D.Theol. (Berlin).
32. ARE WE TO PUNISH GERMANY, IF WE CAN ?
By A. Glutton-Brock.
In Preparation.
PEACE WITH EMPIRE: THE PROBLEM. By
Edwyn Bevan, M.A.
THE REASONABLE DIRECTION OF FORCE: A
Plea for Investigation before War. By Louise E,
Matthaei.
THE PLACE OF THE CHURCH IN THE NEW
WORLD. By J. H. Oldham, M.A.
OXFORD : FREDERICK HALL, PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY
PAPERS FOR WAR TIME


