

BRITISH EXPLORATION
OF
AUSTRALASIA, LIMITED.
PROSPECTUS.
;
J > - \ ' ' r-' ' \ ' ' - * . • / I.
P. LYTTELTON GELL, Esq., Director of British South Africa Company.
A. E. MORGANS, Esq,, M.L.A., Managing Director of Westralia Mount Morgans
Gold Mines Co., Limited, and Millionaire, Limited.
Con. A. J. PILGATE, E.E., \ Directors of Westralia Mount Morgans Gold Mines
C. A. WINTER, Esq., - ) Company, Limited.
*\ N *‘- ■ v ‘ . .• •
J. H. BIRCHENOUGH, Esq., Director of Imperial Continental Gas Association.
HENRY COMPTON, Esq.,
[• Directors of Millionaire, Limited.
W. J. STOKES, Esq, )
an6 Offices:
♦ , N-
H W. BEAVIS, ESQ., 54 and 55, LONDON WALL, LONDON, E.C.




No.
FORM OF APPLICATION FOR SHARES.
/
British Exploration of Australasia, Limited.
: To the Directors of BRITISH EXPLORATION OF AUSTRALASIA, LIMITED.
Gentlemen,
Having paid to your Bankers, The National Provincial Bank of England, Limited,
112, Bishopsgate Street, London, E.C., to the account of BRITISH EXPLORATION OF
AUSTRALASIA, LIMITED, the sum of £ being a deposit of Five Shillings per
Share on Shares of £1 each in the above-named Company, I request yon to allot
me that number of Shares, and I agree to accept and pay for the same, or any less number, upon the
terms of the Prospectus dated the Bth day of December, 1900, and subject to the Memorandum and
Articles of Association of the Company, and I authorize you to register me as the holder of the said
Shares, and I declare that I waive any further compliance with Section 38 of the Companies Act, 1867,
than is contained in such Prospectus.
Ordinary Signature...
Name (in full)
MUST BE . 7A
Address (intuit)
WRITTEN
DISTINCTLY.
Profession or Occupation
Date 1900.
V
British Exploration of Australasia, Limited.
BANKERS’ RECEIPT FOR DEPOSIT ON APPLICATION.
(To be returned to the Applicant.)
Received this day of December, 1900^
from - the sum
of £ being a deposit of 5/- per Share on Application
for. Shares of £1 each in the above-named Company,
For THE NATIONAL PROVINCIAL BANK OF ENGLAND, LIMITED.
jp
“W"* . . STAMP.
This Form to he filled up and sent entire to th£ Bankers, together with a remittance of ss. in respect of each Share applied fcr.




The List of Applications will be opened on Saturday, the Bth day of December,
1900, and closed on or before 12 o’clock noon on Wednesday, the 12th day
of December, 1900.
British Exploration of Australasia,
Limited.
CAPITAL - - - £500,000,
DIVIDED INTO 500,000 SHARES OF £1 EACH.
SUBSCRIPTIONS AT PAS ABE INVITED FOR
t S 0,000 SMARES,
PAYABLE AS FOLLOWS ;
Os. per Share on Application, ss. per Share on Allotment, and the balance in Calls
not exceeding ss. per Share at intervals of not less than two months
Pirccfors.
P. LYTTELTON GELL, Esq., Director of British South Africa Company.
*A. B. MORGANS, Esq. M.L.A., Managing Director of VVestralia Mount Morgans Gold
Mines Co., Limited, and Millionaire, Limited.
Col. A. J. ITLGATE, R.E., \ Directors of Westralia Mount Morgans Gold Mines
C. A. WINTER, E c q., j Company, Limited.
J. H. BIRCH ENOUGH, Esq., Director of Imperial Continental Gas Association.
HENRY COMPTON, Esq., ] . , T . ir . T . ,
5 ; > Directors or Millionaire, Limited.
*W. J. STOKES, Esq., J
* Will join the Board after Allotment.
gtfcmagincj in Western Jhtsfvalta.
A. E. MORGANS, Esq. (Member of the Legislative Assembly), Perth, W.A.
g 3 a nil ci's.
NATIONAL PROVINCIAL BANK OF ENGLAND, LIMITED,
112, Bishopsgate Street, London, E.C.
JUtMfors.
Messes. MUNRO & THOMAS, 20 and 21, Lawrence Lane, E.C.
Solicitors.
Messrs. BAKER, BLAKER & HAWES, 117, Cannon Street, London, E.C.
Messrs. STANLEY, MONEY & WALKER, Perth, Western Australia.
gecrcfarg ans Offices.
H. W. BE AVIS, Esq., 54 and 55, London Wall, E.C.


PROSPECTUS.
This Company is formed as a general Exploration and Development Company, under
the direction in Western Australia of Mr. A. E. Morgans, Member of the Legislative Assembly,
to acquire and develop in the first place the extensive Mineral properties in that Colony
described in the Schedule hereto, to promote remunerative public works conducive to mining
interests, and generally to carry on the business of financiers, concessionaires, and contractors
for public and private undertakings.
The properties to be acquired consist mainly of valuable gold-mining claims
and interests held under the Goldfielcis Act and Regulations and the Mineral Lands Acl
and Regulations of Western Australia in a district practically undeveloped. It will be noted
from the accompanying Reports that some of the claims have been profitably worked
up to a point by local owners, whose operations have been restricted for want of the
working capital and modern plant requisite to handle the large bodies of ore now accessible.
In view of the profitable results anticipated from the operations of this Company, such
owners, when selling, agreeJ to accept fully paid-up shares in respect of a large proportion
of the purchase-price.
Important Copper and Tin properties are also included in the Schedule.
All the mines, interests and claims scheduled have been purchased after personal
investigation and inspection by Mr. A. E. Morgans (Managing Director of the Westralia
Mount Morgans Gold Mines Company, Limited, the shares of which are earning large
dividends and command a high premium), who is well-known in the Colony as a high
authority on all matters connected with mining interests. He re-sells the properties to the
Company at a profit, retaining a large interest in its shares, and placing his services at the
disposal of the Board as Managing Director in Western Australia.
The properties now acquired are situated in the North-West pastoral territory in the
vicinity of Marble Bar, Warrawoona, Nullagine, and Roeburne, their distance from the
coast varying from 25 to 130 miles. The Croydon Copper Mine is within 25 miles of the
Pert of Balla-Balla, whilst the Government road from Port Hedland (a good harbour, upon
which considerable outlay has been incurred) passes through Marble Bar to Nullagine.
It is anticipated that a Railway will be constructed at an early date from Port Hedland
through the latter district, as a resolution recommending the construction of the Railway
was carried in the Legislative Assembly during the Session of 1900.
*
Reports upon tlie Properties, together with plans, ha ve been submitted by Mr. Morgans
and Mr. J. K, Weir, Junr. The Directors desire to draw attention to the following extracts
from Mr. Morgans’ Reports:—
Chamberlain Mines. —“ About 400 ft. from the south eastern boundary an underlay shaft has been sunk to a
depth of 00 ft. In this shaft the average width of the vein is from 2 ft. 6 in. to 3 ft. At a depth of about 90 ft. from
the outcrop of the vein on the other side of the hill, a tunnel of 132 ft. in length has been put in to intersect the vein,
which it did, and was driven upon north east and south-west for a distance of 28 and 25 ft. respectively.' The ore
removed from the vein in carrying out the operations described amounted to 196 tons. This was crushed, and resulted
m a yield of 495 ounces of gold, showing an average of about 2\ ounces per ton. On the same reef, at a point where
Ihe vein turns to its original direction, another shaft of 20 ft. in depth has been sunk upon a vein about 2 ft. wide.
Fifteen tons of this ore gave a return of a little over 3 ozs. per ton in crushing.” {See p. 7).


„j 1 Badeii-Powefl Mines. “The vein averages in this shaft and open cut from 8 ft. to 9 ft. wide. The whole
o e stone taken out daring the sinking operations has been crushed without any selection, and has resulted in
aa P er .^ on * -^ 3 40 tons crushed yielded 1,260 ounces of gold, and the second h c
0± **9 J 0 ? 8 y lo lded 2,188 ounces. This gold has a value of £3 19s. to £4 per oz. It will be seen from these results that
o*u o this shaft 1,110 tons were crushed, yielding 3,448 ozs. of gold. This shows a general average of 3 ozs. 1 dwt. per
on o 01 e. Tailings tiom these crushings average from 6to 8 dwts. per ton, and the blanket concentrates run about
o ozs. per ton. Taking into account the gold left in the tailings and blanketings, I estimate the fire assay of the vein
matter in tms shaft at ozs. per ton. The width of the stone in the shaft is known to be over 5 ft., but as it has 11 t
a 1 been taken out between the walls, the exact width is not known. At the bottom of the shaft, which is 140 ft. below
the outcrop, the stone is nearly 9 ft. in width, and assays from 2\ to 3 ozs. per ton.” {See p. 6.)
Roberts Mines.- “ The main reef is somewhat flat, and has an average width of a little over 3 ft. An underlay
sliatt nas been put down for about 150 ft., all in gold-bearing quartz of an average value of more than an ounce to the
onn’-f . own this underlay shaft a drive has been put in on the course of the vein for a distance of over
200 ft., in which the vein is found to maintain its width and value. At the bottom of the underlay shaft a drive has
been put in for a distance of more than 300 ft., where also the vein maintains its value and width. More than 2,000
tons of ore lias been crushed from these drives, and from some stoping that was done; a yield of about 23 dwts. per ton
was obtained by amalgamation, and about 7 dwts. remained in the tailings.” (See p. 8 .)
. Conglomerates.— “ There are at least nine stratified deposits known to exist, varying from 3to 5 ft.
m width, all of which carry gold. . . . All of them are composed of conglomerates in many cases resembling the
Banket formations of the Band. ... A very large number of samples have been taken from these conglomerate
deposits V/here it has been possible to get at them, and many hundreds of tons have been crushed which have shown an
average of more than half-an-ounce of gold to the ton, obtained upon the plates. It is known however that a considerable
quantit yof gold gets away in the tailings, most of which will be saved wdien a proper plant has been erected for their
treatment. The successful exploitation of the conglomerates will depend chiefly upon two points, first, a systematic
development of the stratified deposits on the most approved plans for extraction of the ore cheaply and expeditiously,
and secondly, upon the erection of a plant with sufficient capacity to treat 200 to 300 tons per day at least. With regard
to the developments of these deposits, they lend themselves to the introduction of an economic system, and by sinking a
centre shaft at a point north-east of Cook’s Hill, the whole of these deposits can be developed and worked from
one shaft.
I have examined most carefully these deposits, and I was greatly impressed with the immense possibilities that
may result from their active and systematic development. The great object of course to be aimed at is to design the
p ant and machinery, and lay out the underground workings, upon lines that will economise labour. If this is done, I,
am convinced that 6 dwts. per ton will more than pay all the expenses.” (See p. 8 .)
Mines. “The properties under consideration contain about 140 acres, but there has been very little
e\e opment v ork done except in one particular spot, where about 40 tons of alluvial tin have been obtained by sluicing.
6 s ipment of the first 17 tons of this tin, after paying expenses of freight from the coast to Singapore, and smelting
c arges, 1 esuited in a net return of £1,485, or at the rate of £B7 per ton. From these figures it will be seen that the
alluvial tin from this field is very pure and of excellent quality.” (See p. 9 .)
ClOy don Copper Mine. “Up to the time of my visit about 300 tons of ore had been taken from the outcrop
!p n fif ° i ie f m g works. these shipments resulted in an average of 25 per cent, of copper; since that time a
ur er o tons xax e been shipped, which resulted in an average percentage of 29’55 per cent, of copper, and vieldcd
a net result of £l5 per ton.
. , 1 tom the foiegoing, it will be seen that the copper ore in this Mine in large quantities has resulted in a very
assay a ue, and ooking at the fact that the whole of the material taken from the deposit has been shipped without
any selection, the result must be looked upon as very gratifying. At the time of my visit the deposit in the 50ft. levM
Vari f , ron 2 ' °a k ‘ m and was at that time about 60 ft. in length. Samples from the floor of this drive gave
aveiages o over 1 per cent, of copper. The character of the ore is black oxide of copper mixed with considerable
quantities of copper sulphide, which is one of the most valuable forms of copper ore.” (See p. 10.)
Tlie purchase price for the properties has been fixed by the Vendor at £310,000,
payable as to £60,000 in cash and as to £250,000 in fully paid-up Shares.
The Vendor will pay all the expenses connected with the formation of the Company np
to the date of Allotment, including registration and brokerage.
Ihe Directors will not proceed to allotment unless the 150,000 Shares now offered are
all subscribed for.
The working capital to be provided by this issue is £90,000. The 100,000 unissued
Shares are reserved to provide further capital as and when required.
3


Name of Claim.
Area.
Nullagine Conglomerates
i •••
320
acres.
(A Mineral area originally granted by the West Australian Government as
a reward under the Mineral Lands Act and Regulations for the
discovery of Diamonds.)
Lease No. 505
12
33
„ ,, 623 )- Chamberlain Group
12
33
?? 5? 518 )
• ••• • • • • • •
12
39
Lease No. 483 (half interest)... >
. • • < ••• ««•
12
3»
55 55 509 ... ... [
Baden-Powell Group
12
33
Claim adjoining Leases Nos. 483 \
and 509 ... ... /
\
}
• • • ••• •••
12
33
Lease No. 21 “A
• i . « • • • 1 * *
4
33
.5 5, 3 > Roberts Group..
• • • • •••
6
3 >
7 J
55 33 * • • •
• • • • •••
18
33
Croydon Copper Mine (near Balla-Balla) ...
40
33
Tin Claims near Marble Bar
• I « •
140
33
The only Contracts entered into by the Company are three dated the 6fch day of
December, 1900, and each contract is made between Alfred Edward Morgans, the Vendor, of
the one part, and the British Exploration of Australasia, Limited, of the other part.
These Contracts, Mr. Morgans’ Reports, a certified copy of Mr. Weir’s Extracts, and
the Memorandum and Articles of Association, can be seen by applicants for Shares at the
offices of the Solicitors to the Company.
The Vendor has entered into contracts relative to the formation and issue of the
Company; such contracts or some of them may be contracts within section 38 of the
Companies Act, 1867. Applicants for Shares shall be deemed to have full notice of all such
contracts and to have agreed with the Company, as Trustee for the Directors and other
persons liable, not to make any claim whatsoever or to institute any proceedings in respect of
•* * •
any non-compliance with the said section or otherwise.
Early application will be made to the Stock Exchange for a special settlement in the
Snares of the Company.
Applications for Shares should be made on the enclosed form and sent to the Bankers
of the Company, together with a deposit for each Share applied for. Where no allotment is
made the deposit will be returned in full, and where the number of Shares allotted is less than
that applied for, the surplus will be credited to the payment due on allotment.
SCHEDULE OF PROPERTIES AND INTERESTS.
Bth December, 1900.


To the Directors of the
BRITISH EXPLORATION OF AUSTRALASIA, LIMITED.
Gentlemen,
In accordance with the request received from you, I have much pleasure in
supplementing the Reports from Mr. J. K. Weir, Junr., with a summary of my personal
observations in regard to the mineral character of the district, and of the facts which
induced me, after careful investigation during the present year, to acquire the properties
scheduled for the initial operations of the British Exploration of Australasia, Limited. I
will only premise as the strongest expression of my own judgment that I am prepared, as
your Managing Director, and as holding myself a very large stake in the Company, to accept
the responsibility of developing these properties to the best advantage.
The Properties to be transferred to the Company are on a line extending from the
Groydon Copper Mine, 25 miles from the port of Balia Balia on the West, through Marble
Bar to the Nullagine Conglomerates on the East, the most important factors being the rich
and partially developed gold reefs in the vicinity of Marble Bar, and the Conglomerate field
covering 320 acres of gold deposits, which are probably lower in grade, but peculiarly cheap
to work. Owing to the distance from the Capital and from the Eastern goldfields, this
district has hitherto been neglected by practical mining men commanding the Capital
necessary to its development.
The whole of these properties are sufficiently near to the sea to receive an adequate
rainfall, and no difficulties as to the supply of water for mining purposes need be anticipated.
They are situated in a pastoral territory, where horses, cattle and sheep thrive, and whence
nearly the whole meat supply of Western Australia is derived.
The geological features of the country I think it is unnecessary to discuss. Generally
speaking they belong to the greenstone class of rocks, which is known in Western Australia
as Diorite. In the districts now under discussion these rocks have undergone considerable
changes by powerful metamorphic action, and as the rocks stand to-day they may be
classified as Schistose and Chloritic Schists. At various points there are intrusions of
granite and basalt rocks. These Schistose formations are traversed in all directions by
innumerable veins of quartz and quartzite, a large number of which are gold-bearing, and
some of them exceedingly rich.
With regard to the question of water, fortunately the same difficulties do not exist
upon this goldfield as upon the eastern goldfields further south. There is always an
■abundant supply to be obtained within 50 to 200 feet of the surface. Therefore, there is
no need for any anxiety with regard to this important element in gold mining. Fuel and
mining timber are scarce, and although a sufficient quantity can be obtained to keep a large
mill going for a considerable time, it would under present circumstances be an expensive item
in the cost of working. Mining timber is even more scarce than firewood, but the system of
returning the tailings to the mine, after the extraction of the gold, can be introduced, which
will, to a very large extent, take the place of the mining timber.
There is, however, very little doubt that a railway will be built through this very
important mining-field from Port Headland at an early date; when all anxiety as to firew T ood
and mining timber in the Marble Bar and Nullagine districts will cease.
A resolution was introduced into the West Australian Parliament during the present
session by the Member for Pilbarra, and affirmed, asking the Government to grant a conces-
sion to private enterprise for the construction of this line. There is no doubt that either
the Government will construct it themselves, or else such a concession will be granted. The
Premier, Sir John Forrest, and his Government realize the great importance of tbis goldfield
to the colony, and looking at the result of the debate in the House, I think it is fair to
assume that, at a very early date, this very important and necessary work will be carried out.
I remain, Gentlemen, Yours faithfully,
A. E. MORGANS.
'Queen Anne’s Mansions, S.W.,
Novemb r 22nd , IXOO.


REPORTS
BY
MR. A. E. MORGANS.
Baden-Powell Group of Mines, Western Australia.
The Baden-Powell group of leases is situated at Warrawoona, a new mining district
only recently discovered, in the Pilbarra Goldfields, Western Australia. The mines are
distant about 18 miles south-east of Marble Bar, and about 128 miles from Port Headland,
which is the nearest seaport. They are connected by a good road with the port, and
although about 40 miles of it from Port Headland in the direction of Marble Bar is sandy,
generally speaking it can be called a good one.
The group consists of an area of 36 acres, comprising three leases, Nos. 609, 483,
and one lease north of 483 which has not yet received a Government number. The
nrst mine of the group was discovered in the latter part of last year, and it was only in
the early part of the present year that the first crushing was obtained from it. Although
this district is so near the road connecting Marble Bar with Nullagine, this splendid line of
leeis remained unnoticed for many years. It is on lease 483 that most of the work has
been done, A valley runs through this lease. On the south side, the hill rises for about 150
or 160 ft. ahove the level of the valley, and on the northern side to about 80 ft.
Taere are three distinct outcrops of veins traversing this lease in a north-westerly
and south-easterly direction, and there is also another travelling in the same direction, which
is not so well defined by an outcrop. The principal work done has been upon the reef
known as No. 2. This reef has a prominent outcrop from near the south-eastern boundary
xor a length of about 800 ft. At a distance of 70 ft. from the south-eastern boundary a
shaft has been sunk to a depth of 50 ft. At the surface the reef is little over 2 ft. in width,
but at the bottom of the shaft, which is about 50 ft. in depth, it is nearly 5 ft. wide. The ore
in this shaft is of good quality, although considered to be of low grade in that part
of the goldfield. Prom tests made in the pan, this will run from 12 to 14 dwts. per ton.
From this shaft the reef outcrops very prominently in the north-westerly direction
for a length of about 200 ft. and shows gold through the stone. Pan tests from this lead mo
to an estimate of from 24 to 30 dwts. per ton.
Proceeding again N.W. from this point, at a distance of about 280 ft. the reef makes
a . turn to the south for a short distance, and then continues its course in its original
direction. Here an open cut was made to a depth of 30 ft. upon the vein, and at
the bottom of this cut a shaft was sunk a further 110 ft. in the vein, which at this
point proves to be vertical. The vein averages in this shaft and open cut from
b to 9 ft. wide. The whole of the stone taken out during the sinking operations
lias been crushed without any selection, and has resulted in an exceedingly good
yield of gold per ton. The first 340 tons crushed yielded 1,260 ozs. of gold, and
Jie second lot of 770 tons yielded 2,188 ozs. This gold has a value of £3 19s. to £4
Per oz. It will be seen from these results that out of this shaft 1,110 tons were
crushed, yielding 3,448 ozs. of gold. This shows a general average of 3 ozs. 1 dwt. per ton
of ore. Tailings from these crushings average from 6 to 8 dwts. per ton, and. the blanket
concentrates run about 5 ozs. per ton. Taking into account the gold left in the tailings and
blanketings I estimate the fire assay value of the vein matter in this shaft at 3J ozs. per ton. The
width of the stone in the shaft is known to be over five feet, but as it has not all been taken
out between the walls, the exact width is not known. At the bottom of the shaft, which is
140 ft. beiow the outcrop, the stone is nearly nine feet in width, and assays from 2\ to 3 ozs*
per ton. Pyrites begins to make its appearance, and I have no doubt that considerable quan-
tities of sulphides will be found at lower levels.


Tlie gold is well distributed throughout this reef, and the quartz is of a good character.
The stone is free milling and amenable to treatment by ordinary battery amalgamation. The
gold in the tailings can be easily recovered by treatment with the chloro-cy anogen process,
wdiich process is now in most successful operation at the Westralia Mount Morgans Mine, and
at a low cost per ton.
There is no doubt, in my mind, that this reef continues through nearly the whole of the
leases, and it is only lost sight of when it approaches the south-eastern and north-western
boundaries. For a considerable distance on each side of the vein the schistose wall-rocks
carry gold, which will leave a very good profit to treat when a large and convenient plant is
erected. A sample from this wall-rock has shown as much as 10 dwts. of goal to the ton.
The other reef, which is known as No. 4, has a very well-defined and bold outcrop,
and I have little doubt that when it is properly explored, it will prove to be a very
valuable reef parallel to the main one. It is not at all improbable that the reefs in this
property will converge to each other as depth is reached, and that they will be found very
close together, if not joining, at a considerable depth.
Looking at this property from a practical standpoint, I am very much impressed with
its present value and potentialities for the future. Ido not hesitate to say that taken in
connection with the group in close vicinity known as the Chamberlain, it is one of the best gold
min in a* ventures I have seen in YCestern Australia.
Chamberlain Group of Leases.
These leases are on the same line of reefs as the “ Baden-Powell,” which has been
described, and are situated a little less than a mile to the north-west of them. They consist
of three leases of 12 acres each. Nos. 505, 518, and 523, making a total of 33 acres.
The geological features of these leases are in nearly every respect the same as in the
u Baden-Powell,” though there are some differences in the physical features such as a basaltic
dyke which runs near one of the reefs, and is not found in the Baden-Powell group. On No. 1
reef the outcrop of the vein is a little over 3 feet wide. This runs parallel with the dyke,
and is next to it. A large number of samples taken from this reef over a length of many
chains showed results varying from 10 dwts. to H ozs. per ton.
No. 2 reef appears at present to be the principal one, and is situated about the
centre of the property. This reef has a slight underlay to the noith, and about
400 ft. from the south-eastern boundary an underlay shaft has been sunk to a depth of 90 ft.
In this shaft the average width of the vein is from 2 ft. 6 in. to 3 fr. At a depth of about
90 ft. from the outcrop of the vein on the summit of the hill, a tunnel of 132 ft. xu length
was put in to intersect the vein, wdiich it did, and was driven upon north-east and south-
west for a distance of 28 and 25 ft. respectively. The ore removed from the vein in carrying
out the operations described amounted to 196 tons. This was crushed, and resulted in a yield
of 495 ozs. of gold, showing an average of about ozs. per ton. On the same reef, at a point
where the vein turns to its original direction, another shaft of 20 ft. in depth has been sunk
upon a vein about 2 ft. wide. Fifteen tons of this ore gave a return of a little over 3 ozs.
per ton in crushing.
■With respect to physical conditions generally, the same remarks apply to this reel
as to that of the “ Baden-Powell,” and the gold is well distributed throughout the stone.
IJp to the present very few sulphides have been met with in the vein, but there is lithe
doubt that they will be, when a greater depth is reached.
This is beyond question a very good property, and, so far as one is able to judge from
experience, there is every reason to believe that these veins will yield a large quantity of
highly payable gold rock, when they have been opened up in a systematic manner. I look
upon this as a valuable property of great prospective merits. The satisfactory cruslungs
leave no doubt as to the gold-yielding character of the veins, especially No. 2,


Roberts Group of Leases.
Tins group of leases numbered 3,7, and 21, is situated within a mile and a half of the
township of Marble Bar, and the geological conditions are very similar to those of the
“ Baden-Powell ” and “ Chamberlain ” groups. The wall rocks are schistose, carrying several
well-defined reefs of gold-bearing quartz.
The main reef is somewhat flat, and has an average width of a little over 3 ft. An
underlay shaft has been put down for about 150 ft., all in gold bearing quartz of an average
value of more than an ounce to the ton. About 80 ft. down this underlay shaft a drive
has been put in on the course of the vein for a distance of over 200 ft., in which it is
found to maintain its width and value. At the bottom of the shaft a drive
has been put in for a distance of more than 300 ft., where also the vein maintains
its value and width. More than 2,000 tons of ore has been crushed from these
drives, and some stuping that was done. A yield of about 23 dwts. per ton was obtained
by amalgamation, and about 7 dwts. remained in the tailings. The amalgamation of
the gold from the ore which was crushed from this mine was very imperfect, owing to the
unsuitability of the machinery employed, but there is no doubt that by treating it with a
well-designed battery and modern appliances, it will yield, without any difficulty, at least
75 to 80 per cent, of its gold by amalgamation.
In this case the question of treating the tailings is not such an easy problem as at the
“Baden-Powell” Mine, inasmuch as they carry a small percentage of copper, which interferes
with the w r et treatment. I anticipate, however, that here, as I have found in the Mount
Moigans Reefs, the problem of successful extraction is purely a matter of careful experiment.
This is a \ aluable property, and will pay well to exploit upon a large scale in the
deep. The ore can be mined easily and cheaply, and so far as one - can judge from the
present developments, the property should be capable of producing a large tonnage of good
gold-bearing ore for a very long time.
Nullagine Mineral Conglomerates.
This property extends over 320 acres, and is about 70 miles from Marble Bar on the
road through Warrawoona.
It would he quite impossible within the scope of an ordinary report to describe the
geological features of tins interesting area. Generally speaking, it may be described as a
series of stratified deposits of siliceous conglomerate carrying gold. There are at least nine
stratified deposits known to exist, varying from 3 to 5 ft. in width, all of which carry
gold. No doubt at one time these conglomerate deposits were formed and stratified by
deposition from water. Probably since that period they have been tilted to an angle by
volcanic action. They have a fiat dip averaging about 30 degrees with the horizontal plain, and
all of them are composed of conglomerate, in many cases resembling very closely the banket
formations of the Rand.
A very large number of samples have been taken from these conglomerate deposits where
ii has been possible to get at them, and many hundreds of tons have been crushed, which
have show n an average of more than half an ounce of gold to the ton, obtained upon the
plates. It is known, however, that a considerable quantity of gold got away in the tailings
most of which will be saved when a proper plant has been erected for their treatment.
The successful exploitation of the conglomerates will depend upon two points chiefly, first,


a systematic development of the stratified deposits on the most approved plans for extracting
the ore cheaply and expeditiously ; and, secondly, upon the erection of a plant with sufficient
capacity to treat from 200 to 300 tons per day at least. These deposits lend themselves to
the introduction of an economic system, and by sinking a central shaft at a point north-east of
Cook’s Hill, the whole can be developed and worked from one shaft.
I have examined these deposits most carefully, and I was greatly impressed with the
immense possibilities that may result from their active and systematic development.
They need a proper system of development underground, and with a well-designed battery and
tailings extraction plant, I calculate that the total cost for the extraction of gold will not
exceed 6 dwts. per ton. The great objects of course to be aimed at are, to design the plant and
machinery, and lay out the underground workings upon lines that will economise labour. If
this is done, I am convinced that 6 dwts. per ton will more than pay all the expenses.
Judging from the large number of samples taken and the ore that has already been
crushed, it would appear that there must be an immense quantity of conglomerate in this
property that will yield from 10 to 12 dwts. per ton. If this is so, there is no doubt that they
can be treated with a very handsome profit.
I could not recommend the erection of a large plant at once, as the present develop-
ment, I think, would not justify it; but I would recommend that a systematic exploration
should be undertaken, which will promptly obtain definite information. That would only
entail a moderate expenditure. There is every reason to believe that such an exploration
would reveal the existence of immense bodies of highly payable rock, and when once
that is proved, a plant commensurate with the magnitude of the property could be erected.
I should advise erecting the stamps and plant by sections, exactly in proportion to the
development of the property. This I think would be the safe line to go upon, and would in
all probability result in a very profitable investment of capital.
Tin Deposits.
The tinfields under consideration are situated about 12 miles in a southerly direction
from Marble Bar. Up to the present time only alluvial deposits have been exploited, and
during - this year from £20,000 to £30,000 worth of alluvial tin has been washed
out and shipped from this field. There are, however, some very excellent tin
lodes running through the granite hills, showing very large crystals of black tin,
and there is no doubt that the alluvial tin now being won comes from these. The properties
under consideration contain about 140 acres, but there has been very little development work
done except in one particular spot, where about 40 tons of alluvial tin have been obtained by
sluicing. The shipment of the first 17 tons of this tin, after paying expenses of freight from
the coast to Singapore, and smelting charges, resulted in a net return of £1,485, or at the rate
of £B7 per ton. From these figures it will be seen that the alluvial tin from this field is very
pure and of excellent quality.
Although I look upon this as a valuable property, I could not compare it, as an
asset, to the gold mines at the present moment. There is no doubt that as soon as
railway communication is established there will be some large and important developments
of the tin veins in this district, and they will certainly prove to be of great value some
day, especially if the price of tin remains at its present level. Even if it should fall,
as it probably will, these tin mines could be worked on a large scale very profitably,
when once railway communication is established between this point and the sea. As a
valuable asset they are well worth retaining until the railway is built, but in the mean-
time I could only recommend a small expenditure upon them with a view to locating tue
alluvial deposits which are easy of access. There is no reason why they should not begin to
yield large returns as soon as railway communication is established.


Croydon Copper Mine.
This mine is situated at Croydon, about 50 miles from Roebourne, and about 25 miles
from the shipping port of Balia Balia.
This mine is also found in the schistose formation, which is common to the whole of
the north-west districts. It could hardly be described as a vein, but rather as a deposit. No
great amount of development work has been done upon it, and the lowest level is only 50 ft. The
shallowness of the developments is accounted for by the fact that water was met with, and only
very inadequate pumping appliances were at hand. For this reason exploration below the
50 feet level has been rendered impossible until some suitable pumping machinery is erected.
However, this mine has a good record. Up to the time of my visit about 300 tons of ore
had been taken from the outcrop and was shipped to the smelting works. These shipments
resulted in an average of 25 per cent, of copper. Since that time a further 150 tons have
been shipped, which resulted in an average percentage of 29*56 of copper, and yielded a net
result of £l5 per ton.
From the foregoing it will be seen that the copper ore in this mine, in large quantities,
has resulted in a very high assay value, and looking at the fact that the whole of the
material taken from it has been shipped without any selection, the result must be
regarded as very gratifying. At the time of my visit the deposit in the 50 ft. level varied
from 14 to 17 ft. in width, and was at that time about 60 ft. in length. Samples from the
floor of this drive gave averages of over 40 per cent, of copper. The character of the ore
is black oxide of copper mixed with considerable quantities of copper sulphide, and this is one
of the most valuable forms of copper ore.
So far as the developments upon this mine have gone, they show that this is a
valuable property, and I should recommend a vigorous exploration of it in depth.
Any work of this kind done would result in the production of a considerable amount of
copper for shipment which would pay all expenses and leave a very handsome margin of
profits besides. Not many miles from this deposit is another copper mine (known as the
Whim Well Copper- Mine). This mine belongs to some Melbourne capitalists, and has been
worked for some years on an inadequate scale; many thousands of tons of copper ore have
been shipped from it, and at the beginning of this year one consignment of 2,000 tons
yielded rather more than £30,000. The Croydon Mine appears to produce ore of a much
higher assay value than the Whim Well mine, although it occurs in the same formation,
while there is no reason to doubt that equally large deposits of valuable copper ore will
be found also in this property.
Referring in general terms to the north-west district, I may say that I am very favourably
impressed with it, from one end to the other, as a cradle for gold. I look upon it as one
of the best, if not the best, portion of Western Australia. Besides this, it has enormous deposits
of tin, lead and copper which are now lying dormant. It is my opinion that the north-
west will some day be the greatest gold producer in the colony of Western Australia.
It certainly will be the premier field for the production of tin, lead, and copper. Owing
to its distance from the capital of the colony and the Eastern goldfields, it has been
neglected. This accounts for the tardiness of its development. There are also very large
pastoral interests in this portion of the colony. Nearly the whole meat supply of Western
Australia is produced in the north-west. The climate in the summer is very warm, but it is
healthy all the year round. 1 think, therefore, that the time is near at hand when this
valuable portion of the colony is bound to receive not only the attention of practical miners,
but also the close attention of capitalists and investors generally.
A. E. MORGANS.
22nd November , 1900.


CHAMBERLAIN GROUP.
WARRAWOONA.


320 A
NULLAGINE CONGLOMERATED.
WATERLOW BROT & LAYTON, LI MT? BIRCHIN LANE. lONDON.E.C.




- SCALE. -
Chs. 10 5 0 20 40 60 80
MARBLE BAR
TOWNSITE.
N? 2 I Roberts
j Mine.


MINING LEASES
AT
WARRAWOO NA.
SCALE.
Q”™ h &
* Sha/Cs.


EXTRACTS FROM THE
REPORTS BY MR. J. K. WEIR, JR.
Baden-Powell Group of Leases.
Situation. —This group of leases comprises thirty-six (36) acres. Gold Lease Iso. 488,
West Lease No. 509, and a 12-acre lease pegged and applied for immediately adjoining
Lease No. 483 on the north. They are situated at Warrawoona, in the Pilbarra Goldfield,
being about one mile north-west of the township of Warrawoona, 18 miles east from
Marble Bar, and about 128 miles by road from the nearest seaport, which is Port Headland.
General Geological Features. —These leases are situated in a belt of country which
is very remarkable, and very different indeed from any other part that I have seen, either in
the north-west or on the Eastern Goldfields in this Colony. There is a belt of country from a
mile to a mile and a half wide, running almost East and West, which extends in a direct line
a considerable distance both East and West from the particular spot where the leases are
situated.
The rocks within this belt are principally chloritic and micaceous schists with occasional
“ blows ”or interruptions of basalt. The schists are bounded on the North and South side hy
extensive quartzite veins, commonly termed in this locality “the dykes.”
It is apparent that the wall-rocks to this particular belt are porphyry and basalt, the
basalt occurring only in places. Within the belt there are numerous quartz reefs and leaders
from 1 foot to 12 feet in wddth, running practically parallel with the course of the belt,
namely, East and West, which can be traced for a distance of 8 or 10 miles almost without
a break. From some of these leaders and reefs extremely rich patches of gold have been
found on the surface, and on those on which any amount of work has been done the gold
has been proved to occur in long chutes and the stone is fairly consistent.
On this belt, and to the South-East of the group of Leases under consideration,
a number of leases have been worked with highly satisfactory results —Lease No. 473,
Lease No. 476. One of these, I understand, has crushed about 600 tons of ore from a
vein averaging 18 inches in width for a yield of 5,400 oz. of gold. The whole of this
stone was taken from one chute worked to a depth of 80 feet. Another has crushed about
1,200 tons from a vein averaging 2 feet in width for a return of about 2,200 oz. of gold,
and another, which has only lately been secured and worked by two miners, has crushed
about 40 tons for 100 oz. of gold or thereabouts.
I have been through each of these mines, and believe these figures are not over-
estimated.
Lease No. 483. —This is an important lease of the group, and considerable development
work been done upon it. It is pegged on the crest of a hill on the Southern boundary
and on high ground on the Northern boundary, with a valley between. The highest point
on the hill on the Southern boundary I should estimate to be about 150 feet above the
valley, whilst that on the Northern boundary is about 80 feet.
There are three or four outcrops on the Lease : —No. 1 close to the Dyke on the Southern
side; No. 2 about midway between the North and the South boundary; No. 3, which is
problematic, in the valley 3 chains from the Northern boundary; and No. 4, a bold outcrop
on the Northern boundary.
No. 1 Reef. — This Reef can be traced by an outcrop showing here and there along the
strike. A little gold has been found on it; but no work has been done to prove its width or
value.


Iso. 2 Reef— is undoubtedly the one on which the present value of this Mine
is to be estimated. It outcrops very prominently from the Eastern boundary for a
oistance ot about 12 chains, where it apparently dips, showing again towards the
Tv estern boundary of the lease. About 70 feet from the Eastern boundary a shaft has
been sunk to a depth of 50 This shaft is across the Eeef, and as the work was not
done by skilled labour, the section of the reef at this particular part is not shown to
advantage. Apparently the reef is 2 feet wide on the surface and increases to about 4 feet or
5 feet at the bottom. The stone taken from the shaft is considered too poor to pay the heavy
expenses of carting to the Public Battery (about a mile distant). Its value, however, I
estimate roughly at about 12 dwts. per ton.
Going in a Westerly direction from this Shaft the reef outcrops very prominently
for about 3 chains. It maintains a width of about 4 feet, and shows gold freely throughout.
About 10 tons of stone have been broken from this outcrop, which I should estimate to be
worth about 25 dwts. per ton.
Further hvest again and distant about 4 chains from this point, the reef apparently
takes a sudden turn to the South, turning almost at right angles and maintaining this turn
tor a distance of about 20 feet, where it apparently again changes its course, resuming probably
its original strike. J
At the point where this bend takes place an open cut was put down to a depth of about
oO feet, and from the bottom of this a shaft was sunk a distance of 110 feet. The stone taken
from above the shaft apparently 8 or 9 feet in width, and, I understand, 340 tons
yielded 1,260 oz. of gold. This tonnage is authentic, and the information was supplied to me
by the shareholders in the Mine, who were also the prospectors.
The Shaft has been sunk on the Eeef throughout, and the only work done from it is a
Ilx cl at oO feet and one at the bottom. Both these levels extend in a southerly direction
about 20 feet, and the whole of the stone, with the exception of about 50 tons, has been
stoped out to the surface.
Stone, which amounted to about 770 tons, has since been crushed and yielded
2,1b8 oz. 18 dwts. of smelted gold, worth ,£3 19s. Od. per oz. This was saved in ordinary
amalgamation, and it is probable that the Tailings will average about 6 dwts. of gold per ton,
and the Concentrates, saved by ordinary blankets, about 5 oz. of gold per ton. Both the
ladings and Concentrates have been put aside for future treatment.
The work in this shaft has been so badly done that it is difficult to decide on the real
width of the Stone throughout, though I think it certain that the average of the whole,
from the surface to the depth so far attained, is over 5 feet, while at the bottom of
the shaft it is fully 8 feet. The stone in the bottom of the shaft is, I estimate, worth about
oz * 0: [ J?°ld P er ton, or in fact, as good as any taken from the shaft, and at this lowest
point, which is the water level, the reef shows every feature of permanency.
The general character of the Quartz is hard to describe as it is continually changing.
In some parts near the surface it is a pink-tinted, close-grained quartz, and in others white
fcugarey quartz, though there is nothing to define whether one class carries the gold more
regularly than the other. At a depth of about 60 feet the stone becomes slightly mineralised,
the mineral being principally arsenical pyrites.- At the bottom of the shaft the Quartz is
either white or blue, and in each case carrying a fair quantity of Pyrites and the gold very
regularly.
The value of this Eeef must be proved by further development, though, from the work
already carried out, everything points to the fact that there is an enormous quantity of
highly payable quartz between this shaft and the Eastern boundary, while nothing has been
done to disprove the continuance of the gold chute towards the Western boundary.
One remarkable feature in this Eeef is the fact that on either side, and in the schists,
prospects of gold can be obtained for a distance of 4 or 5 feet, and I have seen prospects
from the schists worth probably 8 dwts. of gold per ton.


No. 4 Reef. —This Reef, which is barely within the Northern boundary, outcrops very
prominently almost for the entire length of the lease. In the majority of places it is
apparently barren, though in the centre of the Lease and for a distance of 3 chains along
the outcrop, very good prospects have been obtained, and, in fact, there is every reason to
believe a chute of highly payable stone is to be developed at this point. There has been no
work whatever done upon this reef, and owing to its proximity to the “North” Lease,
and the fact that all the reefs have a slight underlay to the North, it is a matter of doubt
whether the majority of this reef will be found in the North Lease or not.
North Lease. — This lease takes in the whole of a very high hill, being an extension
of the one on which the northern boundary is. It is peg and peg with the Lease No. 483,
and has been applied for simply owing to the fact that the No. 4 reef in Lease No. 483 will
most likely underlay into it.
There is no work whatever done upon the lease, though from the boundary of Lease
No. 483 to the top of the hill there are numerous quartz reefs to be seen which traverse the
Lease. In one of these a little free gold can be obtained, while another consists of a dense
pyrites ore, a sample of which it is my intention to have assayed.
No. 1 West. Lease No. 509. —These leases consist of 18 acres immediately to the
N. West of the Lease 483 and North Leases. The whole of the reefs in both those leases
can be traced throughout, though as no w r ork has been done on it, it is impossible to estimate
its value.
Water. —An abundant water supply can be found in almost any locality. As a rule a
supply for a 10-head Battery can be obtained at a depth of 60 or 70 feet, and in no case has
a shaft been sunk to over 150 feet without obtaining as much water as is necessary.
About a quarter of a mile from lease 483, a good supply has been obtained at a depth
of 70 feet. That is on the low ground, but I have no hesitation in stating that a supply
of water sufficient for all purposes will be found on this property in the ordinary course of
development at a depth, say, of 150 feet, or 200 feet. In all cases the water is perfectly fresh
and is used for drinking purposes.
Mining Timber and Fuel. —At the present time firewood can be obtained for about
38s. per cord, though the supply is very limited and the Timber not of the best quality. For
Mining Timber it is already necessary to travel a great distance, which means a deal of
expense in developing a Mine such as this property promises to be. However, as I understand
it is quite likely railway communication wall be established at no distant date, this is not a
matter for very serious consideration, as, with the advent of a Railway, the cost of Fuel,
Timber, &c., would be materially lessened.
Summary.— From the general facts and remarks expressed in this report it is evident
that my opinion of it is a good one. Due consideration has been given, not only to the
developments upon Lease No. 483, but on the surrounding properties, where a greater
depth and length of Ore bodies have been exposed.
On each of the properties upon which any extent of work has been done the results
have been highly satisfactory, proving that where only small quantities of gold have been
obtained on the surface, the reefs at a depth have improved in value and width, and appear
consistent in length so far as the work has progressed.
In view of this and the exceeding richness of the stone already worked in the Lease 483,
as well as the fact that a considerable length of high grade stone is exposed on the sur-
face, there seems to me no doubt that this group of Leases will develop into a highly
payable mining property.
The attached rough Sketches show the positions of the Leases under consideration.


Chamberlain Group of Leases.
Situation. —Tins group consists of three Leases of 12 acres each, No. 505, No. 618, and
No. 525. situated at Warrawoona, in the Pilbarra Goldfield, being about 18 miles distant from
the township of Marble Bar, and about 128 miles from Port Headland.
Geological Features. —These Leases are situated in the same belt of country as the
Baden-Powell group of leases, about one mile North West from that group. They are in a
direct line, and presumably the reefs outcropping are the same as those on the Baden-Powell
group. Generally speaking, the geological features here are identical with all other leases
on the belt, known as the Warrawoona or Salgash line, and a reference to the Plan will
show the continuity of this belt, which I have already described in my Report on the
Baden-Powell group of leases.
Lease No. 505. —This is the most important lease of the Group, and in fact, the only
one on which any development work worthy of notice has been done.
There are four distinct reefs running parallel, coming in from Lease 618 to this
lease, which can be traced on the surface up to within 3 chains of the Western boundary,
at which point a fault occurs which evidently throws the reefs out of their course to the
North, where they again resume their course in a Westward direction.
No. 1 Reef.— This reef is on the South side of the dyke, which occurs near the Southern
boundary of the lease. It is about 3 feet wide on the outcrop, and runs parallel with the
dyke, roughly East and West. No work has been done on it, but it is certainly of value.
A number of samples crushed and panned from various parts extending over a distance of
3 chains lead me to estimate the return at considerably over 1 oz. to the ton.
No. 2 Reef. —This is of the most importance, as it is on this that the majority of the
work has been done. The reef is situated in about the centre of the Lease. It has a strike
a little North of West, and underlies slightly to the North. Its existence can be traced for
a considerable distance along the surface.
At a point about 5 chains from the Eastern boundary an underlay Shaft (No. 1 on Plan),
has been sunk to a depth of 90 feet. At that point the reef maintains an average width of
2 feet 6 inches. As this shaft has been sunk on the top of a steep hill, a tunnel was put in
on the hanging wall side of the reef a distance of 132 feet, at a point to meet with the bottom
of the shaft. When the reef was met with, a level was driven 28 feet west and 25 feet East
on the reef. From this level and the shaft (No. 1) the following crushings were taken :
11 tons from the surface yielded 97 oz.
8f ~ ~ ~ „ 61 oz. 13 dwt.
100 ~ sloped out above the level yielded 184 oz. 3 dwt.
76 „ „ from the level and its surroundings yielded 153 oz.
On a careful examination of the work already done, I gather that there is a short chute
of gold on the surface rapidly increasing in width as it goes down, and I am of opinion that it
will be found, when depth is attained, that this reef will carry gold consistently. In fact, at
the lowest point, the general average may be estimated as 25 dwt. per ton. At this point the
stone maintains its width, and shows every indication of permanency.
About 5 chains distant from this shaft a peculiar disturbance has taken place in this
particular reef. Apparently it has taken an immediate turn to the North in a series of horse-
shoe bends from East to West, until it arrives at a point close to the Northern boundary
of the Lease.


This seems to me to have been caused by an interruption in the schist from the South-
west side, and it is peculiar that the reef maintains its width throughout these bends.
Immediately where the first bend takes place, a shaft has been sunk to a depth of 35 feet
(No. 3on the Plan). The reef is about 2 feet wide, and carries gold almost throughout, and
may safely be estimated to mill from 18 dwts. to 25 dwts. of gold to the ton. On the second
bend, and just where the reef takes its original strike near the Northern boundary, a shaft
(No. 2on the Plan), has been sunk to a depth of 20 feet. The reef here is about 2 feet wide,
and the whole of the stone taken out of this shaft, which amounted to about 15 tons, was
for a return of 3 ounces of gold per ton.
The character of the Quartz in this reef is different from the Baden-Powell, being a close-
grained blue Quartz, canning the gold well distributed throughout, and showing a deal of
crystals of tourmaline and manganese in the vugs that occur, which, in almost all cases, are
associated with richer splashes of gold.
The amount of work done on this lease makes it evident that the possibilities with
further exploration are beyond the ordinary prospects on which Mines are developed. There
is much payable Ore in sight, and it requires but a small expenditure to carry on the develop-
ment, which I am of opinion will prove this particular lease to be a valuable mining
proposition.
Lease No. 618.—This is situated on the East side of Lease No. 605. The reefs
referred to on Lease No. 505 can be traced through it, and gold may be found on
various places along the surface. It has quite recently been acquired, and, therefore, no
development work whatever has been done. The work done on the Lease No. 505 points to the
likelihood of rich chutes being proved in the reefs on this lease.
Lease No. 523.—This is what may be termed a “ block ” claim. It is immediately
North of the Lease No. 605, and was acquired because the principal reef of Lease 505 has
taken such a sudden turn to the North and enters this property about midway on its Southern
boundary. As this reef underlies slightly to the North, it is evident that this lease will
become of importance when the mine is developed.
Summary. —l have no hesitation in recommending this property for exploration.
There is sufficient stone in sight to pay for opening up the mine, so that with careful manage-
ment it should equip itself and prove, at very little cost, a paying concern.
It seems to me that a proposition of this description commends itself to an Exploration
Company willing to undertake the speedy development, with a view of placing it in a condition
to keep a battery continually crushing, when, I feel satisfied, it will take its place amongst
the paying Mines of this Colony.
The conditions of working as to Water Supply, Timber, Firewood and communications
have been referred to in my report on the “Baden-Powell,” all of which apply to this property.
I attach hereto a rough Sketch of the Leases, which show the peculiar horseshoe
occurring on the principal reef.
Nullagine Mineral Conglomerates.
Locality. —This is an area of 320 acres in the locality of the Nullagine township,
Being about three-quarters of a mile west of that place, and is in the Pilbarra Goldfield, in
the North-west of Western Australia. Nullagine is a small town on the Nullagine Eiver,
distant about 70 miles from Marble Bar, and about ISO miles by road from Port Headland.
This distance is around the coach road to Marble Bar and to other mining townships on the
way, though it is quite possible a direct route from Port Headland to Nullagine could be
opened up, saving probably a distance of 50 miles.


Geological Features. —To describe minutely the peculiar geological features of this
piece of country and its origin is a matter which I will not undertake, as it seems to me to be*
so extraordinary that it is a subject on which anyone but a scientific geologist would be rash
in expressing an opinion.
Approaching this property from the East or South-east, the country is slate and
outcrops very prominently. Within a few hundred yards of the Southern boundary
the slate dips to the North, and does not appear again on the surface for a number of miles.
This demonstrates that there is an enormous depression or basin formed. It is in this
depression that the area now under consideration is situated. The whole of these properties
are termed the u conglomerates/ 5 this name being given them owing to the number of veins
of conglomerates that pass through the hills in every direction.
On the area there are a number of hills ranging in altitude from 50 feet to 400
feet, between which are creeks and alluvial flats, which may be easily recognised by referring
to the attached rough Plan. There is no doubt that this huge deposit is sedimentary and that
the alluvial flats are really old Creeks re-filled by the denudation from the surrounding hills.
From the alluvial flats, and in the earliest stages of mining in this locality, many
thousands of ounces of alluvial gold were won, the richest parts being Beaton’s Hill, Brooks 5
Flat and Cook’s Hill. Even now these flats may pay for hydraulic sluicing. Were the
conditions of working favourable, I have no doubt that the returns on economic mining would
be very satisfactory.
General Workings.—The workings on the area have practically been confined to*
prospecting the conglomerate veins on the hills. These veins, which are horizontal, run
parallel with one another and occur irregularly on the hills, and it may be seen distinctly that
they continue in every instance entirely through each hill, and as a matter of fact, in some
cases particular veins can be distinguished passing through one hill and, at the same level, on
the opposite hill.
Cook’s Hill. —I am dealing with this particular spot in the first instance principally
owing to the fact that it is a low hill, that a great deal of alluvial working has been done in its
vicinity, and probably a conglomerate vein that has been developed here is of better value than,
any of the other discoveries.
On the Eastern side of this hill towards Brook’s Flat, a vein about 2 feet wide has been
opened up for a length of about 200 feet on the side of the hill, and at a depth of about
10 or 20 feet lower than the crest. The gold occurring in this vein, which is purely a
conglomerate, is as a rule, very fine, though at times coarse flaky specks are to be seen.
Again on the South-western side of Cook’s Hill this same vein has been opened upon for
a distance of probably 150 feet. The general samples taken from various parts around these
workings (being careful to avoid including any of the richer stuff in the samples) yielded on
assay from 4 dwt. to 30 dwt. per ton, the majority being about 9 dwt.; and, in each case, the
assays have returned about 6 dwt. of silver per ton.
In addition to the samples which have been assayed, a number of richer ones were
panned off by myself on the ground, and from the results of these and the fact that we have
about 300 tons already mined, probably worth about 2 oz. to the ton, I am convinced that,
taking the poorer class with the richer, the average value of this vein will prove to be over 15
dwt. per ton at the Mill.
On the flat to the South of this hill there is a blue clay under the conglomerate vein
referred to, from which I understand a number of small diamonds have oeen secured, but as
it has not been my pleasure to see any of these, I cannot express an opinion on this point
except to say that the clay is very similar to that from other Diamond fields.
Beaton’s Hill.—On this particular spot a great deal of alluvial gold was found many
years ao-o, and on following it up, it was discovered that this gold was shed from a vein near
the top°of the hill. So far there has been no work done to develop this vein, though it is
reasonable to expect that when this is done a quantity of payable ore will be exposed.


Dean’s Hill.— This hill is practically the highest point around, the country. The hill
is about 400 feet above the level of the flats, and is a very extensive one. It is very steep,
and, on the side of the hill, three distinct lodes of conglomerate have been exposed. In view
of the fact that the hauling to the battery from this spot is so very expensive, very little work
has been done, though it is evident from the gold shewn in the prospects taken from these
veins that they will average, at the very least, 9 dwts. to the ton, and I am assured that
two or three small crushings of selected stone have returned 28 dwts. to the ton.
Towards the North-western corner of this property a great deal of work has been done
by dry-blowers in the early stages. The work was confined to a conglomerate vein averaging
about 2 feet in width, running perfectly horizontal into the hill, and I am given to understand
that with a dolly and dry-blower, the men were able to earn a comfortable living. If this is
the case, it is evident that this vein is either of good general value, or carries some very rich
patches; J
-Brooks’ Plat. — This is a very extensive alluvial flat, extending from Cook’s Hill to the
South-eastern boundary of the property. At its widest part (between Beaton’s Hill and
Cook’s Hill) a great deal of alluvial work has been done, and, in one or two instances, diamonds
have been found in a similar matrix to that on the South side of Cook’s Hill.
To the present time the depth of this flat has not been proved, though a shaft has been
sunk to a depth of 160 feet. It Avill be interesting indeed to have this shaft put in working
order and continued to a greater depth, for I am firmly of opinion that when the slates,
which will certainly be the bedrock, are met with, a great deal of gold will be discovered.
It was impossible for me to examine this shaft, though I gathered from the owner of
the Claim at the time the work was done, that a little gold was obtained all the way down
the Shaft, and in parts some fairly rich patches ; but, owing’ to the heavy expenses entailed in
the working at that time, his intention to further develop it was abandoned.
Water was met Avith in this shaft in the driest of seasons at about 100 feet.
Summary.— This Conglomerate Area is an extensive property, and a mining pro-
position that has to be considered very carefully. The position resolves itself into one us
Lo Avhat is the minimum return of gold per ton that can be made pay expenses. It is certain
that the conglomerates will supply an enormous quantity of crushing stuff, and its value may
fie estimated at a minimum of, say 9 (layls . of gold per ton. This is excluding any rich
patches that may occur, or stuff of improved value that may be discovered when the develop-
ment is being pushed forward.
At the present time, and working under the heavy expenses that exist, not only for
fireAvood and carriage, but other details, it has been found that 9 dAvts. of gold to the ton will
pay more than the expenses of working with a 10-head battery only. This being so, and
knowing that there are millions of tons of Ore of that value, it seems to me that there should
be no difficulty in making this a highly payable concern, if it is provided Avith a big Reduction
Plant. °
. . W f. TEß ‘ — Tliere can be 110 difficulty Avith respect to the Avater to supply this Plant for
within a distance of thiee-cpiaiters of a mile from the property there is a permanent stream
known as the Nullagine River; and, in addition to this, it is quite likely that a sufficient
supply will be discovered if it was decided to test the alluvial deposit on Brooks’ Plat.
Perth, Ist September, 1900.


Memorandum of Association of the British Exploration of Australasia, Limited.
1. The name of the Company is the “ British Explora-
tion of Australasia, Limited.”
2. The Eegistered Office of the Company will be situated
in England.
8. The objects for which the Company is established are
all or any of the following (and in construing the following
fub-sections the scope of no one of such sub-sections shall,
in the absence of any express restriction, be deemed to limit
cr affect the scope of any other of such sub-sections) :
(1) To acquire upen the terms (with or without modifica-
tion) of three Agreements each intended to be made
between Alfred Edward Morgans as the Vendor of the
one part and the Company of the other part (the drafts
of which, for the purpose of identification, have been
initialled by the said Alfred Edward Morgans, and by
Messrs. Baker, Blaker & Hawes, on behalf of the Com-
pany), certain gold mining claims, interests, and
properties in Western Australia, and the other property
and rights in the Agreements more particularly described,
or any of them, and to develop the same and to carry
into effect the arrangements in the said Agreements, or
any of them, contained and to agree to any modification
or alteration in the terms thereof, and to rescind the said
Agreements, or any of them, and to enter into any other
Agreement with reference to the acquisition of the
premises, or any of them, as to the Board of the
Company may from time to time seem expedient.
(2) To work, mine and explore for gold, minerals, metals
or precious stones, any mining claims or properties
as the Company may consider advisable, in such
manner and by such processes as may from time to time
be expedient.
(3) To w T ork the mines and mining rights to be acquired
by the Company under the agreements as aforesaid, and
any other mines or mining rights which may from time
to time be purchased, leased or otherwise acquired by
the Company, and to crush, wash, smelt, reduce,
amalgamate, and refine the ore, minerals and metals
derived therefrom, and render marketable the produce,
and develop the resources of all such mines.
(4) To acquire by purchase, lease, exchange, hire, or
otherwise, any mines, lodes or other mining properties, or
any share or interest therein, or any lands of any tenure.
(5) To acquire, purchase, rent or construct all such
smelting furnaces, engines, pumps and other plant,
machinery, gear, tools and materials as may be necessary
for effectually working and mining the lands from time
to time the property of the Company, and for raising
gold and other ores, metals, minerals and precious stones.
(0) To acquire by purchase, hire or otherwise, build,
construct, work, provide, maintain, alter, repair, control,
superintend and use all such engine houses, machinery,
buildings, roads, railways, tramways, railway and tram-
way plant, rolling stock, docks, bridges, canals, wharves,
furnaces, saw mills, smelting or refining works, crushing
■works, hydraulic 'works, electrical "works, factories, ware-
houses, shops, mills, dams, tanks, reservoirs, water-
courses, aqueducts, culverts, races and other works and
conveniences as may from time to time be necessary for
the proper conduct, development and management of
the business and operations of the Company.
(7) To acquire, provide, promote, assist, construct, main-
tain, sell, let or dispose of and deal with any railways,
tramways, roads, ways, vessels, coaches, or other vehicles,
canals, docks, piers, quays, "wharves, saw mills, water
mills, bridges, viaducts, tunnels, gas or lighting works,
electrical power, telegraphs and other communications,
and any running powers or rights and interests
therein, and to contribute towards the cost of pro-
moting, making and using the same respectively by
any other company or person, whether by gnarantee
dividends or otherwise. And also all other undertakings
and conveniences, works and things, either of the
foregoing description, or of other and dissimilar kinds
which may be necessary or useful in developing the
business and undertaking of the Company or of utilizing
any property of the Company,
(8) Generally to acquire by purchase, lease, hire or other-
wise, any mines, lodes or other mining property, or any
share or interest therein, or any land of any tenure, or
real or personal property, concessions, easements, water
and other rights or privileges in Australasia, or else-
where, with any patents or patent rights, licenses, trade
marks, machinery, plant or stock-in-trade, and any lands,
rights, privileges and easements necessary or convenient
for the construction of roads, railways, tramways or other
ways or buildings, or for the carrying on, extending or
promoting of the mining, smelting, reducing and re-
fining operations, and other general business of the
Company, and to construct, and aid and subscribe
towards the construction of roads, tramways, viaducts,
aqueducts, flumes, ditches, telegraphs, telephones and
electric power works, quartz mills, saw mills, factories,
warehouses, or other works or buildings necessary or
convenient for the business or operation of the Company,
or any company in the formation of which, or in which
the Company may have or desire to acquire, ermay have
acquired any interest,
(9) To mine, explore, work and generally utilize mines,
lodes or other properties, and to search for and acquire
ores, metals and minerals, or other produce or profits
obtainable from any such other property.
(10) To reduce into bullion, either at- the Company’s own
or other works, or otherwise make merchantable all or
any ores, metals and minerals, and other products, and to
sell and dispose of the same. To crush, wash, smelt,
reduce and amalgamate the produce of any mines, whether
belonging to the Company or not, and generally to carry
on the business of smelters and amalgamators, and of
dealers in ores, bullion, precious stones, and metals.
(11) To clear, manage, farm, cultivate, irrigate, plant,
build on, and otherwise work, use, or any land
which, or any interest in which may belong to the
Company, to deal with any farm or other products of
any lands of the Company, to lay out sites of towns and
villages on any lands of the Company, and to carry on
the business of general traders for the puiqmso of
supplying goods to any employes of the Company, or to
the occupiers of any of its lands, or to any other persons.
(12) To purchase, build, charter or freight any boats or
vessels, or otherwise provide for the conveyance of any
ores or other goods of the Company, and to employ
boats or \cssels for the benefit of the Company.
(13) To carry on the business of carriers of passengers,
goods and things of every kind, cattle and live stock of
every kind, and to enter into contracts with any Govern-
ment, person, or running company as to interchange of
traffic, powers, joint working or otherwise, as may seem
expedient.
(14) To raise or borrow money for the purposes of the
Company, either with or without security, or on mort-
gage or charge of the undertaking, property, estate,
assets and effects of the Company or any part thereof,
and either including or not any part of the capital of
the Company, called or uncalled, and either with or
without the guarantee of any other person or company;
to issue mortgages, mortgage debentures, debenture
stock, bonds, notes, or debentures, and to make, accept,
endorse and execute promissory notes, bills of exchange,
and other negotiable instruments.
(15) To hold Shares (whether fully or partially paid-up)
or debentures, or any other securities of, or to amal-
gamate either by sale, purchase, exchange of Shares or
otherwise with any present or future limited company
having objects altogether or in part similar to those of
this Company, and whether independently of, or in con-
nection wholly or partially with any such amalgamation
as aforesaid, to form, promote, or assist in forming, or
promoting or developing any such company, and to
subscribe to or guarantee the subscription of the capital
of or to advance or lend money to or for any such
company, or to provide or contribute towards the
expenses of the formation cr promotion thereof, or
subscription of capital upon such terms and conditions
as to payment or otherwise, as may from time to time
appear desirable or necessary.
19


(16) To sell, exchange, lease on rent, royalty, tribute, or
share of profits, mortgage, grant licenses for working,
or otherwise deal with all or any of the lands, mines,
lodes, mining rights, water rights, property, easements,
privileges and effects of the Company, or the under-
taking of the Company as a whole, or the property
or rights thereof, in any company formed by or in
which the Company may have an interest, and to
accept in payment or part payment of the same cash
or shares, debenture bonds, or other securities of any
other company or association.
(17) To distribute any of the property of the Company
in specie among the Members.
(18) To invest the moneys of the Company not im-
mediately required upon such investments as may from
time to time be determined, and to make advances for
the purposes of the Company on stocks, shares or other
securities, and on property of all kinds, either with
or without the borrower’s personal security, and in
particular to customers of and persons having dealings
wuth the Company.
(19) To issue any Shares in the Company fully or partly
paid up, in consideration of any property or rights
acquired by the Company, and to issue securities of the
Company by way of collateral security or indemnity.
(20) To engage miners, and to appoint such managers,
agents and overseers or other servants of the Company
as shall be required and be considered necessary for the
proper working of the Company, and the carrying on of
its business and operations, and to pay to such miners
and others such wages or remuneration as shall be
deemed expedient, and to dismiss or discharge the same
miners and others or any one or more of them at
pleasure.
(- •) r lo pay out of the funds of the Company all expenses
of or_ incident to the formation, registration and ad-
vertising of the Company and the issue of its capital,
including brokerage and commissions for obtaining
applications for or placing Shares, and to apply at the
cost of the Company to Parliament for any extension of
the Company’s powers, and in a similar manner to pay
t io expenses of the formation and promotion of any
companies formed or promoted by this Company, and to
remunerate any parties for services rendered and
expenses incurred in the formation or promotion of such
companies.
(2-) To enter into any arrangement for sharing profits,
union of interest or co-operation with any person
or company carrying on or about to carry on any
business which the Company is authorised to carry on.
(26) To acquire and carry on all or any part of the
business or property, and to undertake any liabilities of
any person, firm, association, or company possessed of
property suitable for any of the purposes of this
Company, or carrying on any business which this
Company is authorised to carry on, or which can be
conveniently carried on in connection with the same,
or may seem to the Directors of this Company calcu-
lated directly or indirectly to benefit this Company, and
notwithstanding that the vendors of any such business
may be some or all of the Directors of this Company;
and as the consideration for the same, to pay cash, or to
issue any Shares, Stocks, or obligations of this Com-
pany, and to enter into working arrangements, contracts
and agreements with other companies and persons.
(24) To promote or establish, either alone or in conjunction
with any other person or persons, company or companies,
any new companies for any purpose whatever, and to
act as agents for public corporations, trusts or companies
in the issue of their bonds, debentures, shares or other
securities; to guarantee, underwrite and provide capital
and to provide funds or security for contingent or other
benefits in connection with the formation or issue of
public companies and other enterprises, and to receive
contributions for the like objects on special terms j
to guarantee the interest on the shares of any company
promoted by this Company, or in any company in which
this Company is interested directly or indirectly. To
subscribe for or otherwise acquire and hold any
shares, debentures, debenture stock, bonds, obligations,
or other securities in any company or private under-
taking, notwithstanding there may be a liability thereon -
to pay the expense of any Acts of Parliament or
Charters in the United Kingdom, or any British colony
or possession or other parts of the world which the-
Directors consider will benefit the Company, or any
property or assets of the Company or any other company
or syndicate with whom the Company may have business,
transactions.
(25) To make gifts or grant bonuses to persons in the
employment of the Company ; to remunerate brokers,
agents and others (including Directors of this Company),
for introducing business to the Company ; to remunerate
the servants and employes of the Company or any of
them, out of or in proportion to the returns or profits of
the Company, or otherwise as the Directors shall think
fit.
(26) To establish, maintain and work agencies in any
part of the world, in connection with the business of the
Company, or any part thereof.
(27) To support or subscribe to any hospital, schools,
clubs or other charitable or public institutions or objects,
in the neighbourhood of the said mines, and to grant
pensions and donations to persons employed by the
Company, or in consequence of such employment.
(28) To establish and cause to be kept a branch register
or branch registers of Shareholders in any part of the
world, and to take such steps as may be necessary te
give the Compauy the same rights and privileges in such
parts of the world as are possessed by local companies
or partnerships of a similar nature.
(29) To apply for and obtain from any Government
(Home, Foreign or Colonial), and any municipal or local
authorities, all such acts, orders, concessions, grants,
powers and privileges as may be useful for the Company’s-
undertaking, and to oppose or assist in opposing auy~
proceedings or application in, before, or to any govern-
ment or other authorities which shall be deemed
prejudicial to the interests of the Company, and to take
all such steps as may be considered necessary or ex-
pedient for the purposes cf securing to the Company
the same rights and privileges in any such colony,
empire or elsewhere, as are possessed by local companies
or partnerships of a similar nature.
(30) To comply with all the laws and regulations regulating
the registration of foreign companies in any colony,
empire or country, so as to obtain a local status in such
colony, empire or country.
(31) To enter into and carry out any arrangement with any
government authorities, supreme, municipal or local,
which may seem conducive to the Company’s interest.
(32) To do all or any of the above things as principals,
agents, contractors, trustees or otherwise, and either
alone or in conjunction with others.
(33) To do all such other things as are incidental or con-
ducive to the attainment of all or any of the above
objects.
4. The liability of the Members is limited.
5. The nominal capital of the Company is £500,000,
divided into 500,000 Shares of £1 each, with power to divide
the shares in the original or any increased capital into
several classes, or to attach thereto respectively any pre-
ferential, qualified, special or deferred rights, privileges or
conditions. Any of the original shares, and any new shares
from time to time to be created, may from time to time be
issued with any such guarantee or any such right of
preference, whether in respect of dividend or of repayment of
capital or both, or any such other special privilege or
advantage over any shares previously issued or then about
to be issued, or at such a premium or with such deferred
rights as compared with any shares previously issued or then
about to be issued, or subject to any such conditions or
provisions, and with any special right or without any right
of voting, and generally on such terms as may from time to
time be determined.
baterlow Bros. & Layton, Limited, 21, Eirchin Lane, London, E.C.
20




MAP OF
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Llm?. BireWiil-auc l/ndoi)
