

1886.
VICTORIA.
BRITISH NEW GUINEA.
REPORT ON BRITISH NEW GUINEA, FROM DATA AND NOTES
BY THE LATE SIR PETER SCRATCHLEY, HER MAJESTY’S
SPECIAL COMMISSIONER;
BY
MR. G. SEYMOUR FORT,
Private Secretary to the late
SIR PETER SCRATCHLEY, R.E., K.C.M.G.
PRESENTED TO BOTH HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT BY HIS EXCELLENCY’S COMMAND.
By Authori ty:
JOHN FERRES, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE.
No. 32,—[1s. 9d.]


APPROXIMATE COST OF REPORT.
£ 5. d.
Preparation—Not given.
Printing (760 copies) .. *. ~ ,« .. ~ .. ~ 40 0 0


INDEX OF SUBJECTS IN REPORT.
No. of Page,
Administration —provisional scheme for ... ... ... ... ... 24
Administrative matters ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7
Appointment of officers ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7
Application for leases ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9
,, from a gold prospecting party ... ... ... ... ... 11
Appointment of sub-commissioners ... ... ... ... ... 24
Animals... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 20
Annexation —results of ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 26
Arrival in Australia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5
Australian company—formation of ... ... ... ... ... 25
Beche-de-mer industry ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 21
Copra-making ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 21
Climate... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 18
Charter of S.S. Governor Blackall ... ... ... ... ... ... 5
Communications with natives ... ... ... ... ... ... 7
Complaints of natives against white men ... ... ... ... ... 12
,, of white men against natives ... ... ... ... ... 12
Contributions —future ... ... ... ... ... ... • 23 and 24
Expenditure—-past ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 25
,, future ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . 25
Existing state of the country ... ... ... ... ... ... 13
Explorations and discoveries ... ... .. ... ... ... 6
Exploration parties ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11
Forbes, H. 0.—concerning .. ... ... ... ... ... 11
Financial prospect ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 27
Government buildings ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8
,, purchases of land ... ... ... ... ... ... 8
Guise and Curry—Trial of ... ... ... ... ... ... 12
General characteristics of the country ... ... ... ... ... 22
Harbours ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 19
Head chief at Port Moresby ... ... ... ... ... ... 8
Imperial officer—relation to Australasian Governments ... ... ... 23
Industries ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 20
Judicial proceedings ... ... ... ... ... ... 11 and 12
Killing of white men ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 12
Land —claims to ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 and 9
,, concessions of applications for ... ... ... ... ... 8
,, purchases of. Port Moresby ... ... ... ... ... 8
,, permissive occupancy of ... ... ... ... ... ... 10
,, pastoral and grazing ... ... ... ... ... ... 22
„ registration of claims to ... ... ... ... ... ... 10
,, tenure, system of ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 15
Leases—applications for ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9
Mission —account of ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 17
Missionaries —different sects of ... ... ... ... ... ... 18
Minerals ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 20
Native teachers ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 17
Natives—distribution of ... ... .... ... ... ... 13 and 14
,, social and political condition of ... ... ... ... ... 14
,, language ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14
,, trading, capacity for ... ... ... ... ... ... 14
,, labour, capacity for ... ... ... ... ... ... 15
,, reforms concerning ... ... ... ... ... ... 15
,, protection of ... ... ... .... ... ... ... 26
,, punishment of ... ... ..t ... ... ... ... 13
Natural products... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 22
Official notices ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10
Preparations for departure ... ... ... ... ... ... 5
Places visited ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6
Permits... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10
Pearl fishing ... ... ... .... ... ... ... ... 22
Ports of entry ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 24
Queensland —relations with ... ... ... ... ... ... 10
Rainfall ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 19
Rivers ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 19
Records —results of ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7
Revenue—methods for raising ... ... * ... ... ... ... 26
Seat of Government —selection of ... ... ... ... ... ... 8
Special commissioner—authority of ... ... ... ... ... 23
Strategical value of country ... ... ... ... ... ... 26
Sub-commissioners ... ... ... ... ... ' ... ... 24
Summary ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 27
Timber industry ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 20
Trading depots ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 24
Tropical products ... ... ... ... . . ... ... 22
White men—No. of ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 18
Wolverene —H.M.C.S. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5
Part I, contains a record of places visited, proceedings taken in connection with the erection of
buildings, purchases of land, judicial matters, &c., judicial proceedings, and other adminis-
trative matters.
Part II, is a statement of the existing state of the country, the character of the natives, their
system of land tenure, resources—actual and potential, &c.
Part III. embodies the views of the late Sir Peter Scratchley with regard to the present political
position which British New Guinea occupies in the Anglo-Australia System—also his views
with regard to its future position and future administration.




REPORT.
Sir Peter Scratchley .arrived in Melbourne at the end of the year 1884.
Before, however, he was able to proceed to New Guinea, two main questions had to
be settled —
(1) To find a suitable vessel in which to go to, and remain on, the New
Guinea coast:
(2) To arrange with the various Australasian colonies with regard to the
present and future contributions towards the expenses of adminis-
tering the Protected Territory. In order to settle this latter ques-
tion, Sir Peter Scratchley visited the colonies of Victoria, New
South Wales, Queensland, Tasmania, and New Zealand, and per-
sonally interviewed their respective Ministers. He also met and
interviewed the Premier of South Australia. The purport of the
replies from these colonies with regard to this point was to the
effect that they would continue to contribute their respective
quotas for periods varying from two to five years, on the condition
that a certain share in the expenditure should be borne by the
Imperial Government (vide Appendix No. 9).
The difficulty and delay in obtaining a suitable vessel for service on the New
Guinea coast was intensified by the threatened rupture between England and Russia,
which was imminent during the months of March and April of that year. Early in
January, 1885, Sir Peter Scratchley had gone to Sydney, and while there the Govern-
ment had offered to place H.M.C.S. Wolverene at his disposal for service on the New
Guinea coast for six months. This offer was accepted, and the vessel was placed
in charge of Captain Taylor, who was instructed to carry out the necessary
refittings and repairs. In the meantime, Sir Peter went to Tasmania, and not
long after his return to Melbourne from that colony the threatened rupture with
Russia appeared so imminent that he felt it his duty to resign the Wolverene , and
place her again at the disposal of the New South Wales Government. For a consider-
able period after this his time and attention were devoted to the defences of the various
colonies. As soon as the alarm with regard to the danger to be apprehended
from Russia had somewhat subsided, he advertised for tenders for the chartering
of a steamer for service on the New Guinea coast. Twenty answers were received,
but the prices asked by the majority of the tenderers were so exorbitant as to leave
only one or two to choose from. After considerable trouble and deliberation, Sir
Peter Scratchley accepted the tender of the Australasian Steam Navigation Company
for the s.s. Governor Blackall , and in July she was laid up in Sydney for the purpose
of refitting and preparing for her work on the coast of New Guinea (vide Appendix
No. 10). In the meantime, at the request of the Governments of Queensland and
New Zealand, Sir Peter Scratchley visited those colonies for the purpose of conferring
with the Ministers on the subject of his mission.
Arrival in
Australia.
Preparations for
departure to
New Guinea.
H.M.C.S.
Wolverene.
Charter of
s.s. Governor
Blackall.


By the end of July, the Governor Blackall was ready, but, owing to his illness,
Sir Peter Scratchley was unable to start until the middle of August. On the 13th of
that month the Governor Blackall left Sydney, and, after-calling at Brisbane, Towns-
ville, and Cooktown, arrived at Port Moresby on the 22ud August.
Part I. —Record of Proceedings.
After arrival of Sir Peter Scratchley in New Guinea, his time may be divided
into three periods :
(i.) Prom 28th August to 12th October, during which period he was
engaged in establishing the seat of Government at Port Moresby,
and in inspecting the country from Port Moresby to South Cape
and Dinner Island. Redscar Bay was visited, and an expedition made
inland, for about twelve miles, to the Kabadi district. The follow-
ing places along the coast were also visited: Bootless Inlet
(vide Appendix No. 4), Tupuselei, Kailee, Kapakapa, Hula, Kemp,
Walsh River, Kerupunu, Kalo, Aroma, South Cape, Teste Island,
and Dinner Island {vide Appendix 32). Prom each of these places
expeditions were made inland, in some cases penetrating to the
interior to the distance' of fourteen miles.
(n.) Period from 12th to 30th October. During this period, Sir Peter
Scratchley, in company with ILM.S. Diamond and Raven , who
were awaiting his arrival at Dinner Island, was engaged in
investigations concerning the killing of white men, which had
occurred among the islands on the South and South-East Coast, in
the Louisiade Archipelago, &c. The following cases were investi-
gated : —The killing of Captain Miller, at Normanby Island, on the
3rd of that month {vide Appendix No. 22) ; the killing of Reid, at
Slade Island, Engineer Group {vide Appendix No. 30) ; the killing
of Captain Friar, at Moresby Island {vide Appendix 18) ; the killing
of Bob Lumse, at Hay ter Island {vide Appendix No. 21) ; the
killing of Captain Webb, in the previous year, at Milport Bay
(Appendix No. 33) ; the attack on the schooner Wild Duck ,
in Cloudy Bay, in June, 1884. For the purpose of obtaining
evidence, the following islands were visited: —Killer ton Island and
the main land in Milne Bay, Dufaure Island, Lydia and Toulon
Islands. On the 29th, the vessels returned to Aroma {vide Appendix
No. 2), where the flag was hoisted, in the presence of about 2,000
natives; and on the 31st they returned to Port Moresby.
(in.) From Ist November to Ist December —a period of exploration and dis-
cover)'. On the Ist November, the Governor Blackall was sent back
to Australia, in consequence of the dangerous illness of Mr. Askwith,
serving on staff, and Sir Peter Scratchley remained on shore at Port
Moresby for twelve days, making an expedition 50 miles inland to
Mr. Forbes’ .station, at the base of Mount Owen Stanley {vide
Appendix No. 17). After the return of the Governor Blackall ,
he went to Hula, and, on the 15th, held a Court of Inquiry on
the conduct of two white men. On the 19th, he proceeded to
Discovery Bay, in Milne Bay, exploring on the way a hitherto
unknown riser on the north-cast portion of the bay. On tbe
6


following dav, the Governor Blackfill was taken into hitherto
O 7
unsurveyed waters, at the head of the bay, to a place called
Maivara. From here the vessel went to Bentley Bay, the most
southerly point on the North-East Coast, calling on her way
at Killerton Island, from which place an expedition was made
across the hills, extending from Milne Bay to Bentley Bay, through
a country which was reported to he teeming with hostile natives,
who were, however, found to be most friendly. From Bentley Bay
the vessel cruised along the North-East coast to Mitre Rock, which
forms the boundary of the English territory on the North-East
Coast ( vide Appendix No. 24). Mitre Rock was reached on the
25th November. From this point, owing to the illness of Sir Peter
Scratchley, the vessel steamed direct to Australia, calling at Dinner
Island and South Cape on the way, arriving at Cooktown on the
Ist December.
Two important results are to be noted:—
(1) The practical knowledge gained of the country, the natives, and their :
environment.
(2) The friendly relations opened up everywhere with the natives.
With regard to the first point, at each place visited a record was kept of the
name of the district and its chief; the approximate number of villages and population;
the native teachers resident; the character of the natives, climate, and nature of the
soil; the natural products and industries, &c.; and any incidents of importance. Each
of these points will be dealt with in a subsequent part of the Report.
With reference to the opening up communication with the natives—at each
place, wherever possible, the chiefs were collected, presents made, and the intention of
the Government and its wish to protect black and white alike explained. The chiefs were
told that all complaints against white men were to be made to 11. M. Special Commis-
sioner or his representative, who would constantly patrol the coast; that no chief was
to take the law into his own hands; that tribal warfare was to be discouraged;
and the absolute authority of one chief to be recognised. The position of the native
teacher, as exercising a beneficial influence, was also every where recognised.
On arrival in New Guinea the subjects demanding immediate attention were—
(l) The appointment of officers ; (2) The establishment of a scat of Government ;
(3) The purchasing of land from the natives ; (4) The erection of a house for the
Government Resident.
Captain Musgrave, Assistant Deputy Commissioner, was placed in charge, and
intrusted with the administration of affairs for the district, extending from Yule
Island to Hood Bay. The Honorable J. Douglas, who was Government Resident at
Thursday Island, was also appointed Assistant Deputy Commissioner for the purpose
of exercising control over the western portion of the protected territory. Mr. Frank
Lawes was appointed Postmaster, Harbour-master, and Clerk to Captain Musgrave.
Two brothers, by name Hunter, of considerable practical experience in New Guinea,
were also taken into Government employ—the one to act as forester and inspector
of the timber trade, the other to inspect the beche-de-mer industry.


Port Moresby was established as the seat of Government, and the sole port of
entry. The reasons for this selection were —(1) because it was the only place where
any permanent attempt at civilization had been made; (2) because of its comparative
healthiness; (3) its vicinity and easy access, especially for sailing vessels, to Cooktown,
and a telegraph station.
A considerable area of land, comprising the best sites in the harbour and
nearly the whole of the frontage to the sea, was, with but small difficulty, purchased
from the natives. In summoning together the claimants for this land, and in obtaining
their assent to parting with their property in perpetuo , and thus securing a sound title
for the Government, the assistance rendered by the Mission was invaluable. A
portion of this was set aside for Government buildings; part was reserved as a site
for a future township, and a portion was also to be held as a native reserve.
Previous to the arrival of Sir Peter Scratchley at Port Moresby, the only
houses were those belonging to the Mission and to a storekeeper of the name of
Goldie. Consequently, all Government officials, and to a large extent all visitors
also, were dependent upon the hospitality of the Mission for board and lodging. A
site was, however, carefully selected by Sir Peter, on which a large two-roomed house,
which had been ordered at Townsville, was erected. This is at present occupied by
Captain Musgrave, and is the only Government residence in the island. By means of
pipes laid on from a natural spring, the house, as well as the native village below,
is amply supplied with water. A prison was also in the course of erection, and
Captain Musgrave was instructed to collect materials for the building of a native
bungalow. A small printing office was also established, and Regulations w r ere printed,
copies of which were sent to as many white traders as possible, and to the native
teachers in each district.
Boevagi, the chief of the village, was formally recognised as chief of the
district. He was instructed to refer all complaints, whether of a tribal nature or
against ■white men, to the Special Commissioner. Twenty-five of the sub-chiefs of the
district were summoned on board the Governor Blackall , were presented wfith presents,
and were told by Sir Peter Scratchley—firstly, that they were to regard the white man
as their friend, whose presence would be to their advantage; secondly, that they w r ere
to regard Boevagi as their chief, to whom they w 7 ere to refer to in all cases requiring
arbitration.
In addition to the land at Port Moresby purchased by the Government, a large
tract of land, comprising nearly one half of Stacey Island, was purchased at South
Cape {vide Appendix No. 31). In this case, the transaction was simplified by the fact
that there was only one owner, and that the rest of the tribe recognised his individual
right to dispose of the land. No title deeds were drawn up, nor did the seller attach
his name to any document; a statement was signed by the Rev. J. Chalmers, the
native interpreter, and others, to the effect that the native (Pusa) had a sole right
to the land, that he had parted with it voluntarily, and that he and the tribe were
satisfied with the payment given—about £5 worth of trade. These were the only
purchases of land made.
Owing to the somewhat unstable and unique relationship that the Imperial
and Colonial Governments had occupied with regard to New Guinea, several Europeans
had gone through the form of purchasing land from the natives. Two classes of
claimants to land were dealt with —those who based their claims on purchases made
prior to the proclamation of the Protectorate ; those who claimed a prescriptive right
to lease lands, on the ground of occupancy or original exploration.


Of the first class, a claim to about 700 acres of land at Port Moresby in 1878,
and a claim to 15,000 acres of land alleged to have been purchased in the Kabadi
district in 1880, were the most important. Although, under paragraph No. 6 in
Commodore Erskine’s Proclamation of November, 1884 {vide Appendix No. 27),
these claims had no legal basis whatever, yet as there might be special cases, where
individuals might in equity appear entitled to consideration, each case was thoroughly
investigated by Sir Peter Scratchley.
In the first case, the original purchase had been made in July, 1878; the original.
purchaser, who had been master of a trading vessel, had died and had assigned his ]
claims to the present claimant, who now claimed about 500 acres of peninsula head-
land, and two other allotments of about 100 acres each, these two being comprised
in the land purchased by the Government as a native reserve. In the purchase of
these it was alleged that £6OO had been spent. After careful inquiry, it was made
clear that certain transactions had taken place, and that certain natives had signed
their names to these transactions. It was, however, made equally clear that, putting
the trade at its highest figure, not more than £8 was given to the natives for the land.
The claim was refused on the following grounds :
(a) Under Commodore Erskine’s Proclamation it had no legal basis.
(b) Neither of the parties to the transaction had any legal or official
authority.
(c) There was no reason shown why in equity any consideration should
be given.
As the land in the Kabadi district was stated to be very fertile, the area
claimed extensive, and the claim already possessed an official history, a special
expedition was made for the purpose of investigation.
This claim was refused on the following grounds:—
(a) Sir Arthur Palmer’s Proclamation (vide Appendix No. 28).
(b) Commodore Erskine’s Proclamation.
( c) There was no reason shown why in equity the claim should be
recognised.
In support of this last clause, Sir Peter Scratchley wrote: “I have ascertained,
by inquiries on the spot, that the purchase of the land was not completed by you or
your late partner, and that your negotiations for the land have at no time been
acknowledged by the chief of the district.”
I may state that one of the partners has voluntarily retired from his alleged
claim —the other still importunes the Government on the subject.
The applications for leases were based on the grounds of occupancy or original
exploration. They were all temporarily shelved or refused until the places had been
visited by Sir Peter Scratchley or one of his officers (vide Appendix No. 20).
The following applications for concessions of land were recorded:—
(1.) From a firm in Australia, on behalf of a German Company, for the
purpose of establishing trading stations.—This application was
referred to the Imperial Government.
No. 32. B


(2.) From the New Guinea Land and Emigration Company in London
{vide Appendix No. 25), to which the following reply was returned
by Sir Peter Scratchley:—
“ Being anxious to assist in every way the enterprise of persons
desirous of developing the resources of the British portion of
the island, I regret to state that the project, as laid before me
in your prospectus, is altogether unworkable and premature.”
(3.) From a New Guinea trader, in order to enable him to start a company
for the development of native industries.—The correspondence in
reference to this application was never completed.
Permissive occupancy of Government land, for the purpose of erecting a house
and store, was granted to two traders at Port Moresby, and also at South Cape.
Permission was granted to Mr. FI. 0. Forbes, who has a station at Sogere,
about 50 miles inland from Port Moresby, to purchase land from the natives in that
district.
A registration of claimants to land or to leaseholds, on the same plan as that
adopted in Fiji, was in the course of compilation. As soon as this had been com-
pleted, the claims of those persons who had expended money in the purchase of land,
or who had worked and cultivated land on terms of agreement with the natives or
otherwise, would have received prior consideration as against all subsequent requests
to lease or purchase.
In addition to the claimants already mentioned, there are others whose claims
date back for some years, who are only waiting the result of test cases before they take
any action {vide Appendix No. 13).
As it was found that no vessel would undertake the conveyance of a monthly
mail to Port Moresby at any economical rate, it was considered necessary to abandon,
for the present, the project of a monthly mail service. The Queensland Post Office
authorities agreed, however, to regard New Guinea in the same light as an isolated
station in Queensland. That is to say, letters posted in New Guinea, and bearing a
Queensland stamp, would be charged Queensland rates; while all letters addressed to
New Guinea would be forwarded to Cooktown, and would there await the departure of
any vessel that might be returning to New Guinea, no extra charge being made for
their transference from Cooktown to their destination. The Queensland Govern-
ment were also good enough to allow the Auditor-General to make a half-yearly audit
of the accounts. Official notices with regard to New Guinea were also, by the
courtesy of His Excellency the Governor and the Premier, allowed to be inserted
in the Queensland Government Gazette {vide Appendix No. 29).
As, in Sir Peter Scratchley’s opinion, the indiscriminate influx of adventurers
and speculators would be to the disadvantage of the country, no person was allowed
to go to New Guinea without a permit. Several permits to trade were granted to
private companies and individuals; but it is a significant fact that, although the requests
for these permits were very urgent, yet in the majority of cases the applicants did not
avail themselves of them when granted. Each permit was granted subject to the
observance of conditions {vide Appendix No. 12). The customs officer, both at
Townsville and Cookstown, was authorized by the Queensland Government to prevent
any vessel without a permit from clearing from either of the above-named ports.


It was a prominent item in Sir Peter Scratchley’s policy to encourage as much
as possible explorations, conducted upon a proper footing and under recognised leaders.
Many persons applied for permits to explore who were totally unfit to do so, and whose
attempt, had permits been granted them, would have been ruin to themselves, and
would have made a breach in the relations with the natives which it might have taken
years to heal. The following remarks on this question appear in his note book :
“ All explorations must be methodical and systematic. No time must be fixed for
the return of the exploring party, which should be composed of as few members as
possible. No exploring party should act independently of the Government.”
The two most important explorations undertaken during Sir Peter Scratchley’s
administration were—
(l.) The expedition of the Australasian Geographical Society, under
Captain Everill. The whole history of this expedition is so well
known that remark is unnecessary.
(2.) Mr. H. 0. Forbes, Fellow of the Royal Geographical Society, arrived
in Australia in August, and accompanied Sir Peter Scratchley in
the s.s. Governor Blackall to New Guinea. His object is to explore
the Owen Stanley Range. For this purpose he has established him-
self, with 25 Malays, at a station at the base of the mountain, and
has opened up friendly relations not only with the natives immediately
around him, but also far back into the interior. Early in the dry
season he will attempt the ascent of the mountain. In the mean-
time, he is engaged in making observations and collecting Botanical
and Natural History specimens. He will eventually furnish the
Government with a Geological Report upon the country through
which he passes. In order to assist him in his operations, Sir Peter
Scratchley has authorized him to purchase land from the natives,
for the purpose of introducing the cultivation of rice and maize, and a
considerable amount of the former, for seed purposes, was ordered
from Batavia. Sir Peter also furnished him with a large number
of seeds for the purpose of forming a Government garden. It had
also been the intention of Sir Peter Scratchley to have granted him
from the Government funds a considerable sum of money to
enable him to continue his operations after his ascent of the
mountain. His long experience in dealing with natives, the
accurate records kept by him of the natural features and natural
products of the country, render his work as an explorer of
exceptional value in adding to the knowledge of the country.
(3.) An application was made from the Mayor of Townsville for a permit
to be granted to a gold prospecting expedition to visit the country.
This was granted, and Sir Peter Scratchley promised to instruct his
officers to assist the expedition in every way possible. It was, how-
ever, pointed out that it would not be advisable for the expedition
to start until the end of the rainy season.
During his cruise along the coast, many instances of strained relationships
existing between the trading whites and the natives were brought under Sir Peter
Scratchley’s notice.
11


The most important complaint made by natives against white men was a charge
brought by Renaki, chief of Hula, against two white men, by name Guise and Currie
{vide Appendix No. 19). These two men had been resident in that district for some
time, and the chief had made a complaint to Mr. Romilly about them in December,
1884. He complained that, although they were resident in the district, they followed
no trade; that they were in the habit of systematically violating the young women of
the tribe; and, what appeared to be the chief cause of his complaint, of violating
the married women also. He further informed Mr. Romilly that they had spoken
disrespectfully of the Commodore. Acting upon this complaint, Mr. Romilly requested
the captain of H.M.S. Swinger to deport the men from Hula. This was done, and
they were taken in that vessel to Australia. They, however, again returned in a vessel
which had no permit, and took up their residence at Hula. On Sir Peter Scratchley’s
first visit to Hula, in September, the chief Renaki made a formal complaint against
these two men, and asked Sir Peter Scratchley if he was strong enough to remove them.
At that time Sir Peter Scratchley was unable to remain at the village, but he promised
that he would return and investigate the matter. Accordingly, when he visited Hula
in November, a Court was held on board the s.s. Governor Blackall , and the two men,
Guise and Currie, were summoned by warrant to appear. The native evidence taken
before the Court was not strong enough to justify their deportation under clause 26
of the Western Pacific Orders in Council, but they were proceeded against under
clause 27 of those Orders, which prohibits residents in the Island from remaining
there if their presence shall be considered by the Commissioner detrimental to the
peace and good order of the Pacific Islands.
A few minor complaints, made against some of the traders on the coast, with
reference to the prices paid for beche-de-mer, &c., were also adjudicated upon.
The principal complaint of whites against natives was a charge of robbery with
assault, committed by some of the natives at Aroma, upon a trader called Dan Rowan.
This case was carefully investigated on the spot by Sir Peter Scratchley, and the native
evidence taken in the matter, the result being that the chief was ordered to restore the
stolen property, which was done.
Six cases of white men who had been killed during the past two years on the
New Guinea Coast were investigated. The results of these investigations went to
show—
(l.) That the white men killed fell into two classes: —( a ) Those who
were killed for their individual crimes against native laws, either
immorality, as in the case of Reid, or of unfair and unjust dealing,
as in the case of Bob Lumse, or, as in the case of Webb, for reck-
lessly ignoring of tribal feuds and warfare, {h) Those who fell as
victims to native superstitious ideas, and the demand for vengeance
which the evils of the labour traffic had aroused, vide Frier and
Miller’s case.
(2.) That in every case, therefore, there was either direct or indirect
aggressive provocation on the part of the whites against the blacks.
(3.) That, in the majority of cases, there was reckless disregard on the
part of the murdered of warnings given. Frier refused to believe
the native boy who told him the natives had determined to kill
him. Miller had been warned by Captain Bridge, of H.M S.
Espiegle , and by Mr. Chalmers, not to go to Normanby Island.
12


So many and so various are tlie difficulties connected with the question of
punishment, that to administer justice according to European notions for these out-
rages is impossible. A murder is committed, and a man-of-w r ar proceeds to the spot.
She finds that every person in the village has left, taking every tiling with them; by
waiting a day or so, some of the men will return. They will not, however, fight—
at the first sign of hostility they flee into the jungle, where, to pursue them, would he
fatal, as, for every native caught, ten white men might be speared. Should, however,
the natives remain and consent to give evidence, such evidence is wholly unreliable
partly from the difficulty of interpretation and explanation, and partly also from the
readiness with which, when they do understand, they will endeavour to adapt their
statements to the leading idea or apparent wish of the questioner. Then, again, the
native custom with regard to payment for murder, and their low estimate of human
life, forms another difficulty. In the case of Miller, one of the murderers came off to
the ship voluntarily, bringing his payment or wergild for the murder he had com-
mitted (vide Appendix No. 23). He was detained on board, hut to have punished him
with death, in the face of his having voluntarily paid what, according to his standard
of justice, was a full penalty for his deed, would have been revenge and not justice.
As a result of the experience gained hy Sir Peter Scratchley during these
investigations, the following conclusions were arrived at :
(1.) That the Government cannot be responsible for the protection of
irresponsible traders, who cruise from place to place in vessels
insufficiently manned, whose defenceless position, and the posses-
sion of trade which they injudiciously expose, are almost invariably
a source of incitement to the natives to attack them.
(2.) That men-of-war vessels are not suited for the purpose of administer-
ing justice and punishing outrages on the New Guinea coast ; that
under the peculiar conditions for which they are required, they
combine the least amount of efficiency with the greatest display
of force.
(3). That the most effective police would he a selected crew of Samoans
or Fijians, under the charge of an English officer, who would he
constantly patrolling the coast. This force could also be utilized
for the prevention of tribal warfare. It would of course be
necessary that the officer in charge should send in a written report
of his proceedings.
Part ll.— The Existing State op the Country.
The above-mentioned administrative proceedings were more or less of a
provisional nature, and were incidental to what appeared to Sir Peter Scratchley to
be the main object of his cruise, namely, to gain a practical insight into the actual
condition of the country, in order to be able to lay before the Imperial and Colonial
Governments some scheme for its administration. As it is evident, on account of the
climate, that as the natural resources of New Guinea can only be developed by means
of coloured labour, the distribution of the natives, both as to population and disposition,
is perhaps of paramount importance. With the exception of some portions of the North-
East Coast, almost the entire littoral of the Protected Territory is inhabited. In the West


and North-West, from the Fly River to Hall Sound, the natives are very numerous,
the tribes are large, and a higher stage of tribal development is reached than
elsewhere. The soil is in some places extremely fertile, and the sago produced in this
portion of the coast supplies the districts on the South-West Coast as far as Kaile.
The natives inhabiting not only the coast, but also the high lands and valleys
from Port Moresby to Kerupunu, are numerous, peaceable, and show themselves willing
to adopt European ideas with regard to labour, &c. This is especially the case among
the fertile lands behind Kapakapa, Hula, and Kerupunu. At Aroma, Cloudy Bay,
Milport Bay, and Toulon Island, the character of the natives changes ; they are very
numerous, their tribal organization is more complete, and their individual physique
finer, hut they are not to be trusted—their latent capacity for bloodshed is strong, and
with difficulty restrained.
The population from South Cape to Bentley Bay and East Cape is more
scattered, the villages are small and numerous, the people small in stature, and of
peaceable disposition.
But little is known of the natives on the North-East Coast ; the few that were
visited were visited during the cruise of the Governor Blackall. Several places were
visited where no white man had ever been before ; although shy, the natives appeared
to be friendly ;in some places the villages were very large.—( Vide Appendix No. 24.)
Most of the islands in the Louisiade Archipelago and D’Entrecasteaux Group
are thickly populated ; the natives are, however, treacherous, and less to be trusted
than those on the mainland ; in most of the islands also, as well as on the mainland
from South Cape to Bentley Bay, the natives have been and are cannibals.
From what is knowm of the interior, the villages appear to be numerous, and the
people friendly. At Mr. Forbes’ station, the furthest settlement inward hitherto
attempted, the natives are not only friendly, but have caused tribes living far away
in the interior to become friendly also.
During his tours of inspection, Sir Peter Scratchley personally visited no fewer
than 18 districts, 27 islands, 34 inland villages, and nearly 60 coast villages. Except
on rare occasions, no arms were carried ; and on no single occasion Avas the slightest
hostility shown, or was there a single disturbance with the nati\ r es.
The social and political organization of the New Guinea natives is quite
rudimentary. Even the tribes in the West, who are less barbarous than elsewhere,
have no fully developed tribal system, such as existed in Fiji, Java, or New Zealand.
On the other hand, hoAvever, nowhere are they nomadic or so low in the scale as the
Australian black.
The infinite variety of dialects to be found throughout the Protected Territory
is a prominent element of difficulty in dealing with the natives, whether for trading or
investigation purposes. Not only each district, but eacli village, has very frequently
a different dialect. The Motu dialect prevails over the largest area, name!} 7 , from
Port Moresby to Kapa Kapa.
Owing not improbably to the influence of the Malay element {vide Appendix
No. 14), they have everywhere shown themselves ready to trade with Europeans, and
eagerly exchange, not only natural products, pigs, &c., but even personal ornaments,
relics, house utensils, &c., for tobacco, axes, cloth, &c. They have also a good deal
of inland trading among themselves, the inland supplying the coast tribes with food


products in exchange for fish, salt, &c. In the Port Moresby district large expedi-
tions are annually made to the Gulf of Papua for the purpose of exchanging the
pottery (burnt clay pots) made at Port Moresby for the sago grown in the West.
These expeditions are undertaken in large crafts (Lakatois) made by lashing several
canoes together. In these they frequently go out of sight of land, and steer by the
'tars. It was estimated that in one of these expeditions, which started from Port
Moresby shortly after the arrival of the Governor' Blackall , 20,000 pots were taken,
for which they would bring back in exchange about 150 tons of sago.
As the natives exist almost entirely upon vegetable diet—yams, bananas, &c.—
they are obliged to undergo a certain amount of labour in tilling the ground.
This, however, is done mainly by the women, who are not unfrequently skilful
agriculturalists. The men, however, as a rule, are not industrious, and seem
incapable of any systematic permanent labour. The principal food sources are
bananas, yams, sweet potatoes, taro, cacoa-nuts, sugar-cane, bread-fruit, and other
native fruits, fish, &c.
In order to render the natives more capable of self-government among them-
selves and useful .instruments in developing the resources of the country, it will be
necessary that native customs and institutions should be reformed by Government in
two directions.
(1.) It will be necessary to create in each district a tribal chief, who will
also be a British official. This chief will be trustee for the lands,
and responsible for the conduct of the inhabitants in his district.
At present, not only in each district but in each village, there appears to be a
chaos of authorities. Under the present circumstances, each man, beyond conforming
to certain established customs, is a law to himself. In a single village there is not
unfrequently to be found three rival chiefs, each basing his claim to chieftainship upon
a different basis; there is the patriarchal chief who is, more or less, connected by kin
with all in the village ; there is the man who is chief by virtue of his individual
prowess in war; and there is also, perhaps, a sorcerer chief. It occasionally happened
that all three attributes, or perhaps two, were centered in one chief—as, for instance,
Koapena, chief of Aroma—but this is the exception, and not the rule. The remedy
suggested by Sir Peter Scratchley was to introduce a modified form of the Java
system, crushing out the minor chiefs, and making the Government-elected chief the
recipient of a certain annual payment. He would then be held responsible for the
safety of all foreigners, and for the maintenance of law and order within his district.
(2.) It will be necessary to raise the standard of native comfort, by intro-
ducing the cultivation of rice and maize.
This could be done by means of the official chief and native teachers. Its
effect would be to increase the number of requirements among the natives—to give
them an inducement to steady labour and systematic cultivation. Hitherto tobacco
lias been current coin among the natives, and only so long as they were in want of
this would they work, consequently their labour could never be depended upon.
At Port Moresby, however, and • elsewhere, the introduction of a meal of ri ce, as
pavment for a day’s work, was appreciated, and proved a far greater incentive to
steady and reliable labour than tobacco.
The system of land tenure in New Guinea-is generally admitted to be a com- 1
plicated one. Those who have hitherto written and reported concerning it have almost


without exception regarded it as an organized system of tribal ownership; but although
the natural boundaries of the tribal district are always known to each member of the
community, yet it seems probable that there is no idea of tribal ownership as it is
generally understood.
The actual ownership of the land appears to be based upon the basis of kin-
ship. The land is divided into divisions and subdivisions, owned by groups of indi-
viduals, who are all more or less connected by kin. The number of individuals in
these groups is variable. The group may have dwindled down to one representative,
or it may have indefinitely increased. Each member of this family group regards
himself as having a distinct interest in the land appropriated to his kinsmen; not only,
however, can no one member alienate the land without the consent of the family group,
but each member will claim to receive a share of the profits of the sale of such land.
The sense of individual proprietorship is very strong, and extends to particular trees,
and even to the fruit upon these trees, &c.
The position and action of the chiefs will vary in proportion to their individual
influence and power. If the land to be disposed of belong to the family group, of which
the district chief is also the patriarchal head, he would be the most prominent figure in
any transactions with the land; but if the land in question belong to a different family
group from that to which he himself belongs, and he has no voice by virtue of kinship
with them, then his authority and power as district chief will, with reference to this
land, be almost nothing. It is exceptional to find a chief strong enough to negotiate
independently for the disposal of the land belonging even to his own group. It is,
therefore, still less common to find him negotiating with regard to land in which, from
want of relationship to the owners, he has not himself any share. However vague
these distinctions with regard to the interests of chiefs and of members of family
groups in land may appear to Europeans, they nevertheless seem to be pretty well
defined and understood by the natives themselves. As a practical illustration of the
strange degrees in which various members and chiefs of tribes are interested in the
tribal lands, I may give the following:—
There was a small piece of land at Port Moresby for which 30 or 40 members
of a tribe alone claimed payment. These, however, were not the whole of the tribe
but only a part, and their apparent right to receive the money was acquiesced in by
the rest of the tribe. At South Cape, however, the independent right of one individual,
and he was not a chief, to dispose of a large area of land was recognised by the whole
tribe—no one, not even the chief of that tribe, putting forward any claim for payment
(vide Appendix No. 31); while again, for the land adjoining, there were many owners
out of the tribe, each of whom, including the chief, would have had to receive payment
in settlement for any land sold. At Kabadi, a piece of land belonged to a family group,
of which the district chief was not the patriarchal head, and he was consequently, on
the sale of the land, only able to veto the transaction, but could not stop the trans-
actions in connection with the sale of the land.
Although it is probable that the confidence of the natives would best be gained
by avoiding for the present any attempt to purchase land, yet this course is now hardly
practicable. It is, however, evident that with all these different and conflicting interests
in any one piece of land, it is absolutely necessary that there should be one recognised
source and channel from which a good title could be drawn, otherwise it might be that
two or three members of one of the groups might pretend to have authority to sell
land to any purchaser, but in reality they would have only a small interest in the pur-


chase-money, each of the other members of the group having an equal right to their
share in it. The conditions for bringing about a war in connection with land, similar
to that which occurred in New Zealand, are abundantly present in New Guinea, and
unless the land transactions are controlled by Government, complications with the
natives must arise. It is not easy, however, to define in what most practical and
economical manner this control could be exercised. One means towards this end
would be the creation of an official tribal chief, through whom theoretically the title
would issue. No title would be valid without his assent, but this assent must be
certified to by the Sub-Commissioner in charge of the district, and, if necessary, receive
the approval of the Special Commissioner. Transactions for land, however, under a
certain defined area, might, under special conditions, be made directly with the natives.
Other means might also be devised on the spot for ensuring a good title to lands.
The London Mission Society commenced to work in New Guinea in 1871. In 1
its constitution and principles it is unsectarian, but for many years it has been mainly
supported by the Congregational Churches of the British Isles and Australian Colonies.
The Mission districts are as follows : —(a) The Western begins at the Baxter River,
embraces the Fly and the Katan Rivers, and ends at the Aird River. This is under
the care of the Rev. S. McFarland and the Rev. Scott. The head-quarters of this
district are not situated on the main land but at Murray Island, where natives are
instructed and sent to the coast to open Mission stations. In the institution many
industrial arts are taught, and a schooner for Mission purposes has been recently
launched which was built by the students under the direction of an English boat-
builder. ( b ) The Central District begins at the Aird River and ends at Orangery Bay ?
having Port Moresby for its head-quarters, and the Rev. W. G. Lawes, F.R.G.S., and
the Rev. J. Chalmers are at the head of this district, (c) The remaining district
extends from Orangery Bay eastward, and is under the care of the Revds. Savage
and W. Sharpe.* At Port Moresby is a college and school, whereat native teachers
are trained for the purpose of carrying out Mission work.
There are 30 South Sea Island and 10 New Guinea teachers, located at as ]
many stations. These stations form a chain from East Cape to Maclatchie Point,
and then again on the Fly River, and to the west of it. Although the whole of that
coast line is not actually occupied, the gaps are being rapidly filled up. Between the
two places mentioned above, there is only one gap, namely, Cloudy Bay, where the
natives are not on friendly terms with the teachers. At each station the Mission
teacher has a large house and a garden, also a whale boat ; at the majority of stations
there is also a church built. It would be impossible to define the area over which the
influence both of Mr. Chalmers and Mr. Lawes as well as of the native teachers
extends. One positive result of the labours of the Mission is that they have succeeded, s
not merely in opening up communication with the natives along nearly the entire <
littoral of the Protected Territory, and far into the interior as well, but, what is more
important, they have inspired those natives with confidence. Had the result been
reversed, and the natives rendered aggressively hostile or suspicious, none but armed
bodies of men could have ventured into the interior, nor could single individuals have
cruised from point to point along the coast in fair security. Under the present con-
ditions, a single white man, unarmed, can go 50 miles into the interior from any point
between Port Moresby and Hula in perfect safety.
* Since writing this the Kev. W. Sharpe has died from fever in New Guinea.
No. 32. C


The successful results attained by the Mission in this respect are due, partly,
to the special qualifications for the work possessed by the Revs. W. G-. Lawes and
J. Chalmers. The former has acquired a scholarly mastery of the native language,
has compiled a grammar and dictionary from an unknown language, and has organized
a body of interpreters. To his efforts are due the possibility of being able to carry
out investigations and enter into explanations with the natives. The latter, by his
energy and enthusiasm—by his courage and tact —has not only overcome native shy-
ness and distrust, but wherever he has gone he has upheld the moral superiority of
the white man, and inspired even the wildest barbarians with trust and confidence.
Success is also partly due to the native teachers, who frequently, with their
lives in their hands, have been pioneers to break down native superstition and distrust
( vide, Appendix No. 26). They are the channels of communication between European
ideas and native superstitions, and their usefulness from a political point of view is
very considerable. To their devotedness and zeal is due the fact that Europeans
are able to go with tolerable security into places which otherwise must have remained
sealed to any but armed forces. By their means, moreover, the natives might be
induced to undertake the cultivation of rice, maize, &c. They are excellent gar-
deners themselves, and have cultivated limes, Papua apples, pine-apples, oranges, tea,
potatoes, &c.
Experience shows, that the presence among primitive barbarians of Missionaries
of different sects is not infrequently the cause of political disturbances, or even civil
war. This was especially the case in some of the islands in the Western Pacific,
Botumah, &c. The efforts of the Roman Catholic Mission to establish themselves in
places which the London Mission Society had occupied for years, were, in Sir
Peter Scratchley’s opinion, upon political grounds, to be discouraged. He considered
that the London Mission had, in equity, a prescriptive right within certain districts,
and that the intrusion within these districts of a rival denominational sect was likely
to produce trouble among the natives. Hearing, therefore, that certain Roman Catholic
priests had established themselves at Yule Island, which had been previously occupied
by the London Mission, he wrote to the head of the Roman Catholic Mission at Thursday
Island, and pointed out the settlement on Yule Island of these priests was undesirable,
and that other areas were available for their efforts. He further offered to take the
priests in the s.s. Governor Blackall to the Louisiade group, or any other island
they might desire.
There are, in all, about 20 white men now resident in New Guinea. The
majority of these are traders, who are backed in a small way by merchants and firms
in Australia. There are three stores at Port Moresby, and one settler has erected a
sawmill. The traders, as a rule, live in their boats, but a few native houses at Hula
and Killerton Island have been erected by Europeans. In consequence of the recent
murders that have been committed in the islands, and the disturbed state of the natives
generally on the South-East Coast, warnings were sent round to as many traders as
possible {vide Appendix No. 11).
The climate of New Guinea must doubtless be considered as one of its greatest
drawbacks. In the first place, it is enervating, and Europeans are incapable during
the summer of performing much continuous labour; and, secondly, the fever, which is
everywhere prevalent, is of a severe character. Although all early attempts at
permanent settlement, especially on the coast, must be attended with a high rate of
mortality, yet it seems not improbable that there the New Guinea climate will resemble


that of the north of Queensland, and that in proportion as settlement advances and
the soil is worked, so the pestilential character of the climate will become modified.
In breaking up land for sugar plantations in the north of Queensland, every one,
Kanakas as well as Europeans, Were attacked, some fatally, with fever. On the same
stations fever is now almost unknown. With regard, however, to the present state of
the climate in New Guinea, all that can be done is to point out some of the least
unhealthy spots on the coast, such as Cornwallis Island, Port Moresby, Dinner Island,
Killertou Island, Teste Island, and several places on the North-East Coast. In the
interior, although fever prevails, it is not of so severe a character as that on tile coast,
while the atmosphere, especially on the highlands, is more bracing and invigorating.
The commencement of the seasons in New Guinea are: —Spring,’ September
23rd ; Summer, December 21st; Autumn, March 20th; Winter, June 21st. The
rainy season commences in December, and lasts with more or less fall of weather
until April. The rough statistics collected with regard to the rainfall shows as
follows :
On the North-West Coast, as far as to Redscar Bay, rainfall moderate
throughout the year ; excessive during rainy season. Most healthy portion of the
year from June to October. On the South-East Coast, from Port Moresby to
Kerupunu, rainfall almost nil for sometimes six months in the year ; during this
season this district, especially Port Moresby, is, comparatively speaking, healthy.
From Aroma to East Cape the rainfall in the summer is considerable. At South
Cape the least unhealthy season is during the north-east monsoon or rainy season.
On the southern portion of the North-East Coast the rainfall is, apparently small.
Among the islands the rainfall throughout the year is considerable, and the most
unhealthy portion of the year throughout the Protected Territory is in April and May,
as the floods are subsiding after the rainy season.
The whole of the Papuan Gulf may be regarded as unsafe for vessels to visit.
The water is always muddy, and reefs cannot be seen. Moreover, there is little depth
of water for miles from the shore, very often not more than two fathoms, and heavy
rollers are constantly coming in. From Redscar Head eastwards the South Coast is
skirted almost continuously by a reef, an outlier of the great Australian Barrier Reef.
This reef extends from the shore, at a distance of some five to six miles, and the
numerous indentations afford excellent harbours and anchorage. Along the whole of
the North-East Coast, from East Cape to Mitre Rock, are numerous large harbours.
The most important harbours, however, which would afford anchorage to any con-
siderable number of vessels of a large size are Port Moresby, Orangerie Bay, Milport
Bay, and South Cape. At some of these, however, landing for small boats is difficult,
on account of the fringe of reef. The navigation along the whole coast is difficult,
and no vessel can travel at night.
There are a larve number of rivers in the Protected Territory, and the whole
of it, with the exception of the district around Port Moresby, appears to be well
watered. The largest rivers are those which drain the basin of the vast level region
which begins on the west side of the Gulf of Papua. The largest of these rivers is
the Fly River, which rises some hundreds of miles in the interior. It is supposed that
many of the smaller rivers are mere branches leading into the Fly. Owing to the
action of the south-west monsoon, which blows during the healthy season, the
mouths of these rivers are silted up with sand and mud, and are urinavigable.
This is especially the case in the Aird River, which it is only possible to enter


during the north-east monsoon, or unhealthy season. On the South-East Coast the
rivers are numerous, and the soils on the banks fertile. As, however, the elevated
land is near the coast, they are small in comparison with those in the west. The
North-East Coast appeared to he well watered, and several rivers of considerable size
were seen. In Dyke Acland Bay, where there is a vast tract of level country, densely
wooded, intervening between the coast and the highlands, which are very distant, the
mouth of a very large river was discerned. This river was not marked on any map.
In Milne Bay, two rivers, not mentioned in any map and apparently unknown,
were discovered and explored. The first river (native name Davadava) was discovered
in the north-east of the Bay, and was explored for a distance of about six miles. The
hanks were steep and precipitous; vegetation rank; timber; depth from 8 to 12 feet;
small bar at its mouth, navigable for a small steamer. It is comparatively a small
river, rising in the mountains near the coast. The other river (native name Hadara)
was a very large one, and apparently led into the heart of the country. There were
several deltas at the mouth. The land on either side was flat and the soil very rich;
vegetation very tropical and in abundance; depth of river from 12 to 16 feet. Large
numbers of natives were seen; they were, however, very friendly.
Within a radius of 100 miles from Port Moresby, the wallaby is to be found in
large numbers. The undulating plains which extend at the back of Port Moresby are
great hunting grounds for wallaby and pigs. Outside this radius the wallaby is not
found. Wild pigs are found everywhere in the Protected Territory. The cuscus, an
animal resembling the Australian native bear, and a species of tree kangaroo are to be
found in the southern portion of the Peninsula. These animals, together with the
wallaby, are marsupials. It is supposed that monkeys exist in the interior in the
west. Birds of all sorts —pigeons, duck, cassowary, birds of paradise, &c. —are very
numerous.
The mineral resources of the Protected Territory, both as to kind and quantity,
are still a matter of conjecture. With regard to gold, two specimens of sand, one from
the Larogi and the other from Milne Bay, have been assayed. The assay of the
specimen from the Larogi River yield gold, but not in payable quantities; the results
of the assay of that taken from Milne are not yet known. It is the opinion of Mr.
H. 0. Forbes, based upon his geological observations, that gold will not be found to the
westward, but might lie among the high country in the Milne Bay district, and on the
North-East Coast. Plumbago has been seen at various places along the South-West
Coast. Pebbles and small fragments brought down from the interior, consisting of
mica slate, quartz, sandstones, greenstone, and jasperiod rocks, show the formations
there to be undistinguishable from the Silurian and Devonian series of the gold-fields
of New South Wales. Rocks of similar age, with granite and gneiss, were also found.
The following industries are at the present time in operation in the country,
from which a revenue could be immediately obtained : —Timber, beche-de-mer, copra-
making, pearl fishing, &c.
The glowing accounts which have appeared in the newspapers of the prospects of
the timber trade in New Guinea have raised expectations of a very sanguine nature.
It is true that there are large quantities of cedar and tnalava (species of cedar) on the
banks of the rivers in the west, in the Manu-manu district, and on the Kemp, Walsh,
Edith, and other rivers; but it is not generally known that a very large proportion of this
timber is so small as not to be of marketable value. As large quantities of cedar had
been felled before the proclamation of the Protectorate by firms in Australia, permits
were granted to remove this timber, but the felling of fresh timber wag prohibited until


the spot had been visited by Sir Peter Scratchley or one of his officers. The wisdom of
this step was shown by the fact that large numbers of young cedar trees, too small for
use, had been cut down in sheer wanton waste. To prevent this for the future, a
Forester was appointed, whose duty it was to prohibit the felling of timber below a
certain girth. It was stated, verbally, by an agent for an Australian company who
had for some years past been engaged in felling timber in New Guinea, that out of
10,000,000 superficial feet of cedar and malava fallen, only about 500,000 superficial
feet were of marketable value. He further went on to state that he did not think the
future prospects of the cedar trade were hopeful, and that he himself would hardly be
able to recover the money he had already spent in felling and removing timber.
Besides the cedar and malava, there are, however, large quantities of indiarubber trees,
massoi, sandalwood, ebony, hardwood, tamonu, &c. —especially in the district around
South Cape, ebony grows in considerable quantities. Two. or three large firms have
invested capital in this trade in New Guinea. By one firm a number of Kanakas
were employed, but hitherto no complications have arisen with the natives with regard
to this industry.
Beche-de-mer, or the sea-slug, which is an article de luxe among the Chinese, i
is to be found all along the coast from Port Moresby to Aroma, including Constance
Island, Milport Bay, Milne Bay, Slade Island, Bentley Bay, and, it is believed, in some
bays on the North-East Coast. The number to be obtained, however, especially on the
South-West Coast, has materially decreased during the last few years. The profits are
small and precarious, and a considerable amount of hardship has to be undergone in
prosecuting the trade. There is also a further difficulty in some districts where the
natives, through superstition, dislike handling the beche-de-mer. It was estimated that
the actual annual export in this industry amounted to about£B,ooo ; and it was suggested
that the revenue raised by a tax on this trade might eventually be considerable (vide
Appendix No. 3). The expense, however, of collecting this tax would absorb a large
portion of the amount raised. It was the intention of Sir Peter Scratchley to establish
a depot for this industry at Teste Island. An inspector was appointed, whose duty it
was to report the number of vessels engaged, and the number of tons of fish exported.
According to his estimate, there are now ten schooners occupied with this work, and
the estimated amount of fish exported is about 500 tons. The persons engaged in this
pursuit are, generally speaking, small irresponsible traders, who are constantly coming
into collision with the natives with regard to payments, &c.
Copra is made by splitting open cocoanuts and drying them either artificially <
or in the sun. It is used in large quantities in Europe as an element in oil cake and
other cattle fo.ods. The localities at present suited for the manufacture of
copra are on the South-West Coast from Hula to Roma, all along the shores of
Milne Bay, at Bentley Bay, and along the North-East Coast as far as Dampier
Straits, and many of the Islands of the D’Entrecasteaux and Louisiade Group.
At each of these places cocoanuts grow in abundance, and could be purchased
from the natives at a low price {vide Appendix No. 7). It would, moreover, be
very easy to induce them to plant more cocoanut trees, which, if planted
in a certain manner, would bear fruit in three years. Thus, this industry is
likely to yield a considerable profit to the individuals engaged in it {vide Appendix
No. 8). In order, however, to facilitate its development, it would be necessary to have
a chain of stations at various points, whereby a constant supply of nuts could be
obtained. The natives show themselves willing to work in procuring the nuts, and are


often found trustworthy agents, and capable of rendering a correct account of any
trade left in their hands for the purposes of purchase. In consequence of the moisture
of the climate at Milne Bay and surrounding islands, there would be considerable
difficulty in drying the nuts in the sun. As sun-dried copra is superior to the smoke-
dried copra, it has been suggested that it would he more profitable to bring the nuts
to Port Moresby, to he dried there by the sun, rather than treat them by artificial
means.
The seat of the pearl fishing industry has hitherto been on the western
extremity of the Territory, and occasionally large amounts of pearl have been
collected. Quite recently, however, a large find of pearl was made in the Louisiade
Group, and it is not improbable that this industry may assume much larger
proportions, especially among the islands on the East Coast.
On the well-watered valleys of the Astrolabe ranges, and on the fertile areas
distributed all over the Protected Territory, the following articles,, for which a market
could be found in the Australian colonies, could he produced without com-
peting with colonial industries : —Cinchona, coffee, rice, on the hills, as in Java and
Timor-Laut; and on the swamps, on the North-East Coast, sugar, arrowroot, cotton
(which grow wild), vanilla, tobacco, &c. In course of time, the natives themselves
might he taught to cultivate these, and would return the produce to the Government,
a certain portion being reserved as their contribution towards the expenses of
Government, and the surplus being made over to them as wages.
The following are some of the natural articles of commerce already growing in
the country, and capable of forming sources of revenue in addition to the industries
mentioned above : —Nutmegs, ginger, pepper, indiaruhber trees (these grow to a large
size in the Tahouri district), spices of all kinds, sago, hemp, massoi hark (largely
used for medicinal purposes), cocoanut fibre, sandal-wood, saffron canes, rattan.
In some portions of the interior it would he possible to graze sheep and
cattle these might supply a local market—but the obstacles in the way of
developing purely agricultural interests in the country, on account of the difficulties of
communication, would he very great.
A central range -of mountains running north and south forms the backbone of
the Protected Territory. The highest point in this range is supposed to be Mount
Owen Stanley, 13,200 feet. Leading to the base of this central range on either side, east
and west, are a series of high ranges or spurs, whose sides are covered with dense
tropical forest of a virgin growth. Interspersed among these ranges are open valleys,
full of rich deep soil, table lands, patches of open country covered with coarse grass, and
craters evidently formed by recent volcanic action. Many of the hillsides and valleys
had been cleared, fenced, and cultivated by the natives. In some cases the ranges come
almost sheer to the coast; in others, as at Kabadi, &c., the intervening land between
the ranges and the coast is perfectly flat and open; while, again, at other places such
as Kapkapa, Hula, &c., miles of gently undulating country, well watered, with patches
of forest intervening, stretch far back into the interior from the coast. The character
of the vegetation, especially on the coast, and in many cases of the soil also, is entirely
Australian; towards the interior, however, it becomes more tropical, both as regards
its character and density.


Part lll.— Future Administration, Expenditure, etc.
Before any definite programme of administration for the Protected Territory
can he laid down, two questions of considerable political importance must first he
settled. In the first place, the status and authority of the Special Commissioner
within the Protected Territory requires to be more clearly and definitely defined, and
secondly, the present political relationship of the Imperial Officer administering the
country with respect to the Imperial and Colonial Governments is a wholly anomalous
one, and one which apparently will not prove workable. Under the present arrange-
ment, New Guinea forms no integral part in the Anglo-Australian System.
With reference to the first point, namely, the authority and status of the Special
Commissioner, the following is the conclusion of a legal opinion obtained from the
Hon. Mr. Griffith, Q.C., Queensland, given as Q.C. and not as Premier:—
“ I am therefore of opinion that General Scratchley has at present no legal
jurisdiction and authority of any kind, except such as he can exer-
cise as a Deputy Commissioner for the Western Pacific; and in
particular that he has no power to make any regulations having
the force of law, or to impose or collect any taxes or license
fees upon exports or imports, or otherwise to exercise any legislative
or judicial functions in the Protectorate.”
With reference to the second point, and especially the relation of the Imperial
Officer and the Australasian Governments, the following is the written opinion of Sir
Peter Scratchley :
“ A Crown Colony, with the simplest machinery for its government, will
probably he the best. The judicial powers of the Governor should
be such as to enable him to deal summarily with minor offences,
and to remit, say to the Queensland Courts, offences of a more
serious nature. Everything will, at first, he necessarily of a
tentative character.
“ What proportion of the expense of the cost of government will he borne
by the Imperial Government? This is of paramount importance.
If the whole of the expense is to he borne by the Colonies, the
Imperial Government will practically have no control, and I foresee
that a deadlock must eventually arise between the Imperial officer
and the Australasian Governments.
“ The exercise of tact, patience, and diplomacy will keep matters going for
the first two or three years; but the deadlock will ultimately occur,
as he will be dealing with half-a-dozen Governments, all holding
more or less divergent views.”
With regard also to the method of contributing, Sir Peter Scratchley writes as
follows :
“The ignorance of the intentions of the Colonial Office as to the future
creates difficulties in the colonial Governments coming to an
agreement with the Imperial Government on the subject of the cost
of governing British New Guinea.
“ Until full information is given on all points, there is little prospect of a
permanent settlement of the question, and the policy of the Australian
colonies will continue to be of a hand-to-mouth character.


“The object should be to get the several Governments to propose acts of
Special Appropriation to their local Parliaments, in order to
permanently secure the contributions to be granted yearly to Her
Majesty.
“An Act has been passed in Queensland, and, although that Government
declines to increase its contribution, there is little fear of the Act
being repealed.
“It is doubtful whether the other Governments will do more than vote
the contribution yearly. If so, every year there will be discussions,
more or less unpleasant, in the local Parliaments; and it will be
difficult for the Imperial officer in charge to look ahead and establish
an economical administration.”
It has also been suggested that—
(l.) That the payments should be made half-yearly.
(2.) The financial year should commence on Ist January instead of Ist
June.
Pending the settlement of these important political questions, Sir Peter
Scratchley had intended to restrain, as far as possible for the present, the indiscriminate
influx of white traders until the necessary machinery for control over whites and
natives had been established. In order to obtain this, he had proposed establishing a
chain of Government officials at various points along the coast.
Each Sub-Commissioner would have to be provided with a house, a schooner
or whaleboat, one trusty and reliable European, and a crew of Solomon Islanders or
Fijians, who should all be married. The duties of the Sub-Commissioner would be —
to act as port officer, health officer, &c.; to superintend all commercial trans-
actions between natives and whites ; to adjudicate on all cases arising between them
and white men ; to initiate the cultivation of grain for the natives ; to encourage
exports of natural products ; to superintend and report upon all local industries ; to
control and advise all exploring expeditions in his district. The salary of the Sub-
Commissioner should be at £4OO a year. The establishment of these officers would
be preparatory to, and a means of, systematically opening up the country, so that,
when an influx took place, not only would it be possible to exercise control, but
the lands best adapted for various industries could be at once pointed out.
After carefully considering all hydrographical, sanitary, and tribal conditions,
it will perhaps be found that the best sites for these ports, which would be
ports of entry, would be as follows:—Cornwallis Island, which would command the
entrance to the various rivers on the Western Coast. The situation is healthy, and it
is within easy communication of Thursday Island and Port Moresby. The central
seat of Government would be at Port Moresby, for reasons mentioned above; and the
Government Resident would have charge of that district from Hall Sound to Hula.
Aroma would be another centre, extending over the Hood Bay district, and along the
coast to South Cape. Dinner Island could be made another centre, to control Milne Bay,
the Louisiade Archipelago, and the D’Entrecasteaux Group; while it might be found
necessary to have an officer stationed at Rawden Bay, for the purpose of controlling the
North-East Coast from Bentley Bay to Mitre Rock.
With regard to the natives, it had been Sir Peter Scratchley’s intention to have
formed depots at these ports of entry, and elsewhere, to which the natives might be


induced to bring trade. Regulations would be in force at these depots controlling
the prices to be paid to the natives, the method of conducting trading operations, &c.
As the area of square miles in the Protected Territory is estimated at 86,382 sq.
miles (vide Appendix No. 1), some portion of this might he handed over to a company
for administrative and commercial purposes. It had been the intention of Sir Peter
Scratchley to have encouraged in Australia the formation of a trading company on a
basis somewhat similar to the British North Borneo Company (vide Appendix Nos. 5
and 6). With regard, however, to the tenure of land by this proposed company, Sir
Peter Scratchley consulted the experience of Sir F. Whittaker, whose opinion it will
be pertinent to quote : —“I may say that, if the Australian Company is to he empowered
to acquire and cultivate land, this would, I think, he very objectionable; in fact, would
at once introduce into New Guinea all the objectionable features that have been incident
to the colonization of New Zealand and Fiji, in an exaggerated form. If, on the other
hand, the Australian New Guinea Company intends only to establish trading stations
on sites to be held under license from the Crown, then I think it would he of great
use in promoting the interests and civilization of the inhabitants, and therefore should
receive encouragement and assistance.”
Referring to the statement made by the Auditor-General of Queensland, Ist
February (vide Appendix No. 16), it will he seen that the amount received for the year
1884-5 was £15,171, the actual amount expended from Ist January, 1885, to 30th
January, 1886, being £15,048. Adding £5OO to this for out-standing accounts, the
total expenditure would amount to £15,548 (vide Appendix No. ). It will he
remembered that the amount £15,171 was the amount due from the Colonial Govern-
ments from Ist June, 1884, to Ist June, 1885. As the contributions for the year Ist
June, 1885, to Ist June, 1886, have not yet been paid in, there is consequently a
very considerable balance to the New Guinea account, and not a deficit as publicly stated.
Moreover, by referring to Sir Peter Scratchley’s memorandum of Ist April,
1885 (vide Appendix No. 15), forwarded to the Governments of the Australasian
colonies, it will be seen that he divided expenditure into three heads— (a) Capital, or
first cost, to he raised as a loan; ( b ) Estimated expenditure for the first year; (c) Annual
expenditure for years subsequent. Had he lived to have carried out this classification,
which was approved of by the Colonial Governments, many of the items —such as
building of house, &c. —which, under the Auditor-General’s Report, appear as annual
expenditure, would have been charged to a loan or first cost account. In no way can
the expenditure of the year from January, 1885, to January, 1886, he taken as the
basis for future expenditure. The work done by Sir Peter Scratchley was preparatory
and tentative. He states—“ I consider that my duty is to examine and report upon the
country for the information of the Imperial Government.”
If any systematic administration of the country be attempted, the machinery' of
government will have to he increased, thereby involving increased expenditure both
in— (a) Capital, or first cost; ( b ) In salaries of Government officers. The principal
items under (a), or first cost, will be the building of the houses for the Sub-Commis-
sioners along the coast, providing accommodation for native police, providing whale-
boats, &c. The increased expenditure under Schedule B (vide Appendix No. 15) will
be the salaries of the Sub-Commissioners and native police, the establishment of a
regular mail service, &c. It can, however, he reasonably anticipated that the increased
expenditure for administration will index a proportionate increased development of
natural sources of revenue.
No. 32. D


It has been confidently anticipated by those who have seen the fertility of th
Protected Territory, and its capacity for producing articles of tropical growth, that it
will ere long become self-supporting. Although in its present condition this, perhaps,
onld hardly r be possible, yet the following methods of raising a revenue to defray
local expenditure might he found practical and economical:—
(1.) License fees on all beche-de-mer and pearl fishing boats. These would
he registered, and have to report themselves at Port Moresby at
least once a year.
(2.) License fees for the erection of smoko huts and copra stations.
(3.) Export duties on cedar and malava, at a fixed rate for so many 100
superficial feet of timber; ad valorem duties on sandal woods and
black woods. With reference to this last duty, I may men-
tion that one timber trader alone, if he had paid on his privileges
according to Queensland timber dues, would owe the Govern-
ment about £2,000. The Customs officers at Cooktown and
Townsville might, with the consent of the Queensland Government,
he empowered to act for the New Guinea Protectorate.
(4.) Funds arising from trading licences, judicial fees, harbour dues, and
leases of certain unoccupied lands.
(5.) Import duties.
(6.) Native contributions to the expenses of government. These would
have to he paid in kind, and could hardly he calculated as a source
of revenue for some years to come.
The question with regard to New Guinea which at present is most prominent is
whether it can he made a successful outlet for capital, or, in other words, a commercial
success. Before, however, considering this point, it will he necessary to recall the fact
that New Guinea was primarily annexed for a strategical purpose. Its value to
Australia in this respect has not been diminished hy the fact that portion of the country
has been ceded to Germany. Not only is the British territory nearest the Australian
shores; hut it contains the best climate, the finest harbours and ports, the most fertile
lands, the largest rivers. The object, therefore, for which the country was primarily
annexed has been obtained, and its strategical and negative value in this respect is not
unfrequcntly lost sight of hy those who only look for positive financial results.
The next point which demands attention is the responsibility which rests with
the annexing powers with regard to the protection of the natives. Probably, in no
country, and at no period of history, was there a more favourable opportunity for
successfully adjusting the mutual interests of European and blacks than in British
New Guinea, On both moral as well as politic grounds, it is essential that the natives
should be protected, not only negatively from aggressive violence and usurpation
on the part of the whites, but positively also from moral contamination and
corruption. Regulations with regard to the introduction of spirituous liquors must
not exist merely on paper —they must be strictly and rigidly enforced; and, as far as
is practicable, the system of appointing teachers to official positions must be avoided.
The following statement with reference to this question appears among Sir Peter
■ Scratchley’s notes :—“ The only hope of making New Guinea pay is the employment
of the natives, who can, by patience and care, be trained. If they disappear, other
natives will have to be imported. Putting, therefore, the protection of the natives on
the lowest ground, it will be seen that it will he cheaper to preserve and educate
them. New Guinea must be governed for the natives and by the natives.”


The future of the country depends largely upon the attitude of the natives.
If they are rendered either hostile or corrupt, then it will continue to he the hunting
ground of needy adventurers or desperate speculators ; if, on the other hand,
they learn confidence in their rulers, then settlement in many parts is possible, and
the country may become the regular source of supply of tropical products to the
Australian markets. On this point, therefore, the duty of the Government and the
interest of the speculator coincide, and if, in the scheme for the administration of the
country, the positive protection of the natives be comprehended, the introduction of
European capital will materially benefit them, will create in them a useful and willing
instrument, and thus be the first means towards rendering financial success ultimately
possible.
Briefly to summarize the foregoing points—
(l.) New Guinea was primarily annexed for a strategical purpose — thatt
purpose has been obtained.
(2.) Elaving been annexed, it is the duty of the annexing power to protect
the natives.
(8.) It is doubtful whether the country can ever be self-supporting, partly
on account of the climate, and partly owing to the attitude and
condition of the natives.
(4.) Nothing can be done towards systematically administering the
country and developing its resources until it is made an integral
part of the Anglo-Australian political system, and the position of
the officer administering its Government, both with regard to the
country itself, and also to the authorities to whom he is responsible,
shall have been more definitely determined.
G. SEYMOUR FORT.
Melbourne,
March 80th, 1886.




INDEX TO APPENDICES.
No. Paoe
1. Area (Estimated) New Guinea ... ... ... ... ... ... 31
2. Aroma. —Incident at hoisting of flag ... ... ... ... ... 31
3. B6che-de-mer fishing.—Statistics concerning ... ... ... ... 31
4. Bootless Inlet.—Note as to ... ... ... ... ... ... 31
5. British North Borneo Company—Notes relating to ... ... ... 32
6. ~ ~ Land regulations of ... ... ... 32
7. Copra.—Estimate by Captain Bridge ... ... ... ... ... 33
8. Copra.—Coat of making, &c. ... ... ... ... ... ... 33
9. Contributions—Answers concerning—
(a) New South Wales ... ... ... ... ... ... 33
(b) New Zealand ... ... ... ... ... ... 33
(c) Queensland ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 34
(d) Victoria ... ... .... ... ... ... ... 35
(e) Other colonies ... ... ... ... ... ... 36
10. Charter of steamer—Despatch concerning ... ... ... ... 36
11. Caution to traders ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 37
12. Conditions of permits ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 38
13. Claims to land—Policy of Imperial Government concerning... ... ... 38
14. Ethnological distribution ... ... ... ... ... ... 38
15. Expenditure. —Memoranda of 1885 ... ... ... ... ... 39
16. Expenditure.—Auditor-General’s report ... , ... ... ... ... 40
17. Expedition to base of Mount Owen Stanley ... ... ... ... 41
18. Friar, Captain—Killing of ... ... ... ... ... ... 41
19. Guise and Curry—
(a) Orders of prohibition to leave New Guinea ... ... ... 42
(b) Summing up of Sir Peter Scratchley at trial of ... ... ... 42
20. (A) Leases —Places applied for ... ... ... ... ... ... 43
(b) Leases applied for by New Guinea Land Company ... ... ... 43
21. Lumse, Bob—Killing of ... ... ... ... ... ... 44
22. Miller, Captain—Killing of ... ... ... ... ... ... 44
23. Native superstitions ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 44
24. North-east coast. —Memo, by Mr. H. O. Forbes ... ... ... ... 45
25. New Guinea Company.—Memoranda of proposed association ... ... 46
26. Native teachers. —Instances of courage, &c. ... ... ... ... 47
27. Proclamation.—Commodore Erskine ... ... ... ... ... 47
28. Proclamation. —Sir Arthur Palmer ... ... ... ... ... 48
29. Queensland Government Gazette —Official notices in ... ... ... 48
30. Reid—Killing of ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4£
31. South Cape.—Purchase of land ... ... ... ... ... ... 5(
32. Southern New Guinea.—Approximate geographical position of places ... 5i
33. Webb—Killing of 5]




Village.
When established.
Yield (now in Store
in Ft. Moresby).
Estimated Quantity
on Station at date.
Tupuselei
Kaile
Kapakapa ...
Hula
Aroma
1885.
12th November
13th „
18th
28th „
30th „
Bags.
13
10
7
Bags.
4
6
30
10
APPENDICES.
No. 1.
AREA OF NEW GUINEA (ESTIMATED).
The following is the extent of area occupied by Great Britain and Germany respectively in metric
measure, as under :
Great Britain ... ... ... 223,730 sq. kilometres.
Germany... ... ... ... 178,200 „
Such computation in square miles and acres gives to —
Sq. Miles. Sq. Acres.
Great Britain ... ... 86,382 ... 55,284,480
Germany... ... ... 68,803 ... 44,033,920
The littoral of the Protected Territory is estimated at 1,000 miles.
No. 2.
AROMA.—INCIDENT AT HOISTING OF FLAG.
At the village of Miopa, where the flag was hoisted on the 30th October, seven Chinamen had
been killed some years before. The matter had been investigated by Commodore Wilson, who had con-
sidered that the Chinamen, by their systematic violation of the women, had brought their punishment upon
themselves. When, however, Sir Peter arrived at Miopa, he found the skulls of these Chinamen hanging
on a platform in the centre of the village. He consequently informed the chief that the flag would not be
hoisted unless the skulls were taken down and buried. After considerable hesitation the chief assented,
and, in the presence of 2,000 natives, the skulls were taken down by the native teachers and buried on the
spot.
A mountain of superstition was by this act removed, for it had been a most earnest belief among
the natives that any one touching the skulls, for the purpose of removing them, would be immediately
attacked by sickness, if not by death.
G. SEYMOUR FORT.
No. 3.
BI)CHE-DE-MER fishing—statistics concerning.
The following statistics of the beche-de-mer fishing were received by Sir Peter Scratchley :
Or a return of two tons beche-de-mer for the month from grounds that have been already fished over for
years.
No. 4.
NOTE AS TO “BOOTLESS INLET.”
This is by some supposed to be the future of a large township. The land does not rise more than
(SO feet at the head of the inlet, and communication with the interior of the island would, it is said, be
easier, besides which it has the great advantage of a fine running stream of fresh water. Unfortunately a
coral reef extends right across the opening of the bay, and no available passage has yet been discovered.
In these days of engineering skill and powerful explosives the difficulties of approach, if as stated, will
soon now be removed.
NEW GUINEA SYNDICATE.


No. 5.
BRITISH NORTH BORNEO COMPANY—NOTES RELATING TO.
From the commencement of the present century, and even before that date, public attention has
from time to time been directed to Borneo as an encouraging field for European enterprise and industry.
By means of untiring labour and a large expenditure of time and money on the part of several
loading merchants and others, the northern portion of that great island, with absolute rights of sovereignty,
has been acquired, peaceable possession obtained, and the whole vested in the British North Borneo
Provisional Association, Limited, by whom the completion of the pioneer work has been most successfully
accomplished.
The territory was in 1877-8 granted in perpetuity by the Sultans of Brunei (Borneo) and Sooloo,
and the Pangeran Tumongong of Brunei, subject only to payments amounting in all to $12,500 (about
£2,400) per annum. Owing to the great importance of the acquisition a Royal Charter has lately been
granted, one effect of which is the formal recognition of the title of Mr. Dent and his association to the
territories granted to him by the Sultans.—(iSee Earl Granville's Despatch, Ith January, 1882 — Blue
Book — Spain, No. 1 , p. 204.)
This charter, further, without injuriously restricting the company’s freedom of action, confers
corporate powers of a very beneficial character.
The area acquired is about twenty thousand square miles in extent, and is in the form of an
irregular triangle, with more than two-thirds thereof bounded by the sea. The coast line exceeds five
hundred miles, and all islands within three leagues are included in the cession.
With a view to encouraging immigration, and accelerating the development of the country, the
company are empowered to make advances to planters, merchants, and companies, who may be desirous
of embarking with capital in agricultural, mining, commercial, or other enterprises within the territory.
In the first instance, and until the richness of the country is demonstrated by experience, it may become
the policy of the company to conduct mining, planting, and trading operations to some extent on their
own account, but the chief and ultimate aim of the company will bo to. attract independent capital and
labour.
The fiscal returns are steadily increasing, and should soon cover the cost of administration. In
addition to these, and among the many other sources of revenue available in the company’s possession are
the following :
(1.) Sales and leases of lands for plantations, building, and other purposes. Under this head it
may be mentioned that several applications from Ceylon planters and others have already
been received and are under consideration.
(2.) Royalties on jungle produce, i.e., gutta-percha, india-rubber, camphor, beeswax, edible
birds’ nests, dama, canes, rattan, and timber of a very valuable character, well suited for
exportation to Europe, China, and other markets. The jungle produce in the company’s
territory is known to be of special value, and gutta-percha (which is almost exhausted in
other parts of Borneo, the export from Sarawak alone having reached one million pounds
sterling), is known to abound. There is no doubt the demand for gutta-percha will
increase enormously for the use of cable, telegraph, and telephone companies, and that
this article will prove a highly productive and increasing source of revenue to the
company.
No. 6.
BRITISH NORTH BORNEO COMPANY.—REGULATIONS WITH REGARD TO LAND.
The Land Regulations of British North Borneo.
Special Regulations for the Leasing of uncultivated Lands in Lots of 100 Acres, and upwards, in
extent.
Approved by the Court of Directors of the British North Borneo Company on the 7th day of February, 1883.
1. Applications for uncultivated lauds of 100 acres and upwards in extent should be made to the
Company', the Governor of British North Borneo, or to the Residents of Districts.
2. Should the application be accepted the land must be selected within twelve months from the date
of such application, but no selection shall be valid unless approved under the hand of the Governor, who
shall have power to disallow any such selection either in whole or in part.
3. The Governor will grant an agreement for lease for the land so approved by him to the applicant,
to be followed as soon as possible by the issue of a lease for 999 years.
4. Should the immediate surveys of such land be impracticable from any cause, the Governor will
issue a permit to occupy such laud, subject to the conditions on which a regular grant would have been
issued; which permit will specify' the extent, and describe as nearly as may be the situation of the land to
which it relates, and after the survey' of the laud so occupied the permit will bo called in and cancelled,
and a regular lease issued in lieu thereof.
5. Upon the payment of $1 per acre a lease may' be granted free of quit-rent,
6. A lease may be granted upon the payment of a premium of 50 cents per acre and an annual quit-
rent of 10 cents, redeemable at any time before the expiration of the lease on payment of $1 per acre in
addition to the premium.


No. 7.
COPRA—ESTIMATE BY CAPTAIN BRIDGE CONCERNING.
I think that it is not over-sanguine to expect that 10 per cent, of the copra alone, which might be
collected with no additional planting, if retained for the Government as an excise tax, or whatever it may
be called, would suffice to meet expenses. Of course the natives will have to be taught the preparation of
the article —a thing simpler than that of sago, which many of them now send to the markets of the country.
It may be stated that the small Haa-pai Group, one of the groups composing the Friendly Islands,
which cannot compare in fertility with New Guinea, and which has a population of only 5,000, exported, in
1883, 2,000 tons of copra, valued at £30,000. Eastern New Guinea alone ought in time to produce ten
times as much ; a ten per cent, excise levied only on copra would more than pay expenses.
No. 8.
COPRA.—COST OF MAKING, ETC.
The price of cocoa-nuts on the south-east coast of New Guinea ranges from twenty to forty for one
stick of tobacco. It takes from 6,000 to 7,000 nuts to make a ton of copra. Putting the tobacco at
Is. 6d. per pound, and 22 sticks to a pound, the actual cost of the nuts per ton is therefore about £3 155.,
adding price for labour of drying, &0., the cost per ton of copra on the ground is about £5. In Sydney
the market price ranges from £lO to £l4. I may add that the demand for copra is increasing, its use in
Europe as fodder for cattle having largely increased.
G. S. F.
No. 9.
CONTRIBUTIONS.
A.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
Contribution to New Guinea Protectorate.
This Government having had under consideration the above subject, and General Sir Peter
Scratchley’s request to know whether this Government will continue its contribution, I have now to state —
Ist. That this Government paid its first year’s contribution, £4,084 14s. 4d,, on the 22nd May
last.
2nd. This Government has always understood that the Imperial Government was to pay a
portion of the expense. At the Convention it was generally understood that the Imperial
contribution would not be less than half, for it was clearly pointed out that the strategic
importance of securing the southern shores of Now Guinea was as much if not more an
Imperial than a Colonial advantage, for the ships navigating Torres Straits were, both in
number and in tonnage, representative far more of British than of Colonial capital. The
Convention did not consider that it would be courteous to dictate what portion the Imperial
Government should pay, but preferred leaving it to the Imperial Government to state what
portion, in its opinion, the Colonies ought to bear; and thus it was that the fifth resolution
was adopted, by which the various Governments represented “ undertook to submit and
recommend to their various Legislatures measures of permanent appropriation for defray-
ing, in proportion to population, such share of the cost incurred as Her Majesty’s
Government, having regard to the relative importance of Imperial and Australasian
interests, may deem fair and reasonable.” To cast the whole cost upon the Australasian
Colonics would be to ignore the resolution of the Convention, unless the Imperial
Government were prepared to advance the doctrine that Imperial interests are not
concerned in this matter.
3rd. Under these circumstances, all that this Government can do is to recommend to Parliament
that a permanent appropriation shall be made of its share according to population, to the
extent of £15,000 for the whole of the Colonies, so soon as the Imperial Government
shall have intimated the extent to which it is prepared to bear the common burden.
ALEX. STUART.
20 July, 1885.
B.
NEW ZEALAND.
Memorandum for His Excellency concerning New Guinea.
Ministers have the honour to state to His Excellency their views regarding New Guinea, for
submission to His Excellency Major-General Sir Peter Scratchley. They also suggest that a copy of the
memorandum he sent to the Right Honorable the Secretary of State for the Colonies.
No. 32. E


2. No definite lines for the administration of the affairs of New Guinea have been laid down in the
instructions sent to Sir Peter Scratchley from the Colonial Office ; and, without conference with the other
colonies, Ministers do not consider that they are in a position to come to any positive decision on the
•übject.
3. Their opinion is that the annexation of New Guinea is of little direct importance to New
Zealand. This colony, however, joined in the contribution up to £15,000 with the other colonies, to show
its willingness to aid the Imperial Government in the extension of British interests in the Pacific, and also
for the reason that it considered the annexation of New Guinea essential to the interests of Queensland,
and that each Australasian Colony should, within defined limits, lend its aid to the other colonies. The
contribution has been paid as requested in anticipation of its expenditure.
4. Ministers have now to consider two questions, viz. :
(a.) What should be the future government of the new possession ?
(6.) What further monetary aid New Zealand should render ?
5. In the opinion of Ministers the possession should, for the present, be' created a Crown colony.
They state “ for the present,” because they consider its contiguity to Queensland should, at no distant date,
make its annexation to that colony a necessity. If, however, this were not desired, then, as a white
population becomes settled, there should be granted to it such powers of local self-government as the
Australasian Colonies possess.
6. Considering the strong bearing that the new acquisition has on the defences of the colonies
generally, Ministers consider that a contribution, not exceeding £15,000 per annum, should, for a specified
term, of three years, be continued. This should not be applied to the cost of a vessel for the use of the
Governor. Ministers submit that a vessel of the Dart type might, be put at the disposition of His
Excellency by the Imperial Government, as he will have to continually visit different parts of the coast
and the Australian Colonies. At the end of three years the colony might be able to do without further
monetary assistance, the use of the vessel above referred to being continued. If, however, it were found
that further aid were required, the Imperial Government might fairly be asked to grant assistance, or the
colony of Queensland, aided to some extent by the other colonies, might undertake the whole government
and management of the new territory. Ministers, desiring that New Zealand should act in unison with
the other colonies, and considering it unfair to Queensland to ask that colony at the present time to
undertake the responsibilities of the government of the new possession, are willing to submit to Parliament
the following resolutions:—
(1.) That, in the opinion of this House, the portion of New Guinea annexed to the Empire
should, for the present, be created a Crown colony, with the view of its ultimately being
annexed to Queensland, or created a constitutional colony.
(2.) That aid should be given by the Imperial Government to the new possession by placing
at the disposal of the Governor a war vessel for his use.
(3.) That, for a term of three years from the first day of June, 188(1, this colony will undertake
to pay its share of £15,000 a year proportionately to population, on the condition that
the other colonies of Australia join in the contribution on the same terms.
7. Ministers have named the first day of June, 1886, as it is believed that the money in hand will
suffice to that time. If necessary, an earlier date could be substituted.
8. Ministers venture to suggest that the Australasian Colonies should bo consulted as to the name to
be given to the new colony.
ROBERT STOUT.
Wellington, 7th July, 1885.
c.
QUEENSLAND.
85/70. Chief Secretary’s Office,
Sir, Brisbane, 18th May, 1885.
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt from Your Excellency of General Scratchlcj’a
despatch of 11th April, forwarding, for the consideration of this Government, a memorandum upon the
subject of the estimated cost of governing the British territory in New Guinea.
2. Lord Derby’s telegram of 19th February to the Governors of the Australasian Colonies
expresses a hope that the Colonial Governments will without delay confer with General Scratchley, con-
sider with him what extent of territory inland should bo annexed, and form an estimate of the probable
annual cost, stating how they propose to distribute it and permanently secure their contributions; and adds
that all these matters should be settled before General Scratchley goes to New Guinea, as the final
declaration of sovereignty must be deferred until these arrangements are matured.
3. I have already, in my letter of 18th February, 1885, informed Your Excellency of the views of
this Government as to the question of the cost of the maintenance of British jurisdiction in New Guinea,
and have in my letter of 2nd April conveyed their wishes as to the extent of territory inland to be
annexed. These wishes were, of course, expressed with reference to the circumstances as then known in
this Colony. Since that time, however, further information has been procured from a perusal of the Blue
Book (C. 4273, 1885), laid before the Imperial Parliament, and the White Book laid before the Reichstag,
from which it is, I fear, to be inferred that the time has passed when any expression of opinion on the
part of the Australasian Governments on the latter point is of very material consequence.
4. Attention was called in my letter of 18th February (following a telegram which I had the
honour to ask Your Excellency to send to Lord Derby on the same subject) to the deficiency of
information on the question of the extent of the powers intended to be conferred on and exercised by the
High Commissioner. On this point, however, the Australasian Governments are, up to the present time,
without further information.
5. Upon carefully considering General Scratchley’s commission and instructions, and the despatch
of 17th November, 1884, to Sir G- W. Des Voeux, High Commissioner of the Western Pacific, it becomes
apparent that the Special Commissioner for New Guinea has hitherto had no legislative powers conferred


upon him and only such administrative or executive powers as may be exercised by a Deputy Commissioner
under the Western Pacific Orders in Council.
6. I have adverted to these matters because, in the absence of any definite information as to the
functions intended to be performed by General Scratchloy, it is difficult to know what expenditure need be
incurred in performing them. I am aware that it is intended that he should reside in or near to New
Guinea, and I assume that he will exercise, at any rate, some legislative authority and some judicial
authority by himself or his officers, and that he will have to maintain a force adequate to preserve order
in such parts of the British territory as may be actually occupied. This Government has accordingly
endeavoured to consider the question of expenditure from this point of view, and with such information as
is in their possession. I have had the advantage, also, of personally conferring with General Scratchley
on the subject.
7. I entirely agree that, whatever may be the ultimate decision of Her Majesty’s Government as to
the mode of occupation and form of government of New Guinea, it is necessary for the High Commissioner,
by personal examination, to make himself acquainted as far as possible with the requirements of the
territory. I agree also that the Government, whatever its ultimate form, must be organized on a tentative
basis.
8. So much being conceded, I think that the proposed annual expenditure as suggested iu Schedules
B and C of General Scratchley’s memorandum is fair and reasonable, except that the cost of manning and
maintenance of a steamer for the first year may possibly be reduced below the sum of £17,000 mentioned
by him, and there may, perhaps, in consequence of the delay that has occurred, be more than £B,OOO
available out of the contributions from the Colonies for the year ending Ist June next.
9. I agree also that the High Commissioner will require a steamer of not less size than that sug-
gested by him, and probably a schooner and boats in addition. It will also, I anticipate, be found necessary
to erect suitable buildings for the residence of himself and his staff on shore at Port Moresby or such other
place as may be selected for his head-quarters. Ido not think that the annual contribution of £15,000 from
the Australasian Colonies will be sufficient to defray the capital expenditure for these purposes, which must
therefore be provided for in some other way. This Government will bo prepared to recommend to Parlia-
ment an appropriation to -cover their share, in proportion of population, of a loan of £20,000 for that
purpose —if Her Majesty’s Government, upon full consideration of the matter, think that the whole of the
amount should be advanced by the Colonies —or of such less sum as may be required after allowing for any
contribution which may be made by the Imperial Treasury.
10. In effect, therefore, this Government accepts and adopts General Scratchlcy’s suggestions,
subject to such variations of detail as to the mode of expenditure as may be found necessary after actual
experience. ■
11. Your Excellency is aware that the share of Queensland of the annual contribution of £15,000
originally asked for by Her Majesty’s Government is provided for by a permanent Appropriation Act. The
Government are not prepared, under existing circumstances, to recommend to Parliament that the amount
should be increased.
12. I have to request Your. Excellency to inform General Scratchley that this Government will
willingly place at his disposal the services of their officers for the purpose of auditing the accounts of his
Government, or rendering such other assistance to him as may be required and may be consistent with
their other duties. In particular, the Government Resident at Thursday Island might, it is conceived,
render some assistance as a Deputy Commissioner, as was formerly done by Mr. Chester, Police Magistrate
at that settlement.
13. As soon as it is definitely decided what form of jurisdiction is to be exercised in New Guinea,
and over what extent of territory, this Government will be prepared to consider any proposition that may
be made for an increase of contribution towards the expenses of the Government of New Guinea. In the
meantime, however, they feel that they are not in a position to deal with this question.
I have the honour to be
Your Excellency’s most obedient and humble servant,
His Excellency
S. W. GRIFFITH.
Sir Anthony Musgrave, K.C.M.G.,
Governor.
D.
VICTORIA.
85/70. Premier’s Office,
Melbourne, 4th June, 1885.
No. 85/1928. Memorandum for His Excellency the Governor.
The Premier has the honour to advert to Your Excellency’s memorandum of the 15th April ultimo,
covering two letters from His Excellency Major-General Scratchloy, Special Commissioner for New
Guinea —one, respecting the payment of this colony’s quota of the ,£15,000 promised to be contributed by
the Australasian Colonies towards the government of New Guinea for the year ending Ist June, 1885 ;
and.the other on the subject of the cost of governing British New Guinea for five years further.
2. With regard to the former, Your Excellency was apprised on the 12th ultimo of the payment of
Victoria’s proportion of the £15,000. This proportion was calculated on the basis of the populations of
the several colonies at the date of the last census, viz., the 3rd April, 1881. This mode of apportioning
the expense was suggested by Mr. Service in the absence of any other proposal. No- objection to it has
been made by any colony excepting Queensland, the Government of which proposes that the population at
31st December last should be the basis of calculation instead of that at date of last census. It is not a matter
of much moment which method is adopted ; the population at last census, however, is an ascertained quantity,
while any statement of population at 31st December last can only bo an estimate. As a matter of fact,
however, this colony, and it is believed other colonies, have paid their contributions on the basis proposed
by Mr. Service.
b 2


Colony.
Population
on 3rd April,
1881.
Proportion of
£15,000.
£ s. d.
Victoria ...
861,566
4,693 8 8
New South Wales ...
749,825
4,084 14 4
New Zealand
489,933
2,668 18 9
South Australia
279,865
1,524 11 7
Queensland
213,525
1,163 3 9
Tasmania ... ... ...
115,705
630 6 2
Western Australia...
29,708
161 16 9
Fiji
73 0 0
Total ...
15,000 0 0
3. The following table shows the populations at date of last census and the proportions of the
subsidy due by each colony under this scheme, viz.:—
It should be added that, by general consent, the contribution of Fiji was reckoned upon its proportionate
revenue rather than upon population.
4. Mr. Service now begs to refer to the other letter of which Your Excellency’s memorandum trans-
mitted a copy—a letter in which Major-General Scratchley encloses a memorandum for the consideration of
the Australasian Governments relating to the estimated cost of governing British New Guinea.
In this memorandum the extent inland of the British annexation in New Guinea is alluded to.
This point, however, has since been determined by the agreement between Germany and Great Britain,
as communicated by Lord Derby’s telegram of the 25th May ultimo. There remains, therefore, nothing
further to be said on that subject, except to express the great disappointment felt by the Government and
people of this colony at the meagre results of their efforts to secure the whole of Eastern New Guinea for
the British Crown. For good or for evil, the matter, with all the incidents which led up to it, passes now
into history.
5. With reference to the estimates of the annual cost of governing submitted by Major-General
Scratchley, Mr. Service desires, in passing, to call Your Excellency’s attention to the method adopted by
Germany in reference to the islands recently annexed by that Power, a method which attains every object
desired by Australia in the first instance, almost without any expenditure at all.
This Government, however, is not prepared to object to the estimates, nor to the clear and practical
programme of proceedings sketched in Major-General Scratchley’s memorandum. Mr. Service will,
therefore, be prepared to ask Parliament to continue the contribution of this colony’s proportion of a
subsidy of £15,000 until the Imperial Government has time to decide what portion of the cost of the
government of New Guinea shall be borne by the Imperial Exchequer.
6. Having regard, however, to the limited area of territory annexed, and lack of information as to
the intentions of Her Government, Mr. Service cannot ask Parliament to grant any increased
contribution, either in respect of the annual expenditure, or the capital or first cost.
7. Mr. Service will be glad if Your Excellency will be so good as to communicate this memorandum
to His Excellency the Special Commissioner for New Guinea,, and also to the Right Honorable the
Secretary of State for the’Colonies.
JAMES SERVICE,
Premier.
E.
CONTRIBUTIONS OF OTHER COLONIES.
South Australia has withdrawn her contribution altogether.
Tasmania promised to continue her contribution, and stated that for the future she would be guided
by what Victoria did in the matter.
Fiji. —Owing to her financial condition she was unable to contribute more than £lOO. The
Secretary of State for the Colonies agreed that she should be exempt from any contribution.
G. SEYMOUR FORT.
[Copy.] No. 10.
No. 28.
CHARTER OF STEAMER.
My Lord, Melbourne, 2nd June, 1885.
The result of calling for tenders in Australia for a steamer for six months, fully manned and found,
for service on the coast of New Guinea, has confirmed the opinion I had formed that this mode of providing
means of locomotion would prove to be more costly than if a vessel were purchased in England and
maintained by me for the service.


2. The lowest of the tenders which are now under consideration is £855 10s. per month for a
steamer of about 480 tons gross tonnage. Assuming that this tender is accepted, the annual cost of the
steamer will be £10,260, an amount which is beyond what can be afforded in future years.
3. On the other hand, I estimate that a steam vessel could be purchased in England for the sum of
£lB,OOO (including fitting out and voyage to Australia), and could be manned and maintained for about
£7,000 per annum. Thus, in six or seven years a saving would be effected which would cover the cost of
the vessel.
4. I am also of the opinion that the steamer should be designed specially for the service, in order to
comply with the requirements laid down in the memorandum annexed to this despatch.
5. Under these circumstances, I beg to recommend that the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty
should be moved to prepare the design of a suitable vessel, and that reference should be made to Rear-
Adtniral J. C. Wilson, R.N., who is well acquainted with the requirements of the service.
6. By adopting this course time will be saved, and the order for the vessel could be given
immediately I reported that funds were available for the purchase.
I have, &c.,
(Signed) P. H. SCRATCHLEY.
The Right Honorable the Earl of Derby.
[Enclosure to Despatch No. 28.]
Particulars of Steam Yacht for New Guinea.
1. Vessel is to be built of wood, as bottoms of iron ships foul rapidly, and there is no dock readily
available.
2. Rigged for sailing, to’ save coal.
3. Tonnage, 450 to 500 tons.
4. Draught of water, maximum, 10 feet.
5. Speed, 10 knots.
6. Small coal consumption, 35 to 40 knots per ton.
7. Cabin accommodation on deck (if practicable) for Commissioner.
8. Ample accommodation for crew, white men to be separated from coloured crew.
9. Special arrangements to be made for increased ventilation.
10. Steam pinnace to be provided.
11. Light armament, to include two Nordeufeldt guns (5 barrel R.C.)
12. Small electric light.
13. Refrigerating chamber for provisions (if practicable).
14. Cost, to include fitting out voyage to Australia, insurance, &c., £lB,OOO.
(Signed) P. SCRATCHLEY.
2nd June, 1885.
No. 11.
Gazette Notice, September, 1885.
Caution to Traders and Others.
It is unsafe for traders and others to visit the following portions of the coast in British New Guinea;—
From Kerepunu to South Cape, as well as Moresby Island, D’Entrecasteaux Group, Engineer Group,
Woodlark Group, Jurien and Jonvency Islands ; also from East Cape to the German boundary on the N. E.
coast.
P. H. SCRATCHLEY,
Her Majesty’s Special Commissioner.
South Cape, S.S. Governor Blackall, sth October, 1885.
Copy handed to Ah Gim, Master of Pride of Logan.


No. 12.
CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH PERMITS TO TRADE, FELL TIMBER, ETC., WERE
GRANTED.
(a.) That you keep mo and my officers informed of your proceedings on the coast of New
Guinea, from time to time sending me the names of the vessels employed.
{]>.) That the permission hereby given you to remove the timber confers no, right to fell any
more timber without a fresh permit; this fresh permit, however, cannot be issued until I,
or one of my officers, have visited the place whore the timber is to be felled.
(c.) That you conduct your operations entirely at your own risk, and on the understanding
that I, as Her Majesty’s Special Commissioner, or any of my officers, undertake no
responsibility whatever.
( d .) That you agree to obey such Regulations as may from time to time be issued by mo for
the government of the British territory in New Guinea.
1. I enclose for your information aud guidance, a copy of the Arms Regulations of 1884, issued by
Her Majesty’s High Commissioner for the Western Pacific.
2. I have further to inform you that I reserve to myself the right of cancelling this permission ;
calling upon you to leave the island should you or your agents at any time perform any act which I should
consider detrimental to the maintenance of good order and government within the limits of the British
territory in New Guinea.
3. You are requested to understand that this case is treated as a special one, and that the exemption
from a licence or export duty will not apply to future cases.
P. H. SCRATCHLEY.
No. 13.
CLAIMS TO LANDS—POLICY OF IMPERIAL GOVERNMENT CONCERNING.
As illustrating the policy of Her Majesty’s Government with reference to these claims, it will
perhaps be not irrelevant to quote passages from a letter from the Colonial Office to Mr. E. Schubert,
dated 30th October, 1875, published in the New Guinea papers in 1876, and consequently before the public
for the last ten years. The passages are as follows : —■
“ The position, however, in which Her Majesty’s Government now stand with regard to New
Guinea is not such as to leave them free to sanction, even tacitly, the acquisition of land
within the island by British subjects.
“ It is clear that, without the funds arising from the sale and lease of lands, it would be
impossible to provide for the government of a country; and that any persons who may
now settle in the country, knowing that Her Majesty’s Government is considering the
question of annexing it, must distinctly understand that no acquisition of land made
previous to a decision on this subject can be recognised to the prejudice of the Crown.”
G. SEYMOUR FORT.
No. 14.
ETHNOLOGICAL DISTRIBUTION.
The three racial types to be found in New Guinea —the Papuan, the Malay, and Polynesian—are
much intermixed, and the data for any scientific statement with regard to their distribution are at present
insufficient. The pure Papuan is only to be found within a small area in the interior and on some portions
of the north-east. The Papuan type, however, prevails with modifications throughout almost the whole of
the Protected Territory. In stature they are short and squat —low foreheads and prognathous; in character
they are noisy and demonstrative, shy and suspicious, with a low estimate of human life, but not aggressively
bloodthirsty. Their standard of comfort is very low, and they show but little capacity for any higher
organization. The Malay element appears to predominate in the tribes to westward and in the tribes at
Aroma and Cloudy Bay district. They are aggressive and bloodthirsty, and are gradually driving back
other tribes ; they show capacity for a higher organization. The Polynesian element is roost prominent at
South Cape, although the Polynesian form of religion is entirely wanting ; they-have a tendency to be
treacherous, are noisy and demonstrative, and the artistic faculty is strongly marked aipong them. Distinct
types of Papuan, Malay, and Polynesian nationality are frequently to be seen in the same village.
G. SEYMOUR FORT.


1.
Purchase of steam vessel of about 450 tons, 10 feet draught of water, speed 10 knots,
provided with steam pinnace and light armament, including arms for crew ; fitting
out, journey to Australia, insurance
£18,000
0
0
2.
Purchase of schooner and whale boats for general service ... ...
2,000
0
0
3.
Provision for buildings and miscellaneous expenditure (spread over several years) ...
6,000
0
0
Total Capital cost
£25,000
0
0
Deduct, amount available from £15,000 contribution to 1st June, 1885 ...
5,000
0
0
Amount of proposed loan
£20,000
0
0
1.
Staff—Reduced estimate ...
£7,000 0
0
2.
Manning and maintenance of steamer and boats
17,000 0
0
3.
Coal (increased quantity) ...
2,000 0
0
4.
Sundry expenditure (reduced estimate)
2,000 0
0
£28,000
0
0
Deduct, amount available from £15,000 contribution to 1st June, 1885
8,000
0
0
Amount required for first year
£20,000
0
0
1.
Staff —
Present Staff—
Special Commissioner ... ... ... ... ... £2,500
0
0
Private Secretary ... ... ... ... ... 300
0
0
Deputy Commissioner... ... ... ... ... 700
0
0
Office and travelling expenses ... ... ... ... 1,000
0
0
Additional —
Second Deputy Commissioner, Accountant, Clerks, office, and
travelling expenses ... ... ... ... ... 2,0C0
0
0
Contingencies for police, native chiefs, sundries ... ... 1,500
0
0
£8,000
0
0
2.
Manning and maintenance of steamer and other vessels, insurance, sinking fund, &
c.
£8,000
0
0
3.
Coal (400 tons at £2 10s.)
1,000
0
0
4.
Sundry unforeseen expenditure; minor works, explorations and surveys, mails, &c. ,
3,000
0
0
Amount required for following years ..;
£20,000
0
0
No. 15.
EXPENDITURE.
Sir Peter Scratchley’s Memorandum of April, 1885.
New Guinea.— Estimated Cost of the Government of the British Territory.
Schedule A.
Capital or First Cost.
Schedule B.
Estimated Expenditure for First Year.
(Ist June, 1885, to 31st May, 1886.)
Schedule C.
Annual Expenditure for Four Years subsequent to First Year.
(Ist June, 1886, to 31st May, 1890.)


Dr.
To grants in aid (for 12 months ended 30<A June, 1885) —
£ s. d.
£■
s.
d.
40
Victoria
4,693 8 8
39
New South Wales
4,084 14 4
41
New Zealand
2,668 18 9
42
South Australia
1,524 11 7
43
Queensland
1,500 0 0
44
Tasmania
600 0 0
45
Fiji
100 0 0
15,171
13
4
Or.
By Establishments — ,
£ s. d.
£
s.
d.
Salaries, Fixed—■
1
Special Commissioner, from 20th Nov., 1884, to 2nd Dec.,
1885 ... ' ... ...
£2,589
16
6
3
Deputy Commissioner, from 26th Nov., 1884, to 2nd Dec,,
1885
203
5
9
3
Acting Special Commissioner, from 3rd Dec., 1885, to 31st
Jan., 1886
202
3
6
5
Assistant Deputy Commissioner, from 26th May, 1885, to 31st
Jan., 1886
477
19
1
7
Private Secretary, from 26th Jan., 1885, to 31st Jan., 1886...
304
16
9
3,778 1 7
Salaries, Provisional and Temporary —
9,10
Medical Attendants
£247
17
0
•
34
Naturalist, two months
16
8
0
264 5 0
Allowances'—
33
House Rent, Special Commissioner, from 3rd Jan. to 2nd Aug.,
1885
£303
6
8
16
Travelling Expenses of Special Commissioner and Staff, &c.
328
10
11
631 17 7
By Services (exclusive of Establishments ) —
4,674
4
2
Steamer Governor BlacJcall —
24
Refitting
£1,522 15
2
25
Charter Money
3,910
5
4
26
Victualling Commissioner, Staff, &c.
376
3
6
28
Engine Stores ...
192
6
5
29
Coaling
794 12
8
30
Uniforms, &c. ...
195
5
' 4
20
Marine Stores ...
173
16
6
21
Ship’s Library .,.
27
4
3
22
Ammunition
29
6
6
31
Medical Stores... ... ... ...
92
11
0
27
Marine Insurance
120
0
0
7,434 6 8
Government Bungalow—
23
Materials, Freight, &c. ...
516 18.11
Contingent Expenditure— '
18
Trade for Natives
£245
0
9
19
Cablegrams, Telegrams, and Postage
135
16
6
17
Clerical Assistance
40 17
0
14
Type Writer and Photographic Apparatus
90
0
0
14
Stationery
110
16
8
14
Flags and Tents
73
4
3
14
Cab Hire
54
19
8
14
Advertising and Printing
26
13
6
14
Outfit for Naturalist
21
8
0
14
Meteorological Instruments
24
12
0
14
Incidental Expenses
70
9
5
893 17 9
8-,845
3
4
By Advances —
£13,519
7
12
Assistant Deputy Commissioner ...
...
1,525 0 0
8
Dr. D. Glanville
4 10
1,529
1
0
£15,048
8
6
37
By Balance ... ... ... ... ...
123 4 10
—
123
4
10
£15,171
13
4
No. 16.
EXPENDITUEE.
Auditor-Geneeal’s op Queensland Statement concerning Protectorate of New Guinea.
Statement shoicing the Total Receipts and Expenditure from the 20th November, 1884,*
to the 31 st January , 1886.
* Date of the late General Sir Peter Scratchley’s Commission.
H. H. ROMILLY,
Brisbane, Ist February, 1886,
Acting Special Commissioner.


Certificate or Audit.
I hereby certify that I have examined the Accounts of the Protectorate of New Guinea, for the period between the 20th
November, 1884, and the 31st January, 1886, amounting on the credit side to £15,048 Bs. 6d., and on the debit
side to £15,171 13s. 4d., as rendered by the Acting Special Commissioner, and find —
1. That all sums received have been duly brought to account; and that the several payments made have been
correctly computed.
2. That, assuming the population of the several Australian Colonies, as ascertained at the Census of 1881, to be
the basis of assessment {vide memorandum by the Honorable the Premier of Victoria, dated 4th June, 1885),
Queensland has over-contributed for the year 1884-5 the sum of £336 16s. 3d., and Fiji, £27, whilst
Tasmania has paid £3O 6s. 2d. short of the proper amount, and Western Australia owes £l6l 16s. 9d.,
having contributed nothing.
3. That the “fixed salaries ” paid have been either settled or approved by the Secretary of State.
4. That the “ temporary or provisional salaries,” and the personal allowance for “house rent” (at the rate of
£5OO per annum up to the date of embarkation on board the Governor Blachall), appear to have been
determined by the late Special Commissioner.
5. That no cash-book or accounts were kept by the late Special Commissioner, the hooks now in use having been
compiled with some difficulty in this office, at the request of Mr. Komilly, with the assistance of Mr. G.
Seymour Fort, Private Secretary to the late Special Commissioner.
6. That vouchers in support of expenditure have not, as a rule, been prepared, or receipts obtained at the time of
payment; but that, during the process of audit, they have, with few exceptions, been procured and
certified by Mr. Fort, on behalf of the late Special Commissioner.
7. That, on the whole, I have every reason to believe that the several sums expended have reached the hands of
the persons entitled to receive the same.
8. That advances—amounting in the aggregate to £1,525 —have been made to the assistant Deputy Commis-
sioner, at Port Moresby, to enable him to make payments in New Guinea on public account. From the
banking records it appears that one-half of this sum has been expended; the necessary vouchers in support
of the expenditure, however, have not yet reached the Acting Special Commissioner.
In auditing the accounts of the late Special Commissioner, I have not; considered myself called upon to
express any opinion as to the manner in which the funds subscribed for the purpose of the New
Guinea Protectorate have been expended. I deem it my duty, however, in view of the undue,
responsibility which has been thrown upon me on the present occasion, to point out the necessity for
the employment by the Special Commissioner of an officer conversant with the mode of public
accounting, in order that the financial transactions of the Protectorate may be regularly and
systematically recorded.
At the instance of the late Special Commissioner, full directions for keeping and auditing the public cash
and store accounts of the New Guinea Government were prepared by me, and supplied to General
Scratchley for the use and guidance of his officers. These regulations, which have in the past been
entirely ignored, will, I believe, if strictly adhered to, prevent any future complications in connexion
with the accounts.
W. L. G. DREW.
Department of Audit, Queensland, Auditor-General.
Ist February, 1886.
No. 17.
EXPEDITION TO BASE OE MOUNT OWEN STANLEY.
Sir Peter Scratchley undertook this expedition partly for the purpose of seeing the interior of the
country, and partly also to see the houses built and other arrangements made by Mr. 11. O. Forbes. Owing
to the roughness of the country, the expedition bad for the best part of the way to be accomplished on foot.
The Astrolabe range was crossed at a height of nearly 3,000 feet. The country from Port Moresby to the
base of the Astrolabe was similar to that seen in the northern parts of Australia, undulating country, dry
parched-up soil, timbered with stunted gum, and covered with extensive patches of coarse grass. This is
the hunting ground of the natives in the district, and swarms with wallaby and pigs, &c. After crossing
the Astrolabe range the country became less broken, and extensive areas of undulating country, covered,
with thick coarse grass, and interspersed with patches of original forest, were passed through. The
vegetation became more luxuriant, the River Tarogi. flowing between steep and timbered hanks, was
crossed, and the india-rubber tree, wild ginger, bread fruit, &c., were found in its close vicinity.
A two days’ march from the Astrolabe range brought us to Mr. Forbes’ station. His house, of
native materials, was built on the side of a natural basin, evidently formed by volcanic action; beneath
flowed a small river, and on the opposite side of the crater was the native village, behind which rose the
series of steep and densely-wooded spurs leading to the summit of Mt. Owen Stanley. Everywhere in the
vicinity of this station the soil was very fertile and the natives friendly. Mr. Forbes has two Europeans
and twenty-five Malays at the station. lie is at present busily engaged in making observations, collecting
specimens of natural history and botany, and in making exploring expeditions. Although fever to a
certain extent prevails here, it is not of so virulent a kind as that on the coast.
G. SEYMOUR FORT.
No. 18.
EEIAR, CAPTAIN—KILLING OF.—CIRCUMSTANCES OF OUTRAGE.
Captain Friar, of the schooner Lalla Rookh, was murdered at Hoop Iron Bay, Moresby Island, on
28th July, under the following circumstances: —He had been anchored in Hoop Iron Bay for three days,
the natives had been friendly, but since his arrival had steadily increased in numbers; on the second day a
native interpreter named Billy warned Captain Friar several times that the natives were going to kill him.
Captain Friar treated these warnings with contempt. On the morning of the third day the native boy again
warned Friar, but, finding he would pay no attention, left the ship professedly to go and buy pigs; the
carpenter was also sent ashore to cut wood. In the meantime large numbers of natives crowded round the


ship, and came on board. Suddenly one of them seized Friar from behind, and one in front cut his throat.
The carpenter, who was on shore, was killed at the same moment in a similar manner.
Motive for Killing.
A chief, Bniiala by name, who some time previously had been taken to Sydney by Baron Micklouho
Macleay, and was consequently acquainted with European habits, was persuaded to come on board s.s.
Governor Blackall. With regard to the motive for the outrage, he stated that some years previously two
natives had gone to Teste Island and had there recruited on board Captain Friar’s vessel; that they had
worked for him for some time, but that both bad been drowned one night while attempting to swim ashore
from the vessel. No payment had been made for their death. Further, that amongst the natives who had
been recruited from Hoop Iron Bay several had died, but that, when the Victoria returned those who
remained, payment had been made for all those who had died except one. There were, therefore, three
families whose relations had died away from their homes, and for whom no payment had been made. The
three families, therefore, whose relations had died, and for whom no payment had been made, made it
known to ail the villages that they would murder the first white man who came to that part of the island.
Punishment Inflicted.
After two days spent in vainly endeavouring to got at the murderers, the vessels were obliged to
return to Dinner Island, and nothing more in the shape of punishment than the capture of some canoes was
effected. The skulls, however, of Friar and his carpenter were given up. A month or so afterwards
H.M.S. Diamond returned to the bay and burnt down all the villages.
G. SEYMOUR FORT.
No. 19.
A.
GUISE AND CURRIE—CASE OF.
Order of Prohibition.
S.S. Governor Blackall,
Sir, 16th November, 1885.
With reference to the proceedings before the High Commissioner’s Court, held by me this day, I
send you herewith an order prohibiting yon to remain in British New Guinea, together with a copy of
Section 25 of the Western Pacific Order in Council of 1877, under which the order of prohibition is issued.
I caution you that should I find you at Hula, or in any part of British New Guinea at any time,
I shall enforce the powers conferred upon me by one of the said sections, which empower me to imprison you,
or remove yon in custody out of the limits of the Protectorate.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
Sent to R. Guise and W. J. Currie.
P. H. SCRATCHLEY.
Order oe Prohibition.
Whereas Her Majesty the Queen, by a Commission under Her Majesty’s Sign Manual and Signet
bearing date the twentieth day of November, 1884, was graciously pleased to appoint me, Peter Henry
Scratchley, to be Her Majesty’s Special Commissioner for the Protected Territory in New Guinea ; and as
such Special Commissioner to do all such matters and things in the said Protectorate as in the interest of
Her Majesty’s service I may think expedient, subject to such instructions as I may from time to time
receive from Her Majesty or through one of Her Majesty’s Principal Secretaries of State.
And whereas it has been shown by evidence on oath to my satisfaction that R. Guise and W. J.
Currie, British subjects, are disaffected to Her Majesty’s Government, and are dangerous to the peace and
good order of the Protected Territory in New Guinea.
Now, therefore, I do hereby prohibit the said E. Guise and W. J. Currie from living in the said
Protectorate within the following limits, that is to say, from the 141st meridian of East longitude on the
South Coast, as far as Mitre Rock on the North-east Coast, inclusive of all islands adjacent to the
mainland, during two years from the date of this order.
Given under my hand, on board the s.s. Governor Blackall, at Hula, New Guinea,
this sixteenth day of November, 1885.
P. H. SCRATCHLEY.
B.
SUMMING UP BY SIB PETER SCRATCHLEY.
(Extract from Official Records.)
The witnesses having been all examined, and the defendants called upon for their defence, Sir
Peter Scratchley summed up as follows ; —■
“ This is a case of old standing. As far back as November last year, when the British
Protectorate was declared, Renaki, the chief of Hula, complained in the strongest terms to Com-
modore Erskine of the acts and conduct of the defendants. He (Renaki) was warned by the
Commodore not to take the law into his own hands, but to trust to the Queen’s officers for justice
to'be done to his tribe. From a report made to lI.M. Special Commissioner on the 18th of
February last by Deputy Commissioner Romilly, of which the original copy has been produced and
read before the Court, it appears that at the first convenient opportunity Mr. Romilly came to Hula
and requested the accused to leave New Guinea by H.M.S. Swinger. Ho brought no charge
against them, and they were removed. They were well aware, however, of the cause of their
removal. Shortly afterwards, in March, one of the accused was informed by H.M. Special


Commissioner that he was not at liberty to return to New Guinea ; yet he did return. In May last
the defendants were warned by the Commissioner at Port Moresby that their return was in defiance
of the orders of Her Majesty’s Special Commissioner. In September, when the Special Commis-
sioner paid his first visit to Hula, the chief, Renaki, came on board to complain to him of the
conduct of the accused, and to remind him (Sir Peter Scratchley) of Commodore Erskine’s promise.
Ho was told that Her Majesty’s Special Commissioner would inquire into the matter on his return;
hence the present proceedings. Now the evidence for the prosecution which has been given this
day before the Court is not sufficient to convict the accused on the actual charge within the meaning
of Section 26 of the Western Pacific Orders in Council, which requires proof that their acts and
conduct were likely to produce and excite a breach'of the peace. It is, however, clear to the Court
that for the past twelve months the accused have followed no occupation, and have led disreputable
and disgraceful lives, setting an evil example to the natives. In the opinion of the Court, their
behaviour has brought the white man into disrepute and contempt in the eyes of the natives of
Hula. Their attitude has been one of open and insulting defiance to Her Majesty’s officers. They
have thus done their best to weaken their authority. They have ignored the regulations issued by
Commodore Erskino, by direction of Her Majesty, when the Protectorate was established, by settling
down on the land without authority. For this reason, the Court is of opinion that the presence of
the white men is dangerous to file peace and good order of New Guinea, and that they should be
proceeded against in accordance with Section 25 of the Western Pacific Orders in Council. [ Section
here read.] The accused are discharged, and will be proceeded against by Her Majesty’s Special
Commissioner as to the enforcement of Section 25.”
No. 20.
A.
LEASES.
The different applications were for—
1. D’Arrow Island, which is apparently in the hands of a syndicate.
2. (a) Deliverance Island, on the north-west coast, latitude 9° 30' S., longitude 141° 35' E.
( h) Bramwell Island, opposite Fly River.
(c) A large tract of land on the Chester River.
The claim to the three last-mentioned places was based on the ground of original discovery.
3. Aro Island.
These applications were all based on the ground of occupancy or original exploration.
G. SEYMOUR FORT.
B.
LEASES.
The List op Lands applied foe by the New Guinea Company.
Yule Island. —Long. 146° 30' E. This site is sought for the chief station of the company, on which
it will erect agricultural mission, farming and trading depots, &c., as recommended in the “papers” read at
the Royal Colonial Institute, of Signor D’Albertis, Wilfred Powell, Esq. (December, 1878, and November,
1883.) (Vide pamphlet, page .)
Kabadi District. —Long. 146° 40' E. Starting from the eastern bank of Ethel River in line with
and about half-a-mile north of Hall Sound ; thence in a straight line east to the Aroa River; thence along
the western bank of the Aroa River to the sea coast.
Coomhes Diver.— Long. 146° 22' E. Starting from the coast inland along the western bank of this
river to the base of Mount Yule ; thence along such base of Mount Yule to the Marata River, with a return
south to the coast along the eastern bank, and east by the sea-front. (Fide pamphlet, page .)
Fly River. —Long. 143° E. From the sea coast along this meridian N. to the southern bank of the
Fly River; thence to the east and west by the said river inner-banks, and along the sea coast to 143° E.
Note. —The small island of “ Hamptonor “Mibu” should be conceded with this plot for
security, on which the agricultural mission, trading stores, and schools and workshops
on the mainland for Moatta and neighbourhood would then be erected.
Baxter River. —Long. 142° E. From the sea coast along this meridian N. to the southern bank of
the Baxter River; thence around E. and S. within the boundaries of the said river to its mouth, and thence
along the coast to 142° E.
Note. —With this allotment the “ Talbot Island” should be conceded, as, like Plot D, the land
is low and swampy, unfitted, without great outlay, to carry erections of a permanent
character to constitute, as would bo desired, an important and extreme western station;
besides it would be necessary for security, as the district will probably for some time be
exposed to native raids and aggressive disturbance.
Bootless Inlet. —Long, 147° 17 E. Starting at the coast, say two miles west and east of the inlet,
carrying the intermediate frontage; thence inland to the Laroki River, with such length of allotment E. and
W. thereupon, with the intermediate land, as can be accorded back to the west and east starting points.
(Fide pamphlet, page .)
Or, as an alternative plot. —Any other eastern point near Yule, which in the opinion of H. M. High
Commissioner would be a desirable station for a township or city eventually, on which the company could
create a port, erect wharfages, buildings, and occupy or apportion the inland beneficially for colonization.
NEW GUINEA SYNDICATE.
13th August, 1885.


No. 21.
808 LUMSE—KILLING OF.
Proceedings on 19 th October, 1885.
On the morning of the 19 th October, 1885, His Excellency Sir P. Scratchley, Mr. Chalmers,
Mr. Fort, and Lieutenant Powey, went to Haytcr Island, and landed at Magaikarona (the village where
Bob Lnmse was killed), in the bay of Gogouare. Tho chief was summoned and questioned with regard to
the murder. Ho stated that Lnmse did not deal fairly with the natives, and that they were constantly
quarrelling ; he called one of the accomplices of the murder by name Kieu, who stated :
“For four Sundays we have been working for this man ; to some he gave tobacco, to others tomahawks,
to others no tomahawks, saying to these last that he would pay them after he had been to Dinner Island.
One afternoon we had a great quarrel with Bob. Langono felt very angry. The next morning very early
Langeno came to him, as he was sleeping close to where Bob slept, and said, ‘ Come and let us kill Bob’;
he said, ‘No, why should wo kill our friend ?’ He saw that Langeno was much disturbed and was very
angry. Langeno then took a spear and pierced Bob’s neck close to the windpipe ; in drawing out the spear
it was broken. The others speared Bob after he was dead. Bob’s head was not cut off.” —Extract from
Official Records.
No- 22.
MILLER, CAPTAIN—KILLING OF.
Circumstances of Outrage.
Captain Miller was murdered on a small island, off Normanby Island, on the 3rd of October, 1885.
The circumstances of the outrage, as obtained from native evidence, are as follows : —Captain Miller
went, on the morning of the 3rd, in his schooner to Normanby Island. He had with him on board an
Italian, a Manilla boy, a Chinaman, and an Australian black. His object in going to the island was to
erect a smoke-house and fish for beche-de-mor. The natives appeared friendly, and collected stones for
him. Suddenly two approached him from behind, and killed him, one braining him with a tomahawk, the
other cutting his throat.
Motive for Murder.
From the investigations on the spot, which were conducted by Sir Peter Scratchley himself, it was
impossible to discover any motive for the murder. Miller had never been to the island before, and had
done nothing to provoke tho animosity of the natives. At the time, therefore, the outrage appeared to be
actuated by a mere wanton bloodthirstiness. Afterwards, however, when at Port Moresby, the prisoner
Diravera told the native interpreter that a brother of Nagodiri’s and a cousin of Diravera’s had been taken
away with others in a labour vessel some years before ; that the others had been returned, but that he, as
well as others, had died in Queensland ; that payment had been made for the others who had died, but that
none had been made for his death; consequently, Nngodiri had determined to kill tho first white man who
came to the island, and he asked Diravera to help him.
Punishment Inflicted.
After two days had been spent in vainly endeavouring to capture the other murderer (Nagodiri), it
was decided to burn down the cluster of villages to which Nagodiri belonged, but to spare the village to
which Diravera, who had given himself up, belonged. The villages were accordingly burnt to the ground
14th October, but little resistance being offered by the inhabitants. Diravera was detained prisoner on
board H.M.S. Diamond until the arrival of that vessel at Port Moresby, when he was formally handed over
to the New Guinea Government. He is now a prisoner at Port Moresby, and as much use as possible is
made of him in making roads and other occupations. Tho question of how to deal with him was not an
easy one to settle. Upon the arrival of H.M.S. Dart, which happened to be surveying near Normanby
Island, at the scene of theoutrage, Diravera voluntarily came on board, bringing with him what he believed
in all good faith was the proper payment for his share of the murder, viz., a few arm-shells, a native
basket, some tobacco, tortoise-shell, &c. He was, however, made prisoner, and handed over to Captain
Clayton, of H.M.S. Diamond, by whom he was transferred to the Government. After he had been handed
over to tho Government, Sir Peter Scratchley wrote a despatch to the Secretary of State for the Colonies,
explaining the circumstances of the case —the low value of life among the natives, and their universally
recognised custom of receiving payment as compensation for murder. He recommended that Diravera
should be kept a prisoner at Port Moresby for some ten or twelve months, after which he should be
returned to his native island.
No. 23.
NATIVE SUPERSTITIONS.
It is not easy to grasp the absolute control which superstition exercises among barbarians, especially
such primitive barbarians as those in New Guinea. To the New Guinea native a so-called superstitious
belief has no hypothetical basis —it is to him an instinct rather than idea —it is a force he is compelled, at
all hazards, and in the face of all other counteracting tendencies, to obey.


The special form of superstition to which these remarks refer is the belief that when a man dies out
of his native village, even if he die a perfectly natural death, the happiness not only of his spirit, but also
the future happiness of the spirits of his relations then living, depends upon one of two alternatives, either
a payment or wergild must be paid by those amongst whom he has died, or a life of one of them must he
taken. Unless one of these two alternatives takes place, there will be no present rest for the spirit of the
deceased, or future peace for those of his relations.
The imperative necessity of recognising the force of this superstition was recognised by the Queens-
land Government, when it resolved to send back to their homes, in the s.s. Victoria in July, 1885, those
natives who had been recruited in labour schooners from New Guinea and the adjacent islands.
It was the intention of the Government to have sent payment for every single boy who had died in
Queensland. In one or two places, however, mistakes were made. At Hoop Iron Bay, where F'riar was
murdered, payment for two natives who had died was accidentally omitted. At Normanby Island, where
Miller was killed, the payment for one native who had died was omitted. According, therefore, to native
belief, it was the most solemn duty of the relatives of those natives to kill the first Englishman they came
across, and Friar and his carpenter, at Moresby Island—Miller, at Normanby Island —were sacrificed to this
superstition.
G. SEYMOUR FORT.
No. 24.
NORTH-EAST COAST.—MEMO. BY MR. H. 0. FORBES.
1. From Bentley Bay to the middle of Goodenough Bay the shores present a very abrupt and
uninviting appearance, very precipitous and rocky, and scarcely anywhere clothed with vegetation other
than coarse grass. From this part of the coast access into the interior would be extremely difficult, if not
practically impossible. The evidences of numerous cataracts were seen, nearly all quite dried up.
As far as can be seen from the deck, the geological character of the country changes in Goodenough
Bay to sandstone rock, in which denudation has carved out the precipitous defiles and valleys which form
so striking a feature of the westerly part of the bay.
Further eastward extended flats are seen between the shore and the coast hills. These flats, if not
covered with salt-water morass, ought to be valuable rice-producing lands, or, at any rate, good for cocoanut
and sago plantations. Certainly those seen just before turning the head of the bay, which are considerably
elevated above the sea-level, cannot but be productive land.
Not many villages were seen, but their non-existence is not by any means certain, or probable even.
2. Beyond the angle of Goodenough Bay the shore is far loss steep, and more undulating, and from
the sea looks very promising.
In Rawden Bay the natives were rather suspicious and timid, but they showed not the slightest
hostility, only a most natural diffidence of a race of people with whom they have evidently been seldom
brought into contact. Their houses were poor, roofed slovenly with palm leaves, and walled down to the
ground with the same material. Their ornaments also were of an inferior make to any yet seen by us —
earrings of cocoanut shell, armlets of fern fibre or perhaps of hair (we did not obtain a specimen), and
necklaces of small fragments of wood. Here we obtained a piece of cloth of the bark of the tree used
both by the South Sea Islanders and by many tribes in the Eastern Archipelago, with rude designs in
black and red painted on'it. Cloth and beads were the only “trade” appreciated ; knives were unknown
to them, and of the use of tobacco they were quite ignorant.
The shores of Rawden Bay and on to Cape Vogel rose in a series of high bluffs, intersected by
deep ravines ; the strata, tilted up towards the shore, sloped back into the country. The undermost beds
seen are of a fine argillaceous sandstone, becoming coarser in the upper beds at the top of the bluffs. The
soil was rather poor, and produced only a coarse species of grass, but yet it is not so poor as not to produce
maize.
The natives of Rawden Bay were from the first perfectly friendly, appearing on the beach quite
unarmed. In fact, they were most eager in their desire to bring cocoanuts to the first who landed. They
were, however, somewhat timid, and appeared to bo not perfectly certain of our object and intentions in
landing. Their houses were desperately poor, and contained no ornaments, and were destitute of all
conveniences. We obtained a sling, and observed a few poor stone adzes among them. They were
unacquainted with the use of knives and of tobacco, but our gifts of red cloth and beads were most highly
appreciated by them.
3. The shores—when we approached near enough to see the land distinctly—of Collingwcod flay,
off Gowland Island (cf. Moresby’s map), were low undulating slopes, stretching away into the interior;
indeed only low mountains or hills could be seen for a great way inland, up, probably, to the high ranges
in the centre of the island.
The westernmost point of this bay is very high, forming a promontory, built up by the abrupt
Trafalgar and Victoria mountains ; and along the coast from Hardy Point to Porlock Bay a series of
deep inlets occur, many of which have all the appearance of being fine harbours.
From Hardy Point all the way to Boundary Cape (as the unnamed headland on the Bth parallel
may be called) the country has a really very promising appearance, stretching from the coast towards the
high ranges in a more or less gentle slope, and finely wooded.
Few villages were detected along this portion of the coast, but the character of the immediate
foreshore makes it probable that such villages as exist are situated behind the fringing vegetation. It was
only after we had approached quite near to the shore that those in Holincote Bay could be made out
distinctly. If our experience of the natives here is any criterion of those in the district, they appear to
be perfectly friendly and very unsuspicious, for they waded a long way out to our boat (which could not
approach close to land for want of water) with cocoanuts, and not a single individual carried a weapon of
defence. The houses, as far as we could see, were poor, and the ornaments worn by the men, who were
all circumcised, were also of a mean description. The use of tobacco was unknown to them, but red cloth
and looking-glasses were much appreciated.


The friendliness of the natives along the coast wherever we have touched has been most remark-
able, and one of the most encouraging facts obtained.
Just before reaching Boundary Capo a deep inlet occurs, which, seen from the sea, has all the
appearance of being a good and safe harbour, and valuable as being at the extremity of the Protectorate.
Many rivers have been observed along tiro coast, showing these shores to be well watered, hut their
positions it has been impossible to fix accurately at present.
HENRY 0. FORBES.
No. 25. Pro-forma only.
NEW GUINEA COMPANY, LIMITED.
Ist. Tho name of the company is “ The New Guinea Company, Limited. ”
2nd. The registered office of the company will bo situate in England.
3rd. Tho objects for which the company is established are : —■
(a.) To purchase tho concessions, land-rights, and all other titles to laud in the British territory
of Southern New Guinea, which may have been acquired under the authority and
consent of Her Majesty’s Government by tho New Guinea Syndicate, Limited, at and
for the sum of pounds; and to deliver to the said last-named company in full
payment of such purchase, paid-up shares in the capital of this company for distribution
pro rata among tho members for the time being of the aforesaid New Guinea Syndicate,
Limited, in accordance with the terms of an agreement dated 24th February, 1885.
To apply to the British Government from time to time for further necessary concessions
of land in the aforesaid territory. To negotiate for the purchase of any lands in the
possession-of natives or others within such British territory as may, from time to time,
bo deemed essential to the purposes of the company, and, agreeing upon the terms
thereof—subject in all such cases to the sanction of Her Majesty’s High Commissioner,
or other duly authorized Governor of British New Guinea being first obtained—to
purchase, pay for, and lake possession of the same.
( h .) To cultivate, farm, sell, rent, lease, exchange, or parcel out for allotment any portions of
the lands of the company, and to erect farm cottages, homesteads, factories, machinery,
and buildings thereupon. To fence in and use any lands of the company for agricultural
or other purposes. To employ native or other labour. To co-operate with native or
other inhabitants of New Guinea for the cultivation and growth of grain, sugar, tobacco,
beet, and other like plants or cereals, and to supply seeds or plants for the purpose
thereof upon such terms as to profit as may be from time to time arranged.
(c.) To plan and erect, or aid in the work of erecting, suitable dwellings for workpeople on the
lands of the company. To construct, or aid in the construction of roads, canals, drains,
or other surface works necessary to the lands and the purposes of tho company, both
within, and, upon -agreement, outside the boundaries of such lands. To purchase,
construct, or aid in the construction of carts, waggons, boats, barges, sailing or other
vessels or machinery for the transit and transhipment of materials, live stock, or other
freight for use of the company or others, either by sea or land. To construct or aid in
the construction of sea or river defences, harbours and wharfages to and upon any sea or
river frontage bordering the lands of tho company, or contiguous thereto.
( d. ) To buy, sell, breed, and keep horses, cattle, sheep, or other animals. To buy and sell timber
or any other native product or deposit of such British territory and to manufacture the same
into articles of commerce; to buy, import, manufacture, and sell building materials, mining,
farming, and other implements, minerals, waggons, and machinery; and to export, sell,
trade, or barter therein, and in the produce of the lands of the said British territory.
(e.) To erect trading establishments, store-houses, and farm buildings upon the lands of the
company; to purchase, manufacture, and trade in stores of all kinds, including coals,
seeds, implements, fools, and all such other articles and materials as may be and are
usually necessary for domestic, agricultural, or manufacturing purposes.
(_/.) To erect, or aid in the erection and support of agricultural and industrial schools adjacent
to the trading establishments of the company, and to employ European teachers in
connexion therewith.
(g.) To construct, purchase, or rent premises for the purposes of the company in England, and
to sell, sublet, or exchange such premises or any parts thereof.
(7i.) To mine and develop any drifts or deposits of gold or other precious metals, lead, tin, copper,
antimony, nickel, bismuth, coal, or other minerals; dig and quarry stone, brick-earth, clay,
or other deposits discovered within the lands of the company. To erect buildings,
machinery, and appliances for mining, and, by agreement, to acquire water-wayrights, ease-
ments, or other privileges necessary to such purposes, or any of them, outside the boundaries
of such lauds. To rent or lease mineral properties within the said British territory; to
explore, develop, furnish, maintain, and equip such properties with all necessary appliances,
and to carry on the business of a mining, reducing, and smelting company.
(j.) To grant leases or take-notes for mining purposes in or over any of the lands of the
company either at dead-rents or royalties, or both, as may be agreed upon; to accept
paid-up shares or debentures in other companies as consideration for granting such
leases or take-notes, and to hold, sell, or otherwise dispose of such debentures or shares
as may be deemed expedient.
(A) To purchase and erect on the lauds of the company, buildings, machinery, and all necessary
appliances for refrigerating meat, and to cany on tho business of purveyors of preserved
meat, for sale or for exportation.


( m .) To apply for grants of 1 and from the British Government by way of subsidy for each
statute adult introduced into the colony by the company; to apply for like grants of
land for each trading establishment and for each agricultural and industrial school
built and opened by the company; and also to apply for such like grants in consideration
of any outlay in roads, works, or erections in the colony which, in the judgment of Her
Majesty’s High Commissioner, may he deemed permanently advantageous to the trade
and growth of that part of Her Majesty’s dominions.
(m.) To apply, from time to time, for grants or loans of money from any public fund voted by
Her Majesty’s Parliament in aid of emigration, colonization, or colonial land
improvements.
(o.) To borrow on debentures or other securities, and take up moneys at interest for the
purposes of the company to the extent of one-fourth of the subscribed capital of the
company; to pay olf the same, and, if necessary, in like manner to re-horrow from time
to time as the directors may consider essential to its interests.
Lastly. And the doing of all such other things as are or may be incidental or conducive to the
attainment of the above objects, or any of them.
4th. The liability of the members is limited.
sth. The capital of the company is one hundred thousand pounds, divided into twenty thousand
shares of five pounds each, with powers of increase.
No. 26.
NATIVE TEACHERS.—INSTANCES OF COURAGE, ETC. .
The following two accounts instance the high courage and manly character of the native teachers:—
On one occasion some trading canoes belonging to the Motu tribe, and coming from westward to
Port Moresby, were blown in a gale of wind past that port and wrecked on a reef at 'Aroma. The people
at Aroma were the deadly enemies of the Motu tribe, and canoes were at once prepared to attack and
slaughter the shipwrecked Motuans. The native teacher, however, at imminent risk to his life from either
party, interposed, persuaded the Aroma warriors to return, and thus succeeded in saving the lives of nearly
60 Motuans. The force of this fact can only be realized by those who know what it is to stem the current
of a large number of armed natives bent on slaughter and bloodshed, especially bloodshed which the force
of custom has caused them to consider theirs by right. In recognition of the bravery shown by the native
teacher on this occasion, he was presented by Sir Peter Scratcliley with a silver watch engraved with the
words, “From the Great Queen Victoria.” The native teacher at Dinner Island was also presented with
a watch of a similar character in recognition of the services rendered by him on the occasion of Captain
Friar’s murder, when, at imminent risk to his own life, he rescued the schooner belonging to the murdered
captain. Upon hearing the nows of the murder, ho had at once gone to the spot and found the natives
gutting the ship. He then drove them out, and navigated her back to Dinner Island.
G. SEYMOUR FORT.
No. 27.
PROCLAMATION.—COMMODORE ERSKINE.
By James Er.riiiNSTONE Erskine, Esquire, Commodore 2nd Class, A.D.C. to tire Queen, and Senior
Officer of H.M. Ships and Vessels employed and to be employed on the Australian Station.
Having received instructions from Her Majesty’s Government to proclaim and establish a British
Protectorate over the southern shores of New Guinea;
By virtue of the power and authority to mo given, I hereby direct that the following regulations are
to be strictly complied with, pending the arrival of the High Commissioner: —
1. Mr. Deputy Commissioner Romilly, on my departure from the New Guinea coast, will
assume temporary charge of the Protectorate, and will exercise the powers and authority
vested in him as a Deputy Commissioner.
2. Port Moresby is to be the sole port of entry for goods, &c., within the limits of the Pro-
tectorate.
3. Captains of all ships, on arrival at Port Moresby, arc hereby required to produce thoir
manifest and papers for the inspection of the Deputy Commissioner, and no spirituous
liquors are to be landed without his written consent.
4. A copy of the proclamation is to be handed to the captain of any vessel arriving,' together
with a copy of these regulations.
5. No fire-arms, gunpowder, dynamite, or any explosives are to he landed under any
circumstances.
G. No settlement or acquisition of land is on any account to bo permitted.
7. The captain of any vessel arriving at Port Moresby is hereby required to declare and report
if he has any infectious disease on board.
Given under my hand, on hoard Her Majesty’s ship Nelson, at Port Moresby, New Guinea, this
fourteenth day of November, 1884.
(Sd.) JAMES E. ERSKINE.


No. 28.
PROCLAMATION re “KABADI” DISTRICT.
Queensland Government Gazette, No. 64, 27th October, 1883.
Proclamation
By His Excellency Sir Arthur Hunter Palmer, Knight Commander of the Most Distinguished
[l.s.] Order of St. Michael and St. George, President of the Legislative Council
A. H. Palmer, of the Colony of Queensland, and Administrator of the Government
Administrator. thereof.
Whereas it has been reported to His Excellency the Administrator of the Government in Council
that certain persons have recently purchased a large area of land from the Natives of the Kabadi
District in New Guinea : And whereas it is deemed expedient and necessary to discourage all traffic in
land with the Natives of that Island pending the Territory being placed under the jurisdiction of Great
Britain : Now, therefore, I, Sir Arthur Hunter Palmer, the Administrator of the Government aforesaid,
with the advice of the Executive Council, hereby declare that, in the event of the Territory of New Guinea
being annexed to the Colony of Queensland, all purchases of land made previous to such annexation will
be deemed to be illegal and treated accordingly ; and that it is highly probable such purchases will be
deemed to be illegal and repudiated by the Federated Colonies, should the Territory be placed under their
jurisdiction, and by the British Government under any form of Imperial control.
Given under my hand and seal, at Government House, Brisbane, this twenty-fourth day of
October, in the year of Our Lord One thousand eight hundred and eighty-three, and in
the forty-seventh year of Her Majesty’s reign.
By Command,
THOMAS McILWRAITH.
God Save the Queen !
No. 29.
NEW GUINEA.
Queensland Government Gazette, 10 th October.
Notices by His Excellency Her Majesty’s Special Commissioner for the Protected
Territory in New Guinea.
The following Notices are published for general information and guidance :
Officers and Government Agents.
1. Captain Anthony Musgrave (who has been appointed a Deputy Commissioner for the Western
Pacific) has been placed in charge of Port Moresby and the coast extending from Hall Sound to Round
Head.
(Z.) To carry on the business of land and financial agents in England and New Guinea, to
act as brokers or agents, either separately or in conjunction with others, in the
promotion and issue of any loan or loans of money which may hereafter be borrowed by
the Government of New Guinea in Great Britain; and to undertake, on commission or
otherwise, any other agencies which may be conveniently conducted with the company’s
business. To establish agencies in Great Britain for promoting emigration to the said
British territory; to make advances of money on security, or afford assistance to
intending emigrants thereto; and to aid in locating and, if practicable, in providing
work and labour for immigrants introduced by the company into New Guinea.
2. The Honorable John Douglas, C.M.G., Government Resident at Thursday Island, has, with the
permission of the Queensland Government, accepted the position of Government Agent for the Protectorate.
3. Officials will be appointed at other points of the coast when required or racticable.
Portions of Coast unsafe to Traders and others.
Traders and others are cautioned against visiting the following portions of the coast and islands in
the Protectorate :—From Kerepunu to South Cape (including Moresby Island), D’Entrecasteaux Group,
Engineer Group, Woodlark Group, Jurien and Jouvency Islands; also from East Cape to the German
boundary on the north-east coast.
Permits.
Persons desirous of visiting, exploring, trading, or cutting timber within the limits of the
Protectorate are informed that they must apply by letter to Her Majesty’s Special Commissioner for
permits. They must specify in detail for what purposes the permit is required, giving the names and
addresses of their partners (if any) who may be connected with the undertaking.


Letters for Her Majesty’s Sjyecial Commissioner.
Letters for Her Majesty’s Special Commissioner should be addressed to the care of the Postmaster
at Cooktown, by whom they will be forwarded to His Excellency.
Mails.
There is no regular mail service to New Guinea, but letters are forwarded by all vessels proceeding
to Port Moresby from Cooktown.
Registration of Vessels trading to Hew Guinea.
Vessels trading to New Guinea will be registered at Port Moresby.
Regulations made by Commodore Ershine at Port Moresby on the 6th November, 1884.
1. Port Moresby is the sole port of entry for goods, &c., within the limits of the Protectorate.
2. Captains of all ships, on arrival at Port Moresby, are required to produce their manifests and
papers for the inspection of the Deputy Commissioner, and no spirituous liquors are to be landed without
his written consent.
3. No fire-arms, gunpowder, dynamite, or any explosives are to be landed under any circumstances.
4. No settlement or acquisition of land is on any account to be permitted.
5. The captain of any vessel arriving at Port Moresby is required to declare and report if he has
any infectious diseases on board.
The Micassar Gold Prospecting Association.
An association, styling itself the Micassar Gold Prospecting Association, has not been recognised
by Her Majesty’s Special Commissioner, and it does not possess a permit to explore or prospect for gold or
minerals in British New Guinea.
Given at Port Moresby, under my hand, this nineteenth day of September, 1885.
P. H. SCRATCHLEY,
G. Seymour Fort, Her Majesty’s Special Commissioner.
Private Secretary.
Note. —The landing of fire-arms and ammunition for the personal use of persons possessing permits
from Her Majesty’s Special Commissioner will be allowed by a written permission from the Deputy
Commissioner at Port Moresby.
No. 30.
REID’S CASE.
Proceedings on 14 th October, 1885. —(Extract from Official Records .)
His Excellency Sir Peter Scratchley, Captain Clayton, and Mr. Chalmers landed on the afternoon
of 14th October, at Slade Island (Tupe-tupe), where Reid was killed in December, 1884.
The natives were asked to make a statement about the matter.
The Rev. J. Chambers, 1 T .
T - , 7 > interpreters.
Ruinate, ) r
They said that Reid troubled their women much; when women went to the well for water, Reid
would follow and try to entice them into the bush by giving them tobacco. He would sometimes seize hold
of them and try to drag them in. We often spoke to him, but he always threatened he would shoot us,
and we were afraid. He has forcibly had connexion with women, and husbands finding fault, he has
threatened to shoot them, and they were afraid. On the night before his murder he slept with a woman,
and in the morning going to his house found that some things had been stolen. He charged Urouroa, a
native boy who was acting as his servant, with stealing them. The boy denying, Reid got angry, and struck
the boy with the stock of his revolver on the back of his head. The boy cried bitterly, and his elder
brother Makasoki took a spear, threw it, and wounded Reid in the hack, as he thought his brother was
going to die. Reid ran to the water, and Dobovesi threw a spear, which struck Reid on the side. Reid tried
to swim off to his cutter and got alongside, when Makasoki, who had taken a rifle from a Chinaman’s hut
close by (the Chinaman being absent), fired, but did not wound Reid. Finding he did not know how to shoot,
he handed the rifle to Aropata, a relation of his from Suon, South Cape, then living at Tupe-tupe.
Aropata then fired, and shot Reid through the head when he was getting over the side of his cutter.
(Sd.) G. SEYMOUR FORT,
S.S. Governor Blackall, Private Secretary.
14th October, 1885.
No. 32. r


REID’S CASE.
Proceedings on 15 th October, 1885,
Examination of Witnesses onboard S.S. “ Governor Black all.”
(Extract from Official Records .)
Mosesa (native of LaWes Bay) was asked to make a statement of the case in English, but was
wholly unable to do so. It is to be noted that this is the man whom Mr. J. Bevan, a trader, in his article
in the Daily Telegraph of Sydney, 25th July, 1885, stated could speak “ excellent English.”
The Rev. J. Chalmers, 1 T ,
, ’ > interpreters.
Kumate, , j r
He then stated (by interpreters) that ho was in Queensland when Reid was killed. When he
returned to Slade Island he asked the people why they had killed Reid ? They said he was a troublesome
man. He used to give tobacco to the women, and tried to get them to go into the bush with him ; they
not consenting, he seized them, put his hands under their petticoats, and handled their breasts.
Makasoki’s wife went with Reid, and committed adultery with him several times. Makasoki
became angry, and went to Reid’s house and stole some cloth. When Reid returned and found the cloth
missing, he accused Makasoki’s younger brother, and asked him where the cloth was. The boy said he
did not know.
The boy knew that his elder brother’s wife had committed adultery; he also knew that Makasoki
had taken the cloth. When he denied it, Reid took his revolver and struck him with the butt end. Blood
came from his nose and ears, and the boy seemed dead for a short time, but afterwards ran into the bush,
crossed the hill, and came to the village of Tupana.
The people went and fetched the boy from the village, and carried him as if dead ; -they took him to
his home, and laid him down as dead.
Dobovesi thought he was dead, and seized a broad sword, rushed out, and struck Reid across the
shoulder blade.
Reid ran to his house, got his revolver, ran down to the shore, and fired, wounding Giodo. When
he had done this he swam out for his cutter.
Makasoki rushed to the Chinaman’s hut and took his rifle and fired, but did not wound Reid.
Reid was getting into his boat when Aropata fired and shot him through the head. His body fell into the
water. The people let it go. They did not cut off his head—(this affirmed emphatically by two witnesses).
When news of the murder reached Teste Island, some people there came and took the boat away.
2nd witness.— Siaki (native of Anagoosa Island) has been to Queensland, and can speak a little
pigeon English, which was however so unintelligible that his statement was made through interpreters.
He stated, “ All that Mosesa has told is exactly what I have heard.”
He was then asked where the people concerned in the matter were, and stated that Urouroa was in
Normanby Island. It was their custom to travel about from place to place. Makasoki was there also.
Dobovesi was there also.
(Sd.) G. SEYMOUR FORT,
Private Secretary.
S.S. Governor Blackall,
15th October, 1885.
No punishment was inflicted in this case.—G. S. F.
No. 31.
SOUTH CAPE.—PURCHASE OF LAND.
(Extract from Official Records .)
Memorandum of a purchase of land effected this day at South Cape, New Guinea, from Pusa,
native landowner, in the village of Suau, on the north side of Stacey Island.
The boundaries of the land, commencing from the beach on the north side of the island, in the village
of Suau, up a creek and water-course and across a saddle of’the hill, down another water-course on the south
side as far as the sea in the Bay of Tautehe, were perambulated.
The persons present during the perambulation have affixed their names hereunder at A.
The amount of trade given for the land, including two native, huts, is as follows :—1 axe, 1 adze,
3 tomahawks, 3 sheath knives, 1 grass knife, 12 looking-glasses, 1 bundle of hoop-iron in small pieces,
6 long pipes, 12 short pipes, 3 wooden pipes, 1 piece Turkey red cloth, 1 piece trade handkerchiefs, 5 lbs.
tobacco, 1 gimlet. And in the presence of the undersigned, whose names appear at B.
Dated at South Cape this seventh day of October, 1885.
P. H. SCRATCHLEY.
JAMES CHALMERS.
G. SEYMOUR FORT.
W. DOYLE GLANVILLE.
KUMATE, Native Inteepeetbe.
Present at giving away of trade articles, and heard Pusa say he was satisfied.
P. H. SCRATCHLEY.
JAMES CHALMERS.
G. SEYMOUR FORT.
KUMATE, Native Inteepeetbe.
Note. —We were accompanied in our perambulation of boundaries by a large party of natives.
P. H. S.
G. S. F,


—
E. long.
S.
lat.
—
E. long.
S.
lat.
Deg.
Min.
Deg
Min.
Deg.
Min.
Deg
Min.
Adele River
145
15
7
42
Kalo Village ...
147
50
9
55
Arid River
144
20
7
36
' Kaiji Village ...
147
. 32
9
45
Amazon Bay ...
149
20
10
24
Kapakapa Village
147
35
9
45
Annie River
145
27
7
48
Karama District
146
7
7
64
Aplin Island
146
52
9
27
Karupini River...
146
7
8
9
Aroa River
146
45
9
20
Keppel Point ...
147
55
10
15
Aroma District...
148
18
9
50
Kerepunu District
147
57
10
12
Bald Head ...
144
50
7
42
Koiari District...
147
20
9
15
Bampton Island
143
25
9
6
Kupele District
147
35
9
5
Baruni Village ...
147
5
9
20
Laroki River (Usbome) ...
146
50
9
10
■ Baxter River ...
142
15
9
10
Lealea River
146
55
9
15
Boera Village ...
147
7
9
18
Lese Village
146
15
8
18
Bootless Inlet ...
147
17
9
18
Maclatchie Point
145
32
9
10
■ Bristow Island ...
143
15
9
10
Maiva District...
146
26
8
12
Brumer Island ...
150
45
10
48
Manumanu District
146
47
8
45
Cape Blackwood
144
30
7
48
Marata River ...
146
12
8
12
Cape Possession
146
' 25
8
30
Mibu Island
143
25
8
45
Cape South
150
20
10
6
Milne Bay
150
30
10
30
Cape Suckling ...
146
40
9
0
Moatta
142
55
9
10
Cheshunt Bay ...
148
20
10
6
Monamuna District
147
20
9
25
China Straits ...
150
35
10
35
Morabi District
146
48
9
0
Cliff Head ...
146
20
8
18
Moresby Port ... ...
147
10
9
20
Cloudy'Bay
148
45
10
7
Motumotu Village
146
10
8
10
Coomber River...
146
22
8
24
Oiapu District ...
146
24
8
50
Daunai Village...
149
50
10
24
Orangerie Bay ...
149
50
10
25
Delena Village...
146
25
8
36
Orokolo District
145
20
7
48
Dinner Island ...
150
45
.10
36
Panaroa River...
145
10
7
42
Domara Village
148
36
10
5
Pier Point
145
42
7
54
Doura Village ...
147
15
9
12
Port Moresby ...
147
10
9
20
Dufaure Island...
149
50
10
30
Port Spicer ... ...
143
0
9
10
East Cape
151
30
10
15
Redscar Bay
146
50
9
6
Edith River ... ...
146
57
9
10
Redscar Head ...
146
55
9.
15
Ethel River
146
36
8
40
Robbertoom
147
35
9
15
Elema District...
145
10
7
8
Sandbank Bay ...
148
30
10
10
Ellangowan Bay
149
55
10
30
Silo Village
145
50
8
O
Fairfax Harbour
147
5
9
15
Stacey Island ...
150
20
10
40
Fly River
143
25
8
45
Subaai Island ...
142
42
9
30
Hall Bay
146
35
8
46
Talbot Island ...
142
10
9
25
Ham Village ...
145
30
7
48
Thursday Island (Q’nslahd)
142
15
10
36
Hood Bay
147
55
10
5
Tupuselia Village
147
25
9
30
Hula Village ...
147
45
9
55
Yule Island
146
30
8
45
Jokea Village ...
146
23
8
26
Williams River
146
8
8
7
Kabadi District
146
42
8
50
No. 32.
SOUTHERN NEW GUINEA.
Approximate Geographical Position of many of the Islands, Bats, Capes, Rivers, and
District Villages, etc.
No. 33.
WEBB—KILLING OF.
Webb and Ms wife were murdered at Milport Bay in July or August, 1881. From native evidence
obtained by Mr. Romilly, it would appear that the'murder was committed in cold blood and under circum-
stances of great brutality. Captain Marx, of H.M.S. Swinger, who visited the scene of the outrage, was,
however, unable to obtain any evidence, and was attacked by the natives.
The s.s. Governor Blackall, H.M.S. Diamond and Haven visited the spot in October last. After two
days spent in vainly endeavouring to come to a parley with the natives, several of the villages on the hills
surrounding the bay were shelled. This was the only punishment possible. The villages were perched up
on heights up which it would have been impossible to send an attacking party.
Sir Peter Scratchley afterwards visited Toulon Island, where Webb had been staying previous to his
murder. He was there informed that the natives of Milport Bay were the bitter enemies of the Toulon
islanders, and that they had warned Webb not to go to the bay, as he was regarded as a friend of the Toulon
people, and would certainly be killed.
It may be stated that Webb had borne a very bad character for brutal and dishonest dealings with
the natives.
G. SEYMOUR FORT.
Authority: John Peekes, Government Printer, Melbourne.




