

WHITE-BOOK
OFFICIAL
CORRESPONDENCE
BETWEEN THE
EUROPEAN POWERS
DURING THE FOURTEEN DAYS PRECEDING
Britain's
Declaration of War
August 4th, 1914
Presented to both Houses of Parliament by Command of His Majesty.
August. 1914.
PRICE SIXPENCE
Published by
WILLIAM BROOKS & COMPANY, LTD.
17 CASTLEREAGH STREET


-^JVj / ERGUSON COIJ.ECTIONA|V
[;| X AT|0XAL Library" jjj


BROOKS'S WAR
MAP SOUVENIR
SIX WAR MAPS.
No. I— Colored Map of Whole War Area.
No. 2— Enlarged Colored Map of Western
Battlefields (Franco - Belgian -
German).
No. 3 —Enlarged Colored Map of Eastern
Battlefields (Russian - Austrian -
German).
No. 4 —Enlarged Colored Map of Environs
of Paris.
No. 5. —Enlarged Colored Map of Environs
of Berlin.
No. 6—Detail Map of European Countries
at War.
PRICE ONE SHILLING
PUBLISHED BY
William Brooks & Co, Ltd.
17 CASTLEREAGH STREET SYDNEY
ALL BOOKSELLERS


WHITE-BOOK
OFFICIAL
CORRESPONDENCE
BETWEEN THE
EUROPEAN POWERS
DURING THE FOURTEEN DAYS PRECEDING
Britain's
Declaration of War
August 4_tk, iqi 4
Presented to both Houses of Parliament by Command of His Majesty,
August, 1914.
PRICE SIXPENCE
Published by
WILLIAM BROOKS & COMPANY, LTD.
M CASTLEREAGH STREET


INTRODUCTION.
WHEST the history of the great War comes to be written, the
world will have a clearer view of many things that are as yet
partially obscure. Already, however, the story of the diplo-
macy that immediately preceded the outbreak of hostilities
is here for us to read, and it behoves every British subject
to read it. The duty is a pleasant one, for the story sheds
glory on British honour and disinterestedness; it brings home
to us indisputably our freedom from blame; and it shows up
British statesmanship in its moral as well as its intellectual
greatness. Our hands are clean.
On August 3, Sir Edward Grey asked the House
of Commons to approach the crisis from the point of view
of British interests, British honour, and British obligations.
That was Britain's attitude all through. Permeating
Britain's diplomatic correspondence is the splendid person-
ality of her Minister for Foreign Affairs. We see him work-
ing night and day for peace and honour. We see him plead-
ing the cause of others, as becomes a great statesman. We
see him warning Germany and Austria—warning them with
a dignity commensurate with the crisis. We see him striving
to save the world from Armageddon, clear of eye, strong of
resolve, and high of purpose. But the tide of affairs proves
too strong and irresistibly rushes forward.
The diplomatic correspondence, which the White Book
covers, opens on July 20, when Sir Edward Grey is anxious
to know what is going on in Vienna with regard to Servia.
The final despatch, dated August 4, is from Sir Edward Grey
to Sir Edward Goschen, British Ambassador at Berlin,
repeating a request for an assurance from Germany that the
neutrality of Belgium would be respected, and fixing a time
limit for the answer. Between July 20 and August 4, the
scenes shift constantly from London to Berlin, to Vienna, to
St. Petersburg, to Paris, to Belgrade. Finally the curtain
rings down on the great diplomatic drama, and war is
declared between Britain and Germany.
"You are fighting lis over a scrap of paper," said the


German Chancellor to Sir William Goschen. "Yes," was
the answer, "but the signature of Great Britain is written
acioss that paper." There you have the difference between
Britain and Germany.
In his famous Guildhall speech, Mr. Asquith (Prime
Minister of Great Britain) said the British Empire was
involved in the war with a clear conscience. "If Great
Britain had stood aloof while the independence of small,
heroic nations was strangled, she would have been basely
false to her plighted words, false to her friends, and to her
honour. Great Britain would then have been the helpless
witness of countless and buccaneering levies."
Mr. Asquith said that prior to the war new and better
relations with France and Russia had matured into settled
confidence and goodwill, but at no time was the Entente
directed against other powers. When the Austrian ulti-
matum was delivered to Servia, Sir Edward Grey, pursuing
tne pacific policy he had adopted throughout the Balkan crisis,
proposed a mediating conference. "If that had been
accepted, said Mr. Asquith, "the whole of this terrible
welter would have been avoided. Germany alone is respon-
sible for the war and its illimitable suffering. Germany is
the fount and origin of this world-wide catastrophe.
"We persevered to the end for peace by every expedient
in diplomacy, even straining our most cherished friendships
and obligations. It was only when we realised that our
choice lay between honour and dishonour, treachery and good
faith, that we decided for war. Does anyone throughout the
Empire regret that decision? I believe not.
"I would rather see Great Britain blotted from the page
of history than acquiesce in the triumph of force over free-
dom in Belgium."
In that stirring address, Mr. Asquith expressed the
sentiments of the British Empire.
Mr. Bonar Law (Leader of the Opposition in the House
of Commons), speaking from the same platform at the Guild-
hall as Mr. Asquith, said that the war w T as one of the greatest
crimes in history. Great Britain had no share in the res-
ponsibility.


"The Kaiser," Mr. Bonar Law continued, ."has drawn
the sword. His accursed system must perish by the sword."
"The key of peace or war was in Berlin. The Kaiser need
only have whispered 'Peace,' and there would have been no
war, but he drew the sword. We are fighting for national
existence, and the moral forces of humanity for right against
might,''
Lord Rosebery, in the course of a great speech, said.
"If we had allowed Germany to violate the Belgian Treaty,
how long should we have endured seeing the oppression and
slaughter of a small but gallant people in defence of territory
which we had guaranteed!
"We should have gone in, but it would then have been
too late, and we would only have had the remorse of oui
first hesitation.
"This is a war of nations, not of armies, and the British
nation would not be able to stand aloof, for we are fighting
for the sanctity of the public law of Europe."
Lord Rosebery saw clearly the issues involved: "If our
armies are conquered," he said, "we will be destroyed for
ever. Make no mistake. This war will not be ended by the
cession of territory or a money indemnity. It will be a fight
to a finish. If we go under now we go under for ever.''
In the House of Commons, Mr. Asquith said: "We are
fighting to vindicate the principle that small nationalities are
not to be crushed, and the principle that reliance can be
piaced in national good faith, against the will of a strong and
overmastering power."
"I believe," said Sir Edward Grey, "that the country
will support the Government with determination, resolution,
and endurance."
Read this correspondence—it will confirm your convic-
tion that we are in the right. It will make you even a better
Britisher.


Correspondence Respecting the European
Crisis.
No. 1.
SIR EDWARD GREY TO SIR E. GOSCHEN.
Sir, FOREIGN OFFICE, JULY 20,1914.
I ASKED the German Ambassador to-day if he had any
news of what was going on in Vienna with regard to Servia.
He said that he had not, but Austria was certainly going
to take some step, and he regarded the situation as very
uncomfortable.
I said that I had not heard anything recently, except that
Gount Berchtold, in speaking to the Italian Ambassador in
Vienna, had deprecated the suggestion that the situation was
grave, but had said that it should be cleared up.
The German Ambassador said that it would be a very
desirable thing if Russia could act as a mediator with regard
to Servia.
I said that I assumed that the Austrian Government
would not do anything until they had first disclosed to the
public their case against Servia, founded presumably upon
what they had discovered at the trial.
The Ambassador said that he certainly assumed that they
would act upon some case that would be made known.
I said that this would make it easier for others, such as
Russia, to counsel moderation in Belgrade. In fact, the more
Austria could keep her demand within reasonable limits, and
the stronger the justification she could produce for making
any demand, the more chance there would be of smoothing
things over. I hated the idea of a war between any of the
Great Powers, and that any of them should be dragged into
a war by Servia would be detestable.
The Ambassador agreed wholeheartedly in this sentiment.
I am, etc.,
E. GREY.


LAST night I met Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs,
and the forthcoming Austrian demarche at Belgrade was
alluded to by his Excellency in the conversation that ensued.
His Excellency was evidently of opinion that this step on
Austria's part would have been made ere this. He insisted
that question at issue was one for settlement between Servia
and Austria alone, and that there should be no interference
from outside in the discussions between those two countries.
He had therefore considered it inadvisable that the Austro-
Hungarian Government should be approached by the German
Government on the matter. He had, however, on several occa-
sions, in conversation with the Servian Minister, emphasised
the extreme importance that Austro-Servian relations should
be put on a proper footing.
Finally, his Excellency observed to me that for a long
time past the attitude adopted towards Servia by Austria
had, in his opinion, been one of great forbearance.
No. 3.
SIR EDWARD GREY TO SIR M. DE BUNSEN.
Sir, FOREIGN OFFICE, JULY 23, 1914.
COUNT MENSDORFF told me to-day that he would be
able to-morrow morning to let me have officially the com-
munication that he understood was being made to Servia
to-day by Austria. He then explained privately what the
nature of the demand would be. As he told me that the facts
would all be set out in the paper that he would give me
to-morrow, it is unnecessary to record them now. I gathered
that they would include proof of the complicity of some
Servian officials in the plot to murder the Archduke Franz
Ferdinand, and a long list of demands consequently made by
Austria on Servia.
As regards all this, I said that it was not a matter on
which I would make any comment until I received an official
communication, and it seemed to me probably a matter on
which I should not be able to make any comment at first sight.
But, when Count Mensdorff told me that he supposed
there would be something in the nature of a time-limit, which
No. 2.
SIR E. GOSCHEN TO SIR EDWARD GREY. — (RECEIVED JULY 22.)
(Telegraphic.) BERLIN, JULY 22, 1914.


was in effect akin to an ultimatum, I said that I regretted this
very much. To begin with a time limit might inflame opinion
in Russia, and it would make it difficult, if not impossible, to
give more time, even if after a few days it appeared that by
giving more time there would be a prospect of securing a
peaceful settlement and getting a satisfactory reply from
Servia. I admitted that, if there was no time limit, the pro-
ceedings might be unduly protracted, but I urged that a time
limit could always be introduced afterwards; that, if the
demands were made without a time limit in the first instance,
Russian public opinion might be less excited, after a week
it might have cooled down, and if the Austrian case was very
strong it might be apparent that the Russian Government
would be in a position to use their influence in favour of a
satisfactory reply from Servia. A time limit was generally
a thing to be used only in the last resort, after other means
had been tried and failed.
Count Mensdorff said that if Servia, in the interval that
had elapsed since the murder of the Archduke, had volun-
tarily instituted an enquiry on her own territory, all this
might have been avoided. In 1909, Servia had said in a note
that she intended to live on terms of good neighbourhood
with Austria ; but she had never kept her promise, she had
stirred up agitation the object of which was to disintegrate
Austria, and it was absolutely necessary for Austria to pro-
tect herself.
I said that I would not comment upon or criticise what
Count Mensdorff had told me this afternoon, but I could not
help dwelling upon the awful consequences involved in the
situation. Great apprehension had been expressed to me,
not specially by M. Cambon and Count Benckendorff, but
also by others, as to what might happen, and it had been
represented to me that it would be very desirable that those
who had influence in St. Petersburgh should use it on behalf
of patience and moderation. I had replied that the amount
of influence that could be used in this sense would depend
upon how reasonable were the Austrian demands and how
strong the justification that Austria might have discovered
for making her demands. The possible consequences of the
present situation were terrible. If as many as four Great
Powers of Europe—let us say Austria, France, Russia and
Germany—were engaged in war, it seemed to me that it must
involve the expenditure of so vast a sum of money, and such
an interference with trade, that a war would be accompanied
or followed by a complete collapse of European credit and
industry. In these days, in great industrial States, this would


mean a state of things worse than that of 1848, and, irrespec-
tive of who were victors in the war, many things might he
completely swept away.
Count Mensdorff did not demur to this statement of the
possible consequences of the present situation, but he said
that all would depend upon Eussia.
I made the remark that, in a time of difficulties such as
this, it was just as true to say that it required two to keep
the peace as it was to say, ordinarily, that it took two to make
a quarrel. I hoped very much that, if there were difficulties,
Austria and Eussia would be able in the first instance to
discuss them directly with each other.
Count Mensdorff said that he hoped this would be pos-
sible, but he was under the impression that the attitude in St.
Petersburg]! had not been very favourable recently.
I am, etc.,
E. GEEY.
No. 4.
COUNT BERCHTOLD TO COUNT MENSDORFF.—(COMMUNICATED BY
COUNT MENSDORFF, JULY 24, 1914.)
(Translation.)
THE Austro-Hungarian Government felt compelled to
address the following note to the Servian Government on the
23rd July, through the medium of the Austro-Hungarian
(Minister at Belgrade:—
"On the 31st March, 1909, the Servian Minister in Vienna,
on the instructions of the Servian Government, made the fol-
lowing declaration to the Imperial and Eoyal Government:—
" 'Servia recognises that the fait accompli regarding
Bosnia has not affected her rights, and consequently she will
conform to the decisions that the Powers may take in con-
formity with article 25 of the Treaty of Berlin. In deference
to the advice of the Great Powers Servia undertakes to
renounce from now onwards the attitude of protest and oppo-
sition which she has adopted with regard to the annexation
since last autumn. She undertakes, moreover, to modify the
direction of her policy with regard to Austria-Hungary and
to live in future on good neighbourly terms with the latter.' ''
The history of recent years, and in particular the painful
events of the 28th June last, have shown the existence of a
subversive movement with the object of detaching a part of


the territories of Austria-Hungary from the Monarchy. The
movement, which had its birth under the eye of the Servian
Government, has gone so far as to make itself manifest on
both sides of the Servian frontier in the shape of acts of
terrorism and a series of outrages and murders.
Far from carrying out the formal undertakings contained
in the declaration of the 31st March, 1909, the Royal Servian
Government has done nothing to repress these movements.
It has permitted the criminal machinations of various socie-
ties and associations directed against the Monarchy, and has
tolerated unrestrained language on the part of the press, the
glorification of the perpetrators of outrages, and the partici-
pation of officers and functionaries in subversive agitation.
It has permitted an unwholesome propaganda in public
instruction. In short, it has permitted all manifestations of
a nature to incite the Servian population to hatred of the
Monarchy and contempt of its institutions.
This culpable tolerance of the Royal Servian Government
had not ceased at the moment when the events of the 28th
June last proved its fatal consequences to the whole world.
; _ It results from the depositions and confessions of the
1 criminal perpetrators of the outrage of the 28th June that the
Seiajevo assassinations were planned in Belgrade, that the
arms and explosives with which the murderers were provided
had been given to them by Servian officers and functionaries
belonging to the Narodna Odbrana, and finally, that the pas-
sage into Bosnia of the criminals and their arms was organised
and effected by the chiefs of the Servian frontier service.
The above-mentioned results of the magisterial investi-
gation do not permit the Austro-Hungarian Government to
pursue any longer the attitude of expectant forbearance which
it has maintained for years in face of the machinations
hatched in Belgrade, and thence propagated in the territories
of the Monarchy. The results, on the contrary, impose on it
the duty of putting an end to the intrigues which form a per-
petual menace to the tranquility of the Monarchy.
lo achieve this end the Imperial and Royal Government
sees itself compelled to demand from the Royal Servian Gov-
ernment a formal assurance that it condemns this dangerous
propaganda against the Monarchy; in other words, the whole
series of tendencies, the ultimate aim of which is to detach
from the Monarchy territories belonging to it, and that it
undertakes to suppress by every means this criminal and ter-
rorist propaganda.
In order to give a formal character to this undertaking
9
COEEESPONDENCE EESPECTING THE EUEOPEAH CEISIS.


the Royal Servian Government shall publish on the front page
of its "Official Journal" of the 26th June (13th July) the
following declaration: —
"The Royal Government of Servia condemns the propa-
ganda directed against Austria-Hungary i.e., the general
tendency of which the final aim is to detach from the Austro-
Hungarian Monarchy territories belonging to it, and it sin-
cerely deplores the* fatal consequences of these criminal
proceedings.
The Royal Government regrets that Servian officers and
functionaries participated in the above-mentioned propaganda
and thus compromised the good neighbourly relations to
which the Royal Government was solemnly pledged by its
declaration of the 31st March, 1909.
The Royal Government, which disapproves and repud-
iates all idea of interfering or attempting to interfere with
the destinies of the inhabitants of any part whatsoever o.
Austria-Hungary, considers it its duty to warn officers and
functionaries, and the whole population of the kingdom, that
henceforward it will proceed with the utmost rigour against
persons who may be guilty of such machinations, which it
will use all its efforts to anticipate and suppress.
This declaration shall simultaneously be communicated
to the Royal army as an order of the day by His Majesty the
King and shall be published in the "Official Bulletin" of the
Army.
The Royal Servian Government further undertakes.
1. To suppress any publication which incites to hatred
and contempt of the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy and the
general tendency of which is directed against its territorial
integrity;
2. To dissolve immediately the society styled Narodna
Odbrana, to confiscate all its means of propaganda, and to
proceed in the same manner against other societies and their
branches in Servia which engage in propaganda against the
Austro-Hungarian Monarchy. The Royal Government shall
take the necesary measures to prevent the societies dissolved
from continuing their activity under another name and form,
3. To eliminate without delay from public instruction in
Servia, both as regards the teaching body and also as regaic s
the methods of instruction, everything that serves, or might
serve, to foment the propaganda against Austria-Hungary;
4. To remove from the' military service, and from the
administration in general, all officers and functionaries guilty
of propaganda against the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy


whose names and deeds the Auatro-Hungarian Government
reserves to itself the right of communicating to the Roval
Government;
•p +if' acce collaboration in Servia of representatives
ot the Austro-Hungarian Government in the suppression of
the subversive movement directed against the territorial
integrity of the Monarchy;
i,* 6 T° judicial proceedings against accessories to the
p°!i° a " 1 Une are on Servian territory. Delegates
ot the Austro-Hungarian Government will take part in the
investigation relating thereto;
7. To proceed without delay to the arrest of Major Voija
1 ankositch and of the individual named Milan Ciganovitch,
a Servian State employee, who have been compromised by
the results of the magisterial enquiry at Serajevo;
a' P reverd effective measures the co-operation of
the Servian authorities in the illicit traffic in arms and ex-
plosrves across the frontier, to dismiss and punish severely
the officials of the frontier service at Schabatz and Loznica
guilty of haying assisted the perpetrators of the Seraievo
cume by facilitating, their passage across the frontier;
9. To furnish the Imperial and Royal Government with
explanations regarding the unjustifiable utterances of high
Servian officials, both in Servia and abroad, who, notwith-
-T ° fficial P° sition > did n ot hesitate after the crime
ot the 28th June to express themselves in interviews in terms
ot hostility to the Austro-Hungarian Government; and
finally, ' '
10 To notify the Imperial and Royal Government with-
out delay ot the execution of the measures comprised under
the preceding heads.
The Austro-Hungarian Government expects the reply of
the Royal Government at the latest by 6 o'clock on Saturday
evening, the 25th July. J
A memorandum dealing with the results of the magis-
terial enquiry at Serajevo with regard to the officials men-
tioned under heads (7) and (8) is attached to this note.
I have the honour to request your Excellency to bring
the contents of this note to the knowledge of the Government
to which you are accredited, accompanying your communi-
cation with the following observations:
On the 31st March, 1909, the Royal Servian Government
addressed to Austria-Hungary the declaration of which the
text is reproduced above.


On the very day after this declaration Servia embarked
on a policy of installing revolutionary ideas into the Serb
subjects of the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy, and so prepaiing
the separation of the Austro-Hungarian territory on the
Servian frontier.
Servia became the centre of a criminal agitation.
No time was lost in the formation of societies and groups,
whose object, either avowed or secret, was the creation o
disorders on Austro-Hungarian territory. These societies
and groups count among their members generals and dip o-
matists, Government officials and judges—in short, men at the
top of official and unofficial society in the kingdom.
Servian journalism is almost entirely at the seivice of
this propaganda, which is directed against Austria-Hungary,
and not a day passes without the organs of the Servian press
stirring up their readers to hatred or contempt for the neigh-
bouring Monarchy, or to outrages directed more or less open y
against its security and integrity.
A large number of agents are employed in carrying on
by every means the agitation against Austria-Hungary and
corrupting the youth in the frontier provinces.
Since the recent Balkan crisis there has been a_ recrudes-
cence of the spirit of conspiracy inherent in Servian politi-
cians, which has left such sanguinary imprints on the history
of the kingdom. Individuals belonging formerly to bands
employed in Macedonia have come to place themselves at the
disposal of the terrorist propaganda against Austria-
Hungary. .
In the presence of these doings, to which Austria-
Hungary has been exposed for the Servian Govern-
ment has not thought it incumbent on it to take the slightest
step. The Servian Government has thus failed in the duty
imposed on it by the solemn declaration of the 31st March,
1909, and acted in opposition to the will of Europe and the
undertaking given to Austria-Hungary.
The patience of the Imperial and Royal Government in
the face of the provocative attitude of Servia was inspired
bv the territorial disinterestedness of the Austro-Hungarian
Monarchv and the hope that the Servian Government would
end in spite of everything by appreciating Austria-Hungary s
friendship at its true value. By observing a benevolent atti-
tude towards the political interests of Servia, the Im P er J al
and Royal Government hoped that the kingdom would finally
decide to follow an analogous line of conduct on its own side.
In particular Austria-Hungary expected a development of


this kind in the political ideas of Servia, when, after the events
of 1912, the Imperial and Royal Government, by its disin-
terested and ungrudging attitude, made such a considerable
aggrandisement of Servia possible.
The benevolence which Austria-Hungary showed towards
the neighbouring State had no restraining effect on the pro-
ceedings of the kingdom, which continued to tolerate on its
territory a propaganda of which the fatal consequences were
demonstrated to the whole world on the 28th June last, when
the Heir Presumptive to the Monarchy and his illustrious
consort fell victims to a plot hatched at Belgrade.
In the presence of this state of things the Imperial and
Royal Government has felt compelled to take new and urgent
steps at Belgrade with a view to inducing the Servian Gov-
ernment to stop the incendiary movement that is threatening
the security and integrity of the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy.
_ The Imperial and Royal Government is convinced that in
taking this step it will find itself in full agreement with the
sentiments of all civilised nations, who cannot permit regicide
to become a weapon that can be employed with impunity in
political strife, and the peace of Europe to be continually
disturbed by movements emanating from Belgrade.
In support of the above the Imperial and Royal Govern-
ment holds at the disposal of the British Government a dossier
elucidating the Servian intrigues and the connection between
these intrigues and the murder of the 28th June.
An identical communication has been addressed to the
Imperial and Royal representatives accredited to the other
signatory Powers.
You are authorised to leave a copy of this despatch in
the hands of the Minister for Foreign Affairs.
IVIENNA, JULY 24,1914.
ANNEX.
The criminal enquiry opened by the Court of Serajevo
against Gavrilo Princip and his accessories in and before the
act of assassination committed by them on the 28th June last,
has up to the present led to the following conclusions
1. The plot, having as its object the assassination of the
Archduke Francis Ferdinand at the time of his visit to Sera-
jevo, was formed at Belgrade by Gavrilo Princip, Nedeljko
Cabrinovic, one Milan Ciganovic, and Trifko Grabez, with
the assistance of Commander Voija Tankosic.
2. The six bombs and the four Browning pistols and
ammunition with which the guilty parties committed the act


were delivered to Princip, Cabrinovic, and Giabez by the mail
Milan Ciganovic and Commander Voija Tankosic at Belgrade.
3. The bombs are hand-grenades coming from the arms
depot of the Servian army at Kragujevac.
4. In order to ensure the success of the act, Cigano\ie
taught Princip, Cabrinovic, and Grabez how to use the bombs,
and gave lessons in firing Browning pistols to Princip and
Grabez in a forest near the shooting ground at Topschider.
5. To enable Princip, Cabrinovic, and Grabez to cross the
frontier , of Bosnia-Herzegovina and smuggle in their contra-
band of arms secretly, a secret system of transport was organ-
ised by Ciganovic.
By this arrangement the introduction into Bosnia-Heize-
govinapf criminals and their arms was effected by the officials
controlling the frontiers at Chabac (Bade Popovic) and
Loznica, as well as by the customs officer Budivoj Grbic, of
Loznica, with the assistance of various individuals.
No. 5.
SIR EDWARD GREY TO SIR M. DE BUNSEN.
(Telegraphic.) FOREIGN OFFICE, JULY 24, 1914.
NOTE addressed to Servia, together with an explanation
of the reasons leading up to it, has been communicated to me
by Count Mensdorff.
In the ensuing conversation with his Excellency I ie-
marked that it seemed to me a matter for great regret that a
time limit, and such a short one at that, had been insisted
upon at this stage of the proceedings. The murder of the
Archduke and some of the circumstances respecting Seixia
quoted in the note aroused sympathy with Austria, as was
but natural, but at the same time I had never before seen one
State address to another independent State a document of so
formidable a character. Demand No. 5 would be hardly con-
sistent with the maintenance of Servia's independent sove-
reignty if it were to mean, as it seemed that it might, that
Austria-Hungary was to be invested with a right to appoint
officials who would have authority within the frontiers of
Servia.
I added that I felt great apprehension, and that I should
concern myself with the matter simply and solely from the
point of view of the peace of Europe. The merits of the
dispute between Austria and Servie were not the concern ot


His Majesty's Government, and such comments as I had made
above were not made in order to discuss those merits.
I ended by saying that doubtless we should enter into an
exchange of views with other Powers, and that I must await
their views as to what could be done to mitigate the difficul-
ties of the situation.
Count Mensdorff replied that the present situation might
never have arisen if Servia had held out a hand after the
murder of the Archduke; Servia had, however, shown no sign
of sympathy or help, though some weeks had already elapsed
since the murder; a time limit, said his Excellency, was essen-
tial, owing to the procrastination 011 Servia's part.
I said that if Servia had procrastinated in replying, a
time limit could have been introduced later; but, as things
now stood, the terms of the Servian reply had been dictated
by Austria, who had not been content to limit herself to a
demand for a reply within a limit of forty-eight hours from
its presentation.
No. 6.
SIR (X. BUCHANAN - TO SIR EDWARD GREY.—(RECEIVED JULY 24 )
(Telegraphic.) ST. PETERSBURGH, JULY 24,1914.
I HAD a telephone message this morning from M. Sazo-
nof to the effect that the text of the Austrian ultimatum had
just reached him.
His Excellency added that a reply within forty-eight
hours was demanded, and he begged me to meet him at the
French Embassy to discuss matters, as Austrian step clearly
meant that war was imminent.
Minister for Foreign Affairs said that Austria's conduct
was both provocative and immoral; she would never have
taken such action unless Germany had first been consulted;
some of her demands were quite impossible of acceptance.
He hoped that His.Majesty's Government would not fail to
proclaim their solidarity with Russia and France.
The French Ambassador gave me to understand that
France would fulfil all the obligations entailed by her alli-
ance with Russia, if necessity arose, besides supporting
Russia strongly in any diplomatic negotiations.
I said that I would telegraph a full report to you of what
their Excellencies had just said to me. I could not, of course,
speak in the name of His Majesty's Government, but person-


ally I saw no reason to expect any declaration of solidarity
from His Majesty's Government that, would entail an uncondi-
tional engagement on their part to support Russia and France
by force of arms. Direct British interests in Servia were
nil, and a war on behalf of that country would never be sanc-
tioned by British public opinion. To this M. Sazonof replied
that we must forget that the general European question was
involved, the Servian question being but a part of the former,
and that Great Britain could not afford to efface herself from
the problems now at issue.
In reply to these remarks I observed that I gathered
from what he said that his Excellency was suggesting that
Great Britain should join in making a communication to
Austria to the effect that active intervention by her in the
internal affairs of Servia could not be tolerated. But sup-
posing Austria nevertheless proceeded to embark on military
measures against Servia in spite of our representations, was
it the intention of the Russian Government forthwith to
declare war on Austria ?
M. Sazonof said that he himself thought that Russian
mobilisation would at any rate have to be carried out; but a
council of Ministers was being held this afternoon to consider
the whole question. A further council would be held, probably
to-morrow, at which the Emperor would preside, when a
decision would be come to.
I said that it seemed to me that the important point was
to induce Austria to extend the time limit, and that the first
thing to do was to bring an influence to bear on Austria with
that end in view; French Ambassador, however, thought that
either Austria had made up her mind to act at once or that
she was bluffing. Whichever it might be, our only chance of
averting war was for us to adopt a firm and united attitude.
He did not think there was time to carry out my suggestion.
Thereupon I said that it seemed to me desirable that we
should know just how far Servia was prepared to go to meet
the demands formulated by Austria in her note. M. Sazonof
replied that he must first consult his colleagues on this point,
but that doubtless some of the Austrian demands could be
accepted by Servia.
French Ambassador and M. Sazonof both continued to
press me for a declaration of complete solidarity of His
Majesty's Government with French and Russian Govern-
ments, and I therefore said that it seemed to me possible that
you might perhaps be willing to make strong representations
to both German and Austrian Governments, urging upon them
that an attack upon Austria by Servia would endanger the


whole peace of Europe. Perhaps you might see your way
to saying to them that such action on the part of Austria
would probably mean Russian intervention, which would
involve France and Germany, and that it would be difficult
for Great Britain to keep out if the war were to become
general. M. Sazonof answered that we would sooner or later
be dragged into war if it did break out; we should have ren-
dered war more likely if we did not from the outset make
common cause with his country and with France; at any rate,
he hoped His Majesty's Government would express strong
reprobation of action taken by Austria.
President of French Republic and President of the Coun-
cil cannot reach France, on their return from Russia, for
four or five days, and it looks as though Austria purposely
chose this moment to present their ultimatum.
It seems to me, from the language held by French Ambas-
sador, that, even if we decline to join them, France and Russia
are determined to make a strong stand.
; No. 7.
SIR M. DE BUNSEN TO SIR EDWARD GREY. —(RECEIVED JTJLY 24.)
(Telegraphic.) VIENNA, JULY 24, 1914.
BEFORE departing on leave of absence, I was assured
by Russian Ambassador that any action taken by Austria to
humiliate Servia could not leave Russia indifferent.
Russian Charge d 'Affaires was received this morning by
Minister for Foreign Affairs, and said to him, as his own
personal view, that Austrian note was drawn up in a form
rendering it impossible of acceptance as it stood, and that it
was both unusual anckperemptory in its terms. Minister for
Foreign Affairs replied that Austrian Minister was under
instructions to leave Belgrade unless Austrian demands were
accepted integrally by 4 P.M. to-morrow. His Excellency
added that Dual Monarchy felt that its very existence was at
stake; and that the step taken had caused great satisfaction
throughout the country. He did not think that objections to
what had been done could be raised by any Power.
No. 8.
MR. CRACKANTHORPE TO SIR EDWARD GREY.—
RECEIVED JULY 24.)
(Telegraphic.) BELGRADE, JULY 24, 1914.
AUSTRIAN demands are considered absolutely unac-
ceptable by Servian Government, who earnestly trust that His


Majesty's Government may see their way to induce Austrian
Government to moderate them.
This request was conveyed to me by Servian Prime Min-
ister, who returned early this morning to Belgrade. His
Excellency is dejected, and is clearly very anxious as to
developments that may arise.
Ho. 9.
NOTE COMMUNICATED BY GERMAN AMBASSADOR, JULY 24, 1914.
THE publications of the Austro-Hungarian Government
concerning the circumstances under which the assassination
of the Austrian heir presumptive and his consort has taken
place disclose unmistakably the aims which the Great Ser-
vian propaganda has set itself, and the means it employs to
realise them. The facts now made known must also do away
with the last doubts that the centre of activity of all those
tendencies which are directed towards the detachment of the
Southern Slav provinces from the Austro-Hungarian Mon-
archy and their incorporation into the Servian Kingdom is
to be found in Belgrade, and is at work there with at least
the connivance of members of Government and army.
The Servian intrigues have been going on for many
years. In an especially marked form the Great Servian chau-
vinism manifested itself during the Bosnian crisis. It was
only owing to the far-reaching self-restraint of the Great
Powers that the Servian provocations to which Austria-Hun-
gary was then exposed did not lead to a conflict. The assur-
ance of good conduct in future which was given by the Ser-
vian Government at that time has not been kept. Under the
eyes, at least with the tacit permsision of official Servia, the
Great Servian propaganda has continuously increased in
extension and intensity; to its account must be set the recent
crime, the threads of which lead to Belgrade. It has become
clear!} evident that it would not be consistent either with the
dignity or with the self-preservation of the Austro-Hungarian
Monarchy still longer to remain inactive in face of this move-
ment on the other side of the frontier, by which the security
and the integrity of her territories are constantly menaced.
Under these circumstances, the course of procedure and
demands of the Austro-Hungarian Government can only be
regarded as equitable and moderate. In spite of that/ the
attitude which public opinion as well as the Government in


Servia have recently adopted does not exclude the appre-
hension that the Servian Government might refuse to comply
with those demands, and might allow themselves to be carried
away into a provocative attitude against Austria-Hungary.
The Austro-Hungarian Government, if it does not wish defi-
nitely to abandon Austria ? s position as a Great Power, would
then have no choice but to obtain the fulfilment of their
demands from the Servian Government by strong pressure
and, if necessary, by using military measures, the choice of
the means having to be left to them.
The Imperial Government want to emphasise their opin-
ion that in the present case there is only question of a matter
to be settled exclusively between Austria-Hungary and Servia,
and that the Great Powers ought seriously to endeavour to
reserve it to those two immediately concerned. The Imperial
Government desire urgently the localisation of the conflict,
because every interference of another Power would, owing to
the different treaty obligations, be followed by incalculable
consequences.
No. 10.
SIR EDWARD GREY TO SIR F. BERTIE.
GJ FOREIGN OFFICE, JULY 24, 1914.
AFTER telling M. Cambon to-day of the Austrian com-
munication to Servia, which I had received this morning, and
of the comment I had made to Count Mensdorff upon it yes-
terday, I told M. Cambon that this afternoon I was to see the
German Ambassador, who some days ago had asked me pri-
vately to exercise moderating influence in St. Petersburgh.
I would say to the Ambassador that, of course, if the presen-
tation of this ultimatum to Servia did not lead to trouble
between Austria and Russia, we need not concern ourselves
about it; but, if Russia- took the view of the Austrian ulti-
matum, which it seemed to me that any Power interested in
Servia would take, I should be quite powerless, in face of the
terms of the ultimatum, to exercise any moderating influence.
I would say that I thought the only chance of any mediating
or moderating influence being exercised was that Germany,
France, Italy, and ourselves, who had not direct interests in
Servia, should act together for the sake of peace, simultane-
ously in Vienna and St. Petersburgh.
M. Cambon said that, if there was a chance of mediation
bv the four Powers, he had no doubt that his Government


would be glad to join in it; but be pointed out that we could
not say anything in St. Petersburgh till Russia had expressed
some opinion or taken some action. But, when two days were
over, Austria would march into Servia, for the Servians could
not possibly accept the Austrian demand. Russia would be
compelled by her public opinion to take action as soon as
Austria attacked Servia, and therefore, once the Austrians
had attacked Servia, it would be too late for any mediation.
I said that I had not contemplated anything being said in
St. Petersburgh until after it was clear that there must be
trouble between Austria and Russia. I had thought that if
Austria did move into Servia, and Russia then mobilised, it
would be possible for the four Powers to urge Austria to
stop her advance, and Russia also to stop hers, pending media-
tion. But it would be essential for any chance of success for
such a step that G-ermany should participate in it.
M. Cambon said that it would be too late after Austria
had once moved against Servia. The important thing was
to gain time by mediation in Vienna. The best chance of this
being accepted would be that Germany should purpose it to
the other Powers.
I said that by this he meant a mediation between Austria
and Servia.
He replied that it was so.
I said that I would talk to the German Ambassador this
afternoon on the subject.
I am, etc.,
E. GREY.
No. 11.
SIR EDWARD GREY TO SIR H. RUMBOLD.
(Telegraphic.) FOREIGN OFFICE, JULY 24,1914.
GERMAN Ambassador has communicated to me the view
of the German Government about the Austrian demand in
Servia. I understand the German Government is making
the same communication to the Powers.
I said that if the Austrian ultimatum to Servia did not
lead to trouble between Austria and Russia I had no concern
with it; I had heard nothing yet from St. Petersburgh, but X
was very apprehensive of the view Russia would take of the
situation. I reminded the German Ambassador that some
days ago he had expressed a personal hope that if need arose
I would endeavour to exercise moderating influence at St.


Petersburgh, but now I said that, in view of the extraoidin-
arily stiff character of the Austrian note, the shortness of the
time allowed, and the wide scope of the demands ppon Servia,
I felt quite helpless as far as Russia was concerned, and I
did not believe any Power could exercise influence alone.
The only chance I could see of mediating or moderating
influence being effective, was that the four Powers, Germany,
Italy, France, and ourselves, should work together simul-
taneously at Vienna and St. Petersburgh in favour of mode-
ration in the event of the relations between Austria and
Russia becoming threatening.
The immediate danger was that in a few hours Austria
might march into Servia and Russian Slav opinion demand
that Russia should march to help Servia; it would be very
desirable to get Austria not to precipitate military action
and so to gain more time. But none of us could influence
Austria in this direction unless Germany would propose and
participate in such action at Vienna. You should inform
Secretary of State.
Prince Lichnowsky said that Austria might be expected
to move when the time limit expired unless Servia could give
unconditional acceptance of Austrian demands w toto. Speak-
ing privately, his Excellency suggested that a negative repl\
must in no case be returned by Servia; a reply favourable
on some points must be sent at once, so that an excuse against
immediate action might be afforded to Austria.
No. 12.
SIR EDWARD GREY TO MR. CRACKANTHORPE.
(Telegraphic.) FOREIGN OFFICE, JULY 24, 1914.
SERVIA ought to promise that, if it is proved that Ser-
vian officials, however subordinate they may be, were accom-
plices in the murder of the Archduke at Serajevo, she will
give Austria the fullest satisfaction. She certainly ought to
express concern and regret. For the rest, Servian Govern-
ment must reply to Austrian demands as they consider best
in Servian interests.
It is impossible to say whether military action by Austria
when time limit expires can be averted by anything but uncon-
ditional acceptance of her demands, but only chance appears
to lie in avoiding an absolute refusal and replying favourably
to as many points as the time limit allows.


Servian Minister here has begged that His Majesty's
Government will express tlieir views, but I cannot undertake
responsibility of saying more than I have said above, and I
not like to say even that without knowing what is being
said at Belgrade by French and Russian Governments. You
should therefore consult your French and Russian colleagues
as to repeating what my views are, as expressed above, to
Servian Government.
I have urged upon German Ambassador that Austria
should not precipitate military action.
No. 13.
NOTE COMMUNICATED BY RUSSIAN AMBASSADOR, JULY 25.
(Translation.)
M. SAZONOF telegraphs to the Russian Charge
d'Affaires at Vienna on the 11th (24th) July, 1914:
Ihe communication made by Austria-Hungary to the
Powers the day after the presentation of the ultimatum at
Belgrade leaves a period to the Powers which is quite insuffi-
cient to enable them to take any steps which might help to
smooth away the difficulties that have arisen.
In order to prevent the consequences, equally incalcu-
lable and fatal to all the Powers, which may result from the
couise of action followed by the Austro-Hungarian Govern-
ment, it seems to us to be above all essential that the period
allowed for the Servian reply should be extended. Austria-
Hungary, having declared her readiness to inform the Powers
of the results of the enquiry upon which the Imperial and
Royal Government base their accusations, should equally allow
them sufficient time to study them.
"In this case, if the Powers were convinced that certain
of the Austrian demands were well founded, they would be in
a position to offer advice to the Servian Government.
A refusal to prolong the term of the ultimatum would
render nugatory the proposals made by the Austro-Hungarian
Government to the Powers, and would be in contradiction
to the very bases of international relations.
"Prince Kudachef is instructed to communicate the above
to the Cabinet at Vienna.
"M. Sazonof hopes that His Britannic Majesty's Govern-
ment will share to the point of view set forth above, and he
trusts that Sir E. Grey will see his way to furnish similar
instructions to the British Ambassador at Vienna."


No. 14.
SIR EDWARD GREY TO SIR F. BERTIE AND TO SIR G. BUCHANAN.
(Telegraphic.) FOREIGN OEEIOE, JULY 25,1914.
AUSTRIAN Ambassador has been authorised to_ explain
to me that the step taken at Belgrade was not an ultimatum,
but a demarche with a time limit, and that if the Austrian
demands were not complied with within the time limit the
Austro-Hungarian Government would break off diplomatic
relations and begin military preparations, not operations.
In case Austro-Hungarian Government have not given
the same information at Paris (St. Petersburgh), you should
inform Minister for Foreign Affairs as soon as possible; it
makes the immediate situation rather less acute.
No. 15.
SIR F. BERTIE TO SIR EDWARD GREY.—(RECEIVED JULY 25.)
( Telegraphic.) PARIS, JULY 25,1914.
I LEARN from the Acting Political Director that the
French Government have not yet received the explanation
from the Austrian Government contained in your telegram
of to-day.* They have, however, through the Servian Min-
ister here, given similar advice to Servia as was contained in
your telegram to Belgrade of yesterday.f
*See No. 14. fSee No. 12.
No. 16.
SIR F. BERTIE TO SIR EDWARD GREY—(RECEIVED JULY 25.)
(Telegraphic.) PARIS, JULY 25.
ACTING Minister for Foreign Affairs has no sugges-
tions to make except that moderating advice might be given
at Vienna as well as at Belgrade. He hopes that the Servian
Government's answer to the Austrian ultimatum will be suffi-
ciently favourable to obviate extreme measures being taken
by the Austrian Government. He says, however, that there
would be a revolution in Servia if she were to accept the
Austrian demands in their entirety.
No. 17.
SIR G. BUCHANAN TO SIR EDWARD GREY. —(RECEIVED JULY 25.)
(Telegraphic.) ST. PETERSBURGH, JULY 25, 1914.
I SAW the Minister for Foreign Affairs this morning,
and communicated to his Excellency the substance of your


telegram of to-day to Paris,* and this afternoon I discussed
with him the communication which the French Ambassador
suggested should be made to the Servian Government, as
recorded in your telegram of yesterday to Belgrade.f
The Minister for Foreign Affairs said, as regards the
former, that the explanations of the Austrian Ambassador
did not quite correspond with the information which had
reached him from German quarters. As regards the latter,
both his Excellency and the French Ambassador agreed that
it is too late to make such a communication, as the time limit
expires this evening.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs said that Servia was
quite ready to do as you had suggested and to punish those
proved to be guilty, but that no independent State could be
expected to accept the political demands which had been put
forward. The Minister for Foreign Affairs thought, from
a conversation which he had with the Servian Minister yes-
terday, that, in the event of the Austrians attacking Servia,
the Servian Government would abandon Belgrade, and with-
draw their forces into the interior, while they would at the
same time appeal to the Powers to help them. His Excel-
lency was in favour of their making this appeal. He would
like to see the question placed on an international footing,
as the obligations taken by Servia in 1908, to which refer-
ence is made in the Austrian ultimatum, were given not to
Austria, but to the Powers.
If Servia should appeal to the Powers, Russia would be
quite ready to stand aside and leave the question in the hands
of England, France, Germany, and Italy. It was possible,
in his opinion, that Servia might propose to submit the ques-
tion to arbitration.
On my expressing the earnest hope that Russia would
not precipitate war by mobilising until you had had time to
use your influence in favour of peace, his Excellency assured
me that Russia had no aggressive intentions, and she would
take no action until it was forced 011 her. Austria's action
was in reality directed against Russia. She aimed at over-
throwing the present status quo in the Balkans, and estab-
lishing her own hegemony there. He did not believe that
Germany really wanted war, but her attitude was decided
by ours. If we took our stand firmly with France and Russia
there would be no war. If we failed them now, rivers of
blood would flow, and we would in the end be dragged into
war.
I said that England could play the role of mediator at


Berlin and Vienna to better purpose as friend who, if her
counsels of moderation were disregarded, might one day be
converted into an ally, than if she were to declare herself
Russia's ally at once. His Excellency said that unfortunately
Germany was convinced that she could count upon our
neutrality.
I said all I could to impress prudence on the Minister
for Foreign Affairs, and warned him that if Russia mobilised,
Germany would not be content with mere mobilisation, or
give Russia time to carry out hers, but would probably declare
war at once. His Excellency replied that Russia could not
allow Austria to crush Servia and become the predominant
Power in the Balkans, and, if she feels secure of the support
of France, she will face all the risks of war. He assured me
once more that he did not wish to precipitate a conflict, but
that unless Germany could restrain Austria I could regard
the situation as desperate.
*See No. 14. fSee No. 12.
No. 18.
SIE H. RUMBOLD TO SIE EDWAED GEEY.—(RECEIVED JULY 25.)
(Telegraphic.) BEELIN, JULY 25, 1914.
YOUR telegram of the 24th July* acted on.
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs says that on
receipt of a telegram at 10 this morning from German Ambas-
sador at London, he immediately instructed German Ambas-
sador at Vienna to pass on to Austrian Minister for Foreign
Affairs your suggestion for an extension of time limit, and
to speak to his Excellency about it. Unfortunately it appeared
from press that Count "Berchtold is at Ischl, and Secretary
of State thought that in these circumstances there would be
delay and difficulty in getting time limit extended. Secre-
tary of State said that he did not know what Austria-Hun-
gary had ready on the spot, but he admitted quite freely that
Austro-Hungarian Government wished to give the Servians
a lesson, and that they meant to take military action. He
also admitted that Servian Government could not swallow
certain of the Austro-Hungarian demands.
Secretary of State said that a reassuring feature of situa-
tion was that Count Berchtold had sent for Russian repre-
sentative at Vienna and had told him that Austria-Hungary
had no intention of seizing Servian territory. This step
should, in his opinion, exercise a calming influence at St.
Petersburgh. I asked whether it was not to be feared that,


in taking military action against Servia, Austria would
dangerously excite public opinion in Russia. He said be
thought not. He remained of opinion that crisis could be
localised. I said that telegrams from Russia in this morn-
ing's papers did not look very reassuring, but he maintained
his optimistic view with regard to Russia. He said that he
had given the Russian Government to understand that last
thing Germany wanted was a general war, and he would do
all in his power to prevent such a calamity. If the relations
between Austria and Russia became threatening, he was quite
ready to fall in with your suggestion as to the four Powers
working in favour of moderation at Vienna and St.
Petersburgh.
Secretary of State confessed privately that he thought
the note left much to be desired as a diplomatic document.
He repeated very earnestly that, though he had been accused
of knowing all about the contents of that note, he had in fact
had no such knowledge.
*See No. 11.
No. 19.
SIB R. RODD TO SIB EDWABD GBEY. —(RECEIVED JULY 25.)
(Telegraphic.) ROME, JULY 25,1914.
I SAW the Secretary-General this morning and found
that he knew of the suggestion that France, Italy, Germany,
and ourselves should work at Vienna and St. Petersburgh in
favour of moderation, if the relations between Austria and
Servia become menacing.
In his opinion Austria will only be restrained by the
unconditional acceptance by the Servian Government of her
note. There is reliable information that Austria intends to
seize the Salonica Railway.
No. 20.
SIB M. DE BUNSEN TO SIB EDWABD GBEY. —(RECEIVED JULY 25.)
(Telegraphic.) VIENNA, JULY 25,1914.
LANGUAGE of press this morning leaves the impres-
sion that the surrender of Servia is neither expected nor really
desired. It is officially announced that the Austrian Minister
is instructed to leave Belgrade with staff of legation failing
unconditional acceptance of note at 6 P.M. to-day.


Minister for Foreign Affairs goes to Ischl to-day to com-
municate personally to the Emperor Servian reply when it
comes.
No. 21.
MR. CRACKAXTHORPE TO SIR EDWARD GREY.—(RECEIVED
JULY 25.)
(Telegraphic.) BELGRADE, JIJLY 25, 1914.
THE Council of Ministers is now drawing up their reply
to the Austrian note. lam informed by the Under-Secretary
of State for Foreign Affairs that it will be most conciliatory
and will meet the Austrian demands in as large a measure as
is possible.
The following is a brief summary of the projected
reply:—
The Servian Government consent to the publication of a
declaration in the 4 'Official Gazette." The ten points are
accepted with reservations. Servian Government declare
themselves ready to agree to a mixed commission of enquiry
so long as the appointment of the commission can be shown
to be in accordance with. international usage. They consent
to dismiss and prosecute those officers who can be clearly
proved to be guilty, and they have already arrested the
officer lefeired to in the Austrian note. They are prepared
to suppress the Narodna Odbrana.
The Servian Government consider that, unless the
Austrian Government want war at any cost, they cannot but
be content with the full satisfaction offered in the Servian
reply.
No. 22.
MR. CRACKAXTHORPE TO SIR EDWARD GREY.—(RECEIVED
JULY 52.)
(Telegraphic.) BELGRADE, JULY 25, 1914.
I HAVE seen the new French' Minister, who has just
arrived from Constantinople, and my Russian colleague, and
informed them of your views.
They have not yet received instructions from their
Governments, and in view of this and. of the proposed
conciliatory terms of the Servian reply, I have up to now
abstained from offering advice to the Servian Government.


I think it is highly probable that the Russian Govern-
ment have already urged the utmost moderation on the
Servian Government.
No. 23.
ME. CRACKANTHORPE TO SIE EDWAKD GREY. —(RECEIVED
JULY 25.)
(Telegraphic.) BELGRADE, JULY 25, 1914.
THE Austrian Minister left at 6.30.
The Government has left for Nisch, where the Skuptchina
will meet on Monday. lam leaving with my other colleagues,
but the vice-consul is remaining in charge of the archives.
No. 24.
SIR EDWARD GREY TO SIR G. BUCHANAN.
(Telegraphic..) FOREIGN OFFICE, JULY 25, 1914.
YOU spoke quite rightly in very difficult circumstances
as to the attitude of His Majesty's Government. X entirely
approve what you said, as reported in your telegram of
yesterday,* and I cannot promise more on behalf of the
Government.
I do not consider that public opinion here would or ought
to sanction our going to war over a Servian quarrel. If,
however, war does take place, the development of other issues
may draw us into it, and I am therefore anxious to prevent it.
The sudden, brusque, and peremptory character of the
Austrian demarche makes it almost inevitable that in a very
short time both Russia and Austria will have mobilised
against each other. In this event, the only chance of peace,
in my opinion, is for the other four Powers to join in asking
the Austrian and Russian Governments not to cross the
frontier, and to give time for the four Powers acting at
Vienna and St. Petersburgh to try and arrange matters. If
Germany will adopt this view, I feel strongly that France
and ourselves should act upon it. Italy would no doubt
gladly co-operate.
No diplomatic intervention or mediation would be
tolerated by either Russia or Austria unless it was clearly
impartial and included the allies or friends of both. The
co-operation of Germany would, therefore, be essential.
* See No. 6.


No. 25.
SIR EDWARD GREY TO SIR H. RUMBOLD.
(Telegraphic.) FOREIGN OFFICE, JULY 25, 1914.
THE Austrian Ambassador has been authorised to
inform me that the Austrian method of procedure on expiry
of the time limit would be to break off diplomatic relations
and commence military preparations, but not military opera-
tions. In informing the German Ambassador of this, I said
that it interposed a stage of mobilisation before the frontier
was actually crossed, which I had urged yesterday should be
delayed.
Apparently we should now soon be face to face with the
mobilisation of Austria and Russia. The only chance of
peace, if this did happen, would be for Germany, France,
Russia, and ourselves to keep together, and to join in asking
Austria and Russia not to cross the frontier till we had had
time to try and arrange matters between them.
The German Ambassador read me a telegram from the
German Foreign Office saying that his Government had not
knowp beforehand, and had had no more than other Powers
to do with the stiff terms of the Austrian note to Servia, but
that once she had launched that note, Austria could not draw
back. Prince Lichnowsky said, however, that if what I con-
templated, was mediation between Austria and Russia,
Austria might be able with dignity to accept it. He expressed
himself as personally favourable to this suggestion.
I concurred in his observation, and said that I felt I had
no title to intervene between Austria and Servia, but as soon
as the question became one as between Austria and Russia,
the peace of Europe was affected, in which we must all take
a hand.
I impressed upon the Ambassador that, in the event of
Russian and Austrian mobilisation, the participation of Ger-
many would be essential to any diplomatic action for peace.
Alone we could do nothing. The French Government were
travelling at the moment, and I had had no time to consult
them, and could not therefore be sure of their views, but I
was prepared, if the German Government agreed with my
suggestion, to tell the French Government that I thought
it the right thing to act upon it.


No. 26.
SIR EDWARD GREY TO SIR M. DE BUNSEN.
(Telegraphic.) FOREIGN OFFICE, JULY 25, 1914.
THE Russian Ambassador has communicated to me the
following telegram which his Government have sent to the
Russian Ambassador at Vienna, with instructions to com-
municate it to the Austrian Minister for Foreign Affairs: —
"The delay given to Servia for a reply is so limited that
the Powers are prevented from taking any steps to avert the
complications which are threatening. The Russian Govern-
ment trust that the Austrian Government will prolong the
time limit, and as the latter have declared their willingness
to inform the Powers of the data on which they have based
their demands on Servia, the Russian Government hope that
these particulars will be furnished in order that the Powers
may examine the matter. If they found that some of the
Austrian requests were well founded, they would be in a posi-
tion to advise the Servian Government accordingly. If the
Austrian Government were indisposed to prolong the time
■imit, not only would they be acting against international
ethics, but they would deprive their communication to the
Powers of any practical meaning.''
You may support in general terms the step taken by
your Russian colleague.
Since the telegram to the Russian Ambassador at Vienna
was sent, it has been a relief to hear that the steps which
the Austrian Government were taking were to be limited for
the moment to the rupture of relations and to military pre-
parations, and not operations. I trust, therefore, that if the
Austro-Hungarian Government consider it too late to pro-
long the time limit, they will at any rate give time in the
sense and for the reasons desired by Russia before taking
any irretrievable steps.
No. 27.
SIR EDWARD GREY TO SIR F. BERTIE, SIR H. RUMBOLD, AND
SIR G. BUCHANAN.
(Telegraphic.) FOREIGN OFFICE, JULY 25, 1914.
I HAVE communicated to German Ambassador the fore-
cast of the Servian reply contained t in Mr. Crackanthorpe's


telegram of to-day.* I have said that, if Servian reply, when
received at Vienna, corresponds to this forecast, I hope the
German Government will feel able to influence the Austrian
Government to take a favourable view of it.
* See.No. 21.
No. 28.
[Nil.]
No. 29.
SIR EDWARD GREY TO SIR R. RODD.
Sir, FOREIGN OFFICE, JULY 25, 1914.
THE Italian Ambassador came to see me to-day. I told
him in general terms what I had said to the German Ambas-
sador this morning.
The Italian Ambassador cordially approved of this. He
made no secret of the fact that Italy was most desirous to see
war avoided.
I am, &c.,
E. GREY.
No. 30.
SIR EDWARD GREY TO MR. CRACKANTHORPE.
Sir, FOREIGN OFFICE, JULY 25, 1914.
THE Servian Minister called on the 23rd instant and
spoke to Sir A. Nicolson on the present strained relations
between Servia and Austria-Hungary.
He said that his Government were most, anxious and dis-
quieted. They were perfectly ready to meet any reasonable
demands of Austria-Hungary so long as such demands were
kept on the "terrain juridique." If the results of the
enquiry at Sarajevo—an enquiry conducted with so much
mystery and secrecy—disclosed the fact that there were any
individuals conspiring or organising plots on Servian terri-
tory, the Servian Government would be quite ready to take
the necessary steps to give satisfaction; but if Austria trans-
ported the question on to the political ground, and said that


Servian policy, being inconvenient to her, must undergo a
radical change, and that Servia must abandon certain political
ideals, no independent State would, or could, submit to such
dictation.
He mentioned that both the assassins of the Archduke
were Austrian subjects—Bosniaks; that one of them had been
in Servia, and that the Servian authorities, considering him
suspect and dangerous, had desired to expel him, but on
applying to the Austrian authorities found that the latter
protected him, and said that he was an innocent and harmless
individual.
Sir A. Nicolson, on being asked by M. Boschkovitch his
opinion on the whole question, observed that there were no
data on which to base one, though it was to be hoped that
the Servian Government - would endeavour to meet the
Austrian demands in a conciliatory and moderate spirit.
I am, &c.,
E. GREY.
No. 31.
SIE M. DE BUNSEN TO SIB EDWARD GREY.—(RECEIVED JULY 26.)
(Telegraphic.) VIENNA, JULY 25, 1914.
SERVIAN reply to the Austro-Hungarian demands is
not considered satisfactory, and the Austro-Hungarian
Minister has left Belgrade. War is thought to be imminent.
No. 32.
SIR M. DE BUNSEN TO SIR EDWARD GREY.—(RECEIVED JULY 26.)'
(Telegraphic.) VIENNA, JULY 26, 1914.
ACCORDING to confident belief of German Ambassador,
Russia will keep quiet during chastisement of Servia, which
Austria-Hungary is resolved to inflict, having received assur-
ance that no Servian territory will be annexed by Austria-
Hungary. In reply to my question whether Russian Govern-
ment might not be compelled by public opinion to intervene
on behalf of kindred nationality, he said that everything
depended on the personality of the Russian Minister for
Foreign Affairs, who could resist easily, if he chose, the
pressure of a few newspapers. He pointed out that the days


of Pan-Slav agitation in Russia were over and that Moscow
was perfectly quiet. The Russian Minister for Foreign
Affairs would not, his Excellency thought, be so imprudent
as to take a step which would probably result in many frontier
questions in which Russia is interested, such as Swedish,
Polish, Ruthene, Roumanian, and Persian questions being
brought into the melting-pot. France, too, was not at all in
a condition for facing a war.
I replied that matters had, I thought, been made a little
difficult for other Powers by the tone of Austro-Hungarian
Government's ultimatum to Servia. One naturally sym-
pathised with many of the requirements of the ultimatum, if
only the manner of expressing them had been more temper-
ate. It was, however, impossible, according to the German
Ambassador, to speak effectively in any other way to Servia.
Servia was about to receive a lesson which she required; the
quarrel, however, ought not to be extended in any way to
foreign countries. He doubted Russia, who had no right to
assume a protectorate over Servia, acting as if she made any
such claim. As for Germany she knew very well what she
was about in backing up Austria-Hungary in this matter.
The German Ambassador had heard of a letter addressed
by you yesterday to the German Ambassador in London in
which you expressed the hope that the Servian concessions
would be regarded as satisfactory. He asked whether I had
been informed that a pretence of giving way at the last
moment had been made by the Servian Government. I had, I
said, heard that on practically every point Servia had been
willing to give in. His Excellency replied that Servian con-
cessions were all a sham. Servia proved that she well knew
that they were insufficient to satisfy the legitimate demands
of Austria-Hungary by the fact that before making her
offer she had ordered mobilisation and retirement of Govern-
ment from Belgrade.
No. 33.
SIR H. RUMBOLD TO SIR EDWARD GREY. —(RECEIVED JULY 26.)
(Telegraphic.) BERLIN, JULY 26,1914.
EMPEROR returns suddenly to-night, and Under-Sec-
retary of State for Foreign Affairs says that Foreign Office
regret this step, which was taken on His Majesty's own
initiative. They fear that His Majesty's sudden return may
cause speculation and excitement. Under-Secretary of State


likewise told me that German Ambassador at St. Petersburgh
had reported that, in conversation with Russian Minister for
Foreign Affairs, latter had said that if Austria annexed bits
of Servian territory Russia would not- remain indifferent.
Under-Secretary of State drew conclusion that Russian would
not act if Austria did not annex territory.
No. 34.
SIB H. RTJMBOLD TO SIR EDWARD GREY.—(RECEIVED JULY 26.)
(Telegraphic.) BERLIN, JULY 26,1914.
UNDER-SECRETARY of State for Foreign Affairs has
just telephoned to me to say that German Ambassador at
Yienna has been instructed to pass on to Austro-Hungarian
Government your hopes that they may take a favourable view
of Servian reply if it corresponds to the forecast contained in
Belgrade telegram No. 52 of 25th July.
Under-Secretary of State considers very fact of their
making this communication to Austro-Hungarian Govern-
ment implies that they associate themselves to a certain
extent with your hope. German Government do not see their
way to going beyond this.
No. 35.
SIR R. RODD TO SIR EDWARD GREY.—(RECEIVED JULY 26.)
(Telegraphic.) ROME, JULY 26, 1914.
MINISTER for Foreign Affairs welcomes your proposal
for a conference, and will instruct Italian Ambassador to-
night accordingly.
Austrian Ambassador has informed Italian Government
this evening that Minister in Belgrade has been recalled, but
that this did not imply declaration of war.
No. 36.
R . SIR EDWARD GREY TO SIR F. BERTIE, SIR H. RUMBOLD, AND
SIR R. RODD.
(Telegraphic.) FOREIGN OFFICE, JULY 26,1914.
WOULD Minister for Foreign Affairs be disposed to
instruct Ambassador here to join with representatives of
France, Italy, and Germany, and myself to meet here in con-


ference immediately for the purpose of discovering an issue
which would prevent complications? You should ask
Minister for Foreign Affairs whether he would do this. If
so, when bringing the above suggestion to the notice of the
Governments to which they are accredited, representatives at
Belgrade, Vienna, and St. Petersburgh should be authorised
to request that all active military operations should be sus-
pended pending results of conference.
No. 37.
SIR EDWARD GREY TO SIR F. BERTIE.
(Telegraphic.) FOREIGN OFFICE, JULY 26, 1914.
BERLIN telegram of 25th July.*
It is important to know if France will agree to suggested
action by the four Powers if necessary.
* See No. 18.
No. 38.
SIR R. RODD TO SIR EDWARD GREY.—(RECEIVED JULY 27.)
Sir, ROME, JULY 23, 1914.
I GATHER that the Italian Government have been made
cognisant of the terms of the communication which will be
addressed to Servia. Secretary-General, whom I saw this
morning at the Italian Foreign Office, took the view that the
gravity of the situation lay in the conviction of the Austro-
Hungarian Government that it was absolutely necessary for
their prestige, after the many disillusions which the turn of
events in the Balkans has occasioned, to score a definite
success.
I have, &c.,
RENNELL RODD.
No. 39.
REPLY OF SERVIAN GOVERNMENT TO AUSTRO-HUNGARIAN N.OTE.
—(COMMUNICATED BY THE SERVIAN MINISTER, JULY 27.)
(Translation.)
THE Royal Servian Government have received the com-
munication of the Imperial and Royal Government of the
10th instant, and are convinced that their reply will remove


any misunderstanding which may threaten to impair the
good neighbourly relations between the Austro-Hungarian
Monarchy and the Kingdom of Servia.
Conscious of the fact that the protests which were made
both from the tribune of the national Skuptchina and in the
declarations and actions of the responsible representatives of
the State—protests which were cut short by the declarations
made by the Servian Government on the 18th March, 1909
have not been renewed on any occasion as regards the great
neighbouring Monarchy, and that on attempt has been made
since that time, either by the successive Eoyal Governments
or by their organs, to change the political and legal state of
affairs created in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Eoyal
Government draw attention to the fact that in this connection
the Imperial and Eoyal Government have made no represen-
tation except one concerning a school book, and that on that
occasion the Imperial and Eoyal Government received an
entirely satisfactory explanation. Servia has several times
given proofs of her pacific and moderate policy during the
Balkan crisis, and it is thanks to Servia and to the sacrifice
that she has made in the exclusive interest of European peace
that that peace has been preserved. The Eoyal Government
cannot be held responsible for manifestations of a private
character, such as articles in the press and the peaceable work
of societies —manifestations which take place in nearly all
countries in the ordinary course of events, and which as a
general rule escape official control. The Eoyal Government
are all the less responsible in view of the fact that at the time
of the solution of a series of questions which arose between
Servia and Austria-Hungary they gave proof of a great
readiness to oblige, and thus succeeded in settling the
majority of these questions to the advantage of the two
neighbouring countries.
For these reasons the Eoyal Government have been
pained and surprised at the statements according to which
members of the Kingdom of Servia are supposed to have
participated in the preparations for the crime committed at
Serajevo; the Eoyal Government expected to be invited to
collaborate in an investigation of all that concerns this crime,
and they were ready, in order to prove the entire correctness
of their attitude, to take measures against any persons con-
cerning whom representations were made to them. Falling
in, therefore, with the desire of the Imperial and Eoyal
Government, they are prepared to hand over for trial any
Servian subject, without regard to his situation or rank, of
whose complicity in the crime of Serajevo proofs are forth-


coming, and more especially they undertake to cause to be
published on the first page of the " Journal officiel," on the
date of the 13th (26th) July, the following declaration:—
"The Royal Government of Servia condemn all propa-
ganda which may be directed against Austria-Hungary, that
is to say, all such tendencies as aim at ultimately detaching
from the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy territories which form
part thereof, and they sincerely deplore the baneful conse-
quences of these criminal movements. The Royal Govern-
ment regret that, according to the communication from the
Imperial and Royal Government, certain Servian officers and
officials should have taken part in the above-mentioned propa-
ganda, and thus compromised the good neighbourly relations
to which the Royal Servian Government was solemnly
engaged by the declaration of 31st March, 1909, which
declaration disapproves and repudiates all idea or attempt at
interference with the destiny of the inhabitants of any part
whatsoever of Austria-Hungary, and they consider it their
duty formally to warn the officers, officials, and entire popula-
tion of the kingdom that henceforth they will take the most
rigorous steps against all such persons as are guilty of such
acts, to prevent and to repress which they will use their
utmost endeavour."
This declaration will be brought to the knowledge of the
Royal Army in an order of the day, in the name of His
Majesty the King, by His Royal Highness the Crown Prince
Alexander, and will be published in the next official army
bulletin.
The Royal Government further undertake: —
1. To introduce at the first regular convocation of the
Skuptchina a provision into the press law providing for the
most severe punishment of incitement to hatred or contempt
of the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy, and for taking action
against any publication the general tendency of which is
directed against the territorial integrity of Austria-Hungary.
The Government engage at the approaching revision of the
Constitution to cause an amendment to be introduced into
article 22 of the Constitution of such a nature that such
publication may be confiscated, a proceeding at present
impossible under the categorical terms of article 22 of the
Constitution.
2. The Government possess no proof, nor does the note
of the Imperial and Royal Government furnish them with
any, that the "Narodna Odbrana" and other similar societies
have committed up to the present any criminal act of this


nature through the proceedings of any of their members.
Nevertheless, the Royal Government will accept the demand
of the Imperial and Royal Government, and will dissolve the
"Narodna Odbrana" Society and every other society which
may be directing its efforts against Austria-Hungary.
3. The Royal Servian Government undertake to remove
without delay from their public educational establishments
in Servia all that serves or could serve to foment propaganda
against Austria-Hungary, whenever the Imperial and Royal
Government furnish them with facts and proofs of this
propaganda.
4. The Royal Government also agree to remove from
military service all such persons as the judicial enquiry may
have proved to be guilty of acts directed against the integrity
of the territory of the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy, and they
expect the Imperial and Royal Government to communicate
to them at a later date the names and acts of these officers
and officials for the purposes of the proceedings which are
to be taken against them.
5. The Royal Government must confess that they do not
clearly grasp the meaning or the scope of the demand made
by the Imperial and Royal Government that Servia shall
undertake to accept the collaboration of the organs of the
Imperial and Royal Government upon their territory, but
they declare that they will admit such collaboration as agrees
with the principle of international law, with criminal pro-
cedure, and with good neighbourly relations.
6. It goes without saying that the Royal Government
consider it their duty to open an enquiry against all such per-
sons as are, or eventually may be, implicated in the plot of
the 15th June, and who happen to be within the territory
of the kingdom. As regards the participation in this enquiry
of Austro-Hungarian agents or authorities appointed for this
purpose by the Imperial and Royal Government, the Royal
Government cannot accept such an arrangement, as it would
be a violation of the Constitution and of the law of criminal
procedure; nevertheless, in concrete cases communications
as to the results of the investigation in question might be
given to the Austro-Hungarian agents.
7. The Royal Government proceeded, on the very even-
ing of the delivery of the note, to arrest Commandant Voislav
Tankossitch. As regards Milan Ziganovitch, who is a subject
of the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy and who up to the 15th
June was employed (on probation) by the directorate of rail-
ways, it has not yet been possible to arrest him.


tions of Odessa, Kieff, Moscow, and Kazan. Please inform
German Government, confirming the absence in Russia of any
aggressive intention against Germany.
The Russian Ambassador at Vienna has not been recalled
from his post.
(2) TELEGBAM TO COUJTT BENCKENDOBPE.
# Austrian declaration of war clearly puts an end to
the idea of direct communications between Austria and Russia.
Action by London Cabinet in order to set on foot mediation
with a view to suspension of military operations of Austria
against Servia is now most urgent.
Unless military operations are stopped, mediation would
only allow matters to drag on and give Austria time to crush
Servia.
No. 71.
SIP. E. GOSCHEN- TO SIB EDWABD GEEY.—(RECEIVED JULY 29.)
(Telegraphic.) BEELIU, JULY 28, 1914.
AT invitation of Imperial Chancellor, I called upon his
Excellency this evening. He said that he wished me to tell
you that he was most anxious that Germany should work
together with England for maintenance of general peace, as
they had done successfully in the last European crisis. He
had hot been able to accept your proposal for a conference
of representatives of the Great Powers, because he did not
think that it would be effective, and because such a conference
would in his opinion have had appearance of an " Areopagus"
consisting of two Powers of each group sitting in judgment
upon the two remaining Powers; but his inability to accept
proposed conference must not be regarded as militating
against his strong desire for effective co-operation. You
could be assured that he was doing his very best both at
Vienna and St. Petersburgh to get the two Governments to
discuss the situation directly with each other and in a friendly
way. He had great hopes that such discussions would take
place and lead to a satisfactory result, but of the news were
true which he had just read in the papers, that Russia had
mobilised fourteen army corps in the south, he thought situa-
tion was very serious, and he himself would be in a very diffi-
cult position, as in these circumstances it would be out of his
power to continue to preach moderation at Vienna. He
added that Austria, who as yet was only partially mobilising, '
would have to take similar measures, and if war were to'


result, Eussia would be entirely responsible. I ventured to
say that if Austria refused to take any notice of Servian note,
which, to my mind, gave way in nearly every point demanded
by Austria, and which in any case offered a baffis for dis-
cussion, surely a certain portion of responsibility would
rest with her. His Excellency said that he did not
wish to discuss Servian note, but that Austria's stand-
point, and in this he agreed, was that her quariel
with Servia was a purely Austrian with which
Eussia had nothing to do. He reiterated his desire to co-ope-
rate with England, and his intention to do his utmost to main-
tain general peace. "A war between the Great Powers must
be avoided" were his last words.
Austrian colleague said to me to-day that a general war
was most unlikely, as Eussia neither wanted nor was in a
position to make war. I think that that opinion is shaied by
many people here.
No. 72.
SIB G. BUCHANAN TO SIR EDWARD GREY. —(EECEIVED JULY 29.)
(Telegraphic.) ST. PETERSBURGH, JULY 28, 1914.
MINISTEE for Foreign Affairs begged me to thank you
for the language you had held to the German Ambassador, as
reported in your telegram* to Berlin, substance of which 1
communicated to his Excellency. He took a pessimistic view
of the situation, having received the same disquieting news
from Vienna as had reached His Majesty's Government. I
said it was important that we should know the real intentions
of the Imperial Government, and asked him whether he would
be satisfied with the assurances which the Austrian Ambas-
sador had, I understood, been instructed to give in respect
of Servia's integrity and independence. I added that I was
sure any arrangement for averting a European war would be
welcomed by His Majesty's Government. In reply his Excel-
lency stated that if Servia were attacked Eussia would not
be satisfied with any engagement which Austria might take
on these two points, and that order for mobilisation against
Austria would be issued on the day that Austria crossed
Servian frontier.
I told the German Ambassador, who appealed to me to
give moderating counsels to the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
that from the beginning I had not ceased to do so, and that
the German Ambassador at Vienna should now in his turn
-use his restraining influence. I made it clear to his Excel


lency that, Russia being thoroughly in earnest, a general war
could not be averted if Servia were attacked by Austria.
As regards the suggestion of conference, the Ambassa-
dor had received no instructions, and before acting with me
tlm French and Italian Ambassadors are still waiting for
their final instructions.
* See No. 46.
No. 73.
SIR M. DE BUNSEH" TO SIR EDWARD GREY.—
(RECEIVED JULY 29.)
(Telegraphic.) VIENNA, JULY 28, 1914.
I HAVE received note verbale from Ministry for Foreign
Affairs, stating that, the Servian Government not having
replied to note of 23rd July* in a satisfactory manner.
Imperial and Royal Government is compelled itself to provide
for protection of its rights, and to have recourse for that object
to force of arms. Austria-Hungary has addressed to Servia
formal declaration according to article 1 of convention of
October, 1907, relative to opening of hostilities, and
considers herself from to-day in state of war with Servia.
Austria-Hungary will conform, provided Servia does so, to
stipulations of Hague conventions of 18th October, 1907, and
to Declaration of London of 26th February, 1909.
* See No. 4.
4
No. 74.
SIR M. DE BUNSEN TO SIR EDWARD GREY.—
(RECEIVED JULY 29.)
(Telegraphic.) VIENNA, JULY 28, 1914.
I AM informed by the Russian Ambassador that the
Russian Government's suggestion has been declined by the
Austro-Hungarian Government. The suggestion was to the
effect that the means of settling the Austro-Servian conflict
should be discussed directly between Russian Minister for
Foreign Affairs and the Austrian Ambassador at St. Peters-
burgh, who should be authorised accordingly.
The Russian Ambassador thinks that a conference in


London of the less interested Powers, snch as yon have pro-
posed, offers now the only prospect of preserving peace of
Enrope, and he is snre that the Russian Government will
acquiesce willingly in your proposal. So long as opposing
armies have not actually come in contact, all hope need not
be abandoned.
No. 75.
SM E. GOSCHEN TO SIE EDWAED GEEY.^ —(RECEIVED JULY 29.)
(Telegraphic.) BEELIN, JULY 29, 1914.
I WAS sent for again to-day by the Imperial
Chancellor, who told me that he regretted to state
that the Austro-Hungarian Government, to whom he had
at once communicated your opinion, had answered that
events had marched too rapidly and that it was there-
fore too late to act upon your suggestion that the Servian reply
might form the basis of discussion. His Excellency had,
on receiving their reply, despatched a message to Vienna,
in which he explained that, although a certain desire had*
in his opinion, been shown in the Servian reply to meet the
demands of Austria, he understood entirely that, without
some sure guarantees that Servia would carry out in their
entirety the demands made upon her, the Austro-Hungarian
Government could not rest satisfied in view of their past
experience. He had then gone on to say that the hostilities
which were about to be undertaken against Servia had pie-
sumably the exclusive object of securing such guarantees,
seeing that the Austrian Government already assured the
Russian Government that they had no territorial designs.
He advised the Austro-Hungarian Government, should
this view be correct, to speak openly in this sense. The hold-
ing of such language would, he hoped, eliminate all possible
misunderstandings.
As yet, he told me, he had not received a reply from
Vienna.
From the fact that he had gone so far in the matter of
giving advice at Vienna, his Excellency hoped that you would
realise that he was sincerely doing all in his power to prevent
danger of European complications.
The fact of his communicating this information to yoa
was a proof of the confidence which he felt in you and evidence
of his anxiety that you should know he was doing his best to
support your efforts in the cause of general peace, efforts
which he sincerely appreciated.


No. 76.
SIR E. GOSCHEN TO SIR EDWARD GREY.—(RECEIVED JULY 29.)
(Telegraphic.) BERLIN, JULY 29, 1914.
I FOUND Secretary of State very depressed to-day. He
reminded me that he had told me the other day that he had
to be very careful in giving advice to Austria, as any idea that
they were being pressed would be likely to cause them to
precipitate matters and present a fait accompli. This had,
in fact, now happened, and he was not sure that his communi-
cation of your suggestion that Ser-via's reply offered a basis
for discussion had not hastened declaration of war. He was
much troubled by reports of mobilisation in Russia, and of
certain military measures, which he did not specify, being
taken in France. He subsequently spoke of these measures
to my French colleague, who informed him that French Gov-
ernment had done nothing more than the German Government
had done, namely, recalled officers on leave. His Excellency
denied German Government had done this, but as a matter
of fact it is true. My French colleague said to Under-Secre-
tary of State, in course of conversation, that it seemed to him
that when Austria had entered Servia, and so satisfied her
military prestige, the moment might then be favourable for
four disinterested Powers to discuss situation and come for-
ward with suggestions for preventing graver complications.
Under-Secretary of State seemed to think idea worthy of con-
sideration, as he replied that would be a different matter from
conference proposed by you.
Russian Ambassador returned to-day, and has informed
Imperial Government that Russia is mobilising in four south-
ern governments.
No. 77.
SIR EDWARD GREY TO SIR E. GOSCHEN.
'(Telegraphic.) FOREIGN OFFICE, JULY 29, 1914.
I MUCH appreciate the language of Chancellor, as
reported in your telegram of to-day.* His Excellency may
rely upon it that this country will continue, as heretofore, to
strain every effort to secure peace and to avert the calamity
we all fear. If he can induce Austria to satisfy Russia and
to abstain from going so far as to come into collision with
her, we shall all join in deep gratitude to his Excellency for
having saved the peace of Europe.
* See No. 75. •


No. 78.
SIR G. BUCHANAN TO SIR EDWARD GREY. —(RECEIVED JULY 29.)
(Telegraphic.) ST. PETERSBURGH, JULY 29, 1914.
PARTIAL mobilisation was ordered to-day.
I communicated the substance of your telegram of the
28th instant* to Berlin to the Minister for Foreign. Affairs in
accordance with your instructions, and informed him confi-
dentially of remarks as to mobilisation which the German
Secretary of State had made to the British Ambassador at
Berlin. This had already reached his Excellency from another
source. The mobilisation, he explained, would only be
directed against Austria.
Austrian Government had now definitely declined direct
conversation between Vienna and St. Petersburgh. The
Minister for Foreign Affairs said he had proposed such an
exchange of views or advice of German Ambassador. He
proposed, when informing German Ambassador of this
refusal of Austria's, to urge that a return should be made
to your proposal for a conference of four Ambassadors, 01,
at all events, for an exchange of views between the three
Ambassadors less directly interested, and also the
Austrian Ambassador if you thought it advisable. Any
arrangement approved by France and England would be
acceptable to him, and he did not care what form such con-
versations took. No time was to be lost, and the only way
to avert war was for you to succeed, in arriving, by means of
conversations with Ambassadors either collectively or indi-
vidually, at some formula which Austria could be induced to
accept. Throughout Russian Government had been perfectly
frank and conciliatory, and had done all in their power to
maintain peace. If their efforts to maintain peace failed, he
trusted that it would be realised by the British public that
it was not the fault of the Russian Government.
I asked him whether he would raise objections if the sug-
gestion made in Rome telegram of the 27th Julyf which I
mentioned to him, were carried out. In reply his Excellency
said that he would agree to anything arranged by the four
Powers provided it was acceptable to Servia; he could not, he
said, be more Servian than Servia. Some supplementary
statement or explanations would, however, have to be'made
in order to tone down the sharpness of the ultimatum.
Minister for Foreign Affairs said that proposal referied
to in your telegram of the 28th instantf was one of secondary
importance. Under altered circumstances of situation he did


not attach, weight to it. Further, the German Ambassador
had informed his Excellency, so the latter told me, that his
were continuing at Vienna to exert friendly influ-
ence. I fear that the German Ambassador will not help to
smooth matters over, if he uses to his own Government the
same language as he did to me to-day. He accused the Rus-
sian Government of endangering the peace of Europe by their
mobilisation, and said, when I referred to all that had been
recently done by Austria, that he could not discuss such mat-
ters. I called his attention to the fact that Austrian consuls
had warned all Austrian subjects liable to military service to
join the colours, that Austria had already partially mobilised,
and had now declared war on Servia. From what had passed
during the Balkan crisis she know that this act was one which
it was impossible without humiliation for Russia to submit
to. Had not Russia by mobilising shown that she was in
earnest, Austria would have traded on Russia's desire for
peace, and would have believed that she could go to any
lengths. Minister for Foreign Affairs had given me to under-
stand that Russia would not precipitate war by crossing
frontier immediately, and a week or more would, in any case,
elapse before mobilisation was completed. In order to find
an issue out of a dangerous situation it was necessary that we
should in the meanwhile all work together.
* See No. 67. f See No. 57. f See No. 69.
No. 79. --—V:.
SIR M. DE BUNSEN TO SIR EDWARD GREY.—
(RECEIVED JULY 29.)
(Telegraphic.) VIENNA, JULY 29, 1914.
1 HERE is at present no step which we would usefully
take to stop war with Servia, to which Austro-Hungarian
Government are now fully committed by the Emperor's appeal
to his people which has been published this morning, and by
the declaration of war. French and Italian Ambassadors
agree with me in this view. If the Austro-Hungarian Gov-
ernment would convert into a binding engagement to Europe
the declaration which has been made at St. Petersburg!! to
the effect that she desires neither to destroy the independence
of Servia nor to acquire Servian territory, the Italian Ambas-
sador thinks that Russia might be induced to remain quiet.
This, however, the Italian Ambassador is convinced the Aus-
trian Government would refuse to do.


No. 80.
SIR E. EODD TO SIR EDWARD GREY.—(EECEIYED JULY 29.)
(Telegraphic.) EOME, JULY 29, 1914.
IN your telegram of the 27th instant* to Berlin, German
Ambassador was reported to have accepted in principle the
idea of a conference. This is in contradiction with the tele-
gram of the 27th instantf from Berlin.
Information received by the Italian Government from
Berlin shows that German view is correctly represented in
Sir E. Goschen's telegram of the 27tli July,t but what creates
difficulty is rather the "conference," so the Minister for
Foreign Affairs understands, than the principle. He is going
to urge, in a telegram which he is sending to Berlin to-night,
adherence to the idea of an exchange of views in London. He
suggests that the German Secretary of State might propose
a formula acceptable to his Government. Minister for I oreign
Affairs is of opinion that this exchange of views would keep
the door open if direct communication between Vienna and St.
Petersburgh fails to have any result. He thinks that this
exchange of views might be concomitant with such direct
communication.
The German Government are also being informed that
the Italian Government would not be pardoned by public
opinion here unless they had taken every possible step so as
to avoid war. He is urging that the German Government
must lend their co-operation in this.
He added that there seemed to be a difficulty in making
Germany believe that Eussia was in earnest. As (retmany,
however, was really anxious for good relations with our-
selves, if she believed that Great Britain would, act villi
Eussia and France he thought it would have a great effect.
Even should it prove impossible to induce Germany to
take part, he would still advocate that England and Italy,
each as representing one group, should continue to exchange
views.
* See No. 46. t See No. 4.
No. 81.
SIR EDWARD GREY TO SIR E. EODD.
(Telegraphic.) FOREIGN OFFICE, JULY 29,1914.
WITH reference to your telegram of yesterday/
It is impossible for me to initiate discussions with
Ambassadors here, as I understand from Austrian Minister


for Foreign Affairs that Austria will not accept any discus-
sion on basis of Servian note, and the inference of all I have
heard from Vienna and Berlin is that Austria will not accept
any form of mediation by the Powers as between Austria and
Servia. Italian Minister for Foreign Affairs must therefore
speak at Berlin and Vienna. I shall be glad if a favourable
reception is given to any suggestions he can make there.
* See No. 64.
No. 82.
MR. BEAUMONT TO SIR EDWAED GREY.—(RECEIVED JULY 29.)
(Telegraphic.) CONSTANTINOPLE, JULY 29, 1914.
I UNDERSTAND that the designs of Austria may
extend considerably beyond the sanjak and a punitive occu-
pation of Servian territory. I gathered this from a remark
let fall by the Austrian Ambassador here, who spoke of the
deplorable economic situation of Salonica under Greek admin-
istration and of the assistance on which the Austrian army
could count from Mussulman population discontented with
Servian rule.
No. 83.
ME. CEACKANTHOEPE TO SIR EDWARD GEEY.—
(RECEIVED JULY 29.)
(Telegraphic.) NISH, JULY 29, 1914.
I HAVE been requested by Prime Minister to convey to
you expression of his deep gratitude for the statement which
> ou made on the 27th instant in the House of Commons.
i
No. 84.
SIR EDWARD GEEY TO SIR E. GOSCHEN.
(Telegraphic.) FOREIGN OFFICE, JULY 29,1914.
THE German Ambassador has been instructed by the
German Chancellor to inform me that he is endeavouring to
mediate between Vienna and St. Petersburgh, and he hopes
with good success. Austria and Russia seem to be in con-
stant touch, and he is endeavouring to make Vienna explain


in a satisfactory form at St. Petersburgh the scope and exten-
sion of Austrian proceedings in Servia. I told the German
Ambassador that an agreement arrived at direct between
Austria and Russia would be the best possible solution. I
would press no proposal as long as there was a prospect of
that, but my information this morning was that the Austrian
Ambassador at St. Petersburgh should be authorised to dis-
cuss directly with the Russian Minister for Foreign Affairs
the means of settling the Austro-Servian conflict. The press
correspondents at St. Petersburgh had been told that Rus-
sian Government would mobilise. The German Government
had said that they were favourable in principle to mediation
between Russia and Austria if necessary. They seemed to
think the particular method of conference, consultation or dis-
cussion, or even conversations a quatre in London too formal
a method. I urged that the German Government should sug-
gest any method by which the influence of the four Powers
could be used together to prevent war between Austria and
Russia. France agreed, Italy agreed. The whole idea of
mediation or mediating influence was ready to be put into
operation by any method that Germany could suggest if ruin a
was not acceptable. In fact mediation was ready to come
into operation by any method that Germany thought pos-
sible if only Germany would "press 'the button" in the
interests of peace.
No. 85.
SIR E. GOSCHEN TO SIR EDWARD GREY.—(RECEIVED JULY 29.)
(Telegraphic.) BERLIN, JULY 29, 1914.
I WAS asked to call upon the Chancellor to-night. His
Excellency had just returned from Potsdam.
He said that should Austria be attacked by Russia a
European conflagration might, he feared, become inevitable,
owing to Germany's obligations as Austria's ally, in spite of
his continued efforts to maintain peace. He then proceeded
to make the following strong bid for British neutrality. He
said that it was clear, so far as he was able to judge the main
principle which governed British policy, that Great Britain
would never stand by and allow France to be crushed in any
conflict there might be. That, however, was not the object at
which Germany aimed. Provided that neutrality of Great
Britain were certain, every assurance would be given to the
British Government that the Imperial Government aimed at


no territorial acquisitions at the expense of France should
they prove victorious in any war that might ensue.
I questioned his Excellency about the French colonies,
and he said that he was unable to give a similar undertaking
in that respect. As regards Holland, however, his Excel-
lency said that, so long as Germany's adversaries respected
the integrity and neutrality of the Netherlands, Germany was
ready to give His Majesty's Government an assurance that
she would do likewise. It depended upon the action of France
what operations Germany might be forced to enter upon in
Belgium, but when the war was over, Belgium integrity would
be respected if she had not sided against Germany.
His Excellency ended by saying that ever since he had
been Chancellor the object of his policy had been, as you were
aware, to bring about an understanding with England; he
trusted that these assurances might form the basis of that
understanding which he so much desired. He had in mind
a general neutrality agreement between England and Ger-
many, though it was of course at the present moment too early
to discuss details, and an assurance of British neutrality in
the conflict which present crisis might possibly produce,
would enable him to look forward to realisation of his desire.
In reply to his Excellency's enquiry how I thought his
request would appeal to you, I said that I did not think it
probable that at this stage of events you would care to bind
yourself to any course of action and that I was of opinion
that you would desire to retain full liberty.
Our conversation upon this subject having come to an
end, I communicated the contents of your telegram of to-day*
to his Excellency, who expressed his best thanks to you.
* See No. 77.
No. 86.
SIR R. RODD TO SIR EDWARD GREY. — (RECEIVED JULY 29.)
(Telegraphic.) ROME, JULY 29, 1914.
MINISTER for Foreign Affairs thinks that moment is
past for any further discussions on basis of Servian note, in
view of communication made to-day by Russia, at Berlin
regarding partial mobilisation. The utmost he now hopes for
is that Germany may use her influence at Vienna to prevent
or moderate any further demands on Servia.


No. 87.
SIR EDWARD GREY TO SIR F. BERTIE.
Sir, FOREIGN OFFICE, JULY 29, 1914.
AFTER telling M. Cambon to-day how grave the situa-
tion seemed to be, I told him that I meant to tell the German
Ambassador to-day that he must not be misled by the friendly
tone of onr conversations into any sense of false security
that we should stand aside if all the efforts to preserve the
peace, which we were now making in common with Germany,
failed. But I went on to say to M. Cambon that I thought
it necessary to tell him also that public opinion here
approached the present difficulty from a quite different point
of view from that taken during the difficulty as to Morocco a
few years ago. In the case of Morocco the dispute was, one
in which France was primarily interested, and in which it
appeared that Germany, in an attempt to crush France, was
fastening a quarrel on France on a question that was the
subject of a special agreement between France and us. In
the present case the dispute between Austria and Servia was
not one in which we felt called to take a hand. Even if the
question became one between Austria and Russia we should
not feel called upon to take a hand in it. It would then be a
question of the supremacy of Teuton or Slav —a struggle for
supremacy in the Balkans; and our idea had always been to
avoid being drawn into a war over a Balkan question. If
Germany became involved and France became involved, we
had not made up our minds what we should do; it was a case
that we should have to consider. France would then have
been drawn into a quarrel which was not hers, but in which,
owing to her alliance, her honour and interest obliged her to
engage. We were free from engagements, and we should
have to decide what British interests required us to do. I
thought it necessary to say that, because, as he knew, we were
taking all precautions with regard to our fleet, and I was
about to warn Prince Lichnowsky not to count on our stand-
ing aside, but it would not be fair that I should let M. Cambon
be misled into supposing that this meant that we had decided
what to do in a contingency that I still hoped might not arise.
M. Cambon said that I had explained the situation very
clearly. He understood it to be that in a Balkan quarrel,
and in a struggle for supremacy between Teuton and Slav
we should not feel called to intervene; should other issues
be raised, and Germany and France become involved, so that
the question became one of the hegemony of Europe, we
should then decide what it was necessary for us to do. He


seemed quite prepared for this announcement, and made no
criticism upon it.
He said French opinion was calm, but decided. He anti-
cipated a demand from Germany that France would be neutral
while Germany attacked Russia. This assurance France, of
course, could not give; she was bound to help Russia if Russia
was attacked.
I am, &c.,
E. GREY.
No. 88.
SIR EDWARD GREY TO SIR E. GOSCHEN.
Sir, FOREIGN OFFICE, JULY 29, 1914.
I TOLD the German Ambassador this afternoon of the
information that I had received, that Russia had informed
Germany respecting her mobilisation. I also told him of the
communication made by Count Benckendorff, that the Aus-
trian declaration of war manifestly rendered vain any direct
conversations between Russia and Austria. I said that the
hope built upon those direct conversations by the German
Government yesterday had disappeared to-day. To-day the
German Chancellor was working in the interest of mediation
in Vienna and St. Petersburgh. If he succeeded, well and
good. If not, it was more important than ever that Germany
should take up what I had suggested to the German Ambas-
sador this morning, and propose some method by which the
four Powers should be able to work together to keep the peace
of Europe. I pointed out, however, that the Russian Gov-
ernment, while desirous of v mediation, regarded it as a condi-
tion that the military operations against Servia should be
suspended, as otherwise a mediation would only drag on mat-
ters, and give Austria time to crush Servia. It was of course
too late for all military operations against Servia to be sus-
pended. In a short time, I supposed, the Austrian forces
would be in Belgrade, and in occupation of some Servian terri-
tory. But even then it might be possible to bring some
mediation into existence, if Austria, while saying that she
must hold the occupied territory until she had complete satis-
faction from Servia, stated that she would not advance*
further, pending an effort of the Powers to mediate between
her and Russia.
The German Ambassador said that he had already tele-
graphed to Berlin what I had said to him this morning.
I am, &c.,
E. GREY.


No. 89.
SIB EDWABD GBEY TO SIB E. GOSCHEF.
Sir, FOREIGN OFFICE, JULY 29, 1914.
AFTER speaking to the German Ambassador this after-
noon about the European situation, I said that I wished to
say to him, in a quite private and friendly way, something
that was on my mind. The situation was very grave. While
it was restricted to the issues at present actually involved
we had no thought of interfering in it. But if Germany
became involved in it, and then France, the issue might be so
great that it would involve all European interestsand I did
not wish him to be misled by the friendly tone of our conver-
sation —which I hoped would continue—into thinking that we
should stand aside.
He said that he quite understood this, but he asked
whether I meant that we should, under certain circumstances,
intervene t
I replied that I did not wish to say that, or to use any-
thing that was like a threat or a*n attempt to apply pressure
by saying that, if things became worse, we should intervene.
There, would be no question of our intervening if Germany
was not involved, or even if France was not involved. But
we knew very well that, if the issue did become such that we
thought British interests required us to intervene, we must
intervene at once, and the decision would have to be very
rapid, just as the decisions of other Powers had to be. I
hoped that the friendly tone of our conversations would
continue as at present, and that I should be able to keep as
closely in touch with the German Government in working for
peace. But if we failed in our efforts to keep the peace, and
if the issue spread so that it involved practically every Euro-
pean interest, I did not wish to be open to any reproach from,
him that the friendly tone of all our conversations had misled
him or his Government into supposing that we should not take
action, and to the reproach that, if they had not been so mis-
led, the course of things might have been different.
The German Ambassador took no exception to what I
had said; indeed, he told me that it accorded with what he
had already given in Berlin as his view of the situation.
I am, &c.,
E. GREY.


No. 90.
SIR EDWARD GREY TO SIR E. GOSCHEN
Sir
' FOREIGN OFFICE, JULY 29, 1914.
j E ad( iition to what pasesd with the German Ambassa-
y, i# ? S morm ng, as recorded in my telegram of the 29th
Sir T? 0 mo" ® xcellenc y> 1 gave the Ambassador a copy of
to if t A !° T C ! S tele S ram of the 28th Julyf and of my reply
a Alt,! ""A 3 , be S un t0 doubt whether even a complete
the Austrian demands by Servia would not
di if l, US A a ' , But tllere a PPeared, from what the Marquis
n Gmliano had said, to be a method by which, if the
rtolTl Were l allowed to liave an y sa y in the matter, they
+1 it nng out com plete satisfaction for Austria, if only
the latter would give them an opportunity. I could, however,
nake no proposal, for the reasons I have given in my tele-
.yoU' and could onl y & ive what the Italian Minister
• f Affairs had said to the German Ambassador for
information, as long as it was understood that Austria would
accept no discussion with the Powers over her dispute with
feervia As to mediation between Austria and Russia, I said
i could not take the form simply of urging Russia to stand
on one side while Austria had a free hand to go to any length
e pleased. That would not be mediation, it would simply
be putting pressure upon Russia in the interests of Austria
Ihe German Ambassador said the view of the German Govern-
ment was that Austria could not by force be humiliated, and
could not abdicate her position as a Great Power. I said I
en ire y agieed, but it was not a question of humiliating
Austria, it was a question of how far Austria meant to push
the humiliation of others. There must, of course, be some
lumihation of Servia, but Austria might press things so far
as to involve the humiliation of Russia.
The German Ambassador said that Austria would not
a ve Servian territory, as to which I observed that, by taking-
territory while leaving nominal Servian independence, Austria
nnght ton Servia practically into a vassal State, and this
would affect the whole position of Russia in the Balkans.
I observed that when there was danger of European con-
flict it was impossible to say who would not be drawn into it
Even the Netherlands apparently were taking precautions.
The German Ambassador said emphatically that some
means must be found of preserving the peace of Europe.
I am, &c.,
E. GREY.
# See No. 84. fSee No. 64. |See No. 81.


No. 91.
SIR EDWARD GREY TO SIR M. DE BUNSEN.
Sir, FOREIGN OFFICE, JULY 29, 1914.
THE Austrian Ambassador told me to-day he had
ready a long memorandum, which he proposed to leave, and
which he said gave an account of the conduct of Servia
towards Austria, and an explanation of how necessary the
Austrian action was.
I said that I did not wish to discuss the merits of the
question between Austria and Servia. The news to-day
seemed to me bad for the peace of Europe. The Powers
were not allowed to help in getting satisfaction for Austria,
which they might get if they were given an opportunity, and
European peace was at stake.
Count Mensdorff said that the war with Servia must pro-
ceed. Austria could not continue to be exposed to the neces-
sity of mobilising again and again, as she had been obliged
to do in recent years. She had no idea of territorial aggrand-
isement, and all she wished was to make sure that her inte-
rests were safeguarded.
I said that it would be quite possible, without nominally
interfering with the independence of Servia or taking away
any of her territory, to turn her into a sort of vassal State.
Count Mensdorff deprecated this.
In reply to some further remarks of mine, as to the effect
that the Austrian action might have upon the Russian posi-
tion in the Balkans, he said that, before the Balkan war,
Servia had always been regarded as being in the Austrian
sphere of influence.
I am, &c.,
E. GREY.
No. 92.
SIR EDWARD GREY TO SIR R. RODD.
GI R> FOREIGN OFFICE, JULY 29, 1914.
THE Italian Ambassador made to me to-day a com-
munication from the Marquis di San Giuliano suggesting that
the German objections to the mediation of the four Powers,
a mediation that was strongly favoured by Italy, might be
removed by some change in the form of procedure.
I said that I had already anticipated this by asking the


German Government to suggest any form of. procedure under
which the idea of mediation between Austria and Russia,
already accepted by the German Government in principle
could be applied.
I am, &c.,
E. GREY.
No. 93.
TELEGBAMS COMMUNICATED BY COUNT BENCKENDORFE,
JULY 30, 1914.
(1.)
RUSSIAN AMBASSADOR AT VIENNA TO M. SAZONOF.
(Translation.)
(Telegraphic.) VIENNA, JULY 15 (28), 1914.
I SPOKE to Count Berchtold to-day in the sense of your
Excellency's instructions. I brought to his notice, in the most
friendly manner, how desirable it was to find a solution which,
while consolidating good relations between Austria-Hungary
and Russia, would give to the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy
genuine guarantees for its future relations with Servia.
I drew Count Berchtold's attention to all the dangers to
the peace of Europe which would be involved by an armed
conflict between Austria-Hungary and Servia.
Count Berchtold replied that he was well aware of the
gravity of the situation and of the advantages of a frank
explanation with the St. Petersburgh Cabinet, He told me
that, on the otherhand, the Austro-Hungarian Government,
who had only decided, much against their will, on the ener-
getic measures which they had taken against Servia, could
no longer recede, nor enter into any discussion about the terms
of the Austro-Hungarian note,
Count Berchtold added that the crisis had become so
acute, and that public opinion had risen to such a' pitch of
excitement, that the Government, even if they wished it,
could no longer consent to such a course. This was all the
more impossible, he said, inasmuch as the Servian reply itself
furnished proof of the insincerity of Servians promises for
the future.


(2.)
M. SAZONOF TO COUNT BENCKENDORFF.
ST. PETERSBURGH,,
(Telegraphic.) JULY 16 (29), 1914.
THE German Ambassador informs me, in the name of
the Chancellor, that Germany has not ceased to exercise a
moderating influence at Vienna, and that she will continue
to do so even after the declaration of war. Up to this morn-
ing there has been no news that the Austrian army has
crossed the Servian frontier. I have begged the Ambassa-
dor to express my thanks to the Chancellor for the friendly
tenour of this communication. I have informed him of the
military measures taken by Russia, none of which, I told him,
were directed against Germany; I added that neither should
they be taken as aggressive measures against Austria-Hun-
gary, their explanation being the mobilisation of the gieatei
part of the Austro-Hungarian army.
The Ambassador said that he was in favour of direct
explanations, between the Austrian Government and our-
selves, and I replied that I, too, was quite willing, provided
that the advice of the German Government, to which he had
referred, found an echo at Vienna.
I said at the same time that we were quite ready to accept
the proposal for a conference of the four Powers, a pioposal
with which, apparently, Germany was not in entire sympathy.
I told him that, in my opinion, the best manner of turn-
ing to account the most suitable methods of-finding a peaceful
solution would be by arranging for parallel discussions to be
carried on by a conference of the four Powers Germany,
France, England, and Italy—and by a direct exchange of
views between Austria-Hungary and Russia on much the
same lines as occurred during the most critical moments of
last year's crisis.
I told the Ambassador that, after the concessions which
had been made by Servia, it should not be very difficult to
find a compromise to settle the other questions which
remained outstanding, provided that Austria showed some
good-will and that all the Powers used their entire influence
in the direction of conciliation.


(3.)
M. SAZONOF TO COUNT BENCKENDORFF.
ST. PETERSBURG#, *
(Telegraphic.) JULY 16 (29), 1914.
AT the time of my interview with the German Ambassa-
dor, dealt with in my preceding telegram, I had not yet
received M. Schebeko's telegram of the 15th (28th) July.
This telegram reports the refusal of the Vienna Cabinet
to agree to a direct exchange of views with the Imperial
Government.
From now on, nothing remains for us to do but to rely
entirely on the British Government to take the initiative in
the steps which they may consider advisable.
*
No. 94.
SIR M. DE BUNSEN TO SIR EDWARD GREY.—
(RECEIVED JULY SO.)
(Telegraphic.) VIENNA, JULY 29, 1914.
I LEARN that mobilisation of Russian corps destined
to carry out operations on Austrian frontier has been ordered.
My informant is Russian Ambassador. Ministry for Foreign
Affairs here has realised, though somewhat late in the day,
that Russia will not remain indifferent in present crisis. I
believe that the news of Russian mobilisation will not be a 1
surprise to the Ministry, but so far it is not generally known
in Vienna this evening. Unless mediation, which German
Government declared themselves ready to offer in concert
with three other Great Powers not immediately interested
in the Austro-Servian dispute, be brought to bear forthwith,
irrevocable steps may be taken in present temper of this
country. German Ambassador feigns surprise that Servian
affairs should be of such interest to Russia. Both my Rus-
sian and French colleagues have spoken to him to-day. Rus-
sian Ambassador expressed the hope that it might still be
possible to arrange matters, and explained that it was im-
possible for Russia to do otherwise than take an interest in
the present dispute. Russia, he said, had done what she
could already at Belgrade to induce Servian Government to
meet principal Austrian demands in a favourable spirit; if
approached in a proper manner, he thought she would pro-
bably go still further in this direction. But she was justly


offended at having been completely ignored, and she could,
not consent to he excluded from the settlement. German
Ambassador said that if proposals were put forward which
opened any prospect of possible acceptance by both sides,
he personally thought that Germany might consent to act as
mediator in concert with the three other Powers.
I gather from what Russian Ambassador said to me that
he is much afraid of the effect that any serious engagement
may have upon Russian public opinion. I gathered, how-
ever, that Russia would go a long way to meet Austrian
demands on Servia.
No. 95.
SIR M. DE BUNSEN TO SIR EDWARD GREY. —
(RECEIVED JULY 30.)
(Telegraphic.) VIENNA, JULY 30, 1914.
RUSSIAN Ambassador hopes that Russian mobilisation
will be regarded by Austria as what it is, viz., a clear intima-
tion that Russia must be consulted regarding the fate of
Servia, but he does not know how the Austrian Government
are taking it. He says that Russia must have an assurance
that Servia will not be crushed, but she would understand
that Austria-Hungary is compelled to exact from Servia mea-
sures which will secure her Slav provinces from the continu-
ance of hostile propaganda from Servian territory.
The French Ambassador hears from Berlin that the
German Ambassador at Vienna is instructed to speak ser-
iously to the Austro-Hungarian Government against acting
in a manner calculated to provoke a European war.
Unfortunately the German Ambassador is himself so
identified with extreme anti-Russian and anti-Servian feeling
prevalent in Vienna that he is unlikely to plead the cause of
peace with entire sincerity.
Although I am not able to verify it, I have private infor-
mation that the German Ambassador knew the text o'f the
Austrian ultimatum to Servia before it was despatched and
telegraphed it to the German Emperor. I know from the
German Ambassador himself that he endorses every line
of it.


No. 96.
SIR M. DE BUNSEN TO SIR EDWARD GREY.—
(RECEIVED JULY 30.)
(Telegraphic.) VIENNA, JULY 30, 1914.
IHE Russian Ambassador gave the French Ambassador
and myself this afternoon at the French Embassy, where I
happened (o be, an account of his interview with the Minister
for Foreign Affairs, which he said was quite friendly. The
for Foreign Affairs had told him that as Russia
had mobilised, Austria must, of course, do the same. This,
hovvevei, should, not be regarded as a threat, but merely as
the adoption of military precautions similar to those which
had been taken across the frontier. .He said he had no objec-
tion to the Russian Minister for Foreign Affairs and the
Austrian Ambassador at St. Petersburgh continuing their
conversations, although he did not say that they could be
resumed 011 the basis of the Servian reply.
On the whole, the Russian Ambassador is not dissatisfied.
He had begun to make his preparations for his departure on
the strength of a rumour that Austria would declare war in
reply to mobilisation. He now hopes that something may
yet be done to prevent war with Austria.
No. 97.
SIB G. BUCHANAN TO SIB EDWABD GBEY.-
—(RECEIVED JULY 30.)
(Telegraphic.) ST. PETEBSBUEGH, JULY 30, 1914.
FRENCH Ambassador and I visited Minister for
Foreign Affairs this morning. His Excellency said that
German Ambassador had told him yesterday afternoon that
German Government were willing to guarantee that Servian
integrity would be respected by Austria. To this he had
replied that this might be so, but nevertheless Servia would
become an Austrian vassal, just as, in similar circumstances,
Bokhara had become a Russian vassal. There would be a
revolution in Russia if she were to tolerate such a state of
affairs.
M. Sazonof told us that absolute proof was in possession
of Russian Government that Germany was making military
and naval preparations against Russia—more particularly
in the direction of the Gulf of Finland."


German Ambassador had a second interview with Min-
ister for Foreign Affairs at 2 A.M., when former completely
broke down 011 seeing that war was inevitable. He hppealed
to M. Sazonof to make some suggestion which he could tele-
graph to German Government as, a last hope. M. Sazonof
accordingly drew up and handed to German Ambassadoi a
formula in French, of which following is translation:
"If Austria, recognising that her conflict with Servia
has assumed character of question of European interest,
declares herself ready to eliminate from her ultimatum points
which violate principle of sovereignty of Servia, Russia
engages to stop all military preparations."
Preparations for general mobilisation will be proceeded
with if this proposal is .rejected by Austria, and inevitable
result will be a European war. Excitement here has reached
such a pitch that, if Austria refuses to make a concession,
Russia cannot hold back, and, now that she knows that Ger-
many is arming, she can hardly postpone, for strategical
reasons, converting partial into general mobilisation.
No. 98.
SIR E. GOSCHEN TO SIR EDWARD GREY.
(RECEIVED JULY 30.)
(Telegraphic.) BERLIN, JULY 30, 1914.
SECRETARY of State informs me that immediately on
receipt of Prince Lichnowsky's telegram recording his last
conversation with you he asked Austro-Hungarian Govern-
ment whether they would be willing to accept mediation on
basis of occupation by Austrian troops of Belgrade or some
other point and issue their conditions from there. He has
up till now received no reply, but he fears Russian mobilisa-
tion against Austria will have increased difficulties, as Austro-
Hungary, who has as yet only mobilised against Servia, will
probably find it necessary also against Russia. Secretary
of State says if you can succeed in getting Russia to agree to
above basis for an arrangement and in persuading her in the
meantime to take no steps which might be regarded as an act
of aggression against Austria he still sees some chance that
European peace may be preserved.
He begged me to impress on you difficulty of German's
position in view of Russian mobilisation and militaiy mea-
sures which he hears are being taken in France. Bey r ond
recall of officers on leave—a measure which had been officially


taken after, and not before, visit of French Ambassador yes-
terday—lmperial Government bad done nothing special in
way of military preparations. Something, however, would
have soon to be done, for it might be too late, and when they
mobilised they would have to mobilise on three sides. He
regretted this, as he knew France did not desire war, but it
would be a military necessity.
His Excellency added that telegram received from Prince
Lichnowsky last night contains matter which he had heard
with regret, but not exactly with surprise, and at all events
he thoroughly appreciated frankness and loyalty with which
you had spoken.
He also told me that this telegram had only reached
Berlin very late last night; had it been received earlier Chan-
cellor would of course, not have spoken to me in way he had
done.
No. 99.
SIR F. BERTIE TO SIR EDWARD GREY. —(RECEIVED JULY 30.)
(Telegraphic.) PARIS, JULY 30, 1914.
PRESIDENT of the Republic tells me that the Russian
Government have been informed by the German Government
that unless Russia stopped her mobilisation Germany would
mobilise. But a further report, since received from St.
Petersburgh, states that the German communication had
been modified, and was now a request to be informed on what
conditions Russia would consent to demobilisation. The
answer given is that she agrees to do so on condition! that
Austria-Hungary gives an assurance that she will respect
the sovereignty of Servia and submit certain of the demands
of the Austrian note, which Servia has not accepted, to an
international discussion.
President thinks that these conditions will not be accepted
by Austria. He is convinced that peace between the Powers
is in the hands of Great Britain. If His Majesty's Govern-
ment announced that England would come to the aid of France
in the event of a conflict between France and Germany as a
result of the present differences between Austria and Servia,
there would be no war, for Germany would at once modify
her attitude.
I explained to him how difficult it would be for His
Majesty's Government to make such an announcement, but
he said'that he must maintain that it would be in the interests


of peace. I ranee, lie said, is pacific. She does not desire
war, and all that she has done at present is to make prepara-
tions for mobilisation, so as not to be taken unawares. The
French Government will keep His Majesty's Government
informed of everything that may be done in that way. They
have reliable information that the German troops'are con-
centrated round Thionville and Metz ready for war. If there
weie a general war on the Continent it would inevitably draw
England into it for the protection of her vital interests. A
declaration now of her intention to support France, whose
desire it is that peace should be maintained, would almost
certainly prevent Germany going to war.
No. 100.
SIN R. EODD TO SIR EDWARD GREY.—(RECEIVED JULY 30.)
(Telegraphic.) ROME, JULY 30, 1914.
+1 Ambassador told me last night that he thought
that Germany would be able to prevent Austria from making
any exoibitant demands if Servia could be induced to submit
and to ask for peace early, say, as soon as the occupation of
Belgrade had been accomplished.
I made to his Excellency the personal suggestion that
some tormula might be devised by Germany which might be
acceptable for an exchange of views.
I see, however, that you have already made this
suggestion.
No. 101.
SIR EDWARD GREY TO SIR E. GOSCHEN.
(Telegraphic.) FOREIGN OFFICE, JULY 30,1914.
YOUR telegram of 29th July.*
His Majesty's Government cannot for a moment enter-
tain the Chancellor's proposal that they should bind them-
selves to neutrality on such terms.
What he asks us in effect is to engage to stand by while
French colonies are taken and France is beaten so long as
Germany does not take French territory as distinct from the
colonies.
From the material point of view such a proposal is unac-
ceptable, for France, without further territory in Europe


being taken from her, could be so crushed as to lose her posi-
tion as a Great Power, and become subordinate to German
policy.
Altogether, apart from that, it would be a disgrace for us
to make this bargain with Germany at the expense of France,
a disgrace from which the good name of this country would
never recover.
The Chancellor also in effect asks us to bargain away
whatever obligation or interest we have as regards the neu-
trality of Belgium. We could not entertain that bargain
either.
Having said so much, it is unnecessary to examine
whether the prospect of a future general neutrality agreement
between England and Germany offered positive advantages
sufficient to compensate us for tying our hands now. We
must preserve our full freedom to act as circumstances may
seem to us to require in any such unfavourable and regret-
table development of the present crisis as the Chancellor
contemplates.
You should speak to the Chancellor in the above sense,
and add most earnestly that the one way of maintaining the
good relations between England and Germany is that they
should continue to work together to preserve the peace of
Europe; if we succeed in this object, the mutual relations of
Germany and England will, I believe, be ipso facto improved
and strengthened. For that object His Majesty's Govern-
ment will work in that way with all sincerity and good-will.
And I will say this: If the peace of Europe can be pre-
served, and the present crisis safely passed, my own endea-
vour will be to promote some arrangement to which Germany
could be a party, by which she could be assured that no
aggressive or hostile policy would be pursued against her or
her allies by France, Russia, and ourselves, jointly or sepa-
rately. I have desired this and worked for it, as far as I
could, through the last Balkan crisis, and, Germany having a
corresponding object, our relations sensibly improved. The
idea has hitherto been too Utopian to form the subject of
definite proposals, but if this present crisis, so much more
acute than any that Europe has gone through for genera-
tions, be safely passed, I am hopeful that the relief and
reaction which will follow may make possible some more
definite rapprochement between the Powers than has been
possible hitherto.
* See No. 85.


No. 102.
SIR EDWARD GREY TO SIR E. GOSCHEN.
(Telegraphic.) FOREIGN OFFICE, JULY 30, 1914.
I HAVE warned Prince Lichnowsky that Germany must
not count upon our standing aside in all circumstances. This
is doubtless the substance of the telegram from Prince Lich-
nowsky to German Chancellor, to which reference is made
in the last two paragraphs of your telegram of 30th July.*
* See No. 98.
No. 103.
SIR EDWARD GREY TO SIR G. BUCHANAN.
(Telegraphic.) FOREIGN OFFICE, JULY 30, 1914.
GERMAN Ambassador informs me that German Govern-
ment would endeavour to influence Austria, after taking Bel-
grade and Servian territory in region of frontier, to promise
not to advance further, while Powers endeavoured to arrange
that Servia should give satisfaction sufficient to pacify Aus-
tria. Territory occupied would of course be evacuated when
Austria was satisfied. I suggested this yesterday as a pos-
sible relief to the situation, and, if it can be obtained, I would
earnestly hope that it might be agreed to suspend further
military preparations on all sides.
Russian Ambassador has told me of condition laid down
by M. Sazonof, as quoted in your telegram of the 30th July,*
and fears it cannot be modified; but if Austrian advance were
stopped after occupation of Belgrade, I think Russian Min-
ister for Foreign Affairs' formula might be changed to read
that the Powers would examine how Servia could fully satisfy
Austria without impairing Servian sovereign rights or
independence.
If Austria, having occupied Belgrade and neighbouring
Servian territory, declares herself ready, in the interest of
European peace, to cease her advance and to discuss how a
complete settlement can be arrived at, I hope that Russia
would also consent to discussion and suspension of further
military preparations, provided that other Powers did the
same.
It is a slender chance of preserving peace, but the only
one I can suggest if Russian Minister for Foreign Affairs can
come to no agreement at Berlin. You should inform Min-
ister for Foreign Affairs.
* See No. 97.


No. 104.
SIR EDWARD GREY TO SIR F. BERTIE.
(Telegraphic.) FOREIGN OFFICE, JULY 30, 1914.
YOU should inform the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of my telegram to Sir G. Buchanan of to-day,* and say that I
know that he has been urging Russia not to precipitate a
crisis. I hope he may be able to support this last suggestion
at St. Petersburgh.
* See No. 103.
No. 105.
SIR EDWARD GREY TO SIR F. BERTIE.
SIR, FOREIGN OFFICE, JULY 30, 1914.
M. CAMBON reminded me to-day of the letter I had
written to him two years ago, in which we agreed that, if
the peace of Europe was seriously threatened, we would dis-
cuss what we were prepared to do. I enclose for conven-
ience of reference copies of the letter in question and of M.
Cambon's reply. He said that the peace of Europe was never
more seriously threatened than it was now. He did not wish
to ask me to say directly that w T e would intervene, but he
would like me to say what w T e should do if certain circum-
stances arose. The particular hypothesis he had in mind
was an aggression by Germany on France. He gave me a
paper, of which a copy is also enclosed, showing that the
German military preparations were more advanced and more
on the offensive upon the frontier than anything France had
yet done. He anticipated that the aggression would take the
form of either a demand that France should cease her pre-
parations, or a demand that she should' engage to remain
neutral if there was war between Germany and Russia.
Neither of these things could France admit.
I said that the Cabinet was to meet to-morrow morning,
and I would see him again to-morrow afternoon.
I am, &c.,
E. GREY.
Enclosure 1 in No. 105.
SIR EDWARD GREY TO M. CAMBON.
My dear Ambassador, FOREIGN OFFICE, NOVEMBER 22, 1912.
FROM time to time in recent years the French and
British naval and military experts have consulted together.
It has always been understood that such consultation does


not restrict the freedom of either Government to decide at
any future time whether or not to assist the other by armed
01 ce * i e agreed that consultation between experts is
not, and ought not to be regarded as, an engagement that
commits either Government to action in a contingency that
has not arisen and may never arise. The disposition, for
instance, of the French and British fleets respectively at the
present moment is not based upon an engagement to co-ope-
rate in war.
You have, however, pointed out that, if either Govern-
ment, had grave reason to expect an unprovoked attack by a
third Power, it might become essential to know whether it
could in that event depend upon the armed assistance of the
other.
I agree that, if either Government had grave reason to
expect an unprovoked attack by a third Power, or something
that threatened the general peace, it should immediately dis-
cuss with the other whether both Governments should act
together to prevent aggression and to preserve peace, and, if
so, what measures they would be prepared to take in com-
mon. If these measures involved action, the plans of the
General Staffs would at once be taken into consideration, and
the Governments would then decide what effect should be
given to them.
Yours, &c.,
E. GREY,
.Enclosure 2 in No. 105.
M* OAMBON TO SIR EDWARD GREY.
(Translation.)
FRENCH EMBASSY, LONDON.,
Dear Sir Edward, NOVEMBER 23, 1912.
YOU reminded me in your letter of yesterday, 22nd
November, that during the last few years the military and
naval authorities of France and Great Britain had consulted
with each other from time to time; that it had always been
understood that these consultations should not restrict the
liberty of either Government to decide in the future whether
they should lend each other the support of their armed forces;
that, on either side, these consultations between experts were
not and should not be considered as engagements binding our
Governments to take action in certain eventualities; that,


however, I had remarked to you that, if one or other of the
two Governments had grave reasons to fear an unprovoked
attack on the part*of a third Power, it would become essen-
tial to know whether it could count on the armed support of
the other.
Your letter answers that point, and I am authorised to
state that, in the event of one of our two Governments having
grave reasons to fear either an attack from a third Power,
or some event threatening the general peace, that Govern-
ment would immediately examine with the other the question
whether both Governments should act together in order to
prevent aggression or preserve peace. If so, the two Gov-
ernments would deliberate as to the measures which they
would be prepared to take in common; if those measures
involved action, the two Governments would take into imme-
diate consideration the plans of their general staffs and would
then decide as to the effect to be given to those plans.
Yours, &c.,
PAUL CAMBON.
Enclosure 3 in No. 105.
FRENCH MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS TO M. CAMBON.
(Translation.)
THE German army had its advance-posts on our frontiers
yesterday (Friday). German patrols twice penetrated on
to our territory. Our advance-posts are withdrawn to a dis-
tance of 10 kilom. from the frontier. The local population
is protesting against being thus abandoned to the attack of
the enemy's army, but the Government wishes to make it clear
to public opinion and to the British Government that in no
case will France be the aggressor. The whole 16th corps
from Metz, reinforced by a part of the Bth from Treves and
Cologne, is occupying the frontier at Metz on the Luxemburg
side. The 15th army corps from Strassburg has closed up on
the frontier. The inhabitants of Alsace-Lorraine are pre-
vented by the threat of being shot from crossing the frontier.
Reservists have been called back to Germany by tens of
thousands. This is the last stage before mobilisation, whereas
we have not called out a single reservist.
As you see, Germany has done it. I would add that all
my information goes to show that the German preparations
began on Saturday, the very day on which the Austrian note
was handed in.


These facts, added to those contained in my telegram
of yesterday, will enable you to prove to the British Govern-
ment the pacific intentions of the one party and the aggres-
sive intentions of the other.
PARIS, JULY 31, 1914.
No. 106.
SIR R. RODD TO SIR EDWARD GREY.—(RECEIVED JULY 31.)
(Telegraphic.) ROME, JULY 30, 1914.
I LEARNT from the Minister for Foreign Affairs, who
for me this evening, that the Austrian Government had
declined to continue the direct exchange of views with the
Russian Government, But he had reason to believe that Ger-
many was now disposed to give more conciliatory advice
to. Austria, as she seemed convinced that we should act with
France and Russia, and was most anxious to avoid issue
with us.
He said he was telegraphing to the Italian Ambassador
at Berlin to ask the German Government to suggest that the
idea of an exchange of views between the four Powers should
be resumed in any form which Austria would consider accep-
table. It seemed to him that Germany might invite Austria
to state exactly the terms which she would demand from
Servia, and give a guarantee that she would neither deprive
her of independence nor annex territory. It would be use-
less to ask for anything less than was contained in the Aus-
trian ultimatum, and Germany would support no proposal
that did not imply non-success for Austria. We might, on
the other hand, ascertain from Russia what she would accept,
and, once we knew the standpoints of these two countries,
discussions could be commenced at once. There was still
time so long as Austria had received no check. He in any
case was in favour of continuing an exchange of views with
His Majesty's Government if the idea of discussions between
the four Powers was impossible.
No. 107.
SIR E. GOSCHEN TO SIR EDWARD GREY.—(RECEIVED JULY 31.)
(Telegraphic.) BERLIN, JULY 30, 1914.
I DO not know whether you have received a reply from
the German Government to the communication* which you
made to them through the German Ambassador in London


asking whether they could suggest any method by which the
tour Powers could use their mediating influence between
ussia and Austria. I was informed last night that they had
not had time to send an answer yet. To-day, in reply to ah
enquiry from the French Ambassador as to whether the
Imperial Government had proposed any course of action, the
Secretary of State said that he had felt that time would be
saved by communicating with Vienna direct, and that he had
asked the Austro-Hungarian Government what would satisfy
them. No answer had, however, yet been returned.
+u wt Cliancellor told last night that he was "pressing
e button" as had as he could, and that he was not sure
whether he had not gone so far in urging moderation at
Vienna that matters had been precipitated rather than
otherwise.
* See No. 84.
No. 108.
SIR E. GOSCHEN TO SIR EDWARD GREY—(RECEIVED JULY 31.)
(Telegraphic.) BERLIN, JULY 31, 1914.
CHAN CELLOR informs me that his efforts to preach
peace and moderation at Vienna have been seriously handi-
capped by the Russian mobilisation against Austria. He has
done everything possible to attain his object at Vienna, per-
haps even rather more than was altogether palatable at the
Ballplatz. He could not, however, leave his country defence-
less while time was being utilised by other PoAvers; and if,
as he learns is the case, military measures are now 'being/
taken by Russia against Germany also, it would be impossible
for him to remain quiet. He wished to tell me that it was
quite possible that in a very short time, to-day perhaps, the
German Government would take some very serious step; he
was, in fact, just on the point of going to have an audience
with the Emperor.
His Excellency added that the news of the active prepara-
tions on the Russo-German frontier had reached him just
when the Czar had appealed to the Emperor in the name of
their old friendship, to mediate at Vienna, and when the
Emperor was actually conforming to that request.


No. 109.
SIB E. GOSCHEN TO SIB EDWABD GBEY. —(RECEIVED JULY 31.)
(Telegraphic.) BERLIN, JULY 31, 1914.
I READ to the Chancellor this morning yonr answer to
his appeal for British neutrality in the event of war, as con-
tained in your telegram of yesterday.* His Excellency was
so taken up with the news of the Russian measures along the
frontier, referred to in my immediately preceding telegram,
that he received your communication without comment. He
asked me to let him have the message that I had just read
to him as a memorandum, as he would like to reflect upon
it before giving an answer, and his mind was so full of grave
matters that he could not he certain of remembering all its
points. I therefore handed to him the text of your message
on the understanding that it should be regarded merely as a
record of conversation, and not as an official document.
His Excellency agreed.
* See No. 101.
No. 110.
SIR EDWARD GREY TO SIR G. BUCHAXAX.
(Telegraphic.) FOREIGX OFFICE, JULY 31, 1914.
I LEARN from the German Ambassador that, as a result
of suggestions by the German Government, a conversation
has taken place at Vienna between the Austrian Minister for
Foreign Affairs and the Russian Ambassador. The Austrian
Ambassador at St. Petersburgh has also been instructed that
he may converse with the Russian Minister for Foreign
Affairs, and that he should give explanations about the Aus-
trian ultimatum to Servia, and discuss suggestions and any
questions directly affecting Austro-Russian relations. If the
Russian Government object to the Austrians mobilising eight
army corps, it might be pointed out that this is not too great
a number against 400,000 Servians.
The German Ambassador asked me to urge the Russian
Government to show goodwill in the discussions and to sus-
pend their military preparations.
It is with great satisfaction that I have learnt that dis-
cussions are being resumed between Austria and Russia, and
you should express this to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and tell him that I earnestly hope he will encourage them.


I informed the German Ambassador that, as regards
military preparations, I did not see how Russia could be
mged to suspend them unless some limit were put by Austria
to the advance of her troops into Servia.
No. 111.
Sib Edwaed Geey to Sir E. Goschen.
(Telegraphic.) Foreign- Office, July 31, 1913.
X HOPE that the conversations which are now proceed-
ing between Austria and Russia may lead to a satisfactory
result. The stumbling-block hitherto has been Austrian mis-
trust of Servian assurances, and Russian mistrust of Aus-
trian intentions with regard to the independence and integrity
of Servia. It has occurred to me that, in the event of this
mistrust preventing a solution being found by Vienna and
St. Petersburgh, Germany might sound Vienna, and I would
undertake to sound St. Petersburgh, whether it would be
possible for the four disinterested Powers to offer to Austria
that they would undertake to see that she obtained full satis-
faction of her demands on Servia, provided that they did not
impair Servian sovereignty and the integrity of" Servian
territory. As your Excellency is aware, Austria has already
declared her willingness to respect them. Russia might be
informed by the four Powers that they would undertake to
pi event Austrian demands going the length of impairing
Servian sovereignty and integrity. All Powers would of
course suspend further military operations or preparations.
1 ou may sound the Secretary about this proposal.
I said to German Ambassador this morning that if Ger-
many could get any reasonable proposal put forward which
made it clear that Germany and Austria were striving to
preserve European peace, and that Russia and France would
be unreasonable if they rejected it, I would support it at St.
Petersburgh and Paris, and go the length of saying that if
Russia and France'would not accept it His Majesty's Gov-
ernment would have nothing more to do with the conse-
quences; but, otherwise, I told German Ambassador that if
France became involved we should be drawn in.
You can add this when sounding Chancellor or Secretary
of State as to proposal above.


No. 112.
SIR E. GOSCHEN TO SIR EDWARD GREY.—(RECEIVED JULY 31.)
(Telegraphic.) BERLIN, JULY 31, 1914.
ACCORDING- to information just received by German
Government from their Ambassador at St. Petersburg!].,
whole Russian army and fleet are being mobilised. Chan-
cellor tells me that "Kriegsgefahr" will be proclaimed at
once by German Government, as it can only be against Ger-
many that Russian general mobilisation is directed. Mobi-
lisation would follow almost immediately. His Excellency
added in explanation that " Kriegsgefahr" signified the tak-
ing of certain precautionary measures consequent upon
strained relations with a foreign country.
This news from St. Petersburgh, added his Excellency,
seemed to him to put an end to all hope of a peaceful solution
of the crisis. Germany must certainly prepare for all
emergencies.
I asked him whether he could not still put pressure on
the authorities at Vienna to do something in general interests
to resassure Russia and to show themselves disposed to con-
tinue discussions on a friendly basis. He replied that last
night he had begged Austria to reply to your last proposal,
and that he had received a reply to the effect that Austrian
Minister for Foreign Affairs would take wishes of the
Emperor this morning in the matter.
No. 113.
SIR G. BUCHANAN TO SIR EDWARD GREY. —(RECEIVED JULY 31.)
(Telegraphic.) ST. PETERSBURGH, JULY 31, 1914.
IT has been decided to issue orders for general
mobilisation.
This decision was taken in consequence of report received
from Russian Ambassador in Vienna to the effect that Aus-
tria is determined not to yield to intervention of Powers, and
that she is moving troops against Russia as well as against
Servia.
Russia has also reason to believe that Germany is making-
active military preparations, and she cannot afford to let
her get a start.


No. 114.
SIR EDWARD GREY TO SIR F. BERTIE AND SIR E. GOSCCHEN.
(Telegraphic.) FOREIGN OFFICE, JULY 31,1914.
I STILL trust that situation is not irretrievable, but in
view of prospect of mobilisation in Germany it becomes
essential to Ilis Majesty's Government, in view of existing
treaties, to ask whether French (German) Government is
prepared to engage to respect neutrality of Belgium so long
as no-other Power violates it.
J
A similar request is being addressed to German (French)
Government. It is important to have an early answer.
No. 115.
SIR EDWARD GREY TO SIR F. YILLIERS.
(Telegraphic.) FOREIGN OFFICE, JULY 31, 1914.
IN view of existing treaties, you should inform Minister
for Foreign Affairs that, in consideration of the possibility
of a European war, I have asked French and German Gov-
ernments whether each is prepared to respect the neutrality
of Belgium provided it is violated by no other Power.
You should say that I assume that the Belgian Govern-
ment will maintain to the utmost of her power her neutrality,
which I desire and expect other Powers to uphold and observe.
You should inform the Belgian Government that an early
reply is desired.
No. 116.
SIR EDWARD GREY TO SIR F. BERTIE.
(Telegraphic.) FOREIGN OFFICE, JULY 31, 1914.
I HAVE received your telegram of yesterday's date.*
Nobody here feels that in this dispute, so far as it has yet
gone, British treaties or obligations are involved. Feeling
is quite different from what it was during the Morocco ques-
tion. That crisis involved a dispute directly involving
France, whereas in this case France is being drawn into a
dispute which is not hers.
I believe it to be quite untrue that our attitude has been
a decisive factor in situation. German Government do not
expect our neutrality.


We cannot undertake a definite pledge to intervene in a
war. I have so told the French Ambassador, who has urged
His Majesty's Government to reconsider this decision.
I have told him that we should not be justified in giving
any pledge at the present moment, but that we will certainly
consider the situation again directly there is a new
development.
* See No. 99.
/
No. 117.
SIR F. BERTIE TO SIR EDWARD GREY.—(RECEIVED JULY 31.)
(Telegraphic.) PARIS, JULY 31, 1914.
AT 7 o'clock this evening I was sent for by Minister for
Foreign Affairs. When I arrived the German Ambassador
was leaving his Excellency.
German Ambassador had informed his Excellency that,
in view of the fact that orders had been given for the total
mobilisation of Russian army and fleet, German Government
have in an ultimatum which they have addressed to the Rus-
sian Government required that Russian forces should be
demobilised.
The German Government will consider it necessary to
order the total mobilisation of the German army on the Rus-
sian and French frontiers if within twelve hours the Russian
Government do not give an undertaking to comply with Ger-
man demand.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs asks me to communi-
cate this to you, and enquires what, in these circumstances,
will be the attitude of England.
German Ambassador could not say when the twelve hours
terminates. He is going to call at the Ministry for Foreign
Affairs to-morrow (Saturday), at 1 P.M. in order to receive
the French Government's answer as to the attitude they will
adopt in the circumstances.
He intimated the possibility of his requiring his
passports.
I am informed by the Russian Ambassador that he is not
aware of any general mobilisation of the Russian forces
having taken place.


No. 118.
SIR M. DE BUNSEN TO SIR EDWARD GREY.—(RECEIVED JULY 31.)
(Telegraphic.) VIENNA, JULY 31, 1914.
I AM informed by Count Forgach, Under-Secretary of
State, that although Austria was compelled to respond to
Russian mobilisation, which he deplored, the Austrian Ambas-
sador in London has received instructions to inform you that
mobilisation was not to be regarded as a necessarily hostile
act on either side. Telegrams were being exchanged between
the Emperor of Russia and the German Emperor, and con-
versations were proceeding between Austrian Ambassador
at St. Petersburgli and Russian Minister for Foreign Affairs.
A general war might, he seriously hoped, be staved off by
these efforts. On my expressing my fear that Germany
would mobilise, he said that Germany must do something, in
his opinion, to secure her position. As regards Russian inter-
vention 011 behalf of Servia, Austria-Hungary found it diffi-
cult to recognise such a claim. I called his attention to the
fact that during the discussion of the Albanian frontier at
the London Conference of Ambassadors the Russian Govern-
ment had stood behind Servia, and that a compromise between
the views of Russia and Austria-Hungary resulted with
accepted frontier line. Although he spoke in a conciliatory
tone, and did not regard the situation as desperate, I could
not get from him any suggestion for a similar compromise
in the present case. Count Forgach is going this afternoon
to see the Russian Ambassador, whom I have informed of the
above conversation.
The Russian Ambassador has explained that Russia has
no desire to interfere unduly with Servia; that, as compared
with the late Russian Minister, the present Minister at Bel-
grade is a man of very moderate views; and that, as regards
Austrian demands, Russia had counselled Servia to yield to
them as far as she possibly could without sacrificing her
independence. His Excellency is exerting himself strongly;
in the interests of peace.
No. 119.
SIR EDWARD GREY TO SIR F. BERTIE.
Sir, FOREIGN OFFICE, JULY 31, 1914.
M. CAMBON referred to-day to a telegram that had been
shown to Sir Arthur Nicolson this morning from the French


Ambassador in Berlin, saying that it was the uncertainty
with regard to whether we would intervene which was the
encouraging element in Berlin, and that, if we would only
declare definitely on the side of Russia and France, it would
decide the German attitude in favour of peace.
I said that it was quite wrong to suppose that we had
left Germany under the impression that we would not inter-
vene. I had refused overtures to promise that we should
remain neutral. I had not only definitely declined to say
that we would remain neutral, I had even gone so far this
morning as to say to the German Ambassador that, if France
and Germany become involved in war, we should be drawn
into it. That, of course, was not the same thing as taking
an engagement to France, and I told M. Carnbon of it only
to show that we had not left Germany under the impression
that we would stand aside.
M. Cambon then asked me for my reply to what he had
said yesterday.
I said that we had come to the conclusion, in the Cabinet
to-day, that we could not give any pledge at the present time.
Though we should have to put our policy before Parliament,
we could not pledge Parliament in advance. Up to the pre-
sent moment, we did not feel, and public opinion did not feel,
that any treaties or obligations of this country were involved.
Further developments might alter this situation and cause
the Government and Parliament to take the view that inter-
vention was justified. The preservation of the neutrality
of Belgium might be, I would not say a decisive, but an
important factor, in determining our attitude. "Whether we
proposed to Parliament to intervene or not to intervene in
a war, Parliament would wish to know how we stood with
regard to the neutrality of Belgium, and it might he that I
should ask both France and Germany whether each was pre-
pared to undertake an engagement that she would not be the
first to violate the neutrality of Belguim.
M. Cambon repeated his question whether we would help
France if Germany made an attack on her.
I said that I could only adhere to the answer that, as far
as things had gone at present, we could not take any
engagement.
M. Cambon urged that Germany had from the beginning
rejected proposals that might have made for peace. It could
not Be to England's interest that France should be crushed
by Germany. We should then be in a very diminished posi-
tion with regard to Germany. In 1870 we had made a great


mistake m allowing an enormous increase of German strength,
and we should now be repeating the mistake. He asked me
whether I could not submit his question to the Cabinet again.
I said that the Cabinet would certainly be summoned as
soon as there was some new development, but at the present
moment the only answer I could give was that we could not
undertake any definite engagement.
I am, &c.,
E. GREY.
No. 120.
SLE BUCHINAS 10 SIB EDWAKD GBEY.—(RECEIVED AUGUST 1.)
(Telegrahphic.) ST. PETEESBUKGH, JULY 31,1914.
Amh^^ STER / 0r , F T ign Affa irs sent for me and French
Ambassador and asked us to telegraph to our respective,
su , bjol " ed , f °rmula as best calculated to amal-
g mate proposal made by you m your telegram of 30th July*
with formula recorded in my telegram of 30th July.f He
trusted it would meet with your approval:
am. 1 I '^: ll ! riche consentira k arrSter marche de ses troupes
rle territoire serbe, si, reconnaissant que le conflit austro-
serbe a assume ie caracßsre d'une question d'intdrSt
lie admet que les Grandes Puissances examinent la satis-
faction que la Serbie pourrait accorder au Gouvernement
d Autriche-Hongrie sans laisser porter atteinte k ses drotis
dßtat souveram et a son independance, la Russie s'engacre
a conserver son attitude expectante." f 6
His Excellency then alluded to the telegram sent to Ger-
man Emperor by Emperor of Russia in reply to the former' 3
telegram. He said that Emperor Nicholas had begun by
thanking Emperor William for his telegram and for the hopes
of peaceful solution which it held out. His Majesty had then
proceeded to assure Emperor William that no intention)
whatever of an aggressive character was concealed behind
Russian military preparations. So long as conversation with
Austria continued, His Imperial Majesty undertook that not
a single man should be moved across the frontier; it was
however, of course impossible, for reasons explained, to stop
a mobilisation which was already in progress.
M. Sazonof said that undoubtedly there would be better
prospect of a pea6eful solution if the suggested conversation


were to take place in London, where the atmosphere was far
more favourable, and he therefore hoped that you would see
your way to agreeing to this.
His Excellency ended by expressing his deep gratitude
to His Majesty's Government, who had done so much to save
the situation. It would be largely due to them if war were
prevented. The Emperor, the Russian Government, and the
Russian people would never forget the firm attitude adopted
by Great Britain.
* TRANSLATION-' 'lf Austria will agree to check the
advance of her troops on Servian territory; if, recognising
that the dispute between Austria and Servia has assume
a character of European interest, she will allow the Great
Powers to look into the matter and determine whether Servia
could satisfy the Austro-Hungarian Government without
impairing her rights as a sovereign State or her indepen
ence, Russia will undertake to maintain her waiting attitude.
* See No. 103. t See No. 97.
No. 121.
SIR E. GOSCHEN TO SIR EDWARD GREY.— (RECEIVED AUGUST 1.)
(Telegraphic.) Jxjly 31 ' 1914
YOUR telegram of 31st July.*
I spent an hour with Secretary of State urging him most
earnestly to accept your proposal and make another effort
to prevent terrible catastrophe of a European war.
He expressed himself very sympathetically towards your
proposal, and appreciated your continued efforts to maintain
peace, but said it was impossible for the Imperial Government
to consider any proposal until they had received an answer
from Russia to their communication of to-day; this com-
munication, which he admitted had the form of an ultimatum,
being that, unless Russia could inform the Imperial Govern-
ment within twelve hours that she would immediately counter-
mand her mobilisation against Germany and Austria,


Germany would be obliged on her side to mobilise at once.
I asked his Excellency why they had made their demand
even more difficult for Russia to accept by asking them to
demobilise in south as well. He replied that it was in
to prevent Russia from saying all her mobilisation was only
directed against Austria.
His Excellency said that if the answer from Russia was
satisfactory he thought personally that your proposal merited
favourable consideration, and in any case he would lay it
before the Emperor and Chancellor, but he repeated that it
was of no use discussing it until the Russian Government had
sent in their answer to the German demand.
He again assured me that both the Emperor William, at
the request of the Emperor of Russia, and the German
Foreign Office had even up till last night been urging Austria
to show willingness to continue discussions—and telegraphic
and telephonic communications from Vienna had been of a
promising nature—but Russia's mobilisation had spoilt every-
thing.
* See No. 111.
No. 122.
SIR E. GOSCHEX TO SIR EDWAED GREY.—(RECEIVED AUGUST 1.)
[(Telegraphic.) BEELIN, JULY 31,1914.
NEUTRALITY of Belgium, referred to in your telegram
of 31st July to Sir F. Bertie.*
I have seen Secretary of State, who informs me that he
must consult the Emperor and the Chancellor before he could
possibly answer. I gathered from what he said that he
thought any reply they might give could not but disclose a
certain amount of their plan of campaign in the event of war
ensuing, and he was therefore very doubtful whether they
would return any answer at all. His Excellency, nevertheless,
took note of your request.


It appears from what he said that German Government
consider that certain hostile acts have already been committed
by Belgium. As an instance of this, he alleged that a consign-
ment of corn for Germany had been placed under an embargo
already.
I hope to see his Excellency to-morrow again to discuss
the matter further, but the prospect of obtaining a definite
answer seems to me remote.
In speaking to me to-day the Chancellor made it clear that
Germany would in any case desire to know the reply returned
to you by the French Government. ,
* See No. 114.
No. 123.
SIB EDWAED GEEY TO SIB E. GOSCHEE".
FOEEIGET OFFICE, AUGUST 1, 1914.
I TOLD the German Ambassador to-day that the reply*
of the German Government with regard to the neutrality of
Belgium was a matter of very great regret, because the
neutrality of Belgium affected feeling in this country. If
Germany could see her way to give the same assurance as
that which- had been given by France it would materially
contribute to relieve anxiety and tension here. On the other
hand, if there were a violation of the neutrality of Belgium
by one combatant while the other respected it, it would be
extremely difficult to restrain public feeling in this country.
I said that we had been discussing this question at a Cabinet
meeting, and as I was authorised to tell him this I gave him
a memorandum of it.
He asked me whether, if Germany gave a promise not
to violate Belgium neutrality we would engage to remain
neutral.
I replied that I could not say that; our hands were still
free, and we were considering what our attitude should be.


All I could say was that our attitude would be determined
largely by public opinion here, and tbat tbe neutrality of
Belgium would appeal very strongly to public opinion bere.
I did not think tbat we could give a promise of neutrality on
tbat condition alone.
Tbe Ambassador pressed me as to whether I could not
formulate conditions on which we would remain neutral. He
even suggested tbat tbe integrity of France and her colonies
might be guaranteed.
I said tbat I felt obliged to refuse definitely any promise
to remain neutral on similar terms, and I could only say tbat
we must keep our hands free.
I am, &c.,
E. GREY.
•See No. 122.
No. 124.
SIB F. BBBTEB TO SIB EDWABD GEEY.—(RECEIVED AUGUST 1.)
.
(Telegraphic.) PAEK, JULY 31, 1914,
ON tbe receipt at 8.80 to-night of your telegram of this
afternoon,* I sent a message to Minister for Foreign Affairs
requesting to see bim. He received me at 10.30 to-night at
the where a Cabinet Council was being held. He
took a note of the enquiry as to the respecting by France of
tbe neutrality of Belgium which you instructed me to make.
He told me tbat a communication had been made to you
by tbe German Ambassador in London of tbe intention of
Germany to order a general mobilisation of her army if
Russia do not demobilise at once. He is urgently anxious
as to what tbe attitude of England will be in the circumstances
and begs an answer may be made by His Majesty's Govern-
ment at tbe earliest moment possible.
Minister for Foreign Affairs also told me tbat tbe Ger-
man Embassy is packing up.
* See No. 114.


No. 125.
SIR F. BERTIE TO SIR EDWARD GREY.—(RECEIVED AUGUST 1,)
(Telegraphic.) PARIS, JULY 31, 1914.
MY immediately preceding telegram.*
Political Director has brought me the reply of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs to your enquiry respecting the
neutrality of Belgium. It is as follows: —
French Government are resolved to respect the neutrality
of Belgium, and it would only be in the event of some other
Power violating that neutrality that France might find her-
self under the necessity, in order to assure defence of her
own security, to act otherwise. This assurance has been
given several times. President of the Republic spoke of it to
the King of the Belgians, and the French Minister at Brussels
has spontaneously renewed the assurance to the Belgian
Minister for Foreign Affairs to-day.
* See No. 124.
No. 126.
SIR F. BERTIE TO SIR EDWARD GREY. —(RECEIVED AETGIJST 1.)
(Telegraphic.) PARIS, AUGUST 1, 1914.
I HAVE had conversation with the Political Director,
who states that the German Ambassador was informed, on
calling at the Ministry for Foreign Affairs this morning, that
the French Government failed to comprehend the reason
which prompted his communication of yesterday evening.
It was pointed out to his Excellency that general mobilisation
in Russia had not been ordered until after Austria had
decreed a general mobilisation, and that the Russian Govern-
ment were ready to demobilise if all Powers did likewise.
It seemed strange to the French Government that in view of
this and of the fact that Russia and Austria were ready to
converse, the German Government should have at that
moment, presented an ultimatum at St. 1 etei sbuigh lequiimg


immediate demobilisation by Russia. There were no dif-
ferences at issue between France and Germany, but the Ger-
man Ambassador had made a menacing communication to
the French Government and had requested an answer the
nest day, intimating that he would have to break off relations
and leave Paris if the reply were not satisfactory. The
Ambassador was informed that the French Government con-
sidered that this was an extraordinary proceeding.
The German Ambassador, who is to see the Minister for
Foreign Affairs again this evening, said nothing about de-
manding his passports, but he stated that he had packed up.
No. 127.
SIR M. DE BUNSEN TO SIR EDWARD GREY.—(RECEIVED -=
AUGUST 1.)
(Telegraphic.) VIENNA., AUGUST 1,1914.
GENERAL mobilisation of army and fleet.
No. 128.
SIR F. VILLIERS TO. SIR EDWARD GREY.—(RECEIVED
AUGUST 1.)
(Telegraphic.) BRUSSELS, AUGUST 1, 1914.
BELGIAN neutrality.
The instructions conveyed in your telegram of yesterday*
have been acted upon.
Belgium expects and desires that other Powers will
observe and uphold her neutrality, which she intends to
maintain to the utmost of her power. In so informing me,
Minister for Foreign Affairs said that, in the event of the
violation of the neutrality of their territory, they believed
that tliey were in a position to defend themselves against


intrusion. The relations between Belgium and her neigh-
bours were excellent, and there was no reason to suspect their
intentions; but he thought it well, nevertheless, to be prepared
against emergencies.
* See No. 115.
No. 129.
MINISTER OF STATE, LUXEMBURG, TO SIR EDWARD GREY.
(RECEIVED AUGUST 2.)
(Translation.)
(Telegraphic.) LUXEMBURG, AUGUST 2, 1914.
The Luxemburg Minister of State has just received
through the German Minister in Luxemburg, M. de Buch, a
telegram from the Chancellor of the German Empire,
Bethmann-Hollweg, to the effect that the military measures
taken in Luxemburg do not constitute a act against
Luxemburg, but are only intended to insure against a possible
attack of a French army. Full compensation will be paid to
Luxemburg for any damage caused by using the railways
which are leased to the Empire.
—
I
No. 130.
SIR EDWARD GREY TO SIR E. GOSCHEN.
(Telegraphic.) FOREIGN OFFICE, AUGUST 1, 1914.
WE are informed that authorities at Hamburg have
forcibly detained steamers belonging to the Great Central
Company and other British merchant-ships.
I cannot ascertain on what grounds the detention of
British ships has been ordered.
You should request German Government to send im-
mediate orders that they should be allowed to proceed with-


out delay. The effect on public opinion here will be deplor-
able unless this is done. His Majesty's Government, on their
side, are most anxious to avoid any incident of an aggressive
nature, and the German Government will, I hope, be equally
careful not to take any step which would make the situation
between us impossible.
No. 131.
SIR EDWARD GREY TO SIR E. GOSCHEN.
(Telegraphic.) FOREIGN OFFICE, AUGUST 1, 1914.
I STILL believe that it might be possible to secure peace
if only a little respite in time can be gained before any Great
Power begins war.
The Russian Government has communicated to me the
readiness of Austria to discuss with Russia and the readiness
of Austria to accept a basis of mediation which is not open
to the objections raised in regard to the formula which
Russia originally suggested. - ,
Things ought not to be hopeless so long as Austria and
Russia are ready to converse, and I hope that German Gov-
ernment may be able to make use of the Russian communi-
cations referred to above, in order to avoid tension. His
Majesty's Government are carefully abstaining from any
act which may precipitate matters
No. 132.
.
SIR EDWARD GREY TO SIR E. GOSCHEN.
(Telegraphic.) FOREIGN OFFICE, AUGUST 1, 1914.
FOLLOWING telegram from M. Sazonof to Count Benc-
kendorff of the 31st July communicated to me to-day:
" (Urgent.)
" Formule amendee conformement a la proposition
anglaise : 'Si Autriche consent a arr&tter la


marche de ses troupes sur le territoire serbe et
si, reconnaissant que le conflit austro-serbe a
assumd le d une question d
europeen, elle admet que les Grandes Puissances
examinent la satisfaction que la Serbie pourrait
accorder au Gouvernement austro-hongrois sans
laisser porter atteinte k ses droits d'Etat
souverain et & son la Russie
s'engage a conserver son attitude expectante.' "
(Above communicated to all the Powers.)
TRANSLATION. —" Formula amended in accordance with
the English proposal: 'lf Austria consents to stay the march
of her troops on Servian territory, and if, recognising a
the Austro-Servian conflict has assumed the character of a
question of European interest, she admits that the Great
Powers may examine the satisfaction which Servia can accord
to the Austro-Hungarian Government without injury to her
sovereign rights as a State and to her independence, Russia
undertakes to preserve her waiting attitude.' "
No. 183.
SIR EDWARD GREY TO SIR E. GOSCHEN.
(Telegraphic.) FOREIGN OEEIOE, AUGUST 1, 1914.
M. DE ETTER came to day to communicate the contents
of a telegram from M. Sazonof, dated the 31st July, which are
as follows: —
"The Austro-Hungarian Ambassador declared the
readiness of his Government to discuss the substance of the
Austrian ultimatum to Servia. M. Sazonof replied by expres-
sing his satisfaction, and said it was desirable that the dis-
cussions should take place in London with the participation
of the Great Powers.
■ «M. Sazonof hoped that the British Government would
assume the direction of these discussions. The whole of


Europe would be thankful to them. It would be very impor-
tant that Austria should meanwhile put a stop provisionally
to her military action on Servian territory."
(The above has been communicated to the six Powers.)
No. 134.
SIR F. BERTIE TO SIR EDWARD GREY.—(RECEIVED AUGUST 1.)
(Telegraphic.) PARIS, AUGUST 1, 1914.
PRESIDENT of the Republic has informed me that
German Government were trying to saddle Russia with the
lesponsibility; that it was only after a decree of general
mobilisation had been issued in Austria that the Emperor of
Russia ordered a general mobilisation; that, although the
measures which the German Government have already taken
are in effect a general mobilisation, they are not so desig-
nated; that a French general mobilisation will become neces-
sary in self-defence, and that France is already forty-eight
hours behind Germany as regards German military prepara-
tions; that the French troops have orders not to go nearer
to the German frontier than a distance of 10 Mlom. so as to
avoid any grounds for accusations of provocation to Germany,
whereas the German troops, on the other hand, are actually
on the French frontier and have made incursions on it; that,
notwithstanding mobilisations, the Emperor of Russia has
expressed himself ready to continue his conversations with
the German Ambassador with a view to preserving the peace;
that French Government, whose wishes are markedly pacific,
sincerely desire the preservation of peace and do not quite
despair, even now, of its being possible to avoid war.
No. 135.
SIR EDWARD GREY TO SIR G. BUCHANAN.
(Telegraphic.) FOREIGN OFFICE, AUGUST 1, 1914.
INFORMATION reaches me from a most reliable source
that Austrian Government have informed German Govern-


ment that though the situation has been changed by the
mobilisation of Russia they would in full appreciation of the
efforts of England for the preservation of peace be ready to
consider favourably my proposal for mediation between
Austria and Servia. The understanding of this acceptance
would naturally be that the Austrian military action against
Servia would continue for the present, and that the British
Government would urge upon Russian Government to stop
the mobilisation of troops directed against Austria, in which
case Austria would naturally cancel those defensive military
counter-measures in Galicia, which have been forced upon
Austria by Russian mobilisation.
You should inform Minister for Foreign Affairs and say
that if, in the consideration of the acceptance of mediation
by Austria, Russia can agree to stop mobilisation, it appears
still to be possible to preserve peace. Presumably the matter
should be dicussed with German Government, also by Russian
Government.
No. 136.
SIR F. BERTIE TO SIR EDWARD GREY. —(RECEIVED AUGUST 1.)
(Telegraphic.) PARIS, AUGUST 1, 1914.
MINISTER of War informed military attachd this after-
noon that orders had been given at 3.40 for a general mobi-
lisation of the French army. This became necessary because
the Minister of War knows that, under the system of
"Kriegszustand," the Germans have called up six classes.
Three classes are sufficient to bring their covering troops up
to war strength, the remaining three being the reserve. This,
he says, being tantamount to mobilisation, is mobilisation
under another name.
The French forces on the frontier have opposed to them
eight army corps on a war footing, and an attack is expected
at any moment. It is therefore of the utmost importance to
guard against this. A zone of 10 kilom. has been left between
the French troops and German frontier. The French troops


will not attack, and the Minister of War is anxious that it
should be explained that this act of mobilisation is one for
purely defensive purposes.
%
No. 137.
SIB EDWARD G-REY TO SIR M. DE BUXSEX.
(Telegraphic.) FOREIGX OFFICE, AUGUST 1,1914.
I SAW the Austro-Hungarian Ambassador this morning.
He supplied me with the substance of a telegram which the
Austro-Hungarian Minister for Foreign Affairs had sent to
the Austrian Ambassador in Paris. In this telegraili his
Excellency was given instructions to assure the French
Minister for Foreign Affairs that there was no intention in
the minds of the Austro-Hungarian Government to impair
the sovereign rights of Servia or to obtain territorial aggran-
disement. The Ambassador added that he wa& further in-
structed to inform the French Minister for Foreign Affairs
that there was no truth in the report which had beeh pub-
lished in Faris to the effect that Austria-Hungary intended
to occupy the sanjak.
Count Mensdorff called again later at the Foreign Office.
He informed me of a telegram sent yesterday to the Austro-
Hungarian Ambassador at St. Petersburg by Count
Berchtold, and gave me the substance.
It states that Count Berchtold begged the Austrian
Ambassador, whom he sent for yesterday, to do his best to
remove the wholly erroneous impression in St. Petersburgh
that the "door had been banged" by Austria-Hungary on all
further conversations." The Russian Ambassador promised
to do this. Count Berchtold repeated on this occasion to the
Russian Ambassador the assurance which had already been
given at St. Petersburgh, to the effect that neither an infrac-
tion of Servian sovereign rights nor the acquisition of
Servian territory was being contemplated by Austria-
Hungary.


Special attention was called by Connt Mensdorff to the
fact that thi§ telegram contains a statement to the effect that
conversations at St. Petersbnrgh had not been broken off by
Austria-Hungary.
No. 138.
SIR E. GOSCHEN TO SIR EDWARD GREY.— (RECEIVED AUGUST 2.)
(Telegraphic.) BERLIN, AUGUST 1,1914*
YOUR telegram of to-day.*
I have communicated the substance of the above telegram
to the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, and spent a
long time arguing with him that the chief dispute was between
Austria and Russia, and that Germany was only drawn in as
Austria's ally. If therefore Austria and Russia were, as was
evident, ready to discuss matters and Germany did not desire
war on her own account, it seemed to me only logical that
Germany should hold -her hand and continue to work for a
peaceful settlement. Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs
said that Austria's readiness to discuss was the result of
German influence at Vienna, and, had not Russia mobilised
against Germany, all would have been well. But Russia by
abstaining from answering Germany.'s demand that she
should demobilise, had caused Germany to mobilise also.
Russia had said that her mobilisation did not necessarily
imply war, and that she could perfectly well remain mobilised
for months without making war. This was not the case with
Germany. She had the speed and Russia had the numbers,
and the safety of the German Empire forbade that Germany
should allow Russia time to bring up masses of troops from
all parts of her wide dominions. The situation now was that,
though the Imperial Government had allowed her several
hours beyond the specified time, Russia had sent no answei.
Germany had therefore ordered mobilisation, and tne Geimaii
representative at St. Petersburgh had been instructed within
a certain time to inform the Russian Government that the
Imperial Government must regard theii refusal to ansv\ei as
creating a state of war.


No. 139.
SIR G. BUCHANAN TO SIR EDWARD GREY.—("RECEIVED
AUGUST 2.)*
(Telegraphic.) ST. PETERSBURGH, AUGUST 1, 1914.
MY telegram of 31st July.*
The Emperor of Russia read his telegram to the German
Emperor to the German Ambassador at the audience given
to his Excellency yesterday. No progress whatever was
made.
In the evening M. Sazonof had an interview with the
Austrian Ambassador who, not being definitely instructed by
his Government, did his best to deflect the conversation
towards a general discussion of the relations between Austria-
Hungary and Russia instead of keeping to the question of
Servia. In reply the Minister for Foreign Affairs expressed
his desire that these relations should remain friendly, and
said that, taken in general, they were perfectly satisfactory;
but the real question which they had to solve at this moment
was whether Austria was to crush Servia and to reduce her to
the status of a vassal, or whether she was to leave Servia a
free and independent State. In these circumstances, while
the Servian question was unsolved, the abstract discussion of
the relations between Austria-Hungary and Russia was a
waste of time. The only place where a successful discussion
of this question could be expected was London, and any such
discussion was being made impossible by the action of
Austria-Hungary in subjecting Belgrade, a virtually unforti-
fied town, to bombardment.
M. Sazonof informed the French Ambassador and
myself this morning of his conversation with the Austrian
Ambassador. He went on to say that during the Balkan
crisis he had made it clear to the Austrian Government that
war with Russia must inevitably follow an Austrian attack on
Servia. It was clear that Austrian domination of Servia
was as intolerable for Russia as the dependence of the Nether-
lands on Germany would be to Great Britain. It was, in
fact, for Russia a question of life and death. The policy of


Austria had throughout been both tortuous and immoral, and
she thought that she could treat Russia with defiance, secure
in the support of her German ally. Similarly the policy of
Germany had been an equivocal and double faced policy, and it
mattered little whether the German Government knew or did
not know the terms of the Austrian ultimatum; what mattered
was that her intervention with the Austrian Government had
been postponed until the moment had passed when its
influence would have been felt. Germany was unfortunate in
her representatives in Vienna and St. Petersburgh: the
former was a violent Russophobe who had urged Austria on,
the latter had reported to his Government that Russia would
never go to war. M. Sazonof was completely weary of the
ceaseless endeavours he had made to avoid a war. No sug-
gestion held out to him had been refused. He had accepted
the proposal for a conference of four, for mediation by Great
Britain and Italy, for direct conversation between Austria
and Russia; but Germany and Austria-Hungary had either
rendered these attempts for peace ineffective by evasive
replies or had refused them altogether. TJhe action of the
Austro-Hungarian Government and the German preparations
had forced the Russian GoVernmeht to order mobilisation,
and the mobilisation of Germany had created a desperate
situation. , .
M. Sazonof added that the formula, of which the text is
contained in my telegram of 31st July,* had been forwarded
by the Russian Government to Vienna, and he would adhere
to it if you could obtain its acceptance before the frontier was
crossed by German troops. In no case would Russia begin
hostilities first.
I now see no possibility of a general war being avoided
unless the agreement of France and Germany can be obtained
to keep their armies mobilised on their own sides of the
frontier, as Russia has expressed her readiness to do, pend-
ing a last attempt to reach a settlement of the present crisis.
* See No. 120.


No. 140.
SIR F. BERTIE TO SIR EDWARD GREY. —(RECEIVED AUGUST 1.)
(Telegraphic.) PARIS, AUGUST 1, 1914.
THE Minister of War again sent for the military attache
this ovening, as he said he wished to keep him informed of
the situation. He laid great stress on the fact that the zone
of 10 kilom. which he had arranged between the French troops
and the German frontier, and which was still occupied by
peasants, was a proof of the French endeavours to commit
no provocative act.
No. 141.
SIB M. DE BUNSEN TO SIB EDWAED GBEY. —(RECEIVED
AUGUST 2.)
(Telegraphic.) VIENNA, AUGUST 1,1914.
I AM to be received to-morrow by Minister for Foreign
Affairs. This afternoon he is to see the French and Russian
Ambassadors. I have just been informed by the Russian
'Ambassador of German ultimatum requiring that Russia
should demobilise within twelve hours. On being asked by
the Russian Minister for Foreign Affairs whether the inevit-
able refusal of Russia to yield to this curt summons meant
war, the German Ambassador replied that Germany would
be forced to mobilise if Russia refused. Russian Ambassador
at Vienna thinks that war is almost inevitable, and that
mobilisation is too expensive to be kept for long, Germany
will attack Russia at once. He says that the so-called
mobilisation of Russia amounted to nothing more than that
Russia had taken military measures corresponding to those
taken by Germany. There seems to be even greater tension
between Germany and Russia than there is between Austria
and Russia. Russia would, according to the Russian Ambas-
sador, be satisfied even now T with assurance respecting Servian
integrity and independence. He says that Russia had no


intention to attack Austria. He is going again to-day to
point out to the Minister for Foreign Affairs that most terrific
consequences must ensue from refusal to make this slight
concession. This time Eussia would fight to the last
extremity. I agree with his Excellency that the G-erman
Ambassador at Vienna desired war from the first, and that
his strong personal bias probably coloured his action here.
The Eussian Ambassador is convinced that the German Gov-
ernment also desired war from the first.
It is the intention of the French Ambassador to speak
earnestly to the Minister for Foreign Affairs to-day on the
extreme danger of the situation, and to ask whether proposals
to serve as a basis of mediation from any quarter are being
considered. There is great anxiety to know what England
will do. I fear that nothing can alter the determination of
Austro-Hungarian Government to proceed on their present
course, if they have made up their mind with the approval
of Germany.
No. 142.
SIR E. GOSCHEN TO SIR EDWARD GREY.—(EECEIVED AUGUST 2.)
(Telegraphic.) BERLIN, AUGUST 1, 1914.
OEDEES have just been issued for the general mobilisa-
tion of the navy and army, the first day of mobilisation to be
2nd August.
No. 143.
SIR E. GOSCHEN TO SIR EDWARD GREY.—(EECEIVED AUGUST 2.)
(Telegraphic.) BERLIN, AUGUST 1, 1914.
DETENTION of British merchant ship at Hamburg.
Your telegram of Ist August* acted on.
Secretary of State, who expressed the greatest surprise
and annoyance, has promised to send orders at once to allow
steamers to proceed without delay.
* See No. 130.


No, 144,
&
SIR E. GOSCHEN TO SIR EDWARD GREY,—(RECEIVED AUGUST 2.)
( Telegraphic.) BERLIN, AUGUST 2, 1914.
SECRETARY of State has just informed me that, owing
to certain Russian troops having crossed frontier, Germany;
and Russia are now in a state of war.
No. 145.
SIR E. GOSCHEN TO SIR EDWARD GREY. —(RECEIVED AUGUST 2.)
(Telegraphic.) BERLIN, AUGUST 2, 1914.
MY telegram of Ist August.*
Secretary of State informs me that orders were sent last
night to allow British ships in Hamburg to proceed on their
way. He says that this must be regarded as a special favour
to His Majesty's Government, as no other foreign ships have
been allowed to leave. Reason of detention was that mines
were being laid and other precautions taken.
* See No. 143.
i
No. 146.
SIR F. VILLIERS TO SIR EDWARD GREY. —(RECEIVED AUGUST 2.)
(Telegraphic.) - BRUSSELS, AUGUST 2, 1914.
THE news that a German force has entered Grand Duchy
of Luxemburg has been officially confirmed to the Belgian
Government.


No. 147.
MINISTER OF STATE, LUXEMBURG, TO SIR EDWARD GREY. —
(RECEIVED AUGUST 2.)
(Translation.)
(Telegraphic.) LUXEMBURG,, AUGUST 2, 1914.
I HAVE the honour to bring to your Excellency's notice
the following facts:—
On Sunday, the 2nd August, very early, the German
troops, according to the information which has up to now
reached the Grand Ducal Government, penetrated into
Luxemburg territory by the bridges of Wasserbillig and
Remich, and proceeded particularly towards the south and
in the direction of Luxemburg, the capital of the Grand
Duchy. A certain number of armoured trains with troops
and ammunition have been sent along the railway line from
Wasserbillig to Luxemburg, where their arrival is expected.
These, occurrences constitute acts which are manifestly con-
trary to the neutrality of the Grand Duchy as guaranteed by
the Treaty of London of 1867. The Luxemburg Government
have not failed to address an energetic protest against this
aggression to the representatives of His Majesty the German
Emperor at Luxemburg. An identical protest will be sent
by telegraph to the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs
at Berlin.
No. 148.
SIR EDWARD GREY TO SIR F. BERTIE.
(Telegraphic.) FOREIGN OFFICE, AUGUST 2, 1914.
AFTER the Cabinet this morning I gave M. Cambon the
following memorandum:—
"I am authorised to give an assurance that, if the Ger-
man fleet comes into the Channel or through the North Sea
to undertake hostile operations against French coasts or ship-
ping, the British fleet will give all the protection in its power.


"This assurance is of course subject to the policy of His
Majesty's Government receiving the support of Parliament,
and must not be taken as binding His Majesty's Government
to take any action until the above contingency of action by
the German fleet takes place."
I pointed out that we had very large questions and most
difficult issues to consider, and that Government felt that they
could not bind themselves to declare war upon Germany
necessarily if war broke out between France and Germany
to-morrow, but it was essential to the French Government,
whose fleet had long been concentrated in the Mediterranean,
to know how to make their dispositions with their north coast
entirely undefended. We therefore thought it necessary to
give them this assurance. It did not bind us to go to war
with Germany unless the German fleet took the action
indicated, but it did give a security to France that would
enable her to settle the disposition of her own Mediterranean
fleet.
M. Cambon asked me about the violation of Luxemburg.
I told him the doctrine on that point laid down by Lord
Derby and Lord Clarendon in 1867. He asked me what we
should say about the violation of the neutrality of Belgium.
I said that was a much mpre important matter; we were con-
sidering what statement we should make in Parliament to-
morrow —in effect, whether we should declare violation of
Belgium neutrality to be a casus belli. I told him what had
been said to the German Ambassador on this point. .
No. 149.
SIR EDWARD GREY TO SIR E. GOSCHEN.
(Telegraphic.) FOREIGN OFFICE, AUGUST 2,1914.
YOUR telegram of Ist August.*
I regret to learn that 100 tons of sugar was compulsorily
unloaded from the British steamship "Sappho" at Ham-
burg and detained. Similar action appears to have been
taken with regard to other British vessels loaded with sugar.


Yon should inform Secretary of State that, for reasons
stated in my telegram of Ist August,! I most earnestly trust
that the orders already sent to Hamburg to allow the clear-
ance of British ships covers also the release of their cargoes,
the detention of which cannot be justified.
* See No. 143. f See No. 130.
No. 150.
SIR E. GOSCHEN TO SIR EDWARD GREY.—(RECEIVED AUGUST 3.)
(Telegraphic.) BERLIN, AUGUST 3, 1914.
YOUR telegram of 2nd August*: Detention of British
ships at Hamburg.
No information available.
* See No. 149.
No. 151.
v '
SIR F. VILLIERS TO SIR EDWARD GREY.—(RECEIVED AUGUST 3.)
(Telegraphic.) BRUSSELS, AUGUST 3, 1914.
FRENCH Government have offered through their mili-
tary attache the support of five French army corps to the
Belgian Government. Following reply has been received
to-day:—
"We are sincerely grateful to the French Government
for offering eventual support. In the actual circumstances,
however, we do not propose to appeal to the guarantee of the
Powers. Belgian Government will decide later On the action
which they may think it necessary to take.''


No. 152.
SIR EDWARD GREY TO SIR F. BERTIE.
Sir, FOREIGN OFFICE, AUGUST 3, 1914.
ON the Ist instant the French Ambassador made the
following communication:—
'' In reply to the German Government's intimation of the
fact that ultimatums had been presented to France and
Russia, and to the question as to what were the intentions of
Italy, the Marquis di San Giuliano replied:—
'' ' The war undertaken by Austria, and the consequences
which might result, had, in the words of the German Ambas-
sador himself, an aggressive object. Both were therefore in
conflict with the purely defensive character of the Triple
Alliance, and in such circumstances Italy would remain
neutral.' "
In making this communication, M. Cambon was instructed
to lay stress upon the Italian declaration that the present war
was not a defensive but an aggressive war, and that, for this
reason, the casus faederis under the terms of the Triple Alli-
ance did not arise. I am, &c.,
E. GREY.
No. 153.
SIR EDWARD GREY TO SIR E. GOSCHEN.
(Telegraphic.) FOREIGN OFFICE, AUGUST 4, 1914.
THE King of the Belgians has made an appeal to His
Majesty the King for diplomatic intervention on behalf of
Belgium in the following terms:—
"Remembering the numerous proofs of your Majesty's
friendship and that of your predecessor, and the friendly
attitude of England in 1870 and the proof of friendship you
have just given us again,. I make a supreme appeal to the


diplomatic intervention of your Majesty's Government to
safeguard the integrity of Belgium.''
His Majesty's Government are also informed that the
German Government has delivered to the Belgian Govern-
ment a note proposing friendly neutrality entailing free pas-
sage through Belgian territory, and promising to maintain
the independence and integrity of the kingdom and its pos-
sessions at the conclusion of peace, threatening in case of
refusal to treat Belgium as an enemy. An answer was
requested within twelve hours.
We also understand that Belgium has categorically
refused this as a flagrant violation of the law of nations.
His Majesty's Government are bound to protest against
the violation of a treaty to which Germany is a party in com-
mon with themselves, and must request an assurance that
the demand made upon Belgium will not be proceeded with
and that her neutrality will be respected by Germany. You
should ask for an immediate reply.
No. 154.
SIB F. VILLIERS TO SIR EDWARD GREY.*—(RECEIVED AUGUST 4.)
(Telegraphic.) BRUSSELS, AUGUST 4, 1914.
GERMAN Minister has this morning addressed note to
Minister for Foreign Affairs stating that as Belgian Govern-
ment have declined the well-intentioned proposals submitted
to them by the Imperial Government, the latter will, deeply
to their regret, be compelled to carry out, if necessary by
force of arms, the measures considered indispensable in view"
of the French menaces.
<>
No. 155.
SIR EDWARD GREY TO SIR F. VILHERS.
(Telegraphic.) FOREIGN OFFICE, AUGUST 4, 1914.
YOU should inform Belgian Government that if pres-
sure is applied to them by Germany to induce them to depart


from neutrality, His Majesty's Government expect that they
will resist by any means in their power, and that His
Majesty's Government will support them in offering siich
resistance, and that His Majesty's Government in this event
are prepared to join Russia and France, if desired, in offer-
ing to the Belgian Government at once common action for
the purpose of resisting use of force by Germany against
them, and a guarantee to maintain their independence and
integrity in future years.
No. 156.
SIB EDWAKD GEEY TO SIB E. GOSCHEN.
(Telegraphic.) FOBEIGN OFFICE, AUGUST 4,1914.
I CONTINUE to receive numerous complaints from
British firms as to the detention of their ships at Hamburg,
Cuxhaven, and other German ports. This action on the part
of the German authorities is totally unjustifiable. It is in
direct contravention of international law and of the assur-
ances given to your Excellency by the Imperial Chancellor.
You should demand the immediate release of all British ships
if such release has not yet been given.
No. 157.
GEBMAN FOEEIGN SECEETABY TO PEINCE LICHNOWSKY.—
COMMUNICATED BY GEEMAN EMBASSY, AUGUST 4.)
(Telegraphic.) BEELIN, AUGUST 4,1914.
PLEASE dispel any mistrust that may subsist on the
part of the British Government with regard to our inten-
tions, by repeating most positively formal assurance that,
even in the case of armed conflict with Belgium, Germany
will, under no pretence whatever, annex Belgium territory.
Sincerity of this declaration is borne out by fact that we


solemnly pledged our word to Holland strictly to respect her
neutrality. It is obvious that we could not profitably annex
Belgian territory without making at the same time territorial
acquisitions at expense of Holland. Please impress upon
Sir E. Grey that German army could not be exposed to French
attack across Belgium, which was planned according to abso-
lutely unimpeachable information. Germany had conse-
quently to disregard Belgian neutrality, it being for her a
question of life or death to prevent French advance.
4
No. 158.
SIR F. VILLIERS TO SIR EDWARD GREY. —(RECEIVED AUGUST 4.)
(Telegraphic.) BRUSSELS, AUGUST 4, 1914.
MILITARY attach b has been informed at War Office that
German troops have entered Belgian territory, and that Liege
has been summoned to surrender to small party of Germans,
who, however, were repulsed.
No. 159.
SIR EDWARD GREY TO SIR E. GOSCHEN.
(Telegraphic.) FOREIGN OFFICE, AUGUST 4, 1914.
WE hear that Germany has addressed note to Belgian
Minister for Foreign Affairs stating that German Govern-
ment will be compelled to carry out, if necessary, by force of
arms, the measures considered indispensable.
We are also informed that Belgian territory has been
violated at Gemmenich.
In these circumstances, and in view of the fact that
Germany declined to give the same assurance respecting
Belgium as France gave last week in reply to our request
made simultaneously at Berlin and Paris, we must repeat that


request, and ask that a satisfactory reply to it and to my
telegram of this morning* he received here at 12 o'clock to-
night. If not, you are instructed to ask for your passports,
and to say that His Majesty's Government feel bound to take
all steps in their power to uphold the neutrality of Belgium
and the observance of a treaty to which Germany is as much
a party as ourselves.
* See No. 153.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by
William Brooks & Co., Limited,
17 Castlereagh Street, Sydney.


Juiv.
mt
I w • AR 0o S T^SwV,..i^Mrjf r .^PiSEr'T?'
TO3tib'*%? » WAV«E« T ' A»* UA CRAMS-UE C
IIFCe«X* rA«A C S? u a^-^ CE^HPI AV1 *5
eppa 6 Co&ue*ce«j
Amiens »N .—, X •ISPA >
1 4~Jc —* c/
m*«PA»s Cl .^ 7- J^.
}fifH&JE& * MM"* REViN# fjf SAsr^e&'§ t/"
0MESANDB u y ® fKAKiivia J3^v" ilU "" g 1 ✓-*
jp^"y* a >< " K rSfM/^L/
rfrcS!?vek^H.^,
'I V "vsv»— w^I^®^2ws kw ' rlau '^
; X - TO A MA«V< ,| i A NEuNKeN
m>AHis <-w< f
VER.SAiut.ES • Vx~ dco^i^ / X^ l e R C. CcmmeRC><® fH B''l^i R^ tf atorE«"«SAf>ReRjc.n
g6Ri6 «ANJuu«EUsr.p (z , ER J V fl - / V *' WfAAR^e/VMJrtD,
chrRtres® PRo^'N6 AR f-r<| -9 words' -i "
FC!<ITfliNEaL£»^U^<^^
|( • T< "^ N 4 . «LANQ*e$ I
V J) ®CHAnut.oN S. fbRT PARCHES V" /
V / • ) W 05 %r
S "^ 5 ""~c~---l Q< f\ fe. tAnABrarfflT ®Co(j>*Ai? '
I
WESTERN BATTLEFIELDS—FRANCO-BELGIAN- GERM AN.


Svot-f-t " ** GSflttawa «m«»**M»
Ru3 —%L eMM J
wziG*^^ BM0 „ sgeti9 ]± ou \
- — „ STA«9/*W» # b |R<C«AU. VeLBlNfc
♦ BeugARo MMdreNBuaq»v tfht-Ycx. •
,• £i Ai-OErt 86R3 to* • JoiiW«^»»SBO«W(^^P
- - _• •**" - »&> ALLS/tiTBM *4*
0 nev Sr&rrin j mrm**b*b**SJ Rosewaaad® • 09 re RODE.
"""1 KoNi-rt vSsctiwBBTj. -^,
__1V~ £c«M>C*au * »tiDe"a"*2,
-STA*4AAt>° r^ A^Pt,e 6**9 SoLOAU* t^00Bl^ B^*Cao».XEtuM
jT'+ICAmeg • fcTRPJA/JTE * ySTWAS5»W^ —
P«HU>B»8*I • |
'""■ m "* sh ' x ? THORN)*#"! 0 Slt-KfO
,-J/ QCMVBm • UM/I .J
t iS j^OJiSL/"^
,fc * , * • • igj^lAPz.<£J* v »'o (C ,.
®eoR*ik«\ ST*ZEe*"> *B. new 0 a I J| l»g
*™r» jr"~" LS ;W -
4 posfw fc~ i was&AW;T
—-* • Rate «\ ♦Koto T
* Cy
«X «KoST6* /Wcmocz. ) ® LC,£3^
vl # u'siA ♦ JJfll k |y ri
FRAvwor Krjrmutui m m ( jl_ J* n»fi KM
CusyA&Vv I N ■ V
j (tewut»fti b \ <j
.l/Otl4^ nB,^ AU J ftWiiMWWS*
0HtUtUAB ,A».
LiftgAjftz. wAr <J
SCHANOa yAWKA . eideuee
SuwA V^okaT^
3 * ■ TAWop«xgrJ» -4
Jf I LuliuN ' T *-» M . pir</cnow0 O AA*/ARU*>J<
m (tr**asiZ°irrt£i&S£ \ twowth ®«&SA<CJ.(A •y v ' ,W5 '
) %v v. eEomcff%
Vv/ £_ aM i> •""««'
. . •fRtew.ri.
I Tfan< # r _ in •TWKOW ■
i / ®0«Gf4Yx_ • . x * Sa*a»«
' x) r^WWCT» Sw^^ l 0toA< > 6Vt2. •'
f J /^W^ TG *
• ( ___ • faAi'a( «Wkasc/U
_ • tSKReAASte-ft \r~\ m JL.
&&UNN 7 J floACMA# • 5
] *«< y
V a»rJewSow_
y { t
y®SASSiA»/ />,
C 6OC«O5. ?
«.VIENNA \ J® 5CHE-*\rtiTi AAtStcctCI* aaa
j \ ai
EASTERN BATTLEFIELDS—RUSSIAN-AUSTRIAN-GERMAN.


»»*•-«"«
=^ss^T vteuWA«pe<« | t " H MliAii ti~f- • Schwikrih rJ^fep?M aegelwAMse a we« <*MTt/«
SEE^P®s^ eeK «<«ssci< y w§ yfW4jwi zs ' KONITJ
• iL)&«Btfnj# wweroun. %mETXm 9 Srw^o*««
Lis^,, ®2.waO.-e P t,r«. Ag
BpP 6ea<5 S JpP?«H» "
Ei r| A \ *^s;*«
'mkc™*fJ Vr~ y«^ovS
LJ y . \eaawswo5 ;
A%i? % «§/ u?t f>«» BBjm 1 fteestewfX \ ©ws&4f4 A
\ I fc "t~ *% \ t \ \
♦y AiMDpvwS — —• c «a /M S Ifjk H v swwtws *<»A atonm**
»"> ®EL6eRFEU0 \ ffi? jClll / J|kS llf / V ** >1 ,» LM*A •
lrf>ussELO(feF KL B i i)•**££$&£. Kr "^ :
\JL cotocNe'C"""" 3?| V- >> \ a, r l -
ISvai*. ua c/iApetue? i A) J $,TeirtA<* d
.ST iB " *k"* */> K S o*o6A&5W* & # >S ( A "*»—• —1,,
!%■£ «f\ ( >/ ?^. a9 ,X \ efcteswnns. W*»
e i SPA V £y* e,eS9GN \ „ tswftr /j X. u&s" N
1.«AU« py X cor«Ae * IT*
A $ V atve rzLftR 2 J^ A V«A Fft^T w ®* i KA TL
i /* L • . / £&£M&tTT o Tm«n \ y^%^r& v
I X U «SfN8U«9 .NIOOA I aUtWW# \ II «*
% y V"i HowBURa \ y fLAub/4 « KA«i.6XSAS3 \ & —"
JL/ X \ V—' • ) r«- J v rc%
rRevE& Jh7 f 1 — '~" / ™
MAP OF GERMANY AND EASTERN AND WESTERN FRONTIERS.


) ° E<J«« ' **2 KON iqg RA*rx. 3 M l»6tirttut* . p ' /VCMOW/ *
/ ,Jp ) \ x. slM,Et - ec - (BsasRd
" /miAcufk ' <L s * r, A 5S " -TTe • 7^ SLAU
, / F^ &li n * Lr /S , • Romattim
/ fi f~* PlL$£H - ) ( A • rP &CXI4HIA •TARNOW
|| J fS t J ®&tCtlYz © «SANOK •
v ( J> / 0liOHO&Yc t #
"X S ' 9L » f
XI *; A -— \y3fa (
MA*mn»V v ) 6mnn r"~ S "l3 .f^VX 25
/ I MlAVA J (
fiATlS0O* \ _/ £ ft«AJA SiOMSAr
,-' / X2A!soshu r ' yisAS&tNy *I~TSoul. / f
4 X evvAC , •;' C BODR°3» jP XXX
\ J® SCHefiAritTZ AAl9 KOCCZ.®* CftjljMy4>MUN»W«t
/ |T X J •"•"V*"#"' \ NAAA^nvcJ
< X 1 • 6ALA«SA &YAAava T • NAjy
— / f } \ /-- ERlaTv •tgcso
J ( \ X [ fcfcw ]»WA.rt6N f • V-vj
P PESTtT /
A U S T R' J A.<- H U N GfA R Y 5? " •
C6ER VEulach X *— t— © a ® gjj (" w
y<?RAX J
_x§ X y RK ° <4
° 4 SX / • KRA/N8 u«q \ AVAR©WA<) \ I
/ Tc*.tNGfh-<l +WWj? <• 3 C® . '■ \ V _i
/ • •ciu.. I ) ? 0£SM **
EpEL-IS #, Jp X^ #OBeR - 'ORIA VVAADSPIN \ \ <
MAP OF AUSTRIA-HUNGARY.




THE FOLLOWING DESPATCH FROM SIR E. GOSCHEN WAS
WRITTEN AFTER THE OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE
HAD BEEN PRESENTED TO THE BRITISH PARLIAMENT.
SIR E. GOSCHEN TO SIR EDWARD GREY.
IR ' LONDON, AUGUST 8, 1914.
In accordance with the instructions contained in your telegram
of the 4th instant* I called upon the Secretary of State that afternoon
and inquired, in the name of His Majesty's Government, whether the
Imperial Government would refrain from violating Belgian neutrality.
Herr von Jagow at once replied that he was sorry to say that his
answer must be "No," as, in consequence of the German troops having
crossed the frontier that morning, Belgian neutrality had been already
violated. Herr von Jagow again went into the reasons why the
Imperial Government had been obliged to take this step, namely, that
they had to advance into France by the quickest and easiest way, so
as to be able to get well ahead with their operations and endeavour
to strike some decisive blow as early as possible. It was a matter
of life and death with them, as if they had gone by the more southern
route they could not have hoped, in view of the paucity of roads and
the strength of the fortresses, to have got through without formidable
opposition entailing great loss of time. This loss of time would have
meant time gained by the Russians for bringing up their troops to
i!u !w n r T? ntler - Ra P ldit y of action was the great German asset,
while that of Russia was an inexhaustible supply of troops- I pointed
out to Herr von Jagow that this fait accompli of the violation of the
Belgian frontier rendered, as he would readily understand, the situa-
tion exceedingly grave, and I asked him whether there was not still
time to draw back and avoid possible consequences, which both he and
I would deplore. He replied that, for the reasons he had given me it
was now impossible for them to draw back.
During the afternoon I received your further telegram of the same
date,T and, in compliance with the instructions therein contained I
again proceeded to the Imperial Foreign Office and informed the Secre-
tary of State that unless the Imperial Government could give the
assurance by 12 o'clock that night that they would proceed no further
with then- violation of the Belgian frontier and stop their advance I
had been instructed to demand my passports and inform the Imperial
Gpverment that His Majesty's Government would have to take all steps
in their power to uphold the neutrality of Belgium and the observance
of a treaty to which Germany was as much a party as themselves
Herr von Jagow replied that to his great regret he could give no
ot ler answer than that which he had given me earlier in the . day
r t^ e , safet F of , the Empire rendered it absolutely necessary
that the Imperial troops should advance through Belgium. I gave His
Excellency a written summary of your telegram, and, pointing out
that you had mentioned 12 o'clock as the time when His Majesty's
Government would expect an answer, asked him whether, in view of
the terrible consequences which would necessarily ensue, it were not
possible even at the last moment that their answer should be reconsider-
ed. He replied that if the time given were even twenty-four hours or
more, his answer must be the same. I said that in that case I should have
i my passports. This interview took place at about 7 o'clock
In a short conversation which ensued Herr von Jagow expressed his
poignant regret at the crumbling of his entire policy and fha? of the
Chancellor, which had been to make friends with Great Britain and
then, through Great Britain, to get closer to France. I said that this


sudden end to my work in Berlin was to me a matter of deep regret
and disappointment, but that he must understand that under the.cir-
cumstances and in view of our engagements, His Majesty's Government
could not possibly have acted otherwise than they had done.
I then said that I should like to go and see the Chancellor, as it
might be perhaps the last time I should have an opportunity of seeing
him. He begged me to do so. I found the Chancellor very agitated.
His Excellency at once began a harangue, which lasted for about
twenty minutes. He said that the step taken by His Majesty's Govern-
ment was terrible to a degree; just for a word—"neutrality," a word
which in war time had so often been disregarded—just for a scrap of
paper Great Britain was going to make war on a kindred nation who
desired nothing better than to be friends with her- All his efforts in
that direction had been rendered useless by this last terrible step, and
the policy to which, as I knew, he had devoted himself since his acces-
sion to office had tumbled down like a house of cards. What we had
done was unthinkable; it was like striking a man from behind whilst
he was fighting for his life against two assailants. He held Great
Britain responsible for all the terrible events that might happen. I pro-
tested strongly against that statement, and said that, in the same way as
he and Herr von Jagow wished me to understand that for strategical
reasons it was a matter of life and death for Germany to advance through
Belgium and violate the latter's neutrality, so I would wish him to under-
stand that it was, so to speak, a matter of "life and death" for the honour
of Great Britajn that she should keep her solemn engagement to do her
utmost to defend Belgium's neutrality if attacked. That solemn com-
pact simply had to be kept, or what confidence could anyone have in
engagements given by Great Britain in the future? The Chancellor
said, "But at what price will that compact have been kept. Has
the British Government thought of that?" I hinted to His
Excellency as plainly as I could that fear of consequences
could hardly be regarded as an excuse for breaking solemn
engagements; but His Excellency was so excited, so evidently over-
come by the news of our action, and so little disposed to hear reason that
I refrained from adding fuel to the flame by further argument. As I was
leaving he said that the blow of Great Britain joining Germany's
enemies was all the greater that almost up to the last moment he and
his Government had been working with us and supporting our efforts
to maintain peace between Austria and Russia. I said that this was
part of the tragedy which saw the two nations fall apart just at the .mo-
ment when the relations between them had been more friendly and
cordial than they had been for years. Unfortunately, notwithstanding
our efforts to maintain peace between Russia and Austria, the war had
spread, and had brought us face to face with a situation which, if we
held to our engagements, we could not possibly avoid, and which un-
fortunately entailed our separation from our late fellow-workers. He
would readily understand that no one regretted this more than I.
After this somewhat painful interview I returned to the embassy
and drew up a telegraphic report of what had passed. This telegram
was handed in at the Central Telegraph Office a little before 9 p.m. It
was accepted by that office, but apparently never dispatched. (This
telegram never reached the Foreign Office )
At about 9.30 Herr von Zimmerman, the Under Secretary of State,
came to see me- After expressing his deep regret that the very friendl/
official and personal relations between us were about to cease, he asked
me casually whether a demand for passports was equivalent to a
declaration of war. I said that such an authority on international law
as he was known to be must know as well or better than I what was


usual in such cases. I added that there were many cases where diplo-
matic relations had been broken off, and nevertheless, war had not
ensued, but that in this case he would have seen from my instructions, of
which I had given Herr von Jagow a written summary, that His Majesty's
Government expected an answer to a definite question by 12 o'clock
that night, and that in default of a satisfactory answer they would be
forced to take such steps as their engagements required. Herr Zimmer-
man said that that was, in fact, a declaration of war, as the Imperial
Government could not possibly give the assurance required either that
night or any other night.
In the meantime, after Herr Zimmerman left me, a flying sheet,
issued by the "Berliner Tageblatt," was circulated stating that Great
Britain had declared war against Germany. The immediate result of
this news was the assemblage of an exceedingly excited and unruly mob
before His Majesty's embassy. The small force of police which had
been sent to guard the embassy was soon overpowered, and the attitude
of the mob became more threatening. We took no notice of this demon-
stration as long as it was confined to noise, but when the crash of glass
and the landing of cobble stones in the drawing-room, where we were
all sitting, warned us that the situation was getting unpleasant, I tele-
phoned to the Foreign Office an account of what was happening. Herr
von Jagow at once informed the Chief of Police, and an adequate force
of mounted police, sent with great promptness, very soon cleared the
street. From that moment on we were well guarded, and no more
direct unpleasantness occurred.
After order had been restored Herr von Jagow came to see me, and
expressed his most heartfelt regrets at what had occurred. He said
that the behaviour of his countrymen had made him feel more ashamed
than he had words to express. It was an indelible stain on the reputa-
tion of Berlin. He said that the flying sheet circulated in the streets
had not been authorised by the Government; in fact, the Chancellor had
asked him by telephone whether he thought ,that such a statement
should be issued, and he had replied, "Certainly not, until the morning."
It was in consequence of his decision to that effect that only a small
force of police had been sent to the neighbourhood of the embassy, as
he had thought that the presence of a large force would inevitably'at-
tract attention and perhaps lead to disturbances. It was the "pestilen-
tial 'Tageblatt,' " which had somehow got hold of the news, that had
upset his calculations. He had heard rumours that the mob had been
excited to violence by gestures made and missiles thrown from the
embassy, but he felt sure that that was not true—(l was able soon to
assure him that the report had no foundation whatever) —and even if it
was, it was no excuse for the disgraceful scenes which had taken place.
He feared that I would take home with me a sorry impression of Berlin
manners in moments of excitement. In fact, no apology could have
been more full and complete.
On the following morning, the sth August, the Emperor sent one
of His Majesty's aides-de-camp to me with the following message:
"The Emperor has charged me to express to your Excellency his re-
gret for the occurrences of last night, but that to tell you at the
same time that you will gather from these occurrences an idea of
the feelings of his people respecting the action of Great Britain in
joining with other nations against her old allies of Waterloo.
His Majesty also begs that you tell the King that he has been
proud of the titles of British Field Marshal and British Admiral
but that m consequence of what has occurred he must now at
once divest himself of those titles.
thp I W ° Uld the ab ° Ve messa^e lost no ne of its acerbity by
the manner of its delivery.


On the other hand, I should like to state that I received all through
this trying time nothing but courtesy at the hands of Herr von Jagow
and the officials of the Imperial Foreign Office. At about 11 o'clock
on the same morning Count Wedel handed me my passports which
had earlier in the day demanded in writing—and told me that
he had been instructed to confer with me as to the route which I should
follow for my return to Kngland. He said that he had understood
that I preferred the route via the Hook of Holland to that via Copen-
hagen ; they had therefore arranged that I should go by the former
route, only I should have to wait till the following morning- I agreed
to this, and he said that I might be quite assured that there would be
no repetition of the disgraceful scenes of the preceding night, as full
precautions would be taken. He added that they were doing all in
their power to have a restaurant car attached to the train, but it was
rather a difficult matter. He also brought me a charming letter from
Herr von Jagow couched in the most friendly terms. The day was
passed in packing up such articles as the time allowed.
The night passed quietly without any incident. In the morning
a strong force of police was posted along the usual route to the Lehrter
station, while the embassy was smuggled away in taxicabs to the
station by side streets. We there suffered no molestation whatever,
and avoided the treatment meted out by the crowd to my Russian and
French colleagues. Count Wedel met us at the station to say good-
bye on behalf of Herr von Jagow, and to see that all the arrangements
ordered for our comfort had been properly carried out. A retired
colonel of the Guards accompanied the train to the Dutch frontier, and
was exceedingly kind in his efforts to prevent the crowds which thronged
the platforms at every station where we stopped from insulting us;
but beyond the yelling of patriotic songs and a few jeers and insulting
gestures we had really nothing to complain of during our tedious
journey to the Dutch frontier.
Before closing this long account of our last days in Berlin I should
like to place on record and bring to your notice the quite admirable
behaviour of my staff under the most trying circumstances possible.
One and all, they worked night and day with scarcely any rest, and I
cannot praise too highly the cheerful zeal with which counsellor, naval
and military attaches, secretaries, and the two young attaches buckled
to their work and kept their nerve with often a yelling mob outside
and inside hundreds of British subjects clamouring for advice and
assistance. I was proud to have such a staff to work with, and feel
most grateful to them all for the invaluable assistance and support,
often exposing them to considerable personal risk, which they so
readily and cheerfully gave to me.
I should also like to mention the great assistance rendered to us
by my American colleague, Mr. Gerard, and his staff- Undeterred by
the hooting and hisses with which he was often greeted by the mob
on entering and leaving the embassy, His Excellency came repeatedly
to see me to ask how he could help us and to make arrangements for
the safety of stranded British subjects. He extricated many of those
from extremely difficult situations at some personal risk to himself, and
his calmness and savior faire and his firmness in dealing the
Imperial authorities gave full assurance that the protection of British
subjects and interests could not have been left in more efficient and able
hands. I have, etc.,
W. E. GOSCHEN.
* See "Miscellaneous, No. 6 (1914)," No. 153.
f See "Miscellaneous, No. 6 (1914)," No. 159.


STATEMENT BY SIR EDWARD GREY.
(From the Parliamentary Debates," House of Commons, Monday,
3rd August, 1914.)
The Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Sir Edward Grey).
Last week I stated that we were working for peace not only for this
country, but to preserve the peace of Europe. To-day events move so
rapidly that it is exceedingly difficult to state with technical accuracy
the actual state of affairs, but it is clear that the peace of Europe can-
not be preserved. Russia and Germany, at any rate, have declared
war upon each other.
Before I proceed to state the position of His Majesty's Government,
I would like to clear the ground so that, before I come to state to the
House what our attitude is with regard to the present crisis, the House
may know exactly under what obligations the Government is or the
House can be said to be, in coming to a decision on the matter. First of
all let me say, very shortly, that we have consistently worked with a
single mind, with all the earnestness in our power, to preserve peace.
e House may be satisfied on that point. We have always done it. Dur-
ing these last years, as far as His Majesty's Government are concerned,
we would have no difficulty in proving that we have done so. Through-
out the Balkan crisis, by general admission, we worked for peace. The
co-operation of the Great Powers of Europe was successful in working
for peace m the Balkan crisis. It is true that some of the Powers had
great difficulty in adjusting their points of view. It took much time
and labour and discussion before they could settle their differences, but
peace was secured, because peace was their main object, and they were
willing to give time and trouble rather than accentuate difference
rapidly.
the present crisis, it has not been possible to secure the peace
o Europe, because there has been little time, and there has been a
disposition— at any rate in some _ quarters on which I will not dwell
—to force things rapidly to an issue, at any rate, to the great risk
of peace, and, as we now know, the result of that is that the policy
of peace, as far as the Great Powers generally are concerned, is in
danger. I do not want to dwell on that, and to comment on it and
to say where the blame sems. to us to lie, which Powers were 'most
in favour of peace, which were most disposed to risk or endanger
peace, because I would like the House to approach this crisis in which
we are now, from the point of view of British interests, British honour,
and British obligations, free from all passion as to why peace has not
been preserved.
We shall publish Papers as soon as we can regarding what took
place last week when we were working for peace; and when those
Papers are published, I have no doubt that to every human being they
will make it clear how strenuous and genuine and whole-hearted our
efforts for peace were, and that they will enable people to form their
own judgment as to what forces were at work which operated against
peace.
I come first, now, to the question of British obligations. I have
assured the House—and the Prime Minister has assured the House
more than once—that if any crisis such as this arose, we should come
before the House of Commons and be able to say to the House that
it was free to decide what the British attitude should be, that we would
have no secret engagement which we should spring upon the House,
and tell the House that, because we had entered into that engagement!
there was an obligation of honour upon the country. I will deal with
that point to clear the ground first-
There has been in Europe two diplomatic groups, the Triple Alii-


ance and what came to be called the "Triple Entente," for some years
past. The Triple Entente was not an Alliance —it was a Diplomatic
group. The House will remember that in 1908 there was a crisis, also
a Balkan crisis, originating in the annexation of Bosnia and Herze-
govina. The Russian Minister, M. Isvolsky, came to London, or
happened to come to London, because his visit was planned before the
crisis broke out. I told him definitely then, this being a Balkan crisis,
a Balkan affair, I did not consider that public opinion m this country
would justify us in promising to give anything more than diplomatic
support. More was never asked from us, more was never given, and
more was never promised.
In this present crisis, up till yesterday, we have also given no
promise of anything more than diplomatic support up till yesterday
no promise of more than diplomatic support. Now I must make this
question of obligation clear to the House. I must go back to the rs
Moroccan crisis in 1906. That was the time of the Algeciras Con-
ference, and it came at a time of very great difficulty to His Majesty s
Government when a General Election was in progress, and Ministers
were scattered over the country, and I—spending three days a week
in my constituency and three days at the Foreign Office—was asked
the question whether if that crisis developed into war between trance
and Germany we would give armed support. I said then that I could
promise nothing to any foreign Power unless it was subsequently _ to
receive the whole-hearted support of public opinion here if the occasion
arose. I said, in my opinion, if war was forced upon France, then on
the question of Morocco—a question which had just been the subject
of agreement between this country and France, an agreement exceed-
ingly popular on both sides—that if out of that agreement war was
forced on France at that time, in my view public opinion m this country
would have rallied to the material support of France.
I gave no promise, but I expressed that opinion during the crisis,
as far as I remember, almost in the same words, to the French Am-
bassador and the German Ambassador at the time- I made no
and I used no threats; but I expressed that opinion. That position
was accepted by the French Government, but they said to meat the
ti m e—and I think very reasonably —"If you think it possible that the
public opinion of Great Britain might, should a sudden crisis arise
justify you in giving to France the armed support which you cannot
promise in advance, you will not be able to give that supporteveni
you wish to give it, when the time comes, unless some conversations
have already taken place between naval and military experts. I here
was force in that. I agreed to it, and authorised those conversations
to take place, but on the distinct understanding that nothing which
passed between military or naval experts should bind either Govern-
ment or restrict in any way their freedom to make a decision as o
whether or not they would give that support when the time arose.
As I have told the House, upon that occasion a General Flection
was in prospect. I had to take the responsibility of doing that with-
out the Cabinet. It could not be summoned. An answer had to be
given. I consulted Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman, the Prime Mini-
ster; I consulted, I remember, Lord Haldane, who was then Secretary
of State for War, and the present Prime Minister, who was then
Chancellor of the Exchequer. That was the most I could do, and they
authorised that on the distinct understanding that it left the hands of
the Government free whenever the crisis arose. The fact that
versations between military and naval experts took place was later on
I think much later on, because that crisis passed, the th g
ceased to be of importance—but later on it was brought to the know-
ledge of the Cabinet.
VI.


The Agadir crisis came—another Morocco crisis—and throughout
that I took precisely the same line that had been taken in 1906. But
subsequently, in 1912, after discussion and consideration in the Cabinet,
it was decided that we ought to have a definite understanding in writing,
which was to be only in the form of an unofficial letter, that these con-
versations which took place were not binding upon the freedom of
either Government; and on the 22nd of November, 1912, I wrote to
the French Ambassador the letter which I will now read to the House;
and I received from him a letter in similar terms in reply- The letter
which I have to read to the House is this, and it will be known to
the public now as the record that, whatever took place between military
and naval experts, they were not binding engagements upon c the
Government:—•
"My Dear Ambassador, —From time to time in recent years the
French and British naval and military experts have consulted
together. It has always been understood that such consultation
does not restrict the freedom of either Government to decide at
any future time whether or not to assist the other by armed force.
We have agreed that consultation between experts is not and ought
not to be regarded as an engagement that commits either Govern-
ment to action in a contingency that has not yet arisen and may
never arise. The disposition, for instance, of the French and British
Fleets respectively at the present moment is not based upon an
engagement to co-operate in war.
"You have, however, pointed out that, if either Government had
grave reason to expect an unprovoked attack by a third Power,
it might become essential to know whether it could in that event
depend upon the armed assistance of the other.
"I agree that, if either Government had grave reason to expect
an unprovoked attack by a third Power, or something that
threatened the general peace, it should immediately discuss with
the other whether both Governments should act together to prevent
aggression and to preserve peace, and, if so, what measures they
would be prepared to take in common."
Lord Charles Beresford.—What is the date of that?
Sir E. Grey. —The 22nd November, 1912. That is the starting
point for the Government with regard to the present crisis. I think
it makes it clear that what the Prime Minister and I said to the House
of Commons was perfectly justified, and that, as regards our freedom
to decide in a crisis what our line should be, whether we should inter-
vene or whether we should abstain, the Government remained perfectly
free and, a fortiori, the House of Commons remains perfectly free. That
I say to clear the ground from the point of view of obligation. I think
it was due to prove our good faith to the House of Commons that I
should give that full information to the House now, and say what I
think is obvious from the letter I have just read, that we do not con-
strue anything which has previously taken place in our diplomatic rela-
tions with other Powers in this matter as restricting the freedom of the
Government to decide what attitude they should take now, or restrict
the freedom of the House of Commons to decide what their attitude
should be.
Well, Sir, I will go further, and I will say this: The situation in
the present crisis is not precisely the same as it was in the Morocco
question. In the Morocco question it was primarily a dispute which
concerned France—a dispute which concerned France and France
primarily—a dispute, as it seemed to us, affecting France, out of an
agreement subsisting between us and France, and published to the
whole world, in which we engaged to give France diplomatic support.
VII.


No doubt we were pledged to give nothing but diplomatic support; we
were, at any rate, pledged by a definite public agreement to stand with
France diplomatically in that question. . .
The present crisis has originated differently. It has not originated
with regard to Morocco. It has not originated as regards anything
with which we had a special agreement with France; it has not
originated with anything which primarily concerned France It has
originated in a dispute between Austria and Servia. I can say this with
the most absolute confidence—no Government and no country has less
desire to be involved in war over a dispute with Austria and Servia
than the Government and the country of France. They are involved 111
it because of their obligation of honour under a definite alliance with
Russia. Well, it is only fair to say to the House that that obligation of
honour cannot apply in the same way to us. We are not parties to the
Franco-Russian Alliance. We do not even know the terms of that
Alliance. So far I have, I think, faithfully and completely cleared the
ground with regard to the question of obligation. _
I now come to what we think the situation requires of us- hor
many years we have had a long-standing friendship with France An
Hon- Member: "And with Germany!"] I remember well the feeling
in the House—and my own feeling—for I spoke on the subject, I think,
when the late Government made their agreement with France—the
warm and cordial feeling resulting from the fact that these two nations,
who had had perpetual differences in the past, had cleared these differ-
ences away. I remember saying, I think, that it seemed to me that some
benign influence had been at work to produce the cordial atmosphere
that had made that possible. But how far that friendship entails obli-
gation it has been a friendship between the nations and ratified by the
nations—how far that entails an obligation, let every man look into his
own heart, and his own feelings, and construe the extent of the obliga-
tion for himself. I construe it myself as I feel it, but I do not wish to
urge upon any one else more than their feelings dictate as to what they
should feel about the obligation. The House, individually and col-
lectively, may judge for itself. I speak my personal view, and I have
given the House my own feeling in the matter.
The French fleet is now in the Mediterranean, and the Northern
and Western coasts of France are absolutely undefended. Ihe French
fleet being concentrated in the Mediterranean the situation is very
different from what it used to be, because the friendship which has
grown up between the two countries has given them a sense ot securi y
that there was nothing to be feared from us. , _ _
The French coasts are absolutely undefended. The French fleet
is in the Mediterranean, and has for some years been concentrated there
because of the feeling of confidence and friendship which has existed
between the two countries. My own feeling is that if a foreign fleet
engaged in a war which France had not sought, and in which she had
not been the aggressor, came down the English Channel, and bom-
barded and battered the undefended coasts of France, we could not
stand aside and see this going on practically within sight of our eyes
with our arms folded, looking on dispassionately, doing nothing! 1
believe that would be the feeling of this country. There are times when
one feels that if these circumstances actually did arise, it would be a
feeling which would spread with irresistible force throughout the land.
But I also want to look at the matter without sentiment, and from
the point of view of British interests, and it is on that that I am going
to base and justify what I am presently going to say to the House-
If we say nothing at this moment, what is France to do with her fleet
in the Mediterranean? If she leaves it there, with no statement from
VIII.


us as to what we will do, she leaves her Northern and Western coasts
absolutely undefended, at the mercy of a German fleet coming down
the Channel, to do as it pleases in a war which is a war of life and
death between them. If we say nothing, it may be that the French
fleet is withdrawn from the Mediterranean. We are in the presence
of a European conflagration; can anybody set limits to the consequences
that may arise out of it? Let us assume that to-day we stand aside*
in an attitude of neutrality, saying, "No, we cannot undertake and
engage to help either party in this conflict." Let us suppose the French
fleet is withdrawn from the Mediterranean; and let us assume that the
consequences which are already tremendous in what has happened
in Europe even to countries which are at peace—in fact, equally whether
countries are at peace or at war—let us assume that out of that come
consequences unforeseen, which make it necessary at a sudden moment
that, in defence of vital British interests, we should go to war; and let
us assume which is quite possible—that Italy, who is now neutral —
[Hon. Members: "Hear, hear!"] —because, as I understand, she con-
siders that this war is an aggressive war, and the Triple Alliance being
a defensive alliance, her obligation did not arise—let us assume that
consequences which are not yet foreseen, and which—perfectly legiti-
mately consulting her own interests—make Italy depart from her atti-
tude of neutrality at a time when we are forced in defence of vital
British interests ourselves to fight, what then will be the position in
the Mediterranean? It might be that at some critical moment those
consequences would be forced upon us because our trade routes in the
Mediterranean might be vital to this country?
Nobody can say that, in the course of the next few weeks, there
is any particular trade route the keepiqg open of which may not be
vital to this country. What will be our position then? We have not
kept a fleet in the Mediterranean which is equal to dealing alone with
a combination of other fleets in the Mediterranean. It would be the
very moment when we could not detach more ships to the Mediter-
ranean, and we might have exposed this country from our negative
attitude at the present moment to the most appalling risk. I say that
from the point of view of British interests. We feel strongly that
France was entitled to know—and to know at once!—whether or not
m the event of attack upon her unprotected Northern and Western
Coasts, she could depend upon British support. In that emergency,
and in these compelling circumstances, yesterday afternoon I gave to
the French Ambassador the following statement: —
"I am authorised to give an assurance that if the German Fleet
comes into the Channel or through the North Sea to undertake
hostile operations against the French coasts or shipping, the British
Fleet will give all the protection in its power. This assurance is
of course, subject to the policy of His Majesty's Government
receiving the support of Parliament, and must not be taken as
binding His Majesty's Government to take any action until the
above contingency of action by the German Fleet takes place."
I read that to the House, not as a declaration of war on our part
not as entailing immediate aggressive action on our part, but as binding
us to take aggressive action should that contingency arise Things
move very hurriedly from hour to hour. Fresh news comes in, and
I cannot give this in any very formal way; but I understand that the
German Government would be prepared if we would pledge ourselves
to neutrality, to agree that its fleet would not attack the Northern
coast of France. I have only heard that shortly before I came to the
House, but it is far too narrow an engagement for us. And, Sir, there
is the more serious consideration—becoming more serious every hour
—there is the question of the neutrality of Belgium.
IX.


I shall have to put before the House at some length what is our
position in regard to Belgium. The governing factor is the Treatry
of 1839, but this is a Treaty with a history, a history accumulated since.
In 1870, when there was war between France and Germany, the ques-
tion of the neutrality of Belgium arose, and various things were said.
Amongst other things, Prince Bismarck gave an assurance to Belgium
that, confirming his verbal assurance, he gave in'writing a declaration
which he said was superfluous in reference to the lreaty in existence
—that the German Confederation and its allies would respect the
neutrality of Belgium, it being always understood that that neutrality
would be respected by the other belligerent Powers. That is valuable
as a recognition in 1870 on the part of Germany of the sacredness of
these Treaty rights.
What was our own attitude? The people who laid down the atti-
tude of the British Government were Lord Granville in the House of
Lords, and Mr. Gladstone in the House of Commons. Lord Granville,
on the Bth of August, 1870, used these words. He said:—
this country was bound either morally on internationally or that
its interests were concerned in. the maintenance of the neutrality
of Belgium, though this corirse might have had some conveniences,
though it might have been easy to adhere to it, though it might
have saved us from some immediate danger, it is a course which
Her Majesty's Government thought it impossible to adopt in the
name of the country with any due regard to the country's honour
or to the country's interests."
Mr. Gladstone spoke as follows two days later: —
"There is, I admit, the obligation of the Treaty. It is not
necessary, nor would time permit me, to enter into the compli-
cated question of the nature of the obligations of that Treaty,
but I am not able to subscribe to the doctrine of those who have
held in this House what plainly amounts to an assertion, that the
simple fact of the existence of a guarantee is binding on every party
to it, irrespectively altogether of the particular position in which
it may find itself at the time when the occasion for acting on the
guarantee arises. The great authorities upon foreign policy to
whom I have been accustomed to listen, such as Lord Aberdeen
and Lord Palmerston, never to my knowledge took that rigid and,
if I may venture to say so, that impracticable view of the guarantee.
The circumstance that there is already an existing guarantee in
force is of necessity an important fact, and a weighty element in
the case to which we are bound to give full and ample considera-
tion There is also this further consideration, the force of which
we must all feel most deeply, and that is, the common interests
against the unmeasured aggrandisement of any Power whatever."
The Treaty is an old Treaty—lB39—and that was the view taken
of it in 1870. It is one of those Treaties which are founded, not only
on consideration for Belgium, which benefits under the Treaty, but in
the interests of those who guarantee the neutrality of Belgium. The
honour and interests are, at least, as strong to-day as in 1870, and we
cannot take a more narrow view or a less serious view of our obliga-
tions and of the importance of those obligations than was taken by
Mr Gladstone's Government in 1870.
I will read to the House what took place last week on this subject.
When mobilisation was beginning, I knew that this question must be a
most important element in our policy —a most important subject for the
House of Commons. I telegraphed at the sametime in similar terms to
both Paris and Berlin to say that it was essential for us to know whether
the French and German Governments respectively were prepared to


undertake an engagement to respect the neutrality of Belgium. These
are the replies. I got from the French Government this reply:—
'The French Government are resolved to respect the neutrality
of Belgium, and it would only be in the event of some other Power
violating that neutrality that France might find herself under the
necessity, in order to assure the defence of her security, to act other-
wise. This assurance has been given several times. The President
of the Republic spoke of it to the King of the Belgians, and the
French Minister at Brussels has spontaneously renewed the as-
surance to the Belgian Minister of Foreign Affairs to day."
From the German Government the reply was:—
1 he Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs could not possibly
give an answer before consulting the Emperor and the Imperial
Chancellor."
Sir Edward Goschen, to whom I had said it was important to have an
answer soon, said he hoped the answer would not be too long delayed.
The German Minister for Foreign Affairs then gave Sir Edward Goschen
to understand that he rather doubted whether they could answer at all,
as any reply they might give could not fail, in the event of war, to have
the undesirable effect of disclosing, to a certain extent, part of their plan
of campaign. I telegraphed at the same time to Brussels to the Belgian
Government, and I got the following reply from Sir Francis Villiers
"The Minister for Foreign Affairs thanks me for the communi-
cation, and replies that Belgium will, to the utmost of her power,
maintain neutrality, and expects and desires other Powers to observe
and uphold it. He begged me to add that the relations between
Belgium and the neighbouring Powers were excellent, and there was
no reason to suspect their intentions, but that the Belgian Govern-
ment believe, in the case of violation, they were in a position to
defend the neutrality of their country."
It now appears from the news I have received to-day—which has
come quite recently, and I am not yet quite sure how far it has reached
me m accurate form that an ultimatum has been given to Belgium by
Germany, the object of which was to offer Belgium friendly relations
with Germany on condition that she would facilitate the passage of
German troops through Belgium. Well, Sir, until one has these things
absolutely definitely, up to the last moment, I do not wish to say all
that one would say if one were in a position to give the House full,
complete, and absolute information upon the point. We were sounded'
in the course of last week as to whether if a guarantee were given that,
after the war 5> Belgium integrity would be preserved that would content
us. We replied that we could not bargain away whatever interests or
obligations we had in Belgian neutrality.
Shortly before I reached the House I was informed that the follow-
ing telegram had been received from the King of the Belgians by our
King—King George:—•
"Remembering the numerous proofs of Your Majesty's friend-
ship and that of your predecessors, and the friendly attitude of Eng-
land in 1870, and the proof of friendship she has just given us again,
I make a supreme appeal to the Diplomatic intervention of Your
Majesty's Government to safeguard the integrity of Belgium."
Diplomatic intervention took place last week on our part. What
can diplomatic intervention do now? We have great and vital interests
in the independence—and integrity is the least part—of Belgium. If Bel-
gium is compelled to submit to allow her neutrality to be violated, of
course the situation is clear. Even if by agreement she admitted the
violation of her neutrality, it is clear she could only do so under duress.


The smaller States in that region of Europe ask but one thing. Their
one desire is that they should be left alone and independent. The one
thing they fear is, I think, not so much that their integrity but that
their independence should be interfered with. If in this war which is
before Europe the neutrality of one of those countries is violated, if the
troops of one of the combatants violate its neutrality and no action be
taken to resent it, at the end of the war, whatever the integrity may be,
the independence will be gone.
I have one further quotation from Mr. Gladstone as to what he
thought about the independence of Belgium. It will be found in
"Hansard," volume 203, page 1787. I have not had time to read the
whole speech and verify the context, but the thing seems to me so clear
that no context could make any difference to the meaning of it. Mr.
Gladstone said: — .
"We have an interest in the independence of Belgium which is
wider than that which we may have in the literal operation of the
guarantee. It is found in the answer to the question whether under
the circumstances of the case, this country, endowed as it is with in-
fluence and power, would quietly stand by and witness the per-
petration of the direst crime that ever stained the pages of history,
and thus become participators in the sin."
No, Sir, if it be the case that there has been anything in the nature
of an ultimatum to Belgium, asking her to compromise or violate her
neutrality, whatever may have been offered to her in return, her indepen-
dence is gone if that holds. If her independence goes, the independence
of Holland will follow. I ask the House from the point of view of
British interests, to consider what may be at stake. If France is beaten
in a struggle of life and death, beaten to her knees, loses her position as
a great Power, becomes subordinate to the will and power of one greater
than herself—consequences which I do not anticipate, because I am
sure that France has the power to defend herself with all the energy and
ability and patriotism which she has shown so often —still, if that were
to happen, and if Belgium fell under the same dominating influence, and
then Holland, and then Denmark, then would not Mr. Gladstone's words
come true, that just the opposite to us there would be a common interest
against the unmeasured aggrandisement of any Power?
4.0 p. m. •
It may be said, I suppose that we might stand aside, husband our
strength, and that whatever happened in the course of this war at the end
of it intervene with effect to put things right, and to adjust them to our
own point of view. If, in a crisis like this, we run away from those
obligations of honour and interest as regards the Belgian Treaty, I doubt
whether, whatever material force we might have at the end, it would be
of very much value in face of the respect that we should have lost. And
do not believe, whether a great Power stands outside this war or not,
it is going to be in a position at the end of it to exert its superior strength.
For us, with a powerful Fleet, which we believe able to protect our com-
merce,'to protect our shores, and to protect our interests, if we engaged
in war, we shall suffer but little more than we shall suffer even if we
stand aside
We are going to suffer, I am afraid, terribly in this war whether
we are in it *or whether we stand aside. Foreign trade is going to stop,
not because the trade routes are closed, but because there is no trade at
the other end. Continental nations engaged in war—all their popu-
lations, all their energies, all their wealth, engaged in a desperate struggle
—they cannot carry on the trade with us that they are carrying on in
times of peace, whether we are parties to the war or whether we are not.
I do not believe for a moment, that at the end of this war, even if we
stood aside and remained aside, we should be in a position, a material


put into words, but which are in all our minds as possible, arise, then
we have already had indications that there is another bright spot and
u to e . very . one , Majesty's Dominions beyond the seas will be
u5 m - ( ri US r I . n whatever action it is necessary, to take. This only I shall
a Iu i vernment already know, but I give them now the assurance
on behalf of the party of which I am leader in this House, that in
whatever steps they think it necessary to take for the honour and
security of this country, they can rely on the unhesitating support of
the Opposition.
Mr. John Redmond.—l hope the House will not consider it im-
proper on my part, in the grave circumstances in which we are as-
sembled, if I intervene for a very few moments. I was moved a great
T2 , by * hat sentence in the speech of the Secretary of State for Foreign
Affairs in which he said that the one bright spot in the situation was
the changed feeling in Ireland. In past times when this Empire has
been engaged in these terrible enterprises, it is true—it would be the
ec I t atlo y i and foll y on my part to deny it—the sympathy of
the Nationalists in Ireland, for reasons to be found deep down in the
centuries of history, have been estranged from this country. Allow
me to say that what has occurred in recent years has altered the
situation completely. I must not touch, and I may be trusted not to
touch, on any controversial topic- But this I may be allowed to say,
that a widei knowledge of the real facts of Irish history have, I think,
altered the views of the democracy of this country towards the Irish
question, and to-day I honestfy believe that the democracy of Ireland
wi turn with the utmost anxiety and sympathy to this country in
every trial and every danger that may overtake it. There is a possi-
bihty at any rate, of history repeating itself. The House will remem-
e.r bal : m .iy 7B , at the end of the disastrous American war, when it
might I think, truly be said that the military power of this country-
was almost at its lowest ebb, and when the shores of Ireland were
threatened with foreign invasion, a body of 100,000 Irish Volunteers
sprang into existence for the purpose of defending her shores. At
first no Catholic—ah, how sad the reading of the history of those days
is.—was allowed to be enrolled in that body of Volunteers, and yet
from the very first day the Catholics of the South and West subscribed
money and sent it towards the arming of their Protestant fellow
countrymen. Ideas widened as time went on, and finally Catholics of
e Bouth were armed and enrolled as brothers in arms with their
fellow countrymen of a different creed in the North. May history
repeat itself. To-day there are in Ireland two large bodies of Volun-
teers. One of them sprang into existence in the North. Another has
sprung into existence in the South. I say to the Government that they
may to-morrow withdraw every one of their troops from Ireland. I
say t at the coast of Ireland will be defended from foreign invasion
• y + r' er c arm i e m??' an , d for this P lir P ose armed Nationalist Catholics
m the South will be only too glad to join arms with the armed Protes-
tant Ulstermen in the North. Is it too much to hope that out of this
situate there may spring a result which will be good not merely for
the Empire, but good for the future welfare and integrity of the Irish
nation. I ought to apologize for having intervened, but while Irish-
men generally are in favour of peace, and would desire to save the
emocracy of this country from all the horrors of war, while we would
make every possible sacrifice for that purpose, still if the dire necessity
is forced upon this country, we offer to the Government of the day
that they may take their troops away, and that if it is allowed to us
in comradeship with our brethren in the North, we will ourselves
defend the coasts of our country.


Mr. Ramsay Macdonald—l should, had circumstances permitted,
have preferred to remain silent this afternoon. But circumstances do
not permit of that. I shall model what I have to say on the
two speeches we have listened to, and I shall be brief. right
honourable gentleman, to a House which in a great majority is with
him, has delivered a speech the echoes of which will go down in history.
The speech has been impressive, but, however much we may resist the
conclusion to which he has come, we have not been able to resist the
moving character of his appeal. I think he is wrong. I think the
Government which he represents and for which he speaks is wrong.
We shall see. The effect of the right honourable gentleman's speech
in this House is not to be its final effect. There may be opportunities,
or there may not be opportunities, for us to go into details, but I want
to say to this House, and to say it without equivocation, if the right
honourable gentleman had come here to-day and told us that our
country is in danger, I do not care what party he appealed to, or to
what class he appealed, we would be with him and behind him. If
this is so, we will vote him what money he wants. Yes, and we will
go further. We will offer him ourselves if the country is in danger-
But he has not persuaded me that it is. He has not persuaded my
honourable friends who co-operate with me that it is, and I am per-
fectly certain, when his speech gets into cold print to-morrow, he will
not persuade a large section of the country. If the nation's honour
were in danger we would be with him. There has been no crime
committed by statesmen of this character without those statesmen
appealing to their nation's honour. We fought the Crimean war because
of our honour. We rushed to South Africa because of our honour.
The right honourable gentleman is appealing to us to-day because of
our honour. There is a third point. If the right honourable gentle-
man could come to us and tell us that a small European nationality
like Belgium is in danger, and could assure us he is going to confine
the conflict to that question, then we would support him. What is the
use of talking about coming to the aid of Belgium, when, as a matter
of fact, you are engaging in a whole European war which is not going
to leave the map of Europe in the position it is in now? The right
honourable gentleman said nothing about Russia. We want to know
about that. We want to try to find out what is going to happen, when
it is all over, to the power of Russia in Europe, and we are not going
to go blindly into this conflict without having some sort of a rough
idea as to what is going to happen. Finally, so far as France is con-
cerned, we say solemnly and definitely that no such friendship as the
right honourable gentleman describes between one nation and another
could ever justify one of those nations entering into war on behalf of
the other. If France is really in danger, if, as the result of this, we
are going to have the power, civilisation, and genius of France removed
from European history, then let him say so- But it is an absolutely
impossible conception which we are talking about to endeavour to
justify that which the right honourable gentleman has foreshadowed.
I not only know but I feel that the feeling of the House is against us.
I have been through this before, and 1906 came as part recompense.
It will come again. We are going to go through it all. We will go
through it all. So far as we are concerned, whatever may happen,
whatever may be said about us, whatever attacks may be made upon
us, we will take the action that we will take of saying that this country
ought to have remained neutral, because, in the deepest parts of our
hearts we believe that that was right, and that that alone was con-
sistent with the honour of the country and the traditions of the party
that are now in office.
XVI.


List of Officials.
BENCKENDORFF, COUNT
Russian Ambassador in Great Britain-
BERCHTOLD, COUNT
Austrian Minister for Foreign Affairs.
BERTIE, SIR F.
British Minister, Paris.
gIENVENU-MARTIN, M.
liJ " Acting Frenck MffligtSf f,9F Foreign Affairs.
BOSCHKOVITCH, M.
Servian Minister in London.
BUCHANAN, SIR G.
British Ambassador, St. Petersburgh.
BUNSEN, SIR M. DE
British Ambassador, Vienna.
CAMBON, M.
French Ambassador in London.
CRACKANTHORPE, D- E. M.
Charge d'Affaires, Belgrade.
GOSCHEN, SIR E.
British Ambassador at Berlin.
GREY, SIR EDWARD
British Minister for Foreign Affairs, London.
LICHNOWSKY, PRINCE
German Ambassador in London.
MENSDORFF, COUNT
Austrian Ambassador in London.
NICOLSON, SIR A.
FcriMHefd Under-Secretary for Foreign Affairs, London
RUMBOLD, SIR H.
Second in Charge, British Embassy, Berlin.
RODD, SIR R.
British Ambassador, Rome.
SAZONOF, M.
Minister for Foreign Affairs, St. Petersburgh.
SCHEBEKO, M.
Russian Ambassador at Vienna.
VILLIERS, SIR F.
British Minister at Brussels.
VIVIANI, M.
Prime Minister of France.
CORRESPONDENCE RE EUROPEAN CRISIS.


I I
I
I
I
I
■ * 3
I
N
■ •
if
1. ' -■ felii I
: ' j * \
j §
i i ; • - ■ V 1
1
. w • \ . . .
