

BRITISH NEW GUINEA:
AN ABSTRACT OF STATISTICAL
NOTES, ETC.
PREPARED FOR THE USE OF PUBLISHERS OF ALMANACS,
DIRECTORIES , Ac., FOR THE YEAR 1891.
15 ris tram; :
WATSON, EERGUSON & CO., PRINTERS, QUEEN STREET.
1890.




BRITISH NEW GUINEA:
AN ABSTRACT OF STATISTICAL
NOTES, ETC.
PREPARED FOR THE USE OF PUBLISHERS OF ALMANACS,
DIRECTORIES, dr., FOR THE YEAR 1891.
Brisbane ;
WATSON, 1 ERGIISON & CO., PRINTERS, QUEEN STREET.
1 8 ‘) 0 .




BRITISH NEW GUINEA
An Abstract of Statistical Notes, &c., prepared for the
use of Publishers of Almanacs, Directories, &c.,
for the year, 1891.
POSITION AND DESCRIPTION.
New Guinea, the largest island in the world if we except
Australia, lies some 80 miles North of the latter country, between
the parallels of 0° 0' and 12° O' S. lat., and the meridians of 130°
50' and 151° 30' E. long. Its greatest length is 1490 miles,
maximum breadth 130 miles, and the total area about 234,768
square miles.
The island is politically divided as follows: —Holland claims
half the territory westward of the 141° of E. long., and Germany
has occupied the North West quarter and important islands of
New Britain and New Ireland, while Great Britain holds the
South Eastern quarter and all islands and reefs between the 141°
and 155° of E. long., and 8° and 12° of S, lat., which do not form
part of the Colony of Queensland.
The boundary line dividing the English and German possessions
begins at Mitre Rock on the North East coast, proceeding due
West along the 8° of S. lat. to the 147° of East long., thence
directly North West to the intersection of parallel 6° and
meridian 144°, and from the latter point continues West North
West to parallel 5° S. lat. and 111 East long. The latter meridian
then forms the Dutch frontier line. The area included is about
90,000 square miles.
T 1 ie Northern, Eastern, Western, and Central portions of New
Guinea are mountainous, as are most of the principal adjoining
islands. Large tracts of low land and plains, however, appear to
exist West of the Gulf of Papua.
The main elevations are the Charles Louis Range in Dutch New
Guinea, estimated at about 18,000 ft.; the Bismarck Range in
German New Guinea, between 16,000 and 18,000 ft., and the
Owen Stanley Range of 13,000 ft. in British Territory.


The principal rivers are the Ply in the latter part, ascended
for over 600 miles; the Empress Augusta River in (Herman New
Guinea, also ascended for nearly 400 miles, and the Amherno
River, in Dutch New Guinea, an important stream but not yet
fully examined. Other considerable rivers are too numerous to
mention, for the country abounds in water-courses, ponds, and
springs.
Forests containing many valuable woods clothe the lower spurs
of the bills, and occur at intervals on the level lands bordering
the Ply River. The banks of the streams are likewise generally
covered with scrub and well-grassed and picturesque valleys are
found in the more open country next to the coast,
A heavy rainfall apparently takes place throughout the year in
the interior highlands. On the S.E. coast it is chiefly confined
to the season of the N.W. winds, viz., December to May. Al
i bis period also occur days of calm, a higher temperature, violent
thunderstorms, and frequent waterspouts.
Prom June to November, a strong South Easterly trade wind
blows with great force and regularity, on the above coast. The
nights at this period are cool and the climate healthy.
The principal animals and those used for food by the natives
are the kangaroo, wild hog, turtle, and dugong. Alligators are
numerous in the rivers and swamps, and are dangerous. Many
species of birds and fish are abundant, and insect life is active
and troublesome during the rainy season.
Birds of Paradise, Kingfishers, Parrots, and Fruit-eating
Pigeons, are remarkable for their richly coloured plumage, and
these skins have formed an article of export for years.
The soil nearly everywhere is very fertile, and the natives
cultivate the Yam, Banana, Sugar-cane, Pumpkin, faro, Maize,
Cocoanut, etc. Prom the Sago Palm they manufacture
Sago, which is, perhaps, their most general article of diet.
The Nipa Palm affords thatch for their buildings, is plaited into
sleeping mats or sails, or used by the women for the short skirts
worn in some districts.
The Betel-nut Palm grows readily, and the Cedar, Pig, Bread-
fruit, Wild Mango, Pandanus, Eucalyptus, Coral Tree, Acacia,
and others, are observed near the coast, and numerous varieties
of grasses, vetches and herbaceous plants are abundant in the
natural pasturages.
The natives, of which the central type is Papuan, modified on
the Eastern coast and islands by Polynesian, and on the Western
by Malayan admixture, are of great anthropologic interest.
Without the tribal organisations which prevail both Eastward
and Westward of the Papuan “ district, ’’ they show notable
characteristics of advancement when compared with Australian
aboriginals. They dwell in large villages of well-built little


cottages, under the shelter of flourishing cocoaunt groves, which,
in many instances seem to h;we been planted by themselves.
Not far from these are carefully enclosed and cultivated grounds,
which, on the slopes of the hills in Eastern 8.N.G., are terraced
for the retention of the soil, and at certain points in the West
irrigation is practised.
They construct ingenious canoes of considerable size both for
fishing and trading, and in the latter make comparatively long
voyages.
One of the chief objects of their barter is coarse pottery, made
by the women, in localities where suitable clay is accessible.
Cordage of different sizes, spears, stone-clubs, bows and arrows,
wooden bowls, basketware, hammocks, fishing nets, and many
other household articles are neatly and variously made.
The innumerable reefs and islets of British New Guinea create
productive and sheltered fishing grounds, and the inhabitants of
the coast and islands subsist largely on fish, Crustacea, mollusca,
and other food products of the sea.
Dogs and pigs are kept in captivity, the former for kangaroo
hunting and the latter for food. Cockatoos and parrots are also
seen as pets in the villages and a small indigenous fowl, for the
extraction of its tail feathers as an ornament.
Although the men live in a state of nudity they are fond of
personal adornment.
Their chief ornaments are armlets of shell and finely plaited
and dyed grass, necklaces of little shells, quills and seeds, turtle-
shell earrings, spindles of shell or bone worn through the septum
of the nose, cowries hung from the hair and legs, feather work
head dresses and fillets, &c.
In some districts the men tattoo themselves with a small figure
on taking a human life, but this mode of decoration is chiefly
used by girls and women, who are often marked with tasteful
and intricate designs from the face to the feet.
In spite of being possessed of so much intelligence and skill,
however, their moral qualities remain practically undeveloped.
Most of the bad characteristics of a savage are found in the
Papuan. They are cowardly, selfish, thievish, untruthful,
treacherous, grasping, bloodthirsty, and morbidly superstitious.
Cannibalism is practiced in some localities, but excites disgust in
others. Infanticide is also alleged to be a. crime of local occurrence.
Their best traits are family affection and a sense of justice.
The women are most industrious, and seldom or never seen quite
idle, gardening, carrying wood and water, pottery making, cooking,
cleaning the village streets, Ac., occupy them principally... Nor
are the men disinclined to labour, although they are often capri-
cious and careless at work.
Some deterrent effect has been produced upon intertribal


massacres by missionary example and counsel, and the present
administration is using every means in its power to repress them,
but bloodshed of the kind is common throughout the island.
The dialects spoken are very numerous, and in some cases
would seem to rise to the rank of separate languages. Sufficient
comparative investigation of these points, however, has not yet
been made under competent authority.
The “ Motu ” language spoken at Port Moresby and on the
coast line, on either side for some little distance, is much used by
the London Missionary Society, but its range is very limited
relatively to the whole of British New Guinea.
PUBLIC OFFICERS.
EXECUTIVE COUNCIL. —In order of Appointment.
The Administrator.
The Secretary to Government.
The Resident Magistrate (Eastern Division).
The Judicial Officer.
LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL.—In order of Appointment.
The Administrator.
The Secretary to Government.
The Resident Magistrate (Eastern Division).
The Judicial Officer.
CIVIL ESTABLISHMENT.
Administrator. — Sir William MacGregor, M.D.
K.C.M.G £1,500
Private Secretary.— The Honorable Matthew Henry
Moreton ... ... ... ... ... £3OO
JUDICIAL.
Judicial Officer. —Francis Pratt Winter ... ... £lOOO
Resident Magistrate (Eastern Division).—Bingham
Arbuthnot Hely ... ... ... ... ... £5OO
Assistant Resident Magistrate and Gold Warden,
(Eastern Division)—William Teller Campbell £3OO
Resident Magistrate (Central Division). —Prank E.
P. Lawes ... ... ... ... ... ... £350
Resident Magistrate (Western Division). —John
Brewer Cameron ... ... ... , £SQQ


CONST A BULART
Commandant. —George Henry AVriford ... ... £3OO
Gaoler and Overseer.— Denis Gleeson ... ... £250
Constables. — Selected men of Government vessels, &c.
GOVERNMENT SECRETARY’S OFFICE.
Go vernment Secretary. —Anthony Musgrave ... £5OO
Registrar-General. —Anthony Musgrave, and House
allowance ... ... ... ... ••• ••• £2OO
Government Printer. —John George Allen ... ... £275
GoVER NMENT Stoß EK EE PER. . Archibald William But-
terworth... ... ... ... ••• ... £2OO
TREASURY.
Treasurer. — -Thomas Henry Hatton-Richards ... £350
CUSTOMS
Collector or Customs, Port Moresby. —Thomas
Hemy Hatton-Richards ... ... ...
Sub-Collector of Customs, Samarai (Eastern Divi-
sion.—David Ballantiue ... ... ... •• £2OO
POSTAL.
(The above Customs Officers.)
NATIVE CONTROL.
Secretary for Native Affairs.— Frank E. P. Lawes
Agent Rigo District. —Albert Charles English ... £250
Agent St. Joseph District. — Charles Kowald ... £2OO
VESSELS.
Master S.S. “Merrte England.” —James Martin
Hennessy ... ... ••• ••• £3OO
Master Schooner “Hygeia.”— Colin Thomson ... £240
POPULATION.
No useful estimate can yet be formed of the aboriginal inhab-
itants in the British part of the territory, since a large portion
remains wholly unknown. But both on the mainland and the
300 odd islands and islets included with it, the natives are thickly
settled in many localities both inland and along the coast,


Gold, 3,470 ounces
£12,440
Pearl-shell, 12 4 tons
1,050
Beche-de-mer, 701- tons ...
4,082
Copra, gum, etc. ...
723
The “foreigners” are the government officers, members of
the London Mission Society and Catholic Mission, beche-de-mer
fishers, pearl-shell divers, miners, Ac. The total number of these,
of which a great proportion are visitors, has never exceeded a
thousand persons ; even when the “ Lonisiade Goldfield ” was
most thickly frequented.
TRADE AND FINANCE.
Trade is principally exchanged with the ports of Coold own and
Thursday Island in Queensland, but both the Government and
missionary bodies purchase stores in Sydney, while the Royal
Navy replenishes its stock of coal at Dinner Island from New-
castle, N.S.W. Some cargoes of cedar shipped from the Western
Division, were sold in Melbourne, but the timber industry from
temporary causes is suspended.
The exports are beche-de-mer, bird skins, copra, ethnographic
specimens, gold, gums, pearl-shells, rattans, Ac.
Gold was discovered in payable quantities in June, 1888, on
Sudest Island, one of the Lonisiade Group. Deposits so far are
alluvial and confined to the channels of the. streams which
abound on the island.
St. Aignan’s Island has also proved gold bearing, and is in-
cluded in the “ Lonisiade Goldfield,” proclaimed last year.
Less than 100 miners are at work on the islands, and hitherto no
productive “ find ” has repaid search on the mainland. The gold
obtained is of the finest quality.
The total value of this export as declared at H.M. Customs,
Cooktown, to the 30th June of this year, was £12,110, repre-
senting 3,470 ounces. This is, however, below the true quantity
and value.
The quantity of exports for the financial year ending 80th
June last, is understated as follows, viz. :—-
Total for 1889-90 ... £18,895
As against £22,742 for the previous year.
It is to bo observed that these products are of a somewhat tem-
porary character, but on the other hand no system for the
occupation of lands by European settlers has yet been organised.
The permanent interests of the country therefore, still remain
undeveloped.
Imports for the past year areyalued at £16,105. Eor the


former year they were £11,109. The “Exchange of Trade,”
therefore, is equal to about £25,000.
The revenue apportioned for the salaries of Government
officers, native control, exploration, etc., consists of £15,000,
jointly and annually contributed by the several Australian
colonies Yearly estimates of expenditure are framed by the
Administrator and submitted for the consideration of the Gov-
ernor and Executive Council of Queensland -being subsequently
embodied in a local “ Appropriation Ordinance.”
A. customs tariff and the issue of mining licenses, etc., afforded
local receipts to the amount of £3,000 odd. These receipts are
not available to the local administration, but are payable under
Act to the Queensland Treasury for proportional distribution to
the contributing colonies.
For nearly f.V years, from Ist July, 1 SSI. to the 3rd September,
1888, when lI.M. protectorate was superseded by the present
form of government, the Colonial Grants in Aid reached the sum
of £(50,553 1 7s. Bd., and the expenditure £59,15(5 15s. 3d.,
leaving a credit balance of over £1,300, subsequently granted
for exploration purposes.
The amount allowed for expenditure for the past financial
period in the new possession, viz.: —lst July, 1889, to 30th June,
1890, was £15,000, while the actual expenditure was confined to
£14,97(5.
Imperial assistance to B. X. G. has been given in the form of
a handsome steam yacht, purchased in England, of some 250 tons
burden, and transferred for the use of the Administrator, in
May, 1889.
The purchase and proper equipment of this vessel was
estimated to cost £lB,OOO, and her maintenance some £3,500
per annum. This outlay was undertaken by the Imperial Gov-
ernment for three years, but has proved inadequate for her
effective maintenance.
A strong steam launch for the ascent of rivers, has also been
provided from the fund appropriated to the 8.8. Merrie England.
Its purchase enabled the Administrator to make a highly im-
portant examination of the Ely River, from December to February
of this year.
The public accounts of B. X. G. have been periodically sub-
mitted to the Queensland Audit Department and then published,
and detailed Financial Statements and Certificates of Audit, can
be obtained for reference from the Government Printing Office
in Brisbane, or seen at the office of the Agent-General for
Queensland, at “ I Westminster Chambers, London.”
The F inancial Year is similar to that of Queensland, and the
several tables and returns are compiled to 30th June accordingly.
There js no Public Debt incurred as yet in or for the Possession-


CURRENCY.
The currency is the usual British sterling in circulation where
Europeans are concerned, and some natives near the coast will
receive it for labor, fish, vegetables, &c. Generally, however,
they prefer their custom of barter, in which the principal articles
used by the alien trader are American “ stick ” tobacco, axes,
hatchets, knives, &c.
SETTLEMENTS.
British New Guinea is divided for administrative purposes,
into the Eastern, Central, and Western Divisions, each controlled
by a Resident Magistrate, responsible for maintaining order
among European settlers and visitors, the improvement of the
natives, and other matters.
Port Moresby situated in the Central Division, near the middle
of the S.E. coast, is the principal settlement. It is a spacious
and good harbor, shaped like an irregular figure 8, and surrounded
by hills varying from 300 to 1,100 feet high. Diversified in out-
line, these present many attractive features when vegetation is
luxuriant after the rainy season. In the South Eastern angle of
the larger and outer harbor to the South, are the largest local
native villages. On alow ridge in their rear, is the head quarters
of the London Missionary Society, next to the Native reserve.
Southward are the Government Domain (including the Ad-
ministrator’s residence and a Botanic Garden), and two surveyed
totvnships, East and West Granville. No allotments have been
yet occupied in the first, but in West Granville are the ollicial
quarters, Government offices, gaols, cottages, boat-sheds, and one
or two other buildings.
Several springs flow freely all the year round from the slopes
of the hills at this part of the bay, and one enclosed and con-
nected by pipes with the harbor beach, furnishes a pure and
ample supply of water for shipping at any time.
The population in the harbor comprises about 1,500 natives,
and less than 50 Europeans, Polynesians, &c.
Samarai (Dinner Island) is a small island in the Eastern
Division, upon which a township has been surveyed, and where a
coal depot is maintained for the use of the Royal Navy. The
settlement is of growing importance, and one or two storekeepers
are carrying on some trade there. The Resident Magistrate for
the Eastern Division is stationed at Samarai.
On Yule Island, at the South Eastern end of the Gulf of Papua,
is the head quarters of the Catholic Mission, presided over by
His Grace the Archbishop of Cyr, (formerly Pere Navarre), the
Superior’of the Melanesian and Micrcmesian Mission of the
Order of the Sacred Heart,


A Gold Warden has lately been stationed in the Louisiade Gold-
field, and a Resident Magistrate in the Western Division, but no
surveys for settlement have taken place at these points.
MEANS OF COMMUNICATION AND DISTANCES.
No regular means of communication is established at present
between B. N. Gf. and Australia, but opportunities occur nearly
every month for the transmission of Mails by ships of the Eoyal
Navy, the Mission Society, the Government or trading vessels.
The postal system is the same as that in Queensland, similar
postage stamp's being used for the transmission of letters, Ac.,
throughout Australia.
Letters for B. N. G. posted beyond the Australasian colonies,
should be addressed carefully “ via Queensland, Australia, ’ other-
wise they may be delayed by miscarriage to British Guiana, as
has occasionally happened.
Distances between the principal points are as follows: —
Table of Distances between certain points in Queensland
and British New Guinea, Etc.
Geographical Points.
Geographical
Miles.
(About)
Port Kennedy (Thursday Island) to the point of coast on 141°
long. E. (the boundary line of Dutch New Guinea)
Port Kennedy to Talbot Island (mouth of Maicassa River)...
Port Kennedy to Kiwai Island (mouth of Ply River)
Port Kennedy to Motu-Motu (head of Gulf of Papua) via
Dalrymple, York, and Darnley Islands* ...
Motu-Motu to Yule Island*
325
Yule Island to Port Moresby
Port Moresby to Samarai (E. end)
Port Kennedy to Port Moresby direct
Cooktown to Motu-Motu
Cooktown to Port Moresby
Cooktown to Samarai
Samarai to Mitre Rock (coast boundary point of German New
Guinea) ...
Samarai to north island of Trobriand group
Samarai to N.E. extreme territorial waters (intersection of
Mer. 155° long., and par. 8 S. lat.)
Samarai to Woodlark Islands
Samarai to Laughlan Islands
Samarai to Adele Island (S.E. extreme of Louisiade archi-
pelago) ...
Samarai to S.E. extreme of territorial waters (intersection
of Mer. 155° E. long., with par. 12° S. lat.)
*This was the course pursued during the steam service which existed from July, 1886.
to July, 1888, betweeij Thursday Island %nd Port .Moresby.


CHRONOLOGY.
Year.
1511
Straits.
Island may have been first sighted by Antonio do Abrea.
Don Jorge de Maneses alleged to have discovered New Guinea.
Luis Vaez de Torres, in the Spanish frigate “ La Almiranta,” dis-
covered the Lonisiade Archipelago, Milne Bay, and Torres
Dutch navigators Lemaire and Schouten made researches on N.E.
coast.
English navigator Darnpier found Straits between New Guinea and
New Britain and New Ireland.
M. de Bougainville, in French vessels “La Boudense ” and
“ L’Etoile,” added to geographical information on the Lonis-
iade Group.
Captain Edwards, H.M.S. “ Pandora,” named Cape Rodney and
Cape Hood, and apparently first described Gulf of Papua.
Captains Bligh and Portlock, in H.M.Ss. “Providence” and
“ Assistance,” made observations in Gulf 80 miles westward
and northward from Cape Rodney.
New Guinea annexed by Hon. East India Company.
Messrs. Bampton and Alt, in English ships “ Hormuzeer ” and
“ Chesterfield,” effected further important discoveries in
Papuan Gulf.
Rear-Admiral Bruny D’Entrecasteaux, in ships “ La Recherche ”
and “ L’Esperance ” pursued researches in Lonisiade Archi-
pelago, and discovered “ Bonvouloir ” and “ D’Entrecasteaux”
islands.
M. Raoult Coutanee, in the French Privateer “ L’Adele,” added to
the knowledge of the S.E. coast, &c.
Captain J. Dumont D’Urville examined portions of N.E. coast.
The Woodlark Islands discovered by a Sydney vessel of that name,
prior to this date.
Captain D’Urville investigated along S. side of the Lonisiade Group
and South-Eastern coast.
Captain F. P. Blackwood, in H.M.Ss. “Bramble” and “Fly,”
made surveys along Western shore of Gulf of Papua.
Lieutenant C. B. Yule, in H.M.Ss. “ Bramble ” and “ Castlereagh,”
surveyed Eastern and Western coast line of Gulf.
Catholic Mission Station established on Woodlark Island, of which
all members were subsequently massacred by natives.
Captain Simpson, H.M.S. “ Blanche, ” visited the Eastern waters of
B. N. G.
Captain Owen Stanley, H.M.S. “Rattlesnake,” surveyed in Lonisiade
Archipelago and on South-Eastern coast.
London Missionary Society placed Polynesian teachers at certain
villages on South-East coast.
Brig “Maria” from Sydney, with some 90 persons intending to
prospect and trade in B. N. G., wrecked on Queensland coast,
a large number losing their lives.
Captain Moresby, H.M.S. “ Basilisk,”discovered Port Moresby, 19th
February.
Same navigator discovered “ Moresby ” Island, at East end, in April.
Captain Moresby contributed largely to knowledge of the N.E. coast
B. N. G.
Head-quarters of Eastern branch L.M.S, located at Port Moresby,
and the Rev, W. G> Lawes placed in charge.


1876 Hon. W. Macleay, of Sydney, in the “ Chevert,” visited Hall Sound,
in August, to collect specimens of natural history.
1875 Rev. S. MacFarlane, in L.M.S. steamer “ Ellengowan,” ascended
Maicassa River, in September.
1876 Also ascended Fly River for 150 miles, in December.
187(3 Signor D’Albertis, an Italian naturalist and explorer, reached a
point some 500 miles from the mouth, in steam launch
“ Neva.”
(?) Rev. J. Chalmers, Missionary of L.M.S., noticed and named the
“ Arthur Gordon Range,” visible from the head of the Gulf
of Papua.
1878 Gold prospecting parties to the number of 100, with some 80 horses,
-70 left Cooktown and examined country on the “Goldie” and
“ Lalokie ” rivers, north of Port Moresby, without result.
1881 Serious massacre of mission teachers at Kalo, followed by reprisals
from H.M.S. “ Wolverene,” under Commodore Wilson.
1888 Eastern half of New Guinea annexed under direction Queensland
Government, but Act subsequently disallowed by Imperial
authority.
1884 H.M. Protectorate in British New Guinea and adjacent islands
(as elsewhere defined) proclaimed by Commodore -1. E.
Erskine, at Port Moresby, on 6th Nov., and subsequently by
ships of war, at other points.
1884 Major-General Scratchley appointed as “ Special Commander for the
Protectorate.”
1885 Catholic Mission station, “ Order of the Sacred Heart,” established
on Yule Island, in June.
1885 First Government building erected in British New Guinea, as resi-
dence for public officer permanently stationed at Port Moresby,
and occupied in October.
1885 General Scratchley died on 2nd December, from fever contracted
while visiting British New Guinea, in chartered steamer
“Governor Blackall.”
1886 Hon. J. Douglas, C.M.G., Government Resident at Thursday
Island, appointed in succession to General Scratchley.
1886 Two townships, East and West Granville, surveyed, lands pur-
chased, gaol, official quarters and offices built, and cattle
introduced under direction of Hon. J. Douglas.
1886 Mr. Andrew Goldie, the well-known collector, trader, and explorer,
opened a commodious general store in West Granville.
1887 “ The British New Guinea (Queensland) Act of 1887,” passed in
Nov., by Queensland Parliament, to guarantee £15,000 as
annual joint contribution from Australian colonies, on account
of local expenditure and to provide for other purposes.
1888 Payable alluvial gold found by Juanita party on Sudest Island, in
J une.
1888 Township surveyed and Government Residence erected on Samarai
(Dinner Island).
4th Sep., 1888. —H.M. Protectorate superseded by declaration of
sovereignty over same area, and an Administrator (Sir William
MacGregor, K.C.M.G. and M.D.) appointed to control affairs
in new Possession, in succession to Hon. J. Douglas.
Sep. to Dec., 1888. Important preliminary Ordinances were passed, a
Central and Magistrate’s Courts established, and Customs
Tariff introduced.
March, 1889. -Some five or six hundred miners congregated in Louisiade
Goldfield, on Sudest and St. Aignan’s Island.


June, 1889.—Sir 'William MacGregor ascended, for the first time, the
highest point of the Owcit Stanley Range (Mt. Victoria), over
13,000 feet in altitude.
Dec. 31st, 1889.—Twice visited the Eastern Division in the S.S. “ Merric
England,” and paid important “Visits of Inspection” to
several interior and coast districts during the past year.
Jan. and Feb., 1890. —Administrator and party, in steam launch “ Ruby,”
examined the course of the Fly River, attaining a point 100
miles further than any previous explorer, or some 000 miles
from the mouth at Kiwai I.
Feb. and March, 1890. —Coast line, islands, &c., between Fly River and
Western boundary examined ; another important water-
course, subsequently named the “ Morehead River,” was
discovered and ascended for a considerable distance.


prnur.\ TTOXS ON BRITISH NEW GUINEA.
Sold by J. D. Potter, Poultry, London.
Australia—
No. 2764
No. 2375
No. 24
Sheet 1. Torres Straits,
Sheet 2. ~ ~
New Guinea—
No. 2423
No. 2120
No. 2121
No. 2126
No. 2122
Port Moresby. Lieutenant Pullen, 1885.
No. 2123
No. 916
No. 2124
No. 937
No. 938
No. 939
No. 926
No. 1088
No,' 1239
China Strait Approaches,
Hall Sound.
Australian
Sheet 2. “ The Coral Sea and Great Barrier Reef,”
Sheet 3. Bampton Island to Aird River, including
Bramble Bay. Captain Blackwood,. 1845.
Sheet 4. Aird River to Freshwater Bay. Lieut. Yule,
1846.
Sheet 5. Freshwater Bay to Round Head. Captain
Stanley, 1850.
Sheet 6. Round Head to Orangerie Bay. Captain
Stanley, 1850.
Orangerie Bay to Bramble Haven, with plans.
Captain Stanley, 1850.
Su-a-u Harbour, &e. Lieutenant Pullen, 1885.
Sheet 8. Bramble Haven to Rossel Island. Captain
Stanley, 1850.
Goschen Strait and Channels round East Cape.
East Cape to Cape Nelson, with the D’Entre-
casteaux Island Admiralty Survey, 1885.
Cape Nelson to Hercules Bay. Admiralty
Surveys, 1885.
W ard Hunt Strait, V asahrsa Anchorage,
Luther Anchorage. Lieutenant A. M.
Field, 1815.
(These charts nearly all contain valuable recent corrections).
Directory, 1889, and Supplement, published under authority of
Loxxls Commissioners of the Admiralty,


N.R.—A large amount of valuable information of a general description
will be found in the “ Imperial Parliamentary Papers ” —entitled “ Corre-
spondence Respecting New Guinea ” —now numbering some 16 publications,
and issued by Eyre and Spottiswoode, London. The Reports and
Despatches of the “ Special Commissioners ” and present “ Administrator,”
to be obtained at the Queensland Government Printing Office, should also
be consulted by anyone interested in a knowledge of the territory.
A. MUSGRATE.
■A? j
I * .’■•■'WV
Watson, Ferguson & Co., Printers, Queen Street, Brisbane.




