

BRITISH NEW GUINEA
AND ITS INHABITANTS.
.A. LEOTTJBB
Delivered to the Home and Foreign Missionary Association of
St. Peter’s, Glenelg, in the Parish Schoolroom,
on Tuesday, 24th July, 1888,
E. T. HOWELL, M.A.,
VICAR OF ST. JUDE’S, PORT ELLIOT, AND HON. CANON OF ST. PETER’S
CATHEDRAL, ADELAIDE, SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
SECRETARY TO THE ADELAIDE DIOCESAN CORRESPONDING COMMITTEE
OF THE AUSTRALASIAN BOARD OF MISSIONS.
Adelaide:
E. S. WIGG & SON, RUNDLE STREET.
PRICE SIXPENCE.




BRITISH NEW GUINEA
AND ITS INHABITANTS.
.A. LECTUBE
Delivered to the Home and Foreign Missionary Association of
St. Peter’s, Glenelg, in the Parish Schoolroom,
on Tuesday, 24th July, 1888,
E. T. HOWELL. M.A.,
VICAR OF ST. JUDE’S, PORT ELLIOT, AND HON. CANON OF ST. PETER’S
CATHEDRAL, ADELAIDE, SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
SECRETARY TO THE ADELAIDE DIOCESAN CORRESPONDING COMMITTEE
OF THE AUSTRALASIAN BOARD OF MISSIONS.
.Adelaide:
E. S. WIGG & SON, RUNDLE STREET.
PRICE SIXPENCE.


The Author of this Lecture is indebted for his facts
chiefly to the following Works
Discoveries and Surveys in New Guinea, by Captain Moresby.
London, 1876.
Pioneering in New Guinea, by James Chalmers. London, R.T.S.,
1887.
Picturesque New Guinea, by J. W. Lindt, F.R.G.S. London,
Longman, 1887.
From Mr. Chalmers’ and Captain Moresby’s works he has
quoted freely without special acknowledgment. Sir Peter
Scratchley’s report will be found in an Appendix to J. W.
Lindt’s volume.
The Lecture does not dwell upon those aspects of New
‘Guinea life, which show the degradation to which cannibalism
has brought the natives. It is those redeeming features in the
savage character which have been brought to light which we
should think most of, as they offer unhoped-for encouragement
to the missionary, and as a fact have been worked upon with
.great success.


nca's^/Fjosqn
!9'S- nq
BRITISH NEW GUINEA.
*.
MANY reasons New Guinea ought to be just now to us
jB one of the most interesting places in the world. It is a very
large island indeed —the largest on the globe; it is a very
fruitful island ; it is the nearest of all important places to Australia;
the people are interesting; and England has recently—solely at the
instigation of the Australian Colonies —annexed a large part of it.
There has been hitherto very little intercourse between Europeans
•and the inhabitants, and in the few critical years which have now
begun, the future destiny of the natives will be almost entirely
decided. No thoughtful man can consider such a position without
very serious reflections on the responsibility of those who first throw
open a country, which has been separate for hundreds of years
from all European and, indeed, practically all external influences;
and Churchmen above all, knowing what vices and sins their country-
men always bring with them where they begin to trade, must feel deeply
their duty to introduce along with the evils which accompany our civili-
sation, the protective and remedial teaching of the Gospel of our Lord.
Most justly, therefore, has the Primate called upon the Church in Aus-
tralia to undertake at once a mission to New Guinea, before it is too
late ; and it is in the hope of interesting you in this great work, and of
obtaining your active co-operation in it, that I propose to lay before you
this evening some facts about the island and its people.
New Guinea is separated from Cape York, in Australia, by Torres
Straits, which are, in their narrowest part, only eighty miles wide.
Roughly speaking, the island is about 1,200 miles long and, in parts, 300
miles broad; its area being more than twice that of the British Isles. It
was first discovered by the Portuguese in 1511, but hardly anyone landed
there till the Dutch tried to make a settlement in 1828. They still claim
the western half of the island, but they make no progress there, and their
possession of the country is little more than nominal. Some of our men
of-war made, from time to time, discoveries on the coast, but it is hardly
an exaggeration to say that until Captain Moresby set out in the Basilisk
in 1871 for New Guinea and the Polynesian Islands, no explorer had
awakened any general interest in the great island and its inhabitants.
His book “ Discoveries and Surveys in New Guinea,” published in 1876,
is most delightful reading, and gives us a very vivid and, I believe, from
further evidence, a very true impression of the country and the native
tribes. Writing as a thoughtful, humane, and Christian-minded man,
he gives us a better idea of the state and capacity for improvement of
the native races than many explorers would have done, and he, in an
appendix to his book, earnestly commends the island to the English
nation as a sphere for missionary enterprise.
But I must confine myself exclusively (or the subject would be too
wide for one address) to that part of New Guinea which the British
Government has annexed, which you will see by the map is about
one-fourth of the island, embracing only the southern coast regions east


of Cape York, and some 300 or 400 miles of the north coast from the
east end. All the northern part of New Guinea east of the Dutch
frontier was claimed by the Germans in 1884, immediately after Lord
Derby had defined the limits of the British protectorate, and the Ger-
mans are now rapidly occupying and developing their possessions. Sir
Peter Scratchley, whose report, as edited by his secretary after his
death, is the most valuable document respecting our new territory
which we possess, consoles us for the loss of the part occupied by Ger-
many by reminding us that New Guinea was primarily annexed for
strategical purposes, and he adds : —“ Its value to Australia in this
respect has not been diminished by the fact that a portion of the
country has been ceded to Germany; not only is the British territory
nearest to the Australian shores, but it contains the best climate, the
finest harbours, the most fertile lands, and the largest rivers.” And he
further gives us this most significant warning : —“ The future of the
country depends largely upon the attitude of the natives. If they are
rendered either hostile or corrupt, then it will continue to be the hunt-
ing ground of needy adventurers or desperate speculators; if, on the
other hand, they learn confidence in their rulers, then settlement in
many parts is possible, and the country may become the regular source
ot supply of tropical products to the Australian markets.”
Now let us accompany Captain Moresby in his first visit to the south
coast at Redscar Bay. If I speak of him as the first explorer here, I
must acknowledge that some representatives of the London Missionary
Society had anticipated him by a year or two, placing native Polynesian
teachers at various spots. These the captain found sometimes in a very
distressed condition from sickness or want of food, and with his usual
humanity relieved them. Ido not remember his meeting a white mis-
missionary anywhere. Wherever he landed he was well received. The
natives were quite unlike the tall, muscular, fierce-looking, naked, black
Papuans, whom he had seen in Torres Straits. They were lithe, copper-
coloured people, with clean well-cut features, and a pleasing expression
of countenance. After discovering Port Moresby, he next visited the
islands off the south-eastern point of New Guinea, and among them
Teste Island, where the people received him in a friendly manner,
taking the white men by the hand as they stepped ashore, and leading
them two miles to their villages on the other side of the island. Indeed,
there were very few places where any real ill-will was shown in all
Captain Moresby’s visits ; and he landed at many a spot where he had
reason to believe a white man had not been seen before. Only once
was he in danger, and that was at a place a little north of our boundary
on the north-east coast, which he named from the circumstance “ Traitor’s
Bay.” Here he was suddenly attacked, immediately on his landing, by
about 50 men with spears ; and after trying to conciliate them, was
forced to fire his rifle at the leading savage. The ball pierced his shield,
but did not touch his body. It staggered him, however, and he and all
his companions fled into the bush. This was a very exceptional case,
and there may have been a special reason for it. Generally the only
difficulty was to assure the natives that the white man meant him no
harm. This was the case at Moresby Island, where he says, “ The men


in sixteen or seventeen large canoes, armed with spears and stone toma-
hawks, came about the ship at anchor; but their hearts always failing
them, stopped and anxiously scanned our every movement, ready for
instant flight. At last, when we despaired of success, four men in a
small canoe were induced to come near enough to receive our presents
on the extreme ends of our paddles. They came still closer, and at last
one bold islander, enticed by many presents and encouraged by much
patting on the back, with ‘ Come along, old fellow,’ slowly climbed the
ladder and stood on our quarter-deck, looking scared and squeezing his
nose spasmodically with one fore-finger and thumb and his body with
the other. Guessing it might mean some form of salutation, we all
responded in the same fashion. The sight was ludicrous, but the effect
was instantaneous ; the scared look gave place to one of delight,
and we were soon friends with the whole crowd. The only difficulty
afterwards was to keep our new friends out of the ship. Each man
as he was shown the wonders of the vessel, would fetch some com-
panions and proudly show them what he had himself seen. Their
great amusement was to watch us at our meals. They would sit in a
circle round the wardroom skylight, pointing at us, and occasionally
roaring with laughter ; and afterwards might be seen relating the details
of the meal to their companions, imitating our use of the knife and
fork. They were willing to take anything that came from the ship in
the way of barter; cocked hats made of newspaper had a great run for
a time, but hoop-iron was in the greatest demand from the first time we
offered it. They could make hatchets of it, and we were able to pur-
chase an abundant supply of yams, fruits and pigs. They appeared to
treat their women kindly, and permitted them to have their say in
bartering and to meet us freely.” So much, then, for the natural dispo-
sition of the natives. They were often shy, and sometimes could not
be approached, generally peaceable, often pleasant and hospitable,
sometimes exceedingly kind and helpful, and in rare cases hard and
hostile.
Now let me say a little of their villages. These vary greatly in size,
sometimes consisting of five or six houses, sometimes with accommoda-
tion for a thousand or more people. The houses are very peculiar,
being raised at least seven or eight feet above the ground on large poles ;
some even in the tops of lofty trees, forty feet from the earth. Some of the
villages are in the sea, some in swamps, some on dry ground. Captain
Moresby says that the houses are often thirty or forty feet long, something
like an inverted clothes basket, with the sides about four feet from the
platform which forms the floor, and which extends for a good space in
front like a sort of balcony, forming a pleasant chatting-place, or cool
seat for the family at meals. The men seldom wear clothes, but they
frizz out their hair mop-fashion, and adorn their persons. How they do
this is best understood from Mr. Chalmers’ description of a bridegroom
on his wedding-day. He says, “ Every hair on his head seemed in
place. He wore a coronet of plumes made from feathers of various
birds, conspicuously from one of the birds of Paradise; on his fore-
head a frontlet of small shells ; hanging from his ears a number of
tortoise-shell ear-rings ; in his nose the much-prized shell ornament;


his face beautifully marked in small squares with red, yellow, and black.
Round his neck were strings of shell-beads, hanging on his chest a large
pearlshell, and round his waist a finely-carved and painted bark belt.”
The women generally wear one or more petticoats, made of grass and
reaching to the knees, and their bodies are adorned with very elaborate
patterns most skilfully tattooed upon them.”
You will now wish to know something of their way of life. Though
they keep many pigs, and use them on feast days, they live chiefly on
vegetable diet, and, therefore, have to cultivate the soil. This, however,
is done by the women, who are often skilful agriculturalists. The men
as a rule are not industrious. A few acres will be enclosed with a stiff
bamboo fence, and produce bananas, yams, and taro in profusion.
Cocoa-nut trees abound everywhere, and the milk from them forms the
favourite drink. They also grow sugarcane, bread-fruit, and some other
less known fruits. The coast tribes naturally live to a certain extent on
fish. The Port Moresby people are skilful in netting, using the fibre of
a small nettle-like plant, making bags and fishing-nets; and the women
busy themselves much in making pottery. Each woman impresses her
own trade mark on the pots she makes, and these are exported to the
western tribes once a year. The vessels in which they are taken are
called lakatois, and consist generally of four large canoes lashed together,
with bulwarks and a stage built all round, so that the sailors can work
them without getting inside the bulwarks. On a mast in the centre a
large sail, made of mats sewn together, is set, and worked with ropes
made of the bark of the large yellow hibiscus. For an anchor they have
a large stone, made fast with long canes sometimes 600 feet long.
Fore and aft are small covered in houses, where the captain, mates, and
boatswains sleep and smoke. There are strong divisions of wickerwork
in each canoe —each division having an owner—and the pottery is so
well packed with dried banana leaves that seldom is any broken. They
sail only when the monsoon suits, and have been known —a fleet of
them—to take 20,000 pots, and bring back in exchange 150 tons of sago.
A sort of regatta, with great rejoicings, takes place before the fleet
starts, and when they reach their destination (some 200 miles distant),,
they are received with great delight—pigs and dogs (for dog is a delicacy
with them) are killed; and, the reception least over, the pottery is dis-
tributed in a neculiar manner. All that belongs to one man is placed
on the beach, and into each pot two small pieces of wood are put, of
which the owner takes one and the purchaser the other. When the time
arrives for the lakatois to return, one bundle of sago is honestly paid for
each piece of wood. For the first month after their arrival they do
nothing but enjoy themselves ; then they set to work to cut down large
trees, and make canoes of them; and when they return have often
fourteen or fifteen canoes in one lakatoi, laden with sago. Of course
there is a hearty welcome and a feast on their arrival.
Whether the New Guinea people will ever become a musical nation
we do not know, but their present love of singing is remarkable. Mr.
Chalmers, who did not pride himself on his voice, seems always to have
been required to sing on his visits, and gave especial delight with the true
Scotchman’s song “ Auld Lang Syne.” He found this useful in teaching


the alphabet, and at Vailata they used to sing A B C to the tune, all
young and old joining in, till, says he, “it was like a thunderstorm
between two hills.” “ A good singer,” he says in another passage,.
“ would be to them as one divine.” So, also, Mr. Edelfeld found, when
in 1884, he made a short trip up the Hilda River into the interior.
Arriving at a village called Nauea, he was received with the usual hos-
pitality upon his presentation to the chief, and after stating, as people
are always obliged to do, his name, where he came from, whither he
was going, and his errand, had a house assigned to him and food. He
was afraid, however, that the floor would give way under the crowd that
pressed upon the new wonder—a white man. The natives all talked
at the top of their voices, speaking of the wonderful man and his be-
longings, so that frequently he could not hear his own voice. At last
he began to whistle, and afterwards to sing an operatic air, which acted
like a charm. They listened with their mouths open in perfect silence,,
and he never tried this remedy for uproar without effect. They are also
fond of dancing—peaceful, not war dances. Mr. Chalmers arrived at
Motu-Motu once when a thorough fancy dress ball, the beginning of a
series, was being held. This one was for the children, assisted by the
young men and women. In front were young men to the number of
thirty drumming, dancing and singing, and to their time young men
and women arm-in-arm, and facing them were singing and dancing
behind them again younger ones arm-in-arm; and behind these, chil-
dren holding one another’s hands. From the child of four to the
youth or maiden of twenty, all were happy and terribly in earnest.
Each head was wonderfully cropped, some had squares, others circles,,
others triangles of hair ; their faces were painted many colours, and
variegated leaves hung from their arms, waist and legs. The ladies had
beautiful petticoats, made from the young sago palmleaf, and dyed
various colours, and all had fastened on their backs, rising over their
heads more than two feet, and hanging gracefully in a curve, like the
Prince of Wales’ feather, the youngest leaf of the sago nicely prepared.
Tied round their knees and ankles was plaited bark with tassels attached,
Mothers were standing about, every now and again throwing out a
suggestion to their children, or giving an encouraging word to them.
The children, indeed, seem not all neglected, if one reads their list of
games. Either they are very inventive themselves or their parents teach
them how to amuse themselves, for we find in Mr. Chalmers’ list of
children’s games, swinging, skipping, top-turning, hide-and-seek, kite-
flying, football, chase and touch, cat’s cradle, boat-sailing, hot and cold,
cock-fighting (two sitting down and trying to overturn each other with their
feet), golf, sham fightingjumping, French and English, building houses,
games for girls, dancing and singing in a circle, and many others like our
own. In Mr. Chalmers’ narrative there are some curious answers to a
catechism by which he got information from the Motu and Motu-motu
tribes as to their customs. I will give a few questions and answers ; —-
“ Are children named after any animal ?—Yes, after the wallaby and pig
generally when there has been a quarrel in the family just before the
birth.” “ Why do women tattoo ? —To please the men.” “ Can a man
speak to his mother-in-law? —Yes; except at the east of the district.


where the husband will leave his house if she enters, and will go a long
way round to avoid meeting her.” It appears that the Motu people
believe in no Great Spirit, but say that other tribes do, thinking that he
is good and kind ; whereas the Motu-Motu believe him to be vindictive.
None of them believe there is any punishment for evil-doing. They
believe in a future life and meeting there. “ How do you salute ?
Everywhere the custom is to rub noses, except that the Koiari touch
the chin or beard. Some rub noses up and down, and some across.”
The Motu-Motu salutation is to say, “ Is that you ? ” and to rub noses.
To the question “ Have you any word for “thanks?” the answer for
New Guinea, with three exceptions, is “ No.” We are told that there is
no infanticide ; that parents make wills that are carried out; and that
■old people are never killed. Women are much better treated on the
coast than inland, where they are often killed for the slightest offence.
On the coast, where the life is more active, women are only beaten by
the men when they are much exasperated. The wife then leaves her
husband and goes to her friends; returning, however, when her man
comes acknowledging his fault and bringing some present to appease the
relations. As to dress, Mr. Chalmers says, “ The women certainly do
not wear much, and lam not astonished at it. They are very
modest and think themselves well clothed. Why savages should be
called immoral I fail to see. They are not so as compared with civilized
nations. It is the contact with white people that demoralizes them.”
An interesting feature in the character of the natives of New Guinea
is their rudimentary love of art. Let me give you some instances : At
Discovery Bay Captain Moresby was invited by the people to partake
of their evening meal —a mess of yams and vegetables, to which pork
was sometimes added, seasoned with cocoanut finely shred over, and
cooked in large earthen bowls. This was eaten with exquisite little
spoons cut out of pearlshell, and made a meal not to be despised. The
women generally presided at the feast, and the men looked pleased to
see the children receiving their shares in little cocoanut basins, and,
indeed, their whole manner spoke well for their treatment of their
weaker ones. Their war canoes were very remarkable, and were care-
fully kept under sheds between the houses. They were from 50 to 60
feet long, dug out of a single tree, with topside planking laced on. The
ends were ornamented with high moveable prow and stern pieces,
grotesquely carved and painted, from which cassowary feathers floated,
and all round the sides of the boat strings of white cowrie shells were
looped up. Their canoe paddles were very beatiful, shaped like long
narrow leaves of a water plant. There, also, the captain saw the tomb,
evidently of some great man. A small space inside the village, about
10 feet by 5, was enclosed, in which stood a miniature house, neatly
made, and painted with ochres and lime, covering the remains. Two
or three pretty shrubs were planted in the enclosure, and the whole was
kept in good order. He says that the people had many pets, tame
cassowaries, which run about the village freely, several varieties of the
cuscus (like our native bear), and some exquisitely plumaged birds,
which they kept in wicker cages. Their temples, for they have them,
though they use them for the men to sleep in, and not for worship, are


often highly ornamented. Mr. Chalmers thus describes one, the finest
he had seen : “ There are two large posts in front 80 feet high, on
which rests a large peaked roof, around which there hangs a graceful
fringe of the young sago leaf. The front is about 30 feet wide, and the
whole length about 160 feet, tapering gradually down to the back, where
it is small. The front is a platform floored with the outer skin of the
sago palm, and kept beautifully clean. (I may remark that in some
instances the houses are described as exquisitely clean). The whole
building is divided into courts, with divisions of cocoanut leaves nine
feet high, on which hang various figures. From the top of the cocoa-
nut leaves hang graceful curtains of the young frond of the sago palm.
Standing on the platform in front and looking down the whole length of
the passage with its various divisions and their curtains, it has a wonder-
ful effect. In each of the courts are numerous skulls of men, crocodiles,
and wild boars, and also many breasts of the cassowary. At the end is
a sacred place, which few ever dared to enter.” In it Mr. Chalmer’s
found six curious-looking creatures made of cane. The mouth was like
a frog’s, enormously large and wide open ; the body seven feet high and
like a large dugong (a sort of seal). Out of the mouths flew, in constant
succession, small bats. Another temple had a carpet of sago bark all
down the centre passage beautifully carved throughout with figures of
men, crocodiles, &c. In the same place nearly all the dwelling-houses
had small flower gardens. A platform was made about 10 feet high,
surrounded with a fence, and inside earth, brought from far inland and
from the coast, was placed to the thickness of two feet. Various kinds
of plants are grown. “ I think,” says Mr. Chalmers, “ these gardens
furnish further evidence that there is a kind of civilization amongst these
people, and this taste for the beautiful can surely be worked upon with
much good result.” In another village, he found a large block of wood
on a house carved with figures of two crocodiles and a youth lying
between them.
The country itself, in parts, is so beautiful as to give the greatest
delight to the explorer. There is a range of mountains forming the
backbone of the British Territory, the highest point of which—Mount
Owen Stanley—reaches 13,200 feet. Leading to the base of this central
range, east and west of it, are open valieys, full of rich deep soil; table
lands ; patches of open country; and craters of recent volcanoes.
Many of the hillsides have been cleared, fenced, and cultivated by the
natives. At present they produce abundance indeed of food for them-
selves, but little for export, except ctfcoa-nuts —the inside of which is
dried and sold under the name of copra, being used in Europe to make
oil-cake and other cattle foods. How little attempt to open up trade
has hitherto been made may be judged from the fact that in 1885 there
were in all only twenty white men resident in New Guinea, who as a rule
lived in their boats. The climate in some parts of the coast region is
very bad, but probably would become much better when the ground was
opened up and drained ; and the air in the high grounds is bracing and
invigorating. On the whole the climate 'is probably as good as that of
North Queensland.
As to missionary work. There were in 1885 four white mission-


aries, mainly supported by the Congregational body, thirty South Sea
Islanders and ten New Guinea teachers, placed at various stations.
They were doing good work, but could not occupy more than a fraction
of the ground to be taken up. The tribes are numerous, and the num-
ber of villages is exceedingly great. Sir Peter Scratchley, on his three
months’ tour, personally visited 94 villages, and found that each district,
and often each village, had a different dialect. His general report of
the character of the natives shows that in the west and north-west of our
territory the natives are very numerous, and the tribes large; from Port
Moresby to Kerepunu the people are peaceable and willing to labour.
Further east the character changes; the natives are more numerous
again, their physique finer, and their capacity for bloodshed with
difficulty restrained. The population from South Cape to Bentley Bay
is more scattered, the villages small and numerous, and the people
small in stature and of a peaceable disposition. Sir Peter never met
with the slightest hostility, nor was there ever any disturbance with the
natives.
Mr. Chalmers gives some idea how the missionary work has been
carried on. The white missionary, who ought, he says, at least for the
more robust tribes, to be a tall fine-looking man, the natives having
great respect for physical power, must gain the confidence of the chief
of the village. Being received hospitably, he introduces a converted
native, who is able to make himself understood. This man will preach
as he could not. Let us take an example. Mr. Chalmers was visiting
Maipua, a village of from 1,500 to 1,800 people, the place where the
beautiful temple was, which has been already described. This temple
was assigned to him for a lodging-place, and Aruaco, one of his com-
panions, a converted robber chief, began at sunset to speak to the crowd
of cannibal savages in the temple, of Adam and Eve, Noah and the
Flood. Then both he and Aruadaera, another native, spoke about
Jesus Our Lord, and His love for man. It was a weird scene, the large
dark temple lit only by flickering fire-lights, the crowd of cannibals, the
hidden sacred place with the six wicker idols to which the slain bodies
of enemies used to be presented before they were eaten, and the
preachers. It was the most attentive congregation Mr, Chalmers ever
saw. They listened well, asked questions, and expatiated freely.
Though not a prepossessing people they seemed kind and willing to
believe. Mr. Chalmers slept on the platform, and, waking in the morn-
ing, found them then, perhaps still, talking and listening. Aruako was
quite hoarse, and on being questioned, said he had been at it all night.
When he lay down they kept asking questions, and he had to get up and
explain. But added he, “I am now at Jesus Christ, and must tell them
all about Him.” The verdict of the people was, “No more fighting,
Tamate ;no more man eating. We have heard good news, and we shall
strive for peace.” At each station where a teacher is settled, he has a
large house and garden, a whaleboat, and generally a church. Some-
times the congregation appeared to have a special dislike to prayer. At
Motu-Motu, Mr. Chalmers once had two well attended services for sing-
ing and preaching ; “ but prayer,” says he, “ drove the crowd helter-
skelter to their homes.” “ Some years ago,” he adds, “ the same thing


happened. I asked an old Motu friend to prepare them for prayer, and':
having done so, he shut his eyes; but at the first sound of the first words,
the earth trembled with the stampede.” *
The best idea, I think, of the better aspect of the New
character is obtained from reading Mr. Chalmers’ account of some of
the great men he had to do with. There was a nobility about them which
is the more interesting from the fact that many of them never became
Christians. Perhaps I may be able to abridge his account of one or two
without quite destroying the interest of it.
(i) Valina, of Kalo, was a fine strapping youth of aristocratic
appearance, very fond of dancing and fighting. A year or two'
before the Kalo massacre, the Kalo natives went inland to fight
Quaipo, a hill tribe. Valina was not interested in the attack, and
went elsewhere to hunt wallaby. In the afternoon word was brought
him that his friends were surrounded and likely to get the worst
of the fight. He at once armed and started, broke through the
cordon to his friends, and taking the lead, fought so desperately that he
brought them all safely back, carrying with him the head of a slain foe.
After this he had many skirmishes with other tribes—coming off always
unhurt. Then the Wolverene visited New Guinea, and the chief and three
other Kalo men were shot for their part in the massacre, the rest being
spared. Valina went on board and was well received by the Commodore.
He thought it right that Kalo should be punished, and said that now it
would be peace truly, and foreigners need not fear. He was much
astonished at the clemency of the Commodore, and said, “ Only a great
chief and powerful people could act so.” Being assured there would be
no more punishment, he told his tribe that he believed all he was told,
and trusted the word of the white man. He was very urgent to have
another tfeacher, and when a Rarotongan and his wife were sent to
Kalo he was their best friend, and promised that they should never be
hungry and no one should molest them. For school and services he
himself had no taste. One day he went with a few others wallaby-
hunting, when Valina and his cousin were surprised and surrounded
by some enemies. They fought splendidly, Valina holding his own
well against the force of his foes, who were determined, if possible, to-
kill him whom they all feared so terribly. He broke through their line
with a spear hanging to his thigh, which he pulled out and threw back
*Note.—May not the following quotation throw some light upon the matter? “There
is one mistake which our missionaries frequently make, which does much to repel the
heathen from f hristian worship; they persist in reading the prayers, instead of reciting
them with musical intonation. Reading is essentially artificial; the natural way in which
petitions are made is that which is known to us as intoning. The beggar in the street,
the child when reciting its simple prayer, both intone their petitions. Jews, Brahmins,
Mahometans, Buddhists, the Indian of JNorth America, all chant their prayers. Bishop
Heber found a whole nation—the Bheels—who did so. On the authority of Hr A. Layard,
the Nestorians of Kurdestan are said to observe this custom. Captain Cook found it among,
the South Sea Islanders. Bishop t-elwyn states that the New Zealanders, when they became
Christians, said their prayers in a low monotone, which sounded like the swell of a distant
surf. Dr. Wolff, when taken prisoner by some people whose bearing was very threatening,
hit on the expedient of chanting; they understood not a word that he said, but they
recognized the musical recitation as connected with prayer, and said, ‘ lo! here Is a man
of God ’ One of our missionaries at Canadagoody reported many years ago that he could
not get the people to attend when he was * reading prayers.’ He tried the experiment of
chanting, and they not only ceased their listlessness, but after service expressed their delight.”
—(“Papers on Missionary Work,” by the Rev. W. H. Tucker, M.A, Secretary to the 8.P.G.).


at his enemies. He was going to run when- he heard his cousin call
“ Will you leave me here to be killed alone ?” and he fought his way
back to his side, and for a long time kept off the enemy. At length,
speared in the chest and several other places, he fell with his cousin,
and they died near each other.
(2). Koapena of Aroma.—Aroma is a dangerous part of the coast,
where Mr. Chalmers was in great peril of being speared and clubbed
in 1880, being the first white man who had ever landed there. In
1882 seven Chinamen were killed; but in 1881 two teachers had
been settled under the protection of the chief Koapena. He asked
for them, and when told that the people might kill them, laughed
at any interference during his lifetime. In December, 1884, two
churches were opened, and at Hula and Kerepunu fears were
entertained lest the missionaries and teachers should all be murdered
at the opening gathering, the old Aroma thirst for blood breaking
out. That they were not was due to Koapena. He is said to be
the finest man in New Guinea, from Bald Head to East Cape,
Five feet ten inches high, splendidly built, he is like a perfect
Hercules, with gait erect and proud, wielding a club larger than
any other could use, with marks on his body showing that he has
killed fifty people, loving his children and loved and respected
by them. Once he said to Mr. Chalmers, “ Who dare touch you ?
Should any injure you, or speak ill to you, where can they go ? Will
they ascend to heaven that I cannot find them. Will they sink under-
ground beyond my reach? No, no one must injure you !” He
appears, however, to have the Australian feeling on the Chinese question,
for he said once : “ All of your countrymen are my friends, but Sinito
(Chinese) never. I will kill all who land here.” A ver/ short
and effectual act of parliament surely. He is always referred to as an
authority all along the coast when anything goes wrong, the tribes asking
not “ What does Aroma say ?” but “ What does Koapena say?” When
Commodore Erskine visited Aroma, Koapena went on board to see the
great white chief. He was much astonished with all he saw, but
especially with the playing of the band. He shook with fear (poor
human nature J) from head to foot; and ashamed of it, sat down. At
the opening service of the Moapa Church afterwards, he gave a short
address to the following effect: —“ Now listen; it must be peace with
us and the foreigners ; the teachers have brought words of peace ; it is
time we received them. If any of you think you can do as you like
with the foreigners, that they are not strong, let me tell you to visit a
ship such as I have seen, and see for yourselves, and you will never
again speak boastfully. I have seen guns large and small, the sound
of which is too much. I have seen men in numbers greater than all
Aroma can speak of.” So it seemed to him, accustomed to take things
easily, for the continual movements of the men made him think that
new men were ever appearing in different parts of the ship. He was
very anxious to visit Cooktown, and was promised the trip. Two of his
wives asked to be allowed to see the steamer in which he was to travel.
They went over everything, and Koapena was very anxious that they
should visit the engine-room. They, however, would only look down


from the deck. The furnace door was opened, and at once a new idea
struck them. They said to Koapena in great excitement, “ You must not
go; see, these foreigners keep this great fire to burn up all they kill.”
Next morning the chief came off before the vessel started, and said “ I
cannot go ; I have spent a miserable night ; my wives have done
nothing but cry over me all night, and I must stay.” So he gave up,,
but afterwards had an opportunity of gratifying his wish, and was greatly
astonished at all he saw. Immediately after the Kalo massacre, the
Aroma teachers were removed as a precaution, A fortnight afterwards
Mr. Chalmers paid a visit: Koapena did not appear. They went to his
house. There he was on his platform with a few old men, his back
turned; no word of welcome. Mr. Chalmers wondered if he had
become an enemy, when suddenly he turned round and cried “ O
Tamate, how foolish you have been ; but come.” Then throwing his
arms round the white man’s neck, he said in a very sorrowful voice
“ Tamate, you might have trusted me with your children ; you know
well, no one belonging to you will be injured here.” Everything in the
teachers’ house was found just as they had left it, and when they re-
turned he was greatly delighted. He is not yet a Christian, but surely
might become one. If not, he is still proof that there is splendid:
material in the New Guinea native for Christianity to work on, if once
it take hold.
And now, lastly, what have we of the Church to do ? Our mission-
should, if possible, be begun with a staff of four or six, including clergy,
mechanic, seaman, &c., with a mission vessel, which at first need only
be a schooner of about six tons, and costing £ 2OO, It has been
suggested that one of the Queensland clergy should be invited to under-
take the mission, but no arrangement has hitherto been made. Mr.
Douglas, the second commissioner, in his report for 1886, says: “A
great and noble enterprise has been conducted by a set of most self-
sacrificing men, who have carried the message of Christ to a savage
race of inhuman murderers. The first stages of transmutation have
been effected at the cost of a great sacrifice of life among the devoted
South Sea Islanders, who have been the chief instruments in the partial
conversion of these interesting, though bloodthirsty, savages. I regret
that I cannot say that the work of the Missionary Society is progressive.
The brave and earnest men who devoted the best years of their lives to the
work of evangelization on an unknown coast cannot renew their youth as
we might wish they could. They are not succeeded by men competent
to follow up the task they commenced, and the work of the mission
languishes just now, from the lack of new men who are prepared to
devote their lives to an efficient attack upon the deep incrustation of
barbarism, which still prevails. The French Catholic Missionaries of
the Order of the Sacred Heart have commenced work at Yule Island.
I trust that the humanising influences which they will doubtless bring
to bear upon the natives will be productive of much benefit to the Pro-
tectorate.” Mr. Douglas reccommends Bentley Island as a site for the
proposed mission. It is favourably situated off the south-east coast, is a
place of call for the German monthly mail steamer from Cooktown, and
within a reasonable distance of Queensland. The island has only about


fifty inhabitants, but it is a place of resort from other islands, and there
are frequently as many as 150 people there. The inhabitants are fairly
friendly.
To carry out this plan the Church in Australia will have to furnish
,£2,000 a year. It is proposed that £5OO each should be provided by
Sydney and Melbourne, and £l,OOO by the remaining dioceses
together. We ought to contribute £2OO a year. Who will help in the
.good work ?
W. K. Thomas & Co., Printers, Register Office, Adelaide.


■
■


