

BRITISH PRESS AND AUSTRALIA
LUNCHEON TO SIR GEORGE REID
HIGH COMMISSIONER’S ELOQUENT TRIBUTE TO THE BRITISH PRESS
The Right Hon. Sir George H. Reid, G.C.M.G., P.C., D.C.L., K.C.
(Reprinted from “THE FINANCIER.,’’ September 9th, 1913.)
YESTERDAY a distinguished gathering, represent-
ing the British Press, entertained the Right
Hon. Sir George Reid, G.C.M.G., P.C., D.C.L.,
K.C., High Commissioner for Australia, to luncheon
at the Trocadero Restaurant. Mr. Robert Donald,
President of the Institute of Journalists, presided,
and amongst those present were the Hon. Thomas
Mackenzie (High Commissioner for New Zealand) ;
Sir John McCall (Agent-General for Tasmania);
Sir H. W. Just (Colonial Office) ; the Hon. Peter
Mcßride (Agent-General for Victoria) ; Major Sir
Thomas Robinson (Agent-General for Queensland) ;
the Hon. T. A. Coghlan (Agent-General for New
South Wales); Ml H. C. L. Anderson (Under-
secretary for Agriculture, N.S.W.); Sir J. W.
Taverner, K.O.M.G. ; Sir Francis Gould
(“ Westminster Gazette) ; Mr. Hugh Chisholm
(“Times”); Mr. J. S. R. Phillips (“Yorkshire
Post”); Mr. Frank Sayer (The Financier); Mr.
Mostyn Pigott (“ World”), R. J. Arnott (“ Canada”),


and Mr. R. D. Blumenfeld (“Daily Express”), the
hon. treasurer, who, with Mr. R. J. Barrett (The
Financier), the hon. secretary to the committee,
organised the function.
There were also present Messrs. Stanley
Adam (“ British Australasian ”) ; W. Banwell
(“South Africa”); J. Hardy Barrett (The Finan-
cier) ; B. M. Bellairs (“ Canadian Mail ”) ; James
Bone (“ Manchester Guardian ”); D. D. Braham
(“Times”); L. J. Brient (“Morning Post”); F.
D. Byrne (“ Financial Times ”); C. H. Chomley
(“British Australasian”); F. Raymond Couison
(“Sunday Chronicle”) ; A. M. De Beck (“Canadian
News”); G. B. Dibblie (“Field and Queen”);
W. A. Doman (“Financial News”); W. J. Evans
(“ Evening News ”) : T. Feilden ; L. Glendemung
(“Investors’ Guardian”); H. S. Gullett (“Sydney
Daily Telegraph”); P. J. Hannon (“Navy”); F.
S. Hartnell (“Standard of Empire”); Geo. J.
Holmes (“Investors’ Chronicle”); S. Hossain
(“New Statesman ”); H. Campbell Jones (“ Sydney
Sun”); George Kinr' (“Sphere and Tatler ”);
Boyle-Lawrence (“Daily Express”); R. Mabson
(“Statist”); G. B. Manders (Commonwealth
Office); Thos. Marlowe (“Daily Mail”); Arthur
Mason (“ Sydney Morning Herald ”); B. Morgan
(“Financial News”); E. Murray (“British Empire
Review”); Les’ie Nield (“Sydney Vocalist”);
W. O’Malley, M.P. (“Connaught Tribune”); Chas.
Palmer (“ Globe ”) ; Ernest Parke {“ Daily News ”) ;
H. M. Peet; S. J. Pryor (“Times”);
Joseph Raymond (“ Pastoral Review ”) ; Col.
W. T. Reay (“Melbourne Herald”); Douglas
Reid; H. J. Richardson (“Australian
World”); J. R. Roydhouse (“Sydney
Sunday Times”); Frank Savage (Commonwealth
Office); C. B. Sayer (“Journal of Commerce”);
Clement K. Shorter (“Sphere and Tatler”);
H. C. Smart (Commonwealth Office) ; A. Edmund
Spender (“Western Morning News”); A. Spur-
geon (Cassell’s) ; Carmichael Thomas (“ Graphic ”);
F. B. Tourtel (“Daily Express ”); T. S.
Neil Turner (“Daily Chronicle”); J. J. Virgo
(“Association News”); Walker (“Glasgow
Herald ”) ; E. A. Wallace (The Financier) ;
Leo Weinthal (“African World”); Arnold White
(“Daily Express”); and H. A WTiite (“Stan-
dard ”).
After the toast, “ The King,” had been loyally
honoured, Mr. R. J. Barrett (the hon. secretary)
read a telegram from Captain R. M. Collins as fol-
lows :—“Regret unable to be present on occasion
of the unique compliment to my chief, the High
Commissioner, in entertaining him on his departure
for Australia. I join you in wishing him bon
voyage and a safe return.” He also announced
that letters of regret had been received from Sir
Henry Lucy, J.P. ; the Agent-General for Western
Australia; the Agent-General for South Australia;
Sir H. Rider Haggard; Sir A. Conan Doyle; the
Editor “Illustrated London News”; Mr. E. S.
Moyle, the “ People ” ; the Editor “ Daily Mirror ” ;
Mr. A. W. Kiddy, the “Standard”; Mr. W. L
Courtney, “Fortnightly Review”; Mr. T. Colsey,
“Truth”; Mr J. Parmelee, “Vanity Fair”; the
Editor “Sporting and Dramatic News”; Mr.
G. Ridler, “Sunday Times”; the Editor ‘Fair-
play ” ; Mr. Raymond Radclyffe, the “ Stock-
broker ”; the Editor “Investors’ Review”;
Mr. Lamert, “ Money Market Review ”; Mr. W.
Chisholm, “ Mining World ” ; Mr. E. Salmon, the
“ Rubber World ” ; Mr. Tucker, the “ Electrician ” ;
Mr. M. Holmes, “ Morning Advertiser ; ; Mr.
G. W. Hubbard, “ Birmingham Daily Post ” ; Mr.
H. Read, South Wales “Daily News”; Mr. H.
Nasmuth, “Textile Recorder”; Mr. A. W. Stan-
ton, “ Mark Lane Express ” ; the Editor “ Western
Daily Press ” , Mr. W. T. White, “ Mining News ” ;
Mr. Harold Feeir, the “Coloniser”; and the
Editor of the “Economist.”
The Chairman (Mr. Robert Donald),
in proposing “ Our Guest,” said ; A few months more
than three years ago a similar function took place in
this room, the object of which was to introduce Sir
George Reid to the representatives of the English Press.
On that occasion we were the guests. Those of you who
were present may remember that we came, we saw,
and he conquered. We recognised at once that Sir
George Reid was an asset to us of the Press, as
well as to the Commonwealth. Since then there
has been no more popular figure at public func-
tions in this country than the Australian High
Commissioner. His rare good humour, his wit, his
sound sense, his whole-hearted belief in himself and
his mission, which is only surpassed by his belief
in Australia and its destiny, has won him popularity
wherever he has gone. (Applause.) His sympathy
2


with the Press has, of course, been entirely dis-
interested, but he has not been unmindful of the
uses of advertisement—(laughter) —and the more
we wrote about him and Australia the better he
liked it. He came here to advertise Australia, and
he has done it. He has at all times shown the
greatest courtesy and consideration towards the
representatives of the Press, and he has also taken
numerous opportunities of bringing newspaper
editors and writers into touch with Ministers and
public men from Australia. The organisers of this
function thought the occasion of Sir George Reid’s
departure on a brief visit to Australia would be
a fitting opportunity for the Press to show its ap-
preciation of his work. (Hear, hear.) The time was
short, and at this season of the year many editors
and journalists are absent on holidays. At the
same time, this gathering to-day is thoroughly
representative of the London and the provincial
Press, the weekly Press, and also of the news-
papers specially representing Canada, South Africa
and other parts of the Empire. We are grateful
for the many courtesies which he has shown to
us, and are here to pay our tribute to him for
public services. An article on the work of the
Dominion Commission, which appeared in the
“Times” a few days ago, suggested that Aus-
tralia was still in the shy, self-conscious stage of
nationhood. She has not learnt, we were told, as
has her sister, Canada, to make the best of her-
self before visitors. We have never noticed
that Australia’s High Commissioner suffered
from the virtue of shyness, and he certainly
has presented the best side of Australia to the
Mother Country. (Applause.) He will probably tell
us that he had no alternative, as there was no other
side.
Sir George Reid’s Success.
His purpose, he said, on coming here was to in-
terpret the sentiments and desires of the Australian
people. He has do le so with signal success. He
has been a most successful commercial traveller.
(Laughter and applause.) He has visited every
great Industrial centre in this country ; he has ex-
tended his commercial tours to Germany, Austria,
the United States, and other countries, opening up
new avenues for trade and making known every-
where the magnificent opportunities which Australia
offers for the worker and the business man. His
greatest achievement is that he has discovered Aus-
tralia to the British people. Before his arrival we
knew of Victoria and New South Wales, and of the
keen rivalry, fiscal and otherwise, which existed
between these two Colonies. We had tasted of the
fruits of Tasmania, we had heard about the vast
grazing lands of Queensland, the rich mineral re-
sources of Western Australia, the attractions of
South Australia, and, indeed, of the advantages ol
each of the Colonies. But the High Commissioner
came to us as the representative and the spokesman
of a united continent. He brought home to the
British public what the Commonwealth stood for ;
what unlimited opportunities it offered to labour
and capital, to the skilled and unskilled, to women
as well as men. (Applause.) He harmonised the
voices of the States in his own official personality,
so that each stood for all, and all for each. It is
not a mere coincidence that the coming of Sir George
Reid was followed by a marvellous development in
Australia Never was the young country more pro-
sperous than it is to-day Thousands of British
emigrants who, some years ago, were being lost to
British citizenship, have been attracted in increas-
ing numbers to Australia. Trade was never so pro-
sperous, the vitality of the young nation never so
great, or the outlook more promising. Australia is
ready to welcome more men and more money, to use
and absorb in building up a great new Anglo-Saxon
community under the Southern Cross. Sir George
Reid has stimulated and directed this great boom.
We honour him for the part he has played, and ad
mire him for his work as High Commissioner. We
wish him an enjoyable and successful visit and a
speedy return to London. (Applause.)
Sir Francis Gould.
Sir Francis Gould (“Westminster Gazette”), in
supporting the toast, said that unanimity was not a
prominent feature in journalism. They had a great
respect for each other as individuals, but it was only
when they had a solid and admirable pivot on which
they could hinge harmony that they were in abso-
lute agreement. They had met together to do honour
to their distinguished guest, because they appre-
ciated the work he had done and the way in which
he had done it. (Applause.) Sir George Reid had
brought about perfect understanding between the
Mother Country and that great Commonwealth which
he represented. He had done a wonderful work in
this way, and one reason why he had done it was
that he had a saving sense of humour, and that was
3


a great feature in all domestic matters and in all
family matters, because, after all, the relations be.
tween Great Britain and Australia were family re-
lations. They were all of one blood and one kin.
There might have been misunderstanding. Families
were a fruitful hotbed of misunderstanding ; they
were always taken so seriously. One reason was
that they saw their own faults reflected in their near
Sunday is my rest day, but the object you have is
one that I feel I ought to assist in, and I will
come.” Since then he had entertained feelings of
gratitude to Sir George Reid, the more so as on
that occasion he told for the first time one of those
jokes for which he was so famous. He told them
he was addressing a meeting in Sydney or Mel-
bourne, or both, and was doing the heavy paternal
relatives, and by condemning them they had the i business, and said, “ You know this will happen,
virtuous idea that they were correcting themselves. and you will be so-and-so when lam fetched away
(Laughter.) There might have been misunderstand-
ings in the past on both sides ; there might have
been faults on both sides ; there certainly had been
faults on our side. This country may have com-
plained that Australia had not always opened her
arms wide enough for the surplus population of this
country, and Australia may have complained that
we had not always sent her our best. That was
true. He was old enough to remember how families
with a black sheep looked upon Australia as a land !
of hope. In those days they sent out their errant
sons, and never wished to see them back again. Un-
fortunately, sometimes they did come back again.
Then, again, in an Australian novel he read that it
was a fault on the part of the Mother Country that
she did not distinguish between the Australian and
the aborigines. This reminded him of a story he
read, in which an American once went with a
friend to the Zoo and saw a kangaroo, and the friend
said the kangaroo was a native of Australia.
“ Gosh ! ” said the American, “ My sister has married
one of them.” (Laughter.) He told this story the
other day to an Australian lady, and she did not
laugh, but said very stiffly, “ The Australians
are very nice people,” whereupon he agreed with
her promptly and effusively. As he saw he was to
be followed by Mr. J. S. R. Phillips he would not
intervene further between that gentleman and his
audience, except to say that he regarded it as a very
great privilege to be allowed to be present and to
join in paying this tribute to their guest, which had
been so well expressed by the chairman. (Applause.)
Sir George as a Humorist.
Mr. J. S. R. Phillips, of the “Yorkshire Post,”
said he agreed most heartily with the closing words
of Sir Francis Gould, in which he expressed his
gratitude and pleasure at being able to take part in
this function, of which Sir George Reid was the
centre. He could only say for himself that he, dur-
ing the night and morning, had travelled at least
300 miles in order to take gart in it, and he did so
mainly on account of Sir George Reid’s ,great emi-
nence in the position he occupied, and also because
when first he appealed to Sir George for assistance,
he said : “My dear boy, you shall have it.” He
went into 'Sir George’s office one day in London and
said to him, “You do not know me, and I do not
know you, except that I know you by name; but I
want you to come into the North, and address a
meeting on Sunday.” He said : “ Do you know. I
always refuse Sunday engagements ; it is not that I
regard Sunday as much more sacred in that respect
chan other days, but I will have a day for rest, and
from this world.” A man in the audience said,
“ Then the fat will be in the fire.” (Laughter.)
He thought a man that could tell such a story
about himself was the right sort of man. Well, Sir
George Reid was going back to Australia in the first
place for six months, and then he would come back
again, and would convert himself into a sort of
“ moto perpetuo,” and would be rushing back-
wards and forwards to greet each successive Govern-
Mr. J. S. R. Phillips.
ment. He hoped Sir George would appreciate the
kindly feelings of those in this country towards him,
and he could assure him that the longer he repre-
sented Australia in this country the better it would
be for the interests of the Empire. As Sir Francis
Gould had said, he was a pivot on which many large
interests turned. In Yorkshire they looked to Aus-
tralia mainly for one thing, and if Sir George Reid
when he returned to Australia, went wool-gather-
ing and sent larger quantities than ever to this
■country, they in Yorkshire would be all the more de-
lighted with him. (Laughter and applause.)
As Sir Francis Gould also said, they had
sent to Australia a great many black
sheep. (Laughter.) It surely stood to rea-
son, therefore, that having 'done that, they ought
to receive from Australia in return an increasing
quantity of wool. (Laughter.) At all events, he
hoped that Sir George would look back and remem-
4


ber the many friends he had made in this country,
not merely among journalists, but among politi-
cians of all grades, as well as in society, in art and
literature, for everywhere he had gone he had
made himself known and welcomed. (Applause.)
Sir George Reid’s Reply.
The toast having been drunk with much hearti-
ness,
The Right Hon. Sir George H. Reid, G.C.M.G.,
P.C., D.C.L., K.iC. (High Commissioner for Aus-
tralia), who was enthusiastically received, said ; A
thousand thanks to the British Press and a thousand
thanks to each and all of you If you, sir, Sir Francis
Gould and Mr. Phillips, three kind and valued
friends, had attacked me instead of praising me far
more than I deserve, and if you gentlemen had
dbown a disposition to echo them, I think I should
make a much more effective and lively reply than I
am about to do. I have been the victim of so many
unfriendly caricatures that exaggerated praise is to
me simply delightful, and Australia will highly ap-
preciate the conspicuous kindness which you have
shown to their representative. (Applause.) Austra-
lians are not keen about ceremonial observances;
their loyalty has no sort of subservient taint. (Hear,
hear.) Of self-respect they have an ample measure,
and their daring ventures and wonderful success,
whether in sport, industry or politics, sufficiently
attest the fearless' independent spirit which animates
them. (Hear, hear.) But they retain the staunch-
ness and the integrity of their British origin. In-
deed, our ample Continent, our generous diet and
the radiant skies seem to give, to the grand old stock
the merits of a new edition. (Applause.) That free
and glorious land, which has been the New Jeru-
salem of the oppressed and destitute of all nations—
I mean the United States—seems to take an immense
credit for that migration. Now, Australians, on the
other hand, simply thank God they are too fax away
for those Transatlantic blessings. (Laughter.)
Ninety-seven per cent, of the men, women and
children in Australia to-day were either born in the
Mother Country or are descended from British
parents. (Applause.) It is the only British conti-
nent. Many strange people come to London, but
I til 1 nk I am about the t£ limit ” —(laughter)—because
I have come here- to represent the whole continent.
The profession of journalism, which is so much in
evidence to-day, has one singular drawback. Able
journalists make fame for so many men, but are
themselves debarred places in the sun, or even the
faintest gleam of reflected glory in the public eye.
There is one rather dubious kind of celebrity which
is open to a British journalist. He may become a
war correspondent, and if he doe® he has an excel-
lent chance, because he might either be shot by
accident or hanged as a spy.
Pre-eminence of the British Press.
_ To come back to my position as High Commis-
sioner, I do think the British Press deserves its
place in the centre of the world’s journalism, al-
though its proud pre-eminence in that respect some-
times pains me. As you must keep in close touch
with the stirring events of the whole world, that
space becomes less which you can give to those new
vast regions far removed from the horrors of war
and the tragedies of wholesale crime, yet regions in
which the majestic developments of industry are
rapidly proceeding. Now, there are some critics of
the Press from other points of view. There are some
who say that the tone even of the highest British
journals is not all that it ought to be—that there is
too much space given to the trivial aspects of life,
and that higher and nobler fields should abridge
the daily chronicles of sport, and even those myste-
rious, metaphysical monographs which analyse the
psychology of performances being played on first
nights. Now, the real culprit, if such there be, is
not the newspaper, but the men who read the news-
papers. (Hear, hear.) The average man devotes
the whole of his serious mental activities to his
particular struggle in the battle of life. When the
hours of his work are over the boy resumes posses-
sion of the man, and hence that irresistible curiosity
which so widely prevails over that sort of literature
which gratifies juvenile curiosity and immature
taste®. (Applause.) The newspaper is not a religious
speculation, I believe. If it were there wou lrl ’ -
creat force in the views to which I have just re-
ferred. I do not know whether it is really the
result of your splendid hospitality to-day ; I do not
know whether it is because I am cheered and in-
spired by this magnificent compliment, but I wish
to inform you that there are four sincere convic-
tions at which I have clearly arrived.
Four Sincere Gonvictions.
The first is that the Press must live. The second
is that the more it thrives the better for its readers,
aud the third and fourth, the better for the country
and for the world at large. Now. amazing advance
has been made recently in popular education. I
admire the universities, which educate a select few
of our men and women. I admire the
high schools which educate a select few
of our boys and girls. I immensely admire the pri-
mary schools in which the masses of the country
receive the rudiments of education, but. as tbe result
of a life-long experience, I feel that the best of the
world’s educators is the world’s Press. (Loud ap-
plause! Now. I hope you will forgive me if I make
some observations which would otherwise be quite
foreign to tbe occasion. I am grateful for the re-
ference to mv sunposed wit and humour, but I wish
to tell you that behind all this trivial froth I have
been inspired by a high and sincere purpose. (Ap-
plause.) I want to take advantage of this intellec-
tual gathering representing the Press of the Mother
Country, to make one or two serious observations.
In every human mind, as we know, there is a mys-
terious sovereign who is never seen. Whatever the
nature of that mind, whatever the ways in which
it works, it is the sovereign part of all life and the
sovereign effect of all life. We live in an age of
machinery. What machine is so wonderful as the
human mind? What so vital? What machine
yields better dividends than the human intellect?
5


Hence the enormous efforts, the stupendous ex-
penditure, to educate the mind. I have come across
many masterly accounts of the mentality of various
insects. How transcendant is the superiority of the
mind of man over the mind of insects. You will not
find one masterly account a man can understand of
the wonders of the human intellect. Every intelli-
gent artisan is supposed to know something of the
properties of the material on which he works. Surely
our teachers should know something more than they
usually do of the quality of the divine material
upon which they work. I took up a report the
other day of the Board of Education for England and
Wales. I looker 1 through all its examination papers
and in one I discovered this subject of supreme in-
terest and importance—psychology. I found it in
a special paper to be submitted to candidates for the
office of teacher of the mentally defective. (Laughter.)
Your Universities of Oxford and Cambridge are
glorious and venerable seats of learning. They have
many chairs, many fellowships, many scholarships
and many prizes, and they have been the recipients
of many bequests, but most of them seem to run
after the students who excel in resurrecting extinct
glories of a mortality which passed away long ago,
or excel in deciphering some ancient or difficult
manuscript. There is not one chair, there is not
one fellowship, there is not one scholarship, there
is not one prize, and there is not one bequest for
one of the greatest studies in the world—the study
of the mind of man as a machine that does some
work. (Applause. 1 )
Hn Astonishing Intellectual Uplifting,
In this twentieth century there is going to be an
astonishing intellectual uplifting. This is due mainly
to the Press. It is mainly to the Press that the
mental equipment of the masses of the people is
rapidly being added to. There are some who ac-
tually dread this spread of knowledge and educa-
tion. There are some who point to these outbursts
of industrial unrest and point to acts of folly and
violence upon a large scale and quote the phrase
“A little learning is a dangerous thing.” So
it is, but is that not the most cogent reason for more
thoroughly and rapidly developing public intelli-
gence? (Hear, hear.) Mankind cannot all at once
escape from that hideous handicap of historic and
pre-historic ancestry of ignorance from which it has
suffered from the earliest times; but ears that heard
not, eyes that saw not and minds that knew not are
beginning to see, to hear and to know the value
of intellectual power. The national mind—and when
I talk of the mind of the nation I speak of the mind
of the obscure masses which mainly compose it—the
national mind is emerging from the narrow avenues
into those broader avenues which lead upwards to
loftier heights of vision, of power, of importance and
of happiness that belong to the children of men, be-
cause they are of the children of God. (Applause.)
Before I sit down may I say that my love and ad-
miration for the people of these British Isles faath-
fully reflects the feelings of those whom I have been
honoured to represent? (Applause.) The ties of
loyalty that bind us to you so firmly are strongly
reinforced on our part by obligations of gratitude
and a vivid sense of mutual advantage. For the
first time in history Imperial supremacy, Colonial
expansion and Colonial independence flourish side by
side. Australia loves peace and hates war, but she
is busily equipping fleets and preparing her manhood
and her boyhood for the fighting line. She is re-
solved to make ready at once to help in defending
the flag that always protected her and defends her
still. (Applause.) She sees, as all should see, the
ominous shades of increasing strain and challenge
which cloud our Imperial horizon. She does not wait
for a larger share in the counsels of the Empire ; she
does not turn aside to enjoy the old pastime of party
conflicts. These surely can be left until the skies
are more clear. The flag of Britain was once the
terror of the high seas ; it is now the ensign of peace
and goodwill. The British fleets, with all those
tremendous powers that repose within them, are the
first line of the world’s defence against glorious
dreams of conquest. The King’s warrant runs over
one-fifth of the surface of the globe ; the King’s war-
rant is obeyed by one-fifth of the world’s inhabi-
tants, and wherever that warrant runs the majestic
quality of equal justice and the glory of religious
freedom reign supreme. (Loud applause.)
Mr. Leslie Nield, an Australian baritone, sang
with great effect the old English song, “ The
Gallants of England,” and was warmly applauded.
“ The Empire.”
Mr. Hugh Chisholm.
Mr. Hugh Chisholm (of the “ Times ”), in pro-
posing “ The Empire,” said the speech of Sir George
Reid reminded him of the story of a boy who, on
6


starting his career as a naval cadet, went up for
examination before a small committee, wEd asked
him a series of ridiculous questions, in order to
see what sort of a little chap he was, and one of
them said to him: “Now, my boy, I want to test
your knowledge of mathematics; you know the
world is round, but have you ever considered why
it is that if you take a tremendous jump into the
air you always come back in the same place?”
The boy said: “ I know, sir; the world goes round
so quickly that when you come down again it is
back in the same place.” Sir George Reid in certain
parts of his speech took them very much in the
air, but when he came down again they found
themselves still in the British Empire, and, although
Sir George was going to the other side of the
world, they would find him in exactly the same
place as he was here. He did not propose to take
advantage of the kindness of those who arranged
the dinner and put him down to propose the toast
of “ The Empire,” because he would want a very
long time to do adequate justice to such a toast,
but he was very pleased to be present as represent-
ing the “ Times,” and was glad to say that two of
his co-directors were also present. They were
pleased to join in this unanimous tribute to the
High Commissioner of Australia, and to wish him
“Bon voyage” and a speedy return. It was men
like Sir George Reid who made the very real
difficulties of Imperial organisation and the work-
ing out of the future of the British Empire an
easier thing to solve. In the presence of a dis-
tinguished representative of the Colonial Office he
would not enter upon the question as to the popu-
larity or unpopularity of Downing Street. Down-
ing Street did not consist entirely of the Colonial
Office. Downing Street was an expression for a
system of government. In the past it had been a
byword in parts of the British Empire. It was
the expression of an attempt of the Mother Country
to find a centre for its own Imperial interests,
irrespective of the national self-government of all
the units of the Empire. Downing Street repre-
sented not only the British Cabinet but the Foreign
Office, the Colonial Office, the India Office, the
Admiralty, the War Office and the Board of Trade,
though on Imperial matters the Colonial Office was
the channel of communication. No doubt, both in the
past and the present, a great many Imperialists
realised the theoretical fault of the Downing Street
system. It was Imperial in function but local in
origin, and it was constitutionally responsible only to
one of the national units concerned —namely, the
electorate of the United Kingdom. Those present
who represented the Colonies would agree with him,
however, that it was working out practically as well
as could be expected, and year by year that ideal of
the future which so many Imperialists looked for-
ward to was coming nearer by a process of adjust-
ment between the organisation that existed in the
Mother Country and the interests of the other
national units in our self-governing Dominions, and
would make them an increasingly important part of
the Empire. He had to associate with the toast the
Hon. Thomas Mackenzie, the High Commissioner
for New Zealand. As far as New Zealand was con-
cerned, he might say, even in the presence of Sir
George Reid, that there was no more patriotic part
of the Empire than that which Mr. Mackenzie
presented
1 he Hon. Thomas Mackenzie.
The Hon. Thomas Mackenzie, High Commissioner
for New Zealand, who was received with applause,
briefly responded to the toast, .saying it was a
pleasure to him to be present to add his tribute
to their distinguished guest, and to say
how heartily they wished him a prosper-
ous voyage and a safe return to Lon-
don as soon as possible. He hardly knew
what London would do without Sir George Reid for
the next six months. He had been delighted to hear
what Sir George had said regarding the loyalty of
the over-seas Dominions and their desire to take
their share in Imperial responsibilities. (Applause.)
Mr. R. D. Blumenfeld (“ Daily Express ”), the hon.
treasurer, rising to propose the toast of “The Chai-
rman,” said the hour was late, and as they were all
busy men he would confine himself strictly to the
toast he had to propose. He wished, however, to
thank Mr. Donald for the splendid manner in which
he had conducted the proceedings, and to congratu-
late him on the great success of the gathering,
which was unique in the annals of the British Press.
The Chairman briefly responded, and the pro-
ceedings terminated with the singing of n Auld
Lang Syne.”
7


