

Australian Broadcasting Co[?]
BROADCASTING
AS A
RELIGIOUS
OPPORTUNITY
By
KENNETH T. HENDERSON
M.A., B. Litt. Talks Officer (Religious), A.B.C.
Notes on MUSIC IN BROADCAST SERVICE
H. CANNON, M.A., F.R.CO.
(Assistant Director of Music, A.B.C.)
Notes on MICROPHONE TECHNIQUE
JOHN ANTILL, (Supervisor of Music, N.S.W.)
(Former Senior Presentation Officer, A.B.C)




TO THE BROADCASTING
CONGREGATION.
(A Direction taken from an Order to Broad-
cast by the Rev. C. H. Denny, M.A., Mosmmi
Congregational Church, N.S.W.)
“This Broadcast Service is relayed to all
parts of the Commonwealth. It is our oppor-
tunity to bring Christ’s message to the nation.
“A Broadcast Service is an opportunity for
each of us to make our ‘witness’ for Christ.
Our thoughts will be centred upon the ‘un-
seen congregation’ rather than upon our own
needs and desires.
“By prayerful and hearty participation in
each act of worship you will help the service
to be inspiring and helpful to others. Your
part in the hymn singing is especially import-
ant.
“Please sit as closely as possible to the mic-
rophone and remain quietly in the Church
jintil the Minister indicates that the service is
‘off the air.’
“The announcements and offertory will fol-
low the broadcast. Please bear in mind that
this is a special type of service designed for
a special purpose and that it is our privilege
to take part in it.”




BROADCASTING AS A RELIGIOUS
OPPORTUNITY
By KENNETH T. HENDERSON
Talks Officer (Eeligious).
Let us get this matter of religious broad-
casting in perspective by realising together
what we must ask religious broadcasting to
do in the whole wide complicated spiritual
agony of our day. Is it true that “every day
Australia knows less of the Lord Christ,” as
Bishop Long said 25 years ago? Anyway, the
times challenge us to find different ways of
delivering our message if further ground is
not to be lost. That message must be given
a cutting edge.
In his great analysis of the rise and fall of
civilisations, Toynbee, the historian, sees them
triumphing or going to pieces according as to
whether they can respond' to vital challenges.
A civilisation grows in vitality or perishes by
overcoming or not overcoming the challenges
to its existence. These challenges are of many
kinds. Our own civilisation, desperately
wounded, weakened, and spiritually exhausted,
has succeeded in surviving challenges of econ-
omic calamity and war; it has thereby won
time to grapple with the fundamental chal-
lenge of moral disruption and spiritual de-
cline. In other words it has won time for its
people to revive their faith in God and each
other, to restore their confidence in goodwill
as a principle that will work in a big way, and
to discover the life of the spirit which makes
life worth living. To-day we must achieve a
higher spiritual life, and a better-managed
material welfare or sink deeper and deeper
into the Time of Troubles in which we are.


Our civilisation was born of Christianity,
and the Christian institutions which carry the
Christian message of the moment have them-
selves to endure the test of challenge and re-
sponse in its deepest and most searching
thrusts.
The crisis of the age is a crisis within each
minister and congregation. The churches are
at the centre of the crisis. In each great
critical age in the making of our own civil-
isation, the Church, whatever its general
human weaknesses, does seem able to produce
the prophets who have had the life-or-death
things to say—men able to voice God’s answer
to the special troubles that most deeply dis-
turb their contemporaries. Broadcasting can
tremendously help these prophets.
Voices Across a Gulf.
“Multitudes in the valley of decision” —
what voices to cross the gulf? How in
these days shall the prophets reach their con-
temporaries? The air offers itself for the
long-range cry of Christianity to-day. For
ottr purposes the fundamental fact about
broadcasting is that 'it can go where the
church cannot go. The ability of the Chris-
tian Church in its various branches to broad-
cast effectively is one important measure of its
ability to respond to the signs of the times.
To-day in our desperate need to pull our-
selves together and lift up our hearts, our
practical problem is that of loving at long-
range—using love, that is, in the New Testa-
ment sense of caring for people. Christian-
ity says that our feuds can be ended only by
earing for people that you have never seen,
caring for people you have fought, caring for
people before they care for you; fighting long


losing battles for your ideals, trying to convey
a sense of the love of God the Father seeking
to do its work through our troubled and tur-
bulent spirits. Anyone with imagination can
see that broadcasting is a fit weapon for that
warfare. But anyone with imagination can
see also that broadcasting ministers and con-
gregations must get a grasp of new conditions
when their work is being done outside the en-
vironment of the Church.
“God is present to every generation, in its
characteristic ideals.” Hut in our own genera-
tion He is by most people unrecognised in
these ideals, which become harder and nar-
rower on that account. This is a day of the
almost unprecedented rejection of Christian-
ity, and the de-christianising of social life.
Maybe, as we think, to-day’s unprecedented re-
jection will give rise to to-morrow’s unprece-
dented acceptance of Christianity. But be-
tween the rejection and acceptance we are
called to an agony of Christian reconstruction
deeper than we can realise. It is first an
agony of imagination. Across the beginning
of it lies the problem of making ourselves
heard on the air, which is the modern Pauline
problem of re-shaping our message for those
outside the Christian Church.
An Opportunity at Stake.
To-day only those who speak with the ring
of first-hand religious discovery, and who yet
retain some contact of sympathy with those
outside conviction, can speak across the gulf
to those who are seeking for some faith. But
how shall they speak? The commercial
agencies of publicity are mainly lost to re-
ligion. Christianity is almost shut out from
the Press. With a few outstanding exceptions,
it has not “made” the films. The theatre, by


and large, has been more against us than for
us. We have lost these mediums largely be-
cause we have not put out the effort of im-
agination to say what we have to say in ways
that these mediums can carry. Let us not
lose the air by any failure of nerve and im-
agination. If we cannot do our best work
by taking our habits with us—as we cannot
—then let us make other ways of self-expres-
sion. The keynote of method should be this
one supremely characteristic quality in broad-
casting—that it can go where the visible
church cannot. Whether in fact the message
is broadcast “to the rabbits” or whether in
fact it does go where the church cannot, de-
pends on the sincerity, imagination and compe-
tence of the churches—their heads and their
broacasting committees—and the ruthless
honesty of their intention to make broadcast-
ing serve God without respect of persons. I do
not dogmatise about the Adversary, except to
suggest that he specialises in broadcasting.
The two enemies to look out for at the outset
are disguised inertia and rationalised vanity.
Both would turn broadcasting into concern
for the distribution of publicity among per-
sons. When that happens, the Powers of
Darkness have good cause to laugh.
The aim of religious broadcasting, remem-
ber, is not merely to broadcast. The aim is
to be listened to. With keen radio competition
for audiences it is all too easy to broadcast
to the rabbits. In' religion we broadcast, of
course, not merely as entertainment, but to
the glory of God. To do that we must reach
His people, and unless we can please, we can-
not persuade.
Then what must we do if we are not to
broadcast mainly to the rabbits? First, we
must realise the newness of broadcasting.
We have got so used to having our lives up-
heaved by our own inventions that we take


them for granted. But if we are to make best
use of theradio we must realise we have every-
thing to learn. You don’t get the best results
by putting a radio on the stage of a theatre or
in a church and hoping for the best. You
must realise what your medium can do. Broad-
casting is not second-hand theatre or church.
For God’s sake —I speak with all meaning—
we must get clear concerning these matters:
(a) The nature of our medium —wireless
broadcasting.
(b) The nature of our audiences —we shall
find more than one.
(c) The qualities of an effective broad-
caster.
We have lost the Press, the theatre and the
films, I think, largely because we have not
brought determined imagination to bear in
making the best use of them. Well, first, the
nature of our medium.
What the Air Can Oo.
I believe that the air is Christianity’s great
mission field, infinitely the greatest and most
varied opportunity that organised Christianity
has ever had of reaching those outside its
folds. But we must understand what we can
and cannot do with the unaided ear. The
great controversialist, Father Tyrell, wrote
once to Baron von Hugel that ideas could be
communicated in three forms —gaseous in con-
versation, liquid in writing, solid for arch-
angels in retreat. Because the reader can ad-
just the pace of his reading to his speed of
understanding and go back on his tracks when
he wants to pick up the thread, he can put
over what he has. to communicate in much
more solid condensed form on the printed
page than on the air or in the pulpit. That
is the difference between speaker and writer.


And there are two other vitally significant
differences which separate the broadcaster
from the preacher and writer. Listening to
the preacher, the member of the congregation
can see his physical presence, his attention
may be helped by his gestures and the play
of expression, and in any case the preacher
is backed and surrounded by familiar and help-
ful background. The listener’s attention is
held within a framework of the building, its
ornaments and associations. He has a warm
sense of fellowship with those who are wor-
shipping with him. All that is left behind
when the sound waves pass beyond the church.
In broadcasting a church service we can give
you only the sound of people worshipping.
That sound enters a family living room, where
it is heard by one, two or three, each listening
in his own solitariness.
Now, on the air the listener must be talked
with —not at. Good broadcasting is not sec-
ond-hand lecturing; it is not crowd preaching.
It is conversation. When printing was in-
vented, it enabled people to set out their ideas
in long close arguments and sequences of at-
tention. When radio was invented it did not
take over the power of the writer or the crowd
orator. It left those powers behind. The
kind of communication which broadcasting
makes possible is long-range person to person
conversation. There is one atmosphere of a
crowd in which the speaker is talking to a
crowd, whose members unconsciously stim-
ulate each other to respond like a crowd. Thus
it is with a congregation in church, whose
minds are brought together by the mind of the
preacher, and the sacred associations within
which they are enclosed. And there is an-
other atmosphere of a radio in a family living
room, talking to two or three people, each
listening as a distinct, unique and separate
personality. The listener’s mood is cooler and


more critical, the strain on his attention
greater—even if he be an habitual church-
goer.
And therefore all radio programmes—mus-
ical, religious, talk, plays—have to be fore-
shortened for the air. Listening with the
naked ear is a greater strain, hut attention
is more intense. Therefore the broadcast
service for most listeners should be shorter,
and brisker in movement than the church
service usually is. The two Sunday 8.8. C.
services are timed for 45 minutes in the
morning, and 40 minutes in the -evening. I
think this is about psychologically right. The
A. has two services on Sunday morning
—the morning ones 45 minutes and 75 min-
utes respectively—the latter intended especi-
ally for absent churchgoers, whose training
should help them to sustain attention. The
B. experiments with its morning services
in an attempt to reach the millions who are
outside the churches but still willing to listen.
It claims to reach two million non-church-
goers each Sunday. The A.B.C. has a session
on Sunday evening for which we choose
broadcasters, lay and clerical, who can think
-themselves into the minds and problems of the
“wayfaring man.” This “Plain Christianity
—A Word to the Wayfarer” is meant to help
those who have no fixed place of abode in their
religious life.
I wonder do many of you realise the range
and variety of our religious sessions by the
way—the short stimulating “Facing the
Week” early Monday morning at 6.40 a.m.,
the daily Bible reading at 8.45 a.m„ the daily
devotional at 10 a.m., using men specially
qualified throughout Australia, the evening
meditation last thing at night, Evensong on
Thursday afternoons, a thoughtful talk on
Wednesday evenings; personal counsel on Sat


urdays; sacred music on Sundays early; and
three Sunday services; talks on applied Chris-
tianity on Sunday afternoons, the Children’s
session—play and acting of Bible stories at
5.30. Dorothy Sayers’ plays on Christ’s life
are heard on the Sundays before Easter.
The Broadcast Audience.
Broadly speaking, we have two audiences.
We find a nucleus of habitual and trained
churchgoers who by reason of age, sickness
or remoteness, are prevented from attending
church. But outside them is a multitude no
man —not even the mass observer —can num-
ber. Many of them have had no first-hand
contact with religion at all. Some are people
reacting from unwise early training, Chris-
tians bored with conventional services, people
of liberal Christian outlook, not at home in the
local church, people who have given up the
help of organised Christianity, but not hope
of the Christian “way,” spiritually-minded
agnostics and “the average sensual man” of
both sexes, with a dash of wonder. Most
people indeed wonder sometimes why they are
here, and what life means. We try to meet
that wonder.
What then can we do for such different
kinds of listeners? It is becoming recognis-
ed, I think, that the regular churchgoer on
the one hand and the “wayfaring man” on the
other, need something quite different. Broad-
ly speaking, the absent churchgoer likes what
he is accustomed to. From the sound of
church worship, he reconstructs the scene and
places himself mentally in the worshipping
congregation. “1 love even the rattle of the
choir boys’ boots” said one old lady to me.
But let it be understood that even the absent
churchgoer is in a more exacting mood than
he would be in his usual place. And the “way-
farer,” as I would call him, is apt to


tune in I think because he can turn off if
he does not strike what “finds” him. He is
best served by something intimate right to
his own address. Not the sound of church
worship but a message, of companionship ad-
dressed directly to him (or. her) that bears
immediately and obviously on the daily life,
with perhaps a hymn or two-eld and familiar
or new and inspiring for to-day, with prayers
that begin by going right to the root of what
concerns the listener most deeply, and read-
ings that mean something for the day’s work.
(The sick, I believe, should always be remem-
bered in radio services.)
For all types of listener the first condition
of doing anything for them is not to bore
them. Remember that a religious service on
the air must compete with seven or eight other
items on the dial. A long spell of inaudible
chanting—and most of your listeners are off.
A long hymn with poor diction, or an unintel-
ligible lesson, and most of your audience has
left you. The organ voluntary for the offer-
tory causes heavy casualties among the non-
musical. A conventional sermon, and most
even of the faithful have left you after four or
five minutes.
The Effective Broadcaster.
By now you will be getting a clearer idea of
the makings of an effective broadcaster. I
should not put voice first, though a sensitive
voice that registers variations of feeling is
as important as a good piano to a fine mus-
ician. There is one basic condition of good
broadcasting. The speaker must convey the
impression that he is “selling sincerity.” Now
that does not mean only that the speaker must
not be insincere. A man who talks a good
deal must necessarily often have to talk with
the top of his mind, and say things that he ac


cepts and believes in quite good faith, but does
not at that moment particularly feel. But the
microphone registers to the naked ear, in a
miraculous fashion, that touch of first-hand
original feeling that goes into a man’s voice
when he is really caring for his listeners, and
moved by what he is saying. On the other
hand the microphone exposes the man who is
trying to feel what he thinks he ought to feel,
and being extra vehement. Ido not mean at
all that a broadcaster should aim at being
vehemently emotional. If people invite you
into their living room and you start vocifer-
ously shouting at them they feel embarrassed,
and will turn you off. It is by intimacy that
you must do your evangelising—by the inter-
est of intimacy and surprise. And there is
always an element of surprise in the voice of
the man who quietly, from first-hand experi-
ence. is saying what he means.
The good broadcaster is the person who
“speaks with authority,” as Jesus said —not
with dogmatic aggressiveness, but from first-
hand experience. I have said that the good re-
ligious broadcaster is one who loves his fellow-
men and can “come unstuck” to do it. Either
loving or coming unstuck is not easy. But
you can see what I mean when I say that a
religious broadcaster should give God credit
for a sense of humour, and base his personal
message on the fundamental generosities of
Christianity.
The manner of the good broadcaster will
naturally differ from that of the writer or
public speaker. In a speech or essay we ex-
pect a man to deal with a long sequence of
ideas, and advocate those which he approves.
But in conversation —the best and most inti-
mate conversation —we expect a man to give
himself away, to communicate those private
sincerities and discoveries that make up his.
special meaning for his fellow men.


A poor voice, faulty or conventional phras-
ing, clumsy arrangement of material —these
and other faults of radio technique are real
obstacles to being listened to, but there are
broadcasters who overcome these and other-
technical faults because they succeed in “get-
ting over” the impression that they mean in-
tensely what they say, and personally care for
their listeners. All speakers who talk well
are asked to talk too much. For the air, how-
ever, the broadcaster, to do himself justice
would do well to prepare by a real effort of
meditation. The microphone is a very sen-
sitive instrument that, perhaps because it ex-
cludes all else but broadcaster and hearer,,
records intimacy and sincerity with pitiless
justice.
There is one fault which will lose a broad-
caster all his audience at once—the artificial
utterance which is called “parson’s voice. 1 '
Many public speakers have it. Many good men
are cursed with it. But the listener will not
forgive. He cannot reconcile personal sin-
cerity with artificial speech.
To sum up, then; If the broadcaster can
convey the impression that he is interested,,
thrilled, and surprised, moved to think and
wonder by the experience that he is trans-
mitting; if he can convey a live experience
charged with the "feel” of his own personal-
ity; if he can translate it into the language-
of personal conversation; if he can reduce
it to script without losing the idiom of the
spoken word; and if he can speak his script
naturally—then he is a good broadcaster.
You will realise why first-class broadcast-
ers are rare, for first-rate broadcasting needs,
a rare combination of gifts—of voice, intellect
and personality. Many ministers have gifts
of thought, speech and spirit of the first order-
who cannot hold a radio audience. That is


why we ask church heads and committees to
choose broadcasters with the single honest
and ruthless fidelity td one purpose—the choice
•of speakers with outstanding broadcasting
gifts. No denomination in any State has more
than five or six such persons. I know it is hard
for a bishop to say to an archdeacon, or a
moderator to say to an ex-moderator “My dear
fellow, the Lord has given you every gift but
that of broadcasting.” But it must be said
sometimes if the Church is not to “let itself
>down.”
The Broadcasting Congregation.
Now just a last word as to the broadcast-
ing congregation. When we ask a church to
broadcast, we do not ask to broadcast just the
sound that it makes at its normal worship.
Our ’ invitation 'is to minister and people to
broadcast to the listeners. We ask you of the
congregation to join with your minister in
broadcasting a service to listeners, many of
them separated from the church, but seeking,
not accustomed to the ordinary form of wor-
ship, untrained to listen, unable to make the
assumptions of Christian faith, spiritual
muscles unformed. We ask you to consider
first the unseen guest. We ask your minister
in many respects to change the habits of a
lifetime when he broadcasts. I say “we,” but
the only justification for this request is that it
should have an authority higher than that of
the Commission, the authority of God’s own
common sense. We ask you therefore, as a
congregation, in spirit to move round behind
your minister and send your fellowship across
the air.
Broadly speaking, I think the type of ser-
vice most pleasing to men and angels, easiest
to join and follow, would be rather more spon-
taneous than the average Anglican service,
.and have rather more sense of form than the


average free church service. It will he easier
for the listener to follow if it is arranged
around a theme, a central idea. Hymns, read-
ings, emphasis in prayer, as well as the ser-
mon might be grouped around such a theme.
The listener likes to know where he is going.
The aiming of the listener’s mind is important.
The service should begin with an announce-
ment of this theme in such a way as to awaken
the listener’s attention, and with an invitation
to the listener. The service should he taken at
a rather faster tempo than the ordinary church
service, with no gaps or pauses. Scripture
Beading should have an introductory word of
explanation, and if the sense is clearer read in
modern speech. Difficult passages thus come
alive in a surprising way. I advise that the
long prayer usual in free churches should be
cut up into its component parts and each of
these given a heading to introduce it. The
listener can join you better if his mind is
directed where you are going. I could say
many more things of detail.
But I would like to end here reminding you
again that broadcasting is first and foremost
a call and a test of your first-hand sincerity
and your evangelical earnestness. Don’t be
satisfied to carry on in habits. A church com-
mitted to its habits has chosen a moderately
useful policy of dignified dying. A broadcast
is an act of worship to God expressed as an act
of corporate love to your fellow men. And
love is not love unless it is trying to be
efficient.


MUSIC IN BROADCAST SERVICES:
H. CANNON: M.A.; F.E.C.0., Asst. Director
of Music; A.B.C.
Members of the clergy, if near an open micro-
phone, should refrain from singing with the choir
■or congregation. A single voice dominating the
musical portions of a service produces an in-
artistic (and often, grotesque) effect.
A most frequent musical fault in broadcast
services is the failure to make clear the words
of the hymns, psalms or anthems. To ensure
such clarity, incessant application and careful
research are necessary. Perfect team-work be-
tween organist and singers (whether in choir or
■congregation) is essential.
Organ accompaniments often show errors of
judgment. Organists must exercise discretion
and self-discipline, and must always take into
account the relative distances of organ, choir
*nd congregation from the microphone. Use stops
that will produce a transparent clarity and avoid
any unnecessary “thickening” of - the tone.
Manual stops of 16 feet pitch and heavy pedal
stops should be treated with the greatest caution
when broadcasting.
Four verses of the average hymn are usually
sufficient in a broadcast service. Descants should
not be used except by choirs possessing voices of
the finest quality.
If soloists are used, they should be chosen with
greatest care and caution.
See that your choir keeps to work within its
capacity. Too often choirs are inclined to treat
a broadcast service as an occasion for over am-
bitious work. Elaborate anthems and settings
such as befit a festival service in a cathedral
are seldom appropriate for broadcasting. Simple
music of good quality should always be preferred
by the choirs of limited resources. Let it be re-
membered that in church music, simplicity, sin-
cerity and sublimity often go hand-in-hand.
Finally, spare no pains to ensure that the
music is worthy of the service and that impresses
the listener not as an adornment imposed on the
service, but as an indispensable element in the
net of worship.


MICROPHONE TECHNIQUE:
BY JOHN ANTILL: Music Supervisor N.S.W.
(Late Senior Presentation Officer, A.8.C.)
The substance of an article which bears this
fearsome title is usually of highly technical con-
tent, and to discuss the intricate process through
which the human voice passes and, ultimately
emerges at the listening end, many pages of
■data would have to be digested.
Casting aside technicalities and becoming
somewhat elementary, allow the microphone to
speak for itself and crudely, yet truthfully ex-
plain basic microphone technique.
“Address me (the microphone) as a sensitive
friend.”
“Never talk behind my back,”
“If you must shout, keep your distance. I’m
not deaf.”
“On the other hand, if you whisper, come a
little closer in order that I may hear you.”
“Dot not sway about too much, because I may
miss a word here and there.”
“Please do not thump the desk to stress a point
because the point will not even register.”
“A good clear resonance is always a pleasing
experience.”
Regarding choirs and places' where they sing,
microphone technique becomes a little more in-
volved. Although most of the problems concern
the sound engineer, the following are a few
which have to be considered:—
Acoustics;
Size of the choir;
Divided choir;
Soloists;
The unbalanced choir;
Organ in relation to choir.
It is to be expected that all necessary techni-
cal equipment is at the engineer’s disposal, and
that microphones will be placed judiciously. If
a microphone is in a seemingly wrong position, it
is probably due to the peculiar acoustics of the
church.


The size of the choir is of little consequence,
as quality is preferable to quantity. It is ad-
visable to confine the dynamic range between
mezzo forte and forte. A pianissimo is lost and
a fortissimo is liable to put the station “off the
air.”
Any means of concentrating a choir in order to
bring the extremities within the range of the
microphone should be encouraged. Therefore,
contrary to general opinion, the divided choir is
an advantage in larger churches where spacious-
ness generally favours smudginess.
Soloists should take a central position in front
of the microphone and not sing from some re-
mote corner of the choir. This is especially -ne-
cessary for quartette work. It is not always de-
sirable to use a special microphone for soloists
as it takes away a certain amount of a desired
“church” atmosphere.
The unbalanced -choir requires judicious plac-
ing for obvious reasons. I have had a success-
ful broadcast with a choir consisting of two-
tenors, four basses, five, altos./ and seventeen
soprano?. In circumstances like- this, the weak-
er sections should naturally be given preferential
position in relation .to the microphone.
Some church organs unfortunately are placed
far away from the choir. ’The organist should
experiment with the acoustics of the chnrch,
especially in the vicinity of the choir, and play
accordingly. This is one of the most common
faults heard in church broadcasts. A perfect
balance between choir and organ is difficult to
maintain. There is always a tendency to “lift”
when the choir lags tempo or gets a little flat.
Unaccompanied works always broadcast well.
My dictionary defines “Choir” thus—A num-
ber of voices blending together; several parts
sung in harmony. Therefore, let there be no
outstanding voice. Let there he no leaders. Let
every member share equal responsibility.
As a microphone has a seemingly uncanny
knack of accentuating faults to the unseen lis-
tener, broadcasting should he the means of re-
viving and maintaining true choral standards.


Wholly set up And printed in Australia by
ROBERT DEY, & CO.,
66-68 Bathurst Street,
SYDNEY.
