

BROAD OUTLINES
OF
LONG TEARS IN AUSTRALIA,
BY
MRS. HENRY JONES,
OF BINNUM BINNUM.
London:
SAMUEL TINSLEY & CO.,
10, SOUTHAMPTON STREET, STRAND.
1878.
[All rights reserved.]




PREFACE.
This is a sketch of real experience during raanj' years
of my life in the Bush. It does not pretend to be
a novel, but is told as a story at the suggestion
of many who pictured the life as nothing but a scene
of hardships and banishment from civilization.




CONTENTS.
CHAP. PAGE
I. THE OLD HOME . . . . .1
11. THE BACKWOODSMAN . . . .11
111. THE PROPOSAL . . . . .20
IV. UNCERTAINTY . . . . .25
V. THE VOYAGE . . . .36
VI. MELBOURNE . . . . .46
VII. FIRST IMPRESSIONS . . . .61
VIII. THROUGH THE FORESTS . . . .84
IX. THE BLACKS ..... 104
X. THE STRANGE LIGHT . . . .126
XI. THE RACES ..... 182
XII. THE COBROBOftEE . . . .137
XIII. A WINTER JOURNEY .... 149
XIV. THE RIVER ..... 165
XV. VISITS AND VISITORS . . . .181
XVI. a lubra’s death .... 192
xvn. THE BUCK JUMPER .... 200


CSiP. PAGE
xvm. SHADOWS • . . . . . 211
XIX. HOMEWARD BOUND .... 220
XX. GATHERING CLOUDS .... 229
XXI. A HORRID MAN ..... 288
XXII. THE DARKEST HOUR ' . . . 249
XXIII. GREY DAYS ..... 255
XXIV. NEVER TRAVEL ALONE .... 262


LONG YEARS IN AUSTRALIA.
CHAPTER I.
THE OLD HOME.
There is in the county of Limeshire an old Eliza-
bethan mansion, which for curiosity and beauty is
surpassed, I believe, by only one other in England.
It is built almost entirely of wood and stucco, with
many gables and tapering pinnacles, latticed windows*
and ancient porch with oak seats, and massive door
studded with huge old nails. There are two wings,
and attached to one an exquisite little chapel—a
perfect gem of its kind. Approached by a long straight
avenue, little is seen of the house until you come close
upon it, when at a glance the mind wanders far back
to the middle ages, pictures the old baron surrounded
by his retainers, standing in that porch either to
welcome with lordly hospitality some cherished friend,
or stirrup cup in hand to speed the parting guest;
or maybe preparing for hawking or the chase, the
ladies with their 1 maidens gathering round, leaving
their tapestry or household cares to bid them good
luck. It stands not very far back from the road,
embosomed in trees and surrounded by luxuriant
meadows. Going past the little chapel, you enter the
garden from the stoned courtyard, through a gate in
1


a high iron screen, to the bright old-fashioned flower
beds, stiffly bordered with low box edgings, standing
in gravel paths, with quaint'old apple trees throwing
their shade over flowers of more modern date. Prim
rows of hedges screened the hotbeds and vegetables
from the view, and following the pathway by the
hedge to the other side, you came upon an old postern
gate in the high brick wall which surrounded these
grounds, which led out into the fields beyond, and
under the old limes which grew in stately rows by
the terrace walk, the walls and buttresses of which
were covered with ivy and luxuriant blush roses.
Hero was the old sundial, with the date 1572 upon it;
seats to lounge on in hot summer evenings, or a dry
walk always when rain fell or the snow lar" thick
upon the ground. The old stone steps were worn by
time and the feet of many generations who had
paced up and down, from the toddling darlings scramb-
ling up to seek their mother’s fond caress, fond lovers
listening to each other’s vows and that sweet old
story which yet is ever new, or by the pale moon-
light with broken accents parting never to meet
again, to the aged pair who come to sim themselves
upon its sheltered path and crone together of by-
gone compared to which the present time was
not to be mentioned: all things had changed, and
for the worse, and so had they; theirs was the day,
theirs the time to have lived in, not in these
degenerate days. And in the time of which I write
truly the glory had departed from the old hall, and
in its stead reigned ruin and decay. Grass grew in
the neglected avenue, up the old stone steps and
terraced walk; and in the once trim courtyard below,
where in the palmy days guest after guest had ever
found the warmest welcome, silence reigned compara


lively: for still the voices of the young might be
heard, which saved the grand old hall from utter
desolation. The squire still lived there, happier in
dinging to his old ancestral walls than seeking a
home in foreign lands, still loved and sympathised
with by all; for though few visitors now ever came
to call, think not that it was because the inmates
were no longer rich. No, some of the world’s false
friends may act in this wise ; not so the staunch and
true : if thej- kept away ’twas from the kindly
thoughtful sense of not intruding in the saddening
change.
Follow me through the old porch into the hall
paved with flags, wainscoted in blackest oak and
hung with portraits of generations gone before, ban-
ners of shrievalties, javelins, and hauberks. Largo
dogs stand in the deep fire-place; a table of solid
oak is in the centre, twenty-three feet long, and
bears the date 1581, the heart in the middle which
divided the retainers from the family and guests ;
high backed chairs stand in stately rows round
the walls, and at one side is a small raised dais.
Come up the grand old staircase, black with time,
to wbat we called the upper drawing-room, panelled
like all the rest of the bouse with oak, and lead-
ing down a few steps to the gallery of the little
chapel, where we always sat on Sunday evenings,
while my uncle read prayers below. This chapel
was a gem in its way, lined with carved oak.
Oliver Cromwell’s soldiers are said to have stabled
their horses here, and desecrated its sacred precincts,
where in bygone days the solemn services of the
Church and holy chant and psalm had been heard.
In the dim light cast by its painted windows and
darkened walls, a quiet hush came over one’s lile,


when stealing away for thought and calm, you
closed the panelled door, and none knew you were
there save One. There was a slip panel in this
drawing-room, and behind it a large cupboard or
recess, which had no doubt in former years held
many a cavalier in hiding from'his foes. We often
thought, if those old walls could speak, what strange
romantic stories they could tell, and all the old
surroundings of the place filled our girlish hearts
with even more romance than is common at that
age. It was more cheerful than the lower rooms,
although its heavy carved oak furniture gave it a
sombre look, relieved however by modern ornaments,
books, work, paintings, and the thousand nick-nacks
lying about, which prove a place in daily use.
In an arm-chair drawn close up to the fire—for it is
winter, and snow lying thick upon the ground—sits
a lady in middle life, tall, pale, and thin to painful-
ness. Her deeply set, large, dark blue eyes, the lines
on her lofty forehead, and a compressed set look
about the mouth, prove that sorrow and much care
have been her portion. Wealth and high position once
were hers, children surrounded her, and all was sun-
shine ; now the first has taken unto itself wings, never
to return; the second she can never lose, and bears
with a quiet dignity and unchanged pride her altered
state : and yet, as she turns to speak, her cordial
manner and kindly smile tell not of the hidden load
within. And thus it is with many; for often those
who appear the lightest hearted have the deepest
cares, but deem it selfish to burthen others with
them. I think we scarcely realize enough how
much a genial kindly smile and word may change
the gloomy current of another’s thoughts, and send
them on their way with lighter hearts.


“ Mamma, mamma, some visitors! ” cried a bright
■eyed, rosy cheeked girl about fifteen, as she burst
noisily into the room.
“ Well, my child, lam at home. Perhaps they will
stay to luncheon—see that we have enough. If your
father is in, tell him. I rather expected these gentle-
men, though being a hunting clay, I wasn’t sure that
they would come.”
A ring at the hall door-bell made Mary escape with
rapid steps, and as the men were shown upstairs,
she disappeared along the galleiy, and down to the
other wing, where sat two other girls, one about her
own age, one older.
“Dears,” she exclaimed, “two visitors! —Captain
Swift and a perfect stranger. Mamma said they might
stay to luncheon, so I’m away to tell the cook.”
“ No, Mary, stay a minute, and tell us what he’s
like.”
“ I couldn’t really, clears, I only caught a passing
glimpse as he walked up the avenue. He is tall and
dark and stout, I think; hut if they stay you’ll see
for yourselves. Mamma said she half expected them.
I wonder who he is.”
In the seclusion to which I have before alluded, the
advent of any one was a great event.
“ He has come at last,” laughed Ethel, " and without
an accident; ” —for in the great monotony they had
often wished that some young gentleman would be
"ood enough to he thrown from his horse at the
O O
avenue gate, carried in with a broken limb, which
would necessitate his staying for some time, and give
the young nurses—as each would then become —em-
ployment, and food for thought and fun, if not for
■deeper feelings.
Luncheon was served. One by one they all assembled.


and in walked the stranger, with Mrs. Delmore on his
arm.
“My daughter, Mr. Williams, —my nieces. Mary, is
your father out ? ”
“ I think ho rode down to the farm, mamma, and
may not be in for some time, but at any rate he never
takes luncheon. Captain Swift, will you sit here ? In
papa’s absence, I will take his place.”
“Do you make a long stay in England, Mr. Williams?”
asked Mrs. Delmore.
“About two years, I hope,” was the reply. “After
so long an absence I may allow myself a lengthened
holiday, and intend to travel when the hunting and
shooting seasons are over.”
“ Have von much sport in Australia ? We know so
little of that country,—indeed until the last few years
we scarcely heard of it.”
Once started on this wide topic, Mr. Williams and
Mrs. Delmore engrossed the whole conversation, and
the girls left Captain Swift to discuss his cold beef
and home brewed ale, whilst they listened with
great interest to the accounts of the wild life and
distant lands from whence this stranger came. He
told of the wildest rides over wide grassy plains
after cattle or hunting kangaroo, of balmy nights
with moonlight so intense that to read was easjy
of the silence broken only by the bittern in the
swamp, the lonely curlew’s cry or wild dog’s howl,
of his flocks and herds that roamed over miles of
trackless forests, where the black man still was lord of
his hunting grounds, and watched with jealous, won-
dering, savage gaze the approach of the white beings
they had never seen before; in short painted a life
so Ml of romance and daring exploits, that no
wonder the girls forgot his cousin, Captain Swift,.


who had walked over with him, and were lost in
the interest of the new existence he depicted in such
glowing colours.
“ Come up to the drawing-room again, Mary,” said
Ethel; “ I am really quite interested in this new man,
and want to hear all he says to your mother about
this curious country where I have always longed to
go ever since I was a child and read about Port Jack-
son and Botany Bay in the Missionary Magazine.”
“ Sophy, do you hear what Ethel says ? she seems
greatly taken with Mr. Williams. For my part, although
his stories are very amusing, I don’t care much about
him —the backwoods have no charms for me.”
. " I’ll go with you, Ethel,” said Sophy, “ and talk to
poor Captain Swift, who is playing - second fiddle
to-day if he never did so before, and you can listen
to your heart’s content to the Australian.”
So up they went, and found Mr. Williams discussing
rather dry topics, but Mrs. Delmore was naturally
anxious to gain all the information she could for her
son.
“ I shall be veiy happy to give your son an intro-
duction to my brother, who will give him an insight
into station life before he enters upon it for himself.”
“ That will be most kind of you,” replied Mrs, Del-
more, “ and is what I could scarcely have expected on
so short an acquaintance. My son will have a small
sum—about three thousand pounds,” she continued,
becoming wondrously confidential to this stranger.
“His father is naturally anxious that it should he
invested securely, or at any rate fairly well, as nc
doubt in these new countries risks must bo run.”
“ If your son has the money you mention I shoujd
advise him to find a partner with an equal sum, which
would make six thousand ; with this money they coulc


go out, take a station (paying down the amount in
hard cash), worth £IB,OOO, and arrange to pay off the
rest in three, four, or five years, according to the agree-
ment between the man from whom they took it and
themselves.”
“Yes, that sounds very good; still I don’t under-
stand how they will pay the rest.”
“With the first sum they purchase, say 15,000
sheep; this will include all the improvements at the
home station and on the run generally, and the first
clip of wool will enable them, unless drought or any
very unforeseen occurrence takes place, to pay off the
instalment. It will of course give them very little to
live upon, and nothing to spend on luxuries or amuse-
ments ; but as getting out of debt will be their great
object, that'will be of the last consideration.”
“ Well, and how long now do you think it would
take to become clear of all debt ? ” asked Mrs.
Dclmore.
“That would depend first on themselves, and
secondly, as I said just now, on lucky years, free
from drought and disease, with the wool market
tolerably high. There are many and great expenses
in working a large station; —the overseer, for of
course at first your son would do wisely to engage
an experienced working man, unless he had the good
luck to join as partner with one who thoroughly
understood squatting, and this would of course save
a great deal at the very commencement; when shear-
ing the men are paid from fourteen to fifteen shillings
a hundred, are fed and housed; packing the wool in
bales, carting, which, if he were as we are hundreds of
miles from town, in itself costs a great deal, to say
nothing of the men required for repairing and attend-
ing to the boundaries. —But I should apologise (bow


ing to Mrs. Delmoro and Ethel, who was listening
attentively) “for these details, which I could scarcely
expect you to understand,” said Mr. Williams.
" But we thank you so much. I only wish my son
Edward had been at home; unfortunately he has gone
out with the hounds, but I hope you will come over
again and be introduced to him. As you hunt, why
not send your horse here for the meet, which will I
think be at Ralston next week, and arrange to stay
with us a day or two? It will give us great pleasure,
although I fear my motives may seem interested,” said
Mrs. Delmore, as Mr. Williams and his cousin rose
to leave.
“ I shall be vfery happy to do so indeed.” And as
he spoke he cast an admiring glance on Ethel.
“ John,” said Williams, as they walked down the
avenue, “ I’ll marry that girl if she’ll have me.”
“ Which girl ? ”
“ The fair one, the smallest and the quietest; I'll
have her if I can.”
“ Papa has come back, Sophy,” said Mary, looking
into the drawing-room; “ let ns leave Ethel to her
reverie, in which she seems lost, picturing feasts on
black swans, rides on kangaroos and other absurdities.
He is down in the study smoking, and I am longing
to have a chat with him, dear old Fatty, so come
away.”
The study was a rare old haunt, well known to all
the benedicts and bachelors in the county ; here they
smoked the pipes of peace or fragrant cigars, and
drawing round the splendid wood fire after a long
day in the turnips or after the fox, stretched their
somewhat weary limbs and discussed a magnum of
port, of a vintage few could rival. Panelled like the


rest of the building, with well lined bookcases, writing
tables, luxurious sofas and chairs, pictures of old
favourite hunters and dogs hanging on the walls, and
old arms piled in corners, it was the snuggest spot
in the house; and there sat the old man in his great
arm-chair, Ins legs stretched out, a dog on either side.
How handsome he looks, the very picture of the real
country squire, who only wanted ten thousand a year
to make him perfect. Sitting down beside him, Mary
takes his hand, and strokes it caressingly.
“ Are you tired, papa ? What a night it is ! the
snow is falling thickly. I wonder Bess didn’t stumble
with you up the hill,”
“ Not tired at all. What news, eh, my dear ? ”
“Well, we had two men to luncheon, Captain Swift
and a cousin from Australia. I’ll just tell you what
he is like. Tall, dark, -with grey hair and black mous-
tache, cut just like a brush; a good figure, only too
stout for me and too old, —I should say lie was past
forty; he has small, keen, hazel eyes, which look out
from under such bushy eyebrows, and a mouth and
chin which seem very large and heavy. He looks a
very determined man. I was a little frightened of
him. Fatty, though he wuas most agreeable and full
of fun. Ethel never took her ejms off him.”
“ Jnst give me that footstool, I feel a twinge of the
gout. Has Ned come home ? He had a long ride to
cover this morning. How the wind howls! I hope
the chimneys will stand. Draw round the fire, girls,
and let us be jolly ; you don’t mind a pipe, I know.”


CHAPTER II.
THE BACKWOODSMAN.
Shall we take a look at Ethel, as she sits by the fire
at the farthest end of that long large room, staring
into the flames and deep in thought ? She is very
fair, with hair which in the sunlight is a sheet of gold ;
small well cut features, full of expression, approaching
at times to melancholy and 3mt which changed with
every varying emotion of her heart and mind ; and a
slight and well proportioned form. You couldn’t call
her pretty, but would become interested in her at
once ; there are many such, who from their very child-
hood seem to set one wondering what their fate will
be.
There was a knock at the door, and there entered
two young men, the one Edward Dehnore, tall, dark,
and very slight, the other Dick Carr, Ethel’s brother,
fair, and very erect, with a visible patch at the side of
his head just above the temple, the remains of a
wound from a shell splinter which had laid him
senseless on the open space that led up to the Redan.
He had only returned a few weeks from the Crimea,
and was being made much of.
“ Dear boys, come in by all means. We will draw
that old arm-chair up. Here is a pillow for your head,
Dick, and you, Ned, take the sofa. Shall I ring for
some tea ? there is an hour or more to dinner.”
“No tea, thanks, I don’t want to spoil my dinner
as you women do,” said Dick. “ I saw Williams drive
up just now with a pair of slashing tandem horses
and pretty dog-cart —awfully neat turn out. He
evidently knows how to take care of himself, for he


was enveloped in furs —fur coat., fur rug, fur hat for
aught I know; looks as rich as Crcesus.”
“ Hush, Dick! ” cried Sophy, who joined them as he
was speaking. “Ethel is rather dreamy about him
since he was here to luncheon one day before yon came,
and talked most beautifully about Australian wilds.”
" Ha' ha' Ethel gone on the backwoodsman, eh ?
All the better for us. You cultivate his acquaintance :
a rich brother-in-law is by no means a bad connection.”
“ I don’t know that he could ever do you much
good, but” (turning to Ned) “ he has offered to help you.
I heard him giving aunt a great many useful hints,
and I advise you to have a long chat with him, since
you really mean to go out, Ned.”
“ I believe it will end in your going too, —not with
me, dear Ethel, for I couldn’t take care of you, but with
Williams.”
“He is old enough to be my father,” said Ethel.
“ Certainly I am very tired of the humdrum every day
life we all lead, I should like to see a little of the
world ; but it does seem such an immense distance to
go with a man you know nothing of.”
" Of course just now he is only a stranger to us all,
but something tells me you are booked for the Bush,
as they call it,” said Ned, “and that we shall meet
there yet.” .
“ One is almost afraid to think of marrying,” said
Ethel: “ for one that is happy lam sure there are
nine the reverse.”
“ Oh, come,” said both the young men at once, “we
won’t have that; there isn’t a woman who doesn’t
wish to be married, and imagines she will be the
happiest of her sex. There is the dressing bell, —
time for you girls to rig out. Come along, Dick, I see
old Joe has lighted up the gallery and all down the


great staircase as in days gone by ; lie is a regular
old Caleb Balderstone, determined to keep up the
honour of the house.”
It was quite a bright family party that met in the
drawing-room before dinner. Reginald Carr, the
father of Ethel, Sophy, and Dick, had arrived by a
late train, and there was a buzz of welcomes as he
entered, every one asking questions at the same time,
and scarcely waiting for answers. He was a very
gentlemanly man of middle height, spare frame, lofty
brow and classic features; he looked so young, that no
one gave him credit for being the father of the grown
up children who surrounded him.
Mr. Williams took Mrs. Delmore down, and sat
opposite to Ethel, which Lord Byron says is the next
best thing to sitting next the person who interests
you.
Joe had indeed been at work, and the hue old room
looked perfection. The fire glowed brightly, reflected
in the glossy tiles, the deep red curtains contrasting
so well with the dark oak wainscoting; the ceiling,
where Neptune sitting in his car, drawn by dolphins
and attended by sea gods, stood out in bold relief,
the Turkey carpet and polished floor, made altogether
a fine setting for this old English family party, which
will rarely be seen elsewhere.
As they left the room to join the ladies upstairs
Ned Delmore said to Mr. Williams, that if ho would
go with him into the study, over a pipe and bottle of
wine after the rest had retired for the night-, he would
be glad to get some advice as to his future life in the
colonies, and thanked him very much for his kind
promise of introducing him to his family there ; so as
nothing very interesting is going on beyond a few
songs from the girls, and general conversation, we will


go with Ned into the study as proposed, and hear what
Mr. Williams has to say.
“ If you like,” said he, " I’ll just give you a little
sketch of my life. My father was a wealthy man,
but at his death it was found that he had left us all
unprovided for, to begin the world afresh. I was
then about eight-and-twenty, and determined on seek-
ing my fortune in the new Avorld. So after realizing
the little which was still ours, my young brother and
I started for the Antipodes. The voyage will not be
worth describing. We were four months at sea, with
none of the comforts which you will now find on
board the vessels of the present day.
“ Leaving the ship at Sandridge, we were taken up
the Yarra in a wretched contrivance by courtesy called
a steamer, to Melbourne, which was then little better
than a hog, for the winter had been severe, that is,
rainy, and the streets were perfectly unmade, with the
stumps of the trees still remaining. From these
stumps the inhabitants were wont to chip fire-wood,
so you may imagine the primitive state of things.
We managed to get quarters at an inn situated where
the market now stands, hut as our finances did not
allow us to remain there, we rented a skill ion, or lean-
to hut, near Pentridge, furnished it with our belong-
ings, and commenced, as soon as we could look around
ns, to wash the linen used during the voyage, the
charge for which was so high that we determined to
try what we could do. Yon may suppose that we
managed to rub the skin from'our knuckles much better
than the dirt from the clothes; still, by patience and
perseverance we accomplished the task. We remained
there six months, breaking-in two colts we purchased,
r 2 course looking out for something to do all the time,
and at last purchased a thousand ewes for £750. We


paid £5OO down, and gave a bill for the remainder
at twelve months. It was arranged that a piece
of country should be given with the sheep, and
that they should be kept for six months for us, as
that which we were to have was destitute of every-
thing ; in fact, it was a portion of the run that had
never been used, and, consequently, did not even
boast of an out station. We had no money to pur-
chase a teem of bullocks, so engaged a dray and driver
to take us up to the place, fifty miles from town.
The man proved to bo quite as inexperienced in driv-
ing as ourselves, so we had quite as much to do in
that way as he had. The roads (every place where a
dray has left a track is called a road in Australia),
were of course as bad as could be, and when I tell
you that we had to cross the ' Big Hill/ (you may sec
it some day; it was known for many years after for
the dangers and difficulties it presented to bullock-
drivers,) you can imagine how badly we fared. In the
course of a week we drew near to what was to be our
home for some few years, and the superintendent of
the station piloted ns through the Bush without any
track at all, to our part of the run. It was a lonely
spot, a sort of promontory with a creek some distance
beneath, the view hounded by a magnificent outline
of well-timbered ranges terminating in the ' Big Hill ’
before mentioned. Our driver turned the bullocks out
for a few hours to feed, and then yoking them up again,
turned their heads on to the track they had just made,
and left us. But I weary you, perhaps,” said Williams,
turning to Ned.
"On the contrary, I am much interested. Pray
help yourself to wine, and I will put another log on
the fire. Is it likely that I shall have the same things
to encounter ? ”


“Oh, no, not quite so had. This was in the very-
early days: we landed in October, 1842. Everything-
has made rapid strides since then, although of course
now in the back blocks there isn’t much civilization.”
<! You must have felt lonely indeed; it is impossible
for us to realize it.”
“ Lonely enough; not a road save the track we had
just made, not a human being within miles; our boxes,
provisions, flour, tea, sugar, and salt beef tying before
us, just as they had been tumbled out of the dray.
We were well supplied with tools, and as it was
evident that if -we intended to put our things in order,
and protect them and ourselves from the rain, the
sooner we commenced the better, we set to work.
The plateau on which we were was very well tim-
bered with the mimosa, many of them very straight,
and we soon cut down sufficient to make a good frame
over which to stretch our large tarpaulin. We now
had a homo, and here we managed to live until we got
a hut built; to do this we had to go through many
experiences.
“ Xu the first place we engaged three men—bushmen
they were called —-accustomed to build huts, etc. Two
soon left us, so Lionel (my brother) and the third man,
an old hand called r White-headed Bob,’ and myself,
began the building. Wo were his slaves: we felled
the trees and cut them up; ho doing the artistic work,
such as splitting shingles, etc.; and in course of time,
after many a hard day’ s work, huts, paddocks, and a
wool-shed grew up around us. Our sheep had in-
creased to 4,000, and we made up our minds to sell
and seek a new run. I started away with sufficient
provisions for my’self and one man, for three months,
and after many hardships, which would take me too
long to enumerate now, I returned to my brother.


having been absent only two months, and having dis-
covered Belanja (my present home), upwards of three
hundred miles to the westward. We took out sheep
and cattle with us. Often they would break away
during the night, in spite of all our watchfulness. It
was truly a patriarchal progress, with no Rachels or
children to trouble us. About three months’journey-
ing brought us to Cadnite, a lake which you will often
see, and then all the hut building began again, only
on a larger scale! For a long time wo were under
our tarpaulin, as at first, coolring and meals entirely
al fresco, and round these camp fires many a strange
adventure has been heard from some of the desperate
characters constituting the hands in the new country.
The best, or rather, most useful, of these men, "were
those who had been convicts: in later years these died
out, as none are now sent to either Tasmania or New
South Wales. Our great work at first, was riding all
over the country, north, south, east and west, looking
for water and good situations for out stations, then
getting hurdles, huts, and watch-boxes, for we dare
not leave the sheep at night for fear of the wild dogs
and blacks. Then came preparations for shearing,
wash-pens to make, wool-sheds, and the wool to be
sent off to Melbourne, SOO miles away, over miserable
roads and bridgeless rivers and creeks.”
“But on what terms did you obtain these runs?”
asked Ned.
“ Well, after discovering a tract of unoccupied coun-
try, an application had to be made to the Commissioner
of Crown Lands for the Province or District, accurately
describing the locality, and giving the boundaries and
area, in Port Philip, as Victoria was then called. The
license was only £lO per annum, and each squatter
claimed as much as he could. In South Australia one
2


square mile was allowed for every hundred sheep and
one head of cattle, or a horse would count as six
sheep, £lO charged for every twenty-five square miles.
Numerous changes took place, such as assessment on the
stock, etc., so that the rent was constantly increasing.’'
“ Well, hut when I get there shall I have to take
up country in the same manner ? ” asked Ned.
“No, I think I explained to Mrs. Delmore that
with your money you would do well to go partners
with some young man understanding squatting, who
would put an equal sum to yours, and enable you to
purchase a very fair station. The boundaries are of
course long since well defined and for the most part
tolerably settled. We are only allowed by a clause in
our leases to cultivate for the use of our horses, not
for sale ; it is simply pastoral, you understand.
" When the gold diggings broke out we were left
without a single man, and had to do the whole work
ourselves; it was a terrible time.—But it is getting
3 O O
very late. However, before we part for the night, let me
give you this one piece of advice ; never get into the
hands of the merchants to borrow money if you can
possibly avoid it. A simple calculation placed before
yon in black and white will show you what interest
upon interest will amount to, and what a paying
business it is to them. Granted they have risks, but as
a rule they prosper well. Here is a rough calculation
of how they make their money, besides which they
have of course large profits in the general stores, with
which they supply stations with every necessary and
luxury, purchasing wholesale and selling by retail,
• —that is to say, comparatively speaking, as a year’s
provision is not like a monthly grocer’s account.


December 31st, by cash .
£20,000
0
0
June 30th, six months’ interest at 10 per cent.
per annum .
1,000
0
0
Commission on £20,000 at 21 per cent. .
500
0
0
£31,500
0
0
June 30th, by cash to debit, brought down
£21.500
0
0
December 31st, six months’ interest at 10 per
cent, per annum ....
1,077
0
0
Commission on £21,500 at 2-1 per cent. .
53 <
10
0
£23,111
10
0
Thus you will plainly see that it must be a very good
station indeed to stand this, and pay the owner
besides; but if you start free and keep out of debt
there is nothing pays better than squatting. Good-
night. I hope we shall have a good run to-morrow,
and any farther information you may require I shall
only be too happy to give to you.”
"Thank you very much indeed,” said Ned, shaking
him heartily by the hand. “ Let me show you up-
stairs across to the other wing: I see the lamps are
all out. They say this house is haunted, you know, and
that old lady (pointing as they went along the gallery
to the portrait in black, just at the entrance) walks
about in chains. I have never seen her, and lam in and
out at all hours. This is your room,” opening an old
oak door in the panelling. “ They say the blood stains
on the floor show -where the boy was murdered, whose
skeleton was found just over the porch and under this
flooring, and the old lady that walks in chains knew
more about it than anyone else ; but I hope you will
be comfortable. I slept here once, and a horrible thing
drew the curtains on one side and stared at me, that
was all; and the doors have been tried several times,
no one knows who by: perhaps it would be as well to
lock yours. We shall not start before nine. I wish
you a very good night,” said Ned as he closed the door.


CHAPTER III.
THE PROPOSAL.
Mr. Williams never told whether he saw ghosts or
not. I suspect he slept too soundly to he disturbed
even by mortals, let alone supernatural creatures; and
if he dreamt, it was of Ethel in all her girlish freshness
and bright spirits. During the few days he remained
at the old Hall, he had of course many opportunities
of judging her character, and the more he saw of her,
the more determined he became to carry out his
purpose, and paid her marked attention. And Ethel,
what did she think of it ? Was she to encourage this
man of whom she knew nothing, a stranger of yester-
day, who might be all he represented himself, and
might not, but towards whom she seemed drawn with
an indefinable influence and irresistible power ? Wore
they suited to each other ? and if not, was she right in
thinking of him, making his life sad as well as hers ?
Her aunt had often said that marriages are made in
heaven, but Ethel, using her own common sense,
doubted this very much, judging from those she saw
around. Could she leave her father, sisters, and all
her home ties, to go to a country but recentlj’ in-
habited by white men, and at the farthest end of the
world ? Poor girl, the world to her then seemed so
very, very wide; ’tis only as wc advance in life and
with our present extended knowledge, that it gra-
dually grows so very small. Oh how she longed for a
mother’s counsel and tender, loving sympathy ! Her
aunt was kind, but she couldn’t miburthen her heart to
her; her father affectionate as the tenderest parent could
be, but she couldn’t tell him. Who could she lean upon


where was she to turn for help ? To herself; and this
was the first lesson in self-reliance which in after life
she Avas compelled to exercise so bravely, yet so wearily.
Her nature was to depend on others, but Fate had it
otherwise written in her book. She was the eldest
of the others growing up, she would be in the way)
Avas poor and motherless; here Avas a man, rich,
apparently kind, avlio would be a guide and protector.
She could help her sisters and herself, would try to be
a good wife, and do her best to make him happy.
She liked the thought of the Avild life; anything Avas
better than the monotonous routine and general aim-
lessness of her present existence. She would go if he
asked her: and to have settled the question A\ r as a
great relief to the indecision of the last few dajss.
The longing of her girlhood Avould he fulfilled: she
Avoukl go to strange scenes, and strange people, and
lead a life calculated to enlarge the mind and thoughts,
and making us all liberal, charitable and sympathising;
teaching us that the world is full of kindness, there is
more good than evil in it, Avhich those avlio stay at
home in their own narroAv spheres cannot realize; and
Ethel afterwards found that many an accpxaintance
grown into a friend by being thrown in the same
troubles and circumstances, could be tenderer, truer,
and much more loving than many of one’s oavu relations.
Meanwhile Mr. Williams returned home. He Avas
staying about sixteen miles off, at the other side of the
county, with his sisters, in a lovely spot, Avhich in
beauty of scenery reminded one of Switzerland on a
limited scale. He was too old a man to make a con-
fidant of any one, but the Avell known tale which
is ever übav Avas making him utterly Avretched. His
horses, dogs, and gun lost all their Avonted pleasure;
if he tried to read he never remembered a single line;


he couldn't sleep ; he was actually losing his appetite.
It was not to he endured, it was dreadful! He could
have used a much stronger expression.
Having been in correspondence with Edward Del-
more, he knew that Ethel, her sister Sophy, and Dick
had been staying with some relations in North Wales,
and determined to meet them at the station and know
his fate. Finding that they had some shopping to do
in Essbury before returning to the old Hall, he per-
suaded them to remain to a champagne luncheon,
walked with them on their way to the train, going
up the principal street, where in those days the
market women sat with their butter, eggs, ducks
and chickens at the edge of the pavement, on either
side of the way.
“ What a horrible cackling,” said Ethel, by way of
something to say, for Mr. Williams was unusually
silent, and it seemed so ridiculous to be walking
along without speaking. “ Why don’t they build a
market-place, and not crush up the thoroughfare in
this way ? ’ ’
“ I suppose they haven’t the money to use,” said
Dick, coming to the rescue of poor Ethel, for her
companion apparently had not heard what she said.
"Well, they could have sheltered stalls as they do
abroad, in the open squares. Have you ever been in
Paris, Mr. Williams ? ” she said, addressing herself to
him.
“Not yet; but I intend to travel during the two
years I am in England, and see a great deal of
he replied.
“ How delightful! I have never been farther than-
Brussels and Paris.”
“ If I could only hope that you would come with
me' —and not only through Europe but out to my


Bush home,” said Williams, looking down upon her
with wistful eyes.
It was Ethel’s turn to he silent now, and they
walked on for several minutes without speaking.
“ Would jmu ?—will you ?” he again said. “Itis a
glorious life' and I can promise you every comfort.”
“Confound the people, how they jostle one!” ho
thought, as several ■women with large baskets on
their arms separated him from her, having of course
no idea of the critical moment so all important to two
in that crowd.
It certainly was a horrid place to have chosen for a
declaration of love, orange peel and vegetables strewn
about everywhere. Dick, having the bad luck to tread
on some, slipped and fell, and got up with anything but
a lovely expression on his lips or in his face, Sophy,
of course, waited to see him on his legs again, and by this
time Mr. Williams and Ethel had gone on some distance
ahead, and she had said “ Yes ” in a most matter-of-fact
voice, for if they had been inclined to he ever so senti-
mental, she felt that that was decidedly neither the
place nor the hour. Whoever did or did not make their
market that day, hers was settled at any rate, and if my
young lady readers are disappointed at the turn things
took they must remember this is not a novel.
So as they walked along Ethel asked many questions
about Australia. “ Were there many neighbours ? ”
“ Two families within twenty miles, they are the
nearest; better off than we luckless bachelors.”
“ Any church near ? ”
“Nob within hundreds of miles; the forests are
God’s churches there, if you choose to make them so;
and away in their vast solitudes I know no fitter-
place for thought and contemplation,” said Ralph,
really quite poetic under tire circumstances.


"Yes, it must be grand, especially at night,” said
Dick, who, having regained his equilibrium, now
joined them.
“ How do you manage for lights there ? I suppose
you have moderators,” said Ethel; “ they are a great
bore.”
“ No,” said Williams; “we grow tallow, and burn it
in the lamps, or make candles.”
" How nasty! But how do you grow tallow ? ”
asked Sophy.
"Really, Sophy,” said Dick, with a burst of laughter,
“ I didn’t think you were so very green; you are ‘in
your salad days.’ ”
“ Well, you may make as much fun of me as you
choose,” laughed Sophy; “but I don’t know how
tallow grows. I never saw any. Suppose you tell
us.”
Williams, highly amused, said, —
"We grow fat sheep and then use the tallow. It is
also one of our sources of income, as we send it down
in casks to town.”
"Well,” said Ethel, quietly, "tallow candles are my
abomination, and home-made ones especially.”
Many a time she suffered from them afterwards,
when with fervent heat they curved and drooped
their heads, all covered with wings of moths, which
silly insects had found their light irresistible.
By this time they had arrived at the station.
Dick and Sophy went to take the tickets, and
returning to the waiting-room discovered Ethel blush-
ing a rosy pink, and Williams kneeling down, helping
to put on her galoshes. There happened to be no one
there, and Ralph, being stout, rose Avith a redder face
certainly, but not confused, not he. At forty-three he
knew better, and had put on galoshes before, no doubt.


“He has popped, I believe,” said Hick to Sophy, as
they stood looking on, greatly amused. " Come, Sophy,
there’s the train. Good-bye, Williams; hope to see
you soon.”
“ Well, Ethel,” turning to his sister as soon as they
were off, “ I suppose we are to congratulate you.”
“ Don’t, that’s a dear hoy,” said she. “ How am I
to tell papa ? ”
CHAPTER IV.
UNCERTAINTY.
They had a wet and very dirty walk home, and
Ethel, hastening to change her dress, thought it was
wiser to have the ordeal over as quickly as possible, so
went down to the dining-room, where Reginald Carr
was sitting reading the newspaper (I forgot to say
that Mrs. Delmore was now away from home, attend-
ing one of her children who was ill), in not a very
good humour, having sent the jaunting car to meet
an earlier train, by which they had, as we know, not
arrived.
“ What makes you so late ? ” said he, as Ethel
entered. “I wasn’t going to send the car twice. I
can’t think what you could have been doing in
Essbury all this time.”
“Well, papa, we met Mr. Williams.”
“ What had that to do with it ? ”
“Well,” she went on, nearly twisting her little
dog’s ears oft' the while, and trembling all over, —“ well,


papa dear, Mr. Williams is going to -write to yon, and
I gave him permission.”
“ What is he going to write to me for ? I don’t want
O O
to hear from him.”
“ Papa, he is going to ask if I may—if I—if you
—he wants mo to go with him to Australia.” She rose
and went up to him, and longed to throw her arms
round him, but he was a man who disliked caresses,
so she only said nervously but firmly, “ I said I would,
if you would let me.’'
There was a deep pause, and a mighty frown
crossed the brow of Reginald ; at last, in low hoarse
freezing tones, he said, —
“ You are of age—please yourself,” and took up the
newspaper.
Poor Ethel! her heart nearly hurst with grief. She
flew from the room, across the hall, and up to her room,
flinging herself, sobbing and moaning, on the bed.
Sophy guessed everything, and vainly endeavoured
for a time to soothe her sister, but continued to caress
her. At last Ethel drew her down to the pillow, putting
her arm round her neck, and whispered between
heavy sobs, —
“ Gan I hear it, Sophy—papa’s anger and to leave
you all ? Until now I scarcely realized it. Australia is
so far away, Sophy, and he is such a stranger; and yet
I have promised, and I think he will he kind.”
“Well, darling, you are very brave, and Mr. Williams
looks a tower of strength, and has fought his own
way so well, he will take , care of and defend my
little sister. You must come down to dinner, and
meet papa ; it will only make matters worse to put it
off until the morning.”
So Ethel, trembling in every limb from crying and
fatigue, went down. An almost unbroken silence pre


vailed through the whole meal, and it was a relief to
everyone when it was ended, and the huge . cate
which Ethel’s lover had presented her with was
placed on the table. The laugh it caused broke the
spell. It was about the size of a large cheese, that
shape, with a sort of saffron coloured crust outside,
and in, a compound looking remarkably like a rich
and half cooked plum pudding. They made great fun
of it, and Ethel, who on going into Wales had been
presented with a large box of cakes, peculiar also to
the town through which they passed, was laughed
at well, for they all declared that she had been bought
with them, which certainly was rather a humiliating
bait, and quite a novel offering on the lover’s i>art.
In a day or two a letter came from Mr. Williams,
formally demanding the hand of Miss Ethel Carr,
and proposing to meet her father in Westry and
settle upon her a fair round sum. Reginald couldn’t
refuse such an offer, the more so as Ethel had pre-
viously given her consent, but made the stipulation
that until it was all properly drawn up they were
not to meet. It was.hard, no doubt, particularly as
they knew so little of each other, but it must be
remembered that this was Reginald’s first experience
in matrimonial matters so far as his children were
concerned. Mr. Williams was a stranger who repre-
sented himself well off at the other end of the world,
but had nothing tangible to show here, and the
father naturally hesitated to place his child under this
man’s protection until convinced of the truth of his
statements. One night, before it was quite settled,,
Ethel and her sisters were sitting in the studjo It was
rent day, and Mr. Delmore with their father were
dining with the tenants in the hall, when the door
opened and a maid-servant came up to Ethel with a


note. The man waited for an answer. It was from
Mr. Williams, to ask if she would meet him the
next night at the postern gate, under the limes.
She said she would, and told Dove and Sophy what
she intended to do. Dove hesitated. Sophy ap-
plauded : it was a fine romantic proceeding; she only
wished she had someone to meet.
Ethel, dear,” said Dove, “it will he so cold, there
is such bitter frost just now.’’
“ Oh,” said Ethel, " I don’t care. I shall wrap up
Avell —put on my old bonnet and a shawl.”
“An old bonnet and a shawl! ” exclaimed Sophy,
and bursting out laughing. “ Why, Ethel, it is too
horribly matter-of-fact, and will spoil the whole thing:
you should start out with a lace veil thrown grace-
fully over your head and shoulders. You would shiver
perhaps, (I don’t know that I should, I should be in
such a state of excitement) and that will give Mr,
Williams an oirportunity of drawing you closer to him,
and protecting you from the pitiless blast, etc., etc.
Oh, it is all going to be delicious! Shall Igo for
you 1 I’ll do it beautifully. To be sure, he is a little
too stout, and cpiite grey; it ought to be a young
gentleman with raven locks, a lithe but manly form,
and very handsome; still, never mind, Mr. Williams
isn’t so bad ; and just when I thought it was going-
on in the most humdrum uninteresting style possible,
here is an angry father, two lovers cruelly separated
meeting b} r moonlight and in fearful frost. It ought
to have been a soft, summer’s eve; but never-
mind, that can’t be helped either. Outside a little
postern gate in an old garden wall, beneath a terraced
walk leading from the oldest mansion round, Ethel
-stealing away from the side door all unseen—why it
is really going to be the deepest romance ! rattled on


Sophy without a pause, except to laugh, when Ethel
quietly remarked, —
“It wouldn’t he so delightful to catch a dreadful
neuralgia or toothache under the limes, Sophy. It is
all very fine for you, but I am to be the sufferer
remember, and there is nothing romantic in a cold in
the head.”
“No, that’s true ; but still, Ethel, don’t put on that
old bonnet, I believe Mr. Williams will be quite dis-
appointed.”
“ Well, I’ll venture to say he will have his own hat
on, and top-coat too, and very, sensible,” laughed
Ethel; “but how I am to get there I don’t know.
The dogs will bark, and papa will be on the alert:
he has looked in three times this evening, as though
he half suspected something of the kind to be going
on.”
" If you could meet in the chapel room, that would
be still better. We would put the ladder in the garden,
Mr. Williams would mount. Could he squeeze through
the lattice, do you think ? Dear Ned has been in and
out that way many a time, but then he is so thin. It
wouldn’t do at all if he were to stick half-way.
Picture papa taking his last cigar and a stroll before
retiring to bed, finding the ladder and removing it
considerately in case of robbers, and leaving your
middle-acred lover neither in nor out, in momentary
O v
danger of a fit of apoplexy coming on I —Oh, Ethel, I
should die of laughing,” screamed Sophy, and peals of
merriment rang through the room.
“ Oh, Sophy, it is too bad of you,” said Ethel when
she could speak again. " Poor fellow, he can’t help
being stout and grey. It isn’t right to laugh; we
ought to treat him with more respect.”
“So rve will, darling, but the picture was so irro


sistible. How would lie get down ? there would be
no alternative but to jump, when doubtless he would
break his leg, and our wishes would have come true
against our will, for I am sure now he is going to be
our brother we would wish no ill to happen to him.
By-the-bye, what is his name ? We can’t go on calling
liim Mr. Williams, it is so formal and cold.”
“He says his name is Llewellyn,” readied. Ethel,
“ and I have been wondering how to shorten it.”
“ Well, one can’t call him Llewy, it would sound so
like a girl, and so would Ellyn; and yet the whole is
such a length. Let’s cliristcu him afresh. He shall be
Ralph ; we’ll tell him so when next he comes; it will
make him feel quite one of us, and that is what we
want to do,” said Dove.
" I wish to-morrow night had come,” said Sophy. " I
wonder how it will all turn out, and long to see you
start, Ethel.”
“ I am afraid it won’t he quite right,” said Ethel,
“ but yet it seems so hard we should not meet. Papa
is to see him to-morrow for a final arrangement, and
O '
after that perhaps he will relent.”
The morrow came, and Ethel watched the weary
hours for her father’s return, hoping he would bring
her lover with him; but lie came alone, and handed
her a letter, which in enclosing- her a large diamond
ring said, since Mr. Carr had now given his consent,
he would not ask her to meet him that night, but
hoped in a fortnight to return, all the business matters
settled, and until then they were neither to write to,
or see each other. He bade her wear the ring, which
when Reginald noticed on her finger he declared to be
unwarrantably premature, and desired her to take it
off. She did, and wore it round her neck instead; for,
true to nature, and now that she had fully made up


her mind, she turned to her lover with all her heart,
each new obstacle thrown in their way only making
her the more determined to cany her point; besides,
she had pledged her word, and was not that enough ?
And so there was nothing left but to wait. The days
passed slowly on. An old friend rode over once, to
whom Mr. Williams was related, and sent by him to
see her. It was hard upon him, for once he had wished
to make her mistress of his own home ; but as he said
good-bye, he placed his hand upon her head and said,
" God bless thee.” He had a generous kind heart, for
all that in many ways he lacked wit, and his poor
brain would wander off in fancies and strange notions,
hold parlance with imaginary men, and laughed the
laugh at times of those whose minds are not as others’.
“ Ralph would be jealous, I suspect, did lie see that,
Miss Ethel,” said Sophy.
But Ethel would not laugh; she pitied him whom
God had thus afflicted, and was silent.
The days passed on. One week had gone; another,
and she would hear from him or see him. How slowly
the hours rolled on ! still, next Thursdaj-, she would
say, —it would be here directly. It came ; week after
week went by; no letter, not a word. They told her
he had gone, she would never sec his face again, and
Reginald Carr devoutly hoped it would be so. All
this time heavy snow and wintry rains had kept the
girls prisoners to the house, or at most to the terrace
walk; nothing to break the drear monotony. Her
fatlier did not speak, her uncle took his view also,
Ethel grew paler and thinner day by day, still con-
vinced that all would come right. She did not know
her lover well, but what she did know had given her
faith in him, which she would not doubt; and if she
did or could, why then how was it possible to even


dream of going with him to his forest home ?At last,
one morning, a servant brought her a note. Her heart
beat high with hope; but no! it was only from an old
lady who lived in the village, and said she wished to
see her very much. So as the snow had ceased, and
the roads were just passable, the three sisters set out
for their walk, wondering what this friend could
possibly have to say of such importance to Ethel.
They left her at the door, went to see some of
their cottage friends, and waited anxiously to hear
the news. When Ethel joined them, she said the old
lady had begun by telling her that her eon had met a
gentleman who was in search of a wife, that she had
asked him there to sta}', and wanted her to meet him
at tea some afternoon. Ethel listened, and then asked
the name of this individual thus cut and dried appa-
rently for her acceptance, and lo ! it was Mr. Williams
himself. So then she told her kind old friend all her
trouble, —of the absence, the silence so unaccountable;
and she, knowing the world, told her all would he
light; that doubtless he had found it difficult to
realize money here when his capital lay at the other
side of the world; and that, having promised, he
would neither write nor send until he could fulfil his
word, which cheered Ethel’s drooping spirit. But
five long weeks passed without a sign of his return,
until one day his servant came, bearing rich presents
to them all, and begging Dove to meet him, that he
might learn perhaps from her the reason why, having
fulfilled his promise, he received no invitation to
the house. He had put it all straightforwardly into
the lawyers’ hands, who were busy drawing up the
deeds, and yet no letter. Morning after morning he
had come down hoping to see the welcome bidding,
but none came; and silently be would shoulder his


gun and awajr over the hills, to wait the issue of
another post, too proud to write : he thought the
summons should have come from Ethel’s father. And
thus these two, who in a few short weeks were, to he
man and wife, were kept apart, Reginald thinking
that it was Williams’ place to write, and vice versa.
At last, as I said, he sent his servant, and then rode
down himself to the avenue gate, where Dove and
Sophy met him, and Ethel watched him from a
window in the gable opposite the drive. Long time
he spoke to the two girls, and sadly told how he had
used the utmost diligence to forward his promise to
their father; how in the stated fortnight it had been
all accomplished, and he had waited daily for him
to write.
They returned to the house, and he rode back to
Westry, without a sight even of Ethel, who had watched
him from the gable : these two had given their word
neither to meet nor write, and had kept it. At last,
next day, the mystery was cleared away; he drove
once more his lovely bays up the avenue, and was
installed the accepted man. Now I’ll spare you the
detail of the further proceedings of the engaged ones;
it is far too common, and to the lookers-on too silly
and absurd, until their own turn comes, when that
“ old tale which ever is the new ” is whispered in
their ears, and by their lips the old, old story told, in
various ways bub with the same meaning, as the hearts
dictate the expression of it.
The last few weeks had had such an effect on Ethel
that when they first met she was speechless. To the
young, sorrow comes so hardly, freezes up their spirit,
casts it back upon itself, paralysed for the time; and
though quickly forgotten when the heavy pressure ot
grief or pain is removed, returning with elastic buoy-
-3


ancy to the old land of hope and love and pleasure,—
still each cloud, small or great, leaves some little
token ; the shadow has been there, training doubtless
little by little for the after struggles, and drawing
shade after shade over the glorious brightness of
youth, until a settled greyness closes around: with
this one good effect, that when the sun bursts forth,
as it does sometimes upon all, its beams are cherished
so much the more as they have been withdrawn
from our paths. We learn to grasp the pleasure
whilst ’tis here, not treat it as our due, having
learned that the present alone is ours, that happy
hours flv all too swiftly, monotonous days will
change and keen griefs pass, each for “ uncertain
moments lent,” crossing by turns our path, teaching
us resignation and the patience we all so deeply need,
that—
“ Gentleness, virtue, wisdom, and endurance,
These are seals of that most firm assurance
Which bar the pit over destruction’s fall ” ;
for ’twas the poet’s loftiest dream of patience when
in the grandest line he makes Prometheus say,
“ Perchance the years are not counted, yet they pass.”
I haven’t said much of Ned. Mr. Williams gave him
an introduction to his brother, and about a month
before the time I write of here he had sailed, to re-
pair, if possible, the fallen fortunes of his house in a
foreign land, and return to restore his old ancestral
Hall to its former prosperity. This he w T as not
destined to accomplish, but of his sad fate 111 tell
in years to come. Poor Ned! he had been the
promise of a fine young fellow, but afterwards be-
came wild, reckless, and dissipated, and there was
nothing for it but to leave his home; it seemed to


be the only chance, and a bad one, in a new country,
Avhere steady perseverance, activity, and care alone
succeed; but indeed the dear fellow did work hard,
for little gain, and deserved a better end. As they
all stood round him he had a cheery word for each.
“ Good-bye, Ethel; you are booked for the Antipodes,
we shall meet again. Good-bye, dear girls; may you
jei get good husbands and be happy,” as he brushed
away the tear that rose unbidden to his eyes, whilst
the three girls, unable to control their grief, clasped
their a?ms round his neck.
Ah ! it was a sad hour. His mother was spared
the trial, being absent, as I said before, and Mary was
at school; but first cousins brought up together,
sharing the same pleasures and sorrows, become as
brothers and sisters.
And so be went, the poor young heir, and looked
his last upon the venerable pile. And there was
mourning in the study; the old squire sat there in his
arm-chair, his head bowed between his hands. The
father and son latterly bad not agreed; the parting
had been consequently a bitter scene, but no one
witnessed it; whatever passed between them no one
ever knew, —so best: they never met again. The
magpies flew about alone that day, the crows in the
old limes cawed a doleful, monotonous dirge, the dogs
missed their young master’s wonted tread and howled
in dismal chorus, and the heavy clouds poured down
the ceaseless rain, the wind moaned miserably round
the house, and the girls stole listlessly about. After a
while Dove gently opened the study door, went to
her uncle, sat down beside him, stroked his knees, his
hands, caressed him silently, until at last he raised his
head and spoke. " Give me my pipe,” he said, and by
degrees the sunshine returned. “ When winter comes,


spring is not far behind.” Gladness came with it
—at least to some. Ethel was to be married the next
week, —but Mr. Delmore never mentioned poor Ned's
name again.
CHAPTER V.
THE VOYAGE.
The marriage was to Lave taken place from the old
Hall, but the death of the cousin whom Mrs. Delmore
had gone to nurse prevented this; so they went over
to Chester, and after the usual routine, church, break-
fast, silly speeches, and farewells, Ethel started with
her husband for a long ramble over the Continent, and
on their return were joined in the Highlands (where
Ralph had taken a shooting-box), by Sophy and her
father.
Everyone has read of or seen the lovoty scenery
there, —the wild passes, mountain streams, and deer
forests ; the heather, rowans, and dark firs ; the kilted
men and soncy lassies; bonnets, plaids, and jewelled
dirks; pipes and pipers, reels and pibrochs, now
gay, now plaintive, turn by turn; and the few who
have never been there should go; it is a land of
romance and poetry, teeming with historical interest
and curio,us customs.
It was a happy time. Dick got leave of absence
and made one of the merry party. But as all things,
bright or sad, must end sooner or later, this pleasant
family gathering was about to break up. Ralph
began to be anxious to return to Australia, Dick’s
furloifgh was up, and they must disperse. There is


something very sad to me in such meetings, for the
doubt must always rise as to whether they may ever
all be together again. Dismiss it quickly, still it comes
again. I have seen many, hut never one since then,
from which one, if not more, loved face was missing,
either from absence or the long silence which is never
broken here.
The early winter snows had begun to fall, the birds
were growing scarce and very wild. Stalking the
roe-deer was now too cold a sport, not even the
whiskey of Ferrintosh could keep it out. The stacks
of corn were all garnered, and the black game conse-
quently sought other food. The tints of the birch
wood had deepened from the first light shade of
bronze to dead-leaf brown. The hoar-frost in the
hedges remained undispelled by the powerless rays of
the feeble sun, and great cobwebs stood out from the
mist and hung around. No more gipsy parties in the
heather clad hills, so charming in their way, with tea
and luncheon for the men whilst they rested from
their • sport, if, by-the-bye, rest it could be called,
when the midges were in myriads and the kilted
knees were bare. But who ever yet sat out of doors
on lovely summer nights, no matter in what climate,
enjoying the balmy breeze, the distant view fading
by degrees in the soft pink hues of departing day,
listening, perhaps, to the sweet conversation of some
cherished friend and companion, or dreaming in silence,
with the most delightful pease stealing over one’s
soul, but some wretched gnat or the abominable buzz
of a mosquito did not come to mar the whole charm
and change the harmony to the utmost pitch of irrita-
tion ?
Partings are ever sorrowful, and need no describing.
The saddest I have ever known have always taken


place at railway stations, or on board vessels, and I
dare say mercifully so, for it is necessary to exercise
a certain amount of self-control in public, though not
always possible; and as I write the parting wail of a
mother still sounds in the ears of memory, as the
steam-tug slowly moved away from the vessel which
contained her darling, bound for England, to be edu-
cated and grow up a little stranger to her love.
Ethel, with her husband, is now on board one of
the finest steamers that had ever then traded to the
Australian shores, as all those who remember 'the old
‘ European ’ will agree. That noble saloon, with its
deep cushioned sofas ranged all round its beautifully
painted sides, its library, grand piano, and splendid
fare ; the kindly Captain, ever getting up some amuse-
ment for his passengers, from the weekly sociable
meetings in his own cabin to the grand trials by jury,
theatrical performances, concerts and balls, in the
saloon. Since then I have crossed those seas many
times, but although ’tis twenty years and more, have
seen no ship to surpass her, or to come up to her in
comfort. I know nothing of her build and rigging,
never in all my voyages became the least nautical.
What then was a most serious undertaking is now
becoming only a pleasure trip, at least to those
“ whose souls ne’er sicken at the heaving wave ; and
few there are in England now who have not some
loved child or relative in the far off land, which year
by year becomes in nearer correspondence with the
mother shores. First come the cold and bitter days
on leaving home, when you know nobody and nobody
knows you, and all look wonderingly at each other;
then the gradual change from cold to warm, from
warm to hot, from hot to broiling, and from broiling
to the utter prostration of equatorial latitudes. The


friendship thermometer rises at about the same ratio,
until such is the dire effect of even this faintest ap-
proach to the regions of Pluto, that the Demon of Mis-
chief heralds in the Goddess of Discord in proportion as
the thermometer increases in height. At these times
it will be very judicious to keep much to yourself,
taking no part in the little scandals and great twaddle
of the hour. The weather will be always a safe topic,
and one which as long as the present state of things
exists, will not be worn out, although perfectly thread-
bare ; politics there are none, excepting the ship’s,
and naturally, from the mixed company, these become
positively dangerous. Newspapers are started. One
voyage I reihember two political organs were issued
weekly, and words fail me to paint the scowls, the
mocking laughter, the sneers and scoffings of the rival
editors and their supporters, the cutting articles
that appear, each more severe than the last, until
positively a sort of civil war is established. It is all
looked upon as really a most serious matter. “ There is
no doubt about it that that last attack of Boxall’s was
too hard on little Teazer, albeit Teazer’s allusions to the
ring were rather uncalled for.” The cap fitted Boxall;
he took and wore it, and by so doing gave Teazer
rather the best of it. At last one wise man in the as-
sembly gave it as his opinion that both the “ wretched
rags,” should be put down, or murder on the high seas
would probably be the result. The Captain orders
the very inflammable sparks of genius to be snuffed
out: they are ; the friends of the antagonists have a
meeting (on board ship nothing can be done without) :
it is resolved and carried unanimously that a recon-
ciliation be brought about: this is done : a concert
ensues, which leaves the harmony of the company
undoubted (?)


By-the-hye, shall I mention that as far as concerts
are concerned it is a mistake to practise too much for
them, as these practisings are of course heard by every
one ; consequently when the appointed evening arrives,
the basses, tenors, counter tenors, sopi’anos having each
sung their parts over separately many times, and then
in full chorus, the audience has learnt eveiy note
perfectly beforehand. Those who are so kind as to try
to amuse their fellow passengers should sing simple
songs, as though they were in their own drawing-
rooms, unless indeed they can try the music over in a
part of the ship where they will not be heard; and
where that will be I’m sure I don’t know, for a ship is
all ears, which often hear falsely, and full of echoes
which have never been uttered. That wouldn’t make
a had riddle for a ship’s newspaper: “ Why is our
noble vessel like a donkey ? To sit next your neigh-
bour for twelve or fourteen weeks and not be pumped
thoroughly dry of even the ghost of an idea will
prove both to be all but superhuman. Here the
topics once so interesting become thinner and thinner,
until threadbare is no word for them, and the jokes
once so much appreciated, the hon mots so racy, fall
flabbily on the ear, die so many natural deaths, and
experience so many miserable resurrections. Mr. S.
has walked up and down and up and down with Mrs.
W. after dinner, until Sirs. Q, with whom he used to
walk and talk, infuriated ly the neglect, considers that
it is quite improper, and gathers round her a little
band of sympathising lady friends, who agree that it
is scandalous, and consequently will scarcely speak to
or notice Mrs. W., who for her part thinks it all a
high joke, continues her walks with Mr. S., who poor
man is quite guiltless of the least meaning to either
ladies, beyond passing away agreeably the daily


monotony; and having heard all Mrs. G. had to say,
leaving her remarkably like a squeezed lemon, he
very naturally turned to little Mrs. S., who being a
reader, had an entirely new stock of stories and ideas,
was rather fun, and having travelled a greal deal
besides, knew how to amuse herself and be amusing
without dreaming of harm. Loo is often a great
pastime for the gentlemen; hour after hour they play,
often to the detriment of their purses and occasionally
of their tempers. At four everyone assembles for
dinner, and to grumble while they dine, which latter-
process must he good for digestion, for nearly every-
one has a splendid appetite, and yet nothing is ever
properly cooked or tit to eat; and although the table
be far better provided than most have been accus-
tomed to, and a far greater variety spread before
them than any ordinary family could possibly see, yet
few will be satisfied. Mr. R will send Mrs. B. the
pinion only or leg of a fowl, when he knows very well
that she has a delicate appetite, and could have eaten
that part of the wing with a little slice from the
breast, whilst she saw him send the whole breast to
another person who could quite well have taken the
leg and not known the .difference. Then the chief
officer gives so much dessert to little Mrs. F.—half
empties the dish of almonds and raisins into her plate,
because the good-natured creature knows that behind
those curtains five or six little faces are peering out,
watching for mamma, who probably steals away with
her plateful, blushing, feeling very like a thief and
yet not being able to help it.
"Did you think I was wrong to take those biscuits
from Miss H. ? ” said Miss G. to a friend. " I don’t think
I was ; and besides, I am very fond of them ! ”
Miss H. had had a terrific quarrel with Miss C.


and abused her frightfully, but the latter had thought
it too silly to take any notice of and so offered the
biscuits; and sweet biscuits towards the end of a long
voyage are far beyond rubies, I can assure you. But
these little storms in teacups, which a long monotony
engenders, developes, and destroys, serve merely as
jokes when all is over and the dry laud appears. Few
will be found who would not shake hands, if only in
simple gratitude and one commou cause of rejoicing at
the successful realization of their hopes,—
Parting even as they met,
With some as strangers,
But with most, regret.
To me there are many pleasures at sea, and I have
found some delightful companions occasionally who
have become fast friends. A vessel in full sail,
with the splendid trade wind steadily wafting her
onwards, is a lovely sight; the glorious sunsets and
cloudless nights—the heavens studded with new con-
stellations, and planets so grand and bright that they
gleam like small moons in the restless ocean ; the
phosphorus—large lumps of light sometimes illumi-
nating the waves for miles around, now on their
foaming crests and now in the vessel’s wake; by
day the little Portuguese men-of-war, spreading their
tiny sails and speaking in their only tongue their
thankful praise to the Great Sun, reflecting back
his beams in the most radiant colours and owing all
their beauty to him alone; for one was washed on
board in a storm, and simply was a little mass of
bine jelly. Then in the oily waters of the tropics,
how I have envied the grampi as they darted past,
revelling in the heat, whilst we were all gasping,
panting, praying for a breath of air—which, however,


was of little use as long as tlie wind remained away,
expending its force in a hurricane somewhere, no
doubt, instead of dividing its energies and giving us at
least our share. Round and round the ship they sport
in the most tantalizing manner, and as you watch
them a flock of flying-fish flutter past, which I at first
took for birds, in ignorance. The albatross in colder
latitudes following for days in our wake become
quite company; how calmly they float on the waters
and sleep on the ocean’s troubled breast! wbab a
shame it is to shoot them! although of course we
know they come for what they can get; but a great
many other species of biped do that and don't get shot.
A. hat overboard, followed almost immediately by the
sailors’ cheery song, puts new life into the whole com-
munity, for after a dead calm a wind of any sort, fair
or foul, is most welcome. Breakfast with a good stiff
breeze is a very different meal to breakfast in a calm, —
it is truly so in more senses than one ; scarcely a word
is uttered, the fact being that everyone is too hot to
speak, except about the weather, and what Englishman
will ever be found who could not gasp out a remark
upon either the heat or cold, clouds or sunshine, wind
or rain, fog or brightness, damp or drought, dust or
mud, etc. ? What would betting men do on board
without the log ? Twelve o’clock to them is the only
time; ladies join the sweeps, and the excitement runs
high; some lucky individual has drawn the number,
pockets the money, and then, da capo, the betting
begins for another day. As a rule I think ladies are
happier than men on board ship, they have so many
more resources. If the superior sex would condescend
to net or knit they would find it really both puzzling
and amusing. I knew one sensible man who learnt to
make button-holes perfectly, scorning help. I must


not omit to tell of the first time -we crossed the line.
Neptune’s secretary came on board the night before
with letters from His Majesty, giving ns a free pass
through his territories on certain conditions, which
when fulfilled would exempt ns from heavy penalties
which he levied on all new comers. The conditions
were, I regret to mention, a fee of five shillings, which
was not a god-like part; but no doubt old Neptune
grew tired of “ water, water everywhere, and not a drop
to drink,” and preferred whiskey to nectar of which
he rarely got a taste. Well, the secretary, having
delivered his notices, returns to his master in a little
skiff, burning a brilliant light to mark his track, and
on a bright moonlit night the bark will be seen float-
ing in the distance as the vessel sails farther and farther
away: the sailors cover a large tub or cask with pitch,
set fire to it, and its brilliant flame on the deep dark
waters has a most lovely effect. The next day Father
Neptune comes with all his attendant mermaids,
dressed in sheepskins and long wigs made of tow ;
forming a great procession, they parade round the
ship, and in the poop Neptune makes a speech, and
then proceeds to the main deck to operate upon those
luckless tars who have not paid the penalty, covering
them over with a mixture I believe of soap and
treacle. No doubt it pleases them, but I considered it an
exceedingly dirty amusement. After the tropical heat
come a long series of wretchedly cold, rainy, sunless
days, which last quite a month, the utter wretchedness
of which I need not enter upon. Most people turn into
dormice, only turning out to meals or for a brisk walk
on deck. We saw two icebergs; they were grand,
stately, and beautiful. I took a good long look at
them, and that will suffice for life ; they are assuredly
glorious sights, and once seen never to be forgotten,


and never I trust to be gazed upon by me again ;
enough is as good as a feast, and I was fully satisfied.
The north pole and the south pole may have their
attractions, but my magnet points not there. I’d
rather endure the most furious blast of the sirocco
than their icy paralyzation. I have smiled to hear it
said that our brave explorers in those terrible regions
didn’t do enough; they should have remained longei', in
order, the speaker said, to have discovered where the
birds came from that were rarely seen to flj’ past. How
easy it is for those who “sit at home at ease” to
discuss and condemn; but the course is open to them
to go and do better, and find out birds’ nests on the
pole if they can, or mares’ nests, which would be still
more surprising; and if they returned, successfully or
not, I will venture to say that few would ever wish to
repeat their experience ; their curiosity about the birds
would be considerabty diminished. Leaving the ice-
bergs to their stately frigidity, bidding them adieu
with intense satisfaction, day by day the temperature
becomes gradually more and more endurable, until
once more the balmy nights are ours, and the bright
clear moon of the Australian waters shines upon the
trusty ship “careering along to the wind's mighty
breath and the ocean’s song.” At length the Otway is
sighted, the Heads are passed, and we steam up the
wide spreading Bay, and are landed on Sand ridge Pier.
The voyage is over ; the days, the weeks, the months
are flown, gone to the dead past’s forgotten tomb, save
a few bright hours and pleasant intercourse with those
we have found genial spirits, which will stand out
prominently in our memories always. To and fro we
have tossed or glided as the winds and waves per-
mitted, rising to pleasure, sinking to rest; calmly secure
and happily blind to the future, we have dwelt


together a little space, shared the same perils (if perils
there have been; most passages resemble yachting
excursions, so few storms ever occur—at least to the
outward bound), and we part to run our separate
race, —
“ The short quick race we hold so dear,
That which is unknown is what we fear.”
We have made some friends whom we hope to meet
again ; have borne, or not borne, with others, remem-
bering or forgetting what they have had to bear from
ns. Each one has left some footprint behind, and has
taught some lesson—let us trust it may have been for
good; and may the harsh opinions we have been
tempted to utter be forgiven, since idle hands and
tongues find mischief still to do or say which they
deeply regret afterwards. We seldom weigh our neigh-
bour in the same balance as ourselves; but since we
cannot make ourselves what we wish, let us not ex-
pect to have others exactly to our mind. These are
the thoughts of the good old monk whose works will
never die ; let us try to make them ours, and with a
kindly farewell wish success and happiness to all.
CHAPTER VI.
MELBOURNE.
As Ethel landed on Sandridge pier, she thought it
the dirtiest, dreariest place she had ever set eyes
on. It was one of those hot steamy days in February,
when after a little rain the heat sets in worse than
before, and far more unbearable on account of the
moisture. Up the dirty pier, into the stuffy railway


carriage, past the sandy beach, over the barren
parched up land, the grass looking like brown
Holland stretched over the plains, and she was in
the capital of the southern hemisphere,—very dif-
ferent then to what it is now, although the well
planned wide streets, the few excellent shops, and
some fine public buildings in course of erection,
together with the comfort in which everyone
appeared to live, were quite astonishing to her, con-
sidering how short a time previously there had been
(so her husband told her) only a few small huts. At
the present time Melbourne will compare most favour-
ably with many capitals—few luxuries but will be
found there, and as well dressed men and women as
in the older countries, in which indeed only the few
are remarkable for their well chosen toilettes. Of
course it is quite observable, on first landing, that
the dress in the streets is much less quiet as a rule
than in Paris or London: on my second arrival from
home, this struck me very forcibly. The Reason may
be that as yet there is no Rotten Bow, no grand
promenade in the morning from twelve till two, —
everyone is too busy as a rule; but Collins Street
about three is amusing enough, and when the parks
grow up, and the drives are finished, it will be nearly
equal to the old country,—surpassing it in climate, for
who would compare the cold grey foggy skies of Eng-
land to the clear, light, and beautiful atmosphere of
southern Australia ? Melbourne only wants age to
become a lovely city; its public buildings, gardens,
and environs are wonderful; vegetation is so rapid
that trees, shrubs, and flowers spring up as though by
magic. The comfortable wagonettes which there take
the place of the dirty London cabs or country flys, of
which latter the Bristol variety will carry the palm


for general discomfort and extortion, will shame tlie
old country. I don’t speak of the dos-d-dos kind, to
sit in which without the certainty of being pitched
out head foremost is next to impossible, unless you
hold on to a leather strap placed in the back seat
for the purpose, and which is difficult to share with
three. Supposing the cab to he full, your remaining
chance then will rest in stretching your feet out to
the curved iron bar, and there steadily continue
high pressure; your body, well thrown back, will then
be in a position to resist the shocks caused whilst
crossing the wide deep open gutters which every-
where intersect the streets for drainage purposes, and
going over, or rather driving into and out of them
ao-ain, which will be apt to jolt you with considerable
force, first against your neighbour and tben against
the leather covering at the sides and overhead. No
matter; the concussion is not so bad, if you have your
feet firmly planted, your teeth closely set, and the
skin of your eyelids ready in case of accident. I
need scarcely say that these conveyances are not
comfortable, and many of my lady friends, no doubt,
have never been in “ the common vulgar things ; ” but
I who know the ups and downs of life, have been
glad to hang upon one —I couldn t call it sitting;
it was better than walking in the hot, dusty' road.
However, now the trains are so convenient, going to
all parts of the suburbs at most reasonable charges,
that no one need complain of the means of transit;
only those other cabs do exist, and very dreadful
they 7 are.
The love of music and the arts is becoming
greatly developed. Attached to the large public
library is a fine picture gallery, containing many
lovely paintings by celebrated masters. A very large


one, The Brigands, the Dancing Girl from Long-
fellow’s * Spanish Student,” and many others I
thought beautiful; but then I am no judge, no artist,
and only know what pleases myself. In the long
sculpture gallery will be found copies of most of the
celebrated statues of the world, the Apollo, Venus,
Dying Gladiator, Laocoon, Perseus—impossible to
name them all; but those who love “ Childe Harold ”
and know it well can here recal his musical cantos,
walk with him, in imagination at least, through
the classic land, and be surrounded in the heart of
this busy commercial city of the south by the silent
monuments, “ relics of nobler days and noblest arts ! ’
The Town Hall, a splendid building capable of hold-
ing 4,000 persons, contains a fine organ, almost too
powerful for the size of the hall, and is often thronged
with enthusiastic audiences who assemble to welcome,
listen to, and almost worship the European stars who
are wise enough and bold enough to cross the world s
wide expanse, and who cannot but acknowledge that
their varied talents either musical or dramatic are
most rapturously appreciated by the cultivated
denizens of this most promising, but undeveloped
country. Yes, undeveloped indeed: the resources
which time will unfold in that vast unexplored land
are incalculable. When we reflect what not much
more than fifty years have done for it, what may
we not expect that succeeding generations may
witness ?—its present wealth and commerce a mere
drop in the ocean compared to the El Dorado which
its undiscovered mines and various cultures shall
exhibit. Every climate, from tropical beat and ver-
dure to temperate coolness and fertility, is to be
found, and in its vast extent the overcrowded deni-
zens of English towns and cities may find room
4


enough and to spare; each, with his own little plot
of ground, could with industry and perseverance
literally sit under his own vines and fig trees.' Not
however on the lands unfit for culture which have
been so indiscriminately thrown open to selection,
bringing ruin alike to the pastoral lessee and the
small farmer, who after hard years of toil as shep-
herd or labourer in different capacities, thinks at last
to obtain the much coveted bit of ground, made
available by a government who have no idea as to
its agricultural capabilities, and who refused the
purchase of it to the first settlers who desired to
make it theirs, and who by their hard toil in the
early years, when they first took their flocks and
herds up to the previously unexplored wilds, justly
earned, as the brave adventurous pioneers of the
new country, the right to possession. I only speak
of such land as from the nature of the soil can
never be anything but pastoral, excepting at great
outlay of capital in enriching it and clearing. If
the poor man can by his industry make a home in
the wilderness and a garden out of a barren land,
where his family may flourish and increase, the rich
have no right to deprive him of the chance; but
the soil must be kindly and fertile in itself, other-
wise the ruin of two interests is the result—that of
the settler who thus has the best of his land taken
from him by being surveyed and declared an agri-
cultural area, and that of the poor man who sinks his
little earnings and reaps for his corn, thistles, and
for the sweat of his brow, starvation. I have seen
it with my own eyes, —seen them arrive, these poor
industrious people, almost triumphantly, thinking to
drive out the pastoral lessee as no longer the right-
ful possessor or holder of so many broad acres and


such prosperity. I have watched their little farms
dotting over the wide spreading plain, the cream of
our country, where once our sheep ami cattle roameu
at large ; have known them sometimes almost rude.
One man even asked how we dared have our house,
garden, and household comforts around ns, and this
to the settler who had been there upwards of frve-
and-twenty years'—and I have known those very
people all hut starving at our doors, and asking for
relief, glad to sell their land to the very man who
not long before they had looked* upon as their natural
enemy.° Therefore to all poor honest men, I would
give this disinterested warning; when you select your
six hundred and forty acres, ho well advised In-
experienced men as to its capabilities, otherwise
your toil, your hard earned wage will all go for
nought, and you will long before the expiration of
the three years ho a far poorer man than when you
commenced life. Many of our own old servants
will testify to what I say as truth, remembei ing
the flourishing happy days when all was prosperity
around the station, and joy and gladness alike were
found in our almost English home and in their own
snug cottages, surrounded by their little gardens,
clustering roses and spreading vines. None then
dimmed of the ruin, grief, and sadness which was to
befall that prosperous little community.
But as usual I have rambled on far ahead, and
must return to Melbourne, where we left Ethel and
her husband newly landed, with a Highland servant,
who with many a bitter tear had left her children with
her poor parents—for she was a widow,—and cast in
her lot with her young mistress. M ages were high; she
knew not where she was going, but would venture :
where Ethel could live, she could. Of course twenty


years ago a comfortable lodging was not very easily
found, and rvhen found had many drawbacks. Furni-
ture was improvised in the most ingenious manner,
and though perhaps partially successful as to out-
ward appearances, was not the most luxurious of its
kind. For instance, a sofa consisting of a plank of
wood, resting on two cane chairs for support, with a
hard cushion placed upon it by way of ornament,
not use (for I should have been sorry to have tested
its resting capabilities), a cocoa-nut mattress and
pillows of wool, were a little severe, it will be ad-
mitted, and poor Ethel sought in vain for a less
rigorous abode. Tis true she did not expect much,
but the surroundings, it must be admitted, were hard.
At last Jessie, her Highland nurse, met a friend who
was married and doing well, who had rooms to let,
which Ethel by comparison considered luxurious.
“ Jessie/' said Ethel one morning, about six weeks
after this, “ tell Mrs. Ryan that I expect a gentleman
to dinner to-day, and to prepare according!} 7 . Take
baby out into the Botanical Gardens, where I shall
very likely meet you.”
Baby was about a month old, and very fair and
bonnie, —so mamma thought, of course.
It was March now; the hot winds of summer had
gone, and the most balmy, delicious climate continued
for weeks without a break. The first north wind
which Ethel experienced was driving into town from
the house of a friend to the little cottage. She noticed
that the hall door was only very slightly opened to
allow her to pass out, which for a moment struck her
as odd, if not rude; but the first breath of air quickly
explained the cause: it blew as from a furnace. No
wonder the house was closely shut; the heat was
awful, the sun a red ball of fire in a hazy mist, and


the dust, as they drove off the grass, rising in clouds
so great, that how the poor horses stood it or the
coachman was able to drive, appeared next to a miracle
to her, as also her own existence, shut up in this fear-
ful atmosphere. Fortunately it was a carriage that
would close, so she was spared the dust. Had she
felt it for a moment she would have declared she
could not have existed. And yet she saw men (not
many women, certainly,) walking in it without being
suffocated. The unceasing hum of insects, croaking
of frogs in the swamps, and buzzing of flies and mos-
quitoes, also struck her; there seemed no stillness,
no rest anywhere, at first; but by degrees this all
passed off, the frogs croaked on without being noticed,
but the flies and mosquitoes ever remained to torment
and try the patience.
“ Ethel,” said Ralph, “ here is Ned Delmore, and
with him my old friend, Mr. Tenn. Let me introduce
my wife.”
Ethel rose to receive the stranger, and then flew to
her cousin, whom she hadn’t seen since they parted in
the old Hall that sad day when ho had left his father’s
roof for ever. Ned looked older in the year which
had elapsed, and perhaps somewhat rougher, but still
there was about him a gentlemanly bearing which
couldn’t be mistaken; and the two chatted away about
home and friends, drawn together by that strong band
which all must have felt who meet in foreign lands, or
who, having become friends in other countries, chance
to come across each other in the old.
" Dear Ned, how delighted I am to see you again.
Where have you been and what doing since we
parted? You were right, you see, and I am really
booked for the Bush. You have seen the station,
haven’t you ? Do tell me what it is like, and about


the people I have to meet; I am so curious to see
them all, and realize what the strange life is. Are
they nice, Ned ? ”
“It would not do for me to make aiw comments on
what I have seen, Ethel; you must judge for yourself,
without previous prejudice one way or the other.
Yoiv are well calculated for the life. Don’t expect too
much, you will then not be disappointed.”
“ Ralph says the same thing, he has never once
described Belanja to me. All I expect is a hut, plenty
of mutton, damper, (Isn’t that a kind of bread ?) and
lots of tea. They say it's poison, if you take too much
of it, but it must be very slow, I think, don’t you,
considering how lots of old ladies we know in England
swallow it and live to a goodold age,not a bit the worse ? ”
“ I don't believe we know what real tea is. I met
a gentleman in the Bush who told me that he had
offered a cup of his best tea to a Chinaman who was
passing, looking for work; he smiled and bowed his
thanks, but declined the beverage.”
“Well, never mind the Chinaman, Ned; J shall
enjoy the tea, with lots of good cream and sugar in it,
and perhaps over there they take it without either,
and so if they offered me a cup in China, some day, I
should decline it also.”
“ A very amusing thing about these Tartars is, that
they think all our women frightful, and make the most
odious comparisons between you and their own lovely,
flat-faced, oblicpie-eyed beauties, Ethel; so if you come
across them on their way overland to Ballarat, don't
suppose if they stare at you that ther* are admiring
your fair complexion, oval face, and golden hair ; they
will be comparing you with their own beloved sisters,
mothers,and naves; they can’t see with our eyes, Ethel.”
“ Why, Ned, I declare you have grown cpiite a flat


terer; a compliment from you is most surprising. But
let me tell you that when men flatter me, I take it
as a direct proof that they have a very weak opinion
of my intellect.”
“ Then, dear Ethel, I shall never flatter you again,
not even indirectly through a Chinaman.”
“ bon sajr I am likely to meet them on my journey
up. Whj' don’t they land here ? it is much nearer to
Ballarat, isn’t it ? ”
“ k es, hut there is a heavy poll tax, which they
avoid hy landing in South Australia. Poor fellows,
man}?-of them die by the way unmurmuringiy; they
are all fatalists, and believe that it is useless to fight
against destiny.”
“ Tell me more about them, Ned, it is so interesting.
I hope we shall meet them.”
“ I have so little to tell, excepting what a passing
observation may be worth. Their camjjs are ranged
in perfect order. Thej r choose some spot, if possible,
where trees are thick, to enable them to break the
more slender boughs and form their shelter. Supported
on low poles and thus covered with leaves, a large
encampment is most curious; each spreads his mat
beneath, with the little cane pillow at the head, and
sleeps as soundly as ”
“ I did on a cocoa-nut mattress, Ned,” broke in
Ethel; “I am sure the ground couldn’t be harder.”
“ They are a very industrious race,” went on Ned,
“and I shouldn’t wonder if large colonies of them
settle here, in years to come.”
" And what are your plans now, Nod ? Shall I see
you up with us again ? ”
“I think not. I have bought a small cattle station
in the Dandenong Ranges, and hope to make it pay;
and someday, you know, Ethel,” looking affectionately


and sadly at her, “ I’ll go back to the old place, set
it all going again, and take my place as a county
gentleman. How were they all when you left—the
governor and my mother ? ”
“Uncle was well, and aunt had only just returned
home. You know, poor Lily died, which was a sore
grief. Dick is with his regiment, was awfully spooney
on Rosie—you knew that when you left. He is in India,
where she wouldn’t go with him, so that’s all off; and
Dove is to be married by-and-bye to Tom Fraser of
the 51st; Mary is still at school, and Sophy as dashing
and full of fun as ever; —so j t ou have the whole ac-
count of them.”
Ned was silent, his thoughts were far away; back
to his heart came crowding up the memories of his
childhood, youth, and early manhood, and all the old
surroundings of his statelv home ; for though im-
poverished, it was still grand in its decay. Ethel had
touched the tender chord of nature’s purest love—a
child for its parent, a parent for his child; the latter
the deepest, as we know ourselves by the love we bear
our own compared to that they give to us; “ Gold
for silver everywhere.”
‘‘You can have as much money as you like at
fifteen per cent. ! ” said Mr. Term to Ralph, as the
pause in the eager conversation with Ned gave Ethel
time to remember her other guest.
“ You see,” said Ralph, “it is of the utmost impor-
tance to fence in the run, and then subdivide it into
paddocks. I am convinced the sheep will do far
better at large than shepherded. I estimate it at
about ninety pounds a mile.”
“Well, as you think best,” replied Mr. Term. “As
I said before, you can have the money.”
Mr. Tenn was a short, thick set, little man, with the


most benign expression of countenance. Ho was very
prosperous, gave more than tithes of all he possessed,
was beloved and esteemed by all, and his
wide-spread benevolence made him universally re-'
spectecl. He was the head of the firm Messrs. Tenn,
Fifteen, and Twenty per cent. Mr. Fifteen was the
very opposite of his superior, a tall, thin, gaunt-looking
man, with long shaggy hair, large protruding eyes,
sunken cheeks, and keen at business. To those who
were his particular friends he was most affable, and it
must be allowed hospitable, but woe betide the luck-
less being who offended him, or who was in arrears
with the fifteen per cent, on borrowed money. Mr.
Twenty was tall and inclined to stoutness, underhung
about the jaw, and had a sharp way of inspecting you.
You have met men who look you through and through,
and you don’t mind much, but think them disagree-
able. At this time all the three partners were most
kind, and showed the greatest possible attention to
Ralph and his little wife, asking them to their houses
and introducing them to their families. Ethel had
many pleasant drives round the outskirts of the town,
up the banks of the Yarra, overhung with drooping
gum-trees and sweet-scented wattles (acacias). Here
she saw the first blacks in their wild-looking mimis
or wurlies, not however good specimens, poor things ;
they were too near to civilization not to have become
demoralized; very unlike the tiibe of whose manners,
customs, love and faithfulness there will be much to
tell as Ethel’s life advances.
Ned stayed and chatted with his cousin until late
after dinner; they took their chairs out into the
verandah. Ralph smoked his pipe, for Ethel liked it,
had been accustomed to it all her life, for Reginald Carr
loved the soothing weed; indeed, in after years, when


Ralph left it off for some time, thinking it disagreed
with him, Ethel implored him to take to it again, for
if tobacco were not good for his body, the want of it
was decidedly not good for his son!, as he had never
been known to be so cross before. It was a fine
prospect that stretched out before them, the - wide-
spreading bay extending away far as the eye could
reach, and much beyond, to the wide Pacific, the
Southern Cross high in the heavens, and the moon,
now nearly full, reflecting its beautiful light upon the
clear unruffled waters and the many ships as they
lay, some in the harbour, standing out prepared to sail,
others moored longside the pier, loading for the home-
ward voyage. Ethel s heart was full of love and sweet
contentment: baby asleep in her little cot, watched by
the faithful Jessie; Ralph at her side, to whom she
looked up almost as to a father, placing in him the most
implicit trust and confidence, and obeying him with
almost childlike submission. Ralph was proud and
happy too in his sweet possessions, and looking for-
ward to the joy of taking his young wife back to his
forest home, where, after years of toil, he had suc-
ceeded in creating a little oasis in the wilderness.
"What though his hands were hard and rough with
work, they were honest, firm, and true as his heart
was generous and kind. A rough diamond, Reginald
Carr had called him, perhaps truly : his was a granite
nature, unj-ielding to stubbornness, but one over which
the power of love was all controlling; and Ethel held
this power; in his fiercest anger and most ungoverned
excitement she could calm him, trembling whilst she
did so. Once before they were married, at the old
Hall, she had seen one fit of passion, which had sent
her awestricken to her room, to reflect on her probable
future with dismay ; yet when they met again, and in


soft and tender accents he asked her whether she was
afraid to go with him, she answered, "No, I have said
I’ll go, and so I will.” He had a gentle, submissive,
almost childlike wife, and whilst she remained so, until
her mind expanded with her years, all went smoothly.
Ned was the only silent one of the three. "With but
little means and slight experience, the battle of life
was before him, and as though he felt that this would
be their last meeting he lingered on, unwilling to say
the last good-bye,—that word in which too oft despair
is mingled. Sound never dies, ’tis said, and so perhaps
in the sad meanings of the wind, the plaintive cry of
night birds, the low sighing of the trees or still murmur
of the darkened brook, its echoes may be mingled, for
“ Slight withal maybe the things which bring
Back on the heart the weight which it would fling
Aside for ever : it may be a sound —
A tone of music—summer's eve —or spring—
A flower —the wind —the ocean—”
the “ token, like a scorpion’s sting,” is there, “ of griefs
subdued” and in some distant clime, with strange sur-
roundings and strange faces near, the last good-bye
will break upon the wanderer’s ear and awaken the hall-
soothed,half-forgotten despair with which it was uttered.
At last Ned rose, and stooping down to kiss Ethel,
shook Ralph by the hand, and the little wicket closed
upon the poor fellow, shut out the last links of home,
and as his retreating form disappeared in the uncertain
light, Ethel watching, a cloud passed over the moon,
the curlew’s note seemed fraught with deeper melan-
choly than its wont, and the hats flew past and back
again—ill omened creatures. Was it the serf breaking
on the distant shore, or the river rushing past with sud-
den and inexplicable swiftness ? what was that lar oft
sound of wind and water striving which would conquer ?


“ Ralph, what is it ? ” said Ethel, as she drew closer
to her husband’s side, “that noise so strange, so weird,
of water roaring ? ”
“You are dreaming, child,” said Ralph; “I hear
nothing. You are tired, the day has been too much
for you. Go in and rest; it’s very late, and }'ou are
full of old superstitions and wild fancies; there are no
ghosts in this country, whatever there may be in the
old. Go in. I’ll finish my pipe.”
“Jessie,” said Ethel, when alone with her nurse in
her own room, “ Mr. Edward has gone, and I feel that
I shall never see him again; he is the last link to
home and the old days, and although I am very happy,
you know, still the thoughts of all I have left make
me sad. The poor fellow went awaj’ so I
watched him until at the curve of the road he dis-
appeared. The wind, I thought, moaned, and the moon
was hidden under a cloud, and those horrid bats flew
past —one fluttered c|uite close to me.” Ethel shuddered,
and then burst into tears.
“ If I was you I wouldn’t be taking such fancies
into head,” said Jessie, quite respectfully, but it
must be admitted rather roughly. She had a short
quick maimer, too abrupt to please generally, but her
young mistress took no notice ; she knew she was
honest and true at heart, and loved her well.
" Ye’ve no call to be greeting the like o’ that, when
there isn’t a wifie near so cared for as yersel, and
baby asleep, an’ a’,” went on Jessie, with a tear in
her eye and a short sniff to prevent it from falling,
as she brushed out the long golden hair and looked
over her mistress’s shoulder into the glass.
But Ethel couldn’t repress her sobs; hers was one
of those natures to which tears come as a relief; heavy
and sharp as April showers they fall, restoring to the


heart its lightness and elasticity; as the sun shines out
and smiles on all around when the passing storm is over,
Jessie saw that it was no use talking, so she got
her mistress to lie down, knowing that sleep would
soon follow this tiring burst of grief, stooped to kiss
the young fair face, and Ethel, putting her arm round
the faithful neck, said,—
“ Oh, Jessie, I have been so selfish, absorbed in my
own troubles, and you have yours and say nothing
about them; but you know we will take cave of you,
and someday we’ll all go borne again—Mr. Williams
says in four years. Baby will be quite old then, won t
she 1 and bow delighted papa will be to see her ! Dear
little pet, she is sound asleep, Jessie. Good-night.”
'• Good-night, dear—ma’am,” correcting herself, "just
you take a glide sleep, or ye 11 no be fit for the
journey, and I haird the maister say we would bo
startin’ veiy soon.”
« Ob, yes, Jessie, I’m quite happy again now, and
won’t have any more dismal thoughts. Good-night.
CHAPTER VII.
FIRST IMPRESSIONS.
It was a lovely bright morning, as the steamer
turned into the little bay where they were to land.
The hills on one side rose fresh and green after the
first autumn rains, which had changed the burnt up
„ V ass from its dead brown holland shade that Ethel
had noticed as spreading like an enormous crumb


cloth over the length and breadth of the land. On
the other side stretched a long sandy beach for eight
or nine miles to a point which jutted out into the sea,
and opposite which stood three or four large rocks,
famous places for cray fish, a very coarse substitute
for the English lobster ; the young ones are tender and
delicate eating enough, but those of a larger growth
want o-ood cooking to be nice; curried, fricasseed, or
potted, they are excellent. An obelisk stood on a
prelecting promontory as a landmark, and the coast
range stretched away on either side into the dim dis-
tance for the most part white sandy hills, covered
with low brushwood of stunted growth, hut emitting
an aromatic perfume which scented the air deliciously
if walked upon or crashed. A very small jetty, to
winch only boats could approach ; the steamer tying at
anchor in safe deep water; a flagstaff rearing its tall
head quite grandly on the first rising ground after
landing; a few scattered huts standing here and there,
dotted about on the open grass land ; a rather good
hotel of three stories looking most importantly down
upon the smaller habitations ; large wooden sheds and
some larger stone buildings in course of erection, gave
a somewhat well-to-do, flourishing appearance to the
otherwise desolate spot. In a hollow, buried in trees—
if the stunted timber deserved such designation and
surrounded by a garden which in its careful culture
at once bespoke the cultivated mind and tastes of the
owner, lived the resident governor or stipendiary
magistrate, a gentleman in every sense of the word,
polished, cultivated, and refined by travel, inter-
course with the world, and his old standing in the
army. Passing this quiet, snug looking spot, still
hearing up the grassy rise, was another larger house,
also of stone, with a deep verandah in front stretching


from wing to wing; here also a garden spread out on
ail sides, -with young and tender plants, old friends
from the mother land, protected from the sharp
keen rands by ribs of casks, which gave anything
but a luxuriant look; so that if you wished to see
the little straggling shrub or flower you had to peep
over its protection, and perhaps find a miserable stick
■with two or three leaves upon it fighting bravely
for existence; “not dead” is about all that could
be said for them, and “while there’s life there’s hope,”
though the chance of it seemed slight. On the green
slope which I have mentioned before, stood Major
Blakeuey and his young and pretty daughter. This
was his accustomed jdace of rendezvous, outside the
little wicket gate which led up to the great merchant’s
house, his inspecting ground in fact for new comers,
whose advent being very few and far between made
them all the more objects of attraction when they
did arrive. Mr. Santley, to whom the whole place
more or less belonged, with the sole exception of the
major’s own residence, had put off in a little boat,
with eager kindness and hospitable intentions, to bid
his old friend Ralph Williams welcome back, and
invite him to his house, to remain as long as Ire
thought fit; for in this land it was the custom, not
only to ask you to dinner, but to real house and
home, and a welcome as true and sweet as the flowers
in May, as long as you could remain. And so, as
Mr. Santley, Ralph, with Ethel on his arm, followed
by Jessie with baby in hers, and a lady who had
bravely and kindly undertaken to accompany Ethel
for the. purpose of entering upon the irksome duty of
teaching her nephews and nieces (or rather Ralph’s),
who were settled not far from her own future home,
walked leisurely towards the house, the major and his


daughter, with Mrs. Santley and her children, had
fair time to make their comments on the advancing
party.
“ She is a very little creature, and very young,” said
Mrs. Santley to the major.
“ Humph ! yes,” laughed he, “ Ralph knew what he
was about; however, let us see her nearer: distance,
you know, may lend enchantment to the view.
Humph! ”
And so in another minute there was a great shaking
of hands and congratulations. Mrs. Santley went
forward and with, as Ethel thought, the truest, home-
liest kindness, kissed her warmly, bidding her welcome,
and turning quite naturally to look at baby in her
long white cloak and lace handkerchief over her face.
She had a few kind words for Jessie, who looked on
with love and pride to see her young mistress thus
greeted. Ethel’s heart went out to her at once; then
Ralph caught her by the hand, and said, —
“Come, Ethel, you must know Major Blakeney;
you will lie such friends, I know. I shouldn’t wonder
if he makes me jealous. Have a care, major.”
And Ethel, turning, held out her hand at once.
This was no place for stiff bows and studied dignities.
There stood before her a man so like in many respects
to her own dear father, Reginald Carr, that she could
scarcely control the tears, which were all but ready to
start at the striking likeness and all the sudden thrill
of excitement with which she was surrounded.
“ I hope you feel none the worse for your voyage
round ?’’ said the major, replacing his hat upon his
head, and looking with undisguised admiration at
Ethel. “ Are you a good sailor, Mrs. Williams ? If
I may be a judge on so short an accpiaintance, you
look none the worse, at all events.”


“ Thanks to the calm weather, and being naturally
always well at sea, I did not suffer at all, but Miss
Chapman felt it very much. Let me introduce you.
What are the guns firing for ? ” went on Ethel, “they
sound quite grand. Do they see some ship in the
offing 1 why are they firing ? ”
“ To do all honour to Mr. and Mrs. ’Williams,” said
the major, as he bowed once more to Ethel.
“ Oh, how kind, how thoughtful' ” said she, “ How
much Ralph must be respected! ” And she wished
her father could hear the booming guns.
“ Will you come in ? ” said Mrs. Santley, “ you must
be tired standing here; Miss Chapman, too, needs
some refreshment; and, Major Blakeney, remember
we expect you up in the evening, with Isabel.”
And thus this kind woman led Ethel in and made
her feel at home instantly, with that true and un-
ostentatious hospitality for which Australia is so far-
famed.
And now I think it is time that I described the
party assembled in the sitting-room. The drawing-
room was not yet built, though in process of erection,
therefore the one room at present had a very snug,
cosy look. Pictures covering the walls, a few choice
ornaments on the mantelpiece, copies ot antique Etrus-
can vases, and specimens of Bohemian glass; a book-
case on one side, in a recess, contained a good selection
of favourite authors, all orthodox, in the strictest sense
of the word; sofas, easy chairs, and a piano. The size
was not large, and one couldn’t help wishing that the
square mahogany dining-table could have been out of
the way, to give more room to move about, cross over
and talk to somebody else on the opposite side
without brushing past anyone in your way, with
the chance of catching the tablecloth and giving it
5


an ugly twist. But these little nothings would all
be rectified in time.
Meanwhile everything was most comfortable, and
far beyond Ethel's expectations. Ralph had been so
wise as never to have exaggerated any descriptions to
her, rather drawing the worst side of the picture,
knowing that he or she who expects little or nothing
will not be disappointed.
Mrs. Santley sat working—making children’s frocks,
I think. She was a very young and pretty woman,
with almost a pure Grecian cast of face, and large blue
eves. Her voice was too deep and did not accord
with her otherwise sweet expression when she spoke
or smiled ; in repose there was a hardness which would
have spoiled the tout ensemble; but then she was so
young. Married at seventeen, she was barely twenty-
one now, the mother of two children, a girl and boy,
who were rather a source of trouble to her, although
she loved them dearly; but having to act nurse as
well, she sometimes saw more of their merry gambols,
heard more of their shouts at play, or infantine
squabbles, than at all times was pleasant. For say
what you will about the delights of bringing up your
own children, its many advantages, give me a good
respectable nurse, and pay her well, to listen to all the
extra squallings, attend to all their various wants,
and settle their incessant little disputes ; so that when
mamma comes into the nursery or they go over to
mamma, she is ever welcome to their little hearts
and they delight in her presence ; whereas if they are
always with her, and they constantly hear “Don’t do
this,” “ Now good children don’t do that: how naughty
you are! ” and the never-ceasing list of little reproofs
of which the darlings always appear to be in constant
need, mamma, instead of a wonder of love and delight,


becomes rather a terror to their little thoughts. But
of course in this new country, nurses at that time
were very rare luxuries, and Mrs. Santley would only
too gladly have got one if she could have been found,
and had already begun to envy Ethel the treasure she
possessed in Jessie.
Mr. Santley was a man of middle height, with
strongly marked and finely cut features, such as one
sees standing out in bold relief on well wrought
canvas. Thoughtful and reserved, as his countenance
told, he could nevertheless be a very genial com-
panion on topics which interested him, and liked to
throw off the harness and trammels of constant daily
accounts, letters, and mercantile’ arrangements, and go
down to the major’s, to discuss the topics of the day
with him—the new works, periodicals, and reviews,
come out by the last mail, which was not then so
regular and often as now, though the first steamers
had just then begun to undertake the monthly service
between Europe and the Australian colonies. Mr.
Santley at that time was progressing well in the
world; he supplied the surrounding settlers for hun-
dreds of miles with stores, from a packet of pins to a
silk dress, a cask of vinegar to the best sparkling
Burgundy, or a ton of flour to the finest biscuits from
Huntley and Palmer’s. The drays arrived with team
after team of oxen, heavily laden with bales of wool from
the various stations, many a hundred and twenty to
a hundred and fifty miles inland; and after discharg-
ing their load, returned, bearing the year’s supplies to
the several housekeepers. To make out a list for a
year was no joke, and required both experience and
forethought. The several trips, as they were called,
took from a month to six weeks, according to the state
of the roads, if such they could be called—tracks would


be a better term ; the time also depended upon whether
the bullocks were lost or not, and whether in crossing
the Glue Pot (an awful swamp, quite deservedly
named) they got bogged, which if they got down
early was almost sure to be the case. This Slough of
Despond was in the middle of a flat extending for
miles, on the surface of which lie in thousands small
stones, of various sizes but all rounded like biscuits,
and lying one upon the other—most curious forma-
tions ; hence it is, I believe, still called the Biscuit Flat.
Not pretending to be scientific in the very least, I
know nothing of the cause of these singular stones.
O O
I have crossed it many times, but never with anyone
who could enlighten me on the subject, always in
company with my children, who insisted on picking
some up, or with cheery, but slightly wayworn com-
panions, who, like myself, were only too rejoiced to
get over the desolate, jolting, never-ending plain, and
have done with it; and all those who have traversed
the same ground will testify to their own feelings as
being much like my own when similarly situated.
The question was once introduced amongst a party
of travellers, as to whether Australia was the oldest
or newest country in the world, when a lady naively
remarked, that she thought it must be the oldest, for
it looked like the work of a ’prentice hand ! That
lady, I think, must have been across that very flat
and through the dreadful dismal swamp on the way
to Mount Gambler.
Well, we have gone a long way from the party as-
sembled in Mrs. Santley’s cheerful sitting-room. I have
not described the major or his pretty daughter, who had
walked up, as previously arranged, to spend the even-
ing. The major was of middle height, slim, and up-
right as the day (the sergeant pronounced his drill


complete); his hair was—you know the colour I
mean—it had been black, but was turning with years
to that shade which so often remains until the beau-
tiful, venerable snows of very advanced life leave
nothing to be surpassed in its pure whiteness. I love
white hair, and I love the aged—love to listen while
they tell of their own day (some, but only very few,
ever allow that ours is equal to it), love to tend and
care for them when they are cheery and still bright,
and when they are not, make allowance for an ache or
twinge, or passing sorrowful remembrance, called up,
as I have quoted before from Byron’s lovely lines, by
sound or perfume, and trying to remember that if I
live I shall be like them, only most likely, indeed, not
half so nice. Well, the major’s hair was iron-gray;
(Dear me, what a 'time I have taken to tell it!) he
wore a thick moustache and long beard; a long thin
aquiline nose, keen dark-grey ejms which shone out
from beneath bushy eyebrows, a well-formed, though
perhaps little undecided, mouth, and rows of teeth as
sound as in his earliest youth. He was one of those
men who never seem to grow old, entering into all
the tastes and pursuits of young people, and especially
his own children, as one of themselves; passionately
fond of music, reading, flowers (as I have hinted as
we passed his garden), and a lover of art in all its
varied forms. It is needless after this to say that he
was a most agreeable companion, and became through
life to Ethel one of her sincerest and truest friends.
His daughter, the only one of his large family now
present, was small of stature but exquisitely formed
and with dark waving hair and clear bright com-
plexion, was a very good specimen of Australia s
daughters, and proved that the warm climate need
not be accused of blanching the roses from the cheeks.


Ethel was asked to sing, which she did at once most
willingly, anxious to please her newly-made acquaint-
ances. She had scarcely been taught at all, having
had only a few lessons at most, but having heard good
music and with a natural taste, true ear, and soft clear
voice, she generally succeeded in giving pleasure, and
with practice in after years improved a good deal.
Isabel Blakeney was not musical, not from want of
appreciation but from the lack of opportunity to bring
it out; therefore after a few songs from Ethel, the
conversation turned chiefly on Ralph Williams’ trip
home, the voyages, travels, and many excellent stories
he had to tell, which kept them all in much merri-
ment, until the servant appeared with glasses, cake,
wine, and a bright kettle of boiling water wherewith
to make the toddy. It was the fashion here to dine
early, but whether dinner were at seven or two, it
appeared to make very little difference—glasses, wine,
and toddy came at ten all the same, and everyone took
some. And then, after a little more chat and some
last capital jokes from Ralph, who was in his element,
the ladies retired, Isabel with them, and chatted in Mrs.
Santley’s rooi»until the major was ready to walk home.
I have not mentioned Miss Chapman, because she
was very tired and had gone to rest early in the even-
ing. Ethel, went to her bed with a favourable im-
pression of Bush people, at all events, and a wish, as
she thought of her father, that he could see the major,
of whom she knew he would approve, and be glad
that she had found such a friend—for friend she knew
he would be, although she had only known him a few
hours. What a freemasonry there is amongst those
who have been born and brought up alike ! they meet
on the same footing everywhere, be it in a London
drawing-room or in an Australian wild.


They stayed here a whole week. Ralph, who was
passionately fond of fishing, induced Mrs. Santley and
Ethel to go with him; also the major, Isabel, and her
youngest sister, who was most eager to be one of the
party. There were still several hours before dark, and
so, well prepared with lines, fish-hooks and baits, the
merry party embarked in a small boat, and after row-
ing some distance out in the Bay, were moored to a
buoy, when Ralph began to distribute the tackle, and
everyone watched eagerly for a nibble. They all de-
clared it was charming, and proposed that Ethel should
sing, which she did, and still everyone declared it was
delightful. Ralph was successful, and hauled up several
small fiat-heads, gar fish, and what he called salmon :
of course they were nothing of the kind, but an excel-
lent little fish more like a fresh herring. Ralph was
excited beyond everything; but the ladies seemed to
have subsided. You rnaj* be an excellent sailor, but
being moored to a buoy is a very trying position;
and although the water may be calm and almost un-
ruffled, still the heavy swell as the waves roll onwards
to the shore, and the swinging of the boat back to
its moorings preparatory to another coming up, is
not the most delightful sensation, though custom or
habit is everything everywhere. Thus they became
more and more silent, paler and paler, until a desert
island or any other wretched place, as long as it
was only terra jirma, would be heaven to this, they
all thought, though no one spoke; little Minnie
Blakeney was the first to sigh and tell her sister
quietly, she didn’t like fishing, and couldn’t she go
home ? So Isabel wrapped her up in a rug and laid
her down in the boat. Ethel asked Ralph how long
he meant to be.
“ Why, you don’t mean to say you are tired ? ” said


Ralph, pulling away at a line where he thought
he had caught a fine noncalore, —-a fish which when in
season is excellent, resembling cod a good deal.
" Oh, yes, Ralph; of course it has been very nice
and pleasant, but still we should like to get to
shore.”
“Tut! nonsense! why the sun isn’t down yet —just
the very time for sport,” went on Ralph, as he hooked
a frightful-looking bait on to his line and threw it
O O
over the side.
Ethel looked at the sun, which was ebbing low, and
' O'
turning to Isabel said, —
“ It gets dark very soon after sunset in this country,
doesn’t it ? ”
“ Isabel smiled assent —a very sickly smile it was —
and they all waited patiently. At last the great fisher-
man was satisfied, and to the great relief of everybody
excepting himself, they rowed to shore.
“Humph ! ” ejaculated the major with a smile, as he
helped Ethel to alight. “ What do you think of our
seaside recreations, Mrs. Williams ?. ”
“ I hope to enjoy the result more than the actual
pleasure,” laughed Ethel as she sprang on shore. “Do
you think the fish of these seas ecpal to our own ? ”
“I cannot say that I do,” replied the major; “we
have nothing to come up to an English sole or a good
mackerel, not to speak of salmon ; we want rivers for
that, the lack of them is one of the great drawbacks to
this country. They might succeed in introducing them
to Tasmania, and I shouldn’t wonder, now that steamers
are beginning to come out, if some of our scientific
men endeavour to accomplish it; but I fear it will be
a long time before we see any of it, saving in tins,
and I confess to be rather tired of the substitute.
But here we are at my home, and I trust you will not


think me inhospitable when I do not ask you in, but
really we are all so tired and altogether uncomfortable
that I am sure a quiet rest will be the most sensible
thing.”
“ Fish oh ! fish oh ! ” rang up from the beach, “ all
alive, all alive ! ”
“There is your irrepressible husband,” laughed the
major; “ the most enthusiastic sportsman in the whole
district. Good evening.”
“ Ralph is going to try the drag to-morrow, I be-
lieve, ” said Ethel; “ perhaps you’ll feel inclined for a
drive ? We will call for you.”
“I shall be most happy,” and the major lifted his
hat, and turned into the garden, whilst Ethel ran up
to the Santleys’, anxious to see her little babe.
The morning came bright, clear, and beautiful as
are so many days in that almost perfect climate,
where from March to the middle of May there is a
season .which can be likened only to the Indian
summer we hear spoken of in Canada—at least to nn'-
mind it was always associated with it, —and you might
quite calculate on many consecutive weeks of fine
cloudless days, the vault of heaven azure as in Italy,
and the air balmy and delicious, all the hot north
winds gone, the first rains over, and the winter storms
still far away.
“ Ralph,” said Ethel, as they walked in tire garden
whilst he smoked his morning pipe after breakfast
(for he had a notion it wasn’t good to take one before),
“ are you going to try the horses to-day ? because if you
are, I said we would call for Major Blakeney and his
daughter.”
“ I mean to do so if the men have the drag put
together. I’ll just go down and see. Put on your hat,
Ethel; you might as well come wuth me. It will be


ready by the afternoon, and I’ll drive you round the
lakes.”
They turned into a little shop, kept by a poor
woman whose husband had deserted her, but who
came every now and then, like the brute that he was,
to take her hard earned gains; however, he hadn’t
been heard of for a long time now, and no doubt she
never wished to see him again. There were a few
dresses, shawls, ribbons, and other nick-nacks, and
a bonnet which might have come out of the ark,
or been worn by the natives of a prehistoric age,
for any pretension that it possessed to the fashion
then; but it gave great satisfaction to its present
owner, who hoped on an earl}- occasion to pack it
up carefully, and send it by one of the drays, as the
last new style, to some rich shepherd or carter’s
wife. Ethel, amused at the air with which she turned
it round for inspection and said, “Not so bad, m’m,
is it ? ” assented with a smiling nod, and her eyes
fixed themselves on a plateful of rosj r apples which
stood on tile little counter. take one, m’m;
they are the first we have seen in these parts —
brought me by a friend from the Bush.” When Ethel
heard this, she did not like to be so greedy, but the
kind woman pressed her so much that at last she
couldn’t resist; and not all the melons, water melons
bananas and bog nuts that she had tasted in this
land of fruit could equal that rosy cheeked English
pippin, to her taste. And so, as they made their way
over to the sheds, Ralph proposed bite for bite of
the rare delicacy, and Ethel assented—took hers first,
then Ralph his, and when the apple was restored to her
it was more than half gone; she kept the rest, laughing,
and declaring that as it never was any use making
two bites of a cherry, she saw it applied to apples


as well. They were very happy and very silly, these
two, as I need .scarcely remark. In the afternoon
np drew Ralph in great style, with four horses and
the new drag he had brought with him from England.
The seats were wide enough to hold three, though in
front the driving box would render the go-between
O O
as uncomfortable as those sort of people generally
are—a most unenviable position, up on that side and
clown on this, no safe hold anywhere, and the chance
of alighting on the hard iron bar, laughed at by both,
when the only chance will be to laugh and bear.
However, with Ralph on the driving box, Ethel by
his side, Major Blakeney and his daughter with Mrs.
Santley behind, thej 7 set out at a goodly pace. The
horses were very fresh, and Ralph a fast and very
reckless driver. Over the grassy mounds, swinging
here and there quite regardless of springs, away sped
the party, Ralph occasionally cautioning Ethel to
hold on in case she might he jerked out; the other
three in the back found safety in numbers, as is often
the case. They passed several pretty little lakes
close b} 7 the road side—a mere track made by the
drags, with many ruts and much dust; hut ruts were
nothing—-you dashed in and out again, and went on
as before. One or two of the lakes looked white as
snow, quite dry and covered with salt, which gave
them a most singular appearance to Ethel, who had
never seen anything of the kind before. Ralph told
her this was the salt they used for curing beef on the
station. Of course they didn’t send such a distance for
it, as there were many similar lakes much larger, and
where the salt urns much better. These were the first
primitive days; afterwards it was cheaper to buy the im-
ported salt than to employ men to collect it off the lakes.
Here a huge tussock of long reedy grass on one side,


and now on the other a fallen limb of a tree or stump,
which either gave way or not as the case might he,
of strength to resist and repel such an unwarrant-
able assault, now a huge stone, and occasionally when
Ralph wasn’t heeding, a large tree, grazed the wheel
only turning up a very little way, just skinning the
bark and giving Ethel’s head a slight knock; but
nothing was anything ; they were all determined to
enjoy themselves and the country, and whatever came
in their way must get out of it. There were the wild
turkeys, bold birds revelling on the sweet grass, which
had come up fresh and most beautifully green after
the rains ; there they were, enjoying the roasted grass-
hoppers and other insects which had fallen victims
to the summer fires ; —lovely birds, lovely to look at,
and still better to eat, properly dressed as game, with
bread sauce and fried bread crumbs ; very few can
surpass them. Well they knew that Ralph had no
gun; sly birds, they saw he had enough to do with
his team, so they strutted along, heads and necks
erect, and took a look at Ethel. All along the shelly
bank of tire large lake, with stony ranges looking
beautifully blue in the distance; all along where the
wattles dip down to the water’s edge, and a curious
sage-coloured shrub called the tea tree mingles with
them; where the wild sarsaparilla twines itself in and
out and hangs in graceful tendrils from the boughs,
and the slender clematis with its lovely green and
soft white downy seeds, ready for the first wfinds to
scatter them away, find some sunny shelter close to
and beneath a protecting bush, where they wall come
up and in a little space of time climb away as their
parent stem before them, until they are sprinkled
all over the hills, and stony rises adding their grace
to the pretty scene; where the shells of countless


myriads of fish lie scattered that lived in these now
grassy plains when the waves rolled over them, with
oyster shells everywhere (pity there are none to be had
now). Away they dash, until at a sort of green road
between the two lakes they turn off, and after a mile
or two begin to ascend the steep and rocky hills on
the other side, covered with trees, underwood, and
ferns. The stones were as a rule invisible, as also
the trunks of trees lying hidden beneath the matted
foliage. There wasn’t much time for observing the
numerous little flowers and shrubs, but now and then
Ethel would espy one, and turning to the major, ask
its name.
“ Dear me, how lovely !” cried she. “ Oh, how I
wish ”
“Heads! heads!” cried Ralph, as he dashed under
the boughs of a feathery oak, or, what was much worse,
a great stiff hideous old honeysuckle, from which all
the honey had departed many an age ago, and left
nothing but the dry, dead, empty cones of the once
tempting blossom. Every one bowed, bobbed then-
heads down nearlj r to their knees; the horses scrambled
up—l am sure they never knew how, any more than
we did—and at last gained a somewhat level spot,
where Ralph actually drew up to let Ethel see the
view, which was certainly very pretty: you saw the
two lakes beneath you, the hills on the right, and away
to the horizon the unbounded plains; the nearest lake
dotted with small well wooded islands, fine places for
the wild geese, swans, and clucks to make their nests
in the long reeds which grew close around. It was
literally black Avith birds, which were tame from being
unmolested. How gracefully beautiful the swans
looked as they glided along, their dark, slenderly
arched necks and red beaks standing out in relief


against the evening sky, the glorious golden light
thrown over the prospect as the sun began to dip in
the west, and the clouds and sky to assume the varied
tints which must be seen to be realized.
“By Jove, it’s getting late, —we must get on,” said
Ralph, gathering the reins up and untying the whip-
cord, just to give the leaders a start. It was down
hill now, over the timber and over the stones —which
was the worst Ethel didn’t know; almost paralysed
with fear, she daren’t express it, but " Oh, Ralph ! ”
would jerk itself out involuntarily now and then, when
an extra shock shook her beyond silent endurance.
She hadn’t learnt to balance herself then: experience
teaches so many things; and to have a good firm
footing in the mat, and an equally firm grip of the bar
of the seat, will break many a severe jolt. At last,
going full tilt down the steep, Ralph suddenly reined
up, pulled the horses back all in a ruck.
“What is it, Williams?” said the major, from behind;
“ anything wrong with the winkers, eh ? Can I help ?”
“ Stay where you are, stay where you are,” replied
Ralph; “ it’s rather an awkward place, but leave it to
me, I’ll manage ; don’t stir.”
But the major thought he would just stir and have
a look at this difficulty, which even Ralph Williams
hesitated to face, and as he looked he at once decided
not to stay where he was; he had a regard, like all
sensible people, for his own neck, and as a duty he
owed to himself and his family he did get out, and,
alas! alighted in the midst of a frightfully prickly
shrub, out of which he bounded like an india-rubber
ball, and small blame to him.
"Now, Mrs. Williams, if I only could help you
down,” said the kind-hearted major, as he saw poor
little Ethel’s face of frightened agony.


“ Stay where you are, Ethel,” said Ralph.
" Oh, no, thank yon, Major Blakeney,” she replied,
longing all the time to jump out, only seeing at a
glance that if she did so she must inevitably send the
poor gentleman into the bush again. “ Oh, no, thank
you, I’ll bear it.” And hiding her face in her hands
she curled herself round to where Mrs. Santley and
Isabel were, who were silently sitting waiting
to see what would come of it all. Quietly, gently, side-
ways, and all but over, and they were down, the four
wheels positively in their places, the four horses, if
they could have spoken, as much surprised as those
in the drag, all safe and sound as the major himself,
and how it was ever done will never be known: a
clear drop of three feet if an inch—the leaders leapt
it, that’s all I know. The sun was sinking, and the
twilight was but short.
“ Get in, Major,” said Ralph, as they proceeded down
the rocky pitch, with the wheels tied together one
side, having no break; and once in the plain they flew
along as hard as the four bays could lay legs to the
ground, until just outside the little township they
came in, trotting quietly, as if nothing had happened,
and pulled up at the major’s gate.
" Safe and sound, Major,” said Ralph, as they
alighted. ■' Have another turn to-morrow ? ”
“Not to-morrow, I think,” replied the major quietly,
and looking up at Ethel with a smile. “No, Williams,
not to-morrow. Humph ! All’s well that ends well.
Mrs. Williams by to-morrow will, I trust, be rested,
when I hope to have the pleasure of seeing you all in
the evening, and hearing some more songs.”
‘"Wait for the waggon,’ I think it will be,” laugher*
Ethel. “ I would rather go up countiy in a dray ; ifc
would be slow, but sure.”


“ Tut! nonsense! Ethel, I am ashamed of you for a
coward,” said Ralph.
“Not upon instinct then, Ralph,” she quickly re-
torted, “ which is thought to he a very clever thing;
for had my instinct told me where I was going I
should have stayed at home.”
“ Ah, Ira! you’ve got to follow me, my little lady,
and trust Ralph to take care of his wife.” Then he
drove up to the Santleys’, gave the reins to Ethel to
hold, whilst he jumped down to help Mrs. Santley,
who had to stand on the top of the high wheel and
let herself gently into Ralph’s open arms; there was
no other alternative, the tires were all over mud:
such things as leather covers to put on whilst ladies
stepped or climbed in and out (according to the height
of the carriage) were quite rmthought of, and as for
the step, pray in a four-wheeled double-seated trap of
any sort, when was the one behind of any use, ex-
cepting to catch your skirts and turn them all up the
wrong way ?
Now that the strength of the drag had been
well tried, and the springs had in every way proved
themselves fit for the long journey before them,
Ralph bid Ethel make every preparation to start in a
day or so, as he was naturally anxious to get home
and to work again. So the next afternoon being the
last, they went for a ramble along the shore, Ethel
delighted with the seaweeds of exquisite colours and
forms, shading from dark to light in green, crimson,
and brown, with every tint that it is possible to
imagine. The shells were not good, the coast being too
rocky, and consequently breaking them; some pretty
specimens had, however, been collected by Major
Blakeney and his daughters, but at best they are
but small. Every now and their a large flat open


shell would be lying on the beach, lined with a kind
of mother-of-pearl, the habitation of the mutton fish,
said to be veiy good eating, but I never tried it. The
rocks were covered with mussels of various sizes, but for
the most part very small. As they strolled along they
came upon beautiful caves, forming little bays, where
they sat on summer evenings, reading and enjoj’ing
the gentle ripple of the waves as they advanced or
receded, according to the tide ; at low water, flat rocks
extended a good way out, leaving little pools, or ponds,
where a few shrimps might be caught, and where
cuttle fish lurked, hidden away under the crevices,
coming out occasionally to seize their prey, and dis-
colouring the water with the dark sepia they eject to
conceal themselves when teased or attacked. The
sea gulls watching for fish, or an occasional musk
duck swimming past, the only living things to be
seen save themselves, and a few little land snipe
running along, seeking their daily food. The star-
fish, with its scarlet orange hues, and the shining
jelly fish, brightened these clear shallows, where the
seaweed floated about in its native element, and grace-
fully spread out its delicate branches on the water. T
didn’t know then that the star-fish has the power of
opening the shells of oysters, and devouring the much
prized contents, reminding one strongly of certain
professional bipeds who also love oysters, and are
proverbial for taking the plump, satisfying, and
nourishing morsels, preferring them living, but not
objecting to them scalloped or fried; oysters they
love, and oysters they take, leaving their clients the
shells, which are very unsatisfactory and hard to
digest, the more so when we remember that the
dainty might have been our own. Moral lesson on the
star-fish: never go to law if you can help it. The
6


caves of winch I speak, formed natural dressing-rooms
for ladies tempted to bathe, and in one place especially,
with a boundary of rocks which kept out the sharks,
it was quite safe, and sufficiently wide and deep to
allow of a good plunge and swim. Sharks abound,
and some of great size ; also a fish called the ray,
which is very poisonous if its sting wounds. Standing
on the rocky promontory which juts out a good way
beyond the coast line, the sea breaks with great force
against the jagged shore, and every now and then
sends up a large jet of water, which falls in graceful
spray around, through large holes, up which it forces
itself with a roar of defiance, encroaching by slow
degrees, and forcing the rocks to sever. Looking to
the right across the hay, j t ou see a cluster of low rocks
standing out in the form of an island and table-land,
■washed into the most fantastic shapes; and to the
left, bold arches and pinnacles, nearer the shore, over
which the spray dashes in the most glorious manner,
showing that the land is gradually receding. Away
to the south lay the broad Pacific, in all the splendour
of the evening light cast by the setting sun; not a sail
to be seen far as the eye could reach, but once a fort-
night or so a small steamer might be seen in the offing,
When the ball at the flagstaff ran up and answered
her signal, and the little township was all excitement,
preparing to unload the stores she brought, and reload-
ing her with wool, destined for the London markets,
transhipped into larger vessels in Melbourne. Turn-
ing homewards as the evening closed in, what a lovely
shade was cast over the whole scene, a hue of mellowed,
softest pink, which the Major told Ethel was in its
character quite Arabian. How still, how beautiful it
was! Ethel could understand why the settlers came
here for a change from the heated interior for a few


weeks in summer. It was almost always cool, the sea
breeze every evening came up, and a walk was always
possible along the shore; and many and many an
evening in succeeding years did Ethel pace up and
down with her old friend, both, it must be confessed,
weary enough of the monotony and exile from the
world, which for some time, whilst the freshness and
romance last, is well enough, giving one ample scope
for reading, thought, and contemplation, but apt to
become altogether too monotonous after a time, with
a tendency to make one nervous, shy, awkward, and
reserved at first when once more restored to the
society to which we were accustomed in our youth;
and yet strengthening the character, giving it a power
and self-possession (when the shyness has worn off)
which it otherwise might not have acquired. Of
course life in the backwoods, hush, or prairies, what-
ever it may be called, has many drawbacks, but it
also has many pleasures; and Ethel’s will, I hope,
show how many are capable of being realized by those
who quietly settle there, and for many years at any
rate make it their home.
To describe the evening Ethel spent at the major’s
would be but a repetition of that passed at the
Santleys’, with the exception that this was a larger
house, and possessed a well-proportioned drawing-
room, which was a great advantage; here might also
be seen the proofs of early culture in groups of
statuary of the ancients, copied in Parian marble,
classic books and poets —Shakspeare, Shelley, Keats
here found their home, together with all the most
enlightened works of science and periodicals of the
day. Amongst these, his magisterial duties, and his
little conservatory, the major contrived to while away
the years of exile. His flowers were the finest, his


plants the rarest, and his children the loveliest and
best in all the district round. Only the mother’s pre-
sence was wanting, and she, alas ! was in her grave,
in the little cemetery which lay buried amongst the
hills at no great distance from the township. At this
time there was no church, so the major held service
every Sunday morning in the Court-house, when he
read the usual services appointed by the Church of
England, and a short sermon written by some wise
and clever man, who knew better than to weary his
congregation with longwinded discourses, during which
he must repeat many things again and again.
“Now, Ethel, jump up,” said Ralph, from the box,
where he held the reins in readiness to start; and
Ethel, bidding adieu to the little knot of kind friends
assembled at the gate (first stopping to see if Jessie
and baby were safely seated in the back), putting one
foot on the axle and springing in, happily waving
and kissing her hand to them, was oft to her forest
home.
“You are going to be spoiled,” said Mrs. Santley.
“ A safe journey i ”
CHAPTER VIII.
THROUGH THE FORESTS.
They only drove about twelve or fourteen miles
that afternoon, and along the same road they had
taken the memorable day of Ethel’s first drive. The
limestone ridge, though well-wooded and grassed, was
worse than anything she had yet endured in the way


of jolting; but the stage was very short, and the track
led through avenues of trees and low lovely acacias,
which being autumn were not in bloom, but their
blight green foliage contrasted well with the more
sage-like shade of the gums. The little inn was built
of stone and stood at the foot of the ridge, and on the
edge of a large lake or huge swamp many miles in
circumference. Mutton chops, ham and eggs, tea and
bottled ale, with not very good bread, formed the
repast, and as there was nothing very amusing to
tempt anyone to sit up, and a long day’s journey was
before them, they all sought their curious little pigeon-
holes called bedrooms early, and found them clean and
comfortable. Ethel awoke refreshed, and ready for an
early start. As she stood at the inn door, looking at the
strange scene, a magpie warbled its full melodious note
from a gum tree near, quickly answered by another,
not far off; and her ears drank in with rapture the
deep musical notes: it seemed as though they bid her
welcome to their wild shade. The air was balmy as on
some rare summer’s day in England, and her heart
was full of a new and exquisite pleasure in each fresh
sound, fresh flower, tree, or shrub, that either fell upon
her ear or met her gaze. The drag stood ready before
the door. The breakfast, which was supper repeated —
mutton chops, eggs, ham, tea—was served and quickly
eaten; the men put the wheelers in, and waited to
hook on the leaders until all were seated, when, fresh
from the stables, they started off—they had sixty
miles to run. They crossed the dreadful flats I have
before mentioned, and sandy barren rocky rises where
little grass grows and what there is of the poorest
kind, and about thirty miles ahead came upon lovely
open, finely timbered, well grassed, level ground,
where they halted near a large waterhole for a couple


of hours, to rest and feed the horses and have
luncheon. A bright fire was soon made with fallen
boughs and dead leaves, the water was boiled in the
quart pot, to which the tea was added, the little bright
pannikins were ranged ready to be filled, the sand-
wiches, cold duck and bread spread out on a log, rugs
laid down to sit on, baby wrapt in her little shawl
crowing on the ground, the parrots chattering in the
branches overhead, the frogs croaking in the swamp,
insects humming and buzzing everywhere, and the
mosquitoes revelling on poor Ethel’s hands and fore-
head ; but nevertheless she was enjoying it all im-
mensely—the sounds of life everywhere, and yet the
interminable solitudes. They had travelled for miles
and miles, and no sound of human voices save their
own had she heard; not even a single black had they
seen, though the charred stumps of trees blackened by
Bush fires had often made her think she saw them
moving in the distance, and the country looked so like
an English park that, save for the untidy scattered
limbs and fallen trees, she expected to come upon
gates leading up to some fine house or handsome
country seat. But the only house she had passed was
a shepherd’s slab hut, with bark roof and the smallest
excuse for a chimney that the builder’s time had
permitted to be erected ; there it stood, the sole human
habitation within miles, and there the shepherd lived
solitary, for weeks at a time seeing no one, speaking
to no one, watching his sheep, and from long acquaint-
ance with them knew their faces to be different to one
another, even as ours are; his dog his only friend
and companion. Sunrise saw him lead out his flock,
noon saw them all camped in some shady spot selected
by the sheep, sunset saw them in the fold, and night
might sometimes find him out scaring away the 'wild


dogs that would prowl around, attack and destroy
the helpless lambs and mothers, and retreat with
dismal howls of rage and disappointment into the
wild woods from whence they came. Ralph, after
seeing that the horses were fed and watered, joined
the happy luncheon party, and Jessie hastened to Avaib
on him and seemed as pleased as her young mistress.
Her lamentations were loud and long at the waste of
good wood, thinking of the many hearths and hearts it
would cheer, could she hut transport it to her High-
land home. Ralph, well refreshed, and taking a long
draught of the quart-pot tea, pronounced that nothing
was ever like it made in teapots, and Ethel thought it
excellent, excepting that the tea-leaves were trouble-
some. Then Ralph lit his pipe and stretched himself
out on the grass, enjoying the rest; by-and-bye, pulling
his hat over his eyes, was soon fast asleep. Ethel,
with Jessie and baby, strolling about, came upon the
loveliest little creeper, with bright scarlet, pea-shaped
blossom (as nearly all the Australian flowers are),
several on a stem, trailing along a little slope at the
foot of a large gum, making the spot exquisitely
bright; and away in the heath they found the little
native fuchsia; (unfortunately, I do not know the
botanical names ;) it was nestling in the shade under a
scrubby bush, larger than ordinary fuchsia blossom,
and resembling more the bell of a campanula, red, with
shaded yellow tips; and from the gum trees they
noticed a kind of mistletoe hanging, with small red
blossoms—a species of epiphyte, I believe, but not to
be compared to those we read of in South American
forests. The air was sweet with the blossoms of tire
gum—feathery yellow flowers; sometimes also a faint
pink. Ralph’s sleep was soon over, and he was
preparing to put the horses to, so they gathered up


the pannikins, quart pots, bread, etc., leaving the hones
to he speedily devoured, or the flesh on them, by the
swarms of ants, which were running about busily in
all directions. As they drove along Ethel saw the
native companions, always in pairs, as their name will
tell—tall grey birds, a large species of crane, I should
suppose, with red about the head ; she watched them
dance to each other, bowing their long necks, and
lightly hopping about in the most amusing manner.
Now and then one or two kangaroos would start and
hop away to a short distance, disturbed whilst feed-
ing; they were neither so numerous nor so wild as
they afterwards became, and would turn round with
pricked ears, sitting up with their two short front
paws hanging down, and their pretty heads erect,
watching and listening to the unwonted sounds of
wheels and horses’ hoofs. They were less troublesome
then because the blacks had not died out, and hunted
them for food; when the former took to preferring
mutton, the latter increased to such an extent that it
became an absolute necessity to hunt them down, as
they ate so much grass from the sheep. But I shall
tell of kangaroo hunts another time. They are not
bad eating, but want, like most other things—in fact,
everything —good cooking to make them palatable,
and the tail makes excellent soup. And now in the
distance appeared low hills and extensive plains
without any timber, exquisitely green and luxuriant;
and nestling at the foot of one, rose the grey curling
smoke of household fires. The huge trees were casting
their long shadows over the scene as the sun sank
low in the west, the distant bark of dogs as one after
another heard afar the tramp of the horses as they all
but galloped over the now smooth and even turf, the
crack of the stockwhips as the tired men returned


home, bringing with them the cows and calves; the
latter to be put in the pens until the morning, when
after their mothers had given the daily supply of milk
the poor little thirsty creatures were allowed to take
their breakfast and go out to the green pastures until
the evening, when they were again shut up to wait
quietly for the happy morrow. It taught them
patience ; everyone learns that in the Bush more than
anywhere else; so did the calves, and became in their
turn long-suffering, much enduring mothers. As they
approached nearer, the place seemed astir with life and
bustle; men ran to the horses’ heads, the kind old host
came out to shake Ralph heartily by the hand, and
Mrs. Gore met Ethel at the garden-gate and led her
into the house. It was almost dark, so Ethel could
only see a low thatched cottage with deep verandah
covered with creepers, and entered a most comfortable
room where supper was spread, and the table appeared
laden with every delicacy that the over-abounding
hospitality of the house afforded. Ethel was glad
to refresh herself by changing her travelling dress,
before she rejoined the numerous family party as-
sembled round the cheerful wood fire* which blazed •
on the low white hearth and gave a glow of warmth
and brightness around; and when Mrs. Gore, introduc-
ing her to her many grown up sons and other guests,
made her sit down beside her, Ethel felt almost at
home amongst them at once. Accustomed from her
earliest childhood to mis with the world, she readily
accommodated herself to circumstances, and this was
one of the happiest points in her character.
The next day broke brightly as the last, and she
strolled out before breakfast to look about her. The
garden was luxuriant with many strange flowers and
shrubs; roses, still in bloom although late in autumn,


clustered up the poles of the verandah and up the
thatched roof; below, in the kitchen garden, were peach
trees, apricots, figs, apples, pears, plums, vines, goose-
berries, currants, which latter Mrs. Gore told her did-
not bear well—it was too hot; neither did raspberries
or strawberries flourish, from the same cause. Quince
trees laden with large golden fruit, still hanging and
perfuming the air, vegetables of every conceivable kind,
flourished in this fertile soil, black with richness. Mrs.
Gore, turning to the very curious cluster of huts, sheds,
yards, and haystacks in fair confusion around, said that
someday they purposed building a house, but from time
to time it was put off ; there was this fence to put up,
and that boundary to attend to, a well to sink at a dis-
tant out station, a waterhole to be cleared out, the
cultivation paddock to plough and sow with oats or hay
for the coming year, lambing to attend to, muster-
ing, shearing (fearful time, she said), then drafting and
mustering (or rather vice versa), the wool carting to be
done, then the hay cutting and stacking, and after
that a little rest, when the settlers mostly went to
town to arrange business matters, leaving for the most
part their wives and families at home, or sometimes
taking them to the Bay from whence Ethel had just
come, and where, although she had found it pleasant
enough (for all novelty has its charm), still it had draw-
backs also, and the accommodation for visitors at the
one inn was neither inviting or repaying for the
trouble of getting there through the weary sandy
deserts over which you had to jolt; the sea breeze was
very nice when you got there, -but on the whole “le
jeu ne vaut pas la chandelle.”
“ And so,” Mrs. Gore continued, “ you see, Mrs. Wil-
liams, that there isn’t much time for improving the home-
steads, so we add a room here and another hut there,


joined by a verandah, and think ourselves lucky, always
looking forward to what is to be; and meanwhile,
although tolerably comfortable, as you see, depriving
ourselves of a great deal, preparing for the future.”
Dear me, said Ethel, “ the work seems intermin-
able indeed; but I think I shall like the life verv
much, and Ralph says he will take me home in four
years,—that won’t be very long.”
“Four years seem long to look forward to, but little
when tis past,” replied Mrs. Gore; " and everyone
that comes to the country gives themselves that time ;
but I have been here more than twenty (not here, but
from Ireland that time), and I see no chance of re-
turning. In the first years the longing to see one’s
fiiends and yearning for home is very great, but it
wears off by degrees; the routine, stir and bustle of
station life gains upon you; it grows to be a home;
friends increase, your family grows up, and you take
root as it were.”
I feel I never could,” said Ethel, “although quite
sure of being very happy. I must go home by and
by; this will never be my real home. But thank you
so much for all your kindness. May I come and see
you again soon ? ”
We shall only be too delighted, I assure vou,”
returned Mrs. Gore; “but I shall get my husband
to drive me to Belanja as soon as I think you are a
little settled. By-the-bye, ask him to take you over
the plains; the high tussocks of grass will jolt you
terribly, and he is celebrated for driving fast.”
“Ah, indeed, you need not tell me,” laughed Ethel.
“ I have found that out to my cost already.”
There is a good road along the range six or seven
miles ahead, out the level ground is deceitful, for all
that it looks so smooth.”


Again they started, Ethel leaving her kind hostess
with regret: she had been so motherly and friendly to
the young girl, who naturally felt strange in a strange
•/ o o ' «/ o o
land, where all was so different to anything she had
ever seen before. Ralph paid little heed to Mrs.
Gore’s injunctions to drive quietly, and away they
went, bounding and tossing from one side to the
other mercilessly, baby sleeping soundly all the time,
rocked to sleep in her rough cradle, and only crying
when they stopped. When they gained the range and
the good road, it was very pretty. A lovely kind of
wattle (acacia) grows here, spreading out its branches
nearly to the ground, either dotted in clumps or stand-
ing singly at little distances in the well-grassed rises,
the sound of the horses’ feet, as they trotted along the
limestone track, was pleasant to hear after the miles
of turf or sand through and over which they had
pulled away almost noiselessly. Away to the left
spread out the plains, with the cattle feeding lazily,
or plunged in the swamps, cropping the sweet fresh
reeds; a blue haze hanging over the vast extent of
landscape, and the silence unbroken save for the dis-
tant low of the kine, chatter of parrots in gayest
plumage, which flew in flocks from tree to tree, or
the harsh caw of a red-tailed black macaw as he flew
slowly past. Here and there busy colonies of ants
(which everywhere infest the country) had thrown up
hillocks of excavations from their dwellings below,
and in eager pursuit of them their enemies, the ant-
eaters, birds about the size of thrushes, clad in very
dusty, dirty brown; they also fly about in flocks, and
devour ants by millions, —strange taste, as those well
know who have had the ill-luck to find one or more
hidden in some ripe, inviting fig or other fruit, or in
cake; for with every care it is next to impossible to


keep these little plagues away. One kind is very
warlike—the " bull-dog: ” sentinels stand on the watch,
outside the nest, and in case of attack 'disappear for a
moment and return with a whole army of the red-
headed monsters, and should they nip you, will give
you a remembrance of their sting never to be for-
gotten.
"What curious holes in the turf, Ralph, and the
road sounds hollow. Are there rabbits here ? I haven’t
seen any. How pretty they would look sporting about
on these hills.”
“ Those are wombat holes ; they live under ground,
feed on grass, and have fur something like kangaroos,
but more resemble badgers, and only come out at
night. There are still more curious creatures than
these to be found in the Gleuely river; we call them
Platypus ; they have bills like clucks, and a skin more
like an otter; it is a quadruped, with webbed feet.
Ornithorhynchus is its other name.”
As they drove on through this beautifully timbered
range, they met a very handsome man, well mounted,
and well got up in a kind of uniform, dark blue and
silver. He drew up, and so did Ralph, and exchanged
the hearty greetings of old friends who haven’t met for
years. He was of course introduced to Ethel, who
was charmed and delighted to make the acquaintance
of so gentlemanly a man.
“ Come up soon, Grafton, and we’ll have some shoot-
ing,” said Ralph. “ Can’t stop now, must trundle my
little wife home to-night, and w T e have to stop at
Nalang. They are in a pretty fuss there, I know,
for we were detained so long in the Bay that I only
sent Harrington on ahead just now, to say we should
be there to luncheon.”
"All right, old fellow,” said Grafton; “glad to see


you back again. Good morning, Mrs. Williams,” as he
bowed low and gracefully to Ethel.
“ Ralph, what a fine-looking man,” said Ethel.
“ Who is be ? "
“ Charles Grafton; he is head of the mounted police
in this district, and a fine corps he has trained them to
be. They were very different before he was put over
them, —a nice fellow, you’ll like him.”
“ There’s a hut at the foot of the bank, Ralph ; what
place is that ? ”
“ That’s no hut; it’s the Inn, where we must stop
an hour and rest the horses, and I must get Greaves
the blacksmith to look to Sultan’s shoes, I noticed
him going a little lame. He isn’t accustomed to be
shod, but for these long journeys we are obliged to
have it done.”
“ Are not the horses shod here, Ralph ? ”
“ They don’t want shoes for turf, and there’s no
Macadam from here to Melbourne, more’s the pity.
However, it will all come some day, before my head
has ceased to ache,” said Ralph.
“ Oh, Ralph, don’t mention headaches, —mine is
thumping; that last jolt over those fearful stones
coming down the hill shook me so fearfully; but I
daresay we can get a cup of tea here and some bread
and butter.”
So they alighted at the little primitive wooden inn,
and were shown into a room neatly lined with calico,
ceiling to match, with small pigeon holes (bedrooms)
leading from it, also very clean, and lined to correspond,
with small square windows —closely shut up, of course,
but which Jessie soon opened. We haven’t said much
about her, poor thing; she had borne all the jolting,
tossing, and roughing it without a murmur, excepting
when Ralph, turning out of the beaten track,' took


them over some fearful bog, or by dashing through a
large bough sent the dried and brittle wood flying in
the air, to alight now and then on Jessie’s devoted
head, or jumping up behind, give her a good thump in
the back; and then she thought more of the “ waste ”
and the bonnie fires it would make, than of the knock.
A woman came, and Ethel asked for a little hot
water, a cup of tea, and some bread and butter.
“ We can give you tea and bread, ma’am, jam, fish,
or mutton, but no butter.”
“ A cup of tea, if you please.” But when it came it
wasn’t good, and Ethel, like the Chinaman, left it, and
waited until Ralph returned, ready for another start
Opposite the Inn, but a good distance away (space
was nothing here), stood the blacksmith’s shop; that
and the Inn, and the store attached to it (which was
a small counterpart of Mr. Santley’s in the Bay), com-
pleted the township. I don’t think at that time there
was another habitation visible anywhere, excepting of
course the hut where Greaves lived. He was a tall,
dark, powerful man, with strong, brawny, sinewy
arms, and fine wiry frame, honest as the day. He
was very young then, but as the little place increased
in after years, he drove a thriving trade, was known
and respected far and wide.
“ Week in, week out, from morn till night
You could hear his bellows blow,
And hear him swing his heavy sledge,
With measured time and slow.”
Yes, the very personification of the Village Blacksmith
(immortalised as long as the great American poet’s
works shall last) was Greaves, and whenever Ethel
passed and saw him busy at his forge she recalled
the lines and the song; hut the chestnut tree was


wanting, which many a poor horse and horseman
knew to his cost, who stood in the broiling sun on a
hot summer’s day whilst the needful work was being
done.
The country after they left this was open and
well grassed, the timber chiefly gum, growing to an
immense height, and not attempting to branch out for
forty or fifty feet, when if a well-shaped, gracefully
formed specimen, the long boughs would droop down
and almost sweep the ground; others again, and for
the most part, sending their huge branches stiffly out,
covered with the pinnate leaves, waving in the wind,
casting very little shade—the foliage is too scanty for
that'; and here and there an immense dead bough
stretched its gaunt, bare nakedness from out the sur-
rounding life. Look at that little opossum peeping
out from a large hole high up in the old tree ahead,
what lovely dark, soft eyes he has, pricked ears, a
little delicate nose. See it run along the branch, with
orey coat of fur and long black tail, and disappear in
another hole, seeking its companions, for that tree is
full of them.
“ Ethel,” said Ralph, “ do you'notice the notches in
the bark of the gums every now and then ? Look at
this one as we pass—see, there they are ! Those are
made by the blacks as they mount the trees in search
of their game, and those opossums you raved about
just now are the game. They take their tomahawks
(which by-the-bye are most curious—you will see them
when we get home), and notch the hark sufficiently
to place one foot or toe firmly in it; then they
stretch up one arm, holding fast with the other and
the foot, and having made another notch, fit the other
foot in that, and so on up the tree; then they tap the
branch to see if it he hollow, and know at once


whether the poor little opossum is crouching inside
away from its enemy ; they probably then make the
hole a little larger, put in their arm, and drag out the
wretched little creature. You will see them often."
“ Oh, Ralph, the poor blacks ' I shall be so much
interested in them. Do they often come to the house?”
“ They are a lazy lot, and you mustn’t encourage
them too much about the place ; but they will be sure
to come in to see you. ‘ I took Billy from the tribe
when he was quite a little fellow; he went to Mel-
bourne with me once. I had him dressed as a page,
and when he came in and saw the people smile, he
drew himself up and said, “ What for all about white
fellow laugh ? ” and looked at them with disdain.
There is a native dignity about them, which is very
striking. Look, there are two mountain ducks on
the edge of that swamp —those birds with the white,
brown, and dark green plumage; pretty to look
at, but not good eating. By Jove! Smith’s lake is
covered Avith geese and ducks. Oh, Avhat a season
for sport! I’ll have a day here soon. I tell you
Avhat, Ethel, you’ll have to ride out with me, and
you shall drive the ducks and mark Avhere they
light.”
“ I am sure I could never tell, every place is exactly
alike ; and lioav can I see over the gums ?—there’s a
dead level everywhere.”
“ You’ll soon learn: the birds will fly round and
round, above the trees, and then you’ll mark where
they swoop doAvn ; —that Avill be another Avaterhole.”
“ What an ugly word that is, Ralph ; why don’t you
call them pools or ponds ? ”
“ I can’t tell you why they bear such a name, but
we never call them anything else, and if you begin
to talk of pools or ponds you’ll get Avell laughed at.”
7


“ Ha, ha ! the people will be easily amused, that’s all
I can say; hut I mean to try to follow the old maxim,
‘ When you are at Rome do as Rome does,’—ditto in
the Bush as far as you can. It is like an English
country life, with nice romantic differences all fresh
and new, isn’t it, Ralph ? ”
“It might he made so, but I don’t think you’ll see
much resemblance at first. We shall be at Nalano-
O
directly. Do you see those bark roofed huts on the
top of that little sand rise ? Well, that’s the spot.’’
“ Jessie,” said Ethel, “ take baby’s white cloak out of
the bag, and put on her little best hood. I hope she
won’t cry. Look, Ralph, doesn’t she look nice ? ”
“ She’s as bright and as bonnie as a bee,” said
Jessie, putting the finishing stroke, and making the
little tiny sit up and look about.
Up the hill they tore, sand flying in clouds, and
drew up at the side of the fence, where Lionel and Amy
with their children stood anxiously awaiting them.
Great was the joy, and hearty and cordial the meet-
ing ; and when Amy turned with held-out open arms
to take the baby, Ethel loved her from that moment,
and does so to this day, never forgetting that first wel-
come. Then Amy, with baby in one arm, and the other
round Ethel, led her to her own room to take off her
hat, Jessie following; and as Ethel brushed out her
long golden hair and stood there in her simple brown
holland dress, Amy thought, as many another, that
Ralph had been a lucky fellow. She then took her
young sister-in-law over to the hut opposite, which
was a curious little place, but snug, lined with green
baize, a calico ceiling and huge fireplace, fresh and
clean with daily whitewashing, and everything be-
speaking comfort and a certain degree of wealth,
despite the rough exterior. The table, spread for


luncheon, had handsome silver, the finest linen, and
well chosen china and glass.
Lionel Williams resembled his brother a good deal,
but had a more open, free, less studied manner and
general bearing than Ralph; a strong, powerfully
built man, knew how to use the gloves, and to some
purpose when necessary; a frank, beaming, open-
hearted fellow. Amy was tall, thin, and had been
handsome in her day, and better than this, was
goodness and unselfishness personified. Ethel was
well contented with her new relations, and agreeably
surprised with all she saw; if Belanja were only as
nice as this, she would be quite charmed. Stand-
ing by the rough cedar mantelpiece, (all the houses
were wainscoted and beaded round with this wood,
which is handsome when varnished) was a young
man, tall, thin, and handsome, who evidently watched
the scene with amused interest-
“ Ethel,” said Lionel, “ Ralph forgets his manners, or
he has left them in England, where he was a great
swell, I’ll be bound. Let me introduce Mr. Philip
Thornton; he is son-in-law to Major Blakeney, whom
you met in the Bay—some clue to begin with, you
know; it’s all strange, isn’t it ? But we will soon
make you at home. Come, Amy, cant we have some-
thing to eat ? why, they are all famished. Sit down.
A glass of wine, Ethel ? Shake hands, and hearty and
sincere welcome to the Bush.” And Ethel, almost
ready to cry with excitement, and covered with blushes
of pleasure, as heartily returned the kindly gtasp.
About an hour afterwards Ralph was heard shouting
to the men to put the horses in. Six miles nov,
only six more—and Ethel would see her home.
They positively flew through the woods as hard as
four horses could lay legs to the ground, disturbing


hundreds of parrots, who were thinking of retiring
for the night as the sun was nearly set, and then-
gorgeous plumage shone most brilliantly in the last
low*rays which glinted through the forest and illu-
minated most beautifully the topmost boughs of the
gums ahead. Flocks of white, yellow-crested cockatoos
flew screeching away, wondering what the unwonted
clatter could possibly be that came to disturb their
ever unbroken repose; they settled on the top of a
tree close by, chattering to one another, and appa-
rently not able to roost again after such an unusual
disturbance.
“ I see two people walking along by that strange
feathery-looking tree over there ; what a pretty shape
it has !—so round; and it seems to have curious stringy
tassels or cords all over it. I never saw such leaves.”
“ It is the sheeoak, capital for fire-wood ; and if you
are very thirsty, and no water to be found anywhere,
if you chew the cords as you call them, there is a
certain juice in them which will allay thirst for a
time. Those people you saw who are hidden now
behind that clump of honeysuckles must be my
brother Lloyd and his wife, come out to meet us ; we
will pick them up and drive them home.”
They soon overtook them, and made them get up,
Ethel making room for Mrs. Lloyd Williams in.fiont.
Greetings of course and looks of intense curiosity passed
between the two ladies; they were to live together m
the same house, so the mutual interest as to the
appearance of each was very natural. Eliza Williams,
having led a monotonous life for many years and been
mistress of the station, was the most interested of the
two ; it was all so full of excitement, change, and
strangeness to Ethel that she hadn’t time to realize any-
thing or form any idea as to her probable surroundings.


They dr.ove up through the large white gates and
got down close to the old bark hut, which had been
Ralph’s first abode after they moved from under the
shed of which he had told Ned Delmore over the
study fire at the old Hall. Lloyd and Eliza both
then gave her the kindliest welcome, and endeavoured
in every possible way to make her feel at home. It
was a trying position for Eliza Williams. Her hus-
band was the younger brother, but partner in the
station with Raljoh ; they w T ere attached to each other
as brothers only can be who feel and acknowledge
the strong natural ties that bind them together, and
who had gone through so much roughing and hard
work. Lloyd was many years younger than Ralph,
and looked up to him almost as to a father.
He was only a boy of sixteen when he left his
native land, a delicate fragile youth, unused to hard-
ships and all the roughness which attend life in a new
colony. Bravely he had borne it all, and was now
reaping his reward in comfort, and with a kind lovino-
wife, who from her careful thrifty habits suited him
admirably. And Eliza Williams was also a clever
accomplished woman, played brilliantly, had read
much, had a keen sense of the ridiculous, and could be
an admirable companion. Well, as I said, it was hard
for her; she had been mistress for many years, much
liked and appreciated, and here was a young girl come
from home, from her own country life and all its
advantages, with a lovely little babe (she had none),
and nine or ten years her junior; no wonder that Eliza
was nervous and not herself; no wonder that Ethel,
sensitive to a fault, highly strung, and more nervous
than the other, felt intuitively and at once the awk-
wardness of her position, but resolved as she always
did to make the best of it. She was very young and


inexperienced, for although, as has been said, she had
seen a good deal of life for her age, still it was only
one phase of society, it must be remembered; she had
been reared in all its rules and customs, and avoiding
to wound the feelings of others, either by remark or
gesture, with all its prejudices, which only contact
with the world can wear away, and had the usual
tendency to be too censorious, which is the failing of
youth, but which softens as years advance into that
charity towards all which dwells, in the breast of every
deep thinking, sympathizing, long-suffering, religious
man or woman, no matter what creed, what sect, what
denomination they belong to. This is the fundamental
principle of true religion—charity to all, and to judge
no man. We are all mortal, all subject to the like
passions, the like temptations, sorrows, and every day
trials; no one can judge another and not condemn him-
self, or herself, in so doing. God know the secrets of all
hearts, and is merciful even as He is glorious and great.
The evening passed somewhat constrainedly. Ralph
and Lloyd conversed earnestly about the improve-
ments on the run, the condition of the stock, sheep
and cattle, the necessity for fencing, as a disease
called the scab, had lately broken out on the next run,
and it was next to impossible to keep the flocks from
mixing, however vigilantly shepherded. Ralph now for-
got his own advice to Ned Del more over the study fire
in the old Hall, never to get into the merchants’ hands,
look the whole world in the face, and owe nothing.
“ I saw Tenn in Melbourne,” said Ralph, “ and spoke
to him about the improvements. He says we can
have money at fifteen per cent, and although it is no
doubt very high it would pay in the end.”
Lloyd didn’t answer, but sat with his hands in his
pockets and legs stretched out, looking into the fire.


“ It's a high rate of interest, Ralph—too high to pay,
believe me; and when you add commission, and per-
haps interest upon the interest, I don’t see how it is
to answer.”
“ But how are you to keep the flocks clean unless
we fence ? I see nothing else for it. The wool market is
up, and likely to remain, so there’s no fear, old fellow;
—but we won’t discuss that now. Where’s my little
wife ? I expect she is pretty tired, what with her long
journey, and the excitement of meeting you all.”
“ I saw her go into the drawing-room with Eliza,
who will take care of her; and then there’s that
precious babe of yours to look after. Who would ever
have thought to see you a paterfamilias % we put you
down as the old bachelor. Take care of them both,
that’s all, old chap. I’ll say good-night. Glad to see
you home again, Ralph.”
Ethel was much surprised with the comfort of
everything around her; Ralph had not prepared her
for half such luxury. The little drawing-room was
so tastefully furnished, and looked so snug with the
bright wood fire on the white hearth, the dark deep
cedar mouldings giving it a handsome look. Her own
room was as comfortable in its way, and as she
laid her head on her pillow that first night in her
far off home, all the long journeys by sea and land
over, England and all its old dear associations of
kindred and customs left behind, it seemed a dream,
and she fell asleep with her babe in her arms, wonder-
ing at her strange fate, but never doubting its success
or regretting what she had done; —her husband, her
child, and Jessie, and all the romance of life before her.
Sleep on, bi’ave little Ethel; many a bright and sunny
day will be yours, mixed with many a saddened hour ;
but the storms of middle life are far away and the


coming years will fit j’ou by degrees to bow to tbe
cold wintry blasts and enable you to rise again only
tbe better and the stronger for the frowns of Destiny,
in your patience possessing your soul, and turning on
misfortune a smiling face, learning to say, “ Whatever
is, is best,” though the way be hard and the rough road
long. Sleep on, sweet Ethel, and—
“ Gentle sleep from waking life shall borrow
Time to renew the power for joy to-morrow.”
CHAPTER IX.
THE BLACKS.
The morning came lovely, clear, bright, and Ethel, with
much curiosity to look around her, walked out and
stood on the verandah : it had been nearly dusk when
they arrived, so the scene was quite new. To the
ricrht stood the old hut. It had taken a long time to
build; there were the trees to fell, the wood to saw
(red gum is very hard), and the bark to split for the
roof; the door-posts and supports were formed of
trees cut to the proposed height and planted deeply in
the ground; the sides of wide slabs, the chimney of
limestones, roughly stuck together; the upper part of
shingles, the roof of broad sheets of bark fastened on
by long poles; a dolichos crept in leafy green over the
chimney. Ethel thought as she gazed at the curious
wild-looking little shelter that she would by-and-bye
cover it with flowers—roses, honeysuckle, jessamine—
and do it all honour as the spot where her husband
had lived at first, and which had—


“Long been the pride
Of the country side."
Inside it was lined with green baize, hung all round
with firearms of every conceivable date and fashion ;
huge brackets and roughly shaped book-shelves and
cupboards proved that the workmen had been bent on
having everything very substantial; the floor was
boarded now, but at first it had only that which
nature gave it; the fire-place was so huge (as all will
remember who ever saw it) that trunks of trees would
burn away in it for a week at a time with relays added
to it, but this formed the piece de resistance, and was
wheeled in on a barrow every Saturday. A huge beam
or rafter stretched across to the left as you entered the
door, and two green baize curtains shut oft" two small
bed-rooms, which in the very early days had been
fitted up with bunks as on board ship, and where the
tired brothers and overseers had slept the sleep of the
weary, at the close of their long days in the saddle after
cattle or sheep. In winter, round the huge blazing fire
with its bright whitewashed hearth, they would draw
their old arm-chairs, or stretched on the sofas, of which
there were two on either side, would tell of the day’s
work and adventures, smoke their pipes, fall into
long dreamless slumbers, or, if a chance traveller
happened to come in, eagerly listen to any news from
the outer world which he might bring. A sort of
rough porch in the same style at the back opened
upon a garden, with trellised vines and fruit trees of
every kind, and a small flower bed ; but there had been
little time for much adornment, although at the other
side of the cottage, on the verandah of which Ethel
stood, Mrs. Lloyd Williams had managed to get a lono 1
. o o o
border filled with roses, mesembryanthemums (there’s
a word!) and other plants; and at the back of the


grassy lawn, native shrubs, and a few English poplars
had been planted. Well, to the left of this cottage a
large new brick house was being built for Ethel, but
it was only in course of erection, and took a long, long-
time before it was finished, on account of the many
interruptions for station work that the bricklayer
and carpenter had to attend to. So you will see that
the place was eventually to form three sides of a
quadrangle, the fourth opening out to the Bush and a
large swamp at the foot of the little rise in which the
houses were placed. This looked wild and pretty
enough now : the huge gum trees dotted everywhere,
the bright and glorious sunshine, and the huge
shadows of these forest giants reflected in the water,
where the wild black swans glided along with their
gracefully arched necks, and flocks of wild ducks
made their haunt.
“ Ralph,” said Ethel, “ I heard such an odd laughing
sound come from that large tree opposite; what could
it be ? ”
“ That was a jackass laughing at you; he knows
you are a new chum, and very verdant.”
“ A jackass up in a tree laughing at me, Ralph ? I
don’t understand you. What is it ? ”
“ A large kind of kingfisher, and its note sounds
exactly like laughter, so we always tell fresh comers
that they are amusing themselves at their expense;
but it is a horribly old joke : too bad of me to play it
off on you, wasn’t it, wifey ? Do you feel too tired to
come for a ride with me this afternoon ? We can have
luncheon early; the days are not very long now, it
will be dark before six.”
“ Yes, I’ll go and unpack my habit at once, and be
ready.”
So the horses were brought round, and away the


four started, the two brothers riding on ahead, leaving
the ladies to follow. After going through the usual
grassy land, with gum trees, sheeoak, honeysuckle,
with now and then a bright green cherry tree, they
came upon a glorious open plain, with a large lake
of some four miles in circumference, with beautifully
green hills bounding it bn one side. As they merged
from the forest on to this, the ground became broken
into most extraordinary mounds, like graves, only more
rounded, and in the hollows there was much water,
which made riding very uncomfortable, but driving
still worse; howeve'r, once on the plain, the level
ground was splendid for a good canter, and away
they all set off, the balmy wind, the lovely air and
sunshine, the freedom, the wildness enchanting Ethel.
The cattle feeding away amongst the tx-ees, the white
and spotted ones looking so pretty in the distance;
the little golden plover running along the gi’ound, dis-
turbed in their marshy homes; the long legged blue-
caps stealing away to the watei-’s edge, seeking x-efuge
on the lake from the unwonted disturbance; the
swans a wain soon thinking of making their nests of
the long reeds, which look like small islands floating
on the water; mountain ducks, wood ducks, teal and
divers, with blue cranes, native companions, and a
white ibis ; add to this the continuous chatter of
parrots of every variety, of the gayest plumage—
rosellas, blue mountains, others of the brightest
green, and the lovely little Budgereegas flying about
in flocks all around, with white, yellow crested cock-
atoos in hundreds; sheep quietly cropping the sweet
fresh grass, a shepherd and his dog lazily watching
them under a gum tree, with a small fire and a
quart pot of tea; an old crow cawing its wretched
note and looking down from a dead branch with


hungry eyes on a poor little dead lamb which an
eagle hawk or a native ’dog had killed, and you
will I think be able to realize an Australian scene
such as Ethel with all her freshness and excited
imagination, added to keen enjoyment, was so en-
chanted with.
“ Gome over and have a look at the cattle,” said
Ralph, galloping towards them. They quietly raised
their heads from the pasture, not attempting to run
away, —excepting one, wilder looking than the rest,
that turned off and at a little distance looked round,
head down and tail in air, inclined to rush. Ethel
and Eliza were frightened, and took care to put their
worthy lords in front; but the beast was only curious,
and, soon satisfied, went on browsing.
“ Ethel, look yonder by that clump of honeysuckles :
do you see something moving ? ” said Eliza.
“ Yes, Avhat is it ? ”
“ Come up nearer, and you’ll see. It is Captain Jack,
the wildest black we have; he will never do a day’s
work for anyone, and I am always frightened of him.
Doesn’t he look wild ? ”
There he was, striding away, Ms only covering a blue
jumper, which, but for being compelled now to dress a
little, he would far rather have been without; a long
spear and shield in one hand, a little dead opossum
and his stone tomahawk swinging down in the other,
boomerangs, a waddy, and leeangle fastened across his
shoulders by a broad piece of kangaroo skin, a red
tailed macaw’s feather stuck in his black matted hair
.—the picture of a wild Australian savage. Coming
nearer, you saw his beard was getting white, his dark
eyes deeply sunk in his head, and his white teeth
gleaming as he smiled when Ralph bid him good day.
“ Oh, Misser Ralph, you come back ? Ha, ha, ha! ”


pointing to Ethel, “ that one lubra belonging to you ?
My word ! ha, ha, ha ! ”
I s “ Where abouts is the camp, Captain Jack ? it’s not
far off’ I know.”
“ Long a there, —you see urn smoke; black fellow
there.”
“ All right. Good-bye.”
“ Good-bye, Misser Ralph—ha, ha, ha! ” and his
wild laugh sounded through the woods.
They soon rode up to the camp, where all the
blacks, then a goodly number-—perhaps forty or so
—jumped up from the ground to welcome Misser
Ralph. How they all laughed and pointed at Ethel,
then laughed again, going off into fits of merriment, all
OO' & O 3
about nothing but just seeing her there.
“Well, Billy, Jenny, Mr. Fry, all about, how are
you ? ” said Ralph.
“ Oh, bery glad see you back again, sir, and
that one; ” and then peals of laughter again.
Their little low mimis, as they called them, were
only just shelters from the wind made of gum tree
bark, under which they crept at night to sleep, their
spears and war weapons stuck round and a few
opossum skins—now sewn together with string, but
before the white men came with kangaroo sinews.
They were all clothed a little now, poor things, in any
old things the settlers chose to give them, or which
they purchased at extortionate prices from hawkers
who, it must be admitted, often took a very wrong
and mean advantage of their ignorance of the worth
of what they sold them. They earned the money
by shepherding then, and afterwards by brush fenc-
ing; but at this time there were no fences, excepting
one boundary line, which extended a few miles only—
at most fourteen.


“ Billy and all about come in along a borne station
some time, and big one yabber,” said Ralph, speak-
ing to them in the abominable jargon which the first
settlers had thought it necessary to adopt in order to
make themselves understood, but which in after years
the more enlightened and younger blacks scorned to
use, and spoke as good English as anyone.
“ All right, Misser Ralph. Good-bye, sir; bery glad
see you, sir, again.”
Billy, having been in Melbourne, was quite a travelled
gentleman; he was one of the princes of the tribe
and had therefore a certain influence with them,
though his uncle, Mr. Fry, was king (an expatriated
prince), as some jolly settler called the poor abject
old man. It was too bad to laugh at them; we had
come and taken their hunting grounds, driven away
their game, made them in a measure partially—very
partially —civilized, and given them little or nothing
in compensation.
“ Well, Ethel, did you enjoy your ride ?” asked Lloy d
when they were all seated at dinner in the curious
little low wooden roofed dining-room, which looked
something like a ship’s cabin.
“ Oh, very much,” she replied, “ but I am rather
tired. How interesting it was to see the blacks. But
you appear to me to have been lazy in not learning
their language; that is such a terrible jargon to use
in speaking to them.”
“ Yes, you are quite right; but we have found that
each tribe has a separate dialect, and that for instance
the blacks twenty miles away from this scarcely
understand each other, unless they are friendly, and
then many words differ greatly, so you see it would
be very little use troubling ourselves about their
speech ; and besides, we have had no time, even grant


ing that we possessed talent and inclination. The
Wimmera tribe will be up some day, and then you’ll
see a corroboree, the wildest sight that can be
witnessed, I suppose, in the world.”
“ What sort of a lambing shall we have, Lloyd ? ”
asked Ralph.
“ Oh, very fair, I hope ; over seventy-five per cent.;
but Murphy told me the dogs were troublesome in
the valley, so I am going to take baits out to-morrow.
We are nearly out of strychnine; I must write to
town for some; and I have rarely seen the eagles
and hawks so numerous. I shall doctor that lamb we
passed yesterday. Take my gun, and if you are going
out again with Ethel you might see how the}' are get-
ting on with that waterhole'at Moree ; it went dry this
summer, so I am getting it cleaned out and deepened.”
“Very well. Ethel, you shall see another part of
the run to-morrow; we will start early and take some
luncheon with us. You shall drive the ducks, and we
will bring home some game.”
Ethel went out, leaving baby in Jessie’s charge with
the greatest trust, and her little bonnie face was at the
gate watching for mamma’s return, or rather Jessie was
for her.
Well, Ralph, said Ethel, after they had ridden a
long, long way over the roughest ground, “ I am getting
tired and hungry. I never saw such a country as this,
these horrid little mounds shake me so dreadfulty, and
Beeswing does nothing but jog; let us stop under this
gum-tree and have luncheon.”
“ Crabholes, as we call them, are not the most delight-
ful undulations ip the world, I must say,” replied
Ralph. “Jump down, and we will have a sandwich.
By Jove ! ” (feeling in his pockets) “ I have forgotten
them ! Never mind, I’ll go into the lagoon and try to


find a swan’s egg; it’s early, but I think I see nests.
I’ll light a lire by this log, it will burn up directly,
and then we will roast the egg; I assure you they are
capital eating.”
So away he dived into the water, stooped down
from the saddle, and presently returned with a large
palish-blue egg, and Ethel waited with hungry im-
patience until it should be cooked; but when it was,
her disappointment was great to find it so fearfully
strong that she couldn’t touch it. So Ralph ate it
instead, declaring it to be excellent.
On their way home they came past several water-
holes which were situated in a sort of chain. Ralph,
seeing ducks upon one, desired Ethel to ride round
the other side as far into the water as she could get
safely, and send them towards him, lie hiding behind
a tree. She did as she was told, and the ducks swam
past Ralph, who, firing right and left, brought down
two, calling to Ethel to mark where the others went.
She tried bei - best, but it was very difficult to see over
the trees, and with the same sort of country extending
all round. However, Ralph secured the game, tied
them to his saddle, and away they both cantered to
the next waterbole. Here were more ducks; they shot
at them again with like success; and had such pretty
sport that afternoon that Ethel forgot all about her
hunger until she got home.
Thus day after day passed by, and she gradually got
quite settled. Although, of course, not always out
with Ralph, still she went very. often, and was
truly happy. Kind neighbours came from long dis-
tances, seventy and a hundred miles, to call upon her;
for in those days distance was thought little of, and
then, of course, they stayed several days, when one
got to know them very well.


One evening, soon after they first came up, they
were all sitting, after dinner, in the drawing-room,
when a low talking was heard in the verandah. Lloyd
Williams said: “The blacks! Come in, Billy-, Jenny,
Peter.”
And in they walked, decently and cleanly dressed,
and sat down by the fire, with as much composure
as any lady or gentleman. No self-consciousness or
mauvaise honte, but a naturally graceful, easy manner.
Savage enough they looked, with their dark, almost
black skins, low foreheads, high cheek-bones, brilliantly
dark eyes, and exquisitely white teeth; but not savage
in their bearing. They had never known servitude,
knew nothing of cringing obeisance then, at any rate,
but felt and knew themselves free to roam where
they chose. They brought a little offering of emeu eggs
to Ethel. Billy had been away with Jenny in the
Malluscrut and found a nest. They were, of course,
great curiosities to her, but everyone knows the large,
dark-green polished look, and these were so fresh.
Jenny had two lovely pink eggs.
“ Lowan egg,” she said, so gently, putting them into
Ethel’s hand. “ Get bird some day.”
“What are Lowan, Ralph '?” asked Ethel, after admir-
ing the gifts, and thanking them all for their kindness.
O O O
“ A kind of pheasant; they live away in the scrub,
and are very difficult to get at, being so shy’; splendid
birds.”*
Then Jenny unbound a curious bunch of feathers,
and laid it down, saying again so quietly-,
“ Emeu feather skirt, kangaroo tooth, necklace, and
* Leiopoa outtala. They are ground birds, never taking to
a tree unless hunted. The nests are made by- both birds in the
sandy scrub, —are raised mounds, which, when the eggs are laid,
they cover up altogether, and allow the sun to hatch them.
8


basket; ” then laughed a little, whilst Ethel was per-
fectly delighted with her presents.
After chatting away to the poor things a little time,
Mrs. Lloyd Williams rang for some wine and cake
they each had a glass, and by-and-bye got up to leave,
saying good-night, pointing to Ethel: “ Eery fine
fellow that one ! ” Then everybody laughed, and they
could be heard chatting, and still very merry, as they
marched back to their camp. Many a day in after
years did they come round Ethel, in sickness and old
age. She had the younger lubras taught to work,
cook, wash, and to (dimly perhaps) understand a little
of Christianity; was with many in their last moments,
and almost closed their dying eyes;—but this was in
time to come.
When they had been about a fortnight or three
weeks on the station the clergyman came one
Saturday evening, to hold service there next day,
when the Mackenzies and Lionel Williams drove over
as usual. It was arranged that the meetings should;
be held by turns at the several houses, within eight or
ten miles ; and this time Mr. Marsden was to preach
at Belanja. The settlers arranged between themselves
to make up his stipend, and as his parish (?) extended
over more than a hundred miles, it wasn’t possible for
him to come oftener than once a month to each.
Sundays are lazy days in the Bush; the early cup
of tea brought to one’s room, about eight, and break-
fast at ten, or past; quiet stroll round the garden after-
wards ; reading, prayers, dinner, and walk; and then
the evening songs, and peaceful rest, are pleasures
hardly earned by the labours of the past week. This
was, however, a special day, and yet for all that they
were very late, and the congregation began to assemble
before breakfast was over.


When Ethel heard that the Mackenzies and the
others had arrived, she left the dining-room at once
and went to receive them. As she entered the draw-
ing-room she saw standing on the hearth-rug the
sweetest face she ever met. “ Oh, what a nice
woman! ” was her first thought as she went towards
her, attracted at once by so much grace and beauty
She shook hands with ail, having seen them before,
and then stood for a second uncertain whether to
speak or not, for Philip Thornton, who was standing
close by, had forgotten to,introduce his wife.
“ Mrs. Philip Thornton, I believe,” said Ethel, hold-
ing out her hand, and looking round inquiringly and
then at Philip.
“ Yes, Mrs. Williams. 1 really beg your pardon; I
quite forgot that you had not met.”
No description that it is in my weak power to
give could do justice to that sweet woman by his
side, so fair, so gentle, so altogether charming in
her quiet self-possession. She was tall and very
slight, with blue eyes, small chiselled nose, clear,
bright complexion, a mouth rather large; and when
she smiled her whole countenance was lighted up and
beamed with a loveliness which we shall never see
again on any countenance until, perhaps, we may
meet in some bright sphere above ; for she has gone
who was for eighteen years the breath and light of
Ethel’s chequered life; and now as she treads along
her earthly path alone, the memory ol those happy
years sheds a saddened lustre over all her days, rich in
the knowledge that—
“ One so pure and wise was once her friend,
Her teacher, and her guide ; ”
for she was possessed of a strange persuasive elo


quence that influenced all on whom it fell, and
strengthened Ethel’s weaker nature. Since then she
seeks in vain for one to take the place of her beloved
friend. She sees in many some sweet resemblance,
and sometimes dares to hope that she has found
another, not to equal the last, but still one whose
sympathies will mingle with her own—a mind and
soul attuned in harmony; but disappointment ever
meets her. Some chord is struck which jars, and
Ethel never expects, or hopes, again to find her equal
on earth. She may perhaps be. said to have raised up
an idol, for in her sweet lost friend she thinks she
saw, to use the poet’s words, —
‘ ‘ A brightness which no sun can dim,
A soft effulgence darkened by no stain;
Hopeful of good, and trustful, and elate,
Yet not with pride, she was content to wait,”
wait for the fulfilment of all good. Her charity was
universal, even as her patience and long-suffering was
beautiful and heavenly. So Ethel, now bereft of this
companion and cherished guide, bears on in the hope
of being permitted some day to join her in those un-
known realms where the sting of Death is over, and
partings are no more.
But to return to the present: thus it w T as that Ethel
met Grace Thornton, These meetings were held in
the old hut, and though most simple and primitive,
were heartfelt and sincere. In course of time, Ethel
contrived to get a harmonium, which added greatly
to the services which Ralph read every Sunday morn-
ing, excepting of course when Mr. Marsden came.
She also formed a small school for the children of the
working men on the station, and it was well attended.
Warm-hearted and impulsive, longing for sympathy,


and a companion of her own age, she would at once
have become most intimate and gushing, hut Grace
Thornton’s character was quite the reverse; to strangers
she was cold, with an indifference of manner at first,
that often sent poor Ethel disappointedly hack. But
in the intercourse of years, with their children growing
up, and the enjoyment they both had in gardening,
music, reading, and the exchange of thought, this cold-
ness disappeared altogether, and Grace became all that
Ethel’s heart could desire. These are the friendships
which never die, but increase year by year, growing in
steadfastness and truth, until a mutual confidence and
trust is established which lives on despite distance,
silence, and severance, ready to take up the thread
again where it left off, no matter how long since it was
closely knit together. And oh ! the joy of meeting once
again those we knew in youth. Perhaps it may not
be until the snows of age have whitened on our brows,
but the heart is ever green beneath, and beats with
renewed life in, moments such as these. I can picture
no greater punishment hereafter, than to be banished
by our misconduct from entering the same realms
whither our loved ones have gone before; the yearning
to be with them, and yet not to be worthy, would be
to me a hell; let us trust the chance will once again
be given us of rising again to where they are, and
sharing their purifying and elevating presence. These
thoughts are not mine, but come back from out the
store-room of memory; it must be, I think, in Gregg’s
“ Enigmas of Life,” where such sorrow is so eloquently
described; but that valuable book is not near me to
refer to. I do not wish to steal my neighbours’
thoughts, knowing how apt one is to mix them up
with those that are really our own; but as there is so
little originality in me, the next best thing is to read,


mark, learn, and remember that which my more gifted
fellow men have written for me.
So Ethel’s novel life went on, varied by occasional
visits in the widely extended district. Ralph took
her to Mount Gambler to see one of his oldest and sin-
cerest friends. This curious extinct volcano was more
than seventy miles away, and rises from the plains a
solitary mountain, not however very high. The home
station lies just at the foot; the soil of course is very
rich, and the surrounding country most fertile. At
that time the township consisted only of a few houses ;
the now macadamized roads were sunk in the blackest
mud in winter, or equally deep in dust in summer;
where it now winds up the mountain side in long
sweeping curves, there was then only an indistinct
bridle path, up which Ethel rode, and looked down into
the large crater filled with water called the Blue Lake,
which now supplies the large populated town. In the
memory of man, black or white, this volcano has never
been active; indeed Ido not know of one in all Australia,
excepting one seen by Major Mitchell called “ Wingen,”
which is a burning mountain but not a volcano, its
fire probably derived from a combustion of the bitu-
minous shale of which the mountain is composed ; it
occupies a small extent, but has been burning as long
as it has been known.* There are also hot springs dis-
covered by ill'. Babbage some few miles west of Lake
Gregory, in South Australia.! “ The spring has a basin
formed by a sand hill, about twenty feet high; the water
bubbles up and runs in several channels; these unite in
a stream flowing through a break in the sandy basin,
and from thence into a reedy swamp. The water is too
* See “ History of Australian Explorations,” by Rev. J. S.
T. Woods,
f Ibid.


hot for the hand to bear even for a minute, but quite
fresh, and yielding 175,000 gallons daily.” “And also
others—the Primrose Springs, near Mount Charles.
The hill in which they are is very remarkable ; they
are not seen until the top is reached, and there the
hot jbasins are placed.” * Stuart the explorer also
mentions these springs.
But to return to Mount ■ Gambier, If some awful
day the extinct fires were once more to awaken, the
devoted town would share the fate of the classic cities
of Italy, though I doubt whether the buried ruins
would be of corresponding interest and beauty to
generations yet unborn. Explosions as of guns and
artillery are not unfrequent in the country. Poor-
Wills, whilst picking nardoo with King, is said to have
heard it, and if I remember rightly - the same sounds
alarmed the quiet inmates of a homestead not far from
Peuola one hot summer’s evening, coming apparently
from the dried-up swamp below the house. Mount
Schanck also rises up from the plains in like manner,
and is also an extinct volcano; but this was too far off
for Ethel to ride, so they returned to the house through
the luxuriant woods, the grassy rises and thickly 7 spread-
ing ferns, which latter are a perfect curse to the farmer
of to-day, or were until quite lately, and are still, no
doubt, unless some method has been found to eradicate
them effectually 7 .
This trip occupied more than a fortnight altogether,
as there were several visits to return; so that when
Ethel got home the early spring was _ coming, with all
its attendant beauties in the native flowers, with which
the scrub, not far away, is literally 7 enamelled. Beauti-
ful white and pink heaths; the fuchsias mentioned
before; immortelles in greatest variety 7 —one especially,
* Rev. J. S. T. Woods.


with thick, fleshy sort of leaves, covered with white
down, and the flower white tipped with pink; then
the leaves, with their soft yellow balls in thick clusters,
and exquisite perfume; the numerous orchids in the
well grassed paddock; the so-called native violet, which
has no scent, and does not resemble its sweet namesake
in the least, except in colour; the wonderful drosera,
with its little white blossoms and curious sticky moss
on stem and leaves; the lovely blue-bells, likewise
bearing no resemblance to the far-famed Scottish
flowers, but surpassing them in depth of azure, though
scentless, and not shaped the same. A kind of prim-
rose, too, she found; and a trailing plant something
like an oak leaf—of the Grevillea tribe, as she learnt
in after years, its pale tinted blossoms curling in and
clustering thickly on one stem. Large white, long
stemmed daisies grew in moist ground, with a pea-
shaped lilac flower. Nearly all the native flora
are pea-shaped ; the most glorious being the Clian-
thus Dempierii, better known as Sturt’s Desert Pea,
with its leaves of sage green, and splendid long red
blossoms with large black eyes, growing five or six
upon a stem. There are two other varieties, one
yellow and the other white, but neither can compare
to the scarlet. Many roots are bulbous, and so are
enabled to withstand the parched and dried heat of
summer droughts.
Many a delightful day did Ethel spend amongst
these rare ferns, but unfortunately she was no botanist,
although she loved them all so well, and therefore
never knew the proper names. Later on in the spring
she found one of exquisite mauve, its petals like satin,
with fringed edges. It is a mistake to suppose that the
Bush flowers have no scent; some of the smaller ones
away in the scrub—


“ Waste their perfume on the desert air,”
and whilst the acacias are in bloom the whole atmo-
sphere is heavy with their perfume. In almost desert
country grows a species of calistemou, I think it
is called, which (unlike the more common scrub
variety, bearing only pale, sickly yellow blossoms) is a
splendid crimson; I have seen it growing in conser-
vatories, but never looking so grand and beautiful as
in its native land; bottle-brush is the common term
for it, and if I am wrong in naming it a calistemou it
is my ignorance, for which I’m sorry.
Ralph had not many days to spare now in showing
the wonders to Ethel, for cattle mustering was close at
hand, and after that, shearing. It was a pretty sight
to see the herds driven into the large stock-yards,
where they were left all night to low mournfully, loud,
and long for their sweet pastures and sweeter freedom.
Those luckless beasts who were fat for market never
returned to their well-loved plains, but were drafted
off for Melbourne; and as they were driven away,
would turn their heads towards the accustomed track,
and stretching their necks, low again a sad farewell to
the crack of the stock-whip. Poor things ! hundreds
of miles to walk, and death at the end ; in the same
plight as Hood’s conceited pig found himself at last:
“ The butcher is coming, I’ve grown so big.”
“Now the mustering is over, Ethel, I’ll take you
out for a day on the lake, before shearing. The
canoe is finished, and the swans’ nests will be full
of eggs.”
Oo
“ Oh, Ralph, I don’t want any more of the horrid
things; that one you roasted was quite enough.”
“ Oh, but they are capital for cakes and omelettes;
one is nearly equal to six hen eggs. You’ll enjoy it,
I can assure you.”


So of course they went, taking Jessie and baby
with them—-the canoe sent on in a cart. It was duly
launched. Ralph handed Ethel in, spread rugs over
the seat, and they were afloat, steering for the nests.
Ralph, stooping down to take the eggs, found the
frail boat dip to oneside, and in another instant
Ethel was alone—only for a few seconds, it is true,
but what an age it seemed to her, in the middle of a
wild Australian lake, the oar overboard, floating away
just where Ralph had disappeared, and made such
large waves by the tremendous splash with which he
had gone down. What should she do ? Jessie was
with baby on the bank, and had heard the scream,
but could do no good, and to paddle your own canoe
without an oar was as great a puzzle as some people
find in paddling theirs with every appliance for the
purpose. There was nothing for it but to sit there
and wait to see what would turn up, a la Mr. Micawber;
but Ethel fervently hoped that it would be Ralph,
and was not disappointed, for in less than three
seconds he appeared, puffing and snorting so loudly
that I am certain the blacks would have taken him
for their imaginary Bunyip, which is supposed to live
in rivers or lakes, and is a very terrible creature, for
this most potent reason, that it has never been seen.
Ethel’s relief was great, and sitting quietly in the
cockle shell, she implored Ralph to keep cool—a very
unnecessary injunction under the circumstances. First
one arm, then another, grappled with the little frail
concern. Ethel quite prepared for a ducking; but
carefully raising himself, Ralph managed somehow or
another to get on board, reached the oar which had
stuck in the reeds, and went back to shore, where
tea was ready and a good fire. The next thing to
be done was to take off the wet clothes and hang them


on sticks round the fire, Ralph arraying himself in a
horse-rug. After some hot tea, he again embarked,
pressing Ethel to accompany him, which she declined,
and away he started once more, looking very like a
wild Indian, with the oar uplifted in his hand aud
his tall figure standing out against the clear open
space. Ethel amused herself, watching the busy little
ants as they hurried away to fulfil their daily task,
never failing to salute each passing neighbour, though
apparently bustling along for dear life. She saw the
large mounds raised by these little insects, which
exist in such armies everywhere, of all sizes and
descriptions; in some parts they are so large as to
appear like huts. One we readmf measured eight feet
in height, and nearly twenty-six in circumference;*
but of course this was exceptionally large. It is
almost needless to add that she never ventured in
the canoe again.
Shearing is always a horrible time, and the poor
sheep are so tossed and torn, and cut about, that
one wonders how they live through it. The washing
was truly primitive; the poor things were huddled by
fifties into a pen, raised some height from the water,
and suddenly this was tilted up, and away they went,
literally head over heels, splashing into the water.
When they had recovered from the shock, they kept
swimming round, whilst men with crutches standing on
spars rubbed away at their backs, giving them a good
push under every now and then; and when cleansed
sufficiently they were passed out into the run, aud
swam on shore, scrambling up with their wet heavy
fleeces the best way they could. When dry enough
they were brought into the shed to be tortured and
* Measured by Mr. Cunningham, botanist to Captain Philip
King’s exploration.


shorn, often cruelly mangled; and when very badly cut
a dab of tar was kindly put over the wound, which
was adding insult to injury. But that sort of wash-
ing was nothing to the hot water system in after
years, when the poor things were nearly scalded alive,
and were lifted on crutches, fainting, to the outlet
from this terrible pool; it was carried to too great an
extent, and proved a failure, I rejoice to say (though
a loser thereby), for the sheep’s sake. How I have
pitied them !
One of the great taxes on the settlers, was feeding
the numbers of men which just before shearing
time flocked through the country, often forty and
fifty a night; these must be fed and housed, and
for many years Ralph Williams kept a hut keeper,
on purpose to cook for them; and at one time to
refuse was now and then the cause of a hush fire,
and miles of fencing destroyed. They got tea, sugar,
mutton and flour, but it was found too much of a
good thing for the men, and the neighbours arranged
to give no meat, and often was Ethel sorry for those
who had perhaps walked many hundred miles in search
of work, looking very thin and pale on such light fare.
Yet the early explorers would have been thankful for
half their rations. When we think of poor dying Wills
gathering the nardoo, and pounding it for food, their
only support. This little plant grows in tufts close
to the ground, each seed upon separate stalks; so we
may imagine the slow process it was to gather enough
for a meal for three, which, when collected, had to be
pounded and cleaned. It was truly a miserable sub-
stitute, and yet we read that Wills wrote: —“ Starva-
tion on nardoo is by no means unpleasant, but for
the weakness; as far as appetite is concerned, it
gives me the greatest satisfaction.” Poor noble un


complaining, djflng man, what an example he has left
us of resignation and trying to make the best of every-
thing !
There is an excellent receipt for fully enjoying
a mutton chop, when from constant repetition you
have become tired of it for breakfast and it is
the staple commodity on every sheep station. Leave
it off for a week, and you’ll find it most appe-
tizing! In those early days there were no fowl
houses—there had been no time to think of such
luxuries; so eggs and chickens were very rare, on
account of the difficulty of protecting them from the
native cats, which literally swarmed at times all
round the place. Amy Williams killed a hundred
and fifty one evening; they had all been down to the
Bay for a change, and were not absent more than a
fortnight, when on going into the hut which served
O > o O
as a store-room, and which had been locked up dur-
ing their absence, she saw nothing but eyes looking
at her from shelves and corners all round, tea, sugar
and flour strewn all over the floor, ankle deep. She
wanted some claret from a case, but what with the
eyes, the noise of the cats, which is very like swear-
ing, and the commotion her entrance made amongst
O' o
the intruders, which Avere running over her feet in
all directions to escape, she thought the place had be-
come bewitched, and let Lionel face them. The skins
of these little animals are loA r ely, some black Avith
Avhite spots, others a light brown with Avhite spots. It
was too hot then to preserve the skins, Avhich make
handsome rugs. The most extraordinary thing was
that they had never been seen there before, but as
eA T ery station, they aftenvards heard, had the same
plague, they must travel in troops through the laud,
like the ants Ave read of in other countries.


CHAPTER X.
THE STRANGE LIGHT.
It was now the middle of summer, nearly Christmas
time; the cherry trees were still laden with fruit, the
apricots beginning to get golden, though not quite ripe
enough to pick, and the peaches still green, but
promising a rich crop in January, not carefully
trained against a southern wall, to concentrate the
beams of a poor cold English sun, but fine large trees,
like the apples and pears at home, from under which
barrows full of peaches could be gathered, and a
common kind of jam made from them. I say common,
because it is the most plentiful and the least nice of
all fruits for preserving. The Cape gooseberries were
hanging in their little paper bags on the bushes, and
the & English kind clustering thickly on the prickly
stems; the large fig trees spread their welcome shade,
and the grapes hung hidden under their leaves and
tendrils from the scorching sun.
It had been a frightfully hot day. The wind was
blowing fiercely from the north' in town the dust
would have been blinding, but away in the Bush this
discomfort was avoided ; the doors and windows had
been closed, and the rooms darkened, so that you
could scarcely see to read or work. Ethel sat in the
lightest possible attire, very much exhausted, and
parched with thirst, as all new colonists generally
are ; baby was crawling about en chemise, apparently
revelling in the freedom from superfluous garments,
and Jessie was helping to amuse her through the long
hours of imprisonment. If you crossed from the
drawing-room over to the nursery in the next house,


the wind blew as hot as from a furnace, the sun pour-
ing mercilessly down in its full meridian height; the
flies (those fearful large yellow-bottles) were crowded
under the verandah in swarms, and as you passed and
disturbed them, flew about with a dreadful buzzing,
and then returned to their sheltered nook, or if the
door were left open for a moment, would half fill the
room ; they would come down the chimney—anywhere
for shade j they are certainly a terrible plague, and
those who have lived in Australia can picture what
the Egyptians went through, and do now, for the
curse seems never to have been removed, and to have
extended its influence to the remote lands of the
antipodes. But these flies, however dreadful, with
their noise and disgusting natures, are not so torment-
ing as the common house fly. If you are lucky enough
to hit them just as they are in the act of settling on
your head or nose (which if you happen to be singing
they are very likely to do, as I am convinced they
love music), they will keep away for a considerable
time, until some sweet strain perhaps attracts them
again; but you may hit a house fly, and battle with
handkerchiefs at it until you are completely tired, and
it will return in the gayest manner; no rebuff has the
slightest effect upon it, and it never seems to know 7
when it is de trap —if it is ever anything else. I
have read somewhere that for courage it is unsur-
passed, and may add to this attribute indomitable
perseverance in being as disagreeable and annoying as
possible; and the same lecturer also told us that in the
insect world it was about the centre, —that is to say,
that there were as many species smaller as larger than
itself. In fact, what with mosquitoes of giant dimen-
sions, flies of all varieties, moths, beetles, and those
still more tormenting dwellers in sand, poor victims


fresh from home have hut little chance of peace, and
must sit and endure untold martyrdom, whilst they
listen politely to what you are saying, and smile as
they are tortured. No amount of cleanliness in some
places will keep them away ; wherever sand is, they
abound. Ralph, the overseers, his brother, and all the
men were out in the fearful sun, putting out bush
fires which were raging all around—some purposely set
alight to burn the rough coarse grass, reeds, and scrub,
so that after the first rains the feed should spring up
fresh and sweet; others caused by a chance match, or
camp fire carelessly left; whatever the cause, they were
blazing away, and the poor men came in exhausted
about sunset or afterwards. As the evening faded
into night, the doors were all opened again, and after
dinner chairs brought out into the garden to rest on,
and catch a breath of cool air. How wonderful the
fires looked at night, like large camps of blacks sur-
rounding the place, trees and logs burning still, and
in the darkness so beautiful, but of course adding
terribly to the heat.
“ Ralph,” said Ethel, “ whilst you were all out at
that fire to the north of Mongul, I saw another blazing
away in Warne, and apparently close to the hut, so I
sent off all the men there were left to see about it
and help to put it out. They were only just in time to
save the place, and found poor Mrs. Murphy and her
children crouching down by the waterhole, having
left the hut to its fate. Her husband was out with the
sheep; the honeysuckles were in a blaze, which would
have caught the roof in another few minutes. The poor
thing was too terrified to speak, the sun beating down
upon her and the little ones, the wind and the fire
roaring and crackling all round her.”
“ Well done, my little wife,” said Ralph, as he sank


into the armchair beside her, and puffed away at his
pipe.
“ I seem destined to discover curious lights to-day,”
said she. “ Look down towards Nalang: what is that ?
It isn’t the sun, for that went down long ago, and I am
sure I hope it isn’t the moon, for if so it’s rising in the
wrong place, and good-bye to everything then.”
“ Newcome, what is it ? ” said Ralph, not answering
Ethel but addressing the manager, who was sitting near.
“I believe it’s the Home Station or the stacks; and
yet Lionel would never have neglected to burn round.
Just go and tell Atkins to get up Harkaway and
Cantab, and come over with me as quick as you can ; ”
and in ten minutes they were off, whilst the little
party in the garden were full of the most anxious
conjectures. It turned out to be the new wool-shed. A
man had gone in with a candle, and striking a match,
let it fall on the shavings. In less than an hour the
building was in ashes, — : a great loss, and one that
determined Lionel on selling the station. He had
made a fair fortune, beginning with nothing, or next
to nothing, and in nine or ten years realized £IB,OOO,
besides purchasing another station. It had required
the greatest economy, industry, and self-denial, but it
was done; the instalments were all paid off, and there
he stood an independent man. His children required
education beyond what a governess could now teach
them ; he would go to England ; it was no use building
another wool-shed for next year; as luck would have
it, all the wool was away. Being close on Christmas,
(the first Ethel had spent in the Colony) the family
all met at Belauja. The heat, glare, and general dis-
comfort made it almost impossible for her to realize
the season; and if those in the drawing-room were
prostrate, what must the poor cook and other servants
9


be over the fire in the kitchen ? But heat is like most
other discomforts, the more you think of, and dwell
upon them, the worse they seem ; the men out in the
broiling sun after cattle, or travelling, don’t feel it half
so much as those remaining in the houses; motion
creates a current, which is infinitely preferable to
stifling, still heat. Nothing is so terrible as a hot dark
night, a darkness which may be felt, making one’s
mind dwell on earthquakes, comets, balls of fire, and
other pyrotechnic entertainments. Many efforts were
made to get up amusements, but the state of the
atmosphere precluded every feeling of enthusiasm,
and the plum-pudding on fire was felt by all to be
much out of place with the thermometer at a 100°.
We want snow and frost, holly and evergreens, church
and merry greetings, otherwise it isn’t Christmas to
those born in the old country; you have to “ make be-
lieve ” very much to realize it. But it is quite other-
wise with the young Australians ; they know nothing
of wintry skies, white fields, and leafless trees ; their
holiday is truly all sunshine; and in their pleasant
homes, assembled on the lawns, enjoying the lovely
night, fearless of damp and dew and such like evils, or
on the Yarra’s tranquil stream, floating along where
the willows bend low and the sweet mimosas perfume
the air, singing some merry chorus or harmonious
glee, they wotild not change their sunny land for the
grey cold leaden skies of England. Home to their
parents it may have been, but not to them. How-
ever, whether in bush or town, say what you will
there is to us an effort about keeping Christmas,
making one thankful when it’s over, and we all return
to the quiet every day routine of life.
' “ If you call this hot, Ethel,” said Ralph, “ I wonder
what you would have thought of Black Thursday. I


was out on the cattle-run alt day; the heat was some-
thing awful. 1 came up to a native well at Jooroot; it
was full of birds, two wild dogs were drinking at it
and never moved, so you may suppose what it Avas;
the birds dropped dead from the trees. The hot north
wind,roaring through the forests, sent the boughs flying.
I was thankful when I got uoav and then amongst
O O
the saplings, for it Avas absolutely aAvful, 110° in the
shade!”
' “ Yes,” said Amy; “ I Avas ill in bed that day.
They put blankets and tarpaulins over the bark roof,
and poured Avater on them, to try to keep it cool. We
thought the last day had surely come, the Avhole Bush
seemed on fire, and towards three o’clock in the after-
noon it grew so dark that the birds Avent to roost.
After that cloavu came the rain in torrents, such as Ave
had never Avitnessecl before.”
“Yes, and do you remember,” said Eliza, “ that
they said cinders from the burning forests Avere driven
by the wind hundreds of miles ? ”
“ You Avill come down Avith us to the races, Avon’t
you, Lionel ? ” said Ethel. “ Ralph is going to take
me, and Ave could all be in the same cottage. They
tell me there are three days’ racing, and three balls.
It must surely be very tiring.”
“ Oh, it’s the only fun there is in the year, so wo
make the most of it; and old BoAvden makes the
most of us, for he supplies all the cottages Avith food,
and attendance ; and much nicer it is than at the inn,
amid all the noise and confusion; besides, there wouldn’t
be room for us all there; as it is the young men have
to put up Avith Canvas Toavu, —that’s a queer quarter,
I can tell you.”
“ Oh, Avell, Lionel, you will come ? ”
“ I will if there is no chance of any more fires; for


I must leave the place as it stands to the purchaser.
You know I have sold Nalang.”
CHAPTER XI.
THE RACES.
What a curiously wild and primitive little course it
was. There stood at one side a rude little erection
called the stand, which served as a shade and pro-
tection from the sun; a few four-in-hands, a good
many dog-carts, and other conveyances of the most
promiscuous styles; horsemen, booted and spurred,
with low broad-brimmed, cabbage-tree hats, or hideous
cones of felt stuck on their heads, accompanying some
merry young girls, also on hoi’seback. A wandering
band of Christy Minstrels enlivened the scene. The
stand was tolerably full of gaily-dressed people, wives
and sisters of the settlers round, who had worked for
the Ladies’ bag all kinds of caps, slippers, cases for
notes, handkerchiefs to fill it and present it to the
winner, who on bended knee, and with many blushes,
received it in the ball-room afterwards. The excite-
ment is very general; not one there who had not an
interest in some particular horse or rider. The jockeys
in their bright colours pass by, carrying their saddles
to the paddock; they weigh and mount. How lovely
each beauty looks as he is led out on to the course
and takes his preliminary canter, his shining coat,
arched neck, and pink nostrils distended with pride
and excitement, ready for the coming battle. See,
they are all now assembled at the post—the flag is
dropped—they are off’! No, that bay colt has shied ;
now he is brought up again, and now they are away,


at first nearly all in a line ; the crowd breathless and
steadily watching. They pass hy the stand almost in
a bunch; swift, closely they keep, until, as they come
round the corner, there are three taking the lead.
Steadily, beautifully sailing along, they keep just a
length behind, while the chestnut, still well ahead,
flies on like a hunted deer. Now a blanket would
cover the three. Quoth Pat, —
“ Sure ’tis a beautiful sight. The chestnut will win.”
“Not a bit of it, neighbour. Just look how the
bay colt is drawing up. I shall win my money upon
him yet. The chestnut’s jockey is thrashing, though
she’s coming a lovely pace, but it’s the distance that
tells upon her. The colt’s being held, I tell you. Now
he passes the black horse again and up the straight
he’s coming—my money is safe.”
The brave little -mare is done ; the crowd gives a
shout; a shake of the rein, they are even, and the bay
wins by a neck.
“ Oh, wasn’t it lovely ? ” said Ethel, as she turned to
Grace Thornton, who had been eagerly watching the
Avhole time, for her brother was riding the colt, and
of course she wanted him to win. “ I was never at
races before, and wish I had a horse of my own. But,
Mrs. Thornton, I am so cold and dizzy, and •”
“ You are pale as death, going to faint, I fear. Try
to come down the steps with me and get to your
carriage. Philip,” (turning to her husband) “ tell Mr.
Williams.”
But before she could get there Ethel said to her
friend that she could go no farther. Grace Thornton
sat down on the grass, and' Ethel fainted away in
her arms. Mr. Gore had given her some water as
she descended the steps, and, forgetting in his solici-
tude that it had been made cpiite hot by the sun,


finished what heat, excitement, and over-fatigue had
begun. Soon a crowd collected round poor Ethel,
or rather Mrs. Thornton, for Ethel knew nothing about
it. Bones, of the Christy Minstrels, was so kind, run-
ning for water and giving it to Mr. Lawrence (of whom
much more hereafter; suffice it to say now that he was
one of Ralph’s most esteemed and worthy friends).
He bathed the hands, the face, as it lay all uncon-
sciously before him, but jirst as the doctor had arrived
and was about to bring his skill into play, Ethel
awoke, sat up, and said, —
“I am better now, Dr. Dickson, thank you. It was
only the heat.”
And no one knew, save Grace Thornton, that the
poor girl had been weeping bitterly all the night
before, scarcely closed her eyes; —some misunderstand-
ing between herself and Ralph. No matter, she was
better now, and Ralph, with Mrs. Thornton, helped
her into the carriage, and drove back to the cottage to
rest for the ball.
No one who saw Ethel dancing away that night
would have believed that she was the same person
who had fainted on the course. Surrounded by
partners, made for society, she thoroughly enjoyed
herself. Ralph, having once brought her into the
loom, considered that he had done his duty, and after
one state set of quadrilles with Mrs. Thornton, whom
he admired if possible more than Ethel, (Don’t misun-
derstand me, I see I’ve put it wrong; and oh ! what a
difference there is in the way of putting things—what
chaos it will create, and what troubles smooth. I
don’t mean you to suppose that he admired her more
than he did his little wife, but that he thought as
highly of her, or more so, than Ethel did. So now I’ve
made it light). When this pleasurable duty of opening


the hall was over he would retire to some snug nook
to smoke and sleep, returning once during the evening
to waltz with Ethel. And no matter who she was
dancing with at the time, if he appeared she had
instantly to excuse herself and go to him at once. As
this became known, she arranged with her partner to
permit her to leave him, and laughingly twirled round
the room, to the great amusement of the lookers-on,
who saw much fun in the game. She was a great
favourite, especially with gentlemen, and the ladies
said she was very kind-hearted with all her faults.
Being the last arrival in the district, she was of course
greatly discussed.
“ Has Duncan seen Mrs. Ralph ? ” said a lady to the
said Duncan’s sister. “ What does he think of her ? ”
“Think of her,” replied the sister; “oh, he raves
about her, like everyone else.”
“ Ah, well! She’s a nice little body, but I can’t say
I see so much to rave about in her.”
“I admire Mrs. Ralph very much,” joined in Mrs.
Thornton, who was sitting near ; “ and expect the more
Ave know her the better Ave shall like her; and I haA r e
also no doubt that if Ave knew her real thoughts she
is quite surprised to find herself placed on such a
pinnacle as she has been raised to. From Avhat I hatm
heard her saj 7 , she Avas one of a large family of sisters
and cousins, and not made \ 7 ery much of. She is un-
affected, SAveetdooking, and true.”
“ A little patronizing, I think, in her manner, and
thinks a good deal of herself,” said the first speaker.
“ There I cannot agree Avith you. She only wants
to be friendly and affable to everyone,” replied Mrs.
Thornton.
“ Yes, but the fact of being affable proves that she
considers herself superior.”


“There she is, flying round, and apparently her
whole soul in the dance,” laughed Janet Baillie,
Duncan’s sister. “ She isn’t dreaming of patronizing
any of us, poor little Mrs Ralph ! and no doubt would
think anyone very silly who could feel themselves
patronized by her. Look, there’s Ralph Williams
coming in for his waltz. See how she will go up to
him directly, like a child; and watch them go round.
Will he always keep her in such obedience ? I trow
not,” said the girl, or rather woman, to herself; and
she smiled as she watched the two.
It was a wonderful ball, and the music was not such
as Coote and Tinney now charm their aristocratic
employers with; but the old Germans kept splendid
time, and never got tired. The tall, fine Highlanders,
the Camerons, Gordons, Macdonalds, and Mcßains,
performed the reels in the grandest style, and with
all the zest and activity which that inspiriting dance
requires. I don’t like to see it gone through minc-
ingly, as if you were half ashamed of it. It’s a rare
old dance, and if you get up to dance, dance it merrily,
and sit down none the worse. Look at Ethel, with
Sandy Cameron for a partner; what a mite she looks;
how she winds in and out in the figure of eight, be-
tween these great big men. See, he is hooking her
O O ' o
arm and twisting her round ; it’s the reel o’ Houllachin,
and how she laughs as they hoot and crack their
fingers, and away again, until Ethel, too tired to go
on any more, had to be led to a seat near to Mrs.
Cameron, who had been looking on trying to make
her husband stop. Ah! what fun !
“ Yell be very tired, Mistress Williams, and Sandy
should be ashamed. Will ye come up to luncheon
to-morrow with us ? we will be proud to see you.”
What a nice motherly woman she was, and Sandy


such a handsome man—wealthy squatters, hearty and
hospitable, like all the rest. So the races went on for
the three clays, and the three balls were kept ttp, the
spirit never flagging, and dawn still saw the flying feet
fly round, and found the weary fiddlers fiddling still.
It had been a very pleasant time; the whole district
round had met and parted the best of friends, and
Bowden was beaming with satisfaction; his horses
had won, his house had been full, and his coffers
positively brimming over. No wonder he beamed on
all around, and gave the grooms an extra glass to
drink success to the next merry meeting.
CHAPTER XII.
THE CORROBOREE.
Some few days after their return home, Bill}', the
black fellow, came in to say that the Winmera tribe
had sent to tell them that they were coming up, and
that they intended to have a corroboree, if Misser
Ralph would allow it. The allowing meant really,
would he give them a sheep, etc., to make merry
with. The tribe arrived according to appointment,
settling down some little distance away from the
friends they came to visit—these blacks observing
the same silence, looking at them from their mimeis.
After a lengthened inspection on both sides, Billy
and one or two more stood up and advanced a few
steps, then the others came forward on their part,
and began to parley; after these preliminaries, the
tribes became gradually more and more friendly,
until the camps presented a curiously wild and busy
scene. It was about full moon. A large supply of


wood had been collected, near a wide spreading
gum, and great preparations made for the approach-
ing feast; loud laughing could be heard, whilst the
men were adorning themselves with white paint —
their wrists and ankles with gum leaves, which when
they dance make a peculiar rustling noise, for the
edges of gum leaves are rather hard. The lubras also
decorate in like manner, and wear a little skirt, very
short, made of emu feathers, and the men long tassels,
also of feathers : but this is in their very wild state
—now they were all decently clothed. Whilst the
blacks were making ready in their camps, Mrs. Lloyd
Williams was busy with more solid work. Besides
the sheep, they were to have large supplies of flour,
sugar, raisins, and currants, mixed with water ; a kind
of hastj r pudding, though not made with milk—the
blacks don’t like it. Buckets of tea, with rum in it:
to give them the spirit alone, would cause the most
awful fights ; it was all judiciously arranged, and no
bad effect ever came of it.
“ The blacks have begun, sir,” said a tall aboriginal
(Wattle), who considered himself then too civilized to
join in their savage mirth. A monotonous beating
of sticks was heard, and the low thud of the lubras’
hands as they kept time on the opossum rugs rolled
up on their laps—a rude and very faint imitation of
drums.
“ Gome, Ethel, put on your hat and a shawl, for
there is a kind of mist rising, and it is a little cold.”
Away they all walked towards the wild scene. The
moon stood half way in the heavens, at her full, shed-
ding so powerful a light that you might see to read ;
the tall gaunt gums threw their long dark shadows
over the grassy plain, the huge fire blazed away, every
now and then flaring up more bright as the flames


caught the crisp dead leaves. To the right of it sat
—or rather squatted—Billy, painted, holding in his
hands two sticks, with which he beat time, whilst he
told in a sing-song monotone some wonderful tale
—let us suppose of heroic daring in bygone genera-
tions ; it must have been certainly not in the present,
although Billy himself may be said to be an excep-
tion, as, Jenny his lubra had belonged to a hostile
tribe in the Tatiara country, and he, like a warrior
bold, had fought three pitched battles before he gained
his prize; so Billy perhaps romanced a little, as his
white brethren occasionallj T do, but no one ever knew
exactly what it was about—the lubras said thunder
and lightning, and that sort of thing, but I don’t
suppose it is a very great loss to the literary world.
Well, next to Billy sat the lubras—a dozen or more ;
one or two blacks—old men not joining in the dance,
looking on, and seeing that the fire was kept up ; while
away in the hazy light stood a vow of men looking
almost like skeletons, so bedaubed were they with
paint, each one with different marks. Now forming
a half circle, they stand out in the moonlight, and
ranged close together, begin their extraordinary dance,
which seems to consist entirely in muscular action;
their arms bowed out, their legs the same, they go
through a series of spasmodic jerks, and after con-
tinuing this for a certain time they all run hack into
the distance again, and become almost indistinct, look-
ing like dark weird phantoms moving stealthily along
in the hazy moonbeams, as however glorious the moon
and clear the atmosphere, it is very difficult to see
far at night. Then two would appear in the open
space, and dance to the admiring crowd, run nearer
with a curious shuffle, the little gum hoiudis rustling;
'OO O ■
two others take their place, and so on until all have


gone through the performance. Then several of the
men will advance much nearer to the orchestra (!), and
the luhras who are to dance go forward to meet them,
tripping along with the lightest, smallest steps or
shuffle, their heads bending modestly down all the
time, and when they get near to the men retiring
backwards, the leaves on wrist and ankle rustling all
the while, and making a hushed low sort of whirr
whirr, like the inward drumming of the emeu. Once
more the men all dance again; and, pairing off in
couples, make a sudden wild and fearful dart, with
sticks in hteir hands, up to the place where Billy is
inciting them on and keeping up “the spirit of the
ball,” the lubras beating time on the rugs, the men
accompanying with their sticks, groaning .whilst they
rush, and finishing up with three last long hideous
yells, which once heard will never be forgotten.
Ethel, as she watched them flying towards her,
clung closer to Ralph’s arm. She could have believed
they were rushing upon them with murderous intent;
hut no—after all the awfully savage- fierceness they
dispersed laughing, some stooping to fasten on the
leaves more securelji, others running back into the
dimness, and after resting, begin all over again and
continue far ou into the night, until they felt inclined
for supper, which many of the lookers on, as in more
civilized assemblies, were quite ready for at a much
earlier hour.
“ As far as I can make out of this curious amuse-
ment, they imitate the emeu as much as possible; you
may have observed this, Williams ? If they spear one
and bring it home, they all sit round before they
begin to eat, and say some words—a kind of prayer
perhaps,” said Mr. Lawrence, who has been mentioned
before as so tenderly caring for Ethel whilst fainting


at the races, and who had come np to stay a week or
so at Belanja.
“ How lovely the emeu look if jmu come across them
in the Bush. As we were driving up, an old one with
eleven young ones ran before us for some distance, the
mother frightened and startled by the unusual noise
of the horses.”
“ They are beautiful birds, but you are wrong in
thinking that it was the mother with them : she lays
the eggs in the mallee scrub, but the male bird sits
OO 7
on them and takes care of them when hatched,” said
Mr. Lawrence.
“ Ralph, when you first came up the blacks wore no
clothes at all, did they ? ”
“Only those feather skirts, worn by young girls.
When they first saw me, they very luckily took me
for a resurrection. One old man came forward, and
after looking at me steadi]} r for a long time, made the
greatest signs of joy; and afterwards, when they got
to understand our language ”
“ Jargon, Ralph,” interrupted Ethel.
“They told me that he thought I was ‘his father
jumped up white man.’ ”
“ There is a story very similar to that told of a man,
a convict, who escaped with some others from Port
Philip,” said Mr. Lawrence.
“ Oh, tell me about it,” said Ethel.
“ There is little to tell, only that it coincides with
what your husband has just said. All of them died
but himself, wandering, enduring the most awful
privations for lack of food and water. He wandered
about for months ; found a grave with the swords and
spears of the deceased natives placed above, according
to their custom, took them for self-defence, and shortly
after met a tribe. They recognised the weapons, and


imagining the man was the deceased come to life,
O O
adopted him. He lived with them upwards of thirty
years; hut it’s a very old story, and has been often
told before.”
“I see their shields have some rude carvings on
them, and how curious those stone tomahawks are,”
said Ethel.
“You should make them mount one as a curiosity,
Mrs. Williams. They are getting very scarce, and will
be. things of the past directly, like the blacks them-
selves, poor things. They fix them in the jawbones of
a kangaroo, tie them round with kangaroo sinew, and
then cement it all with the resinous gum to be seen
everywhere.* And talking of their carvings, some
very ancient drawings and paintings have been dis-
covered to the north-west, in caverns, representing
turtles, porpoises, a human hand, and an unlucky
kangaroo with thirty-two people following after it,
the third person of the band twice the height of the
others, holding a wooden sword. There are many
such, but all on the western coast, and refer to a time
when the savages wore clothes, for some of the figures
are draped in a long tunic. Others are much better
executed, dressed in robes reaching to their feet, which
with their hands were painted a deeper red than the
rest of the body; the face covered with white drapery,
holes left for the eyes, and a double ring round the
head like the aureola of a saint. Three colours were
use d— re d, blue, and yellow; and a kind of writing very
much like the characters used among the natives of
the Indian Archipelago. Near one of the caves, the
profile of a man, not Australian, was deeply cut and
well executed.”
“ How very interesting,” said Ethel. “ Why, the
* See Father Wood’s “ Explorations.”


draped faces with holes for the eyes is like the
Mahometan women, isn’t it ? ”
“Yes; and what is also very singular, in the far
interior Stuart the explorer found natives who made
masonic signs.”
“ Oh, well,” laughed Ethel, “ I know nothing about
freemasonry, it’s a dead secret; but it surely must be
very simple when untutored savages know about it.
It must be a good thing, for it binds all men apparently
in one common fraternity; it’s a pity women haven’t
some similar bond, isn’t it ? ” And she looked archly
up in Mr. Lawrence’s face.
“ Don’t talk nonsense, Ethel,” said Ralph.
“ I don’t think Mrs. Williams could do so, Williams,
if she tried,” said Mr. Lawrence, who was by nature
compelled to say pretty speeches to those ladies he
esteemed and admired.
“ Those natives wore helmets, or a headdress resem-
bling them—most unusual,” went on Mr. Lawrence.
“ There’s one of our blacks—Buckly,” said Williams,
“ who would have made a good general. He comes in
sometimes in the evening when I am smoking my
pipe in the hut, and we have a game at drafts. He
plays very well; but I beat him one night, and he
went back to the camp (where he had manufactured a
draft-board out of a small sheet of bark, making the
difference in the colours by cutting squares in regular
line out of the bark, leaving the others raised), sat up
half the night, played over the game, remembering all
the moves, came down the next evening, and beat me.”
“Yes,” said Mr. Lawrence; “he was a clever fellow,
and an exception; for as a rule, Williams, you can’t
call them bright,—very low standard of intellect.”
“ Granted, of course; still, I believe they are capable
of being taught a little.”


“ Have they any religion ? ” asked Ethel.
“ I have thought sometimes that these very corro-
l .ovees are a kind of relig'ious rite. As I said befoxe, if
they happen to have an emeu for supper they sit
round it, and the oldest or head man says some words
over it before they begin on the all but raw repast.”
“ They are not cannibals surely,” shuddered Ethel.
“ The next thing to it, I fear,” said Mr. Lawrence.
“ Watch them picking the feathers of a bird, throw it
into the low fire beside them, and long before we
consider it even passably fit to eat they have demolished
it, when hardly warmed through.”
“ Oh, Jenny will tell you,” said Tlalph, “ that when
she was a child (and that’s not so very long ago,
fox* they (prickly grow up hei’e), she mmembexs being
given the lip of an enemy to eat, because she was
young and it was tender.”
“ Oh, let us go in,” said Ethel, “ it is too disgusting,
and I am sure we have seen enough of this extra-
ordinary meeting. I shall always be seeing a lurking
black in the dark corners, and fancy they Avant to eat
me.”
“ Lloyd, ring for glasses,” said Eliza, as they all
entered the comfortable little drawing-room, and drew
round the fire, for it Avas chilly. After the heat at
the races the wind had veered ronnd to the south,
and blew cold enough from the Icy Ocean. Yet hoAV
Avelcome, as, yet miles away, it is heard roaring up
through the forests, at first faintly, and then increasing
in speed and strength, until it comes with a hurricane,
sending leaves and dust before it, dispersing all the
heat and languor of the preceding Aveek perhaps, and
chasing the north Avind away to the stony and arid
deserts of the interior.
“You need not fear the blacks, said Ralph, if


whites were as harmless there would be no robberies,
no bushrangers to come and give plucky little ladies
an opportunity of showing their heroism. You don’t
know, Ethel, that there sits before you one who saved
her father’s life b} r her courage and presence of mind.”
“Oh, Ralph,” said Eliza, “pray don’t recall that
time. Whatever nerves I may have had were all
expended then, and now I am left to start at my own
shadow.”
“ How was it, Eliza ? Did bushrangers really come
to the house ? —tell me.” And Ethel drew her chair
farther away from the French window, which stood
ajar, as the chimney had a fancy for smoking, albeit
it was built by a very clever mason, who read
Chambers’ Miscellany, believed it infallible, and had
a theory of his own about chimneys; when they were
found not to be so useful in reality as they promised
by appearance, he either suggested leaving the window
constantly open or to create a good draught, which
would “ obviate the difficulty at once,” take a slice off
the door where it should have met the floor, and it
succeeded perfectly; the smoke Avas thus bloAvn up the
chimney, and so were you, or if not quite, you might
as well have been, for all the benefit you got from the
fire. But these were trifles in such a climate, and
then too it Avas only for a time: were they not all
going home in a few years to fine houses, luxurious
ease, and Ah, ma foi! “ L’homme propose et
Dieu disposed’
“ Oh, Ralph, do sit down. Draw the curtain over
the door. ’What a noise the blacks are making, and
how the mope hawk is screeching. Eliza, come, tell
the story.”
“Well, if I must I must,” said Eliza; “but really
they all knoAv it here.”
10


“Yes, but I don’t; do begin.”
“ Well, it was about nine o’clock on a Sunday even-
ing. Papa and I, with my brother and sister, were
sitting reading, when two men suddenly entered the
room with pistols in their hands. One of them
covered papa, and desired him to stand; but without
rising he took a gun from the wall and presented it at
his assailant. He knew it wasn’t loaded, but snapped
it at him ; and during the surprise and hesitation
caused by this show of resistance, my brother, who
had been lying on the sofa, rushed upon the man and
soon had him on the ground. The other man mean-
while advanced round the table to assist his com-
panion. I saw him, and seized the barrel of his pistol;
he told me I should shoot myself, but I held on and
declared that he should not shoot papa. My sister
meanwhile had procured a rope, with which they
bound the first man, and then turned to relieve me
from my unequal contest. I then flew down in the
dark to get assistance from Harrow, and mistaking
the horses of the men for other bushrangers’, I went
two miles round, while papa and my brother guarded
the prisoners. My brother, after help came, then
started off forty miles away for the police. The men
were taken to Portland, and got twenty-six years
hard labour on the roads; they had been to several
other stations before they came to us.’’
" You were plucky,” said Ethel.
“ The wall of the room bore plain marks of the fray,
being bespattered with the blood of one of the men,
who got hammered about the head severely by papa.”
“Are you not afraid of such a thing happening
again ? I half wish some bushrangers would come up
now ; we are well defended,” said Ethel, “ and it would
be such a tale to tell in days to come.”


“ I think you got a pretty good fright just after you
came up, when Grice went mad, and the} r said he had
escaped out of his room,” laughed Eliza : “ the way you
darted from the dinner table into your bedroom ! ”
The way we both darted,” said Ethel. “ I thought
he would catch up baby—you know how fond ■he
was of her; and do you remember when he got upon
the beam in the kitchen, and was just ready to pounce
down on the three men sleeping there to guard him ]
Atkins got such a fright that night that he has never
recovered from it. What became of him, Ralph ? ”
“ He went to the Asylum in Adelaide, and is dead,
I believe. They put him into the cell at Penola,
whilst Lawrence was taking the depositions; there
happened to be a man up for horse-stealing, and they
put him in too. Grice glared at him for a second,
and then making one pounce upon him, the most
hideous yells ensued; they opened the door and found
the poor horse-stealer in Grice’s grip.”
“ I hope they let the man off,” laughed Ethel; “he
had been punished enough, I should think.”
“ The poor lunatic had been a great drunkard,” said
Lloyd, “ and had suddenly changed; far away from
a public house, he couldn’t get anything here, but I
believe if we had given him wine now and then it
wouldn’t have happened.”
“It is very likely to have been the complete
reform,” said Mr. Lawrence. “ Intoxication is one of
the great evils of this land. In the heat of summer
very terrible deaths occur; if men have to travel many
miles without water, they begin by throwing off one
garment after another, until, raving mad, they dart
away, completely naked, are lost in the Bush, and
never heard of again, for then - bones are seldom found.”
“Do you remember that night, Lloyd, when Sturt,


Gardner, Nellawinda Billy and Yankee Bill came up
from Uapprama, the scene we had in the hut ? ” said
Ralph.
“ I should think I do,” answered Lloyd.
" Tell us about it, Lloyd,” said Ethel. “It is getting
late, but just this one tale more before we say good-
night.”
“ Well, you must know they were all what we call
lags. You won't understand what that means, Ethel,
• —convicts, in more polite phraseology, —ticket of
leave men. They were renowned horse-stealers, and
had been gambling for them. Sturt was our servant
and lived at an out station, where the other men had
joined him. He was a man of good address, and
always claimed relationship with the explorer of that
name —how far true I cannot say. They had had a
great quarrel over a gambling debt, and the others
had declared they would take Sturt’s horse, which was
on our run, so they came up to make Ralph umpire,
who told them that he wouldn’t allow them to do
so ; upon which Sturt, drawing a lovely little duel-
ling pistol out of his belt, held it to Nellawinda’a
head, and told him if he took it after that, he
would blow his brains out. ‘ Mr. Williams’ said he,
‘ this man has stolen more horses than anyone in the
country ; and you’ (turning to Yankee Bill) ‘you spot
them.’ Well, they went away that night, but early-
next morning up came Sturt and said, —
“ ‘ Mr. Lloyd, I must leave, sir.’
“ ‘ That you can’t, —impossible to spare you,’ 1
answered.
“ ‘ Sir, I must indeed ; those men mean mischief. You
are a gentleman, and won’t betray me, I know, but ’
(coming close up to me in a hoarse whisper) ‘lama,
lifer.’


“ ‘ All! how did you get out ?’ I asked.
“ ‘ Took another man’s ticket, sir.’ He got away
from us, but was taken half way to Adelaide by the
police—shot the man, took his horse, and escaped to
California, where he was afterwards lynched.”
“ Dear me,” said Ethel “ what a country it is to live
in ! I shouldn’t wonder when we go home that they
will take us for returned convicts.”
“ An amusing thing happened to a friend of mine—a
very ladylike woman,” said Mr. Lawrence. “She was
going to England overland, and telling of her life in
the Lush, how she weighed out rations to the men,
etc., they,actually took her for a grocer’s wife ! ”
“ I quite believe it,” laughed Ethel. “ I hear the
Indian ladies will have nothing to say to us poor
Australians; the only thing is that a well bred woman
can generally hold her own everywhere. I heard a
man in Melbourne say that it takes three generations
to make a gentleman and four to make a lady. I
turned round to look at him, and saw at a glance
that he owned the right number, if not many more.”
“ Ethel,” said Ralph, “ you are again talking non-
sense ; it is high time that you said good-night.”
CHAPTER XIII.
A WINTER JOURNEY.
After the excitement of the races, they all settled
down to the usual monotony, and those who have
experienced it will know how swiftly time flies in
the quiet round of every day life and duties. When
I think of that little course, with all its pleasures, and


compare it with the Flemington Racecourse of to-day,
it really seems a dream, and yet no doubt in the far
away interior much the same primitive scenes take
place now as we enjoyed then. More than 80,000
people assemble each cup day at Flemington; here
will be seen all the beauty and fashion of the south-
ern hemisphere, adorned in dresses from the north of
falulous prices, and the lawn is one gay parterre ol
varied colours. I have often thought that the toilettes
and their wearers are much more thought of than
the lovely horses, which only serve' as a pretext for
so much gaiety and display. In the Bush we really
enjoyed the racing, and thought little or nothing of
our dress. The question has also often crossed my
mind, as to whether it is really good taste to be the
most conspicuously attired in such a large concourse.
I am an unprejudiced observer, as I really went to see
and not be seen. The Cup Day is quite an institu-
tion in Melbourne, a public holiday in fact, as all
the best shops are closed, and every one who can gives
themselves up to the enjoyment of the hour. The
governor is there, with friends from other colonies.
O ’
Some drive down four-in-hand, and on the I’oad the
same melee of conveyances may be seen as on the
Derby. Trains are crowded to suffocation; I scarce
know which is the worst, the road with all the dust
and crowds of carriages, or the train and its fearful
scramble ; it will never be really comfortable until we
fly there, and then a head wind would doubtless be
blowing. On the whole I think the Cup Day is
not so enjoyable as the two quieter days which
succeed it; like many another amusement, “le jeu ne
vaut pas la chandelle,” unless yon happen to own her
winning horse. Still it is a grand sight, and worth
O O O'
seeing more than once.


But to return to EtLel. She of course had a
great deal of time to herself, as Eliza Williams still
kept house; so she spent most of her days with
Ralph, riding over the ran, either after cattle or
going to the various out-stations to see the shep-
herds and take them their rations. A whole family
was nearly poisoned through the want of thought
of the father. He had a bottle of strychnine in the
house, which he carelessly kept on the rough wooden
mantelpiece; this was generally used, all through
the Bush, for poisoning baits with which to kill the
wild dogs, such formidable enemies to the lambs.
His wife was in the habit of employing a black
lubra, to help her with the children and household
duties; she offended her one day: iu the evening, tea
was laid, and when the husband came in, he asked
why she had put salt into the tea cups. “ Salt ?"
she said, “ I have put no salt in,” and took up one to
look at it, and there was a small dose of strychnine
in every cup, for the children as well. He secured
two lubras, not knowing which to suspect, and sent
for the police. The innocent one slept peacefully all
night, the guilty was restless and condemned herself;
she was taken to gaol, and remained there some
months; she knew quite well the use of the poison,
and had stood quietly by whilst the cups were ex-
amined.
Thus a year or more passed, and found Lloyd
and his wife preparing to sail for England, leav-
ing the place. to Ralph, and retiring with his
share as partner. It was a wise step on their part,
hut not so good for the future prosperity of the
station, as Lloyd had ever been the most cautious
manager of the two brothers, whilst Ralph was the
more enterprising. Looking into the accounts was


highly necessary; they were enormous both ways,
for if the wool and stock brought in large returns on
one hand, on the other the expenses of keeping up
the run were proportionately great, and required
thought and care. Ralph was always hopeful, he
never saw the dark and risky side of a speculation;
whilst Lloyd, less enterprising but more judicious,
always calculated. Ralph’s ducks were all swans,
like the old Park trout, “ as large as Dee Salmon ; ”
and so you see that when Lloyd left, the steady
guide was wanted at the helm. Ralph never loved
accounts or knew anything about them, but trusted
implicitly in the friendship and faith of his most
worthy agents, Tenn, Fifteen, and Twenty per cent.
So straightforward and honest in every way, they
had his welfare at heart; they were such fast friends.
Ralph was a rich and solvent man, likely to be one
of the wealthiest in the colony, and fifteen per cent,
for borrowed money was really nothing. Fencing
went on extensively in every direction, improvements
made, wells sunk on distant parts of the run at great-
outlay ; but the wool market kept high, as also the
sheep and cattle, and nothing more prosperous could
be wished for.
Ethel found that she could manage her large house -
hold tolerably well; made many mistakes at first,
as all young housekeepers will, but little by little
got a well ordered home, endeavouring to have it
as much like an English country place as it was
possible to make it in Australian wilds. She en-
couraged the cottagers to plant gardens round their
huts, flowers in front, vegetables at the back, with
vines and creepers over their rude exterior, making
them ornamental instead of unsightly; the first old
hut where her husband and Lloyd had lived so long


she got bj r degrees to be a perfect bower of evergreens
and flowering plants; whilst the new house, now quite
finished, was adorned along the verandah with
begonias of varied colour, the glorious crimson passion
flower, mixed with cloth of gold roses, and a lovely
little white creeper of the solanum tribe, which came
originally as a cutting from Mr. Lawrence’s station
down the country. Thus the time passed away
most happily and peacefully, with her flowers, her
poultry, music, reading, and above all her nursery,
where two little pets now played about; added to all
these innocent pleasures, her growing friendship for
Mrs. Thornton, which was as sincerely returned —
pleasant visits to her house, where they tried over
duets together (Mendelssohn their greatest favourite),
strolled round and round the garden, watching the
progress of cherished plants which at some expense
and great risk of their tender lives had been sent up
from town, three hundred miles away, and were now
flourishing under the careful nurture of their sweet
mistress.
“The spring arose on this garden fair,
And the spirit of Love fell evexywhere,”—
and the two young friends felt its genial warmth,
and were happy and blessed in its charmed circle.
Far away from the turmoil and distraction of busy life,
they spent their quiet days, meeting at short intervals,
comparing notes on the progress of their children,
their work, their books, and other topics, searching
together for new beauties in song, and rare exotics,
which in that lovely climate grew with little trouble,
Grace Thornton had the most beneficial influence on
Ethel’s mind, strengthening it in every way; she often
said the one thing wanting in Ethel was a love of
O O


poetry ; she could not understand how this was lack-
ing in her character. But intercourse developed what
had only lain dormant. Young people often think
that to he poetic or appreciate poetry is too romantic
and silly; they pretend to be fearfully matter-of-fact,
whereas all the while it is only lying waiting to be
developed. “ Tis remembrance makes the poet,” and
although to few only the gift is given of expressing
themselves in verse, still as years advance they learn to
appreciate the beautiful thoughts and expressions of
others, weaving them into their own existence and
turning back to them with oft repeated pleasure as
each lovely scene or musical cadence recalls the un-
forgotten lines to the lips. Could anything be more
truly charming than to travel with a companion
whose poetic mind sees beauties which you would pass
unnoticed but for bis superior thoughts and percep-
tions ? —“ The mountains, waves, and skies, a part of
him, and of his soul, as he of them.” Twice have I
travelled with those who depended much upon me for
explanations and help in many ways, but I am resolved
that should I once again be given the chance of visit-
ing those same charmed spots it shall be with one
who can inform my lesser mind and educate my willing
spirit. I was never meant to lead, although through
life it has been my fate to be compelled to do so. Oh !
how I do love to lean on some one else, and long
to place all my load of responsibilities on another’s
shoulders; how often do I exclaim, “ Oh, for a prop !”
Again, is there anything much more depressing than
when with enthusiastic pleasure you take another
through the many beauties which you love so well,
they, instead of echoing your raptures, tell you that
they see very little beauty in them, and in fact are
disappointed in the whole scene ? Hopelessly, igno


rantly, wilfully blind. No, let us retract the first, for
while there is life there is hope, and we will trust that
o’er their dream of life enlightenment may shed its all
expanding influence ; for although change and decay
in all around we see, the beauties of nature never die ;
the very dust upon the marble urn or slab softens its
rougher outline ; the very ivy on the mouldering tower
gives a wild and saddening, but beautifying aspect to
its ancient walls. Time, if it destroys,'still mellows,
as it passes steadity o’er; and so with the human
mind; day by day as some little grain of strength
departs from the body, the spirit gains that which
the frame has lost, and grows, or should grow, in
proportion as the lowlier part of our mysterious nature
decays.
As a rule, Ethel had very little trouble with servants ;
Jessie in the nursery was her great comfort, and the
rest were equally good in the other departments.
Now and then one might be disrespectful, but Ethel
would gently remind her that she would not speak so
to an English mistress, and that although thej' were in
the Bush of Australia, she was quite as much a lady
as she would be at home. Wages were very high, and
still are; a plain cook wall get forty pounds a year, a
laundress the same, and housemaids never less than
thirty-six, with a man to wait on them, —that is to say,
to chop the wood, and bring the water to the door;
and these wages go so much further in the Bush, where
they cannot possibly spend much upon dress. There
is great excitement when a hawker’s dray appears; it
is quite an afternoon’s shopping. He will carry dresses
and hats —all of the very latest fashion, of course ;
groceries, boots and shoes of every kind, and, to use
his own phrase, “ collars, culls, laces, ribbons, and a
variety of other articles too numerous to mention.”


They make a thriving business, and are often the
greatest convenience. Many a pleasant afternoon
did Ethel spend looking over their merchandise and
making purchases; they found by degrees that it
was of little use bringing any but the best things,
otherwise tire settlers sent to town for them.
The arrival of the mail each month from home was
always looked forward to with intense pleasure,
and Ethel would fly with the letters to her own
room and devour their contents. They had now only
twenty miles to send, and every week the post came
in from the adjacent colonies. In the early days they
had eighty miles to ride, so you may imagine that
the post was a rare luxury ; but this was long before
Ethel went out. Amy Williams often told her that
she knew nothing of real Bush life, all was made so
pleasant and comfortable for her, and so it was for
many years; in fact, she would advise all young ladies
who were wearied of the every day round, petty
jealousies and squabbles of English life, whether in
country towns or smaller villages, where everyone is
more or less in such a narrow groove that it is next to
impossible to wriggle out of it, to go away to distant
lands —no matter where, only get away—and return
some day a large-hearted, liberal-minded and charitable
woman, with lots to tell of, more to think of, and much
to remember. It struck Ethel very forcibly that every-
one seemed to be hurrying through life as quickly as
possible, there was so much more to be clone than there
was time for, and no one was in that state of quiet
repose which permits of investigating clearly the
concerns of one’s neighbours. The worst you heard
was that this man’s flocks were scabby, that man’s
cattle had pleuro, or that so and so’s sheep were
stolen or driven away by the blacks. This will not


§ound tempting, certainly; yet mingling in with all
this daily bustle, came every now and then the wel-
come visits of friends from distant stations, when music
and exchange of thought came like refreshing breezes
on the soul ; and in after years dances, concerts, and
hunts varied the monotony and enlivened the district,
which then, from the harmony that existed amongst
its members, was often called Australia Felix. Now,
as I write, far away, there is scarcely one left of that
once pleasant circle of friends: death or ruin came
amongst them, and the charmed circle was broken,
never to be united again as it was then.
The autumn passed away even more happily than
usual, for Ralph spent much of his time at home and
the evenings were especially delightful; be read aloud
whilst Ethel worked, and the overseers after dinner
retired to their snug and comfortable quarters in the
bachelors’ hut. The heavy rains of winter had set in,
for it was the beginning of June, and very few visitors
came: the roads were so bad—covered with water, so
that the track was only visible from the lack of reeds
and grasses which from traffic had been trodden down
and consequently left it clear water ; swans swam over
it in many parts, and even the crabholes were all but
lost in the wide spreading overflowing swamps. It
was a miserably wretched day; the rain jxmred
drearily down outside, and tears were shed in torrents
in the house. A little babe but a week old lay- in the
cradle asleep ; Jessie by the fire tried to amuse the boy’-,
not much more than a babe himself; Ethel in an arm-
chair sat anxiously watching the clock as the hands
moved all too slowly round, tears coursing down her
pale wan cheeks; at her knee the little Maud stood
looking up into her mother’s face.
“ Mamma,” she said, “ don’t cry; papa has gone out


to shoot turkeys, he will be back soon. Let me wipe
the tears away.”
Ethel caught the little darling to her heart, and only
wept the more.
“ Jessie,” she said, “ I hear the dogs barking ; go and
see if it is the doctor ; he might be here by this time,
I should think.”
“ Indeed, ma’am, it’s not possible ; sixteen miles to
ride, and sixteen hack —he canua be hers much before
night. I’ll go and see how the rnaister is ; and dinna ye
greet so sair ; maybe he’s not so bad after a, and ye 11
be ill yersel
The truth was that whilst Ethel had been so happy
in having Ealph much more in the house than
usual, he had been gradually ailing more and more,
but feared to tell her, lest the alarm should be too much
for her strength. Now he lay in danger of his life
in another room, and all the household waited for
the doctor’s coming in almost breathless suspense.
He came at last, pronounced the malady to be capable
of cure, but ordered the patient to Melbourne because,
he would require constant attention, which the long
distance and his widely extended practice would pre-
vent him from giving. So as soon as it could be
well arranged to leave home, they started away to
face the frightful winter roads, with three hundred
miles before them, in a dog-cart, driving tandem.
Jessie was left in charge of the two children, and the
head overseer managed the house during their
absence. Down country the roads were truly awful;
in some places there had been attempts to clear a way
for the coaches, which were just then beginning to
run; trees were uprooted and laid on either side of
the track, loose earth thrown back into the immense
holes from which they had been taken up, but no


other effort made to render them passable ; so that of
course after the heavy rains, these holes became pud-
dings of mud, into which the horses dived, sometimes
nearly up to their necks, through which you knew
you had to be dragged, and out of which you came by
a miracle, as it appeared each time, and this would
continue for miles at a stretch, through an intermin-
able gum forest; then the fearful creeks, with bridges
which it seemed impossible to cross and yet live.
How often Ethel thought of the fine ladies in England,
who wouldn’t go down such a road or lane “ because
of a rut that was really very dangerous,” as she was
jolted mercilessly from side to side, terrified at almost
every step. At last they came to a green road which
led round a tree, on the other side of which was a
huge and apparently very deep pool of thick muddy
water; trotting along at as quick a pace as the state
of the roads would permit, Ralph came upon it almost
before he had time to turn on one side, hut Ethel,
seeing the fresh green track, and warned before bv
Ralph always to take these in preference to the older
ones, as they betokened danger either close to or ahead,
begged him to notice it.
“ Tut! nonsense ! ” said he, “we can’t be turning for
every trifling puddle,” and so dashed in, and in less
than a second, over went dog-cart and baby and all,
Ralph on the ground holding fast by the reins, the
nurse and child pitched out at the back, and Ethel
invisible.
As soon as Ralph was on his feet again he called,
“ Where is my wife ? ”
“ Here,” said a small smothered voice from under all
the cushions, rugs, wraps and shawls with which the
trap was laden ; “ but never mind me, Ralph—where
is baby ? ”


Ralph had more than enough to do to manage
the horses, the leaders’ traces were broken ; he had
turned round to look things in the face, and a fine
entanglement there was ; the shaft was smashed, and
the dog-cart sunk deep into the frightful hole, where a
dray had hogged, and out of which it had been dug.
The nurse girl, quick as thought, and luckily unhurt,
put baby on a dry tussock of grass, and ran to help
her mistress, who was nearly smothered and unable
to move, all the time close to the wheelers’ heels;
however, they were quiet horses, mercifully, and she
soon emerged none the worse, by this time laugh-
ing heartily. The horses were unharnessed, tied to
a tree ; Ralph got out the tomahawk, cut down a pole,
and soon levered up the trap, then with straps of
green hide bound up the shaft (Oh, “ there’s nothing
like leather,” especially in the Bush), and finding a
spring had gone, bound that up with whipcord. Every
one is obliged to travel with such like necessaries, to
be ready for accidents and emergencies. At length they
were ready to start again, but this had detained them
so long, that instead of being able to reach the little
Inn that night, they were obliged to ask the hospi-
tality of a settler whose homestead was some miles
nearer. The short winter’s day was closing in; indeed it
was already quite dark before they saw the welcome
lio-ht of “ household fires.” Ralph knew the people,
but Ethel did not; however, tills was nothing in those
days, everyone was sure of a welcome ; and as Ethel
stood there with her young babe in her arms asking
for shelter it would have been a very ceremonious
person indeed who could have refused her.
“ Mrs. O’Reilly, I believe,” she said, as a homely
kindly face came enquiringly to the door, wondering
what the unusual stir was all about at that time of


night, “ We must, I fear, trespass upon your kindness ;
we have met with an accident —broken the shaft, and
one of the springs.”
“ The Lord be praised ! ” ejaculated Mrs. O’Reilly,
leading Ethel into her warm room. “ Sure an ’ye
must be starving ; come in, come in, we’ll do our best
and welcome, but it’s not the like o’ this ye’re accus-
tomed to.”
“ Oh, it is truly delightful to get warm again,’’
laughed Ethel. “We were coming along splendidly’
when Mr. Williams drove into a deep hole, and over
we went in a moment.”
“Ah now, thin, glory be to God! ” again responded
Mrs. O’Reilly. Ethel was highly amused at the pious
expressions, but scarcely realized their meaning as
applied to a broken carriage and what might have
been a serious matter; had they been intended as
thanksgivings for their escape from injury she could
have more readily comprehended ; however, it was the
good woman’s way, and she used these and the like
exclamations most promiscuously, interlarding her
whole conversation with them ; deplored the want of
society in her neighbourhood, confided to Ethel that
she rarely if ever even saw a priest, but trusted that
the time would come when she should be permitted
to hear mass once again, and finished up b} r assuring
Ethel that she really felt she could go to heaven as
easily as she could enter a ball-room ! and Ethel
believed her. Indeed it was far easier to picture Mrs.
O’Reilly in regions unknown which would be heaven
to her, and which doubtless as a good wife, mother, and
woman, she Avould fully deserve, than in a ball-room ;
for, however charming it might be, and is, to thou-
sands, and how charming none knew better than
Ethel herself, still her kind and voluble hostess would
11


have been much out of place: a fish out of water
restored by some lucky chance to his native element,
and Mrs. O’Reilly returned from the festive scene to
the hut in which with her genial hospitality and
warm Celtic heart she looked so well, miu'ht both
' O
exclaim, “ The Lord be praised ! ”
Though this has taken long to write, it took Mrs.
O’Reilly a very few seconds to tell, and during the
conversation she was busily piling more wood on the
fire, and admonishing her children, who still stood
staring at Ethel from dark corners, whither they had
retired like wild goats on her entrance.
“Patty, now, run off and tell Biddy to be quick
and lay the cloth—come out o’ that. Mary, don’t be
clinging round me, honey. Excuse them, ma’am,
they never see anyone, and are shy and wild. Sure, if
I’d had them in ould Ireland on my father’s beautiful
domain, they’d have been very different.”
Biddy was a relation of Mrs. O’Reilly’s, but lived
there in the capacity of general servant; the work
was done between them, and the distinction between
mistress and maid was very slight. The spare room
was hastily prepared, and as Ethel took off her hat
and smoothed her hair, the smell of the fried bacon
and eggs in preparation in the kitchen was most
savoury and welcome; and after putting baby to rest
she gladly sat down with the hospitable pair to their
kindly meal. The hot cup of tea was so refreshing,
with the sweet cream, the bread and butter so fresh,
and added to this the luxury of wild honey gathered
from the nests in the trees, with a flavour of which
even Hybla cannot boast. The long journey, the cold
wind, to say nothing of the accident, the warm fire
and rest, all combined to make Ethel very sleepy;
so she soon asked her kind hostess to allow her to


retire, and was quickly in the land of forgetfulness,
with her babe in her arms. Though the roof was of
bark, the walls of slabs, and the floor tile earth only,
it little mattered to her, she slept more soundly than
the Queen on her gilded couch ; ’tis true in the morn-
ing she dressed on the bed, as the earth was earthy,
and cold, and damp, but this was nothing, and if Ralph
would only get out of the way she could stand down
with her thick boots on and do her hair. A bath would
have been a luxury, but this was not to be expected.
She was most thankful for the night’s rest in the
cleanly room. There was a good time coming, two
hundred miles off in Melbourne; meanwhile make the
best of everything.
Mr. O’Reilly and Ralph made the dog-cart strong
enough by splicing and lashing it together. After
breakfast they bade their kind entertainers good-bye,
and the last words Ethel heard Mrs. O’Reilly say
were, “ The Lord be praised! ” but she knew she didn’t
mean it as a thanksgiving for their departure, though it
seemed like it. We mustn’t take things as they seem,
but as they are meant; it was, as I have said before,
only a way she had: she began her Hallelujahs on
earth instead of reserving them for heaven, as other
people do.
By slow degrees they got as far as Ballarat, where
Ralph said there was a made road all the way into
Geelong, and Ethel cheered herself with the delightful
prospect of once more rolling easily along on a smooth
surface. When she got to it she found that it cer-
tainly was made, and of logs laid close together, sugges-
tively termed a corduroy road, over which you bumped
the best way you could. They said it was an American
idea, but it must have been in the very early days of
that now luxurious country, as our clever neighbours


across the ocean tell us that we English don’t know how
to live. Oh ! the jolts, the shakes, the up and downs,
the fun and the grief, comforts and discomforts of a
new country. Yet I, for one, never regret having
gone out in my youth, and advise thos'e who wish to
have their minds enlarged and enlightened, despite
roughings, which, if you laugh at them, are positive
enjoyments, —those who wish to get away from the
aimlessness of their lives here, to go to the backwoods;
it is really delightful (if you are there with nice
people), and necessity being the mother of invention,
you learn all kinds of .usefulness. The girls of the
Colonies can be charming in the drawing-room, full
of sparkling conversation, for they have read much,
are musical, and perhaps artists ; when you see
them rivalling their English sisters in grace and
beauty, and often, very often, surpassing them in
mind, you would scarcely credit that those nice girls
can bake and chum, wash and iron, attend to a
dairy, milk a cow, perhaps, (never were there sweeter
milkmaids), and have probably made the dress in
which you think they look so irresistible. If those
in humbler life, the poor of our great cities, would
only take courage and emigrate, leave the wretched
rooms and ill-ventilated houses, the close courts and
struggle for mere existence in which they dwell, for
the free life of the Colonies, taking with them energy,
patierrce, perseverance, and thrift, they would ex-
change their present miseries for comparative luxury,
and do good to two countries; —firstly, to England,
by relieving her of a population which, if it goes on
as hitherto, will soon be overflowing into the sea;
and, secondly, to Australia, where good servants are so
much wanted, wages are high, food cheap, and, above
all, plenty of fresh air, and lots of room.


But we must get back to our travellers, and leave
them for a time in the best hotel in Melbourne,
Ralph under the most skilful surgeon, having borne
the long rough journey better than could have been
hoped.
CHAPTER XIV.
THE RIVER.
Far away in the steep and thickly-wooded ranges of
Gipps Land, there stood a lonely hut, rough and
newly-erected ; stock-yards could be seen close by, and
all the signs of hard work and little means around.
At a short distance was another hut, smaller, and
less habitable than the first-mentioned. This was
the kitchen, where a man and his wife and the only
servant lived. As night began to close in a wan and
O O
anxious woman might be seen looking up the road
and through the trees, as though she expected some
one, and turned back disappointedly into the larger of
the two huts. Tall, gaunt, and very thin, her lovely
dark-grey eyes fringed with black lashes, her regular
features, and heavy masses of black hair, where silvery
threads might be seen if closely observed, still showed
that she had been very handsome, and would be still
under better circumstances, as she was not old. The
moon rose upon the little homestead; cold and sharp
the night wind blew, for frost was in the air; the roar
as of a river not far off fell upon the ear, the giant
trees cast their long shadows away into the darkness
beyond, but the place looked best in this soft light.
The fire burned brightly within, where the frugal meal


was spread—so frugal, nay, so scant, sometimes that it
scarcely served to keep life in the worn and tired frame.
Up and down before the hut paced the anxious woman,
with a little girl by her side.
“ Surely I hear a horse’s feet now,” she said; “ he’ll
soon be back.” Over and over again she repeated the
same or similar words, but the longed for sounds never
came nearer. Sometimes with intense gazing into the
far moonlight she thought she could even see him
coming : the eye will fancy what the heart would see.
Backwards and forwards still she paced, turning into
the house now and then to replenish the fire and keep
all bright, for every minute now must bring him home.
At last the little one was so tired that she put her in
her cot, and then paced to and fro alone. Where was he ?
How the river roared, its rapid torrents swollen by the
winter’s rains ; yet he had crossed it many times; even
if the log which stretched from bank to bank had
been carried away be could swim, so could the horse.
Oil, agony of suspense ! Not a friend in the world
bad she but him: what if he never returned ? Ah ! no,
it could not be; the roads were bad, be bad left the
town (whither he bad gone to purchase some few com-
forts for her) late; she wouldn’t go in, she would watch
another hour; be must be back then, when all the cold,
weary waiting would be past, and she would see him
once again before her whom she loved so well, and for
whom she had sacrificed herself. The hour passed;
slowly and still more slowly she dragged her weary
limbs; sharp pangs of agony seemed now at times to
chain her to the spot, and yet she still gazed almost
“ her very soul away ” into that terrible silent forest.
At last she crossed over to where the servant woman
slept, called her up and went with her to her own
hut, and paced no more. The moon went down and


left the stilly darkness only; the woman kept the fire
burning through the night; the dawn broke, and still
the young man was away; but to him that night a
little son had been born, and now lay all unconsciously
in his mother’s arms.
“ It’s all right with me,” she faintly murmured.
“ God grant that it may be the same with your
master. What’s that? Surely a gun went off; he
must be near, and in danger. Oh, the river! Go, tell
your husband to start ofl’ at once.”
And as she spoke in rushed to her bedside his
favourite dog, licked her hand, jumped up and licked
her face, pulled at her sleeve, panting, and with most
eager eyes did all but speak and beg for aid.
Helplessly she lay, in an agony of suspense and
dread. What could that shot mean ? The dog darted
wildly after the man, who in less than an hour re-
turned to tell that the gun lay on the river's bank,
with clothes and hat, the horse grazing at a little
distanee, with the valise strapped to the saddle, full
of purchases, but the rider was nowhere to be seen.
The man, after relating the terrible news, rode otf to
the nearest station for assistance, and every search
was made, but all in vain. He had evidently attempted
to cross, but the current had been too strong and borne
him far away down ; the fallen tree, which formed a
rude bridge in summer, was covered deep in water, so
to swim had been his onty chance; he might have
fired the gun to bring assistance from his home, but
all is mystery, and ever will remain so.
Thus perished poor Ned Delmore, with all his dreams
of restoring the old Hall to its wonted comfort and
joviality. How hardly he had toiled none but those
who have seen the roughest of life in the backwoods
can imagine. On his arrival he had gone up alone to


Belanja, and remaining there for some few months,
had got a slight insight into station management;
hut returning to Melbourne, he had fallen in with a
sharp unprincipled man, who represented this place in
all its brightest colours, much like the Eden of the
Mississippi swamps in “Martin Chuzzlewit.” The cattle
were so wild that it was next to an utter impossibility
to muster them; when all but in the stock-yard they
would break off, tearing with headlong speed down the
range and up the steep ascents on the other side, when
away the tired horsemen would turn after them, or if
too late at night, rest perforce until dawn, when the
same work was before them with about the like suc-
cess. It was a sad ending to a sad life. The poor
mother recovered, sold the few things she could call
her own, and went to her friends, a broken-hearted
woman. There are many like her. She had been faith-
ful and true, had given the best energies of her young
life to help in the struggle. All was past now, and
she was added to the number of those who disappear
from the scene but still live on, where and how no one
knows but He whose pitying ear hears their prayers,
sees their sorrowing penitence, and forgives.
The old Hall once more. From the stir and life
around something unusual must be taking place.
Servants pass and repass from wing to wing in busy
haste; the drawing-rooms, galleries, courtyard, lawns
are filled with gaily-dressed ladies, laughing and
chatting away as at every step they meet some well
known friend or acquaintance. Some wear Lincoln
green, with large drooping Leghorn hats and long
white ostrich feathers; they have bows in their hands,
arrows in quivers slung gracefully over their shoulders
and at their sides. In the large field to the left, the


targets are placed, with wide-spreading tents, where
luncheon is laid out for the numerous company ex-
pected. Carriage after carriage drives up the avenue,
and there stands the old squire outside the porch, with
his handsome face and cordial greeting, Mrs. Delmore
in the lower drawing-room receiving the most im-
portant of her guests, while Mary and her sister do
their best on the lawn to welcome all the younger
ones. The old Hall was a fine place for a bow meet-
ing ; there were so many delightful old nooks and
corners to lose yourself in, and have long pleasant chats
with pleasant people on very delightful subjects, —a
place for romance, and poetry, and dreams; lam sure
many a one will remember its dear old haunts with
saddened thoughts. We were all so young then, and
now are growing old, “ silver threads among the gold,”
raven locks quite grey, and smooth brows “ wrinkled
deep in time.” Can you not almost hear the band
playing, see the brilliant concourse of the assembled
county in all its pride and beauty, watch the arrows
as they fly from out the strained bow, with keen,
unerring mark strike the gold, or less well aimed hit
O O f
only the outer circle, the lithe young figures tripping
gaily across the open space between the targets to
claim their feathered toys, the sunshine, and the glad-
ness ? There go the few who shoot at sixty yards, the
squire leading them, but not successfully; his arm
shook strangely, the arrow shot wide of the mark;
his eye was dimmed with an unwonted cloud, his
heart was shaken with a mighty grief, suppressed
and conquered for the time; he must and would bear
up until the night, and none should know the dread-
ful news which that very morning the post had
brought.
“Why, Squire, you are not in trim to-day,” ex


claimed one old friend, as ■with surprise he saw the
missing shot.
“ Only the sun, that’s all,” laughed the squire.
“ We are not as young as we were, Joe, either.”
There was something hard and forced in the tone,
which his friend noted but couldn’t make out, and as
he quietly observed the absent troubled look, and heard
the deep sigh, breathed only when he thought that
none would notice, he knew the poor old squire was
in deep grief.
There at the head of the long tables he stands,
responding to the toasts and song and long loud
cheers which greet him. And now, refreshed, the
archers all repair again to the field, the band has
regained strength and spirit, the tent for dancing
is filled with merry partners and fast flying feet ;
others have adjourned to the drawing-room, where
some gifted singer charms her attentive audience, or
a sweet tempered performer dashes off a brilliant
fantasia, of which everyone takes advantage to talk
to their neighbour. It is the signal for a general buzz,
the girl herself enjoying it as much as anyone, for
are there not two or three young fellows leaning over
the piano talking the greatest nonsense, the while she
laughs and nods and bows her head and rattles over
the keys ? But evening draws on, most have many
miles to drive, so gradually they disappear, charmed
with everything and everybody, and as they drive
away declare to each other that it has all gone off
capitally.
The twilight is merging into night, the old study
door stands open, the evening is hot and close ; in the
arm-chair we know so well is the squire, his head
bowed on his arms, which the table supports.
“ How shall I break it to her, Charles ? ” he groaned


“it will kill her, after all this excitement; yet it was
best to hear up. My sou !my son ! ”
“ Tell her in the morning,” said Charles; “ she will
have had rest then, and will be the better able to
stand the shock.”
“ You are right. You he the one to do it—l can-
not.” Heavy sobs broke from the poor old man. It
was in this very spot they parted but four short
years ago, and now they could never more meet on
earth. The painful details of his life in the colonies
they never really knew, thus were they both spared
much needless distress; their cup was very full with-
out adding to its bitterness. '
It will perhaps have been noticed that at the festive
gathering neither Reginald Carr nor any of his children
were present. Dove was long since married, and gone
with her husband to Canada, Sophy was with her
father, comforting the sweet young widow of poor
Dick. That cough which all had noticed on his re-
turn from Sebastopol had slowly but surely worked
its fatal task, and after scarce two short years of
happiness had laid the gentle youthful spirit low; but
to him mors janua vitca.
When we left Ethel in Melbourne, nursing her hus-
band, she did not know of either her cousin’s or her
brother’s death. Sorrow never comes alone, they saja
She had scarcely got over the fatigue of her long,
rough journey, when the news from Gipps Land
reached her, and quickly following, the English mail
brought a letter from Mrs. Delmore, telling of Dick’s
death. It was very crushing. Faint and weary from
constant watching and sleepless nights, she needed
not, it would have seemed, these terrible additions to
her griefs; yet we know whatever is, is best, and


perhaps when trouble after trouble comes the heart is
so stunned that it does not realize each separately, thus
suffering all at once may be most merciful. Her little
babe fell ill in consequence, and fear for her was added
to her other anxieties and shocks, so that, when after
many weeks they returned to Belauja, she wandered
about a perfectly changed and broken spirited woman,
not able to rouse herself to take interest in anything.
It was the reaction after such heavy clouds and terrible
strain upon her nervous system. Jessie had fulfilled
her charge well—the two little ones were in rude
health and spirits; she soon brought baby on to look
round, and fat, and bonn'ie; Ralph was quite him-
self again ; but nothing seemed to rouse Ethel; she
appeared in a perfect stupor, and anxiously did Jessie
watch her young mistress, and grieve to see her so
altered. They brought some new plants up from
town, but she cared little for them, until one morn-
ing she discovered one had blossomed in the night.
Its fresh bright beauty awoke a rapture of delight;
she ran to bring the children out to look at it with
her own bright smile once more, and Jessie quickly
followed, inwardly blessed the little flower for the
change which it had wrought; but the truth was, her
strength and spirits were returning, and wanted but
little to call them forth.
About sixteen miles from Belanja there were some
very extraordinary caves, which stretched underground
for a long way. The stalactites were most wonderful,
varying from large pillars to the most exquisitely
delicate formations. To get to one, and this the most
elaborately and finely encrusted, it Avas necessary to
craAvl along on hands and feet, Avith a smothering
sensation and dread lest the rocks might fall and
crush you; but when the beautifully vaulted cave


was reached it quite repaid the exertion, despite the
inconvenience of carrying your own candle as you crept
through. I was once at Adelsberg, but was too ill
to see the caves, so am unable to compare these with
them, but believe they resemble them in beauty. On
this particular day there -was a great gathering of the
district, which was quickly increasing in population;
conveyances of every description were arriving, with
groups of well dressed people lounging about, looking
for the coming of the Governor, who was making a
tour through that part of the country. They had not
long to wait; he soon drove up in Mi’. Gore’s drag,
with his daughters, and alighted amidst loud welcomes
and cheering; The party divided of course into many
groups, following in the train of His Excellency down
the steep descent leading to the outer cave. On ordi-
naxy occasions each person had to carry their own
candle, as I said before, hut it had been arranged to
have them all illuminated in honour of the Governor.
As he advanced into the interior the band struck
up the National Anthem, and from a hidden recess
out rushed some thirty or forty blacks in their war-
paint and weapons, dressed as for a corroboree, going
through their wild gestures. The kind and much
beloved Governor expressed himself well pleased with
such a novel i-eception.
Ethel soon found Mrs. Thornton, and they strolled
off together. Over some large boulders of rock was
another cave, where a poor black fellow, supposed
to be wounded to death, had crept away to hide and
to die.
“ Come, and I will show you the very spot where
he-lay. Some people came from Adelaide once, and
-stole him away; he was retaken and placed in his
old position, but was taken again; an enter-prising


man put the body in a sack, and walked with it on
his shoulder through the dismal solitary forest to
Mount Gambier: I never heard exactly what became
of it. The man no doubt thought to make money
by exhibiting a petrified black. But here comes Mr.
Lawrence; he will tell us more about it.”
“ Doesn’t it make one creep to think of it ?—such
a regular bag of bones! But how came he to be so
well preserved ? Mr. Lawrence, how d’ye do ? ” said
Ethel; “ you have just come in time to satisfy our
curiosity. What kept the black man from going the
way of all flesh ? ”
“ Probably the lime water constantly dripping
from the roof, or the peculiar state of the air, tended
to preserve the skin; the inward parts of his body
were all decayed. A suspicious hole was found near
his chest ; he had probably been wounded, fled for
refuge into the caves, and creeping in between the
rocks, died.”
“ Poor fellow, what a terrible death ! ” said Ethel.
“ How was he shot, I wonder, and who first discovered
these caves ? ”
“It is rather a long story,” said Mr. Lawrence;;
“however, shall we sit down, and I will tell it,
although I fear Mrs. Thornton has heard it before.”
“Yes; I will just go and help to lay out our part
of the luncheon; by the time it is ready you will
have finished the tale,” said Grace.
“ Perhaps Williams never told you of the murder
of Brown, one of the first settlers up here, by the
blacks ? There had been a good many about, for some
little time, so for security Brown, who was shepherd-
ing, kept as near as possible to a man who had charge
of another flock ; they were of course armed, but as
was often the case in the Bush, the loads were kept


in so long, that when the weapon was required, it
would not go off. It was so in this instance. When
the sheep were camping in the middle of the dajq
Brown said to the shepherd that he would take a
walk down to the blacks’ camp and see if thej r had
gone. They were only a short distance away, so lie
went, leaving the man in charge of the two flocks.
He was a long time gone; the man became very
anxious, when he spied a lot ot blacks coming to-
wards him, one of them evidently dressed in poor
Brown’s clothes, and carrying his gun. The shep-
herd had now to defend himself, but the gun missed
fire as usual, and he bolted for the home station.
The alarm was at once raised, and as no blacks were
to be seen, they sallied forth in quest of Brown, only
to find him fearfully disfigured and naked ; the blacks
had gone, taking with them most of the sheep. The
nest thing to be done was to send notice to Wallace,
Eobertson, Ormerod, and Saunders for all the assistance
they could render to go in pursuit of the murderers.
Next day there was a grand muster of forces, each
station having despatched as many hands as they
could spare. During the night many of the sheep
had found theii way home, some with spear wounds
others torn by wild dogs; the natives had evidently
killed all they required, and had not troubled them-
selves about the rest. The plan arranged was to
follow the tracks of the sheep as driven away by the
blacks. Several, more civilized, had been brought
from the various stations, and were found to be In-
valuable trackers. The trail was followed south for
many miles, when they suddenly came upon an
opening in the ground. All round this openino-
-'the grass was much trampled, and it was quite
evident that the blacks had attempted to rush the


sheep into this cavity; there were traces of a great
slaughter. This opening is the one that admits light
into the large cave, not the one you came down-by.
Perhaps I tire you ? ”
“ Oh, pray go on,” said Ethel.
“ On peering down it was thought from the tracks
that the blacks were there then, but how they were
to be got at was another question. Who would ven-
ture first ? At last Ben Saunders and a bullock driver
volunteered and managed to get down, but they had
all escaped through the opening which is now the
entrance. You see Saunders and his man ran no
ordinary risk, for quite independent of the chances
of either being speared or tomahawked, there was the
probability of being shot by friends, mistaking them
for blacks. All were of course anxious to protect them
from sudden attacks, as they wandered about in the
dark recesses, so heads peered in through the opening,
endeavouring to follow the two brave men, and guns
O ' o
were pointed ready to fire. ‘ There’s a black!’ cried
one. ‘ No, it’s Saunders : for God’s sake don’t shoot.’
‘ There, see ! ’ ‘No, that’s Bill; ’so you can imagine
the chance they ran.”
“ Dreadful,” said Ethel. “ I hope luncheon isn’t
ready. Did they find the murderers ? ”
“All that day and all the next they were out:;
then the force was divided, and they say that one
party came up with the savages and took ample
vengeance. We were all compelled to take the law
into our own hands occasionally, for the simple reason
that government could afford little or no protection
to the outside settlers in such emergencies. Nothing
more was known of these caves for several years. It
was not until we became more settled, that the idea of
exploring them dawned upon us. Wallace was the


great promoter of these excursions ; he had just taken
unto himself a wife, the only lady (with the excep-
tion of Mrs. C , some thirty miles distant) west
of the Glenelg; in fact there were not at that time
half-a-dozen women in the district. There are several
caves, but none more beautiful than the first, with
that lovely pillar fonned by the union of the stalag-
mite to its parent stalactite ; you saw it as you came
down.”
“Yes,and the subdued light shows the outline and
various tints wonderfully 4 the contrast between the
glaring light and heat above and the cool temperature
there is delightful. “Are there any paintings or
drawings here, such as you told me of on the west
coast ? ”
“No; I forgot then to tell you that all those
drawings or paintings have a red hand amid their
figures. There are also some very singular carvings,
representing seven left hands, of the ordinary size,
with one large right hand above; on the left, five
pairs of kangaroos’ feet, and the feet of three emeu,
all very well executed. The rock on which they were
cut seemed to be stained with some fluid; they are
very ancient and quite beyond the capacity of the
present race, which is shown by several rude imita-
tions which have been more recently made beneath
them, and a stone instrument was found underneath,
which had been used in the modern attempts. Your
great friend Father Woods mentions them in his
book on exploration.”
“ I fear I haven't read it so attentively as you appear
to have done. Does a river run under these caves l . I
heard some one speak about the water.”
“Not a river; there is water, but I am inclined to
flunk it comes from those curious runaway holes we
12


have on most of the runs—there is one in the hoise
paddock at Belanja; they partially drain the country,
and are supposed to empty themselves into the Blue
Lake at Mount Gambler.”
“ Ralph’s men found in digging a well whole masses
of shells at a depth of more than eighty feet; the sea
must have been over this land ages ago, but when once
you begin puzzling, there is no end to conjecture; Ralph
rather scolds me when I dive into such topics, and says
we are not to think or use our reason ; but you might
as well tell me that we were never intended to use our
hands or feet, as to try to make me believe that we are
not to use our minds. God gave us both, and un-
doubtedly intended us to exercise them.
“We have talked a long time, or rather I have,”
said Lawrence; “ let me take you into luucheon. I see
Ralph and Mrs. Thornton coming to look us up.”
“ Ah, Lawrence, flirting with my wife, eh ? paying
her all sorts of compliments, I know,” cried Ralpln
“Bring her away, will you ? there is a fine spread, and
Gore has brought a table to carve on, which has given
great dissatisfaction to some of the people ; they think
it divides them into sets. Gore was only thinking of
his own back, and how much less it would ache by
carving comfortably rather than kneeling on the rock.
“ Talking of compliments,” laughed Ethel, turning
to Grace, “ Ralph and I were walking in the garden
at Belanja the last time Mr. Lawrence was up. You
know the new porch that has just been added to my
room, and those marble vases which stand on either
side as you go down the steps into the garden? It
looks unfinished at the top, I must confess. We were
simcesting placing statues above, and this man said,
GO G A y
£ Yes, Mrs. Williams, what would you say to Venus on
one side? ’ I could not help the retort (it was too bad


of me, wasn’t it?), but I answered, ‘Yes, and what
you would think of Humbug on the other ? ’ The best
of the joke was that M had passed the
same word round to him not long before, when playing
with those letters —you know what I mean—l don’t
know what you call them.”
“ Ah ! now, too bad of you, Mrs. Williams, upon my
Avord.”
“You mean that it is too bad of me to tell my oath
story and laugh at it; it is so much more dignified not
to smile at your oavii little jokes.”
“ Yours are at any rate not studied,” laughed Law-
rence. “Do you remember the Frenchman Avho fired
off a bon mot at dinner Avhich took and
his Avife, turning to the man sitting next to her, said
naively, ‘lam so glad that went off well; he has been
thinking over it for the last three Aveeks ! ’ ”
“ Ralph,” said Ethel, as they drove home that even-
ing, (for she AA r as not enthusiastic enough to like
camping out as some did) “ do let us take those children
out of Jemmy Hunter’s trap; I haA T e seen the hind
Avheel run up tAA r o trees already, and lam sure there
Avill be an accident; call to him to stop.”
The good-natured, reckless driver pulled up his
team, to let the little ones get into the Williams’
waggonette; beaming AAuth kindness and fun, he ought
to have had ten thousand a year paid quarterly in
advance. Arvay fIeAV his trap, the men holding on and
keeping a sharp look out for the wheel, which from its
frequent exploits Avas very unsteady, and left air
ominous zig-zag track. I haA T e seen the hind Avlieel
run after a carriage Avhich has gone on many yards
without it, from the pace at AA r hich Ave Avere going.
Thus, broken hoav and then by such amusements,
with many Adsitors in her oaaui home, did Ethel’s quiet


life glide on; the years were very prosperous, the
markets were high, and so was wool, and everything
was as nourishing as could possibly be desired. Ralph
built a largo house at the Bay, and gave it to her —a
species of white elephant it turned out to be, but now
she went every summer with her fast increasing family
to the seaside, and there enjoyed the refreshing climate,
never very hot, the thermometer seldom rising beyond
75° in the shade. Major Blakeney was still there, boring
away at the old routine, and longing to get to England.
A very singular shower fell during one of these sum-
mers. It had been intensely hot all day, and a storm
was evidently brewing. An immense and very heavy
cloud hung over the little township for the whole
afternoon, the winds appearing to play with the thick
mass. We watched it circling round and round;
whilst standing in the balcony a few heavy drops fell,
and then down came the shower in a sort of thick
reddish mud. We thought that the same storm
had come down from the desert, and the rain falling
through it had mixed with the dust and become mud.
Ralph was much occupied on their return from the
Bay with superintending the erection of a new wool-
shed, which was highly necessary, as the old one of
slabs, with a bark roof, was in the last stage of dilapi-
dation. There stand the drays, loaded for their journey
over the sandy hills and boggy flats to the Bay, old Munn
(one of the most faithful of all the servants, having
been years with Ralph), with the whip in his hand, at
the head of the team ; and there are the bales, with the
well-known brand, looking plump and neat before they
have been through the dumping shed, which squeezing-
process gives more room in the packing or stowing
away in the hold of the vessel. I was much amused
with a description given by the Rev. Harry Jones (N.B.


no relation, I am sorry to say), in his interesting hook
on East and West London, of the appearance of such
like bales on their arrival at the docks, and their
treatment; I will quote it“ The cruelly laced bale is
tumbled out of the hold on one of the wharves. There
it is laid upon its back by attendants, and a man sets
it free with three or four smart and rapidly delivered
blows of an axe. It is pleasant to see the immediate
sense of relief with which the iron-hooped truss of
wool resumes its proper shape as its metal bonds are
severed one by one and fly asunder. It soon becomes
once more a plump and portly bale. Thus relieved, it
is placed in the company of its fellows, who stand about
comfortably, like aldennen with their waistcoats un-
buttoned, and unsuspiciously await the visit of the
wool-broker. He, however, takes advantage at once of
its freshly recovered freedom by thrusting his hand into
its stomach and pulling out its bowels. After this sur-
prise and rough inspection the floors of the warehouse
are knee-deep in wool, which has to be restored to the
insides of the insulted bales before the goods are sold.”
“ Is it a ae oo ? ” asks the Scotchman.
“ 0, ai, a ae oo,” replies his compatriot.
In former days bullocks onty were used, but now
horse teams are found quicker transit, and in manjr
places tramways save all the toil, dust, and heat of
those early da} T s.
CHAPTER XV.
VISITS AND VISITORS.
“ Well, Williams, I am glad to see you,” said Philip
Thornton, as Ralph pulled up at the gate shaded with


large and wide spreading acacias. “ Isn’t this heat
terrible. I and I see no chance of rain. How are you
off for water? Allow me to help you down, Mrs.
Williams. Grace is in the drawing-room; I suppose
she didn’t hear the dogs bark, or she would have been
out to see who was coming. How are all the chil-
dren ? ”
“ Well, thank you, but suffering from the heat. We
can set so little milk, and no butter.”
O '
“ That is all you ladies care about,” laughed Philip
as he walked with her into the house. “ I wish I could
only see plenty of water, and the milk might wait.”
“ Until the grass grew again,” said Ethel. “We never
had such a summer as this since I have been out
here ; it is quite heartrending to see the poor sheep
standing round the empty waterholes and the pitiless
sun blazing down upon them.”
Grace had heard them coming dov.ni the verandah,
and came out to meet them.
“ Oh, what a day ! how good of you to come. I’ll
order some tea, and Mr. Williams will have wine.
Philip, tell Maria to bring it in, and put hot water in
the bedroom. Come and take your hat off,” turning
to Ethel. “ Isn’t it fearfully hot ? and the glass is at Set
Fair. I was making apricot jam all yesterday, with
this one good effect, that whilst they were all panting
in the drawing-room, Sarah and I felt the hot wind
quite a boon as compared to the fire.”
“ Tell me,” said Ethel, “ have you not had a great
fright since I saw you last ? wasn’t one of Helen’s
children lost in the Bush ? ”
“ Yes; Philip and I had only arrived from Mel-
bourne the night before, when next morning a mes-
senger came down from Minnemur saying that little
Harry had strayed away from the rest ol the children,


and was nowhere to be seen. Philip drove me up
at once, hut of course it was night before we could
get up, (you know the sandy road all through the
scrub,) and we hoped good news might await us ; but
no, he had not been heard of. The blacks had been out
tracking him. Poor Helen was iu the greatest grief, of
course, but I never saw anyone bear it more bravely.
Pound and round the paddocks, near home, we walked
and searched, through the broiling heat of the next
day, but unsuccessfully, and we had wearily returned
to the house, when we saw the horsemen coming
home, and bringing with them the dear little fellow.
They had found him quite naked, sitting under a tree ;
lie said the opossums and the native cats had taken
off his clothes, and he was much scratched all over his
body. You may suppose the joy and relief it was to us
all; we fed him little by little, and now he is as well
as ever, after having been two days and two nights
without food ; he didn’t seem very much the worse
when they brought him hack, but he is such a brave
little man.”
“Well, I am glad he is all right again; we must take
care it doesn’t happen to ours. We have had a little
break to the monotony at Belanja, but iu a different
style. Late one evening up drove an omnibus full of
gentlemen —fancy' an omnibus iu the Bush ! it is well
the roads are so dry. Well, Ralph went out to receive
them, and I thought they would never stop coming
down the verandah, —the Surveyor General, Com-
missioners of Public Works, Drainage, Crown Lands,
and Sewers. It was nearly dinner time, so they were
shown to their rooms, and I went over to tell the cook,
and see how we could arrange to have enough: you
know that wasn’t difficult. They were very entertain-
ing ; they called each other by their official dignities.


“ ‘ Crown Lands, shall I pass you the potatoes ? ’
“ 1 Thank you, Public Works, I’ll trouble you/
“ You may suppose how amused I was, but I never
even smiled.
“ ‘ Yes,’ remarked one, ‘ we thought when we started
from Narracoort that we had left civilization behind us.’
“‘And this,’ said another, bowing to me, ‘is the
commencement of it, Mrs. Williams.’
“ Well, I couldn’t make out what they had come up
for, but they told Ralph in the hut after dinner that
they were making a tour of inspection through the
country ; they had especially heard of Belanja as being
so fertile and rich, and thought it probable that
eventually it would become an agricultural district.
This was an alarm bell to Ralph, you may suppose.
When they came into the drawing-room they com-
mented upon the lovely garden, which, although the
heat has been so terrible, still looks pretty well;
James and the blacks water it every evening—a fine
business it is too, and the children all help, little pets '
and then you know the clay keeps the moisture
better than your sandy soil.”
“ Yes, our garden is hopelessly parched, and the
fruit roasted on the trees; but go on about these men.'’
“ Well, I told them the labour it bad been to get
the place to look so nice—how the borders were
trenched three feet deep, how beneath just the first
sod it was cold clay, and that if they thought wheat
would ever grow up here they were much mistaken,
unless indeed after the greatest expense and tillage.
They laughed, and said I knew how to protect my
husband’s interests at any rate; and I laughed back,
saying that I was only doing as I should, but if
they would come into the garden they could see a
trench being now dug, and judge for themselves.”


“ Well, did they go ? ”
“ No, of course not, they wouldn't listen to a little
woman deeply interested in the matter; but Ralph
made such a blander; he said (you know his way,) 'You
Government officials ; ’ upon which a very stout one in
a dress coat and red Crimean shirt (we christened him
robin redbreast) drew himself up and said, ‘ We are the
Government.’ I was just saying goodnight at the time,
and escaped. Wasn’t it killing ? ”
“ 1 es, I never heard anything better. The sun has
gone down, come for a stroll and see the little Angora
kids; we are going to rear a flock, and Philip thinks
they will succeed.”
“ How many wild ducks there are on the waterhole,
and two black swans.”
“ Yes, they are too wise t.o leave, and I don’t allow
anyone to shoot them; they will get quite tame, and
they look so nice on the water, don’t they ? see the coots
stealing down, —I love birds and animals about. If
you don’t mind we will go and feed the fowls; Philip
brought me up some Brahmas, and we have been very
lucky with the chickens. Have you any new music ?
we might try over Mendelssohn after dinner.”
They found Philip sitting in the verandah with
Ralph, who was smoking his pipe. The passion flowers
and bignonias were blooming despite the heat, and the
trellis over the garden path in front was bright with
crimson blossom.
“ How many sheep have you lost this summer,
Williams ? It’s enough to turn one’s hair grey, isn’t it 1 ”
“ Mine arrived at that stage long ago,” said Ralph,
“ but will be whiter before the rains come, I fear. It’s
hard to say how many until the mustering, but
Newcome tells me they are lying dead all over the
run, and the cattle as well : we haven’t been quick


enough with the wells, but I ’won't be caught again ;
we must set to work with clams, and have the water-
holes deepened. If I get off with a loss of five thousand
I shall think myself lucky.”
“ A man told me the other day that some one had
started a boiling down establishment down country.
It is too late now, and too far for us, but I shouldn’t
wonder if it would pay well; for although the sheep
would go at a sacrifice it’s better than losing them
altogether.”
“ What do you think of the hot water washing ? ”
“ Well, I’m not so sure about it; it’s a great expense
to begin with, and I question if you don’t in the end
lose in the weight: the beat takes the yolk out of the
wool, and I hear often spoils the texture. I don’t
mean to try; we shall all Lave to shear in the grease
next year, unless a perfect deluge comes down this
winter.”
“ There is not much hope of change whilst the wind
remains in the north-east,” said Grace, joining in;
“ the clouds we wish for so much are no doubt expend-
ing their force upon some moist spot where sunshine
would be the greatest boon, or wasting precious
draughts upon the ocean. There was a hawker here
the other day, who told me that he had to cut down
the sheaoaks for the bullocks to eat; there is moisture
in the leaves, you know.”
“ Yes, so Ralph told me once before, I remember.”
« What is this I hear about the Government having
paid you a visit'? ” said Philip, turning to Ralph. “ I
am glad we are over the border. I hope Victoria
won’t follow their example and come on a tour of
inspection; it looks nasty.”
“ Oh, it will be a long time before they carry their
investigations out,” said Ralph; “I’m not afraid at


present, anyhow. Circumstances will have to alter
very much before I begin to shake in my shoes.”
“ Long may you be in the same mind,” said Philip,
who was a far-seeing man, and saw rocks ahead,
Cassandra-like, where Ralph only beheld the smoothest
waters.
“ Byron says,” broke in Grace, with her musical voice
and sweet expressive face, “ that Circumstance is an
unspiritual God and miscreator, but I believe he
quite as' often turns our path from evil as he ‘ helps
along with crutch-like rod.’ Some call him Provi-
dence, Destiny; it is all a mighty puzzle; but I trust
it will he always well with you,” turning to Ethel.
“ How glad I am to have come away from home, if
only that I know j-ou,” said Ethel, fondly stroking-
her friend’s soft glossy hair. “ You do us all so much
good, and make us look at everything in the best
light. I confess to have been very anxious since those
men were up; what with the drought, aud all put
together, I felt desponding.”
“It does no good,” went on Grace, half-thinking
aloud; “and everything is very hard to understand.
Doubtless it is pouring where it isn’t wanted at the
present moment, and we are vainly watching for the
little cloud no bigger than a hand that we know can
grow into the longed for storms which would refresh
O O
our parched up land, as I said before. Did you not
quote the other day those lines, —
“ ‘ My faith is large in time and that
Which shapes it to some perfect end ’ ” ?
“Moliere’s Philosopher says things are not, they only
seem to be; so perhaps this is not a real drought,
though it looks very like one, I must say,” said
Ethel. “ What a clear night it is ! though I wish we
O O


couldn't see those countless stars: how I should like
to know whether they are inhabited,” she went on,
as, taking her friend’s arm, they -walked round the
garden together.
“ Do you remember the dream that came to Tasso’s
Leonora before she died ? ” said Grace. “ She thought
she was setting out to visit other spheres with a bright
company of genial spirits, to behold and enjoy the
countless wonders they contained, and more fully to
realize the exhaustless power of the Creator.”
“Go on,” said Ethel; “ I love to hear you.”
“ I -was reading the other day that the great cal-
culator, Mr. Babbage, some years before his death w r as
known to say that he would give up) the rest of life if
he could be sure of living for two years oir this earth,
and could be given a scientific cicerone to show him
the vast improvements which would be made in that
time.”
“Perhaps,” said Ethel, “he knows more now than
science could develop here in that lapse of time.”
“ Well, I certainly don’t believe id the perfect rest
w r e are taught to expect, neither could I for one
moment consider it happiness. To picture an eternity
of inactivity would be too fearful to contemplate. I
think the man of science will find explained Avhat
here he found inexplicable, and the musician will
listen entranced to strains far beyond the eight notes
with their semitones that we possess can discourse.”
“ Those melodies of which the poet tells us when he
says, ‘Heard music is sweet, but unheard sweeter.’
Now am I not improving under your tuition ?’’
laughed Ethel.
“Poor Keats,” continued Grace, “caa doubtless
breathe his own sweet strains in even purer language
than that with which he charmed and charms us still.’


“Yes, and no Quarterly to sting him •with its sar-
casms : perhaps, had he lived, he would have stung the
Quarterly
“ The mosquitoes are stinging badly; shall we go
in? Philip will want a song and his game at ecurte
with you.”
“ I will be in again in a few minutes, Mrs. Williams,”
said Philip. “ The dogs are barking, and I am sure
they have an opossum down the garden.”
“Have you been riding much?” said Ethel to
Grace, as they seated themselves at the table and took
out their work.
“ No, it has been too hot, unless quite early in the
morning, and then as soon as the sun is up it is
scorching.”
“ I was run away with the last time we were at
the Gore’s. One dog went off' after a kangaroo alone,
O O }
and Romeo followed, leaving the rest of the party
altogether. He flew along; I lost all power over him,
but not my presence of mind, I am glad to say; once
I thought of throwing myself off, but that I knew was
certain death, so I sat there, canned away wherever he
chose to take me. We were nearing a gum forest
which skirted the heath, where if we dashed in I
was certain to go against the limb of a tree. I had
given myself up for lost when I saw to the left a dog-leg
fence; neck or nothing, I thought; he may stop, or at
any rate, if we get over, he will the other side, I had
just power to turn the rein and at it he went, when to
my intense relief, as you may suppose, he pulled up.
There was a woodman near; I told him what had
happened and that I had no idea where the others
were, but in a few moments up rode Ralph and Dr.
T , who exclaimed, 1 Mrs. Williams, excuse me, but
you are a Briton ! ’ They had been following at a


distance, so I was not alone after all. How tired it
made me, and through the broiling sun.”
“ We were out riding one day not long since,” said
Grace; “and I thought I would just take a high brush
fence to try the horse. We went over but not together,
lam sorry to say; I wasn’t hurt, and thought it served
me right for my little bit of showing off. Did you
ever sit a buck jumper '?”
“ Yes, I think I have, and was very proud of it too,
but they laugh at me since, and declare I did nothing
of the sort, and call it pig jumping, which is really too
bad. It was a lovely little grey I had never ridden
before; he seemed very fresh, but the groom said it was
only the stables, he hadn’t been out for some days.
When we started to canter I gave him a little cut on
the shoulder, when down went his head, in went his
tail and up went his back; he plunged and plunged
right across tire road; every moment must be the last,
I thought, it would be impossible to sit another. At
last be stopped, and I was still on his hack, with the
stirrup lying on the ground. It might not have been
buck jumping, but whatever he did it was most un-
pleasant. They say no woman can sit one, but they
might as well have let me boast and not taken the
conceit out of me.”
“You were not at the last ball, at the Pastoral
Show; you remember Mr. Williams drove Miss M
there, with six horses, and turned into the stableyard,
after putting her down, in great style. Philip told me
that old Jemmy Gordon said when he heard of it, 1 Ah,
weel, they must ha’ been a puir lot, if it took sax to
draw one ’ooman! ’ We were all dreadfully tired;
there was no moon, and we bad to wait until it was
light to leave. Philip talks of going to England for a
couple of years; I hope he will."


“ For your sake I do, but not for my own, I shall
miss you fearfully. I wish we could go also, but
Ralph thinks we ought to remain a few years longer
as the children are still so young, and then go alto-
gether. They are getting on very well with Miss
Locksley, and Jessie is such a comfort; in fact all the
servants are good ; we can always leave home and feel
sure that all will go on well in our absence; besides,
there is Mr. Newcome ; I don’t know what Ralph
would do without him, for since his illness he hasn’t
been able to attend to the management at all.”
“ Here are the gentlemen,” said Grace, going towards
the piano. “ You will sing for us, won’t you ? and I
will play afterwards whilst you have your game with
Philip. Mr. Williams, here are the papers, and the
last Reviews; one you will like, I am sure, on the
British Constitution. I observe that Anthony Trol-
lope remarks that time appeared to hang heavily" on
hand in Bush houses. I must say* I rarely found it do
so; sometimes the monotony may have been a little
too much, causing one to feed rather more than was
healthy on our own thoughts, and magnifying small
troubles, but, as a rule, it was not so: occupation is
the soul of life.”
Grace Thornton, for one bright example, was never
a moment idle. Whilst the babe slept on her knees,
waiting for the nurse to take it, the sweet mother
waS deep in some new book,'or feeding on Shelley’s
sublime thoughts.


CHAPTER XVI.
A LUBRA'S DEATH.
The rain came at last, towards the end of May, and
poured down as it had rarely poured before. The
blacks flocked round the home station in far greater
numbers than usual; nearly all were ill with terri-
ble coughs, half-starved, half-clad, half-civilized, and
with no houses but the gum boughs with which
they made their frail shelter. Some few got bark and
made faint attempts at something beyond a common
mimi, but there were only two or three of these
amongst the tribe. One died quite early in the winter.
Mi’. Newcome, the manager, went down to the camp
at night and baptized him; being a Catholic, and a
most excellent man, he considered that he was doing
rightly. Jacob died next day, and with him were
buried all his weapons, blankets, and pillow, which
latter Ethel had sent down to him when he was so ill.
This was a warning to her not to do the same again ;
sb she only lent them, never of course wishing to take
them back, but this prevented the burying, at any
rate. They took the body to a spot selected, raised
a slight mound of earth over it, covered it over with
boughs to mark the place, and then sat lound it all
night in the heaviest rain, with no shelter: Jenny
(his sister) insisted upon this, so that he might not
be alone. Another mode of burial is placing the
corpse on a rude platform made of long poles, and
covering it with a kind of mat formed of long reed
grass, left untidily fringed out to hang down—but a
slight protection from the crows and other birds of
prey ; the face quite exposed to the weather. Some


times they are not buried at all. Stuart mentions
having found the corpse of a native ■where there had
evidently been a tight. The skull was broken in
several places, and the flesh nearly devoured by crows
and native dogs. Rude huts were near, in which
was discovered a curious mark which seemed placed
there as a sort of superstitious rite in favour of the
murdered man. It consisted of a handful of hair torn
from the skull of the corpse and a bundle of emeu
feathers, placed close together, the hair to the south-
east, the feathers to the north-west, (the body also lay
with his feet to the north-west). They were placed
between two pieces of wood which had been burnt,
but extinguished before the feathers and hair were
placed between them.* Captain Stuart mentions a
burial-ground quite different from anything yet found
amongst the savages. It was a portion of a river’s
bank, so full of human bones that it must have been
used as a place of sepulture for many years, and yet
there was no mound which would indicate a memorial
of an} 7 kind. Could it have been a sepulchre or a
deposit of bones brought down by the floods of the
river ? If it proved to be a native cemetery it would
be the only instance on record of graves without
mound or heap of some kind, and therefore to be
referred to some former part of native history. Far
away in the north were found skeletons standing-
upright in hollow stumps of trees, with the skulls
and bones smeared red and white, —the white paint
formed from a kind of clay, probably. I quote Father
Woods’ own words. Ethel knew him well; he was
one of her greatest friends, and one to whom she
owes the remembrance of many delightful days spent
in learning glimpses of knowledge which under
* See Explorations; Eer. J. S. T. Woods.
13


other circumstances would still be a blank to her.
Botany, conchology, music, and slight dips into geology,
beguiled the pleasant hours which,, at long intervals,
he was enabled to spare from his widely extended and
arduous duties. Belanja was a haven of rest now and
then. Mr. Newcome and he had been schoolfellows
together in England, and thus met in the far away
wilds.
But we have wandered away from Jenny and her
company sitting round her brother’s grave. As might
be expected they all became seriously ill after such a
night, and Ethel scarce knew what to do to feed them.
The usual Government rations for the aborigines had
not arrived at the nearest police station, and they had
no blankets. It was impossible to supply forty or
fifty blacks with these necessaries, and yet how could
she sleep in her warm snug bed and forget the miseries
of the poor creatures by whom she was surrounded ?
She did what she could, but it wasn’t much. Those
who were well she sent out to hunt kangaroos and
bring them home to have soup made for the sick; and
sad inroads were made into her stores of oatmeal, rice,
sago, etc., yet after all they were not properly fed.
It was a dreadful time. She had one hut fitted up as
a sort of hospital, and tended them herself, her cook
helping her with all her heart—a good creature from
the Emerald Isle. Ethel never had any trouble with
her servants; they stayed with her for years, with few
exceptions, unless they got married, which was often
the case.
One morning, Billy, the husband of Jenny, came up
to the house to say that his wife was very ill: “ Die
me think,” said he, with big tears in his eyes. Ethel
went down, taking restoratives of several kinds, wine,
jelly, and sat down by her poor little lubra whom she


loved so well, who had gardened with her, worked
with her, been near her ever since she first came np.
But now she saw she was dying. She took what was
offered her gently and submissively, but it was too
late. She had caught cold on that wretched night, and
the frail constitution was gone. She spoke in her
own language to the lubras round, who told Ethel that
she would like to be baptized as Jacob had been.
Ethel thought deeply for a while, and then consented.
God would know she did it humbly. So out on that
sunny bank, (for the rain had abated a little,) in the
midst of the surrounding tribe, men and women stand-
ing by, she knelt and signed her little friend with
the sign of the cross, murmuring the while the Church’s
words appointed for the sacrament. The camp was
about half a mile from the house. It was a strange
scene, the fair young head bent down in prayer, whilst
the wondering blacks looked on, unable to comprehend
the mystery. Ethel herself never realised before how
incomprehensible it was. But we are commanded so
to do, and the name of Jesus was not unknown to
many of them, especially to Jenny herself. So it was
done, and Ethel trusts that it was right. She stayed
all the morning in the camp, came np to the house for
luncheon, meaning to return directly, but before she
had time to do so, she heard the heavy tramp of un-
shod feet coming down the verandahs with the wail of
women’s voices, and she knew that Jenny was gone.
She had sent her love to everyone, master, mistress,
children, servants, and passed quietly away. Ethel
went back with them, and asked to be allowed to see
her. They pointed to a bark hut, and said Billy was
in there with her, that no whites were allowed to see
the dead. But Ethel went in, and found poor Billy
bending over his loved lubra, her head covered


and resting on his knee. She asked him then to let
her see the face. He didn’t speak but lifted up the
handkerchief, and there she lay with a placid smile
upon her lipos, looking quite pretty, for although, as a
rule, the women and men are hideous, still there are
exceptions, and Jenny was one.
The next day Ralph followed the dark procession as
it trailed along-, hearing the body. The women had
cut off their hair, the only sign of mourning in their
power. Thej' did not choose a place near Jacob’s
grave, but outside the boundary, on another run.
Ralph read the burial service over her; the little
mound was raised, the boughs above as usual, and the
sorrowing tribe returned to mourn for and miss another
of their fast decreasing number.
Billy next fell ill, and was put into Ethel’s hospital,
but would neither eat, drink, nor listen to a word she
said. He told the blacks that Mrs. Williams wanted
to make him live, when he wished to die and go to
Jenny, which he was determined to do. Whenever
she came in and spoke to the others, he took no notice
of her. At last she made him speak, when he told
her that she was very kind, but that he could not stay
here; that twice Jenny had come for him, standing at
the door and beckoning. And the blacks testified to
this dream, for they saw him rise up from the floor on
which he was lying, with his feet, according to their
custom, close to a small fire, sit up and stretch his
arms out towards the door. There is no doubt about
his vivid dream, and that he thought life worthless
without his wife. He had fought three pitched battles
for her with a neighbouring tribe, and had been
ever her true faithful lover and husband. Next day
he was laid out in the sun, when all the old blacks
from the nest station came over to see him. He ap


pearecl to expect this kind of ovation. They knelt
down by him one after another, shook hands, and wailed
pitifully. He said he should die the next da} 7 ' at one
o’clock, and went to a mi-mi across the creek away
from the home station, where he took off all his clothes,
even blankets, and' lying thus exposed to the cold,
damp, wintry atmosphere, he died at three o’clock
instead of one. It was a real romance of savage life,
and was followed by another less pathetic. Another
black was ill with inflammation of the lungs ; he had
been in the same little hospital with Billy, but being
young and unmarried, was very desirous of living on,
so attended to Ethels instructions, and after great
doubts had been entertained of his recovery he pulled
through. (This black became famous for being the
best jumper and fielder amongst the cricketers who
went to Melbourne and Sydney with Mr. Hayman,
and two or three of those who were to be seen at
Lords in Loudon came from Belanja and the ad-
jacent stations. Very few survived that journey home.)
Ethel had nursed and tended him during the day, but
deputed a lubra to watch him at night; she was the
wife of another man, but fell in love with the patient,
and he with her. The tribe held councils on the
subject, when it was at length determined that she
should leave old Jemmy, her present husband, and
marry young Jemmy. After some years, during
which time this arrangement went on peacefully
enough, old Jemmy, who had been sent to the wall,
was given a young and pretty lubra named Lucy.
Jemmy the younger,, having by this time grown tired
of his old and very fat wife, being still young and
handsome himself, made love to Lucy, to the infuriated
wrath of fat Kitty, and there is no saying what
scandals might have arisen, only Jemmy the elder


died. It was then proposed that Jemmy the younger
should have two spouses, which was quite in accord-
ance with the blacks’ code of morals ; but fat Kitty,
though she had had two husbands herself, would in
no case allow Jemmy the same privilege, and after
having nearly killed both Jemmy and Lucjq the latter
thought it wiser to retire from the scene, and Jemmy,
like many another, for peace’ sake staj’ed with his
fatter half, and loved Lucy all the more because he
couldn’t have her; a good-natured, lazj-, clever
fellow, to whom quiet days were everything. Kitty
caressed and fondled Lucy’s baby, saying all the
while, “ So like poor dear father,” and Jemmy with a
broad grin looked silently on, smoking his pipe. This
black was ever most grateful to Ethel for saving
his life, as he thought; would do anything for her,
and never think of a reward. When at one time
Ethel told them to go out and get emeu eggs, Kitty
his lubra would fain have been paid for them.
“ What,” he said, speaking perfect English, “ take
money from Mrs. Williams ? No, indeed : didn’t she
nurse me and make me well ? ” and when he met her,
would bow and take off his hat as gracefully as the
best of her acquaintances.
Out of all the tribe that once was so numerous
there are now only two left, and those the very
two I have been telling of last. They all died off,
in most cases of consumption, and the half civilized
life. Strong and powerful in their native wildness,
they adopted many of the habits of the white men,
and yet retained a great number of their old customs,
—such as wearing clothes in the day time, and
leaving them off at night, without very much im-
proving their dwellings, so that it was next to an
impossibility that they should escape disease.


The longing of Billy (Cadnite Goona) to rejoin his
wife in the world beyond the grave, where he had so
recently buried her, and the undoubted belief that he
should see her there, will show that they had an idea
of a future state, but whether this was gathered only
from what they had heard from the white man, or was
a belief common to them before we went amongst
them, is hard to say. In the very early days, one of
the chiefs lost his son, and lifting his arms with
menacing gestures towards the heavens, uttered
O O 3
imprecations on the Great Ruler, who, he seemed to
think, had been the cause of this great sorrow.
Another lubra told Ethel that when her father died,
who was “ very good old man, my mother tell me see
him again some day in the sky.” This old woman
carried charms with her. Ethel found her one day in
the camp, looking at them, and hiding them away
from her, but she made her show them; they were
only a collection of little red roots, very dusty,
enveloped in a small opossum skin, which was red
and dust} 7 too from the powder of the roots. The old
woman said these made people well again when sick ;
they are very superstitious, like all savage and un-
enlightened men. One evening in the heat of
O O
summer a most lovely meteor of many colours darted
across the heavens, illuminating the whole place, and
disappearing in the south-west, went off with a peal
as of artillery. The blacks rushed from their camp, and
crowded round the house in abject terror. About the
same time another meteor, shaped like a coruucopia i
was seen, only in broad daylight, about ten in the
morning, with the sun shining out and at its meridian
of heat and light; this went from west to north-east,
andj was seen to enter the earth near Ballarat. A
ball of fire rolled down the streets of Geelong, scatter


ing the astonished inhabitants like wild-fire, which it
was to them. Ethel once thought something terrible
must be going to happen: for more than three days
the sun had looked almost as red as blood, through,
the densely laden atmosphere ; when it rose its power
was intense, and when it set it left the earth in a
darkness to be felt; not a breath of air, onty this still
black stifling heat, of which those who dwell in
northern latitudes cannot have the faintest con-
ception. However, it must not be thought from these
few drawbacks that the climate is not all that the
most rapturous have ever painted it; it is indeed one
of the most delightful in the world, the clearest atmo-
sphere and the best. Here in the greyness of an
English winter, I lovingly remember its genial
■warmth and sunny light, trusting some clay to return
to bask once again in its brightness, ere the shadows
which are fast falling on my dajcs close finally around
and I succumb to nature’s inevitable law.
CHAPTER XVII.
THE BUCK JUMPER.
Out on the wide spreading plain before you are the
cattle we have seen before; the parrots, cockatoos
flying about, and chattering away as they always did,
and always will; but the swans and ducks, the coots,
the geese are all gone; the lake is dry and parched,
and the only approach to game a few little plover,
the last few seasons having been so dry there had
been scarcely any snipe, and quail had nearly dis-
appeared altogether, though at one time they were


plentiful enough. To look towards the other side of
the plain, you would have certainly been quite per-
suaded that there was abundance of water there, only
not where the lake used to be. It seemed covered
with islands, studded with trees which here and there
looked upside down, whilst the waters mingled with
the sky and lost themselves in its clearness. If you
were to ride to where this water was, as you supposed,
you would find the same parched grass turned to
hay by the summer’s heat, which although passed
now 7 (for it was the beginning of March) still kept
hard and dry, as the autumnal showers had not yet
fallen. Turning to look back from whence you came,
there would the mirage deceive you again, as it
has many a poor traveller and brave explorer, dying
for w r ant of water, yet doomed to this tenable dis-
appointment. I read a lovely poem not long since by
a well-known author; it told of an old man who
longed all his life to see the blue hills far away from
his dwelling; they looked so beautiful, so peaceful,and
the exact spot where he ■would love to rest, but never
could get there. At last a mission came to him to go
and live on those hills, or near them; he went, but
behold ! when he reached them and looked over to
where he came from, there were the very hills as far
off as ever. I don’t know that this applies to the
mirage, but I noted it as applicable to myself and
many others who think they would he always
happier on their own blue hills. Well, out on the
plain this day were to be seen a great company of
horsemen and ladies mounted on well groomed steeds,
children on ponies, blacks leading dogs in couples
a little in advance of the others, with Ralph at their
head ; they were scanning the distant woods, evidently
on the look-out for kangaroo.


At last one black in a low tone said, " Misser
Ralph, me see over there, sir, lot old men and flyers.”
“ Too far oft’ Jemmy ; it would take too much out of
the dogs. By Jove ! there they are though, close to the
right. Let go !” he shouted, and away went the dogs,
followed by Ralph and the blacks, all the gentle-
men, with some of the more venturesome lady riders ;
and away scampered the four ponies as hard as they
could tear, Ethel behind them, so that if any acci-
dent happened to her darlings she could see; the
youngest always needed a little help, as he would
tumble off now and then, when the old pony that had
carried them all in their first rides would stop directly
and wait till he was mounted again, then off after the
rest. Ethel often took a short cut across, watching the
flying kangaroo and dogs and huntsmen, and meet
them when they were brought to hay. What a lively
scene It is, as the large party rush at headlong speed
through the trees. Watch the kangaroo leap that brush
fence—how beautifully they spring over it; and all
follow, even to the ponies, excepting the little hoj 7 who
keeps by mother. They have singled out a large one,
an old man. See, he has rushed into the middle of
that waterhole, the dogs after him, and is sitting up,
his lovely eyes dilated, his ears set up, determined
to die hard, the dogs barking at him, tearing at the
poor fellow; but he catches one, hugs him in his fore
paws, dips him down and down into the water, and
lifting one hind leg, gives him a terrible gash with his
O O' O O
powerful toe.
“ Ride in, I tell you,” shouted Ralph, “ and kill him,
or I shall lose my dog,” and in rushed the black to
put and end to his sufferings, “ Now cut off the tail
and put it in the hag : we shall have some soup to-
morrow.”


Many were killed that day, and as one gentleman
was riding with Ethel, the hunted kangaroo—a very
large one—actually flew up and struck him with his
fore j>aw in the cheek, for which piece of real pre-
sumption he was chased for his life, the pad cut off,
and made into a paper weight. This was the only
time I ever heard of one attacking ; but it is true, for
I saw it. I must not forget to say that Ethel and
Ralph had amply provided for the refreshment of this
large company, and about one o’clock they had all
camped under such shade as a gum tree will give, and
partaken of a substantial luncheon, which had gone
to the appointed spot in a cart. Returning home,
they paired off together as they listed, and a right
merry time it was, pleasantly cantering home in the
cool of the evening.
There was a great houseful, but Ethel's cook never
failed her; and didn’t the beef, mutton, turkeys,
fowls, eggs, butter, etc,, all grow on the place \ If
they hadn’t, there were no markets, no shops, no stores
within reach.
“Grafton is quite gone: I believe it is a settled
thing,” said Frank Broadiey, as he led Ethel in to
dinner that night.
“ What is 1 ” said she. “ You speak in enigmas.”
“ \\ hy, couldn't you see it all day, the attention he
paid to Miss Locksley ? He never left her side,”
“ I shall be very sony to lose her,” returned Ethel,
“ though it is a good thing for her, poor girl.”
The dinner went off merrily, as they always did at
Belanja, and when the ladies had left the room, Marian
Locksley followed Ethel down the verandah, and
putting her arm round her affectionately, asked her to
come for a turn in the garden, when she told her that
Mr, Grafton had really proposed to her that day.


that she had accepted him, and he was going to tell
Ethel himself.
Marian was the children’s governess, and Ethel’s
friend and chief companion (for Mrs. Thornton at this
time was away in England Avith her family). Ethel
considered, and rightly, that any lady Avho came under
her roof to instruct her children, should be treated in
every resjAect (of course if deserving), as a friend,
and hold an honoured position in her house; and
the way in which they strolled off together would
easily prove the confidence existing betAveen them.
Ethel assured her of her sympathy and the sincere
regret Avith Avhich she should part Avith her, that they
would do all in their power to make up to her for the
absence of her parents, one of whom Avas dead >and
the other in England, and that she should haA’e the
greatest delight in preparing the Avedding breakfast.
Breakfast, did she say ? That meant another house-
ful of people, dinners, early breakfasts, common every-
day breakfasts, for several days. Ethel often thought
of all the fuss and rout at home about one or tAvo
dinner parties, and Avhat they would all say to enter-
taining their guests for perhaps a Aveek, and only too
glad to see the table well filled.
Next day, as eA'eryone Avas remaining, the gentle-
men went out on a shooting, expedition some miles
distant, leaA r ing the ladies to their Avork and gentle
gossip. Ralph was to drive them in a neAV American
waggon he had lately had from toAvn; he meant to
try it and he did so; —not in going, the old sportsman
kneAv better than that; he meant to bag his ducks;
—but returning, started at an aAvful pace.
“ Never mind, Williams,” said Frank Broadley, “it’s
all young hiccory, but if the springs stand it they are
the best I ever saAv.”


One or two of the men were fresh from England,
new chums, and knew little of Bush driving, and
nothing of Ralph’s.
“ Hold on,” he shouted, and over the brush fence he
went, the leaders flying, and wheelers too, for the
matter of that; ghastly is no word for the cheeks of
the new chums, and even Frank Broadley grinned
with fright. “ You were never over a fence in a four-
in-hand drag before, gentlemen; tell that to your
friends at home, when you write,” laughed Ralph.
“ It reminds me,” said one (who came from Salop),
“ of Jack Myttou of Halston driving a friend home
one night —from Ellesmere, I think it was. The man
remarked that he had never been upset. Mytton said
nothing, but drove him up against the next mile-post;
over they went, and when they picked themselves up
Mytton said, —
“ ‘ You’ll never say again that you don’t know wlrat
an upset is.’
“ ‘ No,’ replied his friend, ‘ I am sorry I said it then.’
It was touch and go that we didn’t go over this
time. I’ll tell them all in England, and that when you
want a calf’s head you go out amongst the wild cattle,
kill one, cut it oft) and bring it home. I heard Mrs.
"Williams ask you to do it the other night, at dinner,”
rattled on the jolty Joe.
“ I will slrow you stranger things than that,” said
Ralph ; “ they are breaking in some young colts, and
one is a rare one, too much for Rarey; he can buck, and
no mistake. You shall see: that will be something
else to tell the folks.”
The next morning, before Ethel was quite awake,
Ralph, always a very early riser (for elderly people
don’t need half the sleep the young do, or at any
rate never take it, hut are up fussing about when


others are only too thankful to he allowed to enjoy
that sweet morning rest,) said, —“Ethel, I tell you
plainly that you are not doing rightly by Miss
Locksley. Grafton is paying her so much attention
that you should inquire of him what he means ;it is
clearly your duty.”
“ Ask Mr. Grafton what his intentions towards
Marian are ? Oh, really, Ralph, I could not possibly do
such a thing; what would he think of me i ” replied
Ethel, in unfeigned astonishment.
“I repeat what I said : it is your clear duty, and if
you neglect it everyone will blame you,” said Ralph
again, with great dignity and emphasis.
“Supposing everyone did know about it, Ralph,
and meddled as usual with, other people’s business, I
believe they would all think that you were the proper-
person to ask, not me,”
“ What do you mean ? ” said Ralph.
“ I mean that, placing yourself in the position of
Marian’s guardian, the question should come from you
quite as much as though you were her father, though
I am sure when the girls grow up I do hope you will
never have to make such a disagreeable demand. How-
ever, to set your mind at rest, Mr. Grafton wrote a
little note to me last night, telling me all about it;
there it is on the -writing-table,” said Ethel, pointing
to the corner where the desk stood. “ And now, Ralph,
do go out, please, I am so sleepy.”
Ethel’s room was very pretty. As you entered
through the green baize double doors which led into
her nurseries, you were struck with the air of comfort.
The dressing-table stood in a recess at the back op
three arches of cedar; the mullioned windows were
surmounted with small panes of stained glass; in the
same recess Avas a sofa one side, and ottoman the other ;


the writing-table stood in one corner, a large wardrobe,
also of cedar, in another, easy chairs here and there,
with a round table in the centre, and over the mantel-
piece a view of the old home of her girlhood; to the
light was a bath-room, to the lett -Ralph s dressing-
room, and each led out into the garden. It had grown
to be a very pretty place, and all kinds of trees. Eng-
lish, Indian, and Japanese, flourished there ; they had
passed many happy years in bringing it to its present
beauty, and each tree that Ethel planted and nurtured
she fondly thought would be for her eldest boy, to
flourish and spread its shade abroad for him and his,
when she would be away. It was a happy dream,
but like many another, never to be realized. Did not
the fifteen per cent, on borrowed money still hang like
the sword of Damocles over the devoted spot, to
descend and pierce and kill ?—But not yet.
After breakfast all the men went off to the stables
to see the mounting of this untamed colt and others.
Ralph said he would send for the ladies when they
were ready, so that they might also witness the fun.
There stood the blacks ready to mount, and the horses
were led out. Quietly, cautiously, firmly gripping the
reins, whilst a groom held his head, the black put one
foot in the stirrup, and in a second was across his
back before the colt had time to recover from his
astonishment. But when he did the play began;
down went his head, curled in his tail, up rose his
back curved like a bow, and jump after jump in this
position in rapid succession followed, his nostrils dis-
tended ,aud red, his ears tightly back and the white
of his eyes almost alone visible as he looked round
the corner as much as he was able, Pluekily, beauti-
fully, sat the black, but at last over his head he went,
and after him came the saddle without breaking a
O


girth.' Jemmy picked himself up, and catching the
horse hy the hanging bridle, coolly remarked,
“He’d buck a mosquito off, to-day.”
He soon got on him again, and by degrees the young
colt was tamed. Many have witnessed the same thing
in Australia, and they will know that, although per-
haps not technically described, I have only told the
truth.
In due time the wedding day was fixed, and Ethel
was busily occupied seeing about the brides dress
(she was to be treated as her own child), and the
little bridesmaids’, who were to be her own three little
daughters. Great preparations were making in the
kitchen, and the cook was as anxious as her mistress
that the breakfast should,do them both credit: every-
thing had to be made at home, excepting the cake,
which was sent up from Melbourne. The night before,
the house was full again, and amongst the guests at,
dinner were Frank Broadley and his wife, Father
Julian, the doctor, whose native Irish wrt made him
indispensable at such gatherings (our old friend, Mr.
Lawrence, was unfortunately ill, and not able to come);
the bridegroom, of course. I say of course, because the
nearest inn was twenty miles awajg and he couldn’t
be left there alone all out in the cold; so he came to
the house by express invitation, and a very handsome,
fine man he looked. Who would have ever guessed
that the pretty dark-eyed brunette by his side was Jus
own daughter, the mother of several children, and that
he was a grandfather ? nevertheless it was the case.
Opposite to him, on Ralph’s left, sat Mrs. Broadley;
on his right the bride of to-morrow—a tall, very
graceful and love!} 7 girl, with large gray eyes, fringed
with long dark lashes, and black hair; with her
heightened complexion she looked her best. Ethel


had Frank Broadley on one side and Father Julian on
the other, and had managed to place the doctor not
far off down the table, so that the cross-fire of wit and
humour which she intended should flow between the
Rev. Julian and himself should spare her the exertion
of keeping the conversation afloat. But alas for well
laid little schemes of this sort! all Avent on delightfully
up to a certain point, until an unlucky dish was
handed to the doctor, the delicacy of which puzzled
him: “ Cotelettes ala maitre d’hotel qui vase coucher! ”
laughed Father Julian, in which all those who heard
him joined. The dear old doctor didn’t see the joke,
although a very good linguist, and thought the laugh
was at his expense; so although he said very little, still
this marred the spirit of the hour, and Father Julian’s
wit sparkled alone: the doctor subsided and was not
himself any more that evening, which was a pity, for
a more droll, original, delightful companion you could
rarely at that time find. But I have nearly forgotten
the most important person of all, viz., the clergyman
who was to perform the service. Mr. Reeves had
succeeded Mr. Marsdeu in the district for many years,
and was universally beloved. He was passionately
fond of all animals, but especially of the good old horse
that carried him over the hundreds of miles he
traversed in the fulfilment of his duties. His horse
first, his dog next, himself ever last. He has been
heard to hope that we shall have animals in heaven,
and that he might meet his old favourite again. It
was rather a Mahometan notion. Doesn’t A 1 Borak
somewhere ask Mahomet to intercede for her at the
day of resurrection, and the prophet assure her that
through his intercession she should enter Paradise ? I
think I have read it. He gained what he wanted, at
all events, for she let him mount immediately, and
II


together they took that nocturnal journey in which the
prophet saw so much, and heard the experience of
Moses about exacting too many prayers from his
followers.
The eventful day dawned as gloriously as all could
wish. Breakfast was laid for the gentlemen in the old
bachelors’ hut, and the ladies had theirs in their own
rooms,as the dining-room was prepared for the wedding
feast. There were and numerous documents to
sign before the ceremony, but at length when they
were all satisfactorily gone through, Charles Grafton
crossed over with Mr. Reeves to the drawing-room,
where all the guests were assembled with Ethel; and
then Ralph led the bride through the verandah,
followed by the three little bridesmaids. Her dress
was silk—an ivory white simply trimmed, her lace
veil fell over a wreath of white lilac and orange buds,
and she wore the handsome ornaments presented to
her hy the bridegroom ; the bridesmaids’ were in white
muslin, blue sashes, and little tulle veils tied-on with
blue ribbons. Ethel, as she saw them enter, thought
they looked lovely, if no one else did, and nearly wept
before the proper time : had they not all been baptised
in that room, and was it not hallowed by so many recol-
lections ? The bride was the most composed of the two,
and behaved bravely. There was no crying: what had
she to cry for ? she was marrying the man she loved,
and going to a home of her own, to please herself instead
of others, which she had succeeded in doing so well.
This was her reward, and well she deserved it.
“ Mother, we may come in to the breakfast, mayn't
we ? ” asked one of the boys, looking eagerly up into
her face; “ we will bring our own chairs.”
The proposal was received with great applause by


the company, so the high nursery chairs were placed
on either side of Ethel, and the hoys perched upon them,
while here and there down the table the bridesmaids
were dotted on theirs.
As they had many miles to travel, the carriage was
brought round quickly after breakfast, and amidst
loud cheers, a shower of flowers, slippers, and a large
top boot—which, well aimed at the bridegroom’s head,
sent his hat into the drive—they went otf; those left,
after all the excitement, felt the blank which always
follows such events.
CHAPTER XVIII
SHADOWS.
The Thorntons had returned from their trip home,
and the two years’ absence had only endeared the two
friends more and more, Grace had now seen all and
more than Ethel, had travelled through the same lands,
gazed on the same lovely scenery, wandered through
the same galleries of painting and sculpture, and had
come hack with a rich store of knowledge gathered
from all she had seen and heard in that new world to
her. She had this great advantage over Ethel, that
before she went she had read so much that it all
seemed familiar to her, and the satisfaction was full
of charm, as with a line of poetry upon her lips for
every new object that met her she recognised
the beauties about which her favourite poets and prose
authors had written so rapturously. Ethel’s remem-
brances of these were tame indeed by comparison;
although she too looked back with pleasure to her


travels, it was the scenery she loved to dwell upon,
which grew so lovely when contrasted with the mono-
tonous plains and gum forests in the midst of which
she had now d welt so long. Grace Thornton’s mind was
educated before she started ; Ethel, supposed to have
been finished in a London school, where only a few
young ladies were received, knew absolutely nothing
compared with this sweet self-taught woman, who, far
away from the outskirts almost of civilization, was yet
so cultivated and so refined. And Ethel, quick to
perceive her own shortcomings, was never too silly to
confess her ignorance; whatever she didn’t under-
stand she either asked her friend or searched it out in
books; and those days never to be forgotten are as a
golden dream to her, back to the joys of which she
often wanders awaj r from out the saddened change
which has fallen over the present. Ethel pictures her
still in her home of light, sits with her oft in the wide
recess, discussing some topic of mutual interest —the
education of their children, their dispositions and
talents, or the last new book, the while her graceful
head is bent over her work, or looking up suggests
some lovely thought or wise precept, with a per-
suasive eloquence and truth that none could dispute.
Or she would wander with her round the garden when
the shades of evening fell, where the flowers around
“ Rejoice in the sound of her gentle feet,”
as
“ She sprinkled bright water from the stream
On those that were faint with the sunny beam.”
“ If the flowers had been her own infants
She could never have nursed them more tenderly.”
Just about this time the spirit of poetry began to
awake in the minds of many, and they broke forth into


songs, which varied with each writer’s gift and mind
Ethel wrote
‘ ‘ verses about upper air,
And spirits that in truth wex*e never there,”
and got well criticized by a very clever ghost, who cut
up her poor little attempts most mecilessly, the while
he proved that, amongst them all he alone
‘ ‘ could stand
The spirit and true poet of the land. ”
He bid her write of what she saw around, not filch
thought, and truly said, though rudely—
“ That when with others’ meat we make a pie
No wonder its contents are stale and dry.”
This was too bad, her friends pronounced, and
advised her to burn the lines, which after all, of course,
were, they said—
“ but a human sham,
And written by some impudent young man,”
The poet heard of this, and then there came the
loveliest, cleverest lines. From out those ashes, he bid
hei once again to let her thoughts come
“ forth on gentle wings,
To hover on the soft dark cheek of night,
Terrors and joys and hopes imagining ; ”
he said he would
“Array his spirit’s children there ”
to join hers,
“ More light unto the light,
And hold a tournament in air,
And hurl thought’s winged arrows through the night; ”
and


“ Make his voice a gentle charm,
To wander round and breathe a fiery breath,
To warm away the chilliness of death.”
I only quote a little liere and tliere to show how
well a ghost can write, and prove that no one at all
events in that little circle could vie with him as a
poet.
“ Will yon come to us for the Coursing Match ? ” said
Ethel to Grace before they were starting for home
after spending a few days at Molima. “Ralph has
two dogs to run this year, and although I have never
been before, there is some interest in going now. Do
come over,” she continued, turning to Mr. Thornton,
with whom she was always friendly. “We can all
drive down together the night before. Ralph has
ordered rooms at the Inn, and is going to send the
saddle horses for us; the children are going too—the
dogs belong to the boys.”
“ What is that you are saying, Ethel ? ” said Ralph
from the driving-box, where he had mounted first to
get the horses well in hand. “ Our dogs are no good,
but there will be lots of fun, and the first cup ever
run for in this part of the world is waiting for the
winner. Clarke took me up to his kennels ” (turning
to Thornton) “the other day, and showed me an im-
ported dog he got out lately; he says he is sure to
win.”
“ I have seen him,” answered Thornton, “ and don’t
think much of him; however, we will come over at any
rate, and go with you.”
“ Good-bye,” said Ethel as she kissed her friend.
“ The Graftons are coming too ; you haven’t seen her
since the wedding.”
Wherever Ethel went at this time she usually


chaperoned one or two very pretty girls, and was con-
sequently surrounded by men anxious to be intro-
duced to her fair friends.
So we may see her now, mounted and ready to start
with a large company for the plains, whither the dogs
with their trainers had gone long since, and all the
population of the Township had turned out on what-
ever steeds they could muster to see the course. Ralph
had started with the boys on their ponies sometime
before, well knowing that Ethel would not lack
escort. The ground was about two miles otf, where
the wallaby were veiy plentiful, (they are a kind of
kangaroo rat, and very lleet, the onl} r substitute for
hares then in Australia, but now the latter are very
numerous). Ethel and her par ty were too late for the
first course, which was won by Jason, Ralph’s dog ; the
imported one was nowhere. There was great excite-
ment, and the betting men began to name the winner.
There were a great many entries, so it was a long day
altogether ; being still winter', it got dark before six.
It was a lively scene. The dogs with their ears
pricked in the slips, eager to start the moment the
game appeared, the beaters spread out over tire plain
to rouse tire crouching wallaby from, out their lair in
the high tussocks of grass, the motley crowd, the red
coated judge, the carriages drawn up round.
“ Let go ! ” to the slippers, and away dart the dogs
after the poor little hunted wallaby, the judge follow-
ing close, the horsemen behind, eagerly watching the
wave of the flag which decided the run.
Next day Jason again won the first course, and
Ralph was then offered a large sum one of the
betting men for the dog. He rode up to Ethel and
consulted with her whether he should sell him or not.
“Sell? No, certainly not,” she replied, loud enough


for Greaves the blacksmith, who was standing near, to
overhear.
He turned, touched his hat to her, smiled, and said,
“ Thank you, ma’am ; ’twould have been a pity.”
“ Oh, we won’t sell him, Greaves; we are going to
win,” laughed she, as she went off to join Ralph, with
her daughters by her side. And she was right: Jason
was first and Janitor runner up ; and the two dogs that
had been little thought of or noticed, before, Went
home victoriously with their black trainer. There
was a ball afterwards, which went off with the usual
spirit, and dawn even in that season of the year found
the weary band playing whilst the still unwearied
couples danced away.
Several concerts were got up in the small towns in
the neighbourhood for charitable purposes, when
Ethel took her part with many others in singing, and
was always kindly welcomed as she appeared on the
platform. Thus in a little round of pleasures such as
I have attempted to describe another year or so passed
away. The house was often very full, in a friendly
sociable way, without much ceremony, but a great
deal of real enjoyment, Grace and Ethel being the
principal movers in the little gaieties which took
place. Sometimes Grace got up some private thea-
tricals, which were most amusing both to the per-
formers and the audience; small dances at each
other’s houses, which cost little and gave much
pleasure to every one ; picnics and kangaroo hunts, in
which the children joined ; —it all served to break the
monotony and give a little spice to life.
It was the afternoon of a somewhat gloomy day.
Ralph sat smoking in his arm-chair, Ethel working on
the sofa by the little window in the bachelors’ hut.


The post had just arrived ; she was watching the
man dismount and the children running eagerly to
take the bag from him. They carried it in, and plac-
ing it beside their father scampered off, little happy
things, sure that there was nothing for them at any
rate. The English mail had come, and Ethel, busy
with long home letters, did not notice the look of
anger and distress that passed over Ralph’s counte-
nance as he read his correspondence. At last, turning
to him she said, —
“ Well, they are all well, and send their love to you,
Ralph. Sophy is away in Cashmere with Lennox, and
not to return home fora couple of years; she will be dis-
appointed at that, for they had hoped to get leave very.
soon. Papa has gone abroad for the winter, but,- ”
She stopped, expecting Ralph to make some remark,
but found that he had not apparently heard her, as
he went on smoking and looking fiercely into the
fire.
“ Have you had bad news, Ralph ? what is it ? ” and
she went up to him anxiously. “ Are your brothers
not well ? —has anything happened ?—tell me.”
“ My brothers are well enough, but they have written
about Ten, Fifteen, and Twenty per cent., who have
evidently been writing home about me, curse them ! ”
said Ralph.' “There’s the letter; read it if 3’on like.”
Ethel I’ead;—
“ We grieve to hear that the station is not so
flourishing as we could wish. Pray, dear Ralph, what-
ever happens, remember your debt to our old friends;
don’t, we pray j T ou, let them be losers: this would indeed
he terrible.”
“Well, Ralph,” said Ethel, “ evidently some one has
been writing, and what I have feared so long has come


to pass: you must be deeply involved with these
men.”
“ I don’t see it,” replied he ; “ wool has been down
lately, and there is no doubt now—l see the fault —we
boiled it too much last year, and it didn’t fetch a good
price in the London market; but just have a little
patience : we-have a good lambing, and if we only get
a good clip, I assure you, wifey, it will be all right. My
brothers are alarmists; and do you suppose that Ten,
Fifteen, and Twenty won’t see us through ? ah, believe
me, indeed they will. I have the most implicit con-
fidence in them, and know them (as I have told you
often before) to be strictly honourable men.”
“I hope it will be all right. Of course I know
nothing of business; but I heard someone say not long
since that Fifteen per cent, was very high, with all that
is added to it by commission and all sorts of things ;
however, of course, Ralph, if you say it is all right it
must be so, and you are, I know, a splendid manager.”
“ It wouldn’t be a bad move if you went to England
with the children, and placed them at good schools; I
would follow you very soon,” replied Ralph, puffing at
his pipe.
“ I could never undertake it alone, Ralph ; fancy six
children, and now I really know nothing of the world,
having been away from it so long, for remember we
have only been in Town three times since we came out,
and then for our health only ; you never took me for a
pleasure trip, did you ? ”
“ No, indeed,” said Ralph ; “ but you would manage
well enough, and your father would be there until I
join you : think it over.”
Of course the thinking over came to this, that
Ethel at last decided to leave Belanja, with many
regrets; but still it was for the best, and she would


endeavour to do her duty. The next six months
she occupied herself in gradually preparing the out-
fit for such a little tribe, which was no slight task.
She told her friends she was going, but scarcely
any one believed her or realized that she was in
earnest, until nearer and nearer the time drew on.
They were to sail in February; it was already
December, and Christmas day would be here
directly. It was a very different one from the first
she spent at Belanja ; for several years past now they
had kept the feast, by asking their most jmrticular
friends; the Graftons always came as a matter of
course, and in the evening the servants, and all the
cottager’s with their families, came down, had a
dance on the lawn, Ethel and all her guests joining in,
sometimes by the light of the moon, hut when there
was none lamps were hung on the trees. This last
they determined should be a great gathering, and
there was to be a large Christmas tree, with small
presents lor everyone on it. The band came round in
case they might be wanted, and long after the
cottagers had had their supper, the other guests kept
dancing on, until Christmas day was lost in what was
but now to-morrow. There was also to be a ball at
Mollma. Grace Thornton had begged Ethel to fix the
OO
time, so she thought it would be nice to dance the old
year out and the new year’ in, that it aright ever be a
marked date in her memory, which they did. There
were theatricals and charades first, and tire dance after-
wards ; then Grace came over to Belanja, and Ethel, nob
being able to tear herself away, went back once more
to Mollma, just to see the sweet spot once again, and
took Grace and Mr. Thornton with all the children for
the last time back to Belanja, so that they might spend
the last few hours together’. Ethel was well nigh


worn out now with preparations, entertainments of
various kinds, at home and away, and the sorrow
which the breaking up of such a home brought with
it. And when at length she bade adieu in blinding
tears to the little knot of friends, white and black, rich
and poor', who saw her to the gate, she thought until
then she had never known what real sorrow was—not
even when she left her English home to cross the seas
with Ralph. Was not this far worse, to go without
him, with the chai'ge of so many little lives resting
upon her alone, and tearing herself away from many
who had become as dear, if not dearer, than those she
had left so many many years ago, and who by com-
parison had become strangers, to those who had
now entwined themselves round her heart ?
“ Tims, be it joy or sorrow,
The path of its departure still is free ;
Man’s yesterday may ne’er be like his morrow ;
Naught may endure but Mutability.”
CHAPTER XIX.
HOMEWARD BOUND.
The voyage was monotonous, to say the least of it.
They were becalmed in the Indian Ocean for ten days,
coming in for part of a cyclone, when all the hatch-
ways were fastened down, and the smell of the cargo
—greasy wool and other horrors —became all but unen-
durable; those who have smelt it will never forget it,
' O'
and those who have not may be extremely thankful.
A hundred and four days cooped up in a small vessel
with only a few passengers is a trial to the patience


of anyone, even saints, and amongst the many afflic-
tions they were called upon to endure, I am not aware
that such an one was included. They put into the
Cape for four days, which was a delightful break, and
walked about the curious old town ; saw the Hotten-
tots starting with any number of mules, driving
waggons into the Bush; were waited on by Catfres,
stared at by Dutchmen, driven out to Constantia by
Hottentots, and fleeced by everyone. They had been
in a terrible equinoctial storm, which lasted three days,
and who would have thought when they entered
Simon’s Bay that the calm blue smiling ocean was the
same that only a few hours ago had been lashed with
fury ? Is there anything much more awful than to he
“ hove to ” in a roaring gale, the waves mountains
high and breaking over the vessel as though it would
o o o
engulf her every moment, the ceaseless noise of
wind and water, the first whistling through the
shrouds and bare poles, and the last dashing furiously
over her ? The few days on shore were a veiy pleasant
break in the vojmge, and after leaving they soon
caught the trade wind, putting into St. Helena for a
few hours, when most of the passengers landed, intend-
ing to go up to Longwood, but only one party was
lucky enough to get a carriage, if the wretched
shandradan cau be so called. It is a lovely island,
but little cultivated. They saw the last prison of the
great man, walked through the rooms where he had
walked, and stood beside the grave where for a time
his body lay until taken to the beautiful mausoleum
in Paris. There is only one town in Sfc. Helena, and
apparently only one long dirty street, which rims
straight up the valley, the hills on either side of
which are covered with scarlet geraniums and cactus ;
the little half-starved children sitting about in the


most picturesque groups, of all shades, from black
to tawny, from tawny to light brown and white,
eating the fruit of the prickly pear. Running past
Ascension, they had a good view of its volcanic peaks,
of every hue of lava, and rising one above the other.
The captain decided to put in, having various things to
dispose of, preserved meats, butter, etc. —a long way to
bring the latter from Australia, and very bad when
brought. Here also they went on shore, and saw the
famous turtle ponds, the huge monsters basking in the
tropical heat and the little ones swimming about like
black frogs. The climate is not so terrible as might
be expected, as the sea breeze constantly blows
through the shutters of the houses (there are no
windows), and this makes it bearable. The landing-
place is not the most comfortable in the world. Rowed
in a boat from the vessel standing some distance out
at anchor, and reaching the rock, you wait for a
certain wave, and then catch hold of a rope, to which
I need scarcely sa} r you cling, and swing on shore,
where there are many assembled to help your descent
—scarcely on terra firma, as the steps cut in the rock
are always slippery and wet. The only vendure is
on Green Mountain, and that is truly lovely with
tropical luxuriance and beauty; the charmed spot
is but very small, and at a short walk you reach its
limit and gaze down with wonder and rapture on the
empty craters beneath you, tinted as I said before
with so many varied shades. Then there is the
frigate bird hovering aloft, and snatching his food
from the stupid boobies, a species of gannet, which he
pursues, strikes on the neck with his beak, and makes
him give up his prey. Tins bird is so strong on the
wing that distance is nothing. As Michelet says, “He
breakfasts at the Senegal; he dines in America; —the


stoim bursts ; he mounts to lofty heights, where he
finds tranquillity.” The boobies, his purveyors, breed
in swarms at Ascension, and allow themselves to be
readily caught; it is one of the most curious sights of
the island. The officers stationed there are most kind
and hospitable. As we approached they quite thought
we were on lire, as many homeward bound ships are
apt to be, with wool or board: I have been able to warm
my hands under the table from the hot air which
came out of the hold. Ships from the Gold Coast were
here, partly manned bj r Kroo men, tine powerful
fellows with a broad tattoo down their noses, done by
their mothers in infancy to show they belong to Kroo
country. Turtle are most cruelly treated on board
ship. Taken from the ponds, which shield their eyes
from the scorching heat of the tropics, the} 7 are placed
on deck on their backs, without any awnings; or I
have seen them in boats, where with little or no
attention, their poor eyes burnt out of their heads,
they linger on most miserably, and generally die, their
huge unwieldy bodies wasting gradually. No one who
saw them in this state would ever eat the soup, but
what the eye doesn’t see the heart doesn’t feel, or it
would never pronounce turtle to be good. They can,
however, be brought home quite healthily by being
placed on their backs, properly sheltered from heat
and cold, and lots of sea water thrown over them
many times a day. Then came the fishing for Sagasso
weed, which when the children saw, they insisted
on leaning out of the ports with lines, endeavouring
to catch, Ethel in an agony of terror lest they should
over-balance. She bad two servants with her, but
they were no use; she would have done better with
one; they did little else but talk and laugh with the
stewards. However a hundred and four days cooped


up in the same place is an excuse for much, and if they
didn’t gossip what other exercise was there ? Ethel
wished herself back at Belanja many a time and oft,
hut the memory of all the brightness and friendships
she had left cast a sort of strengthening halo over her
life.
Then came the landing—friends coming 'down to
eagerly welcome their own once more back to their
native shore ; all the bustle, all the confusion, one
after another leaving. There is Reginald Carr, scarcely
changed in the thirteen years of separation from his
child, who, laughing, crying, clinging to him with all
the little ones round her, looking up to this strange
grandpapa of whom they have heard so much, and
who with tears standing in his own eyes, took each
little one by turns to his heart. There is Lionel
Williams, the hearty good friend of Ethel’s first Bush
days, as eager and anxious for her welfare and comfort as
her own brother would have been, who had rushed up to
town the moment he heard of her arrival; the children
all astonishment at the number of uncles, aunts, and
relations by whom they saw themselves surrounded.
Reginald took them all to his own hotel for the first
week, during which time they went house hunting,
and a fine hunt it was. The end of May, the middle
of all the life and stir of the London season; Ethel,
fashionably dressed, with her father by her side, seemed
to every landlady who opened the door to the double
knock the spoil they would like to net. Their house
was reall}' perfect in every way, and she was sure to
b e comfortable : would she walk in and look at it ?
Yes, it all looked as charming as she represented,
and each woman thought to herself how lucky she
was in getting such apparently quiet lodgers, and
when Ethel said she would require the whole house


for at least a month, the} r promised greater delights
than ever, and thought them both most charming
people. But after all these preliminaries came the
woeful fact of the six children and two servants. When
each landlady heard this their bland smiles changed
to rigid firmness: they could not take them, it was
quite impossible they could let their houses easily,
and declined, sometimes rudely, sometimes politely,
according to their tempers, or perhaps to the trials
which children had caused them. At last after an
exhausting search of one or two days they found one
woman who, for the compensation of ten guineas a
week, would actually allow the little tribe to enter ;
—which they accordingly did, and being very wild,
hating London, and longing for their free Bush home,
caused great damage and consternation. Poor Ethel,
what with the whirl of excitement into which she
was idunged, which to those who have been leading-
such quiet lives as she had, is at first almost insuffer-
able, and the happiness of being again amongst all
her friends, she hadn’t much time to attend to them.
They amused themselves, however; they played foot-
ball and broke the globes of the gasaliers ; they pur-
chased whole armies of tin soldiers, artillery, and
camion shot, with which they riddled the windows;
they slid up and down the banisters until their
trousers shone like satin, and were once discovered in
the act of preparing to slide on the dining-room table;
so besides the ten guineas a week there was a large
sum to pay for damages, and it will not be surprising
to learn that they were turned out of one or two
houses ignominiously; and although grandpapa paid
in the most uncomplaining mannei’, Ethel strongly
suspected that several panes of glass which it was
asserted they had cracked, besides lame legs of chairs,
15


etc., had been paid for over and over again by many
previous victims. At last they all went down to
the old Hall in Limeshire, and flew along its wide
galleries, making them ring again with their merri-
ment. It was much changed now ; the old squire was
gathered to his fathers; Mary, the bright girl of bygone
days, was also in her grave ; Mrs. Delmore was still
there, but a very wreck of her once bright self. Ethel,
of all the children and nieces, was the only one who
ever returned to the ancient home of their youth ; even
now it was passing away into the hands of strangers,
and would soon know them no more. How she re-
called those bygone days, and peopled the great rooms
with all those lithe young forms who had now dis-
appeared from the scene, some, most indeed, in their
graves, whilst she alone of the once merry party
stood there to gravely, sadly reflect upon the changing
dream of life, as one by one from out the past came
flitting each well loved, well remembered form and
countenance, so vividly, indeed, that she could scarce
believe they were not there, and that those merry
shouts were her own children’s voices.
So having had the pleasure of showing the old
place to her children, we will leave Ethel staying with
her husband’s relations, Lionel and Amy, and their
own grown up family, in their lovely home in South
Wales, and return to Australia to take a look at Ralph
in his solitude at Belanja. Very soon after Ethel left
one of the partners of the firm so often referred to
met him, to consider the state of affairs and how they
might best secure their money, which they began to
consider insecure. Ralph, only anxious that they
should not be losers, signed a bill of sale presented to
him by Mr. Fifteen, over all the stock on the station,
then and there literally making them masters of the


place without realizing the position in which he placed
himself by this act. Mr. Fifteen was most accurate
in every detail; he could tell poor Ralph every pur-
chase he had made, even to the little presents he had
p-iven his beloved Ethel when she left, their form and
O *
make. Maddened with rage at such surveillance, and
crashed with grief at the thought of all the trouble
and care he had thus through carelessness and entire
confidence in his agents brought on his family, the
strong, proud, granite-hearted man broke down and
sobbed before the unrelenting Fifteen like a child ; who
was touched, nevertheless, tried to soothe him, spoke
of the possibility and even probability of redeeming
the present unhappy state of affairs ; but the bill of
sale was in his pocket and signed. So Ralph returned
to the silent home, and pinched and worked and tried
in every way to recover what with common prudence
and honesty should have been a colossal fortune; and
Ethel, having now learnt the terrible news, bravely
bore up in England against the tide which set so
strongly against her. She devoted herself to carrying
out the principal object for which she had been sent
home, viz., to educate the children, put the bo} r s to
college, the elder girls to school, and taught the little
ones herself. Thus she battled on for several years,
cheered by the frequent letters from that little band
of true friends who still lived on in what to her
appeared an Arcadia now, and who only clung the
closer round her now that the clouds of misfortune
and sorrow were lowering. They say when riches
fail you friends depart; don’t believe it. Ethel never
found it so, excepting with those who were never
friends at all; the others were kinder in adversity than
they ever were in prosperity, and it is to their love
and sweet sympathy that she owes the power of hav


iug been able to bear up unflinchingly. 'They have
illumined the rough dark paths over which she has
trodden and still treads with a brightness which could
not have been possible without their encouragement
and truth. At last it was thought best that she
should return to Australia; so leaving her sous at
college, under Lionel’s and her father’s care, she once
more crossed the m&ny seas which roll between the
two hemispheres. This voyage they had smallpox
on hoard, and were in quarantine for a fortnight at
the Heads. Ralph joined her there and took them
all back to Belanja as quickly as possible, rejoiced to
have the sounds of life and youth about him once
more. Ethel found it much altered, for there had
been a sale of nearly all the furniture; but she
set to work to make the best of everything, and
indeed she didn’t care as long as she bad Grace
Thornton near and other friends: they were all the
same as ever; what were riches and comfort com-
pared to that ? So back came the old life in a sort of
way, and although the entertainments were not so
costty, nor the servants so numerous, the welcome was
just the same, and the old clique unchanged. They
all flocked round her even more than before. If she
apologized for any little roughness or alteration, they
said, “Belanja is not changed, for you are here.”
So the happy, happy days at Molima came back
once again, and as the girls were now all in the school-
room under their old governess, who had returned to
her as soon as she arrived, she was able to spend much
time with her friend.


CHAPTER XX.
GATHERING CLOUDS.
Down in the little Trianon (for thus they called the
quiet bower, shaded by every luxuriant creeper which
grows in that sunny land and surrounded by shrubs
and flowers of every clime), close down by the water,
where the black swans sailed about with ducks of
many varieties, and the blue coots sucked up through
the reeds their liquid food quite fearlessly, these two
would sit and hold the sweetest intercourse. If Ethel,
apt to dwell too much on her own trials in private
(though in public no one would have thought she had
a care), got upon the theme, Grace would sympathise
in every way and say, —
“Do not sit too much upon your own little bunch
of thorns —remember old Jeremy’s words; bear on
bravely, and when you think you have overcome self,
fancy my hand pressing your shoulder, saying, ‘ Well
done ! ’ ”
“ I know you are right; still you must confess it is
hard.”
“ Yes, but you will have patience to endure and
constancy to persevere in well doing, as the old monk
says. I believe patience will gain everything, and as
for caring what people say, whether they put a bad or
good construction on our actions, we are still what
we are.”
“You are of a stronger nature, and can reason out
truth where I fail.”
“ Our chief strength lies first in knowing our own
weakness,” said Grace, sweetly smiling on her friend;
“ and next in living above suspicion.”


“ Yes, a bowing acquaintance with Mrs. Grundy is
best certainly ; but I confess to have taken the greatest
delight in seeing the old wretch led on to the highest
pitch of excitement, expecting some fearful denoue-
ment, and then watch her disappointment when
nothing came of it all.”
“True; and then she would profess to rejoice, and
say, Of course she never thought there was anything
in it, for her part.”
“ There is no doubt she is a horrid old creature,
and very censorious—years never appear to make her
less so, as they do with most people; still I suppose
she is a necessary evil and keeps a great deal straight
which without her Argus eye might break the bounds
of propriety, though I should be sorry to be a slave
to her.”
“Every one would miss her very much,” laughed
Grace. “ I don't know where she expects to go when
she dies.”
“ Die ! she never will die, until the time comes when
every one attends to their own business first and give
their neighbours’ any spare time remaining to them
afterwards. How I missed you in England ! there was
no one like you, in my estimation, and truly my spirit
felt starved for lack of companionship. You see I was
a stranger where the boys were at college, and under
the circumstances of the station not being so flourish-
ing I didn’t care to go out. Then coming from
Australia, and having a very common name, half the
people looked suspiciously at me, I believe. One
dinner-party I was at, an officer from India took me
in; he wasn’t long married; his bride was there, and to
tell the truth I didn’t think she was anything so very
surprising, although she did come from the glorious
■East. In the course of conversation I told him where


I bad come from, and saw him eye me and draw just
a shade away. This was fine fun; I then went on to
say that I had been thirteen years out there. ‘ Nearly
served my time ! ’ said I, looking laughingly at him.
‘Ticket-of-leave ? ’ was written in his inquiring glance.
‘ Don’t be afraid; I didn’t go out for 1113? country’s good
in the common acceptation of the term, at aiy rate; ’
and I saw that he believed me. Wasn’t it wonderful ? ”
“ How are your boys getting on ? ” asked Grace. “It
must have been an awful blow to have to leave them.”
“ Don’t remind me of it. The} r could really have
been just as well educated out here now, the public
schools in Melbourne are quite as good as at home, and
there is the university for them to go to; but Ralph
wished it, and since they were there of course it was
wiser to leave them. Clifton is a fine place for learn-
ing, and so healthy.”
“ Did you never think of leaving some of the girls ? ”
“ Oh, no; surely they are best brought up at home,
if it can possibly be so arranged. When I look back
upon what I was when I left school, one could scarcely
find a more ignorant, shy, and awkward creature. I was
imbued with a wholesome dread of all men, afraid to
be natural because it wouldn’t be proper, which made
me both nervous and ridiculous. What would I not
have given at my first dinner party to have been
allowed to remain in the carriage while my uncle and
aunt went in and ate theirs, discussed their neighbours,
—kindly of course—listened to a little feeble music, or
better still perhaps, never heard the little there was
and would rejoin me.”
“ Don't 3 r ou think nervousness arises from fear of
what other people may think or say of you ? Therefore
conceit is often at the root; though some are constitu-
tionally so, others made so by education,” said Grace.


“ That is why girls brought up at home are more
self-possessed and natural; they take their places in
society without gine. A certain amount of amour
propre is necessary to make us tolerable members of
society, hut is difficult to attain under a general snuff-
ing out process such as many luckless creatures have
to undergo.”
They probably turn out prophets in other countries,
where they first glimmer and then shine,” added
Grace,
“Do you notice how much those birds have in-
creased that sing so beautifully ? Isn’t it like the
English thrush ? The children call them my guardian
angels; there are a great many now in the garden at
Eelanja. I always heard that no birds sang in this
country, but it is a mistake.”
“ I think they have come down from the scrub,
finding the shrubs growing up all round in the gar-
dens,” said Grace. “They have a lovely note; but
nothing equals the nightingale; it is worth going-
home to hear it.”
“ Where I was born, in Limeshire, they are very
numerous; they were singing most beautifully in the
morning when I first saw the light; it was early in
Juty, the sun shone gloriously and the whole air was
full of song and of the scent of the newly mown
hay.” *
* “ The nightingale is a migratory bird. Over* the Alps he
wends his solitary way, and escaping the talons of the eagle, and
of the great horn owl, crosses at the gloomy hour of dawn, with
head bent low, and plunges into Italy. At Susa or towards Turin
he builds a nest and strengthens his pinions, and recovers him-
self in the depth of the gigantic Lombard corbeille, that great
nursery of fruit and flowers where Virgil listened to his song.
But the useful insect devourer is here proscribed as an eater of
grain. He traverses the Adriatic despite the winged corsairs of


“Do you remember what Hotspur said,” laughed
Grace, “when Owen Glendower boasted of what
happened when he was born, ‘ the front of heaven full
of fiery shapes,’ etc. ?—-you know,” laughed Grace.
“ Of course they would all have sung on, whether
or no, as the birth of a little puny girl (a severe disap-
pointment I was) could make no difference to them;'
the}'were far too much occupied with their own nurseries
and listening to the first sweet warble of their nest-
lings as they echoed back their mother’s strains; still
it was a brighter welcome to the day than Glendower’s,
and I always look upon it as a good omen.”
“ Are you still superstitious 1 ” said Grace. “ I
should have thought by now that you had come out
of all those trammels.”
“Yes, to a great extent, but it is very difficult to
shake off the chrysalis, and waking up to the light see
things as they are and not as we are told to look at
them.”
“ Still, you don’t think now that you are hound to
believe all that our grandfathers did.”
“ How we all believed in magpies when we were
girls at the old Hall! if one flew past without its mate,
and a ball or bow meeting happened to he in perspec-
tive we were much depressed —our faith in them was
very strong. I remember one hopping all the way
down the avenue after poor Dick, when he was going
to see a girl he was awfully in love with, and we were
deeply sorry for him—it foretold such blight to his
hopes; and yet how we laughed ! It was a most per-
sistent bird; I can see it now."
the isles, and arrives perhaps in genial, hospitable, bountiful
Egypt, where the nightingale and dove are gladly entertained,
but no less so the eagle.’' I quote from Michelet’s lovely book
again ; his chapter on migrations.


“ And yet if people would only realise it, their
superstitions of to-day are just as ridiculous.”
“ All are not so wise or so capable of grasping the
expanding thoughts of the time as yourself. There
comes Ralph; shall we go up and meet him ? ”
“Yes, for flattery is good for no one; you would
spoil me, and I must go and feed the fowls, put the
chickens in, and then go to my own little chicks in the
nursery. After dinner you will have a treat in hear-
ing Miss Maurice sing; she is a charming little creature,
plays most beautifully, speaks French and German to
perfection, teaches English thoroughly, and in fact is
delightful in every way. Were we not lucky to get
her ? ”
“ Mr. Reeves comes this evening, doesn’t he ? ” said
Ethel. “ Does he hold service here to-morrow ? ”
“Oh, no; at the Boiling Down !” said Grace, quite
gravely.
“At the Boiling Down?” said Ethel, amazed. “ What
a horrible place for prayers! besides, I didn’t know
there was one near here.”
“ It was put up whilst you were away, and for a
time did very well, but afterwards was quite useless;
they gave up boiling the sheep, and so as it is half
way between this station and Mr. B -n’s, they
arranged to have service there once a month. I have
become quite accustomed to hearing them speak of
it,”
“ Well, it is the most curious and abominable
name for a church I ever heard of,” laughed Ethel. “ I
knew one man at home who declined a living because
of its name ‘ Inferior Swell,’ but what would he have
said to this ?
“ Well, Ralph, how are they all at home 1 You don’t
look very bright; what is the matter ? "


“ Matter enough, I think,” he answered. “ You
remember that man Brydeu, who came up some time
ago to look at the sheep, one Sunday morning,'when
I, like a fool, sent him out to the plain beyond Caijuck?
Mackenzie rode over to tell me that he went straight
to town, made his selections according to the new Act
which comes into play next January, and has dum-
mied a lot, over eleven thousand acres of land. It is all
up with us, —just as we were getting our heads above
water again, too; for the debt to Ten, 1 ifteen, and
Twenty was coming down rapidly.”
“ Here is Mr. Thornton ; tell him and get his advice.
Perhaps you had better go to Melbourne and see the
Firm. I didn’t like the look of that fellow, he was so
obsequious and sleek, bowing and scraping, and you
were so civil to him,” said Ethel.
“ I was too civil by half. It all comes of letting him
go on a Sunday, and breaking through my rule,” said
Ralph.
Ethel smiled, and said nothing.
<• What are you in such earnest conversation about ? ”
said Philip, as he sat down on the verandah beside
her.
“ Ralph has brought bad news. The agricultural
area is declared and comes into force at the commence-
ment of the year, and already there are upwards of
eleven thousand acres of land selected in the pick of
the run.”
“ Who says so ? ”
“ Mackenzie rode over to warn me yesteixky,” said
Ralph.
“ You have no purchased laud ? ”
“No, I made an application for it some years ago,
but was refused; the time for taking advantage of the
pre-emptive right as the first settler had expired, I


was too late. What I ought to have done, would have
been to apply to the Surveyor General, when the land
would have been put up to auction and become mine.”
“ I advise you to write down to the Firm at once; you
should have purchased before the agricultural area
was declared. I don’t think it can be done now; no
one man can select more than G4O acres. The} r talk
about dummies, but you may depend that will never
answer; it is false and rotten at the very commence-
ment; it will feed the land sharks and starve you.
You must be heavily assessed now.”
“ Yes, I pay the Government £950 a year.”
“Why, man, if you could have purchased 30,000
acres, it would have given you the right of common-
age over the whole run now; you could have mortgaged
it at six per cent, and been safe.”
“ Granted; but you see, being in the hands of the
merchants, I couldn’t do that.”
“ I still think if they had come down with the
£30,000 (for you could have got it all for a pound an
acre then), and become themselves the mortgagees,
they would have had a far better security for their
money than the bill of sale gave them, and you would
have been in a faker position to-day. They were
short-sighted, for granting the possibility of your
failure, they would have become the possessors of
30,000 broad acres anyhow.”
“ I wish I had your head. I trusted them entirely,
and felt so sure they would act for the best, as we are
such old friends, and they have very kindly reduced
the rate of interest now ; I couldn’t stand it: in 1809
I was paying them upwards of 3,500 a,year.”
“ Never trust another man with your own business,
however friendly he may be. Very likely they let it
run on longer than they would other people in con


sideration of this, but it isn’t true friendship in the
end ; they should have pulled you up before, and you
would have thanked them now; it was well meant
perhaps, but they didn’t look ahead either for them-
selves or you. It is a pity Newcome left you ; he was
a' splendid manager, and would have seen the cloud
long ago.”
Some few months after this alarm, Ethel, whose custom
it was to take a siesta every afternoon, was startled
by a servant rushing wildly in to tell her that a man
had come down from the woolshed to say that he and
his mate had found another man with his throat cut.
She sprang up, and seizing her hat, ran through the
schoolroom, where Miss Sladen was also reposing, and
as she flew past told her the terrible news. The
informer was a bullock driver, who made a clear state-
ment of how he found the poor fellow. Ralph was
away from home, so Ethel immediately sent off for
the head of the police, twenty miles off, and desired
them to leave the body where it was until help arrived.
The man, who acted as “wood and water Joey” (every
one will understand the term, who knows anything
of station life), had been in a most melancholy and
terrible state for some time past. He had one even-
ing especially asked forgiveness of every one, even
the smallest children, for his past offences, and had
come to Ethel, who said she really had nothing to
forgive, that he had alwaj-s been a good fellow as far
as she knew ; she gave him some wine, told him to go
and lie down, that he was evidently tired and ill.
He drank the wine and went away, but the nest
evening he met her again under the acacia trees by
the little gate leading out to the yard, looking fear-
fully wild, and a dark swarthy red; he stopped her
and again begged that she would forgive him. She


told him again that she had simply nothing to forgive,
hut since it appeared to prey upon his mind, that she
would do so if it would comfort him. The children
saw him next morning early, going up to milk, as
they thought; hut the cows remained in the pens,
whilst the poor creature, stepping to the brink,
“ Tired and worn and wearsiome for love
Of some immortal hope beyond the grave/ 1
with his own hand cut the thread of life, and sent his
spirit wandering through the infinite.
“His soul was fretted like the prisoned dove,
Which now is sick to di'oop, and now doth rave
To climb the utmost sky with sudden wing :
The heaven is clear and boundless, and the flight
To some new land might be a joyous thing,
For in this cage of clay there is no light ;
Glimpses between its mortal bars there be
That bring a fearful longing to be free.”
Twelve men were summoned to appear as jurymen;
they sat upon the ghastly case, and declared the ver-
dict Felo de se, which was remarkably clever of them,
considering that the facts were as clear as the day,
and none of them understood Latin.
CHAPTER XXI.
A HORRID MAN.
The coursing matches at Narracoort, commencing as
they had done through the energy of a gentleman to
whom all thanks should be due for the introduction of
such a great amusement, had now grown into very


large meetings, contrasting most wonderfully with the
first, when Mr. Hugh McLeod of Benyeo took his doc's
down to the plains to meet those of Mr. Adam Smith,
and won. From this small beginning arose the interest
which is so great at the present day in this sport, and
for many years Narracoort was the principal meet;
dogs became more valuable than horses, and large sums
were subscribed towards keeping it up. We have seen
that the first Waterloo Cup went to Belanja some three
years before, and Ralph’s hounds had been victorious
several times since then. The Governor had honoured
the meet with his presence; the balls had become
largely attended, for the district was now quite thickly
populated, comparatively speaking, to the old days
when Ethel had first gone up, when the Inn, the
Store, and Greaves’ Forge, constituted the whole
township.
The weather was unusually severe; there was a
hard frost—hard at least for those latitudes, and the
sun rose in a thick fog, more like an English winter’s
day than any I ever remember to have seen out there.
Ralph was not in high spirits; his dogs were not in
good training, were being beaten, and it was impossible
for him to shake off the load of anxiety which pressed
so heavily upon his mind. Ethel was there with her
daughters, the Thorntons, the Mackenzies, everyone
for miles round; but it was bitterly cold, and at the ball
in the evening the ladies were all compelled to dance
in their opera cloaks : the ball-room was of galvanized
iron, which is the hottest in summer and coldest in
winter. Ethel was in high spirits, knowing very little
of the cloud which was so soon to burst upon her. She
had just returned from a visit to town, which she had
thoroughly enjoyed, the sunny remembrance of which
brightens many a passing hour; she had entertained


so many at Belanja that they in their turn kindly and
hospitably received her. Rumours of the approaching
ruin had reached her friends, hut they kept it from
her and let her fully enjoy the gilded hours as they
flew. So we still see her dancing merrily away to
the same old German hand, and very nearly the same
tunes as of yore—the last gay gathering, for ere the
nest came round ruin, and far worse, death, had heen
amongst some, and those the fairest there.
“Do come back with us to Belanja,” said Ethel
to little Miss Maurice, “ for a few days after this is
over; I know Mrs. Thornton will spare you, and I will
promise to drive you home. How much you were
engrossed with your last partner; you were quite
unconscious that two people were dancing backwards
and forwards before you in that figure of the lancers.
I was watching, and very much amused.”
“And I was quite surprised; they had just finished
when I noticed them. You have to he too attentive
in the lancers; in quadrilles it doesn’t matter.”
“ What do you think of our Bush balls ? ”
“I am quite agreeably surprised; hut never thought
it would be so cold.”
“It is really wonderful, and won’t last; I daresay
by to-morrow night it will he quite warm. Shall you
go to the course again ? ”
O O
“Not to -morrow ; there is no fun in the carriage;
if I were on horseback I would. How ill Mrs.
Thornton looks.”
“It may be the cold, she seems bright enough;
hut there, she is never anything else. What a sweet
■woman, is she not 1 We have been friends for nearly
seventeen years, and have never had one misunder-
standing even. She is the shining centre round
which we all gather; both beautiful and good.


“‘What’s good we hold to be the essence of the Power Supreme,
And that we grow like that which we behold
Is a sure truth, and not the poet’s dream,’ ”
said Ethel, looking across at her, and talking more to
herself than her companion, with a saddened far-away
look as she quoted the lines.
“If all were like her this earth would be the
promised heaven,” said Miss Maurice.
“ When every mind shall be as noble, as expanded,
and as charitable as hers, it will be so,” said Ethel;
“ and it will come some dajq but not for a long, long
time. She is centuries in advance of most other
women, and has the courage, which few of ns possess,
to say what she thinks. Scarcely any one can do so,
and yet keep the love of all.”
“ I think this is our dance, Miss Maurice,” said a
tall, gentlemanly, handsome man, as he offered his
arm to the little woman.
“ And ours, Mrs. ’Williams, is it not ? ” said Philip
Thornton.
Ethel had how given up waltzing with any but her
very old friends. She had had a confab with Grace
on the subject some years before. They both wondered
whether the younger men asked them oirt of courtesy;
the very thought showed that there was a doubt, so
they then arranged to give quadrilles and lancers to
the young ones, leaving them free to waltz with
pretty, girls instead of middle aged married ladies.
There was a little sadness in it: youth was gone, that
was clear; they would get old gracefully, and still
loving a waltz, would take only suitable partners, who
after all were far the best dancers in the room.
Miss Maurice went back to Belanja, and a day or so
afterwards was busily helping Ethel to unpack a
breakfast service in the verandah, when two gentle-
-16


men rode up : one they knew, but the other was a
stranger. Ethel rose from her occupation to receive
them, took them into the drawing-room, ordered the
usual wine and cake to be brought in,—for after long
rides refreshment was necessary,—-and desired the ser-
vant to tell Mr. Williams.
The stranger was a tall fair man, with light blue
eyes, and looked a thorough man of business; the
other was a friend of Ralph’s: both appeared con-
strained, took little notice of Ethel, and conversed in
low tones on the hearthrug, where the fire burnt
brightly.
“ Who are they ? ” asked Miss Maurice, as Ethel
rejoined her and finished the unpacking.
“ I am not sure,” said she; “ but I feel frightened.
* O
I went in with them, did the polite, and sent for
Ralph; but their manner was so strange, they scarcely
saw me I believe, and seemed engrossed with their
own business. Let us go and dress for dinner, at any
rate, for no matter what happens meals go on just the
same.”
When Ethel entered the drawing-room there were
the two looking over some photographs of the old
masters, which she had collected whilst at home.
She immediately started a brisk conversation on the
coursing, the balls, and the intense cold, thus re-
moving any constraint, laughing and chatting away,
whilst inwardly she was wondering all the time
what their eri’and could be.
The elder man. Ralph's accpiaintauce,—made during
Ethel’s absence in England—told her that he was on
bis way to Tatiara, a fine piece of countiy bejmnd
the broad extent of sandy scrub which bounded
Ralph’s run; but the other evidently meant to stay.
“ What can he want ? ” thought Ethel, as she went


on talking to him on general subjects, and of the
difference between Bush and town life. The .evening
passed off well; Miss Maurice sang some of Gounod’s
lovely melodies, and Ethel joined her in duets, whilst
the rest played whist. When Ralph came to his
dressing-room he found his wife sitting up by the fire,
anxiously waiting his coming,
“ Who is that man, Ralph ? and what has he come
up for ? ”
“ He is sent up by the Firm to inquire into these
free selections, and see what can be done. He is a son
of my old friend, Mr, Ten. That fellow Bryden is to
meet him here to-morrow.”
“ What good will that do ? ” said Ethel.
“ I don’t know, indeed. We shall have to dummy
in self-defence against him.”
“ Oh,” sighed Ethel, “ I am sure that will be of no
use ; the law is that everyone must live on their own
selection, and how can you do that over the whole
extent of this run ? ”
“ Never mind, wifey, it will all come right in time ;
the Firm will pull us through, I know.”
“ I am by no means so sure of it, Ralph.” And
Ethel’s sleep was broken with sad dreams; ledgers,
red-lined accounts mounted up before her, stem men
with hard, stony eyes, driving large flocks of sheep
away, which she tried to stop them from doing, and
was chained to the spot, unable to move.
“ Ralph,” said she next day, " can I have the horses
to drive Miss Maurice up to Molima this afternoon ?
If all these men are coming we had better be away,
and the girls will be with Miss Sladeu in the school-
room.”
“ Mcguire can drive; the roads are too heavy for
you to attempt to go alone.”


“Very well, we will start about three, for it soon
gets dark. I told Mrs. Thornton we would be up
to-day, so she expects us.”
Accordingly after luncheon they left, and for about
ten miles or so the horses went very well, though
Ethel was afraid that the groom was driving too fast,
as the waggon was heavy and they were light. At
last they came to a walk, as the ground became fear-
fully muddy, and every moment they expected to be
brought to a standstill in some large hole made by
dray wheels.
“ We shall never get there to-night, I fear,” said
Miss Maurice, from the back seat. “It is p-ettinw
• ' O O
dark, there is no moon, and the water is out all over
the swamp where the road goes through.”
“ Stump on the right, Mcguire,” said Ethel, on the
look-out for danger. “ Tree on the left, Miss Maurice,
and bough overhead; take care, stoop well, or your
hat will be off, if not your head.”
Down, down sank the wheel on the left side, and
not all the lashing given to the poor little horses, nor
all the coaxing and encouraging from Mcguire (for he
was a very respectable man, and knew better than to
swear) could move them; thej’’ were bogging also.
What was to be done ? Mcguire was a stranger, not
long in the country, knew nothing of the road, which
was covered in water.
“ Well, if you don’t mind, Miss Maurice, being left,
I see nothing for it but for me to mount one of the
horses. Mcguire has brought his saddle, and I will go
by the fence, which will take us to the house, and Mr.
Thornton will send help. Are you too frightened ?
Ada will keep you company ” (she was a young friend
of Ethel’s children, who was staying at Molima).
It is the only thing to do,” said Miss Maurice;


“ and though I do feel timid, it will be quite an adven-
ture to tell of afterwards. If they could only see me
now at Versailles what would they say ? ”
“ Well, it is very courageous of you,” said Ethel.
“ Come, Mcguire, bring the horse close here, that I may
feel my way ou to the saddle,” and she crept irom the
waggon on to its back. “Now, then, I am sorry you
will have to walk through all the water, but you lead
him and I will guide towards the fence.”
They had been gone about ten minutes, and had
just sent the last cooey back through the woods to
encourage those left sitting in the waggon, when the
horse pricked his ears and turned his head towards
the left, and splash, splash was heard through the
darkness.
“ Who is that, Mcguire ? A man ou horseback, I
am sure,” said Ethel; “ perhaps he could help us. Who
goes there ? ” she cried.
No answer, but splash, splash came the horse nearer.
“ Who is there, please ? ” she said again.
“ I am,” said the well known voice of Philip
Thornton.
“ Oh, Mr. Thornton, how thankful I am ! I have
left Miss Maurice behind, and was going to find my
■way across the swamp, or rather round by the brush
fence.”
“ Grace was getting anxious about you, as she knew
you were coming; so I set out in quest of the lost
sheep. Come along, Mrs. Ralph ; send the groom back
to Miss Maurice. I know every inch of the road, and
we will take the strong horses to pull out the trap.
Let me get you in first.”
“ Ralph shouldn’t have given me such a weak pair;
they are good little things for a bugg3 r , and did their best,
but the roads are awful. . Poor fellow, he is so upset:


Ten, Fifteen and Twenty have sent a gentleman up
to look into all this free selecting, and I saw him with
the books and accounts out before him in the hut
this morning. Ralph said he would be up to-morrow
evening—he will tell you; but I much fear we are in
a bad plight. If he only had purchased when he
could, and would have looked at those half-yearly
bills; but I have often seen him throw them into a
box and never open them; he said he knew they were
all right, they were sure to be.”
“ Yes,” said Philip, “ he was always too sanguine.
I don’t suppose that the charges are wrong for a mo-
ment, but as I told him the other day, no man should
ever trust his business entirely to others; he should
always clearly know what is going on, especially in
large transactions such as ours. Mind, little lady,
hold your horse up; the ground is very uneven here,
—you remember the crabholes. Just round that corner
we shall see the lights of home; won’t you be glad ? ”
Soon after the dogs’ welcome chorus broke out as
they heard the horses approaching, and in another few
minutes Grace was taking off Ethel’s wet things and
lending her another dress ; she sat down to some hot
O 7
tea and a good supper. Meanwhile Philip Thornton
went back Avith stronger horses to drag the waggon
out of the bog and through the swamp. But it \vas
impossible to move it that night, so Miss Maurice
had to perform the same feat as Ethel, riding on a
man’s saddle, and as Ada had to mount the other,
Mr. Thornton and his brother-in-law led them, and
Avalked more than knee deep in water the Avhole of
the AA r ay. That night is not to be forgotten, although
they all laughed heartily over it; and next morning
the men succeeded in digging out the Avheel and
bringing the waggon up.


In the evening Ralph arrived, and they all gathered
round him for news.
“ Would you believe it ? ” he said; “ that impudent
fellow Bryden came, walked up and down before the
house, asked what right I had to be there at all, said
that he would bring his sheep up and turn them into
the garden; and upon my life if young Ten didn’t ask
him into the dining-room, and he sat down there, who
but he ! ”
“ But what did he want there at all ? ” asked Ethel.
“ I don't know, indeed,” answered Ralph. “lam no
longer master at Belanja, that’s very clear; I suspect
Ten was trying to come to some arrangement with
the fellow, and buy him off, so wanted to be civil to
him ; but I didn’t inquire, I was too disgusted.”
“Oh dear, Ralph, isn’t it dreadful ? And you never
asked ? —surety it is best to know everything clearty,
and then if we are nearly ruined make the beat of it,
which cannot be done whilst -we go on in the dark.”
“ What sort of answer should I have got, do you
suppose ? ”
A civil one, I should think,” said Ethel. “ Realty,
if they saw that you would understand, and have it
all in black and -white, they would only think you
very wise.”
“ It is no use your fretting, it will all come right, I
tell you; and if we can only hold on long enough, all
these selectors will be too glad to sell me the land
long before their term expires, or at an} 7 rate when it
does,” said Ralph.
“ I am so sorry,” said Grace, putting her arm round
Ethel’s waist; “ but be brave, it may come right, and
you are sure to make the best of everything; look
on the bright side.”
“ Yes ; but isn’t it abominable to have a man like


that asked to sit down where all your friends and
honoured guests have been ? I wonder if Miss Sladen
and the children were there at dinner ? I hope not;
I do feel so angry,” said Ethel, stamping her foot, “it
is such a liberty.”
“ I agree with you, I shouldn’t like it; but there is
no use thinking over it; put it away for the present
at all events. There is the half-hour bell; we will go
and dress for dinner, and what with Miss Maurice's
songs and your own, ymu will forget. Don’t you know
those lines, —
‘ ‘ ‘ And the world’s aspect for a little time
Shall be forgotten in a song divine.’ ”
* * * * #
“ Well, mother dear,” said a tall, fair girl, about
fifteen, as she helped Ethel to descend from the waggon.
“ Dear mother, welcome home ! ” exclaimed two others,
younger, and a little boy of six, as they ran out to
meet her.
“ My darlings, where is Miss Sladen ? ”
“ She is drawing in the schoolroom. Come in,
mother, and I will order some tea to be brought there,”
said the eldest. “ I see you have got some ducks.”
“Yes, your father was out shooting this morning,
and Mr. Thornton put these in the trap. Tell me,
dears, did that man Bryden dine here, and were you
all there ? ”
“ Yes, indeed, horrible fellow,” said the youngest
girl; “he sat there picking his teeth with a pin, and
was quite angry because he wasn’t introduced to 1 that
gyurl who poured out tea,’ meaning Miss Sladen; we
knew if you had been at home he wouldn’t have been
there. He says he will turn us all out, mother —what
does he mean ? ” said the earnest little one, looking


up into Ethel’s face, whilst the little sow stood by her
knee, understanding nothing, and trying tu look con-
cerned.
Ethel could scarcely civilly meet the young man
who had invited Bryden in, and yet perhaps he in-
tended no insult to her ; he was in a most unpleasant
position, acting as a kind of bailiff
It took nearly six weeks to get everything settled.
Bryden dummied 11,000 acres, and Ralph, in self-
defence, had to dummy 13,000; little wooden huts
were put up on the selections, which turned out after-
wards to be a most useless expense and loss, as the whole
of the selections were forfeited through the non-resi-
dence clause ; the money which had been expended in
securing them by dummies went to the Government,
and the land was again thrown open for re-selection.
Ten, Fifteen, and Twenty took the whole management
of the run upon themselves, and Ralph was left to live
on at Belanja, the Government having given him the
right to reside there with as many acres of land as the
horse paddock contained, to depasture the cows, the
driving and riding horses for himself and his family.
He still hoped to be able to redeem his fortunes; but
Ethel never believed that he would, and always thought
Ten, Fifteen, and Twenty would sell if they saw their
way to realizing the debt. One of the out stations
became the bead station, where the manager lived.
CHAPTER XXII.
THE DARKEST HOUR.
About a month before Christmas they received an in-
vitation to go and spend that merry time with a


gentleman and his son, who had a large station on the
Glenelg. He had built a good-sized and most com-
O O
fortable house, with splendid stables, and the whole
place was more like an English country gentleman’s
than any Ethel had ever seen in Australia. The
library was also used as a drawing-room in the absence
of this gentleman’s wife and daughters, who were in
England; well-lined bookcases bespoke the taste and
culture of the master; everything was comfortable
and good, nothing showy or out of place. Men-
servants waited at table, which was quite a step
beyond everyone else, and you might easily have
imagined yourself in one of the shires of England, but
for the heat and dry look of the surrounding hills,
which, thinly wooded, rose on either side of a broadish
creek, the waters of which, not being dried up, looked
like a river in the valley, falling as it did over a rock
into a pool some depth beneath, thereby causing quite
a pretty waterfall. The days were spent in kan-
uarooino 1 for those who liked, drives or rides tor the
O O 1
less spirited of the ladies. The locusts were a perfect
plague that year, and rose up from under the horses’
feet in thousands, striking them with their little horny
backs, and making them wince and shy at facing such
strange flies. They ate every blade of grass, laid their
eggs in the earth, and there were no less than three
swarms that summer; the heavy winter rains and
frosts at length destroyed the larvae.
In the evenings, there was dancing until nearly
midnight, and on Sunday Mr. Reeves the clergy-
man, whose district extended to this, read prayers in
the hall, where all the family were assembled. The
Hamilton Races were to take place that week, when
the party drove down to the {principal hotel there,
and were entertained by their kind and genial host.


His son drove Ethel, with a splendid pair of greys,
in a most luxurious buggy, and the girls one and
all called her the “flying chaperone,” as every now
and then they trotted past the other carriages to see
how they were all getting on. It was a veiy happy
time, and one that Ethel will never forget. The races
were excellent, although her own horse was beaten, and
the hall a great success. Mr. D’Orvillc led Ethel in,
followed by the rest of the party, and the dawn was
nearly day before they broke up and walked back to
the hotel. A rumour came to Ralph whilst here that
Belanja was sold. Ethel had been asking several of
the younger people of the party to go up there with
her and renew the dancing there.
“ Perhaps,” she said, laughing, “we may still have
a roof over our heads; at any rate come up with us,
and we will even make merry to the last; ” and some
accepted her invitation and went with her. That was
as happy a Christmas as she ever spent.
Everything looked as usual as they flrove up. When
Hannah the housemaid brought the hot water to her
mistress, Ethel asked if she had spent a pleasant time,
as it had been arranged that they should all have
a holiday and join a large picnic party at the Caves,
which had now become a great place, and the stalagmites
much injured by people wishing to take away memen-
toes, therebj r spoiling their beauty.
“ No, ma’am ; we could get no horses and no driver,”
said the girl.
“ I am so sony, Hannah; we have had such a
gay week, and I thought you would be all enjoy-
ing yourselves as much as we were ; it would have
taken away half my happiness had I known it.”
“Oh, ma’am, never mind; we all knew that it
couldn’t be helped.”


I suppose everyone was tired that evening, so they
went to rest early, and next day there was to he a
large dance at the Mackenzies’ house, about four miles
off.
In the morning Ethel, in going through the house,
found the schoolroom and bedroom adjoining un-
touched, It was quite late, about twelve, and this was
a most unusual thing in her well-ordered home. It
was the dut} r of the groom’s wife to attend to this.
“ Run up and tell Mrs. McGuire to come down to
me,” said Ethel to one of the children.
“ Mother, Mrs. McGuire says that she is bathing
Ada, but when she has finished she will come.”
“ How disrespectful of her,” said Ethel, “ and she is
generally so civil.”
Shortly afterwards the woman entered.
“ Why are these rooms not attended to ? ” asked her
mistress.
“ Through borders received hi was to do no more in
O
the ouse ” was the impudent reply.
“ Very well,” said Ethel, “ there is the door; walk
out of it, and never enter it again. I will make the
beds myself.”
And the woman slunk away abashed, whilst the
mother and her daughters soon had the rooms tidy.-
Then came the ball. It was a lovely night, the
moon at its full, the dancers strolling through the garden,
enjoying the cool an* without fear' of cold, the blacks
and servants looking into the brilliantly lighted rooms,
where the gay assemblage amused them wonderfully;
“ Big one corroboree there ! ” Poor things, their merry
meetings were all at an end ; they had died out each
succeeding winter, until their numbers had dwindled
to a very few. If they thought at all it must have
been a saddening reflection that when first the white


men came up here, about five-and-fcwenty years before,
they had formed a numerous tribe and powerful; now
the old ones where all gone, the younger who were
left would not long survive, and there were no children.
Ethel’s guests, seeing that all was not well at
Belanja, soon left, for although she kept up her spirits
till the last it was impossible not to see the effort it
cost her.
The servants one by one gave her warning. She
never knew exactly who had been there during her
absence at Hamilton, and she never asked. It was
best that those to whom she had been givino- such
O O
high wages should leave ; she would go amongst the
free selectors—for some few industrious men had taken
up their 610 acres, endeavouring to earn their bread,
and make a home; —she would try to teach their
daughters to become good servants, paying them less.
The necessaries of life provided by the Firm for
Ralph and his family consisted of the commonest
tea, sugar that was almost black, and mutton so thin
that you could see through it, a sheep often weighing
not more than seventeen pounds, when Ethel was
compelled to have it made into broth to use it at all.
Philip Thornton changed the sugar for white, and said
it was so bad that he only used it for the men who in
travelling called for rations and a night’s lodging.
But such treatment could never succeed in crushing
Ethel’s courage : the darker grew the clouds the higher
she strove to rise above them; and whether her food
was of the coarsest or her garments the shabbiest she
was still a lady—nothing could deprive her of her
cultured mind and great love of reading and of art.
O O
She was yet able to keep Miss Sladen, so the children
were not as yet losing time ; and above all was not
Grace Thornton at Molima ?


But there was another and a far heavier cloud
destined to break over poor Ethel’s head, compared to
which all the rest seemed as nothing. For some time
past she had anxiously watched Grace Thornton
growing thinner and paler —perceptibly to those who
only saw her occasionally, imperceptibly to her own
family. Several times Ethel asked her about her
health, but she never acknowledged that she was ill,
until at last Philip Thornton grew alarmed, and took
her to town to consult the best doctors. Alas 'it was
too late; Death had fastened his fetal hand upon this
sweet life; silently, unseen, the venomed dart had
entered and worked its deadly work, and she who had
been to all who knew her and came within the circle
of her strong but gentle influence at once “ the teacher
and the life” was called away, leaving a memory of
beauty never to be blotted out, “a loveliness which
has been, and still must be, our heart’s perfection.”
And what was loss of wealth to Ethel, or what was
any grief she had ever known, compared to this ? She
had hitherto been able to bear up against everything,
bat this last blow dashed all spirit out of her. Never
again could she expect to find such another friend ; she
had given her strong, true, earnest love to her, basked
for nearly eighteen years in the sunshine and bright-
ness of her lovely mind, had expanded into what she
was under her influence; and now alone, “ without her
long accustomed light to guide,” she could only hope
that she was not utterly lost to her for ever, but gone
before, bow her head with uncontrollable grief and
say
“ Till the future dares
Forget the past, her fate and fame shall be
An echo and a light unto eternity.”


CHAPTER XXIII.
GREY DAYS.
In the counting-house of Messrs. Ten, Fifteen, and
Twenty per cent., they, like the king in the story of
the blackbird of old, were “ counting out their money,”
whilst poor Ralph and his family were “in their
parlour, eating bread (without the) honey,”
“ There is nothing for it but to sell,” said Fifteen to
Twenty, as he turned over the red lined accounts and
saw the terrible score on the wrong side of the pace.
Interest upon interest, hundreds, thousands, tens of
thousands, I might almost say hundreds of thousands
of Ralph’s had passed through their hands in the thirty
years that had elapsed since they first became his
agents, much of it earned by the sweat of bis bi’OW
in the early days of bard toil and privations; but what
cared they for that ? The station was clearly not worth
the debt, and if it went on like this they would get
nothing.
“There is nothing for it but to sell,” repeated
Twenty to Fifteen, looking at him as he sat at the
other side of the table.
“ Yes, we quite agree. Williams has written asking
for time to redeem it, but it is quite plain that it can
never be done now; he had far better have taken our
offer and gone altogether—it was a very fair one; hut
now as it is, with our late heavy losses, it is but common
justice to ourselves to sell.”
Mr. Ten, the senior partner, who had been standing
on the hearthrug with his back to the fire, listening
hut silent, at length walked up to the table as Fifteen
stopped speaking, and resting his hand upon it said,


quietly but firmly,—“ It shall not be sold. I will not
see my old friend Ralph a beggar without granting
him every chance ; give him the time he asks for.
So Eelanja was not sold then, and gradually the
debt came down, and Ralph began to hope again, still
trusting to his friends. Mr. Fifteen always wrote so
kindly, nay affectionately, though of late certainly his
letters had been few and short. So Ralph bore on in
grim stern patience. His brothers at home continued
to entreat him to consider the Firm in every way; they
trembled to think of the terrible event of his being
unable to meet his payments to them.
Mr. Reeves the clergyman was his chief comfort, and
has monthly visits the greatest pleasure to them all.
He entered so heartily, so sympathisingly into all
their troubles, having known them in the palmiest
days. He strongly advised Ralph to leave.
“ That’s what they want me to do, and what they
won’t get: if I left they would sell the place to-morrow.
True they offer me a fair income, but that would cease
with the sale. No, here I will remain, and nothing shall
move me.”
“That they will sell as soon as they realize their
money I am convinced, and what they here profess to
allow you comes from other sources, and not from
them at all,” said the little man, as he blew a cloud
into the huge fireplace. “ Any news from England ?
Are your brothers interesting themselves ? ”
“ Of course they are, and write out most anxiously
about us all, but more especially beg me as usual to
guard the Finn from any loss,” said Ralph, as he also
sent another cloud of fragrant tobacco up the other side
of the chimney.
“ Ah, yes,” laughed his companion, and winking at
Ethel, who had brought her work and was sitting


listening. (If it is thought very wrong for a clergyman
to wink, my readers must e’en do the same themselves
—at it.)
“ Yes, never mind whether we starve or not —feed the
baby!” laughed Ethel; aud it became a household joke.
How thin and worn she looks. Two years had
nearly passed since her last great grief. In that time
the district had changed altogether; some had gone
home, others had left for new colonies, glad to clear
out safety in fear of the free selectors; so she was
alone, and but for her children would have gone melan-
choly mad. To see the home of all her happiness
slowly, surely going to ruin, to know that her children
required education beyond what she could give them,
to put up often with rudeness and insult, to see
her husband powerless to help them, and j T et to know
that all this might be remedied if some strong whole-
hearted friend would only appear, realize the whole
state of affairs, and pluck them out with a vigorous
hand from this Slough of Despond in which they were
well nigh immersed, was enough to madden any one.
Ralph should in mercy have taken her away—they had
enough to live upon elsewhere; but he did not realize
it, aud clung to the hope of redeeming his fallen
fortunes as drowning men cling to straws. He saw
her daily cheerful aud gay, laughing with her family,
working with and for them, and knew nothing of her
inner life or of the sadness which made her often fear
to sleep because of the sad waking to the old sorrow
aud the cankering care. She bore along, knowing that
change must come some day, either for better or worse
—it could scarcely be the latter. Neither joy or sorrow
last long, therefore whilst the joy is present drink your
fill, for it will pass ; and when the clouds descend, bear
them patiently, for they will also depart.
17


“Do you see anything of the selectors now ? Are
their crops looking well, and what sort of neighbours
are they ? ” asked Mr. Beeves.
“ Bryden is the most troublesome; his sheep are
constantly getting mixed with ours, I believe, and
there is the cl ’s own work to keep them apart, as
his men are always leaving the gates open ; but I
suspect before long my gentleman will get his quietus ;
the selections will all be forfeited—mine as well as his,
and there goes a clear waste of upwards of £2,500
given to the Government.
“ Just so; only I suppose they look upon it as illegal
to dummy, and therefore what is sauce for one is the
same for another: it wouldn’t be fair for Bryden to
lose his land and money and for you to keep
yours.”
“ Certainly not; only you see when the fellow by his
selections got commonage over so much of the run, I
was compelled in self defence to do the same, or I
shouldn’t have had a blade of grass for my sheep.”
“Itis an awful pity, and I can’t see 3 r our way out of
the wood. I suppose they will throw the land open
again ? ”
“Of course, and it will be taken up by others; but
they "will have learnt a lessou, and live on theii several
acres.”
“We all profit more or less by the experience of
others,” said Ethel, “or if we dont, life goes for little.
Some of those poor people who just took up their 640
acres, built their little huts, tilled the land and sowed
their grain, are miserably off now. One came in here
the other day, trembling from weakness and hard toil;
she had come to return some salt we had lent her I
assure you she could hardly stand. I remarked that
she looked ill, when she burst into tears and said that


foi several days they had scarcely had anything to
eat, and begged me to lend her some flour, tea, and
sugar until her husband could get a little work,
ihe crop, she said, was under water. They had selected
without seeing the land, which looked very well in the
summer time when they first arrived, but in winter
the crabholes had become a perfect swamp. She with
her husband had worked hard to try to fill them up
and so make the ground even, but the most part of
the wheat was either floating or drowned. These
very people not many mouths before had driven up in
their cart asking the way to the plains, and jeeringly
remarked that ‘our day was over,’ to one of the
cottagers. They christened this poor little place Hope
Farm, and as I saw the letters thus addressed I felt
pity for the poor struggling people who must so soon
find out their mistake.”
“ Yes, it will never be the first farmers who will
succeed. I have no doubt in time, and after many a
poor man has been ruined in the trial, that the land
will yield well; but it will be the men coming after
who will reap the profit of these poor fellows’ struggles
in clearing the country. They want capital to begin
with,” said Mr. Reeves. °
Yes; several of our servants, having saved up
goodly sums—say £soo—as shepherds, have left us and
begun farming ; they, are now penniless, and would be
glad to return to us could we take them, but we are
now nearly as poor as they are.”
These are the struggles of new countries. It appears
to me, at present at all events, that the squatters are
being ruined and the labouring men as well; two in-
terests wrecked.”
“It will come right some day, I suppose. There is no
doubt the people have a right to the land if they can


live on it, that is to say if it is fit for agriculture; but
there are numbers of these men putting small lots of
sheep on their stations, just cultivating the presciibed
acreage, thereby proving that they consider the land
only fit for pastoral purposes, excepting at the outlay of
great cost in tillage and manure,” said Ralph. “ I wish
I had secured the land,” he sighed, as he whiffed away
the clouds and looked very comfortable in his old arm-
chair. “ Shall Ave go out this afternoon and see if Ave
can kill a duck ? Ethel Avou’t object to some for dinner.
I will tell the man to have the buggy ready after
luncheon, and Ave Avill go. I Avill take him Avith us to
hold the horses.”
They had not been gone more than an hour, perhaps
less, when Ralph dashed into Ethel’s room, told her to
put on her hat, get brandy and bandages, and come
back with him; that James had shot himself. They
Avere afraid he Avouldn’t liv T e. In less than five
minutes they had started back, and as they Abav along
Ethel asked how it had happened.
“ We Avere close to Monyupghelia, the ducks were
thick on the water, Ave had pulled up, and James got
down to unstrap my gun; he drew it out by the
muzzle, it Avas by some accident full cocked, the strap
caught the trigger, it Avent off, the Avhole discharge
went into the poor fellow’s breast. ‘ Oh, sir ! ’ he
exclaimed, and fell to the ground. I am afraid he
won’t be alive when we get there.”
“ His poor Avife ! ” said Ethel, “ and they Avere only
married the other daj r . I hope it isn’t true.
But as they neared the spot, through the trees Mr.
Reeves could be seen standing beside the lifeless man,
avlio lay stretched out on the grass, still and cold, his
face covered with a handkerchief. The cart Avith the
bed, Avhich had followed closely, came up, the body


was lifted in, and Ethel returned to break the dreadful
news to the young girl.
“James isn’t well, Mrs. Fraser,” she said, as she
.entered the tidy hut, and sat down by the young
widow’s side; “he has met with an accident and is
hurt.”
“Is he much hurt, ma’am ? Where is he ? Please can
Igo to him ? ”
“He is much hurt; he is coming in the cart. Mrs.
Fraser,” she added, taking her hand, “you will never
see James as he was, I fear.”
“ What is it ? is he then so much disfigured ? ”
She could not realize the sudden and awful truth.'
When the body arrived they carried it to a hut near,
and laid it out with decent care before they told her
that he had come.
“ Let me go to him ! ” she cried, “ let me see him
once again. Why didn’t they bring him home to me ? ”
They led her in, removed the face cloth from his face.
“ This is not James ! ” she cried, “ this is a dead man,
and not my husband.” And the wail that broke the
stillness of the evening air was pitiable to hear.
There had been a little romance about their marriage.
The parents had objected, but at last they had run
away, and the knot was scarcely tied when the father
overtook them, too late. Now some people drew
long faces and said it was a judgment on them. What
sort of idea of Divinity had they, or of One who could
thus descend and wreak vengeance on this young and
hapless pair ? The fact is, when people utter such
sentiments they do not understand what they say, or
realize how they bring down their God to a level with
their own narrow thoughts. I say they do not realize
the words they utter. Would any sane parent shoot
his child for disobedience, or if he sinned, however


greatly, would he not forgive him ? Then why make
God appear a mighty tyrant instead of the Essence of
universal Love, which is as incomprehensible as it is
boundless ? There must be something deeply wrong in
the superstition which could teach such a doctrine.
“ The luck of this house has departed, there is no
doubt,” said Ethel. The next man who came fell into
the well, and was with great difficulty rescued from
drowning; after this Ralph had much trouble in get-
ting anyone, and no wonder.
“ Are you hurt, George ? ” asked Ralph, from terra
firma.
“ Yes, sir, I’m dead,” was the answer; but when
wound up he was found to have been mistaken.
CHAPTER XXIV.
NEVER TRAVEL ALONE.
“I don’t think anyone will ever come to Belanja
again—at least no boys,” was the significant remark of
the youngest child, in writing ' to a little friend of his
own, who, although much older, had been very kind
to him in former but who was now away in
Queensland. It was indeed very different from the
bright and hospitable roof of yore, and Ethel longed
for change, whatever it might be; it would prove
a relief from all this suspense, and the sword of
Damocles, in - the shape of the sale of the station,
hanging over their heads. It was coming closer than
O O °
she thought. She had gone to town with one of her
daughters, to place her at school; Ralph had been very
far from well for a long time, and therefore was un


able to go himself. A telegram was put into her
hands one morning shortly after her arrival, to beg
her to return as quickly as possible. Ralph was very
ill, and her presence was greatly needed. She got a
friend to take her place by the coach and book her
through to the last stage nearest home. He saw her
O O
off by train that evening, which went then as far as
Beaufort, and bade her God speed. It was twelve at
iiiodit when she reached Beaufort. The inn was some
O
little distance from the station, so she got a man to
take her portmanteau to the booking-office, and went
to get a glass of wine. The waiter was veiy civil;
she asked him to see the coach-driver, gave him her
ticket, and said she wished to sit up on the box by
him, as a lady travelling alone was likely to find
disagreeable companions inside. At the stated time
(one o’clock in the morning) she was told to walk
down to the booking-office, where she was asked for
her ticket.
“ The coachman has it. I am booked through to
Horsham.”
“ You are not on the way bill,” said the man
roughly.
“ I cannot help that, I am booked through.”
“Now then,” said one of the ostlers, “if you will
lift your portmanteau into the back there, it will go.”
“ I daresay it will,” said Ethel, gently. And looking
up at the driver, said, “ Coachman, is there no one to
put my luggage in ? ”
“Of course, madam. Bill, attend to the lady. And
now, madam, if you will put one foot on the bos of
the wheel and another on the tire, and then give a
spring, I will help you up.” And he held down his
arm.
Ethel obeyed, and was in another moment on the


box, where the newspapers for up country formed a
good footstool. A man, however, seized these from
under her feet.
“ Do not remove them, if you please,” she said.
“ There’s straw under yer,” was the reply.
“ Yes ; but being very little feet do not reach
down. I want some support.”
“ Bill, give her up a bag.” And the bag was thrown
up and caught by the driver, who placed it com-
fortably for her.
“ Now then,” she said, looking down from this great
height at the men below, “ would you give me up my
railway rug, if you please ? ”
“ What do yer say ? ”
“ My rug, if you please.”
They threw it to her, and the driver, wrapping it
round her, pulled up the great leather apron, fastened
it at the side and in the centre, so that should she fall
asleep she would not be thrown out, cracked his whip,
and away.
When they were fairly off Ethel burst into tears.
Never before in all her experience of the Bush had
she been so treated; this came of travelling alone and
of all the ruin Avhich had fallen upon them.
“ I am afraid you are not wrapped up enough about
the neck,” said the kind-hearted driver. “It is very
cold to-night, and very bad ’for ladies. Would you
take this scarf, madam ? you are welcome to it.”
“ No, thank you,” said Ethel. “ I have not been
accustomed to such rough men as those, and have
never been alone before.”
“ Are you going far ? ” said the man.
“ Yes, to Molima.”
“ I know Molima very well,” said he. “I lived at
Mr. B n’s, only a few miles off, for some years.”


“ Did you ? ” said Ethel; then perhaps you know
Belanja. I am Mrs. Williams.” And although he
had been very civil before, he was mud) more so
now, offering her tea at the different places where
they stopped to change horses. All that night she
travelled. Plow bitterty cold it was, and how long
it seemed after the first streaks of dawn before the
sun rose to give any warmth ; the wind across those
Ararat plains was so cutting. All the next dajy through
the hot dusty roads, for when the sun did shine it
shone indeed, and the dust needs no description to
those who have travelled in Australia. Sleeping that
night at a dirty inn, she would have left next morning
without breakfast, as the coach started at four (it was
only a little rattle trap of a buggy to hold two people,
a spider on wheels), had not the driver asked if she
would take a cup of tea and a bit of bread and
butter. “ His missus would be very glad to give
her one.” So Ethel went into the little house and
sitting down with the two to breakfast, enjoyed
the homely fare. Resting at Molirna that night, she
went on next day to Belanja, to find Ralph between
life and death, as all thought. He had been seized
with severe fits of shivering, which had left him for
a time speechless, but they thought he was coming
round.
He was slowly recovering, when one evening on
opening the post bag, Ethel saw the well known
handwriting of the Firm. There is no mistaking a
business hand, it is so characteristic and so unlike
other people’s—clearer and better, no doubt, but un-
mistakable.
She opened it, and found that it ran to this effect, —
that as an excellent opportunity had been offered for
the disposal of the run, they had sold it, and therefore


it now no longer belonged even in name to Mr. Ealph
Williams.
“ Dear sir, yours faithfully,
“ Ten, Fifteen, and Twenty Fer Cent.”
“Gills, the place is sold,” said Ethel, as her daughters
entered ; “ and lam afraid it will kill your father, I
don’t know how to break it to him.”
However, when he knew, he was almost too weak
to realize it, and took it much more resignedly than
any one would have believed. The dummied land
was all forfeited, both Ralph’s and Bryden’s, and
thrown open again for re-selection. Ethel, wishing
to let his brothers know as soon as possible, drove
down to the telegraph office, twenty miles away, next
morning; but a telegram cost nine pounds, so it was
out of the question, and after all she consoled herself
by thinking it would have done no good; they would
know in time, and long before they got the letters
dear old Belanja would have passed away into the
hands of strangers. The last days were spent in
packing up the household treasures, which had
accumulated to so many in those past happy, happy
years. Every nook had its cherished associations,
and every tree its deep rooted regret. Had she not
planted each with the firm belief that she did it for
her boy, her eldest son ?—and where was he now ?
Serving strangers, having asked for work on his own
father’s run, and been refused.
The four-in-hand stood ready for the journey, and
wide open were the gates; a few poor blacks weeping
round, and two stranger servants, one or two of the
free selectors, with the faithful Jemmy, ready to mount
and go with them to the Bay. The laughing jackass
from his perch upon the limb of the old gum by the


well, looked down with curious glance, and was silent;
the magpies flew along without a warble, the swallows
from under the long verandah roof flitted restlessly,
guarding their little nestlings perched above the door
where all poor Ethel’s had been reared; the very
parrots seemed to chatter more harshly than ever, and
an old crow, picking at a wretched sheepskin hang-
ing on the fence some distance down, looked up from
his morning meal and gave forth the most discordant,
O O >
wretched caw; the collie licked her hand. There to
the left stood the cottages, with their climbing creepers
and honeysuckles clustering over the roofs, but no
curling smoke of household fires wreathed up into the
clear atmosphere as of yore, the little gardens a wilder-
ness, which once had blossomed as the rose ; and further
on the woolshed, the source of wealth, prosperity, and
joy, with closed doors now; the empty kennels tell
their tale. Good-bye, old home, with all its hopes,
its joys, and comforts. Good-bye, old hut, where
week by week and year' by year Ethel knelt, sur-
rounded by her family and the many faithful ser-
vants who had been with her so long; Avhere tired
men had rested in the old hard' days of toil, where
babes had been christened, marriages solemnised, and
the little ones had played and lisped their joyous
prattle, all unconscious of the clouds which were to
descend upon them whilst yet they were too young to
battle with the world. The dear old place to others
would only he an old and useless hut, and nothing
more.
Strangers will tread those walks where each loved
spot and tender flower had some sweet memories;
strangers will fill those rooms where such blithe,
gladsome faces had so often assembled; but never
again will it he as it was then, never again,—


“ Tis disenchanted,
And no spirit of the past will linger there.”
That dream was over, and Ethel bowed her head in
silence as she turned her back for ever on her forest
home.
It was still early morning when they pulled up at
the well-known forge for some slight repair. Ethel
held out her hand to tlie honest blacksmith (one of
nature’s gentlemen). He looked at her, then at his
own broad palm, and, wiping it on his apron, shook
the daintily gloved hand. “Has it come to this ? ” he
said.
Two more long days’ journey, and they drove into
the Bay and up to the house, which Ralph had given
to Ethel many years before. It was her own, so
here we will leave her. As she got down a tall,
handsome woman opened the hall door, and flinging
her arms round liter old mistress, sobbing, cried, “ That
I should live to see this day ! ”
Once more the gates are open at Belanja and car-
riages are coming. One would almost believe that all
was as it used to be, and that as they drive up we
should see Ralph and Ethel welcoming their guests.
But the crowd is too motley for this, and why is the
bell ringing ? It is the sale. Listen to the hammer
of the auctioneer, —“ Going, going, gone ! ”
THE END.-
