

E. Crimwood Printer, Echuca.




IS PRESENTED BY THE
Exhuca Borough Council
AS A
Souvenir
Those Visiting the Municipality of and the
Districts Surrounding Echuca,
With a view to bringing under their observation the many
advantages to be derived by settlement in these areas,
AND AS
A Handy Reference to others who, desiring to better their
fortunes, have turned their attention to Northern Victoria.


ECHUCA WHARF
Loading: Carg:o for Rivehna Ports.


A BRIEF OUTLINE
OF THE
HISTORY OF ECHUCA.
(Late J. W. Andrews and others).
The Town of Echuca, which
within the borough confines
has now a population of about
4500, is situated on a narrow
peninsula formed by the
union of the Campaspe and Murray
Rivers. Consequently it has a some-
what lengthened appearance. The
' principal streets —High and Hare —are long but
wide and straight. Their appearance is im-
proved by liberal tree planting. The main
Vv public buildings are a considerable distance
apart, which has the effect of giving some —like
the Supreme Court —quite an isolated appearance.
Echuca may be said to be miles from E. to W. and
2 miles from N. to S. The name of the town, it is said,
is derived entirely from its geographical position. The present
site was at one time a favourite fishing and camping ground of
the now almost extinct Murray aboriginals, to whom the locality
was known by a name which signified, in their language, the
meeting of the waters. The pioneers of the district could not
correctly pronounce the word used by the blacks, and usually
stopped short when they had uttered the word “ Echuca,” which
is a considerable abbreviation of the native name for the district.
In passing, may it be known that a New South Wales Mission
to the aboriginals is situated about fourteen miles by road up the
Murray from here, where the manager, we feel sure, would
gladly welcome any visitors caring to drive thither.
Echuca was founded in 1853 by Henry Hopwood, to whose
memory a granite obelisk has been erected by the townspeople in
Victoria Park. Previous to his settlement in Echuca, Hop-
wood was employed managing a boilingdown establishment
situated on the River Murray, below the present site of the
town. While there he had sufficient acumen to foresee that the


Hare Street. Looking Towards Railway Station.


settlement of Riverina (the land across the Murray) which was
then rapidly taking place, would inevitably result in the
establishment of an important town at the spot on the river
most suitable for the crossing of stock and stores. Convinced of
the correctness of his predictions he selected the present site of
Echuca, and at a place near the river bank, close to where the
wharf now stands, he erected the first house built in the locality,
and which he afterwards converted into an hotel and store on a
site now occupied by the Echuca Club. While his house was in
course of erection he purchased the good-will of a punt which
belonged to a man named Isaacs, who plied it across the river
at a spot in Victoria Park.
Hopwood soon afterwards removed the punt to a place more
convenient to his hotel, and alongside of which to-day is the
Morgue, nearly opposite the present Bridge Hotel. Visitors may
to-day see at this spot a huge coil of steel wire which originally
sustained the wealth of commerce in transit from one state to
another. He was not long in receiving a return for the enter-
prise he had displayed in establishing the crossing. On each
side of the river settlement was rapidly taking place, and the
development of the district largely increased the trade of which
he held a complete monopoly. Sheep were being driven into
Victoria in large numbers, and Hopwood’s fees for crossing them
on his punt often amounted to a considerable sum, as much as
£lO a thousand being charged by him. In addition to the
lucrative business done at the punt, his hotel was largely patron-
ized by squatters, boundary riders, shearers, &c., who bought
their stores and otherwise liquidated their cheques with him,
whom they designated King of Echuca. The punt first erected
soon proved inadequate for the requirements of the crossing,
which induced Hopwood to build a pontoon bridge so as to give
greater facilities for the increased traffic. In 1855 Echuca was
surveyed, and the first Government land sale was held on the
7th August, in the same year, at which most of the lots offered
were disposed of at the upset price of £8 per acre.
The Government continued to sell town lots until 1859, when
they withdrew the remainder from sale. This action created
quite a boom in the town lots already sold, many of which
changed hands at high prices. After the land sale of 1855
Echuca grew rapidly, and Hopwood was compelled to share the
trade of the district with many other places of business.
From 1856 onward the settlement of Echuca progressed
rapidly. Businesses of every description were opened, and the
main surveyed streets were speedily denuded of the box trees
which then grew upon them. So rapid indeed was the expan-
sion of the local trade that in 1859 it was confidently predicted
by the “ knowing ones ’’ in the commercial world that Echuca
would eventually become “the Chicago of Australia.” Although
(he above prediction is not yet fully verified, appearances in


Echuca Wharf at High River.


1859 certainly warranted the Echuca residents in indulging in
such bright anticipations, for besides the development of the
local trade already referred to, Echuca was fast becoming a river
port of considerable importance, and vhrough the medium of
the river steamers commanded the trade of the vast territory
through which many navigable rivers run. In 1853 Captain
Cadell navigated the steamer “ Lady Augusta” from Adelaide to
a point on the Murray, some distance above Echuca. She was
the first steamer to plough the waters of the Murray. Captain
Cadell subsequently made many voyages in the same steamer on
the Murray, and after many years of service the vessel was
eventually abandoned as useless near the Echuca wharf. Al-
though it is not generally known, it is nevertheless a fact that
portion of the hull of the first steamer to navigate the River
Murray, viz., Captain Cadell’s “ Lady Augusta,” can yet be seen
projecting above the silt deposited on the New South Wales
bank of the Murray opposite the north end of the Echuca wharf,
and her stem may be seen at the Mechanics’ Institute.
Once Captain Cadell had navigated the Murray other
steamers quickly followed, and in turn the Livers Darling,
Murrurnbidgee and Edwards were navigated, and finally
steamers traded to and from the following ports and Echuca :
Goolwa, South Australia, river distance, 1,160 miles, Walgett,
on the Darling, 1,678 miles ; Gundagai, on the Murrurnbidgee,
1,16.0 miles; Albury, on the Murray, 301 miles; as well as
several hundred miles up the River Edwards.
Echuca’s supremacy as a river port was not assured until
the line from Bendigo to Echuca was opened. Early in the
sixties the building of a line of railway from Bendigo to Echuca
was urgently advocated. It speaks well for those who conducted
the agitation that they lost no time in getting their claim to a
railway line recognised, for in 1864 the railway from Bendigo
to Echuca was opened and Echuca placed within a six hours’
journey of Melbourne. The opening of the railway gave an
immense impetus to the river trade ; steamers which before the
opening of the line had, after coming from the Darling or
Murrurnbidgee gone down the river to Adelaide with their
cargoes, after the line was opened turned up the river and dis-
charged their loads at Echuca, and reloaded their barges with
stores and station supplies. Owing to Echuca ihen being the
terminus of the line, the whole of the Deniliquin trade passed
through Echuca. This, however, was to an extent lost in 1876
by the extension of the railway, by a private company, as far as
Deniliquin. At first the Deniliquin train crossed the Murray on
a skelton pile bridge, and many residents of Echuca recall with
a shudder the journeys they made in the train over it. Fre-
quently passengers from Echuca would cross the river in a boat,
and board the train on the Moama side rather than risk what
appeared to be the very perilous journey across the bridge.


Echuca Post-office.
ffc=


Passengers who have crossed the old bridge in a train describe
the sensation as awful. They state that the train appeared to
crawl over the ricketty structure, which swayed and creaked as
if it were going to collapse every minute and let the train with
its living freight drop into the swift running waters of the River
Murray. The remains of some of the piles may be seen at the
foot of the western side of the present bridge. The wooden bridge
was not asked to do duty long, however, for in 1878 the then
finest iron bridge in the southern hemisphere was erected across
the Murray at a cost of £120,000, which was born jointly by
both States.
Echuca was first constituted a borough in January, 1865,
and on the 13th February of that year the first borough election
took place, when Councillors Homan, Payne, Moore, Redman.
Riddle, Lewen, Hogarth, Simpson and Sloban were elected, E.
Homan topping the poll. At the first meeting of the Council
held on Ist March, 1865, E. Homan was elected Mayor of the
borough. In the same month Mr. C. E. Pascoe, of Avoca, was
appointed Town Clerk, a position which he held for a period of
over twenty-seven years. During his term of office he saw the
place transformed from a bush township to an important town,
with streets nicely laid out and planted with a splendid variety of
beautiful shade trees. For the tree planting in the streets alone the
residents of Echuca owe everlasting gratitude to their ex-Town
Clerk, the late Mr. C. E. Pascoe. The Mayoral chair this term
is occupied by Cr. William James Martin, J.P., a gentleman who
has, during a long residence in the town, always identified
himself with any movement calculated to benefit the borough.
Mr. Frank P. Hungerford occupies the responsible position of
Town Clerk, and has proved himself to be a gentleman who can
ably fulfil the duties appertaining to his office. The era of pro-
sperity which dawned upon Echuca when the railway was opened
in 1864 was visible on every hand in 1876. Immense areas of
land had been cut up by the Government aud thrown open for
selection from the Campaspeto the Loddon on the west, and to the
Gon 1 burn on the east. The country was dotted with settlers who
had migrated from the south and taken up their 320 acres for the
purpose°of establishing a permanent home for themselves. This
influx of selectors, which greatly increased the trade and pro-
ductiveness of the adjacent districts, was most opportune, for
before many years had elapsed the restricting influence of the
border duties on the interstate trade was severely felt.
Looking at Echuca to-day, one can hardly pardon the
pessimistic individual who states that Echuca has seen her
best days.” No town in Victoria has now a more encouraging
outlook than Ecfiuca. We have a climate ec[ual to oi surpassing
any in Australia —its curative powers are too well known to
require reference here : suffice it to say there are in our midst
wonderful examples of life, snatched from the grave.


fc£
'■%
' f _ .i^m, sMPfc ■;; ', Hi
- . - . f ■ -j . j,- - - jpnjv- M 1 | i
MBm$% ~ \ ■ % V Vvy 1 • ..’ t ~ wHt&
jrs / ' /^S
jj laPPi^y. f / / AAOMM
* --**** *.<-' —■■ t * S' BBHhH
v .- x * / ZeBN
-. *. ■;■ -iKlfe''' /*' I
' ,- / / jjHM
/ - ■.srjr\ ;'■
' ,^ r< / ■*••••■ •- ”• «8s5a
Echuca Wharf During Busy Season.
Loading Wool Into Trucks.
— 9
5*


Settlers in the new irrigation areas will, unlike pioneer
settlers, have all the advantages of modern civilisation about
them in the shape of established centres of community with
ready access to them and the seaboard by rail or road. There
will be little or nothing to undertake in the matter of road
construction. This has all been done by the municipalities.
Briefly, Echuca prospers to-day on the carrying trade of the
river in the season, by supplying the requirements of visitors
and in valids during the cooler months of the year, and a pastoral
and agricultural position extending for a radius of from 18 to
40 miles. 4he Hour and Timber Mills employ labor, likewise
the Bacon and Butter Factories, and there are the usual means
of employment incidental to a large town. For the children of
settlers there is established in Ecbuca a District High School,
with a competent staff. The curriculum includes chemical
and scientific enquiry into product raising. Ecbuca can boast
for her residents every institution required by settlers—Charit-
able, Ecclesiastical, Educational and Sporting. Situated on a
bend of the Murray, within nice walking distance, there is a
National Park of 300 acres, wherein is a Sports Ground.
“ Ihe Vagabond” (Julian Thomas), said that one of the drives
around this Park equalled anything for natural beauty he had
seen.
POSSIBILITIES OF THE DISTRICT.
The State Legislatures of Victoria have, with commendable
statesmanship, grappled with the problem of unlocking huge
areas of land, which hitherto had been sheep runs, and con-
verting them into closer settlement areas with an assured
water supply from the Waranga reservoir.
The Minister for Lands (Mr. McKenzie), and Mr. Mead, and
Mr Cattanach, Chairman and member respectively of the
State Rivers and Water Supply Commission, have been abroad
to bring irrigationists to these lands. There are residents
in our midst who with the aid of irrigation and small patches of
ground are making considerable sums of money from orchards,
market gardens, and tomato growing. It has been demonstrated
that dairying and stock raising by means of specially grown
fodder crops can be carried on on areas which are absurdly small
when compared with those of former days.
The policy of closer settlement which aims at settling the
people on all good land suitable for cultivation, coupled with
the businesslike proposals of Mr. Elwood Mead as to the manner
in which the water shall be used for irrigation purposes will
secure abiding prosperity. Mr. Mead has persuaded the State
Government that if he is to supply water it must be used to the
best advantage. Country suitable for irrigation and commanded
by the water channels is to be put to its best use, or the owners,


Croup of Cargo Carriers.
1 ‘ Symbdl of life andpow'r supreme,
God-given , man-neglected stream ,
The curse of lethargy doth seem
On black and while co-equal.
Still —as the ill-clad natives knew —-
Rolling thy wealth to ocean blue ,
With drought to etch the sequel •
Lock ! and the water rights of each
Fair State adjust —quit alien speech ,
Australian brotherhood must reach
Beyond the State to nationhood.'
H.R.W. (Kchuca).
Redgum Arch and Statuary—Victoria Park.


who refuse so to do tins, will have to pay heavily for the privilege
of keeping their land half idle. Fortunately there is within
easy distance of Echuca a large area of such land. The acres
are there and the water is there, and the State Government,
evidently meaning business, has already purchased a considerable
area of good land in the district. It is intended to create and
encourage the establishment of irrigated farms, where it is be-
lieved that it will be practically demonstrated that a small area
highly cultivated by expert irrigationists will give a man and
his family a better living than hundreds of acres grazed, or half
cultivated, under the old system in vogue. There is no reason
to doubt the success of the new movement, and there is great
probability that many thousands of acres of the land west and
south-west from Echuca will be occupied by at least ten times
the number of producers now settled in the district.
The fact of the lands around Echuca having been made
irrigation areas is being received with general satisfaction by the
neople of the town and district, aed individual residents are
endeavouring to advance the movement as much as possible,
while the Borough Council has taken steps to further the project.
The possibilities of this district under irrigation, even on
poor land, have been amply demonstrated by Mr. Mead. A
farm was purchased and the cultivation of lucerne was com-
menced on a soil which local authorities declared would never
be made to grow lucerne successfully. After eighteen months
the verdict of the land has been decidedly in favor of Mr. Mead.
The financial returns have been most satisfactory. If the farm
were sold now and a profit and loss account struck there would
be a substantial balance on the credit side. _ In every sense the
demonstration has been a complete and an indisputable success.
The good results have sprung from the right utilisation of both
soil and water. The land has been properly graded and pre-
pared for the scientific use of water. 1 his, it might be said, is
the basis of modern irrigation. Under irrigated cultivation,
from tomatoes, as much as £250 per acre has been returned. If
irrigation can be employed with such success, Echuca, which is
surrounded by good and in many places rich soil, has wonderful
possibilities.
The success which is attending the irrigation districts and
the already perceptible benefits of these settlements to adjacent
towns are factors which are being felt in Echuca. The adjacent
land is rich, and the greater portion of it has never been culti-
vated, but what has been sown has produced very heavily, some
parts yielding as much as 10 bags of wheat to the acre, while eight
bags was generally expected in a good season. Iwo miles from
Echuca two men are engaged in intense culture on this land.
A small bit of ground —a fraction of an acre is being irrigated
by means of water which is pumped by hand from a well.




Tomatoes and beans have been principally cultivated. The
yields have been astonishing. For a period of two months the
returns worked out at about £l5O per acre. A plot of beans 17
yards by 10 returned about £5 10s. during the same period.
This shows what the country can do, and with such irrigation
facilities, fertility of soil, salubrity of climate and adjacency to
markets, we may well say—
“ A.DVA.3XTCE ECHUCA.,”
PLAGES AND ITEMS OF INTEREST.
The Echuca Progress Association is an active body, pre-
sided over by Mr. A. C. Ostrom.
The Echuca District Hospital is situated at the south end of
the town within easy walking distance.
Mechanics’ Institute and Free Library is open from 12 noon
to 9 p.m.
The Town Hall and Court of Petty Sessions are next door.
The Race Course and famous Plumpton may he reached by
driving some three miles along the Toolamba line, while the
Agricultural Show Grounds and two Rifle Ranges may be visited
at the same time at the extreme south of Echuca.
Victoria Park is prettily situated at the Northern end of the
town. An invigorating before-breakfast exercise is to walk
around the Park, which follows the course of the Murray the
whole way. This Park is one of the few natural ones in the
State. Here will also be found the Sports Ground and Tennis
Courts. Mr. Adam Alton, F.R.H.S., ably fulfils the duties of
Curator to the borough. A walk through the Park will bring
you to the Junction of the Campaspe. Alton Gardens are along-
side the Presbyterian Church.
The Echuca Wharf, although at some periods of the year not
very active, may be inspected after a few minutes’ walk from
any of the hotels. The Murray Bridge is a feature of Echuca.
Constructed of iron, it is perhaps one of the finest and largest in
Australia. A walk across carries one to New South Wales and
into the Municipality of Moama. The Mayor will make visitors
welcome. Moama is a very old town, and is connected with
Deniliquin by rail —a distance of 43 miles. Moama boasts some
rather fine buildings.
Echuca buildings worthy of inspection are the Post-offlce,
Anglican Church, Roman Catholic Church, and Presbyterian
Church, while other denominations in onr midst are Metho-
dist, Baptist, Church of Christ, and Salvation Army. There is
also a Convent, State School, and Masonic Temple.




There are two fine Flour Mills (L. Kickham Milling Co.,
proprietors).
The famous Milo Bacon Company (W. G. Boyle, Manager),
have their works on the Murray River at Echuca East, at a
distance of about a mile and a half from the Post-office.
Adjoining the Milo Works are the Redgum Mills of Mr. W.
J. Nicholas. Situated too, at the foot of the Murray Bridge,
may be seen the Mills of the Murray River Co.
There are seven Medical Benefit Orders with branches at
Echuca M.U.1.0.0.F., 1.0.0. F., A.N.A., H.A.C.8.5., Druids,
A.0.F., as well as branches of the 1.0. F., Orange and Masonic
institutions.
Echuca is served by a daily newspaper, the Riverine Herald ,
and by a tri-weekly, the Echuca arid Moama Advertiser.
Echuca boasts two first-class Brass Bands —the Victorian
Rangers, and Federal.
There is an efficient Fire Brigade, and detachments of Light
Horse, Infantry and Senior Cadets.
Scholastically the town is served in the higher education by
a District High School, Convent, and Technical Art School.
Echuca has three Social Clubs —the Echuca, Border, and
Working Men’s Club.
Sports are governed by the Athletic Association. Their
Boxing Day fixture is not excelled by any similar gathering in
the State.
Swimming may be indulged in at places set apart, without
any charge. Arrangements can be made for any visitors desirous
of boating on the Murray, or having a day’s fishing.
Rowing, Football, Cricket, Tennis, Golf, Rifle and Gun
Clubs are well supported here.


Fountain, Victoria Park.


To Melbourne,
via Bent’igo.
Echuca depart
Bendigo arrive
Castlemaine ,,
Woodend ,,
Melbourne ,,
Mon. Tu.
8 a.m.
11.13 ,,
12.50 p.m.
2.26 „
3.55 ,,
Other Days. Daily.
8.35 a.m. 4.30 p.m.
11.13 ,, 6.25 „
12.50 p.m. 7.40 ,,
2.26 ,, 9.14 ,,
3.55 „ 10.55 ,,
To Daylesford,
via Woodend.
Echuca depart
Woodend depart
Daylesford arrive
Mon. and Tues., 8 a.m.
Other Days, 8.35 a.m.
6.45 p.m. daily
.. Mon,, Wed. and Fri., 8.5p.m.
Tues., Thur. and Sat., 8.51 p.m.
RAILWAY TIME-TABLES.
-—l—-V-CM ■*< -
TO BCHUCA
From Melbourne via Bendigo.
Melbourne depart
Woodend ~
6.40 a.m. 4.50 p.m.
9.6 ~ 6.30 ~
10.32,, 7.40 ~
12.2 p.m. 8.45 ~
2.15 ~ 10.23 ~
Castlemaine
Bendigo
i-) Cll tl 1 g U y
Echuca arrive
From Ballarat, via Daylesford and Woodend
Ballarat depart .. .. 7.55 a.m.
Daylesford,, .. .. 3.15 p.m.
Woodend ~ .. .. 6.30
From Ballarat, via Maryborough and Castlemaine.
Ballarat depart .. .. 7.25 a.m. 1.10 p.m.
Maryborough ~ .. .. 10.20 ~ *5.25 ~
Castlemaine „ .. .. 7.40 p.m. 7.4 ~
*6.6 p.m. on Wednesdays and Fridays.
From Melbourne, via Seymour and Toolamba.
Tu. Th.
Daily. Sat.
6.15 a.m. 4 p.m.
9.20 ~ 6.15 ~
11.13 ~ 8.15 ~
Melbourne depart
Seymour ~
Toolamba
2 p.m. 10.10
Echuca arrive
from: echuca


View of Campaspe River.


RAILWAY TIME-TABLES-Continued.
FROM ECHTJCA.
To Ballarat, via Castlsmainß and Maryborough.
Mon. and Tues. Other Days.
Echuca depart . . .. 8 a.m. 8.85 a.m.
Castlemaine ~ .. .. 4.17 p.m. 4.17p.m.
Maryborough .. .. 6.45 ~ 6.45 ~
Ballarat arrive .. .. 9.37 ~ 9.37 ~
To Melbourns, via Toolamba and Seymour.
Mon., Wed., Fri. Daily,
Echuca depart .. .. 5 a.m. 2.55 p.m.
Toolamba arrive .. .. 7.10 ~ 6 ~
Seymour arrive .. .. 9.15 ~ 8.12
Melbourne . . . 12.16 p.m. 11.8
Note.—Tickets upon Ballarat via Maryborough Line are available via
Daylesford. Melbourne Tickets are available either via Seymour or
Bendigo.
MAIL ARRANGEMENTS.
Mails close at Echuca Post-office for Bendigo and Melbourne
line (and branches) : —Monday and iuesday, 7.35 a.m. , Wed-
nesdav, Thursday, Friday and Saturday, 8.10 a.m. Daily at 4
p.m. Due at Melbourne, 4 p.m. and 11 p.m. Goulburn Valley
line, via Toolamba and Seymour, daily at 2.30 p.rm and at 11
p.m. on Sunday, Tuesday and ihursday. Due ioolamba 6
p.m. daily and 7.10 a.m. on Monday, Wednesday and Friday;
Seymour, 8.12 p.m. daily ; Melbourne, 11.8 p.m. daily and 12.16
p.m. on Monday, Wednesday and Friday.
Coach Lines —Kerang ; Monday, Wednesday and Friday, 8
a.m.; Terricks East, 3 p.m.
Mails are due at Echuca Post-office from Melbourne, 7 a.m.
and 2.15 p.m.; Goulburn Valley, 2 p.m.


A
u
i
ft
•H
u
0
0
•H
>
6
•H
(3
d
'h
<1
hi
■p
h
0
ft
in
u
c
3
O
o
•C
be
3
O
k
O
00
cs
o
3
■C
a
Ul
>»
■Q
mm t 3
<v
+■*
a
Jam <a
k
ui
■n
§
co
"O
c
3
v.
u


m
x
r+
CD
2,
O
T
o
03
T
g
£
S'
cp
o
o
3
<
(w
3
rf


E. Crimwood Print, Echuca.




