

£'\ i
BROTHER JOHN
Incidents in the Life and Work of
JOHN DENT MARTYN




BROTHER JOHN


The profits derived from the sale of
this book are to be devoted to the
Candidates Training Fund of the
Brotherhood of the Good Shepherd.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by William Dunbibar
at The S. John’s College Press, Morpeth, New South Walales,
and
Registered at the General Post Office, Sydney, for tr.insmissision
through the post as a book.


FOREWORD
(have been asked to write a Foreword to a sister’s tribute
to Brother John. I have not seen it, but I doubt not it
will be a faithful and discerning record of a life, young
and full, clean and strong and free. We all loved him
here, of course. In his great parish of Bourke he was the
friend of everyone. I hope the record of this little book
will include a poem written by a townsman of Bourke,
a member of another faith than ours, who when he
went, apostrophised him in a remarkable tribute of verse.
He had almost every quality that makes men loved by
men. He was virile, cheery, honest, and sincere. His
quips, his songs, his bubbling humour, was the life and
soul of every Brotherhood Reunion. He was a man,
and he was a boy as well. But he was more than just
genially human. John Martyn was a Christian, and the
Christian graces shone out in his life, and drew men,
through him to his Master. Faith and hope were there,
and love, I think, shone out above them all. He stood for
love where life was at its hardest. He bathed bruised
feet and set them on the King’s Highway again. And
above all, John Martyn was a priest a servant of
God, a lover of souls, a faithful steward of those
Heavenly mysteries he so dearly loved to steward and
reveal. May light perpetual shine upon him, the same
light that shone on him, and through him, in his priest-
hood here.
Charles Hamilton Sorley, in 'Expectans Expectavi’,
gives us a picture of Youth on tip-toe, vital and dedi-


cated, giving its body and its blood to be the meat and
drink of men. To this company belonged Brother John.
From morn to midnight, all day through,
I laugh and play as others do,
I sin and chatter, just the same
As others with a different name.
And all year long upon the stage
I dance and tumble and do rage
So vehemently, I scarcely see
The inner and eternal me.
I have a temple I do not
Visit, a heart I have forgot,
A self that I have never met,
A secret shrine and yet, and yet
This sanctuary of my soul
Unwitting I keep white and whole,
Unlatched and lit, if Thou should’st care
To enter or to tarry there.
With parted lips and outstretched hands
And listening ears Thy servant stands,
Call Thou early, call Thou late,
To Thy great service dedicate.
Horace Bathurst
Bishopscourr
Bathurst, 2/10/31.


PKEF ACL
'We could write a book on our experiences’, John said
to me on more than one occasion, usually after an event
of an exceedingly humorous nature, some disappoint-
ment, or perhaps some miraculous escape from danger—
or yet perhaps something accomplished. I remember, on
one of these occasions, my reply was, 'I shall write a
book on your life some day; there’s already a lot to tell;
but you will have to blue pencil it for me’. 'Ah! splen-
did’, said John in his jocular way, 'then I shall cut out
all that I don’t like about myself.’
But I was serious. I really looked ahead to the time
when we would have grown quite old, and John had
faced many more experiences indeed I hoped we
should face many of them together. I did not expect to
write yet ah, not yet.
Brother John was often referred to, and congratulated
upon his being after the same type of man as the Rever-
end Hulton Sams, (known in Queensland as 'the fight-
ing parson’) and on many occasions was told how
closely he followed in the train of the Reverend Stud-
dert Kennedy (commonly known in the days of the
Great War as 'Woodbine Willy’).
Soon after John joined the staff of S. James Church,
Sydney, a lady who knew the Reverend Studdert Ken-
nedy personally, went to John and said, 'I have never
met you, but I want to shake hands with you, because
you remind me so much of the Reverend Studdert Ken-
icdy. And, since the friends of these two men saw fit
o write something of their lives and work, as a memorial


to them, I have felt that a record of the life of this
young priest, my brother, would be a fitting memorial
to him and to his wonderful personality.
But, although my brother was such an inspiration to
me at all times, I feel that this effort is far from worthy
of him, and I hope that Brother John’s friends will ac-
cept this record of him, and forgive its shortcomings.
Some there may be, who, in their bigness of heart,
will see something acceptable in my presentation of such
a life’s work if so, then I will know that, although
my brother has not been present in the flesh to 'blue
pencil’ my work, he has been present in the spirit to
inspire me. And if you find it inadequately written,
you will at least see something of John’s beautiful life
when you pass on to the many splendid tributes paid
by Brother John’s friends, which so thoroughly
strengthen my humble effort. To these contributors,
and to Mr William Dunbar, of the S. John’s College
Press (an old College mate of John’s), I offer my sincere
thanks.
Many incidents will doubtless be looked upon as being
hardly worthy of note, but in most cases these have been
necessary in order to bring out some point a little more
worthy, later in the book.
But most people will agree with me, I am sure that
the small things all help in making up a big and beauti-
ful character.
I hope I shall be forgiven for any references to my
own experiences in the narrative. I have tried to avoid
coming into the picture as far as possible.
Ivy Martyn.


CHAPTER ONE
Boyhood and School
John Alfred Dent Martyn was born in Melbourne, on
April 17th, 1902. His father, the youngest son of a
very old English family, was born within the sound of
Bow Bells, and was the only member of the family to
leave England. A large firm in Melbourne brought him
from England to do the artistic gold work of illuminated
address cases.
John’s mother was the eldest daughter of Mr and Mrs
Samuel Tratt, of that very ancient English family of
Tratts, whose estates were large and carried a title to
the eldest son for hundreds of years. One of the eldest
sons cut himself off from the family by marrying a Qua-
keress, but the title and estate were to be inherited by his
eldest son (Mrs Martyn’s father), who, having come
to Australia as a young man, refused to go back to Eng-
land to claim his right, despite the fact that his father
came out at the age of ninety years to try and persuade
him to do so, because of the fact that if it were not
claimed by him the estate would go into Chancery and
the title would lapse. Evidently there were many of his
Quaker mother’s humble ideas in him, and he had no
regard for title or estate.
Mr and Mrs Martyn had lour daughters and one son,
fohn being the youngest of the family.
On April 10th, 1903, which was Good Friday, John
aw Sydney for the first time, arriving with his parents
o make their home therein. He was growing to be a
iappy and contented child, one who was seldom passed


unnoticed, yet never spoiled by the praise of others,
being carefully brought up by strict but affectionate
parents.
At the age of four years, John one day asked his father
to buy him a mouth organ, saying that he was 'sure he
could play one’. 'A mouth organ!’ Mr Martyn met the
request with surprise and enquired if he had been trying
to play some other boy’s mouth organ, but the small
John assured his father that he had only seen one played
by another boy. Next day his father gave him the
money to buy one and said 'I expect to hear you play a
tune by the time I ccme home this evening from work’.
The mouth organ was purchased as early in the day
as possible and the tiny child sat for the remainder of
the day persevering with a tune on the valued instru-
ment. By the time his father returned that evening
John had accomplished the tune of 'Home Sweet Home’.
Shortly afterwards, a friend visiting us from Mel-
bourne was told this story, and to John’s delight, pur-
chased a much more expensive mouth organ and also a
tin whistle, which he learnt to play as quickly as he
had done the first instrument.
At the age of six years and six months John had his
first music lesson on the piano and proved an apt pupil
from the beginning. He always had a very keen ear for
music and when he practised, he seemed to manage with
ease, for nc one ever heard him counting. One day his
father remarked to the music teacher 'you don’t seem
to teach John anything about time; I never hear him
counting’. The reply was, that the child had a natural
gift for time and from the beginning was able to apply
what he learned in theory concerning the time of the
notes. The teacher also explained that, when beginning
a small child on a new 'piece’ he was to learn, it was
her practice to play the piece over to give the child an
idea of how it should sound and to encourage him to
see the beauty of it. 'But,’ she said, 'I dare not play
over a piece for John, his ear is so keen and his memory
so good that he would never need to read the music.
So John always had to fathom his own 'new piece’


with very little difficulty the rhythm of music was
so natural to him that after going over it a few times
he played from memory. This was to his advantage
later on, for he won the prize nearly every year at
school for sight reading music.
From his earliest years John had a beautiful voice,
strong and clear, with great confidence when singing.
He made his first public appearance at the age of four
years, singing a soldier song, dressed in a Tommy uni-
form and playing a kettle drum. He was always much
sought after to take part in concerts, and even theatrical
companies had offered engagements to his father for
John’s appearance, which gave Mr Martyn the ambition
that his son should follow the theatrical profession.
When John was seven years old we went to live in
Woollahra, within the parish of S. Matthias’ Church.
We went there to Sunday School and John was gladly
accepted as a member of the Church choir.
A year later he was taken by his father to S. Andrew’s
Cathedral and his voice was tried as a prospective choris-
ter. The Choirmaster and Organist, Mr Joseph Massey,
said that he did not want boys under the age of nine,
nor did the Precentor, as the schooling was graded from
boys of that age. However, he would give the boy a
trial. The test was a severe one, as Mr Massey tells us
later on in these pages, but the small John did not fail
and in spite of his being 'too young’, he was admitted
as a probationer to the Cathedral Choir and took his
place in the pew behind the choir stalls, along with the
other probationers, but John’s probation was not as long
as usual. He soon took his place as a chorister in the
choir stalls and soon afterwards was given a solo to sing.
In order that he might be able to see the music as it lay
on the book rest, it was necessary for John to stand on
a hassock, which was put on the wooden kneeler.
On entering the Cathedral Choir School there was
a form of initiation that had to be gone through one
of the forms it took involved the dipping of the fresher’s
1 ead in a horse trough close by the school, which at that
time was held in an old church building in Pitt Street,


opposite the spot on which the Water and Sewerage
Board buildings now stand. So little Johnnie Martyn
was seized by some older boys and told he must be
'ducked’. To their amazement and surprise, his only re-
sistance consisted in the reply, 'wait till I take my collar
off’. He knew that an Eton collar would look rather
untidy after a wetting. Needless to say 'skinny’ as he
was nick-named at the ducking, was let off lightly, as
the big fellows would not get the fun out of one who
showed no resistance, but only joined in the fun with
pleasure. So Skinny Martyn became a general favourite
at once with boys, both big and smalj, in the school.
But there was one big boy who took a great delight in
showing his strength on this tiny chap. One evening
John said to his father, 'By jove dad, Alf knocked me
out today, we had a fight’. His father knew that the
other was a big boy and was annoyed that he should
take advantage of John’s size and said, 'l’ll go and see
the Precentor; that big fellow is always taking advan-
tage of your size’. But the little lad said 'Oh no! dad,
don’t do that, he only meant it in fun, and anyway, I
gave him one good punch’. That was rather typical of
his character able to take a thrashing, and with the
courage to stand up for himself.
At the time when the Archbishop of Sydney, the
Right Reverend John Charles Wright celebrated his
fiftieth birthday, the Cathedral Choir made him a pre-
sent of a beautiful book. And it was decided that, as
Johnnie Martyn was the youngest and smallest boy in
the choir, he should make the presentation on behalf
of the choir.
The Precentor, the Reverend Ed. N. Wilton, ex-
plained to John that he was to ask the Archbishop to
accept the gift from the members of the choir with
their love and good wishes for his birthday.
All were gathered together in the vestry after service
for the occasion of the presentation. The smallest boy
approached the Archbishop with the book in his hands
and gravely began 'Your Grace, we beseech thee to
accept this book —’ T. he remainder of the speech was


drowned in the peal of laughter that went up from the
adult choristers.
John was a smart and intelligent boy at school and
although not very studious, carried off many prizes each
year, English being one of his strong points. He was a
good all round sport and several years running won the
Old Boys' Union prize for the best all round boy. In
1915 and 1916 he won the hundred yards' Swimming
Championship of the school and secured the Bronze
Medallion on January 9th, 1920. Among many others
were prizes for 'never late and never absent' from school
and Sunday services. In 1915 he won a certificate for
attendance at all Sunday Services in holidays for three
years, for sight reading music and for choir work, as a
soloist and leader of Decani. One year when John had
broken his right arm, he didn’t miss a day from school,
but learned to write with his left hand, a feat which
earned him special mention next Speech Day. Inciden-
tally this gives some indication of his characteristic per-
severance.
There could hardly have been a more contented boy.
His love for everybody, his truthfulness, obedience to
parents and elders, honesty of purpose, cleanliness of
thought and action and habit, and respect of aged and
infirm won for him the love of all with whom he came
in contact. His generosity of thought saw only the
best in everybody, which resulted in an attitude of love
for all and not only a love for those who surrounded
him, but also for the place that surrounded him and this
held good throughout his life. The Cathedral fascinated
him and he loved every stone in it and was interested in
anything historical he was told about it. From the very
earliest the Precentor had told the boys lots of interesting
things about its architecture, and because of his love
for it John never forgot these things. He loved to take
a visitor over the Cathedral and tell of all the items of
interest.
When John was about ten years old adversity befell
Mr and Mrs Martyn, through an accident to Mr Mar-
tyn’s leg, which caused him to spend many months in


hospital, imposing a severe drain on finance and a
considerable decrease in income. So with much regret
John’s music had to be given up. Being a boy that he
could reason with, Mr Martyn explained to John that
he could no longer afford to pay for music lessons. 'But,’
he said, 'you have a little knowledge of the piano, and
reading music now; keep up your practice and there
may be a time when we will be able to have you taught
again’. The boy practised regularly and never had to
be driven to do so. He learned to play perfectly the
music that had already been bought for him, and-friends
were always ready to lend him music more difficult to
help him to improve. The time did not come when his
parents could afford to put him under another music
master, until he was a very big boy. Then it was Mr
Joseph Massey who offered to teach John to play the
Cathedral organ at a reduced fee. The parents saw fit
to accept the offer and John had his first organ lesson
on March 11th, 1918. He was ever grateful to Mr
Massey for his kindness in giving him such an oppor-
tunity. Again he proved an apt pupil, and often played
for small services in the Cathedral, and many times
played for choir practice. Later he went as relieving
choir master and organist to S. Cuthbert’s Church,
Naremburn.
During the Great War John was kindled with the
spirit of adventure which added considerably to the
love he always had for King and Country. All the men
he loved and admired had enlisted, though some had
failed to pass the test. His father was disabled on ac-
count of his leg, and his two brothers-in-law had enlisted
but had been 'turned down’. So there were no men of
the family in the firing-line; he was the only one left
to offer. He had done well in compulsory training and
had developed considerably in size, surely they d take
him!
So, in 1917, on his fifteenth birthday, John went to
Victoria Barracks to enlist for service in the Great War.
So far as John believed at the time, his offer was taken
seriously by the officers, and he was put through the


examination and passed, but on account of his age, was
given papers for his parents to fill in, giving their con-
sent. But to the bitter disappointment of the eager lad,
his parents refused to fill in the papers. Well he must
not give up hope of serving his country; if the war
lasted long enough he would try again. In the mean-
time he must work hard in the compulsory training to
fit himself to serve when the time came, hie soon be-
came Sgt-Ma;or, and, being popular with the lads in
his company, had good results with their work.
It was in 1917 that the pupil teacher at the Choir
School was to enter S. John’s College, Armidale, to
study for Holy Orders. And as it was understood that
John Martyn had also decided to study for Holy Orders
he was offered the position of pupil teacher in his place.
At that time Mr J. A. Martyn was in business on his
own account as a law book binder, and it was his great
hope that his son would go to him and in time, would
be able to carry on the business; so that the news of
John’s desire to enter the priesthood had not disturbed
his father any more as time went on than when he first
heard it a few years earlier. He was yet young and
surely the opportunity of owning a flourishing business
would be more tempting than the small salary offered
to the clergy, and in addition, if he remained in the city
at business he would be able to earn a lot of money pro-
fessionally, with his beautiful voice.
But when the offer of teacher at the Choir School
came, it seemed like a step nearer the theological college
and John’s father was not at all anxious that he should
accept the position. He could stay at school for some
time yet, but he must give up all idea of the priesthood.
John was not without the usual 'kind friend’ who con-
tinually offered such remarks as —'Fancy wanting to be
a parson; you won’t make much money at that game’.
And the cynical grin of another, who would say 'Hm!
do you think you’d like that sort of thing? Well you’ll
never be wealthy, my lad’. And of the many who drew
comparisons between the droll country life to that of
a business man in the heart of the city and between


poverty (as the priesthood was always described) and
the life of a prosperous business man. But when money
was used as the argument, John’s reply always came
'But money’s not everything.’
All this time John’s mother was going through a very
anxious time. It was her great ambition that her only
son should go to the priesthood and yet it was far from
her to encourage him to go against the wish of his father.
So she became the mediator, reckoning with the father
and trying to help him to see that their son was not at
all suited for a trade, but that she felt sure he had de-
finitely received a call to the Church. And, on the other
hand, trying to help the boy to see that what his father
suggested for his future was, to his way of thinking, for
the boy’s good. At the same time she gave him to under-
stand that the priesthood was her great hope for his
future.
John accepted the position of junior teacher at the
Choir School with his father’s consent, and began teach-
ing on February 7th, 1917 but still the hope remained
in his father’s heart that John would change his mind.
The Reverend R. E. Freeth was then Precentor of
the Cathedral and when he introduced John to the boys
of the school as one of the teaching staff, a master, he
explained that, from then on, John was to be called
'Mr Martyn’ by the younger boys, and by the older
boys he might be called ' John , but the name of Skin
must now be given up altogether by the boys of the
school. John discarded the knee breeches and golf-
stockings for long trousers for general wear, as hitherto
Jong-uns’ were only worn with Eton suits.
Fie was loved as a teacher, and even from those early
days of his teaching, he showed a wonderful control
over boys when necessary, but at play of any kind re-
mained the boy with the boys.
The seeking of practical knowledge was another of
his great aims. There was an invitation extended by the
Military authorities to all male school teachers coun-
try and city, to take a course of physical culture, with
the opportunity of winning certificates for the teaching


of physical culture in the schools. Many country school
teachers took advantage of this offer but John was the
only city teacher. He became flier of the team and
passed the final test on July 9th, 1918, with good marks.
John became drill instructor at the school as well as
giving lessons in physical culture.
Not only did he think of fitting himself to serve his
country, he must also help and encourage the boys at
the school to look to the future service they might be
to their country, and so he formed a troop of Boy
Scouts. He was 'too young' to be a Scout Master, so he
had to sign up as Assistant Scout Master, although his
uniform resembled that of the Scout Master and he was
in full control of the 'First S. Andrew’s Cathedral
Troop’. He worked hard with a small number of boys
to begin with, but very shortly afterwards nearly every
boy in the school joined up and the number grew to
over fifty.
They were all keen scouts, and in addition to working
bard to make himself a proficient Scout Master, John
encouraged his scouts too, to work hard to win badges
how proud he was of 'my little boys’ as he used to call
them, even though he was so young himself. They had
their physical culture during school hours, but that was
not enough; they must be able to give a display to raise
funds for their troop. So John called one day on Major
Flynn who had been his instructor at Victoria Barracks,
and asked him if it were possible to hire the vaulting
horse, spring, and mattress, in order that he might train
his scouts to give a display.
The Major was delighted with the young teacher’s
ambition and arranged for him to have the required ac-
cessories free of charge if John made himself responsible
for them while away from the Barracks, and saw to
the cartage. The display was a great success, and was
given to a crowded audience in the upper hall of the
Chapter Flouse with a request to repeat the pro-
gramme which did not begin and end with a physical
culture display, and little lads following the Scout Mas-
ter over the vaulting-horse with as many as 'five men


up’, but they also gave a display in first aid, instructed by
their Scout Master, a one-act play about camp life, writ-
ten and produced by him, and several musical items of
part-songs and solos, accompanied by him at the piano,
and a few other items in which Mr Joseph Massey as-
sisted.
In the early days of the scout troop, when they could
net afford to buy bugles, the boys were not deprived of
the pleasure of marching to music, for John always car-
ried his mouth organ and played the inspiring, patriotic
march tunes as they tramped along some outer-suburban
road.
He formed an association of the Parents and Sup-
porters of the Scouts, and the organisation became sc
strong that, in a very short time, the troop was the proud
possessor of a beautiful banner bearing the name of the
trcop, a Union Jack, bugles, drums, tents, and every-
thing necessary for a complete camping outfit. The
dedication of the colours of the First S. Andrew’s Troop
of Boy Scouts was performed by the Dean of Sydney
on Sunday, November 14th, 1920.
They went camping during school holidays, but Johr
always arranged the camp between Sundays so that the
boys would not be kept away from Church througl
scouting, even though there was allowance made during
holidays.
On several occasions, a friend of the troop allowec
them to pitch their tents on his land, which was a short
distance from his house at Dee Why. Now John con-
sidered that the boys must have other pastimes in camp
beside cooking, fishing, walking and swimming. So
during the weeks at school before camp, he would b(
found at the piano in the lower hall of the Chaptet
House, with a group of boys around him learning a fev
part songs. This was put to use in the evenings at camp
After the day’s work and sport were finished a camp
fire was lit, and all sat round and told stories and
songs as only a Cathedral choir could. This entertain-
ment was always appreciated by those people living ir
the cottages near by; they sat on their verandahs on thos<


ummer nights, looking towards the camp fire, from
whence came the strains of beautiful trained voices,
"hen the bugle would sound 'lights out’, the fire was
•ut out, and the lads were soon fast asleep. Then, when
hey were all safely asleep their Scout Master would
ut his own head down to rest.
One Saturday evening John arrived home from camp
t about eight o’clock, wildly excited at having brought
ae 'camp mascot’ with him, a huge dog. 'He hasn’t left
s once throughout the camp:’ he told his mother,
wherever we went he went with us, and slept outside
ur tent at night. We fed him regularly, and as he
■emed to belong to nobody, I brought him home.’
'A well cared-for dog like that is not without an
wrier;’ was Mrs Martyn’s reply, 'don’t you know that
) bring a dog home, that does not belong to you, is steal-
ig?’ Such a thing had not occurred to John. 'The only
ling to do is to go straight back to Dee Why and leave
:m there, see that he does not follow you, and he will
len find his way to his rightful owner,’ said his mother.
) John had to make his way back through Manly to Dee
A hy, all the way from Waverly, once again concealing
le dog under the seats of trams and ferry, as he had
ready had the trouble of doing on the trip home. He
rived home at about midnight, with a clear conscience
tat he had put back what he had stolen though
nocently.
All this meant that John spent seven days in each
eek in the service of S. Andrew’s Cathedral. There
ere the school days, with services and choir practices,
iturdays were devoted to the scouts, and he was never
>sent from Sunday services. He was marshall of all
•ocessions and many times led the procession of Cathe-
al choir and clergy to Macquarie Place to commemor-
e the first Christian service.
In the meantime (to go back a little), John had his
aeenth birthday, and the war was still on. One even-
g, when walking through Bondi Junction with his
other, he was attracted by a recruiting meeting. He
•uld not pass by, but left his mother and went to the


recruiting officer to offer himself. Mrs Martyn was
very proud that her boy was so keen to serve his King
and Country, especially as he was not ignorant of the
many hardships and dangers the men were going
through during that year of 1918, for he read up all the
war news and his scout work brought him into close
contact with many returned soldiers. And she had not
forgotten the bitter disappointment she and her hus-
band had 'inflicted’ upon their only son, by refusing to
give their consent to his enlisting before. So she deter-
mined to try another way this time.
Next morning, after consultation with John’s father,
she called on the Recruiting officer in his office, and asked
what would become of her son if his parents gave their
consent. The officer’s reply was that the lad would be
given work to do in one of the camps, until he was
eighteen years of age, if the war lasted long enough, and
then would be sent away.
Then the officer asked what profession or trade the
lad intended to follow, and when he was told that he
hoped to study for Holy Orders, suggested that the boy
be kept in his present environment until he was old
enough to go to the war, as the surroundings and com-
panions of camp life would not be in his best interests.
So John was again disappointed, but had not the time to
dwell upon it as he was always a busy young man and
he must work hard to prepare to enter S. John’s College,
Armidale, and there were many things one could do
at home that were considered as war work.
About this time John had his first interview with
Bishop Long. The Bishop was to preach at the Cathedral
on this occasion and John was told that Dr Long wished
to see him after the service. He was quite used to meet-
ing Bishops and had seen Bishop Long many times; but
this was to be an interview; that sounded rather im-
portant and he felt he must have all his wits about him,
as the Bishop was sure to put him to a severe test. He
saw the Bishop in the Cathedral grounds and went up
to him. 'You wish to see me, My Lord!’ Bishop Long
asked his name, and a few minor questions about him-


self, looking him through, meanwhile, as only Bishop
Long could. The lad answered brightly, wondering what
would be his next question, and thinking these were
preliminary to the the interview. Then Dr Long looked
at John very thoughtfully and walked away!
John came home very disappointed. He was prepared
for a severe test and was disappointed that he had not
been put to it. The next we heard of the interview was
from the Reverend E. N. Wilton, that 'the Bishop was
well pleased with John’.
During his service as a Cathedral chorister, John wit-
nessed many services of historical interest, such as the
Memorial to the late King Edward, at the time of his
death. He saw and took part in the service held at the
time of the Coronation of the present King and Queen,
and many other services of interest during the Great
War, when the Prince of Wales and many other dis-
tinguished visitors worshipped at the Cathedral. He
saw many Confirmations, Ordinations, and Consecra-
tions of Bishops. Among these latter was the Conse-
cration of Bishop Long, who later ordained John and
proved a beloved friend.
In addition to the busy life his Cathedral work called
for, even as a small boy, John always loved doing some
of the many little jobs there are to be found in a church,
if only we will see them. In November, 1918 there was
a street mission held on Friday nights by some of the
Cathedral laity. A portable organ was taken to the
corner of Bathurst and George Streets and a service was
held there. John it was who played ti e organ for those
services.
On one occasion, when a new Precentor was 'taking
over’ from his predecessor, he was told that if there was
anything he wanted to know or anything he could not
find, that the young teacher, Martyn, would be able to
help him out 'he knows everything about the place’.
It was proved some time later, when on vacation, John
received a telegram to go to the Cathedral at once.
On arrival it was announced that something could not
be found and that the clergy were 'sure John would


know something about it’. He did, and so the telegram
was not wasted.
The time was drawing near when John would be en-
tering S. John’s College. But one day word came that
he was not to go till the next year Oh! the disap-
pointment. What had he done that the Bishop had not
approved of? He tried to think back but no clue came
to him. Would he write to the Bishop? How dreadful
it would be if the Bishop of Bathurst rejected him after
all he had gone through to obtain his father’s consent.
The anxiety weighed heavily on him.
He knew that Bishop Long was to take part in some
big conference that was to be held shortly in the Sydney
Town Hall, so he decided not to write, but he would
face it out; he would make it his business to see the
Bishop personally. How was he to do it? The Bishop
was a busy man, and if he was annoyed with him for
some reason or other he would surely not see him if he
tried to make an appointment. But he was determined
he would see the Bishop. He made enquiries about the
meeting in the Town Hall what time it was to be,
what time the Bishop was expected, etc..
The day arrived, and John came early to the Town
Hall, in case the Bishop did the same. When at last he
did come to where John was waiting he was walking
with the State Governor! Well, even though he did
walk with the King’s representative, John must speak to
him. There may not be another opportunity. So, feel-
ing about half his usual size, he respectfully touched
the Bishop on the arm and begged to be excused. One
of Bishop Long’s characteristics was his almost uncanny
memory for facts and faces. He remembered the boy at
once and called him by name. So in a very few words
John asked why he was not allowed to go to S. John s
that year had he done anything wrong?
To his relief the Bishop smiled and explained that
he had done nothing wrong but he was simply too
young’ to go that year. He must continue teaching
for another year, and then go to Armidale.
Then the time came when John was to leave S. And-


rew’s Cathedral to study for Holy Orders. Due notice
was given to the Archbishop and Chapter that he was
resigning his position as teacher in the Cathedral Choir
School to enter S. John’s College, Armidale. It was not
till this last moment that it was thought advisable to
ask the young man to remain in the Sydney Diocese,
and he was asked to consider the matter. He explained
that he had given his word to Bathurst Diocese some
years before, and that they were putting him through
college. Archbishop Wright assured John that he valued
his services in the Cathedral and did not want to lose him
altogether. Could he not go through Moore College?
Then he himself would ordain him. John then enquired
if there was a fund of any kind that could help him
with his expenses, but the Archbishop assured him that
Cere was nothing from which they could draw. How-
ever, he was sure there was a way in which the expenses
could be met. His Grace advised John to see the Rever-
end G. A. Chambers, as he had a vacancy on his teach-
ing staff that would be more helpful financially than
Hs present position. John interviewed Mr Chambers
with the result that the following suggestion was made
to him. He should take a position on the staff of Holy
Trinity Grammar School, Dulwich Hill, and attend
evening lectures. In addition to this he would be ex-
pected to continue his work with the Cathedral Scout
Troop, or form a troop at Holy Trinity School. Then,
as the salary he would receive from teaching was still
not sufficient to pay for his training at Moore College,
the Cathedral authorities offered to pay him for his
services in the choir. He would be free to go wherever
he wished after Ordination and would be under no ob-
ligation to Sydney.
John appreciated the trouble taken by those who
made these enquiries and arrangements. But how was
he to become eligible for Ordination in all this busy
life that had very little to do with the priesthood? When
he wrote to the Bathurst Diocese and explained that
Sydney was trying to arrange for him to stay in the
Diocese, Bathurst’s reply was that although he had given


them to understand that he would go to them, still, the
vocation of the Church was a call, and if he felt that
he was called to serve the Sydney Diocese wherein he
had laboured in many ways for so long, he would be
quite free to change his mind. Bathurst would think
none the less of him for so doing.
However, when it came to the thought of his 'call’,
it was quite evident to John, that the call had not only
just come to him. He also felt that it was a definite
call to serve in the Bathurst Diocese, and considering
the offer they had made to him at an early age, he felt
that to Bathurst he must go. The offer made by Bath-
urst was that he should remain in S. John’s College for
three or four years at the expense of the Diocese, and
that, after Ordination he would be under obligation to
give them the first five years of his ministry, either as
a deacon or priest, at a salary of approximately £3OO
a year. This would take him away from home and loved
ones and his many friends for perhaps nine years; and
what then?. Still to work in the country perhaps. The
city meant a lot to him. He had spent all his life in it.
He had grown up in and around its big Cathedral, with
its glamour of historical services, and famous preachers,
and wonderful music. He loved every stone in it and
he knew the majority of those who worshipped in it.
There was his Scout troop; the boys he taught at school;
the boys with whom he had gone to school. But again,
his vocation was not to be taken lightly. He was not
naturally studious and would need to devote all of his
time to study to become a successful priest. Sacrifice
was necessary in whatever decision he made. He did not
want to sacrifice his vocation. At our home one night,
Canon Wilton weighed up all the details of both sides.
'Don’t decide now, John’, he said, 'lt is you who are
called, and no one else can decide for you. We have
prayed that you shall be led to take the way the Master
intends for you. I am sure your decision will make no
difference to the diocese you reject. Sleep on it and
try to decide in the morning.’
John had said little while it was being thrashed out


but now he said 'I don’t need to sleep on it, Canon; I
have decided to go to Bathurst.
John’s resignations from the Teaching Staff, Choir,
Scout Troop, as well as from Scout Parents’ and Suppor-
ter’s Association, Communicants’ Guild, and Cathedral
Association, were received with regret and all began
to make arrangements for his farewells, of which there
were several, all of them very largely attended, while
the numerous presentations included cassock, surplice,
undergrads’ gown and trencher, a gold cross, a large
Cathedral psalter (organ size), College blazer. An ad-
dress was read and presented from the Parents’ and Sup-
porters’ Association, and among other gifts large and
small, was one small one with a big meaning it was a
gold Swastika with a Fleur-di-lis in the centre and
inscribed on every available space on the back. It was
considered to be one of the highest honours bestowed
upon a scout, and called a scout’s 'Thanks badge’ from
his 'little boys’
Most of the occasions of farewell took the form of
social evenings in the upper hall of the Chapter House,
with many musical items, but the largest was adjourned
to the lower hall for supper and found a spread fit for a
wedding feast. The tables were arranged in T shape
and were presided over by Dean Talbot. The other
speakers were the Precentor, the Reverend G. M. Searcy;
Mr Joseph Massey, the Choir Master and Organist;
several of the Cathedral laity; and Canon Wilton, who
had come from Bathurst at the invitation of the Or-
ganisers especially to be present at John’s farewell. It
was found that with the exception of a few more books,
there was very little to be bought to fit the student for
his college beginning.
His farewell solo chosen by Mr Massey was one of
those he had rendered so successfully and beautifully;
many of his friends had their hearts bent as much on that
solo, as on the sermon preached that evening, and a large
number waited in the Cathedral grounds to thank him
for the way he sang it, and to bid him farewell. I re-
member when we spoke of the wonderful rendering


later, John said, 'I could hardly sing, I had such a lump
in my throat, I could not forget that it was my last solo
in the Cathedral’. Afterwards he went to the Cathedral
when no one was about and he said 'I had a good look
around the dear old place I wanted to say good-bye
to every stone in it; by Jove, I could have cried as I had
that last look round’. It was that same love for his sur-
roundings that was shown through his whole life.
Throughout his career in the Cathedral choir John
was always looked upon as one to be depended upon. In
his own solo work there was never any fear of his break-
ing down or not coming in at the correct time, the lad
sang from his heart at all times and knew everybody’s
part, and the fact that he followed every note of the
music. This was proved more than once, when through
nervousness, a little lad might break down or fail to pick
up his solo at the right time. Mr Massey says it was al-
ways John who picked up the threads and went on as
though nothing had happened. This quality is surely a
valuable asset to any choir. I must explain here that
the organist and choirmaster was a considerable distance
away from the choir, in a loft, high above the South
door where the choir could not depend upon him for
a word of warning or a pulling up of time, etc. The story
was also told by Mr Massey that, on one occasion he had
cause to reproach the choir boys as a whole, for the work
of a small service just rendered to which came a reply
from one of the small boys 'But sir, Martyn wasn’t here.’
After entering S. John’s College, John usually found
his way into the dear old choir, whenever he came to
Sydney on vacations.
On the evening of his departure from Sydney, there
were between thirty and forty people at the train to see
him off, as well as the full troop of S. Andrew’s Cathe-
dral Scouts. Some came armed with blue and white
streamers they were so thrilled that the colours of
S. John’s, Armidale were the same as those of S. Andrew’s
Cathedral, and more still that the mottoes of both were
the same 'Via Crucis via Lucis’. Among the other pas-
sengers in the carriage was a young man, of much about


the same age and station as John. Someone in the crowd
suggested that this fair youth looked like a prospective
student for a theological college, and so asked him where
he was bound, and on learning that he was to be John’s
fellow student, their hearts were at once opened to him
and he shared in the good wishes that accompanied John.
After making an individual farewell to each one present,
and the door of the carriage was locked upon John, the
scouts hied past, one by one, and gave the scout’s hand-
shake to their beloved Scoutmaster, while he spoke some
word of confidence in the ear of each of his scouts; some
word that no one else heard but the boy for whom it
was intended. All who witnessed this filing past were
moved with an emotion which would be hard to analyse.
As the train pulled out a crowd of men and women
cheered, many with tears in their eyes and lumps in their
throats while the scouts blew their bugles and played
their drums —such a royal send off to a humble youth!
In the next carriage were some second and third year
students from S. John’s on their way back to college
after the Vacation. It was learned afterwards, how
one had enquired of the railway porter 'A wedding
party next door?’ to which the porter replied in a rather
disgusted tone of voice 'No, a feller goin’ to college!’
Needless to say, 'this feller’ got no end of a bad time on
arrival at Armidale.
One of John’s first letters home gave the name of the
fair youth who shared in the enthusiastic send off it
was Roy Innes, who from that very night became John’s
greatest pal and their friendship grew and ripened as
their years ripened into manhood. They shared each
other’s joys and pleasures as well a seach other’s sorrows
and sadness, but most of all, each other’s spiritual views.


CHAPTER TWO
Theological College and Ordination
Many stories are told of how John’s bright and happy
personality helped his fellow students when study was
weighing heavily on their shoulders not that it did
not weigh heavily upon John, for as 1 have already said,
John was not naturally studious, but, as he was so
anxious to get through his exams, it will be understood
that study was very hard work to him and he tried
many different ways to get the best of it. Throughout
his life, one of his outstanding features was to wave his
own worries aside at a time when he might help another
to overcome his troubles. So, when the Warden would
say 'Get to the piano, Jack, and liven up the boys’, there
was no retort in the nature of 'what about me? I need
someone to liven me up, I am just as worried about my
studies as any other man in the college, in fact, I find
study heavier than most of the men here’. Not he I
feel sure John’s thoughts of himself fled immediately
the Warden reminded him that the other students were
getting a bit 'down to it’. Anyway, whatever I could
imagine John’s feelings tp be, I am told that the War-
den’s request was always answered by the strains of
music from the piano in the common room, something
bright and jolly that he knew the majority of the stu-
dents loved and one by one, men left their studies
and wended their way to the common room, welcome
for a little relaxation from their labours. And when
they had gathered round the piano it was no trouble to
start community singing, and the climax would come
with the singing of the song they had localised. It ran —


Oh, come up to Armidale all who would see
A college of students so happy and free;
We live in a building of deal boards and cracks,
But we’re thankful we don’t have to live like the
blacks.
Tra la la, Tra la la,
We’re thankful we don’t have to live like the blacks.
After a general sing song which inspired the desire for
a bit of fun, men could go back to their dry reading,
refreshed by the relaxation that John had been able to
create with his musical gift and sunny nature.
It was during his period of training that S. John’s
College purchased their first small hand printing press
and having become established as printers had
exchanged it for a larger press worked by treadle.
John was exceedingly proud of work turned out
by the Press. The establishment of 'The S. John’s College
Press, Morpeth’, on the larger scale as it is now, was a
very great joy to John.
John had been some considerable time at S. John’s
and was now beginning to change his views concerning
churchmanship, for he could see how very much of the
teaching of the Church of England he had never really
understood. He said, 'I have spent most of my life in
the service of the Church and thought I knew every-
thing about it, but I was not long at S. John’s when I
found how very little I knew’.
No one could have a narrow view of the Church’s
teaching after going through S. John’s. One meets men
of various views, most of which are discussed from time
to time, while the views of others are read and discussed
it gives men a very broad outlook and makes them
tolerant with each other. It is the definite Prayer Book
teaching.
But with his change of churchmanship came a change
in some of his friends. For, although he was always
given a hearty welcome by the Choirmaster and some
cf the choir and even many of the congregation of the
Cathedral, there were those who showed a distinct


change of attitude towards him. John’s sensitive nature
was not slow to detect the less cordial welcome by those
who had only a short time ago sought to keep him in the
Sydney Diocese.
'But’, said John, 'it’s my Cathedral as much as any-
body else’s. It was the Master’s House he knew he
received just as hearty a welcome from Him, as when
he worshipped there regularly even if the servants
of the House did not give him a warm reception. So to
those, John would go directly and put out a friendly
hand that could not be refused.
In April, 1923, the Healing Mission was held in Armi-
dale, It was most successful. It must surely have been
the cause of John’s great faith in the gift of healing
through the laying on of hands with prayer.
In his letter to his parents, he said: 'We of Armidale
can say like the Apostles of old "We have seen strange
things today”. In fact we have seen them ever since
Monday afternoon. We have seen the lame and crippled
walk, the blind restored to sight, the deaf hear, the
dump speak, and those possessed with devils freed.
It has really been a wonderful manifestation of God’s
love to mankind.’
John went on at length then, to describe the many
wonderful happenings he witnessed, some instantaneous,
others a day or so after the laying of hands.
He never lost an opportunity of gaining practical ex-
perience. If there was a student required to take services
anywhere to relieve a parish priest, John was always
among those anxious to go. In this way he obtained ex-
perience and confidence in preaching. His first sermon
was pleached at Guyra, N.S.W. on March 20th, 1921,
from Phil.l. 21.
When vacations were drawing near John began to
look around for a Job’. During short vacations, when
he sometimes came home, he was often employed doing
odd jobs in connection with his father’s business. One
vacation was spent as Catechist at All Saints’, Woollahra,
another at S. Mary’s Waverley.
During one of the long vacations John went to work


on a banana plantation for his brother-in-law and on
another short one helped a friend in Armidale to do some
droving. Then there was that happy vacation spent at
the Mission to Seamen Institute in Stockton, Newcastle,
where, after a few weeks experience there the Chaplain,
the Reverend H. Vickery, left John in charge of the
Mission while he went on his annual holidays: and found
the Mission still flourishing on his return.
John loved the work at the Mission. He loved all sail-
ors, and took a keen interest in their work and when he
visited their ships they were glad to show John the tricks
of a sailor’s job. He climbed the mast and went out to
the end of the yard arm. He talked to them of their
travels and of their homes and dear ones and was genu-
inely interested in every man, and they found in him a
true friend, full of that real brotherly love that the sailor
who is deprived of his home and loved ones is ever seek-
ing in men and ever welcomes when he finds it.
Another very happy vacation was spent in the Castle-
reagh district of the Brotherhood of the Good Shepherd.
The district worked out from Gilgandra. The Reverend
D. Caddick Adams was the Brother in charge at the
time. Here again John found happiness in the work of
the bush which was just as foreign to him as the work
among the seamen had been before he attempted to do it.
Although the Brother-in-charge had a motor cycle
with which to cover his District, the remainder of the
work was done in a sulky. So when John was told to
put the pony in the sulky, to go to Eumungerie, Bear-
bong, or Gulargambone, along this road or that, he didn’t
knew the first thing about it, but as the Brother-in-
charge had given his orders and left John to carry them
out, there was nothing for it but to work it out the best
way he could. Cannot you imagine John laughing at
his own helplessness with a lot of straps and buckles and
a pony and sulky, and then laughing again when he
feund that it hadn’t been such a hard job after all?
It was summer time and the newness of the bush life
would have been sufficient in itself, but the flies and
mosquitoes were particularly bad, and of the bumps in


the road or track there were not a few apart from the
fact that the springs of the sulky were not the best,
added to the knowledge on the part of the pony that
there was a stranger driving, which probably meant
that she pleased herself whether she went fast or slow.
One can imagine that the faster movement may have
added just a little to the comfort of the driver even
if it were only to create a slight breeze. He would have
the list of the names of the people he was to call on, but
what kind of a reception would he receive from people
who expected the Bush Brother to call and not a student
who was just helping for the vacation?
This was probably the thought that crossed the mind
of the hot, tired, mosquito-bitten student who at that
time was a stranger to the Bush and is warm-hearted
people.
But we who have had the experience and privilege
of a life lived in the Bush among the bush people are
quite sure of the welcome that was extended to the
student.
A Bush Brother never passes a camp, hut, homestead,
or building of any kind when he is on the track, unless
it has previously been made quite clear to him that his
presence is not required. Needless to say this would be
impressed upon the student, which we can be sure would
be strictly carried out by John.
He came upon a very delapidated and forsaken-look-
ing log hut, and drove over to it, even though it did not
appear to be inhabited, but on drawing closer, saw a very
big man standing in the doorway. So big and muscular
was he, that John, who now felt smaller than ever, with
many miles dividing them from any other man was re-
minded of the story of the giant who could 'smell the
blood of an Englishman’. John knew that it was a Bush
Brother’s job to meet any man manfully, so if he was
there in the capacity of 'assistant to the Bush Brother’
he must do likewise.
'Good day, sir’, said John. The reply came back in
the form of a grunt, but with perseverance John man-
aged to find out that there were others living in the
hut also.


He found, moreover, that this big man was much
gentler than the impression his appearance and the sound
of his gruff voice had given; that he had a wife and
children; and that one of the children now lay ill. His
attitude towards John changed completely when he
learned whom he was representing. John asked per-
mission to see the wife and family. He was ushered into
the hut, and there, in a half dark room that was very
crudely furnished, there lay a woman on a rough and
poor-looking bed, with a sick child across her arm. She
looked up with surprise when she saw the stranger enter
and had a question ready on her lips for him at his very
entrance. 'Are you a minister’, she said hastily, with
a hushed voice. 'Why do you ask that?’ said John. 'Be-
cause’ said the brave little voice, 'my baby is in con-
vulsions and might die and he has never been Christened,
and 1 have been praying all day that God would send a
minister to Christen him before he dies.’
'I am not a minister’, said John. 'I am only out here
for a little while to help the Bush Brothers but I can
baptise your baby’. A light of thankfulness crossed the
sad face. John instructed the husband, who had stood
by quietly during the conversation, to prepare some
warm water while he put on his cassock and surplice.
Picture the setting; the font in the form of an old
tin in which the water had been heated! The big mus-
cular, rough-looking man, with a heart as soft as that
of his wife who lay on the bed, his big, work-soiled
hands holding the 'font’. The mother, now happier, still
lay quietly beside her child for fear of disturbing him.
The child lay in what seemed to be unconsciousness,
upon the mother’s arm; while the student proceeds in
earnest prayer T baptise thee in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost’ and
then— 'We yield Thee hearty thanks, most merciful
Father . . . ’, after which, prayers for the child’s
restoration.
Then it is left to our own imagination; the cheerful
words John would leave them with, and the re-assurance
of the Heavenly Father’s love and safe keeping, with a


prayer of thankfulness that the sad woman’s humble
prayers had been answered, together with his own praise
and thanksgiving as he proceeded upon his journey,
that he had been the disciple called upon to fulfil this
office.
As a Bush Brother’s journeyings are generally ar-
ranged in a sort of round trip, so as not to cover the
same ground twice when it is unnecessary, it will be
understood that John’s return trip would not take him
near the log hut again, but on this occasion, he decided
to do that extra travelling and went back eight miles
next day ot enquire how the 'little chap’ was progres-
sing, and to give the parents another cheery word in their
isolated home. On arrival the second time the scene was
changed by the appearance of a tiny boy, playing in the
shade of the trees, happy and regaining srength, in com-
pany with his brothers who had doubtless been sent to
play a distance from the house when the baby lay so ill.
John took a 'snap’ of the little chap and in his album
we find written under the picture the following 'My
first Baptism, Boxing Day, 1921’.
There is another 'snap’ near it, of John with the old
sulky and worn-out horse, under which is written
'Hot and tired, but happy; cross country trip Collie
to Gulargambone all I had that day was two sand-
wiches and a cup of tea’. S. Ambrose’s Church, Gilgan-
dra was being built at this time.
Other vacations were spent at the Community of
the Ascension, Goulburn, N.S.W., and although the
first visit there was to his way of thinking at the
time rather severe, he and the several students who
had gone with him, all healthy young men, with equally
healthy appetites could not understand how the Ascen-
sion Fathers lived on so little food, and they complained,
too, of what they called 'knee drill’ being harder than
they could stand.
But John was glad to go back to the Community, for
he realised what a help the discipline and training of
those wonderfully experienced priests was, to a student
or young priest. 'Such saintly men’, he called them,


and was ever grateful for the opportunity of going to
receive instruction from them.
John had failed in the first part of Th.L. Next year
he sat for the second part and got through. He was too
young for ordination, so it was decided that he was to
remain in S. John’s for another year and sit again for
the first part of Th.L. But in spite of his determination
and hard work, he did not accomplish it. This was more
than he could stand, and the Warden and his fellow
students knew it when they knew he had failed they
dreaded his hearing the results, for they knew how
anxious he was to get through. When finally he did
know, we are told that his 'nerves went all to pieces’ and
there was not a man in college whose hear*: did not go
out to John.
He sent a telegram home to say he had failed, and
afterwards he said T would have sent a wire if I had
passed, which might have been looked noon by some as
boasting so I thought I had better face facts snd own
up to it that I had failed.
Shortly after that, Bishop Long was preaching at
S. Mary’s, Waverley which was our Parish Church.
After the service, mother and I had a long talk with the
Bishop. He said, T am very disappointed that John
failed in his Th.L.’ Mother, expressing her regret, and
assuring the Bishop of John’s own regrets, asked if it
would 'make any difference to John’s ordination’, to
which the Bishop replied that he knew how upset John
had been about his failure and that he really felt sorry
for the boy, but he assured John’s mother that the
failure would not make any difference to his ordination
-for’ he said, 'John will make a very good priest, a
much better priest than a student’. 'Do you think
John would like to go to the Brotherhood of the Good
Shepherd?’ he asked; to which Mrs Martyn replied that
John had been very happy in the work during the time
he spent out in Gilgandra on one vacation.
The Bishop said he thought John would be most suit-
able for the work out West, but it meant sacrifice in
many ways; loneliness that is not experienced in an or-


dinary parish, and many more miles to travel, and then
again, where he may leave college and be given charge
of a parish with a Rectory and salary of between £2 50
and £3OO a year, going to the Brotherhood would mean
receiving a salary of £4O a year, for five years.
'But it’s men like John that we want in the Brother-
hood it’s not every man that we’d make this offer
to. I can assure you, Mrs Martyn, it’s an honour to be
asked to join the Brotherhood of the Good Shepherd.’
John was delighted when the Bishop made him the
offer ever since his trip to Gilgandra he had longed
to go out and work with those other students who were
to leave College at the same time as himself, so his ac-
ceptance of the Bishop’s offer was not with the thought
of sacrifice. His greatest concern was to work in the
place where he could do most for the Kingdom of God,
and he knew how badly men were needed out there
he knew that it meant hard work, but John was never
happier than when he was working hard.
As far as the salary was concerned, that did not
trouble him for one moment. John had always said,
since he was very young, that 'money was not every-
thing’.
And so, on the Feast of S. James, July 2 sth, 1924,
which was also the anniversary of his parents’ Wedding
Day, John was ordained Deacon at the age of twenty-
two years and three months, with Messrs Roy Innes,
George Gibson, and Laurence Jarman, by the Bishop of
Bathurst, Dr Long, at S. Ambrose Church, Gilgandra,
N.S.W. These were the first Australians to join the
Brotherhood of the Good Shepherd, which had been
established by English clergy and manned by them for
all the years of its existence until this date. H. T. Genge
and L.C.S. Walker, of the Bathurst Diocese, were also
ordained Deacons.
My mother and I had the good fortune to have the
opportunity to journey to Gilgandra to be present at
the Ordination Service, which was most inspiring. The
Church was crowded. It was a very big event for an
outback town and a great beginning in the life of the


newly built Church. Venerable clergy journeyed from
all parts of the Bathurst Diocese. Among them was
Canon Wilton, then Sub-Dean of Bathurst Cathedral,
who was proud to witness the ordination of his little
choir boy of S. Andrew’s Cathedral eight years before.
How thankful we were to be privileged to receive the
Blessed Sacrament at that service. Father Kemp, C.A.,
gave a most inspiring address, and the Reverend William
Butler, who had been a school-fellow of John’s at S.
Andrew’s Choir School, sang the Litany.
After the service there was a Luncheon in the Parish
Hall. What a spread! The table was T-shaped, and ex-
tended from one end of the hall to the other. Several
splendid and enthusiastic speeches were made by Bishop
Long, the Reverend A. L. Wylde, Principal of the 8.G.5.,
Canon Wilton, and other priests of the Bathurst Diocese.
On the Sunday morning following (July 27th, 1924),
John preached his first sermon in Sydney, at S. Mary’s,
Waverley, at 11a.m., and that evening preached at
Evensong at S. David’s, Arncliffe.
John returned to S. John’s, Armidale, and there re-
mained till he was sent to take charge of the Bourke
district of the 8.G.5., early in November, 1924.
In Gilgandra, Mrs Martyn was introduced to Mrs
Godwin, who said, *1 am glad to meet the mother of
John Martyn. I shall never forget him. When he was in
Gilgandra some time ago he came to see me I had
begun to do my washing, but feeling ill, had to leave
it. When your son arrived, he found me resting. He
finished the washing and hung it out to dry.’


CHAPTER THREE
Bourke, and Bush Brotherhood.
In November, 1924, in a letter to his parents, John
described the Church in Bourke and told something of
the beginning of his work out there.
'I am known as "the Rector of Bourke”. Just fancy
little Johnnie as the Rctor of a big town like Bourke
with a surrounding district of 25,000 square miles. In
reality, my title is "Bush Brother-in-charge”. I have two
Lay-Brothers helping me at present and the Principal
will be here on Saturday, so between us we should have
a very happy time.
My Church is S. Stephen’s, and is quite a fair size. It
is a wooden building in need of painting, but is really
quite nice. There is a High Altar and a Side Chapel.
There was at one time a very big brick Church here
but it was burnt down in 1895, with the result that
the Parish Hall and Sunday School was turned into the
Church. However, we manage to have some nice ser-
vices in it, with quite decent, ceremonial.
"The Rectory”, as it is called but I prefer "Bro-
therhood House”, is of brick, not at all a bad place either.
We have the Gloria light (benzine and air). This is used
all over Bourke a splendid light.
This morning I buried a little child three months old.
The parents are only quite young. They are Aborigines;
such a nice couple it was vary sad. The dear old
black grandmother of the baby came up to me after the
interment and said "How much will that cost?” When
I told her that there was no fee, but that she could make
a donation to the Church if she so desired, she looked


up at me with dear old loving eyes and said, "Oh well,
I’ll give you five shillings,” which she did. Poor old
dear, I felt so sorry for her.
I’ve done quite a lot of visiting since I’ve been here,
and it seems to have borne fruit. Many some of them
men, have spoken of it. This morning a man said to me,
in the course of conversation, "Excuse me telling you,
Mr Martyn, but you are doing one good thing that is
being appreciated, even though you have only been in
the town three or four days, and that is, you are visiting
the people. We all like it and thank you for the interest
you have taken in the town, even though only new
to it.” This was at least encouraging and made me feel
quite bucked up.
The Church bell is rung at 7.30 a.m. for Matins, and
at 5 30 p.m. for Evensong every day. I have explained
that when that bell rings I want everybody to at least
stand for a moment or two and offer up a prayer to
God, and they will know also that prayer is at that time
being offered up in the Church on behalf of the Parish.
It has caused quite a stir, and the people are absolutely
keen about it. People I have visited who were not at
Church last Sunday night, all ask me what the bells are
for and when I tell them, they, too, seem keen about it.
By this means, I hope to have a chain of prayer going
round the whole town at these special times during each
day.
There are two girls at the Hotel where I meal, they are
housemaids wait on table, etc. They want to be con-
firmed. Oh! it’s splendid to be absolutely up to one’s
neck in good, definite work.’
After a short time, John discovered that, in addition
to the fact that the Church could not afford to pay for
his meals at the Hotel, there was also a large account
owing for Brothers’ meals that, much as they had tried,
could not be met. So he decided that he would not go
for another meal until the outstanding account was
paid. In the meantime he would batch. A primus ring,
a few kitchen utensils, and some crockery were pro-
cured, and batching proceeded.


In addition to his decision to clean off this debt, John
saw others that he decided to wipe off. One was for
£3OO, on the Church, that had been outstanding for
some years. It was also his hope that some day he should
paint the Church. Then there was the old car that the
district had to be covered by, which was tied together
with fencing wire and string, had only one lamp and
for part of the time had neither windscreen or hood.
A short description of its miraculous doings are given in
a letter John wrote to his sister and which appears fur-
ther over. It certainly needed replacing.
These things meant the raising of a lot of extra
money by the people of Bourke. But Bourke was not the
only place that was going to be kept busy, for after
a very few visits to Byrock, John determined that dur-
ing his ministry in the Bourke district he would strive
to build a Church at Byrock and was not long in getting
to work among the people, for before the close of his
first year in the district he had inaugurated a Church
Building Fund in Byrock. The people worked hard for
a while, but as their efforts only raised the amount so
little at a time, on account of the fact that it was not
a very wealthy place, they became tired after a time and
the amount stayed as it was for a long time. But John
was not disheartened. Fie knew their difficulties and
their number was small.
On April 30th, 1925, John wrote something of a
description of the Bourke district and of a Brother’s
work to his sister. In it he said: 'Bourke is not a bad
place at all. In fact it’s "Goodo”. My district is a terrific
size. The old Lizzie in which I have to travel is quite
a specimen for the Museum. It is six years old, has done
76,000 miles, has been up two trees, has torpedoed one
cow, has had the chassis snapped, has been bogged, I
might say hundreds of times. It is really wonderful
how it stands up to it; especially on these roads. Some of
them are pretty good, but others are dreadful. I have
only one "made” road in my district; the others are all
bush tracks.
I have just got in tonight from a 150 mile trip. That


is the shortest trip I have to do. One of my boundaries
is 130 miles from Bourke. In one part of my district,
I can travel for over 60 miles and not see a house or
person. It is a back track from Hungerford toWan-
aaring. Yes, it’s on the map. Look at this map and
you’ll find you could put half of your South Island of
New Zealand in it comfortably.’
Here John drew a map of his district, giving the
mileage to the boundaries, and showing some of the
prominent centres. At the side he says '2 3,000 square
miles takes twelve months to cover thoroughly. Who
wouldn’t be a Bush Brother? This district is half the
size of England and just as large as the whole of Vic-
toria.’
Continuing his letter at a later date, he wrote
'Monday May 4th. Since I began to write this epistle,
I have had a very strenuous time. I began this last
Thursday evening, but as Friday was the date set down
for our Annual Vestry Meeting, it meant that most of
the time on Friday I was toiling at Balance Sheets, Re-
ports, etc. When the time of the meeting came, only
five people arrived. This not being a quorum, I had to
postpone it until next Friday. I roared on the people at
Church last night for not attending the meeting. I hope
they’ll come next Friday.
After the meeting last Friday I went to visit a little
boy who is very sick. He wanted me to play to him,
so I played for about two hours. He would not let me
stop, and it cheered him up a good deal. On arrival
home I was told that O’Malley’s twenty miles down
the river had been ringing for me. Mrs O’Malley
was very low, she had been suffering for about twelve
months. I put a call through to them, got them at
12.13 a.m., said I would leave at once, left Bourke at
12.30 a.m., and arrived at O’Malley’s at 1.20 a.m.
The old Ford ran well but I was too late. Mrs
O’Malley passed away while I was yet on the track. I
stayed with them until 3.30 a.m. Then I had to rush
back to Bourke to take a wedding. I got home at 4.30
a.m. and had a sleep until 3.13 a.m., when I got up and


went for my life to the Church to make ready for the
wedding which was to take place at 6 a.m.
The wedding over, I had to run round the town to
make arrangements for the funeral for the O’Malley’s.
They left all arrangements to me. Having sent several
wires, seen the Registrar, Undertaker, and Doctor, and
having bought some materials for the girls, I again
sailed down there, arriving at noon, and stayed till 2.30
p.m., when I left for Bourke, as I had a Confirmation
class at 4 p.m. (Unfortunately I fell asleep when I got
home and did not go to the Confirmation class l’ve
got to go and see the lady whom I am preparing, today.)
I got to bed on Saturday night at about 11 p.m., hav-
ing been up almost without a break for forty hours. It
was strenuous.
Yesterday (Sunday) I went down with the under-
taker and helped him with the coffin. The funeral took
place from the Church at 3 o’clock in the afternoon.
Then Evensong last night then as soon as possible
I got into bed talk about tired!
Such is three days in a Bush Brother’s life. This sort
of thing is a common occurence. I have experienced it
three times since I’ve been here. It’s nothing to sit a
whole night at a dying bedside l’m nearly getting
used to it. Just think of the contrast in one’s work!
Cheering a sick child one minute, the next, dashing
through the Bush at breakneck speed to get to a dying
bedside before it’s too late comforting the people as
best one can, then dashing back through the bush to-
wards the town to marry two people, arranging a
funeral, then back again to the sorrowing people and
returning for a Confirmation class and so it goes on.
A parson’s life is one of contrasts —he is with people
in their saddest moments, their deepest sorrow, then he
is with them in their greatest happiness and joys mar-
rying people today, burying people tomorrow. Yet it is
a wonderful privilege to be allowed to do such things.
It certainly knocks one to pieces, but it’s worth it.
The objects of my concentration are at all times, the
sick and dying. God is very good to me. He gives me


an abundant share of health and strength and determina-
tion so that when nearly dead with tiredness, I am still
able to carry on and do yet a little bit more.
I thank God always for such gifts. Please continue
to pray for me that I may be strengthened to do this
task that is nearly too big for me ldo my level best,
but it nearly beats me at times. Remember me especially
when you go to your Holy Communion; thank God that
you have the opportunity of communication regularly.
I exhort you to be regular in your Communion I
am lucky if I get a celebration of Holy Communion
once in a month. Oh! I shall be glad when I am made
priest. As yet I am but a Deacon and cannot celebrate
the Holy Eucharist, but I hope it will not be very long
now before I shall be raised to that Holy Office. Just
think, I have been ordained just on ten months. How
time flies, and I have been in charge of Bourke now
for six months!’
Just at that time there were only two Priest Brothers
in the Brotherhood, the Principal, the Reverend A. L.
Wylde, and the Vice Principal, the Reverend R. H.
Palmer, which meant that they were very much over-
worked, as there could only be Celebrations of the Holy
Communion in any of the districts when they could
get there, which resulted in their constant travelling
from one district to another and covering as much of
each district as possible whilst there. They were oc-
casionally relieved by the visit of a priest from perhaps
some other diocese or other part of the Bathurst diocese.
Two I know of as giving assistance in the Bourke dist-
rict were the Reverend P.A. Micklem,D.D., and the
Reverend A. G. Acheson, both of S. James’, Sydney.
When a visiting priest came there would be a celebra-
tion in the town and then he would be taken by John to
the part of the district that had been longest without
a celebration.
In August or September, 1925, the Editor of the
'Sunday Times’ newspaper circularised some of the
clergy and other people whose opinions they valued,
asking their opinions of the moral effect of moving


pictures on the public, with the result that a little later
there appeared in their columns, under the heading of
'Public opinion and the Film Combine’, a small piece
with a sub-heading, 'Support from Bourke’. It read:
'This letter is from the Reverend John D. Martyn, of the
Bush Brotherhood, from as far away as Bourke. "Allow
me to offer my heartiest congratulation on the steps you
are taking regarding the importation of American films.
It has long been my wish and hope that someone would
move in this respect. It is my intention to preach on
this subject on Sunday night. I am not against moving
pictures. On the contrary, I maintain that pictures can
be made very instructive; for example, children in the
back-blocks, in which I happen to be working, are
enabled by them to get some sort of an idea of what
the ocean and ships look like, matters they would not
be able to comprehend otherwise. But when moving
pictures get down to the level of idealising prostitutes,
siding with murder, adultery, and crime, then it is time
something was done to prevent such pictures being im-
ported into the country, much less shown on the public
screen.” ’
When the editor acknowledged this letter he invited
John to call and see him when next in Sydney, and as
the annual Brotherhood campaign followed soon after,
John found the time to hurry in and make the acquain-
tance of this gentleman. I have no doubt that John
found him to be quite up to his expectations, but I very
much doubt whether the editor expected to find such a
youthful Bush Brother at least, he did express his
surprise at not meeting a much older man. He was most
interested in the doings of the Bush Brotherhood, and
listened attentively while John told something of his
'rounds’ out West. Needless to say he described his old
car very humourously, and told of how he had started a
fund to buy a new one. When telling something of the
services held in shearing sheds among the shearers the
editor asked 'How do you lead the singing when you
have hymns?’ to which John replied that he always
carried a mouth organ and it was always handy for


leading the hymns and also for playing a few tunes to
amuse the men. This caused the editor much amuse-
ment and he asked John if he thought a portable grama-
phone would be of any use in this way. Imagine John’s
joy at the mention of such a thing! He assured the
editor that it would be a most appreciated addition to
the Bush Brother’s visit to the shearing sheds as well as
to the home of the lonely settlers and the boundary
riders’ huts.
This interview resulted in the donation by the Sun-
day Times of a substantial cheque towards the new car
and the gift of a 'His Master’s Voice’ portable grama-
phone, with 78 records of most widespread variety.
Not long after this a new Ford was purchased. It
was such an innovation after the old warrior, which had
the name of Nelson, because it had only one eye (lamp).
John said, 'lt’s such a "swanky” little bus I don’t know
what to call it. So he picked on 'Marmaduke’, which
seemed most suitable— while it was yet new.
So John was able to travel in considerably more com-
fort as far as the hood and windscreen were concerned,
and as he loved the mechanical part of the car, he saved
the parish a lot of expense by doing his own repairs
whenever possible. Thus, for a while, his travelling
troubles were reduced to punctures and bogs which
in themselves were surely sufficient.
In the Bush Brothers’ quarterly paper we find among
the Bourke Notes’ the following: 'Lately the Brother-
in-charge has been running round the bush from wool-
shed to wool-shed, holding services in them. Some ex-
cellent services have been held amongst the men. The
Sunday 1 imes” gramaphone has come in very useful
at these. The men sing up well when the hymns
are accompanied on the gramaphone.’ John finishes up
other notes by thanking the "reps” of the shearing
sheds for arranging the services, and the shearers them-
selves for their warm welcome and hospitality’.
Many very happy times were spent by John among the
shearers big, rough, whole-hearted fellows, most of
them. Brother John always carried his boxing gloves and


would either accept a challenge or referee for the men.
These men always showed Brother John the greatest
respect and were always glad to see him, even though
they had to be on their best behaviour as far as their
language was concerned not that John would re-
proach them. He would say 'that’s just the way they
have of putting it. They mean no harm.’ But when any
of them made a 'slip’ and used any bad language in his
presence, they always apologised for having 'slipped’.
John’s reply would be something in the nature of 'That’s
all right, old chap I drive a Ford’. This was just his
cheery way of making the men feel more at home with
a 'parson’ not admitting to the practice of such a
vice, but the men knew that a troublesome Ford was
inclined to drive a man to that. John knew that re-
proach was not the way to bring out the best in this
type of man.
They didn’t put aside their game of poker when the
Bush Brother was spending the evening with them
there wasn’t much else for them to do after their heavy
day’s work. Perhaps the shed would be seventy to ninety
miles from the town.
John generally landed at a 'shed’ sometime during
the afternoon. He loved to move about among the men
while they worked. He was as interested in their speed
and skill as any shearer there, and the wool-classer gener-
ally liked to discuss the quality of the wool and the
market for it with Brother John.
The men always expected Brother John to have the
evening meal with them at tea at a long board sitting
perhaps in the middle of the equally long form eating
the food from tin plates and drinking tea out of a tin
mug. John often found that a man who had not
'mealed’ with him before would look at him a little shyly
in spite of the fact that he might be twice John’s size.
John was always quick to see such things and would
hasten to put him at his ease by a merry jest or finding
h s point of contact by discussing shearing. John knew
how many sheep were being shorn at each of the sheds,
and how many bales they sent away. He knew how


many sheep a man could shear, the records men had put
up in times past whether the wool was good or bad
this year, whether it was too greasy or not, and how
much the Australian wool of different grades was bring-
ing. How could a man be shy with a 'parson* like Bro-
ther John?
Then after complimenting the cook on his stew or
'Brownie’ and a word or two to those washing the 'tin
dishes’ John would move around among the card players
—often he was asked, perhaps more as a joke— to 'have
a game of poker’. 'Yes’, would come his reply, 'but
you’ll all have to put your money off the table and play
for matches.’ Well! perhaps the game for 'matches’ was
not so en oyable as for money but the shearers enjoyed
the game with the Bush Brother.
Then, having shown an interest in their work and
sport, shared their meal and happy laughter, v/ho could
decline to be present at the Bush Brother’s service and
listen to an address put in good old flat Australian terms,
that brought the teaching to be a living reality here and
in their very midst.
Sometimes a party of shearers passing through Bourke
to a Wool Shed would be in town for Sunday. It was
not an uncommon sight to see a number of men filing
into the back seats during the singing of the first hymn,
having waited about outside the church till they heard
the strains of music and singing from within.
John was always quick to notice if they had been
provided with books. If not, he would proceed to the
bookshelves, still heartily singing, and hand books round
among them and make known the number of the
hymn, with a welcoming smile. I remember on one
occasion of this kind, that just as John announced the
number of the hymn before the address there came a
voice from one of those back seats that of a rather old
man, and he said 'Let us have "Abide with Me”, Brother
John’, to which John calmly replied, 'very well, we’ll
have that next’, and it took the place of the one already
arranged for after the sermon.
And John never forgot that for the most part, these


men did not know their way about the Prayer Book, so
every part of the service that required the place to be
found, John was careful to announce on what page it
was to be found.
Thus, in John’s understanding way, he made these
men perhaps, otherwise strangers to the House of
God, to feel the warmness of the welcome, that some-
times strangers experience as being 'so cold’.
The shearers of the West respected Brother John as a
priest, and were drawn close to him by his true brother-
liness and the love and true friendship he showed them.
When the 'sheds’ were all finished and they had done in
their cheques, they knew Brother John would not re-
fuse to lend them a few shillings if he had it; and
more than once, when John had not any money he
would say, 'Have you any money in the house, mum?
One of the boys is coming along this afternoon for a
loan.
Often when John was on a trip in the bush, young
men, who announced themselves as shearers would call
at the Rectory and ask for Brother John, and when told
that he was away, confessed that they were hard up and
had come to borrow something from Brother John
Tie wouldn’t refuse us if he was here’ generally came
the assurance, and we were so sure of that, that we were
glad to meet their needs as far as possible. 'Just tell him
it was "Scotty”, or "Longun”, or perhaps "Curley”;
he’ll know; we’ll pay him back when we see him at the
sheds’. And they did though perhaps it might be
months hence and John had forgotten about the loan
and was often surprised when a man would say, 'I owe
you three and fourpence, Brother John. You lent me
two "bob” one day, and one and four another’.
One day, John was driving along one of Bourke’s
main streets, his father was in the car with him. A
shearer hailed him, and he pulled up; the man stood and
talked for a moment, then said, 'Will you lend me five
"bob”, Brother John?’ 'Now what do you want five
"bob” for?’ said John. 'Oh well, a bit hard up, you
know.’ John didn’t question whether he’d pay it back,


but began to feel in his pockets to see if he had that
much; and on taking some money from his pocket
the shearer said. 'lt’s all right, Brother John. I don’t
want it, but I bet that fellow over there, that you
wouldn’t refuse to lend it to me’. John saw the humour-
ous side, as usual, pretended to show fight, and drove
oft after a hearty hand-shake.
Before finishing this subject I want to go a little ahead
to the time of John’s departure from Bourke for the
last time. The same old man who had asked for 'Abide
with Me’ to be sung in Church that night, arrived at the
Rectory on the day before we left.
'I owe you some money, Brother John. I heard you
were leaving Bourke tomorrow and I got a chance of a
lift in to town today, so came to pay me debts.’ It was
five "bob”, but I want you to take seven-and-six to re-
member me by. I’ll never forget you you’ve been a
good friend to me.’ John swallowed a lump in his
throat and thanked him.
When relating the interview n his return from see-
ing the old man oft at the gate, John said, 'wasn’t it
good of the poor old chap. I couldn’t refuse to take it.
I wouldn’t offend him for the world.’
In 'The Bush Brother’, September 1926, the Principal
of the Brotherhood, the Reverend A. L. Wylde, re-
minded the people of the bush how the young Brothers
needed their help. He said, 'You are now being minis-
tered to by young men in Deacons’ Orders, or just
Priested. These young men must give a certain definite
part of each day to reading (it should not be less than
three hours) as they still have examinations to pass. Most
of those you have had in the past have been, happily
for them, past the examination stage, and though that
fact does not free them from the duty of reading, it
dees give them more time to devote to their parishes
and districts. Help them to be loyal to their rule of
life and back them up wholeheartedly.’ The Principal
knew how hard it was for these young men to study.
At the end of John’s first year in the Bourke district
he made another attempt to 'get through’ Th.L., as he


had given Bishop Long his word that he would continue
to sit for it until he got through.
How could he get any time for study that first year
was very hard work for a young deacon. There was so
much to be learned about the practical work and as we
have already seen, John’s work was laborious and his
hours long.
Well, he snatched a little time at reading but how
could he concentrate when he had so many things on
his mind, and while he studied there was something
waiting to be done or someone to be called on. However
he must keep his word; he could but try. He left
Bourke by train at 9.45 one morning and after travel-
ling all day, arrived in Bathurst at 2 a.m. He had to
search round for lodgings, finally asking a policeman if
he knew where he could get a bed for the night and he
took him to a hotel. As there was not a bed made up
and the hour was late, John was glad to sleep on a bare
mattress. At nine o’clock that same morning John sat
for Th.L. All that was conducive to concentration was
as far from him as possible. He knew he had no hope
whatever of passing his only consolation was in the
fact that he had made an attempt —and a very big effort.
Those who were ordained to the Diaconate at S. Am-
brose, Gilgandra, on S. James’ Day, July 25th, 1924,
were now to be priested, but when it came to a question
of ages it was discovered that John D. Martyn was Too
young’, as it was illegal to raise a Deacon to the Priest-
hood under the age of twenty-four years. So, much to
John’s disappointment, his brother Deacons took their
next step before he could. The Principal, in a letter to
me, said, 'Nothing but John’s extraordinary youthful-
ness prevented his being ordained with the others’.
Bishop Long said, T will ordain you on the first
Saint’s day that is possible, after your birthday’, which
was on April 17. So May Ist, 1926, the Feast of S.
Philip and S. James, was set down for John’s ordination.
The Principal and John arrived in Bathurst on Wed-
nesday, 28 th, April, and were the guests of the Bishop
and Mrs Long at Bishopscourt. There John received wise


counsel and spent a quiet time in preparation for his
ordination, being excused for a while on the Friday
afternoon when he and the Principal and Canon Wilton
met my mother and I at the Railway Station, having
journeyed from Sydney to be present for that day in
John’s life and ours that we had all looked forward to
for nearly ten years.
On Saturday morning the service of Ordination was
held in the Bishop’s private Chapel (S. Martin’s) at
eight o’clock. There were no other candidates but John.
The very atmosphere of that beautiful little Chapel
was inspiring. There were nine or ten clergy present,
most of them very aged Priests such a contrast to
probably 'the youngest Priest in Australia’ as the Bishop
afterwards told John he thought he was.
The service was most impressive. (Imagine our over-
whelming joy and pride when we remembered that all
these men had come together, and the Bishop had ar-
ranged this service and given an address for one person
addressing himself directly to John). The Bishop sat
on a chair on the sanctuary steps to deliver his address.
He said how pleased they were to accept John as a
priest and Brother into the Diocese and to welcome
him to Bishopscourt, which in future would be open
to him as his home at any time. In the course of his ad-
dress he said, 'John, it gives me great pleasure to see you
surrounded by friends who have known you and have
come forward to vouch for you. Firstly, Canon Wilton,
who has known and watched you since you were eight
years of age, and knows that you are a lit and proper
person to be raised to the Priesthood. Secondly the Rev-
erend L. Walker, who spent some years in S. John’s Col-
lege with you and had a very good opportunity of know-
ing your inner life, also is sure of your sincerity. Thirdly,
the Principal of the Brotherhood, who has been in con-
stant touch with you since you joined the Brotherhood,
and is more than pleased with your good and noble work;
he knows you are a worthy and capable brother. And
lastly, myself.’ The Bishop went on to tell of how some
of our men, when raised to the Priesthood, strut about


and try to ape someone in authority. 'Now, John,’ he
said, I mention this to you, not because I see it in you,
I know you have always been a good and modest boy
and one that any achievement will not alter, but I want
you to help us to try and teach these young men who
will be with you from time to time that they must be
modest in all things.’
After the address the Laying on of Hands, and the
Bishop’s Blessing, Canon Wilton affectionately placed
John’s stole upon him, while the Principal saw that the
cross on the back was quite central.
The Eucharist was choral, the Cathedral Organist
presided at the organ what an inspiration to hear
those strong male voices singing the Eucharist. After
the procession from the Chapel, all were entertained at
breakfast by the Bishop and Mrs Long, who herself
waited on table, assisted by her two daughters. The
speeches were opened by the Bishop, who again addressed
John himself, and was followed by Canon Wilton, and
the Reverend A. L. Wylde, to which John responded.
John’s first celebration of the Holy Communion was
next morning in the Bathurst Cathedral of All Saints,
at eight o’clock, and he was assisted by Canon Wilton
and the Reverend Leslie Walker. The first person to
receive the Blessed Sacrament from his hands was the
Priest who had first helped John to see and hear his Call
to the Priesthood; the second, a young Priest who had
been his fellow student and was ordained Deacon with
him, and next, his mother and sister. The joy ex-
perienced by each could hardly be explained by one
such as I. At the eleven o’clock Eucharist John assisted
Canon Wilton and Mr Walker as sub-deacon, and at
Evensong read both lessons.
The Canon was the preacher at eleven o’clock and the
Bishop at Evensong. Both made a lengthy reference to
John’s career. The Canon told of his life from the time
he was eight years of age and said, 'To have him here
with me today and to know that I was the first to re-
ceive the Blessed Sacrament from my boy means more
to me than any of you can understand.’ The Bishop


spoke of the little boy he had watched since he was
fourteen years of age and spoke of John as a 'worthy,
modest, and good, Brother’.
All this was very wonderful for John’s mother and
sister to witness, but what of poor old John. Those
addresses on the Sunday seemed never to end. He said
he longed to run away, it was all so embarrassing.
We travelled back to Sydney next day, John’s mother,
with a thankful heart that she had 'lived to see that day’,
back to John’s father, who had been unable to leave his
business to be present at his son’s ordinations, who waited
patiently for the news of all that had happened. Our
hearts swelled with pride as we related everything. John
journeyed back to Bourke, considerably strengthened
with a greater authority, to a greater responsibility.
During the latter part of 1926, Brother John’s father
began to fail in health, but continued to carry on his
business in the city under difficulties. Brother John be-
came very worried about him and sought a way to
help him. He interviewed the Principal and the Bishop
and begged to be allowed to leave the Brotherhood and
apply for a parish where he could have his parents living
with him. By so doing, John would have had to sink
one of his principles, for he did not approve of a Priest
applying for a position at any time he believed that
Priests were called to their work and where it pleased
God to call a man, there he should work. He felt that
his father should give up his business, which he daily
seemed less able to carry on.
Bishop Long and the Principal, the Reverend A. L.
Wylde, considered the matter well. They did not want
Brother John to leave the 8.G.5.; he had given two and
a half years of very valuable service in Bourke. Finally,
John’s parents and sister were invited by those in
authority to take up their residence in the Rectory,
Bourke, which they accepted and arrived in Bourke on
May 18th, 1927, and remained there till Brother John
had completed his five years of obligation to the B.G.S.


CHAPTER FOUR
A Priest’s Work Out Back
As time went on, John found it impossible to keep
the daily services going in the Church in Bourke. The
lay Brothers had gone back to College and the pro-
bationers were only with him for a little while and even
when in Bourke, were expected to do some trips with
the Brother.
Of course the work of a Bush Brother is very different
to that of a Parish Priest. Where the Parish Priest can
hold celebrations of the Holy Eucharist, at the very least,
on Saints’ Days and Festivals, and can also say Matins
and Evensong fairly regularly, visit his parishioners, at-
tend meetings, and still give them all the beautiful ser-
vices on Sunday, the Bush Brother, when single-handed,
as John was during most of his ministry in Bourke, has
a life even more strenuous than a Priest’s in ordinary
country parishes, as his district is usually so large and he
concentrates particularly on the isolated parishioners.
In the first place, you must fully understand that
he is not exempt from the usual worries of a Parish
Priest. The townspeople must be visited. They must
have someone to go to in their time of trouble; someone
from whom they can seek advice and even someone to
fight their battles at times. He must attend to the sick
and dying. Then there are baptisms and marriages to
be performed and Confirmation candidates to be pre-
pared.
Keeping this in mind, we will begin on Sunday morn-
ing with Brother John’s celebration of the Holy Com-
munion in S. Stephen’s, Bourke at 6.30 a.m., after which
he very often went to the Hospital to take the Blessed
Sacrament to patients. Then Children’s Service at 10


a.m. (this is the summer time-table) and between this
service and the mid-day meal Brother John would begin
to wade through some of the mail that had been ac-
cumulating all the week whilst he had been in the Bush.
In the early part of the afternoon in mid-summer one
is glad of a little rest during that hottest part of the
day. Brother John could not always indulge in this
luxury perhaps the engine of the car needed atten-
tion for the following morning. There is more mail and
a sermon to be prepared for Evensong. After Evensong,
Choir Practice. John was his own Choirmaster and
the moulding of the raw material was no easy task, but
the fact that they very successfully rendered Merbecke’s
Choral Eucharist on festivals, is a proof that the task
was accomplished by the Choirmaster.
If it happened that candidates were being prepared
for Confirmation, they would receive their instruction
after Choir Practice (but occasionally Choir Practice
would be abandoned in favour of the Confirmation
candidates). Before returning home there was some
sick person to be visited or someone to call on and re-
mind about something to be done during the week. On
returning home, more correspondence to be attended to
and often this was not finished till as far on as two
o’clock in the morning.
This was the usual Sunday in Bourke, with the ex-
ception of Children’s Service, which was only held once
a month and on Festivals.
On such Festivals as Christmas and Easter, the Sunday
services would be as follows: 5.45 a.m., Special Holy
Communion for those who had to go to work, such as
housemaids and others whose work began early; 6.30
a.m., Choral Eucharist; 8 a.m., Holy Communion; 10
a.m., Children’s Service; 7.30, Festal Evensong, Pro-
cession and Te Deum of Thanksgiving, with the singing
of many carols. (Some of Mr Joseph Massey’s composi-
tions were always sung, John singing the solos himself.)
To quote some of John’s own notes of work in the
bush, he says:
The Rectory was astir at 4.30 a.m., and at 5.30 a.m.


all necessary preparation having been completed "Mar-
maduke was driven out of the Rectory gate and followed
the track along the Barrigun Road to Garlands, thirty-
five miles from Bourke, where we had a celebration of
Holy Communion at 7.30 a.m.
In the hope of reaching Barrigun that night I drove
straight away after breakfast towards that little town-
ship, but I was destined to be late. Heavy rain had fallen
and the "Warrego” had overflowed her banks. On ar-
riving at Mr Hodge’s place which was almost surrounded
by water, I was told that I would have to go a good many
miles out of my way if I hoped to get through at all.
This proved useful information. By observing Mr
Hodge’s direction and following the flood track I was
able to get to "Belalie” homestead just at dusk, and even-
tually to arrive at Mr Cuffi’s house (my destination) at
9.30 p.m. These people were thrilled at my reports of
the flooded country and even forgave me for being late.
We had a short preparation service just before going
to bed and at 6 a.m. next morning a celebration of the
Holy Communion. I did hope to go and see Mr Baker
at "Owengowan”, whose father had passed away just
prior to my visit, but I could not get to his place owing
to the floods. I am sure he will take the word for the
deed. We had Evensong at "Belalie” homestead that
night and a celebration of Holy Communion next morn-
ing at 5.30 a.m., then on to Erngonia for Holy Com-
munion at 9 a.m., which was followed by a baptism.
Most of the people at Erngonia had Typhoid Fever,
so I was only able to see a very small percentage of the
dwellers in this village. Then I went on a tour of visita-
tion to "Thurmylea”, "Lila Farm”, "Lila Springs”, and
finished up at "Bellfields”, where I spent the night.
The next day I made for Bourke, where I arrived on
Thursday afternoon in a much more plump condition
than when I started out on the Monday before. I had
encountered many millions of sand flies, which infested
the edge of the flooded country over which I had been
travelling. Under the sand flies’ kind treatment I
"swelled visibly” and remained a chubby member of


the community for a few days, enduring much irrita-
tion both of skin and temper
On Friday the 6th of January, four car-loads of
people drove from Bourke to Boorundal Siding, to the
home of the Turnbull family. Here we had Sung Even-
song at 7.30 p.m., and afterwards had a Christmas Tree
for about thirty youngsters who had, by their parents’
aid, found their ways to “Boorindal” for the service.
The children enjoyed seeing Santa Claus being driven
in from the bush in a Ford car. They shouted and
danced for joy. Each child received a toy and then when
Santa Claus had gone on his way, games were enjoyed
until quite a late hour, when the Bourke-ites turned
their headlights towards home.
Th*- following week I started on a trip to the settlers
out beyond Ford’s Bridge. Services were held at “Cur-
ragh’ and “Wirranya”, while visitations were made to
“Merrita” and "Minnetta” and I hope won’t be the last.
But I do hope it will be the last time I shall arrive on
foot. You see, while I was at 'Whranya” two inches of
rain fell and made the ground well to say the least
of it, a trifle damp. Driving from “Wirranya” to “Min-
netta” my progress was cut short by my sinking in a
mulga flat. I got bogged six times in five yards and in
the sixth one suction set in and it was impossible to
move “Marmaduke” on my own, even though I had
cut down big poles with which to lever it up. Night-
fall came before success. I decided to camp for the
night and have a further try in the morning. The morn-
ing brought feelings of hopelessness and the only thing
left to do was to walk for help. I walked eight miles
to “Minnetta” and these good people drove out to the
scene of trouble, and after about an hour’s work we
Mr Major, one of the sons of the house, and myself
got the old bus on to dry ground, drove on to Major’s,
and spent the night there. Next day I drove to Bourke,
arriving at midnight.
February Ist to 4th. I was down the river and held
services at “Glenville”, “Woodlands”, “Talowla”, and
“Louth”. 7he “Talowla” service was the first Com-


munion of the newly Confirmed and this made it a
specially happy service. On this trip again I had the
misfortune to be bogged four times and get into a deep
swamp which flooded the engine with water. I waded
through water up to my waist for over a hundred yards,
then walked bare-footed for a couple of miles to ''Red-
bank”. Bare-footed walking on Bindii-covered pastures
is not the most pleasant way of migrating from one
place to another. Nevertheless, the pain of that, and the
disappointment of the swamp were more than over-
come by the kindness of the Howell family, who re-
ceived me very cordially. Mr Ted Howell came out in
his lorry and towed "Marmaduke” on to higher ground.
He did more he came with me to Bourke after we
had cleaned the water out of the engine and had tea.
It was Saturday night. Ted knew that I had to get to
Bourke for the Sunday morning service, and that it was
quite impossible for me to get through alone. So he
came with me and we got through but not till 3 a.m.
on Sunday morning. This was very kind of Mr Howell,
as it means the loss of almost a week to him, since no
cars were travelling on account of the rain and he
could not get home. However he stayed with us at the
Rectory until he could find a conveyance home again.
March 12th to 17th was a busy week during which
time services were held at "Yantabulla”, "Brindingabba”,
"Parragundi”, Hungerford and Wanaaring, as well as
visits to "Youngerina”, Tmapagel”, and "Yarrawonga”.
March 20th to 23 rd saw me down the Railway line,
holding services at By rock, Collabah and Glenariff.
Visits were made to the fettlers all along the line.
Throughout the whole of the bush trips I taught in the
schools wherever a school was to be found viz: Native
Dog Bore, Yantabulla, Hungerford, Cobbadah, and oc-
casional children found in houses. You can see just a
little of the work we are trying to accomplish in this
parish with its scattered population and its trying
weather conditions. The trip outlined in this report was
beset with almost every pest and difficulty that it is pos-
sible to encounter in the bush heat, flies, sand flies,


mosquitoes, sand storms, rain, bogs, punctures, blow-
outs, water-filled engine, long walks in consequence of
engine trouble, even to two encounters with snakes.
So, everything taken into consideration, it was a busy
quarter.’
These services in homes were most inspiring they
brought the Church life right into their very midst. So
often the table from which they dined daily, was spread
at one end with a fair linen cloth, with an Altar Fron-
tal doing service in its place in front, a cross and candle-
sticks making it complete— but of flowers there were
usually so few that they were seldom seen on these altars
arranged in outback homes, and as one knelt with these
dear faithful souls, who had( in many cases) never
seen a Church, one could not help but be thankful for
the work of the Bush Brotherhood. The Brother takes
everything possible to help these people in their worship.
He sets up an altar and wears his vestments, just as he
does in the Church, and how very much his visit is ap-
preciated!
According to the number of communicants the place
was chosen it might be a kitchen or a dining room;
at a station homestead it might be in a wide entrance
hall or a lounge it might be in the parlour of a hotel
in a little hamlet.
But the surroundings mattered not, the atmosphere
was inspired by their reverend devotion.
The Christmas Evensong and Christmas Tree held at
Boorindal siding, referred to in Brother John’s notes,
was a sight I shall never forget.
The house, built of corrugated iron, had a very long
kitchen (being January, it was very hot). From the
unlined iron roof, hung branches of gum leaves. The
piano was brought into the kitchen and all other furni-
ture removed. (People came from many miles round
to be present at the service.) All available chairs were
placed in rows and the remainder of the space was filled
with planks of wood resting on petrol cases. A tiny
table, on which was a nice white cover, was used as the
priest’s prayer desk.


All sang the responses of Evensong heartily and un-
accompanied, and the Christmas hymns were sung
lustily to Brother John’s accompaniment on the piano.
'O come all ye faithful’, how wonderful! Surely these
are the faithful who are glad to receive their Christmas
message whenever a Priest is able to take it to them!
And then when the strains of 'The Church’s One
Foundation is Jesus Christ Her Lord’ peeled out oh!
words fail me that I could adequately describe what
I felt for as I joined in the singing, I felt that my
throat would burst for the very joy of it Yes, I have
joined in the singing of this hymn in Cathedrals, large
parish churches and small, country churches of various
sizes, in wartime at combined services, it had always
thrilled me, but here in this corrugated iron kitchen
twentyone miles out of Bourke, it had yet another mean-
ing that the 'corner stone’ was not only the founda-
tion of the church that worships God in those imposing
buildings but is also a very solid, and in many cases,
more rigid foundation, of that isolated Church in the
Western districts of New South Wales, who, when we
think of Mission fields and country parishes we are apt
to forget!
Theirs is the faith in the foundation on which they
rest so trustfully, yet with so little stimulant for
they see the Brother sometimes only twice in a year.
Their hardships are many, their loneliness frightful
they need more of the ministration of the Church
yet how can they get it with only one priest in each
district, covering vast spaces? Many young men are
waiting to be trained for this work, but there is not the
money to train them.
The people of the West look forward to the Bush
Brother’s return from the Annual Sydney Campaign,
for they usually have some message of joy for them.
The following is the way Brother John had of delivering
his message in Bourke:
'lt is a great joy to be back amongst you once again,
and to celebrate the Holy Mysteries at our Altar here.
I bring you glad tidings of the great City of Syd-


ney. Churchpeople there have been reminded during the
last three weeks of the work of the Church in these
parts and thy have responded splendidly. There is a
large body of Communicants in Sydney praying regu-
larly for you here in Bourke and in all the districts
of the Bush Brotherhood. They are praying for us out
here we must pray from them, too.
In the Holy Communion service we are in com-
munion with God, with the whole Church throughout
Christendom and with those who have gone beyond the
veil. We must aim at a definite unity. Our brethren
in the city need our prayers just as much as we need
theirs, so we will pray for them and be with them in our
Communion and especially remember the unity of the
whole Church in the following out of the doctrine
taught by the Apostles and Prophets. With them as
the foundation Jesus built up His Church. We stand
today in direct line with the Apostles and Prophets.
That unbroken line of succession has gone steadily on
right up to the present time. Let our prayers then be
for those in Sydney who are backing up with prayers
and money the work of the Brotherhood of the Good
Shepherd, that they may continue in their prayers and
support, interest and backing so needed at this time for
the advancement of the work for Christ in these remote
parts of our State.
When traveling in the bush, Brother John dressed to
be prepared for the worst, whether it be bogs in mud or
sand, engine trouble, or punctures. Usually he wore
riding breeches and boots that laced up to his knees, with
khaki shirt and a hat that was well known throughout
the district. It was the shape of a "south-wester’ made
of khaki drill and lined with green, most suitable for
the climatic conditions, being light, and thus cool, and
giving protection from the sun to the back of the neck.
The green helped to lessen the glare, and on one occasion
came in handy as a signal.
Being very badly bogged, after already working hard
and getting out of several smaller bogs in the mud, on
the road that runs beside the railway line, one Saturday


evening, as Brother John was on his way back to
Bourke for Sunday Services, he decided to walk the
remainder of the distance which was many miles, at
least for walking. However it was fairly early and as
long as he reached Bourke for the services next morn-
ing it would be quite all right.
The train only runs to Bourke three times a week.
Fortunately for Brother John, Saturday was one of the
mail days. As he trudged along the road, he heard the
train coming in the distance. A happy thought struck
him. He waited until it came along and then got out on
the line, took off his 'south-wester’, turned the green side
out and waved furiously in front of the engine.
The enginedriver, seeing this khaki clad figure waving
something green, obeyed the signal and pulled up the
train. John ran forward and explained that he was a
Bush Brother who had had to abandon his bogged car
and to walk to Bourke. Would he give him a 'lift’
in? Brother John arrived in Bourke by train that even-
ing, much earlier than he had expected.
The open-necked shirt is the usual dress of men tra-
velling the tracks out west and the Bush Brother usually
finds it most convenient and comfortable and in ad-
dition, while wearing it, meets the swaggy, the drover,
the musterer, the tank-sinker, the scrub-cutter, the
fencer, the boundary rider, the shearer, the station
owner, and all men on a level footing. He gets into
contact with men, has a man to man talk with them
and they are not inclined to steer clear of him because
he wears a clerical collar. And when they find they
have been talking to a Bush Brother, they begin to
think that 'Parsons are not such sanctimonious, high-
browed, unnatural beings as they had always thought
them to be’. In fact they find them jolly decent
fellows. Then when they meet him in the town wearing
his clerical collar they are glad to go out of their way to
speak to him forgetting the collar and only thinking
of the man inside. In this way, I really think the Bush
Brother gets to the hearts of men he would otherwise
never reach.


Brother John tells, in 'The Bush Brother’, August
1927, of a swagman who asked to be allowed to make his
Communion when Brother John was celebrating at
'Belalie’ station homestead. He had not received the
Blessed Sacrament for many years, never having an
opportunity of doing so.
After making his preparation the night before, he
was present at the 6.30 a.m. Celebration next morning.
Brother John concluded his remarks by saying, 'Such
incidents help to hearten us on our way as we Ford
round the districts, sometimes receiving more bumps
than encouragements.’
Having travelled, suitably clad, the Bush Brother, ar-
riving at his destination for the night, usually changes
to clothes more suitable and his host finds this recently
khaki clad figure, now wearing a dark suit and clerical
collar, which, after all, would have been most unsuitable
for the track in a Ford.
On one occasion, a stranger to Bourke, in conversation
with Brother John at the door of the Rectory, proceeded
to put him on the 'right track’ towards the Kingdom
of Heaven, declaring that he was travelling from town
to town, going from door to door, converting souls
thoroughly well meaning, and undoubtedly doing a
great deal of good in the world. When Brother John
d:d not agree with his point of view, the missioner be-
came heated, and tapping Brother John’s clerical collar
hastily with his forefinger, asked 'is this your authori-
ty’. Brother John calmly raised the 'stock’ that was at-
tached thereto, and from beneath exposed a small cru-
cifix, which hung on a rough piece of string about his
neck. 'No, sir! This is my authority, the Cross of Christ
Crucified,’ he replied.
No one but his own had ever seen that crucifix be-
fore that rough piece of string on which it hung al-
ways reminded me of the humble S. Francis he had
been wearing it for a long time then, and continued to
do so for the remainder of his life here on earth.
And when in Sydney Hospital at the end, that little


crucifix still hanging on the rough piece of string, re-
mained upon him and was not even ?d when he
was operated upon, or after his passing be _ ond the veil,
until the following day, when it was taken off his body
and given to his mother
Gave his Blood Midas Foster, only five months old,
was very ill in the Royal Alexandria Hospital, Sydney.
Uncle John had been kept in touch with the latest
news concerning her. She had undergone two blood
transfusions from her father, which on each occasion
revived her for about a week. The baby was failing
again. Those of us who offered our blood were re-
jected. 'She can’t live’, said the doctor, 'and it’s only
putting her to unneessary pain’.
This sad news was sent to her uncle, who had bap-
tised her and had hung a tiny gold cross about her neck
after he had placed the cross upon her forehead. 'She
can’t live.’
Brother John received the news in his mail on Saturday
evening. His first thought was to give his blood. He
hurriedly did all that was necessary that evening, packed
his car ready for a long trip and arranged with some-
one to be at the Church early next morning to say there
would not be any services as Brother John had hurried
away to Sydney.
On the journey down, John encountered a consider-
able amount of engine trouble which not only delayed
him, but caused him to have very little time for food or
sleep. Coming over the mountains without brakes as
they had gone wrong before he had travelled that far, his
only method of stopping was to shut off the petrol. The
trip of over five hundred miles was completed in twen-
ty-two hours actual travelling time, although, having
left Bourke at 9 p.m. on Saturday, he did not arrive
till about 9 a.m. on Monday morning.
Imagine his mother’s surprise when this khaki clad
figure entered by the side entrance. His first words after
the greeting were, 'How is the Baby’? He was on the
verge of collapse, and when his mother explained that


'the elector thinks she can last a little longer, perhaps a
few days’, it was not hard to persuade John to take
a little rest and food.
In a couple of hours he had revived considerably and
made his way out to the Children’s Hospital. After
seeing the tiny failing figure and her mother, John
asked to see the doctor who had the case in hand and
told him that he wanted to give some blood to try to
save her life. 'But we have decided not to worry her
with any more transfusions’ said the doctor. 'Surely
you’ll take a test of my blood to see if it will blend with
the baby’s,’ said John. The doctor did not seem anxious,
so John explained. 'l’ve travelled 511 miles in a broken-
down Ford to give my blood for her’, said John in a
disappointed tone.
'What!’ said the doctor in astonishment. 'Where have
you come from?’ 'Bourke’, replied John. 'Good gra-
cious! then we’ll give it a trial.’ A test of John’s blood
was made and found to blend with that of the tiny mite.
'Come tomorrow, and the transfusion will take place at
11 a.m.,’ said the doctor.
He left everything in readiness for the return trip
when he went to the Hospital next morning, (having
taken the Ford to a garage near by on his arrival to be
repaired, and requested a rush job, as he had to be in
Bourke for the week end).
Now John had heard many times of transfusions and
knew that the blood was taken from the arm of one
but just what this meant, he had never really stopped
to think, but when leaving Bourke on the previous Sat-
urday evening he imagined himself returning with per-
haps a large scar on some part of his arm, but that
didn’t matter, he could stand anything to save the baby
nor did he question anybody as to what he would have
to undergo. So he arrived at the hospital, full of hope
for the baby and prepared to go through anything, at
any cost.
When the whole thing was finished, John, feeling
none the worse, turned to the doctor and said, Ts that
all?’ The doctor replied that it was, and inquired how


he felt, to which John replied that he had 'expected
something very much more severe and only felt a little
limp’.
After waiting to see how tiny Midas survived her
part of the treatment, John left the hospital still more
hopeful, went in to the city, to see a friend of the Bro-
therhood, had lunch, then 'dropped in’ at his father’s of-
fice to say good-bye to us, arriving home soon after, an-
nouncing that he was 'leaving for Bourke at about
4 p.m.’
We were rather anxious about him, but a friend who
lived in Blackheath offered to travel with him, and be-
ing a good driver also, was able to take a turn at the
wheel when John’s arm eventually became stiff. As
time went on John felt more the effects of the day’s
programme and on arrival at Blackheath was persuaded
to stay a couple of days, much against his wish, although
he could see that it was advisable.
After the rest and care and kindness of his friends,
John travelled on to Bourke alone. We can imagine how
he worked to try to make up for the time of his absence.
He took longer to recover from his loss of blood than
would ordinarily have been the case of one who had
regarded the loss of blood as more serious.
To some, this had seemed a hopeless chase to Sydney,
a lot of inconvenience and loss of time, but it was not
fruitless, the child began to improve, her mother was
given permission to take her home and with careful
nursing for a very long time, little Midas Foster began
to grow in body and strength. She is now a healthy,
happy, well built, sturdy child. And as a thank offer-
ing from the Martyn family for her recovery there
hangs in that little Church of S. Stephen’s, Bourke, out
in central Australia, a small neat sanctuary lamp, ever
burning as a reminder of the Presence of God, and to
some it may now have an additional meaning a re-
minder of our faith in the Communion of Saints.
Hospital Work and the Gift of Healing.
I remember how, so often when Brother John had


been sent for to go to the Hospital at night, we might
wait up late for his return, but finally would go to bed,
leaving supper and light burning in the hall, knowing
that when John returned home the light would be ex-
tinguished. How often it burned till about six o’clock
in the morning and seeing it go out, mother would call,
'ls that you, John?’ And the answer would come
that it was then mother would ask after the patient,
often it would be that he or she had had a bad night but
was now easier. And seeming very tired John would go
to bed for a couple of hours, perhaps less. As often as
this would happen the thought would come to me
'Well, it seems unnecessary to stay there all night, surely
John could talk to the patient for a little while and then
come home’. But of course I would not dream of criti-
cising anything he did in connection with his work as
a priest. But my questions were answered without my
asking them, when the time came for John to leave
Bourke, to go to S. James’ in Sydney. Talking with
Matron Stowe, of the Bourke Hospital, she looked at me
in desperation and said 'What on earth will I do when
I’ve got a bad case at night Brother John won’t be
here to send for’ 'What nonsense, you 11 always have a
Brother at the Rectory.’ 'Oh, but nobody I have ever
met has been like Brother John, and I don’t ever expect
to find another clergyman of any denomination to be
like him.’ 'But,’ 1 said, 'he was only doing his job and
any of the Brothers will do that well.’ 'He wasn’t satis-
fied just to do his job,’ said the Matron, 'he always did
more.’ Then she went on to explain that only one nurse
could be spared for night duty, which was workable
in normal times, but as the men’s ward was a distance
across a sort of court-yard from the women’s ward it
was very hard when there was a bad case to look after
both wards thoroughly. So it always fell to Matron’s
lot to stay up with the night nurse and it was at times
like this that Brother John was of valuable assistance.
He would go into the kitchen and make supper for
the nurse and Matron, keep the fire stoked, carry drinks
to patients and look after hot water bottles, while they


were busy with other patients. After relating
this, Matron said, 'And what would we have done with-
out him the night poor old Mr Howell was so ill? The
poor old fellow was taking awful fits all night and
Brother John helped me the whole night through to
roll him in hot blankets, which was no light job as Mr
Howell was a very heavy man and was having awful fits.
And then, on the night when we had a young woman
so very ill, and a young man over in the men’s ward
who had been operated on that day and nobody expected
him to get better Brother John stayed with him all
night, and attended to all his wants and only left him
to attend to the wants of the other men in the ward.
He did full duty all that night in the men’s ward for
everybody and nurse only did rounds once throughout
the night, we were so busy in the women’s ward it was
hard to get away; but no man wanted for anything
and none went without his medicine and treatment at
the right time. No job was too menial for Brother John.’
These were the answers to my questions of 'why need
John stay at the Hospital all night’. Yet we, living in
the same house, taking full interest in everything he did
and helping in any way we could because we did not
question, never heard from John of what he was doing.
I have no doubt that even if we had questioned him he
would simply have made some light reply.
No wonder he needed that little rest in the
morning. And I remembered that at the time John
had been sent for, to go to Mr Howell, he had been
travelling hard in the country all day, arrived home, or
at least as far as the Rectory gates at 5.30 p.m., where I
met him and said that the Hospital had been ringing
for him all the afternoon, that Mr Howell was dying.
John turned the car round and went to the Hospital.
He returned home at 7.30 for some dinner, having had
very little food all day. After a bath and dinner he read
his mail which had been accumulating whilst he was
in the bush and at 11 p.m., instead of retiring he an-
nounced that he was going to the hospital. One of us
said, 'But they’ll all be asleep’. John’s reply was, 'I must


see old Daddy Howell before I go to bed’. That was
the night of the rolling in hot blankets. Matron said she
had never come across one so tactful with the relatives
of a dying person she always felt relieved when he
arrived. She knew he would take full charge of the
relatives and leave her free to do what was necessary for
the patient. He knew just when to take them away
from the bedside and just when to bring them in again,
and just what to do after their dear one had passed. 'I
am not at all religious’, said Matron, 'and I never once
went inside Brother John’s church, but it made no dif-
ference to him in his treatment to me or his feeling to-
wards me, and he never talked religion to me. He could
do more for the world by the life he lived and the ex-
ample he showed than all the preaching of the most
eloquent nature.’
So, often when we were about to retire, which was
mostly somewhere between 11 and 12, John would
take a run up to the Hospital and he would say, 'This
is the time they need me most someone might be
lying awake, can’t go to sleep, and its surprising how
it helps them to have a little talk to comfort and cheer
them. It takes their thoughts away from themselves to
something cheerful and they go off to sleep comfortably.
These were the nights when John’s return was within
a reasonable hour.
Speaking of these nights at the Hospital reminds me
of the many nights spent in homes of sick people do-
ing the night duty while those who had done all for the
patient during the day had a sleep, forgetting that his
own day had also been a tiring one perhaps spent in
travelling over those rough bush tracks in the little old
Ford that had seen better days and now had no wind-
screen or hood.
There was a man seriously ill in his home that was
built out of flattened out petrol tins. When Brother
John arrived, the Doctor told him that the patient had
a very bad hemorrhage could he stay with him for
a while and try to prevent him moving much, and in any
case 'he can’t last long’. John remained with him till he


passed through the veil, then proceded to prepare him
for burial. This was a distressing process as there were
not the bare necessities with which to do so. So John
got in his car, went round the neighbourhood and
gathered the required things, returned and proceded to
prepare the poor fellow’s body for its last resting place.
Then, as there was nowhere else to put him, John took
a door down and laid the body upon it.
This case was only one of many of its kind. When he
first went to Bourke as a deacon at the age of twenty-
two it fell to his lot to help to lay out the body of a very
old lady whom he had sat with for three days and three
nights, whose sons and daughters— some of them old
enough to be John’s parents, were so stunned as to render
them helpless.
Then what of the tiny mite of one day old whose little
head lay on John’s hand from 11 p.m. till 3 a.m. The
nurse having been called to another case, a neighbour
and Brother John had taken charge of the patients. The
mother was going on well but the baby could not live—
'would Brother John come and Baptise the baby’, came
the message, but John’s work did not end with the Bap-
tism. However the baby lived and great gratitude was
shown to Brother John his praises were sung through-
out the town for saving the baby’s life. Brother John
had married this couple, they had lost their first little
baby, how thankful they were that this tiny treasure
had been spared to them. When expressing their thanks
to Brother John, he replied that they must bring the
baby to be received into the Church which was the con-
tinuation of the Baptismal service held in the home, and
make their thanksgiving in the Church too. They did
this and John said afterwards to me 'They are a fine
couple. I’m very fond of them and they seem to like
me but I can’t get them to come to church, although
I’ve heard of him very nearly having a stand up fight
with a man at one time for saying something against the
Church of England. They are loyal Anglicans, but now,
since they feel that the faith of the Church has restored
their child to them, surely they will come to church
regularly.’


But this was only one of the Bush Brother’s many
disappointments. They didn’t come to church they
didn’t see what John wanted them to see, their eyes were
dim, they saw that Brother John had restored their
baby to them, but could not see further, that it was the
Holy Spirit working through Brother John as an instru-
ment by his wonderful faith and earnest trusting prayers
throughout the night.
A very old man, of frail and feeble frame, was sud-
denly taken very seriously ill. The Doctor and Brother
John were immediately sent for. The Doctor arrived
first and announced that he was nearing the end. As he
was leaving, Brother John arrived. His car was out of
order and he had walked. As they met, the Doctor said,
'Do whatever you have to do quickly, he can’t last long’.
When Brother John entered the room the patient
was in a seizure. All the family had gathered
together to be with him at the last. Brother John went
straight to the bedside and laid hands upon the sick man
with prayers for healing and his Blessing. Immediately
the frail old body was calmed. The sons and daughters
looked at each other in amazement they were a family
of devout Anglicans Brother John quietly and
quickly withdrew from the room, jumped into some-
one’s car which was standing outside the house, drove
to the Church, got his Communion bag that was ever
ready for emergency, and drove quickly back to the
house. The family was large and the room small, but
all assembled therein for the service. There was not
enough room to kneel so most stood with bowed heads
while the sick father received the Blessed Sacrament.
Members of the family reported afterwards that they
watched with astonishment the gradual improvement
of their father. It was Brother John’s earnest prayers
and spiritual hands combined with their own faith that
restored their father to them. Next morning he sat
up in bed and asked for his pipe. In a few days he was to
be seen walking about the town again. It was not till
about twelve months later that he crossed the bridge and
entered the eternal gates of Paradise.


Holy Baptism
ism 'Hello! Yes. Ah! how are you all,
? That’s good The line is very clear to-
Mrs
day, you don’t sound ninety-five miles away. Yes, my
next trip out your way will be on Oh yes,
we can baptise the baby. Will your husband be at
home? That’s a pity, when does he finish mustering?
Then I’ll do another short trip and make your visit later
on so that Mr will be finished mustering and
can be at home for the Baptism You know we always
like the baby’s father to be present if possible. I’ll ar-
range the date with you later. Cheerio! Keep smiling!’
Although John watched very closely to see that
parents did not neglect their responsibility regarding
Baptism he was never hasty in reminding them to bring
their babies to be baptised. He liked the request to come
from themselves, then he would stipulate who must
be present.
'You know how many Godparents she must have,
don’t you? Two Godmothers and one Godfather Ah!
that’s good, you’ve got that all arranged. So they and
the father and yourself will bring the baby along to
Evensong next Sunday evening. Yes, the evenings are
nice and cool now Oh! why won’t the father be pre-
sent? If he were out of town we could wait till he came
in from the bush.’ 'Perhaps you could persuade him to
come, Brother John. He won’t come for me’, came the
reply so often.
'Very well, I’ll see him’, John would say, and meeting
the man in his good-natured way would say, 'Ah! so
your baby is going to be Baptised next Sunday. You’ll
be there of course. It’s not a matter of not liking to
come! You know, old chap, its your duty to be there.’
Some men could be persuaded by this appeal of duty.
For some, it would be found necessary to alter the date
in order to find time to assure the father that he must
be present. The presence of both parents was a definite
stand that John would not move from if at all possible.
Too often, the responsibility of the spiritual life of
the child is left to the mother to bear alone, and even
well intending Godparents are at times found wanting


in their responsibility tor the child’s faith in God and
love for the Church. 'You’re not ashamed of the child
being in your family, are you? Then come along and be
present at his reception into the great family of Christ’s
Church.’
One man whom John requested to be present at his
child’s Baptism was quite frank and open about the
fact that he himself 'didn’t believe in God at all’. 'Why
then are you sending your child to be baptised’, said John.
'Oh well, its the usual thing and the wife seems to want
it’, said the man. Whereupon John assured him that the
Church was not there to be made a convenience of. If
he and his wife did not believe in the Christian faith and
only brought the child out of superstition, what use
would the Baptism be, how could the Godparents carry
out the promises made? But the child was not denied the
sacrament of Baptism. John hoped that the parents
might yet come to see the true Light.
This training of fathers to be present at the baptism
of their children was rather an up-hill battle for a while,
but it became quite the usual thing for parents to ar-
range a date that would suit father as well as mother.
What beautiful baptismal services we had in Bourke!
Holy Baptism was as often as possible given it’s place
during Children’s Service on Sunday mornings or at
Evensong in order to follow out the rubric which says
that Baptism should not be administered but on Sundays
and other Holy days 'when the most number of people
come together; as well for that the congregation there
present may testify the receiving of them that are newly
baptised into the number of Christ’s Church that
those present may be put in remembrance of their own
profession made to God in their Baptism.’
The procession to the Font consisted of Cross bearer,
Taperers, Choir, servers, and Priest. The address would
be most instructive it would be a complete explana-
tion of the meaning of everything that was done in the
service and why it was done. Those who had witnessed
the Baptism were well reminded of their own profession
of faith. John made no apologies to those who had heard


these things before, though perhaps told in a little dif-
ferent way as he always made a special point of doing.
It was good for us to be instructed more than once on
the same subject and we should surely appreciate the
fact that perhaps someone was hearing it for the first
time.
The following is taken from some of Brother John’s
notes in the Bush Brother, December, 1928, that I have
come across since writing the former pages.
'There were a great number of children Baptised this
quarter. It is very pleasing to note that in nearly every
case where the father was a member of the Church he
was present at the Baptism of his child. Perhaps this
may seem a queer thing to note but it is extraordinary
the number of men who seem to find it hard to attend
the Church at the Baptism of their children. Surely it
should be an occasion when he is more proud than when
the child was born into the Kingdom of the World, be-
cause at this service his little one is born into the King-
dom of God I am sure that deep down in every
father’s heart there is a great feeling of joy, when the
baby is made a member of Christ, the child of God and
an inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven. One point
more that is worthy of note and that is that Sunday is
becoming more and more the day for Baptisms in this
parish and rightly so too. The Prayer Book rubric says
that "it is most convenient that Baptism should not be
administered but upon Sundays and other Holy Days,
when the most number of people are come together”.
The same rubric shows that baptisms on any other day
but Sundays or Holy Days are the exception and not
the rule of the Church. Though it has taken a long time
for this to become embedded in the minds of lots of our
people, yet it is now being understood and carried out
by most and it would be a great joy to be able to
say that "week-day hole-in-the-corner baptisms are the
exception rather than the rule in Bourke”.
One of the main reasons why many people were
against the revision of the Prayer Book was because they
did not know the present one nor did they know the


rules contained therein. Never let it be said that Bourke
people do not know their Prayer Book: and having got
to know its contents and rules, see to it that you carry
them out and assist and encourage others to do the same’.
Bourke’s ever open Doors They are never locked. If
they are not wide open, all one needs to do is to turn the
handle. There was no ceremony about Brother John’s
visits. He was their Brother, and they expected him to
enter as a brother. Tts only Brother John, how’s every-
bodybody’, would be heard as he entered the house,
'where are you all?’ and he’d make his way through till
he found someone. If there was nobody at home, he
would probably sit in the kitchen and wait their return
a cup of tea in the kitchen was not uncommon of his
visits. If nobody returned after a little while, he would
leave a note on the table, to let them know he’d been.
This was typical of the town visits.
Unexpected visits in the bush were much after the
same type, except that, if he found everybody away, he
would probably make for himself a cup of tea, knowing
this was what he would be expected to do, having tra-
velled a long way, leaving a humorous note referring to
the fact that he had 'helped himself’ before continuing
his journey.
The Servers’ Guild John always said that in the
Sanctuary, everything must be done 'decently and in or-
der’ and for this purpose he must have a Guild of Ser-
vants of the Sanctuary. He tried hard to muster a num-
ber of young men or even older men, but found them
rather shy of taking an active part in the Sanctuary.
'Very Well,’ said John, T shall train some small boys for
this work. They shall grow to men and the sanctuary
of S. Stephen’s, Bourke, shall perhaps, see men as ser-
vers some day.’
A noble band of small boys, who had njt as yet had
the opportunity of Confirmation, was formed into a
Servers’ Guild they underwent a period of probation,
according to their merit, then were admitted before the


Altar. They wore Albs, Amices, and Girdles. They
received their training and instruction every Saturday
evening and after their Confirmation this opportunity
was al c o used as a preparation for Holy Communion.
Their work in the Sanctuary was equal to that of men
of many big churches. They felt the responsibility of
their positions. They were present at the Eucharist
regularly, whether on duty or not, and if there happened
to be no warden or councillor present to take up the
collection, one of the small servers in the congregation
would be seen passing round the plate.
For this purpose of training and preparation Brother
John generally managed to get back to Bourke after the
week’s travelling but if it happened that he was unable
to do so, the servers met just the same to prepare the
sacred vessels and to lay in readiness the Priest’s robes
and change the frontals if necessary. They were a band
of staunch little men, loyal and ready to serve their
Priest at all times. Occasionally, on school holidays,
Brother John took servers, in turn, on short trips in the
bush. It was his great hope, that out of this band of
servers there would come priests for Bush work.
One boy, though young, expressed his desire to be a
Priest. Brother John knew his home life to be far from
the environment that would stimulate this desire, apart
from the fact that it was found difficult in that home
to meet the needs of the family in the way of food, much
less clothing, and not having a very keen outlook on life,
the boy’s education was sadly neglected, although for-
tunately for himself he was very clever and a really nice
lad. Brother John offered to adopt the boy —the little
fellow was keen to go to him and after consideration
on his parents’ part he eventually made his home at the
Rectory. Brother John, in spite of his youth, was a typi-
cal old father to the boy.
The lad attended school more regularly and was being
gently moulded and trained and before long showed
signs of improvement in health and appearance, due to
the regular life and a little discipline. Brother John
hoped, when the boy was old enough, to send him to All


Saints’ College, Bathurst, to fit him for future study
for the Priesthood.
But all this was not to be, for the mother of the boy
only endured six months of his absence, and in spite of
her difficulty to keep him, took him home again. She did
not see that she was standing in the light of her son’s
career by doing so. But she allowed him to leave home
a little later, to work for a drover 'cooking in the
camp’.
Brother John lost sight and touch with him for a
long time, but he managed to get to Bourke for Brother
John’s valedictory Eucharist, and a few days later, as
the train sped on its way to Sydney, a few miles out of
Bourke, a lonely little lad, minding a few sheep, waved
farewell to his beloved Priest, who would have given
anything to have stopped the train and gathered him
up, to travel away from the West with him.
The Organ It was rather dilapidated, owing to
its age and the severe climatic condition of Bourke, but
it was put to good use and was presided over by one of
those 'faithful’ people who will never see a job going
undone for the want of someone to do it.
Miss Alice Sharp had reluctantly filled the position of
organist, and did excellent work at Evensong and on
Festivals when the Eucharist was choral, but was always
looking for someone who could play the organ to take
her place. She was already a very busy person and was
anxious to be relieved of this extra work. Other than on
Festivals, Brother John came off the sanctuary and
played the hymn for the Holy Communion service
it was a strange sight to see a priest in chasuble, sitting
at the organ.
Eventually, one who had a knowledge of the piano
consented to be taught to play the organ, and so Brother
John gave Miss Betty Ware lessons on the organ as often
as possible and in a little while she became organist, thus
relieving Miss Sharp, who was always willing to relieve
her when desired.
So in Brother John’s varied experiences he trained


many in their work for the Church. Servers, choir, and
organist, at least, go down to his credit.
Social Functions Brother John had set himself many
tasks when he decided to raise money for the liquidation
of the many debts upon tne oistric : when he took charge.
He organised many and varied types of social functions
in order to accomplish this. Bazaars were never favoured
by Brother John, but were found a neccessary evil at
times, at which he himself shared greatly in the work
by taking charge of a stall and by finishing up each
evening as a very successful auctioneer. He took no
small part in the advertising and decoration arrange-
ments, nor was he missing when the cleaning up was
to be done. No job was too humble for this priest.
The parish was badly in need of funds and everybody
was so anxious that a financial success should be the re-
sult of the Bazaar, and two of the splendidly hard-
working men of the parish were tempted to introduce a
little gambling to increase funds. They knew what
Brother John’s reply would be if they asked his permis-
sion, so they took it upon themselves, and while Brother
John was busy, managed to smuggle in by a back en-
trance, and erect, a chocolate wheel, and preceded to
make a lot of money, making the prizes such things as
groceries, etc.
Brother John was very hurt, but what was he to do?
These were two of his most loyal friends, for whom he
had a great love. He knew that they had given way in
a weak moment and that when all was considered, they
had not done it to do wrong, but because they were
over-zealous. He told them he was hurt, but forgave
them and said no more about it, but he knew he would
have to answer for it sooner or later. And the time was
not far distant, for very few months later, Bishop Long
wrote and told John that he had heard of the occurance
and was it true?
John called a meeting of his Council and told them
of the Bishop’s letter. They passed a resolution which


Brother John forwarded to the Bishop, with his apology,
taking full blame for his parish breaking a rule of the
Diocese. Just what his letter contained I do not know,
but the following is Bishop Long’s reply to it: —
Bishopscourt,
Bathurst, 26/4/1928
My Dear John,
1 am very glad to have your letter. I was
hurt and disappointed when I knew that the wheel had
been used at Bourke.
You have made a manly and honourable
apology and the Parish Council has done the right thing
in passing that resolution.
Henceforth I dismiss the whole occurrence
for I know you will stand firm and strong to the laws of
your diocese in the future.
Every blessing be upon you,
Yours Sincerely
G. M. Bathurst
Brother John had been very unhappy about the whole
occurance, and now that he had made a clean breast of
it and had received his Bishop’s forgiveness, he was
much happier.
The Bishop knew his man when he said he knew John
would 'stand firm and strong to the laws of the Diocese’
and John proved it as time went on he put up a hard
fight against all forms of gambling and would not allow
anything approaching it what he called 'the thin
edge of the wedge’. No games of chance were again
indulged in.
Balls were always a successful feature, socially and
financially. The Bourke people love good balls and they
know how to cater for the suppers. The frockings of
the ladies at these functions is a revelation to city folk.
But the orchestra is a very expensive item. Unless
there happens to be an efficient orchestra organised in
the town, musicians have to be engaged from other
towns, and realising their 'importance’ charge accord-


ingly for their services. To overcome this expense on
one occasion Brother John organised a jazz orchestra.
Tales are still told of the successes of that orchestra,
which was so much sought after that the other members
decided to become professional and charge for their ser-
vices, so the pianist who took John’s place when he was
out of town became the permanent pianist, as Brothers
could not receive any payment for such services. Un-
fortunately some of its members left the town and the
orchestra was disbanded.
No ball or dance was considered a success if Brother
John could not get there to play a few extras. There was
something so jolly and enjoyable about them and the
time could be depended upon.
On one occasion, when some ot the members of the
town were producing a Musical Comedy, 'The Mar-
riage Market’, Brother John was the musical conductor.
So highly appreciated was the overture, played by Bro-
ther John and Mr Dave Dunlop (violin), that they
were obliged to play an encore a rather uncommon
occurance for an overture.
Brother John was a successful actor, often taking part
in plays and sketches.
Everybody went to everybody’s social functions in
Bourke, and Brother John never neglected to be present
at the efforts of other denominations whenever possible.
On one occasion, when attending a small dance held
by the Roman Catholics in aid of their Bazaar, it was
found difficult to procure the services of a pianist among
those present, so Brother John took the chair at the
piano and played on and on, to the success, socially, of
the function, which was very greatly appreciated, and
often referred to, by the organisers.
An Ugly Man Competition was very successfully or-
ganised by Brother John. When he suggested his scheme
to his Parichial Council, it was not met with enthusiasm,
but Brother John was not disheartened when the Council
were sure that this one or that one would never stand as
candidates. He interviewed them personally where pos-
sible, and wrote to others, and in a very short time the


Ugly Man Competition was launched, with a large num-
ber of competitors, all leading men of the town, each
representing a different section of the community
Town, Country, Sport, Railway, Wool, Squattetrs,
Motors, Stock and Station Agents, and Storekeepers,
were among the sections represented. Each man had
his committee, which organised functions to raise
money for their threepenny votes. It involved a very
large number of men, working their very hardest to
raise funds for the Church.
Brother John painted big calico signs to advertise
their functions. He had smaller signs painted and on
every gatepost on every road leading to Bourke for
many miles were to be seen signs on calico which Brother
John tacked up himself as he travelled pointing the
way to Bourke’s Ugly Man Competition.
There were balls, parties, swimming competitions,
burlesque football matches, mock courts in the street
and gymkhanas. Brother John took a very active part
in all functions. If he could not be present on the actual
date through the call of his duties in the country, he did
all he could to help beforehand. On one occasion when
there was a gymkhana in the afternoon and a ball at
night, Brother John had to come down from the ladder
on which he stood, helping with the decorating of the
hall for the ball, to go out and ride a horse in a race at
the gymkhana hurrying back after the race to help
with the completion of the decorations, taking none
the less active part at the ball at night and giving freely
of his musical abilities.
The Ugly Man Competition resulted in about £450,
of which the Vestry were determined that Brother John
should have a new car and not a Ford. They said
he had travelled in discomfort long enough. He must
have a comfortable car, and not a single seater, for they
said he now had his parents with him, and if he had a
larger car there was room for them to travel if they so
desired. The car caused much discussion, in which
Brother John was asked to take no part. A Dodge Six
was purchased and Brother John journeyed to Sydney


and proudly drove 'Topsy’ to Bourke. He called her
'Topsy’ because 'she "growed” out of threepnny bits’.
There was a substantial balance after outstanding
debts were paid, which put S. Stephen’s, Bourke, on a
good financial footing.
In spite of his social activities, Brother John in no
way neglected his work, either in town or country. He
was a much beloved Priest, who knew his flock well and
who was well knewn by them men, women, and
children.
Mr and Mrs Ivatt, of Wentworth Falls, very keen
supporters of the Bathurst Diocese, travelled out to
Bourke to realise the hope that they might some day
see 'The Gates of the Never Never’. They were only
able to stay in Bourke for one night. Brother John
showed them as much of the town as possible in the
time. Needless to say, S. Stephen’s Church was con-
sidered among the most important. Before leaving, they
announced their intention to paint the Church. Herein
was one of Brother John’s hopes to be eralised. Subse-
quently a cheque for £lOO was received from Mr and
Mrs Ivatt. So thrilled were the congregation that they
determined to paint the exterior of the Church while
the painter was on the job, and another £9O was raised
without much trouble for this purpose.
Help of the Outcast Though shunned by those who
considered themselves more righteous and respectable,
they were never passed by Brother John, who would go
out of his way to be friendly with such as our Lord
came to save. Of these, both men and women, boys
and girls, found a friend and confidant in Brother John,
who did more for the good of their souls, than even
they themselves realised. For they liked to know that
Brother John was their friend and quite unconsciously
found more self respect. I have heard people say, 'You
ask Brother John he knows me’.
For he realised that all do not have the same chance
in life, and if they do not get out of that environment,
how can they expect to look higher? Was not our Lord


a friend of publicans and sinners? Surely, if our Priests
are to win them for Christ, they must follow in His
steps.
A girl of sixteen years, quite a naughty girl, was en-
couraged to join the Church Choir and attend the Sun-
day School. A scandal concerning her was spread about
the town. She was shunned, and mothers forbade their
children to keep her company. Coming to Brother
John in distress, she assured him that this was not true.
'I shall help you to prove it’, said he, and lost no time
in making investigation. He found her to be telling the
truth. Who else would have done this for a forsaken
girl, who had no mother, and had not seen her father
for years, being brougt up by an old Aboriginal aunt?
This pretty girl with olive skin and dark flashing eyes
could not agree with her aunt, who later had her sent
to an Industrial School. 'Poor little girl! Its the best
thing that could happen’, said Brother John. 'She will
now have a chance in life.’ He wrote to her regularly
and in her replies she always had something new to her
credit to report. Whenever in Sydney, Brother John
paid her a visit, and encouraged her to look up. He
showed interest in her by enquiring of those in authority
at the School as to her progress.
She became prefect, then senior prefect, and even-
tually was sent to another school, which spoke volumes
for what 'those in authority’ thought of her. A friend of
Brother John’s, a doctor in Sydney, was in need of a
maid. Brother John wrote and told him about this little
girl, and gave him every assurance that he would never
be sorry if he gave her a chance. The doctor and his
wife visited the school and were given a very good report
of the girl, and applied for her release to work in their
service. She was allowed to go. This was six months
before her term had expired. Brother John continued
to write and encourage her, and on the first Sunday he
was on the staff of S. James’, Sydney, there she was,
after the service, waiting to welcome her friend.
The following is an extract from a letter Brother
John received from her later:


'I am so very grateful for all you have done for me
in the last twelve months, and long before that too.
You always have tried to help me, but until I got away
from Bourke I used to laugh and sneer at all you said
to me. But while at the school, and hearing your sermon
at the Church in Parramatta, and your visits, which
cheered me up so much, and the little chat we had to-
gether which helped me to rise to the highest position
in the school the Captain. Your lovely letters have
helped me to stick to my guns and win through. In
three weeks’ time, my time is up the first part of my
prayers have been answered. I have not neglected my
prayers, for one glance at the Crucifix you gave me
reminds me of something I must always do.’
A few months later she came with a young man and
showed her engagement ring to Brother John and said,
'I wanted to tell you soon, because you were the only
one that ever took an interest in me’. Shortly after,
they were married at S. James’ Church by their friend,
Brother John.
Confirmation The first candidates Brother John
(yet a deacon), prepared for Confirmation were obliged
to travel sixty miles to Brewarrina, where Bishop Long
was administering the sacrament of Confirmation and
was unable to go to Bourke. Their number was not large,
and the happly band travelled across with their Deacon
to present them. But one man, who was a drover, had
been travelling along the road with a large number of
sheep, and when the date for Confirmation arrived, it
was not certain where he was to be found, or how far
along the road. So, Brother John set out in search of him,
found him, and after returning from Brewarrina, took
him out once again to his Drover’s Camp.
Bishop Long was never able to get out as far as
Bourke, while Brother John was their Priest-in-charge.
The next time candidates were prepared for Confir-
mation, the Bishop was unable to go on account of ill-
health and stress of work. It was at this time that it was
found necessary to consecrate a Bishop Coadjutor in


the Bathurst Diocese. Had it not been that he was to
take an active part in the far western part of the Dio-
cese, the Brotherhood of the Good Shepherd would have
been greatly distressed at their Principal being selected.
But instead, they still benefit by his years of experience
and solid, skilful advice and have the benefit of this
'financial genius’ (so termed by Brother John) to guide
them in all money matters.
Bishop Wylde it was then, who next administered the
Sacrament of Confirmation in Bourke much to the
delight of the Bourke people who knew him as their be-
loved Principal and friend in the 8.G.5., and for some
time stationed at Bourke, before Brother John’s time.
Many thousands of miles were covered by Brother
John in the preparation of candidates for Confirmation.
It was my privilege to travel with him as 'gate-opener’
on several occasions when on one trip we covered
over 600 miles in the week in 'Marmaduke’, who by
this time, as a result of much travelling and bad tracks
was reduced to a rather delapidated condition, having
a torn hood and only one mudguard, which was on the
driver’s side of the car, so that when there had been a
severe shower of rain and we had to go through swampy
country it fell to my lot to receive the mud that was
thrown up by the wheel on my side of the car.
How thankful I am for the opportunity of a peep into
the very depths of the life of a Bush Brother. But how
I wish I could describe more adequately the life of hard-
ships, pests, and disappointments, that are the lot of
a Brother.
Services of Evensong and preparation for Holy Com-
munion, and next morning a Celebration of Holy Com-
munion were part of the 'trip’ wherever we happened to
stay over night. But it is not the actual service and in-
struction of candidates that is the hard part of a Bro-
ther’s life, it is the getting to them its a case of 'fitting
in’ all the time.
We started off one Monday morning immediately
after John had given religious instruction in the Public
School in Bourke. The shearers were at work on Tooralle


Station, so we went round that way in order to give
them a service, and as Tooralle had not had a service for
some time, it would be an opportunity of 'fitting in’
one at the Homestead.
We had left the bridge over the Darling (called by
some, 'he Gates of the Never Never’) about two miles
behind us, when John stopped the car. 'l’m going to
take you back, Ivy’, he said. 'Why’, was my disap-
pointed enquiry. 'Don’t you see those thick, brown-
looking clouds rising in the distance? We are heading
for a severe dust storm.’
'But the people at Tooralle are expecting you,’ I said.
'l’ll make up the time when I start out again, after
taking you home’, said John. 'l’m used to these dust
storms, and can stand it.’
'lf you are going through it, so am L’ The clouds were
coming on us at a terrifying rate, but I couldn’t let him
go through it alone.
'lt will be terrible for you, Ivy, but if you’re sure
you want to go on, we’ll get through it alright. We’ll
have to have the hood down. If a strong wind like that
gets under the hood of a light car like this its enough
to turn it over.’
We started off again and had not gone far past Fort
Bourke homestead when we were met by the storm
a frightfully strong wind, carrying blinding, cutting,
sand, and the air seemed too thick to breathe. The noise
of the wind, combined with that of the car was terrific.
'Lean forward close behind the windscreen,’ shouted
John. But it was not only coming from the direction we
were travelling, but was also coming side on, and John
was getting it full force. He could hardly see the track
at times. The car was registering high speed but did
not seem to be getting over the ground very quickly.
There was no inclination to say anything unnecessary,
for we had to shout to make ourselves heard.
There are two tracks that lead to Tooralle Station,
which is over fifty miles from Bourke. The one John
had chosen on this occasion went through the scrub
for many miles and then round the edge of a plain.


As we travelled over the cleared country that be-
longed to Fort Bourke Station we certainly saw the
dust and felt the strength of the wind and saw an oc-
casional tree bending down under its strength, but when
we got on the cleared track through the scrub we saw
the slender gums and gidgee being madly shaken, it
seemed to me more terrifying, although we were slightly
protected by them from the wind that came side on.
After leaving the scrub and getting out on to the
edge of the plain the wind and dust seemed more severe
as it was blowing right off the plain on our right, and on
the left were occasional clumps of very old and weather-
beaten trees that looked so gaunt and uncanny under
these circumstances.
Suddenly, in the midst of these surroundings, the car
stepped and refused to move, and there we were held up
for some time with engine trouble, but fortunately John
located the trouble and was able to overcome it.
All this time the wind continued to blow and the
dust to fly at a terrifying rate. We had become used to
breathing the thick dusty air and grinding it between
cur teeth, as we shouted to each other, taking fresh
mouthfuls of it in. And while John was busy on the
engine and I was able to hold this or press or turn that,
I looked round on this lonely and God-forsaken-looking
scene and felt thankful that I had continued the journey
with my brother, for I realised how dreadful such an
experience would be for one alone and yet this is
common to the Bush Brother’s life. It gave me an op-
portunity just to get a glimpse of what makes men
suffer from 'isolation’. We were many miles from a
living soul a far-reaching sandy plain on our right,
and on our left these old, rugged, trees that to a lonely
man must at times seem to have mocking faces carved
on their distorted trunks.
Well, if I hadn’t been of much assistance I was at
least company for John. That is why the ideal of the
Brotherhood of the Good Shepherd is to have two men
travelling together always, but the shortage of men and
lack of funds will not permit such, so the Brothers


(most of them having spent most of their lives in the
city) must continue to suffer this frightful loneliness.
Eventually we arrived at Tooralle homestead and re-
ceived such a hearty welcome from Mrs Ault that we
soon forgot our experiences. A little later John went
off in the little Ford again, down to the Woolshed to
see the shearers.
Mr Ault, the Station Manager, arrived just before
dinner and enquired, 'Where’s Brother Jdfin’. 'He’s
gone down to the sheds to see the men and he won’t be
up here till morning’, came the reply. 'But he’s not
going to sleep in those bunks’, said Mr Ault, 'I won’t
allow that. He’s got to "rough” it quite enough’ So
the Manager phoned through to the sheds and told Bro-
ther John that his room had been prepared and that
he was expected at the Homestead that night.
Next day we set out for 'Goonery, one of Tooralle’s
outstations, thirty-five miles further on, where Mr and
Mrs Cooper and their three sons were being prepared
for Confirmation.
'l’ve never taken this cross country track to
'Goonery’, said John, and Mr Ault preceded to direct
him, but explained that no one had been over the track
for some months, and as there had been rain in the mean-
time, the grass would have covered the track. As we
preceded, we found that the grass, though quite dead,
was standing about two feet high, so that no track was
visible, but we followed the fences over very rough
ground which made it impossible to retain our seats.
Eventually we came to the sheep pens, as directed,
from which we expected to find the track, but the only
one we found led into the pens, so we had to find our
location by the setting sun. In the distance we saw a
rise in the ground and a track leading up the slope. We
reached the track the Ford would not take the rise
in the sand for a while, but after much perseverence
and backing we eventually reached the top at full speed
pulling up quickly on the edge of a huge tank. For-
tunately John always had full control of the car or we
might have gone dashing into the water. We may not


have been drowned (I don’t know how deep the water
was), but we would certainly have been badly bogged.
We had to get off the edge of the tank, down on to
the flat again and proceed upon our rough travelling,
covering many more miles than would have been neces-
sary on the right track.
The sun went down and that frightful loneliness that
comes with the dusk crept over us. I began to wonder
if we would have to camp under the stars for the night.
We were both worn out from the continual bumping
over rough ground, which made our heads ache as
though we had received heavy blows on them, but
neither admitted these things and both appeared cheer-
ful, though we had no desire for conversation. In all
probability John’s visible cheerfulness was to prevent me
from feeling otherwise while mine was assumed in
crder that John should not feel sorry he had brought me
and was to be bothered with a frail companion who
was afraid of facing hardships.
It became dark, but with the darkness came a hope
for in the distance we saw a faint light, so we kept in
that direction and when drawing near we could see
water between the light and ourselves, in which our
headlights shone.
John Coo-eed very loudly, and after a moment that
seemed to me like an hour, there came a reply and we
saw a hurricane lamp swinging towards us still on
the other side of the water. 'Brother John here’, John
called out into the darkness. 'Which is the best way to
go round that water?’ The voice from the other side
directed him to the gate round the swampy ground and
we were warmly welcomed by those who had expected
us hours earlier. John, on entering the house, was his
usual bright cheery, self full of life and fun and
happy conversation. This was really wonderful, for I
had something of an idea of how he felt, for in addition
to what the trip had meant to me, John had been con-
trolling the wheel, which is such hard, laborious work
over such country. When I commented upon it after-
wards John answered, 'The people in the bush expect


to see me smiling and cheerful and it helps to cheer them
up too but its an awful strain at times’.
After a meal and Evensong, the Confirmation candi-
dates received instruction, then we were kept amused
till a late hour by cheery conversation that these isolated
people had looked forward to ever since they had re-
ceived a card from Brother John, telling of his intended
visit.
After making other calls on this trip not quite so
eventful, we headed for Bourke, where we were expected
in time to meet the train from Sydney, on which tra-
velled the Organising Secretary of the A. B. M., the
Reverend E. W. Bradley, who was to give lantern lec-
tures to stimulate the missionary spirit in the district.
A little engine trouble and a little longer time spent
in some places than was anticipated made it impossible
to reach Bourke by the time appointed, so John phoned
through to Bourke and arranged for one of the Coun-
cillors to met Mr Bradley.
We were within forty miles of Bourke, just in the
thick of the scrub when we had a puncture. It was just
dusk —the hour of the day when not only John, but, I
believe, many Brothers, feel that loneliness that they
seldom overcome. John had already put the 'spare’ on,
so there was nothing to do but to mend the punctures,
which were caused by a twig piercing the tyre as
soon as John mended one puncture, he found another —
it seemed so hopeless. The darkness was pressing on.
A bird twittered it’s good night in a tree near by and
in the distance was the uncanny sound of a cow-bell
ringing slowly and unevenly.
When at last we got the wheel on and moved off there
was a feeling of coming out of a haunted house glad
to leave behind all that seemed so depressing.
During this quarter, in a space covering about thirty-
five days of it, John covered close on three thousand
miles. This mileage would seem sufficient in itself, with-
out all the work fitted into the time. And it was during
the same quarter, between April and June, that Bishop
Wylde had come to Bourke to administer the Sacra-


ment of Confirmation.
The candidates in the bush had been given as much
of John’s time as possible, but the candidates in the
town had a much better opportunity. They received
instruction weekly, and when the day for the Confirma-
tion drew near, they were given individual interviews.
John was very definite in his teaching, very outspoken at
all times, in spite of those people whom one will always
find, who seldom go to Church, who hear 'something’
interpreted wrongly by someone who was there, and
repeat it so many times in different parts of the town
that, having grown in the process, might sound as if the
Priest-in-charge was well on the way to Rome.
The actual 'something’, that had been expanded ten-
fold since it was first spoken, would perhaps not reach
Brother John, but the remarks of the people, concerning
it, would. There was no hole-in-a-corner about Brother
John he would be quite definite in his remarks from
the pulpit on the following Sunday if he thought it
necessary.
I can see him now, holding up a Prayer Book, and
saying it was 'the Handbook of the Church of England,
and I carry it out to the letter. I do not leave out this
or that because it suits me. If there is anyhing at any
time that I say, and you don’t understand, come to me
and I’ll do my best to explain the meaning of anything
to you. And if after I have explained, you think I am
in the wrong, then write to the Bishop for his ruling on
the matter, and I will submit to what he says whether I
like it or not. lam here to do as I am instructed by my
Bishop and the Principal of the Brotherhood and I, at
all times, do my very best to carry out the charges laid
upon me in my ordination.’
Just at this time there had been murmurs that Brother
John was 'going too far talking about candidates
making their confession before their Confirmation’.
But to the surprise of those particular people, who had
come to Church because the Bishop was there, Bishop
Wylde, in his address to the candidates, said how very
pleased he was to hear from Brother John that all the


candidates (of whom there were twenty-six) had made
their confession, with the exception of two.
After Confirmation came two or three weeks pre-
paration for their first Holy Communion. Part of this
time of preparation was given in showing to the candi-
dates the Altar linen and vessels, used in the Holy Com-
munion service, and each was allowed, very reverently,
to handle the chalice in the way he or she would be ex-
pected to do at the Altar. John’s intention was to help
them to overcome any nervousness at their first Com-
munion. They were also shown the Priest’s vestments
and their use and maening was explained.
One young lady who had twice before been prepared
for Confirmation and had been prevented each time
(through force of circumstance) from receiving the
Laying on of Hands, was now attending the class of
instruction in which Brother John was preparing his
candidates. She remarked to me that she had 'never
before had everything so fully explained and made so
easy to understand’. In order to be company for her
friend on the way home after the class of instruction,
another asked Brother John if she might also attend the
class, as both were new to the town. She was given a
hearty welcome. She also found that the things that
puzzled her most were here unfolded unasked and
said, 'How lucky the people of Bourke are to receive
such wonderful instruction. I didn’t learn half as much
as that about the Church when I was being prepared
for Confirmation.’
The day after that Confirmation in Bourke and the
Afternoon Tea of welcome to the Bishop and a beautiful
Evensong, the people of the bush were to be taken the
Sacrament of Confirmation.
So on the Monday, the Bishop and Brother John set
out for Hungerford in 'Marmaduke’, who had recently
had his body strengthened by the blacksmith and had
been given a new mudguard. They were due there at
4 p.m., but, having broken the front spring of the car
near Ford’s Bridge, about forty miles out of Bourke,
they completed the trip of about 130 miles, with a


stump of a Gidgee tree doing service as a spring and did
not arrive at Hungerford until 8 p.m. Fortunately a
new spring was procured there.
Next day, travelling to Bourke, we expected them
at the Rectory for a cup of tea at about 4 p.m., on their
way to Louth, sixty miles down the river.
John went to purchase a lamp for his car 'while his tea
would cool’. He was away longer than had been ex-
pected, but the Bishop was glad of a few moments’
quiet rest. He was suddenly disturbed by a lady’s en-
trance. 'Brother John is doing far too much, Bishop,’
she said. 'You surely won’t let him go to Louth tonight,
will you?’ The Bishop looked up in surprise. 'Why!
What’s the matter with him?’ he asked.
'He was coming into our shop to buy a lamp, and he
collapsed at the door. We picked him up and I drove
him round in the car’, said she. By this time, John had
walked into the room, looking very pale, but saying,
'l’m all right; I’m all right: Don’t worry about me’.
The Bishop, amazed, asked John if such a thing had
ever happened before, to which John replied that it had,
'once, recently, at Byrock’.
We were all distressed. What could be the matter?
Was it his heart? But surely it was because he had been
doing so much travelling and fitting so much into the
week-ends in Bourke. John was only cross with himself
that he had been 'caught in the act’ of fainting.
The Bishop instructed me to 'phone Louth and say
there will be no Confirmation there tonight’. But before
I had left the room, John, overlooking the Bishop’s re-
quest, said, 'Phone Louth and say we will be there at
the time promised’.
I looked from one to the other not knowing whom
to obey. 'Then I shall go alone, John,’ said the Bishop.
'I am going to Louth to present my candidates,’ said
John in a determined manner. 'Very well John, if you
will go, I shall drive’, said the Bishop, to which John
gladly consented.
The Bishop saw to it that a small flask of brandy
was in the pocket of the car. They had already tra-


veiled 130 miles that day, but they left a little later on
their 60 mile trip to Louth.
The Bishop, however, insisted that when he left the
District and Confirmations were over, John should 'have
a good rest’, which he did, for four days, on Tooralle
Station, where Mr and Mrs Ault were kindness itself.
Why they gave their Christmas Gift There were
yet a few weeks before Christmas would be upon us,
but a hearty knock came at the Rectory door one day.
Brother John opened the door and there stood two ladies
with a very large baker’s basket, which looked very
heavy. They asked if Mrs Martyn was at home. 'Yes’,
said Brother John, 'She is preparing lunch in the kit-
chen.’ They asked permission to go through to her.
They would not allow Brother John to bring her in.
As they entered, he attempted to help them with
their heavy basket, but they declined his help and
struggled through the house to the kitchen. 'We wanted
to come early, before you had done your Christmas
shopping,’ they announced as Mrs Martyn beheld a
really delightful sight, for the basket was filled to over-
flowing with Christmas luxuries and delicacies of every
kind. Presenting it to Mrs Martyn, they said, 'This is
just a small gift for Christmas, to all at the Rectory,
from the Church workers’.
Mrs Martyn was moved to tears, and when she tried
to express her thanks, one of the messengers said But
you’ve been so good to Brother John’.
He was their Brother John, and they appreciated any
kindness and love shown to him even from his parents
and sister!
S. John the Baptist, Byrock 'Good news!’ were
Brother John’s first word on arriving at the Rectory
after a trip to Byrock on one occasion. 'There’s a gal-
vanised iron building at Byrock. It was built of new
timber and iron only three months ago, a splendid, solid
building,’ he said. 'l’ve never really taken much notice
of it before, but as I approached it the other day, I


imagined I saw a cross standing on the top of the gable—
it was an inspiration—here was the Byrock church. It
is a forsaken place, the man who built it for a garage
had to give up business, and there it stands—apparently
of use to nobody. I found the owner—he will sell it for
less than the timber and iron cost, but he only has the
land on lease. I saw the owner of the land and he says
he will give the land to the church.
The people of Byrock will never be able to build the
walls and the roof of a church for the small amount he
is asking for it as it stands.
After various enquiries and arrangements, it was de-
cided to purchase the building and to convert it into a
church by voluntary labour. Brother John secured the
voluntary advice and services of a building contractor
in Bourke, who measured up and ordered the material to
complete the building, and also undertook to oversee
the whole of the work.
Sundays were the only days that voluntary workers
from Bourke could lend a hand to their Byrock brothers,
so, in order that Byrock should have their church,
Bourke must forego Evensong occasionally. Brother Pat
was now assistant Brother at Bourke in Deacon’s orders.
He took Evensong in Bourke in Brother John’s absence,
but was anxious to help in the building too.
There would be the usual celebration of the Eloly
Communion, and immediately after breakfast the cars
would set out on their 32-mile trip laden with men
armed with tools, and ready for a good hard day’s work.
They had, as their leader, Brother John.
The beginning of the work was the hardest, as holes
had to be dug for the piles on which the floor was to
rest, and this was no light work, as it happened to be on
a 'clay pan,’ the very hardest type of ground found in
the West. But Brother John never asked a man to do
anything he was not prepared to do himself, so took a
fair share of the pick and shovel work.
Some of the workers’ wives travelled with them and
boiled the billy, and all the visitors partook of a picnic
lunch and tea, while those whose homes were in Byrock


were able to go home for their meals. They worked till
it was too dark to see, and then, with the aid of car head
lamps, held Evensong within that humble place that was
a little nearer the fulfilment of their hopes as every
Evensong was held.
Bishop Crotty was to come to Bourke on June 16th,
1929, for Confirmation, so it was hoped that the little
Byrock church would be far enough advanced to be
opened by him while he was in the district, so everybody
worked their hardest. Brother John selected the blue
felt for the Sanctuary floor and steps, and the material
for the riddel curtains, the rods for which were made by
the blacksmith in Bourke to Brother John’s instructions.
The Altar and Frontals for these far west churches
are provided by a fund which is raised by some of the
churches in England, and Byrock was promised the same
gift, and looked anxiously and excitedly for its arrival,
but, as the time drew near for the opening of the church,
Brother John received word that the Altar could not be
ready for that date. This was a disappointing blow for
Brother John. He had experienced many disappoint-
ments, discouragements and worries from the time the
Byrock church was begun —more than, probably, any-
one but his own people knew of —yet he overcame them
all, at the expense of great strain on his feelings. But
this was the final blow, and he said —'I am terribly dis-
appointed, but it is not always wise for young priests
to have everything go on smoothly in their work.’
Then, as was characteristic of him, seeing the brightest
side, he added, 'Many big churches go on for years with
only temporary Altars, we shall have a temporary one,
and when it is seen what a worthy little place it is, I m
sure we will soon have the Altar.’
We made a temporary font at the Rectory and were
given a glass bowl for the top of it. (I have not heard
of its being replaced by a proper one yet.)
Throughout the whole of the building Brother John
did a fair share of the work with pick and shovel, ham-
mer, saw and brush, arriving back in Bourke with his
car full of men at about 9 o’clock, tired out, only to rest


for a little while, and be off early next morning to the
Bush.
A portable organ, almost new, was for sale at one of
the station homesteads.
Brother John liked its tone, but was not sure that
Byrock could raise sufficient to buy it, so he secured
the cost of hire for a few days at the time of the
opening.
When the people of Byrock saw it in their little
church they were thrilled with the thought of having
their own organ, and quickly collected more than
enough to purchase the instrument —so it never returned
to Bourke.
Bishop Crotty duly arrived, in company with Brother
Tom, on the Saturday, June 16th.
Sunday, 17th, was a really wonderful day for the
Bourke church.
The early celebration of the Eucharist, later in the
morning a beautiful Confirmation Service —many can-
didates travelling many miles to receive this Sacrament.
In the afternoon a splendid tea to welcome the Bishop
on his first visit to Bourke. Nor did the people forget
that this was the Rev. T. M. Armour’s (Brother Tom)
first visit as Principal of the Brotherhood.
Festal evensong crowned a truly glorious day.
Monday and Tuesday found the Episcopal party
down the Darling River, taking the Sacrament of Con-
firmation to candidates in Louth and Tilpa, returning
to Bourke in time for a meal, and then on to Byrock
for the opening of the little church.
Meanwhile, Brother Pat, the carpenters and I, made
a start very early on the Wednesday morning for Byrock
to put the finishing touches on, in preparation for the
opening.
A table—just about the correct length—was bor-
rowed from a person living close by, and stilted on
blocks till it was the correct height.
We had gone armed with sheets, frontals and fair-
linen, also a Cross, candlesticks and vases, and some
beautiful pale pink roses for the Altar, and when we


had adjusted the riddel curtains, laid the felt on the
Sanctuary floor, and arranged the Altar, no Sanctuary
could have looked more beautiful—at least, we thought
so.
The organist, full choir, and many of the congrega-
tion from S. Stephen’s, Bourke, journeyed to Byrock
for this day.
Brother Roy came from Brewarrina, and Brother
Godfrey from Cobar.
Rooms were made available for the clergy and choir
to robe in the hotel close by, from whence proceeded a
long and dignified procession, headed by a crossbearer,
to the door of a galvanised iron building with a Cross on
the top of it.
S. Stephen’s (Bourke) people’s warden met the
Bishop at the door, and the ceremony proceeded. When
the Bishop opened the door of this humble structure,
he beheld a place much more beautiful than he, or those
who followed, had expected to find.
White fibro walls with mission panels, a pale blue
Wunderlich ceiling of suitably embossed design, and a
beautiful Sanctuary worthy of this House of God.
The organist played beautifully, the choir and con-
gregation sang with a thrilling note of joy in their
voices. The Bishop’s address was most inspiring, and
within that Sanctuary there knelt a Bishop and five
priests to praise and thank God for his blessings and
gifts.
The nearest saint’s day to the day of this opening cere-
mony was June 24th, S. John the Baptist s day, and so
the little Byrock church was called S. John the Baptist.
It was very symbolical that immediately after the
opening ceremony was over there was a baptism in the
Church. n
The townspeople finished the celebrations with a Bail
that night in honor of the Bishop, after which all re-
turned to Bourke, tired but happy after a triumphant
day—never to be forgotten by many of us.
Herein was the accomplishment of another of


Brother John’s ventures for the good of the Church in
the Bourke district.
The Byrock people who had raised only very little
money during the past four years, because they only
looked hopelessly ahead with a feeling that they would
never raise sufficient to build a church, now had some-
thing to work for.
Before leaving the District, Brother John organised a
small Ugly Man Competition for them, and by Decem-
ber, only two months after Brother John’s departure, S.
John the Baptist’s Church was dedicated by Bishop
Wylde, now having its permanent Altar.
A Call to the City . —On Sunday, August 4th, 1929,
Brother John received a trunk-line call from Sydney.
The voice announced that it was Dr. Micklem, of S.
James’ Church, Sydney, who said that he had 'heard
that morning that John was to complete his five years
with the B.G.S. the following October’ —and would he
'consider a position on the staff at S. James’, Sydney.’
Brother John, afterwards relating the occurrence, said
that the great difference between the Bush work and
the work of the great Church of S. James flashed upon
him in a moment, and he felt inclined to shout in an
excited, boyish way, 'Too right’—but he had to compose
himself and say —'When do you wish to know, sir?’ and
was given two days’ grace to make a definite decision.
There was no time to be lost. He got in touch with
Bishop Crotty, Bishop Wylde and Brother Tom (Prin-
cipal) by telephone.
John was given very little encouragement by either
Bishop, who said they did not want him to leave the
Diocese, but did not withhold their release from Diocese
and Brotherhood, nor their good wishes and blessings.
Brother John decided to accept the appointment, and
wired his reply to Dr. Micklem as arranged, to which he
received a wired acknowledgment.
Bishop Crotty wrote: ' I receive your resignation
from Bourke and the Diocese with profound regret.
You have my goodwill, and you leave for your new


work with my blessing. Should opportunity occur, I
shall always be pleased to welcome you back. You have
done zealous and effective work at Bourke, which we all,
I am sure, appreciate.
'Your service in the Brotherhood has likewise been
marked by devotion and zeal. ’
Brother John’s next duty was to write to Archbishop
Wright, asking permission to go into the Sydney
Diocese. He received a very nice personal letter from
His Grace, in which he said:
'Of course you are welcome back to the Diocese of
Sydney. We know you and you know us, after all those
years as a valued member of the Cathedral staff.’
Bishop Wilton wrote to Brother John on hearing the
news of his appointment, and said:
'lt is a splendid appointment for which I think you
eminently suitable. You have gifts that will be of the
greatest service at S. James’. Wonderful that you
should be called to Sydney again from far-away Bourke!
This will be Part II in your ministry. I
pray it may be as rich in the formation of friendships,
and as profitable for you yourself and others in the
accomplishment of work attempted and done for Christ
and His Church as by the grace of God was crowded
into Part I.’
Hearing from John of his leaving Bourke, Bishop
Long wrote:
'I am glad you let me know of your future plans. I
think the work at S. James’ should be very useful to
you, and I hope you will find happiness in it. I shall
look forward to seeing you sometimes when I visit
Sydney.’
All final arrangements were made before the news
was told to the people of Bourke, and then there was no
time lost in the spreading of it throughout town and
district. Brother John was leaving Bourke and going to
S. James’ Church in Sydney. 'How proud we should
be of him,’ said one, 'being appointed to such a big
church in the city.’


'Well, they never had a better man there,’ said
another.
'lsn’t it wonderful? Fancy our Brother John being
appointed to such a big church. Shows how lucky we
have been to have had him so long.’
But there were other sides of the story, for some could
only see the sad side of their loss. It was alright for S.
James’, but what about Bourke; they couldn’t bear the
thought of losing him.
One of the Public Works Department’s gangers,
working many miles out of Bourke on road-making,
read the news in the Western Herald. He immediately
sent a message to the paying clerk at the Bourke office,
and said: 'I hear the Rev. Martyn is leaving Bourke.
They are sure to collect for a presentation for him.
Dock (so much) out of my next pay for it.’
And so the topic of conversation was Brother John’s
departure, and preparations were made to bid him fare-
well.
He covered as much of the District as possible on his
last trip through the country, taking the Blessed Sacra-
ment to the faithful for his last time, and saying fare-
well to those dear people for whom he had a very great
love, and who showed him the greatness of their love for
him.
One little girl of 5 years old, a member of a large
family, cried bitterly when Brother John said good-bye,
and said, 'I don’t want him to go,’ and when she was
asked 'Why?’ replied, 'Because he’s our Brother.’
Women and children wept, and big, strong men, har-
dened by the severe conditions and disappointments of
their life out West, turned away, swallowing a lump in
their throats, still gripping firmly the hand of this
Brother, this friend, for perhaps the last time.
Then as he drove away, they watched for that khaki
'sou’-wester’ as he turned to wave it, till the car was out
of sight.
This was a very sad last trip for Brother John, along
those bush tracks he knew so well. Every shrub and mile
post was familiar to him, every curve in the track he


knew, and as he gazed out over the plains at the wonder-
ful mirages and 'willy-willys’ travelling over the clay-
pans and through the sandy tracks, alone, after a fare-
well at the last homestead or boundary rider’s hut, what
must his feelings have been? Knowing the big, loving,
sympathetic heart of this man of small frame, youthful,
yet grown old in these surroundings—we are left to
imagine. But on his return to Bourke, relating the ex-
periences of the trip, tears welled into his eyes and
were blinked back more than once.
There were many Baptisms on that last trip. The
people of Louth gave a splendid supper at which they
said Good-bye’ to Brother John —and later forwarded
their gift.
Byrock people held a Ball to bid farewell to their
Priest-in-Charge, and to make him a presentation, a
token of their love.
A black tracker at Byrock took him aside when saying
good-bye, and said, 'You won’t forget my little boy, will
you, Brother John?’ (The little chap had passed away
just recently, and Brother John had buried him.)
At Brother John’s Valedictory Eucharist the Church
of S. Stephen’s, Bourke, was crowded, equal to the at-
tendance at the Altar on the greater Festivals.
It was a very sad service for all who attended, and
many shed tears of sorrow at the very thought of bid-
ding farewell, at the Altar, to their beloved Priest,
friend, and Brother—he who had been not only their
spiritual adviser, but had helped, encouraged and ad-
vised many of them in ways known only to their con-
fidant and themselves. He who had bridged many a
gulf in their spiritual life, who had made their religion
a living reality, who had striven to reflect for them the
example of their Lord, who had Baptised and prepared
them for Confirmation, who had- nursed them in their
sickness and comforted them in their sorrow, and shared
their joys.
And for Brother John it was equally hard to part with
them, for he, too, had, and still did, appreciate the love
they showed him at all times. Their homes had been his,


and their helping hands had ever been outstretched to
aid him. They would have shared his sorrows and
troubles if need be, and were ready to nurse him in any
sickness.
And so it was not without sorrow that he celebrated
the Holy Eucharist on that last Sunday morning in
Bourke.
His addresses at these services Sunday by Sunday were
always beautiful and most instructive and helpful. By
the time of his departure from Bourke, Brother John
had not long concluded a series of five-minute instruc-
tions on 'What is said and done by Priest and People in
the Holy Communion Service, and Why.’
He had begun with the entrance into the Church of
the people, how they should enter and what they should
do, and of the preparation of Priest and Servers in the
Vestry before entering the Sanctuary. Each prayer and
rubric was explained, and the need of it in the service.
Such addresses had made the Holy Communion Service
much more real and much more a part of their lives,
and the Real Presence was no longer vague.
And now he was to deliver his final Eucharistic
address to them. It took longer than five minutes —
though no thought was given to the length of time he
spoke, except that it was all too short.
He first of all read to them Acts XX, 17 to 36, which
in itself was so true of his life and ministry among them,
his address following, with a personal note for each one,
a reminder of how they and he had shared the joys and
sorrows and services of the past five years. His musical
voice rang with emotion and told of his concealed feel-
ings, and it was true with Brother John as it was also
true of St. Paul, that 'They all wept sore . . . sor-
rowing most of all for the words which he spake, that
they should see his face no more.’
Brother John’s parting with the children was equally
pathetic.
Evensong was attended by a crowded congregation—
eager to hear their departing priest’s last message, the


text of which he took from II Corinthians, 13 th chapter,
11th verse.
And after an inspiring exhortation to 'be of the same
mind,’ and 'live in peace/ Brother John concluded with
the three opening words of the text, 'Finally, Brethren,
Farewell.’
This last Sunday was a glorious, enthusiastic, but sad
witness to a faithful ministry, concluding with a witness
of great love on both sides, from Priest and People, never
to be forgotten by the majority.
The people of Bourke asked Brother John to be sure
to be in town and keep free from engagements, the
evening of September 23rd, which he did, and when the
evening arrived, it was Bourke’s public 'send-off’ to
Brother John.
This was not a Ball, nor was it a dinner, nor yet a
supper.
These people took a more solemn view of this occasion.
'We’re not going to have dancing just for the amuse-
ment of others, nor refreshment of any kind to en-
courage people to come. We only want those people
who are really sorry that Brother John is leaving
Bourke.’
There was a large and representative gathering in the
town’s main hall, and all looked 'really sorry.’
There were several speeches made of a very apprecia-
tive nature, and Brother John was presented with a
wallet of notes, with which he was requested to purchase
a roll-top desk, as a token of love from the parish of
Bourke.
In spite of the fact that he was feeling this 'break’
very keenly, Brother John tried hard to cheer those
present, who had already been moved to tears by the
remarks of the previous speakers-—but all effort failed.
The more cheerful Brother John tried to appear, the
more pathetic their expressions became.
Brother John’s parents and sister were also presented
with very handsome gifts, which were quite unexpected
and very highly appreciated.
There were some members of the parish who thought


it more suitable to give Brother John a more cheerful
send-off, so, on the evening before his departure, gave a
party, which, in spite of what the morrow held in
store, was a very happy gathering.
Next morning, at the railway station, a crowd of
men, women and children assembled to bid farewell to
their beloved Priest. In spite of the fact that the train
left long after the school’s last bell had gone, the children
were not at all worried, for they said that their head-
master would know where they all were. And as the
train sped along, people waved from their houses, and,
passing the hospital in the distance, uniformed figures
were seen standing in elevated positions waving towels
and sheets, lest smaller articles would not be obvious.
A few days after John’s departure, the following
poem appeared in the Western Herald, written by Mr.
A. J. Johnson, of Bourke, sitting on an old petrol tin
By his camp-fire one night, way out near Goodooga; he
signed the assumed name of 'Tom Collins’: —
'BROTHER JOHN.’
1. When first you came amongst us, Brother John,
With your kindly face, so good to look upon,
The kindly smile was there,
With a cheery word to spare.
We will miss you when you leave us, Brother John.
2. Five years you have been with us, Brother John.
Five droughty years have come, but haven’t gone;
But there isn’t any doubt
With the Church, there was no drought,
For you’ve been the goodly Shepherd, Brother John.
3. And you leave us very soon, Brother John,
And the city gets the boon, Brother John;
But let the city fuss,
She needs you more than us,
For the city holds some sinners, Brother John.
4. In the city where you’ll work, Brother John,
I know you’ll pray for Bourke, Brother John.
I feel I’ll get a share
When you offer up a prayer:
I’m a separated brother, Brother John.


5. Here in Bourke, and further out, Brother John;
In this land of dust and drought, Brother John,
The West will write your name
In her guarded scroll—the same
Will be in 'Golden Letters,’ Brother John.
—Western Herald, Bourke, Oct sth, 1929.
Later, John’s uncle, Mr. Jenkinson, of Melbourne,
printed the poem on card, and it looked very imposing
—it now hangs, framed, in many homes.
Kruger. —Brother John was very fond of animals and
birds of all kinds, and did not even vary his love for
that very faithful animal 'the dog’ after having been
rather badly bitten by them no less than four times in
his life, twice as a small child, and on one of these occa-
sions, when it was suggested that the dog should be shot,
the little lad pleaded for him, and said, 'Oh, don’t shoot
him, he couldn’t help it.’
The next occasion was what John called the dog’s
gratitude for releasing him from a rabbit trap in the
dark in Armidale. Hearing the agonised cries of a dog
one night, John suspected that he had been caught in
the trap, and followed the direction from whence the
cries came. In his agony, and fearing that John would
hurt him more, he bit John’s hand very badly.
The next bite was also a severe one from a big, heavy
dog on one of the stations, that flew at him and fastened
his teeth in his body just above the hip. John considered
that the khaki drill shirt he was wearing saved him con-
siderably, for although the dog inflicted a nasty wound,
the shirt only showed the teeth marks, but was not torn.
But the great love and faithfulness that 'Kruger’ had
for his master outweighed all antagonism of other dogs.
He was a big fat brown curly fellow with a fierce
bark that was much worse than his bite, and although
he often threatened to bite, I don’t think he was ever
found guilty.
Many were the miles he travelled with Brother John;
his usual position was on the front mudguard overlook-
ing the headlight, and more than once he lost his footing


when the Ford was travelling some rough country, and
went bounding to the ground. When it was realised
what had happened, a look round would discover him
chasing the car along the track; but considering the
thousands of miles he travelled, this only happened a
few times.
Fie was Brother John’s sole companion at times, and
when it was found necessary to camp for the night
through engine trouble or bogs, Kruger was his body-
guard. He often 'served as a pillow,’ John has said, and
when on occasions he has had to abandon his car and
continue the journey on foot, if it was not many miles
to his destination, and he knew that he could soon get
back by car, he would leave Kruger on guard, as long
as he could see to it that there was water nearby, and
the dog would be in the shade under the car. It was not
necessary to tie him up. If his master said 'sit down
here’ or 'there,’ or 'come along with me,’ the good old
fellow would obey, and so, as John walked along the
road alone, carrying his water bag, looking back occa-
sionally would see Kruger sitting in the same position
watching his master out of sight, and John knew that
he would be there when he returned.
When it fell to Kruger’s lot to continue the journey
on foot, he would walk along quietly beside Brother
John, but if the sun was very hot he would leave his
side whenever he saw anything in the way of scrub or
tree that was casting a shadow, and would run ahead
and rest in the shade till John 'caught up.’
Whenever John had a drink from the water bag,
Kruger had one too, either from John’s hand or any
other improvised vessel.
It has been John’s experience more than once to run
out of water, and his tongue and lips swelled from
thirst and the severe heat, combined with the exertion
of walking. Doubtless his mute companion was suffer-
ing in the same way. On one occasion, when they came
to where a little stagnant water lay in the mud on the
track, John was glad to lay flat on the ground and put
his face in this water and drink some of it. The taste


of it was frightful and it was impossible to avoid swal-
lowing some of the mud. Kruger stood by until he was
told to have a drink. Though far from inviting, it
helped them on their way.
When at the Rectory in Bourke, Brother John slept
on the verandah, while Kruger took up his position
somewhere close by or under John’s bed, and only re-
sorted to a kennel during the winter months. Even then,
early morning found him on guard at his master’s bed-
side.
No matter how he tossed and turned, the dog took no
notice, but if he ventured to open one eye, Kruger
would make one bounding leap to his side and stand on
hind legs with his fore paws on John’s bed, and proceed
to pull the clothes off him. In the scuffle John would
cover his head with the clothes, and as soon as the dog
could get near his face he would bestow a morning
kiss upon his master.
It was when anybody dared to approach that bed
while John lay upon it that Kruger’s bark and threats
were most severe.
Kruger was a good churchgoer, and for a very long
time attended every service, taking his place in the
centre aisle, lying with his head resting on his out-
stretched paws and never once moving through the
whole of whatever the service, except his eyes—they
followed every movement of his master. One day
another dog, not nearly so dignified, attended church,
and became a little restless, roamed round and wanted
Kruger to play, who snapped his reply rather noisily, and
was sent out of church and never again allowed inside;
but he showed his loyalty by continuing to attend, but
sat quietly on the front porch while the service pro-
ceeded.
Knowing from experience how Kruger fretted dur-
ing his absence at Brotherhood Reunion and Sydney
Campaign, and how he seemed almost to hate the sight
of the Rectory when John was away, he decided that
something must be done when leaving Bourke to take
up his work in Sydney. He could not take Kruger


with him, much as he would have loved to do so —it
would be cruel to take him to confined spaces.
Mrs. O’Malley, of Glenvilla, had always wanted
Kruger, and John knew she would be good to him, and
being out of Bourke the dog would not be so likely to
fret. So on the day before his departure, Brother John
took his faithful and beloved friend, who had known
his every movement, obeyed his commands loyally, and
shared with him in many curious and hard experiences,
to Glenvilla, and the parting was not without regret.


CHAPTER FIVE.
S. James’.
October 6th, 1930, was John’s first Sunday at S.
James’ as a member of the staff, and it happened to be
the 110th anniversary of the laying of the foundation
stone of the Church. A Parish Social was held a few
days later to celebrate the anniversary, at which John
was welcomed to the Parish by the Rector.
Many of S. James’ parishioners had met John when
he came to Sydney for the Brotherhood Annual Cam-
paign, but it was not long before the remainder felt that
they had known him well, for a very long time, for he
never passed any of them without a cheery word at any
time; he had a wonderful memory for faces and names,
and in a very short time he knew all the boys and girls
by their Christian names, and was interested in their
interests from the beginning. As one has said, 'John had
a passion for friends.’ Yes, and he wanted to be every-
body’s friend in return.
To meet him once or twice was to know him well,
and to feel that he was your friend.
There was no organisation in the Parish that did not
claim his interest.
He was to be seen at the meetings of the Servers’
Guild —as often as possible he attended choir practice;
the Boys’ Club claimed him every Friday evening, while
he was well acquainted with the doings and rules of the
Fellowship of Service.
The Women’s Guild and Women’s Work Party occa-
sionally saw him at their meetings.


The Sports claimed him as their captain, and the
Heralds of the King found a warm place in his heart.
The Children’s Chapel was his pride, and he spared no
pains in teaching the children and making them familiar
with the Holy Eucharist. On Quarterly Clothes Days
he was to be seen among those who sorted the garments,
and on nearly every Relief Depot day, he found time to
run in for a few minutes. Nor did he forget the work
of the Rest Room —he paid the workers an occasional
visit; even those ladies who clean the brass in the church
say he seldom failed to drop in and say a few cheery
words.
Sunday morning breakfasts at S. James’ after the 9
o’clock Eucharist always found John moving about
happily among the people, old and young alike. His
merry laugh was to be heard everywhere. Sunday was
not complete for many of the elderly folk if they had
not had a word with him, and the young people would
call and wave to him from where they sat, lest he should
not notice them.
One tells an instance of the breakfast table in the
room where those of riper years assemble to break their
fast. Having spoken for a little while to one elderly
lady, John proceeded further till he was now speaking
to one opposite to where she sat, and as he glanced at
her, she smiled at him. John put his head on one side
and shook his finger in his venerable way (in spite of his
youth) and said, 'Now, I’ve given you your smile,’ as
mi ach as to say T must save enough to go all round.’
Referring to this, another said, 'We looked forward
to his coming into that room —all we older women just
waited for that smile and cheery word.’
People still frequently refer to some inspiring address
given by Father Martyn.
One person was asked at a meeting in S. James’ Upper
Hall one evening, 'Who is the young Priest who has
just come in?’ Her reply was, 'That is the Reverend
John Martyn, now on the Staff at S. James’, and when in
the Holy Eucharist he says "Lift up your hearts,” you
really feel that he has lifted your heart up for you —
his is a most inspiring service.’


His Study in the Crypt . —As John’s home in Sydney
would not be very close to S. James’ he arranged with
Dr. Micklem before he left Bourke that there should be
a space set apart for his study in the Crypt. For a few
weeks he shared the Warden’s room, then the room
adjoining was made available for him. His beloved
roller-top desk, that he had purchased with part of his
presentation from the Bourke people, and a settee which
could be converted into a bed, which John bought for
emergency, were among the furniture.
It was half an hour’s journey by tram to the city
from where he lived, and John knew he would have
early morning duties, and perhaps late watches at the
Hospital, that would make it necessary for him to have
somewhere to sleep in town, and thus the bed-settee
would be of use.
The first occasion of this kind was the Christmas
following his appointment. So on Christmas Eve he
went prepared with bed-clothes, but when, in the course
of conversation with the Rector, he mentioned what he
intended to do, Dr. Micklem would not hear of it, so
put him up at the Rectory for the night.
But it came in for use during Holy Week, and on the
occasion of the 24-hours’ vigil before the Fiery Cross,
as some of the Servers and John took turns at resting
there between their Watches’ during the night.
And then, methinks, it was of use during those days
of suffering, when John was still carrying out his
priestly duties between the day of his accident and his
collapsing on that Thursday night, when he tried so
hard to keep his appointment with two people whom he
was preparing for Confirmation.
John had not occupied this little study for long be-
fore the Rector and Council saw the necessity of a
telephone, which was attached to his desk.
Several pictures, not expensive ones, but all of beauti-
ful meaning, hung on the walls of his study, such as
'The Little Lord Jesus,’ the 'Nativity,’ 'The Bread of
Life,’ 'A Wayside Shrine,’ and a small brass Crucifix


had its special place, and on the shelf there stood a tiny
statuette of The Good Shepherd.
Then there were group photographs of men he had
studied with at S. John’s, Armidale, groups of football
clubs, one being S. John’s College Club—a pair of box-
ing gloves also hung upon the wall.
What a busy place it was, always somebody coming
or going—what a hospitable place it was, a hearty wel-
come always greeted the visitor to that room that had an
atmosphere of holy joy, the beauty of religion filling the
air—a place to reverence, a place to rejoice in—a place
wherein many poor souls told their troubled story to a
sympathetic listener, a place where the needs of many
were worried out in a thoughtful heart, a place where
compacts were made between many a prospective bride
and bridegroom, where the sorrows of many were com-
forted, from where many a man was found employ-
ment, a place to which clothes and boots were brought
and distributed to the needy, where friends left parcels
of baby clothes for John to take to some poor mother
for her wee babe, a place where regular worshippers of
S. James’ could find a patient ear and ready reply to
their difficulties in the Church’s teaching, from where
many a helpful letter was written, where the young
men always held their meetings, and when John formed
the football club, this place was their headquarters,
where they changed for training and re-dressed for the
journey home, where the lads could sit and yarn and
have merry meetings together, even if Father Martyn
could not be present. He had no objection to lending
the key of his study to the boys to hold a meeting there,
or to the girls to use his typewriter.
On Palm Sunday John took a large palm leaf into his
study and hung it on the nail on which hung his brass
Crucifix—there they hung together till after he had
carried his Cross and palm to victory.
The Sisters of the Church, at S. Gabriel’s School,
Waverley, asked John to take a Requiem for them on


the 26th March for some of their friends and relatives.
After the service, Sister Hilda—the Superior—told
John how very beautifully he had taken the service,
and added: 'I hope you will say my Requiem when I
die.’ To which John replied that, if possible, he would.
He visited her frequently during her last illness in
S. Luke’s Hospital, and more than once she reminded
him that she hoped he would say her Requiem.
John was really very fond of both Sister Hilda and
Sister Freda —such lovable women —who, in return,
showed their love for this boyish Priest.
'What do you think! Dr. Micklem served for me this
morning, when I was celebrating Holy Communion!’
said John one day.
Ts that anything out of the ordinary?’ said his
mother.
'Out of the ordinary! I should say it was! He need
never have humbled himself to serve for his Junior
Curate! He could quite easily have left me to celebrate
without a server or else have said: "I’ll celebrate, John,
and you serve, as there are no servers here,” but to offer
to serve for me, and to bow to me where a server bows
to a Priest! Really, he is one of the most humble men
I know.’
Thus, one humble man was viewed through the eyes
of another, who, but for his own humility, might have
viewed this happening from a very different standpoint,
which would probably cause him to be 'puffed up’ with
his own importance.
In a very short time John became a link between
S. Andrew’s Cathedral and S. James’ Church —he re-
newed his acquaintance with many old friends, many
of them calling on him in his study in the Crypt; he
was a keen member of the Cathedral Choir School Old
Boys’ Union.
The Cathedral Association asked him to give them a


lecture on his work in the West, which he did, with
lantern slides on the B.G.S. work as a whole, and was
greatly appreciated.
It had been his great hope to spread the interest of the
Brotherhood of the Good Shepherd very widely by
means of these slides.
Many of the photographs he had taken himself.
'Father Martyn brought the Blessed Sacrament to me
regularly when I was ill in hospital,’ one told me.
'When he came near my bed he brought that spiritual
atmosphere—didn’t speak a word, but just greeted me
with that beautiful smile of his that was so spiritual and
uplifting. He would immediately proceed very quietly
and reverently to prepare for the little service, which
was always so inspiring. When the service was over he
would give me the laying on of hands for healing and
his blessing. I always felt that I had really received a
blessing—there was something so wonderfully different
about Father Martyn’s blessing. Then, after a few quiet
moments and a cheery little chat, he would leave me
with that smile again.
'His visits were always something to dwell upon,
though he held but little conversation. I always felt
that his entrance was so quiet lest he should interrupt
my preparation for reception of the Blessed Sacra-
ment, and that he had left me to meditate upon it.
At other times his visits were so full of bright, sunny
conversation —always leaving one something happy and
cheerful to think about.’
Union of Churches .
In Bourke there lived a young man who was a mem-
ber of the Greek Orthodox Church. Brother John often
talked to him of the Union of Churches, and on one
occasion, when both were visiting Sydney at the same
time, he invited his Anglican Priest friend to go to his
Church with him. Brother John gladly accepted the


invitation and they went together. Brother John was
given his place on the Sanctuary of the Greek Orthodox
Church.
When, a little later, the young Greek came to live in
Sydney, after Brother John’s appointment to S. James’,
the former was very ill in Sydney Hospital, and it was
Brother John who regularly took to him the Blessed
Sacrament of Holy Communion.
On February 27, 1930, Rev. Frank L. Oliver wrote
to John asking him to consider a position on the staff
of the Missions to Seamen.
He wrote: 'You will probably not know me, but
when I tell you that you are known quite well by repute
as "Brother John,” you will possibly understand that
your brief period here at the Mission in Newcastle has
not been forgotten. I was speaking yesterday to Bishop
Long, he expressed himself as being quite enthusiastic
when I told him that I was going to have an attempt to
get hold of you. He warned me that you had only
just gone to S. James’.’
John loved the work of the Missions to Seamen, but
declined to consider the position on the ground that he
had only recently joined the staff of S. James’ and he
didn’t think that it would be 'playing the game’ with
Dr. Micklem to leave after so short a time.
In his reply to John, of March 11, 1930, Mr. Oliver
said: 'I suppose I should thank you for the graceful way
in which you have turned me down. In what really
is my despair, I had a yarn to Mr. Bergman, of S. John’s,
and asked him if he could think of anyone for me, and
he only had your name to suggest. When I told him
what I had suffered at your hands, he said that he still
reiterated that, in his opinion, you were the one who
would suit the nature of the work best. I really want
you, old chap, so, unless you are absolutely rude and
brutal over it, I shall continue to annoy you. If it is
a matter of loyalty to Dr. Micklem —which, naturally,
I quite understand —if only you feel able to give me an


expression of your own personal feeling and willingness,
and can let me, I will come up to Sydney like a shot and
talk things over with him. Should he agree to release
you, if not now, then in a reasonable time, I could make
arrangements accordingly. I might be able to
manage with a layman for a few months if I know you
will link up before very long. So, what about it?
Do be a sport and give the whole position another
H.l • 1 il J
think.
The Rev. E. H. Burgmann also wrote, and strongly
appealed to John to accept this position.
Mr. Oliver has since written: 'Bishop Long and the
Warden of S. John’s, Morpeth, mentioned Brother John
as ideal for such a work. We did not actually know
each other very well, but he wrote in his characteris-
tically breezy way, making me all the more anxious to
have his help and companionship, as he revealed himself
more and more in his letters. He was always known in
the Newcastle Missions to Seamen as "Brother John of
the big heart and ready humour.” We had lunch
together in Sydney before my departure for Melbourne.
, . . It was then that he finally declined my pressing re-
quest for him to ccme to Melbourne.’
Dr. Micklem knew nothing of this until all cor-
respondence on the subject had ceased.
His Hope to Form a Religious Order of Nursing Sisters,
John was wearing a rather disappointed expression—
most unusual for him. 'We had a wonderful scheme
we were trying to get on foot,’ he said, 'but the "cat’s
out” now, so I can tell you all about it. We hoped to
get further ahead before it became public, but one of
the few who had our confidence could not keep a
secret.’
John told us then of how he had had a scheme in his
mind for a very long time and often wondered if it
would be realised. He had dreamed of a Religious Order
of Nursing Sisters in Sydney.
He hoped to begin in some small way; that perhaps a


couple of trained nurses could have a small house near
the city —living under community rule—and begin by
district nursing. Then he pictured gradual growth, by
the addition of other trained nurses, with a view to
entering the Religious life.
Next his dreams saw a house, just a little larger than
the first, which would allow sufficient space for one or
two patients.
He always felt sure that the funds to finance the
scheme would be the easiest part —community life being
the main factor in economising.
His dreams and hopes carried him further, for he saw
in the distance, with much perseverance and patience,
and not a few stumbling-blocks to overcome, a Church
of England Hospital in Sydney, run by a Religious
Order of Nursing Sisters.
'When one of S. James’ members told me that she
felt she was not doing enough with her life and asked
my advice about entering the Religious life, I disclosed
my plans to her,’ said John. 'She, being a nurse, seemed,
as it were, a step towards the realisation of my plans.’
John did not speak of it to us again, nor did he live to
see even the first steps taken of his scheme.
But the only person to whom John gave all his details,
still hopes to see the tiny seed, which was planted by
Brother John, grow and burst into blossom, and to see
what John was not to see from this side of the Veil; but
we feel sure, that, among the many works of love for
which he is now interceding, this will not be the least.
'We began at once to make enquiries and seek
information that would help us,’ she wrote. 'We
looked forward to the time when we might persuade
English Sisters to come out as Novice Mistresses —when
we had nurses ready to enter as postulants. I always
felt sure that the scheme would succeed, and, of course,
Father John would be our Chaplain. We went to Dr.
Micklem with our plans, and he is still helping me to
realise it, but we are more or less at a standstill now. It
will always be my hope to form a Nursing Order, and
even yet to carry out Father John’s ambition.


'He and I talked long and earnestly many times on the
subject, and I will always remember how, one day when
I was leaving, Father John laughed and said: ' In years
to come we will be able to tell people that this scheme
was hatched under the earth.” —meaning his study in
the Crypt of S. James’.
'I feel sure God has called me to this, and He will
bring it about in His own way, if I am content to go
patiently, step by step. I know what Father John
wanted, and I hope it will yet be brought about, even if
I am not to be the instrument used to carry out what
he planned and thought so much about.’
When John accepted the appointment at S. James’,
Sydney, one wrote and said: 'I hope you will be happy
at S. James’. I think your strength lies in more definitely
pastoral work, but the experience will be useful to you.’
But he had not been at S. James’ very long when he
said: 'People do not realise that there is social service
work to do at S. James’.’
And John was truly in his element in work of this
kind.
Dr. W. S. Sweet writes: —
'On April 4, 1930, and on several subsequent occa-
sions, the S. James’ Church Council debated the question
of Evangelistic Effort in the Domain and Hyde Park;
and whether, seeing that these places were within the
parish boundaries, and owing to the growing depression
and the increasing number of unemployed men and
women, it was considered its right and bounden duty to
provide mission services for them, and also add male
members to its congregation.
'Father John Martyn took an active part in these
debates, and was the first to volunteer to take a service
in Hyde Park.
'Later, out of this matter, arose the combination of
the Churches of S. James’, Christ Church, and S.


Saviour’s, Redfern, in Home Missionary effort and the
formation of the Combined Catholic Campaign.’
'Father Martyn took a very keen interest in the men’s
meetings, which are held on Sunday afternoons at Riley
Street, Surry Hills, under Sister Freda’s management,
and, besides occasionally taking these services, he sang
and played for the men. He was very popular with
them, and during his last illness he sent messages to the
men which they reciprocated. On the Sunday follow-
ing his death a Memorial Service was held at Surry
Hills, his favourite hymn being sung by request, and
two minutes’ silence was observed, all the men standing
at attention.’
He found great scope for work that few knew he was
doing, for, as he visited the patients in Sydney Hospital,
he did not let his ministry to the sick end at their bed-
sides, but made enquiries concerning their families, and,
where circumstances seemed to need his help, he sought
them out in their homes.
One man who was worried about how his wife and
child were faring during his absence was much relieved
from his suffering by the ease of mind that Father
Martyn was keeping a watchful eye over them, for he
found them living and sleeping in. the laundry of a
house, having no home to go to; and John helped them
to better their conditions of living.
The help that he afforded many of those people,
doubtless helped the patient to look on the brighter side,
knowing that those at home were not forgotten.
The work of the hospital was so near to his heart that
it was one of his main reasons for moving into town
and nearer to S. James’ Church, in order that he might
take his share of night calls at the Hospital.
Though he was sought after and gladly welcomed and
entertained by the aristocracy, John never forgot to
visit his less fortunate brothers.
He would be entertained at dinner to-night in the
home of some honourable gentleman, and to-morrow he
would sit on his haunches (in a home where most of the
furniture had been sold to buy food) and drink a cup
i 99
l ZZ


of tea with apparently the same relish —he knew that
it gave the giver an abundant amount of pleasure.
A very poor woman, whose husband had been con-
siderably helped by John, who was one of those patients
in Sydney Hospital whose heart had been gladdened by
the fact that John had found time to seek out his dear
ones, greeted me recently with the question: 'I suppose
you recognise this hat and dress, Miss Martyn? I
admitted that both were very nice, but that I had never
seen them before.
'Oh,’ said the woman, 'Father Martyn brought me
these one day; I didn’t even ask him for them; but I
suppose he could see that my clothes were very shabby,
I thought they must have been his sister’s.’
She did not know that John was so often to be seen
going down some alleyway with a bundle of clothes —
they might be for children, or parents, or yet for some
wee babe, recently arrived in some home where no pro-
vision had been made to clothe it. The latter came
under my notice when John would say to me: 'Have
you anything you could make some tiny baby clothes
out of? Anything at all to keep it warm; it’s got
nothing now, poor little fellow.’
And after he had gone from us, we found a parcel of
little clothes (that someone else had made up from old
clothes and pieces) all ready to be delivered —but we
didn’t know to whom.
Other scope for mission work was found among those
unfortunate men who attend Sister Freda’s Sunday
Afternoon Services in Riley Street, Surry Hills.
Each of the Clergy of S. James’ staff, together with
those of a couple of other Churches, take their turns at
conducting these services, after which the men are pro-
vided with tea, early enough to allow Sister Freda and
her helpers to get away to Evensong in their respective
parishes.
Here again, John’s work did not end with the service,
for he spent the remainder of the time between their
service and the time when he was due at Evensong at


S. James’ with the men, moving about among them and
playing the piano and singing for them.
It was in ways of this kind that John used his won-
derfully musical gift to give pleasure to others; he had
a great memory for music, and an equally keen ear, for
he could always go to the piano and play most difficult
music after hearing it once. He loved really good music,
and the fact that he played 'jazz’ did not lessen his
ability to play a classic. If he went to a theatre he
would come home with the music on his mind, and he
would not be satisfied until he had played all he could
think of. If there was a 'trick pianist’ to be heard at
any of the theatres, John could usually play their tricks
as well as inventing a few of his own.
So those who never heard him at the piano will well
imagine the pleasure he could afford these men at Riley
Street on Sunday afternoons.
No, he didn’t play 'only hymns’ because it was Sun-
day. John described music as one of God’s most beauti-
ful gifts—it was all beautiful to John.
So, when he sat at the piano, he would ask: 'What
will you have next, boys?’ He seldom failed them—it
might be only part of the piece asked for, that perhaps
he had never played before, but had heard at some time
or other—for their choice covered a wide range, and
John has told of his surprise at some of the classics that
he has been asked to play. He used to say: 'They tell
tales of better days.’ These little episodes were very
touching to John, who, to outward appearances, was
always light-hearted.
John’s 'turn’ happened to fall on Armistice Sunday,
and he gave the men a real treat. He played all the old
war-time songs and marches that could be thought of,
and had the men singing lustily with him.
In times past S. James’ had held, on Good Friday
evening, a procession through the streets, giving
addresses at appointed places in the city, with a mission
service, showing lantern slides, in the Church on their
return.
John had told the men at Riley Street of this, and a


large number of them had promised to attend on the
next Good Friday, but requested that John should be
the one to give them their service on that afternoon, to
which he consented. But, when the time came, the
usual procession had to be abandoned, as all processions
had been stopped owing to industrial disturbances; but
the mission service with lantern slides was held just
the same.
Just here, I want to tell of the whole of that Good
Friday, it was John’s last one here on earth.
When I think of Good Friday my mind always travels
back to those wonderful services of three hours’ devo-
tion which John conducted in Bourke. The whole of
Lent was a truly wonderful and instructive time, lead-
ing up to a climax of devotion on Good Friday. I was
only in Bourke on two of these occasions, but according
to their attendance, which, I would venture to say, was
equal to the attendance in any Church on such a day,
they had had an equally inspiring effect on previous
occasions—l shall never forget them—and when the bell
tolled slowly seven times while all knelt in silent prayer,
one could scarcely realise that three hours had been
spent by a crowded Church in devotion, at the foot of
the Cross.
One day, during Lent of 1930, John announced that
he had been asked to take the three hours’ service at
S. Thomas’, North Sydney, on Good Friday. I was
overjoyed, and said: 'Oh, John, fancy being asked to
take such an important service at such an important
Church! How wonderful!’
'Don’t get excited about it, Ivy,’ said John calmly.
'They have probably only asked me because they couldn’t
get anybody else. However, I haven’t asked Dr.
Micklem’s permission to accept, yet.’ The same modest,
humble character! Dr. Micklem gave John permission
to accept, which he did.
Whenever any of the Bourke people were coming to
Sydney at Easter time, John made a special effort to
extract a promise that they would not attend the Agri-
cultural Show on Good Friday. It had always been felt


keenly by John that the Show was open on that day,
even though he was so far away.
It was nine years since he had spent Easter in Sydney,
and now that he was at S. James’, he was very keen to
help in some protest against the Show being open on
Good Friday.
It seemed to him very dreadful that the Churches
would not combine in one big effort of protest, not only
against the Show, but pleasure-seekers in general.
'Well, the only thing left is to make our individual
protest in our own humble way,’ said John.
So, on Good Friday John wore his cassock and biretta
throughout the day. He said: 'As I travel on trams and
ferries, among people going to the Show and other
places of pleasure, they’ll probably say: "What is this
fool doing in that long coat and funny hat?” and when
they stop to think, it might just remind them that it is
Good Friday, and though they may not turn back from
their pleasure-seeking, they will probably remember
that it is the day on which Our Lord was Crucified for
them, and how that hundreds of people were keeping it
as a day of devotion, and even that might be a help.’
He fasted from dinner on Maundy Thursday, was
present at the morning services at S. James’; then that
trip across to S. Thomas’, North Sydney. Some of S.
James’ parishioners also journeyed to be present at that
service, and they tell us of his inspiring addresses and
devotional prayers.
Immediately after that service, at which there was a
large attendance throughout the three hours, John made
his way back to S. James’ Rest Room, to have a cup
of tea before continuing the journey to the men in
Riley Street.
After their service and they had had their tea they
joined John, and all walked together to S. James’ for
early Evensong, which was held before the lantern
service.
As they walked along people turned to look at these
30 or 40 shabby-looking men, and one remarked upon
it to John, but his reply was: 'They’re not looking at


you; it’s my funny hat.’ As they proceeded, a police-
man approached John and said: 'Are these men giving
you trouble, sir?’
'Not at all/ said John, in his hearty jovial way.
'We’re all going to S. James’ Church!’ The policeman
expressed his surprise and withdrew.
On entering the Church John tried to persuade them
to occupy the pews in the centre of the Church, but
they preferred the back pews. He saw to it that all
were provided with books, and, as he proceeded with
Evensong, my mind was carried back to the time in
Bourke, when the shearers came to Church, for he occa-
sionally stopped to tell them where they would find the
place 'in the red book.’ Before the lantern service began
the Rector went along to the men and gave them a
hearty welcome, having a few words with men here and
there.
John sat with the men during the lantern service, and
he said his heart bounded with joy when the men sang
the hymns so heartily.
That was a heavy day for John, who afterwards said:
'Perhaps mine was a weak protest against pleasure-
seekers, but it was very hard to carry out. I felt the
whole world’s scoffing eyes upon me, and I longed to run
away, hearing mocking remarks and sniggers every-
where I went, but I was determined to carry out my
humble witness.’
The Fiery Cross, 1930.
John was its Custodian in Sydney that year.
How symbolical it seems to us now, that this young
Priest should be the one chosen to hand on the Fiery
Cross to those two much older Priests, Dr. Micklem and
the Rev. F. W. Riley, of S. Mary’s, Waverley (both of
whom showed a love for him as that of a father for his
son), and to have finished his work here on earth so
soon afterwards, leaving them to carry on the torch.


It is remarkable that so many of John’s possessions
were stolen from him.
At S. John’s, Armidale, his bicycle was stolen just
before he was to leave College. In Bourke a beautiful
rug which was presented to him was very soon stolen
from ofi his bed. His Communion Bag was stolen from
the Church in Bourke —when the police were searching
for the man, John’s greatest hopes were that they’d find
the bag and not the man; they found both, and when
the man was on trial John pleaded for leniency for him,
though he was a stranger, because he was an old man and
had committed sacrilege whilst under the influence of
drink.
A few weeks after arriving in Sydney a thief entered
our home and robbed John of all his clothes and every
article of sentimental value, including many presenta-
tions. All he wanted were his goods returned, but was
never anxious to have revenge on the thief.
S. James' Football Club.
John’s great aim was to bring men to Church; he
used to say: 'Women stick to their Church and are the
backbone of it; the men want encouragement and
sporting fellowship to keep them together.’
So, when the winter months were approaching, John
asked the Rector’s permission to form a football club.
This was granted, and John got to work making en-
quiries, etc., and before very long he had a number of
the young men, already members of S. James’, ready to
join up, but it was his aim to bring in others who did not
bother about Church, or were shy of going to Church.
They were not exempt from membership because they
were non-churchgoers—they were the very men he was
out to get, he wanted to give them his companionship
and the fellowship with the other young men who were
regular churchgoers, so that, in time, they might be en-
couraged to attend Church too.
They selected John as their captain and coach; they
trained twice a week. Often it was my job on training


nights to paint John’s back with iodine. He would say:
'ls there any skin off my shoulder, Ive?’ —there might
be a couple of patches of gravel-rash as large as one’s
hand on the back of his shoulder. My reply on one
occasion was: 'Goodness, John, how did you do that?
'Teaching the fellows how to fall,’ came his reply. 'But
you surely don’t have to take the skin off yourself to
do that,’ I said.
'lt’s better for me to lose a bit of skin than that any
of the boys should break their limbs because they don’t
know how to fall properly when they are playing,’ said
John-
Mother and I always hated football. John used to
say it was 'foolish to be nervous about a game just be-
cause a man had a bit of skin knocked off occasionally.’
'Why not come and see us play,’ he said to me. 'Our
boys are a bosker lot of chaps. Some of them are a bit
raw at the game yet, as they have never handled a foot-
ball till this year.’
By the second match I gathered enough courage to go
with John to see the game; I went a second time, but
afterwards said to John: 'l’m very sorry, but I really
can’t go to the football match again; it upsets me
terribly. lam all the time watching the players being
knocked about and forgetting all about the ball; I’ve
tried hard to be a sport but have failed in the attempt.’
So I did not go again to watch the match. John was
very disappointed, but he was very understanding and
did not scoff at my weakness or try again to persuade
me. How I wish he had, and that I had been there
when he was hurt, to know how really bad he was.
John was delighted one day when he told of how Dr.
Micklem had remarked that the organising of the foot-
ball club was bearing fruit, for he had noticed that the
members were very regular at Church —it was 'bringing
the lads to Church.’


THE LAST CHAPTER.
Every Saturday, when he went off to play, my first
thought was a prayer for his safe-keeping and for all the
team, nay, for every boy and man playing football that
day, and it was with thankful hearts that we received
him on his return; the minor scars and scratches were
worrying enough.
On August 9 he was present and celebrated Solemn
Eucharist, and was afterwards at the luncheon at the
Servants of the Sanctuary, and went direct from there
to the football field.
The whole afternoon I was anxious about John,
though I said nothing about it, and somehow I was pre-
pared to hear that he was hurt. He looked so pale when
he arrived home and said: 'l’ve had a bit of a knock
in the back.’
'Was it a "clean” game?’ we enquired. 'Yes, a per-
fectly clean game, a fellow was tackling me, and another
of the other team was running across the field so fast
that he couldn’t stop when we went down, and ran into
us —it’s all in the game of football.’ And though he
seemed to be in pain he tried to smile. We wanted him
to go to bed at once, but he said: 'l’ve promised to help
at the Heralds of the King Party; I must go. I’ll be
alright when I’ve had something to eat.’ He tried to
struggle through a meal, but failed. 'l’ll rest a while,
and then I’ll be able to go,’ he said, in spite of our
trying to persuade him to abandon all idea of going, but
finally was compelled to give in and go to bed, after
we telephoned his apology.
That evening Dr. Micklem sent word that he would
Celebrate at the 9 o’clock Eucharist in his stead on the
morrow. But John was always so anxious that football
should not interfere with his work, so when the priest


and servers entered the sanctuary next morning, it was
not Dr. Micklem who wore the Cope, but Father
Martyn, looking very pale, and when he began to speak
there was a note of physical weakness in his voice, which
seemed to grow stronger after a little.
John’s address at that Eucharist, from the Chancel
steps that morning, was mostly concerning the wonder-
ful life of Sister Hilda, who had passed away the day
previously. He told how that it had been his privilege
to take the Blessed Sacrament to Sister Hilda regularly
during her last illness, and how that she had told him
that the doctor had said she 'could not live,’ and repeat-
ing her words, he said, 'I know this old body of mine
cannot live, but I am going to live on, and,’ said John,
'she has gone to meet her Lord.’
After the service that morning John was examined by
the doctor, who told him that the right kidney was
bruised.
On returning home he announced the doctor’s verdict
and said he had told him there was no need to go to bed,
but that in a few days, when all the bruised blood had
absorbed, he would be all right again—he could keep
his appointments, but to rest as much as possible.
So John assured his parents that there was nothing
to worry about.
He rested that afternoon and at Evensong was taking
an active part in the service as usual, retiring immedi-
ately on his return home.
On the Monday he went early with Dr. Micklem by
car to the Requiem Eucharist of Sister Hilda, in St.
Gabriel’s Chapel, Waverley, and swung the incense at
the service, which must surely have been tiring for him
under the circumstances, and preceded the body to the
grave, having a long walk from the cemetery gates.
When he returned home looking very tired and pale
but never once complaining, so that we really had no
idea of how he was suffering—he was still his bright self.
He told of the beautiful Requiem from beginning to
end and of the funeral service and the part he took in
each, and said, 'I was never at such a cheery Requiem
and funeral —they were beautiful. The sisters sang the


hymns lustily and brightly—no one could feel really
sad.’
But his mother said, 'lsn’t it awful to lose people
like Sister Hilda and Bishop Long? We couldn’t afford
to lose either of them—the Church needed them.’
John put his head on one side and in his venerable
way said:
'Mum! God works in a mysterious way, and it’s not
for us to question!’
The truth of his words have since pressed heavily
upon us.
Tuesday was his usual day for Celebrating the Holy
Communion at S. James’. On this particular Tuesday,
without complaint of suffering, John was to be seen at
the Altar at the appointed time, as he went about his
duties as usual, still smiling and bright, though looking
very pale and beginning by now to look a little stooped.
No one seemed to realize how much he was suffering.
We were seeing to it that his diet was nourishing, and
occasionally reminded him that he should see the doctor
again, but his reply was that he was attending the
doctor, and said that he was taking the medicine pre-
scribed by him regularly.
On the Tuesday evening he attended the meeting of
the Cathedral School Old Boys’ Union, and by this time
was using the aid of a walking stick.
So often we suggested putting off an appointment,
but his reply would be that he 'had promised, and he
must go.’
But this was nothing out of the ordinary—he was
always to be depended upon. John seldom declined an
invitation to anybody’s home, a meeting of any kind, a
service, or anything else, if he could possibly help it.
He would attend as many as three meetings in one even-
ing, and could be depended upon to arrive at the time
appointed.
The members of the Football Club tell a rather funny
story of how he changed rather quickly. It was his turn
to do duty at Evensong. Immediately after, he stripped
off his cassock and donned the football shorts and
guernsey, hurrying down to the Domain with the boys,


returning to change into evening dress clothes to go
with a party to a Ball, and wishing to wear a collar and
tie on this occasion, he found that his neck had grown
rather a little larger since he last wore the former —the
boys proceeded to stretch the collar for him and suc-
ceeded in tearing it in halves, but secured another, better
fitting, for him, and enjoyed the fun of sending him off
in time to the Ball. They have many stories of love and
cheerfulness to tell of their beloved Captain.
So often, that he might not have to decline an invita-
tion to anybody’s home, he would accomplish much
travelling in ferry, tram and train to 'fit in’ several
visits on one day.
Everybody wanted him. We saw very little of him —
so many duties and people claimed his time.
On the Wednesday morning John went to St. Hilda’s
Hostel, Stanmore, to Celebrate the Holy Communion
in their Chapel, and to all outward appearances was
bright and cheerful. In all probability the remainder
of that day was as busy as those previous ones. He
arranged that day for his mother to be admitted to the
War Memorial Hospital on the following Monday.
The Thursday was the only morning since his accident
that John took advantage of resting in bed a little late,
and then not for long—some appointment awaited him.
He admitted that day that he was feeling ill, and
after the evening meal, when he was about to leave home
to take a Confirmation Class, he collapsed at the door.
He tried so hard to go, saying, 'I must go, I don’t want
to lose those candidates,’ but, instead, was compelled to
go to bed.
Next day Dr. Micklem and Father Hume called at
different times to see him, and assured him that they
would do his duties —Dr. Micklem telling John that
although he was to preach on Sunday at 11 o’clock he
was not to worry about it, but that he himself would
preach instead. 'l’ll be there when the whips are crack-
ing, sir,’ was John’s reply. But, at 11 p.m., he was
admitted to Sydney Hospital in a critical condition, and
though he continued to be bright and cheerful, his con-
dition became worse daily.


'He’s a wonderful patient,’ the nurses repeatedly said,
and one told of how the man in the next bed had been
'not nearly so ill as Father Martyn, but that he had
been considerably cheered by him.’
Ward 7 was John’s charge, so he knew several of the
men in it, and was glad to be in that public ward.
All those days, from 9th till 15 th, the haemorrhage
had continued, though we knew nothing of it —
even after entering hospital on the latter date, all
efforts to stop the haemorrhage failed. A blood trans-
fusion was found necessary, but it would be of no use
till the haemorrhage had ceased. When seeking to draw
blood from his arm for a test it was found that there
was none to draw —eventually a little was drawn from
the lobe of his ear. Out of 60 tests, two men were asked
to stand by for emergency.
Since entering hospital, John’s mother had been
deprived of seeing her son owing to her own ill-health,
and on the Monday she was admitted to hospital in
Waverley and operated upon on the Tuesday. John was
very anxious about her, but as the operation was success-
ful he was very much relieved concerning her.
On the other hand, the seriousness of John’s illness
was not made known to his mother, and she wondered
why he should be kept in hospital so long. Friends helped
to keep her bright and cheerful with frequent visits,
bestowing beautiful gifts of flowers upon her. She
enquired of news of her boy from everybody, but all
were reserving the truth till he had recovered, and she,
too, was well enough to know.
On the Wednesday the doctors decided early in the
morning to operate and remove the kidney. We were
with John before he went to the operating theatre; he
was very cheerful, and still smiling. He said: 'All my
blood has gone; I have to get back now something that
I was once able to give—they’re going to give me a blood
transfusion, and then they are going to remove the kid-
ney. They asked my consent —I told them to go ahead,
they knew best what to do.’ And he added: 'Cheer up,
Dad, I’ll be alright. Cheer up, Ive. I did it in the exe-


cution of my duty, trying to keep the fellows together
and bringing men to Church/
Another blood transfusion followed the operation,
immediately after which I saw him.
On entering the room he was quite conscious, greeted
me, and said: 'Hello, Girlie —they’re wonderful; they’re
doing all they can for me; don’t detain them in their
work.’ He was now in a private ward, with special
night and day nurses. Truly, the Sydney Hospital did
all they could for John.
But what of the hundreds of loving friends! They
made frequent visits to the hospital; though debarred
from seeing their beloved Priest, they could at least en-
quire and send some beautiful flowers or some nourish-
ing dainty in to him with a message.
The nurses said they have never known a patient to
have so many enquiries, both personally and by tele-
phone. They wrote him beautiful letters, and sent him
beautiful messages. His room was as a beautiful flower
garden. One bunch of flowers that were brought from
a home garden on the Sunday morning were taken by
the children into their Chapel, and there remained dur-
ing their Eucharist; afterwards the children sent kisses
in the flowers to their beloved Father Martyn, and when
I gave him their message his face lighted up.
John’s condition did not seem to change much in the
days that followed; no one but the Clergy and his own
people were allowed to see him.
And in spite of my many enquiries of those who
should know, the only reply I would get would be:
'Your brother is a very sick man,’ and on one occasion
the Superintendent said: 'Everything possible is being
done.’ I said: 'Do you think that he won’t get better?’
He replied: 'I wouldn’t say that.’
I knew that my brother was a sick man, and that
everything possible was being done for him, but that
did not convey to me the fact that he was dying!
The Rev. C. King, on the staff of S. Thomas’, North
Sydney, arranged to provide champagne for John in any
quantity to strengthen him.


Brother Tom (The Rev. T. M. Armour), of the
8.G.5., was taking a mission at S. Thomas’, North
Sydney, at the time, and paid John frequent visits,
which considerably helped him; his face always lit up
when he said: 'Tom was in to see me.’
It was quite evident that his suffering was great, and
as one quietly entered his room he would be seen clutch-
ing with his thin hand something near his neck that was
concealed —it was his little Crucifix—his eyes closed, his
lips moving slightly, and an expression of agony upon
his thin, pale face. But when he opened his eyes to see
someone standing beside him, it was with a smile he
greeted them. And as I sat silently beside his bed, so
often he said: T’m sorry I’m so uninteresting, Ive.’ To
which I would reply: 'You don’t have to be interesting,
darling. I wasn’t talking because I thought you’d
rather be quiet.’ 'Yes—as long as you’re there, that’s
all I want,’ he said.
He lay most of the time with his eyes closed, occasion-
ally opening them to give me a smile and make an
occasional remark. He never forgot to enquire about
his mother’s progress in hospital, and one day said:
'How much does Mum know about me?’ 'She knows
that you’ve had one transfusion,’ I said. 'Would you
like me to tell her all?’ He shook his head slowly.
His father was able to visit him frequently in the day
time.
'There’s lots of work to do yet,’ John said one day.
'Yes, darling, and we’re all waiting for you to get better
to do it, but don’t worry about work now, everything
is going on alright.’ But afterwards I realised that John
was not referring to the work of the Church Militant,
but in Paradise.
On Monday, 25 th August, they telephoned from the
hospital and said: 'Your brother has had a very bad
night,’ also telephoning to Dr. Micklem the same news.
I went to the hospital and met Dr. Micklem also on his
way, arriving to find John improved after a bad night.
We were both surprised and relieved to see him look-
ing so bright, and he talked to us, but I’m afraid we did


not understand his meaning when he said: 'l’m going
to be cleaned up to-day.’ I asked 'What do you mean?’
And, rubbing his thin hand round his chin that was now
covered with a heavy beard, he replied: 'l’m going to
have this cleaned off to-day.’ How I wish I had known
his real meaning of those words, for I feel so sure now
that he knew the end was near.
After giving John his blessing, the Rector left us,
confident that John was improving; it seemed to us that
he had passed a crisis in the night, and now we were con-
fident of his progress.
For the first time during his illness John asked me to
get some little thing he fancied to eat, which I procured
for him, and he heartily enjoyed.
So that, later, when I left him to go to the hospital
in Waverley to see my mother, it was with a thankful
heart that my brother was really improving.
All that evening John was very restless, and when I
asked the Sister in Charge, doing evening duty: 'How
is my brother this evening?’ her reply was in the nature
of a question: 'How do you think he seems?’ To which
I replied that I thought he seemed a 'little delirious.’ She
replied that he was.
We were giving him Benger’s Food and champagne
in alternate spoonsful. Once, when he wanted more,
he said: 'I thirst!’ Surely he was meditating upon the
suffering of Him Whom he had served throughout his
life!
The doctor and the night sister announced that 'lf
he could only have some sleep he’d be better,’ for he had
'not slept for about twenty-four hours.’
So we tried to settle his restlessness to induce sleep.
I seemed to be the only one who could do this, for when
I would say, 'Just lie still for a little while,’ he would do
so.
Father Hume came, and, while he prayed, John lay
quietly and responded to the prayers, but between them
he requested to be moved in some way or other.
When he could feel the strength of my hand in his
he seemed comforted, and did not complain of losing
his strength.


At his request, Father Hume and I held him up on
the pillows in a sitting position, and he slept for a
quarter of an hour. He seemed calmer after that. How
thankful we were —that was what the doctor had said
he needed.
John could hear the Post Office clock strike always,
and every evening at eleven o’clock he would say, 'You
go home now, dear, or you will miss the last tram —I’d
be worried if I thought you had to walk,’ and he would
raise his right hand with two fingers outstretched to
give me his blessing as I left him.
'Brother Tom’s gone back to Reunion, he’ll tell the
boys about me, and give them my love,’ said John, 'but
I forgot to tell him the news.’ 'What was that, darling?’
I asked. 'Eleven operations and only one anaesthetic,’ he
said brokenly. 'Brother Tom knows all about it, dear,
and he’ll tell the Brothers,’ I replied.
It was long past eleven o’clock when John said, 'Good-
bye, Ivy, good-bye.’ In my ignorance, I calmly replied,
'l’m not going yet, darling, it’s quite early, and I’m stay-
ing a while longer.’
I had no idea he was going, but thought I had been
mistaken about the previous evening and that he was
now passing through the crisis.
It was after that that we held him up while he slept,
and he seemed a good deal more comfortable, but I
decided to stay the night, but foolishly, instead of
telephoning to ask the night porter of the flats to waken
my father and tell him so, I asked Father Hume to take
me home to tell him myself.
We were out of the room while John was receiving
attention. I went back into the room; he looked so com-
fortable. I kissed him, and said, 'Just lie still for a few
minutes till I come back, darling, I won’t be long.’ John
looked at me without a word.
We hurried there and back —only in the flat a few
minutes while I explained that John was restless, and I
thought I’d stay the night. 'Very well, my girl,’ said my
father.
If you’ll just see me to the hospital gates I’ll be al


right—don’t bother to come further,’ I said to Father
Hume, but he continued with me. We were only twenty
minutes away, and I rested on a chair at the top of the
stairs when we got to the ward—l was out of breath.
Father Hume went ahead into the room, coming out
again quickly, he said quietly, 'He’s gone.’
'Gone to sleep at last, I’m so glad,’ I said. He shook
his head. 'What do you mean?’ I said hastily. 'Come
in,’ said he. John looked so comfortable and much
better, lying in the same position as I had left him, with
his head turned towards where I always sat.
'He’ll be much better after that, he is asleep, isn’t he?’
But Father Hume shook his head and whispered, 'He’s
with the saints in Paradise.’
'Why didn’t you tell me? I would never have left
him,’ I said to sister and doctor, who both said 'I didn’t
know.’
Certainly his pulse seemed strong and his voice, too,
was very strong —perhaps they didn’t know the time
he would go, but they certainly knew he could not live.
We learned afterwards that the little nurse was with
him when he went, quite suddenly; he looked up and
said calmly, 'Good-bye, Nurse.’ and closed his eyes, to
open them on the other side of the Veil, 'ln Paradise.’
I could not believe it! I went next day to see him.
There he lay, quite still—in his bed. But now we can
rejoice, for that was not John, but merely his poor, tired
body, 'for he being dead yet speaketh and liveth on.’
That day John’s body was taken back to S. James’,
and there he lay in the Chancel with six tall candlesticks
standing round his bier, and a vigil was kept throughout
the night, while many came and went, some of them
poor, homeless men from the Domain who were now
going to miss him.
Next morning a large number of people made their
Communion at 7.45 a.m.


The flag of S. George was flying half-mast from S.
James’ flagpole, everybody spoke with hushed voices,
nay, many could not find words. Priests, aged and
youthful, hard, worldly business-men, light-hearted
sports, and stalwart youths, from men of high degree to
men of poverty and degradation, the Sisters of the
Church, venerable and youthful, from the aged and
motherly woman to the pretty young maiden, and little
boys and girls, to those unsteady of limb and with white
hair, from the strong and wealthy to the sick and needy,
of all denominations, wept at his passing.
While the little ones, who did not understand, con-
tinually asked, 'When is Father Martyn coming back?’
One of S. James’ Choristers, a lad of 17 years, said,
'He was nearly the Perfect Man, wasn’t he?’
On August 27th a Choral Requiem was celebrated in
S. James’ while John lay in the Chancel. What we knew
to be his wish was carried out —for he had said on several
occasions, when in health, T hope they shall have every-
thing white, and plenty of candles at my Requiem.’
Three Priests on the Altar wore beautiful white copes
and the servers gold apparels. The choir sang with a
note of thanksgiving a beautiful choral setting, and as
we sang 'The King of Love my Shepherd is’ we almost
imagined we could hear John’s beautiful voice joining
in the singing of the Brotherhood hymn.
We sang throughout the service, for we knew that
was what John would like us to do. We thought
of how he had described Sister Hilda’s Requiem as a
beautifully bright and cheery service. Many Clergy
attended in robes, and many were scattered about the
thickly crowded congregation, of which a very large
percentage were men. In the front pews were to be seen
about twenty of the Sydney Hospital nurses in uniform;
they had gone to the service 'on duty,’ and marched
along the streets together—this was a most uncommon
occurrence, for it is against the rules of the hospital for


a nurse to go outside the hospital gates in uniform —
many other nurses were among the congregation in
'mufti/ off duty.
All guilds and organisations were represented.
At the conclusion of a glorious service many made
their way to the Chancel, walking reverently and affec-
tionately round his bier, which was surrounded by a
wealth of flowers, and under those on the top of his
bier was his S. John’s hood, laid there as might be a
soldier’s helmet and sword, and his pew was, as it were,
'roped off’ with his white stole and a wreath was upon
the seat thereof.
A densely crowded congregation attended his funeral
service—while crowds failed to gain admission. The
Choir stalls were again crowded with choristers, and the
boy choristers of S. Andrew’s Cathedral filled the front
pews, while on the other side of the aisle rows and rows
of men were to be seen, representing The Cathedral
Old Boys’ Union, various sporting bodies, many football
teams from various parts, some men who had once been
Scouts in his troop, many masonic brethren, men and
women of all types and all denominations, Jews and
Gentiles, and among the Clergy of various types and
ages were to be seen Marist Brothers, representing the
Roman Communion.
The whole of the Chancel was as a wonderful flower
garden.
The Choir sang beautifully a lovely Anthem that
John would have enjoyed—the singing of the Twenty-
third Psalm was again a reminder of his work in the
Brotherhood of the Good Shepherd. Dr. Micklem spoke
with genuine personal feeling. All present showed
visible signs of grief, and as the funeral procession left
the Chancel, following the Cross-bearer and taperers
came a server bearing affectionately his S. John’s hood.
And as he was taken out of the Sanctuary for the last
time the Nunc Dimittis was sung —so symbolical.


Followed in the Master’s Footsteps.
When we sum up his short life, do we not find that he
did this? For —
He was taken to the Temple as a little child.
Gave his life wholly and solely to the Church.
Was obedient to his parents.
Surely he described the Scriptures among the learned
doctors and teachers by singing beautiful solos in the
Cathedral.
Went out to the highways and byways and preached
the Gospel.
Raised up the fallen.
Healed the sick.
Taught and blessed the little children.
Mixed with, and was loved by, publicans and sinners.
Men followed him.
Took happiness into the homes of the poor.
Was humble of heart, slow to chide, and swift to
bless.
Died bringing men to Church.
Suffered patiently and smiled to the last day.
And left us a message —
'There’s lots of work to do yet.’
The closing words of one of his last addresses were
'Cheer up, keep smiling, and pray hard.’
'Brother John,’ a humble name for a humble soul,
who won no high degrees acquired by study, assumed no
authority above his position—but won for himself the
highest degrees of love from all who knew him, by his
very natural self, bigness of heart, buoyant nature,
sincerity, sympathy, outspoken, straightforward
opinion, suiting himself to all circumstances —he was old
with the aged; he was business-like and serious with the
business man; he was a boy, as full of fun as any of the
lads; he was only as old as the children when in their
company, and as their teacher he remembered their
limit of intellect. He loved the beauty of Art, yet was
not prone to look askance at those less artistic in taste.
With a love so great, embracing all his surroundings


and human nature as a whole, with none the less love for
beast and bird and vegetation, the wonderful works of
God.
HIS PRAYER.
Was this the secret of his beautiful life?
A rather ragged piece of paper, discoloured with
either use or age, was found in John’s pocket-wallet
after his passing. On it was written, in John’s own
hand-writing, the following:—
A Morning Prayer.
All through this day, Dear Lord, let me touch as
many lives as possible for Thee, and every life I touch
do Thou, by Thy Eloly Spirit, quicken, whether through
the word I speak, the prayer I breathe, or the life I live:
So shall Thy Kingdom come on earth, as it is in Heaven.
Amen.
EXTRACTS FROM RESOLUTIONS.
Sydney Diocesan Synod:—
May the memory of his Consecrated life lead
other young men into the Sacred Ministry.’
S. James’ Vestry:—
His character, his friendliness, his priestly
service, and his single-hearted devotion to his work had
won increasing appreciation during the brief period of
his ministry in the Parish, and his passing means to all
members of the congregation the loss of a loyal friend
and a faithful Priest.’
Guild of the Servants of the Sanctuary:
'Though only with us for a brief period he greatly
endeared himself to us all. We cherish the memory of
his bright and happy fellowship. He has left us an
example that will not fade, of the joy in the Lord which
was so evidently his strength.’
S. James’ Football Club:—
We feel that we have sustained an irreparable
loss by his untimely death, and we realise that we have
lost in him a firm and staunch friend.


'On the field of football he proved himself an ideal
sportsman —full of pluck and courage, never beaten,
most chivalrous to his opponents, most considerate to his
own team —a great leader, who inspired us all.
'As he played the game of football, so he played the
game of life. We are not ashamed to admit that we all
feel better men for having had the benefit of his friend-
ship. His name will ever live in our hearts. . . .’
Brotherhood of the Good Shepherd (Principal) :
' It was hard to part with John when he went
to S. James’, but we felt that he had given to the
Brotherhood the fullest service that we could expect of
any man. I have never known a Priest’s life so full
as was John’s. He accomplished more in his time, both
in the Brotherhood and at S. James’, more than any of
us could have done in a longer period. We are
proud that he belonged to the 8.G.5., and his memory
will ever be treasured within this Brotherhood which he
so loyaly served.’
Lodge Tranquility (Masonic) :
'. . . One great characteristic of Brother John’s life
was that with whomsoever he made contact, it was
always for their good. In his lodge, the sincerity and
love he showed for his work in the far West led members
to send each Christmas a large quantity of toys for the
bush children. The Master of the Lodge has asked me
to inform you that the Christmas toys will be sent by
Lodge Tranquility in perpetuity as a Brother John
Memorial. This is but one way in which it is proposed
to perpetuate his memory.’
Extract from report in Western Herald, Bourke: —
'. . . Strong men bowed themselves, young children
spoke in whispers and in nearly every house in Bourke
the womenfolk showed visible signs of their grief—be-
cause the late Brother John was loved and respected by
everyone. . . .’
A man who went to Leichhardt Stadium met one of
the boxers and said, 'How are you to-night? To which
the boxer replied, 'Not too good; I can t win to-night


—l’ve lost one of my best friends to-day—the Rev. John
Martyn. Talk about a sport: he was the right stuff; a
better fellow I never knew.’
'I think there were few of us who were not drawn
nearer to God by his unfailing faith and devotion during
his illness,’ wrote the charge nurse on night duty.
PERSONAL TRIBUTES.
By the Right Rev. Ed. N. Wilton:
The Rev. John Dent Martyn was presented as a pro-
bationer Chorister at the age of 8 years, and inside three
months was admitted to full Chorister status and sang
his first solo, in Sydney Cathedral—the selection being
from Wesley’s 'Wash Me Throughly.’ The Cathedral
Organist, Mr. Joseph Massey (the beloved friend of all
the Choristers, men and boys), who also trained the
Choir, was soon fully alive to the exceptional gifts of the
youngest member of the fine body under his direction.
The high hopes centred in small Chorister John quickly
began to be realised. Year after year he won —without
serious opposition—the sight-reading prize for music;
90 per cent, was the standard he set and maintained.
The Annual Gift of the Cathedral Old Boys’ Union for
all-round usefulness and ability—a prize much coveted
—was awarded to him by the votes of staff and scholars,
on several occasions.
From the moment of his arrival and acceptance this
boy, with a sunny winning personality, attached him-
self to me, and, when yet but eight, made me under-
stand it was his fixed intention to be what I was —a
priest of the Church of England. John had no difficulty
in getting on with others; boys and masters of the
Cathedral Choir School, with which he was destined to
serve in unbroken connection of ten completed years,
all took him to their hearts because of a delightful
naturalness and engaging modesty that never deserted
him and were referred to, with warm commendation, by
the Bishop of Bathurst (The Rt. Rev. G. Merrick
Long) when ordaining him to the priesthood in S.


Martin’s Chapel, Bathurst, in 1926. Personal triumphs
and a more than ordinary amount of popular apprecia-
tion failed to spoil John or to rob him of a striking
simplicity of manner. He was generous to a fault, un-
swerving in his settled determination to seek Holy
Orders, and in his devotion to his family and friends.
Wherever he went he 'made’ music, and as he grew older,
it was more and more evident that he must be included
in the company of those of whom Keble was thinking
when on S. Matthew’s Day he wrote:
'Who carry music in their heart,
Through dusky lane and wrangling mart,
Plying their daily task with busier feet
Because their secret souls a holy strain repeat.’
He was a reliable singer, able to sustain his alto part
unerringly. He showed in very tender years, just nine,
that he had confidence and ideas in making a telling
speech on 'Empire’ at a special luncheon given by busi-
ness men, after the Choristers had joined in a public
demonstration in honour of Empire Day—in the Sydney
Stock Exchange.
He was my constant shadow on those many occasions
when the Choir, taking its melodious and uplifting Mes-
sage of Song, went into distant places within and with-
out the Diocese to deepen and extend the influence of
the mother Cathedral Church of Australia. Two out-
standing visits under this heading were to Yass and to
Wagga Wagga. Such excursions were invaluable in the
expanding and impressionable lives of young city-bred
Australians, and certainly helped to create a thirst for
the open spaces of our vast continent —a longing that
was to be duly satisfied in the case of this ardent soul,
when, as a Bush Brother, he was for five years to roam
over the far-flung and spacious areas of the Bourke
District.
When I resigned the Precentorship, after 10 years of
the happiest service, to go to Bathurst as Sub-Dean, this
lad made up his mind to follow that he might continue
within the one Diocese the close friendship between us.
At this stage there came into John’s life a double
crisis. Where should he make preparation for the


realisation of bis Call? Was he justified in disappointing
the long-cherished hopes of his dear father whose valu-
able and profitable book-binding business in Sydney
had been built up in the expectation that John would
enter into, and, in due time, take the complete control
of it? He succeeded Mr. Oliver Hole as junior master
in the Choir School. This period of office was marked
by the creation and successful carrying on of a smart
and jolly Scout Troop.
Next we find him in 1921 at S. John’s College, Armi-
dale, N.S.W., earnestly addressing himself to a theologi-
cal training before admission to the Brotherhood of the
Good Shepherd. Another former chorister, the Rev. W.
E. Butler, sang the Litany at the service in S. Ambrose’s
Church at Gilgandra, when Bro. John was admitted to
the Diaconate. At his Ordination to the Priesthood, four
of those who laid hands upon him were intimately asso-
ciated with his life. The Bishop of Bathurst had kept in
affectionate touch with him for ten years. Bishop
Wylde, the Principal of the 8.G.5., after supervising his
Diaconate Service, was keenly interested in his coming
to strengthen the depleted Priestly Staff of the Brother-
hood. The Rev. Leslie Walker, now Vice-Principal of
the 8.G.5., was closely associated with John during his
years at the Theological College, and the writer fanned
the flame of early desire until it burst into a blaze of
glory on Ordination Day.
Three rather personal touches that awaken tender
thoughts and evoke heartfelt thanksgiving may be per-
mitted in this all too brief recollection of a shining
Christian soul:—
(1) On the Sunday morning after his Ordination he
was the Celebrant at the early Eucharist in All Saints’
Cathedral, Bathurst. I followed with the Chalice. What
a moment of inexpressible joy for his wonderful mother
and devoted sister, Ivy, as they received from him, and
for me, his old master and friend! What a time of thrill-
ing pride for his deeply attached father who, with the
others of the family, had made continuous sacrifices
gladly that their 'dear boy’ might respond to the Call
of His Heavenly Lather!


(2) When I left for the Mandated Territory of New
Guinea to serve for a while on the Melanesian Mission
Staff, it was John Martyn, priest, recently appointed to
the staff at S. James’ Church, Sydney, who, true to a
well-developed pastoral instinct, kept a constant and
affectionate eye upon the welfare of my aged mother,
compelled by physical disability to stay within the con-
fines of the home. This ministry brought another link
in the chain that will forever bind us together about the
feet of God.
(3) A fortnight before the accident that had such
fatal consequences, my dear young friend came across
to see us all at 'Gasmata,’ Mosman. He was in his
cheeriest and breeziest mood and spoke enthusiastically
of his splendid chances for social service in our great
city, of his warm regard for those with whom he was
working so very happily (The Rev. Dr. Micklem,
rector, and the Rev. W. Hume). It was easy to see he
revelled in his particular job of looking after and teach-
ing the little ones, who met in the Children’s Chapel of
the Crypt of the Church!
That last afternoon together will never be forgotten:
it provided so much that in retrospection has a special
significance. Our minds were engrossed with the build-
ing up of God’s Kingdom in this sun-kissed land, as we
travelled by ferry back to Brother John’s headquarters.
We touched upon a matter uppermost in his heart —his
next sermon to be delivered at the Choral Eucharist in
S. James’ Church on the ensuing Sunday morning. The
sermon remains unspoken. These are two of the con-
siderations, drawn from the Church itself, that Brother
John intended to present and to enlarge upon:
(a) There was the consideration of the Mosaic in the
floor of the Chancel, revealing a cleverly conceived de-
sign made permanent in masterly fashion by the co-
operation of so many little pieces, every one of value:
all held together by the Spirit of God, all contributing to
the realisation of a holy purpose —the beautification of
God’s House.
(b) The Spire of this historic Church of S. James\


bearing such striking witness to the presence of the
Christian Faith in the greatest city south of the line,
was also to come under consideration. The thought of
the danger of the overshadowing effect of materialism,
of the steady and sure shutting out of the upward point-
ing finger of the Church by the rising and ever rising
higher of the buildings of the city, saddened while it
stirred and stimulated the fighting and soldierly qualities
of his manly soul.
My few last glimpses of him were in the Sydney Hos-
pital. There he lay outstretched and helpless after a
severe operation, full of cheerful courage, gazing wist-
fully into my eyes. It was my unspeakable privilege to
give him a personal Benediction before leaving him, and
with him to call down richest blessings upon the dear
ones remaining.
When the Lord turns to look upon us —you and me —
may He find us following, and may He use us as He used
Brother John to bring others to follow Him in The
Way—The Christian Way.
May we not reverently think of him who has followed
in the Way and been caught out of our sight, but for a
little moment, as singing with rapture: —
'O Light , that followest all my way,
I yield my flickering torch to Thee;
My heart restores its borrowed ray
That in Thy sunshine’s blaze its day
May brighter, fairer be.’
ED. N. WILTON,
Bishop.
S. Matthew’s Day, 1931.
By Mr. Joseph Massey , Late Organist and Choir Master ,
S. Andretv’s Cathedral , Sydney.
During my occupancy of the position of Organist at
S. Andrew s Cathedral, Sydney (nearly a quarter of a
century), many fine boys of sterling character and
musical ability came under my supervision. One of the
foremost of these boys was John D. Martyn, who came,
a little chap 8 years of age. I could not but admire his


courage in going through the test for admission, which
he passed quite easily—a test which is severe enough to
frighten many older and bigger boys.
Soon he was promoted from a probationer to a seat
in the Choir stalls, when he was given a little solo to
sing from Wesley’s ''Wash Me Throughly.” He acquit-
ted himself so well as to gain the admiration of the
whole of the Choir, men and boys, including myself.
Thence onward, he steadily progressed till he was made
leader of his side, having become a first-class sight
reader and exponent of any solo work entrusted to him.
I always remember with great pleasure his beautiful
rendering of the solo parts in "Last
Judgment” among other works. After years of service,
his boy’s voice showed signs of breaking. He therefore
rested his voice for a short period, and later joined up
with the Choir as an adult member, rendering splendid
service therein. Much solo work included the tenor part
in Gounod’s "Redemption,” which he sang with marked
success.
About this time, he was appointed a Master in the
Choir School, where he was a tower of strength. His
strong personality, his goodness, courage, loyalty, and
sportsmanship were splendid assets in building up of
character in the boys, who displayed a great love for
him. His success here could not be excelled. However,
higher duties awaited him, and he was called away to
train for Holy Orders.
Some years after his leaving S. Andrew’s, I took a
trip with him to his parish of Bourke, for we were
always great friends, and I was amazed when I wit-
nessed some of the great splendid work he did there.
He brightened every face by his cheery manner. He
was a courageous fighter against evil of whatever kind.
No trouble was too great to do something for the great
cause of Christianity, and whatever he undertook he
carried out as far as was humanly possible.
The memory of John D. Martyn will remain with
me, as with many others doubtless, one of the most
beautiful things in my life.


By the Rev. E. H. Burgmann, Warden of S. John’s
College, Morpeth.
John Martyn entered S. John’s College, Armidale, on
the 2nd February, 1921. He left College, after having
completed a four years’ course, in October, 1924.
The Bishop of Bathurst, the late Dr. Long, wrote
before Jack’s entry —'Martyn promises to be good. He
is young and should do a thorough course. I would like
to see him matriculate, but leave that to him and you.’
The Bishop was greatly disappointed when Jack did
not turn out to-be a student. 'John Martyn’s failure is
a disappointment,’ he writes. But he lived, not only to
ordain Jack, but also to see him grow into one of his
most efficient and best beloved young Priests.
Jack was an outstanding example of the type of man
who failed consistently in examinations, but who had
brightness and alertness of wit, plenty of common sense
and practical ability, a good range of useful information
and powers of sound and intuitive judgment beyond the
ordinary. These qualities formed the background of
his life. He was sound and clean in limb and mind.
In the foreground were a radiant and cheerful disposi-
tion, a great and patient kindliness, an ever youthful
charm of manner. Jack was a loyal and loving soul,
and soon became a general favourite in College. He
had a good voice and considerable musical ability. He
soon became the entertainer par excellence. When Jack
got going on the old piano in the Common Room, the
College was quickly noisy and happy. It was not easy
for Jack to be quiet, except when asleep, and, according
to his mates, not even then, for it was confidently
asserted that Jack talked in his sleep. Still there were
stories of the soundness of his sleep, especially when it
was time to arise for Chapel. Again it was asserted that
Jack could be lifted out of bed, stood in the corner, and
still go on sleeping. Stories like these tend to become
exaggerated, but they become part of the store of tales
told in College, and were always told to glorify Jack.
The hero of College stories is always a man who has left
his mark on College life.


The gift of being childlike in soul without being
childish in mind is one of the greatest, and it was Jack’s
in no small measure. There was a lot of Peter Pan about
him. By virtue of this gift, Jack could enter where
others would be afraid. It might be among shearers,
sailors, or a conventional afternoon tea. It would need
to be tough or stiff if Jack could not penetrate its hide
or dissolve its starch. It was the same with individuals.
Jack’s guilelessness gave him perfect freedom of which
he was entirely unconscious. Sometimes, especially
after a collapse in the examination room, I would plead
with Jack to make a start at growing up. I would have
had genuine regrets if he had acted too literally on my
advice. For Jack to have changed his nature would
have been like spoiling a work of art. Many things are
more precious in life than the capacity to pass examina-
tions, and Jack had some of them. He could brighten
the depressed soul, he could give courage and grip to
the one who was giving up, he could get beneath the
shell of the lonely and shy, he could release the forces of
life in young and old, because he drank naturally and
unconsciously from the well-springs of abiding youth.
So he was to the end. He has shown us his place in
the scheme of things. He has left his witness to the
goodness of life. His memory will inspire, his spirit
cannot die. He lives in Him for Whom he witnessed so
well, in Him Who gives Life and gives it abundantly.
By the Rev. Hadden D. Vickery, Chaplain to Seamen,
Auckland, N. Z.
The Missions to Seamen Society furnishes an excep-
tional sphere in which students for the Priesthood may
obtain an insight into social work among men, and the
experience thus gained is helpful to the work of a
Priest, even though his future career may be that of a
Parish Priest and not that of a Chaplain to the Mission.
In common with many other branches, The Flying
Angel Mission, in Newcastle, N.S.W., has been accus-
tomed for many years past to. employ students from


Theological Colleges during the long vacations. John
Martyn was one of those so employed during my Chap-
laincy at Newcastle.
His work for the Mission was of outstanding merit.
His personality was such that he immediately won the
confidences and the interest of the men with whom he
came in contact in the forecastle, half-deck, and cabin.
His methods were unconventional, and probably
appealed the more on that account, as they were the
spontaneous expression of his sincerity and desire to
help. Certainly his visits to the ships attracted many
seamen to the Institute who would otherwise have found
other ways of filling in their time. His musical talent,
which was far above the average, was used to great
advantage, and his powers as an entertainer made the
evenings at the Institute very happy and pleasant, and
behind this use of his talent was manifest his interest in
the spiritual nature of the Mission’s work.
The charm of his personality not only won seafarers,
but also attracted numerous helpers at the Mission.
The Church’s work amongst seamen had a great at-
traction for him, and he often visited the Mission after
his actual connection with it had ended.
While in The Bush Brotherhood, he kept up a corre-
spondence with many seafarers, whose friendship he had
made at the Mission.
So adapted did he seem for the work, and so interested
and successful in it, that it appeared to me to be his
vocation, and it was my personal hope that when his
term with The Bush Brotherhood had ended he would
join the Missions to Seamen staff.
I thank God it was my privilege to work with him
aboard ships, on the sports ground, and in the Institute
and Chapel. To know him was to love him, and, still
more, to respect him.
Many there are who sail the seven seas who will never
forget John Martyn.


By The Right Rev. A. L. Wylde, M.A., Coadjutor
Bishop of Bathurst , Late Principal of the B.G.S.
'One of these Bush Parsons?’ said a man to me, some-
where round Coolabah, one hot day as we were talking
and drinking tea together. 'Yes, I’m a Bush Brother,’
was my answer to his query. 'Do you know Brother
John?’ 'Yes, he and I belong to the same Brotherhood.’
I passed muster when my friend heard that, and I soon
learnt that he had been shearing in several of the
sheds which Brother John visited faithfully when
shearing was on, North and West of Bourke, and I
learnt, too, what the shearers thought of Brother John;
he was to the shearers round Bourke what Hulton Sams
was to the Queensland shearers. How John Martyn
came to join the Brotherhood of the Good Shepherd
was in a way we may almost call 'accidental.’ He paid
a vacation visit to the Castlereagh District at the end
of 1921, during his first year at S. John’s College, and he
enjoyed his few weeks going about with the old horse
and sulky, and the people enjoyed his visits. It was
during this visit to Gilgandra that Brother Syd (the
Rev. J. S. Caddick-Adams) showed him several of the
maps of the district which he had drawn on small loose
sheets of paper taken from a diary. With characteristic
kindliness and thoughtfulness, John collected all the
sheets, took them to Sydney with him, had them all
bound together very beautifully, and presented the
finished article to Brother Syd. When his time at S.
John’s was drawing to its close, Bishop Long was dis-
cussing with me the problem of manning the Brother-
hood Districts, and a big problem it was, with only two
men in Priest’s Orders. 'I think John Martyn is the
very man you want.’ And sure enough those words
were true. We found that John was quite ready to join
us, and late in 1924 he was made Deacon and went up
to Bourke. There is a story that four young Australian
Brothers went out to tea together in Dubbo, and the
lady of the house said 'Brother John, will you say grace?
you are the oldest.’ Very gravely Brother John com-
plied, being quite the youngest of the party —but he


looked a good deal older than he was, and that was why
I dared to put him in charge of that vast Bourke Dis-
trict when he was a Deacon not quite twenty-three
years old. He took the advice given to him not to say
how young he was, just as he took all advice readily
and cheerfully. During most of his Diaconate he was
absolutely alone, for there was only one Priest for the
three Districts of Brewarrina, Bourke, and the Mining
District. The people of Bourke soon found, as we
found during Reunions, that they had in Brother John
one who really had the love of souls, one whom they
therefore could love and trust and follow. And with it
all he was always cheery and full of life and humour.
His ordination to the Priesthood was the happiest time
of his life, and the knowledge that he could go back to
his people and minister to them completely and fully
made him radiant with joy. He never spared himself,
and he never thought of himself. There were times —
though few knew of them—when he would be going
hard all day, and then he would be sitting up most of the
night with a sick man, or woman, or child. The only
complaint I ever heard against him was that people did
not see him often enough—that he was too much in the
Bush, according to the townspeople, and too much in
the Town according to the country people.
It would be easy to write a book about the journeys
he undertook, and the distances he covered, in the little
battered old single-seater Ford, and certainly some of
my most delightful trips were with him. He had the
happiest knack of making friends; getting out of the
car if ever he did come across anyone on the road,
squatting down on his haunches, and chatting away as
if he had known them for years. The following inci-
dent of his early Deacon days will illustrate this: I
had arranged to meet him in Louth; I was to travel
from Tottenham and he from Bourke, and we were to
meet in Louth for the evening service. When I arrived
Brother John had not been heard of. I suppose I showed
some little anxiety, for I had hardly entered the hotel
bar before seven men had offered to come out with me


and look for him. They were all fairly tired after a
long hot day’s work, but they knew something I did
not, namely, that there was a nasty washaway along the
Bourke road. On the way out I learnt how they valued
him, though they had only seen him once or twice. He
had not got to the washaway, his car had broken down
some miles out, and he was just settling down for the
night when we rescued him. We had a late service that
night, and then, in the bar parlour, a sing-song, with
John at the piano—where he excelled.
It is not of many people that it can be said that they
are as good with individuals as with crowds, but of
Brother John it could be said truly. He was not a
preacher in the generally accepted sense of that word,
but he was a splendid teacher, and his preparation of his
Confirmation candidates was exceptionally good, each
candidate receiving individual care and attention. It
was owing to this that the Church life in Bourke became
so remarkably good and keen, and not only in Bourke,
but in the smaller centres, and in the Bush. One of his
greatest joys was the building of the Church at Byrock;
it was not an easy job, and there were many obstacles
to be overcome, but he carried it through triumphantly.
I was visiting a Bourke patient in the Dubbo Hospital
some few weeks ago, just about a year after John’s
passing, and I mentioned Brother John. Instantly came
the remark: 'There’s no one quite like him.’ How true
it is—the loyal, obedient, humble, devout, loving,
Christian Priest, going about with his people’s names in
his heart and on his lips, cheerful and untiring, a true
shepherd in close touch with the Good Shepherd, Who
was so well known and knew so well.
By the Rev. T. M. Armour, 8.A., Principal of the
Brotherhood of the Good Shepherd.
My acquaintance with Brother John goes back to our
first meeting, immediately after my arrival in Australia.
I had left the boat at Melbourne, and had travelled by
train to be present at Bathurst for Synod. Just after
the service in All Saints’ Cathedral, an energetic young


Priest approached me with the words, 'I am Brother
John,’ and before I knew it, I had promised to go up to
Bourke in order that he could have a much needed
holiday. As I travelled westwards at the end of the
summer and saw the sandy plains, my heart sank.
Imagine the change from a comfortable life on board
ship to 'the everlasting sameness of the never ending
plains,’ and yet, for five years, Brother John, born and
bred in the city, had found here his ministry. My stay
in Bourke convinced me of the solid work which had
been done by this youthful Bush Brother. 'Youthful’
is perhaps the best word to describe the character of
Brother John. The buoyancy of his ministry made it
so attractive to the younger people, and yet withal he
did not sacrifice principles for the popularity which
came to him so easily. In his travels in the bush the
same care-free disposition made his presence so welcomed
in station, homestead and shearing shed. In few Bush
Brothers has the power of quickly winning the confi-
dence of shearers been so prominent. Most of us hang
round waiting for an oportunity. Brother John took
them by storm, and they were willing captives. I was
never privileged to spend a night with him when he spoke
to shearers; but travellers on the road have told me of
the joy they had in the shed when Brother John visited
them. He not only gave them a service, but he stayed
long afterwards and entertained them. His personality
radiated happiness and rough men caught it, forgot
their discontent, and realised that a Parson could be a
supremely happy person. The same cheerfulness was
dominant when Brother John entered Brotherhood
House for Reunions. We quickly knew that he had
arrived, and instinctively we forgot our troubles, or the
dusty roads we had travelled. The days together passed
all too soon in the Central House, and left us looking
forward to our next meeting with him. In August,
1929, he left us to join the staff of S. James’, Sydney,
but he promised that he would help us in Campaigns.
He would be another link with Sydney, and try to
widen the interest in our work.


A year afterwards, as I was conducting a Mission in
North Sydney, I learned that he had been taken to
Hospital as the result of a football accident. In spite of
extreme pain and weakness he was cheery and hopeful
throughout. My last memory of him was on the Sun-
day before he died, when he removed the ice-pack from
his head to receive the blessing.
On the Tuesday morning, as the Brothers went to
their first Eucharist of the August Reunion, came the
telephone message that the first of the Bush Brothers
had entered into the Unseen, but nearer, Presence
of the Good Shepherd. We shall ever remember him as
embodying all the qualities of the Youthful Shepherd,
and feel that he is the first fruits of a Brotherhood
whose care for the scattered and sometimes wandering
sheep is the work of young men of adventure and
resource.
With courage high he faced his work, whether in
bush or city, for he realised that men were at heart
alike and could only be caught up by a fire which itself
was always kept burning. The secret of his power was
the source of that inner flame which was ever kept
burning 'by the live coal from off the altar.’
By the Rev. P. C. Nelson, 8.A., Priest-in-Charge,
Bourke B.G.S.
I first met John Martyn at S. John’s College, Armi-
dale, where, in my Freshers’ Year, he was one of the
senior men. On this occasion, I think, he was the last to
return after the vacation, which he had spent at the
Seamen’s Mission, in Newcastle. I was placed at the
same table as he, and remember feeling from the start
that vigour and cheerfulness which dominated his
character then as it did in the years of his ministry.
Brother John always said that he entered Bourke 'in
spreadeagle fashion.’ It was quite a slight incident, but
I remember thinking at the time how easily he made


such small things a 'point of contact’ whereby he came
to know and understand people so readily, and whereby
they came to understand him and welcome him into
their friendship.
Shortly after arriving in Bourke, in November, 1924,
when, as a Lay Brother on vacation from S. John’s,
Armidale, I was helping in that Parish, Brother John
and I went to the pictures, then held in the open air.
Half way through the programme, rain began to fall,
and soon drove us all into the hall alongside, where the
entertainment was to be continued. While passing from
the one place to the other, the new Parson tripped and
fell sprawling along the gravel pathway. The shock
of such a rude experience in no wise daunted Brother
John’s spirit for a moment: he merely claimed it as his
unique way of introducing himself into Bourke.
When I returned to Bourke at the end of 1925 for a
couple of months, the Brothers, that is to say, Brother
John and Mr. Hammond, a Probationer, were batching.
Part of the Rectory was let to tenants, and there re-
mained for the Brothers’ use a study, a bedroom, and a
small 'box room.’ This last served as Brother John’s
kitchen, dining-room, and pantry, not only for the
short time that I was there, but for a considerable period
before and a longer time afterwards. The room con-
tained a small and rickety octagonal table, covered with
white 'American cloth’ to serve as a table-cloth, a few
chairs and boxes, a dresser equipped with a sufficiency
of odd cups and plates and other such necessities, and in
one corner a single 'Primus’ standing on a kerosene tin.
The 'Primus’ would only take one utensil at a time, so
cooking had to be in rotation, as it were. Potatoes
would be boiled first; when these were done, the chops
would be fried; then the kettle would be put on the
'Primus’ for the tea, never to be omitted. I have
memories of dishes of butter and tins of jam standing in
basins and tins of water to be in isolation from the ants,


and to retain some measure of solidity; of powdered
milk with porridge and in tea, and of saveloys ad
u an seam.
The batching remained a system of poor and injurious
nutrition. It must have been a very cheap way of
living, and it was in a determined effort to put the
finances of the Parish on something approaching a good
footing that Brother John, of his own choice and deci-
sion, started batching under such conditions. The effect
of it, however, on his health remained long afterwards.
On one of the trips, not very many in number, on
which I accompanied Brother John, he took with him
from Bourke an old 'swaggie,’ who wanted to make his
way into Queensland. Brother John accordingly had
promised to take him as far as Barringun, on the border.
We got as far as Eungonia, 60 miles north, on our first
day; and here Brother John decided to camp on the
verandah of the hotel with the old chap, who, of course,
could not afford to put up for the night. So we moved
the seating from the car on to the verandah, tried to fix
up our mosquito-net effectively by fastening it to the
wall, and, with half our clothes on, crawled underneath
and tucked the net under the car-seats as best we might.
It was a most uncomfortable night, the mosquitoes were
particularly numerous and rapacious as a result of much
stagnant water lying about the district, and the net was
worse than unavailing; and, besides this, a verandah is
always a hard place for sleeping on. Half the night the
poor swaggie groaned on account of the mosquitoes, and
before dawn, able to stand it no longer, he got up and
cleared off into the bush, to make his way northward
by foot. We expected to pick him up later, but did not
see him; however, we knew he would get along without
getting lost, and that when he was determined to go his
own way he was best left to do so.
On May 8, 1929, we were returning from a very
desolate-looking Wanaaring along the heavily sanded
track to Bourke. This is the most lonely of all the roads


in the district, and in May, 1929, loneliness was accentu-
ated by the heavy burden of anxiety which lay on the
hearts of settlers during that time of prolonged drought.
The first place after we left Wanaaring was the 'ten-mile
tank/ Here Brother John pulled up and found old
Mrs. Carter, who had been long known in the district as
'Nine Horse Mary/ Brother John was very proud of
having Mary Carter as one of his parishioners, and had
only on that trip been telling me of her pioneer fame,
the adventure with the team of nine horses, her almost
complete isolation, her unfailing sun-hat of large dimen-
sions, and her equally unfailing blue apron. We had
not expected to find her this time at the 'ten-mile tank,’
but, as soon as I saw her in hat and apron, I knew that it
was Mrs. Carter. Mr. Carter was at the tank: there was
just the old couple themselves. Their place was a very
small iron building. Very seldom did any callers come
to see Mrs. Carter, and it was, I think, twenty-seven
years since she had even been into Bourke. I do not
know how long she had lived on or near the Wanaaring
Road, but I remember that for the first twelve years of
that period she never saw another white woman, so
great was her isolation. There she was still, uncom-
plaining, patient, and gentle; and, kneeling down, we
prayed together for a short while, at the end of which
Brother John rose and laid his hands in blessing on that
brave and simple child of God. He never passed her
home without such prayer and blessing; but hers was
one case out of many; and it was because Brother John
could see the greatness and the nobility of such souls,
and was proud to find his work amongst them, that his
name is one of the names that live in the West.
By Miss Alice Sharp, Bourke.
He came to us with his foot on the first rung of the
ladder of Manhood, barely 22 years of age, yet gifted
beyond his years with a wonderful personality and a
keen insight of human nature.
It was this knowledge, combined with his never failing


energy, humour, gentleness, sincerity, and last, but not
by any means least, his teachings and upholding the
principles regarding the Church that he loved and repre-
sented, that helped him to grasp and hold the immense
responsibility of the largest Parish in the Bathurst
Diocese.
Many an older man coming to this remote and vast
area of twenty-five thousand square miles would have
felt the possibility of taking charge one to be re-
considered, but not so Brother John. Where others had
trodden before he was quite ready to take up his pack
and carry on, and before leaving, at the end of his five
years’ service, he placed on the work already started a
solid rock foundation which will stand for ever in the
memory of those whom he came in touch with.
He saw only the good in mankind, and the rough
diamond appealed to him just as much as the finely
polished one. In sickness, he was a true follower of his
Master, gentle as a mother, capable as a nurse, and
spending night after night with those who were in pain,
alleviating their sufferings with prayers and soothing
words.
Many a lonely wife and mother had cause to bless the
name of Brother John in their lonely vigils with sick
loved ones. He shared their watch, and in a case which
came under the writer’s notice, after being up all night
he made the last preparations for one who had been
called home with all the gentleness of a woman, saving
the wife the painful ordeal of having to do the same.
(This family was in very straitened circumstances, and,
being strangers in the town, had no friends.) It was
with infinite care and love that he made ready the body
for its last resting place.
He loved little children and they loved him.
In answer to an appeal for the children in the Bush,
toys, books, and a gramophone were sent along to him.
He felt keenly for the little ones living so far away from
the comforts and blessings of the town, and many an
isolated boundary rider’s home existing miles away from


any human being was made brighter by the gramophone,
and little hearts gladdened by the sight of a doll or book
as the case may be.
His name was known far and wide, all up and down
the Darling River, and making no distinction as regards
class or colour, found his way into the home of all and
sundry, and the men from isolated huts, shearing sheds,
and the stations themselves found in him a friend and
comrade as well as their Rector. While being a friend
to all, he was most loyal to the principles of his Church,
and if occasion demanded it, would stand with a will of
iron while defending same.
During the Dengue Fever outbreak in Bourke,
Brother John did yeoman work. He was visiting his
people, and not them alone, but anywhere where he
thought that help was needed. He was in and out homes
at all times and hours, cheering and nursing where, in
some cases, the whole family was ill, and many a one
was brightened and helped by his cheerful and unselfish
spirit. At the same time, besides being a tower of
strength to those whom he visited, he was also nursing
a sick Brother at the Rectory until, at last, he himself
could not keep up any longer, the fever having got its
grip on him. Such was his life in all things, indomitable
pluck and courage in everything, and well may we take
an example from it.
His ambition, while with us, was to formate a little
Church in one of our bush centres, and this was realised
not long before he left, when S. John’s, Byrock, after
a lot of hard work entailed, was opened on 20th June,
1929, by Bishop Crotty.
He spent five happy years with us. We know that
they were happy, because they were happy ones for us,
and it was with regret that he had to take up duties in
a new field. He had fulfilled his obligation, and we did
not begrudge his leaving us, while feeling very sad over
it, knowing that the city, with its teeming thousands,
needed men like Brother John.
For five years he made all the sacrifices of a Bush
Brother in a district where he learnt the true meaning


of Drought, Isolation, and Loneliness, yet never once
did he turn back, but kept manfully on, helping those
whose lives were bound up in those three words to find
and to know that at the end of all things there was
something which mattered greatly, something which
gripped and held them through all hardships and some-
thing which they, as he, their friend and Rector, having
run the straight race and fought the great fight, would
know as he has known, the 'Peace of God,’ which knows
all understanding.
We who knew him for his true worth thank him for
all that he meant to us —Friend, Adviser, Rector, and
Comrade—and we feel the better for having known and
taken him into our hearts.
He was indeed a true follower of the One in Whose
work he laid down his life, and most truly may it be
said of him, 'Well done thou good and faithful servant/
By M/ss Dorothy Chalk.
Brother John was every inch a man, as in every
thought a Churchman. He put his heart into his work
for God, and wherever he went his light so shone before
men that they, seeing his good works, were led to glorify
their Father which is in Heaven. He was a natural
heart-singer; by his very' carriage and spontaneous
action he calmed, cheered, and helped his fellow-men.
Brother John worked amongst all sorts and conditions
of men as a fellow Brother, teacher and friend. He
deemed the rough diamond, with all its roughness, its
demese-looking faces, its dull exterior, better worth
polishing than all the smoothly-rounded pebbles on life’s
shore. Like every soul-finder, he 'knew what was in a
man of good as well as of evil/ He knew the power of
the grace of God, and believed in the man until the
man began to believe in himself, and to seek God’s grace.
Brother John will ever be remembered for his earnest-
ness and fearlessness, his kindly, sympathetic attitude
to the aged and lonely, his tenderness towards the sick


and suffering, and his love and inspiration to the little
children of the bush. His was a spiritual light-hearted-
ness that cast a spell about the simplest doings. His
personality was as how we should term it 'magnetic.’
By the Rev. P. A. Micklem , D.D., S. James’, Sydney.
John Martyn came to us in October, 1929. He came
in response to an offer which I made him by telephone
to Bourke, an offer which, a few days later he accepted
by wire.
He arrived just in time to take part in the Annual
Campaign of the Brotherhood of the Good Shepherd.
He spoke at a number of B.G.S. meetings, and then
plunged right into the work at S. James’.
He lost no time in finding his way into the hearts of
our people, and the value of his presence and work was
obvious from the very first.
I do not wish to speak in detail of his work amongst
the young men. This part of the story has already been
well told by themselves.
It is enough to say that he won from them a deep
brotherly affection coupled, however, with an equally
deep respect for his Priestly office and authority.
The young life of the Parish was quickened into fresh
vigour through his keen and vivid interest and per-
sonality, and he has left a lasting mark for good in this
sphere.
The strong young people’s associations in sport and
fellowship and devotion, which are now part of the life
of the Parish, can very largely be traced to him and to
his work.
There are, however, two aspects of his work on
which, from personal knowledge, I should like to lay
special stress.
The one was his wonderful capacity for seeking out
and befriending the lonely and unwanted. From a trip
in the Bourke District, which I had had with him, I


had seen something of the trouble he would go to to
reach and talk to the casual wayfarer, even if it meant
stopping the car and walking across a paddock to reach
him.
This same untiring love of souls he brought with him
to Sydney.
The casual youth who had dropped in to see a football
match would be button-holed, befriended, and before
he knew where he was, would be one of John’s circle.
Nor would he stop there. He would follow his friends
to their homes and soon be a friend of the whole family.
Evidence which has come to me since his death, as
well as earlier, has brought home to me the great pains
he would take to see that no one whom he could reach
should be left outside our ever growing fellowship.
The other part of his work of which I would say a
word was that within the Church.
With all his brotherliness and capacity for good fel-
lowship, he never forgot his Priestly Office and charac-
ter. His influence with the servers in raising the level
of their work and devotional life, is mentioned else-
where. To him his ministry at the Altar was the centre
and heart of all his work, and whether in the Solemn
Eucharist on Sundays or the quietness of the Chapel
Services on week days, he was at home at the sacred
trysting place of God and man.
So with the ministry of penance.
The little bronze tablet erected to his memory is
placed near the spot where he would hear confessions on
the eve of Festivals: and Friday after Friday he would
be waiting for an appointed hour for any penitent who
might come, or if none came at all.
He was but ten months amongst us, yet, in that brief
space he 'fulfilled a long time.’
To me he was a most loyal friend, and for the Parish
his few months of life and service in our midst have
made an impression for good which will endure.


By the Late Rev. W. Charles Pritchard, D.D.
There is a passage in the Book of Wisdom, lv., 7-16,
which beautifully describes the glory of a short life
devoted to God’s service. Its phrases read like epitaphs
on such a life as John Martyn’s—'Being found well
pleasing unto God he was beloved of Him.’ 'Being
made perfect in a little while he fulfilled long years.’
'Youth that is quickly perfected.’ All this was so
exactly true of John, whose short life with its few years
of Priesthood is so vivid and gracious a memory. I only
came to know him intimately within his last year, and
during his ministry at S. James’, Sydney. Occasionally
I had met him during the time of his work in the
Brotherhood of The Good Shepherd, and had been
attracted by his zeal and devotion. Our close acquaint-
ance quickly ripened into a tender and close friendship.
To have experienced this is a privilege for which I am
deeply thankful. Nothing is more cheering to a senior
Priest than the filial regard of one who is beginning his
ministry. It has been my happiness to experience this
in many cases, and to benefit by the experience. The
brightly burning zeal of such a 'son in the faith’; the
ardent devotion to duty; the self-emptying love which
gives its best for others good; the undaunted cheeful-
ness which will not be cast down, but keeps smiling
when so many would frown; the charity which thinketh
no evil, but always believes the best of everyone; these
signs of grace revive an older man’s spirit and he lives
again in the spring of youthful fervour. Such signs
were abundant in John, and make his memory undying
and his personality a permanent encouragement.
In the too brief months of our friendship, I was
especially moved to admiration of his exercise of his
ministry as a Pastor. He had a deep love for his fellows,
not merely for their souls in the ordinary and profes-
sional sense, but for their whole selves. This made him
a quick and ready companion in other people’s interests,
in their joys full of a happy joviality, in their sins and
sorrows a real helper and sympathiser, always inspiring


hope, stimulating perseverance and building up courage.
With all this, he was most painstaking in the prepara-
tion of his teaching and his sermons. He would often
discuss the proposed subject, and eagerly seek for advice
and suggestion. It was wonderful that he found time
for study and concentrated thought, but he knew well
that 'the Priest’s lips must keep knowledge for he is the
message of The Lord of Hosts. 5 And in all the func-
tions of his Priesthood, John Martyn was most careful
and reverent. He strove to be a faithful Priest of the
Catholic Church, but was loyal to those who had trained
him to understand and appreciate the Anglican ways of
setting forth the teaching and ministering in Divine
worship. This was most evident in his ministry at the
altar. He was always clear in utterance and careful to
maintain the Anglican principle, that every part of the
sacred Liturgy must be 'understanded of the people, 5 no
mumbling or mannerisms, but in everything a manifest
loyalty to the Prayer Book standard of reverent and
dignified ritual. He had a strong faith in The Com-
munion of Saints. His last acts of ministry were con-
nected with the burial services for Sister Hilda; almost
his last preaching was of her example of devotion and
our lasting communion with all such devoted souls.
Now in the Paradise of God, he rejoices with the
Church Expectant.
In his going from us he links us of the Church Mili-
tant with those happy souls who are so truly described
in the familiar refrain—
'When loyal hearts and true
Stand ever in the light;
All rapture through and through
In God’s most holy sight. 5


By Mr. George Morell.
Father John —His Work among the Servers of S. fames’.
In his work among the Servers, Father John showed
more fully and deeply his wonderful personality, his
absolute sincerity, devotion and single-heartedness as a
Priest than he no doubt showed elsewhere.
He had a perfect understanding of what was neces-
sary of him as a Priest. He held no two views on the
matter. He glorified in serving God, and was wonder-
fully devout in all his duties around the Altar, so it was
only natural that, on his arrival, he set out to know
those who were to assist him at the Altar.
He came to us with a ready knowledge of serving
and servers. He knew and understood young men,
knew how to judge their lives and temperament, and
when teaching he knew how to put his subject into
words clear and precise, never taking his pupils out of
their depth, and always getting them to their ultimate
objective. It did not take him many hours to find his
feet when he arrived. This was not remarkable. His
sheer personality is a sufficient answer for his doing so,
and from the very first he won the confidence and re-
spect of all the Servers and held it.
His greatest achievements were the remarkable ad-
vancement he made in the spiritual and devotional life
of the Servers, and the better understanding they have
of the requirements of the Prayer Book in matters of
Churchmanship. The former is particularly noticeable,
and was only obtained after much hard work and study
of character and temperament. In nearly all of his
many achievements, his remarkable personality has
played the greatest part, but in this, although it played
some part, it was of second place alongside his own abso-
lute devotion. He was so devout in all he did at and
around the Altar that the Servers were inspired by his
example to try and better their own standard of devo-


tion, and in him they found a ready teacher and helper,
who was thorough in all he did. He did not give them a
sketchy outline, but a full and proper understanding of
all he did, or asked them to do. To assist them in these
matters, he necessarily had to work carefully. He had
to judge their outlook on things, know their tempera-
ment, and many other such things, and it was then that
his previous experience and his own devoutness helped
him. It is certain that the way in which he carried out
his own work at the Altar played an important part and
inspired those who went to him, as the M an himself
inspired confidence.
Father John was a thorough Churchman, and a strict
believer in obedience to the requirements of the Prayer
Book in matters of Churchmanship, and it is him that
we have to thank for the better understanding of these
matters that is now in existence among the Servers. This
was a weak point with the Servers, but soon after his
arrival the standard greatly improved. He did this, not
so much by his talks at Servers’ Meetings (for unfortu-
nately we are not together in a band very often), but
more by his little chats to little gatherings of Servers
here and there in the Vestry or elsewhere, and by his
ever readiness to answer questions of any description in
that clear and definite way that was his alone. In the
Ceremonial side of things, Father John knew what he
was talking about. He came to us just when we were in
the middle of changing over to an authoritatively Eng-
lish ceremonial, and proved to be of inestimable value
in helping to solve our many problems. In the actual
carrying out of his own ceremonial duties at the Altar,
he was a pleasure to watch, and he was always ready to
fill in or cover up the mistake of another without the
slightest fuss.
He was a great help in the training of the new Servers,
either by actually training them or by solving the
problems that arise by telling of his own experiences
when training his own Servers in Bourke. In the latter
way he helped with the Junior Servers.


Another feature of his work in this sphere was the
clear and happy way he had of explaining the whys and
wherefores of different parts of the services when ques-
tioned, never making his subject too dry, always having
that happy, cheerful touch, and always explaining fully.
He was always the first to congratulate a new Server
after his first service, or an older Server on a good piece
of serving, and in/ this way endeared himself to the
hearts of many.
He was always on the go. He never slacked for one
second, and was always inspiring others to be doing
things by the cheerful way he tackled what he himself
wanted or had to do.
His wonderful personality was always in evidence.
Whatever he did it was always there, it was never fail-
ing, and many a Server can remember the time when he
has cleared away a cloud either by a talk or by his cheery
'Keep smiling,’ and the comradeship among the Servers
has received a wealth of strength by his acquaintance.
He inspired all he came in contact with, was loved by
them all, and those who had the honour of serving with
him at the altar will never forget him. There is many a
Server who can say with the sincerest feeling that
line of Lord Tennyson—
'And I would that my tongue could utter the
thoughts that arise in me.’


By Mr. F. Weir:
Brother John was greatly beloved because he was
lovable himself; he was blessed with a remarkable
attachable nature —his eyes, voice, smile, mannerisms
extended to one and all a very cordial invitation to
'come unto me.’ His buoyancy and laughter was up-
lifting and contagious; he was blessed with the happy
knack of passing on 'all things good and beautiful,’ with
a cheery smile—a smile of sunshine and gladness. He
was often a tired and weary priest because he practised
the 'doctrine of the second mile.’ No wonder then,
John, following in the footsteps of his adorable Master
who went about doing good, was the beloved disciple
whom Jesus loved. Brother John was quite 'at home’
in the conduct of worship, giving unto God his very best
in a heart full of song, linking up his soul with Angels
and Archangels and all the company of heaven at the
Eucharist —the living Christ was very real to John be-
cause John was very real to Christ. He was a distinct
Bible reader of the lessons; his belief in God’s message
transformed the written page into a living epistle to
many listeners in the pews —truly, he read as one having
authority. My mind lovingly lingers upon some tender
and sweet words. Wisdom of Solomon, 4 Chapter: 'For
honourable age is not that which standeth in the length
of time, nor that is measured by number of years. . . .
He pleased God and was beloved of Him; so that living
among sinners he was translated. Yea speedily was he
taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his under-
standing or deceit beguile his soul. . . . He being made
perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time. . . . For
his soul pleased the Ford; therefore hasted He to take
him away from among the wicked. . . . This the people
saw, and understood it not, neither laid they up this in
their minds. That his grace and mercy is with the
saints, and that he hath respect unto his chosen. Thus
the righteous that is dead shall condemn the ungodly
which are living; and youth that is soon perfected the
many years and old age of the righteous.’
Brother John will always be known in our little circle
as the 'Disciple whom Jesus loved.’


TT his tribute teas paid to Brother John by the Worshipful
Master of Lodge Tranquility, Mr. Schachtel, on the
Lodge Night following John’s passing :
Brethren, —
It is my duty to-night to refer to the passing of one
of our Brethren—a duty painful in the extreme, yet
involving a task made lighter by the fact that it affords
me an opportunity of placing on the records of this
Lodge the high and noble qualities of a Brother beloved
by us who knew him as a Member of Lodge Tranquility
and esteemed by all, irrespective of class or creed, whose
privilege it was to come in contact with him. Since our
last regular meeting, as all of you are no doubt aware,
Brother John Dent Martyn has been called to the Grand
Lodge above.
Brother Martyn received his early education at S.
Andrew’s Cathedral School Choir, and so outstanding
was his character and the promise shown by him there
that he was chosen by the Rev. E. N. Wilton—then
Precentor —as a candidate for the Ministry. From this
school our late Brother went to Armidale to continue
his studies at S. John’s College.
In December of 1921 Brother Martyn was initiated
into this Lodge as a Lewis together with the twin sons
of Very Worshipful Brother Hogbin, who performed
the ceremony. In March of 1922 he took his second
degree in Lodge Unity at Armidale, and in the follow-
ing July took his third degree at the same Lodge.
His education at S. John’s College, Armidale, having
been completed, our late Brother was called to the
diocese of Bathurst, where he took up his labours under
the late Very Worshipful Brother Dr. Long, Grand
Chaplain, late Bishop of Newcastle, and at that time
Bishop of Bathurst. From Bathurst he was transferred
to Bourke, where he served for five years as a member
of the Bush Brotherhood. It was here our late Brother
affiliated with Fodge Central Australia, but he visited


his Mother Lodge during vacation, and we were always
happy to renew acquaintance with him at Xmas time.
During the pursuit of the activities and duties of his
calling, our late Brother earned popularity with all
classes of the community, be they co-religionists or not,
and was admired by all for his simple honest manhood,
his good fellowship, and his sincerity of purpose. His
was a practical religion which endeared him to the
hearts of all and sundry, and the good work accom-
plished by him as a member of the Bush Brotherhood
and as a result of his self-sacrifice and unremitting toil
will stand as an everlasting monument to his memory.
In October of last year Brother John was called to
this city and relinquished his duties at Bourke to assume
them again at S. James’ Church, King Street, under Dr.
Micklem. In this month also he affiliated with his
Mother Lodge, and it was our happy privilege to wel-
come him back into our midst. During that all too
brief period of his activities as Assistant Priest at S.
James’ Church until the time of his death, he earned a
popularity with the parishioners no less great than that
which he had enjoyed at Bourke, and in the course of a
tribute paid to our late Brother by Dr. Micklem at a me-
morial service, the Doctor remarked that the Rev. John
Martyn would be indeed difficult to replace, and that in
his death the congregation had suffered a severe loss. He,
by his genial disposition and simple faith, had gathered
more of the younger members of the congregation
about him than the Church had previously known.
From his association with the younger people sprang
the S. James’ Football Team, and it was on the field in
friendly contest that our late Brother received the in-
jury which resulted in his regrettable and untimely
death.
Brethren, we record to-night the passing of a Brother
who was a sportsman, a gentleman, and essentially a
Mason. The remains of our late Brother, as was his wish,
were cremated and his ashes will be placed in an urn


in the crypt of the Church with which he was lately
associated. This Lodge was largely represented at the
cremation service on the Wednesday following his death,
at the service held at S. James’ that afternoon and at the
Memorial Service on the following Sunday.
Brother John Dent Martyn has crossed the Bar. He
has been called to the Grand Lodge above, that house
made with hands eternal in the Heavens where the
world’s great Architect lives and reigns forever.


Since his passing hence, the following have been
dedicated to his memory in the historical old church
of S. James’:- —
The Altar furnishing of the Columbarium in the
Crypt, where his ashes rest.
Six large candlesticks to be used at Requiems.
A Credence table, given by the children for their
Chapel of S. Mary and the Angels—where his stoles are
worn Sunday by Sunday.
A bronze tablet upon the wall of the main church.
Also the forming of S. James’ Sports and Social Club
as a memorial to his work among the young people.
176


t


■- . .
t
I
178
