

? H i ' �
BROWS THE GREAT;
PRESS AND STAGE.
A COLLOQUY.
GEORGE SCOTT HOUGH.
?JUSTUM SIT, NECNE, POEMA;
NUNC ILLUD TANTUM QUiERAM.? ? HOT.
<
A
M
.0
Jffilelfcmmie:
PRINTED BY HEATH & CORDELL, 30, FLINDERS LANE WEST.
MDCCCLXYIII.


\
t
I
HEATH AND CORDELL,
PRINTERS,
80, FLINDERS LANE WEST,
MELBOURNE.


ADVERTISEMENT.
The present colloquy, lampoon, invective,
satire, or whatever else the reader may please to
consider it, is intended as a protest against
unprincipled criticism.
The anatomy of a clique is not perhaps a very
pleasant, but it is, to some extent at least, a
necessary process. The worthlessness of the
individual elements must be plainly shown if the
clique as a whole is to he attacked. Brownism,
or, as it might equally well he called, Zoilism, is
not so potent as it was. It has already begun to
be laughed at. All here wanted to he done is to
help forward a most desirable result. The gradual
process of disintegration cannot fail to be pro-
ductive of amusement. Brown, by himself, would
be a very poor sort of fellow after all, a kind of
Parolles. Fitznoodles in the like condition would
remind one of nothing so much as of the young
gentleman who was perpetually exclaiming
?esker? at Mr. Podsnap?s dinner table.* The
Fitznoodles are appendages of the Zoiluses.
It was Mr. Podsnap?s, was ?lit it ?


Zoilns ?hesitates dislike? of a play, or what not,
and the Fitznoodles immediately discover that the
thing is not ?in good taste.? The Fitzes have
no capacity to form opinions, but they think they
can venture upon saying that this or that is ? not
in good taste.? They can keep on saying
? esker,? if they can do nothing else. The
Zoiluses are rogues, pure and simple. The
Fitznoodles are merely imbeciles.
The Zoiluses, the Fitznoodles, the Lucios, et
hoc genus omne are sometimes capable of the
perversion of facts. They may he very indignant
at being told this; hut it is nevertheless true.
In this way ?they will often prop up a worthless
criticism by misreporting the demeanour and verdict
of an audience. They deal largely both in the
suppressio veri and the suggestio falsi. What was
impotent as opinion, or even as malice, becomes
noxious by the addition of falsehood. This is
certainly one Avay of exercising the privilege of
the press, but it is not a very reputable one, and
it is stupid, because it is sure to be observed, and
brings the press into contempt withal. These
gentlemen should reflect that
O
? Still there goes some thinking to ill-nature.?
One remark of a critical nature remains.
Some will be disposed to think that the eleven-


ADVERTISEMENT.
syllable and even twelve-syllable lines with
trochaic or dactylic endings have been too freely
used. It is hoped that the greater part of the
versification is sufficiently strict to be admitted in
proof of the plea that this frequency was in-
tentional on the author?s part. Many of his
readers will not require to be reminded that satire
admits of much greater license of versification
than do other kinds of poetry. The intent how-
ever was to give an occasional Hudibrastic turn to
the expression, that was all. The heroic couplet
of Dryden and Pope must for ever remain our
best model in writing satire, but for all that it
cannot be denied that Butler in his ? Hudibras?
and Byron in his ? Beppo,? and in ? Don Juan,?
have at least tempted us to a freedom of style and
rhyme which the great satirists have used very
sparingly.
Melbourne,
January Ith, 1868.


*


ANTHOLOGIA,
A PREFACE OF MOTTOES.
" Upon my life, I am a lord indeed,
And not a tinker, nor Chnstophero Sly.?
? Give me leave
To speak my mind, and I will through and through
Cleanse the foul body of the infected world.
If they will patiently receive my medicine.?
? Yidet huuo omnis domus et vicinia tota
Introrsum turpem, speciosum pelle decora.?
61 A man in all the world?s new fashion planted,
That hath a mint of phrases in his brain ;
One whom the music of his own vain tongue
Doth ravish like enchanting harmony.?
? A (man), whose chief devotion lies
In odd perverse antipathies;
In falling out with that or this,
And finding somewhat still amiss ;
More peevish, cross, and splenetic,
Than dog distract, or monkey sick.?
? Railing in other men may be a crime,
But ought to pass for mere instinct in him ;
Instinct he follows, and no farther knows.?
? O?er his books his eyes began to roll,
In pleasing memory of all he stole,
How here he sipped, how there he plundered snug,
And sucked all o?er like an industrious bug.?


ANTHOLOGIA.
? Who shames a scribbler ? break one cobweb through,
He spins the slight, self-pleasing thread anew :
Destroy his fib, or sophistry; in vain,
The creature?s at his dirty work again.?
Cl But in the verity of extolment, I take him to be a soul of great article;
and his infusion of such dearth and rareness, as, to make true diction of
him, his semblable is his mirror; and who else would trace him, his
umbrage, nothing more.?
? Si mala condiderit in quern quis carmina, jus est
Judiciumque. Esto, si quis mala: sed bona si quis
Judice condiderit laudatus Csesare ? si quis
Opprobriis dignum latraverit, integer ipse ?
Solventur risu tabulse, tu missus abibis.?
??T is not my intention to make an apology for my poem : some will
think it needs no excuse, and others will receive none. The design I
am sure is honest; but he who draws his pen for one party, must
expect to make enemies of the other. The true end of satire is the
amendment of vices by correction. And he who writes honestly is no
more an enemy to the offender, than the physician to the patient, when
he prescribes harsh remedies to an inveterate disease ; for those are
only in order to prevent the chirurgeon?s work of an Ense reddendum.
which I wish not to my very enemies.?
? Quid dem ? quid non dem ? Eenuis quod tu,
jubet alter ;
Quod petis, id sane est invisum aciduraque duobus.?
u What is he of basest function
That says his bravery is not of my cost,
Thinking that I mean him, but therein suits
His folly to the mettle of my speech ?
There then; how then ? What then ? Let me see wherein
My tongue hath wronged him ; if it do him right,
Then he hath wronged himself ; if he be free,
Why then my taxing like a wildgoose flies,
Unclaimed of any man.?
? Si te forte mese gravis uret sarcina chartse,
Abjicito.?
? Hie mums aheneus esto :
Nil conscire sibi, nulla pallescere culpa.?


BROWN THE GREAT;
PRESS AND STAGE.
A. COLLOQUY.
The famous city of the golden South,
Where men of letters live from hand to mouth,
And incense, wanting to the muse of Horne,
Smokes to the looser goddess of Cremorne ?
There, ye stern sisters, turn awhile your gaze,
End the long night, and give more genial days.
Dread Juvenal, and courtlier Horace, rise
Immortal from the sleep of centuries !
Rise, Pope ; rise, Churchill, from your honoured graves,
Behold in Australasia fools and knaves !
And thou, imperial master of the pen,
Dryden, awake ! the years roll round again ;
Whole crops of Shadwell ev?ry acre yields,
And swarms of Spori darken o?er the fields.
Is satire dead 1 Shall swift iambics urge
No more the sharp and salutary scourge ?
Just Heaven, forbid : ye sacred bards, look down,
Prompt the winged words, the dang?rous labour crown ;
Source, end, example, vict?ry, all your own.


AN ACTOR. THE AUTHOR.
Au. Why should I write? A. The rascal stops the way,
Jeers and grows fat on?t ; and we Ve nought to say.
Unchecked he wallows in his ink, and lies.
Au. Liars, assassins, merit may despise.
A. Silent contempt will scarce amend the ag - e.
Au. Awaken, then, the veng - eanoe of the stage;
Bid sock and buskin to the rescue come,
And strike the sour malignant fellow dumb.
Through your own cowardice he apes the god,
And plies, on backs that bend, his darling - rod.
Horse him and flog: he ?ll kiss the keen disgrace,
Who knows ??learn manners while he soothes the place.
A. Ah! might we dare! His friends? Am. His what?
His poodles!
That crew of nothings, unessential noodles,
Long since set down in Archibald?s oration,
As ? young men of imperfect education ! ?
Fellows who pick opinions by the way,
? Brown says so, does he ? well, then, so we say.?
A. Loud-thund ring Ogra ? Au. Who marks Ogra now.
Or fears the legend on that brazen brow ?
Who reads not in those meretricious eyes,
The truth long rifled by the lust of lies ?
The conscience seared, the vain attempt to win
The trust betrayed through long - long - years of sin ?
Go, ask the miner, when, in days of yore,
Heav?n smiled, and earth gave up her golden store,
Who raised the trumpet cry ?Unlock the Lands,?
Yet after clenched the fetters on his hands ?
Who woke each fatal passion into life,
And in the hour of danger shirked the strife ?
And would she still pretend with virtuous rage
To prick the dying conscience of the ag - e ?
In vain ! She preaches to insensate ears,


And herself aids the moral death she fears.
High-favoured lovers can hut once transgress,
No harlots like the harlots of the press !
A . Our friend the bastard with the borrowed hunch-
Au. An animalcule from the brain of Punch,
A spore of Ogra's cryptogamic folly?
Witness the love-lay, We have missed you , Wallie.
A. There?s Lucio. Au. Ah! among?congenial cits
The lord of punsters and the type of wits ;
A man of easy virtue, not quite evil,
But, at the worst, a kind oi merry devil,
Who for his pocket, dinner or a pun,
As soon would curse as bless the Tomlinson.
Is satire dead ? What satire can restrain
Blockheads with Tomlinson upon the brain 1
Who still, the good old weakness of the ass,
Chew thistles, though you offer wholesome grass ?
Wits of a pattern, critics from the mint,
Plies of the press, and pitchforked into print.
Fitznoodle, now, implores to be preferred
But for a moment from the vulgar herd?
Sour as a crab, cantank?rous as a monkey,
With just enough of wit to seem wit?s flunkey,
Suspicious, jealous, eager to command
In all he does, or does not, understand,
Kind nature yet had nursed him into man,
Had not some envious devil spoilt the plan,
And, loth to see such good material lost,
Turned him flat snob and all his prospects crossed.
Tis pity, friend, a decent cypher once,
And now confirmed, half puppy and half dunce.
Put these aside, the rest are nebulous
I-know-not-whats, hebdomadally bibulous;
Who once a week, in some secure retreat,
Drink, smoke, and talk the ethics of the street;
Wine not their own, their parts, Sir, all they bring,
Where ev?ry fool is welcome to the ring.


Here meet the master spirits, once a week,
To foster genius, and promote critique :
Here, in the midst, in easy state displayed,
Truth, conscience, pen, to welcome slumber laid,
Great Ogra sheds the influence of her head,
The central sun of brass to all those worlds of lead.
Here Lucio draws his fav?rite weapon ?pun,
And puns all night?-perhaps at Tomlinson;
The Bunchbach borrows something from his sire,
And in loud laug-hter all the room expire.
Not one but great Apollo holds in chains,
And all Pieria trickles through his veins.
Alone they strip Hymettus, scale Parnassus,
Theirs is the Muses? honey, yours molasses ;
In song, ode, elegy or epigram,
Alone they harp, chaunt, prosper, praise or damn.
These be your wits, my friend, your critics these,
Whose smile makes summer, and whose terrors freeze
O?er ink?s black ocean these your only men,
And sovereign rulers of the realms of pen.
High o?er the rest behold the man whose frown
Begets paralysis?potential Brown !
The critic?s critic and wit?s wit, the rod
Of scenic artists, and salt-pickle god
Of trembling Thespians, whose heroic name
Puzzles the practised trump of loud-resounding Fame,
Immortal Brown ! such genius it were hard,
Whate?er the cost, should go without a bard.
Bless Brown, ye poodles, for to him ?twas given
To fetch the cherub Tomlinson from heaven !
To him, g'reat happiness ! what charms we owe
In Master Hamlet and Miss Borneo !
?Twas he ? colloquialized ? th? ideal scene.
And dressed our Shakspere first in crinoline !
He first set free our sisters and our brothers
To laugh at their grandfathers and grandmothers.
Prodigious Brown ! who dare despise the name ?


Earth hears thee, rolling from the lips of Fame !
Wide-open lips, the goddess stuns the town,
And rather roars than sings the name of Brown !
A. But say, indeed I?m curious to know,
How mounted he so high, sank these so low ?
Au. By little arts and slow degrees he rose
From flimsy labels up to furious prose;
Kept little notes of little things that past,
In hopes t? attract great Ogra?s smile at last.
No fool, but one whose saccharine principle
Had been squeezed out by force invincible,
Impulsive, cunning, plausible, well-read,
His conscience always breakfasted in bed ;
Or if it gave?m a spasm now and then,
It -never touched his heart nor checked his pen.
You had some doubts at times of?s sanity,
For full nine-tenths of him was vanity.
His firm conviction was that he?d a mission
To send whom he thought proper to perdition:
Or, on the other hand, if he thought right, he
Would swear Beelzebub was G ?d Almighty.
His ruling passion was for flagellation
And ev?ry day in?s heart he flogged the nation ?
The sons of Thespis, trembling at his rage,
Proclaimed him Mumbo Jumbo of the stage.
? That man was made for flogging is a feature
?Writ plain upon his back by great Dame Nature ;
? For neither lawyer, doctor, nor the Church
? E?er awed the soul like pedagogic birch :
? There?s such persuasive rhetoric about it!
?None e?er was worth his salt that went without it.
? And though too oft in these degen?rate days
? One hears that the best punishment is praise,
? And that the only stimulus applied
?T? a boy, should be t? his conscience, not his hide,
? I rather trust the wisdom of the past,
? The rod oft saves a world of pain at last:


? Preach to the ear, and half your preaching?s nonsense,
? Preach to the hack, you ?ll soon impress the conscience.
Soliloquising thus, he inly swore
That ev?ry Thespian should in turn he sore :
?By Jove, no lick-and-promise work spasmodical,
? But well-laid-on in style methodical,
? Sharp scientific cuts and periodical;
? I?ll he a universal benefactor ,
? And never spare the rod to spoil the actorf
Egad ! to tell the truth the pledge-was kept,
He hardly seemed to wink, and never slept:
He looked, when putting culprits to the question,
Like an old Roman emperor with a Christian :
Timour and Torquemada were queer fellows
At times, hut Brown, Sir, would have made both jealous :
Ivan the Russian, Nero, Diocletian
Showed, now and then, some symptoms of repletion,
And ev?n a hoa-constriotor?s in the habit
Of throwing skin up when he?s done his rabbit;
But Brown would bury body bones and all
Within his alimentary canal;
Dire were the shrieks that echoed round the god,
And dire the hissing of the slaught?rous rod !
But how to write ? he questioned with himself.
With curious eye around his well-stored shelf
He straight surveys the masters of the art,
And first the muse of Dickens won his heart;
The cheery brisk and fascinating flow
Of words, wit, wisdom, satire high or low,
He envied, fain would imitate, but found
He lacked the sense howe?er he hit the sound ;
Besides, though Dickens? muse might teach to write,
She hardly served as model for mere spite.
The caustic touch of Thackeray pleased him more,
He tried, worked hard, failed, gave it up and swore :
Till once, exhaling all his soul in ? D n! ?
Perchance he laid his felon hand on Lamb.


Poor Lamb, through long wet nights and long hot days,
He trimmed and tortured twenty thousand ways,
Till, somewhat as young lamh tastes like tough mutton,
Poor Elia might he flavoured in his glutton.
The secret found, he brewed the toothsome chalice
To Ogra?s taste ?part truth, part lies, part malice.
The dame well-pleased, for cat will after kind,
Gave him at length full ? leave to speak his mind.?
He?d wit, howe?er, to know that imitation
Makes no one master of a situation :
One must have something of one?s own to write,
Although the something be but lies and spite :
So to combine his pleasure with his labour
He fell, ere long, to picking holes in?s neighbour.
Bardolph was coarse or drunk, Biron a child,
(?T was thus his brother-critics he reviled),
Leo was too accessible to Cupid,
Fitznoodle wrote bad grammar, Jones was stupid;
In short, to cleanse the press from prostitution,
He preached a fundamental revolution.
As on Niphates? top the Spirit of evil
Prom holy angel turned to unclean devil,
E?en so this arch-malignant of the press,
The goal once reached, revealed his ugliness.
He saw in all mankind his friends or foes,
These Heav?n gave life to, and the devil those.
Lay on his altar frankincense and gold,
Confess his godship, and his godship?s sold :
Bid for his favour, deprecate his frown,
No woman pays for flattery like Brown :
Let his self-love or his caprice be crossed,
No woman ever was so quickly lost.
?T is then, as Hamlet cries, ? 0 villain ! treacherous,
? Remorseless, bloody, how-d?-ye-do ? and lecherous ! ?
Give him a grudge against a manager,
Inflamed with spite he damns th? whole theatre ;
George Coppin?s th? incarnation of all evil?


Let?s solemnly bequeath him to the devil,
And with him all his company and kin,
His horse, his ox, his ass, his everything!
To gain some place, ask Lyster for a vote?
? What! he refuses ! cut the villain?s throat! ?
Forthwith poor Squires?s voice comes through a crumpet,
Escott sings out of tune or down the trumpet.
These grave offences yet to graver yield :
The cherub comes when Anderson?s a-field.
At once the well-won fame of thirty years
Wrung from the greatest critics, disappears.
Macready, Kean, Phelps, Dickens?idiots all!
No such authorities our wits enthrall;
The Times , Spectator, pshaw ! Let all bow down
To mighty Ogra and stupendous Brown!
The first redeems that pledge ? Look out, great Times ! ?
The last snuffs out the author of ? The Chimes ! ?
The days have been when o?er the Melbourne press
Great men presided, or to curse or bless;
When malice could not cheat th? experienced eye,
And not e?en wit availed to mask a lie.
Lamented Syme ! whose mem?ry lingers yet
In hearts that knew thee never to forget;
Ah ! from the simple urn that hides thy dust
Could friendship call once more a man so just,
And in those orbs could death?s dull stony glare
Yield to the light of genius rising there,
His borrow?d plumes how many a jay would shed!
How many a sland?rous villain hide his head !
A. I ?ll point the moral with a brief digression
On th? ethics of the Thespian profession.
It need not be contended, nor will I,
The stage may sin without pay?ng penalty :
None more than actors should the maxim spell
?Whate?er?s worth doing- is worth doing- well.?
O O
Let none demur, if Tomlinson turn sloven,
That Brown should pot him down in?s critic?s oven;


Fitznoodle does his little possibility
With all his wonted taste and imbecility?
Fitznoodle may do all his syntax dare
On plays ill-mounted or a stage too bare; ,
Or suppose Pitt paint cypresses for beeches,
Brown, with a savage yell, takes down his breeches,
And fairly justifies the usual work
For once, though Pitt the while roar like a Turk.
Au. Well said, and here I must agree with Brown
Some actors want a little taking down.
For of all classes who amuse for gain
With rare exception we find none so vain :
Burn tons of incense, ?tis but incense due,
But the least breath of blame blows back to you :
Eager for praise, the greatest to the least,
They ?re oft ungrateful when they ?re treated best.
A. Be just but generous ; I freely grant
Humility?s a virtue we much want:
But yet remember, when to live ?s the strife,
Praise to an actor is the breath of life.
The best in this kind are but shadows still,
Praise if you can ?to censure?s oft to kill.
How oft the little tyrants of the press
Crush rising merit in sheer wantonness !
Fitznoodle thinks himself a wolf ?mid lambs,
Fitznoodle sniggers and Fitznoodle damns :
Not that to think he?s ever at the pains,
For thinking needs one grand essential?brains;
But, somehow, sitting with superior men,
He?s picked up something, and?he owns a pen.
?T is not the mastiff indignation stirs,
But the incessant yelping of the curs.
Proteus, ag?ain, a most good-natured man,
Means well, and really does what good he can ;
In half-an-hour he sifts you wheat from chaff,
Flies to his desk, and scrawls a paragraph :
Plot, scen?ry, actors, all, within a minute


Must be summ?d up, Sir, or the devil?s in it.
Au. Most just,- but still I shift the blame to those
Who lead the fry of critics by the nose.
What?s to be done while you ? first ruffian ? sits
The cynosure of all our little wits ?
In prurient raptures o?er the shape of Don,
Or in the seventh heav?n with Tomlinson ?
Let stately Anderson his art display?
? Gods ! is it Stentor, or a grampus ? Say ! ?
His throaty treble let the cherub squeak?
? Gods !?t is some angel! or, is?t Hamlet ? Speak ! ?
For our new canons have this strange position,
Nature implies departure from tradition :
The age of Kemble was an age of noodles,
And sense came in with Tomlinson and poodles !
The great art now-a-days is so to play,
That half the house be ignorant what you say :
The terrors falling from the eye of Kean,
The voice of Siddons, quite destroy the scene ;
Marcius, Macbeth, Othello, Gloster, Lear,
Must learn of sucking-doves to please us here,
Rough Hotspur turn a girl to give us joy,
And Roman Antony a snivelling boy.
Now in the circle only brains we find,
Pit, stalls, and gallery are the jakes of mind;
No ?leg,? dunce, idiot, but for just a crown,
Takes rank with gentlemen, and thinks with Brown.
A. Oh ! that the task would some bold hand eng-age
To give once more its freedom to the stage !
Tear from the fool the mask that hides the man,
Unveil the dunce, and mark the charlatan !
Au. Patience awhile ; of this be sure, my friend,
Corruption ever travels to its end :
Impatient Justice hovers in the skies.
Indiff?rence is the Nemesis of lies :
Behind the curtain, you as well as I
Know how pretenders pay the penalty ;


Not so much cursed as laughed at Brown appears,
And ev?ry day prolongs Fitznoodle?s ears.
Dang?rous to novices are sharp-edged tools,
But far more dangerous is ink to fools :
Your ancient viper, spent his vig?rous youth,
Laments the failing venom of his tooth;
Your monkey still in happy ign?rance moves,
Nor dreams all he relinquished with his gloves.
A. His gloves! your speech is mystic. Au. Is it so?
Well, for the present, let the myst?ry go :
After the Duke?s departure, meet again,
If still I talk in riddles, ask me then.
But see, our chat has crept upon the noon,
And Melbourne lies in dim and sultry swoon;
Come in ; try these fresh cherries, and a glass
Of sherry and a biscuit, and so pass
An hour, or, if you will, remain and share
Our meal, here?s welcome and a bach?lor?s fare.


IN PREPARATION
THE SAME AU T HOE.
COLLOQUIES
OCCASIONAL POEMS.
3 1508 01515004 3
