

Department of Public Instruction.
BRUSH
FARM
HOME
FOR
BOYS.
SYDNEY:
W A. GULLICK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER
1910.
81201




Department of Public Instruction,
Sydney, N.S.W.
Minister of Public Instruction a
The Honorable G. S. BEEBY, Esq., M.L.A.
Under Secretary,
PETER BOARD, Esq., M.A.


DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC INSTRUCTION,
BRUSH
FARM
HOME
FOR
BOYS
SYDNEY:
WILLIAM APPLEGATE GULLICK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
I C) I O


Sydney:
W A. GULLICK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.


DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC INSTRUCTION.
Brush Farm Home for Boys.
Value of Institutional Training.
IT is recognised that when lads over 13 years of age
commit such serious offences as deliberate theft, a
course of wholesome discipline and utilitarian training
j is essential to their reformation. In dealing with
I delinquents under the Neglected Children and Juvenile
| Offenders Act, 1905, a term of probation is regarded
| || [j 111| j| as being adequate to meet the cases of very young
lads who commit offences of a minor character.
Institutional training is, however, considered necessary with
older offenders, who, after a reasonable period of detention, can
then be discharged on probation. The value of the present course
at Brush Farm consists largely in the fact that it represents
years of experience in handling boys of a type requiring the
utmost care, sympathy, and understanding. In the first instance,
the influence of the Primary School, based on the best methods in
vogue in the Department, is requisitioned. The lad’s vision must
be enlarged by educational processes, and this expansion brings in
its train a cleaner moral view, without which all the rest of the train-
ing to which the lad is subjected is useless. Unfortunately most of
the lads who are sent to the Brush Farm, are belated in the matter
of schooling, and specialized instruction to suit individual needs
has to be resorted to. This uneven method of teaching means
more trouble to the Staff, but each lad is dealt with according to
his urgent requirements with most satisfactory results. After this
preparation, or rather it would be more correct to say contempo-
raneously with it, the industrial education of the lad is attended to.


Purpose and Methods.
With the exception of the Superintendent, and the Teacher
and Attendants, the Staff of the Brush Farm Home is made up of
competent craftsmen. The Institution is pleasantly situated in the
picturesque suburb of Eastwood, 13 miles from Sydney, and its
37 acres of good soil afford every facility for agricultural and
general farming work. The fields are from time to time put under
cultivation, the crops sown being maize, rye, oats, wheat, &c. It
has also an orchard that compares favorably with the many others
in this well-known fruit-growing district. Those boys selected for
training as rural workers receive a valuable practical training in
all that appertains to farm life, and this includes the handling of
horses and cows, and the rearing of pigs. In the orchard a know-
ledge of the care of fruit trees is inculcated, and in addition the
lads are taught the art of packing the fruit and also of jam-making.
A large amount of good wholesome jam is made at the Farm, and
is supplied to other Institutions. The lads when trained are fit
for positions on general farms or orchards, and have no difficulty
in finding employment in these capacities. In addition to equip-
ping lads in these ways for the battle of life other industrial
outlets are found for those of the inmates who are trained in the
Trade Schools that form part of the Institution’s educational pur-
pose. These Schools, four in number, comprise Tailoring, Tin-
smithing, Bootmaking, and Carpentry. Each one is presided over
by a thoroughly competent tradesman, and after a suitable period
of training which serves the purpose of an ordinary trade appren-
ticeship, a boy is fitted to take up work as a journeyman in the
trade in which he has received instruction. It is satisfactory to
report that most of the lads adhere to the avocation taught them
at the Farm, and some have prospered exceedingly, becoming em-
ployers on their own account in the trades taken up by them.
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC INSTRUCTION.


An Institution without Walls.
Brush Farm as a place of detention possesses one peculiar
feature, and that is that nothing but an ordinary fence surrounds
the Estate. Within easy access of Sydney, lads have every oppor-
tunity of escaping. It is pleasing to relate, however, that the
number of absconders is comparatively few, and this can be ascribed
mainly to the kindly treatment and interesting character of the
occupation provided for the lads.
Recreation.
Each day is an instructive and busy one at the Farm, and
the process of character reconstruction receives much help from
this one cause. When the mind is absorbed in work, moral safety
is fully assured. It is in the leisure moments that ensue that
danger to the immature character intrudes. Educational responsi-
bility is not now confined to turning out scholars, but has
taken under its wing the betterment of those whose characters are
in need of shaping or re-shaping. Essentially this is an educational
process, calling for something more than mere confinement from
temptations and the exercise of discipline. The whole problem of
dealing with wayward lads is fast entering into the region of peda-
gogical methods, after a period of ineffective handling by forces
that were simply punitive. It may truly be claimed that one of
the most onerous responsibilities devolving on a Superintendent of
an institution such as the Farm Home is that connected with
suitable and wholesome recreation. Recognizing this truth, the
Superintendent and his Officers regard the recreative periods as
calling for as much consideration and attention as the instructional
work just described. It will come as a surprise to many to learn
that the Brush Farm boys take part in athletic contests with
BRUSH FARM HOME FOR BOYS.


most of the adjacent suburban and Church clubs in cricket,
and football. In the minds of all boys is an inherent love of
sport, particularly centring round those two pre-eminent games,
Football and Cricket. Lads committed to a term of confinement
in an Industrial School or Reformatory would, unless an intel-
ligent view were taken of their requirements, either say good-bye
to all participation in these vigorous games, or play ineffective
and uninteresting contests, oft-repeated, between themselves.
The spirit of outside conquest that is afforded every School
when it carries its flag to victory or defeat against other schools
should not be denied these wayward lads shut up in Industrial
Schools, and it is pleasing to record that the Officers of the Insti-
tutions under the Department of Public Instruction have never
failed in this important phase of their work. At Brush Farm,
field sports are most enthusiastically organized, and a very high
degree of efficiency has been attained by both the Football and
Cricket teams. For many years past regular fixtures with outside
clubs are arranged from season to season, and this contact with
boys of a better type has been found to work admirably and to be
productive of the best of uplifting influences in the Farm Home
lad. But all this can only be done under sympathetic and careful
control, and that these exist at Brush Farm is evidenced by the
man y years of successful effort in this all-important element of thq;
Institution’s work.
Apprentices.
The lads trained at the Farm are in great demand by farmers
and graziers, not only because they are lads of mature years, but
also because their training has been altogether in the direction of
general farm work. A good type of all-round rural worker is being
developed at Brush Farm, and this consideration enhances the value
of the Institution as a factor in practical industrial education.
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC INSTRUCTION.


Visiting Regulations.
In this respect the lads are most liberally treated. Parents
and friends are permitted to visit every Sunday afternoon between
the hours of i and 3. They are, therefore, enabled to keep in
touch with the inmates, and this tends to a large extent to prevent
any diminishing of those family ties upon which so much ultimately
depends.
Care of Health.
Very little sickness occurs among the boys at the Farm. The
local Government Medical Officer, Dr. Violette, visits the Institution
regularly, and in special cases lads are, if necessary, removed to the
District Hospital, where they receive every attention. A dentist
also visits the Farm and attends to the teeth of the inmates.
Staff.
The Superintendent of the Brush Farm Home is Mr. F. A.
Stayner; he was originally a Public School Teacher, and gained
his Industrial School experience in the first instance on the N.S.S.
“ Sobraon,” in the capacities of Schoolmaster and 2nd Officer. In
1895 he was appointed to succeed Captain Murray as Superintendent
of the Brush Farm Home for Boys, then known as the Car-
penterian Reformatory, and has achieved uniform success in
the many avenues of practical training work which form the course
of instruction in the Institution under his charge. Mr. Stayner’s
methods are largely blended with an attitude of personal kindness
to each lad, and this is responsible for an atmosphere of content
throughout the whole Institution. As in other Institutions under
its care, the Department makes a special feature of the Primary
School. The one at Brush Farm is under a trained Teacher,
Mr. A. P. Humphries, whose successful work in bringing on the
backward lads in attendance at his School cannot be too highly
commended.
BRUSH FARM HOME FOR BOYS.


Discharge on condition of Good Behaviour.
When the Superintendent is satisfied that a lad can be
given another chance of living a proper life in the community,
he recommends conditional discharge, subject to good behaviour.
An Officer of the Institution to whom the lad is well known visits
him every week, and if satisfactory behaviour is not being shown,
the lad is summarily returned to the Institution. This probation
system is working well. The lad, after a short period of detention,
becomes known in his disposition to the Superintendent and the
Staff, and the probation under which the boy is subsequently placed
is a safe system because of its being based upon a close knowledge
of the lad’s habits and character.
The attention of Magistrates is invited to this important
consideration. If gaol were the only alternative to extending the
probation principle to boys over 13 guilty of serious offences, there
would be no question as to the right to apply that principle in a
large number of cases, but where the State has provided educational
institutions, which in no way can be regarded as prisons, for the
humane treatment of the juvenile offender in the manner herein
described, with probation following a course of wholesome training,
it is desired that the proyision thus made should be fully understood
and utilized by the Recommending Magistrates in dealing with cases
under the Neglected Children and Juvenile Offenders Act.
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC INSTRUCTION.


A view of the Superintendent’s residence, showing lawn, gardens, and shrubberies, which are kept in order
by the inmates under capable instructors.
BRUSH FARM HOME FOR BOYS.


A garden view—Parramatta River in the distance. The pine trees are over 80 years old, and were planted
by Gregory Blaxland the famous explorer. The gardens of this institution are very well kept, and reflect
great credit on the lads.
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC INSTRUCTION.


THE PLAYING FIELD AT BRUSH FARM.
The lads are engaged in a football match, Rugby rules, and are coached with much skill by their masters. They
enter keenly into the game, and display a good knowledge of the rules and marked proficiency as players.
There is also a Cricket Club, which holds a most successful record in its matches with Church and School Clubs.
No difficulty is experienced in promoting these friendly contests with outside clubs, and it is found that the
bringing of the farm lads into contact with boys of exemplary character in this way is productive of the best of
influences.
BRUSH FARM HOME FOR BOYS.


THE DORMITORY.
This is a new structure, and represents the latest ideas in this class of sleeping apartment. Accommodation
is provided for I25 boys. In the roof are five ventilators and on the floor ten. There are twenty windows and
four doors and this ensures a continuous supply of fresh air. The hammock system has been adopted by the
Superintendent, Mr. Stayner, as making more for cleanliness and convenience. Every day the hammocks
with the bed clothes, are taken out and aired, and scrubbed once a month. The lads are under the supervision
of a night watchman from “turn-in” to “turn-out.”
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC INSTRUCTION .


THE LAUNDRY.
The boys do all their own washing and mangling.
BRUSH FARM HOME FOR BOYS.


The school-room is under the charge of a trained Teacher of the Department of Public Instruction. Most of the
lads sent to Brush Farm are found to be backward in their education, and the work of making up this lost
time is carefully attended to by Mr. A. P. Humphries, the teacher in charge.
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC INSTRUCTION.


THE TINSMITHING SHOP.
The tinsmith’s trade is taught by a competent craftsman, and after a lad has passed through the necessary
term of instruction he is able to take up a position in any tinsmith’s shop outside the Institution. The articles
made are those required in Public Schools and Government Institutions, such as garbage tins, soil pans, bath-tubs,
buckets, baking dishes, &c.; so that this little trade school has the advantage of being self-supporting. A fair
proportion of the lads who have had their training at Brush Farm are now earning their living at the tinsmith’s
trade in Sydney and elsewhere.
BRUSH FARM HOME FOR BOYS.


This is another of the Institution’s Trade Schools. The instructor is fully qualified at his trade, and the
boots worn by the inmates are made by the lads, and all the necessary repairs to boots, harness, and other
leather work arc also carried out by them. This is one of the trades followed by the lads after discharge,
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC INSTRUCTION.


The Tailoring Class, under the direction of a competent tailor, makes and repairs the lads’ uniforms. They are
taught the trade, and some of them so trained are at present in leading Sydney shops earning a good livelihood.
BRUSH FARM HOME FOR BOYS.


CARPENTERS’ SHOP.
The minor buildings and repairs are carried out by the lads under their Carpentry Instructor. Much useful
work is done in this direction at the minimum of cost to the Department, and the lads at the same time learn
the use of tools and the elements of practical carpentry. A large number of the lads discharged from the
Institution are earning their livelihood at the trade to-day.
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC INSTRUCTION.


THE SMITHY.
All the agricultural and farm implements are repaired by the boys.
BRUSH FARM HOME FOR BOYS.


A view of the Brush Farm buildings, looking South.
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC INSTRUCTION.


ORCHARD WORK.
The lads are placed under the care of a competent orchardist, who imparts instruction in the various features of
orchard work, such as planting, setting-out, pruning, and spraying, also picking, packing, and preserving fruit.
BRUSH FARM HOME FOR BOYS .


A side view, showing Offices and Dormitory.
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC INSTRUCTION.


SCHOOL GARDEN.
Each lad has his own plot, which he attends to in his spare time. As a result of this individual effort the
Institution is supplied with fresh vegetables daily, and at the same time the lads concerned gain a sound
knowledge of this section of agricultural work.
BRUSH FARM HOME FOR BOYS.


AT THE COW-BAILS AND STABLES.
Lads are taught to milk and tend cows, to drive, harness, and look after horses and vehicles, and are in this
way made useful for work on farms and stations.
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC INSTRUCTION.


THE PIGGERIES.
Lads are trained in this useful phase of farm work, and are taught not only how to rear pigs, but to gauge
their market value. This is useful knowledge, for it enables lads to judge of the commercial value of an industry
that is rapidly increasing in connection with farming operations.
BRUSH FARM HOME FOR BOYS.


This lad, 16 years of age, has had six months practical training in ploughing, harrowing, and other field
work, and is now competent to prepare the ground and sow crops of maize, oats, wheat, and rye. This
instruction is given to all lads adapted for farm work.
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC INSTRUCTION.


EMBRYO FARMERS AND AGRICULTURAL WORKERS.
These lads are being trained as rural workers, and will be fitted to take up positions on farms upon discharge.
The Superintendent is unable to accede to all the applications for apprentices, the demand for lads trained at
Brush Farm being far in excess of the supply available.
BRUSH FARM HOME FOR BOYS.
