

1% B B L£GVI (nj
P (2fl £fdhO4iX>0VUj, &itfuL
4f lynott j
D
sQ
(JN
00
G\
—J
M
ro
M
00
<
Z.


*
c


e
'9<y x
3
sBUBBLEGUGi
I
2
J FAIRY story I
I
I B-Y P
5 J
c I
4 LYNOTT j
r 1
j , 5
| l “ A::;: “vr.,;; j
) LYNOTT. J




BUBBLEGUG
CHAPTER I.
story is all about the curious happenings which befel a small community
of people who lived in a village called Bubblegug on the top of a very
high mountain, many years ago.
They were very strange people, because they were a long way from any
other part of the world and lived only among themselves. Each family had to
produce something necessary which would help to feed and clothe the people
who lived there.
About a dozen families lived in Bubblegug, and each shared in producing
something required to meet the wants of the villagers.
Breadilebake, who had a wife, two sons and a beautiful daughter named
Greetcha, had to grow corn and make bread so that he was known as the baker.
Then there was Meemilka, his wife and one daughter. This family had
some cows; their duty was to provide milk and butter.
Also Iman Nunter, with his wife and one son. This man had to go into
the woods and kill the animals, which his wife helped to skin, so that meat
was supplied to the villagers. The hides from the animals were given to
I cgginstitch, the shoe maker, who provided the shoes for everyone.
Woodenuff, the woodcutter, supplied the wood, and Bizzazbec, who
lived by himself, had a small orchard, from which he nrovided .mnUc
from which he provided apples and
tomatoes.
Several other families also lived in Bubblegug.


BUBBLEGUG
The mam events of this story relate to Bizzazbee, who was an honest,
timid little chap, living in a house of two rooms. There was a livingroom and
a bedroom. His orchard was about half an acre in size, not very large you
might think: but he was very industrious. He worked very hard all day long,
so that he was able to grow the most delicious big. juicy apples and the most
wonderful tomatoes ever tasted.
Now this village had strange ways and customs, among which was a
rule that a meeting of all the villagers was held once each month to discuss
anything that annoyed them. Everybody had a say, so that the community
seemed like a large family.
Let us peep in at one of these meetings in the village hall. Everybody is
present, and seated in the centre of the crowd is Breadilebake, who usually takes
the chair.
“Has everybody arrived?” he asks.
“Yes, yes,” responded the villagers.
“Then,” he continued, “let us get down to business. Has anybody a
complaint to make?”
Meemilka stood up, and Breadilebake declared.
Silence, everybody, while we hear Meemilka’s complaints. What have
you to say, Meemilka?”
He replied; “Well, I think this is important. As you know, very soon
we will have winter all around us, and the ground will be covered with snow.
Now, I think the shoes made by Pegginstitch are too short in the legs.”
To this the villagers shouted: “Yes, yes,” in hearty agreement.
Breadilebake asked; “What would you have done Meemilka?”


vrfnvm wMV.
\ % n\ ':„:•- . ■•■ 1
\ & I - IS ISJ (f a OL
' \ Nj 1
> v —’ i-rvr v
■■ %: )
[ r h/\ixf/i \|
r / NIC/ t '
; *! \ <*c~\ . —~~h
:— —- —-y/iA.i X"'\
J ?4j : V
| < :.-
j N " I ' |]
, r ]ji
BREADILEBAKE ORDERING 1 I
BIZZAZBEE TO GROW ORANGES sf- jJj \'
BUBBLEGUG
To which Mcemilka answered that the boots should be made to reach
the knees.
Breadilebake put the question to the others present, who all heartily
agreed.


BUBBLEGUG
If Meemilka expected an argument he was disappointed, for Pegginstitch.
when asked what he would do about it, simply shrugged his shoulders and
said: "If you want tall shoes, Pegginstitch will make them.”
That argument settled, Breadilebake asked if there were any more
complaints.
Woodenuff stood up.
"Well, Woodenuff. let us hear what you have to *ay,” Breadilebake
invited.
Woodenuff really had a grouch. The only fruit we get,” he grumbled
"is apples. I think a change would do us all good. We’re tired of apples.”
"What would you suggest,” Breadilebake asked him.
Get Bizzazbee to grow oranges.”
A roar of agreement went up. "Yes, get Bizzazbee to grow oranges.
That is a grand idea.”
Breadilebake put the matter to Bizzazbee. Poor little Bizzazbee he was
a timid little soul. He stood up, but he was so nervous that all he could say
was, "I have nothing to say,” and quickly sat down again.
However, Breadilebake took that to mean he would grow oranges, and
as there was no other complaints, closed the meeting.
Poor Bizzazbee. It was a sad blow to him. He walked home utterly
downcast and worried. "What can I do? What can I do?” he muttered
to himself. 'Can’t grow oranges from apple seed. Can’t grow oranges from
tomato seed. Can’t grow oranges without orange seed.”


BUBBLEGUG
CHAPTER 11.
T tNDERNEATH one of the largest apple trees on his orchard sat Bizzazbee,
tears streaming down his cheek. In his hand was something which looked
more like a dried-up passion fruit than anything else. While he wept his
poor heart out he kept saying, “I can’t do it, I can’t do it.”
Suddenly, by the side of Bizzazbee there appeared a beautiful Fairy,
who bent over him and whispered in his ear, ‘‘What worries you, little man?”
"Oh.” said Bizzazbee, ‘‘your voice frightened me. I thought I was alone.”
"So you are, my dear, and do not be afraid, for good, honest little men
like you need never be afraid of Fairies. Come now, tell me your trouble,
and I will see if I can help you.”
And Bizzazbee told the Beautiful Fairy how he had always worked
hard in his orchard to produce the best apples and the best tomatoes for the
villagers: but now they wanted oranges.
BIZZAZBEE ADMIRES HiS ORANGE TREE


BUBBLEGUG
He knew he could not grow oranges from apple seed or tomato seeds, and
as he did not have any orange seeds, he had tried mixing apple and tomato
seeds to see if he could produce something like an orange, but it was no use,
for this shrivelled-up thing, that looked like a dried-up passion fruit, was all
the result he got.
When Bizzazbee had finished pouring out his trouble to the Beautiful
Fairy, who had patiently listened to his tale of woe, she waved her magic
wand and touched the shrivelled-up specimen with it three times, when
suddenly it changed into a lovely big ripe orange.
Then, with a smile on her beautiful face, she said: “Put this orange into your
oven, dry it until you get the seeds out, then plant them in your orchard, and
they will grow into a beautiful big orange tree, but be sure that you give this
tree plenty of water and it will grow quickly.
“Now, the first orange to ripen will be of pure gold. This you must pick
and keep for yourself. Should you be in -trouble, rub the golden orange and
make a wish, which will be granted.”
“You can have only three wishes, and at the third wish the golden orange
will disappear, so be sure that each wish is for something very necessary and
urgent.
“The other oranges which grow on the tree you can give to the villagers,
but there is one very important thing to remember; do not pick any of the
oranges until they are quite ripe.
“You will know they are ripe when the two leaves nearest to each orange
turn quite yellow. If you do not heed this warning, or if anybody else picks
an orange before the two leaves turn quite yellow, and eats it, a terrible sickness
will attack them. Farewell.”
When Bizzazbee, who had been very attentive, and had let every word
become imprinted on his memory, at last looked up, the Beautiful Fairy had
disappeared.
But he still had the orange in his hand: so he hurried into the house, and
after putting some wood on to burn, placed the big orange in the stove to dry.
Then he made himself some supper and ate it whil? waiting.


v\ ■ tW'
' i,// 4 A \
■ ■ ■ f < , 1 \ \
\
A x if x \ - v j
*
! /V& v ... ; / M v 'v
' ■■■■v. '••<:
BUBBLEGUG
In an hour’s time he heard a gentle pop inside the store, and when he
opened the stove door he saw a dozen clean, bright orange pips lying on
the shelf inside.
Gathering these up in his hand, he got his spade and went out into the
orchard.
BIZZAZBEE AND GREETCHA AT THE SPRING
Bizzazbee decided to plant the orange seeds near his house, so that he
could make sure nobody who came along would pick an orange before it was
ripe, because he was a very honest little man, and, although the other villagers
caused all his troubles by demanding oranges, he did not wish any of them to
pick an unripe orange and become dreadfully sick.


BUBBLEGUG
CHAPTER 111
OUICKLY a most beautiful orange tree grew where Bizzazbec had planted
the seeds, later it began to bear fruit, and a large number of big juicy-
looking oranges could be seen on it.
Bizzazbee looked after this orange tree very carefully, giving it plenty of
water, and watching it very closely.
He had to make sure which orange ripened first, for this one would be of
pure gold, and would allow him to make three wishes. He did not want to
make any mistake
He need not have worried, for one orange growing just outside his bed-
room window seemed to be getting ripe more quickly than any of the others.
One morning he was awakened by a beautiful sound, just like golden
bells being rung.
Looking out of his window he saw that the orange nearest to him had two
yellow leaves near it, these leaves were swinging together and making the
beautiful bell-like notes which had awakened him.
jr Opening the window wider, he reached out and plucked his golden orange.
So overcome was little Bizzazbee at his wonderful good fortune that he
sat on his bed. and stared at this marvellous gift which the Beautiful Fairy
had sent him.
Then, without thinking what he was doing, he began to gcntlv rub the
golden orange with his hand.
Instantly, a lovely voice, which seemed to come from inside the golden
orange, said, Wish number one, good master, what is your desire?”


' -’' ‘1 / ,cn ;■ ' : ■"
4^1* ; 'A r '->i* ' '* ' *V» f* i ---■ S!:: v. / >i • v J
■ . yj - I
\ . i* ■ > /■ Xr x l p >
BUBBLEGUG
“Oh, dear,’’ said Bizzazbce, frightened almost out of his wits. “I was
not really ready to wish for anything at present, but I will have to do so, and
the Beautiful Fairy said it must be something really necessary as I will get
only three wishes.
“Yes, yes, I know what 1 will wish.’’
BREADILEBAKE HANDS HIS DAUGHTER TO BIZZAZBEE
“Golden orange,” spoke Bizzazbee. “I wish to thank the Beautiful
Fairy for what she has done for me, that is quite necessary, and through you
is the only way I can do it.”
The lovely voice then replied, “She is here, master.”


BUBBLEGUG
Then the Beautiful Fairy again appeared at Bizzazbee’s side, and said—
‘Bizzazbee, you are a good little man, and I am proud of you. Many
other men would have wished for money and power, but you only thought
to express your gratitude to someone for helping you in your hour of trouble.
You are a noble man. Farewell.”
Once again the Beautiful Fairy disappeared.
Bizzazbce then placed the golden orange in a safe place, and went about
his work as usual, all the while watching the growing orange tree.
When any of the villagers called and wanted fruit, he told them they
would have to take apples for a while longer, because the oranges were not
ripe enough to pick.
Some of the villagers said they did not believe him, because the oranges
looked ripe, and they wanted to try some to sec.
Bizzazbee felt frightened when they spoke like that, but he managed to
stop them from picking any of the oranges.
CHAPTER IV.
'JpIME went on, and Bizzazbee hoped the oranges would soon be ripe enough
to pick, for some of the villagers were saying nasty things about him,
and threatening to take the oranges in spite of his pleading that they must not
be picked until they were ripe enough.
But, unnoticed by most of the villagers, a disaster was approaching.
There had been a long, dry spell, and the spring from which all the water
was obtained suddenly dried up.
This indeed was a tragedy, for without water the corn would not grow
the cows would die and eventually everything in the village would perish.


: $ ■ ‘I
I ''I
\ >. -, ■« ,-■<:>■ . r-Nx : ;;i.->
■
«*, s -r r
• , ’ I
BUBBLEGUG
Breadilebake, becoming scared, called
together all the villagers at a
meeting to discuss this new danger
When everybody had arrived at
meeting, he said:—
“Folks, a dreadful thing has happened:
the water in the spring has stopped flow-
ing. if we do not have water everybody
will die. What is to be done?’’
Grumbles and rumbles of angry and
frightened voices came from the villagers,
until at last Woodenuff rose to his feet
and shouted, “Listen!”
Breakilebake thumped on the table and
said, “Folks, listen to what Woodenuff
has to say.”
Woodenuff then said: “Folks I think
Bizzazbee has made this trouble. He has
grown an orange tree which takes
much water. The oranges look ripe.
Bizzazbee says they are not ripe, and
will not give us oranges which are full of watc
to orange tree and the spring stop running.”
THE FAIRY VISITS BiZZAZBEE
water. He keeps watering too much
Breadilebake then cried: “What do you think, folks: do you think this
is the cause of the spring drying up?”


• V- I
. wa i
A.*l ?
: 0 1 \. ., j
BUBBLEGUG
And the villagers shouted, “Yes, yes,
Breadilebake then asked; “What
be done?”
is to
Pegginstitch, the shoe maker, then
stood up and cried: “Listen to me, folks,
and I will tell you what to do.”
When Breadilebake had got everybody
to be quiet, Pegginstitch went on—
THE GOLDEN ORANGE
‘ Folks, you all think Bizzazbee made the spring go dry because he give
too much water to orange tree. I ask, ‘Where Bizzazbee gets seeds to grow
orange tree?' That is a miracle. Now, ask Bizzazbee to make more miracle.”
“Make him put water back into spring in two days, or we cut down his
orange tree.”
Breadilebake then asked: What do you say, folks?”
In a chorus the villagers yelled: “Yes, Yes. Yes.”
Breadilebake then told poor little Bizzazbee lo stand up, and said:
Bizzazbee, have you heard what the villagers have said. You must
make the water run again, or they will cut down your orange tree. Folks,
this meeting is finished.”


BUBBLEGUG
CHAPTER V.
/"\NCE again from the villagers' meetings Bizzazbee went sorrowfully home,
wondering how he could put water in the spring, so that his cherished
orange tree could be saved.
Thinking as hard as he could, he just could not think how to do this,
and had just about given up in despair as he reached his house, when suddenly
he thought of his golden orange.
Now, he could make a wish that was truly necessary
Hurrying to his hiding place, he brought out the golden orange. Placing
it on the table, he began to gently stroke it. and said. “Please, Golden Orange,
come to my aid.’’
For the second time that lovely voice which seemed to come from inside
the golden orange was heard to say: “Wish number two, master. What is vour
desire?”
Bizzazbee replied: “Oh, Golden Orange, the spring has dried up, and
no water can be got. Everything will die very soon if no more water comes
from the spring. The villagers say it is my fault because I used too much
water for my orange tree, and if water does not come from the spring in two
days they will cut down my tree. How can I make water come again from
the spring?”
Listen carefully, said the lovely voice. "Seek the most beautiful maiden
of the village and ask her to accompany you to the spring.”
“When you are seated at the edge of the spring tell her you love her and
ask her to be your wife.
“I shall not tell you what her answer will be, but she will begin to cry.
and you must make sure that her tears fall into the spring, for when they do
water will flow again.”
But, said Bizzazbee, she might say yes—l said she might say yes—l
said she might Oh. dear, the lovely Voice has gone and left me in a terrible
plight.


BUBBLEGUG
'But Che water has to run again, so I must seek Breadilebake’s daughter,
who is the fairest maiden in the village.”
Bizzazbee, with much wobbling at the knees, went towards the house
of the baker to ask Greetcha, his beautiful daughter, to come with him to
the spring.
When he arrived at the baker’s house, his knees still knocking together with
nervousness, he heard voices inside crying out.
"No water, we die. No water, everything will die. All Bizzazbee’s fault:
he make magic with his Orange Tree. No water we all die.”
Nothing could stop this brave little man. so he knocked on the door.
Suddenly the voices stopped and very soon the door was opened by
Breadilebake himself.
When be saw who was at the door he flew into a rage and shouted, “Get
away. You make trouble. You are not wanted. Go away.”
The little man raised his hand for silence and said. “Oh, Baker, listen
to me and all will be well.”
But the baker replied, ‘‘All will not be right until the water comes back
into the spring ”
Then.” said Bizzazbee, “help me, and the water will soon be back
“How?” shouted the baker.


BUBBLEGUG
In a quiet voice Bizzazbee said. “Let me have speech with your daughter."
"No," spoke the baker, “she is too good to talk to you.’’
"But she can help," persisted our little hero.
No," the baker roared, “my daughter cannot talk to you
Just then Greetcha, who had heard them talking about her, came to the
door beside her father and said,
"Who wants me, father?’’
He," replied her father. “Bizzazbee—he is no good for you
But she can help in this trouble." pleaded Bizzazbee. “If she will
speak with me.’’
I will help you, Bizzazbee." Greetcha murmured. “What must I do?”
Our hero, with all his courage said, "Walk to the spring with me so that
we can talk.”
All right, answered Greetcha, "I will come with you
Turning to her father, Greetcha said.
Do not worry, father, I will not be away long, and perhaps all will be
well.”
The couple then walked down to the spring and sat on the edge of
the dry pool.
Greetcha said. Now Bizzazbee, you need not be nervous. I see your
knees are knocking together, but I know you are a good, honest man, and I
did not feel a bit afraid to come here with you.”
But Grtetcha, said Bizzazbee, you are so beautiful I do not know
how to say what I want to.”


BUBBLEGUG
“Well.” replied Greetcha, “it must be important. I will not interrupt,
so say what is in your mind.”
“Thank you. Greetcha,” Bizzazbee found himself saying. “I have watched
you grow up, and seen how beautiful you arc compared with the other folk,
and I love beautiful things. I love my beautiful apples, I love my beautiful
oranges, and I love you. Will you be my wife?”
“Oh.” murmured Greetcha, "why do things like this happen when every
thing is nearing the end 5 I think I could have loved you. Bizzazbee, because
you are such a good man, but now there is no water and everybody will die.”
"Oh dear,” she sobbed. “It is too late now.”
Tears started to roll down her checks.
"Greetcha," excitedly shouted Bizzazbee. “you are crying. Oh, Greetcha.
let your tears fall into the spring and perhaps the water will flow again.”
While saying this he gently helped her to lean over the edge so that
her tears could fall into the spring.
W hen her tears fell into the spring they made musical sounds just like bells.
Suddenly there was a gurgling noise, the well began to fill, and the spring
once again began to flow.
Bizzazbee had been watching the water filling up the well, and had not
noticed that Greetcha had left him and gone back to her father’s house.
When he found he was he shook his head and slowly made his
way back to his own house.


BUBBLEGUG
CHAPTER VI
■fT THEN Greetcha arrived back at her father's house and told her family
’ * that the water was again flowing in the spring they rejoiced.
When she told them that it was Bizzazbee who had done it by telling
her to let her tears fall into the spring well, and that he wanted her to become
his wife, they agreed that he must be a great man, and felt they would be
pleased if Greetcha did marry such a wonderful fellow.
Greetcha, her cheeks red with blushes, admitted that she loved Bizazzbee,
and would be willing if her father would allow her to marry him.
Greetcha’s father and mother, happy now that the water was flowing
again, decided to arrange with the villagers for each to bring a present, and they
would all go over to Bizzazbee's house, and there Breadilebake would hand his
daughter Greetcha to Bizzazbee for his wife, all the other villagers would give
him their presents and thank him for saving their lives by making the water
flow again.
The next day, when Bizzazbee was sitting at his window looking at his
orange tree and wondering how much longer it would be before the oranges
would be ripe enough to pick, he heard a great noise.
Going to his door, he saw the whole of the villagers with Breadilebake,
his wife and their beautiful daughter Greetcha at the head of the crowd, coming
up the pathway towards his house, which they soon reached.
Those who could get in went inside, while the rest of them stood at the
doorway.
Breadilebake, as usual, took the position of speaker. He thumped on the
table, and when silence was obtained, he said, “Folks, folks, why are we all here?’’
And the villagers shouted all together, “To give thanks to Bizzazbee.’’
Yes, folks," said Breadilebake, “Bizzazbee has earned our thanks, for he
saved all our lives by making the water flow in the spring, but he deserves
more than thanks. What else do we do?’’


BUBBLEGUG
Again the villagers shouted. “Give presents! Give presents!”
Breadilebake then thumped the table for silence, and said in a serious voice:
“Yes. folks, we will all give Bizzazbee presents. First of all I will give
my present.”
Then, turning to Bizzazbee, he said
“With my best wishes, I give thee my beloved daughter, Greetcha for
your wife. Now. folks, give your presents.”
Thus Breadilebake and his wife gave their lovely daughter to Bizzazbee.
and in turn all the other villagers gave their presents, laying them on the table
and floor, or anywhere they could find room, until the only space left in the
room was at the end of the table.
And there, sitting on two chairs, were Bizzazbee and Greetcha, holding
hands and telling how much they loved each other.
For a while they sat together, until eventually they decided to look over
the presents which the villagers had left. While doing this Bizzazbee looked
out of the window, and was stunned to sec that every orange had been picked
from the tree.
The villagers when leaving had passed the orange tree. The oranges
looked so tempting and inviting that each one had picked an orange to eat on
the way to their homes.
Bizzazbee was very frightened indeed, because the yellow leaves had not
appeared by the oranges.
He knew they were not ripe enough to eat, and a terrible sickness would
come to all those who ate them.
He told Greetcha his fears, and asked her to clean up the house and put
away the presents while he went to see how the villagers were.
He rushed from house to house, but his fears were justified, for at every
house where he called he heard moans and groans, and when he looked inside
the folk yelled. Go away—l am dying—Go away!”


BUBBLEGUG
After visiting all the houses and finding everybody suffering from the
sickness, including the father, mother and brothers of his beloved Greetcha, he
hurried back to his own house.
When he told the terrible news to his wife she got such a shock that
she fainted.
Bizzazbec was nearly frantic. He did not know what to do to help the
villagers, he blamed himself for not being more watchful and preventing them
from picking the unripe oranges.
He walked up and down the room, trying to think of something to do
so save the folk. He even forgot that his wife had fainted and lay on the floor.
Then, in a flash, he thought of his golden orange. Hurrying to the place
where he had hidden the golden orange, he took it out and gently rubbed the
shining sides.
Again the Lovely Voice spoke, this time it said, “Last wish master: what
do you desire?’’
In answer Bizzazbec told how the villagers had eaten the oranges before
they were ripe, and how a terrible sickness had come upon them. He then
asked the Golden Orange to help him and to tell him what to do to save them.
The Lovely Voice replied, “Give them each a piece of this apple, and
all will be well.”
Then a very strange thing happened. The beautiful Golden Orange
changed into a big rosy apple, just like one of those he grew in his orchard,
only larger.
Bizzazbee. who believed what the Beautiful Fairy had told him. did
not stop to wonder.
He knew he cou'd save the lives of the villagers by giving each one a piece
of the apple, so he got a knife with which to cut up the apple, for each villager
had to have a piece to cure him of the terrible sickness, then he rushed from
the house.


pif 'jr \ J ?'PM"
\&3k r /s*yS C - ™ *W0%w$r'
f} \ k:« - ■-, ' x ; &
' JC > t\) ' - - ' '' /< ik / '' < (
i A^.rx
i vv ;l X
■
I :l|f /ZT'''\/''
J | '.\^
V'5^W' ; : I ' I
■• ■;.;.•• ./ > \ ' » k '
,v£ ,v^,
I : /
IPf
BUBBLEGUG
CHAPTER VIE
CARRYING the precious apple with him, Bizzazbcc started out to cure
the villagers.
The first house he went to was Breadilebake’s.
When he knocked on the door and got no answer he opened the door
and went inside. He heard much groaning, as if those in the house were
suffering great agony.
Going straight to the bedside of Breadilebake, he said, ' Father-in-law, I
have come to cure you all of this terrible illness.”
The baker looked up and said in a weak voice, "Go away. Go a wav, or
you will catch the sickness and die like we are all dying. Go away and look
after Greetcha.”
"No,” said Bizzazbee, "for I have a cure here for this illness.”
Cutting off a piece of the apple, he handed it to the baker, saying, ‘ Here,
cat this piece of apple and you will get well again.”
"What, apple?” asked Breadilebake. "I won’t eat it. Go away.”
"Eat it," insisted Bizzazbee.
"No,” answered the baker.
'Yes, you must,” shouted Bizzazbee.
Being too weak to resist any longer,
Breadilebake took the piece of apple and
ate it. Almost immediately he sat up
and said, "I feel better. Give me more
apple.”
"No," replied Bizzazbee, "I must give a
piece to each of the folk, so that all of them
will be cured. Here, give this piece to your
wife while I give a piece to each of your
sons. When everybody here is cured we
can take pieces to the other villagers.
Breadilebake did as he was asked, and
very soon all the family were cured.
Then they each took some of the anplc
and hurried to the other houses in the
village.
It was not long before all the folk had
been given a piece of the apple, and
they soon recovered.
BIZZAZBEE GIVES THE BAKER
APPLE.


■
; -\, v' v ' ' ' g \ X> 5
8 ' h JSsSr \ f j x^gkLo^sS
Rv -’- w •:•:•>;« ;•>. « / Ws /-. )
■:v %:'/ fFi Pssd
4% 5; * j v
' Tk J !
fflOTAw.v.‘ •- it .<)? • < <<
i • '
|r>'V#INcs - ' 1
r ' .it *v‘
i'. ' 1 . . *
|HHK. ; d *
| | ' V
BUBBLEGUG
When Bizzazbee was quite satisfied that everybody in the village had been
attended to and had recovered from the awful sickness he hastened to his
own home.
Although very tired, he felt happy when he thought of the lovely Greetcha
and how pleased she would be to hear that all the folk were quite well again.
Oh, dear, what a surprise our little hero got when he entered his house.
Everything was neat and tidy, and a good meal was ready, for Greetcha although
she was the most beautiful maiden in the village, was also a wonderful housewife.
While Bizzazbee had been attending to the villagers Greetcha had been
busy putting away the presents, cleaning up the house and cooking an appetising
dinner for her husband when he returned.
After having eaten his dinner, Bizzazbee and Greetcha sat side by side
while he told her all that had happened, how a terrible sickness had come upon
the folk because they ate the oranges before they were quite ripe, and about the
Golden Orange which had turned into an
apple, and how the apple had cured the
stricken villagers.
Greetcha listened patiently to all that
Bizzazbee told her, and then said. “Oh
Bizzazbee, you are wonderful, and I love
you so much.”
Next day Breadilebake called all the vil-
lagers together for a meeting.
When everybody had arrived Breadile-
bake said. ' Folks, folks, are we all here?”
And the villagers answered. “Yes, yes.”
Listen, folks,” spoke up Breadilebake.
we have all had a very narrow escape
from death.
"All the trouble we have had has been
caused through not being satisfied with
what we have.
I say let us be content with what we
have got, and not want something which
we cannot get. What do you say, folks?”
In a very loud chorus the whole of the
villagers yelled all together, “Yes. Let us
be satisfied with what we have got.”
PEGGINSTITCH, THE SHOEMAKER
As everybody was now contented, they lived happily ever afterwards in
that strange village of Bubblegug.
THE END,




we H' t + I
/) 123.Z
Z X
/y c
3 1508 01755643


