

"Buckshee"
A picloial Record of the
work of the N-Z-Y-M-C-A
on Active Service




"Buckshee"
A Rictorial Record
of the of
the New Zealand
Y.M.C.A
on Active Service




There is a sentiment attaching to the past four years which can never die.
Those who have gone through this period, as so many men have, in close
touch with the horrors and the miracles of the war, will find their future
inevitably influenced by it all. As the recollection of the horrors dies away,
the recollection of the miracles will be ennobled. Men will talk less of the
suffering than of the bravery, the devotion, the self-sacrifice and the splendid
comradeship which we who have walked in the valley of death have seen
on all hands. It is because of these more beautiful memories that this little
book is published.
\
During the Great War the Young Men’s Christian Association has played an
important part in the endeavour to meet the religious and social needs of the
men of the N.Z.E.F., and the people of New Zealand generously contributed
the funds to carry out this important work. This souvenir book gives an
account of how these funds were utilised, and forms a link between the
men and the public of the Dominion. However, the war work of the Association
lias been but a prelude to the larger work ahead, and in this great task all who will
may take a definite part.
LONDON, June , 1919.


Brig.-General G. S. Richardson, C. B., C.M.G., N.Z.S.C., on R.M.S. “Remuera”
en route to New Zealand.


Major-General Sir A. H. Russell, K.C.B., C.M.G., on S.S. “Arawa” en route to New Zealand.


On the way over:
(1) Convoy. (2) Naval Gunners. (3) Sunset. (4) Sports.


(1) Y.M.C.A. at the Pyramids.
(3) Temporary Bridge over Egyptian Canal,
(5) N.Z. Mounted Rifles in Cairo.
(2) Touring in Egypt.
(4) Esbekieh Gardens, Cairo.
(6) Scene on the Suez Canal.


(1) Anzac, showing Y.M.C.A. marquee.
(2) Admiral de Roebeck and Gen. Sir Ian Hamilton.
(3) Anzac Beach.


The Call to Service.
Even in the earliest months of the war, when the struggle had not yet involved more than a
small proportion of the manhood of the Nations, the Y.M.C.A. felt the call to be up and
doing. It was essentially a peaceful organisation, concerned normally with the sociaUe e
of the citizen; but here at one stroke the particular class of citizen with whom it had to de
the young man in civilian life, had been called away en masse to the battlefield. Ihe demand
that the Y.M.C.A. should march with them was inexorable. It had to take its courage in oi s
hands, as they had done, and endeavour to bring the amenities of social and rell gtous Me as
close as possible to the horrors of the campaign. Else would there be no ray of brightness
and hope at all in the weary marches and countermarches, the tense watches and the heart-
breaking scenes into which these thousands of peace-loving young men had been carried.
Setting a Precedent. It was not so difficult in New Zealand to adapt the organisation of
The Y M.C.A. to war conditions, for valuable experience had been gamed m the annua
Territorial Camps. Without delay work was commenced at d rentham, and thereafter at each of
the other camps as they were opened. It was, of course, the desire of the National Council
to follow the troops in the field, but the scheme of British Expeditionary Forces overseas did
not provide for such voluntary social services, and it was not until the 4th Reinforcements left,
in April, 1915, that the persistent importunities of the Council succeeded in breaking down
official barriers. A second representative left with the 7th Reinforcements, and from that time
onward almost every draft had its Y.M.C.A. Held Secretary.
The experience gained by the earlier secretaries showed clearly how very
by the organisation—by the supply of stationery, papers, books, magazines, a chin life
games, by entertainments and sports—to allay the tedium and the monotony of troopship .
In co-operation with the padres, too, the spiritual needs of the men were provided for, and


Y.M.C.A. Dug-out, near Rossignol Wood, the Somme Area.


(1) Manawatu Hut at Stationary Hospital, Wisque. (2) Y.M.C.A. Tent at Horse Show, Lottinghen.
(3) Y.M.C.A. Reference Library at Beauvois. (4) Wairarapa Hut, Ploegsteert.
(5) Y.M.C.A. for walking wounded at Pont d’Achilles.


thousand and one little personal commissions quite unrecognised in military regulations,
the whole time of the busy secretaries was absorbed.
In Sunny Egypt. The first New Zealand Y.M.C.A. Secretary to proceed overseas modestly
inaugurated the work in a small army bell tent in the stifling heat and everlasting sands of
Egypt. It was in the desert near Zeitoun that he found what was left of the Main Body of
the N.Z.E.F., the rest had already gone forward to the great adventure of Gallipoli. The
War Emergency Committee of the Egyptian Y.M.C.A. had not left the work undone. Before
the arrival of New Zealanders, this Committee had established activities in marquees and mat
huts, specially suited to keep out the intense heat of the desert. The New Zealand Secretary
at once took over part of this work, and by opening a new centre in the lines of the Mounted
Brigade amply provided for the existing needs of the New Zealand force in Egypt. Nor was
it a moment too soon. Cosmopolitan Cairo, the meeting-place of hybrid races of east and
west, was a sink of oriental vices, full of pitfalls for soldiers on leave, and it was soon evident
that something vigorous would have to be done to protect our men from these rampant dangers
by providing them with counter-attractions. In August, 1915, by the aid of generous con-
tributions from the Australian Red Cross, a wonderful new centre of attraction was created in
the Esbekieh Gardens, strategically situated in the heart of Cairo. The nucleus, over which
the representative of the New Zealand Y.M.C.A. was asked to take charge, was a skating rink
and theatre. Gradually new features were added—reading and writing rooms, billiards, games,
boxing matches, athletic meetings and skating, a splendid buffet run by English and Colonial
ladies—how much did its success depend upon the home touch and association which they
afforded —and finally a swimming pool, the only one in Cairo. The success of Esbekieh
Gardens was instant and complete. It became the rendezvous of thousands of soldiers, British
and Colonial, on leave in Cairo, and one of the most important institutions in their social life.
Esbekieh was managed throughout by representatives of the New Zealand Y.M.C.A., under the
direction of the Y.M.C.A. National Council of Egypt.


(1) Y.M.C.A. Hut at Kotypyp, destroyed by shell fire.
(2) Carrying on; interior of Hut.


Y.M.C.A. “Pozzie” at Bertincourt on the Somme.


There was great difficulty again in getting a footing for the Y.M.C. A. in Gallipoli, but eventually
this was achieved, and work was carried out at Anzac and at Helles. After the evacuation,
the organisation moved with the New Zealand Brigade to Ismailia, where the Division came
into being and trained in preparation for the transfer to h ranee early in 1916. Though t e
Y.M.C.A. representative accompanied the Division on this move, the Egyptian Force was not
neglected. Another Secretary remained with the Mounted Brigade, and carried on active
work, in conditions of great difficulty but of great appreciation, all through the Palestine
campaign. Right through the piece the New Zealand representatives in Egypt were made
much use of by the Y.M.C.A. National Council in that country, and one of their innovations
in particular, the system of physical training for convalescent soldiers, was of great benefit, not
only to Dominion soldiers, but to British troops who passed through Egyptian hospitals.
Operations in France. The tragic town of Armentieres, shell-torn and dismantled, held
in durance for retaliation at any time by the German guns, was the centre of the first sector
held by the Division, when it went into the line in Flanders. The work of the New Zealand
Y.M.C.A. was commenced in one of the deserted halls of I’Ecole Professionelle, a large
technical school at the western end of the town, and there for three months, in spite of
numerous alarms and narrow escapes, the centre provided, in surroundings of unusual comfort,
recreation by day and entertainment by night. It was here that the Y.M.C.A. developed the
distribution of comforts —dolly cakes, cigarettes, sweets, etc., provided through the facilities o
the British organisation. The Sunday afternoon teas, which had been a feature of the work in
Egypt, were also continued. Before the Division moved away, a second centre, for which the
British Y.M.C.A. supplied an extra man, was opened at Chapelle Armentieres.
Transport Difficulties. It was in August, 1916, that the first great strain of a war of
movement fell upon the organisation. When the Division moved south to take its part in the
Somme offensive, the Y.M.C.A. had no transport whatever. While in training billets in the
.Abbeville area, the Y.M.C.A. had a hall in Halleacourt, and, liberally assisted by the British


Y.M.C.A. “Buckshee Stunt” near Achet le Petit during attack on Grevilles.


V.M.C.A. “ Buckshee Stunt,” Wizernes Siding, after, Passdendaele.


organisation with gear and concert parties, it carried on its work as before. Then came
the trek to the Somme front, and the Y.M.C.A. marquee arose on a spot on Fricourt m!
of dm r ever b r e remembered for the bloody struggle which culminated in the expulsion
of the Germans from their fortress. The transport difficulty had not yet been overcome
and it was only with very great trouble and scheming that a few wagon loads of stores were
obtained on the spot. Canteens were then few and far between, and the supplies
disappeared as if by magic. C!>
In the Forward Areas. The Division had its first big stunt in France when it took Flers
on September loth, and exploited its success in the three weeks following. The Y.M.C.A
was eby hard work and foresight to follow up every stage of the advance from the base
f, a C ?T\ incidentally to develop what was afterwards a most valued aspect of its work
the distribution of comforts to the wounded and to men actually in the line. Unless it be
assc endaele, more terrible conditions of mud and devastation than were experienced in those
early Somme days could scarcely be imagined. It was an unforgettable sight to witness the
remnants of the Division, unshaven, unwashed, and covered with mud, partaking of hot coffee
and comforts as they marched back, proudly victorious, from their part in the push.
Instead of going out for a rest, the Division had to proceed by train from
Albert to Picquigny a distance of 40 miles in 06 hours—the bitterest train
journey surely that ever troops endured, to take over a sector in the 2nd
Army area. On this occasion the Y.M.C.A.. got ahead, and, with the
assistance of two new representatives who had just reported for duty
succeeded in supplying hot refreshments to the men as they detrained!
I hose who made that journey can testify how much this was appreciated
and how well the three days’ and three nights’ constant work which it
entailed was repaid


(1) Gun on rails. (2) 6 in. Howitzer going into action. (3) Ruined French village.
(4) New Zealanders in Le Quesnoy just after its capture.


“Buckshee Mac,” Y.M.C.A. Motor Canteen, presented by P. M'Hardy, Esq., of Palmerston, N.


(1) Going into action.
(3) Hun Tank captured by N.Z, Division.
(2) Tank in difficulties.
(4) A Whippet.


Model of German Trenches and Organisation, Messines Sector.


. T ,r- i The winter was now setting in—the severest without question
The Severity of „ provided for a great extension
in all the campaign in Flanders-and the plans of the CA. P • . ; al unit
dugouts were established om of b went to finish comforts to men actually in
re"L y e Wa Tr P Tple otiTzealand were quick to realise it, and responded with the greatest
liberality to demands for more.
of Messines, and the little “buckshee pomes” of “eve? fetaed S efforts to
forts, at the time when they were most required. Thousands ot the neroes
received thankfully welcome revivers on those sweltering roads of June.
In Unwholesome Places Then the Division swung to the right, to the nasty
confinesTof° Font de Nieppe, and the 4th Brigade came across rom its
training in England, and with it two recruits for the Y.M.C.A. It was a hot locality,
onen to consent alarms and shelling and bombs. Over and over again one centre
Or another was put out of action. Yet in this period of stress 22 places, including
3 officers’ kept going, and one Y.M.C.A man accompanied the
Brigade when it went north to co-operate with the Ist French Army in P
sector.


Reproduction of Calico Sign from a Y.M.C.A. Hut in France.


(1) Aamaged gun. (2) Exploding a mine. (3) General Bird wood in the trenches.


in the LnmbiS HaidMouck, and later
sss z STS gr r
ZXSXZZ
more tragic « SXssafed on
the fct n buMfagto aris h e C to ‘the hT nS - almost out of ran ge. and
the L.„e Gate entrance, erected b y thTklwXetXd E^XrX?!’“
full uf rumours of an wasa . fieetl ”g ? ne - Winter was
storm that the Division withdrew early in March’, 1918, for a SSebrouckTrS
the St °™ b T'’ and the «" ™hed «>h fury
devastation of Ypres. One after another" h * Tt a ." d throu « h the ho P ele ”
Passchendaele, Bapautne—fell again into the I!™? a^ 0 ? ous ““quests—Messines,
reached the Division to put itsT’to h' n f^ nd /^ f the ruthless Hu u. Orders
was a matter of life and death and e P t S | of , the ,orrent before Amiens. It
bayonets of the front line. It seemed 'as Tf the YMt’a”'/*!! - Wanted fOT the
would have to go by the board • but nnnn * f 7 Y -M.C.A. and all it wished to do
the scene. The Division reached th^ ne !. y - 1 ts own new motor lorry arrived on
a 20-mile march And as thev i ° danger, weary and footsore, after
fam liar “ Y.M. pozzie ” was readv f °T^ rd to A . f J ll the g a P m the line, the
refreshments. A quantity of sunnliVc road side at Albert to supply the men with
quantity of supplies and equipment that had perforce to be left


(1) British Y. M.C.A. for walking wounded.
(2) Canadian Y. M.C.A. Dug out.


A Calico Sign well covered with Diggers’ names.


(1) Canadian Y.M.C. A. in ruined French village. (2) Canadian Y.M.C.A. “ Somewhere in France,”


(1) Y.M.C.A. “Pozzie" in Fontaine.
(2) German Soldiers’ Club in Fontaine, converted into a Y.M.C.A.


The Y.M.C.A. Lowry Hut, Etaples,


behind when the enemy torrent came on was soon afterwards rescued in our victorious
counter-attack.
Though the summer of victory was full of movement and feverish haste, the Y.M.C.A.
not only established itself once more on the Somme in its full proportions, but it
was able to initiate the Field Education Scheme. The organisation had its severest
experience of open warfare when the final advance commenced at Hebuterne late in
August. To keep pace with a Division in full pursuit of the retreating enemy, to
bring up supplies with restricted transport on roads choked with traffic, and all the
time to meet the incessant demand for comforts, was an almost insuperable problem.
Yet through it all, from Hebuterne to the Armistice, the Y.M.C.A. never once failed the
men. Within a few hours of the storied fall of Le Quesnoy it was fully established in
the walled town. 'lhe achievement was a triumph of willing workers and burning enthusiasm,
but even they could not have triumphed but for the assistance and sympathy of D.H.Q.
Thence onward to the Rhine the work became fuller and, in a way, daily more important.
Throughout the demobilisation and until the last man left Germany it was continued at its
usual standard. In fact, what was done in Germany stands out as probably the most
efficient work accomplished during the whole history of the Y.M.C A. with the Division.
Fragments in France. While the work with the Division was continuously maintained,
the New Zealand Y.M.C.A. had various activities elsewhere in France. A large hut at
Ltaples, presented by Mrs. T. H. Lowry, proved of the greatest service to thousands of men
who passed through the New Zealand base there. Mrs. Lowry also gave the baths, which
were established in the same locality. Another amenity of very great value in more ways
than one was the Y.M.C A. garden scheme at Etaples, from which large quantities of fresh
vegetables were issued free to the men in the Division. At the Stationary Hospital at Wisques,
near St. Omer, a large Y.M.C.A. hut was much appreciated by both patients and staff.


Y.M.C.A. “Buckshee Stunt” at Ehrenfield, Cologne.


(1), Hohenzollern Bridge, Cologne.
(2) H. R.H. Prince of Wales, Major-General Sir A. H. Russell and Staff.
(3) N.Z. Divisional Headquarters, Weisdorf.


Y.M.C.A. “Pozzies” in MUheim, Germany
(1) Victoria Hall. ( 2 ) Gaiet y Theatre.


Y.M.G.A., Leichlingen, Germany.


(1) Y.M.C.A. at Leverkusen, Germany. (2) Y.M.C.A. Divisional Reference Library, Mulheim


Y.M.C.A, Langenfeld, Germany.


New Zealand Y.M.C.A., Mulheim, Germany;—
(1) Reading Room. ( 2 ) “Home Hour Tea.


Y.M.C A. work with a mobile fighting division under modern war conditions must necessarily
be difficult, and only the devoted service of the staff, including the soldiers who were detailed
from time to time to assist, made success possible. There were isolated units, such as the
Cyclists, the funnelling Corps and burestry details, for whom nothing special could be done
unless they happened to be with the Division, for inadequate staff and transport were an
everlasting problem, and efficiency demanded concentration on the work with the Division.
Nevertheless, these isolated units were always cared for, under the general Y.M.C.A. policy,
by other Y.M C.A. centres where they happened to be.
As regards France, it only remains to notice the active work done by the Y.M.CA. in Paris
to make leave there more enjoyable and less dangerous than it might otherwise have been.
When leave to Paris first commenced, a joint arrangement was made by the New Zealand
VM.C.A. with the Australian and British organisations to run the Hotel Florida as a hostel.
Later, the Windsor and d’Ostende were also taken over, and the latter especially, being
operated by a New Zealand Y.M.C.A. staff, including two New Zealand ladies, became
a very popular centre. For general information and guides there were always avail-
able the services of the bureaux established by the British Y.M.C.A. early in
the war.
Work in England.
Sling 1 , When the Division came to France early in 1916 administrative head-
quarters were transferred from Cairo to London and the United Kingdom came
suddenly into the orbit of the New Zealand soldiers serving overseas. Here
reception and training camps sprang into being ; and here, of course, the Y.M.C.A.
had to minister to the comfort and the social welfare of the men. In the interim
the British Y.M.C.A. did what it could and did it well, but its work at Sling


Y.M.C.A., Dellbruck, Germany.


Y.M.C.Am Dunnwald, Germany.


The N.Z. Y.M.C.A. in Germany:—
(1) Bulk Stores, Dellbruck. (2) Leichlingen.
(3) The Y.M.C.A. “Ford” on the road to Solingen.


(1) “Buckshee” cocoa for departing troops, Cologne Station.
(2) The Canteen, Langenfeld, Germany.


Hall commandeered for Y.M.C.A. at Dellbrnck, Germany.


' soon inadequateJ for the increasing number of men. By a previous arrangement
'! lth . the British Y.M.C.A. it was agreed that when the troops of any Dominion pre-
dominated m a camp the hut there should be taken over by the Dominion Association,
n nch naturally desired to work among its own men. Sling hut was thus taken over. The
first act of the New Zealand Y.M.C.A Commissioners and the Supervising Secretary was to
decide on extendmg_the centre, and Sling soon became one of the finest huts on the Plain.
By virtue of its position it has become probably better known throughout the N.Z.E.F. than
any other Y.M.C.A. centre in any theatre.
Brockenhurst Shortly afterwards No. 1 New Zealand General Hospital, which had been
at Pont de Koubbeh, m Egypt was transferred to the old Hampshire village of Brockenhurst,
m the New forest dhe first \ .M.C.A. representative who was available was sent to take over
the existing British hut, but it was some distance away from the hospital. A new one was
accordingly erected in the hospital grounds, which throughout the war was a great boon to
t lousands of sick and wounded men. Its cinema, with concerts and other parties, provided
ample entertainment.
Hornchurch. When this camp became a convalescent depot the Y.M.C.A. was reouested to
open there also, and before long the building which was first designed had to be enlarged to
do what was required. Extensions were needed primarily to accommodate the growin-
educational work m arts and crafts, which also became a feature of the Brockenhurst centre!
Alter the Armistice a generous contribution was received from W. T. Williams Eso who
handed over to the Y.M.C.A. Te Whare Puni Club, in the village of Hornchurch.’
Shakespeare Hut. Provision for New Zealanders on leave was no less pressing in London
than it was in laris. In fact, despite all that the British Y.M.C.A. had done, it became an
WsD Pr ° b e u T ° f °°, P n ' Xl th v the Shakes P eare Hut > a large building in Bloomsbury, a
locality much frequented by New Zealanders owing to the proximity of the headquarters offices,


Y.M.C.A, Hut, Sling Camp.


At the Y.M.C.A., Sling Camp:—
(2) Sunday “Buckshee” Tea.
(3) Saturday Evening.
(1) Billiard Room.


Y.M.C.A., Hornchurch, showing additions for Educational Work.


Y.M.C.A. Hut, Brockenhurst.


was taken over as the headquarters of the New Zealand Y.M.C.A. in London, and it became
the rendezvous of thousands of New Zealanders visiting the capital of the Emphe. Here any
soldier could obtain a bed for 9d. and—what was more important in the days of dearth and
food shortage—meals, day and night, at less than half the prices charged in London restaurants.
Codford. When the Command Depot was established at Codford the British Y.M.C.A. hut
in camp No. 11 was taken over by the New Zealand Association. Thereafter it not only
catered for the camp itself, but was the centre from which the patients in the New Zealand
Isolation Hospital near by were looked after. The military assisted in every way, and nowhere
has the work of the Y.M.C.A. been more appreciated than at Codford, where an arts and crafts
department was an important feature.
Walton-on-Thames. A commodious house was taken over, equi-distant between the two
branches of the No. 2 New Zealand General Hospital—Oatlands Bark and Mount Felix—and
there was always a real touch of home in the work at this centre.
Boscombe. When the N.Z. Headquarters decided to establish special camps in the United
Kingdom for the different branches in training, a request was made to the Y.M.C.A. to stait
work in each of them. Hence when the Engineers went to Christchurch the Y.M.C.A. took
two houses near by at Boscombe, and the presence of a staff of New Zealand ladies made the
hostel and club there very popular. At the Machine Gun Camp at Grantham the Y.M.C.A.
took over part of the Regimental Institute. For the benefit of the Artillery Reinforcements at
Ewshot, the existing British Y.M.C.A. hut was taken over, and similarly for the Rifle Brigade
that at Brocton-
When the Armistice came a number of the sectional training camps were closed down, and the
men were concentrated in a new camp at Sutton Coldfield, where two British huts were taken
possession of for the N.Z. Y.M.C.A. Moreover, a large building in the vicinity known as the


Y.M.C.A. Shakespeare Hut. London.


Group of Visitors, Shakespeare Hut, London.


Model Platoon, Sling Camp, in charge of Lieut. Andrew, V.C.


(1) A concert audience, Y.M.C.A., Sling.
(2) The Canteen, Y.M.C.A. Sutton Coldfield.


Y.M.C.A. Hut, Codford Camp.


Y.M.C.A. Club, Walton-on-Thames.


In and around the Y.M.C.A., Walton-on Thames:—
(1) Cot Cases. (2) A Maori Helper... (3) Afternoon Tea. (4) “The Stuff to gi’e them.”
(5) In the tea room.


(2) Australian Y.M.C.A., Aldwych, London.
(1) Y.M.C.A., “Maycliff,” Torquay.


(1) Billiaid Room, Y.M.C.A., Brockenhurst. (2) Y.M.C.A., St. Marychurch, Torquay.
(3) “Home” Room for Soldiers’ Wives, Y.M.C.A., Torquay.


Crystal Palace was adapted as a cinema, and nightly shows were given in co-operation with the
military.
Tormiav This beautiful seaside resort in Devon was selected as a centre for the concentration
„{ unfit men awaiting return to New Zealand. They were billetted in the town, and the Y.M.C.A.
did raoital work at its two clubs in providing entertainment and inaugurating the arts and cratts
courses which had been so successful at Brockenhurst and Hornchurch At a later stage
Torauay was used for the concentration of married couples awaiting embarkation : and the
Y.M.C.A. always practical and up-to-date, started classes in domestic science for the benefit ot
the wives.' The Association also carried on its work at the two experimental farms which were
operated by the N.Z.E.F. as part of their educational scheme.
Hostels in London. After the Armistice, leave for New Zealand soldiers to visit London
was given more freely, and an entirely new strain was put upon the available accommodation.
To meet this the Y.M.C.A. took over a large up-to-date hotel, the West Central, in
Southampton Row, the Catalpha Hotel in Torrington Square, and an annexe in Little
Russell Street, thus enabling the men to obtain good accommodation and social tacihties
at moderate rates when it would otherwise have been quite impossible:
International Hospitality League. The co-operation of all the Y.M.C.A.
organisations in Great Britain brought about what became known as the International
Hospitality League, which was instituted to deal entirely with the case of men on leave.
Each of the Bntish, Colonial and American Associations contributed its quota of personnel
and finance, and the first chief secretary was a representative of the New Zealand Y.M.C.A.
It was this body which set up in the main thoroughfares of London complete Information
Bureaux where soldiers could obtain reliable informat on instead of appealing to strangers,
who might or might not have been reliable. Incidentally the Bureaux, by organising
social evenings in private homes, set up a new bond between the overseas soldier and the


Y.M.C.A. Hostels at Boscombe, near Bournemouth.


Y.M.CA. Hut, Brocton Camp, showing soldiers of the 40th Reinforcements.


Cookery Class tor N.Z. Soldiers’ Wives, Y.M.C.A., Torquay.


Y.M C.A. Hut, Sutton Coldfield Camp.


people of the Home country, many of whom were associated in the work. The
managers of London theatres provided free tickets which the League distributed.
Thousands of introductions were secured for soldiers, which resulted in their spending:
short periods in British homes throughout the length and breadth of the Kingdom.
The work extended to all the principal cities. In Edinburgh a New Zealand
Y.M.C.A. representative was in charge, and in Glasgow one was attached to the staff.
Street Patrol. Not the least important feature of the work of the I.H.L. was
the delicate and difficult work of the street patrols. This was initiated to endeavour
to protect men against the temptations of the streets of London. It succeeded
beyond expectations. Most of the work, which was carried out between 7 p.m. and
2 a.m., was of a delicate personal nature requiring the utmost tact to separate men
from women of known disreputable character. Its success was so distinct that before
long Great Britain, Canada, United States, Australia and New Zealand were
engaged in it.
Leave Department. This interesting branch, which was put in charge of a special
man, included the organisation of parties to visit the historic spots of London.
1 o idon gentlemen acted as honorary guides, and thousands of New Zealand soldiers were
shown round at next to no cost to themselves. Arrangements were also made for regular
visits of groups of men to industrial works and historic spots throughout the Kingdom.
Educating the Soldier. The Education Scheme, which afterwards grew to such great
proportions, may be traced to its origin in 1917 in the “ Hobbies room ” at the Y.M.C.A. hut
at Hornchurch, a sort of workshop where convalescents could employ their minds and spare
time making useful and ornamental articles. It soon proved itself to be of distinct curative
value, and the Y.M.C.A. suggested to the medical authorities that instruction in carving, fret-
work and cabinet-making should be installed as a definite part of the hospital treatment.


(1) N.Z. Ladies of the I.H.L Patrol. (2) Window Display, Strand Bureau.
(3) I.H.L. Enquiry Bureau, Strand.


(1) International Hospitality Bureaux, London:-
(1) Leicester Square. (a) Parliament Square. (3) Australian Y.M.C.A., Aldwych Theatre.
(4) Trafalgar Square. (5) Victoria Street.


The “All Welcome” Y.M.C.A. Hut, Victoria Station, London.


Canadian Y.M.C.A., Beaver Hut, London.


Work was soon commenced under capable instructors, and immediately the demand came for
extension of the classes Graduates from the South Kensington Royal College of Arts were
engaged for rafia work, basket-making, needlework, sketching, lettering, illuminating, pewter-
work, bootmaking, stained-glass work, leatherwork, architectural drawing, carpentry and so on.
The curative value of the scheme was undoubted, and the educational and vocational value
clearly demonstrated. Frequent additions were made, until the buildings at Hornchurch
assumed the appearance of a miniature technical school. The whole of the classes were under
the local Y.M.C.A. secretary, a qualified educationalist who was able to surmount all the troubles
that arose. The work extended to Torquay, Brockenhurst and Codford with equal success,
and in April, 1918, the N.Z.E.F. Education Scheme was born at a conference of the leading
educationalists in the force and the representatives of the Y.M.C.A., called by Brig.-General G.
S. Richardson. The Y.M.C.A. of course had a definite part in the scheme, which aimed at
extending to the whole force what had hitherto been done only in hospitals and convalescent
camps. The Supervising Secretary was made a member of the Board of Governors, and
each camp secretary was on the local camp executive. By supplying eminent lecturers to
various camps, the Association continued to maintain its arts and crafts work and co-operated
in the success of the general scheme. For the remainder of the fighting period in France, the
Y.M.C.A. undertook the organisation of a voluntary scheme of education with the Division,
and it received every encouragement from Headquarters. A great deal of useful work was
thus carried out before the signing of the Armistice permitted the Division to enter fully into
the Education Scheme as a part of military routine.
The Religious Side. If the Y.M.C.A. had restricted itself to providing solely for the
social, physical and mental needs of the men on service it would have been unfaithful to its
fundamental principles. The Red Triangle symbolises the Christian ideal of complete
manhood—body, mind and spirit—and the Association endeavoured throughout to give


Canadian Y.M.C.A. Beaver Hut, London :-
(1) Cloak Room. (2) Shower Bath. (3) Dormitory. (4) Lounge. (5) Billiard Room.


(1) New Zealanders in the Hampton Court Maze. (2) Queen Mary’s Bower, Hampton Court
(3) Scene in Sutton Coldfield Camp.


Scenes in Petticoat Lane, London, on a Sunday morning.


American Y.M.C.A., Eagle Hut, London.


Y.M.C.A,, Camberwell Green, London.


Educational Work in England:—
(I) Art Class. (2) Basket-making. (3) Rafia work. (4) and (5) Samples of Soldiers Work.


due emphasis to each side of the work. The activity and
persistence with which it supplied the men with material
comforts largely broke down the feeling of suspicion, and
even of antagonism, to religious organisations which
undoubtedly existed before the war, thus opening the way
for a more direct religious message. The song service
held on Sunday evenings in every centre was always
popular. It w'as quite informal. Men were allowed to
choose their own hymns: soldiers frequently took part
in the service: and the address w r as a simple straight
talk. Who can estimate the results to thousands of men
who were thus brought within sound of the Gospel ?
A forward move in the religious activity of the
Y.M.C A. was made in 1917 in the formation of the
Brotherhood of Men of Goodwill. This aimed at assembling groups of men for Bible
study and consideration of the great social and moral questions of the day. It was realised
that large numbers of men who were not quite prepared to subscribe to orthodox Christian
creeds, were strongly in favour of “the betterment of things” generally. These were the
men the Brotherhood wished to link up ; and in spite of the extreme difficulty of maintaining
an organisation owing to continual losses through casualties, the movement progressed with a
high measure of success. Popular Sunday afternoon “ Home Hour Teas ” were held in
every centre, at which from 50 to 100 men might sit down, and this institution, followed by a
social or religious discussion, had as much of the “ home touch ” as was possible under the
circumstances.
In all its religious work the Y.M.C.A. closely co-operated with the chaplains. Its buildings


Scenes at Hornchurch:—
(I) Seed-testing. (2) Grey Towers. (3) Farm carpentry. (4) Poultry Farming. (5) Wool-classing.


(1) and (3) “Diggers” at the Zoo, London.
(2) Y.M.C.A. Party at Hampton Court.


(1) In the Australian Y.M.C.A., London. (2) “Aussies” locating their home towns.
(3) A popular corner at the Aldwych.


(1) Y.M.C.A. Tarty at Hampton Court. (2) River Thames and house-boats at Hampton Court.


■were freely placed at the service of padres of all denominations, and they in turn frequently
took part in the Sunday evening services of the Y.M.C.A. The happiest relations always
existed.
Comforts for the Front. The balance sheet on page 114 shows what has been expended
in the issue of comforts to the men, and how rapidly this scheme developed into one of
the biggest of the organisation, particularly in France. Besides the methods which have
already been described for the distribution of comforts, the Y.M.C.A. always had its
“ buckshee pozzie ” at the horse shows and athletic meetings organised by Division or
brigades. Even in the regular forward work it was sometimes possible to introduce
innovations. For instance, in the summer of 1918 large quantities of eggs, oranges and
grapes were obtained from a neighbouring French town. The eggs were boiled at a forward
“ pozzie,” and runners came from the line to collect and distribute them. The fruit and
other comforts were distributed in the line by the Y.M.C.A. representatives themselves or
by special runners.
Whenever the Division was on the move the Y.M.C.A. endeavoured to get ahead, and set up
its “ pozzie ” either at the detraining point or on the side of the road to supply the men as they
arrived. During the trek to Germany the Y.M.C.A. managed to get itself established in almost
every village before the troops came in. It vas on the spot with a free issue of hot cocoa,
biscuits, chocolate and cigarettes, both when the Division entrained at Herbesthal, just inside
the German frontier, and when it arrived at Ehrenfeld station on the outskirts of Cologne,
During the demobilisation again, with the three to five days’ train journey to Rouen, a special
truck was set aside for the Y.M.C.A., and throughout the tedious journey hot refreshments were
always obtainable. Another interesting feature was the free distribution of daily papers in the
line. Special transport arrangements made the Paris “Daily Mail” available the day after issue,


Y.M.C.A., Mile End Road, London. Presented by East End Jews.


(1) No. 2 N.Z. General Hospital, Brockenhurst. (2) The Last Post.
(3) The arrival of a convoy. (4) Hospital in France. (5) Sisters’ Quarters.


(1) Y.M.C.A. Party leaving Snakespeare Hut.
(2) Ann Hathaway’s Cottage, Stratford on-Avon.


American Y.M.C.A. for Officers, Washington Inn, London.


and when it arrived at Y.M.C.A. headquarters with the Division, supplies were sent immediately
to the line.
Social Activities. Anything that would help to keep the men occupied when off duty and
relieve the monotony of life was recognised as part of the Y.M.C.A.’s social work. A full
equipment of games, athletic gear, stationery and literature (including a large Divisional Library
of the best classical and reference works) was always available and extensively used. All kinds
of lectures, debates and concerts, were organised. Wherever possible, in England, France and
Germany, the cinema was made use of, no charge being made for admission. On the Rhine
the Y.M.C.A. had five cinemas with the Division. Recognising the importance of the work,
the Division formed several Pierrot Troupes of highly talented artists who gave performances
equal to that of any professionals. On arrival at the Rhine the organisation of the whole
entertainment scheme for the Division, including the Pierrot Troupes, was entrusted to the
Y.M.C.A.
Homeward Bound. The Association felt its work would not be complete if the men of
the forces were not catered for on their long journey from England to New Zealand. Through
the kindness of the Administrative Headquarters, London, suitable accommodation was
provided on every troopship and a representative of the Y.M.C.A. was embarked with each
diaft which left for New Zealand, after the end of 1918. The Secretary’s duties included the
organisation of sports and entertainments and the distribution of comforts. The good
relationships, which always existed between the Padres and the Secretaries, continued to the
end, and together they made the most of religious work on board ship.
A Final Word. In such a review as this it is only fitting to mention the services of a


Y.M C.A., Grosvenor Gardens, London.


(1) Bulford Station. (2) The entraining siding, Bulford. (3) Bulford Village. (4) Stonehenge,
(5) Entrance to Sutton Coldfield Camp.


devoted staff particularly the women. They gave themselves unreservedly to the work for the
benefit of the men, and without them the success achieved could never have
—• ? he co-operation with kindred Associations should also be mentioned. Tne
• M-.L.A. is a world-wide organisation, and wherever the Red Triangle appears, any
soldier, irrespective of his nationality, knew that he was welcome. To the British Association
m particular, the New Zealand Y.M.C.A. owe a debt of gratitude not only for services
rendered before we arrived in Europe and for the use New Zealand soldiers made of British
nuts in England and trance, but also for the generous manner in which it has handed over
ds o\vn huts to the New Zealand Y.M.C.A. in camps occupied by New Zealanders. Without
this hearty co-operation our work could not possibly have been established so promptly
wherever it was required.
It is also due to the Headquarters Staff and other administrative departments of the N.Z.E.F.
to acknowledge the great assistance they gave both in England and France. Any
scheme which had for its object the welfare of the men was heartily approved and assisted
into operation by the military.
wor k °f the Association is practically finished ; but its close only brings into bolder
relief the greater task of the future in our homeland. A few months before the Armistice
was signed the following message was given to the men of the New Zealand Division by its
distinguished Commander, Major-General Sir A. H. Russell, K.C.8., C.M.G. :
Ihe last furrow will soon have been turned : get ready for the sowing. On what we
sow in a world ploughed and worked by the war depends the crop of happiness or
sorrow our children will reap.”


(2) Y.M.C.A. on troop train en route Cologne to Rouen.
(1) Interior of V.M.C.A. truck on troop train.


(1) Two-up School. (2) “The Search.” (3) Blue Boys at Walton.
(4) New Zealanders in Edinburgh.


(1) The “Tuis.” (2) The “Diggers.” (5) The “ Kiwis.” (4) Sling Camp Orchestra.
(5) N.Z. R.B. Band, Brocton.


Staffs of N.Z. Y.M.C.A. Huts in England:—
(1) Boscombe. (2) Brocton. (3) Walton-on Thames. (4) Sling. (5) Codfori-


Voluntary Lady Workers, Shakespeare Hut, London.


New Zealand Y.M.C.A. Field Secretaries on Overseas Service.


(1) N.Z Y.M.C.A. Stores, London. (2) N.Z. Y.M.C.A. Headquarters.
(3) w eat Central Hotel, ( 4 ) Torrington Square Hostel.
(5) Shakespeare Hut under Snow.


(1) The “Remuera” at Plymouth. (2) Camouflaged steamer on the Thames.
(3) The “ Prinzessin,” first German prize-ship for N Z. (4) Tender at Plymouth.
(5) The “Arawa” at Tilbury.


Scenes on the'“ Remuera” :
(1) Life-belt parade. (2) N.Z. Sisters. (3) Soldiers and their wives. (4) Going on board.


These prophetic words have come true ; we have now entered upon the sowing period, and
New Zealand’s young manhood represents a field capable of yielding a great harvest. Out
of the experiences of four and-a-half years of war comes a clarion call to the Y.M.C.A. to
take a worthy part in this great sowing process, and to this task every ounce of thought and
effort must be concentrated.


Y.M.C.A. Hotel Florida, Paris.


(2) Entrance Hall, Y.M.C.A., Hotel d’Ostende, Paris.
(1) Entrance Hall, Hotel Florida, Paris.


(1) Y.M.C.A. Party at Versailles.
(2) The Trocadero, Paris.


Ministerial Party at Y.M.C.A., Hotel d’Ostende, Paris.


Sight-seeing party leaving Y.M.C.A., Hotel d’Ostende, Paris.


Y.M.C.A. Party at Versailles


(2) Gambetta Monument, Paris.
(1) Eiffel Tower and Big Wheel.


(1) Y.M.C.A. Party at Napoleon’s Tomb, Paris.
(2) Large Arc de Triomphe, Paris.


Y.M.C.A. Tours in Paris: —
(1) At the Palais Royal. (2) Notre Dame.


(1) An Australian Y.M.C.A. Hostel in England.
(2, 3, 4, and 5) Canadian Y.M.C.A.’s in Forestry Camps, Scotland.


British Y.M.C.A.’s:—
(1) Archangel. (2) Palestine. (3) Switzerland.


Memorial to New Zealand Soldiers at Lodge Hill Cemetery, Birmingham.


From New Zealand
Sundry receipts in London,
5,779
Extract from Commissioner’s Report on Aggregate Balance Sheet
Published in full in “New Zealander” of 14th March, 1919.
This aggregate Balance Sheet and Statement of Accounts
summarises the whole of the details of Receipts and Expenditure
contained in the three previous audited Statements, dated
respectively 31st May, 1917, 31st May, 1918, and 30th
November, 1918, and accounts for the whole expenditure on
operations of the New Zealand Y.M.C.A. in France and
England during the entire period of active warfare.
Receipts and Expenditure Account.
Receipts. The total receipts during the above mentioned
period were ;
The canteen trading profits, amounting to £15,214, are not
included in the above receipts. They were carried direct to
the free Comforts Account to be expended as provided for in a
resolution of the London Executive, i.e., on additional free
comforts for men in the forward areas.
The Free Comforts Account shows that in addition to the
trading profit a further sum of £31,280 was expended out of
the New Zealand Y.M.C.A. War Funds, making a total outlay
on free comforts of £46,505.
Expenditure. The expenditure has been grouped under two
main headings, viz. :
Headquarters administration, ... £3,426
Field expenditure, 118,297
Headquarters Administration. When the many ramifications
of the work are taken into account, and the amount of
supervision and accounting involved thereby (including the
construction, equipment, and maintenance of the numerous
huts, tents, dug-outs, and other centres in the forward areas in
h ranee occupied successfully by the New Zealand Division, and
in the various camps in England, together with three hostels in
London and two in Paris, and in addition the running of
canteens in most of the huts and dug-outs, with a turnover last
year of over £143,000), it will, I think, be recognised that the
administration has been carried out with commendable economy.
Field Expenditure. Out of a total of ,£llB,OOO expended on
field work, over one half (£62,249) has been spent in providing
huts, tents, dug-outs, and equipment and maintenance, over
one-quarter (£31,220) has gone to supplement the Free
Comforts Fund, leaving less than one-quarter to cover the
whole cost of maintaining a staff of over 40 secretaries and 150
other members of personnel, and an active programme of
entertainments, religious and educational work, free distribution
of stationery, literature, etc.


Balance Sheet.
Liabilities. The balance sheet shows liabilities for trading
goods, comforts, etc., amounting to and .£13,866
bank overdraft, totalling £34,800 outstanding. Against this
stocks of trading goods and comforts to the amount of £52,212
were in hand, either in Havre or in the various huts in England
and France. The stock was exceptionally high on account of
the large contracts for comforts, etc., which had been placed
early in the year in anticipation of great shortage during the
coming winter. These stocks are now being realised rapidly,
especially in the centres at Cologne in Germany, where there is
a great shortage of food and comforts other than Army rations.
(Since the foregoing was written, practically the whole of these
stocks have been disposed of).
Assets. Up to the present the. London Executive have, upon
the advice of their auditors, followed the precedent of the
British Y.M.C.A. in writing off the expenditure on huts,
buildings, equipment, etc., the realisable value of same being so
uncertain. This does not mean that these assets have no
realisable value. Immediately on the signing of the Armistice
an Assets Realisation Board was set up and an expert valuer
has been engaged with a view to realising the highest possible
prices.
Coupons. The system introduced by the New Zealand
Y.M.C.A., with the co-operation of the New Zealand Govern-
ment (whereby coupons representing half-a-crown and five
shilling packets of Money Orders redeemable in goods at any
Y.M.C.A. canteen were obtainable at Post Offices throughout
New Zealand), has met with remarkable success. As these
■coupons can be exchanged in any Y.M.C.A., British or
Australian, England or France, their advantage was widely
appreciated. Up to the present, the total amount redeemed for
coupons is approximately
Deposit System. The Deposit Trust Account has been of
great assistance to the men. Any soldier can deposit his
surplus cash with any Hut Secretary and it becomes immediately
available at any time at Y.M.C.A. Headquarters in England or
France. During the period covered by the balance sheet over
has passed through our books in this way, and in
addition was deposited with our secretaries locally.
All Funds Spent on New Zealand Soldiers.
The whole of the funds accounted for have been expended,
under the direct control of the London Executive of the New
Zealand National Council, amongst New Zealand troops, on
buildings, maintenance, and equipment necessary to carry out
such work efficiently, and activities connected therewith.
Wherever our huts have been within reach of our Allied troops,
in accordance with the world-wide principle of the Y.M.C.A.,
which is reciprocal, they have also been made available for
British, American, Canadian, and Australian troops.
Canteen Trading.
Trading Policy. As some criticism has been raised in regard
to the trading operations carried on in our canteens, I feel that
some explanation is necessary. Since the inception of Y.M.C.A.
work amongst the troops, the provision of refreshments and
other requirements not usually stocked in Army canteens, has
been found to be absolutely essential. When our Division
arrived in France and England our men at first used huts and


canteens erected and run by the British Y.M.C.A. The British
Association financed the undertaking, and any profit arising was
retained by them, and expended on their work amongst Allied
troops generally.
In November, 1917, however, finding that adequate supplies
for canteens were not always forthcoming, we considered
it necessary, in the interests of the men, to undertake
the responsibility of our own canteens, not for the sake
of any profit arising therefrom, as we had all along been
provided with sufficient funds by the people of New Zealand to
render us quite independent of that source of revenue, but
because we felt sure we could serve the men more efficiently if
we had the control of the canteens in our own hands. This
policy was approved by both General Richardson and General
Russell. From a letter recently received from General Russell
I quote the following extract:
“ I should like to add a few words in support of the policy
your Association followed. The supply of stores became
a matter of urgent necessity directly we reached the
Amiens sector. I was compelled to send lorries many
miles into back areas in the endeavour to provide the
necessary stocks for the divisional canteens, and then
could not get nearly as much as was demanded by the
troops. When the system of rationing canteen stores
was introduced in the 3rd Army, and lorries were no
longer allowed to go back into back areas to search for
supplies, the shortage was increased, and I gladly
welcomed the assistance the Y.M.C.A. were aide to give
in supplying the men with necessities —and this in spite
of the fact that I had been personally against the
Y.M.C.A. running canteens except for the purpose of
refreshments. This help was badly wanted and
willingly given by the Y.M.C.A. right through the
advance. It was invaluable. The same conditions
applied on the Rhine on our arrival.”
I think the above extract will be sufficient to satisfy contributors
to Y.M.C.A. War Funds that we were quite justified in
adopting the above policy. The trading returns show that on
the whole the experiment has been satisfactory. The gross
profit on the turnover was 14.50 per cent., the working
expenses 3.81 per cent., leaving a net profit of 10.68 per cent.,
the whole of which has been returned to the men in free
comforts.
B-S.—The above Balance Sheet does not include operations in
New Zealand and Egypt. As soon as peace is signed, a
complete Balance Sheet covering the whole of the operations
will be issued. Copies of the Balance Sheets issued by the
N.Z. Y.M.C.A. can be inspected at any time at the accountants
office of the New Zealand National Council, Bakers Buildings,
Wellington.
(Signed) W. H, GEORGE,
Honorary Commissioner,
New Zealand Y.M.C.A. National Council.


