





Jj|iJW)MS »ni*
WITH SOME SKETCHES OF THE
Roch Temples of Damboola -**-»
AND THE
Ruins of Anurabhapura
XJST CEYLON,,*
uy *
WM. ROBY FLETCHER, M.A.
(Author of “Egyptian Sketches”).
E. S. Wigg & Co., 12, Bundle Street.
Adelaide ;
A K. Pf.thehick & Co., 144, Bundle Street.
*
■* «




JfJx the early months of the year 1891 I was enabled to carry
C out a plan, which 1 had long entertained, of visiting the
ruined Buddhist City of Anuradhapura in Ceylon. Some time
after my return to Adelaide I gave a course of lectures on
Buddhism in Ceylon. The material which I used in those
lectures I afterwards embodied in a series of papers which were
published at irregular intervals in the Register. As many of
my readers expressed a wish to have those papers in a more
permanent form than the columns of a daily paper, I arranged
for the preservation of the type, and now issue them in a
booklet. This will account for the peculiar appearance of these
pages with their small type and wide margin. By this arrange-
ment, however, 1 am able to issue this little book at such a
small price as would have been impossible under any other
circumstances. When 1 gave these lectures I was able to call
in the aid of the limelight to exhibit views of the Ruins of
Anuradhapura. I should have liked to reproduce those pictures
as illustrations of my papers, but the difficulty and expense of
doing so obliged me to abandon the idea. Ido not expect to
make much profit, but if there be any profit I shall give it to the
Adelaide Children’s Hospital.
1 shall be glad if any of my readers can point out any errors.
Buddhism is a venerable system, but our information concerning
it is modern and is only partially discovered. It is, moreover,
very conflicting; and an honest writer must confess to having
much difficulty in making up his mind on many points. lam
quite prepared to alter my expressed opinions if fresh informa-
tion gives me reason for doing so. 1 regret that Bishop
Gopleston’s work on Buddhism in Ceylon came into my hatcls
too late for me to make any use of it. * v - \ *-
W. ROBY FLETCHER.
I j \ cvy, 9


• * .•
BY THE SAME AUTHOR.
“Egyptian Sketches,”
pPicc’, ©T)e §>l)illir)ef.
Adelaide: Petherick & Co., Rundle Street.
%


CONTE NTS.
CHAPTER PATH.
I. The Island of Ceylon ... || 1
11. Damboola and Kandy H
111. The Shrine of the Tooth K*
TV. The Ruined City of Ant radhapura ... 25
V. The Sacked 80-Tkke 54
VI. The Sacred Mountain 4/
VII. The Story of the Buddha 50
VIII. What the Buddha Taught 65
IX. “The Light of the World” 73




CHRONOLOGICAL MEMORANDA
Birth of Gautama a
Great Renunciation i>, C-
Becomes a Buddha j * - - Ith Century
Death of Buddha J
Anuradha comes to Ceylon - - 450
Mission of Mahindo - - - - 307
Planting of the 80-tree - - - 288
Death of Mahindo - - - - 267
A. D.
The Mahawanso Chronicle 460
Anuradhapura Deserted - 769
Polonarua Deserted - - - 1,550
Last King of Kandy - - - - 1,815




CINGALESE BUDDHISM,
CHAPTER I.
THE ISLAND OF CEYLON.
I intend in a short series of chapters to give a
brief sketch of Buddhism, with illustrations
gathered chiefly from Ceylon. Some four or
five years ago I treated the same subject from
the standpoint of a traveller in India. I had
not then been favoured with the opportunity
of seeing the famous historic remains in the
remote interior of Ceylon. I had not pene-
trated further than Kandy, where the visiter
looks with amused wonder, rather than intelli-
gent sympathy, upon the fantastic and noisy
oddities of the worship of the sacred tooth of
Buddha. Buddhism is an Indian religion, but
it exists no longer in India. It is a banished
creed. Orthodox Brahminism crushed it out
of all recognition 900 years ago. If it will be
understood, it must be studied where it still
lives and still moulds the lives of men. One
may get information about a man’s form and
physical structure frem piecing together the
bones dug up from cemetery vaults, but such
relics are powerless to tell us what his smile
was like, or whether he was ever angry, or
what opinion he held on everyday themes.
Moreover, Buddhism is a fashionable study in
these days. It has secured a graceful and
gifted poet in the person of Sir Edwin Arnold,
of whose “Light of Asia” I shall have more
to say in a future chapter. It has migrated
into Europe and America. It has settled
itself as a visitor who says he means to stay,
among the drawing-rooms of New York and
London. It has even come to these colonies.
It professes to be a claimant for the religious
faith and reverence of practical Australians.


It has taken to itself a modern philosophical
dress, and aims at proving itself the grand
eclectic system of the world and the true
mediator between theism and athesism,
between materialism and faith, between
Christianity and all other forms of religious
thought. Buddhism is, therefore, among the
current forces of to-day, and whatever will
assist in making its origin and history more
intelligible, is of some worth. I do not
pretend in any sense to be an original thinker
on these and kindred schemes. I am not a
Pali or a Sanscrit scholar. I am, like my
readers, a searcher after truth, and if I can
either give or receive help in this search by
writing these sketches, I shall be content.
Before, however, touching upon more abstruse
themes, I will try to introduce my readers to
the Island of Ceylon, which is the ecclesiastical
centre of southern Buddhism, and to its capital
city, Colombo.
COLOMBO.
Colombo, the capital of Ceylon, has come
into the possession of a curious heritage of
privilege. The development of modern travel
has made it the “ Chatham Junction ” of the
world. Into no port is tnere such a constant
influx of passenger steamers as that which
flows through the harbour of this upstart oity.
Thousands of people from every country under
the sun land there every week, and after a few
hours, or, at most, two or three days on shore,
go on their way to England or China, to Aus-
tralia or India. The recollections that they
carry away with them are mostly of having
had a peep at a delicious dreamland, where the
floral beauty of the world is at its finest, and
where Oriental quaintness runs riot. If a
traveller from Australia has the good fortune
to catch his first sight of Ceylon when the
weather is fine, he will never forget it. It
looks, even from the deck of a steamer, a
veritable Paradise, with its rich lowlands
backed by a range of lofty mountains. The
fringe of shore line is adorned with millions of
palm-trees, which suggest a steamy, lazy


climate, but the peaks beyond, which mingle
with the clouds, promise a cooler region, where
perhaps even a roaring fire may be welcomed.
Among these peake, rising like a mighty spire
into the mists, is to be seen one named after
our great forefather, “Adam’s Peak,” and this
reminds us at once that Ceylon has been
deemed so fair that it has been thought worthy
of being the original Paradise which was
“planted eastward in Eden.” If scepticism
should suggest that Adam had not learned the
art of boatbuilding, and so could not have sent
his children thence to people the rest of the
world, tradition will remind us how the chain
of islets which connects Ceylon with India is
still called “Adam’s Bridge,” and will insist
upon it that no country in all the world can
compete with this one for Edenlike loveliness
and suitable beauty.
Most of the thousands of visitors see nothing
of Ceylon except the streets and gardens of
Colombo, They land, look in at the “Grand
Oriental,” get a carriage and drive round the
cinnamon gardens, lose their temper over the
beggars and cunositymongers, take refuge for
an hour in the Museum, then, getting into the
train, go and lunch at Mount Lavinia, and
return to their quarters on board ship, ready to
set sail next day. Others may prefer to visit
the native quarters, and have a peep at the
venerable old Dutch Churches, or the Hindoo
temple, or the quaint house of Buddhist
worship, or perhaps may seek to learn some-
thing of the missionary work which is being
carried on in this busy city. If the steamer
be delayed for two days, then an opportunity
is given for a trip up into the higher lands to
the mediaeval historic city of Kandy, famous
at once for its exquisite scenery, its Botanical
Gardens, and as containing the temple where
is enshrined the most famous Buddhist relic in
the whole world—the eye tooth of Gautama
Buddha himself.
A LAND OB’ KOMANCE.
Few travellers are aware how much more


than all this there is to be seen in Ceylon, that
for those who will go further afield there are in
store wild gorges, magnificent waterfalls,
strange rock temples, immense irrigation works,
and the ruins of two cities, one of which was
as large as London, and the other not much
smaller. The hillsides are covered with tea
estates, the gardens are adorned with chincona
and cocoa-trees, the jungle is one mass of floral
splendour, and alive with novel forms of
animal life and vocal with novel cries. Every
hilltop has its legend, every valley can tell its
story of stirring historic events, every grove
has its traditions of uncanny ghosts or kindly
spirits. Its smaller caves have been peopled
with monks of the vellow robe, its caverns
turned into houses of worship, and its rocky
peaks have been sanctified by fantastic but
very holy events which claim the enthusiastic
reverence and affection of thousands of pil-
grims. It is, in very deed, the land of
romance. Hindoos, Mohammedans, and
Buddhists all look upon it as the home of their
quaintest traditions—a place which either
charms them because of its celestial beauty,
or appals them because it is haunted by devils.
It was the home of the monster Ravanna,
where he imprisoned the chaste and beautiful
Sita. It was the site of the great battles of
Rama and Hannuman as they went in search
of that banished queen. It was sanctified by
primeval worship on its high places long before
history tells us any tales. It is still, for a
large portion of the human race, the legendary
seat of the lost Paradise of our first parents,
and, by a curious and natural coincidence, it ia
still thought to be haunted by the prince of the
air and his subservient ghosts, and is therefore
deemed a land of terrible dangers.
ITS CURIOUS REPUTATION.
When I was in the north of India I had
many curious illustrations of the strange repu-
tation that attaches to Ceylon. I had been
reading in the Ramayana the adventures of
Rama and Sita, and in a freak of inquisitive


mischief I said to a village schoolmaster one
day, “Tell these children that I have been to
Lanka, where Savanna lived.” He smiled,
and interpreted my remark. It was received
by most with absolute incredulity. They
thought I was making sport with them. They
could not believe that I could have actually
been to that delicious land of uncanniness, and
have come away without having had my head
cut off. It was true I was sitting there before
them in the flesh, and they evidently thought
there was a mistake somewhere, or else that I
was bewitched, and so was proof against all the
wiles of the devil. The people in Southern
India have long got over this unreasoning awe,
and pass and repass from the mainland to the
island in a constant stream. In fact, Ceylon
has been a favourite hunting ground for Tamil
adventurers for the last 1,800 years, and a
large part of the present population profess the
religion and speak the language, not of Ceylon,
but of India. The real defects of the Cingalese
type of character are by no means of the awful
demoniac sort which they bear in ancient
legends. The people are of a mild order, and
have never been able to hold their own against
the successive invasions of stronger races,
which have poured into their tempting
country. Temples to Siva, the Hindu deity,
are thus to be seen side by side with temples to
Buddha; and Adam’s Peak, the most famous
of the sacred sites in the island, is visited by
crowds of pilgrims who follow the rival
standards of Mohammed, of Brahma, and of
Gautama, each claiming a right to the exclu-
sive possession of its holy features.
GENERAL SURVET.
Before attempting to describe in detail any
of the notable places in Ceylon, it will be well
to take a general survey of the island. It is
about the size of Ireland or of Tasmania, but
in shape it is like a pear. As it is famous for
its pearl fisheries, it has naturally been com-
pared to a “pearl pendent on the ear of
India.” It is very mountainous in the


southern or thicker half, but the northern part
is an undulating jungle plain, where all the
twelve months of the year vie with each other
as to which is the hottest. The mountain
region is very grand, abounding in rugged
beauty, a land of cascades and dells and
forests and caves. The air is cool and bracing,
and ofttimes the visitor will imagine himself
back in Scotland or Switzerland as he comes
home to his hotel or his bnngalow, drenched
with mist, and glad to pile on the logs to make
the blaze crackle up the chimney of an ample
fireplace. The rainfall on the mountains is
abundant, and falls more or lass all the year
through, though at the time when the south-
west monsoon bursts it reaches a maximum.
These uplands, which are thus drenched with
squalls, are the home of the tea and coffee
plants, to which they took kindly on their first
introduction, and are favourite refuge for
European residents when wearied of the moist,
monotonous climate of the lowlands. A railway
now winds its way up past Kandy almost to
Nucrra-Eliya, and there, more than 6,000 feet
above the sea, is to be found a cluster of
English homes and English gardens, with
familiar fruit-trees and homely vegetables in
abundance, and English children playing
about, gathering roses into their cheeks as well
as in their hands.
THE MAHAWANSO.
The history of Ceylon is very tangled, but is
intensely interesting. Unlike India, this little
island has a reliable story to tell of many
changes and terrible struggles. The Hindoos
seem to be utterly devoid of the true historic
faculty, and confound all ancient dates in a
kaleidoscopic haze. They have no sense of th e
perspective of events in time. It is not so
however, with the people of Ceylon. Like the
ncient Hebrews, the Kings of Ceylon had
their State Chroniclers, and each succeeding
editor added his chapter of contemporary
history. Thus the story of the ups and downs
of politics kept growing like one of the native


palm-trees, each age being built upon that
which went before it. This wonderful
chronicle is very old, butt its discovery is quite
modern. The writing was executed, like all
the sacred books, on long strips of palm leaves
or thin plates of metal, strung together by a
cord. It was in the Pali language, which is
akin to Sanscrit, but was unknown to modern
scholars. It was suspected that vast treasures
of literature were concealed in those curious
volumes, but no one had turned up who had
either the learning or the patience, or both, to
raise those dead writings into the living, vocal
present. But at last the man appeared who
was wanted. He was an English Civil servant,
whose name was Tumour, and he was in
charge of the Adam’s Peak district about sixty
years ago, that is, in 1820. He was fired with
inquisitiveness to explore this unknown mine
of literary wealth. He had a hard battle to
fight, for he was a pioneer. He tells us that
the work was so utterly neglected and forgot-
ten, that he never met with one man who had
ever read, much less studied it. He published
a translation of part of it in 1837, in Colombo,
but the learned world thought he was acting
the part of Ohatterton, and befooling them.
His book won its way, however, and is now
counted among the trophies of the world’s
literary heroes. It is called the “Mahawanso,
or the Genealogy of tlm Great,” and begins the
history of Ceylon in b.o. 541, when Buddha
was alive in India, but long before he had been
heard of in other lands ; when the Jews were
smarting under the captivity, when Rome was
a small village, and when old England was no-
where. The writing of the book was not
commenced till a. d, 400, so we are not surprised
to find much legendary matter in the early
portions. Tumour died before he had finished
more than half bis task, but the Government
of Ceylon has had it completed, and the entire
work was published in 1889.
HISTORIC ODDITIES.
Erom this history we learn some very curious


and most unexpected things. In it we read
how Ceylon was first conquered by the
Cingalese; how they founded a great city,
which was called the “pura” or capital of
Anuradha the Prince; how there came mis-
sionaries from India preaching the doctrines of
Buddha ; how the King and the people were
converted; how diverse and great wonders
were wrought; how the great city grew and
grew and became more and more holy; how
mighty “dagobas” were built there, rivalling
in size the Pyramids of Egypt; how temples
and palaces and monastries and sacred lakes
were constructed ; and last, but not least, how
there were brought to Ceylon, in a fashion
wonderful to narrate, two treasures worth more
than all the gems underneath Adam’s Peak, or
all the pearls in a million oyster-shells—the one
was the eye tooth of the great Buddha himself,
and the other a branch of the sacred 80-tree in
India, sitting under which Gautama the man
became Buddha the sublime. This tooth is the
palladium of all glory, sacred and political, and
is deemed by the credulous to be the same that
now rests in its jewelled casket in Kandy.
This tree, venerable, gnarled, and twisted, but
petted, bedizened, and fed with milk,
flourishes to-day green and beautiful amid the
ruins of the once mighty City of Anuradha—
the oldest historic tree in the whole world ;
the centre of southern Buddhism. Of these
singular treasures I shall have more to say in
future chapters.
THE STATE RELIGION OF CEYLON.
It is my intention in these sketches to speak
more especially of the religion of Ceylon, or
rather to describe some of the scenes and
places in the island from the standpoint of one
whose interest in the new and unexpected
forms of worship that one meets with there has
been sharpened by sympathy and reading;
and also by noting the heroic efforts of
missionary brethren to bring among these
dreamy islanders the more solid blessings of


the Gospel of our Lord and Saviour Jesus
Christ.
The religion of Ceylon is Buddhism. The
adherentsof other forms of faith are to be found
there, but they are all “dissenters,” as it were,
from the established creed. Even in the
streets of Colombo the yellow-robed Buddhist
monk may be met at early morning, as he goes
from house to house begging for his daily dole
of rice, which he puts into a great coarse bowl
which he carries under his dress. Convents of
such monks are scattered all over the island,
sheltered in the queerest and most unexpected
nooks among the rocks, or hidden in the deep
glades of the jungle. Some of these monks are
mere youths, and many of them are deplorably
ignorant, but there are knots of learned
devotees here and there who pride themselves
on their libraries, and deem themselves the
leaders of a faith which they believe is des-
tined to convert the whole world, and even to
eclipse the milder glories of Christianity. At
Candy is what may be called the Cathedral of
Buddhism, but just as London outweighs
Canterbury in ecclesiastical England, so
Colombo is undermining the sacred authority
of the mountain city, and is drawing its social
influences to a new centre. At Kandy is the
great shrine of the Dalada, where day by day,
to the sound of tom-toms and horns, the saints
are called upon to bring their floral offerings to
Buddha. At the extreme summit of Adam’s
Peak is a footprint of Buddha himself, which,
like the sacred tooth, commands all the more
fervent devotion because huge enough to have
fitted the person of a giant some 30 or 40 ft.
high. On the rock of Mihintale is a venerated
cluster of shrines, which, like the ruins of lona
in Scotland, are sacred because they have to do
.with the early dawmngs of the religious history
of the Cingalese. In a rocky cave which few
ever visit, it is said that a Buddhist Saint, like
St. Jerome in the cave of Bethlehem, trans-
lated the story of Buddha into the language of
the people, and filled three “ pitakas ” or
baskets with the sacred fragments of his


teachings. While at Anuradhapura exists, as
I have already said, the venerable old tree,
which quivers incessantly with nervous agita-
tion over the honourable destiny that has been
assigned it.
TOLERATION.
Nowhere in the world can the inquisitive
enquirer find a better or a purer form of
Buddhism than in Ceylon, and nowhere can he
so easily gain access to its ceremonies and its
kindly priests. Buddhism, unlike Hinduism,
is not an exclusive religion. In a mild way it
invites attention. It aims at expansion. It
does not close the door upon strangers as
unwelcome intruders. In India the temples
would all be shut close against the polluting
approach of an infidel outcast Christian if the
Brahmins could but have their will. In the
native State of Travancore, where the Brah-
mins are all-powerful, there is not a single
temple which a white man can enter without
raising a riot and evoking a ruinously expen-
sive process to wash away the defilement. In
Buddhist countries this, however, is not so.
When in Sikkim, I stood by the altar while the
devotees set their praying wheels revolving,
and I even induced the wife of a priest to make
a praying flag for me. I was invited to see all
I oould of the tiny temples on the hills near
Darjiling, and in Ceylon I found the same
freedom of access. The monks had no hesita-
tion in showing me their shrines and their
treasures ; they even allowed me to penetrate
into the dark dens hollowed out of the rooks, in
which they slept; they were delighted to draw
forth their precious silver and copper books
from their hiding-places ; they would gather
fresh cocoanuts for us from the overhanging
palm-trees as we sat on the steps of a shrine;
and I even brought away with me as a trophy,
a yellow robe which a young priest gave me,’
and also a begging bowl, both made sacred and
irty by much usage. What they would not do
was to allow me to see the actual “tooth”
itself, or pluck for me a leaf from a holy
Bo tree. The spirit of Brahminism is a proud


xclusiveness; the spirit of Buddhism is
kindly brotherliness. Brahminism has no
hand of mercy or even of recognition to extend
to any outsider. Buddhism is pervaded by a
great pity for the woes of humanity, and, in
its own cold and joyless fashion, tries to offer a
gospel of comfort to all mankind. Though
clothed in extraordinary garments of fantastic
nonsense, it is much nearer to the religion of
Christ than its rival in the temples of India,
simply because it is a missionary religion. Its
message is, however, of such a character that a
Western mind finds much difficulty in under-
standing it, and still more in believing and
welcoming it. It is a religion whose god is an
impersonal law, whose prophet is asleep, and
whose heaven is a painless and joyless uncons-
ciousness. In such a religion true penitence
has no place, forgiveness is neither asked for
nor desired, prayer is but a vain repetition of
charms, and self is taught to seek its extinction
in a slumber to which there can never be any
awakening dawn. If there be any resemblance
between Christianity and Budddism it is only
superficial, for the two systems are radically
antagonistic, and as for that modern religion
of which we have heard so much of late, called
Theosophy, it is not Buddhism in any proper
sense of the term. It is an ecclectic atheism
which is opposed in spirit both to the teachings
of Buddha and still more of Christ. It tries
to make an ally of the former system, but
against Christianity it declares irreconcilable
war. Christianity stands opposed to both in
being a religion of life, not of death, based
upon faith in a living, saving, redeeming God,
not upon the cold hope of escaping the due
reward of our deeds by losing our sense of
personality in an endless sleep.
CHAPTER 11.
DAMBOOLA AND KANDY.
Buddhism has the honour of sharing with
Christianity its missionary character. It cama


into Ceylon because it was preached there.
The first missionary was named Mahindo, and
he came to the devil worshippers of the island
as their teacher about 300 years B.c. He did
not come like a fiery Mohammedan invader,
with the sword in one hand and a book in the
other, and a crisp short creed on his lips. He
came depending on moral suasion alone, with
a creed that was by no means simple, but with
an earnest purpose in his mind. He had his
reward in seeing the whole island brought over
to accept his mission. The King and the
peasant were alike converted, and from that
day till now Ceylon has been the centre of
southern Buddhism. lam prepared to give
honour where honour is due, and so I deem
Mahindo to be worthy of no mean place in the
list of the world’s benefactors. My ardent
devotion to the religion of Jesus teaches me to
recognise and admire whatever there may be of
sincerity and of goodness in the lives of those
men who in other regions have sought after
truth if haply they might find it. No follower
-of Christ ought to tolerate any narrow-minded-
ness or exclusive bigotry among his own ideas.
The soul that dwells in the light ought to have
a brotherly sympathy with those who are
groping in the gloom far below, and not to
treat their efforts with scorn.
WHAT BUDDHISM HAS DONK.
There is no denying the fact that Buddhism
is a very wonderful creed, and has accom-
plished a great work. It would be unfair to
shut our eyes to the meaning of its history, or
to forget its influence on the world. We can,
indeed, only understand its lamentable defects
by keeping in view its better features. It can
never become a world-wide system, because it
gives the lie to human nature and crushes it;
butt there is, nevertheless, something about it
that has made it welcome to the Oriental mind.
I shall deal subsequently with the life and
career of Buddha himself, but in the meantime
let us note these facts, for which I am indebted
to Lilly.


Buddha was an Indian reformer, who lived
and died in India about five centuries b.c. As.
the result of his work we note —
1. The most formidable priestly tyranny
that the world has ever seen crumbled away
before his attack. The followers of Buddha
were paramount in India for 1,000 years.
2. Caste was assailed and overthrown, and
all men were counted as on one level.
3. Polygamy was pronounced immoral and
slavery condemned.
4. Woman was uplifted from being a mere
chattel, and allowed, as man’s equal, to develop
her spiritual life.
5. All bloodshed, whether with the knife of
the priest or the sword of the conqueror, was
rigidly forbidden.
6. For the first time in the history of religion,
the awakening of the spiritual life of the indi-
vidual was substituted for religion by body
corporate. No man need be dependent on any
priest.
7. It gave expression to the missionary
spirit. Its practical principal was that those
who had found what they called light, should
help those who were still in darkness.
8. Buddhist preachers and missionaries
gained over to their side India, China, Bur-
mah, Ceylon, and Japan, and even touched by
their influence Egypt and Persia. Its advo-
cates never took to the sword. It won its
victories by moral means alone.
This is doubtless a striking record, but it is
nevertheless true, and because true is doubly
interesting. This gospel is of the nature of an
opiate rather than a cure. It is to us as com-
fortless as an ice palace. Its reward is like the
sleep which comes over explorers in lofty snow-
clad summits —attractive, but dangerous—too
deep to be dreamful, and whose end is never to
waken. Still, it has been better than nothing
to the people to whom it has come. In this
very island of Ceylon it found tho people de-
graded in barbarism, and it raised them into a
high condition of civilization. It taught them
many useful arts. It encouraged a taste for


architecture. It created a national literature.
It covered the land with useful engineering
works. It has trade the people ashamed of
their native devil worship, and has done much
to overcome it, and has mitigated their cruelty
by teaching them the law of kindness.
The story of the Buddha and his “ great re-
nunciaoion ” will be more or less known to most
■of my readers. This Oriental preacher has of
late emerged from oblivion and become “ the
fashion” in European and American circles.
This resurrection of a buried reputation is
largely due to Sir Edwin Arnold’s poetical
picture of the “Light of Asia.” In another
paper I shall refer more at length to that
fascinating poem, which is misleading not so
much from its errors as from its gilded truths.
In the meantime I wish to introduce my
readers to some of the actual evidences of this
old religion as an existing creed of the present
age. It may have been stamped out in India
by the Brahmins, who never liked it, and is
now only represented in the land of its birth
by its ruined “ dagobas ” and carven rock
temples, but it is at this day the religion
which holds in its embrace the grotesque
•Chinamen, the practical Japanese, the hardy
Thibetians, as well as the dreamy Cingalese.
THE ROOK TEMPLE OF DAMBOOLA.
Let me ask my readers to come with me in
imagination to the quaint little City of Dam-
boola, among the mountains of Ceylon. To
get there we must take the train that leaves
Kandy for Matele, and there book ourselves as
passengers on a stage-cart for our destination.
It is a glorious drive. The road is good, the
scenery both wild and beautiful, the floral
grandeur of the wayside copses is enchanting,
and the quaint groups of villages make a suc-
cession of pictures which are of constant and
varying interest. Erewhile, after about six
hours of this drive, we see before us, blocking
up the valley, a monstrous boulder. I speak
of it as a boulder, perhaps I should be more
■correct if I called it a mountain, for it rises as


a bare granite dome 700 ft. above the valley,
with its feet in a forest of palms and fig-trees.
There is a quiet little resthouse in the village,
where we take up our abode, and prepare
early the next morning to visit the famous
mountain and explore its marvels. We have
been going down hill all the way, and are now
on the northern side of the highlands, and on
the edge of the steamy plain of jangle, in the
midst of which is the City of Anuradhapura,
some forty-two miles away. We must expect
it to be hot anywhere, and especially when
standing face to face before naked cliffs of
smooth rock. We engage the services of a
small boy to show us the path, and set off in
the cool morning air. We go for some short
distance up the valley, when we strike off into
a mountain path to the right and begin to
climb. Our progress is intently watched by
some monkeys, who swing themselves from tree
to tree at a safe and convenient distance. Our
path then becomes a steep staircase up which,
however, it is easy to ascend. We wonder how
many millions of pilgrims have trod those
sacred steps before us, and drank water out of
the holy well which bubbles forth, fresh and
cool, near the top. A rude gateway is before
us, and a yellow-robed monk stands under it
awaiting our arrival. He has in his hands an
enormous key, fully a foot and a half long,
polished like silver. He receives us with a
smile that is ‘‘childlike and bland,” and my
friend, the Rev. Mr. Moscrop, of Kandy, wins
his further attention by a few kindly words of
enquiry in his native language. We find our-
selves, when beyond the gateway, on a wide
rock platform, and before us an enormous over-
hanging precipice of granite. Built under the
crag hi a long range of ugly mean sheds, with
an inscription, carved in the rock above them.
My friend asks the meaning of the inscription,
for it is in ancient Pali, and our reverend guide
tells us it was put up nearly a thousand years
ago in honour of a very holy King named
Kirti-Sri-Nissanga. It runs thus:—“Thrice
did he make the circuit of the island, and


having visited the villages, the towns, and the
cities, such was the security he established, as
well in the jungle as in the places where men
dwelt, that even a woman might traverse the
land with a precious jewel, and no one ask her,
What is it?”
INSIDE THE CAVE.
We stop at a ponderous ugly door in the long
line of sheds, and the monk begins to wield his
key. This is evidently no easy task, and gives
us an opportunity of looking back on the grand
view of mountain and plain behind us. The
lock gives way, the door swings on its hinges,
and we are free to enter. All is dark, but the
light that streams in at the door is enough to
reveal that strange interior. It is a sight
which once seen can never be forgotten. It is
a large low cavern, the limits of which are
invisible In the gloom. The ceiling is adorned
with highly coloured and fantastic pictures of
gods and demons and mortal heroes. All round
the cave, seated in solemn silence, are fifty-
three gigantic statues, sedate, calm, thought-
ful, and each exactly like the rest. They ar&
all coloured, and look in the dim light as
though they were alive, though, evidently,
only half awake. But the glory of this strange
shrine is an immense statue of a similar figure,
lying on its side fast asleep on a couch. This
figure is 47 ft. long, and the statue and its
pillow and its couch are all carved out of the
solid rock. The great head is resting on the
right hand, and that again on the pillow,
which seems to be indented by the elbow and
its burden. The soles of the mighty feet,
which are about two yards long, are adorned
with lotus flowers and mystic circles. It is
very, very weird and wild to look on this
strange parliament of dozing giants, with their
enormous chief fast asleep in the centre. We
find it hard to take in the meaning of the
spectacle, and look and keep looking wondering
if they will speak, Erewhile, we catch sight
of one who seems to have woke up. He stands
there erect, his head almost touches the ceiling


of the cavern ; he has uplifted his right hand,
and seems about to give the orthodox episcopal
blessing with those two fingers of his extended.
He is, however, only a statue, like the rest of
his brethren, and the silence is unbroken.
By and by we get familiar both with the
light and with this conclave of Rephaim, and
are able to examine them more at leisure.
They are all alike, we think, but that is not so,
for we see near the sleeping figure a statue
canopied with a five-headed cobra; also an
image of the god Vishnu, one of the famous
Hindoo triad. There is no mistaking him, for
he wears the sacred trident painted on his
brow. We wonder what Vishnu is about in
such company. Surely the yellow-robed monks
do not imagine that they have been making
converts among the gods. We ask our
reverend guide about it, and with a naive
smile he says, that Vishnu gave a hand in
carving that sleeping giant, and it was fitting
that such condescension should be acknow-
ledged. “Is Vishnu among your converts?”
we ask, “I don’t know, but I know he gave
us a helping hand.” “If these Buddhists
claim Vishnu and Sir Edwin Arnold they will
be claiming us next,” I whisper to my friend.
His reply is interrupted by one of the
brethren suddenly kindling astripof magnesium
wire, which floods that weird cavern with
glory. The solemn statues glow with light,
but they move not, but, on the ceiling, which
till now we have not thought much of, we see
abundance of life. Battles and adventures are
there in abundance. Ships are to be seen
ploughing the sea amid fishes as big as them-
selves, Fierce warriors are hurling javelins at
each other. Others are carrying relics of
Buddha—an eyebrow, a collarbone, a tooth.
One group is seen planting the sacred 80-tree
and in another we have the awful duel on
elephant back between Dutugemunu, the
patriot king, and Elala, the Indian usurper.
THE SLEEPING BUDDHA.
There are four other caverns in this strange


rock, and all close together, and all very
similar to the one we have entered. We can
go into them all if we like. The one here
described is that which is called the second.
No. lis smaller: No. 3 is still larger; No. 4
and 5 are again smaller. They are all shrines
of Buddha. The yellow-robed attendants are
guardian Buddhist monks. The sitting giants
are portraits of Buddha as he sits under the
Bo tree, meditating. The standing figure is
Buddha preaching after he had awoke from his
trance of thought. The sleeping figure is
Buddha in Nirvana, at rest, not in death, not
in eternal life, but in the dreamless, holy sleep
of Nirvana, in which all emotion, all thought,
all joy, all sorrow are gone for ever, and the
soul is quieted into a slumber so profound that
neither men nor gods, nor destiny, nor Karma
can ever awaken it. “Will Buddha ever
awake?” we ask our guide. “O, no,” he
answers; “he is in Nirvana, but a new
Buddha will come some day, and he will be
very wide awake, for he will convert all the
nations of the west. We expect him in about
500 years. You may see his portrait at the
sacred temple of the tooth at Kandy.” “ Why
do you always sculpture your Buddha of such
a great size? I never see anyone with a yellow
robe as big as those giants in there. You
modern disciples of the eight paths must have
sadly degenerated.” “Buddha was a holy
man, and a great one also. He left his actual
footprint on the top of Adam’s peak, and if
you measure the foot of the recumbent
Buddha inside here you will find it exactly the
same, and the tooth at Kandy agrees there-
with. ” There was no resisting such a chain of
evidence, so we took no more objection to
Buddha as being as huge as an inhabitant of
Brobdingnag, with a foot 6 ft. long, a tooth as
big as that of a crocodile, and a presence like
Hercules.


CHAPTER 111.
THE SHRINE OF THE TOOTH.
KANDY.
The present ecclesiastical centre of Southern
Buddhism is Kandy. It is now connected with
Colombo by a railway, and passing travellers
often manage to pay it a flying visit. Those
who go there generally have a look at the
renowned temple of the Dalada, but the scenic
attractions of the mountain city and the floral
glory of the gardens at Peradenia claim so
much attention, and are in themselves so
fascinating, that there is but little interest to
spare for the grimy, malodorous, and grotesque
temple and its noisy and absurd worship. It
is, however, of that temple that I wish now to
speak, leaving out of account the countless
other novelties of that fairy-like city.
The city lies on the edge of an artificial
lake. A green space has been reserved
bordering the water, which is the forum where
the public buildings are to be found. At one
end of this esplanade was the palace of the
Kings, and around their palace clustered the
sacred edifices of the national religion. The
Kings have passed away, but the priests and
their temples and their processions remain to
this day.
THE DALADA,
This temple consists of a curious jumble of
edifices, which require some study to reduce to
harmcny. Fronting the green is an old moat
well stocked with fish and small turtle. No
angler disturbs them, no mischievous urchins
throw stones at them, but every day they are
fed by the faithful as an act of worship.
The tank is surrounded by a parapet of mossy
stonework of a mystic and fantastic pattern.
A bridge over it leads to the gateway, through
which can be seen the main court of the
temple. The pavement is of carven stones
from older buildings, and two stone elephants
guard the doorway. A yellow-robed monk
invites us to come in, and offers to show us


round. In the quadrangle stands the great
shrine, a Hindu-looking building of two stories,
surrounded by a verandah and balcony,
and adorned with two pinnacles of solid gold.
“The shrines will not be open,” says our
guide, “till sunset, but there is much to be
seen which will occupy all the time till then.”
We climb up some stairs on to a sort of loggia
adorned with rude frescoes. These frescoes
represent in vivid style the Buddhist doctrine
of Kharma, which means that every deed
is indestructible in its effects, and that
till a man loses himself in Nirvana he must be
influenced by the deeds wrought by him in all
his previous births, and must be making for
himself a corresponding future. They are
pictures of the Buddhist hells, and are gloomy
and terrible enough to scare the faithful into
good behaviour, if anything can. Grotesque
demons in the shapeof birds are seen tormenting
those whoharebeen given to hunting, which to a
Buddhist is no mere sport, but an awful crime.
Disobedient children are depicted enduring a
merciless flagellation, not by human hands, but
by demons. Those who dare to injure the
sacred 80-trees or pluck their leaves are shown
as being subjected to endless attacks from
noisome insects, and as I looked at that uncom-
fortable picture I confess I felt a twinge of
conscience. Other crimes, such as opening
dagobas, adultery, and lying, are exhibited as
obtaining in the future world that exact kind
and measure of retribution which the inflexible
law of “Kharma” might dictate. One picture
on the ceiling is especially interesting. It is a
representation of Matreya, the glorious Buddha
that is yet to come. I cannot explain this
picture with logical consistency, for the creed
of this religion tells us that Gautama has
attained Nirvana, the blessed sleep from which
there is no awakening. But, be this as it may,
it is an article of belief which is held most
tenaciously, that Buddha will, somehow or
other, come again to reign in holy splendour,
and that the present period is about halfway
through. The new Buddha will, therefore.


come in about 2,000 years. There is a small
shrine near by, among the palms, which is
dedicated to this coming Buddha. It is kept
closed, and is not to be opened “ till he comes.”
This curious semi-Christian idea is not to be
found in the original form of this creed. It is
a tnore recent importation, and may be due to
the Christian influence of the earliest Apostolic
missions to India. Some expect this new
Buddha much earlier, and say he will be here in
500 years, and some say they expect him daily.
THE LIBRARY.
At the corner of the facade is the library.
It is a charming room, octagonal in shape, and
with a balcony running round it upon which
its numerous windows open. From this
balcony the Kings of Kandy used to review
their armies and watch the saered processions
file by. The view hence of lake and mountain
and tropic verdure and quaint edifices is,
indeed, beautiful. Inside, this chamber is
furnished with very modern bookcases with
. glass fronts, and cupboards, and is hung round
with portraits of defunct Kings and sundry
holy monks. On the table is a magnifi-
cent silver candelabrum of strange design.
The Prince of Wales, I was told, wanted
to buy it, but the guardians were not
to be tempted. The assistant - librarian,
who spoke a little English, received us
with an abundance of courtesy, and pro-
ceeded to show us the wonders of this treasure
house. He brought out, one after another,
some curious and unique manuscripts of the
Buddhist sacred writings. These are written
for the most part on strips of palm leaves
threaded on a cord, but others are on plates
of copper, and a few on plates of silver.
The script is in the Pali character, and so
was quite unintelligible to me. The buried
lore of this unexplored mine of literature is
only beginning to be brought to light.
SACRED BOOKS.
People in the East have an odd habit of
valuing sacred books by their size. Again


and again do Christian evangelists meet
with the objection that our Scriptures are
nothing at all, and are hardly worth read-
ing because they are so small and so short.
“ Why, our holy writings are fifty times as
long as yours, and can you expect us to
put them all aside for your one poor little
book?” I am afraid that this practical
age will have but little sympathy with
this singular objection, though perhaps
our Puritan ancestors might have under-
stood it, seeing that they enjoyed a ser-
mon of three hours’ duration, and could
stand a heavy cannonade of 15 or 20 heads,
set off with the rifle fire of a whole company
of subdivisions. Be this as it may, the sacred
books of the East can only be described as
“prodigious.” The famous epic history called
the “ llarnayana” contains 24,000 stanzas, and
the Mahabharata has in it no fewer than
200,000 verses. The Scriptures of the Budd-
hists are not by any means so voluminous
as those of the Hindoos, but they are mon-
strous enough to frighten away all but the most
enthusiastic of scholars. The English Bible
contains nearly a million words, the Buddhist
Bible if translated into English would contain
about four times as many.
The first time I was there I remember that
as I was looking at these things the chief
“Thera” himself came in. He looked a
benevolent old man, and has the reputation
of being a very learned man indeed, but as he
knew no English, and I knew no Cingalese, we
had to communicate through the interpreter.
I could not help looking with intense interest
on that man, who holds the chief place in the
modern system of Buddhism. I asked him if
it were not true that Sir Edwin Arnold had
presented to the library a dried leaf from the
famous 80-tree in India. The mention
of Edwin Arnold caused a smile to
spread over his face, and proceeding
to one of his cabinets he brought forth a
pressed leaf, which had been furnished with a
silver holder, on which, in Arnold’s own hand-


writing, is an inscription stating that he had
brought it from Behar, and with the signature
and date attached. My readers will find the
incident mentioned in Arnold's “India Re-
visited.” I did not feel quite sure about the
authenticity of the graceful gift, for in all the
recent photographs I have seen the great
80-tree is wanting. In this library are to be
found modern as well as ancient books, and
among them are some rare and valuable
editions, and almost every book in English or
French which aims at depicting Buddhism
and its literature.
THE SHRINK OP THE DALADA.
The visitor is sure to be made aware of the-
setting of the sun when in Kandy. As we
were wandering about the esplanade after
seeing the library we heard a ragged band of
performers, seated in the entrance gateway,
begin an awful and demoniac concert. Tom-
toms were being beaten and banged, and
horns made to screech their loudest. This row
was the call to evening worship, and we saw
troops of people wending their way towards
the Temple, bringing trays of bright yellow
flowers to be offered to Buddha. We joined
the throng, and followed up a steep stairway
to what they deem the most holy and
sacred shrine in all the world. It contains
the famous “ Tooth” of Gautama the Buddha,
which therefore once on a time adorned or dis-
figured the mouth that spake so many strong and
gentle words of wisdom. This noted relic has
played no small part in history since the fifth
century B.C. It has been buried and stolen,
and found again several times. It has been
carried from India to Ceylon in a lady’s hair,
and taken back again as a trophy of war. It
has been made the subject matter of treaties
and embassies. It has been publicly pounded
to powder by the enemies of the faith, but it
has somehow come into being again, and now
by the irony of fate it has passed into the pos-
session of the sceptical British Government,
and by it has been restored to its-


proper resting - place and entrusted to
its own faithful guardians. The chamber in
which this monstrous tooth (for it is big enough
for the eyetooth of a tiger or a wild boar) re-
poses is a small dark cell with no windows and
no ventilation. The doors are inlaid with
carved ivory. A strong iron cage encloses a
silver table on which are numerous lamps and
candles. In this cage is a bell shaped dagoba
of silver gilt about 5 ft. high. Inside this are
five other such cases, and in the innermost is
the precious tooth itself, resting on a golden
lotus leaf. The cases are strung with wreaths
of costly jewels. Some of the finest rubies of
the island are here, and their value is beyond
the dreams of avarice. The air of the chamber
is hot and stifling, ard the scent of flowers
is quite overpowering, so we are not
tempted to linger. I have never yet
seen the tooth itself, which is only exhibited
on very rare occasions. An exact model of it
and its golden bed is to be found in the
museum at Colombo, and this has to do duty
in satisfying inquisitive strangers. We did
not stay loner in that chamber, as crowds of
genuine worshippers were waiting with their
flowers till we, who were only sightseers, chose
to come out.
There are many other shrines of Buddha
in the precincts of that temple; one,
which is very beautiful, is adorned with a
silver model of Gautama sitting under the
80-tree, Another has an image of Buddha
carved out of a single flawless crystal. In all
these shrines lay trays of flowers, and as fresh
offerers appeared the old flowers were cast
aside into a heap. They had served their
purpose, and were discarded, for they are
never used twice.
A LIVING OR A DEAD CREED?
The aspect of that singular temple and its
courts when the darkness came over it, is weird
indeed. The mouldy, grimy walls and pas-
sages were lit up by flaming torches and
candles. The gaunt frescoes seemed as though


they were staring at us in the gloom. The
noise of the tomtoms echoed through the
courts, and a cloud of fireflies flitted through
the air. Is Buddhism a dead or a living
creed ? This was the question I asked
myself as I came away. Is it possible
that atheism can call forth even such
languid enthusiasm as this creed does?
Are we right in saying it denies a God ? Can
we expect logic in the harmonizing of
philosophy and practice in an Oriental mind ?
What is the meaning of all this worship offered
to a man who is wrapt in an eternal slumber,
who sees not his devotees, who hears not their
prayers, who can extend no helping hand to
them, who preached to his generation the cold
gospel of self-conquest ending in Nirvana? To
these questions I can offer no answer. The
human heart does not govern itself by thelawsof
reasoning. It delights in inconsistency, and
surely nothing on this earth is so inconsistent
as the theory and the practice of Buddhism.
If I describe it as a credulous agnosticism, or as
a religion which does not trouble itself about a
deity, I do not think I should be misrepresent-
ing its tenets. Doubtless to the crowds of
vulgar worshippers Buddha is, in some sort, a
God, and they trust him as they would a hear-
ing and helping friend, but such a faith has no
warrant from the creed on which it has grown.
CHAPTER IV.
THE RUINED CITY OF ANURAD-
HAPURA.
The present capital of Ceylon is Colombo.
That is, however, only a modern upstart city,
created by the commerce of the world. The
former capital of the Kings of Ceylon was
Kandy. That likewise is not an ancient city,
for it only carries back its annals for a few
hundred years. It was adopted as a mountain
stronghold, in which a dynasty of Kings, too
weak to maintain themselves on the lowlands,


entrenched themselves against both real and
imaginary foes. Before Kandy was heard of
the seat of power was to be found in a distant
region to the north, far away over the steamy
plain, called Polonarua. That city was one of
great splendour and beauty. It was of no
mean size, and was adorned with numerous
temples, monasteries, and dagobas. It was at
first deemed secure from its distance, and
from the impenetrable wilderness of jungle
that encircled it. It is now one vast rum. It
was deserted (a.d. 1550) in favour of its
pretty mountain rival. Polonarua was, how-
ever, not the real histone capital of Ceylon.
If we go back no further than the Norman
Conquest we shall come upon this city in its
glory, but if we seek to track the history of
Ceylon to its true and proper beginning we
find ourselves enquiring where in the island
was the famous city of Anuradhapura? There,
and not at Kandy, the first temple for tho
tooth of Buddha was built. There, and not at
Polonarua, did the Court of the Emperors of
Southern Buddhism shine in its true glory.
Anuradhapura was the capital from B.c. 450 to
a.d. 709.
Probably most of my readers have never
heard of this city with such an uncouth name.
It has so completely dropped out of the region
of living ideas that very few, even of those who
take a trip to Kandy, have ever ohought that a
great history lies behind the moss-grown
temples on the shores of the lake. It is a fact,
however, that there exist away in the jungle
the ruins of an enormous city, that the ruins
there cover a space equal to modern Paris
that the remains will vie with those of ancient
Rome, or even of Egypt, for massive architec-
ture, for delicate carving, and for ambitious
utility; and that the history of this forgotten
city is written in clear and vivid detail
in the romantic records of the island.
A hundred years ago no one knew any-
thing about that city. A few vague rumours
were afloat of a wilderness of carven stones,
overgrown by jungle and tenanted only by


wild beasts. Its name and its history were as
mysterious as the forest cities of Central
America, Now, however, its locality has been
discovered, and it has become one of the show
places of modern travel, and its history has-
been unrolled from its concealment in the
mystic characters of the Mahawanso, of which 1
gave some account in a former chapter.
A BIDE THBOUGH THE JUNGLE.
As the simplest introduction to this for-
gotten city let me narrate my own experiences
in a visit that I paid to it in the year 1891. In
company with the Rev. Mr. Moscrop, Wes-
leyan missionary in Kandy, I set out first by
rail for Matale, and thence by coach to Dam-
boola. Datnboola lies at the foot of an
immense rock, which rises from the plain at its
junction with the mountain country. Behind
are rich and varied valleys, but to the north is
a boundless ocean of jungle. From this sea of
verdure some isolated rock masses stand out
like islands, each of which is the home of some
wild legend, or famous for its historic stones.
Away in this jungle lie the two forsaken
capitals, Anuradhapura being forty-two
miles to the north and Polonarua about the
same distance, but more to the north-east.
There is a daily mail to this ancient city, and
this mail is carried in a bullock-cart. The
mail starts from Damboola at sunset, and
after travelling all the night reaches its desti-
nation about breakfast-time the next day.
To spend a night in a bullock-cart is nod,
under the most favourable circumstances, a
lively prospect, but the Government allows
any couple of travellers to secure the whole
conveyance on payment of an extra fee. This
I felt was hardly fair to wayside passengers,,
but as it was the rule of the place we deter-
mined “to do at Rome as Rome does,” and
bespoke the cart for our sole and exclusive
use. It was dark when we set to work to pacK
ourselves in for the night. We stowed our
baggage in the bottom, together with Her
Majesty’s mails, and on them placed some


boards on a level with the seats. This was
the foundation for our bedding, which we
spread side by side. Overhead was a primi-
tive arched cover, which was effective in
keeping off the night dews. This interior
arrangement was all very well for lying down,
but was not suited for any one except, an
Oriental, when not asleep. We were too
lively and too full of interest to think of
going to sleep at 7 o’clock, so with legs
dangling out at the ends or over the
sides we made ourselves as comfortable
as possible till tired Nature should
invite us into dreamland. We had both a
driver and a mailman, each with a minimum
of clothing, and the latter was clad with a
string from which depended a curious horn.
This villainous instrument was to be used at
intervals during the night to give notice from
afar of our approach to the different villages
and changing places, or to warn other vehicles
to get out of our way. It was especially de-
vised to make a noise that would penetrate the
Jungle, and be heard if the jaekalls were
howling their best. With my ignorance of
“the tongue understanded of the people” I
was powerless to remonstrate with the musician
when a frenzy for his art came over him, but
my friend was moved to such eloquence that
after a feeble resistance the mailman capitu-
lated.
It was a quaint journey. There was no
moon, but the stars shone brightly, and a
flittering army of fireflies mingled with the
dark foliage. The road, which was well made
and very good, ran through the jungle like a
railway line through a cutting. The trees
were as thick set as possible, and the original
pathway could only have been made by the use
of the axe. Bears, we were told, abounded in
that jungle, and some of the faces of the
villagers at one halting-place bore marks of
ugly scratches in encounters with these crea-
tures. Leopards too were numerous, but we
were only privileged to imagine that we heard
them growling in the scrub. Monkeys swarm


in that region, bub as most monkeys go to bed
at night like their human relations their
chattering did nob disturb us. We sat and
talked for a long time. There was nob much
to be seen in that gloomy wilderness, but every
now and again we were startled by the music
of our mailman, which awoke a chorus of dogs,
and informed us that we were approaching a
village. Our bullocks kept up a trot which
carried us along at about six miles an hour.
To enable them to do this gymnastic feat,
which is by no means natural even to trained
and educated bullocks, they were incited by a
perpetual activity on the part of the driver,
who talked to them incessantly, tickled them
with his bare toes, took their tails in his hands
as if they had been reins, and employed his
whip vigorously bub harmlessly upon their
tough hides. Each pair of bullocks had about
six miles to do before they earned their night’s
rest.
Weslept, or ratherdozed, through thatstrange
night, which provoked a succession of most
fantastic dreams. Erewhile we saw the morn-
ing light streaming through the jungle. The
night creatures went off to rest and a chorus of
new cries arose. Birds sang, but their harmony
was disturbed by cawings from the crows, and
other noises with whose origin I was un-
acquainted. Taking a turn in the road I saw,
nob far off, a great dome over the trees, about
as big as St. Paul’s, London. That, I knew,
was the Dagoba of Abhayagiri, built about
the time when Csesar landed in Britain, and I
knew we are at last in the far-famed city of
Anuradhapura.
THE “RESTHOUSE.”
A good-sized modern village exists in the
heart of the ruins. This village is thriving and
growing, and is the centre of a good deal of
cultivation and trade. It boasts of a bazaar,
a “ residency,” a Courthouse, a clubhouse, and
a population of about 2,000 persons. It also
possesses a comfortable and freshly built “rest-
house” where travellers can put up. We drove-


in at the gate of the compound, and settled
ourselves in that resthouse for three or four
■days, during which we intended to devote
ourselves to the study of Buddhism and its
archaeological remains. A “ resthouse” is not
exactly an hotel, for it belongs to Government
and has no bar. The landlord is a public ser-
vant, who is bound to provide travellers with
shelter and bed for three days at a fixed rate.
Lodgers may, if they like, trust to their own
ingenuity or foresight as to what shall be put
on the table ; but it is better for all parties to
let the official landlord do the catering, which
he looks upon as a legitimate perquisite of his
office, and for which he dare not over-
charge his guests under pain of summary
dismissal. Round about every resthouse
is generally to be seen a suspi-
cious - looking company of barndoor fowls,
who seem perpetually haunted with the fear
of “sudden death.” It is said that they know
a traveller by instinct, and are not to be found
anywhere about when a bullock bandy or a
buggy comes in sight, and can then only be
caught with guile. Be that as it may, it was
-our privilege, later on in the day, and after
our first walk, to sit down to a substantial
breakfast which these fowls had helped to
provide.
PLAN OF THE CITY.
As we sat resting on the verandah, look-
ing out upon the trees and the ruins, our first
business was to note where we were. We
spread a plan of the monuments and excava-
tions before us, and began to take our bearings
preparatory to a short walk before the day got
too hot. The resthouse is located very near
to what must have been the holiest centre of
the vanished city. We could see, rising over
the trees, no fewer than three great domes, and
each within half a mile of us. These domes
are called “Dagobas,” and are the most
characteristic of all Buddhist buildings. They
are nothing more or less than solid mountains
of masonry or brickwork, built to conserve
some famous relic of Buddha or of one of his


saints, or to mark some spot especially sacred.
Somewhere beneath these monstrous erections
may be found perhaps a hair of Buddha’s eye-
brow, ora piece of his collarbone, ortheashes of a
very holy monk, or the bowl in which he used
to gather his rice as he went round every
morning to beg his daily bread from the less
sanctified lay members of the congregation.
Their shape is peculiar, but there is a mystical
meaning attaching thereto, which is an
eloquent parable to the initiated. It sets forth
the twenty-two heavens which are above this
world of ours, and through some of which every
human soul must pass, sooner or later, before it
loses itself in the eternal quiet of Nirvana, and
is no longer troubled with the burden of being
obliged to be conscious of itself. Every large
dagoba was encircled with a platform and an
elaborate railing, and various altars on which
the floral offerings of the faithful could be
laid. It was thus both a monument and a
shrine, and afforded opportunity for those
numerous religious processions of which the
Buddhists are so fond, and to which the
dreamy climate of Ceylon invites all wor-
shippers rather than to stifling indoor
assemblies.
We had nob far to look to find minor ruins,
for the very compound of the resthouse is
marked by a number of broken pillars, which
seem to have formed part of a nameless monas-
tery. We found from our map that not far in
the rear were the remains of the “ Great Brazen
Palace,” and also that curious living ruin—the
historic Bo Tree of Anuradhapura. Taking a
wider circuit we saw on our plan an endless
list of ruined halls, palaces, pokunas, and
monasteries, stretching a way in every direction
into the jungle; and also a system of enormous
waterworks which of old kept this great city in
being in such a torrid region, and which are
now being restored and promise in their
restoration to make a new city arise which will
gradually absorb the forest into its ricefields
and gardens. We noted, too, how, last bub
not least, was the far-famed and romantic


mountain Mihmtale, waiting its turn for us to
visit. This mountain is deemed to be very
sacred, and to be as beautiful as it is precious.
It lies seven miles to the east, and of old the
city stretched away to its base, and a long
street, which was called the Sacred-road, con-
nected the shrine of the 80-tree and the
temples on the mountain summit. On this
mountain lived Mahindo, the great and good
missionary, who first taught the principles of
Buddha to the people of Ceylon. There too, in
a nook in the rocks he died, gazing on his be-
loved city, and there too, under a large Dagoba
his ashes lie entombed.
This great city is now being explored by the
Government of Ceylon, who have sent that ac-
complished archaeologist, Mr. Bell, into the
field. To him we had letters of introduction,
and were told by our host that he would be
sure to call in at the rest-house during the day,
He told us also that Mr. Bell had a bandy, with
a pair of trotting bullocks, so we had hopes
that our labours in tramping the jungle paths
under a burning tropical sun might be some-
what diminished, as well as our stock of infor-
mation increased, under so excellent a guide,
so excellently provided.
THE BKAZEN PALACE.
The heat was intense, but we were in no
mood to restrain our impatience till far on in
the afternoon, and so we set off shortly after
our “ chota-hazre,” or little breakfast, on a
tour of discovery, trusting to our umbrellas
and pith hats to ward off sunstroke. We soon
came to a curious sight. Before us was a
square forest of stone pillars, 1,600 in number,
regularly spaced and arranged in lines, like
vines on a hillslope. This was once the far-
famed Brazen Palace, which in its days of
glory, in the second century 8.c., rose to the
height of nine stories, the topmost of which
was roofed with gilded brass. It is a misnomer
to call it a “palace,” for it was really a
monastery, in which 1,000 monks, of the yellow
robe, found board and lodging at the expense


of the King. The ruin is not impressive, for
the pillars are uncarved, and not more than 12
ft. out of the ground, but it is very weird and
strange. We should know nothing at all about
it, for there is not a trace of any inscription on
the stones, had we not a full and particular
account of it in that old chronicle, the
Mahawanso. From that we learn who built
it, how it was furnished, and what a tremen-
dous sensation was created when it was duly
and formally opened. Its great hall on the
first Hoor was thronged with thousands of holy
men. The King himself made an oration,
seated on an ivory throne, on eaih side of
which were a golden sun and a silver moon.
The walls were studded with gems, and over
the throne was the “ Chakra” or sacred wheel,
symbol of the universal empire of that blessed
monarch who chanced to have in his dominions
the chief relic of the world, to wit, the eye-
tooth which had once done duty in the mouth
of the all-wise and silver-tongued prophet—
Gautama the Buddha.
A QUESTION OF PRECEDENCE.
It is said that the oldest and most venerable
of the monks were accommodated in the top
story, and that the other flats were occupied
by other monks, according to a graduated esti-
mate of their sanctity or success in conquering
the ills that flesh is heir to. This, I fancy,
would be a trying arrangement for the feeble
and tottering steps of the aged Arhats, who
had to climb nine stories towards heaven before
they could find their couches, while the young
and vigorous monks would have an easy task
in taking the lower rooms, It was, however,
a holy custom. It was not meet
that the young should get higher than the
aged. Spiritual pride and “ noblesse” obliged
the faithful to observe it in spite of fatigue.
This custom still exists in some quarters, and
sometimes has its ludicrous side. A deputa-
tion of potentates came not long since to visit
the Governor of Ceylon. His Excellency sent
his carriage to meet them, with a native coach-


man and footman in gay livery on the box, so
that they might drive in state throngh the
streets of Colombo and draw up with befitting
dignity before the viceregal residence. The
great men looked at the carnage ; it was very
comfortable, the horses were very good, and
the outriders were well mounted, but the
coachman on the box—he was to sit higher
than they, and that was an indignity to which
they could not submit. They hesitated and
objected. What was to be done? For the
coachman to walk and lead the horses would be
robbing the ceremonial of all dignity ; for them
to take the reins and drive while the coachman
and groom sat inside was too risky a proceeding
with those fiery horses. Finally the matter
was compromised, and the dignitaries con-
sented to take the lower seat on condition that
both doors of the carriage were left swinging
open, to show that they were not being sub-
jected to improper restraint by being shut in
in so narrow a space. I leave my readers to
discover the logic of the evasion if they can.
In more senses than one it was a case of “ dis-
puted middle.”
CHAPTER V.
THE SACRED 80-TREE.
As we came out of the forest of columns we
saw a small party of pilgrims coming alonar the
sacred way. They were bringing offerings of
flowers for Buddha. Putting their hands to-
gether, palm to palm, over their heads, and
bowing low towards a cluster of trees near by,
they uttered their sacred greeting, “Sadhu,
Sadhu, Sadhu.” We, too, followed them.
Before us was a stone enclosure filled with
some noble trees, which in some cases seemed
to be tearing the wall to pieces with their con-
torted roots. A flight of steps lead up to the
enclosed grove. At the foot of it is a sort of
semicircular stone door mat, called a “moon-
stone.” There are many of these scattered
about the city, but this is an especially fine


one. It is formed of carved streams of mystical
creatures going round from right to left. The
outer border shows a procession of elephants,
lions, horses, and bulls ; inside them is a string
of lotus flowers; and inside them again a solemn
row of sacred geese; while in the innermost
circle of all is again a lotus flower. Every-
thing on this stone mat has its hidden mean-
ings to the initiated, but with these I will not
trouble my readers. On each side of the stairs
is a hideous figure, representing the guardians
of the shrine ; but we resist any inclination to
be afraid of the carven monsters, and ascend
the steps. Entering the grove we note a
large stone image of the sitting Buddha
on our right hand, and a number of
other images, but all with a tattered
look about them and bearing many wounds.
The trees of the grove are magnificent speci-
mens of the sacred fig (“Ficus religiosa”)
with a number of palms mingled with them.
One of these fig-trees measures 10 ft, in diameter
at 6 ft. from the ground, and this trunk has
grown completely round a palmyra-tree with
out injuring it, producing a most curious effect.
The grove contains a second and higher plat-
form of masonry, up to which we ascended by
another stairway, and on that is a third sur-
rounded by an iron railing. In the centre of
this highest tier is the sacred tree itself, much
smaller and less imposing than its gigantic
daughters. Its branches extend far over the
railing and seem tottering with age and worn
out by incessant homage. Its leaves, as is
their wont, were incessantly quivering, but
no one ever dares to pluck one. This ceaseless
movement, say the faithful, is due to its
sympathy with the Great Buddha, who under
the parent tree at Gaya, in India, fought out
his bitter struggle and gained the victory over
the world, the flesh, and all the devils that
assailed him. I wanted much to pluck a leaf
but the yellow-robed guardians would not
hear of such a sacrilege, and for a time I had
to content myself with picking up, like other
pilgrims, one or two that had fallen. I confess,


however, that I was not restrained, in a short
moment when the guardians were busy with
the pilgrims, committing the awful crime of
stealing two leaves and slipping them into my
pocket. I noticed how one part of the railing
was quite broken away, and found out the
reason from a photograph that I had in my
guidebook. A long branch had for many
years shown signs of weakness, and, like an
old man. it had been tenderly supported by a
prop, but a strong monsoon gale had torn it
from the parent trunk, and in its fall it had
broken the railing. As we stood there watch-
ing we saw three pilgrims with reverend care
putting lotus flowers on each spearhead of the
rail, and when that was done they took a
“chatty” and poured out a libation of milk
over one of the branches. We noticed that
various parts of the principal arm of the tree
were gilded with tattered gold leaf, and a few
faded garlands adorned its aged nakedness.
It was a strange sight to witness this modern
remnant of the worship of a sacred grove or
“Asherah,”to which there is such frequent
reference in the Scriptures, and it was
interesting indeed to picture the thousands
of pilgrims who have kept on doing
homage to this tree for the past twenty-
one centuries. Around in the enclosure were
cartloads of broken lamps, brought hither for
midnight worship by the faithful, and nume-
rous fragments of broken begging-bowls left by
the monks. The whole place looks venerable,
battered, and weird, but the religious feeling
that deems it sacred is by no means dead. As a
strange contrast to the solemn impression of the
scene and the calm earnestness of the monks,
we saw a troop of monkeys making merry
among the other trees of the enclosure, and
looking with greedy envious eyes upon two
chatties full of boiled rice which two women
came to offer to the sacred tree. Doubtless
they were not so awed with the sanctity of
the place as to restrain themselves from gather-
ing up the fragments, on the first chance, that
nothing might be left.


My friend and I walked all round all the
enclosures. In a Buddhist sanctuary there is
no restriction, and no grudging of the intru-
sion of strangers. The monkeys and the pea-
cocks watched us carefully and with more
suspicion than the yellow-robed devotees, and
could not understand our movements as we
measured the various treef and took note of
the many ruined columns that lay about. All
these trees are more or less sacred, but no im-
pediment was placed in our way if we
wanted to pluck any of the leaves, though the
worshippers themselves would nob do such a
thing. My friend told me that all the trees
of this species everywhere are deemed some-
what sacred. A 80-tree was planted about
twenty years ago in the Wesleyan Mission
Compound at Galle. This occasioned much
remark among the islanders, who could nob
understand it, and whose comment was—
“ Even the missionaries must have a 80-tree
in their garden.” It grew apace, and one
intrusive bough overhung a tennis court in
such a way as to make the missionaries wishful
to get rid of it. No Cingalese man would,
however, undertake the work of cutting
it off. Usually the mildest of ser-
vants, they were obstinate in their
refusal. A Tamil man from India had to
be got to do the work. The wounded bough
naturally oozed much sap. “See how Buddha
bleeds,” said the onlookers.
THE STORY OF THE SACKED TREE.
“ What is the true story of this tree?” This
was the question I asked of my friend as we sat
down under the shade of that curious grove,
“There is no doubt,” said he, “ that this tree
was brought as a sapling from the tree that
once grew at Buddha Gaya, near Patna, in
India. The records are most clear and con-
sistent. No tree in the world has such a long
and such a genuine history. It was brought
from India by the Princess Sanghamibta, the
sister of the royal missionary Mahindo, in
the year 245 b.c., and seems to have taken


kindly to the land of its banishment. The
parent tree in India has disappeared of late
years, and so this tree remains without a rival
as the most famous and the most venerated in
all the world. There is another very old
80-tree at Kandy which was a branch of this
one, and is held in almost as much respect as
this; but as it is only the granddaughter and
this is the daughter of Buddha’s 80-tree,
its reputation does but enhance that of this
tree. ”
I have since then searched into the history of
this tree in the obscure pages of the Mahawanao,
and from that record I will set down,
partly in my own words, and partly in the
words of the historian, this wonderful story. I
do not either ask or expect my readers to
believe all that I tell them out of Chapter
xviii. of that ancient chronicle, although
it is entitled with due emphasis “ The obtain-
ing of the great Bodhi branch, composed
equally for the delight and the affliction of
righteous men.”
HOW A DIFFICULT QUESTION .WAS SOLVED.
It was in the time of the famous King Tissa
that all this came about. He reigned during
the time that the royal missionary Mahindo
was at work preaching and teaching and con-
verting the land to the religion of Buddha.
He had a sister, a very holy lady, who resided
at Gaya in India, and he persuaded the king
to send an ambassador to the Rajah of that
country, asking that the lady should come to
help on the good work, and that she should
bring with her, as a blessed favour, a branch
of the original 80-tree. I omit the story of how
thispuzzlinsr and flattering message was received
and debated, and how the lady expressed her
willingness to become a missionary if the re-
quest was granted. The great difficulty was
how to get such a branch. Who would dare to
cut it off? Who would venture to make
Buddha bleed in his own land ? “It is not
meet,'’said the Rajah, “to lop it with any
weapon; how then can I obtain a branch


thereof?” A great assembly of priests said it
ought to be done, and as “ ought” is the
measure of “ can be” preparations were made
for the ceremony. All the highways to the
temple were swept and decorated with banners.
The king himself turned goldsmith, and out of
a mass of the precious metal proceeded with
his own hand to fashion a suitable golden
flower-pot as big as a washtub, for it measured
4 ft. in diameter. This mighty and pon-
derous vessel was brought ready ; a vast
concourse of soldiers, citizens, and priests, and
even kings, assembled ; the tree “ was decked
with rows of streaming banners, was glitter-
ing with gems, and laden with offerings of
flowers of every hue, and surrounded by the
sound of every description of music.” Every-
thing was ready except the axe and the saw,
which seemed to have been thought quite
unnecessary, as indeed was the case, for “as
they stood gazing thereon with uplifted
■clasped hands, lo the small twigs that were on
the right-hand bough suddenly disappeared,
leaving the stem bare.” Here was a miracle
indeed. The King was so overjoyed that he
cried out “I make an offering of my entire
empire to the great 80-tree.” I suppose he,
like many others, did not intend his words to
be taken seriously, for I do not read that he
resigned his throne. However, the golden
flower-pot was brought right under the bough.
He then took, not a knife, or a pruning-hook,
or anything so sensible and practical, but a
golden paintbrush, which he dipped in vermi-
lion and marked a crimson streak round the
bough, and exclaimed, “If this supreme right
Bo branch from this 80-tree is destined to
depart hence to the land of Lanka let it, self-
severed, instantly transplant itself into the
golden vase.” What else could the branch do
but obey? It immediately performed for itself
a fission and lay upon the rim of the flower-pot,
which was filled with scented earth. It did
not at once plant itself, but the King was
quite equal to the emergency, for again
taking his golden paintbrush and


his pot of vermilion he traced nine
streaks around the severed stem three
inches apart. From one of these streaks
sprouted three tap roots, and from each of the
others ten smaller roots, all of which descended
into the scented sod of the vase. Here was a
wonder indeed ! Who could be a sceptic after
that ? Who would not second the missionary
zeal of the Princess after that ? No wonder we
read that the King “ stood on his golden chair
and set up a shout, which was echoed by the
surrounding spectators no wonder that the
priests rent the air with their cheers and that
all the heavens heard the cry, “Sadhu !
Sadhu !” and that the yakkahs of the infernal
regions grievously yelled.
THE VOYAGE AND ARRIVAL OF THE TREE.
Many and fantastic were the adventures of
the 80-tree in its migration. It was carried
up into the blue sky for a trip. It was then
placed upon a grand chariot and brought to the
capital. It was embarked on a gorgeous
barge, on which were also placed sixteen vases
of gold and silver with which to water it, and
thus was floated down the Ganges. In imme-
diate and happy attendance upon it were the
missionary Princess and her eleven priestesses.
When the ocean was reached another vessel
was ready, and eighteen royal personages and
eighteen nobles and sundry others, with the
Rajah in their midst, bore it aloft, and waded
in up to their necks, and then most carefully
deposited it in the vessel, whereupon the
King, “the delighter in good,” stood in his
dripping garments on the shore “ with up-
lifted hands, and gazing on the depart-
ing 80-branch, shed tears in the bitterness
of his grief, and weeping and lamenting
in loud sobs departed for his own capital.”
Then the voyage commenced. All storms
were hushed, and no one suffered from the
ocean swell, for “ within the circle of a yogana
all the waves were quieted, while an invisible
choir in the air chanted sweetest melodies and
scattered perfumes.” It was not to be expected


that the devilish nagas would let all this go
on without their interference, but the holy
Princess Sanghamitta not only kept them off,,
but converted them to the true faith. The
voyage was pleasant, rapid, and prosperous,
and as the ship drew near to the palm-girt
island of Lanka, the pious King Tissa was on
the shore waiting for its reception. Then we
read that the great Prophet Mahindo and the
enthusiastic King and many others began a
chant, which ran, “ This is the Bo from the Bo-
tree at which Buddha attained Buddha-
hood,” and as they rushed into the waters took
the tree in its golden flower-pot on their heads,
carried it on to the beach, and “ deposited it in
the superb hall which had been built on the
shore.” The King himself, surrendering his
sovereign authority as the other King had
done, to the tree, mounted guard as a sentinel,
and waited thus at the gate for three entire
days in the discharge of this oacred duty.
HOW IT WAS PLANTED.
Other adventures followed ere the tree
rested in the grove where I saw it. Along a
new highway, “ sprinkled with white sand and
lined with banners and garlands of flowers,”
the tree was brought in “ a superb car” through
the villages that lay in the route and
entered the city of Anuradhapura by the
northern gate. It was then brought to the
prepared grove of palms and pipuls, and was
lifted by royal and priestly hands out of the
car. Then, says the chronicler (but this fact
is, I admit, open to question), “ springing 80
cunits up into the air, self-poised and re-
splendent, it cast forth a halo of rays of six
colours,” aud there it remained all the day till
the sun was near its setting. As the shadows
grew longer the tree and its golden vase came
down, and “thereupon the earth did quake."
The roots became excited, and climbing up
over the rim of the great golden flower-pot, shot
downwards to the earth, and not only fixed
themselves there, but forced down the vase
itself deep into the ground, and there it re-


mains to this day; and as that vase was as
"thick as an elephant’s trunk, and as big as a
wine vat, a valuable gold mine must lie hidden
beneath that tree, awaiting some sacreligious
speculators to get up a Company to dig for it.
When the tree was thus self-planted it needed
watering. This time this process must be the
work of the spirits of Heaven. Heavy rain
came down, and “dense cool clouds enveloped
the great 80-tree in their snowy womb.” For
seven days the tree was invisible, and when
the clouds lifted the tree was seen in all its
beauty with a halo of six coloured rays.
We read in the Book of Revelation how, in
the idealized picture of the new earth, there
was a grove whose trees bare twelve
manner of fruits, and whose leaves were
for the healing of the nations. The
same idea is to be found in the old chronicle
for we read how the 80-tree let fall a ripened
fruit which the King picked up and planted,
and “while they were gazing at it eight sprout-
ing shoots were produced and became vigorous
plants, each one 4 cubits high,” These young
tress were distributed to various centres in the
island, and one of them was taken to Kandy,
where it still flourishes. Erewhile they each bore
four fruits, which planted themselves through-
out the land “by virtue of the glory of Buddha
inherent in the Bodhi-tree, and for the spiri-
tual happiness of the people of the country.”
TREE AND SERPENT WORSHIP.
Such is the history of this famous old tree in
which wild legend is commingled with precise
fact, and which, whatever else we may say of it,
is radiant with a simple but sincere faith in the
truth of the religion of Buddha. In worship
ping the unknown under the symbol of a tree
Buddhism is not peculiar. Such worship is
mentioned again and again in the Old Testa-
ment. It is presented frequently on the
sculptures from Nineveh. It was observed b>
our Druidioal forefathers in Britain, and it is
everywhere manifested in India, where sacred
trees can be counted by thousands. It is


generally associated with some sort of serpent
worship, and reminds us, though it is difficult
to trace the connection, of the tree of life, and
the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.,
which grew near together in the thornless
‘Garden of Eden, and which garden was a
paradise of innocent joy until the subtle
serpent invaded it and palmed itself off as a
would-be sage.
By the time my friend and I had made the
acquaintance of the sacred 80-tree the sun
had assumed such a mastery that we deemed
it wise to retreat to the grateful shade of the
resthouse. Our tramp amid the ruins made us
well able to appreciate a bath, and after that
our “burra hazri,” or proper breakfast, to
which we sat down about 11 o’clock.
RUINS.
We had seen just enough to whet our appe-
tite for more ruins. We found from our plan
that the principal remains of this old city may
be reached by two circular tracks —the inner
one about two miles in length, and the outer
one about three times as long. The rest of the
jungle, which covers the site of the city for six
miles in every direction, has not yet been
explored. It is not likely that any very large
ruins will be unearthed, for the houses of the
people were built of temporary material, and
have been washed down by the rains
and torn by the roots of trees, but still
there is no doubt that a rich harvest
awaits the explorer, for this city origi-
nally boasted of hundreds of palaces, and
even more numerous monasteries. During the
afternoon the Government Archteologist (Mr.
Bell) drove up in his bullock-bandy, and he
offered to take us out for our afternoon excur-
sion. We gladly accepted his invitation, and
meanwhile waited in pleasant archaeological
discussion the comparative coolness of
approaching evening.
A BUTTING BUDDHA.
I will not attempt to give anything like a
detailed description of what we saw on that


interesting drive. Our guide knew every stone
in the jungle, and every few yards made his
bandy stop and showed us innumerable curiosi-
ties that we should never have suspected to be-
there—enormous baths, the foundations of
royal homes, stones carved with seven-headed
snakes, altars for flowers, stables for elephants,
ruins of monasteries, sitting statues of Buddha,
and innumerable dagobas. It did indeed seem
strange to find amid the densest jungle, again
and again, an enormous granite Buddha
sitting alone in the wilderness, contemplating
nothing, unmoved by the drenching monsoons,
or the revolutions of empires. On one occa*-ion
we got our driver to squat by the image in the
same attitude as Buddha, so that we might
compare the two, and Mr. Bell told him to
look straight before him at nothing, so that his
face might have some trace of the dreamy
serenity of the original. The effort at obtain-
ing the proper expression was not, however,
very successful.
We passed along the edge of the great tank
or reservoir of Tissa-wewa, constructed 300
8.C., which in its turn is fed from other water-
works higher up in the hills. Those ancient
Kings of Anuradhapura were splendid
hydraulic engineers. The city was the out-
come of their skill in this direction, and now
that a paternal Government is reconstructing
those great dams and channels there is no
reason why the city should not rise from the
dead and grow and become famous once more.
We paced the edge of that vast artificial lake
lost in admiration at the skill of the architect
of it. It looked tempting for a swim, but we
saw here, there, everywhere amid the shallows
at the edge, and among the reeds, the suspicious
snouts of a school of crocodiles, and we lost all
wish for a bath when we learned what com-
pany we should meet in the waters. When,
dealing with suchlike creatures in their native
haunts, the better part of valour is discretion.
A SACKED PARK.
Finally we found ourselves in the midst of a
beautiful grassy park, surrounded with the


■choicest ruins. This seems to have been a
kind of holy forum in the ancient city. Here
we dismissed our bandy, as the sun was nearly
setting, and walked around. At each end of a
green sward some half-mile in length was a
dagoba. The one to the north is small, but
is a model of grace; the other to the south is
very much larger and very rich in historic
memorials. The names of these dagobas sound
to us uncouth, but they have a music of their
own which is very sweet to the devout
Buddhist. The one monument is called
Thuparama, the other Ruanwelli. The former
is the oldest building in Ceylon, and older than
any in India, and is one of the best preserved.
It was built by King Dewananpia Tissa in the
year 307 b.c., and its purpose was to enshrine
and preserve the collar-hone of Buddha himself,
which, somehow or other, together with the
tooth, escaped being burned when the holy
prophet was cremated. This collar-bone was
brought in great state to Ceylon, and the King,
it is said, put it on the back of the huge state
elephant. The elephant was overjoyed with
the honour, and carried the relic to the site of
that dagoba, and there he stood. The King
wanted to take the relic down, but the
elephant would not think of such a thing.
“What means this?” said the King. The
answer was that the elephant, knowing how
high his back was, and that the high seat was
the seat of honour, would not allow the sacred
thing to be brought low. The elephant under-
stood all that was said, and looked his approval.
He stood stock still while the King’s men
brought a great many baskets of mud from
the tank, and made therewith a conical
mound which was a little higher than the back
of the wise animal. The relic was then quietly
removed to the top of that spire of mud, and the
elephant, and the King, and all the people made
obeisance to the wonderful charm. Around
that mound the dagoba of Thuparama was sub-
sequently built, completely burying and
hiding the sacred treasure, and there I sup-
pose it remains to this day'.


THE BUANWELLI DAGOBA.
The other dagoba, called “ Ruanwelli, ” or
“ Golden Dust,” is much more imposing. It
is about as high as the Post-Office tower, and
has a diameter of nearly 400 ft., so that the
entire Post-Office might be buried inside it. It
was surrounded by a long regiment of great
stone elephants with real ivory tusks, but the
elephants are sadly mutilated, and their tusks
have been stolen away long ago. This great
dagoba is now being restored by the pious con-
tributions of the pilgrims who come to visit
the shrines which are around it. It, too, has
its romantic legends, which tell how once on a
time a certain able and chivalrous usurper
named Elala sat on the throne; how the
native and proper royal family tried in vain to
unseat the usurper; how at last the matter was
decided, not by a pitched battle, but by a
Homeric duel between the chieftains ; how the
King, mounted on his elephant, charged the
usurper mounted on another elephant; how
each warrior hurled his spear at his foe, and
how Elala fell and Dutugaimunu reigned in
peace. So great was the King’s admiration of
his brave antagonist that he erected a magni-
ficent tomb on the spot where he fell, and
commenced this great dagoba as a monument
of the victory— b.c. 161.
We stood between those two venerable
dagobas as the sun went down behind the
trees. Around us were ruins without number,
each with its legendary background of romance
to give it a living interest, and each a puzzle to
the antiquarian. It seemed as though we were
encompassed about with ghosts of far-gone
ages which took form in the bats that were
wheeling overhead. A sound of tomtoms from
the village reminded us that the time of offer-
ing the evening sacrifices of flowers had come,
and that the faith in Buddha, which had in-
spired the builders of these structures, was not
dead yet. The lights of a small band of
pilgrims going the circuit of the dagoba
twinkled against the shrubbery. We set off on.


our walk home to the resthouse, musing on
the strange mysteries of this religion of despair,
which, in spite of its awful negations, has so
much charm for these people. To us it is in-
comprehensible that such a religion should
have any attraction at all. It presents to us
doubtless a tender morality, but it is based or.
the denial of pleasure. It offers as a reward for
virtue not the expansion, but the eternal
shrivelment of our energy. It opens up a
rest in Nirvina in which nothing remains
to enjoy that rest. It practically denies a
God, and offers instead a human prophet who
is wrapped in an everlasting sleep and has
conquered his desire to be anything con-
ceivable. It takes no form as prayer, and yet
makes much of magical incantations. In all
those things it is the direct opposite of
Christianity, which comes as a glad message
from a living God, through a living Christ,
and offers us righteousness in our sin, peace in
our troubles, and eternal joy in God as an
immortality of blessedness. Ido not hesitate
to say of Buddhism that it is the purest of
non-Scriptural religions, but the religion of
Jesus is as sunlight contrasted with moonlight
when named in comparison therewith.
CHAPTER VI.
THE SACRED MOUNTAIN.
In my last two chapters I have endeavoured
to describe some of the most striking and inte-
resting remains of the great vanished city of
Anuradhapura. That city was founded before
the Island of Ceylon was converted to the
religion of Buddha, but it owed all its social
and architectural glory to the influences of the
creed that it adopted under the teaching of
the missionary Mahindo. Buddhism, like
Christianity, seemed to inspire its architects
with a new life. The wild Gothic tribes of
Europe built their castles and halls in a style
of rude vigour, but they only learned how to
add grace and beauty to strength when they


erected their Cathedrals. The ancient Indians
were not great builders. There is not a single
Hindu temple that is as old as Durham
Cathedral. India learned the art of building
from the Buddhists. Anuradhapura, in its
earliest days, was a mere collection of huts and
houses built of wood and sun-dried bricks, but
it blossomed into solid glory when its Kings
and Councillors became enamoured of the new
religion. Every ruin that is there is either a
monastery, or a sacred bathing-place, or a
dagoba, or a shrine. Even those ruins which
are called palaces were more or less holy
edifices. The question, therefore, natu-
rally arises—How did all this come about?
Who was the genius that gave such a
novel impulse to this dreamy island ? What
was the doctrine that he taught, and why has
it been so potent a factor in the life of this
country, and indeed of the whole eastern
world ? Who was this Gautama who gained
the name of “the Buddha, ” and of what sort was
the religion that he founded ? To answer these
questions fully would take a volume, and
would lead me into endless mazesof controversy.
Before, however, attempting even a slight
description of Buddha himself allow me to
introduce my readers to the great missionary
whose spirit created this ruined city.
MIHINTALE.
About eight miles from the centre of
Anuradhapura, where the sacred 80-tree
stands, rises a grand mountain rook called
Mihintale. It is a granite upheaval, and is
crowned with enormous boulders piled one on
the other. Its sides are covered with forest,
except where too steep for trees to find any
roothold. Its summit is now crowned with
two large dagobas and a variety of sacred
edifices, and in the crevices beneath and
among the boulders the yellow-robed monks
have their abode, dreaming away their exis-
tence “far from the madding crowd.” That
mountain was the home of the first Buddhist
missionary, Mahindo. There he lived in a


tiny cell; thence he descended to preach to the
citizens; there he founded a community of
monks ; and there he was buried, and his
mighty monument can be seen from afar by
every traveller over the jungle plains of Ceylon.
The way thither used to be along a busy and
crowded street, which we may compare to the
" Strand” in old London which connected the
City with Westminster, but now isone dense
forest. It is even uncertain whether the
modern highway follows the ancient street at
all. My friend and I hired a bullock-bandy
to take us there, and as the bullocks did not
profess to be able to trot, we made a very early
start so as to get to the end of our two or three
hours’ ride before the heat of the day. The
pace was such that we could easily alight and
examine anything we wanted to see without
stopping our conveyance. We saw some
wonderful trees, and passed through a matted
jungle which was like a prison-wall on each
side of the road ; we saw lovely birds floating
through the bushes, and were amused at the
behaviour of the baboons, who stared at us and
then beat a retreat; but we did not see a single
ruin. What a mine of wealth for some future
antiquary at the head of an army of ex-
cavators armed with axes and spades! We
drew up about 9 o’clock at a small resthouse,
located in a sort of parklike suburb of the vil-
lage, which stands at the foot of the mountain.
The more open character of the country enabled
us to see the mountain rising before us in all
its grandeur about a mile off. It is not very
high, being about 1,000 ft. or rather more, from
the plain to the monastery, but its rugged
character makes it look higher. We now noted
that it has two summits, and both covered
with enormons ruins, but the amount of forest
which clothes the hill all the way up hid the
many lesser ruins upon its slopes. This moun-
tain is undoubtedly the most ancient of the
sacred high places in Ceylon. It was venerated
by the Cingalese long before the time of
Buddha or his devoted missionary, Mahindo.
For many centuries it was to the religion of


Buddha what lona was to Christianity in the
north of Britain.
A GIGANTIC STAIRCASE.
Securing a guide we set out on foot first for
the village and then for the ascent. .Entering
the dense jungle we were prepared for a stiff
climb, but soon found that our pious fore-
runners had done their best to make the way
easy. An enormous staircase, 15 ft. wide and
composed of 1,850 steps, cut in granite, or
built of granite slabs, runs right through the
forest to the top. This staircase is in flights,
and ruined shelter-houses are on either hand
between the stages. Everywhere are to be
found traces of ancient monastic dwellings and
hermit cells, where “ the holy disciples of the
fourfold path” dreamed away their life. In
fact, this mountain was one vast pile of sacred
edifices, and was tenanted by thousands of
monks. A little off the stairway to the left are
the ruins of an immense refectory, and near
by a granite trough, which royal munificence
used to fill with rice for these hungry ancho-
rites. A quiet little path which branches off
from the last flight leads to a very curious
relic on a ledge of rock, which, where a spring
oozes through a crevice, has been hollowed out
into a huge cistern or tank about 150 ft. long
by about 10 ft. wide. It is called the “ Naga
Pokuna,” or the Snake bathing-place. At the
back a five-headed cobra has been carved in
relief, as if it were rising out of the water.
This monster measures seven feet across the
head, and its aspect is not reassuring, as
veritable living cobras haunt the nooks and
crannies thereabouts, and however cobras
may be worshipped I never heard that they
had any special reverence for human charac-
ter, religious or otherwise.
A MOUNTAIN PARADISE.
Continuing our upward march we come
through a narrow glen to a gateway, which
opens upon a veritable scene of sacred fairy-
land. On a level platform between two peaks
is a beautiful stone dagoba, called the Ambus-


tala, graceful in form and perfect in preserva-
tion, and all around is a forest of fantastic
columns and another forest of living palm-
trees. Here we are met by two or three
monks, who give us a kindly welcome in their
own way. It is against their principles to
make salaams to any one except a superior in
their own grades of ecclesiastical rank, but
they greet us with a smile, and motion to us to
sit and rest on a fallen column, after the toils
of the ascent. My friend soon gets into con
versation with these monks, and asks them
the story of Mahindo, and why these dagobas
were built, and how many monks live on the
mountain, and where their cells are.
They soon lose all reserve and talk
freely, but I can only get a few
odd snatches of the conversation through the
tedious process of interpreting. Meanwhile
one of them calls a young man and says some-
thing to him, and forthwith he climbs up one
of the tall palms like a monkey, and throws
down a couple of coeoanuts. With the aid of
a great curved knife, like a heavy sickle, the top
is cut off each nut like the top of an egg, and a
nut is handed to each of us. Ido not know on
what principle it can be accounted for, but the
fact remains that the milk of a fresh cocoanut
is always cool however hot the day may be,
and however exposed to the direct rays of the
sun the tree may be. It was a delicious
draught, and we drank the health of our
entertainers in that innocent beverage.
THE SUMMIT.
It was a lovely and interesting spot. Over-
head on one of the peaks is a fnighty dagoba,
built when Jesus was a boy at Nazareth to
afford a secure resting-place for a single hair
which once grew between the eyebrows of
Sakya Muni himself, and from the gallery
around it, we were told, a very wide view
could be obtained. On the other side was a
pile of enormous boulders marking another
summit, also covered with shrines. Not far off
among the palms was a royal statue of one of


the vanished kings, but sadly weatherworn. The
place on which we were resting was carved with
fantastic emblems. The whole place wasredolent
with a mysterious historic sanctity which I
soon learned to understand. We explored the
whole surroundings. We climbed to the
gallery of the great dome before us, and were
rewarded with success. We made vigorous
attempts to reach the top of the highest
boulder of the other summit, but had to
confess to a defeat. It rested on other
boulders, up which we climbed with our
stockinged feet. Right glad were we to clasp
the friendly hands of reverend guides, for
they, with their bare feet and constant
practice, were as sure-footed as the mountain
goats. The actual top was only to be reached
by the aid of a long perpendicular bamboo
ladder. I looked at it and came to a pause.
I was suddenly conscious of the growing force
of an argument that might be educed from the
value of my life to others far away. The
argument seemed to me irresistible, and I
posponed the further ascent sine die. Our
yellow-robed attendants laughed mildly at our
prudence, and doubtless in their tongue
described it as timidity, but instead of dis-
cussing the matter we began to go down by
the way we had come. The descent was far
worse than the ascent. But for the steadying
help of our guides we should, both of us, have
rolled to the bottom, and fallen martyrs to
our rash inquisitiveness into sacred shrines.
“ MAHINDO’S BED.”
Coming again to our idyllic resting-place
under the palms we started off by a little
path to see the lower side of those boulders,
which we had been rash enough to try to
climb. Here a new interest met us. The
crannies and ledges have been quarried out
for monkish cells. Rude walls were built to
close in numerous natural caves. The result
is a medley of the quaintest little dens in
the oddest of places—some above, some below,
and of all shapes. One grand boulder espe-


cially attracted us. It gave beneath it a narrow-
ledge, on which there was comfortable resting-
ground. Here a rude couch was carved out of
the rock, with a great granite arch overhead.
Thesituation is romantic in the extreme. To the
left of this perch is a deep ravine, filled with
fallen boulders, as if giants of old had fought
with huge rooks for missiles. The chasm was
adorned with gay creepers and lively with
monkeys. To the right was a view which
reaches far over the steamy jungle plain of
Ceylon, and over the entire site of the vanished
City of Anuradhapura. Tar away, over eight
miles of foliage, we could see the domes of the
ruined dagobas. Near to them glittered in
the sun the great engineering reservoirs that
had kept that city alive. Far away to the
north stretched a wilderness of forest, broken
by a few rock 7 knolls, and as we strained our
eyes we fancied we could discern the waters of
the ocean both to the east and the west.
What a prospect must have been presented to
the beholder when the city was in its glory !
I can conceive of no similar picture, not even
that of Damascus from Mount Lebanon, or
Cairo form the Mokattam Hills, that would at
all equal it.
Where twice five miles of fertile ground,
With walls and towers, were girded round;
And there were gardens bright with Sinnon’s rills
Where blossomed out many an incense-bearing tree.
And there were forests, ancient as the hills,
Enfolding sunny spots of greenery.
“Here,” I said to my friend, “let ua rest
and talk, and you can tell me all that those
yellow-robed fellows have been telling you.”
We sab down, our Buddhist friends at a re-
spectable distance, marvelling much over our
English tongue. “ This rocky retreat was
Mahmdo’s home ; here was his study, and here
was his bed. He certainly sho ;ved his taste in
the choice of so romantic a spot, bub it would
nob have done if he had been given to walking
in his sleep. Everything about this mountain
tells of Mabindo. Where we got our cocoa-
nuts is where he lies buried. Near by he


preached his first sermon, and in this eagle’s
eirie he lived.”
MAHINDO.
I have since then searched in the quaint
pages of the Mahawanso Chronicle for the
facts of this man’s life, but to separate fact
from fiction is not very easy. Mahindo was a
descendant of the family from which the
Buddha came, but he was born about 200 years
after him. He belonged to India and was a
nigh-born Prince of the country of Maghada.
Like his renowned ancestor he preferred
religion to splendour, and made choice of the
lifeofa monk rather than that of a secular states-
man. He was, however, in his own line, a
great man, and was renowned as “profoundly
sapient,” and a “ Thero”of twelve j ears’ stand-
ing. There came to him one day a remarkable
vision. One of the devas appeared to him and
°aid “The time is come. Depart on
thy mission for the conversion of the land of
Lanka. It is the fulfilment of the prediction
of the supreme Buddha.” He prepared to
obey, and enlisted five others in the enterprise.
The voyage was no trouble, for we read that
“on the day of the full moon he and his com-
panions stood together in a certain sacred spot,
and rising aloft into the air were carried along
and instantaneously deposited on the top of
the sacred mountain,” on the very spot where
we had enjoyed so much our rest unier
the palms. I suppose the real mean-
ing of this story is that he came
there quietly and without ostentation.
The name of the King at that time was
Devanampiya Tissa, the same King of whom
I said so much in telling the story of the
80-tree. At that time this King was a
stranger to the new religion, and the mis-
sionary, like Gregory in England, thought it
would be a good thing to begin by converting
the King. This, however, was easier thought
of than accomplished. The holy mountain
was not then so covered with shrines as it
afterwards was, and was a favourite ground for
a hunt, and one day the King went out for a


day’s sport. The old chronicle says he had
40,000 attendants, which I fancy would spoil
any hunt. He came to the foot of the
mountain. He saw in an open space, not far
off, a fine elk quietly grazing. It was, as we
would say, “agood shot.” The King had,
however, a love for fair play, and as he saw
the elk, said, “It is not fair to shoot him
standing,” and twanging his bowstring startled
the creature, who fled into the glades of the
mountain. The huntsmen were after him, and
reached the neck of the hill between the two
summits. Then the elk was nowhere to be
seen, but in his stead the There, Mahindo.
The metamorphosed deer had vanished. This
was a novel and easy way to get a congrega-
oion, and the devas might do well to help
modern missionaries by some such interesting
device.
HOW THE KING WAS CONVERTED.
Mahindo disdaining compliments addressed
the King, saying—“ Come hither, Tissa.” The
King thought he must be some rude yakkha,
but the missionary added —“We are the min-
isters and disciples of the Lord of the true
faith, in our compassion toward thee have
we come hither.” The King laid aside his
weapons and sat do am, and then the There
talked for a long time, and told who
he was. “How did you all come here?”
asked he. “We came neither by land nor by
water, and yet we are here.” He then put the
King through a curious catechism to find out
•vhat capacity he had. This is a part of it: —
“ O, King, have you any relations?”
“ My Lord, I have many.”
“ O King, are there any persons not thy re-
lations ?”
“ There are many who are not my relations.”
O King, besides thy relations, and thoss who
are not thy relations, is there, or is there
not any other human being in existence?”
“ My Lord, there is myself.”
“ Ruler of men, thou are wise.”
Then follows the story of how the missionary


preached. He was satisfied that the King had
Drains, so he recited and explained one of
Buddha's discourses, and the King listened and
the 40,000 attendants listened, and it came to
pass that they were all converted there and
then. With such a beginning it is not to be
wondered at that the work went on apace, and
chat the King and Mahindo were great
friends. Then it was that the city began
rapidly to arise into a new splendour. Build-
ing went on at a great rate. Dagodas and
monasteries, and huge tanks, and public high-
ways, and parks, and monuments adorned the
nicy. A new civilization came in with a new
creed, and Ceylon, entered upon the most bril-
liant period in her history.
Mahindo lived to be an old man. He had
nearly fifty years of work to do in Ceylon, but
at last he too must pass away. He breathed
his last lying on that stone couch gazing on
his beloved city. He died in the proper odour
of Buddhist sanctity—that is, he entered, like
his master, into Nirvana, that painless, pas-
sionless rest in which is neither joy nor sorrow,
but which is the Buddhist’s heaven. He was
accorded a more than royal funeral. His body
was taken in procession all the way to the
centre of the city, carried in a golden coffin,
and there cremated, the King himself applying
the torch. There was no gloom over the land
over this death, for had not the prophet gained
the proper victory? Some of his ashes were
taken back to the mountain and buried on the
very spot where he first had met King Tissa,
and where, after 2,000 years, my friend and I
sat and talked together with his monkish fol-
lowers over these very things that had hap-
pened so long ago.
MONKS AT HOME.
Before we left the holy mountain our guides
volunteered to show us thsir rocky dens.
There are not many brethren living there at
present, and they told us how of old the
fraternity was vastly more numerous, and they
showed us many ruined cells. These cells are


all caves, closed in with walls and furnished
with a window or two. A pallet, a box, and one
or two images of Buddha were the entire fur-
niture. My friend had told our companions
that I came from Australia. Their notions of
geography were very vague indeed, and they
regarded me with some extra interest, almost
as if I had come through the air like Mahindo.
He further told them that I was very anxious
to have a real Buddhist robe, not one made up
of yellow calico bought in a bazaar, but made
by their own hands, and dyed with the proper
dyes, and that I was willing to pay for it.
They shook their heads in pious horror, and
said they never had anything to do with
money, and that they could never think of
selling anything so sacred. “ Well then,” said
he, “ will you give him one that he may take
it with him to far-off Australia, and show it to
the people who dwell there that they may
know what a Buddhist monk looks like?” This
was another matter, and one of the young
brethren dived into the recess of his den and
brought out a dirty, grimy, yellow cloth, and
with a smile offered it to me. I had
noticed a discarded begging bowl near
the entrance, marked with some mystic
letters, and this also I coveted much.
My friend picked it up and said, “ May he
take this too ? Perhaps be will go about beg-
ging rice in Australia.” They were not above
understanding and appreciating the joke, and
so the bowl was added to my treasures. I saw
through the door a small shrine, and I was
honest enough to deposit in the offering-box
enough coin of the realm to enable the donor to
replace his robe with a new one. “He can
easily buy himself another,” I said. “No, he
can’t,”said my friend ; “these things are not
to be bought; the material may be purchased,
but it must be dyed by the owner and made
up by him. Every monk can use his needle,
and as no monk may wear anything new, a
dirty bit of some older robe must be sewn into
the corner. You are to be congratulated on
your capture; I never heard of such a thing


before as a monk giving away a robe.”
“ What will he do with the money?” I asked.
“I thought these fellows were under a vow of
poverty and never would touch money.”
“There are many ways of keeping the letter of
a vow and breaking it in spirit. I have been
often amused when one of these yellow-robed
brethren wants to go a railway journey. He
will bring his coin wrapt up in a corner of his
cloth, get a bystander to undo it and count it
out for him, and hold up his hand with the
cloth and the coin at the ticket window, and,
if change has to be given, will again solicit the
friendly help of a stranger, and from beginning
to end will never touch the unclean thing. I
believe their scruples do not extend to bank-
notes, which are only paper and not coin, but I
have never satisfied myself on that point.”
We then started off down the mountain,
one of our kindly friends carrying the rcbe
and the bowl. The bowl had some writing on
it which either they could not or would
not interpret, and my companion said he too
was puzzled with it. It seemed to spell
“Playa,” but there is no such word in the
language. I have not yet solved that
mysterious handwriting. We halted at a
spot where there was a glorious view, and
where the mountaineers were to say good-by.
We took out our fieldglasses to have a look
at the distant objects on the plain. One of
them asked for my glass, but could not adjust
the focus. “ Our eyes ate different from yours,’’
said he; “ours are black, yours are grey.” He
looked in at the wrong end and smiled, “ Ah,
I can see all right now.” We then said good-
by and made our salaams. They returned
cur farewell in words and looks, but it was
against their principles to make any sort of
bow, so that part of the ceremony was
omitted.
We oame down the mountain by another
route, and came upon several groups of ruins,
which it would be tedious to describe. A hot
walk over the burning plain brought us to the
little resthouse, from which we did not intend


to stir till the sun was near its setting. The
afternoon in Ceylon is no time to be out of
doors if it can possibly be avoided. I got out
my notebook and began to record what I had
seen, and to make notes for a paper on the
life of that extraordinary man called variously
Siddartha, Sakya Muni, and Gautama, the
Indian Prince who forsook bis throne to be-
come first a Yogi and then a Buddha, and who
has by his personal influence changed the life
of half the Asian Continent. The substance
of those notes I shall embody in my next
chapter.
CHAPTER VII.
THE STORY OF THE BUDDHA.
I purpose to conclude this series of sketches
by giving a short account of the career and the
doctrines of the Buddha himself, who, without
any doubt, was one of the most remarkable
men that ever lived upon this earth, and who
has left his mark upon human thought more
indelibly than any other religious teacher,
excepting only the Christ himself.
THE STOKT OP THE INDIAN PRINCE.
About a hundred miles to the north of
Benares lay a small city called Kapilavastu.
This was the modest capital of af small but
very independent tribe. The Rajah of the
tribe was called Suddhodana, though his
family name was Gautama. Concerning this
chief nothing is recorded save what is noble
and brave. He was a politic and sensible
ruler, a warrior, and a religious man according
to the light of his time. He lived about 600
years before Christ; that is, about the time
when Daniel was rising into power in Babylon.
Though so long ago the religion of India
was then pretty much what it is to-day.
The priestly claims of the Brahmins were
almost as tyrannical as they now are, and
Benares was then, as now, the great central
sacred city, to which thousands of pilgrims


resorted every year to bathe in the well into
which Siva’s earring fell, and to worship at
the shrines of the great god himself.
This good Rajah had two wives, but no
children, which, of course, was looked upon
as a sad disaster. One of these wives was
named Maya, and she, when forty-five years of
age, gave birth to a Prince. That he was
doubtless beautiful to look upon, and that his
advent caused universal joy, we can well
believe. We can easily bring ourselves to
sympathize with the father in his Royal de-
light at having at last a son and heir, and with
the Hindu mother on having attained the
crown of her ambition, but we are
hardly prepared for what we find
written in the sacred books, namely, that
“at his birth the babe did take seven steps
forward, and that a lotus flower sprang up at
■each step,” and that he cried, not with an
infantile wail, but with a loud voice—“lam
the most exalted in the world ; I am the chief
of the world” —a voice so loud and penetrating
that its echoes rolled to the highest heavens of
the Brahmins, and made 10,000 worlds to
tremble, and caused a shower of yellow flowers
to fall, so copious that even the whole ocean
was covered with them. The baby’s name was
Siddhartha, but he is generally known by the
family surname “Gautama.” “Buddha” is
only a title, like prophet, or apostle, or
Messiah, and should not properly he used as a
•name. It means “ the enlightened one.” The
little Prince lost his mother in a week, but his
aunt, the other wife, took proper care of him.
He seems to have been a boy who would per
sist in thinking for himself, and would ask
awkward questions, and would not be put off
like ordinary children with evasive answers
AN INDIAN HAMLET.
As he grew into manhood he became a sort of
•Oriental Hamlet, who cared more for philo-
sophy than politics, and was a serious trouble
to his father and his friends through his im-
practical and dreamy ways. His father wanted


a son who would gain renown by deeds of arms
and by skill in the administration of affairs,
and did not know what to do with
this melancholy metaphysical genius. To
cure him of his strange ways his
father got him to fall in love with, and to
marry, while still in his teens, his own cousin,
Yasodhara. She was a very great beauty, and
Siddhartha loved her with a great passionate
love, and was envied by a whole crowd of
disappointed suitors. Like other Oriental
Princes he had also his harem, “ a rosebud
garden of girls, ”to adorn his palaces—a fact
which Arnold stipples out of his portrait.
Nothing, however, could cure this young man
of his awkward habit of brooding over things.
“ The world was out of joint,” and he would
keep on asking questions as to how this had
come to pass. No courtly splendours could
tempt him to take things as a matter of course.
He would torment himself with those ever-
recurrent problems about sin and suffering,
about life and death, about time and eternity,
which have attracted and bewildered earnest
minds in every age and every country. He
would not rest content in his own happy
Royal lot while all around him were sorrowing
and dying men. He must get to the root of
this awful problem of life. He must find out
the truth even if he perish in the attempt. Ho
must solve the double riddle—Whence does
this trouble come, and how may a man find
deliverance therefrom ?
For ten years he continued in this state of
anxiety, and then, when he was twenty-nine
years of age, a little son was born. The baby
was called Rahula, and long afterwards became
a disciple. This event decided him, “ Now
that I have a son,” said he, “home is doubly
dear. I must tear myself away at once. I
must, I will solve these my doubts and find
out how a soul may gain its freedom.” This
is the dramatic turning point in his career,
over which the poet lingers with tender enthu-
siasm. The mother lay sleeping one night
with the babe on her arm, unconscious of


trouble. Her husband came in and quietly
drew aside the gauzy curtains. He longed to
kiss them both, but he did not dare for fear of
awakening them. He stood there giving one
long last look, and then he fled away to hide
himself in obscurity. He will give up the
world, and search out truth for himself by
living a life of severe penance, seeking “ deli-
verance and the unknown light.” Instead of
livingas a Rajah he will live as a “ yogi.” Sidd-
hartha the Prince will become a “Buddha,” or
perish in the attempt.
So with his brow he touched her feet, and bent
The farewell of fond eyes, unutterable,
Upon her sleeping face, still wet with tears;
And thrice around the bed in reverence,
As though it were an altar, softly stepped.
With clasped hands laid upon his beating heart;
“ For never,” spake he, “ lie I there again ;”
And thrice he made to go, and thrice came back,
So strong her beauty was, so large his love.
ARNOLD.
For six years he lives in the forests the life
■of a wandering devotee, practising all sorts of
austerities. He is terribly in earnest and
passes through the throes of a perpetual
mental agony. There is no rest, however, for
his wearied soul; he finds no joy in the present,
no hope for the future, no light in his gloom,
no God to give him comfort. He is weighed
down by a double burden —the burden of his
own sin and sorrow, and the burden of the
Bins and sufferings of the world about him.
He is alone. No one can either understand
him or give him any sympathy. After a long
and bitter experience he gives up being a
“yogi,” having come to the conclusion that
such a life cannot minister to a mind diseased.
“ If fasting is meritorious the wild beasts who
are content with grass ought to abound in
merit.” So he again takes up his begging-
bowl, and again goes among the haunts of
men. He regains his health, but he has no
thought of giving up the struggle.
HE BECOMES A BUDDHA.
Every one who has read the “Pilgrims Pro-


gress” will remember how the hero met one
day, and had a battle grim and fierce, with the
arch fiend Apolyon. A similar experience
befel Gautama. He deemed himself to
be specially tempted by Mara, the great devil.
The story here becomes wild and romantic,
and we lose all the threads of biography in a
tangled network of legend. Finally we see
him seated under the shade of a spreading
tree. It was one of those long-limbed Indian
figs, whose pointed leaves are so slenderly
hung that they are never still. Here the final
scenes of his temptation are enacted. Hideous
and spiteful demons attack him and fail.
Then comes a troop of lovely women and girls
who try to bewitch him with their wiles. After
them appears the greatest of all the devils in
person. All this is told us with every detail
and all manner of Oriental imagery. It was,
however, all in vain. The bewildered man is
close upon the goal. He is about to win the
race. He presses on in his inmost soul for the
prize. Night falls upon the lonely sitter. The
morning dawns and he has entered at last
into rest. He has found the secret. He has
solved the riddle. He is now “ Buddha” the
enlightened. He is a new man, and hence-
forth is at peace. The very leaves of the tree
quiver anew with excitement and sym-
pathy. The news is carried up to the gods in
the heavens, and down to the devils in the
hells, that a human soulhas actually outstripped
the gods and become a Buddha. His liberated
soul found expression in a new song, a song
of victory, a peon of awful ecstacy. He was
overjoyed because he had at last discovered,
and had actually reached, a pathway that
leadeth to the very end of conscious life, and
which will safely conduct him into an eternal
dreamless sleep.
This incident is what is represented in the
thousands of sitting Buddhas which are to be
found everywhere in Ceylon or Thibet. This
incident it is which gives so great a sacredness
to the Pipul-tree, that it is adored almost as
if it were an idol. To a devout Buddhist it is


the crisis in the history of humanity, the
birthday of hope. It took place in a wood not
far from Patna, and that locality is deemed by
all true disciples as the most sacred spot on the
whole earth.
THE PRINCE TURNED PREACHER.
Benares, the holy city of Hinduism, was not
far off, and thither he wends his way to pro-
claim his new doctrine. In a pleasant wood in
the outskirts he takes up his abode and there
he preaches his first sermon. The spot is
called Sarnath, and is marked by the ruins of
what is perhaps the oldest building in all
India. His progress at first was very slow, but
soon converts flocked in numbers to his stan-
dard. Unlike a Brahmin teacher he made every
convert into a missionary. He said to them—
“ Go ye out, O disciples, and travel from place
to place for the welfare of many people, in
pity for the world, for the blessed welfare of
gods and men.” I cannot follow his career
further, or give now in detail a record of his
wonderful successes, of his ceaseless labours,
of his moral victories, of his return home as a
holy mendicant, of how he converted his father
and his wife and his son; how he founded
monastic brotherhoods everywhere, and how
he made the conservative Brahmins, the
guardians of the gods and of caste, to hate him.
For more than forty years he was a wandering
preacher, and at last, in a good old age, he
died, or, as he would express it, he passed into
“ Nirvana,” and ceased from conscious life for
evermore. This took place not far from where
he was born, on the banks of a stream called
now the Badhi. His last words were—
“ Hearken, O disciples, I charge you,
All that comes into being passes.
Seek your salvation without weariness."
His body was placed upon a grand funeral
pyre. Attempts, ’tis said in the legends of the
event, were made to kindle it, but in vain. It
would not burn. At last it caught fire of itself.
When the body was consumed torrents of water
came down from the sky and arose up from


the earth, and put out the fire just in time to
allow of a considerable number of relics re-
maining among the ashes. A procession was
formed, and these relics were carried to the
city, and there distributed. A collarbone
here, a fragment of the skull there, and, most
precious of all, a gigantic, unsinged, awful,
canine tooth, which was destined to be a literal
bone of contention among the nations in sub-
sequent ages, and the very same, say the
Cingalese, which now rests on a golden lotus
leaf in the shrine of the Dalada at Kandy,
CHAPTER VIII.
WHAT THE BUDDHA TAUGHT.
It remains for me now, as a supplement to
this short biography of the Buddha, to attempt
to give some slight idea of the doctrine which
he taught, and by which he achieved such
singular success. Here, however, at the out-
set, I am met by two difficulties, which are
all but insuperable.
First —Buddhism has changed from age to
age, and has a different aspect, and even a
different creed in the various countries that
profess it. Suppose an enquirer were to
attempt to set forth primitive Christianity,
and in his search for facts were to go in suc-
cession into St. Peter’s at Rome, into a Coptic
Church in Cairo, to attend a sacramental
service in the Scottish Highlands, and
to listen to a Salvation Army prayer meeting,
he would be indeed puzzled to state clearly
what was in very deed the original Christian
system of doctrine and practice. This is
exactly the case with Buddhism. Its worship,
its doctrines, its organization are different,
according as we study them in China or
Ceylon, in Japan, or in Thibet. Even its
doctrinal basis has frequently shifted. It is
generally spoken of as a religion without
God, and a moral creed based on
atheism. With this I cannot agree.
As far as I can get at the evidence


as to what was the character and theology of
original Buddhism it was not altogether
atheistic, nor was its promised reward quite so
featureless as the deep sleep of Nirvana seems
to imply. Atheism is so repugnant to human
nature that I never could understand how such
a non-religion could grow and flourish. The
soul cannot feed on negations. It was a relief
to me to find that the more the subject is
investigated the more human does Buddha’s
teaching seem to have been. The cold
atheism of Buddhism was a subsequent growth,
which was in reality the cause of that inherent
weakness which resulted in its expulsion from
India.
Second —It is exceedingly difficult for the
matter-of-fact western mind to understand the
mental position from which Buddha looked at
things. He set himself, as we do, to puzzle out
the awful problem of sin and suffering, but he
started with the notion that sin and suffering
are inseparable from living. He could not
believe in a happy and blessed life either on
earth or in the heavens. Life, that is con-
scious individual life, must therefore be got
rid of, and a man must learn somehow to
conquer desire and feeling and hope and
ambition, and then he may drop into the
bosom of the infinite, and be no more troubled
by the curse of individuality. Remembering
these initial difficulties we must proceed with
caution and hold our opinions with modesty.
HINDU PROTESTANTISM.
Buddhism was an outgrowth of Brahmin-
ism—a sort of Indian Protestantism. It was
a revolt of the mors spiritual principles of
higher Hinduism against the lower and more
sacerdotal aspect of it. In some things it was
like, in others exceedingly unlike, its parent.
The Prince when he left his home became
a “Yogi,” just like those who may
be met with to-day in Benares or Kali-
ghat, bub he did not remain one. He became
a reformer, and preached against the entire
priestly system of the Brahmins. To under-


stand him and his creed we must remember
that he was brought up in the Hindu doctrine
of the transmigration of souls. This curious
delusion he never doubted. With him it was
fundamental, and needed no proof. He
believed that he himself had been on this earth
many times, and that he had a dim memory of
those days of a far-off past. This succession
of births was the result of an iron
ethical necessity, the outcome of the law
of “Karma,” which neither man, nor the
gods, nor the demons could interfere with.
When he set himself to find the light he really
meant to discover how it was possible for a
soul to escape from Karma and to get rid of
its separate existence and pass into “Nirvana.”
His song of triumph, when he found the light
sitting under the 80-tree at Gaya, seems to us
more like a song of despair. I quote it, as
given by Sir Edwin Arnold, that my readers
may judge for themselves :
Many a house of life hath held me—seeking ever
him who wrought
These prisons of the senses—fraught with sorrow;
Sore was my ceaseless strife.
But now, Thou builder of the tabernacle, Thou!
I know Thee! never shalt Thou build again these
Nor raise the roof-tree of deceit, nor lay
Fresh rafters on the clay;
Broken Thy house is, and the ridge-pole split!
Delusion fashioned it!
Safe pass I thence —deliverance to obtain.
How different this to St. Paul's hymn, “ If
the earthly house of this tabernacle be dis-
solved we have a building of God, a house not
made with hands, eternal in the heavens.” So
different in spirit are these two utterances
that it is hard for either to understand the
other.
The difference between Buddha and the
Brahmin priests now comes out plainly. They
agree in their fundamental positions, but
their pathways now diverge. The Hindu
thought that by making proper use of the
priests and by following their ritual he could
buy the favour of the gods, and so come back


to this world to live a less questionable
life, or else go to one of the heavens.
Buddha replied in effect —“That is no
deliverance at all. Your heaven with the gods
is only a temporary refuge. The soul must
come back to earth some time or other. The
gods, too, are passionate and cruel, and their
heaven is not much better than this world.
There is and can be no rest till the soul is
set free from the awful fear of being born
again, and sinks back into the unfeeling peace
of “ Nirvana.” So it comes to pass that
Buddha brushes aside Brahminism and its
gods because such a religion does not go deep
enough, and he says'that each man must reach
this rest for himself if at all. No brother
man, no priest, no devil, no god can do it for
him. He must make up his own mind
to save himself. People often ask whether
or no Buddhism is atheistic. The
fact is Buddha never troubles himself about
the gods; if they exist they are no better off
than men are. He held to a belief in the one
great vague Deity, who is the uncaused cause
of all, and in whom he would rest at last ;
but his published system was one of practical
morality, whose end was to win deliverance
from personality. He had, however, a heart
of wondrous sympathy and kindness, but he
had no heavenly friend to pray to, no external
life to look forward to, and no divine heart to
beat in sympathy with his own. His very
kindness was an inconsistency, for pity and
love are outbursts of personal life which
sooner or later must be got rid of, as they cause
a disturbing ripple on the ocean of inward
peace. Buddha tells us how he attained
Nirvana when he sat under the 80-tree. To
be consistent he ought then to have died, but,
with a delicious violation of logic he felt so
strong a pity for suffering humanity that he
postponed his entrance into rest for many
years that he “ might preach deliverance and
the unknown light.” He lived within sight, as
it were, of Nirvana, but for our sakes he would
not enter in. It is this wonderful self-sacrifice


which gives the life and character of Buddha
such a mighty influence over hia modern
followers.
BUDDHISM A MOKAL SYSTEM.
It will thus be seen that Buddhism is not,
strictly speaking, a religion at all; it is a
system of practical ethics. It is the deliberate
adoption of certain moral maxims in order that
a man may escape from personality and loosen
the ties that bind him to life. If a man will
abjure vice ; if he will deliberately set himself
by kindliness and virtue to conquer all desire
for life ; if he will crush out or overmaster all
his passions, he will then be rewarded by
passing away into a painless, dreamless,
eternal sleep. The tough bubble of life will at
last be burst and be absorbed into the ocean of
deity. The moral maxims which Buddha
preaches are excellent enough, but we cannot
ignore the strange motive that upholds them.
They are simply the steps by which
a man climbs up or down to Nirvana. As a
code of ethics they have been grafted into all
sorts of creeds, have been wedded to atheism
on the one hand and the worship of devils on
the other; have been compared with the-
teachings of Mohammed and Zoroaster and
Jesus, but it is impossible to sever them from
the mystical goal which they contemplate.
Other systems aim at wellbeing ; this system
aims at nonbeing.
THE TEN COMMANDMENTS.
Some of Buddha’s moral maxims are, how-
ever, very noble. He, too, gave a law consist-
ing of ten commandments. Let us glance at
them, and I will quote from Sir Edwin
Arnold’s poem as the most pleasing present-
ment of them that I know.
1. Kill not for pity’s sake, and lest ye slay
The meanest thing upon its upward way.
This is the Jewish CDmmand, “Thou shalt
not kill,” greatly amplified. As a merciful
maxim it becomes, however, rather absurd
when it comes to be applied to cobras, and


mosquitoes, and fleas, though doubtless, if one
really did believe this doctrine, it would take
away one’s relish even for a dish of genuine
Indian curry to think that one’s great grand-
mother had been incarnate in the sheep which
the butcher had killed and sold away in
pieces, or that a fit of indigestion was the
result of the spiteful toughness of a defunct
enemy. A Buddhist abhors butchering, but
his qualmishness stops with the operation of
killing. If another man does that part of the
business he will do the eating. I was told that
some of them are fond of fish, and that they
quiet their consciences by saying that they do
not kill the fish; they simply take them out of
the wet and then they die of themselves, and
that if they are hooked it is their own doing
and not the fisherman’s.
In the recognised history of a great dedica-
tory feast in the time of the Emperor Asoka
it is gravely asserted that “elks, wild hogs,
and winged game came to the King’s kitchen
of their own accord and then expired,”offering
themselves to be eaten by the faithful.
2. The second maxim is—
Give freely and receive, but take from none
By greed, or force, or fraud what is his own.
With this maxim no one can find fault. In
theory every one admits it and admires it, but
it is one which very few have the courage to
practice. It is opposed at once to all forms of
robbery, commercial scheming, dishonest
trading, and gambling. It cuts at the root
of all greed, miserliness, and stinginess. It is
equally opposed to injustice, to enforced
socialism, and to anarchy. It would sweeten
society by teaching it justice and kindness.
3. Bear not false witness, slander not, nor lie;
Truth is the speech of inward purity.
So runs the third maxim, and none can take
exception thereto, not even if it were carried
into every shop in Adelaide, pervaded every
advertisement in the newspapers, dominated
the share market, and inspired the debates in
Parliament.


A. Shun drugs and drinks which work the wit
abuse;
Clear minds, clean bodies need no somajuice.
Trae to this maxim the Buddhists are, for the
most part, a sober people. I do nob pretend,
however, to explain how the Chinese reconcile
their worship of Buddha with the existence of
their opium dens, or the natives of Ceylon with
their passionate craving for the betelnut or
their liking for cocoanut toddy.
5. The last of these five maxims is nothing
more or less than the tenth of Moses’ Com-
mandments, “Commit no adultery or any
uncleanness. ” For an Oriental teacher to con-
ceive such a high idea of social purity is a
notable achievement. It implies a notion of
the dignity of womanhood such as we do not
find in Brahminism. Under Buddhism woman
is not deemed a mere slave of man. She is
recognised as having rights as well as duties,
and is considered as able as men are “to enter
the holy paths.” Bub this command meant
more than Christian chivalry and gallantry can
endorse. The following conversation between
Buddha and his disciple Ananda will explain
what he meant. If his advice had been carried
out 2,000 years ago I am afraid there would
have been no Buddhists at all to-day to perplex
our ingenuity:—
“ How are we to conduct ourselves, my lord,
with regard to womankind ?”
“ Don’t see them, Ananda.”
“ But if we should happen to see them, what
are we to do ?”
“Abstain from speech with them, Ananda.”
“But if they should speak to us, my lord,
what are we to do ? ”
“ Keep wide awake, Ananda.”
I have set forth the first five out of Buddha’s
ten moral precepts in the words of the poet.
His treatment of this code is a good illustration
of what may be spoken of as the great fault
of his poem, the “stippling of the negative.”
The code really consists of ten commands; but
Arnold omits the remaining five, not because
they are bad or harmful, bub because they are


nob aesthetic. They would be ugly marks upon
she ideal picture he has given us, and because
nob pretty must be “stippled out.” These
omitted inelegant commands are—6. Do nob
eat after midday. 7. Thou shalt not attend
the theatres nor adorn the body with flowers
and perfumes. 8. Thou shalt nob sleep on
any soft material ; nothing beyond a mat
spread on the ground, 9. Thou shalt nob use
high seats or couches. 10. Thou shalt not
wear gold or silver.
These ten commands were intended for the
outside circle of Buddha’s followers. There
were very many more which were meant for
his own band of disciples—his order of the
yellow robe, his great array of monks. They
are, however, all based on those I have already
given, and for me to quote them would be a
needless demand on the patience of casual
readers.
NO BUDDHISM IN INDIA.
It is often a surprise to people to be told
that Buddhism, though an Indian religion,
does nob now exist in India, and that it has
been utterly banished from the land that gave
it birth. The reason for this will now be
apparent. The Hindu system is baaed on
two venerable and strong ideas which
Gautama fought against—the first is priestism ;
the second is caste. The privileges of the
dominant party rested on these two founda-
tions, and if they were undermined the super-
structure was bound to fall. Though very
successful at first the movement of Buddha
provoked a ritualistic reaction. Priestism has
a strange fascination for mankind in every
clime, and India is no exception. And so it
came to pass that by degrees the old Brah-
minism reasserted itself, and, partly by force,
and partly by its assumption of sacerdotal
authority, and partly by a policy of absorption,
it completely obliterated Buddhism in India.
Some of the Buddhist Assemb'y Halls were
converted into Hindu shrines, others were
neglected and allowed to fall into ruins, and
the sacred literature of Gautama was for-


gotten. The reformer himself was raised to a
sort of divine rank, and was called an incar-
nation of Vishnu, which was an innocent way
of doing him homage, and made the reaction
easier against his teaching. Mohammedanism
also has done much to assist in absorbing
Buddhism, for it was manifestly easier for a
Buddhist to accept the monotheistic doctrine
of the prophet than for a Hindu. This was
especially the case in Bengal, and explains the
existence there of such a number of Moslems,
who do not even pretend to have any Arabian
blood in them. However we may explain it
the fact remains that if we would understand
the creed of Buddha we must seek our infor-
mation in the outer circle of countries into
which its zealous missionaries carried his
movement, and expect to find nothing of it in
the land of its birth except some wonderful
rock temples and some remains of its dagobas
and shrines in the remoter regions of the
interior.
CHAPTER IX.
“THE LIGHT OF THE WORLD.”
Two Famous Poems.
In the course of writing these papers I have
frequently made reference to Sir Edwin
Arnold’s “Light of Asia.” That poem, in
spite of its manifest preference for what is
artistic rather than for hard uninteresting
facts, remains the clearest and best picture of
the Buddha that exists in our own or, indeed,
any other language. It is a work of real
genius, and will always rank as an English
classic and as one of the imperishable monu-
ments of the Victorian age of literature. Its
delicate diction will make it always a favourite
among lovers of art, while its translucent
beauty will commend it to the “ general
reader,” who does not relish being com-
pelled to puzzle over what he is reading for
mere delectation, and to study a poem
as he would a mathematical problem.


No one can read this poem without
being charmed. The art of this artist in
words is almost perfect. He succeeds in
telling a story in which truth and
legend are so exquisitely blended that
it is impossible to say where the one begins
and the other ends. After reading his book
one feels that it would be a vandalism to touch
the picture with the sharp sword of criticism,
just as it would be cruel to throw a doubt on
the story of Wilhelm Tell after reading
Schiller’s play, and after sailing past Tell’s
Chapel, and after standing on the very spot
amid the eternal hills where the brave man
shot the arrow through the heart of the apple
on his son’s head. Arnold’s book should, how-
over, be read as poetry, not as a history. It
is a picture, not a biography. Just as Sir
Walter Scott dresses up the character of Mary
Queen of Soots to suit his fancy, and gently
alters history to make it fall in with his
{esthetic purpose, so does Arnold sketch for us
an ideal Buddha, and quietly twists or omits
facts to make the ideal more interesting. The
result is very beautiful, but must be received
with caution;
His book reminds me continually of one of
those familiar but marvellous productions of a
modern photographer. The operator takes a
picture. It is a capital picture, but there is, it
may be, a wart on the chin, or some crowsfeet
marks at the corners of the eyes, and these are
unpleasant defects, however true. They must
be removed forthwith by a delicate process
called “stippling the negative.” After that
has been carefully done pictures can be struck
■off by the score, very like and yet very unlike
the original. The sitter hardly knows him-
self, and yet his friends are proud of the
result. Nobody can mistake the face. It is
very like Mr, Brown or Mr. Jones, but still
there is a doubt, for nobody ever saw the real
Jones without the wart, or the real Mrs.
Brown without the rayed wrinkles. Sir
Edwin Arnold has been guilty of the artistic
crime of “ stippling” his negative. He makes


a better picture but a worse likeness. If
Buddha were a mere mythical person like
Arthur of England, “ the blameless King and
stainless gentleman,” no one would complain ;
bub as Buddha was a real man, who played no
small part in history, what we demand first of
all is absolute truthfulness. I hold that no
author when dealing with actual personages
has any right to alter facts to suit his fancy.
If he is writing a pure fiction let him do as he
likes with his characters, but if he is teaching
the records of the past he should never let the
instructor be lost in the artist.
The general and substantial truthfulness as
well as the popularity of this poem is shown
in the fact that it has been translated by
Buddhist scholars into more than one of
the languages of Asia. They look upon it
as a better presentment of their founder and
his doctrine for use among the more cultured
youth of Ceylon and Japan than any other
book, and they hail it as a manifest proof
that their religion is better and truer than
ours, that a great Christian scholar should
write such a book. Many readers both in the
East and the West have, however, misunder-
stood this poem by forgettiner the standpoint
which the artist has selected. They treat it
as the utterance of Sir Edwin himself, spoken
from the midst of his nineteenth century in-
vestigations. The author never intended this,
any more than Sir Walter Scott intended that
the opinions and thoughts of the autobiographic
authorof Rob Roy should be deemed as his own.
The assumed author is an imaginary Indian
Buddhist devotee, who lived some few hundred
years after the death of the great reformer, and
who was both an ardent admirer of his Master
and a credulous believer in the legendary accre-
tions which had gathered round the story of his
life. He is an Oriental who has no taint of
Western scepticism in his thinkings. He see*
everything through a haze of myth, and crowns
his hero with a halo of renown which is as
lovely but as unsubstantial as a rainbow.
The poet identities himself so completely with


this imaginary Eastern singer that one loses,
sight of the modern scholar, and thinks only of
the picture that is drawn. The work is not,
however, simply a dramatic picture. There is
a great deal of the author’s own self in it, for
he says in his introduction that “ the
views here indicated of ‘Nirvana,’ ‘Dharma,’
‘Karma,’ and the other chief features of
Buddhism are at least the fruits of consider-
able study, and also of a firm conviction that
a third of mankind would never have been
brought to believe in blank abstractions or in
nothingness as the issue and crown of Being.”
With the first part of this sentence all must
agree. The easy rhythm of the poem is
really the result of much concealed
hard reading. The second part is
more open to criticism; but the truth
is that the Oriental mind does not seek to
encrib its thoughts in the iron frame of strict
logic, and breaks asunder the cords of the
syllogism, just as Samson, the Hebrew hero,
snapped the “seven green wyths” that Delilah
employed to bind him with.
“the light op the world.”
Since Arnold wrote the “ Light of Asia” he
has given the world another book which he
ealls “The Light of the World.” This is
neither more nor less than a poetic picture of
the life and death of Jesus of Nazareth. The
very title suggests a comparison between “ the
Buddha” and “the Christ,” and the narrative
perpetually invites us to carry this com-
parison into details. This second book is
quite equal to his earlier effort in literary
merit. Its music, its vivid picturing, and its
dramatic tenderness are as sweet and as fas-
cinating as is the account of Buddha. It will,
however, never be so popular ; partly because
the theme was lacking in novelty, and
partly because the poet had not such
a free hand in interweaving romantic
legends with the story. His own reve-
rence for the Christ compelled him to
adopt a severe simplicity in his narra-
tive. His readers, also, would have resented


the introduction of too much material from
such sources as the “ Gospel of Nicodemus” or
the “ Gospel of the Infancy” as an insult to their
faith and an outrage on their taste. The
modern Christian is too much of a critic to
endure such a treatment of the Gospel story as
the artist has given of the vaguer story of
Gautama. The poet understood both his own
heart and the feelings of his readers too well
to attempt such a thing.
“ WISE MEN FROM THE EAST.”
Arnold’s “ Light of the World” has, how-
ever, Buddhism for a background. He gives
wings to his imagination in telling how “wise
men from the East” came to pay their homage
to the Babe of Bethlehem, and describes these
Magi as a company of ardent Buddhists, who
Gaze, hand in hand, with faces grave and mild,
Where, mid the gear and goats, mother and child
Make state and splendour for their eyes.
They make their “eight prostrations” in
orthodox Buddhist fashion and present their
gifts, and, with their foreheads in the dust,
worship the babe. As they depart they say to
each other:—
The Buddha again
Appeareth, or some Bdddhisat of might
Arising for the West, who shall set right,
And serve and reconcile: and maybe teach
Knowledge to those who know.
The orthodox tradition of the Roman
Church tells us that these wise men were
Zoroasterian in creed, and that after their visit
to Bethlehem they did not go back to their own
country, but went as missionaries to the
regions of the lower Rhine-land. There they
were martyred, and the Cathedral of
Cologne is their monument, within which
their skulls are to be seen to this
day adorned with crowns of priceless jewels.
Arnold has completely altered the background,
and in my opinion he has abundant grounds
for so doing. The evidence of the prevalence
of Buddhist teaching in Western Asia about
the beginning of the Christian era is con-
tinually increasing, and is throwing fresh light


on the tangled problem of the ecclesias-
tical tendencies of that interesting age.
The poet's use of his licence in
making the magi to be Buddhists
from India is quite legitimate and natural.
These wise men go back to their own country,
India, and there they live for the next thirty
years. Two of them die, and the third, now a
very old man, once again visits Palestine. He
has heard in his distant home vague rumours
of the teaching of Jesus, he has been told that
this new Buddha had been despised and
rejected by his own countrymen, and finally
cruelly murdered. He is possessed with a
restless desire to learn the truth concerning
these rumours. He cannot believe that a life,
heralded by angelic songs, can have issued
in hopeless disaster and defeat. He will
visit Bethlehem once again, and worship in
sorrow the martyred hero. He is directed to
Galilee, and there on the shores of the lake he
meets with Mary of Magdala, and lodges in
her hospitable abode for many days. From her
he learns the story of Jesus, what he taught,
what wondrous deeds he did, how he was
betrayed and crucified and buried, and how he
rose again from the dead, and appeared once
more as a teacher.
THE HOME OF THE MAGDALENE.
The individual incidents of this story as told
by the grateful Magdalene are of wondrous
beauty. They are delicately cut like literary
cameos. They tempt the reader to pause and
think and read over again. They make the
old familiar gospel incidents to glow with new
meaning and lustre. The venerable sage
drinks it all in with avidity. He can hadly
believe his ears, and his philosophic calm is
almost broken by his enthusiastic indignation
over the tragedy of Golgotha. He compares
every word, every miracle, every parable, with
his own accepted Indian creed. His previously
adopted ideal is the Buddha, and he measures
all thereby. Slowly, but surely, as
the rising sun overwhelms with its


strong glory the pale radiance of the moon,
the conviction arises in the sage’s mind
that if Buddha was good Christ was better,
that the exquisite law of Buddha was surpassed
by the yet purer law of Jesus, that the doctrine
of Buddha concerning sin and sorrow must
pale before the doctrine of the Great Redeemer,
and that the passionless peace of Nirvana was
but a cold comfort compared with the “ many
mansions” of “my Father’s house” spoken of
by the Christ.
Now,” says he, “ do these lucent words kindle a
Brighter than what we took from Buddha’s lore.”
It would be foreign to my purpose to attempt
a general review of this remarkable poem.
There is scarcely an incident in the four Gospels
that does not reappear in its pages, and some
of the characters which only flit across the
pages of the New Testament are given us by
the poet with much elaboration. Pilate’s wife,
“ who suffered many things in a dream be-
cause of Jesus the daughter of Jairus, who
came back from the mystic realms of death;,
and the Magdalene herself pass before
us as living pictures adorned with much
rich Oriental detail. It would be difficult to
justify critically all the conclusions to which
our author leads us on such points as the re-
lationships of the family at Bethany, and the
share that Lazarus takes in the gospel story
but in none of these things does he transgress
the bounds of poetic licence. He has ibut
added an unexpected charm to the story he is
telling us.
THE RETURN HOME.
For seven days Mary entertains her vener-
able Buddhist guest, and meanwhile he has
been almost a silent listener. We only get a
glimpse into his mind’s working by an occa-
sional sentence. But when the story is all
told and the grateful sage is about to turn
again towards his Eastern home we find him.
saying


I do discern that, forth from this fair life,
And this meek death, and thine arisen Christ,
Measureless things are wrought—a thought-dawn
born
Which shall not cease to broaden till its beam
Makes neon of knowledge for a gathered world,
Completing what our Buddha left unsaid,
Carpeting bright his noble eight-fold way
With fragrant blossoms of all-renouncing love,
And bringing high Nirvana nearer hope,
Easier and plainer.
Thus this Oriental wise man is drawn into the
worshipping of Jesus. His loyalty to Buddha
compels him to be loyal to Christ. He recog-
nises that a greater master than the one whom
he has reverenced so sincerely has risen upon
the world, and before Him he bows the head.
Arnold is too great a master of poetic art to
spoil his picture by any dramatic story of
a “conversion.” Such an ending to
his narrative would utterly disturb that
deep suggestiveness of untold meanings
which marks every great work of art, whether
the instrument employed in its production
be the brush of the painter or the pen of the
poet. We see the reverend Buddhist going
back to his home to meditate on a life nobler
than Gautama’s, a doctrine more true and
tender than the iron law of Kharma, a hope
brighter and purer than the awful peace of
Nirvana, and a promise of a possible exten-
sion of personality which renders the whole
philosophy of Buddha nugatory and vain. He
had found in Buddha a grand morality, but he
has found in Christ the same morality made
yet grander, and on finding it he has
grasped the hand of an eternal Divine Father,
and has seen the way opened to an immortality
of blessed service and profound blissfulness.
Buddhism was but a resting-place by the road-
side for the weary pilgrim; Christianity has
proved itself by the sublime marvel of the
resurrection to be a revelation of the possibility
of everlasting life in the social mansions of
heaven.
“If death—the Indian said—be dead indeed,
Be dead in knowing that one human soul


Once laid tlie flesh aside, and went and came,
Taking it up again, then am I answered.
Then thy Master wrought
Better than Buddha, showing the world beyond
Where men shall find their treasure of good works
Laid up in trust, awaiting; loss made gain;
The Kingdom come.”
The conclusion to which a comparison of
these two poems thus lead us is, I feel con-
vinced, the true one. The world owes a great
debt of gratitude to Sir Edwin Arnold for
teaching us this lesson so beautifully. I would
that the Christian Church would learn his
lesson. There is so much that is noble and
good in Buddhism that it is false to speak of
Buddhism as one would of the worship of the
Indian Pantheon. Every missionary who
attempts to proclaim in Thibet or Ceylon or
Japan the doctrine of Jesus should begin by
himself feeling and acknowledging the good
that lies at the root of all Buddhist teachings.
He need not be afraid to do this. His
Christianity is too great to be injured by a
concession which is forced upon him if
he will be an honest enquirer. It
is a magnificent acted prophecy which
carries the conviction of its own fulfilment,
and blessed are they who are called to be its
ambassadors. Lptthem magnify their office and
not belittle it by manifesting an unChristlike
narrowness of soul and a weak inability to see
how God has spoken to the Asian world
through the Buddha, and in due time will
speak again through Jesus, the risen one.
I conclude by quoting Arnold’s version of
the Christmas anthem, which is in truth the
text of his poem:
Love, which is sunlight of peace.
Age by age to increase,
Till augers and hates are dead,
And sorrow and death shall cease.
“ Peace on earth and good will!”
Souls that are gentle and still
Hear the first music of this
Far off infinite bliss!


