

BUILDING SOIL FERTILITY
in
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
Subterranean Clover
\ «£, AW-Jr




Issued by the
COMMONWEALTH BANK OF AUSTRALIA
The opinions expressed herein are those of the authors
and are not necessarily shared by the Commonwealth Bank
July, 1950


NEW FRONTIERS
It seems anomalous that, at this stage in the history of South Australia,
so much is being done to develop land in the higher rainfall areas of
the State. Yet to-day, 114 years after the first settlers arrived, all effort at
new development is being concentrated in rainfall areas of eighteen inches
or over. What is more, the efforts are meeting with unqualified success and
a veritable agricultural revolution is under way.
The explanation unfolds a story of new knowledge relating to the
soils the use to which they can be put and the manner and means whereby
they can be brought into production. The results of agricultural research
the use of better agricultural machines and implements, unth powerful
tractors as their hand-maidens, have opened up new possibilities, revitalised
interest in poor scrub-land soils and fired with enthusiasm all those who pin
their faith in the scientific approach to agriculture. The results of years of
research, experience and yes, trials and tribulations, successes and failures,
are being recognised and acknowledged as never before. No longer have
we false hopes of doing impossible things m regions where both water
resources and rainfall are limited. No longer are we tolerant of the
exploitive, soil-destroying methods of the past or the avaricious o
stocking of our native bush and pastures. Australian agriculture m the
older settled areas is growing up, and adolescent nonsense is giving way o
reasonable, steady adult consideration of the sod, its sMscepfofttWws, ftf
importance as the production medium, not only for to-day, but for the
future as well. The development of virgin country, and neglected countrj
l in the higher rainfall areas, by comparison, is a strapping youngster,
anxious to get on with life and grow in stature, as it will, in the modern
age of science and labour-saving devices. Agriculturally as in so marry other
wans the principle of scientific approach and application has been firmly
ZabllZdZwJis most heartening, it is being widely recognised and
accepted by Australia’s new generation of farmers.
This is Australia’s answer to dismal forebodings of “a
Vfrrt'’ Let us be up and doing instead of wringing our hands and wailing
over the inexcusable excesses of the past. Put faith in the enlightened
generation who are prepared, anxious and capable of applying all that
ideZTZ to the new andbetter agriculture. Let us go on with
'renewed enthusiasm, reasoned and rational scientific methods, and the
future of our agriculture will be assured.
A. R. CALLAGHAN.


CONTENTS
LAND DEVELOPMENT IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA
by A. B. CALLAGHAN,
Director of Agriculture and Chairman
of the Land Development Executive Page 4
PRIVATE ENTERPRISE APPLIES THE FINDINGS
OF SCIENCE
by W. S. KELLY Page 8
SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH INTO SOIL FERTILITY
IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA
by J. A. PRESCOTT,
Director, Waite Agricultural Research
Institute Page 13


LAND DEVELOPMENT IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA
by ALLAN R. CALLAGHAN
Director of Agriculture and
Chairman of the Land Development Executive
A SOUTH AUSTRALIAN SAGA
Scientific, technical and technological advances have
enabled South Australia to look anew at lands which
formerly were tried and found wanting—lands which,
when wheat was the great pioneer, were by-passed
because the soils were too poor. Within fifty miles of
Adelaide, good rainfall country in the Mt. Compass,
Victor Harbour districts has been developed by
private enterprise during the last fifteen years,
with strikingly successful results. Here was an area
of scrub in one of the oldest settled regions of the
State, next door as it were to Adelaide market, yet
people were clearing scrub in the drier areas of the
mallee and Eyre Peninsula. In the meantime the
Southern Hills area lay comparatively neglected. The
soils were poor and the pioneer crop, wheat, could
not be grown economically. Now we have subter-
ranean clover, a fresh and vigorous pioneer—a mere
youth compared with the ancient Triticum. Given the
essential encouragement it needs from liberal dress-
ings of superphosphate, and in some cases from a
trace of copper, of zinc or a combination of the two,
in other cases from an addition of molybdenum, then
subterranean clover will work wonders as a direct
medium of production and as an unsurpassed soil
building agent at the same time.
Southern South Australia, showing areas in the higher
rainfall areas where development is in progress or
contemplated. By courtesy of Dr. Callaghan.
The advent of subterranean clover and its proper
feeding with fertiliser is by no means the whole story.
When scrub was cleared for wheat growing in the
early days, the regrowth of shoots meant that gum
leaves were often harvested with the grain. The idea
was to grow tall wheat varieties, so that the regrowth
would not interfere much with harvest, and the heavy
straw growth would give a more satisfactory burn.
For after the crop was grown, the stubble was burnt
to destroy the shoots. These were the days before
the present superb mechanical aids were available.
Rollers drawn by horses and even bullocks were used
to fell the scrub and the ploughs were not capable of
getting under the stumps and rooting them out. The
stump-jump plough was an invention to meet this
very problem. Now-a days the caterpillar tractor,
with scrub rollers or logs, can cope with very dense
and heavy scrub thickets. Then the first ploughing
with the modern large disc ploughs aided by the enor-
mous power of the present-day tractor makes it pos-
sible to plough stumps and associated vegetation clean
out. These ploughs, based on the stump-jump prin-
ciple, do extraordinary work. There is no doubt that
the large disc ploughs of South Australian manufac-
ture have contributed more to effective scrub clearing
than any other single factor.
Having invented methods and mechanical aids
which make the clearing of large areas of scrub both
practical and efficient, and having put to use the
extremely capable soil-building characteristics of sub-
terranean clover, experience indicated that real suc-
cess in the conversion of scrub to pasture was assured.
There were still a few headaches. The chief of these
was the time required to get payable results. To roll
the scrub, burn and plough, then re-plough, sow to
seed and superphosphate, all cost money, lots of it,
and the results from a monetary point of view over
the first few years caused a nasty jolt, and one, be it
said, that shook both enthusiasm and financial
resources almost to breaking point, Unless backed
with plenty of money, this patient waiting while the
effects of phosphate and subterranean clover built up
the soil, often caused men to falter and fail just when
they were on the threshold of success. What is more,
in order to do the job as cheaply as possible, the initial
ploughing was often ineffectively done and regrowth
of shoots and yacca were a constant threat and
menace to the future.
For the past twenty years a wealth of valuable, if
bitter experience has been obtained. Even though the
major problems were overcome in some localities, dis


tressing difficulties were encountered in establishing
the otherwise easily grown subterranean clover.
Research work has disclosed that molybdenum is
required in some areas, notably the Southern Hills;
copper in others, such as Kangaroo Island; and cop-
per and zinc in the heath scrub soils of the South-
East and latterly in the Upper South-East on the
Ninety-Mile Plain.
Experience on the financial side of converting
scrub to pasture Avas provided by many Avho had
tackled the job. On the face of things it looked as
though it Avas a rich man’s job. To get accurate and
reliable figures of cost from those Avho had failed and
even from those who had succeeded, was easier said
than done. The thing to do then Avas to carry out a
decent sized developmental project and see what it
cost and get first-hand experience of the problems
involved. To this end the Government authorised the
development of 550 acres of scrub on Kangaroo Island
in the centre of a huge area of similar country.
All the modern mechanical aids were commissioned
and subterranean clover and plenty of superphos-
phate plus copper were used. Figures covering all
costs Avere accurately kept. The area was judiciously
grazed. After carrying to 2 sheep to the acre for
the last five years, it has been possible to determine
the true economic possibilities and define the prob-
lems that are likely to be confronted before probable
returns meet known liabilities. This large-scale
experiment was successful on Kangaroo Island and
was in fact a very necessary preliminary to under-
taking full scale development of an area of 280,000
acres. This work is now Avell under way.
Another such area is being used as a pilot experi-
ment in scrub-lands just south of Keith in a typical
mallee-broom area of the Ninety-Mile Plain. It is
from the results of such Avork that the practical and
financial possibilities of developing the country can
be determined. To tackle large scale development
without first testing the possibilities in this way would
be risky and unsound.
The process of converting large areas of scrub to
pasture is more modern than might at first be sup-
posed. In fact, agriculturally, Ave can Avell use the
adjective new. The neAv methods represent a saga of
South Australian initiative and resourcefulness. To
begin Avith, both the use of superphosphate and sub-
terranean clover AArere first successfully sponsored by
South Australia. The stump-jump plough is a South
Australian invention and the large modern disc
plough for scrub clearing is the product of South
Australian industry. The minor-element problems
associated with our soils and livestock husbandry
have been solved by South Australian research
workers. The economics of development and the
problem of meeting the time factor involved, have led
this State to put into operation a land development
scheme as sound and modern as experience has been
able to devise.
There is no doubt that the large disc, stump-jump
ploughs of South Australian manufacture have con-
tributed more to effective scrub clearing than any
other single factor.” By courtesy of Dr. Callaghan.
A NEW APPROACH TO DEVELOPMENT AND
SETTLEMENT
It was obvious that land settlement in South Aus-
tralia was to be given a new lease of life. The
experience of the past had shown that agricultural
settlement had gone too far into the low rainfall
areas. The “marginal’ ’ lands problem had been
created and. far from advancing further, a strategic
retreat was necessary. Not only that, but our soil
conservators must go out and attempt to heal, or at
least allay, the mortal consequences of wounds ruth-
lessly inflicted on a countryside deprived of its
natural defence. The sweat and tears, the bitter
struggle and, indeed, the great sacrifice of some of
the finest human effort was largely in vain. While
too much was expected of the country, even more
was expected of the settlers themselves.
Now, after years of experience, science and indus-
try were enabling us to look at thousands of acres
of scrub-lands m the podsolised soil regions of higher
rainfall with a veritable gleam in our eye.
Capital to tackle the job of clearing the scrub with
the utmost efficiency, and time to enable the soil-
building influences of subterranean clover and super-
phosphate to do their work. It Avas a job that
required above all a scientific approach if the best and
most economical results were to be obtained and
unnecessary human sacrifices avoided.
The Government of South Australia, realising the
need for a revieAv of previous closer settlement policy
in the light of the new possibilities, appointed a Crown


“Now-a-days the caterpillar tractor, with scrub rollers
or logs, can cope with very dense and heavy scrub
thickets.” By courtesy of Dr. Callaghan.
Lands Development Committee early in 1942. As the
effects of the work and recommendations made by this
Committee were applied, a more substantial organisa-
tion became necessary. The Committee was reconsti-
tuted the Land Development Executive in 1945.
From then on, a well-staffed organisation was built
up and the foundational phases of the work gave way
to an action programme that really got under way
when the first tractors arrived and were put into
commission in March, 1946.
The exploratory phase of the work had led to the
passing of the Crown Lands Development Act of
1943 which established the important principle of
empowering the Minister of Lands to clear and
improve Crown lands, or lands purchased by the
Crown, before actual allotment. The idea behind the
Act was to enable the State to undertake at least
partial development so that the incoming settler
would be able to make a living and meet his commit-
ments from the outset. This policy grew out of the
slow and often wasteful results obtained previously
by leaving the actual development entirely to the
individual. The usual story was one of financial
struggle, accompanied by hit or miss methods which
were frequently exaggerated by the desire, and neces-
sity in most cases, of obtaining quick returns.
Soon after the passing of the 1943 Act, the Com-
monwealth Commission on Rural Reconstruction sub-
mitted a report to the Commonwealth Government
which followed very closely the principles set down in
the Crown Lands Development Act of 1943. The South
Australian Parliament consummated these ideas fur-
ther by the passing of the War Service Land Settle-
ment Agreement Act in 1945. When these Acts were
passed, an impartial examination of the circumstances
leading to their enactment disclosed that their pro-
visions aimed essentially to meet the mistakes and
shortcomings of previous policy. The Executive has
since then accepted this policy and set about its
attainment as an ideal which has been a guide and
beacon since the beginning.
Here was exciting work to be done, a national
achievement in the making; something worth doing
and worth doing well —a new deal in land settlement
policy: converting unproductive scrub-land to pro-
ductive pastures, putting idle land to good and proper
use, stimulating others to do likewise, making farms
for men who deserved them, and putting stability,
security and contentment into the lives of hundreds
of new settlers, their wives and families.
The task has not been easy. Land had to be
acquired and surveyed. The appointment of techni-
cally trained staff, the procurement of plant and the
marshalling of resources in the way of materials for
structural improvements, seed and fertiliser, the
employment of labour and provision of camps and
workshops, had to be accomplished at a time when
everything was in short supply. In spite of this, great
strides have been made and a new era of land develop-
ment in the State is now well under way. At the
time of writing, the Executive is able to record that
iu all it has had land referred to it sufficient for the
making of some 600 farms. In the South-East of the
State, 194,000 acres have been subdivided into 340
farms of which some 200 have been already allocated
or allotted under the War Service Land Settlement
Scheme. On Eyre Peninsula, 98,000 acres have been
subdivided and made into 70 farms, all of which
have been allocated. On Kangaroo Island,, some
280,000 acres of virgin scrub-lands are now in the
course of development and in the long run should
provide about 200 farms. The first 50 of these will
be allocated to selected applicants in the course of the
next twelve months.
The outstanding feature of this work is that it is
primarily creative. While the Executive has dealt
with a few estates which are well developed, by far
the greatest part of the work has been and is being
carried out on under-developed and undeveloped
lands. Country in under-developed areas has been
brought from token production to production levels
four to five times as great as at the time of allotment.
What is more, farms are made and foundations laid
which will lead to further increases in production by
the settler to the extent of their full economic
potential. Undeveloped areas and huge acreages
are involved —are being brought into production foi
the first time. Miles of scrub-land that formerly had
no claim to production, or at most a sheep to ten to
twenty acres, is being rapidly brought to the stage of
carrying If to even 2 sheep per acre. The South
Australian effort is therefore not one that involves
merchandising in farms. It is not an effort implying
mere change of ownership, or the putting in of two


settlers where one was before; it is a clear case of
absolute increase in farms and production. Two
hundred men will farm on Kangaroo Island ivhere
none farmed before. To a lesser extent the same
applies to the South-East and Eyre Peninsula, but in
all areas farms in numbers have been created out of
former scrub-lands. At Wanilla on Eyre Peninsula,
for instance, over 30 men are already farming on land
which five years ago was a sea of scrub as far as the
eye could see. On Eight Mile Creek in the South-East
4,500 acres of swamp land densely covered with almost
impenetrable ti-tree 12 to 18 feet high have been
cleared and pastured for the benefit of over 30 dairy
farmers. Most of this country will now carry from f
to 1 cow to the acre without any doubt. So that, far
from the scheme being merely one of closer settlement,
it is one of great national significance which is leading
to and achieving very substantial increases in the
State’s production of wool, fat lambs, meat and dairy
produce.
Four years’ experience with an action programme
of great magnitude, in a rapidly changing world, has
had salutary and mellowing effects and led to tantalis-
ing developments—salutary, in that unpredicted
shortages and difficulties had to be cheerfully over-
come, mellowing in that rigid plans had to be made
elastic, and tantalising in that fulfilment of aims and
objects have been deferred, but not defeated.
There have been moments of deep satisfaction, but
the Executive is the first to admit that the attainment
of the original ideal has been seriously upset by the
shortage of resources and building contractors and
tradesmen willing to work under isolated camp con-
ditions in the country. The clamour for quick and
spectacular settlement was incompatible with the cir-
cumstances of the time. With feverish anxiety the
Executive struggled to gain resources it so urgently
needed to maintain the momentum of its work and
thereby match with results the anticipated popular
demand for quick results.
Agriculturally, the work has proceeded as far as
resources, staff and general man-power would allow.
Structurally, plans have gone awry, through no fault
of the Executive or the supporting administrations,
hut simply because the Australian coal and steel
industries have failed to provide the wherewithal as
required. Never at any time, so far, has the Executive
been able to proceed without the impeding influence
of one or several limiting factors. Fencing material,
galvanised iron, troughing, water piping, are a few
of the commodities that have constantly inflicted irri-
tating and damaging delays on the organisation’s
plans.
In spite of all the delays and irritating frustrations
which have been the lot of the organisation, by and
large the community is beginning to accept the suc-
cess of this mass scale attack on development with
modern up-to-date aids. It has been accepted as a
reflex of the times, rather than for what it is, a really
enterprising effort on the part of South Australia to
fill its developabie spaces as rapidly and as efficiently
as circumstances will allow. It is significant that
private enterprise, in this instance, is following in the
wake of Government initiative and, seeing the possi-
bilities of such large-scale attacks, is now ready to
exploit the possibilities in other undeveloped areas
which beckon their attention.
The tremendous development that is taking place in
the Meningie, Coonalpyn, Tintinara and Keith areas
of the Ninety-Mile Plain by private enterprise is both
encouraging and satisfying. Encouraging in that the
findings of science and the methods of clearing and
development are being accepted by those with the
necessary financial backing, and satisfying in that
Governmental effort is being supplemented by large
worth-while efforts sponsored and financed by private
enterprise. The sum total of the efforts must lead to
the ultimate development of all the land capable of
such development in the State. The era of expansion
in cereal growing is over and the new era of pasture
development well on the way to fulfilment.
On the podsolised soils of the scrub-lands being
handled, nature is inexorable in her demand for time,
and economical and lasting results can only be
obtained by being patient. The scrub-lands of'Kan-
garoo Island, the Ninety-Mile Plain, or the heath
plains of the South-East cannot be made to grow
pasture, permanently and securely, in the short space
of a couple of years. TIME in capital letters is as
much a factor in the developmental process as any
other. Given TIME, the knowledge and aids at the
disposal of those responsible will not only convert the
scrub to pasture but also assure that pasture will lead
to prosperity.
Ti-tree barrier after drainage but before clearing
operations began. By courtesy of Dr. Callaghan.


PRIVATE ENTERPRISE APPLIES THE FINDINGS OF SCIENCE
During the last decade big steps have been taken
in South Australia towards building up the fertility of
very poor soils. In this article I give examples of
three areas where this is being done. In each case the
farmer has been greatly assisted by the work of the
scientist. Those of us whose job is to apply the
findings of science to agriculture pay a ready tribute
to the help we have received in land development over
the last ten years; it is only through the findings of
science that these developmental projects have been
made possible.
by W. S. KELLY
KANGAROO ISLAND EXPERIMENT
When H. W. Robinson and my son took up adjoin-
ing properties some twenty-five miles west of Kings-
cote, Kangaroo Island, in 1935, there followed the
wagging of many wise heads. We were reminded of
the extreme poverty of the soil. It was said, “success-
ful settlement has been established long since in the
more fertile parts of the Island but these ironstone
plateau soils are almost impossible !” Still, we thought
we would have a try. We knew something of what
sub-clover had done in other areas of low fertility;
moreover, the rainfall was reliable at about 23 in.
and the climate mild. But we had our share of teeth-
ing troubles. A technique had to be developed to roll
down the thick scrub of eucalypt, casuarina, yacca and
broombush. After this had dried out it was burned
and the country ploughed with heavy disc stump-
jump ploughs. Later this was worked down and sown
to sub-clover and grass mixtures.
A couple of months after my son had sown his
first ton of clover seed he wrote to say that the leaves
were turning queer colours and curling up. I flew
over to inspect and sure enough the plants were
dying. I went immediately to see Professor Prescott
at the Waite Agricultural Research Institute and he
showed me the recently found answer. Clover plants
in some pots of Kangaroo Island soil Avere looking just
as sick as ours while others were vigorous and
healthy. The difference was due to the presence or
absence of bacteria: where the plants had been inocu-
lated they were healthy while, where this was not
done, they were dying. In our anxiety not to carry
the lucerne flea to Kangaroo Island, we had purchased
our clover seed “dressed and polished”. That dis-
posed of the lucerne flea but at the same time mur-
dered the little bacteria so essential to the life
Developmental work on Kangaroo Island from the air—-scrub in the foreground, logged and burnt areas
and in the centre, areas which have been ploughed. By courtesy of Dr. Callaghan.


of the clover. The Waite Institute supplied the
culture for inoculation and following the urgent
advocacy of T. H. Strong the practice of inocula-
tion soon became widespread, with the result that
the clover grew healthily. It would appear that,
provided the clover seed is not' ‘ dressed and polished
but the dust allowed to adhere to the seed, the bac
teria will be carried into the soil and inoculation made
unnecessary. We are seeking more experiment on
this issue.
After getting a reasonable acreage down to pasture,
a flock of ewes was purchased. Just before lambing
time, however, we heard stories of lambs in that area
developing a stiffness in their hind .joints which
ruined their growth and often caused their death.
Ataxia it was called. I went to Dr. L. B. Bull, Chief
of the Animal Health Division of the Commonwealth
Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation. He
told me that particular area was noted for severe
cases of ataxia. They were not sure of the cause but
were working upon it and would let me know as soon
as they got a lead. A few weeks later Bull sent word
that Dr. Bennett of Western Australia had reported
cures at Gin Gin by giving doses of copper sulphate
and that trials in Victoria had confirmed these findings.
We were recommended to mix a certain proportion
of powdered blue stone in the licks. The copper was
thus made available to the ewes before they lambed
and no ataxia has developed since then. Moreover,
the lambs thrived excellently.
Spectacular results had already been obtained by
H. R. Marstone and others of the Bio-chemistry
Division of the C.5.1.R.0. in widespread areas
deficient in certain minor elements. The dosing of
cobalt to sheep grazed on this country had cured
the long dreaded ‘ ‘ coast disease ’ \ This work had led
the scientists to suspect copper deficiency and work
was then being conducted which showed that copper
deficiency was indeed widespread and that steeliness
of the wool was an indicator. Experiments on Kan-
garoo Island showed significant results from the
application of 7 lbs. of powdered blue stone per acre,
which dose has proved adequate over a number of
years. The application of copper to the soil greatly
added to the capacity of the clover to form seeds and
thus safeguarded the permanent establishment of the
pasture.
These applications of the findings of science, toge-
ther with the improved technique of scrub rolling
and subsequent cultivation, made possible by securing
more powerful track-laying tractors, have resulted
in the establishment of excellent pastures upon soils
previously thought to be too poor to develop. My son
would claim no priority of performance on his pro-
perty. Many have done just as well and some, with
greater resources, have done much better. Outstand-
ing among the latter is A. J. Mcßride who has
turned poor scrub into a most prolific pasture.
There is no doubt that great stretches of the Island
Southern South Au Jr alia; area of CSIRO soil survey of 1944. CSIRO map by courtesy of Mr. Kelly


are being built up so that they will carry two sheep
and more per acre. Encouraged by the evidence now
readily available, many settlers are busy extending
their pasture areas and not a few firms are carrying
out some wide scale development. Much the most
important of these operations is being done by the
South Australian , Government’s Land Development
Executive.
It is good to have been associated with the conver-
sion of useless scrub into first class grazing country.
But the end is not yet, Given more superphosphate,
carrying capacity can be still further increased.
There is room also for more research into problems
as yet unsolved and it is encouraging to know that
the Department of Agriculture, in association with
the Waite Research Institute, intends to set up a
research station on the Island. This will encourage
still further development and more intensive treat-
ment of many partially developed farms. Kangaroo
Island is going to be a big wealth producer in the
future.
WHEAT SICK SOILS
A serious reduction in fertility and loss of top soil
has been taking place for many years in much of
our wheat growing areas. The soil conservation
officers of the Department of Agriculture have been
sounding the warning that falling fertility and
increasing erosion would rob us of our inheritance.
They have urged that corrective measures must be
applied. This, however, was not easy to do. Many of
the washed-out soils were inclined to set heavily and
were unfit for growing permanent pastures. If the
country was left uncultivated, production fell very
low, the paddocks having very light grass cover. How
Typical Heath on Laffer Sand near Keith.
By courtesy of Mr. Kelly.
could these soils be lifted in fertility and still enable
the farmer to make a living ?
Top-dressing, associated with sub-clover, had been
the answer in the wetter districts. This practice had
doubled and trebled carrying capacity in areas with
an annual rainfall of 22 inches and over. But the
Mount Barker variety of sub-clover would not grow
in the lower rainfall country; what then could be
done? Our agrostologists found the answer in the
common medics which in the past have not been
fully appreciated. A very valuable lead in recognis-
ing the worth of the medics was given us from Rose-
worthy College. The earlier sub-clovers, particularly
the Bacchus Marsh and Dwalganup varieties, have
proved to be of great advantage in other countries
and seem to be doubling the area suitable for sowing
to “sub”. Barrel and Burr medics are particularly
valuable in limestone soils while the small seeded
cluster clover and the earlier varieties of sub-clover
grow better in neutral or slightly acid soils. These
sub-clovers can be grown in areas with an annual
rainfall as low as 17 inches, while the medics and
cluster clover will thrive on considerably less. Lucerne
also is being successfully grown on sandy soil with
an annual rainfall as low as 15 inches.
These legumes can be sown very simply by the use
of a disc drill or the combine using narrow shears.
These methods can also be applied on grass country
growing danthonia or spear grass. When these
legumes are established, the fertility of the soil
improves and Wimmera rye and other annual grasses
soon form a dense cover to the soil. It is essential to
apply “super” as a top-dressing and, if this is done,
the out-turn from these erstwhile washed-out soils can
be very profitable. With the current remunerative
price for animal products, these practices are being
widely adopted with the result that water run-off is
being checked and carrying capacity lifted to a very
profitable level. Much of this country will go back
into cultivation again after the soil has been enriched
but other areas, particularly where the slope is severe,
will be kept as permanent grazing country.
The above practices are only gradually being
adopted, but now farmers are becoming much more
soil conscious and there is opportunity for a forward
move. It is remarkable, however, how a dense sward
of legumes and grasses will hold the water. Country
can be seen which was previously badly eroded, but is
now so thick with pasture that there is very little
run-off. This is forcing many to reconstruct their
water supply and bores are being sunk in areas where
previously dams supplied all the water required.
THE NINETY-MILE PLAIN
While other areas of the State have developed, cer-
tain “problem lands” have remained untouched.
There have been some remarkable responses in these
‘'‘problem” areas to the application of “trace
elements” over recent years. Mention has been made
of the effect of the application of copper on Kangaroo
Island and Professor Trumble, A. J. Anderson and


others have secured some spectacular results from
the use of tiny quantities of molybdenum.
The greatest of these “problem” areas is what has
long been called the “Ninety-mile Desert”. This great
tract of country stretches from the Coorong to the
border above Bordertown and beyond into Victoria
and comprises some 6,000,000 acres.
Relatively fertile pockets have been successfully
developed over the years, but much of the country
has failed to respond to cultivation of either crops or
pasture, even though heavy dressings of superphos-
phate were applied. As a result, much of this country,
with a rainfall of from 15 to 20 inches, has remained
untouched over the century. It appeared that the
poverty of the soil had condemned this country to
remain unused for all time.
In 1944, the Bio-chemistry Division of C.5.1.R.0.,
following upon successful experiments in other areas,
established plots near Keith on what was known as
Laffer sand. D. S. Riceman describes the site of the
experiment in these words: ‘ ‘ The soil there consists
of about 4 inches of grey sand and 9 inches of white
sand overlying a greyish yellow sandy clay sub-soil. It
is underlain by limestone at a depth of about 19 inches.
The natural vegetation was heath scrub which rarely
exceeded 3 feet in height, and it was composed prin-
cipally of Casuarine Muelleriana, Banksia spp., and
Xanthorrhoea semiplana together with numerous
heath plants”. The soil was thought to be reasonably
representative of wide areas. The story of the experi-
ments is told by Riceman in C.5.1.R.0. Bulletin 234.
It is a thrilling story of great significance. Plots not
receiving any trace elements failed even though heavy
dressings of 1 ‘ super ’ ’ were applied. This was in line
with the experience of many men who had tried
before. Plots sewn to Bacchus Marsh clover were not
a success when dressed with either zinc or copper
alone, but where both these minerals were applied
together with “super” a remarkable response was
secured. The zinc stimulated the growth of the plant,
while the copper greatly improved the seeding of the
clover. Lucerne responded remarkably to copper
alone but required heavy dressings of ‘ ‘ super ’ ’. Excel-
lent mixed pastures were secured at the end of the
second year, becoming even better the following year.
This result was obtained by the use of only 1 cwt. of
“super” at seeding time, with one bag to the acre
subsequently. The mixed pasture which included
Phalaris was remarkably good at the end of the third
year.
Here was something really significant. A key had
been found to open up great stretches _ of waste
country. J. K. Taylor, now Chief of the Soils Division
of C.5.1.R.0., had surveyed the Hundreds of Laffer
and Willalooka in 1933 and had shown that closely
related soils probably extended over some 10,000
square miles. But he had also shown that there were
many sandhills that it would be unwise to clear while
other areas were submarginal because of saltiness or
for other reasons. It was obvious that Riceman’s find-
ings would have to be applied with discretion and
Sub-clover, lucerne and phalaris growing on Laffer
Sand near Keith the second spring after seeding.
By courtesy of Mr. Kelly.
care. But now there was outlook and hope where pre-
viously men had been afraid to venture far. Very
soon after the result of the plots were known, men
were out clearing scrub and putting down pastures.
There have been failures, as in other areas, but the
proportion of successes has been high and the pleasing
part is that these successes have been well dispersed
over the country.
Much is being done, but how much waits to be done!
This clearing of the scrub and the subsequent cultiva-
tion require much capital expenditure —on big crawler
tractors, big ploughs, big transport and water prob-
lems and lots of “super”. A long lag is inevitable
between tackling the scrub and the first income from
the stock fed on the established pastures. The rabbit
is only occasionally seen in the untouched scrub for
there is very little for him to live upon but when
clover and grasses are sown, rabbits are liable to con-
verge in their thousands. Many hundreds of miles
of wire netting will be needed before the Ninety-mile
“Plain” (that is the new name) will be conquered.
Bringing the scrub to profitable pasture is not a
small man’s job. It is liable to break even a hero’s
heart, It requires big investment of capital and the
accumulation of valuable plant. The technique of
each operation must be studied and conquered. It’s
a job for an organisation which can invest heavily
and then wait. But if the task is well tackled it
offers success, provided the proportion of unsuitable
land is not too high. The Australian Mutual Provi-
dent Society decided in 1948 that they would be pre-
pared to invest in land requiring large capital expen-
diture if they could discover an area of sufficient size
where economic production seemed feasible. Their


search for land coincided with Riceman’s findings and
this encouraged further investigations. The result
has been the purchase or lease of some 400,000 acres
in the Ninety-mile Plain. The South Australian
Government, after receiving a report from the Parlia-
mentary Committee on Land Settlement, passed legis-
lation approving the transfer to the Society of this
land on a “Developmental Lease” which requires the
Society to divide the land amongst settlers as the
country is developed. The Society plans to begin
work upon the last of the country suitable for
development within ten years.
The A.M.P. purchased “Brecon”, a partially
developed property of 4,000 acres of freehold, some
ten miles south of Keith. Here, experimental work is
in progress and tests are being made to determine
cultivation costs and carrying capacity. Other areas
purchased are now becoming available and it is
planned to log big areas during 1950 and to plough
and later sow 25,000 to 30,000 acres per year from
1951 onwards. The experiments so far carried out,
together with much data secured from other sources,
justify the belief that over much of the country first
class pastures can be established some five years after
the scrub is first tackled. The lucerne on “Brecon”
has been particularly attractive while Bacchus Marsh
clover, Phalaris, Veldt and Evening Primrose have all
done well.
Riceman followed up the earlier work by experi-
ments in growing pasture under cover crops. These
experiments showed that, on Laffer sand, payable
An established pasture of white clover, strawberry
clover, perennial rye grass and cocksfoot on country
previously covered with ti-tree with water level at
or above surface level. By courtesy of Dr. Callaghan.
crops of oats could be grown without affecting the
ultimate establishment of clover and Phalaris. Sub-
sequent trials by a number of farmers in various
localities have shown that wheat at current prices
can also be profitably grown as a cover crop and a
good pasture established. This may not prove to be
the case every year or in all localities, but where
possible will greatly offset establishment costs. The
A.M.P. will experiment further in this important
matter of cover crops.
The Society plans to hold “Brecon'’ for experi-
mental and demonstration work. The remainder of
the country will be divided as developed. Service-
men are being selected for the pioneering work of
clearing and cultivation; there will also be a propor-
tion of younger men chosen who were too young to
enlist. These men will have exacting work to per-
form. Conditions will be made as comfortable as
possible but this work in new country will always
be difficult. The Society plans to give the men who
do the work satisfactorily the first offer of the farms
when developed. Men who have done the pioneering
work well and have proved themselves to be efficient
and reliable will be financed by the Society on to their
own blocks. They will be assisted in erecting further
improvements and guided in their future operations.
This venture by private enterprise into big-scale
land development should add significantly to the pro-
ductive capacity of the State. After the project gets
fairly under way,, the Society expects to place some
25 to 30 men on farms every year. If this can be
done, it will contribute significantly to what promises
to be the greatest developmental era of the State.
It is heartening to know that the resources of South
Australia can be so markedly developed just at a time
when the world badly needs all that we can produce.
This developmental work will be twice blessed; it will
be a benefit to the farmers who are settled on the
land as well as to those who supply their require-
ments and will be a blessing to those in sore need in
the hungry world. These big projects will, however,
depend upon the right to purchase much plant and
equipment. I wonder is it known, particularly by
superphosphate manufacturers, how great will be the
future demand for superphosphate ? We in South Aus-
tralia are at present suffering a serious reduction of
25 per cent, in our “super” supplies just when
we should be increasing its use by a substantial
proportion.
These big developmental projects being carried out
bv both private enterprise and government agency
can be a great boon to the State and Commonwealth.
But if the supply of essential raw materials continues
in very short supply, all these efforts will only result
in an unpleasant scramble for plant and equipment.
The need for power plant, tillage implements, wire
and superphosphate will be very great over the com-
ing decade. It is not a case of “Give us the tools” but
give us the right to buy the tools and we will do
the job.


SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH INTO SOIL FERTILITY IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA
The study of the fertility problems of South Aus-
tralian soils may be said to have started with the
foundation of Roseworthy College. The earliest per-
manent experiments at the College go back to 1904
and information was also then becoming available
from the State of Victoria, where experiments on fer-
tilisers were extensively conducted during the early
years of the century.
The Waite Agricultural Research Institute and the
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research
Organisation have both since entered the field and
all three have contributed a major share to successful
scientific research into agricultural problems in South
Australia.
by J. A. PRESCOTT
Director, Waite Agricultural Research Institute
USE OF SUPERPHOSPHATE
Although superphosphate was patented by Lawes
in 1842 and its importance for English agriculture
established by the Rothamsted Experiments, it was
some forty or fifty years before it came to be used in
Australia. It was Professor Custance of Roseworthy
College who conducted the first field experiments
demonstrating the value of superphosphate as a fer-
tiliser for wheat and it was his successor, Professor
Lowrie, who succeeded in popularising its more
general use in the State.
From about 1880 until 1910, the area under wheat
in South Australia remained relatively constant at
rather less than two million acres. In 1897 only 8
per cent, of this area was treated with superphos-
phate but five years later, in 1902, the proportion had
increased to 44 per cent, and in 1907 to 69 per cent.
In 1912 the proportion reached a steady value of about
85 per cent, and the dressings used were of the order
of 80 lbs. per acre.
The next stage in the scientific investigation of
the problem, that of ascertaining the most useful
dressing, was mainly the work of Professor Perkins
who initiated a series of field experiments at Rose-
worthy and at special Government farms where
various amounts of superphosphate up to 3 cwt. per
acre were tested on wheat. From these experiments it
became possible to assess the most profitable dressing,
having in mind the price of wheat and the cost of the
superphosphate. It was generally evident that quan-
tities greater than 80 lbs. per acre could be used with
profit and in most cases 180 lbs. or more.
One important feature noted by Perkins was that
not only were wheat yields increased but there was a
substantial improvement in the grazing value of the
stubbles and following self-sown pastures.
An event of some importance was the purchase
about 1906 of the estate of Kybybolite for closer settle-
ment. An area was set aside as an experimental farm
and trials were conducted with crops and fertilisers.
It soon became evident, however, that the locality was
not suitable for cropping in the sense that the estab-
lished wheat areas were suitaole, and by 1920 a policy
of transition from cropping to grazing had been
adopted. Kybybolite is near the Victorian border in
what is known as the middle South-East of the State
and the experience gained there with pastures laid
the pattern of much subsequent work in South
Australia.
It is of some interest to note also that at this period
the first attempts were made to solve the problems of
the ironstone soils of the Hundred of Seddon on Kan-
garoo Island. About 1908, Dr. Richardson set up a
series of fertiliser trials on the Island but again
attention was paid to cropping with barley, oats and
wheat rather than to the needs of pastures.
The key to the pasture problem came with the
discovery of the importance of subterranean clover as
a pasture legume and the advocacy of its use by
A. W. Howard, a farmer in the Mount Barker dis-
trict. Subterranean clover had been known for many
The response of oats to copper on the Robe calcareous
sand in an experiment conducted by Piper in 1938.
The crop in the foreground has been treated with
superphosphate and salts of manganese; the crop in
the background has received copper salts in addition.
Photo W.I. 3822 by courtesy of Professor Prescott.


years; indeed, there is an early record of its identifi-
cation of the famous botanist Yon Mueller for the
Mount Pleasant branch of the Agricultural Bureau.
Its importance was not recognised, however, until the
top-dressing of pastures with superphosphate was
tried.
The earliest experiments with pastures at Kybybolite
arose in part from a suggestion by the Department of
Mines that the value of local rock phosphates as fer-
tilisers should be assessed. In 1919, experiments were
tried with Wimmera rye grass and subterranean
clover on native pasture and on pastures seeded on
land previously cropped. It was natural that the
standards for comparison should be the unmanured
ground and that treated with superphosphate. These
experiments were very fully reported upon in 1939
by Cook, who had been associated with them since their
inception. From 1929, the experiments at Kybybolite
were extended by co-operation with the Waite Agri-
cultural Research Institute and the Commonwealth
Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation with
financial assistance from the Empire Marketing
Board.
The most striking features of these experiments
may be summarised in terms of carrying capacity in
sheep.
EFFECT OF TOP-DRESSING WITH PHOSPHATES ON
THE CARRYING CAPACITY FOR SHEEP AT
KYBYBOLITE
Sheep per
acre
Wlmmera
Phalaris
Natural
rye grass and
tuberosa and
Pastures
subterranean
clover
subterranean
clover
No manure
10
1-2
—
Rock phosphate
2 4
31
—
Superphosphate
3 4
4-4
4-2
Lime and super -
phosphate
3-5
5-2
This striking increase in carrying capacity is due
to the overall response of the pasture plants to phos-
phate together with the extraordinary response of the
clovers and illustrates the general situation in South
Australia where a straight-forward response to super-
phosphate is to be expected. It is of interest that
more recent investigations at Kybybolite carried out
on behalf of C.5.1.R.0. have shown no benefit to the
sheep on these pastures from supplementary feeding
with cobalt and copper.
The Waite Agricultural Research Institute was
established by the University of Adelaide in 1924 and
the earliest experiments at the Institute speedily con-
firmed the importance of phosphates both on cereal
crops and on pastures. A simple trial with natural
pasture was established in 1925 and is still being con-
ducted. The total yields of herbage and the average
carrying capacities for the twenty years 1928-1947
are summarised below.
EFFECT OF TOP DRESSING WITH PHOSPHATES ON
NATURAL PASTURE AT THE WAITE INSTITUTE
1928-1947
Total yield of
Sheep
dry herbage,
carrying capacity,
cwt. per acre
sheep per acre
Unmanured
36-3
30
Superphosphate
481
4-3
Rock phosphate
48-5
4-2
Basic slag
53 1
4-5
The difference between the natural carrying capaci-
ties at the Waite Institute and Kybybolite is associated
with the phosphate* content of the natural soil. At
the Waite Institute it is 0.040 per cent, and at
Kybybolite 0.008 per cent.
The most recent investigations on soil phosphates
at the Waite Institute have had for their purpose the
assessment of the benefit of the residues left in the soil
after many years of treatment with superphosphate.
There is reason to believe that when an aggregate
amount of one ton has been used over the years, sub-
stantial useful residues are available and that
responses to normal dressings of superphosphate are
likely to be small.
The natural phosphate content of South Australian
soils covers a wide range. It is probably associated
with the number of cycles of weathering undergone
by the parent material from which the soils have been
derived. Thus the richest soil of all, the volcanic ash
of Mt. Gambier, may contain 0.30 per cent, of phos-
phate*; some of the black soils derived from the Pre-
Cambrian limestones, 0.17 per cent.; the red-brown
earths of the wheat belt have a most frequent range
* Expressed at P 2 0 b
The response >of flax to zinc on dark heavy soil at
Saddleworth in an experiment conducted in 1943 by
Adam and Piper. Photo W.I.P.P. 1265, by courtesy of
Professor Prescott.


between 0.04 and 0.06 per cent, and the mallee soils
from 0.01 to 0.03 per cent. The podsols contain mostly
less than 0 02 per cent. A special group of soils such
as the reclaimed swamps of the lower Murray are
relatively rich in phosphate, containing between 0.1
and 0.2 per cent., and these soils, when drained,
irrigated the year round and sown with appropriate
pasture species, have extraordinarily high carrying
capacities, up to 20 sheep to the acre, as was shown
by Dr. Richardson.
NITROGEN SUPPLIES
The problem of the phosphate status of South
Australian soils having been resolved, the next prob-
lem was that of nitrogen supplies. The wheat-bare
fallow rotation which was characteristic of the early
farming is really based on a gradual depletion of the
original nitrogen reserves in the soil. These are
reasonably high when the original phosphate is high
but after' some twenty years of such exploitation,
declining wheat yields manifest themselves together
with an increasing liability to soil erosion. The
importance of nitrogenous fertilisers on stubble-sown
crops was established in a series of experiments con-
ducted by the Waite Institute from 1928 onwards.
The soils which in their native state are very low
in phosphate, however, are also very low in nitrogen
and reserves of the latter cannot be said to exist,
The building up of the nitrogen level is to be regarded
as a major objective in these cases of depleted and
natural soils.
The value of medics, clovers and peas for this pur-
pose is one of the most important facts that has been
established by practical experience and experimental
work. It is now well known that these leguminous
plants function in this way, by their association with
nitrogen-fixing bacteria, known as Khizobium , which
flourish in the nodules on their roots. Where land is
sown for the first time with these legumes it is desir-
able to inoculate the seed with the appropriate strain
of bacteria and some thousands of cultures are sent
out each year from the Waite Institute. The Division
of Soils of the C.5.1.R.0. has carried out a great deal
of helpful work in this connection by investigating
the factors responsible for the efficiencies of the
various strains of bacteria that are available for this
purpose. The most important legumes available for
South Australian conditions are lucerne and the
related annual medics for the lower rainfall regions
and alkaline soils, peas for the main wheat belt, sub-
terranean clover in a range of strains for the more
reliable rainfall areas, and white and strawberry
clover for the regions with longer and wetter agri-
cultural seasons.
MICRO-ELEMENTS
When once the phosphate problem has been met by
the use of superphosphate, there remains a series of
fertility problems which have proved to be associated
with what are now known as the micro-elements.
Initial ploughing following logging and burning on
Kangaroo Island, By courtesy of Dr. Callaghan.
When the Waite Institute was established in 1924,
the only two micro-elements whose need by plants was
reasonably certain were boron and zinc but no
known cases of their possible value as fertiliser had
as yet been observed in any part of the world. Salts of
copper and manganese were, however, being used
empirically by certain farmers in northern Europe.
The first problem to be tackled in South Australia was
that of a disease of oats at Mt. Gambier, locally known
as ‘‘road take-all”, and referred to the Institute by
Perkins, then Director of Agriculture. The soil on
which the disease occurred was the richest in South
Australia, at least with respect to phosphate, and
the work of Samuel and Piper led to its identification
as grey-speck disease and its cause as being due to
manganese deficiency. That manganese is indeed an
element essential to plant growth was confirmed at the
Institute by means of very carefully conducted solu-
tion cultures. Although boron deficiency diseases
were becoming known in other parts of the world, a
survey based on the composition of apples grown in
the State did not suggest any likely deficiency here and,
in fact, subsequent experience, following a lead from
Victoria, has shown that boron poisoning is quite
likely to be associated with the salt problems of the
irrigated areas. Later, solution culture experiments
confirmed the essential character for plant growth
of copper and zinc and the probable need for
molybdenum.
The next discovery of importance in South Aus-
tralia was the result of the need to study crop and
pasture establishment on areas known to be ‘ ‘ coasty
for sheep. The work of the Nutrition Division of the
C.5.1.R.0. had shown that ‘ ‘ coastiness ” was due to


a double deficiency of copper and cobalt and it was
natural that on the highly calcareous soils which were
then being studied the value of copper as fertiliser
should be recognised. These experiments began in
1936 as a joint effort of the C.5.1.R.0. and Waite
Institute and the identity of some of the symptoms
observed with those of “reclamation” disease in
Europe confirmed the need for copper.
The recognition of the need for zinc came later. It
had been known since 1870 from work in France that
zinc was an element of likely biological importance.
The news of the first practical application of this came
from California in 1933 and was followed in 1936 by
the discovery of its importance as a fertiliser spray
for pine trees in AVestern Australia.
The hint that zinc might prove to be of importance
nearer home came from the application of the Cali-
fornian experience in the irrigated orchards of the
River Murray and from the experience of the Vic-
torian Department of Agriculture with wheat at Nhill
in 1936.
This Victorian experience led to the trial by farmers
of zinc salts on the wheat lauds of the adjacent South
Australian district of Tatiara, and in 1941 the State
Championship went to the grower of a wheat crop
in this district who had ir ed a dressing of 10
lbs. of zinc sulphate to the acre in addition to
superphosphate.
Further west still, near the coast at Rendelsham and
AVoods AVell, suggestions of the likely importance of
zinc for subterranean clover were obtained in 1942 by
workers from the Waite Institute. Zinc was also
found to be important to the growth of flax. With
the development during the war years of the growing
of flax as an economic crop in South Australia,
failures were encountered on certain soils in the
Lower North of the State. These soils were usually
dark in colour and of heavy texture and had some
affinities with the soil at Nhill. Investigations were
begun in 1941 and it was shown that the symptoms of
the unthrifty flax were the same as those seen in flax
grown in solution cultures in the absence of zinc. In
field experiments, very clear responses to dressings of
compounds of zinc were demonstrated in the early
growth of flax on these soils.
The importance of zinc together with copper as a
supplement to the standard phosphate dressing for
pioneering on the so-called Ninety-mile Plain, was
established by experiments conducted by Riceman of
the Division of Nutrition of the C.5.1.R.0. at Keith
in 1944 and these experiments have paved the way to
the possibilities of the efficient use of subterranean
clover and possibly other legumes for building up the
fertility of this very extensive area.
One other micro-element has proved to be of excep-
tional interest in connection with the building of soil
fertility in South Australia and that has been molyb-
denum. Whereas of the soil improvers, lime and
gypsum are required in tons per acre; compounds of
phosphate and nitrogen in hundredweights; those of
zinc, copper, boron and manganese in pounds, molyb-
denum is required in only ounces per acre. The hint
that it might be of importance biologically came from
the work of a German bacteriologist in 1931. In South
Australia, certain ironstone soils in the Adelaide Hills
had shown a consistent lack of response over the years
to dressings of superphosphate; such clover as grew
remained stunted but responded remarkably to the
application of wood ashes in addition to superphos-
phate. The first hint that molybdenum might be
important came from an experiment conducted at
Meadows in 1941 by Anderson, a C.5.1.R.0. scientist
working at the Waite Institute. Subsequent work has
confirmed this and it is very probable that the effect
of molybdenum is the indirect one of stimulating
nitrogen fixation by the nodule bacteria associated
with the clover-.
There is a great deal of evidence that these micro-
elements do not need to be used regularly and that
one dressing may be of service for as long as three or
four years. They should be used with circumspection
for, apart from their expense, both copper and molyb-
denum are known to cause disorders in livestock.
So far as can be ascertained, the list is complete
at present, but there are still certain puzzling features
associated with the behaviour of the poorer soils of the
South-East and Kangaroo Island. Scientific research
into the problems of soil fertility in South Australia
still offers plenty of opportunity for obtaining new
knowledge, and there is still much need for the
study of the economic requirements of the various
plant species and soils that are available for
development.




