

V>l2m- pPrvr^
I flYtufrcfocfr tT< n*i gffc iita »Tttfn flSufttT—l* 1
Bully Hayes,
Louis Becke
Earl of Pembroke.
Written for “The Mail” by
A. T. SAUNDERS.




Bully Hayes, Louis Becke
The Earl of Pembroke.
(Written for “The Mail” by A. T. Saunders.)
*
To test the accuracy of many of Louis
Becke’s statements it is necessary to
know the date of has birth, and on that
subject authorities widely differ. “Who’s
Who” (London) says he was born in 1848;
Johns’s “Notable Australians” says June
17, 1857; so does the preface to “Bully
Hayes, Bucaneer,” published in 1918.
“Bulletin” writers say 1848. Yet when
Becke died. February 18, 1913, the “Bul-
letin” of February 20 said —“A once bril-
liant writer, Louis Becke, died in Sydney
last Tuesday morning. He was not an old
man in years, being only 55. One bio-
graphical volume made his age about 10
years more, but that seems very improb-
able.”
The “Daily Telegraph,” Sydney, Febru-
ary 19, 1913. said —“Louis Becke, one of
the best and most popular of Australian
writers, was found dead in his bed yes-
terday. He was born at Port Macquarie,
and was in his 59th year. For many years
he was associated with the notorious
Bully Hayes.” The Sydney “Morn ng
Herald” of the same date said —“Mr. Louis
Becke died suddenly yesterday. Mr. Becke
was 58 years of age.”
Becke himself informed Mr. Fred Johns
that he was born June 17, 1857, and this
is borne out by Becke’s reminiscences of
his schooldays in Sydney, when at Fort
Street School. He says he pulled off in
bis little dinghy to the P. & 0. steamer
Avoca, and was taken aboard the old
paddlewheel Virago, Cant- Bing-
ham. That this must have been between
1867 and 1870 is shown by the Sydney
newspapers I have examined.
The late Earl of Pembroke and Dr.
Kingsley sailed the South Seas in 1870
in the yacht Albatross, which was wreck-
ed at one of the islands. They wrote an
account .of the cruise, entitled “South Sea
Bubbles, by the Earl and the Doctor,”
which gave great offence to the mission-
aries and their friends.
On April 5, 1869, the Sydney “Morning
Herald” records the arrival in Sydney
from Auckland of the Auckland built
yacht Albatross of 86 tons, chartered by
the Earl of Pembroke and Dr. Kingsley,
who had been sailing around New Zea-
land. The Albatross cleared from Sydney
May 5, 1869. and on April 5, 1871, exactly
two years after their first arrival, the
Hero steamer brought to Sydney from
Auckland the Earl and) the doctor after
the wreck of the Albatross.
In 1894 the Earl wrote a preface to
Becke’s first book, "By Reef and Palm.”
He did not know Becke when he was
cruising round the islands, and makes a
shocking mess of dates and facts in the
preface to “Reef and Palm.” He anpar-
ently wrote what Becke told, or wrote,
him, and made things worse by giving
some of his own erroneous recollections.
He says;—“When in October, 1870. I sail-
ed into Apia, Samoa, in the Albatross,
Louis Becke was gaining bis first exper-
ience of island life as a trader on bis own
account by running a cutter between Apia
and Savaii. The beach was still seething
with excitement over the departure on
the previous day of the Pirate Pease, car-
rying with him the yet more illustrious
Bully Hayes.”
This is rubbish. Pea'se and Hayes left
Apia on April 1, 1870, more than six
months before the earl arrived in Samoa,
as my last article shows.
The Earl says further: —“But even be-
fore this date Becke had had as much ex-
perience as falls to most men of adven-
tures in the Pacific Ocean. Bbrn at Port
Macquarie, N.S.W._, he was seized at the
age of 14 with an intense longing to go to
sea. An uncle undertook to send him
and a brother two years older to a mer-
cantile house in California. They sail-
ed for San Francisco in an old barque;
for over a month they were drifting be-
tween Australia and New Zealand a par-
tially dismantled wreck. They were 90
days to Honolulu, and 40 more to the
Californian coast. The two lads did not
find the routine of a merchant’s office to


their taste. The elder obtained employ-
ment on a cattle ranch. Louis got a berth
as a clerk in a steamboat, and traded to
southern ports. In a year Louis had
money enough to take passage in a
schooner to Christmas and Palmyra Is-
lands on a shark catching cruise. He re-
turned to Honolulu and put a thousand
dollars into a schooner trading among the
Western Carolines, lie being supercargo.
The captain went mad from drink while
among the Marshall’s. Becke and the
sailors got the captain right at last, and
the ship stood to the westward. They
fell in with a. big Marshall Island sailing
canoe that had been blown out of sight
of land and bad drifted 600 miles to the
westward. Out of 70 people 30 were dead.
The survivors were given food and water,
and were left to make Strong’s Island,
which was in sight. Becke and the -Mar-
shall Island chief swore eternal friendship,
which came in bandy to Becke years after.
The cruise proved profitable, and Becke
determined to become a trader. Return-
ing to California, he made for Samoa, and
thence to Sydney, but at this time
the Palmer River gold rush had just
broken out in North Queensland, and a
brother, who was a bank manager at Char-
ters Towers, invited him to come up. He
wandered between the rushes for two
years. Returning to Sydney he sailed for
Tonga, in company with the King of
Tonga’s yacht Taufaahau. From Tonga
he went to Samoa, and set u pas a trader
on his own account for the first time.
This was the time of Col. Steinberger s
brief tenure of power." From Soraoa he
was sent in charge of a vessel to the Mar-
shall Islands with orders to hand the ves-
sel to Bull}' Hayes. He met Hayes in
the Leonora, and took passage with Hayes
in the Leonora. After some months’
cruising in the Carolines the Leonora
was wrecked on Strong’s Island. Hayes
made himself ruler of the island, and
Hayes and Becke had a bitter quarrel.
Hayes was captured by an English man-of-
war, but escaped to Guam. Becke went
back in a cruiser to the colonies.”
Then follows Becke’s later life, the ac-
count of which is probably no more true
than the foregoing.
It would be flattery to say Becke was
inaccurate or a romancer —he was menda-
cious. The bulk of the foregoing is un-
true, and Becke shamefully used the Earl
when he induced him to write the intro-
duction to “Reef and Palm.” According
to the publisher’s note to “Bully Hayes,
Buccaneer,” “at the age of 14 Louis got a
berth on the Rotumah, and sailed with
one of his brothers for Samoa. The two
lads afterwards went to San Francisco,
and were employed in that city for a
while. But Louis was soon anxious to get
back to sea, and shipped again as super-
cargo on a, boat trading in the Pacific.”
On Mar-ch 21. 1872, the barque Rotu-
mah, Capt. Robertson, sailed from Syd-
ney for the South Sea Islands. Passen-
gers —Miss Olding, Rev. Mr. Padel, and
Mr. C. Sands. It was on this voyage and
at this date that Beeke sailed from Syd-
ney in the Roturn ah. Five days pre-
viously the new schooner purchased for
the Tongan Government, and named the
Taufahau, sailed for Tonga from Sydney.
There can be no mistake. Becke be-
longed to the class of men who should
have good memories. In the “Lone
Hand” for July, 1913, in “Old-time Aus-
tralian Shipping,” Becke says—“ln the
Rotumah I made my first voyage to
Tonga and Samoa. We sailed in com-
pany with old King George of Tonga’s
newly built brigantine Taufaauhau.” In
a “Modern Buccaneer” he says:—“l took
passage in the barque Rotumah, Capt.
Robertson. There were two other pas-
sengers. a lady and a fine old French
priest.”
We know Becke was from March, 1872,
to October, 1874, between Sydney, Samoa,
the Carolines, and Strong’s Island, and
perchance San Francisco.
Col. Steinberger arrived in Samoa on
April 1, 1875, or 15 months after Becke
left there, and was deported February 28,
1876.
The Charters Towers and Palmer gold-
fields were discovered in 1872, and were
in full swing in 1874, so how could Becke
have been there when we know he was in
the South Seas? I doubt if Becke was in
California in 1872 or 1873; he certailny was
not before 1872. If he was he cannot
have been many months there, for we
know that on December 3, 1873, he was
employed by Mrs. Ma.cfarland, of Apia, in
her store. When Hayes was arrested by
the captain of the Rosario he wrote a let-
ter to one of his agents. Mr. Marshall,
dated September 26, 1874, in which he said
—“I have given to Mr. Becke, late clerk
at Mrs. Macfa.lin’s store, my power of at-
torney.” So Becke had only about 18
months to go to ’Frisco and return, even
if he was only a week in Mrs. Macfar-
land’s employ.
The bulk of the story told by the Earl
of Pembroke is fiction, evolved from
Becke’s imagination. In the “Lone Hand”
Becke says:—“Early in the seventies Syd-
ney established a fine mail service to San
Francisco, and the steamers were the Citv
of Melbourne. CiW of Adelaide, and Al-
bion. The writer made the trip from
’Frisco to Sydnev via Honolul uand Fiji
in the last-named: it occupied 40 da,vs.
The Albion became, I believe, the Du-
pleix. and then the Jubilee. There was
no such steamer as the Albion running to
Frisco, or into Sydney, at any rate, till
after 1872. The steamer Albion arriv-
ed from Wide Bay on September 12,
1870, and cleared for Newcastle on Sep-
tember 15, 1870, with 600 tons of Coal for
Melbourne. I cannot find a record of
any other Albion in Sydney. This ’Frisco
mail service continued from March, 1870,
to September. 1871. when it stopped, and
was run by H. H. Hall, the American
Consul, with ■ the City of Ade-
laide, City of Melbourne, and


the Wonga Wonga. all owned
by-■■■the./Australasian Steam Navigation
Company of Sydney. I have wasted many
days in trying to verify Becke’s state-
ments, and am convinced that he never
left Sydney till he went on board the
Rotumah in March, 172. The truth is
board will attend trese services.’ ‘Only
if they are inclined.’ I replied-”
In Romiily’s “Western Pacific,”, which
was published in 1886, is an amusing ac-
count of this cruise ■ and of what Hayes
did to compel his crew to go to these
prayer meetings or services.
that, as the records of the Registrar-" Mr. Chalmers continues:—“We
General of New South Wales show,
George Lewis Becke was born at Port
Macquarie on June 18, 1855; therefore
when he sailed from Sydney in the Rotu-
mah on March 21, 1872, he was 16 years
and 9 months old, and he was 19 years
and 4 months old when he last saw
Hayes, and from these facts it. can easily
be proved how untruthful Becke was.
Excepting the Rev. Mr. Chambers, those
who wrote of Haves, Pease, and Becke
seem to have allowed full play to their
fancy and cared little for facts. Robert
nouis Stevenson and Lloyd Osbourne, who
wrote “The Wrecker” in collaboration,
say in the prologue—“ Talk in the South
Seas is all upon one pattern. It is a wide
ocean, but a narrow world. You shall
never talk long and not hear the name ,of
Bully Hayes, a naval hero, whose exploits
left Europe cold.” That was because
no such writer as Stevenson has exploited
them. Many books printed and published
in England have given chapters, or parts
of chapters, to Haves and his exploits,
but none of them told the whole truth.
They could not, for none had the luck
that I had to have the key to the store-
house of Hayes’s life and doings, with the
time and patience to search for and find
them. Only two of the English writers
I quote from claim personal acquaintance
with Hayes, viz., Missionary Chalmers
and Edward Reeves, of New Zealand.
The autobiography of James Chalmers,
published by the Religions Tract Society,
1902, says: “The John Williams was
wrecked on Savage Island on January 8,
1867.” Mr. Chalmers continues:—“l em-
barked in a schooner after being six
weeks on Savage Island, and in 11 days
reached Apia.. Soon after we arrived at
Samoa most of the crew and passengers of
the John Williams were brought to Samoa
in the Bona, a. brig of 150 tons, owned
and commanded by the notorious Bully
Hayes. On the arrival of Capt. Williams,
of the John Williams, the wreck was sold
and Hayes bought it with all belonging
to the ship that had been saved. Hayes
was then chaptered to return to Savage
Island and to bring to Apia all the spoiled
saved cargo, which he did. After spending
six weeks in Samoa Hayes was chartered
to take usto Rarotonga and Mr. and Mrs.
Saville to Huahine. Hayes seemed to
take to me during the frecment meetings
we had on shore, and before going on
board I said to him, ‘I hope yon will have
no objection to our having morning and
evening service on board, andl twice on
the Sabbath. Only those who like to
come need attend.’ ‘Certainly not,’ said
Hayes: ‘my ship is a missionary ship now,
and 1 hope you will feel it so. All on
well treated on board. Hayes was a per-
fect host and a thorough gentleman. His
wife and children were on board, and al-
though we had fearful weather nearly all
the time we enjoyed ourselves. Hayes sev-
eral times lost his temper and did very
queer things, acting under the influence of
passion more like a madman than a sane
man. Much of 'his past life he related
to us at table, especially such things as he
had done to cheat Governments. When
near to Rarotonga 1 had a very kind letter
from Hayes thanking me for the
services 1 had held on board
the Ship and for my kindly
demeanour towards him, saving ‘lf you
were near me I should certainly become a
new man and lead a new life.’ Yet a few
days after arriving at Rarotonga he nearly
killed his supercargo with a bag of dollars
1 had given him as a last payment of the
charter for the voyage now successfully
completed.” Romilly says of this: —“Hayes
was an enormously powerful man and
strictly temperate. He had a supercargo
on board who shared in many of his ven-
tures, but the-'- separated after this voy-
age. The supercargo was a young man
of a good and well-known family at home,
who had joined Bully Hayes from love of
adventure- However, they had a quarrel,
and Hayes battered him over the head
with a bag containing 260 dollars, after
which he threw the bag into the sea, ex-
claiming that the 'dollars were not fit
to keep after touching such a skunk as
his supercargo.”
I can imagine how Hayes must have
enjoyed telling yarns at the Rona’s table
to simple and credulous Missionary Chal-
mers. and how Hayes would laugh over his
letter to Chalmers. At this time Hayes
had hardly won his spurs in piracy, black-
birding. kidnapping and South Sea trad-
ing. He had yet to kidnr - the Manihikans
and Savage Islanders, also to escane from
Consul Williams, whom I am informed was
a son of the missionary John Williams.
This Consul Williams and his son Samuel
were apparently igood friends to Hayes.
I am informed that Hayes acquired the
Rona from MacFarlane of Auckland, and
the MacFarland clan were leading people
in Samoa. They had intermarried with
Consul Williams’s family, and had close
business relations with Hayes. Becke was
“clerk in Mrs. store,” and
Becke says in “Bully Hayes, Buccaneer”:
—“The big bungalow of Mrs. MacFarlane.
who was the leading spirit of the firm of
MacFarlane & Williams, and a very
charming lady, was within a few hundred
yards of that of Hayes, and there was ;
daily communication between the two
families, for Mrs. MacFarlane had several


young children,■ and Mrs. Hayes 1 two
little twin daughters'. One day I was
sent for by my employer, Mrs. MaeFar-
lane,” &c:
This explains why Hayes was allowed to
escape from Samoa in 1870, and why Con-
sul Williams did ndt -give evidence against
him when in 1872 the American warship
Narraganset arrested him in Samoa, and
explains the following letters:
From John C. Williams to Earl Gran-
ville. Samoa, 24th February, 1872: —“On
the 19th' February, 1872, the U.S. warship
Narraganset, Oapt. Meade, arrested W.
H. Hayes, of Atlantic notoriety, on cer-
tain charges made against him. He was
acquitted on the 22nd February, 1872. I
have not heard any particulars of the
charges or trial, or the examinations, for
it was held bn board the Narraganset.”
Capt. C- H. Simpson, of H.M.S. Blanche,
writes Commodore Stirling. Sydney, No-
vember 15th, 1872:—“While at Samoa
about three months ago the Leonora was
detained three days, and thoroughly ex-
amined and searched by the U.S. corvette
Narraganset. This having been done at
Samoa, I conclude H.M.’s Consul, Mr. Wil-
liams, would have represented to the cap-
tain of the Narraganset the fact of Hayes’s
previous escape from Samoa, when de-
tained by H.M.’s Consul, when the mat-
ter would have been thoroughly sifted.”
Commodore Stirling to Admiralty, en-
closing Capt. Simpson’s above report,
writes Sydney, December 11th. 1872:
“Capt. Mead, of the U.S. warship Narra-
ganset, stated to me while in Samoa, July,
1872, that he had Hayes on board the
Narraganset for three days, and that as
Mr. Williams (British Consul) declined to
produce sufficient proof against Hayes to
justify sending Hayes a prisoner to San
Francisco, Hayes was permitted to de-
part.”
Commodore Goodenongh shows how
close the connection was between Hayes
and Consul Williams’s family. He says,
in his letter of 16th November, 1874, to
the Admiralty:—“l was at Samoa in
H.M.S. Pearl in November, 1873- The
ketch E. A. Williams was then there
under repairs. She belonged to the sons
and daughter of Consul Williams, one of
Whom, Samuel Williams, is doing duty as
acting consul under a warrant, from his
father. Samuel Williams told me nothing
of bis intentions regarding the. ketch E.
A. Williams, but gave me to understand
that Hayes was a great rascal, and offered
to obtain evidence against Hayes. Yet, on
December 3. 1873, he actually enters into
communication with this man against
whom he had pretended to give me infor-
mation. I consider the whole affair as
most unsatisfactory, even regarding Mr.
Williams as a trader. In the position of
Her Majesty’s Acting Consul I consider
that he has been guilty of dishonest be-
haviour. rendering him unworthy to con-
tinue to occupy such a position.” And the
whole Williams clan ceased to be British
Consuls.
Edward Reeves, of New' Zealand, says
in "Brown Men and Women,” 1898:—“I
remember Hayes in New Zealand in the
sixties. My experience of Mm was slight.
It was not profitable-—no one’s ever was.
i mention it, to show that nothing came
amiss to him. He enjoyed stealing a'few
pounds as much as seizing a merchant
ship and making crew and passengers
walk the plank. (Rubbish—A.T.S.) It
must have been, as nearly as I can recol-
lect, about the year 1864 (It was the end
A.T.S.) that he dropped into
Hokitika River, New Zealand, with the
brig Rona. He was a stout, bald, plea-
sant looking man of good manners, chi-
valrous, with a certain or, rather, uncer-
tain. code of honour of his own; loyal
to any one who did Mm a good turn;
gentle to animals, fond of all kinds of pets
especially of birds. Of these he had a
number, and treated them with tender
care. He was never without some caressed
favourites, and sauntered about Hokitika
Wharf followed in the most affectionate
manner by three little white poodle dogs.
Ihe Rona had, for these times, a luxurious
cabin, where his two white wives sat, each
with a child in l her arms. Jack Castles,
of South Sea fame, was in Hokitika at
the turifu I came across Castles the other
day at Nukualofa- Hayes knew well when
he ventured into Hokitika River he was
wanted, but felt safe, for there was no tele-
graph in those days The Rona bad a lot
of South »Sea islands curios on board, and
an auction was arranged and was a great
success. This auction sale of curios on
the infamous Rona by a villain with a
price on his head (Rubbish—A.T.S.) was
then a godsend to the diggers, wearving for
a fresh excitement. All lots were cleared
at absurdly higr-h, prices. It was late in
the afternoon before the sale was over,
everything paid for, orders given before
delivery, and before the auctioneer had
settled with Hayes. Several wise buyers
took their purchases with them, but the
majority trusted the nleasant-looking
nirate trader, waited, and were 'paid with
the topsail sheet.’ On the night tide
Hayes was over the bar, and by breakfast
tune was out of sight, with both money
and curios. SilN of the buyers, no doubt,
but Hayes had a way of persuading ordi-
nary people to do the simplest of foolish
things.”
Frederick J. Moss. M.P.. New Zealand,
published in 1889 “Through Atolls and
Islands of the Great South Sea.” Moss
says:—“Capt. Pease ; so happily killed by
the natives at Bonin, was no small per-
sonage in his day, but fell far behind his
friend and associate. Capt.. or, as he was
universally called. Bully Hales. From one
end of the Pacific to the other the name
of Bully Hayes _ may still be heard. I
talked of him with manv who knew him
intimately, and whose accounts in the
main were in accord. Hayes was a great
“big bearded (Becke. in the “Lone
Hand.” March. 1912. page 388.
makes this “big hearted.” and it is also


“big hearted” in “Bully Hayes. Bucaneer,”
page 32. Big hearted seemed to better
suit the tone of Becke’s article. Both
Boldrewood and Becke misquoted docu-
ments when writing of Hayes.—
A.T.S.), baldheaded man. said one
of mv informants, weighing 236
lb., with a soft voice and persuasive
ways. He was an American of the mag-
netic type. Mad as a hatter at times, said
one of the men who had sailed with him.
Bor example, he had two dogs, Barney,
a terrier, and Dash, a water dog, of whom
he was very fond. Pig hunting one day,
Barney made a blunder. Hayes called him
to his side, and as the little dog looked
up into his face, shot him dead at his feet.
Stunlg with remorse, he threw' the gun
into the sea, went on board his little
•craft, and smashed to pieces every article
•of furniture in the cabin, and wandered
about moody and speaking to no one for
nearly three days. Hayes made his first
colonial appearance about 25 years ago at
Invercargill in South New Zealand (Phis
is wrong —A.T.S.) as a member of a small
musical company. Afterwards, as captain
of a collier, he traded between Newcastle,
New South Wales, and New Zealand.
During the Maori war he was strongly
suspecied of supplying the natives with
powder and lead, landed, at out of the way
places. His practice, it is now known, was
to stow the powder under the cabin, and
litter the floor with straw. No official
visitor would dream that powder would be
stored in so dangerous a place; wdiile
Hayes’s request to be careful with the fire
was accounted for by the litter which
there had been no time to clear away.
In New Zealand he bought the brig Bona
and made his Maori traffic easier by con-
necting it with a legitimate trade to Ho-
kitika. The war ending, Hayes started
for Tahiti, and began on new lines. What
an infernal scoundrel, I could not help
interjecting as the narrative proceeded.
No doubt of it, said one of the party; but
look at me. Hayes left me for five years
on the little island of Ujilan to opt copra
for him. There were only a few natives,
and we made what we could, hut he never
came near me again. I was nearly dead,
living on fish and cocoanuts, and torment-
ed with anxiety to get away. At last,
by great good luck, a vessel called and
rescued us. I never saw Hayes again, but
if he were to come here now and slap me
on the hack with one of bis jovial laughs
and begin chaffing me about Ujilan. I
won’t say you might not see me shaking
hands with him in less then ten minutes
and! ashamed to talk about being left at
Ujilan any more. This sketch of Hayes’s
career would be incomplete without giv-
ing his dealings in the Pioneer. The own-
ers of the Pioneer were merchants in
Shanghai. They had failed, and the estate
was in the hands of trustees. Pease knew
this, and concocted with Hayes a plot.
Pease stayed behind at Bonin on the
ground of ill-health, and sent the Pioneer
to Shanghai with Hayes in charge. The
worst face was put on the vessel. Her
copper was to all appearance destroyed,
and she was made to look as dilapidated
as possible. The crew were told by Hayes
to protest against the vessel being sold
or given up till their wages were, paid in
full. Thus armed, Hayes appeared before
the assignees, and so frightened them
with prospects of law suits and the pro-
bable cost of repairing the brig,, that they
let him have her for a nominal amount.
Of this a verv small portion was paid in-
cash. The remainder, it is needless to
say, was never paid at all.
The Pioneer was renamed Leonora,
Conversant with the affairs of the insol-
vent firm, he called in at their trading
stations on the islands, [traduced formal
authority to wind up their business, arid
obtained from the agents what supplies of
goods they had in store and what balance
in cash they were able to pay. Among
his victims on this occasion was Alfred
Eestiaux, now trading at Furafuta., from
whom and many others I heard the ac-
count now put together.”
Basil Thomson published in 1902 his
book on “Savage Island,” He say-s ; —“Mr.
P. H. Head had lived more thaln 40 years
on _ Savage Island, and was 70 years old.
Quite early in life he had married a Sav-
age Island woman, with whom he still
lived. He was the best specimen of an
English trader that it has been my good
fortune to meet. He had had more than
10 children by his native wife, a.nd .he
was sufficiently educated: to know the
value of education. Nothing daunted by
the forebodings of his friends he deter-
mined to bring up his children as Euro-
pean Children. As they grew old enough
they were sent to school in New Zea-
land. All the sons that have stayed in
New Zealand are in good positions. Three
have returned to Savage Island, where two
help their father in his business, and the
third has set up a store of his own. It’s
all very Well with the boys, but what
about the girls,’ they used to say, Tut
I think I have proved that half-caste girls
are as good as any others if you give them
a. start,’_ lie said with quiet pride. One
of his girls is married and prosperous in
Auckland), New Zealand, another is a
teacher in the public schools, and a third,
whom I met, at Alofi, would pass for a
handsome, well-educated Italian. It was
interesting to observe the manners of the
boys towards their native mother when we
met at breakfast. Mrs. Head! wears the
native dress, and speaks English with hesi-
tation, but she is an intelligent woman;
and plays the hostess at the head of her
table admirably. She seemed a little shy
of her English sons, but they spoke to '
her with courtesy and respect,’ and oblig-
ed her to take her fair -share in the con-
versation. They have preserved) the-old’
fashion of addressing their father as Sir;
Thus has Mr. Head solved the problem
that has baffled most fathers of half-caste
children the world over. Mr. Head- is
the oldest trader on Savage Island. He


was landed in January, 1867, and began to
trade ais agent for the notorious Bully
Hayes, pirate and blackbirder. Bully
Hayes found Savage Island a virgin field
for blackbirding. In the intervals of
piracy Mr. Hayes posed as a lawabiding
trader, and 1 it was only when he wearied
of the slow returns from the sale of
calico that he turned to means of quicker
profit.
“One day in 1868 he put in unexpected-
ly at Alofi, Savage Island, and made him-
self so agreeable to the natives that 60
of them came off to his vessel to gloat
over the wonder of a foreign ship. With
that he slipped his cable and stood out to
sea.. The indignation of the islanders
knew no bounds. It was at its height
when one morning, about a week later, the
joyful news spread that the ship was re-
turning. Mr. Hayes landed alone and
met Mr. Head on a village green before
all the natives. He was in high spirits,
a.nd had a ready answer to Mr. Head’s
reproaches. 1 told the beggars I was
going to sail,’ he said, ‘but they would
not leave the ship. T could not stay here
a month. What could I do?’ The men,
he told the natives, were all right. Find-
ing that he had not provisions enough, for
so large a company he had landed them
at a nice little island to the northward,
and had returned for food and water for
the return voyage. If he had meant to
kidnap them would he have returned like
this? The story was thin, but the na-
tives were in no mood to test it. Provi-
sions were shipped, and the crew of Aitu-
taki men landed and made friends with
the people. That night word was brought
to Mr. Head that these gentry had made
plans to elope with a number of girls
whose heads had been turned with stories
of foreign travel. Mr. Head went at once
to the chiefs, and a guard was sent hotfoot
to the beach, only to make out the schoon-
er’s lights in the offing. When they
called the roll they found more than 30
girls were missing. This was the last
time Bully Hayes visited Savage Island.
It was not till long after that Mr. Head
heard the sequel of the story. Re-em-
barking the men, whom he found half
starving, Hayes 1 set sail for Tahiti, where
he disposed of the whole of his cargo to
the highest bidder, or, as he chose to put
it, to the planter who paid the highest
sum for their passage money. Many died
in Tahiti, a few found their way to
Samoa and Queensland, a remnant, among
whom was King Tongaia’s (Savage Island)
daughter, now a middle-aged woman, re-
turned to Salvage Island, the rest had
scattered who knows whither?”
H. Stonehewer Cooper, who- published
“Coral Lands of the Pacific” in 1882 says:
—“One of the most respected of the in-
habitants of Apia, Samoa, is Mrs. Hayes,
widow of the notorious Bully Hayes, per-
naps the last of the pirates of the Pacific.
Cooper evidently did not know that Hayes
was legally married in South Australia on
August 25, 1857, to Amelia Littleton,
who was probably alive, if Hayes _ had not
thrown her overboard, as was said. la
1876 she would be only 43 years old.
After the loss of another brig alt Strong $
Island Hayes changed his tactics and actu-
ally succeded in persuading the mission-
aries that he was converted from the error
of his ways. After his arrival in Guam
he was captured while bathing, and it was
generally believed that his romantic career
had come to an end, but he bamboozled
the clergy of Manila as effectualy as he
had the Americon missionaries. The
Spanish authorities had sufficient evidence
to garotte 20 men, but Bully Hayes wag
equal to the occasion, and whether aided
or not by a mistaken interest of the
clergy in their new convert, he managed
to escape, and turned up at San Fran-
cisca, where he succeeded in stealing a
schooner called the Lotus. I know he
paid 12 dollars for water, but for nothing
else, and in this vessel he was cruising
while I was in the Pacific. Captain Ilayes
was a handsome man. of about the middle
height, with a long brown beard, a.l wavs
in perfect order. He had a charming
manner, dressed always in the perfection
of taste, and could cut a confiding friend’s
throat, or scuttle ids ship with a grace
which, at am 7 rate, in the Pacific, was un-
equalled. A friend of mine who resides
at Fiji’s capital told me the following
characteristic anecdote of Hayes. The
captain was in harbour with his schooner,
and, wanting a good supply of stores
for a long cruise, gave a heavy order
to my fnend. This was executed, and
goods' and account sent aboard. Next
morning, when payment was looked for,
Hayes’s schooner was doing her utmost,
under a depressing want of wind, to put as
much distance as possible between her
keel and Ovalau. A round sum being at
stake, my friend determined on a stern
chase, the native boys pulled pluckily,
and the schoner was overhauled.* Capt.
Hayes, bland as ever, was most courteous.
In what way could he serve the Levufca
party ? Any parcels or letters to take ? De-
lighted, to be sure, but it was fortunate
for them the wind was so light, as by this
time he ought to have been well out of
the group. Somewhat dumfounded at
this reception, and hardly caring to drink
the proffered “nip” my. friend delicately
hinted at his firm’s transaction with the
gallant skipper. The captain grew indig-
nant. Whose account? He was told.
‘Paid yesterday ’ was the response. The
merchant implied in return that he re-
greted such was not the case. ‘Send for
so-and-so.’ He appeared. ‘What’s this
I hear? Messrs. So-and-so’s account not
paid. You had my money and instruc-
tions, and you knew we left at daybreak.’
Then the captain gave his purser a lec-
ture in the choicest invective of the souh-
ern seas. Apologising to the merchant
and his clerk for thus losing his temper
he explained that his drunken scoundrel
of a subordinate had had the exact
money wrapped up in the bill, and he


would have to find it. Tn a few minutes
the purser returned with the amount, as
Hayes had stated, and the Levukans left
the schoner, reflecting, perhaps, on the
sin of harbouring unfounded suspicion
against the innocent victim of a servant’s
negligence. Hayes died what may be
called a natural death, as he was very
deservedly, perhaps, knocked on the head
by an officer he had brutally ill-used. The
gossip of the Pacific credits him with
many murders, especially of women.”
Residents of Adelaide in 1867 will re-
member Ensign Churchward, of the
rowdy fourteenth —two companies of
which were then stationed in Adelaide.
Air. Churchward left the army, and in
1887 published “My Consulate at Samoa.”
He reached Samoa in 1881, and was there
for four years. He says:—“Samoa was
quite a favourite place with ‘Bully’ Hayes
and one which used to see a great deal of
him, and is where he choose to leave his
legitimate wife and family during his pro-
longed absences. There are residing at
Samoa several people who formerly accom-
panied Hayes on his cruises, and who
while not excusing him from many of
the undoubted rascalities he was guilty
of, yet cannot be found to speak of him
in any terms than as a reckless devil-
may-care sort of a man, of wonderful in-
genuity and resource, to whom nothing
Came amiss in the way of business, which
word with him meant a great deal more
than is conveyed in its ordinary accepta-
tion. My informants told me that al-
though more brutal than any beast when
enraged, this pirate could, when he liked,
assume a courteous behaviour and address
positively fascinating, and calculated to
deceive even the greatest sceptic. Al-
though self-educated, he could converse
fluently and cleverly on all ordinary topics
and if he were judged by his handsome
and gentlemanly personal appearance the
lie direct would be given to the multitu-
dinous reports of his lawless career. To
see in 1876 an elderly, well-dressed man
in missionary black frock coat and tall
hat with a flowing grev beard sweeping
bis expansive chest, above which smiled
a handsome and benevolent countenance
fit for a bishop, and be told that the en-
tire person was that of an undoubted pirate
who was far from being free from suspi-
cion of having committed murder, would
astonish any man in his sober senses. Y'et
such was ‘Bully’ Hayes in his best rig
on shore in the colonies. In spite of his
many rnfliianisms, some of which were of
so gross a nature as to preclude mention,
Hayes had many friends, even among
those whom he had swindled, at all events
in Samoa When discussing any of his
rascalities in company it was always thus.
‘Oh, never mind that.’ And then' would
follow instances of humanity, daring, and
good-fellowship that, in the eves of the
community, comnletelv overbalanced any-
thing to his discredit, although these
very few people knew right well that
Hayes would have victimised any. one of
them if he had only the chance. The
only persons safe with Hayes, friends or
foes, were those who bad nothing to be
stolen, or wheedled out of. Even mem-
bers of the crews with whom he had sail-
ed, in spite of the cruel treatment they
received at his hands, could not be induc-
ed to give evidence against or speak a
bad word of him. This may have been
from the danger of Self-crimination, but
still, although there is now no danger
from him, the fact remains the same.
Hayes was commonly believed to have in-
dulged somewhat in murder, and it is on
all sides said of him that when in the
mood he would as soon kill a man as talk
to him. Yet I never heard in ;any conver-
sation a positive statement of his having
done so. Hayes was, according to report,
very much married, not taking into con-
sideration native wives, of whom he bad
at least one in every island he haunted,
and has left all over the Paeifis a numer-
ous progeny of half-castes. His legiti-
mate wife, a, New Zealand lady, was re-
siding in Apia with two lovely daughters
(Leonora and Lamina, according to Becke
—A. T. S.), and one son, when I arriv-
ed in 1881, but about a year after they
left for Fiji. Hayes in one of his play-
ful moods is said to have attempted to
obtain a divorce ; from the whole of this
family, after his own fashion, by upsetting
the boat in which be was rowing them
outside the inner reef of Apia Harbour,
but to his disgust he did not obtain the
decree, «for they all got safely ashore.”
Churchward had apparently not heard of
the “unfortunate accident” which befell
Hayes in New Zealand in 1864, when his
boat upset and his “wife” (Roma Buck-
ingham, aged 20), his daughter (Adelaida
Endora. aged 13 months), George Bucking-
ham, and Alary Cowley were drowned.
H. H. Romilly was Derm tv Commis-
sioner for the Western Pacific, and pub-
lished in 1886 “The Western Pacific.” in
which he says: —“I snpnose Bully Hayes,
who for many years followed this profes-
sion in the Pacific, must be termed the
last of the pirates, for the world is be-
coming too crowded and well known for
him to have any success. Hayes was all
bis life able to elude the law. and he
eventually met with his death from natu-
ral causes, that is to say, he was knocked
on the head with a handlsnike by bis cook.
My information is derived from two- gen-
tlemen who both knew Hayes intimately,
and bad chartered his vessel on several
occasions. One of them, who is a clergy-
man,. declares that he never wishes to
have a more amusing or better informed
companion. Hayes used to give way to the
most violent fits of rage, which were not,
however, long lived. While they lasted he
was decidedlv unsafe to approach, and his
crew kept out of bis way. On one ocea-
, sion he lost his temper with his cook,
and! chased him round the deck, when the
cook took to the main rigging. Hayes, in
the choicest language, ordered biro down,
but the cook, who knew his peculiarities,


said ‘No, massa, you plenty angrv now.
by-andrbye me see you laugh, me conje
down.’ In later years Hayes would have
brought him dowm with a revolver- Hayes
was unable to open his mouth without
swearing. On one occasion of his voyage
with the missionaries, his mate was or-
dered aloft to look after some ringing, and
being a little sulky at the time, went up
swearing audibly. ‘Come down, you
skunk,’ roared Haves, ‘don’t you know you
are on board a missionary ship? Don’t
you go to church on Sunday? If there is
any swearing to do on board this ship I
guess I can do it all.’ There is no doubt
that towards the end of his career Hayes’s
temper became beyond his control, and
that he shot several people in these fits
of rage. He always professed himself
sorry for these acts, but penitence does
not. appear to have weighed much on his
spirits. It was a favourite practice of his
to disappear for many months at a time,
and spread a report that he was dead, so
when he actually did die no one believed
the report. The last act of his life was
perhaps the most audacious he committed.
He had reached San Francisco, and there
he remained for some time. One day he
met an old cook of his, and they concocted
a plan between them. This was to steal a
cutter and escape at night. But this was
not all. Ship-stealing was nothing new to
Bully Hayes. He was in love with the
wife of the captain of the cutter. Whe-
ther his affection w r as returned or not I
cannot say, but that seeing to have been a
matter not much considered, as Hayes de-
clared that he would not steal the cutter
without stealing the wife. One night,
while the captain was ashore and the wife
on board alone. Hayes nulled off to his
ladylove, hove up anchor, and made sail.
Hayes’s course of successful roguery was a
very long one, and most certainly he w r as
by no means the hero some have tried to
represent him. He was as fond of cheat-
ing a poor man as he was of derfauding a
government on a large scale. He had a
very plausible and pleasant manner, he
looked honest, and with all these advant-
ages he succeed in deceiving people who
would not have been taken in by more
common rogues. He used to say he could
never have made the reputation he had
and escape justice so long had he not been
strictly temperate, in which impression of
opinion he was doubtless perfectly right.”
The foregoing is only a part of what
most of the writers quoted from wrote
about Hayes- Several of them, notably
Churchward, wrote nonsense, and mixed
im various exploits. The yarn about
Hayes landing Chinamen in Melbourne or
Sydney by scuttling his ship, or pretending
to do so. is retold by three of four of
them. Of course, there is no foundation in
fact for the story.
F. W. Christian _ in “The Caroline Is-
lands,” published in 1899. has a purple
patch about Haves, which is not worth re-
producing. and in his preface lie mentions
meeting Becke. I do not think Hayes
ever killed any white person, or defrauded
any government on a large scale. I think
he was too astute to do anything of the
sort. So far as 1 can learn his only proved
legal offence in Australasia was abscond-
ing from Adelaide when he was an in-
solvent debtor, and under the jurisdiction
of the Insolvency Court.
“Samoa Times, Saturday, December 1.
1877.
MURDER OF BULLY HAYES.
KILLED BY HIS COOK WHILE
CRUISING IX THE SOUTH SEAS.
Some short time ago we extracted a
paragraph from the “Fiji Times” to the
effect that the notorious Oapt. Hayes had
been killed by the chief mate of the vessel
in which he had been cruising. As ac-
counts of his death 'have before been
published, and he has mysteriously turn-
ed up in the enjoyment of good health
in some other part, of the world, doubts
are still held by some people as to whe-
ther this was not another similar false
report. However, the following remarks
from the “San Francisco Post” not only
confirm the “Fiji Times” statement as to
Hayes being killed, but we think
leaves no doubt as to the truth of it:—
“Oapt. Hayes, of the schooner yacht
Lotus, which sailed from: this port Octo-
ber 9. 1876, for the Samoan Islands, was
murdered in March last by the cook, a
Dutchman, who shipped in Samoa, as cook
and seaman. The Lotus left Bonham
Island, one of the Marshall group, about
120 miles south-west. Bfx days after-
wards she came back, and the following
information was obtained from the man
acting as mate: —The second day out the
captain spoke to the main at the wheel—
who was cook and seaman —about his
steering. Some altercation followed, and
the captain went below. When he came
up the companion way. some time after,
the man let- go the tiller, and struck Capt.
Hayes on the head with the crutch be-
longing to the main boom. He fell and
immediately expired. No firearms of any
kind were found on him. The acting mate
at the time was below sleeping. The
vessel returned to Bonham Island as soon
as possible. The captain was buried at
sea. The Maggie Johnston arrived at Bon-
ham the latter part of March. The mat-
ter was explained to Oapts. Bliven and
Henry, and it was found that the mate
(mot having signed any articles or papers
of agreement of any kind to bind himself
to the vessel) had no control over her
at all. Rumours of her going away to
other islands in other hands got about,
which induced Messrs. Capelle & Co., a
large German firm there, to ask Oapts.
Bliven and Henry, as American citizens,
to do something in the matter. The only
thing they could do was to deliver the
vessel’s papers to Capelle & Co. for safe
keeping, until her owners in -Ban Fran-
cisco coidd communicate instructions.


The acting mate was left in charge,
and did everything possible to fix things
up. An inventory of all goods on board
was taken, and all were stored in Ca-
pelle & Co.’s warehouse. The vessel was
to be moored to a 1.600-lb. anchor, sails
unbent, and put on shore in the ware-
house. All was not completed when the
Maggie Johnston left on May 15, but it
was expected that everything could be
fixed on that day.
“Capt. Haves will be remembered as
the gentleman whose strange life and ad-
ventures were published in October last
under the caption of ‘A South Sea Pir-
ate.’ He made many friends, who con-
tend that his- errors were those of the
head, and not of the heart, and it is
said of him, even by his enemies, that
he was a man who never counted the
cost when he could render assistance to
a fellow sailor in distress. He was equally
well known in San Francisco.
Sydney, and the groups of the South Paci-
fic where years of his life had been spent.'
As Hayes’s wife, family, and business
friends were in Samoa, it is strange that
this article only appeared in the Samoan
paper on December 1, 1877, recounting
what had occurred the previous March.
Capelle & Co.’s headquarters were at Sa-
moa, which was the centre of the Line-
island trade. Vessels were coming and
going continuously, and yet nothing is
known in Samoa till Novemebr or Decem-
ber. and nothing in the way of trial or
enquiry re the killing of Hayes is men-
tioned. It seems that most neople were
glad to know Hayes was dead, and let
it go at that.
F. J. Moss. M.P.. of New Zealand, who
left Auckland for a cruise among the
islands in Henderson & M'acfarland's
schooner Buster, September 18, 1886, and
who wrote “Through Islands and Atolls,”
says on page 89:—“At Sian Francisco
Hayes contrived by some trick to get
possession of a cutter yacht, which he
named the Lotus. He supplied her with
stores by taking them without leave from
one of the Californian lighthouses, and
began a new career of adventure and ras-
cality. The crew consisted only of Hayes,
a native, and a Scandinavian named Peter
(-Peters?) now (1886) living at one of the
Caroline Islands, near Rink. They got to
Jaluit, and one day, after leaving that
island. Peter was at the helm, when
Hayes, in a violent rage, went below for
a pistol to shoot him. Arming himself
with the iron boom crutch. Peter struck
Hayes down as, pistol in hand, he put his
head above the companion. Then with-
out more ado he threw Hayes and pistol
overboard.
He took the Lotus hack to Jaluit. and
renorted what had occurred. The Lotus
lay at Jaluit for some time, and was
claimed and taken in charge by the mas-
ter of a Californian vessel, under power
of attorney from the rightful owner in
San Francisco. By him she was sold to
a Jaluit trader, and finally became the
property of a native -chief. As we entered
Jaluit Lagon (end of 1886) I saw the
Lotus on the reef,, fast going to decay.
The following, written from Sydney re-
cently to an Adelaide man, is ‘■mow.
How could Ahe consul at or for Samoa hold
any enquiry of any value; who was to give
evidence? Liven if a genuine enquiry was
held how is it the “murderer was not
arrested and tried. Of that there is not
a word, even in the account of our cock
sure” friend who can account for every
day of Hayes's life:—
“As a matter of fact, however, i be-
lieve I have been for some years regard-
ed as an authority on the subject of .Paci-
fic and Polynesian history in Sydney. My
library contains practically every work
published on the subject. i am
a member of several historical societies,
and with regard to Huh Hayes—please
note the spelling—l have for some years
accumulated all possible facts. Owing to
my old-time associations with the powers
that be at the Admiralty, I have been
supplied with the original despatches of
captains and Admirals who dealt witlrahe
various episodes in Hayes's life, and in
addition my father’s nephew happened to
be surgeon-general of the United states
Army at Washington, and obtained for
me copies of all consular and naval re-
ports from that source. Later on another
cousin was appointed a surgeon in the
Philippine Islands, and he collected ioi
me copies of all documents connected with
Hayes and Pease, and sent them on to me.
Practically 1 can account for every day of
his life from his first command at Lake
Erie until he was knocked on the head oft
Jaluit. The statement which Mr. Saun-
ders obtained and published from a
member of the House of Representatives,
then a boy of 13. is not in any sense a
true account of what occurred. As soon
as the murder was reported the bh.
Consul at Samoa took steps to hold a judi-
cial enquiry into the murder, and the facts
disclosed, of which 1 have a copy, are
at entire variance with the report which
Mr. Siaunders took from ‘the boy of 13,
whose memory has evidently failed him in
many ways. It may interest you to know
that the Lotus was a schooner and not a
cutter, that the murder occurred at sea,
that Hayes was unarmed when killed,
and that’ the vessel was, with her cargo,
handed over to Capelle & Co , a local trad-
ing” firm, and the Lapis. Bliven and
Henry, two American masters, were- mem-
bergs, of the court of enquiry held by the
consul. The Lotus was brought back to
Jaluit after the murder, and if she was
lost on the reef at all. it was after she
had been sold, by order of the consul
who administered Hayes’s affairs hy vir-
tue of his office.”
Except that Hayes was killed in 1877,
none of the various accounts of his death
agree.
Mr. E. J. Turpin writes me that in
May, 1866, he voyaged from Lytifcleton,
New Zealand, bo Tonga, with Hayes in
the brig Rona. formerly the Anglo-Saxon.
In 1867 Mr. Turpin was appointed secre-
tary to the British consulate of the
Fejees and Tonga.


1 111 111 1 111 1 1 111 111 »'' " *
3 1508 00247433 1
