



A?/ y)




f sT tt %


( —
BUNYIP SAYS SO


To My Children, and all other
children, this story of “ The
Great Camp in the Australian
Bush,” and the doings of the
birds and animals that live in
it, is affectionately dedicated by
the Author H


'’.£ j $s f* wtSSm** IBMW48
v v-; •*- jEJ» flQiOv ' &■ ‘ ; ‘ ««aS
‘&bK i 8 >18^^^
mi flN9nw$* mm** L*> t |^B r^ ;< v Wi%*jpWi • ’•m'^y
Bt IK w * &■ -
%l£S& • si . ' |Mr <
' Up A * Jf ■ j
The Camp


BUNYIP SAYS SO
A TALE OF THE
AUSTRALIAN BUSH
W. M. FLEMING, M.P.
With Illustrations in colour and black
and white by R. W. Sturgess
Commonwealth of Australia :
EDWARD A. VIDLER
MELBOURNE


1 2 [
CONTENTS
I. The Camp in the Australian Bush - 7
11. The Meeting of the Daylighters - 16
111. The Meeting of the Night-timers - 24
IV. How the Great Meeting was Called - 31
V. The Great Meeting - - 39
VI. The Great Competition - 47
VII. The Stories of Joe-the-Rat and Glory, the
Lyre Bird - - - 55
VIII. The Stories of Curlee Lew and Slow Tom 64
IX. The Awarding of the Great Prize - 71
COLOURED PLATES
Doctor Creeps reads the Book of Nature - Cover Design
The Camp in the Bush - - Frontispiece
Father Crow and Mrs. Gnoorie Facing Page 16
Joe-thc'Rat talks to Miss Cresty „ „ 32
Slow Tom, Ginger Groogie and Joe-the-Rat ~ „ 36
Bingy and the Hornets ' - „ 58
Jerry, the Dingo - - ~ » 70


BUNYIP SAYS SO
CHAPTER I.
The Camp in the Australian Bush
EVERY boy and girl should know The Camp.
Do you? If you don’t, it is time that you did,
especially if you happen to be an Australian,
though all children everywhere really ought to
know about it. It has been in existence a long,
long time, so long that no one can tell you when
it began, or who made it. But since it is an
Australian thing, and so only Australian children
have had any opportunity of seeing it, and very
few even of them have actually done so; as it
is really a wonderful place, and I have been there
lots and lots of times, and know it well, I shall tell you something about it.
In doing so, I shall tell you how the lyre-bird got his tail, why the Black
Cockatoo is black, and has such a mournful cry, and some other things that
every boy and girl ought to know. Some of these things a boy, and some of
them a girl, should more especially know, but both girls and boys should
really know them all.
The Camp is a place where all the birds and animals of The Bush meet
together. The Bush, you know, is the country, the big paddocks that take a
day and more to go round on horseback, the forests and the plains and


far-stretching hills, with the great high mountains that stand behind them,
places where grass grows, wild flowers bloom, and birds sing all day long,
and sometimes at night, too. The mopoke, for instance, sings at night.
Did you ever hear a mopoke sing? If you have, you may not think much of
his singing; you may even think it is not singing at all, but no doubt the
mopoke thinks it is all right. In fact, I have heard some mopokes boast
pretty loudly of their singing, but that is perhaps because they are asleep
in the day time, w 7 hen the Day-timers, who really can sing, do their singing.
The birds and animals are never at The Camp all at once. Big as it is,
it would never be able to hold them all. But now some and then others, or
perhaps some of the same and some others, gather there; at one time a few,
at another time many are there. Morning and noon and evening, and most
of all at night, for then they are safest, they come to The Camp, and chatter
quietly together, telling each other tales of all that they have seen and heard
and thought. And the birds and animals having no printed books, but
reading all they can see in the grass and the trees and the bushes and the
flowers, and the sky and the clouds, and the water and the stars and the
sunlight and the moonlight, are great story-tellers.
It is quiet, too, in The Camp, very quiet, except when someone happens
to get excited. And it is miles and miles away from anywhere; no town or
railway line, or even road, is near it. It is so very far away that very few
people know anything about it. Father Bunyip, the strange animal that is
so hard to find, will tell you that he found it years and years—oh! ever so
many years!—ago. A queer old fellow is Father Bunyip. He does not talk
much, but whatever Bunyip says is right. It is not only to see each other and
to hear the interesting stories that are told there, that the birds and animals
come to The Camp. There is also a prize to be gained. He or she amongst
the birds and animals who tells the best story is King or Queen till a better
is told. That is, it was so. I mean, that is as it used to be. Even now, as
they go about The Bush day after day and night after night—and most
people, if they think of them at all, think that they are only working up some
mischief or looking for food—the Campites are really thinking out stories
they intend to tell at the next meeting. And such tales as some of them do
tell!
One time long ago —most interesting things seem to have happened long
ago —there was trouble in The Camp. It is from this that we get the saying,
“There is trouble in the camp.” It was first said by Joe-the-Rat. It came
about in this way.
Of course, you all know that some birds and some animals come out only
in the daytime and some only at night, while others come out both day and
night, or whichever happens to suit them best just at the time.


At The Camp it was generally easy enough for those who heard the
stories told during the daytime to make up their minds as to which they
thought the best. It was also fairly easy, though not so easy as in the day-
time, for those who listened to the stories told at night to make their choice.
The trouble arose when some of The Campites—those are the birds and
animals that belong to The Camp, you know—began to listen to both the day
stories and the night stories. Bunyip said so. And whatever Bunyip says
is right.
We all know and understand, or if w T e don’t we ought to, that stories
told at night always seem better, somehow, than those told in daylight. So,
of course, it came about that the prize w r as always being w T on by one of those
who told their stories at night. The day-time story-tellers got tired of this,
and held a meeting about it. Mrs. Gnoorie, the emu, was the one who called
the meeting. She got Keen-eyes, the eagle-hawk, to help her. You see, she
could make herself heard further than any of the others could, and he could
see better what was going on. He only had to circle round aw ay up amongst
the clouds, as he w T as alw T ays doing, to see everything. That is, of course, in
the day-time. Woop-Woop, the owl, could beat him easily at night.
TV ell, the trouble, as I was telling you, began in this way. The night-
time story-tellers were always winning the prize. It had been the case for
some weeks that the winner was a bird or animal that came out both day and
night. Both parties were satisfied with this, because the Day-timers could
claim the honour as belonging to their side, and the Night-timers could do the
same for their side. So both were more or less satisfied. Of course, there
weie some dissatisfied ones on both sides. But there are always those amongst
animals, just as amongst children and grown-ups, and sensible people take
little, if any, notice of them. They are better left alone.
In this case, Mrs. Gnoorie, the emu, raised the trouble. It was at a little
gathering at The Camp. Some of the birds and animals were, as usual,
standing or lying about the ground. Others were in their favourite places
up in the trees. Mrs. Gnoorie, of course, was on the ground. She can’t
climb; she would make it hot for Ginger Groogie, the opossum, if she could.
She said that it was high time that a Daylighter was at the head of The
Camp. Ginger Groogie took up her remark at once. He was seated well up
an apple-box tree, so was quite safe.
“That is just like you, Mrs. Gnoorie,” he said. “You must be complain-
ing about something or finding fault with somebody. You are the most dis-
contented creature in The Bush. You always want to be on the other side
of the fence.”
Mrs. Gnoorie’s eyes flashed as she looked up at Ginger Groogie.
“Oh, it is all right,” he went on; “you need not look so savage. I am
too high up to be hurt. TYhat I meant to say was that whichever side of the


"s'
fence you happen to be on you are always wanting to be on the other.”
Which is really true about Mrs. Gnoorie and all her kind.
“Why, Mrs. Gnoorie,” continued Ginger
Groogie, “let me tell you, and all those who
pretend to think with you —none of them really
can, you know—that you have only got three
good story-tellers amongst all the Daylighters.
There is Mr. Kook, the laughing jackass, and
he can only tell snake-yarns, and does all the
laughing himself.”
“Well, what is the matter with snake-
yarns?” asked Kook goodnaturedly, from where
he sat on the horizontal limb of a white-cedar
tree.
“Oh, everyone knows what a snake-yarn
is,” replied Ginger Groogie. “Whatever a
Mr, Kook
fellow can't believe he calls a snake-yarn. And yours are snake-yarns. Oh,
caterpillars, they ARE snake-yarns!”
“Why shouldn’t you believe snake-yarns, anyway?” hissed Brown, the
snake. He looked so savagely at Ginger Groogie as he spoke that Kook
began to chuckle to himself. Then a couple of his friends seated further
along the limb began to chuckle, too. Kook broke out into a loud guffaw.
His friends did the same, and soon The Camp was fairly rattling with their
laughter. When it had died down through a succession of hoots to a quiet
chuckling again, Ginger Groogie went on. He pretended to be angry.
“Just listen to him,” he said. “Anyone would think that I had said
something funny.”
“Not anyone who knew you. No fear!” chipped in Joe-the-Rat, from
wdiere he sat under a bush. “You’re hardly fit to be a wit.”
“Not from your point of view, perhaps,” snapped Ginger Groogie, “you
little hop-skip-and-a-jump,”
“He certainly has a point of view 7,” remarked Dr. Creep, the old wombat,
very thoughtfully, from wdiere he was moving heavily about the ground.
“He looks along his nose, and that is pointed enough for anything.”
Now Dr. Creep’s nose is a short, blunt thing, hardly a nose at all.
Joe-the-Rat is a great fellow 7 for a joke, even if it is against himself.
“You are not as blunt as you look, old friend,” he laughed.
“Silence in The Camp!” ordered Bundah, the big browm kangaroo, or, as
he is generally called, Bundah-the-Fighter, from where he stood at the foot
of a big gum-tree, w 7 hich was his usual place. Slow 7 Tom, the native bear,
was occupying his customary fork high up in that same tree. As usual, he


appeared to be asleep. At the sound of Bundah’s voice he looked down with
a start. “Did anyone speak?” he asked. “I was thinking.” Before any-
one could reply, he was asleep again. Cresty, the cockatoo, flew up and
screeched savagely in his ear. Slow Tom looked up humorously.
“Anything wrong, my dear?” he asked lazily.
“Anything wrong? Anything wrong?” screamed Cresty. “Of course
there is. You are awake.”
It w T as not nice of Cresty to taunt Slow Tom with being such a sleepy
fellow T , but Cresty is not always very nice. Anyway, Tom did not mind. He
could not mind; he was asleep before he had time to.
Bundah-the-Fighter spoke again. “Silence in The Camp!” he roared,
“and let us hear what Spike, the ant-eater, has to say.”
“Please, Sir,” said poor Spike, looking out from among his quills, “it
is not me. I did not do it. lam not King of The Camp now. It is Woop-
Woop, the owl, and I did not say anything, and I have not got anything to
say. I don't know what is the matter, and I did not do it.”
“Silly!” exclaimed Flighty, the squirrel, from up another tree; “there
isn't any King just now. There is a Queen.”
“And who is the Queen?'’ asked Bundah-the-Fighter.
Flighty looked at him shyly, and looked away again, but said nothing,
at least so that anyone could hear.
“Can't you see? Of course, it’s she,” rhymed Joe-the-Rat.
Joe-the-Rat w T as good at making rhymes. He always went by hops him-
self, so, of course, he could make rhymes run easily, though Spike, the ant-
eater, said he could not see why.
Bundah-the-Fighter looked up at Flighty, who by this time was on a
limb just over his head. “Are you our Queen now?” he asked. “I apologise
for having to ask, but there seems to be some little confusion here to-day.”
“Yes,” answered Flighty. “I was awarded the prize the night before
last.”
“She didn’t deserve it, either,” snarled Sir Lee, the water-rat.
Bundah ignored the remark. He turned to Flighty. “You are Queen,
and I did not know it, he said, in a w T ay that made you think he had missed
a great joy. “But,” he went on, “I did not know this was fairy-land.”
Wasn’t it nice of Bundah-the-Fighter?
Flighty looked very pleased, but Mrs. Gnoorie did not like it.
“There you go again! Paying compliments to Night-timers. It is
awful!”
Bundah-the-Fighter looked at her solemnly for a moment. “Don’t you
find it an awful bother, Mrs. Gnoorie?” He spoke very quietly.


“Find what a bother?” asked Mrs. Gnoorie. And, although she was
pleased at being spoken to by Bundah-the-Fighter, her voice was not at all
nice.
“That bad temper of yours,” said Bundah, with a twinkle in his eye.
1 ou see, he had to keep order in The Camp, and he could give it to people
when he thought they needed it.
Mrs. ( jnoorie got the huff, and walked away and sat down under another
tree all by herself. Joe-the-Rat broke out:
“There is trouble in The Camp;
The squirrel is a scamp,
She sits upon a tree,
And blushes prettily.
Oh ! Flighty is a scamp,
And there’s trouble in The Camp.”
Spike, the ant-eater, poked his head out from among his quills. “Joe,
you little larrikin,” he said; “can’t you keep quiet, and hear what your betters
have to say?”
“Why, I was King of The Camp myself only last week,” replied Joe, as
he carelessly flicked a fly off his ear with one of his hind feet. “I am a big
gun, I am, Bunyip said so. And whatever Bunyip says is right.”
At the word gun, Slow Tom raised his head a little and looked down.
“Don’t shoot,” he said, “I am not ready yet.” . And he curled himself up
tightly in the fork of the tree.
No one took any notice of him, and Mynah, the soldier-bird, began to talk.
“I quite agree with Mrs. Gnoorie,” she said. “Those Night-timers have
the advantage all the time.”
Miss Mynah has a very shrill voice. Jerry, the dingo, was sitting up
very straight beneath the tree from which she was speaking.
“Can’t you talk a little more quietly, Miss Mynah?” he asked gently,
cocking up one ear. “You will be bringing someone along to see what all
the noise is about.”
“Anyw r ay, I have warned you of danger more than once,” replied Miss
Mynah. Which was quite true, and Jerry had not denied it, but Miss Mynah
was always hasty-tempered and sharp of tongue.
Muraway, the blueflyer kangaroo, looked quickly over her shoulder out
on to the big plain that could be seen through the trees. “Perhaps you hear
something now, do you, Miss Mynah?” she asked anxiously.
Mrs. Gnoorie did not wait for anyone to hear the reply; she always was
rude.


“It is evident that we will not come to any decision here,” she snapped.
“What between the noise that is made by the Kook family and their friends,
the surliness of Ginger Groogie, the cheekiness of that pert little hop-skip-
and-a-jump, Joe-the-Rat, and the timidity
of Muraway, I think we had better have
another meeting at some other time, and
decide then as to what ought to be done.
For it ought to be done, and I intend to
do it.”
“It is my duty and I will,” sang Joe-
the-Rat cheerfully.
“Yes,” agreed Brolga, the native
companion, most sedately, from where he
stood star-gazing, his long, sharp beak
stuck straight up into the air. “I quite
agree with you, and I think it would be
better if we had two other meetings first.”
“I would hold one first and the other
afterwards,” remarked Jerry, the dingo,
blandly.
“If it were the right kind of bait
you would hold only one,” said Joe, who
was never on the best terms with Jerry.
Brolga
“You don t hold baits at meetings;
they are debates,” remarked Dr. Creep.
But Weetah, the bower-bird, was thinking of Brolga’s remark. “What
would that be for? she asked sweetly. Weetah always did speak sweetly.
“Mrs. Gnoorie proposes that w T e have another meeting. You suggest that we
should hold two other meetings first. It may be all right, but it sounds odd,
don’t you think?”
“Yes, before we meet we’ll meet twice. Hooray!” shouted Joe-the-Rat.
Brolga made a savage peck with his long, sharp beak at Joe, but the
little fellow was too smart. He ducked in between Brolga’s long thin legs
and whacked them with his tail as he went.
Brolga staggered and squeaked with the pain in a very undignified
manner.
“Silence in The Camp!” called Bundah-the-Fighter. “Mr. Brolga has
the floor. What were you about to say, Mr. Brolga?”
“I am about to say that if I get hold of Joe-the-Rat I’ll ” beean
Brolga.


Ciesty, the cockatoo, flew round and screeched savagely at Slow Tom.
Don t you want to hear what Mr. Brolga has to say?” she asked.
Slow Tom looked up sleepily. “Brolga,” he said, “I’d rather see him
dance. 1 always wonder when his legs are going to break.”
Brolga thinks he is a very fine dancer, and he looked up angrily. But
Slow Tom was asleep again. That is, he appeared to be, but I doubt if he is
asleep as often as he pretends.
hat is it that you suggest, Mr. Brolga ?” asked Bundah, very politely.
“Just this,” broke in Mrs. Gnoorie impatiently. “We Daylighters will
have a meeting of our own. The Night-timers, if they like, can have one of
their own. After that, we’ll all meet together. That is it, isn’t it, Mr.
Brolga?”
“Exactly, Mrs. Gnoorie,” replied Brolga, bow-ing very low and settling
down the feathers that had been rather rough with anger.
“And where do I come in?” asked Spike, the ant-eater. “I belong to
both.” 6
“Oh, you,” said Joe-the-Rat, w-ith a grimace; “you’ve got the spike
again.'’ Which is slang for being in a bad temper.
Flighty looked down in a superior sort of w-ay. “Vulgar little creature,”
she exclaimed.
But Kook and his clan burst out laughing, and Weetah chuckled softly
to herself. “Clever little scamp,” she said.
Joe-the-Rat smiled. “When do we meet at the meeting that is to take
place before we meet?” he asked jauntily.
“No one you to be there, said Spike, w-hose sharp quills
were slowly settling back into place again.
Joe laughed. “Don’t be nasty, old friend,” he said. “I’d take your
arm and see you home, only those quills of yours are apt to tickle a fellow’s
fancy so.”
“And you can’t stand being tickled about the fancy, eh, Joe?” said Kook.
“It all depends on w-hat you call the fancy,” replied Joe. “Now-, I fancy
that my fancy—of course, you’ll fancy it is only fancy ”
But Mrs. Gnoorie, w-ho was very angry, w'ould hear no more of him, and
gave him such a savage kick that he turned a few back-summersaults, and
finished up in a cotton-bush. Before he had time to pick himself up and
paste on a bit of skin that had been torn off his nose, it w*as all arranged that
the Daylighters should meet next morning and the Night-timers next night.
Miss Mynah and Cresty screamed at Slow- Tom till he awoke, and, between
them, told him what had been decided. For though Slow Tom is a sleepy
sort of fellow, he is also very sensible. Though he does not say much, what
he does say is well worth listening to, and the Daylighters wanted him to be


one of them. But Slow Tom was not at all sure about that, and thought he
would likely be on the side of the Night-timers. Anyw r ay, he said he wanted
time to think about it.
“Never do anything in a hurry, my dears,” he said. “Hurry is a bad
thing. More hurry more bruises, you know.”
Joe-the-Rat having recovered sufficiently to see that he was too late to
have any say in fixing things in connection with the proposed meetings, pre-
tended he saw something awful coming, and raced away hurriedly, shouting
as he went—
“There is trouble in The Camp,
Flighty is a scamp,
Mrs. Gnoorie’s feet are damp;
There is trouble in The Camp.”
So the discussion ended in confusion before Weetah could ask Ginger
Groogie, who he considered were the other two
good story-tellers amongst the Daylighters.
And since she had thought she must be one of
them, she was very anxious to ask that question.
But Weetah’s question that she did not ask,
and Ginger Groogie’s answer, and what was done
at the meetings that were held before the meet-
ing, and what Gnoorie did and Joe-the-Rat said
and did not think, and Slow Tom thought and
did not say, will have to wait.
Bunyip says so. And whatever Bunyip says
is right.
Slow Tom


CHAPTER 11.
The Meeting of the Daylighters
NEXT morning, that is, the morning after
the trouble in The Camp, Mrs. Gnoorie, the
emu, got up bright and early and started off
to gather all the Daylighters and urge them
all to come to the great meeting.
The first thing that she did was to stalk
slowly out from the clump of young cooli-
bah trees, where she had spent the night,
most of the time thinking things over, on to
the edge of the plain. There she made a
hollow, drumming, booming sort of noise
that in the still morning air could be heard
for miles around. Keen-eyes, the eagle-
hawk, woke up and shook his feathers. He
looked down from the high tree where he
had slept through the night in peace and
quietness, for he is not one to worry about
things. The dew w T as sparkling on the
grass, and as the sun came up over the edge
of the plain and turned the dew-drops into
millions of living diamonds, he thought
what a beautiful world it really is. He
stretched a leg and wing on one side. Then
he did the same for the other side. He felt
ready for the day. He dropped off the
limb on which he had been perched, and,
with a wide sweep of his powerful wings,
set off to carry out his promise to Mrs.
Gnoorie, for he had promised her that he
would help in gathering the Daylighters,
of whom he w y as one of the chief.
A pair of crows, perched high up in a
tree near where Mrs. Gnoorie had given her
call, began to talk. They had noticed all
that was happening; they always do. And being of an inquisitive and mis
chie\ous sort of nature, they must always be making trouble somewhere.


* a * i - . -
“ Mrs. Gnoorie pretended not to hear”


.


“So you are having trouble in The Camp, Mrs. Gnoorie,” said I ather
Crow, looking down sideways with one evil white eye.
Crows are such awfully bad things, you know, that no one can believe
anything they say, so long, long ago the birds and animals had a great big
meeting, and expelled them from The Camp, and no one was supposed to
speak to them at all for fear of the mischief they would be sure to make.
Of course, the crows said that they did not mind, rather liked it, in fact, but
all the same they did mind, and mind very much, too. And ever since
they had been turned out, they had been trying harder than ever to make
mischief among all the other birds and animals.
They would have done it too, for crows are very cunning birds, but that
none of the others would listen to them, much less stop and talk with them.
Because of this, it w r as a common trick of the crow's to talk loudly to each
other when they knew some of the other birds and animals could not help
hearing what was being said. They would say things about those who be-
longed to The Camp. Nasty, spiteful, vicious things they would say, just
whatever they thought would be likely to cause the most ill-feeling, and do
the greatest amount of harm. And though the others tried hard to take no
notice of them, still, the weaker ones could not altogether forget some of the
things they heard. It was this which made the coolness for quite a long time
between Chirrup, the fantail, and Perch, the yellow-hammer. But that was
all passed now, and they were angry about it. It is quite probable that if one
had been able to find out, the trouble now in The Camp had really come from
the crows. It was Mrs. Gnoorie more than anyone else who had caused it.
But never before to-day, since ever the crows had been turned out and
forbidden The Camp, had one of the Daylighters or the Night-timers
deliberately listened to what they had to say. And never, never had even
the weakest and most inquisitive of the Campites stopped to talk with them.
And now Mrs. Gnoorie went and did it; poor, silly, bad-tempered Mrs.
Gnoorie, who would have been such a grand lady had she only known how.
“So there is trouble in The Camp, Mrs. Gnoorie,” said Father Crow.
Mrs. Gnoorie pretended not to hear, I will say that for her. The first
time Father Crow said it, she pretended not to hear. Even when he re-
peated it she took as little notice as she could. But when he had said it the
third time, Father Crow saw that Mrs. Gnoorie really wanted to talk about it.
He continued to talk. “Of course, anyone with half an eye could see that it
was bound to come, when ladies like yourself had to meet such very queer
people as one finds there.”
“That is just it!” burst out Mrs. Gnoorie, who was pleased at Father
Crow’s way of putting it, which showed that he recognised her as the fine
lady she has always believed herself to be. “One has to meet all sorts of
people there. There is nothing I detest so much as ”


She stopped short, fearing lest someone might come along and see her
talking to Father Crow.
Ihe cunning old bird smiled to himself, but you may be sure he did not
let Mrs. Gnoorie see. “I quite understand,” he said. “And I could tell
you a few things that would surprise you about the way they talk of each
other, when they think they are by themselves, and no one will hear what
they are saying. They do not always see me, you know, and I have very
good ears. Now, only yesterday, Miss Mura way was saying that you
are ”
Just then Willy Wag came flying up, chattering as usual. He had seen
them talking together, and did not wish to let it go on. He is too decent
a little fellow to want to overhear what anyone is saying, so, as I have said,
he came up chattering away as usual. Mrs. Gnoorie pretended that she had only
been busy getting some breakfast amongst the bushes, before starting out
to gather up all the Daylighters for the great meeting. Father Crow knew
that it was no use trying to talk to her any more just then, and though Willy
Wag is such a chatterbox he knew that he could make no mischief with him,
so. croaking harshly, he flew away to look for his breakfast.
As he went, he turned to Mrs. Crow. “And the things that Kook says
about her, too,’' he said. “It is a pity that no one has told her or will tell
her. She certainly should know. It is not fair.”
He spoke loudly enough for Mrs. Gnoorie to hear. When he was out of
earshot he laughed to himself, well knowing that he had sown the seeds of
trouble.
Mrs. Gnoorie was very angry. She turned savagely on Willy Wag.
“What are you looking for here?” she snapped. “Can’t you see that lam
having my breakfast, and don’t like being disturbed?”
She pecked off some berries as she spoke. She had not looked what
she was doing, and got some green ones. They were very sour, and she
dropped them in a hurry. But Willy Wag never laughed. Instead, he
apologised quite nicely, and flew away, chattering to himself in the most
cheerful fashion.
Mrs. Gnoorie was very angry. “I always had my doubts of Muraway,”
she grumbled. “She always puts on too many airs. And as for Kook, I
always knew him to be just a common, vulgar fellow. I shall watch them
now and see if I can find out what they have been saying about me. I wish
I had not arranged to call the meeting for to-day. I would like to go away
by myself and think things over.”
What she really wished to do was to go away and sulk. But no one ever
admits they want to do that, do they?
Keen-eyes, the eaglehawk, who often sits quietly thinking about things
for quite a long time, never wastes time when he wants to do anything, and


he was already calling the Daylighters to gather up. But there were many
to be reminded that they were expected to be present, and Mrs. Gnoorie set
off to do her part. She wanted to be the most important person of the day,
as she was the biggest. Coorbarlee, the shingle-back lizard, had slept near
The Camp, so that he would not have far to go in the morning, and would
be sure to be there in time. Miss Muraway came hopping along from away
out on the red plain, and everyone she passed she reminded of the meeting.
She had such a nice way of doing it, that many who had only half made
up their minds about it, and some who had decided not to go at all, went,
just because she was going to be there. Wando, the wallaby, had been a
long while making up his mind as to whether he would join the Daylighters
or the Night-timers. He had finally decided that he would be a Night-timer.
Jacky Ringtail, the ring-tailed possum, never had any doubts as to what he
w y as, but he stayed up late that morning just to see the Daylighters gathering.
It was worth waiting up for. From his tree he could see them coming in
all directions, and in all sorts of ways. Some flew, some walked, some crept,
some wriggled, and some hopped.
“What a lot of birds there are amongst them,” said Jacky to himself.
“If the prize were for singing they would beat us easily. It’s a wonder none
of them ever thought of that.”
As a matter of fact, Weetah, the bower-bird, and Cresty, the cockatoo,
had both done so, but, as they were both very much better as mimics and
story-tellers than as songsters, they had said nothing about it to anyone.
Fancy a white cockatoo trying to sing! The idea made even Cresty herself
smile. But it was stupid of Mat Magpie and Nellie Thrush and Jack
Butcher and Will Puljooringhee, and all the other sweet-voiced ones, not to
have thought of it. Anyway, it was not Jacky Ringtail’s business to men-
tion it, so he crept into his nest of sticks and leaves, and kept dark.
So the Daylighters gathered at The Camp to begin their great meeting.
Now, the very first thing that upset them was to find that Bundah-the-Fighter
had not come. There have been many talks and much hot argument as to
what was the beginning of trouble that day, and some have said one thing
and some another, but I was told by both Slow Tom and Joe-the-Rat, at dif-
ferent times, too, that this was really the cause of it. And Slow Tom watched
the whole affair from up in the fork of the gum-tree, where he appeared to
be asleep, so he should know. I do not know where Joe-the-Rat was, but
anyway it does not matter, because he always knows everything. And any-
one who would doubt the word of Slow Tom or Joe-the-Rat, much less the
word of both of them, especially when you get it separately as I did, knows
very little about the animals of the bush, and especially those who are the
leaders at The Camp.


It really was Bundah-the-Fighter not being there that upset them ali
to begin with. It was, too, one of those trying sort of days that begin hot
and have a feeling of unpleasantness about them; the sort of day that makes
you feel that quarrelling is easy, and being nice not as easy as it should be.
Instead of coming, Bundah-the-Fighter had sent word that, after deep
thought and mature consideration, he had finally decided that his place was
amongst the Night-timers. Ihis w T as even worse. Before the trouble at The
Camp had begun, both Daylighters and Night-timers had looked on Bundah-
the Fighter as one of them, and been proud of him. Now to think that he
had decided to be one of the Night-timers! It was a nasty knock for the
Daylighters.
“Well,” said Mrs. Gnoorie, testily, “I suppose we can get along without
him. Let us constitute the meeting, and go on with business.”
“Who will take Bundah’s place?” asked Brolga, the native companion,
well knowing that Mrs. Gnoorie wanted it, and not wanting her to have it.
“Perhaps you had better get Slow Tom,” suggested Joe-the-rat, who had
been delayed so that he could not get home before daylight, and happened
to be just passing at the time. “He has as much dignity as the position de-
mands, and certainly is a level-headed sort of fellow. He is always calm in
a crisis.”
Now Mrs. Gnoorie has little but her dignity to support her in any high
position, and everyone knows that at times she gets very flustered. Of course.
Joe-the-Rat knew this, and that is why he said what he did.
Mrs. Gnoorie turned on him furiously. “Who asked your opinion? What
right have you to be here?” she said, her eyes flashing.
“Oh, I only mention it in passing. A passing remark, as it were,” re-
plied Joe, as he hopped away. “11l be back to-night,” he called from away
among some bushes. “Many happy returns to you all. Don’t quarrel, that’s
good children.”
Mrs. Gnoorie was very angry. “The impudence of the brat!” she ex-
claimed.
“Brat. Rat. Joe-the-Rat, cheeky brat,” said Weetah, the bower-bird,
softly to herself. “Joe would like that. It would make him laugh. I must
tell him wdien next I see hiih.”
“Well, anyway,” she said aloud for everyone to hear, “what about Slow
Tom?”
Coorbalee, the shingle-back lizard, opened one eye. “He told me last
night, as he was moving to another tree, that he is a Night-timer,” he said.
Jack Butcher whistled. “Things are looking only middling for us,” he
said.
“Not at all,” snapped Mrs. Gnoorie. “We have not begun yet. They
are not looking at all. How can they till we begin?”


“There are not many of us to begin,” said Coorbarlee heavily, “except
birds.”
Mrs. Gnoorie looked at him as though she would like to stamp on him,
but said nothing. It was beneath her dignity to argue with him. And just
fancy an emu stamping on a shingle-back lizard.
Keen-eyes had returned from his gathering-in of the people, and was
sitting on the limb of a box-tree. He did not like the way things were
going. For one thing, the limb on which he was sitting was lower than he
usually occupied, and he was feeling somewhat crowded.
“I propose that Mrs. Gnoorie take the chair,” he said. “In these days
of division between us and the Night-timers, it is just as well to show them
how independent we can be when we like. They are sure to have Bundah-
the-Fighter for chairman; so we’ll have Mrs. Gnoorie for chairwoman.”
No one appeared to be very pleased, and there were some murmured
objections to a bird being in the chair, but no one actually protested. So
Mrs. Gnoorie became head of the Daylighters.
Thus begun their real trouble. Had they put Weetah at the head of
affairs they would have been all right, for though she is small she is very
clever. As for Mrs. Gnoorie, she has more foot than head. Putting one’s
foot down is all very well; but it does need to be put down at the right
time, on the right place, and in the right way. It needs, one might say, to
be put down with the head. Always use your head in putting your foot
down. Never put your foot down unless you do it with your head. Mrs.
Gnoorie’s readiness to put her foot down without using her head to do it
caused trouble before the day was out.
As soon as Mrs. Gnoorie was appointed chairman —I mean chairwoman
—Miss Muraway left the meeting. She was slipping away quite quietly when
Willy Wag, in his fussy way, called after her. She took no notice.
Miss Muraway never did like Mrs. Gnoorie. Mrs. Gnoorie had been
rude to her many times, and beyond all endurance, even the patience of so
kind and gentle a creature as Miss Muraway is. She had always been quite
ready to allow Mrs. Gnoorie that precedence to which her greater age entitled
her, but Mrs. Gnoorie was not satisfied, and was really nasty to her. It was
only last week that Mrs. Gnoorie, seeing Miss Muraway coming for a drink,
had deliberately gone in and stirred up as much mud as ever she could, so as to
make the water unfit to drink, and Miss Muraway had had to go on to another
waterhole. Though she had been horrid many times before, Miss Muraway
had always tried to forgive her, but this was an insult past all forgiveness.
Miss Muraway was such a kind-hearted, gentle creature, such a real lady,
that everyone except Mrs. Gnoorie was fond of her. Of course, others had
seen what had happened at the waterhole, and it had been very much talked
about. Now, when Miss Muraway left the meeting in that quiet way, the


others remembered all this, and ill-feeling immediately arose. Pirribee, the-
wild pig, grunted a good deal about it, and told Mrs. Gnoorie that she had
made a mighty poor sort of a beginning.
“I did not do anything,” objected Mrs. Gnoorie. “The silly thing left
of her own free will. It is simply because she is jealous. Anyway, she is no*
loss.”
“We’ll know more about that later,” said Googar, the goanna, with
cunning smile, for he is one of those who like to see mischief.
“Miss Mura way may not be very clever,” said Kook from up on his
perch, “but she is always very nice, and not at all vain and high-and-mighty.
It is better than being silly, spiteful, and nasty.”
1 ou see, he was the wisest of all the Daylighters that had gathered there
that day, and thought he should have been chairman instead of Mrs. Gnoorie
being chairwoman. Besides, like most of the others, he really did like Miss
Muraway.
“To whom do you refer, Mr. Kook?” asked Mrs. Gnoorie, haughtily.
But Kook had his eye on Brown, the snake, and did not reply.
Matters went from bad to worse. Weetah said all sorts of nice things to
try and make it better. Nellie Thrush spoke sw T eetly now and then. Coor-
barlee threw in a wise word here and there. But all was to no effect. Even
little Jacky Winter, try as he would, could not get any chirpiness into the
meeting. Mat Magpie had a try or two, but he soon lost his temper. Will
Puljooringhee sang a song by himself away up over the tree-tops, but nothing
seemed to do much good. Even Kobin, the red-breast, could not brighten
things up at all.
Before long, Jack Butcher got in a rage at a remark made by Brown,
and shouted at him savagely and vigorously. The noise he made made all
the Daylighters very excited. They all began to speak at once, and only
succeeded in making things worse. Mrs. Gnoorie got flurried, and put her
foot down. She did not use her head to do it, and the consequence was that
her foot came down on the neck of poor, inoffensive Slug, the sleepy-lizard r
who is a first cousin of Coorbarlee.
Dr. Creep, the old wombat, who is a Night-timer, had to be called in.
He found that Mrs. Gnoorie was suffering with hadicus temperoris , a bad
complaint, and likely to recur; Slug, with injuries to the neck and a slight
concussion of the cavity—the place where those who have any keep their
brains. Weetah had nerves; the Kook family hysterics. Willy Wagtail
had chatterosis, and Mynah furiosis. Cresty had a bad fit of screamis hor-
rihilis. The Blue Jay family w T ere all talking at once, and Plimsoll, the
pelican, was yawning dangerously. The only thing for Doctor Creep to do
was to order immediate discontinuance of the meeting and all discussion
of anything that might excite the Daylighters. Of course, he belonged to*


the Night-timers himself. Mrs. Gnoorie was frightfully angry, especially
when she thought she neard the voice of Joe-the-Rat in the distance
chanting gleefully
The Daylighters meet,
They can’t agree,
It’s all that sweet
Old Mrs. Gnoree.
“Horrid little wretch, calling me old.
And he can’t even pronounce my name
properly,” she said, and stalked off in high
disdain.
So the meeting of the Daylighters
ended, and nothing was done.
As Doctor Creep went back to his den,
Joe-the-Rat spoke to him. “You are a sly
old dog. Doctor,” he said.
But Creep only winked one eye behind
his spectables, and went on.
Googar, the goanna, feeling very wild
inside, went up and attacked Ginger Groogie
in his hollow tree. But Ginger ran out past
him on to a limb where Googar could not
follow, and sat there hissing. The sunlight
hurt his eyes, and for some time he sat
there blinking. But when he looked down
and saw all the Daylighters going away
home in disgust, and Mrs. Gnoorie stalking
Doctor Creep
along angrily by herself, he nearly fell off the tree with laughing.
Googar went away in a huff, and Ginger Groogie decided just to stay
where he was, for the sun was setting, and it would soon be time for the
Night-timers to have their meeting.


CHAPTER 111.
The Meeting of The Night-timers.
Ihe snn dipped behind the trees fringing the far edge of the plain,
while yet its light still lingered high up in the sky, where fleecy clouds
floated in changing colours, the cry of Curlee Lew, the stone plover, rang out
over the land. With such startling suddenness did it come that it made
Ginger Groogie, as he still sat thoughtfully on the limb, turn to see where it
had come from.
Before it had quite died away, the call of Woop-Woop, the owl, came
up along the creek. It was answered like an echo by the howl of Jerry, the
dingo, away back amongst the hills that lay to the east. Almost before one
had time to think what it was all about, and before the soft and beautiful
pink in the clouds overhead had faded into the still, pure gray that means
the sun has gone, and Evening has arrived in her quiet way, the Night-timers
were calling, calling on every side, calling each other to their great meeting
at The Camp.
Bundah-the-Fighter heard it all as he went down to the creek for his
evening drink. He hopped slowly to the water’s edge, dropped down on his
hands, and drank till he was satisfied. Then he turned quietly, stood listen-
ing for a while, and then leisurely made his way to The Camp. The eyes of
Joe-the-Rat, who was still in his nest in the grass, sparkled as he heard him
go, and he thought of the time there was before them that night. For Joe-
the-Rat knew that the tempers of many of the Night-timers would be tried at
the great meeting. There would be many different opinions there, and
many voices. And Joe meant to see that his fellows, the Night-timers, did
not disgrace themselves as their opponents the Daylighters had done.
Doctor Creep set his spectacles straight on his blunt old nose and smiled
slowly to think how the meeting of the Daylighters had ended. The way
in which they had allowed themselves to be guided by him was amusing.
Slow Tom moved to another limb, one from which he would be able to get a
better look at all that took place, and would be handier to hear all that Joe-
the-Rat had to say about what had happened, as well as all that he would
have to say about what had yet to happen. He knew that Joe would have
seen all that had taken place at the Daylighters’ meeting. Joe always did
see all that went on everywhere. And the way he told about it always
amused Slow Tom immensely.
“Good morning, Tom,” said Ginger Groogie, as Tom came up near him.
Of course it was really evening, but it was morning to them.


“Good morning, Ginger,” replied Slow Tom. “Have you heard what a
failure the Daylighters made of their meeting? I was thinking.”
Slow Tom always ended his sentences that way. He was so often caught
asleep by his friends, and had to tell them that he was thinking that it had
become a habit with him. In fact, some of the larrikins of The Camp called
him “Old I-was-thinking.”
“I saw some of it,” answered Ginger Groogie. “It was a frost. It did
me good to see the way that horrid Mrs. Gnoorie felt about it all. She got
what she deserved. She did look sorry for herself. Oh, grasshoppers! It
was good. But I would not be Mrs. Gnoorie for a day or two for some-
thing.”
“Wait till we hear what Joe has to say about it,” said Slow Tom. “I
was thinking.”
While the two talked the other Night-timers gathered on the ground be-
neath them and in the trees beside them. Soon The Camp was crowded.
When the Daylighters had gathered, one could see them coming, but now
birds, and particularly animals, seemed to be appearing silently from every-
where, coming as though they would never cease. Miss Muraway was amongst
them, and everyone was pleased to see her there. Joe-the-Rat came hopping
along, and sitting up suddenly on his tail, exclaimed: “Hulloal Here we are
again. This is how we meet before we meet. Well, it is to be hoped that
we can make a better thing of it than the Daylighters did of their show.
Oh, my! Oh, my!” and holding his sides with his strong little hands, he
fairly shook with laughter. “Just to see Mrs. Gnoree (now that he knew it
annoyed her he always pronounced her name like that) getting away, looking
as though she had trodden on her own neck instead of that of Slug, the sleepy
lizard, who doesn’t count; or had been out in the wet and was wondering
how cold her feet were, or something of the sort! It was great! And all
because old Bundah, our Bundah-the-Fighter, was not there. That’s what
began the whole trouble!” He turned as he saw Bundah approaching.
“Yes, Bundah,” he said, “just fancy! They actually felt the want of you.
Poor lot, aren’t they, when they could not get along amongst the lot of them?
Oh, yams and ta tie-roots!”
He continued laughing till Bundah-the-Fighter moved over to his usual
place, and looked as though he were going to call the meeting to order.
Sharp, the native cat, pinched his tail as he went, but Bundah pretended not
to feel it. If it had hurt him he would have knocked Sharp into the middle of
his future history. But it did not hurt, and it was beneath his dignity to
take any notice of it. Joe did not want the meeting to begin just yet. Quite
a number had not yet arrived, and they would be annoyed if they found
the meeting had been started before they got there. Joe was particularly
anxious that everyone should be in a good temper.


“Oh, I say!” he exclaimed. “Not so fast. Not so fast. I must tell you
what happened to-day. Now, all those in favour of hearing what happened
at the meeting of the Day-timers ”
Of course, everyone wanted to hear, and Slow Tom grunted something to
the effect that if he knew anything it would be worth hearing.
“But then you never do know anything, do you, Tom?” laughed Joe-the-
Eat.
Slow Tom looked down. “I was thinking,” he said. Some say he smiled.
Sharp says he didn’t. But Sharp always was a mean sort of fellow.
All the Night-timers that were present gathered round to hear Joe tell
what had happened, how it had happened, why it had happened, and what
he thought of it now that it had happened. He told them the whole story as
you have already heard it. And the antics he went on with while he was
telling them, put everyone in a good humour. So the Night-timers began
their great meeting quite happily.
Bundah-the-Fighter was chairman, as he always had been, and he looked
as if he always meant to be. The talk began in a quiet and orderly way.
Bundah himself was the first speaker. That is, he spoke a few words to start
the meeting, as is proper for every Chairman to do. He hoped that the
meeting would be a well-conducted one, that the speakers would not say any-
thing unpleasant, and that everyone would listen quietly. He also hoped
that the whole thing w r ould be gone through with proper dignity. When he
said that, there were loud cheers from those who were enjoying the failure
of the Daylighters. The cheering was so loud that it aw r oke Cresty, where
she was asleep on a big tree down along the creek, and she spoke savagely to
Mrs. Gnoorie, who was moving restlessly beneath. And Mrs. Gnoorie
snapped back at her in a way that was far from ladylike, and went away
sulkily.
The next speaker was Miss Muraway. She said gently, as she always
did, that she was sure all would be perfect harmony. But, for her part, she
said, she did not see that there was any necessity for them to tell stories to
see who should be King or Queen amongst them. She looked at Bundah-the-
Fighter with her great soft eyes as she spoke, and Bundah bowed. “But,”
she added, “I am quite ready to do whatever is thought to be the best.”
Ginger Groogie, who was a bit of an agitator in his way, immediately
followed her. He spoke with spirit. “Bundah-the-Fighter is a fine fellow,”
he said, “and one whom we all admire and respect most highly. He will
always be our real leader when it comes to trouble. But it is not necessary,
no, nor nice, for the King or Queen to be that; one does not expect it of
them. Before the days of wire fences, it may have been all right, but we
have got beyond that stage. Bundah is Prime Minister by natural right, but


to be King always is quite another matter. It is quite a different thing, and
if we did such a thing, what is to be the prize for story-telling?”
Ginger Groogie, having put this question, looked straight at Miss
Muraway.
“Quite so,” she assented. “I had not thought of that. As you know r , I
do not study these things.”
“No,” said Woop-Woop, the owl, rather unpleasantly, “and you are not
a story-teller, either. I don’t mean anything nasty in saying that, but stories
do not seem to interest you much, and you never tell any, so, of course, you
would look at this differently from most of us.”
Doctor Creep spoke up. “No,” he said, “Miss Muraway spends much
of her time dreaming. I do not know what about, but I think it must be
about when the world was young, and what her ancestors used to do. She
comes of a rather remarkable family.” Doctor Creep is very learned; he has
delved deep in the Book of Nature, w T hich is the greatest of all books of learn-
ing. Bunyip says so.
Said Joe-the-Rat, “She can’t help that. As far as I know, we all come of
\ery old and remarkable, not only remarkable, mark you, but old and re-
markable, families, all about as old as one another, I suppose. And that is
something to be proud of. But as far as lam concerned, I have always found
more interest in the root of a yam than in the root of a family, and most of
us, Slow Tom, for instance, think a lot more of a good gum-tree than a good
genealogical tree.
Slow Tom raised his head and looked down. “Genealogical, Joe, that is
good. Where did you find that one? I was thinking.”
“Oh, I am always digging out something fresh,” said Joe, who lives
largely on roots. “But talking of family—
The rat’s a rat,
The cat’s a cat,
The kangaroo a ’roo is;
For more than that
Don’t fret your hat,
Or be a who-is, who-is.”
Curio, the platypus, objected. I find these subjects of great interest,
and not to be treated lightly,” he said, from behind his horn spectacles, which
made him look very learned.
“Naturally you would,” said Ginger Groogie, “because neither you nor
anyone else know T S what you are nor why you are.”
“I am a Night-timer,” said Curio, with great dignity, as though that
were all it was necessary for anyone or anything to be. Everyone cheered.


“T es,” said Bundah, who did not care about such talk, being afraid that
it might lead to ill-feeling, “we who are here are all Night-timers, and that
it all we want to know of each other’s a hairs. We may as well get on with
the business before the meeting.”
“But there is no business before the meeting,” objected Jerry, the dingo.
“The meeting has no business to be here,” growled Spreckle, the tiger-cat.
“Well, you need not stay if you don’t like it,” Ginger Groogie snarled
down at him. “No one will miss you very much if you go, I am sure.”
“Order! Order!” called Bundah-the-Fighter.
Wando, the wallaby, whipped up a leaning tree, and sat there licking
his paws..
Very rude of him, wasn’t it?
Bundah named him, and he began to speak.
“Well,” he said, “we are all met here together ”
“It looks like it, but we haven’t,” said Joe.
Wando, who thinks a great deal of himself, but is a poor speaker, began
again.
“Well,” he said, “we have all met here together.”
Joe interjected again. Joe simply could not keep quiet. Anyway, he
did not want to just now. He jumped to his feet, and began:
“He says we’ve met,
We have not yet.
We have to meet
Before we meet,
And time is fleet.
So don’t forget
We ha\en’t met.
We’ve only come
To make things hum,
And have them neat
Before we meet.”
He saw Bundah-the-Fighter looking at him severely.
But time is fleet,
I’ll take my seat.”
He sat down.
“Well,” began Wando again, “we’ve all met here together ”
“That’s the third time,” said Ginger Groogie, sourly.
“And we are only to meet twice,” exclaimed the irrepressible Joe.
“We’ll need to meet a lot of times, if we go on like this,” said Jerry, thb
dingo.


“Or not at all,” growled Spreckle, the tiger-cat.
“Order! Order!” called Bundah-the-Fighter.
Meanwhile, Doctor Creep had begun to dose. Joe-the-Rat hopped over
to him and tickled his nose with a blade of grass. It made Creep sneeze.
The hardness of his sneeze made him lose his spectacles. And losing his
spectacles nearly made him lose his temper. Not quite, though, for the old
Doctor is always a gentleman, and no gentleman should lose his temper over
a harmless joke. He saw Joe behind him, laughing as usual.
“You again! You young scamp!” he exclaimed. “Look here, Bundah,”
he said, “we shall never do any good with this fellow at the meeting.”
“I don’t think we’ll do much good in any case,” sighed Wando, who was
hurt at not being allowed to speak.
“What is it we are here to do, anyway?” asked Merry, the field-mouse.
Now that was a poser. No one seemed to be able to answer it. Bundah-
cleared his throat. “We are here ”he began, and paused-
“Hear, hear,” called Joe-the-Rat.
“Eh? Eh? What is the matter?” asked Slow Tom, waking up. “I was
thinking.”
“Well, go on thinking. You are better that way,” replied Joe, cheerfully.
“We are here,” Bundah began again. Again he paused. A smile spread
over his face. “What IS it we are here for?” he asked.
Everyone began to laugh.
“We’re here to meet before we meet. I told you that before,” said Joe,
brightly.
“But what for?” asked half a dozen voices.
“That is more than I know,” answered Joe. “It seems to be more than
anyone else knows, too. Mrs. Gnoorie said the Daylighters should meet be-
fore we all met to talk over what is to be done about the story-telling busi-
ness. So we’ve met, too. Why we have done it no one knows. Their meet-
ing came to nothing but angry words.”
“And ours has come to nothing but laughter,” said Wando, wearily, as
those around him laughed at Joe’s performance.
“Better that than quarrelling,” remarked Muraway, gently. Like the
lady she is, Muraway always speaks gently, even when getting in a dig at
Mrs. Gnoorie.
Doctor Creep looked at Joe-the-Rat. “You young rogue,” he said, “you
laid yourself out for this, I can see. H Only for you, we would ha\e all been
at each other’s ears long before this.”
Joe laughed. “There is the morning star coming,” he said, with a wave
of his hand toward the east. “There is no fear of trouble now.”
Bundah looked at the star. Then he turned solemnly to the meeting.
He spoke in his deepest voice. “Dawn approaches,” he said. “The meeting


must be brought to a close. The Daylighters met. They quarrelled. Be-
sides that, they did nothing. We, the Night-timers, also met. We also have
done nothing. But we have not quarrelled. Instead, we have laughed. For
this the thanks of the Night-timers are due to Joe-the-Rat. I, therefore, move
that a hearty vote of thanks be carried to Joe-the-Rat.”
Doctor Creep seconded the motion. He entered into a long speech about
how ill-feeling is aroused, and how much damage it does. Before he had
got far, Jerry rudely remarked: “You had better finish the rest of it in your
burrow, old bean.”
The remark so staggered the old Doctor that before he had recovered
they carried the vote to Joe, cheering like mad. The noise they made over
that vote was such that again Cresty was awakened by them. She heard
quite plainly the last two cheers that were given. Mrs. Gnoorie also heard them
and spoke savagely. “Ah,” she said. “It sounds as though they had had a
good meeting. I would like to dance a polka on Ginger Groogie and kick
Joe-the-Rat into a heap of dead thistles, with all their thorns on.”
She guessed that Joe must have had a good deal to do with it, but she
did not know that it was really owing to him that the meeting had been
saved from failure. But Joe and Tom and Ginger had a little talk over the
affair before they parted for the day, and felt sure that they would now be
able to keep things going all right.
“Mrs. Gnoorie will be mad,” said Joe-the-Rat cheerfully


CHAPTER IV.
How the Great Meeting Was Called.
Joe-the-Rat had just got home to his nest in the grass when he began
to laugh. And he did laugh!
“Well/’ he said, “Ha ! Ha! I —He! He! —never did. Ho! Ho! Ho! I never
did. Neither did anyone else. Oh, yams and tatie roots, I never did.
Ho Ho!”
Cresty, the cockatoo, happened to be sitting in the tree which overhung
the very quiet and comfortable place where Joe had made his nest, and over-
heard him. She was still very angry with him. Like Mrs. Gnoorie, she was
always angry with someone.
“No one ever said you did hoe,” she screeched. “You dig, you \ulgar
little animal. You scratch. You dig with your horrid little hands and dirty
all your nails. You could not hoe if you tried.”
Joe-the-Rat looked up with surprise. He had not known that anyone
was within hearing. But, as usual, he was only amused. “You need not be
so awfully snappish about it,” he said. “My! but it is good, really good.”
And he began to laugh again. We are a
smart lot. He-ho ! He-ho ! It is good!”
Cresty flew down a little nearer to
where Joe was. He looked up at her in-
terestedly. She walked along the limb.
Carefully she walked, in as graceful a way
as she knew how, all the time getting nearer.
She wanted to know what it was that was
amusing Joe-the-Rat so much, for w r e all
like to be in any joke that is going on. She
put up her top-knot, and smiled down at
Joe.
Joe ceased laughing and looked at Cresty.
At first he had a very wise and critical air,
but that soon passed away. He began to
look very pleased with her or with himself
or something. Of course, Cresty thought
it was with her.
“Well, Joe,” she said softly, “what is
it?”
Miss Cresty
Joe kept back a smile. “You know,


Miss Cresty,” he said, “you would be rather a nice girl if you had not such
a hasty temper. You are quite nice to look at.”
Cresty was very pleased. But it was the first part of Joe’s remark to
which she replied. She wanted him to say something that was all nice.
“Rather nice, would I?” she asked, in a much kinder voice than she had used
before. “How \ery good of you to say so. I like being rather nice, but why
put in the ‘rather’?”
“Yes, you know,” said Joe, not taking any notice of the question, “you
can look pretty. When you put up that beautiful crest of yours, and ask
questions with it the way you sometimes do, you are just sweet.”
Joe-the-Rat was warming to his subject. “Do you know,” he went on,
“if you always looked like that, I believe that I would fall in love with you
myself.”
“That would be most delightful for me, I am sure,” said Cresty archly.
“Perhaps you could look nice, too, if you tried.”
“You have no idea how nice I can be when I try,” replied Joe. “Sup-
pose I try.”
“Suppose you do nothing of the sort,” answered Cresty, suddenly grown
huffy again. “If you feel that it is an effort, perhaps you will be good
enough to practise on someone else, I am not a doll to be played with or a
silly young thing to be practised on.”
Joe was enjoying himself. “I do not feel that it would be any effort at
all with you,” he said. “It might be with anyone else, but not with you.
You see, when a fellow meets a girl like you he only has to look at her to
feel nice. He may not be as nice as he feels, but he does feel nice.”
“Feeling nice and being nice may be two very different things,” said
Cresty, who really was pleased to listen to Joe talking like this. “Anyway,
do you often meet girls like me?”
“Never, so help me, gum-leaves!” exclaimed Joe.
Cresty looked more pleased than ever. Joe looked at her for a minute.
“Now, if you were only a Night-timer,” he said.
Joe-the-Rat made a mistake there. Perhaps he meant to.
“I thank my fortune I was hatched a Daylighter,” said Cresty stiffly.
Joe thought the matter had gone far enough, so he answered, “Of course,
of course; it is natural that you should. Your crest is simply lovely in the
sunlight. And those sweet little rings round your eyes show up so much
better in the daytime; one can see them all then.”
Now the rings round a cockatoo’s eyes show its age. For every year it
gets one ring round each eye, so, of course, silly Miss Cresty was a little
touchy on the subject. But she was intending to be sweet this morning, ir
the hope that Joe would say some more nice things to her.
“But I have not many rings, Joe,” she said, softly.


i || ffiiw
\ >. ♦ "ILh. :■’<
Ml JrV.' ih a JmmKtm<<r%mE!mm*m «H8k% m
jJjA t?..,.S\..'•■■:■•'.••■ Jr '$■ J5pjt?' : . v; .
‘1t. 7 TB| ’* " « - -{> ’ • .«;. £*' 4# .*8Bpj&. &&*#!**%.
' f ' * >C . 4uf tahte*' « j* *BP’ f*®-.? V f', ; ■ <
, v I
“Why should I want to see Slow Tom?” asked Cresty, scornfully.


.


Joe thought he would proceed with the game. “No! No!” he said, “you
have just enough to make you look really beautiful. But I would like to
add another ring.”
“Why, Joe,” said Cresty, “you do not want to make me look old, do you?”
“No, Cresty,” he answered, “not unless a wedding ring would do it.”
Cresty spread out her top-knot to its fullest extent and blushed prettily.
“But you—you don't mean that, Joe?” she said.
Joe-the-Rat put one hand over his heart, curled his tail beautifully round
one side, and began, “Cresty, dear Cresty ”
But she was higher up than he was, and could see further. “Hush!”
she said, warningly, “here comes Mrs. Gnoorie.”
Mrs. Gnoorie came stalking along moodily. She looked savagely at Joe.
Then she glanced up at Cresty, and w 7 as just going to give her a good lec-
ture for talking to a Night-timer, and such a Night-timer as Joe-the-Rat,.
when he, seeing what was coming, began to rattle off a rhyme:
“Cresty, the cockatoo.
Was making a how T -do-you-do,
And giving poor Joe a time, a time,
A pretty rough sort of a time, a time,
And Joe, wdio’s a terror to rhyme, to rhym
Being stuck for the next line he turned suddenly, as though he had just
noticed Mrs. Gnoorie, and bowing low, began to chant—
“But now do I see
The most stately
Mrs. Gnooree?
It cannot be
She would speak wdth me.”
He was letting her know* that he had noticed she had stopped as though
about to say something.
Mrs. Gnoorie saw that she had made a mistake. “Speak to you!” she
exclaimed; “everyone knows that I would not do such a thing.” She never
did have sense enough to know that abuse hurts the one who gives it more
than the one who receives it.
Joe-the-Rat winked at Cresty. Gnoorie turned upon her and began to
scold.
But Joe was equal to the occasion. “Really, Mrs. Gnoorie ” he
began.
She turned on him fiercely, but he had been prepared for it, and, hop-
ping quickly under a wild-currant bush, laughed aloud.


Mrs. Gnoorie was awfully angry, and began kicking and striking at the
bush in vain etlorts to reach him. The little rogue, seeing how angry she
was, began to tease her. He stuck his tail out along the ground, so that it
would be within her reach. She made a savage peck at it, as he had intended
she should. He whipped his tail away, and Mrs. Gnoorie got her beak full
of dirt.
Cresty felt inclined to laugh, but was afraid lest Mrs. Gnoorie should see
her. Mrs. Gnoorie was really too busy trying to get the dirt out of her
mouth to see anything. As she put her head down near the ground in her
etlorts, Joe raised such a dust that it got into her eyes. She did get savage!
She tried to scold, but could not do so for the dirt in her mouth. Winking
one eye furiously, she got rid of enough dust to be able to see Joe sitting
within her reach. She made a dive at him. Joe-the-Rat jumped her
outstretched neck, and boxed her ears with his tail as he went. She got so
mad at this that even Cresty got frightened, and, hying up to the top of the
tree, on which she had been sitting, screeched aloud. Miss Mynah and her
friends away down along the creek took up the cry. Jack Butcher, hearing the
noise, flew T hastily to the scene, uttering his war-cry as he went. Willy Wag
went chattering round as usual, and soon there was such a commotion that
Mrs. Gnoorie was glad to get away and pretend that, as far as she was con-
cerned, nothing had happened. Joe watched her go with a look of great pity on
his face, a look that, of course, everyone could see, as he meant them to do.
The others began to ask him questions.—But Joe had done what he wanted,
and was too generous to make sport of a fallen foe, so said nothing much.
Soon they all left, returning to their usual work and play.
As soon as they had all gone, Joe-the-Rat began to laugh again. “But it
is good,” he said. “Yams and tatie roots, it is good!”
Cresty, seeing that Joe was again alone, dropped to a lower limb and
began talking to him once more. She wanted him to make love to her again.
“Mrs. Gnoorie is awfully bad-tempered, isn’t she?” she said. “Such bad
taste, too, to interfere in things that way. It was quite uncalled for.”
“I am afraid that I have rather a bad effect upon her,” laughed Joe.
Cresty smiled sweetly. “You really should not try to annoy people in
the way you do,” she said. “You are altogether too clever at it. You really
can be very nice when you want to be.”
“I am glad to hear it,” said Joe, who was now quite tired of this sort of
talk. “By-the-w r ay, did you see anything of Slow T Tom while you were up
there, sitting on the very top of that tree and making such a noise?”
He meant to show that he did not think much of the way in which she
had behaved, leaving him to bear all Gnoorie’s ill-temper when he had only
brought it on himself to save her from a scolding.


“Slow Tom,” said Cresty, scornfully. “No, I saw nothing of him. Why
should 1 want to see Slow Tom?”
“Oh! I just thought you might have seen him. You went up a good way,
you know r , and he happens to be a friend of mine, and I have something I
particularly want to tell him. But it will keep; it will keep.” He laughed
and broke into rhyme:
“Sleep, sleep,
Slow Tom sleep.
Do I hear you snoring?
Deep, deep,
Slow Tom, sleep,
Nose in brisket boring.”
That is how Slow Tom sleeps, you know, with his nose stuck into the
fur on his chest. He looks very comfortable that way, too.
“Oh! how horribly vulgar,” exclaimed Cresty, flying higher up the tree
for fear someone would see that she was talking to Joe-the-Rat.
“I thought that would offend her,” said Joe to himself. “What a vain
little bunch of feathers it is, to be sure! But she can look nice sometimes.
However, I must be off to find Slow- Tom and tell him the joke.”
He started to hop away, but had hardly taken more than six hops when
he stopped short. The sun was high up, shining almost overhead. Joe-the-
Rat glanced up at it, and winked and blinked and sneezed as though it had
emptied a can of pepper in his face. It was some time before he recovered
sufficiently to take a long breath and say to himself, “What a little duffer I
am. It is time I was in bed long ago.” Hopping back, he dived into his
nest and tucked himself up there. He was very sleepy. “I must tell Slow
Tom to-night,” he said to himself. “I must tell—Tom to-night. I must tell
—Slow —Tom to-night. I must —tell—Tom —to-night. I—must —tell—
Slow ” Before he could finish saying it he fell asleep.
At sunset Joe woke up with a start. He knew that there was something
he wanted to do. “Let me see what is it?” he asked himself. “Oh, yes, I knowl”
He watched the darkness gathering, and waited. He did not want to get out
in the daylight again. When the stars were well out, winking their mes-
sages to each other all over the sky, he jumped out of his nest and raced away
to find Slow Tom. He knew that he would find him up the same tree he had
sat in during the meeting. Tom has never been one for change. No one
could call him a globe-trotter or rolling-stone, or anything awful like that.
When he finds a place that suits him he just stays there. Why shouldn’t he?
Joe-the-Rat hopped along merrily till he came to the tree he wanted to reach.
Then he sat up on his tail, and, looking up, called, “Tom I Tom! old boy!
Tom! I say, Tom, I’ve something to tell you.”


lom took his head out of his chest. He really does sleep with his
head on his chest, or, as Joe had called it, his brisket.
“Hulloa, Joe! Is that you? I was thinking.”
give that a rest, and DO something,” called Joe. “I say, here is
a lark, a jolly lark! We’re a smart lot, we Night-timers, and I don’t think
the Daylighters are any better. We have each held a meeting, haven’t we?”
“I believe we have,” said Slow Tom, sleepily.
?sow, then, old boy, keep awake if you can,” called Joe. “I say, is
Ginger Groogie up there?”
(linger had just come out of a hollow limb, and was sitting looking down
at Joe,
“Yes, Joe, old boy, lam here,” he said. “What is the trouble?”
“No trouble,” shouted back Joe, “rather a pleasure.”
’Tis a pleasure,
Beyond measure,
He’s a treasure,
Is Slow Tom.
Can you wake him?
Mind don’t break him,
There are not any more like him,
Where he comes from.”
Slow Tom raised his head again. “What is it, Joe?” he asked. “I was
thinking.”
“Can you tell me when the Great Meeting is to take place?” asked Joe.
Slow Tom looked at Ginger Groogie, and Ginger Groogie looked at Slow
Tom.
“I can’t,” said Tom.
“And I can’t,” said Ginger.
“And I can’t,” laughed Joe-the-Rat. He was enjoying the joke.
But Ginger Groogie is not a great one to laugh. He thought for
moment.
“Perhaps Doctor Creep can tell us,” he said
“We had better go and see,” suggested Joe.
“Not me,” said Slow Tom, decidedly.
“Oh, nonsense! It isn’t far,” said Joe-the-Rat. “Come along, Tom.”
“Not me!” said Slow Tom.
“Yes,” said Ginger Groogie, “you must come, Tom.”
“Not me!” said Tom. “I was thinking.”
Now Ginger is apt to be a bit surly at times, but he has a lot of fun in
him all the same. “I’ll race you there, Tom,” he said.


“Ginger Groogie was sitting, looking down at Joe-the-Rat ”




Slow Tom smiled. “I was not built for speed,” he said.
“Oh, come along, Tom,” called Joe.
“Not me!” said Tom. “I was thinking.”
Just then Doctor Creep, the wombat, happened to come along. He had
heard his name mentioned. “What is all this about?” he asked.
He put his horn-spectacles straight on his blunt old nose, and looked
up the tree. “Ginger Groogie and Slow Tom,” he said. “And, my good-
ness, Slow Tom is awake! Is anything wrong? What is it all about?”
“It is all about the Great Meeting,” said Joe-the-Rat. “We want to
know when we meet. Everything is arranged for the Great Meeting, but no
one knows when it is to be. There is no time fixed, or even mentioned.
“Oh, no trouble about that,” said Doctor Creep; “to-night, of course.”
“Then what about the Daylighters?” asked Joe. “They can’t come if it’s
held at night.”
“The old Doctor was nonplussed. He straightened his spectacles again,
and looked very wise. “I never thought of that,” he said.
“Nor did anyone else, apparently, till it struck Joe,” said Ginger Groogie.
“Well,” said Doctor Creep, “we shall have to attend to it. We four shall
have to form ourselves into a Committee-of-Messengers to let everyone know
when the meeting is to be.”
“Not me!” said Slow Tom. “Not me!”
“Oh, you! You’d go to sleep on the way,” laughed Joe-the-Rat.
“Not me!” said Slow Tom. “I would not get on the way. Not me!”
“Well, we three shall have to do it,” decided Doctor Creep, the wombat.
“Nothing else for it,” agreed Joe-the-Rat. “Let us start in, right away.”
He was just about to set off when Doctor Creep laid hold of his arm.
“It might be better to put up a notice about it,” he said. “Let us consider.”
Doctor Creep is good at considering, much better at considering than at
running about.
So it was decided that the four of them, Doctor Creep, the wombat,
Ginger Groogie, the possum, Slow Tom, the native bear, and Joe-the-Rat, the
kangaroo-rat, would talk the matter over and consider what would be the
best method of letting both Night-timers and Daylighters know when the
Meeting was to be held.
They began to discuss it at once. Joe-the-Rat was of the opinion that the
best method was to take word round. But he did not say so, for he knew that
he would have to do it pretty well all himself, and that was too much of a
good thing even for Joe-the-Rat. Finally, it was decided that a big notice-
board should be put on one of the two great gum-trees that grow at the
entrance to The Camp. So it was done.
I have a photograph of the board, which was taken by Bilby, the little


silver fellow who lives in holes in sand-ridges amongst the cypress pines. It
reads thus:
To All Those Interested.
Take Notice
THE
GREAT MEETING
will take place at
THE CAMP
On the Night of The Full Moon
ORDER
I his time was fixed to suit, as well as could be done, both the Day lighters
and the Night-timers. Of course, it would not suit the Daylighters as well as
the Night-timers, but then they were Night-timers who arranged it, and they
really did think that they w r ere doing the best they could for all concerned.
Joe-the-Rat scratched underneath the notice some of his rhymes. They
read like this:—
Now don’t go wrong,
But come along,
With laugh and song and story,
Each has a show
To win, you know,
The Kingship and its glory.
When the Daylighters saw the notice, some of them said that they did
not think it was fair that the meeting should be held at night, even on the
night of the full moon. But everyone knows that while it is quite impossible
for some of the Night-timers to see in the daytime, all Daylighters can see at
least pretty w T ell on a clear moonlight night. So there was very little ill-
feeling about it. Some of the Daylighters growled, but they came all the
same, and it was a great gathering of all the birds and animals of the Bush,
the greatest that has ever been.
And what happened? What happened, eh? Well, I’ll tell you in
another chapter. Bunyip said so. And whatever Bunyip says is right.


CHAPTER V.
The Great Meeting.
Ihe sun set, and the moon rose at the same time. They do, you know,
when the moon is at the full. You may have noticed—everyone with eyes
ought to notice these things—that it is just as though they were a pair of
scales, or two children sitting on the ends of a see-saw—one goes down, the
other comes up. In winter-time the sun is too sleepy to catch the moon next
morning, until it is a very weak moon, but in summer-time he catches it all
right.
All day the bush-folk had hardly known what to do with themselves,
especially the Daylighters. The Night-timers went to bed as usual, but none
of them could sleep much, and quite a lot of them got up and talked in the
sheltered places, where the sun was not too hot or too strong for their eyes.
The poor Daylighters, for the most part, were wandering about in an aim-
less sort of way, starting at one thing, and, before they had properly begun
it. setting oft to do another, and never really doing anything at all.
As I have said, the Night-timers slept badly, those of them who slept at
mll. Old Doctor Creep never went to bed. He was busy all day down in his
burrow, with his spectacles on, reading The Signs of The Times or The Book of
Nature. Most of the birds and animals read these regularly, but very few
human beings are able to. Which is sad for the humans, for there is a great
deal of good reading, often very amusing reading, in The Signs of The Times.
In the Book of Nature one finds real wisdom, and those who read it regu-
larly are the happiest of beings. They take little notice of the small things
that are forever worrying many people—life is too interesting for that.
The time for The Great Meeting having at length arrived, the birds and
animals began to gather. Almost all the birls of any consequence being Day-
lighters, and Daylighters only, found it very awkward, and many of them
stayed away. Not that it mattered much, Ginger Groogie remarked, with


which Googar, the goanna, agreed so readily that Ginger said that, on second
thoughts, he was of opinion that it was a great pity, and that things might
have been better arranged if he had only thought of it in time. Googar, the
goanna, asked what Ginger Groogie had to do with it anyway. But Ginger
only winked slowly at his friends, and said nothing.
Some birds came along all right. Woop-Woop, the owl, Thurrin, the
bittern, Curlee Lew, the stone plover, were there, for they are naturally
Night-timers. Even Willy Wag could put in a word now and then, seeing
what a nice bright night it was, but as a whole the feathered Hock were not
present. Mrs. Gnoorie had made up her mind to be there, though she knew
well enough that she would not feel altogether at her ease. Gnawoo, the
w r ood-duck, was in the crowd of water-birds that gathered up. But none of
them count for much at meetings of this sort. They are none of them good
talkers. Gnawoo is easily the best. All they do is to make a splash, and
people who make a splash rarely are of much account in the long run.
Most of the animals were at The Meeting all right. A few, like Googar,
the goanna, did not stay long. The reason Googar did not stay long was that
he had made good use of the time that the others, being so excited about what
was to take place, had left for him to do as he liked in. As a rule, quite a lot
of birds keep their eye on Googar all day, and w T hen they see he is up to any
mischief, or is going to steal anything, they give warning by making all the
noise they can. To-day they had all been too excited to do this property, and
Googar had stuffed himself so full of eggs and young birds that now he had
to crawl away and go to sleep. He always was a thief, and an awful glutton,
and quite a lot of both Daylighters as well as Night-timers were glad he had
to go aw'ay.
Bundah, Joe-the-Rat, Slow Tom, Ginger Groogie, and Doctor Creep stood
at the entrance to The Camp. They were glad to see how many were coming,
and hoped that everyone would be there, for since they had put up the notice
calling The Meeting, they felt responsible for the result.
Noav Joe-the-Rat is a generous sort of little chap, who never bears malice
against anyone, and when he saw Mrs. Gnoorie hanging about outside The
Camp, looking as though she were feeling very uncomfortable, and did not
know whether to show herself at The Meeting or not, he went out and asked
her to come in quite nicety. And Gnoorie came. It did look funny to see
Joe-the-Rat showing her in, taking two or three hops to every step she made.
Of course, he need not have done so, but for some reason or another he
thought it the proper thing for him to do.
Spreckle, the tiger-cat, growled that he was a little fool for bringing her
in at all, and would be sorry for it before it was all over. For Spreckle, poor
unfortunate, bad-tempered thing he is, does not know, and will not be taught,
that being nasty always brings trouble, and being nice often smoothes it away.


Joe knew well enough that more than half the trouble in the world is caused
by bad temper, especially sulkiness. A wise little chappie is Joe-the-Rat. He
used to sing a song that ran like this:
Life is what you make it;
Pleasure, if you’ll take it
Is aw T aiting your approval every day.
What’s the good of crying,
Moping round and sighing?
Smile, and all your troubles fly away.
Never fret or worry,
Do not rush and hurry,
Take the joys of living one by one,
And you’ll find that trouble
Is a glorious bubble,
If you’ll only float it in the sun.
Time is ever fleeting,
Whate’er you may be meeting,
Make the best of it and sail along;
Don’t be cross or snappy,
Always make folk happy,
And you’ll find that life is full of song.
When the rain is stinging,
Though you’re simply wringing,
And the wet winds whip you as they pass;
Though you trip and stumble,
Don’t begin to grumble;
If we had no rain we’d have no grass.
Life is what you make it,
Pleasure, if you’ll take it,
Is awaiting your approval every day.
What’s the good of crying,
Moping round and sighing?
Smile and all your troubles fly away.
He believed it, too, and there is not much wonder, for he had tried and
proved it. Bunyip says so.


Ihe Gieat Meeting now began. Most of the birds and some of the
animals had taken their usual places up in the trees. The others —that is,
nearly all the animals and a few of the birds —sat or stood about the ground.
Bundah-the-I ighter was in his usual place at the foot of the big gum-tree.
Everyone was wondering what would happen; some of them were a little
excited, some of them a lot. None of them felt quite the same as usual.
* k Jerry will oblige the company with a song,” said Ginger Groogie, sar-
castically.
There was a general titter at this, and Jerry glared.
Joe-the-Rat did not want to see the meeting start off in a bad temper, so,
quick as a flash, he said, “Woop-Woop, Gnawoo, Curlee Lew, and all the other
moonlight songsters will join. It will be a part song. In most parts it will
not be a song at all.” Of course, everyone laughed.
As soon as the laughter had ceased, Bundah-the-Fighter began to speak.
He looked very dignified and somewhat stern. “I am afraid,” he said, “that
I must ask the opinion of The Meeting on one matter before we begin the
business of the evening.” There was dead silence, everyone holding his
breath and wondering what was coming next. Bundah went on: “I regret
having to do so, but I must ask if Round-eyes, the hare, (he looked at poor
Round-eyes as he spoke, and Round-eyes trembled with fear) and Restless,
the rabbit (he looked at Restless, who gammoned dead) and Sneer, the fox
(he looked at Sneer, who only grinned) have any right to be here at this
meeting of the free and independent children of The Bush?”
Jerry, the dingo, saw a chance to be nasty. “Of course, they have not,”
he said, most emphatically. “They don’t belong to us at all. They are
aliens, outsiders. They come from another country. They have no right to
be here at all.”
“What!” snapped Snarl, the tiger-cat, who is very fond of young rabbits
and hares to eat. “You would turn them out, would you?”
“You generally turn them in, don’t you, Spreckle?” asked Slink, the wild
cat, who had a weakness for doing that very thing himself.
At this Pompous Plimsoll, the pelican, grunted, and said it was a very
fishy thing to do.
Snarl nearly smiled. Some say that he did smile, but it is hard to
believe.
Jerry did not wait for anyone else to speak. “I would like to see an
alien-restriction act in force to keep all these things out,” he said.
“It would be all right if we could pass one that would keep human be-
ings out,” said Ginger Groogie from his tree.
They all heartily agreed with this. “But since I don’t see any hope of
that,” went on Ginger, “I can’t see what is the use of making a fuss about
things that do no harm.”


He did not know that there had been a deputation of grass-eaters to
Bundah about the matter.
‘‘That is all right for you, Ginger,’' said Coorbarlee, the shingle-back
lizard, who had been one of the deputation. “You don’t eat grass, at least
you can do quite well without it.”
At this remark, all the grass-eaters cheered, for the hares and rabbits eat
so much good grass that the others have sometimes to go short. It did not
atfect Bundah nor Muraway much, for they can eat closer to the ground than
can eA 7 en Round-eyes or Restless, but the other grass-eaters cannot. In any
case, Round-eyes, and Restless especially, pick out all the nicest, sweetest
parts.
Doctor Creep ambled out into the open space near Bundah. He held a
big book tucked under one arm, and had his spectacles on. He looked very
learned. Gnawoo, the wood-duck, threw a stick in his way, and clumsy old
Doctor Creep tumbled over it. He got up again, rubbed the dust otf his
face, straightened his spectacles on his nose, and without a word of complaint
began: “Alien-restriction Act. Very good.” To hear him speak one would
never think that he had just had a fall, and still had some of the dust of it
on his face and shoulder. “Would you make it retrospective?” he asked
blandly.
His hearers gasped at the big, long word.
“Ret’spective! What’s that?” asked someone.
“I am afraid you will need to explain yourself, Doctor,” said Bundah,
with a smile.
“It is not himself, it’s his language,” said Slow Tom quietly. “He could
never explain himself. No one could do that; at least no one who looks like
he does.”
Creep, ignoring the remark, looked in rather a doubtful way at Jerry,
who had been prowling around, but now went and sat down. The old Doctor
measured with his eye the distance between Jerry and himself, and himself


and Bundah, to make sure that he would be safe if Jerry went to do anything
unpleasant, and continued:
“We’ll pass that word,” he said. “I’ll begin it another way. The ques-
tion which has been raised, and which must be decided, is, who is and who is
not an alien. I have it here”—he tapped the big book—“and everyone knows
it is the best authority—that the one who made the remark about aliens is
himself of alien parentage.”
“Me!” exclaimed Jerry, in great surprise. “I am an Australian. 1 al-
ways have been.”
“Your parents, and your parents’ parents, were born in this country,”
continued Doctor Creep, “but your ancestors ”
Jerry, the dingo, began to snarl. The record of his family was some-
thing like that of Spreckle, the tiger-cat—not to be too closely inquired into.
Joe-the-Rat saw trouble brewing. “We won’t bother about ancestors,” he
said, and began to sing one of his songs. It ran like this:
“We’re one and all,
Both great and small,
And fat and lean,
And in between,
The same old grass and gum-leaves,
The same old grass and gum-leaves,
The same old grass and gum-leaves.
Yes, one and all,
Both short and tall,
The same old grass and gum-leaves.”
“But grass will be grass and gum-leaves gum-leaves,” protested Doctor
Creep.
“Order!” called Bundah-the-Fighter, in his deepest voice. “After all, we
are not here to discuss our family history. If we are Australians, bush-
dwellers, that is all that is necessary. The business of the meeting is to
decide as to the most suitable time for holding our great story-telling compe-
tition. We are not antiquaries, or whatever those people are called who are
so deeply interested in the beginning of things.”
“Slick, the bandicoot, is pretty good at that kind of thing,” said Wando.
Slick objected to the remark. “I never bother about such things,” he
protested.
“I have often seen you dig right down to the bottom of the root,” said
Wando, who himself sometimes dug grass up by the root when there was not
much else to eat, and did not like Slick, with his sharper claws, doing it
more easily.


“Order!” called Bundah. “We are not antiquaries; we’re, we’re ”
“Grass and gum-leaves mostly,” said Slow Tom, softly.
“We are,” went on Bundah, “we are Campites. Some of us are story-
tellers.”
“We are Night-timers,” called some silly person.
“Daylighters I” said three or four, Mrs. Gnoorie amongst them.
“Night-timers!” shouted about forty furiously.
“Daylighters!” insisted the others angrily.
It looked as though there would soon be more trouble in The Camp.
Joe-the-Rat again came to the rescue. “Sillies!” he called, as loudly as he
could. As this remark embraced them all, the surprise that was felt made
silence long enough for Bundah to get in with his big voice, and restore
order. |
“Argument is not to be allowed,” he said. “We are not here to discuss
things but words. We are a parliament of the people.”
Jerry, the dingo, looked at him sulkily, but said nothing.
Then Ginger Groogie, sitting on his branch well up out of harm’s way,
made a long speech. After speaking for about half an hour, he closed his
remarks by saying that he thought the trouble in The Camp always arose
from too much talking. “No one,” he said, “seems to have any idea of the
value of time. It is not a question of day-time or night-time, but just time.”
This was such a wise remark that no one know what it meant, so they
were all silent for a while, pretending to think it over. Ginger did not really
know what he meant by it himself, but it sounded all right.
Pompous Plimsoll, the pelican, spoke next.
He said very little in a very long time, in very
long words—like his beak—and with very little
meaning. He was followed by Dreamy, the
grey thrush, who really spoke very prettily,
but did not say a great deal that was worth
much.
So they went on talking and talking and
never getting any nearer to a satisfactory de-
cision. They were all beginning to get tired of
it when Doctor Creep rose to his feet and
said: “It appears to me that we came to-
gether to settle the story-telling business.
The trouble in The Camp has arisen from the
story-telling business, or, as some might pre-
Pompous Plimsoll
fer it, the telling of stories. Why has it arisen from the telling of stories?
It has arisen not from the mere telling of stories, but because there is a prize.
The easiest way to settle the trouble is to have no prize. If a story is worth


telling, it is worth telling for its own sake. To tell stories for prizes is, in
my opinion, to lower the great art. Life would be just as pleasant without
prizes, but just think what we would lose if there were no stories. We must
June a king or queen to set the fashion, you know, and to be pleasant gene-
rally. But whatever we do, let us not degrade our literature for a mere king
or queen. Kings and queens are mostly just a matter of dates in a history-
book, but stories are the things which give us our understanding of life.”
He sat down.
After a moment of silence, Slow Tom began to speak from his seat in the
big gum-tree. “I have been thinking there is much good sense, as there
always is, in what my learned friend has said. With most of it I entirely
agree. If there must be a prize for story-telling, and a great many seem to
think there should be, let us have the great competition, and give a prize that
will be an ornament for life. Instead of being able to give only one prize,
we could then have yearly competitions. There is no necessity to mix it up
with the Kingship. Let us be sensible. It is much less trouble.”
“You mean it brings less trouble, old fellow,” laughed Joe.
Slow Tom’s idea pleased the meeting. After a lot of talk as to how it
was to be done, and what it would mean when it was done, it was finally
decided that a big story-telling competition should take place on the night of
the next full moon, and the prize should be some ornament that the winner
could wear, and hand on to his or her children. All agreed that this was a
fine idea, for though everyone is not fitted to be a king or queen, which, after
all, requires some special gifts and training to do properly, anyone could be
given an ornament that would suit at least some members of the family.
Just as this conclusion was reached, a clear, sweet voice was heard, siuir-
ing away down along the creek, coming closer and closer, as it sang:
“The night is past,
And Dawn is waking,
Across the sky
The morn is breaking,
And in the singing of the gentle stream
I hear a voice
Which says, ‘Rejoice,
For Day is full of beauty as a dream.’ ”
It was Glory, the lyre-bird, singing his morning song. And so, since Day
was almost upon them, all those gathered at The Camp left for their homes,
having done the wisest thing possible. Bunyip says so. And whatever
Bunyip says is right.


CHAPTER VI.
The Great Competition.
the time of the next full-moon having arrived, all the birds and animals
of The Bush gathered at The Camp to listen to the stories of those who had
entered for the Great Competition. It was the greatest gathering of Bushites
that had taken place for very many years.
At that time all who could had come to hear of the strange new animals
that had lately been seen on the shore of one of the beautiful bays away down
on the sea. Some of these animals, it was said, stood up on two legs like
Bundah and Muraway. But they did not hop, like Muraway and Bundah
do. They walked like some of the birds do—Mrs. Gnoorie and Father Crow,
for instance —putting one leg out in front and dragging, or, rather, lifting,
the other after it in the same way as blackfellows did. But they were not
blackfellows; they were quite different, and had a lot of strange and fearful
ways. It was said that they had skins that they took off and put on, when-
ever they wanted to. They had sticks that shot out fire and killed things,
and the}' had with them animals on four feet that were far bigger than any-
thing ever heard of outside Doctor Creep’s big book.
When this was told to Jerry, the dingo, he said straight out that he did
not believe a word of it.
Ruf Keen-eyes told him that he had seen some of these things himself.
“And what is strangest of all,” he said, “is that they change colour like a
sick gum-leaf, and sometimes they are all sorts of colours at once.”
Where did they come from? ’ asked Jerry, but no one could answer that.
But all that was a long, long time ago, and this was easily the biggest
meeting since. It was very interesting to see them all gathered there, Day-
lighters and Night-timers all mixed up together, and all as excited as ever
they could be. It was almost like what happened at a big bushfire, the way
they were all mixed up at the entrance to The Camp. Of course, none of
them were in such a hurry as they would have been if it were a fire they were
getting away from.
Some day I must tell you what happened once, when they were getting
away from one of those big fires, for though most of them are frightened of a
flood, they have a much greater fear of fire, and some of them get quite
terrified.
But this time very few of them were at all flustered or angry. Even
when Paul Thoora Thoora, the spur-wing plover, being bumped on one side


by Paddy Melon, the imitation kangaroo, stuck his spur into Sir Lee, the
water-rat, Sir Lee took it quite in good part —for him. And when Cresty, in
her excitement, tried to perch on Bundah’s left ear, he only laughed, and
advised her to find a more solid resting-place. Also when Ginger Groogie,
who is usually not the best-tempered fellow one could find, got hit on the
nose—and the nose is a tender spot with Ginger Groogie—by a stick that had
jumped up when Muraway trod on one end of it, he only rubbed his nose
with both paws, and grunted a little to himself. Muraway immediately apolo-
gised very nicely, so nicely that Joe-the-Rat felt that he would like to kiss
her there and then. But he did not try it all the same; Bundah-the-Fighter
was there. Besides, there were a lot of others looking on. There is no saying
what Joe might have done if he could get the chance. There is no saying
what he did do when he got the chance, for Joe was a lively little chap, who
enjoyed life fully.
When they were all, Night-timers and Daylighters alike, settled down in
their places, the story-telling began. There had been quite a long discussion
as to who should be the judges of the stories. Some had been for appointing
a Committee to judge them. Others had been for leaving it to the learning
and the prodigious wisdom and the keen discrimination of Doctor Creep.
Finally, it was decided that, since it w 7 as a matter affecting them all, and the
test of what was the best story was that it should please the most, all should
have a say in the judgment. That is, as Slow Tom was careful to explain,
everyone would have the right to have a say. But it was to be hoped that
they would not all make use of the right, because if they did it would be
hard to tell when they would arrive at a decision, or when they would come
to an end.
Joe-the-Rat suggested to Slow Tom that he could go to sleep when he
got tired of listening, then wake up and go to sleep again, as often as he
liked. Slow Tom only smiled. He always was a good-tempered old fellow.
Finally everyone agreed that it was only right that everyone should
choose, since it was for what was meant to as nearly as possible please
everyone. The prize was, therefore, to be awarded by the general vote. That
is to say, each bird and animal had as much say in the matter as any other
bird or animal. Which everyone agreed was only fair. It was thought that
some really believed otherwise, but were afraid to say so. If they did think
so, it was just as well that they did not say so.
“For that matter,” said Ginger Groogie, in a fault-finding mood, “it does
not matter much. No one seems to know what the prize is to be.”
“That,” replied Bundah-the-Fighter mysteriously, “depends on who wins
the prize. The gift must be such as will be satisfactory to the winner, who-
ever it may be. Ido not see any reason for fault-finding.”
Ginger Groogie had made a mistake that time.


There were so many stories told that the meeting lasted all night, all
next day, and all the following night. Of course, the Bushites were all very
tired. Most of them had managed to keep more or less awake, but nearly
everyone had had a nap or two. It had been hardest on Bundah-the-Fighter,
for he, as chairman of the meeting, had to keep wide awake all the time to
see and hear all that was going on, and to keep order. Now he could hardly
keep awake. In his trouble to do so he asked Spike, the ant-eater, to come
and stand between his legs and stick his quills into him now and again to
keep him going. Spike did it, too. What is more, he enjoyed doing it.
But Bundah didn’t.
Ginger Groogie had got hold of a sharp stick, with which he was prod-
ding himself and other people in the ribs to keep himself and them awake.
Cresty, the cockatoo, was biting hard at the big toe of her left foot. It is
an ugly habit she has. Jerry, the dingo, who is a very good hand at keeping
awake, was getting up every now and then and chasing his tail. Mrs.
Gnoorie was trying to tie a knot in her neck, or appeared to be doing so.
Brolga, the nati\ e-companion, had his head poked through under his wing,
and was looking back over his shoulder. Jacky, the ringtail possum, was
doing fancy swings from limb to limb
amongst the trees. Joe-the-Rat was get-
ting up a little entertainment on his own
account. Joe’s entertainment was like
this:—
Fiery, the bulldog ant, with all his
family, having got too tired to take any
further interest in stories, had gone down-
stairs to bed some time ago. Now, Brown,
the snake, happened to be asleep quite
close to Fiery’s nest. It is hard to say
what had made Brown so sleepy; he is not
generally that way. It may be that the
stories were not interesting to him; it
may be that he had been out late the night
before. Brown does keep bad hours,
especially at some seasons of the year. It
is well to keep away from him then.
But Joe never missed an opportunity
for a little amusement. He could see op-
Ginger Groogie
portunities, too, where other people saw
nothing. This chance was too good to be missed. It would keep all of them,
all except Fiery and Brown, that is, amused, and in a good temper.


Carefully, very carefully, Joe-the-Rat took hold of Brown’s long, slender
tail. Brown stirred a little, as though about to wake up. Joe suddenly ap-
peared to be very interested in the story that Kook, the laughing-jackass, was
telling just then. Brown settled down again, and Joe, taking his tail very
gingerly, dropped the end of it down Fiery’s nest. Then he gave the nest
a kick, and hopped away.
Now, Fiery, the bulldog ant, never looks first and stings afterwards; he
stings first and looks afterwards. He is very brave, but very hasty. Joe
knew* that. Joe-the-Rat had hardly stopped moving w T hen Browm let out a
sudden, savage hiss, and began to get about like a jumping-jack on a dark
night.
“Yams and tatie-roots!” exclaimed Joe, “wdiat’s all this about?”
It w 7 as some time before Fiery and his friends could be made to see that
it was all a mistake, that Brown had not tried to get into their nest, that
Brown, in fact, had been sound asleep at the time. Brown has never yet
been able to understand how his tail got dowui into that nest. Joe-the-Rat
w’as the only one w’ho could tell him. And Joe never w T as one for giving aw T ay
secrets.
Even happenings of this sort could not keep the birds and animals
aw ake much longer. Slow Tom, who had surprised them all by telling a story
—a good story, too —and who still seemed as much aw 7 ake as he ever w’as, took
pity on them all, and suggested that the best four stories should be selected
now’, and the final choice be made at another meeting.
“Seeing how’ utterly w r orn-out we all are,” he began—considering how
fresh he w 7 as, and how he w T as always being teased with being asleep, a less
nice person than Tom wmuld have said, “you all are”—“seeing how utterly
worn-out w 7 e all are, I propose we take the four selected stories and come to
a final decision. I say four stories, as that will give equal chances for the
Night-timers and the Daylighters. Also if they wish to have it so, and I feel
sure they will, it will give equal chances for birds and animals. So that there
can be no chance of ill-feeling, I wmuld suggest that there be chosen the story
of one bird and one animal amongst the Night-timers, and the story of one
bird and one animal amongst the Daylighters. That will be fair to all.”
“A good idea,” said everyone, and Doctor Creep added, “I would suggest
that the birds of the Night-timers choose w’hat they consider to be the best
story, the birds amongst the Daylighters select what they consider the best
story, the animals who are Night-timers decide on the story they like most,
and the animals who are Daylighters make their choice. In this way, all
will secure fair representation. The Campites as a w T hole can then make the
final selection, and the prize be awarded without any fear of ill-feeling,
jealousy, or dissatisfaction.”


n
This was agreed to, and in three minutes they were all asleep just where
they were; that is, all except Brown, the snake. He did not feel like any more
sleep just now. He went sneaking round to see if he could find out anything.
Before long, Jerry, the dingo, awoke. Of all the animals in the bush, he
sleeps for the shortest time. Most people will tell you that he is never more
than half asleep—always sleeping, as it were, with one eye open.
Jerry started round to wake up all the animals among the Night-timers.
He pretended that he thought it was time for them to get up and decide which
story was to be their choice. What was really the matter with him was that
he did not like to see others sleeping so peacefully whilst he was awake.
Sometimes he liked to see others asleep while he was awake; but just now
there was nothing to be gained by it, for no one ever does anything really
wrong in The Camp.
It being still daytime, most of the Night-timers would not wake up pro-
perly. Jerry growled a good deal, and then went and sat down and looked
at them savagely. While he looked at them those whom he had awakened fell
asleep again. Presently a slow smile spread over his face, a slow, cunning
sort of smile. He lifted up his head, pointed his nose straight at the sky, and
howled. How he did howl! Slow Tom smiled. Bundah-the-Fighter awoke
with a start..
“Order!” he called, fiercely.
Jerry, the Dingo
lay down and nearly went to sleep himself,
No sooner had he spoken than his
head sank again. Poor old Bundah-the-
Fighter was very tired.
Jerry went on howling. “Ord’r!”
called Bundah, in a somewhat smothered
sort of voice. “Ord’r!”
Jerry took no notice. “Order !” mur-
mured Bundah-the-Fighter, “Or-der!”
His chin fell on his great, broad chest,
and he was asleep again. Poor old Bun-
dah-the-Fighter was very tired indeed.
Seeing that even his howling could
not waken the Campites, Jerry knew that
they must be too tired for anything, so he
After quite a nice little sleep, Joe-the-Rat stirred in his place. High
overhead little clouds were showing the reflections that tell sunset is near.
Father Crow, away down the creek, gave a hoarse croak or two as he flew
home to his roost. Joe-the-Rat woke up with a start. He had begun to
dream that Brown, the snake, was getting even with him. It felt strange to


be waking up without being able to feel his nest. He glanced round quickly,
and took it all in. As usual he broke into rhyme:
“Oh, here’s a go!
All in a row,
The Campites are asleeping
Oh, hillalu,
I wonder who
The sentry-guard is keeping.”
Jerry, the dingo, half opened one eye. “I am here,” he said.
So quietly did Jerry speak that Slow Tom did not hear him. “I’m
keeping a good look-out, Joe,” he remarked. “Cresty is up here beside me.
Should any danger appear to be threatening I’ll just pull her tail. Every-
one will hear. There is no need whatever for anxiety.”
“No doubt, if you pull Cresty’s tail you will hear about it, too,” said
Joe. “I am not worrying, Tom, old friend, but you will be if you do that.”
As soon as the sun set, the Night-timers began to wake up. They could
not help it. But the Daylighters got more sleepy than ever, for now it w T as
their proper bed-time. But the noise the Night-timers made in discussing
who they would choose to represent them w T as so great that it properly w T oke
up quite a lot of the Daylighters.
They also began to talk about w T ho they would have to represent them.
Quite a number of the bird Daylighters had told good stories, but not one
animal amongst them had told even a fairly good one. Of course, there are
not many animals of much account amongst the Daylighters; they are almost
all Night-timers.
It was getting quite dark, and the Daylighters were still undecided.
They did not want to be out of bed for another night, so they w T ere in some-
what of a hurry to end the discussion, and come to a decision. Presently
Coorbarlee, the shingle-back lizard, who had told the best story of any of
the Daylight animals, turned to Joe-the-Rat. “1 say, Joe, wmuld you tell
your story for the Daylighters?” he asked. At this there w T ere great signs of
approval amongst the Daylighters, for Joe w T as a favourite with them, and
his story, being of rather an amusing sort, had taken their fancy.
Joe-the-Rat has no false pride or conceit about him. Many of the
Night-timers might have felt it beneath their dignity to appear for the Day-
lighters. But Joe was not like that; Joe was sensible. He had sense enough
to know, too, that his story was not as good as those told by some of the other
Night-timers. He would not be chosen to represent them, and his story,
though it had pleased many, was not good enough to defeat them, so he con-
sented without even asking the advice of Slow Tom, who was sitting there


looking down in an interested sort of way. It was a risky sort of thing for
Joe to do, but he did it.
As soon as Joe-the-Rat had agreed to do this, the Daylighters scuttled
away to their beds, glad to get the chance of a good night’s rest. The Day-
light birds had already gone to rest. The choosing of the one who should
represent them had not been any difficulty at all. On the suggestion of
W eetah, the bower-bird, who, by common consent, was completely eclipsed
by Glory, the lyre-bird, the latter was chosen by all to tell his story for them.
They could not have made a better choice, for Glory, though really more of
a poet than a story-teller, had done well.
It remained for the Night-timers to choose their story-teller, each ac-
cording to their kind, the birds theirs and the animals theirs. There was a
good deal of discussion as to whether Woop-Woop, the owl, or Curlee Lew,
the stone plover, had told the better story. It was generally agreed that the
story of Woop-Woop was the wiser of the two. But, as Spreckle, the tiger-
cat, said—though he had no right to interfere at all—it was not as deep as
that told by Slow Tom, in fact, not as good of its kind as that of Slow Tom,
whereas that of Curlee Lew was in a class all by itself. After a good deal
of further talk, and some complaints about Spreckle having interfered, it
was decided that Curlee Lew was the one who should appear.
Then it came to the turn of the Night-time animals to decide who should
represent them. Again some were for one and some for another. Jacky
Ringtail, the ringtail possum, himself a good story-teller, and Flighty, the
squirrel, were discussing it between them at the top of a high tree.
“I’ll vote for Slow Tom. I’ll swing if I don’t,” said Jacky.
“You’ll swing, anyway,” retorted Flighty. “You are as proud of that
tail of yours, as if you could fly with it.”
But Jacky was feeling quite pleased with things in general, and he
answered sweetly: “Since I have not your gifts, I must just make the best
of what I have. Fou would not have me sit down and weep for what I
cannot get, instead of enjoying what I have, would you?”
“That is sound sense,” grunted Slow Tom to himself.
What could Flighty, the squirrel, do but be pleasant, too. So she said:
“Well, even if you can’t fly, you can tell better stories than anyone else. I
intend to vote for you to represent us.”
“It is very nice of you to say so,” replied Jacky, “but I hope you will
not do that. I would rather that you voted for Slow Tom.”
Flighty tossed her pretty head. “His story is like himself,” she said.
“In what way?” asked Jacky.
“Too slow,” answered Flighty.
Jacky looked shocked, but Slow Tom, who could not help overhearing
all that was being said, only smiled.


“Do you think go?" laughed Jacky. “For my part, I do not think any-
one should stand against him.”
Jerry, the dingo, sitting away down on the ground beneath them, with
his quick ears, caught the remark, and, with his usual lack of breeding, im-
mediately broke in. “Oh, don’t you?” he asked sarcastically. “Well, I do.
If no one else does, I shall do so myself. Curlee Lew will win amongst the
Night-time birds. Joe-the-Rat is to appear for the Daylight animals.
Glory, the lyre-bird, is the one for the Daylight birds. Now., you want that
slow old duller, that sleepy old stump, Slow Tom, to appear for us. Why, the
whole three of their stories put together have not got the taste of blood in
them! What’s the sense in stories that have not a toothful, not even a smell,
of blood in them? They are not stories at all. They are only nursery
chatter.”
Ginger Groogie looked down from where he sat, half-way up between
Jerry and the other two. He spoke directly at Jerry. “Yours!” he said,
“yours is only a common murder yarn. It is not a story; it is only a murder,
that’s all.” <
Jerry snarled savagely up at Ginger Groogie, who took no notice of him,
but just went on talking, saying things that he knew Jerry would not like
to hear.
It turned out in the end that Ginger Groogie was quite right. When it
came to choosing who was to appear for the Night-timers, Jerry was simply
passed by, and the choice fell on Slow Tom. Jerry was savage, but Slow
Tom did not mind that. Like Ginger Groogie, he was well up out of harm’s
way.
So now all the different sections of The Campites had their story-tellers
chosen. Slow Tom was to represent the Night-time animals; Curlee Lew was
to tell the story for the Night-time birds. Joe-the-Rat, though he was not
one of them, was to appear for the Daylight animals, and Glory, the lyre-bird,
in whose trust it was quite safe, was to tell the story for the Daylight birds.


CHAPTER VII.
The Stories of Joe-the-Rat and Glory, the Lyre-Bird.
The Campites had all come together again after a good sleep. There
being only four stories to be told this time, no one would get too tired to
listen to them all. So everyone would be able to vote quite well when the
proper time came. They w T ere all very excited about it, too.
As often happens when it comes to the real time of trial, the winners,
that is to say, those who were now left in for the final contest, were not all
those that had been generally expected to be there. Though everyone, ex-
cept one or two, like Mrs. Gnoorie, had a kindly feeling for Joe-the-Rat, and
thought him a jolly, clever little chap, few, if any, had thought for one
moment that he would be among the four at the finish. And though all
knew that Glory, the lyre-bird, was really a poet, and could not help being
so, however hard he might try, they had hardly expected him to be so good a
story-teller as he had proved. Then Curlee Lew was known to be a great
traveller, and one who had seen many strange things, but no one had ever
heard him say much about them. As for Slow Tom, he had never been
known to tell a story before. Everyone w T as well aware that he was a great
thinker, what is generally known as a philosopher—that is, a person w T ho
spends a lot of time thinking, and takes things as they come, and makes the
best of them, without troubling to try and better them. But it by no means
follows from this that he would be able to tell a good story; rather the oppo-
site. He was just another proof that it is well to listen before you speak, and
hear before you answer. Slow Tom had listened to a lot, and had seen a
great many things, without making a noise about it. So, of course, Slow Tom
was wise.
Most people had expected Mat Magpie to tell a good story. But he had
not done so. He had just wandered from one thing to another, saying some
very fine things now and then, but having no proper sequence in his story
at all. Jack Butcher had disappointed his friends by being too frivolous.
But the two about which there was the most surprise were Wat Whistler, the
quarrion, the grey parrot, with a pretty topknot and yellow cheeks, who is
as neat as a grey kid glove—he was too nervous to do himself justice—Rose
Grey, the gaiah, from whom much was expected, also failed. Doctor Creep
could not be prevailed upon to tell a story at all. So tnat the result was that
these four, Joe-the-Rat, the kangaroo rat, Glory, the lyre-bird, Curlew Lew,
the stone plover, and Slow Tom, the native bear, were the four competitors.


When they had all taken their places, Night-timers and Daylighters
alike some on the ground, some in the trees, Joe-the-Rat was called upon to
tell his story. The way he stepped out from his place, put his left hand over
his heart, not his right one, as is generally the case with those who do that
kind of thing, and bowed all round, with a specially low sweep to Bundah-
the-Fighter, made everyone laugh to begin with.
Once upon a time, he began. “I daresay you have heard that before.
In case you may not have done so, I shall say it again. Once upon a time.
ougi vliy once would not do by itself I don’t know. Anyway, once upon
a time, there was a rat ”
“Not a kangaroo-rat, I hope,” hissed Brown, the snake, whose tail was
still as irritable as his temper from the attentions of Fiery, the bulldog ant, on
the night of the Great Meeting. He had been thinking hard about the matter,
and had come to the conclusion that Joe knew more about it than any other
person. It w T ould not have taken much to make him say so.
But Joe was not thinking about those things just now, he was too in-
terested in his story.
“Yes, sir,” he answered, quite gravely, “a kangaroo-rat. No other rat
is so well worth talking about. Once upon a time, there was a rat, a kan-
garoo-rat. His name was Jerry. He was no relation of Jerry, the dingo.”
“That need not be mentioned,” said Jerry, the dingo, sourly
“His name was Jerry,” repeated Joe.
“Jerry, the rat,
Smart as a cat,
Never too fat,
Pittity-pat,
He would hide in your hat,
And dodge you like that,
Would Jerry, the rat.”
“Well, this Jerry loved a little girl rat—a sweet, beautiful, merry little girl
rat she was. He was getting on very well with her. He had not a great deal
to offer her, you know. You see, he was only a young fellow, and had not
yet built himself a home. He was always going to see about settling down,
but between finding puff-balls with which to play football, and playing
football when he had found the puff-balls, and leading the other fellows round
the water-holes and over logs, and seeing who could race through a wire
fence the quickest, and turning somersaults over bushes, and running after
pretty girls, and all that sort of thing that every young fellow who enjoys
life has to do, he never did settle down. You see he was one of those people
who make the most of things. Some people do, you know, till there is
nothing left to make the most of, but Jerry was not one of these.


“As I told you, Jerry had fallen in love with a pretty little girl rat. He
would have asked her to marry him straight away, but he had no home to
oiler her. And though, I believe, many of the Campites marry first, and
find a home afterwards, kangaroo-rats don’t do things in that way. It isn’t
respectable ”
At this there was a general outcry. Some were angry, some laughed
heartily.
Joe held up his hand. “It is not respectable for kangaroo-rats,” he said,
and laughed. “I wish you would not be so impatient, you quite frighten a
poor little fellow. Now that you have interrupted me, I shall pause to make
a remark. Of course, if you had not done so, I would not have thought of
breaking the thread of my story, but now I shall. It is a question lam going
to ask, a question that Doctor Creep and Slow Tom might well be called upon
to decide. It is this: When a chap meets the right girl, should he wait to
marry her till he gets the right home, or marry the girl wdien he gets the
chance, and find the home afterwards? Anyone who can read the moral
of my story will see what I think, but there have been many wise ones who
thought otherwise.
‘ k To begin again. As I was saying, Jerry had no home, and, foolish
fellow that he was, did not hurry to get a home. One night he and the
pretty little girl rat were talking beside a big belah tree in the moonlight
when who should come along but Binjy, a fat, corpulent old wallaby, not a,
rock-wallaby like our friend Wando, but just a common "wallaby, and a fat
wallaby at that. As soon as he saw the pretty little girl rat he fell head over
heels in love with her.
O, come with me, my darling,’ he said 5 ‘I have a lovely home just
waiting for you to fill it.’ ”
“ Tt must be a big one if you can't fill it yourself,’ said Jerry, who was
naturally annoyed at this fat chap shoving in like this.
The wallaby took no notice of him. ‘lt is dry and warm in the wettest
time,’ he went on, still speaking to the girl, ‘and cool on the hottest day. It
is shaded by lovely mimosa-bushes and sweet with the scent of clematis.’
ancy a wallaby’s home being scented,’ said Jerry.
“But the girl rat was moved by these attentions. She looked shyly at
the big chap most women have a weakness for size—and asked softly
‘Where is it, Mr. Binjy?’
A little way up the side of this beautiful hill,’ answered Binjy. ‘As
you stand in the entrance you can see all over the river and the flats, and
observe all that goes on there without being seen yourself. It is so in-
teresting at times.’
“That was a good touch on old Binjy’s part, for all girls like to see all
that is going on, especially if they can’t be seen doing it, though some


of them like being seen even better than seeing. Jerry just stood glaring
at him. But the big, fat fellow took no notice of him at all, no more
than if he had been a bit of stick with a beetle on it. Jerry felt mad,
and like hitting Binjy in his big fat body, but thought he would find a
better way than that of doing things. Jerry hated bloodshed, especially
when it was likely to be his own blood that was shed. It is a sensible belief.
All the time, he could see that the wallaby was making an impression on the
girl, but he would not try to turn her against him by saying anything. Jerry
knew that saying things is not much good; you have to do them. And doing
things is not much good unless you do the right thing. So he just stood and
waited, believing that he would find a way to do what he wanted.
“Binjy spoke so softly to the girl, and said so many nice things to
her, and made himself such a good fellow generally, and appeared to be a
person of so much importance, that at last she said she would go down with him
to the promenade on the flat beside the river, where her friends would see her
walking with this great man. She waved good-bye to Jerry, who answered
quite cheerfully, and away she and Binjy went.
‘‘Jerry stood and thought for a moment. Then he remembered a red
hornet’s nest in a bush, he had been stung himself a few days ago. He
owed those hornets something for that. He would get even with them and
Binjy at the same time. He knew Binjy’s cave quite well, and now he re-
membered that the hornets’ nest was not far away from the mouth of it. A
great idea came to him.
“It being night-time, the hornets would be asleep. Hopping quietly up
to the bush in which their nest was hanging, he very gingerly broke the dead
stick to which it was fastened. Hornets are easily awakened, and not much
fun when they are awake to people who have awakened them; so he was
very careful. As he broke the stick there was an angry buzzing. Jerry
knew what that meant, but he stuck to his work. He knew that if he moved
too quickly the hornets would be upon him. So he stood quite still, and held
the stick quite still too. He held it in the same position as it had been on
the bush, so that they would not know that anything had happened. He
held it till his arm ached. It ached so much that he felt almost inclined to
let the nest drop and make a bolt for it in the darkness. No girl w T as worth
all this, he thought. But by this time the spirit of the adventure had seized
him, and he held on. At length, when his arm was almost dropping off, he
thought he could move with safety. Carefully, very carefully he moved
along, and reached the stick with the nest on it to the mouth of Binjy’s cave.
With the greatest caution not to disturb the hornets he hung it there, right
in the entrance.
“ ‘Now,’ he said to himself, ‘if that little girl is foolish enough to be led
aw T ay by Binjy, I’ll show her what she will get. She will see what sort of a


5 * * 1 ' '* ' '
Vv, / %^> ; , ’' ** V / Q \|
“ Forty-five hornets stuck red-hot needles into his face”


'


fellow he is, and it will do no harm if she gets a sting or two herself. I
hope she won’t be as foolish as that, but if she is it will be the lesson of her
life.’
“He sat down behind a rock and waited. A wallaroo passed by without
noticing him, then another and another. Jerry turned to see what it was all
about. The noise he made in doing so was not noticeable, but his movement
caught the quick eye of the wallaroo, and gave him a start. He made a
tremendous leap without quite seeing where he was going, and dislodged a
decaying log. As it moved and fell back almost into the same place, Jerry
noticed some glow-worms attached to the damp part. A new idea came to
him, but he did not move. Binjy and his sweetheart might be coming home
any time now T .
“It was well for Jerry that he did not move, for almost before the sound
made by the wallaroo, who had not stopped to scold Jerry for startling him,
had died away, Binjy and the pretty little girl rat came over the brow of
the hill, heading straight for the cave. Binjy was leading the way, and
making all sorts of nice remarks about the beautiful view from his home on
moonlight nights and on cloudy days, and what lovely times they would
have there.
“ ‘Just you wait awdiile, my fat, clumsy fellow,’ said Jerry to himself,
having made up his mind that if his tricks failed he would fight Binjv for
the girl.”
At this there was a general murmur of approval from both the Night-
timers and the Daylighters, for with them all the proper thing to do is to
fight for what you w T ant.
“Well, as they came along, the girl was hanging back a little, as though
not quite sure she wanted to go home with Binjy, and he was coaxing her
along. Just as he came to the entrance to the cave, he stopped and turned
towards her.
“ ‘Look,’ he said, ‘is it not charming? Of all this you shall be queen.’
“As he spoke, he waved his arm round. It struck the stick on which was
the hornets’ nest, knocking it down. There was a terribly angry buzz, a
grunt of surprise from Binjy, and forty-five hornets stuck redhot needles
into his face. He gave a leap to get away from them, a rush past the pretty
little girl-rat, and a tumble down the hill. Jerry, do as he might, could not
help bursting into a laugh. Binjy was too busy with the hornets to hear
him. Even the girl, though she thought she recognised the laugh, was not
quite sure. A couple of hornets were after her; she bolted away in the
darkness.
That ought to settle them, said Jerry, ‘but I’ll do the other thing, just
in case. It can’t do any harm, anyway.’


He hopped over to where he had noticed the glow-worms on the log,
and, carefully gathering some of them, returned to the cave. With great
caie he placed them so as to make them look like a big eye peering out of the
cave. Then he quietly went back to the big apple-box tree on the flat, and
v aited for his girl to come back to him. He thought she would soon be
doing that.
As a matter of fact, the girl had been on her way back to him when
Bin jj> having recovered somewhat, caught up to her, and with some diffi-
culty persuaded her at least to come and have a look at his cave. When
they reached it, he again went first. The hornets were, of course, all scat-
tered by this time. But now when he peeped into his home he got another
shock. There was a great evil eye glaring at him. He stepped back in
alarm. As he did so his face came into the moonlight. The little girl rat
caught sight of it, swollen with hornet stings as it was, and with the eyes
bulging in fright. Just as she did so, one of the hornets crawling about the
ground, fastened on to her left foot. With a cry of fear, horror, and dis-
gust, she tore away and left Binjy.
“Jerry, standing by the tree, guessed what that cry meant, and had not
long to wait. As she hopped up to him shame-facedly, he remarked quietly,
‘I hope you had a good time.’
“‘A good time!’ she gasped. ‘Jerry, I’ll never leave you again.’
“ ‘lt’s great to hear you say so,’ replied Jerry, and together they began
building their nest just where they were.”
And this is the story of Jerry-the-rat,
Smart little brat,
You will all agree, I am sure, with me,
That a cute little chappie was Jerry-the-rat.
The story being finished, there was a great storm of applause, and
though it was evident that it was more a Night-timers’ than a Daylighters’
story, the Daylight animals were satisfied that they had had a good story.
They were pleased, too, because in Bushland it is a crime to marry out of
one’s own kind, and they were glad that Binjy had failed in his attempt to
do that which should not be done.
Now Glory, the lyre-bird, was called upon to tell his tale for the Day-
light birds. Standing on a little mound, without display of any kind, he
began.
“Some little time ago,” he said, “just as the east w T as flushed wdth the
first touches of rosy Dawn, before the morning star had lost its lustre, I
awoke, and leapt gaily on to a high ledge of rock, from almost every
morning I could look over the country and watch the coming of the day.


“I love to stand there and hear the falling of the water in the streams
which then sing so clear and sweet a song, and see the dappled Dawn come
smiling up out of the glorious eastern hills, greeting with joyous strength
the perfumes of the valleys, throwing a glory over all things, musical with
the songs of all my friends, and turning to living jewels the dew on the
trees, and pencilled fronds of fern. The moss on the rocks glows with the
touch, the whole wide world seems to tremble with beauty and with joy.
“On a morning such as this, w r hen all was free and beautiful and fair,
when the earth was sweet with scent and song and freedom, I stood upon that
crag and felt the glory of life. Suddenly, far, far away, miles away dow T n
in the distant valley, I saw something moving. As I looked, I saw it to be
one of those vile Man-beasts. He was riding upon a horse, and leading
another. The animal he rode—ah! what would he give if he could only ride
a bird —was tired and drooping as one that has travelled far. But the one
he led w T as full of fire and vigour. As the sun crept up over the moun-
tains, I could see, even at that distance, that this captive was no common
beast. Black he black as the gloss of a Satin-bird. His eyes flashed
fire like the sun on a rippling stream. His extended nostrils were as red
within as the beak of a Swan.
“As they passed far below me, I saw the beautiful black beast struggling
to be free. But the Man-beast jerked on an iron chain that ran beneath his
jaw, and made him snort with pain. Again and again he tried to get free,
and again and again that cruel chain galled him. Eull of sorrow for the
beautiful being thus led captive by the Man-beast, I watched them go. As they
came near to where many sticks are piled together, the nest of the Man-
beasts, a mob of brumbies, creatures like the captive one but free, noble
animals that have never yielded to the Man-beasts, past on the wings
of the morning, making for the mountains, whence I watched. Again the
beautiful one fought to be free, but again he w T as galled into submission.
Shake himself as he would, he could not be free.
“After they had gone some distance further and come close to the nest
of the Man-beasts, the noble one uttered a cry which I take it w 7 as his call of
despair. Other Man-beasts came out of the nest. The one who had led the
captive handed the chain to one of these, saying strange words. Then they
led him away, and closed him up in a nest by himself.
“For long the thought of that beautiful black captive was a sorrow to
me. So full of fire he was, so strong, so swift, I knew, swift as a falling
star or the cry of Paul Thoora Thoora on an east wind. Often in the early
morning, before the stars had left the sky, I would go dow r n to the valley and
listen to the brave one pawing restlessly at the earth, crying aloud in his
captivity, and trying to break the chains that held him. Sometimes would
I see him with a Man-beast on each side of him holding him with cruel


chains. Not often was it thus, for I think they feared lest they should lose
him.
“So at length it happened. How it happened I know not, but one morn-
ing in the early Spring-time, the chill of Winter not having yet altogether
departed from the breeze of Dawn, I heard a noise as of galloping hoofs, and
looking down saw the great black animal free. Free at last! and, racing like
Swift, the swallow, on the breast of a storm, he came towards the mountains
where I stood. Swift as a cloud he came along, and behind him, where they
stood, the Man-beasts were waving their arms frantically, and calling aloud.
But he, heeding them not, swept to the mountains, and, standing on a grassy
eminence, gave forth his high, piercing cry. Suddenly from far up the
valley came an answering call, high, shrill, clear as his had been, but touched
with scorn and full of challenge. Tossing back the hair from his eyes he
answered it in the same way, and raced on once more. I, in wonder, fol-
lowed him; he racing in the valley below, I passing from crag to crag high
above, and seeing all.
“Without pause, the beautiful beast swept up the valley to those of his
own kind, who long since—on the day of his arrival —had passed him,
and now answered his call with challenge. As he came they ceased from
their feeding on the short, green grass, and looked up at him.
“Then a great red horse, high of crest, clean of limb, strong-backed, and
with fierce look, came out to meet him. Without pause they threw them-
selves upon each other. For long they fought, and terrible was the fight.
But at length the red horse turned and fled, and hid himself behind the mob
which he had led. Then the black master trotted up to those free ones, and
touching them with his muzzle one by one, took them in his care and charge.
Many days have the Man-beasts spent in trying to retake him. But ever have
they failed, as they will ever fail. Leading his mob across the rosy plateaus
of dawn, up and down the golden valleys of noon, over the purple hills of
sunset, the noble animal follows a life of freedom, a leader of the free.”
As Glory finished his story he broke into song, fluting and piping with
a mellowness and sweetness that only he can command, and that filled The
Camp with music, such as is given to few to hear. And since I cannot by
any means whatsoever give the full, pure beauty of his melody, the words
are robbed of the most part of their music; still they are his words:
“Free as the Dawn on the hill-tops,
Knowing no master nor chain,
Free as the leaves of the forest,
Free as the winds of the plain.
Free, free, as creatures can be,
What is there left us to gain?


We, who may gaze on the morning,
We, who may loiter through noon,
Deep in the shade of the valleys,
Or laugh in the light of the moon,
Free, free, evermore free,
What could we ask as a boon?
Free as the fancy of fairies,
Free as the songs of Delight,
Matching our pride with the Morning,
Dreaming our dreams with the Night.
Free, free, for evermore free,
This is our joy and our right.”
He ceased for a moment, and all held their breath. His song was
so pure, so joyous, so full of the love of that which is the greatest of
all things, freedom, that none could withstand its beauty and its charm.
The silence was followed by a burst of applause. Glory stood surprised,
astonished. In the exultation of song he had forgotten his hearers, ajid
imagined himself to be singing only to the Dawn, as it was so often his
custom to do.
So ended the stories of the Daylighters. Now it was for the Night-
timers to see if they could outdo them.


CHAPTER VIII.
The Stories of Curlee Lew and Slow Tom.
Now it was time for Curlee Lew to tell his story on behalf of the Night-
time birds. Curlee Lew is a very shy fellow, indeed, but being a born lover
of mystery and romance, when once he gets going he forgets all about him-
self and his hearers, and simply tells his story as he feels it must be told.
Having had a lot of quite unusual experiences, he has a lot of strange stories
to tell, so he had plenty to choose from this time.
Knowing that if he allowed himself to think too much about the im-
portance of the occasion, he w T ould be very nervous, Curlee Lew decided to
begin in a way that would take him right into the heart of his story. Some
people think it better to talk all round their story before they begin to tell
the story itself. This time, at any rate, Curlee Lew did not; he plunged
right into it.
“I stood on the edge of night,” he began.
Such a beginning rather startled his hearers, especially the Daylighters,
who wondered what would come next. But Curlee Lew did not notice. He
had already forgotten his hearers, and was again living the story which he
was telling.
“I stood on the edge of night. It was a land of silence, silence desolate
and complete, for it was upon the stony desert, where nothing ever comes
save those driven by Famine or Despair. I had been drawn there by the rest-
less longing that draws me to all that is vast and mysterious. My wing is
strong and silent. I fly far through the halls of Night. But this time I had
flown too far. In an unknown land, far from shade of tree or ripple of
stream, my strength had failed me. There I lay, gasping with thirst.
“The stars grew pale. A gleam of yellow touched the sky. A glow of
fiery red came out of the east, and, with a bound, the Sun sprang up over the
edge of the earth, and stared upon the desert, a ball of fire. Closer, closer to
the earth I lay and panted. Slowly, slowly the fierce Sun climbed the hot
sky, burning as he went. The desert became a shimmering sea, the sand and
stones beside me grew scorching hot. My feathers twisted in the heat, my
tongue and throat were as dry as my feathers. Surely, I thought, I shall die
ere Night comes to help me.
Long I lay there in pain and suffering, till all things were blended to-
gether in heat and nothing seemed real. At length the Sun stood straight


above me. Now the heat was greater than ever. Soon, I thought, I must
surely die. So it would have been, but a change came. Clouds began to
gather, hard, red-looking clouds they were, with no softness or beauty, but
at least they gave something like shade. Gradually they became denser, till
they hid the sun. The sand and pebbles still scorched me, but the shimmer-
ing of the heat-waves died away, and life again began to be real. There was
a growl of thunder in the west. I raised my head ever so little and looked.
It seemed that a great storm was approaching. Now, thought I, I shall soon
drink, and the thought revived me.
“Blacker, and still more black, the clouds rolled up, till it seemed as
though the beautiful darkness was coming before its time. Soon there was
the sound of thunder. The air was filled with a strange light that seemed
to be everywhere. By and bye, it began to fade, and I heard a strange roar-
ing noise. It was not as the roar of thunder bursting upon the ear, and then
passing away in rumbling anger, but deep, heavy, and without change; a
sound of terror.
“Fearing to move, I lay and waited. Closer and closer it came, though
all was strangely still. Presently little puffs of sand began to rise. The roar
came still closer, and now it had in it a sort of muffled shriek. Then in one
sudden blast the hurricane was upon me, hot sand stinging me almost to mad-
ness, hurricane and howling terror let loose upon an empty earth. Were it
not that I have learned to lie close to Mother Earth, I had certainly been
swept away. I lay close, close,' and gradually the wind died down. Dark-
ness remained.
“After some time, I know not how long, for all my senses were numbed,
I heard sounds of something stumbling along in pain and fear, drawing
breath in those short, hissing sobs that speak of great exhaustion. Vainly I
strove to see what this thing might be, for though the night is as day to me,
this was not the darkness of kindly Night but of sand and Desolation. I
wondered and feared what manner of thing the storm had raised out of the
Desert. But I heard a sound like that which the Mother Kangaroo makes
to its young. Like it was, yet not altogether like, for it was hard and dry as
dead bones. Had I been one of those who believe in stupid tales of ghosts,
I would have thought that at last I had met one.
“There was silence for a, space. Then I heard the sounds of a kangaroo’s
feet. I gave a low, whispering call. The answer came after the manner
that you all know. It was a Mother Kangaroo. We tried to speak, the one
to the other, but our tongues were so dry that we could utter no word. So we
lay silently in the great desert, with the Black Storm Evil howling around
us in the Empty Spaces. After a time, I know not how long, drops of rain
began to fall. Big, heavy, unequal drops they were, few and far apart.
Then for one brief moment it rained, rained heavily, and the storm had gone.


And, lo! the Day had gone with it, and we stood on the edge of Night. But
in its passing the storm had left enough moisture in little crevices of the
pebbles for the softening of our parched tongues.
‘‘Then I, who had travelled there upon the strength of my silent wing,
asked Mother Kangaroo how she came to be there where no one should be if
they desire life. ‘Dingoes,’ she murmured. ‘They would have eaten my babe.
With it so heavy in my pouch I could not outrun them.’ Here she looked
down at the Joey in her pouch, and fondled it. ‘My only hope was the desert,
where they would not follow me. Therefore, I faced the desert. Then the
black, choking, evil Storm came up, and I went stumbling on till I chanced
to find you. Now I fear that I can never get back to the Fat Lands. But
for my child it would be easy, but I would rather die in the desert with my
baby than that it should fall into the teeth of the dingoes.’
“Now, some of you may wonder why Mother Kangaroo called her baby
‘lt’ instead of ‘He’ or ‘She.’ It is because amongst the Bushites there are no
inequalities between girls and boys. Both are treated alike, and both do
exactly the same work. And, of course, they all dress in the same style of
clothes, except that when they grow up the males often wear brighter colours
than the females do. Until they are grown up, there is no difference what-
ever.
“Kemembering the way by which I had come,” continued Curlee Lew, “I
said to Mother Kangaroo, ‘Let us in the coolness of the kindly Night work
our way back to the Fat Lands whence we came. I can travel slowly by your
side.’ At first she would not, fearing that I should perish of thirst with her.
In the end, I persuaded her, and we set out together.
“We had far to go. All that night we travelled, and ere the morning
star arose the gravel of the desert had changed to sand, with here and there
a rock and patches of spinifex. How that brave Mother Kangaroo struggled
on! But as the Sun rose she turned to me and said sadly, ‘lt were better
that you went with me no more. Already have I held you back too long.
Soon it will be too hot for you to travel, and the Sun will blind you. Stretch
your wings in rapid flight, and it may be that you will yet win to the land of
trees and streams, cool shade and running waters.’ I, knowing that her words
were the words of wisdom, did not contradict them. ‘Go,’ she said, ‘and I
shall follow slowly. If you come to the water and if it be not too far, for
the sake of my child return and bring me word. I have saved it from the
dingoes. I would not have it perish miserably when lam dead.’
“So I left her, knowing that death would be her lot, because even in the
agony of thirst she would not forsake her child.
“But sometimes the Powers that hold all our lives in their hands are
kind.


“Sometimes great deeds are not lost, great sacrifices are not made in vain.
Scarcely had I stretched my wings in full flight, for though my throat was
parched with thirst, my wings failed not, when the smell of water came to
me. Now and then, as we travelled, the smell of dampness left by the storm
had freshened our nostrils. But here w T as the savour of real water.
Hastening on, I found a pool left by the rain. Shallow it was, and would
soon be sucked up by the sun, but just now it would suffice us.
“Having tasted of the water, for, of course, in my perished state I feared
to drink deeply, I hastened back to Mother Kangaroo. I found her writhing
in pain of body and agony of mind, that while I was with her she had held
so well in check. Slowly I led her to the water, and she was saved. Not only
was she saved, but her baby also, her baby for which she w r ould have given
her life, not by swift and easy death, but through the long-drawn torments of
thirst. Such is Mother-love. Whence comes it ? Did but know this, we
would know all.”
Curlee Lew's story was finished. There was little applause and no ex-
citement. But it sank deep, for all his hearers knew the worth of self-sacri-
fice. Without it, none of them wmuld have been there to listen to the story.
They knew that it is by self-sacrifice that the race of animals lives in the bush.
It was some time before Slow Tom w T as called upon to tell his story. The
calling began with a single voice here and there. Not till it became general
did Slow Tom rouse himself for his effort. Then he spoke softly, slowly, as
though Curlee Lew’s story was still weighing on his mind.
“I’ve been thinking,” he said, “my story is of quite a different kind.
Curlee has told us of the beauty of love, patience, pluck, and perseverance.
I wish to show you the danger of vanity. Of all foolishness, Vanity is the
worst, the most likely to get us into real trouble; not just a scrape, but real
trouble. The greatest of virtues is ”
“Courage,” interjected Bundah-the-Fighter, as though he could not help
it.
“Patience,” said Muraway.
“Perseverance,” urged Coorbarlee, who, once he takes hold of a thing, will
never let it go again, even though you kill him for it.
“Maybe, maybe,” said Slow Tom, wffio w T as never one to argue about any-
thing. For Slow Tom is wise. Bunyip says so.
“My story,” went on Slow Tom, “is about Ambition unfulfilled and disap-
pointed Love.”
At this all the Campites laughed loud and long. Slow Tom talking of
love and ambition was very funny to them, especially when he did it so seri-
ously. But old Slow Tom, wdth his usual patient good-nature, only smiled
and waited for them all to quieten down again.


I hope this dreadful thing has not happened to you, old friend,” said
Joe.
to me, Joe,” replied Slow Tom, “but an ancestor of mine—the old
scamp —was one of those principally concerned in it.”
This made it much more interesting to everybody, and all settled down
to listen. Sitting comfortably in the fork of the big gum-tree, Slow Tom
went on.
Away back in the days when the world was young, when the great book
that Doctor Creep carries about was only beginning to be written, there was
a beautiful bird something like Cresty (Cresty, the cockatoo, blushed and
looked pleased), but ever so much handsomer (Cresty did not look so
pleased). It was bigger, brighter in colour, gayer in fashion, for it was a
most brilliant red. It was the most gorgeous bird ever seen, more gorgeous
even than Ripple, the rifle-bird, or Splendour, the satin-bird. Never was
parrot or other bird so bright and brilliant as that wonderful red cockatoo.
And away back in those days my ancestors were not like what the family is
now. They were smart, bright, jolly, handsome, dashing sort of fellows.”
At this the Campites burst out laughing more than ever. Fancy a
native-bear being smart, bright, jolly, handsome, and, above all, dashing! It
amused the Campites immensely.
Slow Tom waited till the laughter had ceased, and then went quietly on.
“So it came about that this beautiful red cockatoo and my great, great,
great—oh, I don’t know how many greats!—grandfather fell in love with
each other. In those days it must have been fine to be like that. Everyone
was happy, and those in love happier than all the others, happier than a
blue-wren with a new tail on a spring morning, or a robin at a wedding.”
“Oh! why were we born so late?
It’s awfully cruel of Fate,
We’ve only begun when all pleasure is done.
Oh! why were we born so late?”
sang Joe-the-Rat, but so that only a few could hear him.
Tom, not being one of those, went quietly on: “It must have been very
funny to see them together. A snub-nosed bear and a long-beaked cockatoo
would be a strange pair. But they were really in love with each other, so
everything seemed all right. That is the worst of love. It is very deceiving.
Now we all know that it is against the laws of Nature that a bird and animal
should fall in love with each other. When they do, something dreadful is
sure to happen. You see they did not know that in those days; it still had to be
learned. Someone has had to pay for all we know. I said something was
sure to happen. One day it did happen.


“One afternoon, when the beautiful bird and my dashing ancestor were
having a, great time in a quiet little spot beside a beautiful little stream, with
grass and flowers growing along its banks and lovely shady trees and deep
pools, and all that is nice, along came Dame Nature.
“They should have known, the silly creatures, that this was one of Dame
Nature’s favourite walks, that is why it was so pretty. They really did know,
but they were so taken up with themselves that this afternoon they had not
thought of it. When Dame Nature saw them there, making love to each
other, she got very angry. ‘What is the meaning of this?’ she asked sternly.
“The two were somewhat taken aback, but presently my ancestor, being
drunk with a mixture of love and vanity, looked up and asked, ‘Could you
find a handsomer couple in all your realm?’
“Till the whole wide world be dead,
Bird and beast shall never wed,”
said Dame Nature severely. “That law is surely well known to all. If not,
I shall teach it.”
“ ‘But surely that cannot apply to us,’ said the beautiful red bird.
“‘And why not?’ asked Dame Nature.
“For answer the bird in her overweening vanity spread her beautiful
plumage for Dame Nature to admire, and understand her remark.
“Dame Nature looked at her for a moment, and it was awful to see the
scorn deepening in her face. ‘Vain creature!’ she said; ‘has the beauty of
your plumage taken away your senses? Listen! For your vanity, because it
would make you not only transgress my laws, but also flaunt that which I
gave you even in my face, your beauty shall depart from you. You shall
be black, black as Night, and your voice shall be mournful beyond all things.
And that you may never forget, and that you may be a warning to all other
things that live upon the earth, I will leave you a little of your present
colour. Under the wings and in your top-knot will I leave it, so that, when
you stretch your wings in flight and utter your mournful cry, all that will
may see. All the rest of you shall be black, black as Night, and your voice,
your ever-mournful voice, will tell that all must obey the laws of Dame
Nature.’
“ ‘For you,’ turning to my ancestor, ‘since you have been modest even in
your vanity, you shall only lose your beauty and your sprightliness, but not
your contented mind. Happiness you will never know, but contentment will
be yours. Only at times will the enormity of your sin come upon you, and
then you will wail in the silent places, and all who hear will wonder at the
sadness of your cry. Henceforth, you will be plain to look upon, slow of
speech, and thought and action, but quiet for the most part, and content.’


“With these words Dame Nature went her way, thinking deeply. As
she went, the beautiful red bird grew blacker and blacker, till at length she
could bear it no longer, and stretching her wings she flew off, uttering for the
first time that mournful, lonely cry that has ever since been the cry of the
black cockatoo. As for her lover, my ancestor, he climbed slowly into a tall
gum-tree, and seating himself in a fork sank into deep thought on the foolish-
ness of ambition, even as do his children, and his children’s children, unto this
day.
“Thus fare those who disobey the laws of Nature. Who strive most,
suffer most.”
So ended the stories. Now came the time for judging, for giving the
decision, and awarding the Great Prize.
Mat Magpie


“Jerry, the Dingo, that travelled many miles”


1
■
.
*
'


CHAPTER IX.
The Awarding of the Great Prize.
The day of the great decision had arrived. All the Campites, birds and
animals, Daylighters and Night-timers, were gathered together for the
occasion. The time had been well chosen, for it was evening, evening to be
followed by a fine moon.
Woop-Woop, the owl, had been hooting
for some time. He was so excited that he
could not wait till the Evening Star gave him
the signal to begin, which was the proper
thing for him to do. He could not even wait
till sun-down, as every respectable owl is sup-
posed to do. Some of the Campites were very
much annoyed about it, but most of them, see-
ing what an occasion it was, made allowances
for him. Not that he really cared much, for
he was not one of those who are always look-
ing for the good opinion of others. Merry,
the field-mouse, said he was altogether too
good at looking for things, but it was not that
kind of thing; Merry wished it were.
Jerry, the dingo, had travelled many miles
to be “in at the death,” as he put it, and Mura-
way, the blue kangaroo, had been having a
very broken day’s rest. Even in the middle of
the day, when the sun was nice and hot, and
the Wilga tree she was lying under was throAV-
ing a perfectly lovely shade, her sleep had not
been really sound—not as it should be at such
a time.
As for Ginger Groogie, the ’possum, he
had stayed awake nearly all the time. More
than once he had looked out of his hollo\A T
tree to see if Night were coming yet, and meet-
ing the strong sunlight had drawn back, wink-
ing and blinking. When he heard Woop-
Woop, he waited no longer, and came right
out. Of course, that was Woop-Woop’s fault,


but for all that Ginger should not have done it. It was not in accordance
with the best behaviour.
for the last two hours Will Wag, the w T agtail, had been chattering away
without a stop. The Coolooks, the twelve apostles family, were all hopping
about, talking all together at an awful rate, and not listening to anything.
Miss Mynah, the soldier bird, who was now shouting from a grey-box tree,
had hardly left otl making a noise since daylight, and Jack Butcher, the
shrike, would every now and then give a burst of song, as though he were the
one who had won the prize, or at least knew what it was going to be, and could
not help his joyousness from bubbling up through his throat.
It was noticeable, though, that Weetah, the bower-bird, had not been as
lively as usual, and Brown, the snake, had been in a particularly bad temper,
lie had been in a nasty temper ever since Fiery, the bull-dog ant, and his
family had taken a taste of his tail that time. But to-day he was even worse
than usual. Perhaps he was particularly savage because he had not been
able to tell a story that anyone wanted to listen to.
Joe-the-Rat was as lively as ever, here, there, and everywhere, chirpy as
a cricket and cheerful as a catherine-wheel on a dark night. He had no hope
that he was going to be awarded the prize. He was quite content, because the
Daylighters were satisfied that he had put forward a good effort for them.
Mrs. Gnoorie, the emu, was still somewhat sulky. But no one who knew her
ever expected anything else. Slug, the sleepy lizard, quietly, but firmly, kept
out of her way. He knew when it was well to keep quiet. He said so to
Coorbarlee, the shingle-back lizard, who had taken hold of a stick instead of
one of his feet that had been tickling him, and would not let it go, and was
wondering why the ridiculous foot went on tickling. Bundah-the-Fighter
told him what was the matter, but Coorbarlee just held on as though he had
not heard.
Cresty, the white cockatoo, could not keep still for a moment, but kept
moving from one foot to another, and raising her top-knot, and stretching
her wings in a most annoying manner, till Jacky, the ringtail ’possum, came
swinging along from limb to limb, enjoying himself to no end. Robin, the
red-breast, was fluttering about most cheerfully, and Jack Winter was flirt-
ing his little gray tail at a greater rate than ever even he had been seen to do
it before.
Brolga, the native-companion, was trying to appear very sedate indeed,
but was really feeling quite curious as to who the winner w T as, and what the
Great Prize would be. Altogether it must have been evident even to those
who do not know much about the Bush, that something unusual was astir.
As the Campites took their places, the cry of Mournful, the black


cockatoo, came from the distance, and many looked up at Slow Tom, and
thought of his tale. But Slow Tom looked quite unconcerned, much more
so than did Joe-the-Rat, Curlee Lew or Glory, who, as we know, were his three
rivals for the Great Prize. For Slow Tom is a fellow of sound judgment, and
much common sense. He had quite made up his mind that he had no chance
of winning; in fact, he had decided to vote for Glory. For, though Curlee
Lew’s story had had a great effect upon him by reason of its unusualness, he
thought that on the whole, seeing to whom the stories were told, that Glory’s
was the best. It was such a glowing, inspiring sort of story, so full of the
love of freedom, which is perhaps the strongest of all sentiments among
Campites, that he felt it should and must win. He was not in the least
jealous about it, only pleased that such a story had been told.
Bundah-the-Fighter having taken his place, and all the birds and animals
having settled themselves down, the discussion was just about to begin when
Kook, the laughing-jackass, and his whole family began to laugh. They
laughed so heartily that Bundah looked rather surprised, but waited quite
good-naturedly for them to stop. But they did not seem to want, or to be
able, to stop. One would chuckle. Then another would chuckle. Then they
would all go off together into another burst of laughter. One would stop
laughing, and begin to chuckle softly. Another would do the same thing.
And before they could all stop chuckling, one would begin laughing again,
and off they would all have to go. It seemed as though they were never
going to stop.
Ginger Groogie got tired of it. “Why are you all laughing like a lot of
lunatics?” he growled.
Kook stopped short. “Why! it is the proper time to laugh,” he said, in
a surprised sort of way. “Why shouldn’t we laugh? Don’t you see the sun
is just setting?”
“What is that to laugh at?” asked Snarl, the native-cat, crossly, and
without waiting for a reply, w T ent on to say that he was of the opinion that
none of the stories were worth a prize of any sort, or even worth thinking
about at all. Curlee Lew’s might have been, he considered, if Mother Kan-
garoo had been caught by the dingoes, and he had described wdiat happened
after she had been caught, and how good Joey, the baby kangaroo, was to eat.
But, as it was, it Avas little better than any ot the others, and that w 7 as saying
little enough. But Snarl always was bad tempered and a cranky sort of
fellow. Sir Lee, the w r ater-rat, w r as the only one who agreed wdth him. Even
Mat Magpie, who is not always a very generous sort of fellow 7 , took quite a
different view of the case. His trouble was that all the stories were so good that
he did not know which w 7 as the best. When he made a remark to the effect


there was great cheering, for many of the
Campites were feeling the same way
about it. Anyway, they did not like the
fault-finding of Snarl and Sir Lee, and
meant to show them that they didn’t.
Ginger Groogie said he thought Slow
Tom’s story the best of all, because it set
down those creatures who thought they
were the greatest things on earth, and
who seemed to think that everything and
everyone should stand aside and admire
them and their little ways. He always was a bit severe, old Ginger Groogie.
“Besides,” he added, “Slow Tom’s story was interesting as a bit of history,
the history of the making of the world as they knew it. It gives a fellow
something to think over while he is waiting for sundown.”
TV hen he had finished speaking, Flighty, the squirrel, scampered along
a limb in a great hurry, and said that she thought Joe-the-Rat had told the
best story, and she was going to vote for him. She did not give any reasons,
but Flighty never was good at reasons. Reasons are like figures to some
people —they don’t like them. Flighty was one of those.
Then Weetah, the bower-bird, had her say. To her mind the story told by
Glory was easily the best. “Hear! Hear!” said Slow Tom. Ginger Groogie
looked at him as much as to say, “What did you do that for?” Joe-the-Rat
looked up and smiled in a friendly sort of way. He knew that his story was
altogether too light and flippant to please his friend. He really thought
that Glory was entitled to the prize. In his own lively, generous way he said
so. Of course, he had to say it in rhyme. It ran like this:
“Weetah is right. By all that’s bright.
The prize should go to Glory.
He really told with voice of gold
A most delightful story.”
“If it had been for making rhymes, Joe, you would have won all the
way,” said Glory, brightly. “I should not get the prize. Mine w T as not a
story, it w T as a song. You see I cannot help singing, just like you can’t help
rhyming.”
“Ah. well; you know,
That may be so,”
answered Joe, gaily. And they all laughed.


Then Doctor Creep had his say. Setting his horn spectacles straight on
his nose, and holding his big book closely tucked under one arm, he began:
“All four stories have merit. None of them is without its good points.”
“Hear! Hear!” said Joe, laughing.
“All four of them have their merits,” repeated the Doctor, “but all have
not equal merits. To take them in order. That of Joe-the-Rat is gay,
amusing, and, may I be allowed to say so, a trifle vulgar.”
“Say, old friend, you are not taking them in order at all. You are
taking them in disorder,” objected Joe. “Anyway, there will be disorder if
you go on like that.”
Doctor Creep continued steadily: “That of Slow Tom is interesting from
its historical bearing, and points a good moral. But it is too serious, too sad,
too sombre, too crushing. Whatever Slow Tom may say, proper ambition is
a good thing, and one that should be encouraged.”
“Of course! Of course!” put in Mrs. Gnoorie, who never did like Slow
Tom. But then she never liked anyone much, except herself.
Doctor Creep went steadily on: “That of Curlee Lew is good, a strong
story, well told and full of thought, but altogether too depressing. We don’t
want stories of that sort. We know that sorrow and trouble exist. The
more we think of them, the more they exist. Let us think of them as little
as possible. There is no use in being miserable—nothing is to be gained by
that.”
Joe-the-Rat chimed in again. “Nice game that would be,” he said.
“We’ve more sense:
We’re game enough
To take the rough
And swallow it,
And still be fit.
And hop along,
With laugh and song,
For life is good, yes, every bit.
No reflection on you, Tom, old boy. And I beg your pardon, Doctor.”
The Doctor went steadily on. “That of Glory,” he said, “is a fine story.
In my humble opinion, it should win the prize. It is filled with the fire of
life, the love of freedom, the joy of living. Too much of that sort of thing
we cannot have. I think the prize should go to Glory.”
After this, little was said for some time. Everyone was thinking hard
or trying to look ias if they were. For though Doctor Creep is apt to be a
bit prosy at times, no one ever doubts that there is a lot in what he says.
And if people don’t see it, they like to pretend that they do.


After a time, Coorbarlee let go his hold on the stick, to which he had
still been clinging, half opened one eye, and looking up sideways at Doctor
Creep, said, “But, after all, what is there in it? Take away the manner of
telling it, strip it of its poetical ornament, whatever that is, and all that
remains is a big, savage brute, with fiery eyes and nose, galloping about,
fighting and robbing another of his own kind of his property. I don’t see
much in that. I would rather have Joe’s story. It is more sensible.”
No one ever expected Coorbarlee to understand poetry, and some of his
hearers felt inclined to laugh. But some cheered his remarks. All the same
there was little more said, and what there was turned mostly in favour of
Glory.
The end of it all was that Glory won. Then there was great excitement
amongst all the Campites as to what the prize would be. Of course, there
was the honour of winning, and all thought a great deal of that, but what the
prize would be was even more interesting. You remember Bundah-the-
Fighter had promised that the prize would suit the winner. Now that Glory,
the lyre-bird, had won, everyone was greatly concerned as to what form the
prize would take.
As soon as the decision was given, Bundah, saying that he would be back
shortly, left The Camp. The talk waxed fast and furious. Everyone
wanted to know just exactly what Bundah would bring back, and, as everyone
wanted to know at exactly the same time, and no one did know at all, and
those who were not saying they wanted to know were busy explaining that
they did not know, things got a bit mixed. Will Puljooringhee, the Australian
lark, flew away up over the tree-tops, and sang a song to himself. Googar
was hissing at Ginger Groogie, and threatening him with all sorts of things,
though no one knew why. Mrs. Gnoorie was openly rejoicing over the fact
that the prize had been won by a Daylighter.
Bundah-the-Fighter returned, carrying something very carefully. It
was quite a good-sized thing, but seemed to be very light.
Now, you must know that up to this time, Glory, the lyre-bird, though
he had always been a very intelligent bird and a beautiful singer, was not
very striking to look at. He was not at all bad-looking, but he was not
very noticeable, and had a particularly insignificant sort of tail. Bundah
had noticed this, so what do you think he had got? He had brought a most
beautiful tail, formed like a lyre, far the most beautiful that any of the
Campites had ever seen. And from that day to this, Glory wears the lyre
as a tail, to show what a beautiful singer he is.
So now you know why Glory, the lyre-bird, has such a beautiful tail;
why Mournful, the black cockatoo, is black, and has such a sad cry; why Slow


Tom, the native bear, is so quiet and thoughtful; why other birds and animals
never have anything to say to Father Crow, and one or two other things.
Perhaps some day I shall tell you more about them all, for I am so
friendly with them that I get to know quite a lot of things.
Bunyip says so. And whatever Bunyip says is right.
Bunyip, you know, is the animal that is so hard to find that no one has
ever seen him yet —except me.
THE END
Glory, the Lyre-Bird


Printed in Australia by
Keating-Paice Pty. Ltd.
Melbourne <gJ (£)
The Illustrations en-
graved by Patterson
Shugg Pty. Ltd., Mel-
bourne


#5%
] \




