



||j BELONGS M3
THE CHAUCER,
80 Swanston Street.
Melbourne.
Central 9604


5 | PRECIOUS PS
||^FEHB]Pop|||
fi IMI- XU <l^
SU-fo i t-




The KINGS TREASURIES
OF LITERATURE
GENERAL EDITOR
Sir A T QUILLER COUCH


'pwj-
Kluo— —-a
/'Fx "»., , .
X f>k k
NEWYORK E P DUTTON AND COMPANY


BUNYIP
TOLD ME
By
W.M.FLEMING
i \ysyj
i,iw« JAy
rr^KJ*
m fj WAT-
I Vylg
EDITED BY
GEOFFREY E. GREEN
B.A.
.Vi's';
Wm V n l WKWm*
'v ¥T
■' '<*•'W,'/'"^" 1 1 *'\ (•. 1 1 ig l7, ‘r..;A tV. .. i. A J.i, Va / .
jijfex/'/•>V*. »'; *■
M DENT & SONS LTD • LONDON & TORONTO


All rights restored
Sole Agent for Scotland
THE GRANT EDUCATIONAL CO. LTD.
GLASGOW
PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN


||| TO THE BOYS AND GIRLS
I don’t suppose you have ever thought that there are
some people who don’t appreciate what there is to be
found in the country. However, it is unfortunately only
too true. They are so used to living in the great and
dusty cities that they find the country uninteresting
and boring because, so they say, there is not enough
to do. But, of course, there are great numbers of
town people who just love to get away into the
country for a change. I hope you are among those
who can say that they love the countryside, no
matter where they live.
I should like to tell you what happened to me
one day when I was walking in one of the most
beautiful parts of the Australian “bush.” To people
who do not five in Australia the word “bush” may
sound rather strange, but it simply means the woods
and forests. This one word really does for every-
thing which is not open country. I was walking with
a friend of mine who had lived the greater part of
his life in Melbourne, which, as you know from your
geography books, is the capital of Victoria. We were
walking along one of those beautiful country roads
which are one of the many charms of Australia.
I hope that all of you may one day have the


opportunity of walking along an Australian country
road; it is just wonderful. It was a beautiful day,
there were lofty hills on both sides of us, everything
was perfectly quiet. It had been raining shortly before
we set out, and the rain had made the trees smell
in a delightful manner. The road was rather muddy
—many country roads are in Australia, but that
doesn’t matter, it is part of the fun of walking in
the country. My friend did not seem at all interested,
and at last he told me that he was not enjoying the
walk. I was very surprised indeed to hear that because
I was having a most enjoyable time. I felt rather
sorry for my friend, so I asked him what was the
matter. He actually told me that he could see or hear
nothing to interest him. I dare say you know that
people walk in their sleep with their eyes open. Well,
that is exactly what he was doing. A sleep-walker
with his eyes open, a man who had good eyes and yet
was quite blind.
Now, during that walk I had been seeing interest-
ing things, but I had said nothing about them, for
I like to enjoy myself quietly in the country. Just
think of it! Not a single interesting thing in all those
fields and woods around us! Of course, you must
have very good eyes and keep them wide open to
find them. I made up my mind to make my friend
see a little better, so I told him that I would make
his walk an enjoyable one by showing him some of
the many delightful animals and birds to be seen
in the Australian bush. We had to go very slowly


and very quietly; I hoped that this would not
make him tired.
We continued our walk in silence for a time, when
suddenly I drew his attention to a small black spot
on a hillside some distance from us. We looked at
it carefully, and came to the conclusion that it was
a rabbit. Black rabbits are not very often seen in
Australia, so that was a really interesting thing.
I wonder whether that rabbit knew that he was of
a rare colour, because when I gave a shrill whistle
he vanished more quickly than I had ever seen a
rabbit do before. Black Rabbit was glad to find safety
in his burrow. But I have seen rabbits which are not
so scared as all that: those in England sometimes
refuse to move until one gets quite close to them,
and then one of them suddenly gives the alarm by
tapping on the ground with his paw and they all
rush off to their holes. I wonder whether rabbits are
really so stupid as many people think.
This little event seemed to interest my companion
very much, and he actually began to smile. Bunny
had apparently amused him. So we both decided to
continue our walk in search of another “event.”
Our way led us past a huge orchard with fruit-
trees simply bending over with the weight of the
fruit. That fruit looked very tempting indeed, and
we were not the only ones who thought so either.
A flock of beautifully coloured parrots suddenly
darted down and pounced on the fruit of one
tree, and we were so interested in watching these
*A


destructive birds that we quite forgot to scare them
away. I don’t suppose it was a very nice thing to
do: we should have done something to prevent them
from eating the fruit, but they were so mischievous
and so pretty that we let them go on. The birds
screamed at one another the whole time they were
eating. I dare say those birds were fairly hungry,
but they were eating in rather a peculiar way for
hungry ones. Each bird would make a few greedy
pecks at some fruit and then pass on to something
else on another tree; what they were really doing was
to make the fruit unfit for eating, although they did
not eat it all. It was such a funny sight to see them
swinging on the branches of the trees, and very often
two or three would be after the same fruit, which
always caused a terrible screaming to go on until it
was finally settled as to who should have it. Then-
screams were screams of joyous destruction, but they
very soon changed to screams of anger, for the owner
of the orchard suddenly appeared and put an end to
the feast. I was so pleased that we had seen these
parrots devouring great quantities of fruit and not
sitting solemnly on the branch of a tree and looking
as if they were made to be of no use whatever. I am
sure that you would have been as interested as I was
if you had seen those happy birds. Their screams of
joy had cheered my friend very much, and he was
now eagerly looking for something new; I did not
know whether we would be lucky enough to come
upon one of those rare birds or animals of the bush,


TO THE BOYS AND GIRLS
but of course we now had two pairs of keen eyes
to spy with.
We walked on. The road gradually became one of
those delightful bush tracks so well known to people
who love the Australian countryside. The smell of
the gum-trees was beautiful after a short shower of
rain that had fallen a few minutes before. I had an
idea that the birds and animals would be roaming
again now that the rain had stopped. The track was
so muddy, but we did not mind that, we were so
anxious to hear and see everything around us. We
heard the ringing laugh of the jackass. Probably you
already know that this merry old bird is often called
by the peculiar name of "kookaburra.” That is what
the aborigines of Australia called him. but unfor-
tunately there are not many aborigines left now, so
you will not hear this funny name very often. You
must not forget to read about the jackass in this
book, it is so interesting. They often become quite
tame, and I have known them to eat out of my hand.
Well, we went deeper into the bush, and presently
we noticed on both sides of the track lovely tall tree-
ferns, and that often shows that water is close by.
Perhaps some of you have never seen a tree-fern: it
is a strange kind of fern with a long thick stem or
trunk, and at the top the fem-fronds are spread out
exactly like an umbrella. We soon reached a creek
which was filled with clear, rapidly-flowing water,
and the tree-ferns and gum-trees seemed to grow
everywhere. All was very still. We. sat down on a


large rock to rest and admire the scene, when
suddenly I felt a touch on my arm, and my friend
whispered that there was something moving in the
bushes. We watched carefully, and the bushes moved
again. We held our breath when we saw a splendid
lyre-bird come down to the water. This was just
what I had been longing to show my friend from
town, and it was the first time he had seen one.
I dare say you have heard of the lyre-bird even if
you have not seen one. I know it is a strange name
to give to a bird, but there is a good reason for it.
If you look at the tail of a lyre-bird when the feathers
are opened out, you will notice that the tail is shaped
like the ancient musical instrument called a lyre. If
you have a good dictionary you will probably find
a small picture of the lyre-bird in it, if you look up
the word there. Now lyre-birds are very shy, so we
had to be most careful not to let ourselves be seen
moving about. The trouble was that we were sitting
on a very exposed part of the rock and the bird
could easily see us if we moved. We hoped, perhaps,
that the lyre-bird would think we were logs of wood
stained black by fire-smoke, for we were wearing
dark suits. The bird walked about among the rocks
searching for food, and presently it was joined by
three others. This was indeed a rare opportunity for
me, and a still rarer one for my friend. Presently
the four birds disappeared, but I knew that they
had not gone very far because nothing had startled
them, and, moreover, they had not gone off in a


hurry. Just then I had a bright idea: I thought that
we might be able to stalk them and perhaps get a photo
of them. I knew that it would be very difficult to do
this, for if we disturbed the birds we might not have
another opportunity for perhaps some time. My com-
panion was as eager as I to photograph them. We
got up from our hard, rocky seat and prepared to
follow the birds. We had a good idea where they had
gone, for there was a large quantity of bushes on one
side of the track. The difficulty was to know where-
abouts in these bushes they were, and the only way
of doing that was to listen for their scratching among
the leaves. It was not long before I heard them
behind the trunk of a fallen tree. Now came the
hard part of our plan. In almost painful silence we
walked round the end of the trunk, being very care-
ful not to show ourselves suddenly to the birds.
I almost felt afraid to put my feet on the ground in
case I should break a twig and frighten them. We
could hear each other breathe, so quiet was every-
thing around us. Finally, we managed to get to
within a few feet of the birds, who continued to feed
in spite of us. Both of us took photos of them, but
later we were so disappointed because the man in the
photo-shop told us that they were a failure. Of
course, the birds ran off as soon as we made a sound,
and we did not see them again. But it was interesting,
don’t you think?
I have told you these three incidents that happened
to us in the Australian bush so that you too may be


able to take an interest in such things when you read
about Australia, or, I hope, when you go there. You
will learn about the wonders of the animal and bird-
life in the Australian bush when you read this book.
When you have finished the book you will then know
whether the lyre-bird has many friends in the bush,
and what sort of friends they are. As you read and
re-read the book, you will certainly have a great
desire to go and see for yourselves what all these
things are really like. Don’t be content with reading
it in books: they are not the real thing, although
they are better than nothing. The author of this
book knows what a splendid thing it would be for
all you children if you could go out into the bush
and see all these wonderful sights for yourselves, but
I am afraid that is not always possible, is it? Some
of you live perhaps many miles from Australian
shores, others perhaps cannot go for other reasons,
and it is for you that this book has been written;
you never know when you might get an opportunity
of going to live for a while in the Australian bush,
and then you can say truthfully to your friends:
“ I know all about what I am going to see, for I have
read Bunyip Told Me and learnt it there. Emus,
kangaroos, crows, lizards, snakes, jackasses, wallabies
are no strangers to me: I know what they do in the
daytime, I know what they do to get food when
they are hungry, and I can recognise them all when
I see them.”
G. E. G.


CONTENTS
To the Boys and Girls
Bun yip Told Me .
The Story in Twelve Chapters . . . 22-138
Do You Remember? . . . . . 139
A few Notes on some Australian Birds and Animals 142




BUNYIP TOLD ME




|| BUNYIP TOLD ME
Perhaps you have never heard of Bunyip, and will
wonder who or what it is. Well, it is both who and
what. He is the Spirit of the Bush that was known
to the aborigines of Australia. No white man has
ever seen him, though I have heard him call and
talked with him more than once. And seeing that
I know a great number of the birds and animals
by their native names, Bunyip sometimes uses those
names when he is talking to me. So I use them when
telling you what he told me. If the names seem
strange to you, remember they are the names that
Bunyip uses, the real names. The blacks of Australia
(who are the aborigines) had a way of naming things
by their appearance or the sound they make. For
instance, Paul Thoora Thoora the plover has a call
that sounds just like that. And Tuggerah the black
swan bends his stately neck and says “Tuggerah!
Tuggerah!” very angrily when you chase him. So it
is with almost all the birds in this book. Even Brolga,
the native companion, is named after the call it
gives. Jumbi, which they call the pig, means big ears.
The stories that Bunyip told me were all about the
birds and animals in the freedom that is natural to
them. In those places life is full of happiness for them,


20 BUNYIP
and they see and hear and know things that people
never see or hear at all. It is because I have lived
with them and learned to understand some of their
ways that I got to know Bunyip, and when he found
that I was really interested in all of them and their
pretty ways he told me these things which I thought
I would like to tell you.
At first Bunyip did not want me to tell anyone,
but after quite a lot of persuading I got him to see
that it would do no harm and might do quite a lot
of good by making people understand. For when
people understand they are almost always much
more kind than when they don’t. Don’t you think
so ? Anyway, Bunyip thought so when I had explained
things to him. So he let me tell you, and said if you
really like these stories and they do make things
better for the Campites that is, the birds and
animals of which I tell you—he will let me know
more another time, so that I might go on telling
everyone and making them kind because they
understand.
Those who really know the birds and animals, do
not divide them into birds and animals when they
are thinking about them, but into Daylighters and
Night-timers. You see, the birds and animals that
are about together in the daytime understand each
other. And the birds and animals that come out only
at night also understand each other. The daylight
animals understand the daytime birds much better
than they do the night-time animals —and like them


better too. And the night-time birds understand the
night-time animals. So when Bunyip is telling his
stories he does not talk so much of animals and birds
as Daylighters and Night-timers.
Now you’ll understand, and when you understand,
of course you’ll be kind. You will also want to know
all about the Daylighters and the Night-timers, for
they really have most interesting ways, and it is
very nice really to know how they are feeling by the
way they do things, and say things, and sing their
songs. You can tell by the sound of their voices
quite well when you get to know them. So let’s begin.


When Bunyip found that I had been writing about
the Camp he was a little bit annoyed. You see, these
things had always been kept secret from white people,
though the aborigines were allowed to know some-
thing about them. And now I had made them known.
And I had made them known, not only to Australians
—even that would not have been quite so bad—but
to all the world. Bunyip feared that visitors would be
coming from everywhere and spoiling things. Any-
way, why should people know? Of course, birds and
animals all over the world had known all about the
Camp for longer than anyone could remember. But
then, of course, birds and animals know quite a lot
of things that men have no knowledge of, and in
most cases can never learn. For they are mostly not
things that one can learn, but those that one just
knows. And that, if you will consider it, is an
altogether different thing.
When he realised that I had told just a few of
the surface things, the things that really could not
matter, Bunyip was better pleased. From what he had
heard he believed that I had been giving away secrets.
He soon realised that he should have known better.
I had not, for instance, told anything about how


birds know when to fly from one land to another,
or migrate, as it is called; how a caterpillar knows
when to arrange things to enter on the chrysalis
stage; how the chalcid wasp knows where to lay its
eggs; how the animals and birds know what sort of
weather to prepare for, or anything of that sort that
is hard to understand. I had simply told the children —
and a lot of grown-ups had gone and read about
them too —a few things that would make them
interested in Nature and her ways.
When Bunyip learned, as he soon did, that this
had already made some of them kinder to animals
and birds, he began to think there was some sense
in it. When he discovered that quite a number of
people had said what a wise old fellow Doctor Creep
appears to be, and since he is so wise what a wonderful
being Bunyip must be, he appeared to be beginning
to believe that I had done quite the right thing.
And when I was able to assure him from my own
knowledge that some of the boys were enormously
interested in Ginger Groogie, Slow Tom and Joe-the-
Rat, and that quite a lot of girls had fallen in love
with Weetah, and some even liked poor cranky old
Mrs. Gnoorie, he was more than satisfied, and decided
that it was as well that human beings should know
something.
“They will still know little enough, even if they
understand all that you can tell them,’’ he said.
I don’t think he really meant to be nasty, you
know. So I said: “I’ll only tell them this time why


2 4 BUNYIP
Mrs. Gnoorie is always lonely and discontented; why
the Reverend Mr. W yse and his brethren have such
long beaks; why Memda, the old-man kangaroo, is
red, and is often found camping in the shade of a
red-currant bush—not that there is any connection
between the two things, though it does sound as
though there should be—and why Weetah’s play-
house is there. I’m only going to tell them about
things that happened a very long time ago,” I said,
and Bunyip was satisfied.
I know that quite a lot of you would like to know
what Bunyip is like to look at. But I am not going
to tell. He would be very angry if I did, and would
never let me know anything any more. Anyway I
could not tell you even if I tried, for he is not like
anything you ever saw, not in any way. So it is no
use trying to describe him, is it ?
\\ e 11 go on with the story. It was a good year.
There was lots of grass and water everywhere, and
all the birds and animals, being able to get all the
food they wanted quite easily, had plenty of time to
play and talk and generally amuse themselves. Like
people when they have not much to take up their
time, they began to wonder what to do next. So one
cloudy day, when they were gathered at the Camp
—it was sure to be on a cloudy day that it would
happen, for then Night-timers as well as Daylighters
can be present—they began a great discussion about
what is the best thing to be able to do. When you
come to think of it, we very rarely consider what is


the best thing to be able to do; we just do things
as they come along to be done. And then some of
us wonder why we don’t enjoy life as we think
we should.
The animals and birds, never having to bother
about making money, have more time for the things
that really matter. So, as I have said, one cloudy day,
when there were a lot of them at the Camp, they
began this discussion about what is the best thing
to be able to do.
Old Doctor Creep, the wombat, remarked slowly,
with a twinkle in his eye, “The best thing to do is
to be able to get enough to eat and drink.”
“Everyone knows that, old friend,” replied Joe-the-
Rat, the kangaroo rat. “But after that, what next?”
“To keep your clothes nice,” said Ginger Groogie,
the possum, who, though you might not think so,
is a bit of a dandy.
“Exactly,” chimed in half a dozen birds at once,
and amongst others one could distinguish the voices
of Weetah, the bower-bird. Glory, the lyre-bird,
Mat Magpie, Brolga, the native companion, and
Nellie Thrush.
“One takes all that for granted,” said Tuggerah,
the black swan, somewhat wearily. “Water, food and
feathers, of course, but what next? ”
But Tuggerah had put water first and talked
of feathers.
“It’s not as easy as all that,” growled Jerry, the
dingo. "First you get food, that makes you want a


drink. Then you get water, and feathers! Feathers
are nothing but a nuisance. They get in the way
when you are eating things. Hair is what you want,
it does not stick in your mouth so.”
No one took any notice of his remark; it was
not nice.
‘‘lt was not what is the best thing to do, but what
is the best thing to be able to do,” protested Miss
Muraway, the blue flyer kangaroo. "And,” she added
gently, "that is quite a different thing.”
Paddy Melon, the imitation kangaroo, came hopping
into the Camp, "One of the best things to do is to
keep fit,” he said. “You never know when you will
have to run for your life.”
"Not if you are of the running kind,” remarked
Coorbarlee, the shingle-back lizard, from where he
lay in the grass. At that everyone laughed, for Coor-
barlee is a terribly slow mover. In fact he rarely
moves at all if he can help it, though he was known
to move a bit one time when Mrs. Gnoorie, the emu,
trod on his neck.
Brolga, the native companion, was looking thought-
fully up at the sky. "The best thing to be able to do
is to know when it is going to rain next,” he said.
"Then you know exactly where to go and what to
do.” He was speaking in a very wise way and wanted
everyone to take notice.
Just at that moment, Joe-the-Rat, who had been
away to tell one of the other Campites something,
came hopping back. Everyone turned to look at him.


“It is only the jumping jack,” remarked Mrs.
Gnoorie, sourly.
Joe smiled. ‘‘l am not a jumping jack, lam a
hopping Joe,” he said. ‘‘To jump is vulgar, but to
hop polite.” Then, as he so often does, he broke
into rhyme
To hop, you know,
On heel and toe,
Is quite a genteel way to go.
To give a jump
And come down bump
Is clumsy, awkward, ugly, slow.
And such a way.
night or day,
Would not be any good to Joe.”
Bundah - the - fighter, the big brown kangaroo,
thought it was time for him to speak, so he said
very gravely: ‘‘The best thing to be able to do is
to keep in a good temper.”
You see, Joe was always a favourite of his, and he
thought Mrs. Gnoorie needed reproof for her un-
pleasant remark. Besides, it really is one of the best
things in the world to be always in a good temper.
Slow Tom looked down from the fork of the gum-
tree where he was sitting. ‘‘That remark is wise
enough for my friend Doctor Creep,” he said. The
old doctor bowed. “ Bundah-the-fighter is usually
wise,” he remarked. At that, of course, Bundah also
had to bow. So all were put smooth again. Miss
Mynah, the soldier-bird, spoke up.


"I think that the best thing to be able to do is to
warn people when danger is approaching.”
With this Wando, the wallaby, cordially agreed,
for he on the ground and Miss Mynah in the trees
are great ones for giving notice to the birds and
animals when there is anything dangerous coming.
Miss Mynah does it by calling out as loudly as she
can, and getting all her friends to do the same.
Wando’s way is to thump on the ground with his
tail. You would be surprised at the noise he can
make in that way. When they hear that noise, all the
birds and animals know that it is time to be on the
alert, and as soon as they know from which direction
the danger is coming, they get away in another, or
take any of the other ways they know for escaping.
But I must not tell you about those things—Bunyip
says so.
“The best thing to be able to do is to avoid the
danger,” hissed Googar, the goanna. “And the best
way to do it is to get on the other side of the tree.”
“Into the tree,” corrected Ginger Groogie.
Under the tree,” said Slug, the sleepy lizard.
“ I find the best way is to lie quite still and gammon
dead.” remarked Coorbarlee. “Never get excited,
that’s the thing.”
Slow Tom smiled down from where he sat. “That
is the remark of one who is wise,” he said. “It shows
that the breadth of our mental vision is not neces-
sarily regulated by the height at which we dwell,
I was thinking.”


"Better to be thinking than saying, if you are
going to talk in that style,” complained Cresty, the
white cockatoo, who was somewhat uppish in her
manner.
Sky Blue, the crane, who never has any ideas of
his own, or if he has, must keep them as his own,
for no one ever heard of them, repeated Miss Mura-
way’s remark: "It is what is best to be able to do that
we are supposed to be talking about,” he said loftily.
"I think the best thing to be able to do is to fish.”
"To fly, I think,” said Rev. Mr. Wyse, the ibis.
" I think the best thing to be able to do is to sing
at sunrise,” said Glory. Then he blushed, fearing that
the others might consider him to be boasting.
"The best thing to be able to do is to get under-
ground,” murmured Bilby, the shy animal who lives
underground and who rarely speaks.
"I am of opinion that the best thing to be able
to do is to be able to swim,” put in Pompous Plim-
soll, the pelican.
"What about being able to dive?” asked Mystery,
the musk duck, who, of course, knew that Pompous
cannot dive, and who can himself get under water
so quickly that he can beat the shot from a gun
fired at him when he is looking.
Doctor Creep closed the Book of Nature which he
had been reading and, tucking it under his arm,
remarked slowly: "Each one thinks that thing best
which he himself finds most useful, or which he can
do best. But there is one thing that is good for us all.”


“What is that?” asked half a dozen at once, for
everyone knows that Doctor Creep is wise.
“After getting enough food, and keeping skin,
hair, or feathers in proper condition, the best thing
in the world is story-telling,” replied the old Doctor,
quietly.
At this remark there was general approval, for
after all, life would be a very dull affair if there
were no stories.
“Quite right, old friend, quite right,” chipped in
Joe-the-Rat:
“ Better than seeing, touching, smelling.
Is the gift of story-telling.
We live by sight and touch and smell,
And most of us live pretty well,
But life would be a dreary thing
If we could not talk and sing.
Better than seeing, touching, smelling,
Is the gift of story-telling.
We ought to decide what we are going to do
about it.”
“Do about what? ” growled Spreckle, the tiger-cat.
“Enjoying life,” grinned Joe.
Spreckle showed signs of being nasty. Bundah-the-
fighter noticed it in time.
“Order!” he called in his biggest voice; not in his
loudest voice, but his biggest voice, which of course
is quite another thing.
Bundah was always in control of these meetings at
the Camp. He was not always responsible for calling


them together, but once the birds and animals were
together he was always chairman of the gathering.
Now that he had called them to order, all those
assembled there began to discuss the question in a
more serious way. They talked it over, this way and
that, for quite a long time. Finally, they came to the
conclusion that Doctor Creep was right, as usual.
Mrs. Gnoorie, as she generally does, disagreed with
them on the matter. She said that the best thing to
be able to do is to find out everything you want to
know. “Anyway,” she concluded, “it is getting late.”
The Day-timers, that is the birds and animals that
come out during the day, were ready to agree with
this, even if it was Mrs. Gnoorie who had said it,
but the Night-timers, the animals and birds that
move about mostly at night, were naturally of
another opinion. Their time was just beginning. But
as I have already said, it had been a cloudy day
and many of them who should have been asleep, but
who had stayed up on account of it being, as they
considered, such a nice day, were now beginning to
feel somewhat tired.
Brolga, the native companion, seeing the sun was
about setting, uttered his trumpet call that means it
is time to go to bed, and twitched his wing.
Mr. Kook, the laughing-jackass, and all his family,
broke into their evening laugh. It rattled high, it
rattled low, it rattled here, it rattled there. It ran
all over the Camp. When it stopped nearly everyone
was preparing to leave.


Bundah-the-fighter called for order. Everyone
stood still. “We shall have another story-telling
competition,” he announced.
“When? When?” asked many voices, for this
interested everyone.
“That will be decided.” replied Bundah, in his
most stately manner.
The sun had now set, evening was coming; the
animals and birds scattered. Soon everywhere, up
and down the creek, through the scrub, out on the
edge of the plain, all over the place, one could hear
them going. And as they went they were repeating,
some of them softly to themselves, others singing so
that the whole place was filled with the words:
Better than seeing, touching, smelling.
Is the gift of story-telling.
“Clever little chap is Joe,” murmured Slow Tom,
as he curled himself up and went to sleep. Which
was the best thing he could have done.


Next afternoon Joe-the-Rat called on Bundah-the-
fighter. He found him lying comfortably in the shade
of a gum-tree, in a bend of the creek.
“Well, Joe, what is it?” asked Bundah.
“I’ve just come round to see what is to be done
about this new story-telling competition that you
announced at the meeting yesterday,” replied Joe,
as he stood at ease. “You know you rather sprung
it upon us.”
Bundah raised himself on one arm. “It seemed to
be the right thing, don’t you think?” he asked,
somewhat anxiously.
“Quite,” replied Joe decidedly: “quite the right
thing, there can be no doubt about that. But you
said it would be another competition. What form is
it to take and what will it be for? That’s what every-
one will be wanting to know, you know. Last time,
—of course, that is some time ago now—you’ll
remember, you gave Glory his tail.”
“And he has been very proud of it ever since. I am
glad I thought of that,” said Bundah. “It was a good
idea, wasn’t it? ”
“Do you expect to be able to think of anything
as good next time?” asked Joe. “One does not go
on getting inspirations.”
Bundah looked very thoughtful. “It would be
B 33


easier if we knew who was going to win.” His eye
brightened. “It will be easier to decide when we
know who has won,” he said, with a smile.
Joe laughed. ‘‘To know what is wanted is half the
business,” he said. ‘‘To know where and how to get
it, is the other half.”
‘‘Quite true,” replied Bundah. ‘‘But one can get
many things.”
‘‘But one can think of more, want more; at least,
many can.”
‘‘Be a little more precise, Joe,” said Bundah.
‘‘Do you mean that one can think of more than
he can get, or that many can think of more than
one can get?”
“I think either way would do,” laughed Joe.
‘‘l am not so sure of that,” answered Bundah,
looking very thoughtful. He turned to Mrs. Bundah,
who was sitting in another part of the shade of the
same tree. ‘‘What do you think, my dear? ” he asked.
‘‘Really, I have not been listening to what was
being said,” she answered.
Bundah turned to Joe again. ‘‘Well,” he said, ‘‘we
can discuss that later. At present we are more con-
cerned with the competition itself than with what
the prize shall be.”
Just then a family of Coolooks, the twelve-apostle
birds, came chattering along, scattering all over the
ground. Bundah waited till they had passed, then
continued: “Since you, Slow Tom and Ginger Groogie,
made such a success of the last competition, I think


, [iUs&l 1 1 .. '*'-~^
"well, joe, what is it?’’ asked bundah




you had better arrange this one. You know every-
one was simply delighted with your work on that
occasion.”
Bundah-the-fighter is a wise fellow and knows how
to get others to do things.
Joe had already guessed that the greater part of
the work to be done in connection with the affair
would fall upon him and his friends; it usually did.
So he simply said: “I had better see Slow Tom and
Ginger Groogie about it then. I’ve no doubt they
will be ready to act.”
‘‘Ah, yes, if you would, if you would,” replied
Bundah.
‘‘And we’ll go straight on with arranging the
meeting?” asked Joe.
‘‘lf you would be so good,” murmured Bundah.
‘‘l am sure everyone would be more than satisfied.”
Joe started to hop away. Then he stopped, looked
back and said: ‘‘There will be no objection to us
getting anyone else we can to help us?”
“Not at all, not at all. Get all you can. The more
that are directly concerned in the affair the better.”
“And the method of calling the meeting?” asked
Joe.
“I leave that entirely to you,” replied Bundah,
graciously.
Joe hopped away chuckling. “Bundah is a great
old bird,” he said to himself. “He’ll leave it en-
tirely to me, eh? Caterpillars and centipedes, he
is a quondong!”


Half an hour later he was talking the matter over
with Slow Tom and Ginger Groogie.
It was a lovely night, still and warm, with a young
moon showing clearly in the soft, distant sky. It
was so peaceful and comfortable that Slow Tom
came down out of his tree and was now sitting
quietly and contentedly at its foot. Ginger Groogie,
with whom it was not so unusual, was also on the
ground close to Joe, and so they could all talk
together with the greatest ease.
As the three sat there they could hear Woop
Woop, the owl, in the distance. Now and then the
piercing cry of Curlee Lew, the stone plover, and
his friends, broke through the thousand lesser sounds
that told them so many of their friends were abroad,
enjoying the beautiful night. Once they heard Yangi,
the night-hawk.
As he had come to a standstill between the two
trees occupied by Tom and Ginger, Joe had announced
the reason of his visit in this fashion:
" I’ve come to see
If there may be
Some friends now ready to help me.
Bundah has said
He’ll take as read
Whatever we do in his stead;
That he’ll agree
To what we three
May do, so long as he’s the head.”
“What does he want us to do?” asked Ginger.


"Anything, anything,” replied Joe, imitating
Bundah’s fine large way.
"Somewhat a large order,” remarked Slow Tom,
with a smile.
" Well, it’s like this,” said Joe. " You know that Bun-
dah has announced another story-telling competition ? ”
They both signified that they did.
"Well,” continued Joe, "I don’t think he knows
the next move.”
"It seemed to me,” said Ginger, "that he rather
rushed things.”
"In that I agree with you,” said Slow Tom. One
would expect Slow Tom to agree with that. He never
rushes things himself.
There followed a brief silence.
"Now he has said it, we have to do it,” continued
Tom. "We have to see it through, is that it?”
"That’s about it,” agreed Joe cheerfully. "We
couldn’t let the old chap down.”
"Quite,” chimed in Ginger, readily enough. "Of
course not.”
"Then the thing is, what are we going to do about
it?” said Slow Tom.
"Of course we’ll have to put up a notice saying
when the competition is to take place,” said Joe;
“but I don’t think that will be enough. We ought
to do more than that to make it a real success.”
"Bundah can also announce it the next time he
is at the Camp,” put in Ginger, “and we can each
tell all our friends.”


Suppose we ask Mrs. Gnoorie to help us,” sug-
gested Slow Tom slyly.
Joe-the-Rat bristled at once. “Immediately she
knows it, she will tell everyone,” he exclaimed. “She
could not help it if she tried.”
“It is we who want to help it,” laughed Ginger
Groogie.
“Well help it most by not asking Mrs. Gnoorie to
have anything to do with it,” said Joe decidedly.
“Well, let it stay at that as far as she is concerned,”
said Tom. “What next? Whom shall we get?”
This was a matter that could not easily be decided.
There were so many who could help if they would,
that it was difficult to know whom to ask, especially
as those who were not asked might easily feel offended
if those who were asked were not exactly those who
should have been asked.
“This asking business often leads to trouble.
Invitations are treacherous things to deal with.
People are so touchy about that kind of thing,”
remarked Joe, almost sadly.
Slow Tom smiled. “Cheer up, Joe, cheer up,” he
said. “It’s not as bad as that.”
Joe grinned. “I’m sorry,” he said. “I did not mean
to be gloomy.”
"If you grow sad, we’ll all go mad,” said Ginger.
That started Joe off:
“ I must deny
At once that I
Could ever be called gloomy


For come what may
By night or day
Whatever comes will do me.
I’ll not complain,
For every pain
But points the path to pleasure.
And life for me
Shall ever be
A joy beyond all measure.”
“At present we want to point the path to the
meeting and make it a joy beyond all measure,”
remonstrated Tom. “Just keep those rhymes of
yours till we’ve finished business.”
“Gum-leaves and grasshoppers! but that is the
way to get on with business,” exclaimed Joe.
“Not this business,” said Tom steadily. Slow Tom
was always one for sticking to the business in hand.
He stuck so closely that he would never have got
anywhere if it had not been for Joe and Ginger.
Bunyip said so, and whatever Bunyip says is right.


af 'f|,S CHAPTER III MP '>%
Merry, the field-mouse, hearing the discussion going
on above, came up from her nest under a root of the
big gum-tree and joined in.
"I heard you talking of business,” she said. ‘‘l
hope I do not intrude, but I was afraid that I might
overhear something that was not meant to be heard,
so thought I should come up and make you aware of
my proximity.”
Merry is a sweet little creature, but she does like
to be impressive, and uses big words. Of course you
know Merry is not the ordinary kind of mouse, the
one that lives in houses and destroys things. She is
quite a different sort of being. One great difference
is that she carries her young in a pouch. This is a
mark of motherhood that carried distinction amongst
Campites to all those who do it, because, you see,
wild animals have always to be thinking of safety
and they, above all things, understand the value of
mother-love. So wiien Merry came up and spoke so
nicely, Ginger and Joe and old Slow Tom were
quite pleased to see her, and listened to what she
might have to say.
Tom bowed in a dignified way that showed his
approval. Ginger Groogie remarked softly: ‘‘lt was
very nice of you to think of it.”
Joe exclaimed heartily: “We are very glad to see


you, my dear, very glad. You can join us in making
the arrangements.”
Merry looked quite pleased. “ What arrangements ? ”
she asked in her usual quiet and modest way.
“Oh! Bundah has decided that we ought to hold
another story-telling competition,” replied Joe. “We
want everyone to know about it. That is what we
are arranging now.”
Slow Tom spoke. "We want to arrive at the best
method of making it known.”
“Exactly,” chimed in Ginger Groogie, “the best
method.”
“Without too much trouble,” added Tom.
Merry smiled. She knew Tom. “I under-
stand,” she said. “But I am so glad that we
are going to have another competition. They are
such fun.”
While she was speaking, the sound of breaking
bushes was heard, and Wando, the scrub wallaby,
appeared. He had his cousin Slick, the rock
wallaby, with him. Slick is quite different from
Wando, who is somewhat slow and clumsy. Slick
is slim, with a rather long sharp nose, and is verv
active.
"Meeting on here?” grunted Wando. “What’s the
mischief now?”
He looked at Joe with small, blinking eyes.
“I doubt if it would interest you,” replied Joe.
“You don’t go in for stories, do you? At any rate,
no one has ever heard you tell one.”


Slick cocked up one ear and let it fall again. He
looked interested, but said nothing, for he is a shy
sort of fellow.
“What about you, Slick?’’ asked Ginger, noticing
that look of interest.
“Well, what about me? ” asked Slick humorously.
“Do you take an interest in stories? ”
“In historical ones I do,” replied Slick, who
really is a thoughtful sort of chap and spends a
lot of time sitting on high rocks and looking into
the past.
“One of the old families?” asked Tom quite
seriously.
“Can’t you see that by the length of his nose?”
asked Joe cheerily, he having a long nose and Tom
a short one.
Wando is not noted for his sense of humour. “In
our family,” he said, rather haughtily, “short noses
are desired. Slick is different. The best bred people
of his particular line have long noses. Some short
noses are much admired.”
Slow Tom looked at Wando approvingly. “Quite
right,” he said. “They should be.”
Merry stroked her rather long nose thoughtfully.
Joe winked at her and began to rhyme:
‘A striking feature is the nose.
As you all understand, I s’pose,
The thoughts must follow where it goes.
When it looks up towards the sky.
Its owner’s spirits will be high;


But when it’s turned towards the ground.
Most melancholy they’ll be found.
But, long or short,
It surely ought
To be more pointed-like than round.”
Merry blushed. "You do make charming little
rhymes,” she said.
Slow Tom smiled. "He is a base flatterer, Merry,”
he warned her. "Take no notice of him: I don’t.”
Joe started off again:
“ Now, my old friend.
I’d not offend
Your blunt but most delightful end.
It may be round,
But I have found
The sentiment behind it’s sound.
And you’ll agree,
I think, with me,
It’s just what your nose ought to be
It tucks away so comfortably.”
He was alluding to Tom’s habit of tucking his
head away when going to sleep.
Ginger Groogie, who has rather a sharp nose,
laughed. "A long nose is a prying nose, isn’t it, Tom?
It’s his nose that makes our friend Joe such an
inquisitive sort of a fellow, eh?”
"Me?” ejaculated Joe, striking an attitude. No
doubt he would have started off with some more of
his rhymes, but a big, fat, blundering beetle bumped
into him. He shuddered. "Ugh!” he said. "Horrid
thing, get out!”


Animals don’t understand insects any more than
we understand animals, and they like them less, for
they are never anything but a bother to them. The
beetle had fallen to the ground and was crawling
away, dragging one wing. While the others watched
it going, a silent shape appeared out of the dark,
dropped down beside the poor staggering beetle and
devoured it.
“Everything has its uses,” remarked the newcomer.
“I was just looking for a mouthful when I heard
that beetle bump into Joe.”
It was Yangi, the night-hawk, who spoke. He
looked round in a fierce, aggressive sort of way, and
was just in time to see Merry disappearing into
her nest.
"I wish I had not wasted time over the beetle,”
he said.
The others knew what he meant, but no one said
anything, for Carapites all recognise the fact that it
is no use arguing against Nature. It is Yangi’s nature
to eat field-mice; it was Merry’s business to keep out
of his way. They were all glad that she had done
so, all except Yangi. They did not mind seeing him
eat a beetle, for the beetle was not one of their kind,
but Merry was, and they were pleased to see her
disappear in safety.
A slightly awkward silence settled on the group.
Yangi did not like it.
“What is all the discussion about, anyway?” he
asked rather viciously.


"When you arrived we were talking about noses,”
said Wando.
"And before that,” put in Joe, "we were con-
sidering the next meeting. The arrival of Wando and
Slick rather threw us out of our stride.”
"What meeting?” demanded Yangi, still some-
what fiercely.
Ginger explained. "You can help us in this,
Yangi,” he said. "You have a good carrying voice.
It should be of great use.”
"We sometimes wish he would cany it more and
use it less,” remarked Tom, for Yangi’s screams in
the still night make you feel as though the world
were coming to an end.
Yangi took no notice of that remark. "I’ll do what
I can,” he said, for fierce and uncompanionable as he
is, Yangi, like all live things with an active brain,
likes to hear a good story. " When is it to be? ”
"Bundah left the whole of the ananging to us,”
said Tom with a slow wink.
"As I would have expected,” replied Yangi, who
had little of the other Campites’ respect for the big
brown kangaroo, fighter and all as he was. "What
next?” he rapped out.
"Next is to anange the time of the meeting,”
answered Joe, who rather admired Yangi’s indepen-
dent spirit and dashing ways.
"The dark is all right for me, but full moon is
the only time that suits a lot of folk,” said Yangi,
in a final sort of tone. "I’ll do what I can to help.”


But Wando was feeling a bit cranky. He does
sometimes. “It will not suit me,” he objected. “I am
a Daylighter”—he isn’t, really, you know—“and
naturally, like all the best folk, I prefer the daytime.”
Slick supported him. “Some moonlight nights are
fine,” he said; “but they are not as good as daylight
—you trip over things.”
Ginger gave a grunt, but said nothing, and Tom
waited to see what would happen.
"That sort of argument won’t do,” said Yangi
decidedly. “As you know, I am entirely a Night-
timer myself. There are more birds and animals that
come out at night than in the daytime.”
"Not more birds, I think,” put in Ghindi, the fan-
tail, who had come twittering out of the bushes where
she had been going to sleep.
Wando turned to Slick. “We shall have to contest
this, he said. “Go and gather up as many of our
people as you can find.”
When Yangi heard this he sprang up quickly, and
with one sweep of his wings had disappeared noise-
lessly into the night. In a moment, so quickly that
they could hardly believe it could be he, they heard
him uttering his wild call away along the creek.
Slick plunged off through the bushes. “I’ll need to
move,” he said, over his shoulder, as he went.
The other four looked at each other.
“Now we’ve done it,” said Joe gleefully. "This
will stir things up.”
It is strange,” remarked Slow Tom thoughtfully,


“that it should be a bird who asks for a night-time
meeting, and an animal that seeks to have it in the
daytime. If it had been one of the water-birds it
would have been just what one might expect, but
who would ever have thought of Yangi turning up
and taking a part in these things.”
“Life is full of contradictions,” sighed Merry,
who having heard Yangi go, silent as he was, had
reappeared.
“And of comings and goings,” said Ginger Groogie,
rather sourly.
“Perhaps Googar, the goanna, will come,” sug-
gested Merry.
“That’s one on you, Ginger, old boy,” laughed
Joe. For Ginger is frightened of Googar, who chases
him about a good deal.
“Serves me right,” admitted Ginger. “I went
looking for it; I deserve it.”
Slow Tom smiled approval at the admission. He
began to climb the big gum-tree.
“There will be a crowd here soon,” he said.


Slow Tom had just got settled in his favourite fork
of the big gum-tree when the birds and animals began
to arrive. Thurrin, the bittern, was first. He was
immediately followed by Gnawoo, the wood-duck,
behind whom flocked many other kinds of water-
fowl. While they were finding places, animals began
to appear. First Snarl, the native cat, who had been
prowling round seeing if Ghindi was at home, came
in quietly. Wando, the wallaby, followed. Jacky
Ringtail, the ringtail possum, came swinging along
through the trees, accompanied by Flighty, the
squirrel. As they were dropping into the Camp,
Tuggerah, the black swan, who had been some-
what slow in leaving the water, came lightly down
beside them. There was the sound of the snapping
of a twig and Bundah-the-fighter appeared. He
looked quite agitated.
“What is it all about?” he asked.
Slow Tom looked down at him soberly. “There
is nothing to get worried over,” he said. “There is
no danger threatening anyone.”
He did not mean to insinuate that Bundah-the-
fighter was frightened. No one would do that. But
Bundah was responsible for the Campites more
than anyone else was, especially when they were
at the Camp.


“A bit of an argument as to when the meeting
should be held,” said Joe with a grin. “Wando and
Yangi had a few words over it.”
“How did they come to have anything to do with
it?” asked Bundah.
“They just happened to drop in while we were
talking about it,” replied Joe.
“Since it is a matter that affects us all, I presume
it is one on which we all may have something to
say,” remarked Wando haughtily.
“Of course, of course,” agreed Bundah, who, being
chairman of all Camp meetings, always tried to keep
everyone in a good temper and on good terms with
each other, and saw some difficulty ahead in this
gathering; for birds and animals were coming in
from all directions. Yangi’s call had stirred them
properly.
Old Pompous Plimsoll, the pelican, and Brolga,
the native companion, arrived at almost the same
time as Spreckle, the tiger-cat, and Goorbarlee, the
shingle-back lizard. Brown, the snake, had slipped in
without anyone seeing him, and now he was whis-
pering to Mrs. Gnoorie, the emu, in a secret sort of
way. Whispering in the Camp was bad form, and
Jerry, the dingo, gave them a look of scorn as he
passed and took up a stand near Bundah.
By this time the Camp was becoming crowded, and
everyone was asking what it was all about.
Yangi returned. “I reckon I’ve stirred things up
a little bit,” he remarked, as he took his perch on


a limb near where Ginger Groogie was sitting,
watching the scene below.
Woop Woop, the owl, was already there. As
Yangi settled down and shook his feathers into
place, Woop Woop moved further along the limb.
He did not like Yangi; very few did.
Seeing that so many had gathered, Bundah
thought it was about time to begin the meeting.
"Order!” he called, in his big voice—his chairman’s
voice.
Wando immediately objected. "I do not think the
meeting should begin yet,” he said. “Slick is not
back. I object to discussion being begun before
he returns.”
\ our objection is sound,” said Bundah gravely.
The chatter immediately broke out again.
“What about a song, Nellie?” called Joe.
“Now, Joe, you know that I do not sing at night,”
objected Nellie Thrush.
“Perhaps Will Puljooringhee will give us a turn.”
It was Keen Eyes, the eagle-hawk, who made the
suggestion.
“Nor do I sing at night,” replied Will Puljoo-
ringhee, the Australian lark.
“Of course, I should have known that,” said Keen
Eyes. “But you see I never know what goes on at
night; I am such a good sleeper, you know. But
I often like listening to you in the daytime. You
do sing well.”
“Not nearly so well as Jack Butcher,” answered


Will Puljooringhee modestly. “My songs are longer,
but they are not nearly so good.”
“He is a Day timer, too,” objected Gnawoo, the
wood-duck.
“What about Willie Wag? He sometimes makes
a noise at night,” put in Thurrin, who was afraid
that Gnawoo wanted to make a noise himself.
Ghindi, the fan-tail, objected to this. “Willie Wag
does not ‘make a noise,’” she said. "He chirrups
cheerfully.”
This was Joe’s opportunity to stop an argument
that might lead to ill-feeling, and he broke in:
" We’ll all agree that he
Chirrups quite cheerfully.
But still at singing he is not a star;
Now if you want a song
Bring Mr. Kook along.
Of melody he does not know a bar.
But what’s the odds to us ?
He’ll start without a fuss
Andfstop all quarrelling, so there you are.”
Mr. Kook!” called Bundah.
Without a moment’s hesitation Mr. Kook, the
laughing jackass, broke into his discordant cackle.
His family immediately joined in, and together they
completely drowned all other sounds.
By the time their laughter had died down, Slick
had returned, bringing Miss Muraway, Bilby, Paddy
Melon, the imitation kangaroo, and Weetah, the
bower-bird, with him.


“I thought that the meeting would have begun,”
he said.
“We waited for you to return,” said Bundah,
genially.
‘‘l made them,” grunted Wando, none too
pleasantly.
“Wando means that he brought the matter under
notice,” said Bundah with great dignity, and even
Wando felt somewhat squashed, the way he did it.
But Wando was not one to give way. As soon as
the meeting was ready to hear anyone, he voiced
his feelings.
“I hold that this meeting should take place in
the daytime.”
“But it is taking place at night, here, now,”
interjected Joe.
"The meeting of which I am speaking, I mean,”
said Wando.
“That’s not this. It’s that,” growled Jerry, the
dingo, who has no love for Wando.
Wando blinked viciously. “I hold that the meeting
which we have met to arrange, should take place in
the daytime,” he insisted.
“Why? ” asked half a dozen voices.
“Because ”he said, “because ." He was
stuck for a reason.
A ripple of amusement ran around the Camp.
“Because ” said Wando desperately, “moonlight
hurts my eyes.”
Even old Pompous Plimsoll laughed at that.


“Moonlight never hurt anything,” he said; “not
even fish, though some think it does.”
“Not when you’re about; you never give it time,”
said Carbo, the cormorant diver.
“Order!” said Bundah-the-fighter. “Wando has
the call.”
“Well, I claim that the meeting should take place
in the daytime. I think ” began Wando again. Mrs.
Gnoorie had taken the opportunity to cross over
near Wando, and as she passed she whispered down
to him. Wando looked relieved. “Yes,” he said;
“I think that as the last great competition was
held at night the next one should be held in the
daytime.”
“Wando hardly ever attends any meetings. Why
should he come here now and try to upset every-
thing?” asked Ginger Groogie. “It is well known
that many of us cannot be out in daylight with any
safety. Everyone can come out in the moonlight.
It may be a little awkward for some, but it is
dangerous to none.”
“Spreckle and Snarl move about at that time,
and they are not to be trusted,” said Ghindi softly
to Willy Wag.
“Quite true,” he replied. “But we are just as safe
from them abroad as at home on a moonlight night,
I find.”
"More argument,” sighed Bilby to Joe. “Well,
what could one expect in a crowd like this? ”
Bilby is a shy and solitary sort of fellow, but


much as he dislikes a crush, even he could not keep
away from the Camp.
Joe, who would at any other time have teased
Bilby with some nonsensical rhyme, was too busy
listening to the discussion to hear him, or at least
to take any notice of him. Joe liked crowds. He also
liked to hear all that was being said.
"I agree with Ginger Groogie,” remarked Tug-
gerah, the black swan, in stately fashion. Tuggerah
generally is stately.
“And I also,” called Woop Woop, so suddenly
that everyone jumped.
Half a dozen others attempted to speak all at
once.
“ Order! ” called Bundah-the-fighter. “ Order! Merry
has the call.”
Merry is such a tiny little thing, especially coming
after Bundah’s big voice, that it was some little time
before most of the others could see her. She got up
on the root of the big gum-tree where she had been
sitting when talking to Slow Tom, Ginger and Joe,
and, standing on her hind legs, began to speak:
“ Moonlight meets the requirements of the
majority,” she said. “That is surely sufficient
reason for selecting a moonlight night for this
most momentous meeting.”
“How do you know it will be momentous?”
interjected Snarl.
“It’ll be more than moments, it will be hours,”
said Coorbarlee.


“I said momentous, not momentious,” replied
Merry, rather stiffly.
Coorbarlee wanked one eye. "I see; it makes a
difference, eh?”
He turned to Camee, the frill-necked lizard, who
was close beside him.
‘‘Did you ever hear of Momentious before, old
fellow?” he asked. ‘‘l never saw him come into
the Camp.”
‘‘Without an eye you couldn’t see at all,” replied
Gamee.
Coorbarlee closed one eye and thought solemnly for a
moment. ‘‘Without an ‘ I ’ I wouldn’t be,” he answered.
Joe caught their remarks and rattled off a rhyme:
“ Without an eye we couldn’t see.
Without an I we couldn’t be.
Without an i we couldn’t sigh.
But what an awful sound ’twould be! ”
“What do you mean by that?” asked Coorbarlee.
But Joe was not going to explain what he meant
—if he meant anything. He wanted to have his way
about the meeting, for he knew that if something
definite was not done now, the whole of the arranging
would fall upon him and his friends, Slow Tom and
Ginger Groogie.
By that time everyone was so anxious to speak
that no one could be heard.
Bundah threatened to close the meeting. When
silence had been obtained, he asked Miss Muraway
for her opinion.


“I understand,” she said, ‘‘that the idea is to hold
a story-telling competition.”
Bundah bowed.
‘‘ls it for all? asked Miss Muraway.
Again Bundah bowed. ‘‘Then in my opinion the
meeting should certainly be held on a moonlight
night; if possible, at full moon. That will give every-
one an opportunity to take part.”
She ceased speaking and again Bundah bowed
gravely.
“I agree with you,” he said.
‘‘Slow Tom, Ginger Groogie, and Joe-the-Rat can
summon it.”
‘‘That ends it,” said Jerry, the dingo, and slipped
away at once.
‘‘He is going to end something,” remarked Ginger,
watching him go. "I’m glad it isn’t me. Trees are a
great invention, aren’t they, Tom ? ”
Slow Tom smiled. “If there weren’t trees there
wouldn’t be any of these meetings,” he replied.
"If there weren’t trees there would be nothing,”
said Ginger, “nothing w’orth having. Why even Joe
sometimes seeks safety in a hollow log.”
“Logs are not trees,” objected Joe.
“They were once,” replied Ginger.
Joe started off again;
“ O what you were and what you are
Are things apart so very far
That I’ll be bound
None could be found
To say that you’ll remain at par.”


“There is no need for you to remain at all,”
laughed Ginger. “Don’t you see that almost every-
one else has gone? You know your rhymes are
wasted on me.”
Joe laughed. “Yes, old friend,” he said, “rhymes
are wasted on you and rhymes on you are wasted.”
Ginger broke off a dead stick to drop on him and
Joe scampered away into the bushes.
Ginger turned to Slow Tom. “What did they
decide?” he asked.
“Practically nothing. Only to leave it to us as
usual,” sighed Tom.
He curled himself up and went comfortably off
to sleep.


Slow Tom, Joe and Ginger Groogie had got together
to arrange about the meeting for the story-telling
competition.
"Of course well have to tell everyone we see,”
said Joe; "and well have to make a point of seeing
all we can.”
“I’ll tell everyone whom I see pass,” said Slow Tom.
"And of course well put up a big notice,” said
Ginger Groogie.
"And all sign it,” remarked Tom.
"With initials only,” Joe suggested.
" Why with initials only? ” asked Ginger.
"It’s more stylish,” replied Joe, whose active
little brain was already devising a way to get some
amusement out of it.
So they set to work and produced a notice like this:
STORY-TELLING COMPETITION
Stories may be Told or Sung.
Prize presented by Bundah-the-fighter.
Open to all Campixes.
To be held on the night of the next
Full Moon.
S.T. J. G.G.


And Joe scribbled underneath:
We ask you all—let no one fail—
To sing a song or tell a tale.
But if you neither sing nor say.
Well come and listen, anyway.
“They will think that S.T.J. the Governor-General
wrote that,” he said. “That’ll bring ’em along,
won’t it?”
By the time they had finished their work day-
fight had just begun to appear. The ordered pro-
cession of the stars across the distant sky, by which,
of course, our friends knew how the time was going,
was now at an end for them, for with the coming of
day the stars would become invisible.
“I think we have done a good night’s work,”
remarked Slow Tom.
They were all looking in a satisfied way at the
notice they had put up, and feeling in no hurry to
depart from the scene of their successful labours,
when the Reverend Mr. Wyse, the ibis, seeing them
so engaged, dropped down beside them. He wanted
to see what was going on before he went.
“Hulloa!” exclaimed Joe. “I am glad you’ve put
in an appearance.” He looked at the Reverend in
an understanding sort of way for a moment and
continued: “You have arrived just at the right
time. You can help us very much.”
“Help you do what?” asked the Reverend Mr.
Wyse, looking as wise as he felt.
“Where are you bound for?” asked Tom, who


like Joe had immediately seen that the ibis was
starting on a long journey.
There was nothing special to show that Mr. Wyse
was setting out anywhere in particular, or, indeed,
that he was setting out at all, but Joe, Ginger and
Slow Tom saw at once that he was. They would not
have known that packed trunks and stiff and un-
comfortable clothing mean travel with us, but they
understood the signs with their own people all right.
What we know they don’t, and what they know we
don’t, though we do think that we know such a lot.
“Word has come through of a great inroad of
grasshoppers over ninety miles towards sunset,”
replied Mr. Wyse. “I am just starting off to tell
all the brothers. We shall go there at once. Before
midday we shall be amongst them. By sunset we
shall have made an impression on them, by to-
morrow evening there should be few of them left.”
"Good,” said Joe-the-Rat. "We don’t want them
along again.”
"They will not get here this time,” answered the
ibis decidedly. "It was only owing to interference
with our plans that they did so last time. But I am
afraid, owing to that, there will be a lot more of
them this time.”
"It is a good thing you happened to call in before
you left,” said Ginger. "You will now be able to
carry our news and spread it as you go.”
"We shall be glad to do that, but what is the
news?” asked Mr. Wyse.


“We want everyone to know that there is to be
a great story-telling contest —it will be a sort of
singing competition too, I suppose —on the night of
the next full moon,” replied Ginger Groogie.
“Ah, I see, an eisteddfod,” said the Reverend Mr.
Wyse somewhat pompously.
“Call it that if you like,” said Ginger, “so long as
they understand what you mean. And tell them all
to come.”
“I shall explain,” said Mr. Wyse. “I shall also
urge them to come.”
“You might explain at the same time,” said Joe-
the-Rat, “that Bimdah-the-fighter intends giving a
prize of some sort. In fact, I think it is more than
likely that there will be two prizes.”
‘' What makes you think that, Joe ? ” asked Slow Tom.
“Last time, you will remember,” continued Joe,
still speaking to the ibis, “it was Night-timers against
Daylighters. There is to be nothing of that sort this
time. It is just a straight-out story-telling and singing
competition for which all may enter.”
“That is a good idea; it will create just a pleasant
rivalry from which no ill-feeling should arise,”
remarked Mr. Wyse.
“Exactly,” agreed Slow Tom. “We want to keep
clear of anything that may raise a quarrel. And I
would suggest to your friends that Bundah, who
is giving the prize, inclines much more to stories
than to songs.”
“That is so,” agreed Ginger. “A story-teller is


certain to win this time. But what makes you think
that there will be two prizes, Joe?”
Joe was in his most serious and thoughtful mood.
“Because,” he answered, “Bundah is too clever to
raise ill-feeling between us. He knows that the birds
look at things differently from the way we do.”
“Lm,” sighed Slow Tom; “so you think he will give
a prize for each —one for birds and one for animals ? ”
“ I feel sure that he will. Most likely it will be one
for a song and one for a story. And he’ll make them
as like as possible,” said Joe. “He is not going to
create trouble if he can help it.”
"It will be interesting to see the course he adopts
in such a delicate and difficult position,” said Mr.
Wyse thoughtfully. “ Bundah-the-fighter is clever,
we all know, and has a great deal of judgment, but
I do not see his way to making both the prize-
winners satisfied.”
“He will find a way,” replied Joe, whose faith in
Bundah was very great. It was well deserved, too.
Bunyip says so.
“I think you are right, Joe,” remarked Slow Tom.
“But it will be interesting to see just how he will
manage it, as Mr. Wyse says. Of course a great deal
depends on who wins. It would be difficult if, say,
Glory and Pirribee or Jerry and Mrs. Gnoorie
happened to be the winners.”
Ginger Groogie grunted. “Fancy Pirribee or Mrs.
Gnoorie winning a story-telling competition. Are all
the rest to be struck dumb, Tom, old boy? ” he asked.


Tom smiled slowly but made no reply; he was
getting sleepy.
"I must be getting on my way,” said the Reverend
Mr. Wyse, and wishing them all well he spread his
strong wings and soon disappeared.
“The wisest and best of all birds,” remarked Joe,
looking the way he had gone.
“I am inclined to agree with you,” said Ginger
Groogie.
Joe became enthusiastic. “He is, the greatest
protector we have. I think we shall have to make
some recognition of it in some way just to show
our appreciation. If it were not for him and his
kind w 7 e would be starved to death. Look! Look!”
he exclaimed, and was silent while he and Ginger
Groogie watched in wonder, and with satisfaction, to
see Mr. Wyse leading his ordered phalanx through
the sky on their long flight to consume the pest that
was threatening the food of the countryside with
destruction.
“How beautifully they fly!” Joe exclaimed. ‘‘And
in what w'onderful order! One could almost wish he
were one of them.”
Ginger w r as w r atching them go, his eyes bright and
eager. Slow Tom stifled a yawn.
The birds disappeared away in the western sky,
now brightening with the first high rays of the sun.
Joe’s eyes fell on Tom standing there half asleep.
His mood immediately changed. ‘‘Come, Tom, old
boy, I’ll lead you home,” he laughed.


"Don’t risk it," Ginger warned; "he might fall on
you and be too sleepy to get up. And where would
our meeting be then?”
"Over Tom’s dead body,” said Joe lightly.
Tom smiled; he was getting very sleepy.
“Go to bed, Joe,” he advised solemnly.
But Joe was feeling cheerful. He began to rhyme:
‘‘Let’s go to bed.
Says Sleepy-head,
Whose other name is Tom.
Make no mistake.
He could not wake
If sat upon a bomb.
But don’t be led
Sleepy-head
To sleep your life away.
For life is ours
To use our powers,
Enjoying every day.
The ibis flies
Through opal skies,
His kind of work to do.
We only pass
Through sticks and grass.
Yet we are useful too.
For things are so,
We all must go
The path we’re bom to tread.
’Tis in your heart
To make your part
Bright silver or dull lead.”


' I .TTTrr 5^- " 1 "Al\ffjj
H. SANBS >hvv <iS'’c')n 1 K
“ HOW BEAUTIFULLY THEY FLY!” JOE EXCLAIMED




“Quite true,” agreed Slow Tom; “but things
always look brighter when you have slept on them.”
“Spiders and tadpoles! You can’t think of any-
thing but sleep,” protested Joe.
Ginger Groogie began to move away.
"The sun is showing up, Joe,” he warned. “It
really is time that we were all off to bed.”
He suited his actions to his words and disappeared
into a handy hollow limb, while Slow Tom laboriously
climbed into his favourite sleeping-place, which was
a fork in the big gum-tree standing at the entrance
to the Camp. When he had reached it and settled
himself he looked down and saw Joe still beneath.
“Go to bed, Joe,” he advised. “You are only
courting trouble staying up so late.”
Joe roused himself from the thoughtful state into
which he had again fallen. He knew that self-preser-
vation is the first law of Nature, and he glanced
round quickly on every side. Nothing threatened,
but he realised that something might do so at any
moment, and with a parting wish for pleasant dreams
to Slow Tom, he hopped off towards his own home.
As he went, the Daytimers were awakening on all
sides of him. He heard Glory, the lyre-bird, singing
his morning psalm along the creek. On a low bush
beside the path he was following he found Willy
Wag devouring a moth he had just caught. "That
one stayed out too late,” he thought. “I am glad
that I am not a moth.” He stopped to speak to
Willy Wag.


“Take a look at the notice up at the Camp and
tell all your friends,” he said.
“Very well, Joe. What is it?” asked Willy Wag,
as soon as he could speak.
But Joe had passed on, knowing well that the
wagtail’s natural curiosity would do all that was
wanted. He would not be able to help going to see
the notice and telling all his friends, and anyone else
he chanced to meet, all about it, for he is always
chattering about something and just loves news.
As Joe passed on, Jack Butcher and his mate were
singing high, clear responses to each other from the
topmost branches of two different trees, and just as
he was entering his nest a little group of magpies
carolled joyously to the new day. He snuggled down,
feeling that even if he could not explore the skies
like the Reverend Wyse and his brethren, life was
still very pleasant.


Father Crow intended to make mischief. It was for
making mischief that he and his kind had been
banished from the Camp. He had felt it very much
ever since and was for ever trying to cause trouble.
Now that another great story-telling competition was
about to take place, he felt it more than ever,
especially as he really is such a splendid story-
teller. The best story-tellers are usually those who
do not stick too closely to the truth, and this suits
Father Crow very well indeed.
Mrs. Gnoorie being a vain creature, Father Crow
was wise enough to try her first in his mischief-making
scheme. He knew that vanity is the greatest of all
weaknesses, and he knew how to take advantage of
it. Seeing Mrs. Gnoorie feeding quietly about on the
young grass growing on the edge of a lignum plain,
he took Mrs. Crow with him and settled on a box-
tree growing close to where Mrs. Gnoorie was.
“Yes,” he said, as though continuing a discussion,
“it is a very cunning plan of the animals to have
the meeting at night. They know that most of the
birds are Daylighters, and we know that most of the
animals are Night-timers.”
“They would have no chance against the Day-
lighters if the meeting were held at a proper time;


they know that,” said Mrs. Crow. “They know quite
well that Mrs. Gnoorie and her friends would beat
them completely.”
“Of course,” said Father Crow. ‘‘There could be
no doubt about that at all. It is a cunning trick that
they are playing.”
Now you know it is considered to be very improper
for any of the Campites to be seen talking to Father
Crow or any of his family, and Mrs. Gnoorie tried
hard to pretend that she did not hear what was
being said. Of course if she had really had any sense
she would have seen that Father Crow and his wife
were simply talking at her, and would have gone
on with her feeding and taken no notice of them and
their tricks. But Mrs. Gnoorie always was foolish.
She did not give in at once, because she really did
not want to be caught talking to Father Crow, and
she knew that even when you cannot see them,
there is always someone about in the bush. However
quiet and lonely it may seem, there are hundreds
of eyes looking, and thousands of ears listening.
Besides, she wanted to hear what the crows were
saying to one another, for curiosity is another of
her weaknesses.
The Crows knew what was happening and they
went on talking to each other.
‘‘Bundah-the-fighter is only a big bully, after all,”
said Father Crow. ‘‘He’s a Night-timer himself and
he will not give anyone else a chance.”
“Yes,” agreed Mrs. Crow, “no doubt he thinks


SHE DID NOT WANT TO BE CAUGHT TALKING TO
FATHER CROW




himself very fine. But it is Ginger Groogie and his
snarling ways that I think are mostly to be blamed.
Of course Slow Tom helps to make things worse, but
he is too sleepy to have a mind of his own. What
mind he has is bad, but he hasn’t much.”
“I am not so sure of that,” said Father Crow. ‘‘But
anyway he is not nearly as bad as Joe-the-Rat. He’s
the cause of most of the troubles.”
At the mention of Joe-the-Rat Mrs. Gnoorie could
keep quiet no longer. She glanced round furtively
on all sides to see if anyone were near. Then she
walked right under the tree and without raising her
head, but pretending that she was still feeding in
the grass, said: “I’m sure you’re right, Father Crow.
That vulgar little creature is the cause of all the
troubles that ever come to the Camp. It is disgusting
to think that he should have so -much influence with
the Campites. I hate him.”
Father Crow winked at Mrs. Crow as much as to
say, “Now we’ve got her,” and replied: “How could
it be otherwise? A lady like you would naturally
detest a larrikin like him.”
“Yes, a larrikin, that’s what he is,” agreed Mrs.
Gnoorie emphatically. “I wonder that anyone with
any dignity has anything to do with any of his
kind anyway.”
“That is one of the troubles of being a Campite,”
said Father Crow cunningly. “All Campites are
expected to treat each other as equals. You know
that, of course.”


6 BUNYIP
“Just like a lot of children all going to the same
school,” complained Mrs. Gnoorie.
“And like the children at the same school, they
don’t,” said Mrs. Crow.
“Tut! Tut!” said Father Crow to her, softly, so
that Mrs. Gnoorie would not hear. “That is not the
right thing to say just now.”
He raised his voice so that Mrs. Gnoorie would
not miss what he was saying. “That is the trouble
with the Camp,” he said. “Everyone is supposed
to be treated as an equal, and of course it can’t
be done—not by people who have anything in
them.”
“Of course it cannot be done,” said Mrs. Gnoorie.
“And,” she added loftily, “I do not try. Why
should I?”
“Exactly!” Father Crow laughed heartily, as
though much amused. “Why should you?” he asked.
“In fact, how could you? A lady like Mrs. Gnoorie
treating Joe-the-Rat as an equal! That is too good.”
And he laughed again.
Mrs. Gnoorie looked pleased but Mrs. Crow was
wiser. “Hush!” she said. “Not so loudly; you will
be attracting attention.”
Father Crow quietened down at once. “Mrs.
Gnoorie,” he said very seriously, “don’t you think
it is time that you gave up trying to do it? ”
“What exactly do you mean, Father Crow?”
asked Mrs. Gnoorie.
“I mean,” said the sly old bird, “that it is quite


time that you showed the Campites that you will
no longer be degraded in this manner.”
‘‘How do you suggest that I should show it?”
asked Mrs. Gnoorie, much flattered.
‘‘Start a set of your own,” replied Father Crow.
‘‘There are quite a lot of the Daylighters, and I
should think some of the Night-timers, who would
gladly break from the Campites to belong to your
set.”
‘‘What a good idea,” put in Mrs. Crow. “An
excellent idea! Mrs. Gnoorie will be leader of the
New Set.”
Mrs. Gnoorie was delighted. She raised her head
and looked about her, the very feathers on her neck
ruffled with pleasure and pride.
“You think it can be done, Father Crow?” she
asked.
“I am sure of it,” he answered. “If you will leave
it to me I shall see that it runs smoothly.”
“I know you are so clever, so very clever,” she
murmured. “Perhaps it might be done if you will
do it.”
“I will do it all right, never fear,” Father Crow
assured her. He felt inclined to laugh but controlled
himself.
“You will leave it all to me? ” he asked.
“It is very good of you,” said Mrs. Gnoorie.
Father Crow was just beginning to speak again
when Mrs. Crow exclaimed again, loudly this time.
“What a good idea. Mrs. Gnoorie will be leader of


the New Set. Hush! ” she said suddenly. “ I see Miss
Muraway coming. She must not hear us talking.”
The day was getting warm and Miss Muraway
was leaving the hot plain and seeking shade for a
rest. As soon as Mrs. Gnoorie saw which way Miss
Muraway was coming she sauntered off quietly in
another direction, and Miss Muraway came to the
very tree where she had been. It was a cool and
comfortable spot, so she stayed there, lying down
quietly in the grass and looking at all the interesting
things going on around her.
Father Crow and his wife had not moved. As soon
as Miss Muraway had settled down he began to talk.
“So the Camp is breaking up,” he said.
"How interesting!” exclaimed Mrs. Crow. “When
did you hear that? How did it happen.”
“It was bound to come,” replied Father Crow.
"You could not expect some of the better people
there to go on associating with all sorts.”
Miss Muraway smiled to herself. Though of course
she would not speak to any of the Crow family she
sometimes found it very amusing to listen to them
talking, especially when they were so evidently
talking at you.
“That is so,” agreed Mrs. Crow. “I wonder that
they have stood it so long.”
Father Crow knew that Miss Muraway rather liked
Joe-the-Rat, so he tried another way with her. “It
was bad enough before,” he continued, “but lately
I believe that Yumbi, the big-eared pig with the


long snout, has joined the Campites. That will surely
finish it.”
‘‘lt certainly should,” said Mrs. Crow with a harsh
little laugh. ‘‘No lady could be seen at the same
meeting as Yumbi.”
Miss Muraway only smiled softly to herself. Yumbi,
despite his appearance, was not half a bad fellow',
and she knew that the Crows were only trying to
make trouble. But she felt that she would rather
not listen to such things, so made a little noise to
show that she heard what was being said.
Father Crow looked down with pretended surprise.
“Oh!” he exclaimed. “Miss Muraway is there. We
should not be talking so loudly. I hope she has not
heard what we were saying.”
Miss Muraway made no sign and he went on. “It
is better to let people find out these things for them-
selves. It is none of our business, I am glad to say.
Come along, my dear, we shall find some quieter
place where we can talk as we please without
disturbing anyone.”
As they flew away Father Crow croaked hoarsely
in his joy at having so successfully sown the seeds
of mischief.
Miss Muraway dropped quietly off to sleep, not
bothering at all about what the Crows had been
saying. When, just before sundown, she arose and
began to see people, she was surprised to find every-
one talking about it, for after leaving her the Crows
had played the same trick on scores of others. Some


of these had become quite excited about it, and now,
though no one knew where it had come from, there
was a general feeling of excitement about what was
going to happen at the Camp. It is easy to start
rumours that create unrest, Bunyip says so.


When Joe-the-Rat heard a whisper of what was
going on and being on the ground he heard it
sooner than Slow Tom or Ginger Groogie, who were
in trees —he saw immediately that something must
be done. It took him some time to find out what
was really happening, and then he guessed where it
had come from.
Joe knew Father Crow and his ways well enough
to realise that this was a serious matter, and he
immediately set off to see Ginger and Tom about it.
By this time the last tinge of sunset had died out of
the highest clouds. A young moon could be seen
hanging low in the western trees. Stars shone all
over the sky. The Daytimers had mostly disappeared
but the Bush was full of the movements of Night-
timers, abroad on land and water.
Joe found Ginger Groogie having his breakfast.
He had just begun on some nice young gum-leaves.
Later on he would come down for a little grass as
a finish to his meal.
“Have you heard anything? ” Joe called up to him.
“Nothing particular,” replied Ginger. “Mat Magpie
and his mate sang their evening carol as usual. Mr.
Kook and his family gave the sun a good farewell.
Gnawoo and a few others are splashing about a bit
in the water. Woop Woop has had a song or two.


Curlee Lew has called a couple of times. Yangi is
abroad. Bundah passed down to the creek a little
while back. Doctor Creep spoke to him as he passed
and looked rather serious, but I’ve not noticed
anything unusual.”
‘‘Well, there is something unusual,” said Joe. “Is
Tom about?”
I m here,” replied Tom, looking down from his
tree. “What’s the matter now?”
“Same old thing,” said Joe, and started off:
“ The way of life
Is full of strife.
There is no peace at all.
If you stay still
You get a chill,
And if you run you fall.
What’s best to do,
’Tween me and you.
I really do not know.
But certain ’tis.
To get through biz.
You must keep on the go.
There’re always some
Who’re out of plumb
And send things all askew;
And while we live
They’re bound to give
Us lots of work to do.”
“l’ve no doubt. But what’s it all about? ” asked
Ginger Groogie.


“well, there is something unusual,” said joe.
“is tom about?”




"Yes, what’s it about? And no more rhymes,”
said Slow Tom.
"Well, it’s this way,” said Joe. "There is a move-
ment, a conspiracy to break up the Camp.”
"Father Crow,” said Ginger Groogie.
"And who else? ” asked Slow Tom, taking Ginger’s
guess as correct.
"We don’t know yet,” replied Joe. "That is what
we have to find out. I should guess Mrs. Gnoorie is
in it. Who else I can’t say.”
"They will all, or nearly all, be Daylighters,”
said Tom.
Joe turned to Ginger.
“You have seen both Doctor Creep and Bundah
since sunset?” he asked.
Ginger nodded. "I have,” he replied. "They are
over there.”
"I shall get them,” answered Joe. "We must have
a talk over this matter.”
He started off towards the creek, heading for where
Ginger had pointed to as being the place to find
Bundah and Doctor Creep.
In a short time Joe was back again, puffing some-
what with his exertions.
"They’re coming directly,” he said. When he had
got his breath he remarked: "I’m beginning to think
that I ought to be called Joe-the-messenger.”
"Too long,” said Tom.
"I was not nearly so long as you would have
been,” protested Joe.


"I did not say you were too long. The name is too
long,” replied Tom.
"Oh! That’s all right,” said Joe. He looked over
towards the creek. "Here they come,” he said.
"Don’t they look a cut?”
They certainly did look comical as they came
through the dim light. Dr. Creep, with the Book of
Nature under his arm, as usual, and Bundah-the-
fighter stooping over to speak to him as he pon-
derously rolled along. Of course Joe-the-Rat had to
make a rhyme about it:
There’s one thing I would like to know.
Why is it wisdom’s always slow?
Does learning fill the brain with lead
And take the spring out of our tread ?
If so, for Joe it is no go.
I’ll stick to skittishness instead.”
When the others arrived, Tom and Ginger were
still laughing.
"What’s the joke?” asked Bundah, looking at
them somewhat suspiciously as though he thought
the whole thing might be a hoax.
"Only Joe,” replied Slow Tom.
"If it is only Joe that is all right,” said Bundah,
and the Doctor looked relieved.
"What is all this stir about?” he asked.
"An attempt is being made to break up the
Camp,” replied Joe.
"Where does it come from?” asked Bundah.
"The attempt or the information? ” asked Joe.


“Well, perhaps both,” said Doctor Creep.
“The information is everywhere,” replied Joe.
“Yes,” agreed Creep. “I can feel it. I presume we
can all feel it. But how did it come to be every-
where? Who started it?”
“From the mystery surrounding it, the kind of
thing it is, and the rapidity of its spread, I should
say Father Crow has something to do with it,”
guessed Joe.
“That is so,” agreed Bundah, who had only been
finding out what the others thought of it. “I have
spoken with Miss Muraway on the matter. She heard
Father Crow and Mrs. Crow starting it this morning.”
“Was Mrs. Gnoorie anywhere near?” asked Joe,
immediately suspicious.
“I never thought to ask. We certainly should
know,” replied Bundah.
“It is important,” said Joe, “and Miss Muraway
would certainly notice if she were, for they are not
good friends.”
“Miss Muraway should be seen on this point,”
said Bundah. “You will find her between the Camp
and the creek.”
Joe looked comically at his friends. “Poor Joe-
the-messenger,” he said.
“Stay!” decided Bundah. “I shall see Miss Mura-
way myself,” and he hopped away in a stately,,
though somewhat eager, way.
Joe settled back with a sigh of satisfaction. “I’m
glad Miss Muraway is so good-looking,” he remarked..


“It is nice for her,” said Slow Tom, with a twinkle
in his eye.
"And for me,” said Joe.
It was quite a long time before Bundah returned,
but the others had expected that and did not grow
at all impatient.
“Yes,” he said when he returned. "Miss Muraway
says that Mrs. Gnoorie was close by the Crows this
morning. In fact, although she does not like to
believe it, she fears that she was actually talking
to them.”
“That is it!” exclaimed Joe. “She is out to break
up the Camp. She always wants to be breaking some-
thing. Father Crow is making use of her. I can see it all.”
“Can you see how to stop it?” asked Bundah,
smiling at his vehemence.
“Quite easily,” answered Joe, to their general
surprise. “Stop it? Yes.”
“How do you propose to do it, Joe?” asked
Doctor Creep.
“Have Mrs. Gnoorie watched. Catch her talking
to the Crows. The rest is simple.”
“Let it be known that Mrs. Gnoorie is in league
with Father Crow?” asked Ginger.
“Exactly,” replied Joe. “No more than that is
needed. And Mrs. Gnoorie will be for ever disgraced,”
he added with evident satisfaction.
“Who will do the watching?” asked Slow Tom,
who knew little of the intrigues that always go on
in the governing of any community.


"Oh! the usual detectives—Slug, the sleepy lizard.
Keen Eyes, the eagle-hawk, Jerry, the dingo, and
Yangi, the night-hawk,” replied Bundah. "There
are more if we need them; everyone will be ready
to uphold the welfare of the Camp, but those four,
with ourselves, should be plenty.”
To this all agreed, for little real difficulty was
expected, and it was better that there should not
be too many employed in the case.
A call was sent out, a call of urgency. It was not
the call that means danger but the one that says
immediate attention is desired.
In a few moments Yangi, the night-hawk, appeared.
Of course he already knew what was astir, he always
did. He was soon told what he was wanted to do.
"Certainly,” he said fiercely. "They will almost
certainly be talking together immediately after day-
light. I shall be there.” He disappeared into the
night. Yangi had not long been gone when Jerry,
the dingo, arrived. He surveyed the group critically.
"What is it?” he asked suspiciously, for Jerry
never takes anything for granted.
When he was told what was wanted he thought
for a moment. Then he spoke. "Father Crow often
talks in his sleep when he is overfed. It is his great
weakness. I shall see that he is overfed to-morrow.”
"And you will report here at this tune to-morrow
night,” said Bundah.
"It is good,” replied Jerry, and slipped off in the
darkness as though he had melted into the night.


“That is all for the present. We shall get Slug and
Keen Eyes moving on it to-morrow,” said Bundah
and hopped away, leaving the three friends to talk
things over.
„ J° e was delighted with the turn things had taken.
“We’ll fix Mrs. Gnoorie this time,” he said.
‘' Don ’t be so savage, Joe,” advised Slow Tom.
“No good ever comes of it.”
But she is such a discontent,” objected Joe;
such a creator of discord in the Camp and every-
where else she goes.”
Yell she suffers most by that, poor creature,”
replied Tom, truly enough.
But Joe was not to be so easily satisfied. "Now,
Tom, he said, no lectures. I’ll get even with
you.” He started off:
"We’ll save The Camp
From every scamp
Who wishes to destroy it.
Those who have vice
Should ponder twice.
And then—well, not employ it.
It does not pay
To go that way.
And Gnoorie should have known it,
But in her pain.
There’ll be this gain,
That others will be shown it.”
“Much good it will do them,” sniffed Ginger
Groogie, who was inclined to be somewhat of a cynic.


"Well, well,” said Slow Tom, "the Camp should
be safe, that is the main thing.”
"But what about the story-telling competition?”
asked Ginger Groogie.
"We had better wait till the reports come in before
we do anything about that,” replied Slow Tom.
"And meanwhile,” said Joe, "our notice can just
remain, and people go on preparing for the contest.”
Both the others agreed with this and they parted,
each intent on his own affairs but all wondering
what would come of this wicked attempt to create
trouble in the Camp.


On the following evening Bundah, Slow Tom and
Ginger Groogie were gathered together to receive the
reports of those who were to find out all they could
about what had taken place between Mrs. Gnoorie
and Father Crow, and how far the plot for break-
ing up the Camp had gone. They were looking
very serious about the matter when Joe arrived.
Seeing their glum faces he started off with one of
his rhymes:
“We all are waiting for the word.
It may be serious or absurd,
We shall not know until we’ve heard
So why all look so blue ?
But I will wager anyone
That something rotten has been done.
When Mrs. Gnoorie is the one
And Father Crow the two.”
Bundah smiled in a rather half-hearted sort of
way, but Slow Tom objected straight out.
“Now, Joe,” he said, “we can’t stand any more
of that kind of stuff.”
“And I can’t stand any more of those kind of
looks,” replied Joe. "You look as though you’d all
just found out that you have been eating poison-
weed, or” —he turned to Tom —“that you’d dis-
covered grubs on the gum-leaves. Perhaps the


Reverend Wyse and his brethren have been unable
to deal with the grasshoppers.”
“Word came through this afternoon that
they are having a great struggle,” said Bundah,
"but they are hopeful of ultimately getting them
down.”
"They’ll get a good many of them down, I’ve no
doubt,” laughed Joe. "But why are you all looking
so glum?” he asked.
Ginger laughed. "That would be hard to say,”
he replied. "Because there was nothing to do but
wait, I suppose. Most people look miserable when
they are just waiting.”
"They’ve no right to do so,” replied Joe. "It is
not fair to the surroundings.”
As he spoke Yangi appeared.
Bundah looked at him questioningly.
"Nothing to report,” he said, and, taking his place
on a limb, sat there silently.
Before long Jerry arrived. He bore signs of travel.
Bundah looked at him.
"Nothing doing so far,” he reported. "But Father
Crow has gorged himself on what I provided. I must
get along to where he is camping for the night. He’ll
talk before morning. If you don’t mind, I’ll get
away at once. I don’t want to miss anything; he is
a cunning old bird.”
Bundah nodded assent and Jerry disappeared. But
he had no luck. When he got near enough to where
Father Crow had perched for the night and was just


settling down to keep watch, Spreckle, the tiger-cat,
saw him. Now Spreckle hates Jerry, and as soon as
he noticed that the dingo did not want to be seen
he called out loudly, “Hullo, Jerry! What brings
you here?”
Of course Father Crow heard and he silently slipped
away to another tree. When he did have bad dreams
and start talking that night Jerry could not hear
what he said.
Meanwhile Keen Eyes, who did not like night-
work at all, had sent along his report by Woop Woop.
He was very sorry to say that it amounted to nothing.
Woop Woop had just reported when Slug, the sleepy
lizard, came labouring along. He looked tired and
somewhat disappointed.
“I have heard nothing of any value in a direct
way,” he said, “but I fancy that my cousin Coor-
bariee, the shingle-back lizard, knows something. He
is a close sort of chap who will not say much, but
I’ve no doubt that he will tell us all he knows when
he considers the right time has arrived. It is no use
trying to rush him.”
“Have you any idea what Coorbarlee knows?”
asked Slow Tom.
“I have just a suspicion,” replied Slug.
“We might have him along and question him,”
suggested Bundah.
“That would spoil it all,” said Slug. “If you do
that, you will get nothing out of him. When Coor-
barlee shuts his mouth nothing can open it. Give


him time and he’ll tell all he knows. He is as good
a Campite as any of us.”
“Quite so,” agreed Bundah. “He is a very loyal
fellow. As you say, he takes his time, but he generally
comes out right in the end. Has anyone else heard
anything that we should consider at the present
time? ”
Ginger Groogie spoke. “My second cousin, Flighty,
the squirrel, seems to have something on her mind,”
he said. “If she has, we are bound to hear it before
long. It cannot be anything very definite or we
would have been told before now. She, too, is a good
Campite. And she is a terror to talk.”
“Ever ready to talk,” agreed Tom, not unkindly.
“I often enjoy her chatter.”
Yangi returned, as usual dropping suddenly out
of nowhere.
“Yes?” said Bunyip, as soon as he saw him.
“What is it?”
“The Blue Jays and Black Magpies held a meeting
to-day,” replied Yangi. “Coolook, the twelve-apostle
bird, and Miss Mynah saw them. They are meditating
mischief. Coolook and Miss Mynah are much annoyed
about it. Brown, the snake, was there too, but no one
knows what he was after, he never said anything.”
“What had the Blue Jays and Black Magpies to
say? ” asked Tom.
“Nothing very definite, I understand. They are
an empty-headed lot. They were all talking together
as usual, and no one listening to what anyone else


had to say, but I believe they were finding fault
generally and especially with the Night-timers.”
“That means that they are tainted with Mrs.
Gnoorie’s crankiness,” said Ginger. ‘‘But anyway
they don’t count for much. When they find that we
are the strongest they will be with us all right.
Don’t worry about them.”
“ I also found out,” continued Yangi, “ that Spreckle
is feeling sore about things.”
‘‘That is so,” said Slug. ‘‘He spoiled Jerry’s little
game just now.”
‘‘How do you know that?” asked Bundah.
‘‘Word has just come down to me on the wind.
You will hear all about it to-morrow from Jerry.
He does not know yet how badly he has been let
down.”
Bundah had heard—or felt —nothing of what had
happened. Nevertheless he did not doubt that Slug
knew what he was talking about —he certainly
sounded as if he did. Slug, being such a slow mover,
simply had to know things in some unseen way like
this or he could not have lived at all.
‘‘This is more serious,” he said. ‘‘Spreckle is not
one to decide lightly or do things in the careless,
scatter-brained way of the Jay family.”
‘‘Spreckle hates Jerry,” Joe reminded them.
‘‘There may be nothing more in it than that. That
would easily account for it.”
“Quite possibly,” agreed Slow Tom. “Hate is the
strongest thing in Spreckle.”


“I am afraid it is,” said Bundah. “It is a pity,
but I am afraid it is.”
“The question is what is to be done next,” said
Slug, who, like his cousin Coorbarlee, is one to stick
to things.
“We’ll just have to let things run along,” remarked
Tom. “They will sort themselves out all right if we
just give them time.”
“And carry on with the story-telling competition
as if nothing had happened,” said Slug. “I have
an idea that, as you say, things will sort them-
selves out.”
Bundah spoke thoughtfully. “I see nothing else
that we can do at the present time,” he said. “We
shall all keep on the alert. Everyone will be on the
alert. When the meeting takes place and we are all
together something is sure to happen. It is well that
we are warned and know what to look for.” He looked
at the others to see what they thought.
"There is nothing definite to go on yet,” said
Yangi. “We must wait till there is.”
"I think that is so,” agreed Ginger. “So far there
seems to have been nothing done except by Mrs.
Gnoorie and Father Crow. They cannot do much
by themselves.”
Bundah looked at Joe, who broke into rhyme:
I’m with those who’re for letting things run;
We’ll sit and watch them go.
It’s wonderful how the things get done.
Though some may think it’s slow.


And now though everything’s tangled up
I’m sure they’ll come all right.
We’ll find them wonderfully straightened out
Before to-morrow night.”
‘‘From which I take it that we are agreed that
there is nothing more that can be done to-night,”
said Bundah. “The meeting is now closed.”
The others had moved away, but Yangi sat looking
intently at Slug.
“What’s up?” asked Slug. “Anything wrong
with me?”
“I don't understand you,” said Yangi.
“Nor do I understand you,” replied Slug. “Why
worry?"
Slow Tom stopped climbing, looked down and
smiled. “That is right, friend Slug,” he remarked.
“We each have our own ways of doing things and
none of us really understand; so why worry? I think
we’ll hear some good stories at the next meeting.
I am looking forward to that.”
“If the stories are ever reached,” said Yangi, and,
sliding off his perch, he was gone like a shadow.
“Evidently Yangi expects trouble,” said Ginger.
“Oh, we’ll get that all right,” remarked Joe
cheerfully. “Good-night, boys,” and he hopped away
amongst the trees, leaving Ginger, Tom and Slug
to their own devices. But they soon parted, each
thinking in his own way and wondering what he
could do to make things smooth again.


jjl[~ 111
The night of the full moon had arrived. From far
and near birds and animals gathered with their songs
and stories. There was a feeling of excitement in the
air, for there was not only the interest aroused as
to the stories that were to be told and the songs to
be sung, and who would gain the prizes; there was
also a feeling abroad that other things would happen.
Ginger Groogie felt certain that Flighty w'ould let
out all she knew, and Joe-the-Rat had gathered from
Slug that Coorbarlee was bound to speak. He told
Tom about it, told him in his most impressive manner,
for Joe, with his dislike of Mrs. Gnoorie, had guessed
nearer the truth than many.
“Well,” said Tom, when Joe told him. “What
then ? ”
“Then,” replied Joe, “if Coorbarlee says what
I expect we shall hear, it will be necessary to con-
sider what is to be done with Mrs. Gnoorie.”
“You don’t suggest that the shock is going to kill
her,” said Tom with a smile.
“It is not getting rid of her body that I am con-
cerned about,” answered Joe, “but relieving everyone
of her presence.”
Tom looked at him seriously. “You are a bitter
little chap sometimes, Joe.”


But Joe felt that he had reason really to dislike
Mrs. Gnoorie, not only because of the way she treated
him, but also because she was always unkind to Miss
Muraway. And the person who could be unkind to
Miss Muraway could have little or no good in them.
In this opinion Joe had the support of Bundah.
He had once given Bundah some rhymes about
Mrs. Gnoorie that ran like this:
I’ve seen the lady turn aside
In her insufferable pride
To lash an unoffending cheek
That she has thought should be more meek,
I’ve heard a jibe and seen a sneer
When kindness should have chastened fear.
So I may tell you, my good friend,
I’ll hate the lady to the end.
And now Joe was not alone in expecting something
unusual to happen at the story-telling. Slug had also
made it known that he was expecting some excite-
ment of an unusual sort. The result was that all the
Campites were coming together in a state of great
expectations, though none knew exactly what to
expect. Bundah, you will remember, had said that
everyone would be on the alert, but even he was
surprised, and not a little disturbed, to find how very
excited they all were. He saw that he, as chairman,
would have plenty to do to keep things in order.
The sun had scarcely set and the moon begun to
peep through the trees when birds and animals began
to arrive. In fact a few of the Daylighters had taken


up their positions before sunset —a thing that had
never been known to happen before. At times of
very great importance some had come in before it
was actually dark, but never before sunset. So it
was evident that this time they were really excited.
By the time the moon was showing her full shape
in the sky the Camp was already half-filled. And
still they came, flying, walking, hopping, creeping,
most of them chattering as they came. Once they
were inside the Camp they lowered their voices and
spoke almost, if not quite, in whispers, for had they
not done so, no one would have been able to hear
anything for the noise.
Some of them talked of their songs, some of the
stories that were to be told, some of the report that
Mrs. Gnoorie had been seen talking to Father Crow
and his wife, and that between them they were going
to try to break up the Camp,
The meeting was not begun till an hour after moon-
rise. That was to give the more timid Night-timers
time to leave their homes after sunset, which, as it
was the night of the full moon, was at the same time
as the moon rose. Even then some of them were late.
Father Crow and his wife, who, as you know, were
not allowed at the Camp, came as close as they could
without being seen, and hid themselves in the boughs
of a big tree from which they hoped to hear, at any
rate, something of what took place. Mrs. Gnoorie
arrived only a few minutes before the opening of
the meeting. She had left it as late as possible in the


hope of being able to have a talk with Father Crow
and get his advice about one or two things, but
everyone being astir, she had found no opportunity
of doing as she had wished without being seen, and
that was a risk she could not take.
There was a good deal of difference of opinion as
to Mrs. Gnoorie. Some held that no one could possibly
be so foolish or so unpleasant as to try to break up
the Camp. Others thought that Mrs. Gnoorie was
catty enough for anything, and foolish enough too.
They were still talking over the matter when Bundah
took his place beside the bole of the bigger of the
two great gum-trees that grow one on either side of
the entrance to the Camp.
“This meeting, as you all know, has been called
for a song- and story-telling competition.” Bundah
spoke in his biggest, most solemn voice; in a way
that seemed to say that nothing must be allowed to
interfere with the work of the evening. “There is to
be a prize for each,” he continued; “a prize for the
best story and another for the best song. Both con-
tests are open to all. Anyone may compete in either
or both. We shall have the stories first.”
“But the songs are shorter. Why not have them
first?” asked Mrs. Gnoorie, determined to create
trouble as soon as she could, and in anyway she could.
“Does anyone support Mrs. Gnoorie?” asked
Bundah, quite undisturbed.
“I do,” said Spreckle. "I don’t see much in either
of them, but the shorter the better.”


“Two members having moved in the matter, there
will be a vote taken,” Bundah announced in a
matter-of-fact sort of way.
The vote was duly taken and Bundah and his
friends were much surprised to see how many voted
with Mrs. Gnoorie and Spreckle; evidently the dis-
contents were more numerous than they had thought.
Mrs. Gnoorie was very pleased, so pleased that she
made a bad mistake.
“I now ask,” she said, “that a committee be
appointed to judge the songs and stories. We want
there to be no mistakes made this time.”
“Unless that demand is supported,” said Bundah,
“the prizes will be awarded as is usual with us —by
the vote of all Campites here assembled. Does any-
one support Mrs. Gnoorie in her request?”
This time Mrs. Gnoorie was supported by Cresty,
the white cockatoo, who was a little huffy still at
what had taken place at another story-telling com-
petition held quite a long time before. Cresty is one
of those people who never forget, especially when
their vanity is wounded.
But this time when the vote was taken, it was
very strongly against Mrs. Gnoorie’s idea. She
immediately endeavoured to make a scene.
"We can’t expect to get a fair decision,” she
said. “We know very well that Bundah and a few
of his friends will give the prizes to their crowd.”
“What makes you say that, Mrs. Gnoorie?” asked
Bundah, very stiffly.


“Because you always do,” exclaimed Mrs. Gnoorie
angrily.
“But it is entirely in the hands of the meeting as
a whole,” said Bundah.
That was true and quite a number of the fair-
minded Campites began to laugh.
“I shall not be laughed at! I shall not!” stormed
Mrs. Gnoorie, and stamped savagely. She happened
to stamp on the end of the tail of Googar, the goanna,
who had been inclined to side with her, and had
come up close beside her to do so. He let out a
savage hiss and shot his fangs at Mrs. Gnoorie’s legs.
But she had felt that she had trodden on something
unusual, and with the instinct of self-preservation
had jumped aside. There was some stir and much
amusement.
“Order! Order!” called Bundah-the-fighter.
But both Googar and Mrs. Gnoorie were now
thoroughly angry.
“Apologise,” demanded Googar fiercely.
“I shall do nothing of the kind,” answered Mrs.
Gnoorie heatedly. "To whom should I apologise,
I would like to know.”
“To me and to the whole Camp,” replied Googar.
“I’ll do no such thing, either to one or the other.”
“Then I shall be compelled to move that you be
expelled from the Camp,” said Googar, who, though
never looking for a quarrel, is a fierce fighter when
roused. At this there was general uproar. It took
Bundah some time to restore order. When he had


done so he asked Mrs. Gnoorie to apologise to the
Camp.
“I refuse,” she answered sulkily.
Coorbarlee looked up at her out of one eye. “You
had better do so, Mrs. Gnoorie,” he said quite quietly
and nicely.
Mrs. Gnoorie immediately flared up again. “Who
are you that you should advise me what to do?”
she asked.
“I am not a very great personage,” replied Coor-
barlee. “All the same I advise you to do it.”
“And I, also,” said Flighty softly, leaning over
from the limb where she was sitting high up in
a tree.
Mrs. Gnoorie looked, oh! so haughtily round upon
the assembled company. Campites of all sorts and
sizes were there; rarely, indeed, had there been such
a gathering. Amongst animals they ranged from
Memda, the old-man kangaroo, so big and yet so
shy, to Merry, the field-mouse, who is so important
though so small; and amongst birds from Pompous
Plimsoll, the pelican, and Brolga, the native com-
panion, to Ghindi, the fan-tail, and Jewel, the diamond
sparrow. Big and little, strong and weak, bright and
dull, beautiful and plain, pleasant and unpleasant,
they were all gathered there and all waiting for her
to speak.
"I flatly refuse to take advice from two such
insignificant creatures,” she said scornfully.
“Then,” said Coorbarlee slowly, “there is only one


thing to be done. I shall tell all I know. I had hoped
to avoid doing so.”
‘‘What do you know? ” asked Mrs. Gnoorie, though
not so proudly now.
"I know,” said Coorbarlee steadily, ‘‘that you have
been talking to Father Crow. That you and Father
Crow are trying to break up the Camp.”
‘‘How do you know?” asked Mrs. Gnoorie, still
trying to brazen it out.
‘‘As I lay in the grass I heard you,” replied
Coorbarlee. "You forget that humble things have
ears, that some of them see and know many
things.”
“You will need to prove this,” said Mrs. Gnoorie
savagely, “ or you will pay dearly for your impudence.”
Coorbarlee continued unmoved. "I heard,” he
said, " I heard Mrs. Crow say that Mrs. Gnoorie will
be the leader of the New Set. I heard her say it
to you.”
When Mrs. Gnoorie heard Coorbarlee repeat the
very words that Mrs. Crow had used, she knew that
the game was lost. She said nothing, but there was
a great sensation in the Camp.
"Does anyone support what Coorbarlee says?”
asked Bundah.
A small voice came down from a high limb.
"I can.”
It was Flighty who spoke. She was trembling with
excitement, and her voice sounded high-pitched and
nervous, but her words were clear and distinct


“In what way can you support it and to what
extent?” asked Bundah.
“I was in an old nest of mine in a tree beside the
one in which Father Crow and Mrs. Crow were
sitting,” answered Flighty. “They must have for-
gotten that old nest. I could not help hearing
them talking. They only stopped when they saw
Miss Muraway coming.”
“What has Mrs. Gnoorie to say?” asked Bundah.
But Mrs. Gnoorie said nothing, only looked ex-
ceedingly sulky.
“Have you nothing to say?” asked Bundah with
sorrow in his voice.
Mrs. Gnoorie only continued to look sulky.
At this the general outcry broke out again. Some
were calling on Mrs. Gnoorie to defend herself, others
clamouring that she should be expelled from the
Camp without further argument about the matter.
Bundah tried his best to restore order but failed,
everyone being too excited to listen to anyone else.
When he had tried quite a number of times, some-
times thinking that he was going to succeed and
then losing all hope again as the noise broke out
afresh, he called as loudly as he could. In the pause
that immediately followed he announced: “There
will be no competition to-night. We shall meet at
the same time to-morrow night to decide what is
to be done with Mrs. Gnoorie. All who can should
be present.”
The meeting broke up in confusion, some lamenting


that the competition had been delayed, some com-
plaining that Mrs. Gnoorie’s affair should have been
brought up at all—though it was difficult to see how
it could have been avoided when she acted in the
way she did—but most of them agreeing that now it
had come up, something must be done about it; it
must be settled. Some were for one thing and some
for another, but almost all were of the opinion that
Mrs. Gnoorie must be expelled from the Camp, and
all, without exception, w r ere decided that they must
be at the meeting to be held next night, when the
matter would be dealt with.
Father Crow and his wife consulted together to
see if they could not think of something that would
make further trouble so that more than Mrs. Gnoorie
might be expelled. The more they could get put out,
the better they would be pleased.


There was little sleep amongst the Campites for the
est of that night or the following day. So excited
were they, and so restless, it would have been hard
for anyone to know who were Daylighters and who
Night-timers, for they were all abroad together.
Few seemed to have any doubt but that Mrs.
Gnoorie would be expelled from the Camp, but some
of the kinder ones blamed Father Crow and his wife
more, and washed that they could find some way of
punishing them. But since no one ever spoke to such
an abandoned family, or had anything to do with
them, no one knew how they could be punished any
more. Even those few weak characters who might
at one time or another have felt tempted to talk to
the Crows, or at least listen to what they had to
say, would now take no notice of them at all, and
Father Crow and his wife found life very miserable.
They tried all sorts of ways to get a hearing but
failed every time, w’hich those who know them will
admit was a very good thing. Bunyip says so.
Even Spreckle would now snarl savagely when any
of the Crow family came near him, for Spreckle,
cranky as he w r as, did not want on any account to
risk his standing as a Campite. This was the general
feeling brought into prominence by what had


happened—that no one must do anything that
would cast the least doubt on their loyalty to the
Camp and all that it stood for. Under the circum-
stances it would take a strong friend indeed to say
anything in favour of Mrs. Gnoorie; so it was
generally considered that she was out.
Before sunset one could see animals and birds
making towards the Camp from all directions, and
after sunset they came in droves. It would have
been hard to name anyone who was not there,
except Mrs. Gnoorie.
After much thought she had decided to stay away
and let them deal with her case in her absence. This
was one of the wisest decisions that she had ever
made, for there could be no doubt whatever about
her expulsion, and there was nothing to be gained
by making it more painful than it must necessarily
be and by her having to walk out before them all.
But when Father Crow tried to speak to her about
it she simply would not listen to him at all.
“It is all your fault that it happened,” she said
as she stalked off in high dudgeon, feeling quite
dignified again for the moment.
Father Crow’s wicked eyes gleamed with delight.
"It is not much wonder that she has so few
friends,” he said. “She will have none at all now.”
Again the Camp was crowded and the talk excited.
But there was something different about it all this
time, though for some time no one could tell what
the difference was. As the last rays of the sun left


the sky the moon appeared, the softest of breezes
passed gently over the land in a quiet, mysterious
way. It was as though the earth breathed. Then the
Campites knew what made to-night different from
other nights, and word passed from mouth to mouth;
“Bunyip is abroad. Bunyip is abroad to-night!”
When Bunyip is abroad is the time of rewards
and punishments.
“Of course Bunyip will be abroad, for is it not
to-night that Mrs. Gnoorie will be banished from
the Camp, that is sure enough,” said Thurrin,
the bittern.
‘‘lt is more than that,” answered Glory, the lyre-
bird, in his full, rich voice. “There is more than
punishment; there is also reward; one can feel it.
To-night is one of the great nights. Someone will be
given the reward of merit. Who can it be?”
The reward of merit amongst birds and animals
means some permanent improvement either in the
appearance of a bird or animal and its children, or
in the way of getting a living for the family to which
that particular bird or animal belongs. So of course
it is rarely given.
They all fell to discussing what everyone had done,
and who it could be who would receive the reward.
Some thought that Bundah was to be honoured for
all the good work he had done in managing the
meetings. Others rightly asked what was there that
Bundah could possibly wish for; he had everything
that anyone could want. Others said, wisely enough.


that Bundah managed the meetings because he liked
doing it, and not because he expected anything for
it. Some were of the opinion that it was Slow Tom’s
philosophy that was going to be recognised, and a
few believed that it might be Joe-the-Rat, for his
energy, cheeriness and general helpfulness. None of
them guessed the right thing, and it is not much
to be wondered at, for rewards are rarely given for
real usefulness.
Still it passed from mouth to mouth, earning with
it always a sort of mystery and wonder: “Bunyip is
abroad to-night. Bunyip is abroad!”
Everyone on entering the Camp, and in a few cases
before they reached the Camp, was thrilled by it,
and when Bundah took his place beside the big tree
and called the meeting to order, all were on the
tip-toe of expectation, feeling that something unusual
must happen.
“This,” said Bundah, “is a great occasion. For
the first time since the expulsion of the Crow family
—and that is so long ago that few remember it —
we have come together to consider sorrowfully the
expulsion of one of our number. Much as I regret it,
I see that nothing else can be done. Has anyone
good and sufficient reason to show why Mrs. Gnoorie
should not be forbidden the Camp ? ”
There was a general murmur, and here and there
some movement, but no one spoke. Bundah waited
for some time. Then he repeated the words;
“Has anyone good and sufficient reason to show


why Mrs. Gnoorie should not be forbidden the Camp ?
Of course you all know that this means the whole
emu family for ever and ever. It is a serious thing.’'
Again he waited, but this time there was dead
silence.
For the third and last time Bundah’s big voice
boomed forth:
“Has anyone good and sufficient reason to show
why Mrs. Gnoorie should not be forbidden the Camp ? ”
This time there was movement. Jerry, the dingo,
stepped forward from his place.
“I know little good of emus,” he said, “but Mr.
Gnoorie is the best of all fathers in the bush. Will
that not count for anything? ”
“More shame that he should have to be,” said
Merry, the field-mouse, who is the best of mothers
where almost all are good. Most of the mothers there
agreed with her.
“He can still be a good father outside the Camp,”
hissed Googar, “and Mrs. Gnoorie has committed the
great crime. It is good to be kind; it is easier to be
kind than just. But in public affairs it is more
necessary to be just. If Mrs. Gnoorie and her family
are to be allowed to remain amongst us, being
treated as one of ourselves, we may as well take
the Crow family back again.”
At this there was a general shout of protest.
“Not the Crows!” they all cried.
Someone added: “You may as well break up the
Camp at once.”


“Let us be just,” said Bundah in his biggest voice.
“Let us be just.”
“Then the emu family goes out,” came the general
reply.
“Is that the will of the Camp?” asked Bundah
solemnly.
“It is!” they all shouted with one voice.
“Then the emu family is banished from the Camp
for ever and for ever,” pronounced Bundah.
All looked at each other but no one spoke or moved.
It was as though the end of things had come and no
one knew what to do. Before this strange silence had
ended, the sound of wings was heard. The Reverend
Mr. Wyse dropped wearily into the Camp.
“We knew there were big things doing to-night, so
I came along at the wish of the brethren,” he said.
“We are glad you have come,” replied Bundah.
“We only regret that you could not have been here
earlier, but we knew that the work you were doing
was too urgent to leave even for so important a
matter as this. You would like to know what has
happened?”
Mr. Wyse said he would, and when Bundah ex-
plained all that had taken place he said that he was
quite satisfied, and he was sure all the brethren
would be.
“The peace and the loyalty of the Camp must
always be our first care,” he said.
He looked round over the great crowd assembled
there.


“And now,” he said seriously, “I am sorry to have
to tell you that there is danger of a famine.”
“Dry weather, caterpillars or grasshoppers? ”
asked Dr. Creep.
“Grasshoppers,” answered Mr. Wyse. “The breth-
ren are quite tired out trying to destroy them. We
have done great work but there are myriads of
'hoppers. We are worn out; we need help.”
He looked round as though asking for volunteers
to help in the great work.
Gnawoo, the wood-duck, spoke.
“To-morrow will be a cloudy day. My flock will
fly across to-night. We shall be with you at day-
break. There are many of us. We shall help you a
good deal, for grasshoppers are good for breakfast.”
At this there was general applause. All Campites,
especially the grass-eaters, know well the danger of
a plague of grasshoppers. And not only do almost
all Campites eat some grass, but when summer is
ending, the grasshoppers die in millions and make
everyone sick, whether they are grass-eaters or not.
Brolga had been standing, watching all that was
going on.
“We, too, shall help,” he said. “To-morrow
morning at daylight I shall give the trumpet-call
that means to take the sky. In three hours we
shall arrive. We can dispose of many, for grass-
hoppers are good not only for breakfast; we find
them eatable at all times.”
“So we find them,” said Mr. Wyse, “but we have


got tired eating them. If we only had longer beaks
we could manage a lot more; we get tired with
stooping. If we had beaks as long as Brolga’s—that
would be about the same length as our legs—we
would not have to stoop so much and could keep
going all day, especially if our beaks had a curve in
them so that the 'hoppers would not know where we
were going to reach the ground.”
At this many of the birds and animals began to
laugh. But the laughter soon stopped, for a very
strange thing was happening. Mr. Wyse’s beak, which
before had been quite an ordinary shape, began to
grow longer and longer. While they watched, it grew
into exactly what he had wished it should be and
then stopped. Everyone was astonished. Then some-
one whispered: “Bunyip is abroad to-night.”
At once they all knew that this thing that had
happened to Mr. Wyse was a reward for the good
work he had done.
Then Gnawoo, the wood-duck, uttered an ex-
clamation of surprise and delight and, looking, they
saw that the outside feathers in the centre of his
wings, instead of remaining grey like the rest of his
feathers, had suddenly become beautiful, shining
with many colours almost like those of his great
cousin Black.
“What about Brolga ? ” they asked. At the question
Brolga blushed a lovely red over his cheeks and half-
way down his neck—and the blush has remained in
the family ever since, though they do not all wear it.


"Our good friends are being rewarded for saving
us from hunger/' said Bundah.
Mr. Wyse rose and disappeared in the sky. He
was going back to congratulate all his people on
what had happened, and tell them all that he had
seen. He would also cheer them up by telling them
that help would arrive.
“What about the songs and stories?” asked Nellie
Thrush, when things had somewhat settled down
again.
“Too late for them now,” answered half a dozen
voices at once.
“We need a full moon to give everyone a show,”
said Woop Woop, which was very nice of him, for
he is a true Night-timer himself and it would have
suited him to go right on with the contest.
“Yes,” said Miss Muraway gently. “We should
fix the night of the next full moon for it. It is a
pity that the contest should have to be put off, but
this has been a wonderful night.”
“It has, indeed,” agreed Brolga, who was still
blushing and wondering when he would stop doing it.
Miss Muraway looked at him.
“I never saw you looking better, Brolga,” she
exclaimed so naturally, that Brolga immediately
wished that the blush would remain for always. As
I have already told you, it did.
Everyone agreed that the contest should not take
place till the night of the next full moon. It was
fair to all and, as Bundah rightly remarked, you


could not expect anyone to be in the mood just
then for judging songs and stories. So the meeting
came to an end and Joe-the-Rat immediately hopped
away to the notice that he and Slow Tom and Ginger
Groogie had put up. Now he underlined the word
“next” before “full moon,” and wrote beside it:
“ It’s coming soon,
The next full moon.
I’m sure you’ll all enjoy it.
If you’ve a thing
To say or sing,
We hope that you’ll employ it.”
Then he stood back and looked at it.
“Ah,” he said to himself, “it has been a great
night. I wonder what the next moon will bring.”


Joe’s “next” full moon had arrived. The putting off
of the song and story competition that had taken
place owing to the expulsion of the emu family from
the Camp, and all that had happened then and since,
had really given lots of time for getting ready what-
ever anyone wanted to sing or tell. All the same
there had been very little done in that direction.
One needs to be a born story-teller or singer of songs
to be able to give proper attention to these things
in such stirring times as the Campites had been going
through. With someone always interrupting, it is very
difficult for even the best born story-teller or singer
to do any really good work. Not many of the Campites
were either the one or the other, except the birds, a
fair number of whom are good singers. But the birds,
especially the song birds, are mostly of very excitable
nature. They are also nearly all insect-eaters, so of
course the coming of the grasshoppers in such swarms
had quite upset them, and one could not expect any
of them to be at their best.
Even Glory, the lyre-bird, could not get any con-
tinuous song together but was constantly bursting
out with a little of this and a little of that, and
swinging off into something different, till one would
have thought that all the birds in the bush were
gathered in that one spot, each giving a little sample


of what they could do. Try as he would Glory could
not get anything that would satisfy him. Nothing
seemed to be quite right, and nothing that is less
than quite right will satisfy Glory.
Mat Magpie and Jack Butcher could think of
nothing fresh; they were far too busy with the
’hoppers. Even Will Puljooringhee was helping, and
Willy Wag, in his fussy way, was also doing his best
since the grasshoppers had got so much closer to the
Camp. If it had not been for the Reverend Mr. Wyse
and his brethren the contest would have been
hopeless, but they were doing really great work
with their new beaks, which undoubtedly saved
the situation.
Everyone realised that nothing very great in the
way of a competition could be expected under these
circumstances, for though songs and stories are of
very great importance, the food supply is even more
important. People must have enough to eat, even if
they are Campites. The most unfortunate part of
the whole thing was that the animals whose food
supply was being threatened could themselves do
nothing to save it except urge their friends the
birds to do all they could. It was a good thing that
there was such good feeling between them.
The Crow family made a great show of attacking
the grasshoppers, and really did destroy quite a lot.
There was great difference of opinion as to why they
did it. Some said it was because they wanted to try
and make friends; others that it was to please Mrs.


Gnoorie, who was in a dreadful state for fear the
’hoppers would eat up all the grass and leave her
to starve. Still others thought that they were doing
it simply because they liked eating grasshoppers.
For some time the birds were greatly agitated
about who they could get to sing. Since there was
to be a competition, however many other things
there were to take up time and attention, they must
make a showing that would not disgrace them. When
it became known that Weetah, the bower-bird, was
preparing a song they felt much more happy, for
Weetah is such a clever fellow that he seems to be
able to do anything he tries and do it well. There
were others, too, they had heard, who were going
to try, but no one of very much account as a singer.
They all felt that Weetah would not only represent
them well but would also be a certain winner, at
which they were all pleased.
Now that the time for the contest had actually
arrived, it was seen that the expulsion of the emu
family from the Camp had not caused anyone to
stay away, as some had feared it would, and the
Camp was crowded.
It was decided that the songs should be
taken first.
Now the jays and the black magpies had for some
time been doubtful about attending at all. After
talking the matter over, they had decided that they
would not only attend, but that one of their number
would sing a song. There were such a lot of them


that could make sure that their singer would get
lots of encouragement, and if they could get any
other to back them in their choice, he might possibly
win the prize.
“What a come-down that would be for all those
who think themselves such great singers,” they said.
Poor things, they did not understand that no one
with a voice like theirs, with some such lovely notes
and some such awfully harsh ones, could ever make
anything but a patchy sort of song —good in parts
and bad in parts. So when Jardine Jay got up to
sing, they all made a great noise and appeared very
pleased.
Jardine perched on a stick and began his song. He
opened with a clear, melodious, bell-like note that
made the Campites all think that he was going to do
well. But just when they felt like that, his horrible,
harsh notes came. So it was all through; for a few
words his song would promise well, then it would
suddenly grate harshly upon the ears of the listeners.
He finished very badly. These are the words he sang,
which, like his voice, are terribly uneven:
The wide plains stretch around us,
The grass is full of seed,
So gather round, my comrades
And let us have a feed.
The wind is in the tree-tops.
With whispers of a flood.
Which means, my merry brothers.
There will be lots of mud.


Home-building will be easy,
As it should always be ;
So come along, good fellows.
And live at ease with me.
And when we’ve raised the children.
And added to our clan.
We’ll, singing all together,
Make all the noise we can.
His friends certainty made all the noise they could,
but it was quite evident that his crude song had not
pleased anyone but them.
“Who is next?” asked Bundah, and Ghindi, the
fan-tail, came fluttering forward. She danced from
twig to twig of an overhanging branch and sang her
song very brightly. Her voice was not at all a strong
one, nor was it very melodious, but her pretty little
ways helped her quite a lot. She knew that she had
no chance of gaining a prize, and was just singing
her song because, when all those who realty could
sing were so busy in defence of them all, she felt
that she ought to do something.
This was her song:
When fogs abound
And all around
Is dull and damp and chilly,
I do rejoice
To hear the voice
Of our friend Cheerful Willy.
It seems to bring
A brighterying
To all the sounds around us,


Till with a rush
Sweet Nellie Thrush
With her voice doth surround us.
And so we know
The fog will go,
In sunshine we’ll be basking;
So why despair,
Joy will be there.
To gather for the asking.
Everyone knew that Ghindi was not a songster,
and though the words were poor and her voice some-
what weak, the way in which she had sung was very
attractive and she was given quite a good time over
it, so that she was quite pleased that she had tried.
Now it was Weetah’s turn.
Weetah was better known for the wisdom of his
sayings and doings than for anything poetical. But
he has a wonderful voice with which he can do almost
anything. At times he amuses himself in a rather
annoying way by making all the harsh and unmusical
noises he can think of, but at others he sings gloriously,
running through all manner of notes with an easy
range that is surprising. His difficulty seems to be
to keep to one thing; he is always experimenting.
This time, though, he had practised his song, and
though few had heard him at it, he had really done
it very thoroughly. The result was splendid.
When Bundah called upon him to make his effort,
he went forward and stood on a little mound that
had been made in the middle of the Camp. He looked


round to see all his friends, bowed to Bundah and
began to sing. At first he was a little nervous, but
he soon got over that and sang his very best.
This is the song he sang. Not being able to write
down the music I can only give you the words. If
you set them to the very best music you have ever
heard —or a little better than that —you will get some
idea of how the song sounded to the Campites as they
listened in the calm, quiet moonlight night with the
silence of the bush all around them.
Life, standing at the gates of day.
Before the Sun upon his way
Has thrown them open royally.
Trumpets the triumphs yet to be.
At noontide, resting by a stream
In drowsy luxury adream,
His words take on a deeper tone
Than earlier, restless hours have known
When the last flush of weary Day
From golden clouds has passed away,
The perfumed grace of evenfall
Gives full contentment unto all.
So runs the story of our days,
Who live in touch with Nature’s ways,
And wondrous joy she doth afford
In gladsome hope and rich reward.
No one had expected anything of this sort from
Weetah, and for a moment all were silent. He began
to wonder if they had not liked his song and was


beginning to feel very sad about it, when they began
to show their approval. Soon they were all standing
up making all the noises of appreciation they could
think of.
Mrs. Gnoorie, who, of course, could hear it all,
stamped her foot angrily, and Father Crow croaked
harshly. But the Campites did not hear them, and
would not have minded if they had.


When the songs were finished, those who had sung
them left the Camp while the decision was being
made. When it was over they returned to their
places to hear the stories.
“Who are the story-tellers?” asked Bundah.
Now the animals, in their anxiety about the doings
of the grasshoppers, had not felt like preparing
stories, so some of them got together and asked
Memda, the old-man kangaroo, if he would tell a
story for them.
“Me,” exclaimed Memda, “I can’t tell stories.”
“But you know a lot of things that have happened,”
said Curio, the platypus.
Memda looked thoughtful.
“Yes, I suppose I do,” he admitted.
“Then tell us one of them,” said Jacky Ringtail.
Memda thought for a moment. Then he looked up.
“Very well,” he said, “I shall. But I warn you that
it won’t be much of a story.”
“That will be all right,” they all said, and left
him to think out his tale. But the old-man kan-
garoo did not intend to do much thinking, for
when he does it gives him a headache. So he rarely
thinks much at all, but just lives along as comfortably
as he can.
Now when Bundah asked: “Who are the


story-tellers?” Spike, the ant-eater, looked out
of his quills.
“I’d like to tell a story,” he said.
“Don’t you think you might sing a song?” asked
Jerry, the dingo, sarcastically.
Spike looked at him contemptuously. “I’ve made
you sing before to-day,” he said. “Now that you’ve
made that remark, that’s the story I’ll tell.”
He looked round on his audience, as many of them
as he could see, for he does not see very far.
“You know our trouble is we eat well,” he remarked.
“So do I when I get the chance,” said Googar.
“You mean that you eat a lot; I mean that we are
good to eat,” replied Spike.
“We all know you would be but for your beastly
quills,” said Googar.
“That is my story,” said Spike, his little black
eyes glittering like beads.
“Better go on with your story, I think,” said
Bundah, and Spike began;
“Years and years ago we had no quills. Before
Jerry made his appearance and started interfering
with us we had a coat of beautiful hair.”
At this Jerry blinked but said nothing. He did not
like being made to appear an interloper, but he knew
that Spike was an older inhabitant than he was, and
thought the best thing he could do was to keep quiet
and see what Spike would say.
“We were very proud of our hair,” went on Spike.
‘Our only trouble was that when anything attacked


us, and as I have mentioned we are good eating, we
had no means of defence but our claws. Till Jerry
came along we really did not need much. As soon
as he arrived, he smelt at once that we should make
good meals for him.
** It so happened that when Jerry came along, the
original ant-eater was just at the end of a hollow
log. Jerry made a dive at him. The ant-eater saw
trouble and tried to get into the log. The opening
was very small, and while he was struggling in, Jerry
gave him a nip, but he managed to squeeze in. Once
he was safely inside he lay and recovered his breath.
When he went to move he found that he fitted so
close that his hair got caught. At this he got very
angry. What right had this great bully to come along
and hunt him into such an uncomfortable place?
“The ant-eater moved again, but stopped, suddenly,
hot all over to know that his beautiful hair was
getting damaged beyond repair. He called out to
Jerry and asked him angrily what right he had to
come there at all.
“ ‘ I don’t know about what right,’ answered Jerry,
‘but I am here, and here I mean to stay. I like
the taste of you.’
“ Spike got hotter and hotter, and could feel his hair
trying to stand up with rage. It began to hurt him
very much.
‘“Go away!’ he called to Jerry. But the dingo
only laughed.
“ The ant-eater’s hair felt hard against the top and


the sides of the log, and the pain of the pressure where
Jerry had bitten him was more than he could bear.
‘“I’ll have to get out of this/ he said to himself.
‘“Go away!’ he called again to Jerry. But Jerry
only grinned; old Spike could see him through the
hole in the log. Not knowing what to do he tried to
brush down the hair that was hurting so. To his
surprise it was quite hard. His anger became hotter
than ever. He got into a tearing rage, and stormed
at Jerry, who only went on teasing him with his
laughter and mockery.
“ Again he tried to smooth his hair down with one
foot. To his surprise something hot stuck in and
made his foot bleed. He looked at it in astonishment.
Then he felt again. He could hardly believe it, but
his hair had turned into hard, sharp quills. ‘ It must
have been me getting so hot with rage that did
it,’ he said to himself sadly, for now his beautiful
coat was spoiled.
“A new idea came to him, and he felt again, very
carefully. Then he laughed.
“ When Jerry heard that laugh he wondered what
had happened.
“The ant-eater waited a little while, making sure
in his mind that everything would be all right, and
then crawled out of the log at the end furthest away
from the dingo. Then he carefully felt himself all
over and was satisfied.
“Jerry soon smelt him there and came over with
a bound.


‘“Here’s a joke,’ said the ant-eater, and laid his
quills flat on his body.
“ Jerry made a grab at him. As he did so up went
the quills. Jerry let out a yell and dropped him;
the quills were too much.
“ If anyone doubts my story, you can look at my
quills and you’ll see by the colour of them that they
have been red-hot.”
There was more amusement than appreciation
shown over the story, and Joe remarked: “I know
now where we get the saying, ‘He’s got the spike.’”
Now it was Memda’s time to tell his story.
The idea of Memda telling a story had caused a
good deal of amusement; he was such a big, strong,
good-natured sort of chap that story-telling did not
seem to be in his line at all. If it were a strong-man
competition, he would be a certain winner, but as a
story-teller! What next?
All the same the old-man kangaroo had his story
ready, and he stepped out to tell it in quite a fine
way. As he stood there ready to begin, he looked so
big that even Bundah seemed almost small beside
him. When he had glanced round and seen all the
friendly faces he seemed to lose his usual shyness.
‘‘My story,” he said, ‘‘is about a thing that actually
happened. It happened a very long time ago, but it
happened all the same. I chanced to see a little about
it in Doctor Creep’s Book of Nature, and that made
me remember it as my Father told it to me when
I was a little chap.” He looked across at Joe-the-


Rat. “When I was about the size of Joe. Perhaps
you know, or perhaps you don’t know, that when
kangaroos first came down out of the sky they were
the colour of the sky—all blue.”
At this statement nearly all the Campites looked
at Bundah, and there were murmurs of surprise and,
perhaps, unbelief.
“I knew that would surprise you,” said Memda,
"but it is true, I can assure you. And I’ll tell you
why Bundah-the-fighter is brown, and why I, and
most of my people have quite a lot of red in our
coats —in fact, that is my story.”
This was interesting, and everyone settled down
to listen. Memda continued. “It was quite a long
time ago that all this happened, when the different
families were settling where they would live. There
were only three families of kangaroos then. One
wanted them all to live in the scrubby country, one
wanted to live on the plains, and the third wanted
to live in the mountains. But that is another story.
What I am going to tell you about are the two,
one of whom wanted to live in the scrub, that is
the timbered parts, and one in the open, and how
they quarrelled over it.
“The place where the quarrel took place was just
on the edge of a big belah warrambool, beside a red
plain. It was a good season; there were lots of grass
and water about. But it was some time since there
had been any rain, so of course the water standing
in the water-holes had become discoloured with dead


IT WAS DEEP, AND HE WENT RIGHT OVER HIS HEAD IN
THE WATER




leaves. It was right beside one of these water-holes
that the argument took place.
“My great-great-great-grandfather wanted to live
on the plain, Bundah’s wished to live in the timbered
country. My father’s father’s father’s —a few more
father’s father’s —father said that the plain was safer
for a family because you could see your enemies
coming, and, anyway, the grass was sweeter. Bundah’s
parent agreed that the grass was better, but said that
it was not nearly as safe a place because you could
be so easily seen.
“After they had argued about it for quite a long
time my old man became very angry and pushed
Bundah’s ancestor into the water-hole. It was deep
and he went right over his head in the water, but
he soon got out again. When he stood up straight to
drv himself, my parent began to laugh like anything.
“‘What’s the matter?’ objected the one who had
been tipped into the water. ‘I don’t see anything
funny about it at all.’
“‘Why!’ exclaimed the other, ‘you’re all brown.’
“Then Bundah’s great-grandfather looked at him-
self and saw that his beautiful blue coat had got all
spoilt. He was very annoyed.
“‘l’ll teach you to spoil my clothes and make me
all brown,’ he said, and went straight at the other
with all his feet.
“But the blue did not want to fight; he was not
really angry at all, and now, although he laughed,
was sorry for what he had done. He hopped away.


The brown went after him. The blue hopped faster.
The brown followed, and soon the two were racing
away across the red plain. When they reached a
dusty place where the blue could not hear the feet
of the brown coming after him, he looked round.
He saw the brown so close to him that he got a shock
and tried to quicken up too suddenly. There was a
log lying in the dust just there and he struck it with
his two big toes, breaking the nails right back, and
tumbled into the dust. Before he could get up the
brown had him and was rolling him over and over
in it, saying all the time: ‘l'll teach you! I’ll teach
you to spoil my clothes! I’ll teach you!'
“When he had finished and let the blue up again
he had done what he wanted. The red dust had got
all through the blue’s beautiful suit, and in places
quite changed its colour. And that is why Bundah
and his people are brown and I and my people are
still blue dusted with red.”
Memda stopped. The Campites, thinking he had
finished, applauded loudly.
— —, * V *
Memda looked hurt. "There is more of it yet,”
he said.
“Go on! Go on!” they all called, and Memda
continued:
“When the old-man red kangaroo got back to his
family with his sore feet and soiled clothes, they did
not know him—he was so battered and dirty-looking.
He tried to tell them who he was but they would not
listen to him, and Mrs. Memda scolded him loudly.


“‘Go away, you dirty, ragged, red-looking thing!’
she shouted at him. ‘You my husband, indeed! I may
tell you my husband is a gentleman. He does not
hobble along in that ugly way, and he dresses in
beautiful blue clothes. Go away!'
“The old-man kangaroo felt very hurt about it and
went away and lay down all by himself, just as you
will often find him doing to this day.
“With the brown it was different. When he got
home his wife met him and exclaimed: 'How nice
your new suit is; it matches the furniture perfectly.’
“You see, it was just the colour of the bark of
the belah-trees amongst which they lived, and have
always lived since. And even now you will generally
see Bundah and his wife together.”
This was the sort of story that they could all enjoy,
and they cheered Memda till he felt quite overcome.
“Not a bad yam, is it?” he said, "and it’s true,
too. You ask Doctor Creep. There is quite a lot about
it in his Book of Nature.”
“That is so,” agreed Doctor Creep, tapping his book
fondly. “There are quite a lot of good things here.”
As there were no other songs or stories that came
up to Weetah’s and Memda’s they won the prizes.
No one knew what they were going to be, and every-
one wondered how Bundah would manage so that
both, as well as their friends, would be satisfied.
But Bundah is a wise fellow, and thinking that
these two would be the winners, he had already
decided what the prizes would be.


“As winner of the story-telling competition,” he
announced, "Memda will have the right to camp in
the shade of the red-currant bush.”
At this there was loud approval, for that would
suit Memda well, and it was a great privilege, the
red-currant being a bush that throw's a very pleasant
shade and has a delicate fragrance that is all its own.
“As for Weetah,” continued Bundah, “he and his
people will have the right to make their plavhouses
at the foot of the red-currant bush.”
This, too, met with great approval, for the red-
currant bush is the best of all places for Weetah’s
treasure-house and playground.
So now you know why Mrs. Gnoorie is always
wandering about by herself and is so spiteful against
all other birds and animals; w r hy Mr. Wyse has such
a curious beak; w'hy Brolga often w'ears a blush; w'hy
Spike has such hard, sharp quills; why Weetah builds
his playhouse in the red-currant bush whenever he
can get one, and why Memda, and Memda only,
will so often be found camping by himself in the
shade of that same bush.
This is all I can tell you this time—Bunyip says so.


T&k DO YOU REMEMBER?
i. You have just read this interesting book, and I
want to see what you remember about it. The book
has been telling you all about a very funny person
called the Bunyip: now who was this Bunyip, and what
has he got to do with the animals and birds of Australia ?
Who were the people who first heard of the Bunyip?
Please don’t forget the name of these people, because
they have had such a lot to do with Australia.
2. If you heard that the Bunyip would one day show
himself in the woods and you went out to look for him,
what sort of a person would you expect him to be ?
See if you can tell me all about him.
3. You will probably remember how Bunyip told you
that some of the birds come out in the day-time and
others come out only in the night-time. Do you know
the names of three who would remain in their nests the
whole night and not show their faces until the morning ?
Suppose one of these day-birds came out at night to
see what was going on, what other birds would it meet
while it was roaming round ? Do you think it could be
friends with them all ?
4. There is an Australian bird which has a most
beautiful tail: he won it in the competition before the
one you have been reading about. Do you know the
name of this bird ? Can you guess how it got its name ?
Now just get someone to turn to the part of the book
where I have made a few remarks about the birds and


animals of Australia and read to you something else
about this bird.
5. I am sure you can all tell me the name of that very
small animal which carries its young about in a pouch
and which is very much afraid of Yangi the Night-
hawk: what is it? Do you know the name of another
much larger animal that carries its young in the same
way? If you can’t remember it, ask someone to allow
you to look at an Australian silver coin, and you will
see it on one side of it. If you can’t be shown a coin,
then you will be able to see one of these animals in the
London Zoo or else in one of the Australian Zoos.
6. Why did all the animals and birds like the Reverend
Mr. Wyse so much ? Don’t you think it is a very good
name to give to an animal ? Why did he get this name ?
7. What was the name of that cunning old bird who
has a coat which is all black? Why was he turned out
of the Camp ? What did he try to do when he had left
the Camp ? Did he succeed ? Try and think of other
birds which have a coat of the same colour as this
cunning old one. How many do you know?
8. When everyone met for the story-telling competi-
tion some of the members flew to the meeting, others
walked, others hopped, and some crept along the ground.
Who would be the ones that hopped ? Who would creep
to the meeting ? Some of those who flew chattered
terribly; what ones do you think would not be able to
hold their tongues ?
9. You remember how the Bunyip rewarded some of
the birds for doing good to their fellow-creatures; what
good had they done to deserve a reward ? What would
have happened if they had not done this good deed ?


DO YOU REMEMBER? 14 1
Which were the birds who received Bunyip’s reward?
Do you think it would be a good thing if the Bunyip
gave the kangaroo a shorter tail? If not, why not?
Would it be a good thing if the Bunyip said that he
could have shorter hind-legs ? If not, why not ?
10. I suppose you know now how the kangaroo got
his brown coat. Let us suppose that you wish to tell a
friend of yours how you think the kangaroo got his two
strong back legs, what would you say ? Try and invent
a story of your own, and you could also try and make
up a story to explain how the lyre-bird got its wonderful
tail. When the competition was going on some of the
birds thought they could sing well, but they really knew
nothing about singing at all: they were only able to
make very peculiar sounds which were far from good
singing; who would these birds be? Imagine that you
are holding a competition of your own to see which
of the Australian animals can run the fastest: what
animals would take part in it ? To which one would
you probably give the prize ? Would any enter who
cannot run at all well ?


E— » c
A FEW NOTES ON M 1
E AUSTRALIAN BIRDS AND &h
ANIMALS ly
The Bower-Bird
This extremely interesting little bird receives its name
from the strange bower-like structures it is so fond of making.
It leaves the bower open at each end in order to walk
through it, and the decoration of the ground outside each
entrance is a singular habit of this bird. These external
decorations are carried out with all kinds of bright objects
such as shells and coloured stones, which are sometimes
brought quite a distance by the birds. The bower-birds
usually return to their bowers each year, when they are
repaired.
The Emu
The emu is one of the very few birds which can run at a
good pace: for this purpose it has a very strong and long
pair of legs to carry it to safety. These legs are also very
useful as a means of defence if the bird is attacked by an
enemy. It is mainly to be found in great open spaces as the
bush is not a suitable place for a bird of its size. The eggs are
a dark green in appearance, and upwards of twenty eggs are
laid in one season, all of which are placed in a hollow scooped
out in the sand. Unfortunately one does not come across
this bird very often now.
The Jackass
This bird is probably well known to almost everybody in
the world, mainly on account of its laugh, which is a really


splendid imitation of a human being’s laugh. It is often
called a kingfisher, but it is not actually a fisher at all. These
birds often become quite tame, and they have frequently
been known to eat out of a person’s hand. In Australia they
are considered to be very valuable birds because they kill
many of the reptiles there; for this reason they are pro-
tected by the Government. The native name for these birds
is “kookaburra,” which is much preferable to calling the
bird a “jackass.”
The Lyre-Bird
This is a very shy bird which lives in the most secluded
parts of the country. It is a very peculiar bird indeed because
it imitates the songs and calls of the other birds of the bush,
and on occasions it even manages to imitate certain animals
very successfully. The male bird has a very beautiful tail,
which has the appearance of very fine and delicate fern-
fronds. The nest which these birds make is shaped hke a
dome. The male bird builds mounds which it frequently
visits in the daytime, and on the top of these it displays
its beautiful tail; it is also on these that the lyre-bird
imitates the song of other birds and the calls of some of
the animals.
The Cockatoo
Most of these birds are distinguishable by the small crest
of feathers which they have on the top of the head. They
make very good talkers, and are often trained to do this when
kept in captivity. Some of them are quite large birds with
brilliant plumage, the black one being a particularly large
species. Their main item of food is fruit, of which they devour
a good deal, sometimes causing great losses to farmers in
doing so. The eating of the fruit is usually accompanied by
piercing shrieks, as they generally go about in large flocks.


The Kangaroo
This Australian animal is probably the best known to the
whole world, mainly, I should think, on account of the fact
that it is such a strangely formed animal. It is called a
marsupial because it carries its young about in a sort of
pouch in its body. This pouch is used by the young kangaroos
as a place of refuge when danger approaches. The tail of the
kangaroo is very long in many cases, and as the tail is both
strong and thick, it serves the animal as a powerful weapon
in a fight. The hind-legs are also very strong, and are also
useful in the event of an attack. The fore-legs, however, are
very little used, so they are not nearly so strong as the hind-
legs. The kangaroo is frequently hunted with dogs, but it
is difficult to capture owing to the fact that it can easily
make its escape by taking long leaps with the aid of its
hind-legs and tail. Many of them can leap several feet into
the air. The skin of the animal is very useful for the making
of leather goods.
The Wombat
Like the kangaroo, these animals are also marsupials. They
might almost be compared to rats, except that they are
somewhat larger than the latter and do not possess a long
tail. They have very short legs and live in burrows, spending
their whole time on the ground. For the benefit of the readers
of this book I will call them “Night-timers.” The fur of
these animals is rather coarse to the touch.
The Platypus or Ornithorhynchus
This animal is among the most curious which are native
to Australia. It is a brownish-looking animal and has most
peculiar feet which are webbed like those of a duck, but


A FEW NOTES *45
they are also equipped with claws for burrowing. So these
feet are a combination of those of a duck and those of a
burrowing animal. The platypus is very active in the water,
and is both a good swimmer and a good diver. The burrows
of these animals are huge structures made in the vicinity of
some pond or river. Each burrow is very carefully made and
has two entrances, one being above the water and the other
under it. The platypus has fur like any other animal, and
when in danger it can roll itself up like a ball, exactly in
the same way as a hedgehog. However, it has no mouth like
that of an ordinary animal, but a bill exactly similar to that
of the duck. Its young are hatched from eggs.


M*oe At Twe
TeMPLelPßess
L6TCHAVORTM
Chcat Britain


THE
Kings treasuries
of literature
General Editor:
SIR A. T. QUILLER-COUCH
141 VOLUMES
Each Is. 4d. Net
From a Recent Letter:
“The Kings Treasuries series
gives such remarkable value that
there is nothing to equal it.”
J. M. DENT & SONS LTD.
ALDINE HOUSE, BEDFORD ST., LONDON, W.C.2


The ages mentioned are only intended to he approxi-
mate as local conditions, size of classes, etc., need
to be considered.
141 VOLUMES
ALLEGORY, MYTHOLOGY, etc.
No. for JUNIOR FORMS (Ages 10-12)
10. The Adventures oi Odysseus.
14. Hawthorne’s Wonder-Book.
15. Bee: Princess of the Dwarfs. By Anatole France.
23. A Child’s Book of Saints.
24. The Heroes.
38. The Pilgrim’s Progress (abridged).
50. Stories from Le Morte D’Arthur.
60. The Water Babies.
115. Knights of the Faerie Oueene (re-told).
119. The King of the Golden River.
139. Old Gold. Fables and Parables.
FOR LOWER MIDDLE FORMS (Ages 12-14)
17. Evergreen Stories.
21. Tales from Andersen.
37. The Story of the “ Iliad.”
87. Rip Van Winkle, etc.
BIBLE AS LITERATURE
FOR JUNIOR FORMS (Ages 10-13)
73. The Gospel Story of Jesus Christ.
FOR ANY FORMS
85. A Bible Anthology.


No. DRAMA
12. Form-Room Plays—Junior Book.
13. A Shakespeare Progress.
65. Form-Room Plays —Senior Book.
105. Plays before Shakespeare.
110. The Beau of Bath, and five other one-act Plays
126. The Rivals. Sheridan.
[Shakespeare s Plays, see under Shakespeare.)
ESSAYS AND BELLES-LETTRES
FOR MIDDLE AND SENIOR FORMS
1. Sesame and Lilies.
2. The Lore of the Wanderer.
6. Prose and Poetry. Sir Henry Newbolt.
7. "Alpha of the Plough.”
9. Essay on Clive. Macaulay.
20. The be Coverley Papers.
35. Unto this Last.
42. Lamb’s Essays.
48. Selected English Essays.
49. Selected English Letters.
53. Essay on Hampden. Macaulay.
88. Naturalism in English Poetry.
90. Selected Essays of Robert Lynd.
98. The English Admirals.
104. Modem Essays.
106. Bacon’s Essays.
109. Some English Diarists.
120. Poems and Essays of Oliver Goldsmith.
121. Essays of William Hazlitt.


FICTION
No. FOR JUNIOR FORMS (Ages 10-12)
25. Black Beauty. Anna Sewell.
32. A Christmas Carol.
47. The Story of a Short Life and Jackanapes.
64. Adventures of Don Quixote (abridged).
71. Robinson Crusoe. Part I.
113. Little Sidsel Longskirt. Hans Aanrud.
125. Theras: The Story of an Athenian Boy.
137. Bunyip Told Me. W. M. Fleming.
138. Solve Suntrap. Hans Aanrud.
140. Uncle Remus. J. C. Harris.
141. The Rose and the Ring. W. M. Thackeray.
FOR LOWER MIDDLE FORMS (Ages 12-14)
5. Tales from Tolstoy.
117. Tales of a Grandfather (selected).
123. The Adventures of a Younger Son (abridged).
124. In the Morning of Time. C. G. D. Roberts.
136. Little Women. Louisa Alcott.
FOR MIDDLE FORMS AND SENIORS
8. Conrad’s Youth, and Gaspar Ruiz.
22. A Tale of Two Cities.
26. Under the Greenwood Tree.
33. The Wreck of the Golden Mary, etc. C. Dickens.
34. Cranford.
55. Selected Short Stories by “Q.”
81. Fort Amity. Sir A. T. Quiller-Couch.


No- Fiction —(( continued )
95. Silas Mamer.
107. The Eye-Witness. Hilaire Belloc.
129. Four Stories by Joseph Conrad.
{See also Prose Anthologies.)
HISTORY
9. Essay on Clive. Macaulay.
31. London in Literature.
44. Macaulay’s History. Chapter 111.
45. Stories from History (Henry 111. to Edward IV.)
53. Essay on Hampden. Macaulay.
54. Stories from History (Patrick to Dunstan).
62. Gibbon’s Story of Constantinople.
97. A Gallery of Master Historians.
107. The Eye-Witness. Hilaire Belloc.
114. Pages from Latin Authors.
124. In the Morning of Time. C. G. D. Roberts.
MYTHOLOGY
{See under Allegory.)
NATURAL HISTORY AND STORIES
FOR JUNIOR FORMS (Ages 10-12)
72. Parables from Nature.
89, The Old Post. Carl Ewald.
FOR LOWER MIDDLE FORMS (Ages 12-14)
27. Some Animal Stories. C. G. D. Roberts.
69. White’s Selbome (omitting the Antiquities).
103. More Animal Stories. C. G. D. Roberts.


Natural History and Stories — {continued)
No. FOR MIDDLE AND SENIOR FORMS
46. Birds in a Village. W. H. Hudson.
PLAYS
FOR JUNIOR FORMS (Ages n-12)
12. Form-Room Plays—Junior Book.
FOR MIDDLE AND SENIOR FORMS
65. Form-Room Plays—Senior Book.
105. Plays before Shakespeare.
110. The Beau of Bath.
126. The Rivals. Sheridan.
131. Form-Room Plays —Intermediate
POETRY
FOR JUNIOR FORMS (Ages 10-12)
28. The Song of Hiawatha.
58. A Book of Story Poems.
82. Junior Modem Poetry.
FOR MIDDLE AND SENIOR FORMS
3. Modem Poetry.
13. A Shakespeare Progress.
41. Selections from Tennyson.
63. Ballads and Ballad Poems.
112. A Book of Lighter Verse.
118. A Book of English Odes.


Poetry —( continued )
No. FOR SENIOR FORMS
16. Paradise Lost (abridged).
18. The Lay of the Last Minstrel.
30. Lays of Ancient Rome.
36. Selections from Bums.
40. Selections from Wordsworth.
51. The Ancient Mariner, etc.
57. Story and Rhyme. Walter de la Mare.
66. Tales of a Wayside Inn.
74. Marmion.
75. Selections. Robert Browning.
84. Atalanta’s Race and two other Tales. William
Morris.
108. Keats and Shelley.
120. Poems and Essays of Goldsmith.
122. Poems of Matthew Arnold.
130. Stories in Verse. G. C. Loane, M.A.
135. Evangeline and the Courtship of Miles Standish.
PROSE ANTHOLOGIES
{lncluding Anthologies of comparison and those
containing some Poetry.)
2. The Lore of the Wanderer.
6. Prose and Poetry. Sir Henry Newbolt.
19. Lamb and Shakespeare.
31. London in Literature.


KINGS TREASURIES
Prose Anthologies— {continued)
A Book of Ships and Seamen.
A Hugh Walpole Anthology.
Story and Rhyme. Walter de la Mare.
Readings from Borrow.
Plutarch and Shakespeare.
Stories from Hakluyt.
Modem Prose.
Tales of Travel.
A Bible Anthology.
Literature and Labour.
Junior Modem Prose.
Standard Prose.
A Book of Lighter Prose.
Some English Diarists.
Pages from Latin Authors.
Great Fights in Literature.
The Younger Characters of Dickens.
Sir Walter Raleigh.
PRECIS
Prose for Precis. A Key supplied to Teachers
only, Is.
Further Prose for Precis. A Key supplied to
Teachers only, Is.
SCIENCE
11. The Chemical History of a Candle. Faraday.


SHAKESPEARE PLAYS
A commentary with literary exercises on tnodern lines
is given at the end of the text. A simple acting
appendix is included in most cases.
4. Richard 11.
13. A Shakespeare Progress.
29. Coriolanus.
39. Henry V.
43. Julius Caesar.
59. Macbeth.
70. Merchant of Venice.
76. Twelfth Night.
78. As You Like It.
79. A Midsummer Night’s Dream
92. King John.
96. Henry IV. Part I.
100. The Tempest.
101. Hamlet.
111. Richard HI.
116. King Henry VIII.
128. Cymbeline.
TALES
{See also under Fiction and Prose Anthologies.)
94. The Canterbury Pilgrims (re-told for Juniors).
102. The Song of Beowulf. A Prose Translation by
Prof. R. K. Gordon.


THE
KINGS TREASURIES
OF LITERATURE
Sesame and Lilies.
2. The Lore of the Wanderer.
3. Modem Poetry.
4. King Richard 11. Shakespeare.
5. Tales from Tolstoy.
6. Newbolt. Prose and Poetry.
7. “Alpha of the Plough.”
8. Youth, and Caspar Ruiz.
9. Essay on Clive. Macaulay.
10. The Adventures of Odysseus.
11. The Chemical History of a Candle.
12. Form-Room Plays—Junior Book.
13. A Shakespeare Progress.
14. A Wonder-Book for Boys and Girls.
15. Bee: Princess of the Dwarfs.
16. Paradise Lost.
17. Evergreen Stories.
18. The Lay of the Last Minstrel.
19. Lamb and Shakespeare.
20. The De Coverley Papers.
21. Tales from Andersen.
22. A Tale of Two Cities.
23. A Child’s Book of Saints.
24. The Heroes.


Black Beauty.
26. Under the Greenwood Tree.
27. Some Animal Stories.
28. The Song of Hiawatha.
29. Coriolanus. Shakespeare.
30. Lays of Ancient Rome.
31. London in Literature.
32. A Christmas Carol.
33. The Wreck of the Golden Mary.
34. Cranford.
35. Unto this Last.
36. Selections from Bums.
37. The Story of the “ Iliad.”
38. The Pilgrim’s Progress.
39. Henry V. Shakespeare.
40. Selections from Wordsworth.
41. Selections from Tennyson.
42. Lamb’s Essays.
43. Julius Caesar. Shakespeare.
44. Macaulay’s History. Chapter 111.
45. Stories from History (Henry 111. to Edward IV.)
46. Birds in a Village. W. H. Hudson.
47. The Story of a Short Life, and Jackanapes.
48. Selected English Essays.
49. Selected English Letters.
50. Stories from Le Morte D’Arthur
51. The Ancient Mariner.
52. A Book of Ships and Seamen.
53. Macaulay’s Essay on Hampden.
54. Stories from History (Patrick to Dunstan).


Selected Short Stories by “Q.”
A Hugh Walpole Anthology.
Story and Rhyme. Walter de la Mare.
A Book of Story Poems.
Macbeth. Shakespeare.
The Water Babies.
Readings from George Borrow.
Gibbon’s Story of Constantinople.
Ballads and Ballad-Poems.
Adventures of Don Quixote.
Form-Room Plays—Senior Book.
Tales of a Wayside Inn.
Plutarch and Shakespeare.
Stories from Hakluyt.
White’s Selbome.
The Merchant of Venice.
Robinson Crusoe —Part I.
Parables from Nature.
The Gospel Story of Jesus Christ.
Marmion.
Selections from Robert Browning.
Twelfth Night. Shakespeare.
Prose for Precis.
As You Like It. Shakespeare.
A Midsummer Night’s Dream. Shakespeare.
Modem Prose.
Fort Amity.
Junior Modem Poetry.
Tales of Travel.
Atalanta's Race.


A Bible Anthology.
86. Literature and Labour.
87. Rip Van Winkle.
88. Naturalism in English Poetry.
89. The Old Post.
90. Selected Essays. Robert Lynd.
91. Junior Modern Prose.
92. King John. Shakespeare.
93. Standard Prose.
94. The Canterbury Pilgrims.
95. Silas Mamer.
96. Henry IV. Part I. —Shakespeare.
97. A Gallery of Master Historians.
98. The English Admirals, etc.
99. A Book of Lighter Prose.
100. The Tempest. Shakespeare.
101. Hamlet. Shakespeare.
102. The Song of Beowulf. (Prose Translation
103. More Animal Stories. C. G. D, Roberts.
104. Modem Essays.
105. Plays before Shakespeare.
106. Bacon’s Essays and other Writings.
107. The Eye-Witness.
108. Selections from Keats and Shelley.
109. Some English Diarists.
110. The Beau of Bath.
111. Richard HI. Shakespeare.
112. A Book of Lighter Verse.
113. Little Sidsel Longskirt.
114. Pages from Latin Authors.


Knights of the Faerie Queene.
Henry VIII. Shakespeare.
Tales of a Grandfather.
A Book of English Odes.
The King of the Golden River.
Poems and Essays of Oliver Goldsmith.
Essays of William Hazlitt.
Poems of Matthew Arnold.
The Adventures of a Younger Son.
In the Morning of Time.
Theras; The Story of an Athenian Boy.
The Rivals.
Further Prose for Precis.
Cymbeline. Shakespeare.
Four Stories by Joseph Conrad.
Stories in Verse.
Form-Room Plays —Intermediate.
Great Fights in Literature.
The Younger Characters of Dickens
Sir Walter Raleigh.
Evangeline, and Courtship of Miles Standish.
Little Women.
Bunyip Told Me.
Solve Suntrap.
Old Gold.
Uncle Remus.
The Rose and the Ring.
32-Page Detailed Prospectus Post Free on Application.




t U)AJL*^v»-
t*y ir^JL-
N n cop u


3 1508 02063923 8


S5 - "i;i i: a tBSrgHHHfe.- M3^y£:sff?^3BHSR^?Fp^n^^f*tjffmrfr
_ 1. 'WfffigaSSaCwSjqffiga^^
I^B
~ f J: "" “I ~ j"’?^ rf c . 5" V ! t-
