

■JTV-f
fe to
Commonwealth of Australia.
lurtal
OF THE LATE
SIR LITTLETON GROOM,
K.C., M.P*
n% QUfmrlf, (Canberra
10th November, 1936*


The service will be conducted by the Most Reverend
Archbishop of Sydney and Metropolitan of New South
Wales, assisted by the Yen. Archdeacon Robertson, Th.L.,
Rector of Canberra, and the Reverend Canon Edwards,
8.A., Headmaster of the Canberra Grammar School.
The address will be given by the Right Reverend The
Bishop of Goulburn.
lurial farmer.
AT THE KING’S HALL.
The service will commence at 3.43 p.m. on Tuesday,
I Oth November, with the sentences :
T AM the resurrection and the life, saith the Lord; he that believeth
1 in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live : and whosoever liveth
and believeth in me shall never die. S. John xi. 25, 26.
T KNOW that my Redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter
* day upon the earth. And though after my skin worms destroy this
body, yet in my flesh shall I see God : whom I shall see for myself, and
mine eyes shall behold, and not another. Job xix. 25, 26, 27.
YV/E brought nothing into this world, and it is certain we can carry
™ nothing out. The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away;
blessed be the name of the Lord. 1 Tim. vi. 7. Job i. 21.
D EMEMBER not the sins and offences of my youth: but according
to thy mercy think thou upon me, 0 Lord, for thy goodness.
Psalm 25. 6.
Psalm 23. —To be said by all.
Dominus regit me.
r J I HE Lord is my shepherd: therefore can I lack nothing.
2. He shall feed me in a green pasture : and lead me forth beside
the still waters of comfort.
3. He shall convert my soul: and bring me forth in the paths of
righteousness, for his Name’s sake.


4. Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death,
I will fear no evil: for thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff comfort
me.
5. Thou shall prepare a table before me against them that trouble
me : thou hast anointed my head with oil, and my cup shall be full.
6. But thy loving-kindness and mercy shall follow me all the days
of my life : and I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever.
Rest eternal grant unto them, 0 Lord : and let light perpetual shine
upon them.
SAVIOUR of the world, who by thy Cross and precious blood hast
redeemed us : Save us and help us, we humbly beseech thee,
O Lord.
Lesson.
Hymn.
™f A BIDE with me; fast falls the eventide;
The darkness deepens ; Lord, with me abide
When other helpers fail, and comforts flee,
/ Help of the helpless, (p) 0 abide with me.
p Swift to its close ebbs out life’s little day;
Earth’s joys grow dim, its glories pass away ;
Change and decay in all around I see ;
mf 0 Thou, Who changest not, (p) abide with me.
mf I need Thy presence every passing hour;
cr What but Thy grace can foil the tempter’s power?
Who like Thyself my guide and stay can be?
/ Through cloud and sunshine, Lord, (p ) abide with me.
/ I fear no foe with Thee at hand to bless ;
Ills have no weight, and tears no bitterness;
Where is death’s sting? Where, Grave, thy victory?
I triumph still, if Thou abide with me.
p Hold Thou Thy Cross before my closing eyes ;
cr Shine through the gloom, and point me to the skies ;
/ Heav’n’s morning breaks, and earth’s vain shadows flee ;
In life, (p) in death, 0 Lord, (cr) abide with me.
Address by the Right Reverend the Bishop of
Goulburn.
The procession will form and leave the King’s Hall
for St John’s Churchyard.


/ J7OR all the Saints who from their labours rest.
Who Thee by faith before the world confess’d.
Thy Name, O Jesu, be for ever blest.
Alleluia !
Thou wast their Rock, their Fortress, and their Might:
Thou, Lord, their Captain in the well-fought fight;
Thou in the darkness drear their one true Light.
Alleluia!
O may Thy soldiers, faithful, true, and bold.
Fight as the Saints who nobly fought of old.
And win, with them, the victor’s crown of gold.
Alleluia !
mf O blest communion ! fellowship Divine !
We feebly struggle, they in glory shine ;
cr Yet all are one in Thee, for all are Thine
Alleluia !
p And when the strife is fierce, the warfare long,
Steals on the ear the distant triumph-song,
cr And hearts are brave again and arms are strong.
Alleluia !
mf The golden evening brightens in the west;
Soon, soon to faithful warriors comes their rest;
p Sweet is the calm of Paradise the blest.
Alleluia !
/ But lo ! there breaks a yet more glorious day;
The Saints triumphant rise in bright array:
The King of glory passes on His way.
Alleluia!
ff From earth’s wide bounds, from ocean’s farthest coast,
Through gates of pearl streams in the countless host,
Singing to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
Alleluia! Amen.
Benediction.
WILL
The service will be continued at the graveside and
conclude with the hymn—
