

kp . d
surns ventenarv),
JUbV 21st, 1896.
RECORD OF THE CELEBRATION
THROUGHOUT NEW SOUTH WALES
GIVING A —■— ——
Report of the Principal Speeches delivered at the A
Haggis Supper in Sydney, / )\
with a Reproduction of t*he Menu Card. j
And an Appendix, containing Lord Rosebery’s


THE SCOTTISH FIRE OFFICES.
THE
Scottish Union & National Insurance Co.
Established in 1824, Sir WALTER SCOTT being the first President.
Total Assets, £10,000,000.
The Caledonian Insurance Go
The Oldest Scottish Insurance Office.
ESTABLISHED 1805.
Capital
Assets
£1,000,000.
£1,800,000.
The above Companies are prepared to accept risks
of almost every description, from
One Shilling and Sixpence per cent, upwards.
AGENTS WANTED Remunerative Terms to those able
* to influence business.
W. S. FORBES, Manager.
93 Pitt St., Sydney.


Tjurns (entenarv),
JOby 21st, 1896.
RECORD OF THE CELEBRATION
THROUGHOUT NEW SOUTH WALES
GIVING A
Report of the Principal Speeches delivered at the
Haggis Supper in Sydney,
with a Reproduction of the Menu Card.
And an Appendix, containing Lord Rosebery’s
Famous Speeches at Glasgow and Dumfries.
Issued by the Burns Centenary Committee, representing the
combined Scottish Associations of New South Wales.
Sgtnwg:
IV. M. IJACLARDY & CO., Printers, Lithographers, &c
82 Pitt Street.








THE BURNS CENTENARY IN
AUSTRALIA.
July 21st, 1896.
USTRALIA has not been unmindful of the centenary
of the death of Scotland’s national poet. In each
of the capital cities—Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane,
Adelaide and Perth—there were large and enthusiastic
gatherings of the poet’s admirers to hear his songs and poems
sung and recited, and orations eulogistic of his genius and
humanity. In New South Wales, with which this record is more
immediately concerned, the celebration assumed large proportions.
Acting on a happy suggestion emanating from the Caledonian
Association of South Australia, and concurred in by the
Caledonian Societies of Melbourne and Brisbane, the Highland
Society of New South Wales undertook to procure a suitable
wreath of Australian flowers, have it frozen in a block of ice,
and despatched to Dumfries to be placed on the Poet’s grave as a
tribute of admiration from the combined Scottish Associations of
Australia.
In order to make the tribute as representative as possible,
the Council of the Highland Society asked for, and received the
hearty co-operation of the Burns Anniversary Club, and the
Thistle Club of Sydney. A combined committee of these
Societies was formed with the Hon. A. Kethel, M.L.C., as Chair-
man, Mr. R. M. Mc.C. Anderson, as Treasurer, and Mr. H. C.
L. Anderson, M.A., as Hon. Secretary.
This committee invited the assistance of the whole of the
Scottish Societies existing in the country towns of the Colony,
and received very sympathetic replies, with contributions towards
the expenses, from the Societies at Broken Hill, Bathurst,
Goulburn, Glen Innes, Grafton, Lismore, Junee, Wollongong,
Bourke, and Newcastle, in all of which towns enthusiastic
celebrations were held.
A beautiful wreath was procured from Miss Goodenough of
King Street, Sydney, which attracted enormous crowds during
the days on which it was on view before and after being frozen.
It was four feet high and three feet six inches broad, and con-
tained over 1800 flowers including 800 white carnations for the
ground work, roses (Bride and Niphetos), orchids (Cypripedium


spicerianum, C. barhatum, C. insigne, and C. insigne maulei),
bouvai’dias (Priory Beauty and Bridal Wreath), five varieties of
heather, camellias, flannel flowers (Actinotus helianthi), narcissus,
ivy, mountain moss, and many choice Adiantum ferns. The
reproduction of the photograph herewith gives a fair idea of the
design of the wreath.


It was frozen into a block of ice weighing twenty-three
hundredweight by the Metropolitan Ice Company, free of charge,
and despatched by the Orient steamer Orotava on June 15th.
Mausoleumof Burns at Dumfries.
Herewith is given a reproduction of the photograph showing
the frozen wreath standing in front of the beautiful mausoleum
and statue which mark the Poet’s last resting-place.


The wreath arrived a few days late for the principal celebra-
tion at the poet’s mausoleum on July 21st, but owing to the
great enthusiasm evoked by its arrival, a special ceremony was
held on August 7 th, and the tribute from Australia escorted from
the Dumfries Railway Station by thousands of people to the
mausoleum, where it was officially presented by Mr. Phillip
Sulley, the Hon. Secretary of the Dumfries Committee, and
received by Provost Glover, Chairman of the Executive.
The Sydney Committee, in order to meet all tastes, made
arrangements to hold a Emms Concert in the Town Hall on
Monday July 20th, and a Haggis Supper at the Freemasons’
Hall, York Street, on the following evening.
At the Concert over 2,200 people assembled to hear an
excellent programme of Burns’ songs rendered by the Permanent
Artillery Band, a choir of forty male voices, Miss Marie Hooton,
Miss Maggie Stirling, Mr. E. Branscombe, M. H. Poussard and
Mr. Alick Edward. The songs chosen were, “Scots Wha Hae,”
“ Afton Water,” “ Corn Rigs,” “ Tam Glen,” “ A Man’s a Man
for a’ that,” “Ye Banks and Braes,” “Duncan Gray,” “O, Whistle
and I’ll Come to You,” “ Green Grow the Rashes 1 ” “John Ander-
son, my Jo,” “ Lass o’ Ballochmyle,” and the enthusiasm culmin-
ated in the whole audience joining in Auld Lang Syne.
At the Haggis Supper 280 ladies and gentlemen were
present. The Hon. Dr. MacLaurin (President of the Highland
Society of New South Wales), was in the chair, and the
Vice-chairmen were, the Hon. A. Kethel, M.L.C., Robert
Anderson, James Wilson, James Inglis, Andrew McCredie, and
Inspector Jas. Bremner. The Chairman had on his right His
Excellency the Governor, Viscount Hampden, and Mrs.
MacLaurin; on his left the Hon. G. H. Reid, M.P , Premier of
New South Wales, and Sir Patrick Jennings, K.C.M.G.; among
the guests were the Hon. John Mclntosh, M.L.C , Mr G. A.
Wilson (Chairman of the Public Service Board), and Mrs.
Wilson, Mr, Chief Justice Rae, of the Punjaub, Professor
Anderson Stuart, Professor and Mrs. MacCallum, Professor F.
Anderson, Professor Wilson, Dr. and Mrs. A. McCormick, Dr.
James Graham, M.P., Major G. R. Campbell (Commanding the
Scottish Rifles), Rev. John Ferguson, Mr. John Rae, M.A , Mr.
G. Littlejohn, Mr. J. T. Walker, Dr. F. A. Bennet, Dr. G.


Armstrong, Dr. T. Dixson, Messrs. James Barnet, James Muir,
Quong Tart, J. T. C0f13.11, Thomas McCredie, Gordon Marr, A. T.
Telfer, R. M. McC. Anderson, Richard Binnie, J. L. Thompson,
J. Currie-Elles, (great grand nephew of the poet Burns), A.
Fraser Hill, Dr. Gordon McLeod, and H. C. L. Anderson,
M.A., (Hon. Sec.)
The Governor was received by a Guard of Honour from the
Scottish Rifles under Lieutenants Grieve and Machardy, and
escorted into the supper room by the Regimental Pipers. After
the loyal toasts had been duly honored, the Chairman gave a
sketch of the events leading up to the celebration, and announced
that he had sent to the Dumfries Celebration Committee a cable-
gram in these words “Scottish Associations and Burns Clubs of
New South Wales at supper assembled, unite with you in
honouring The Immortal Memory of Burns.” This would, he
hoped, reach the hands of the Earl of Rosebery, as he was
delivering his oration at the Poet’s grave. He also reminded the
audience that there were with them on this occasion, four gentle-
men who had been present at the Centenary of the Poet’s birth,
celebrated in Sydney on January 25th, 1859, Messrs John
Rae, John Mclntosh, Robert Anderson, and James Barnet,
the first of whom had responded to the principal toast on that
occasion. Dr. MacLaurin also exhibited to the audience a
specimen of Burns’ signature attached to a permit for ten gallons
of rum.
In responding to the toast of his health, which had been
followed by “ A man’s a man for a’ that” from the orchestra,
Lord Hampden, who was warmly received, said he thanked
Dr. MacLaurin and the other members of the committee for
inviting him to be present at that large Scotch gathering, and he
thanked those present for their courtesy in responding to the
toast of his health. With respect to the observations made by
Dr. MacLaurin, and the praise which he had kindly bestowed
upon Lady Hampden and himself—what could he say ? He felt
he could only repeat the observation which he made when he first
landed in Sydney—that it was the desire of Lady Hampden and
himself to do their duty. If in that effort they obtained from
the public their thanks, and their respect, Lady Hampden and
himself would be repaid a hundredfold. The chairman had said


that he (Lord Hampden) had one defect, that of not being a
Scotchman. He was afraid that he had many more. But he would
point out that, as he was not a Scotchman, it might be somewhat
incongruous for him to intervene to speak upon the subject of
their great Poet. He had gone there with the hope and expecta-
tion of hearing Scotchmen speak eloquently of their illustrious
countryman. But if he were allowed to say a word or two, he
would point out that one of the greatest glories of Burns was
that he had made a real Scotland known to the world and to the
English people—the spirit of the country and the genius of its
people. It had been said by someone—he did not remember
whom —that before the poems of Burns and Scott the real
Scotland was an unknown world, even to Englishmen. It was
represented as a country inhabited by a people given up to sordid
pursuits, fanatical to a certain extent, and among whom there
was not a grain of wit or humour. That could not be said after
the time of Burns and Scott. Burns had made known to them
the real Scotch people, for he was one of them himself.
(Applause.) It was true that when fame drew Burns from his
cottage, and brought him into the circle of the higher life of
Edinburgh, he assumed a sort of rather defiant democracy, but
that could only be credited to him as of greater merit in
Australia, and he (Lord Hampden) felt that the sentiment
expressed in the lines,
The rank is but the guinea stamp,
The man’s the gowd for a’ that.
was one that he should always endeavour to set himself in life.
If, however, it was very fine in theory, it was not always easy to
carry it out in practice. Whilst in Melbourne he once found it
necessary to take a hansom cab to travel a short distance.
When the journey was finished he found that the fare was 7s. 6d.
He remonstrated with the cabman, but the latter replied, “It is
not every day that we get the chance of carrying a gentleman
like yourself.” He (Lord Hampden) observed that he was living
in a free country where one man was considered to be as good as
another. The cabman endorsed his sentiment, but added that it
did not pay him. He would not tell them the sequel, but he
would just explain that the cabman, got the better of it.
(Laughter.) Then he admired the poetry of Burns in the


sentiment it expressed upon love—the love of a man for a woman.
He did not know anything more beautiful than the lines to Mary
Morrison, in which the Poet had shown how one woman is above
all others in the mind and heart of her lover, and he did not
think any woman in the world had a more graceful tribute
paid to her than had Mary Morrison. This Poet, maker of
British and Scotch song, was a man of the people, without
education and without culture. He thought he understood the
sentiment which had brought that large assemblage together
upon the anniversary of his death. Burns was dead, but his
genius lived. He had faults, no doubt ; but they must remember
the habits and thoughts and manners of the times in which he
lived—and, remembering that, surely they could be blind to all
his faults, and only remember with grateful thanks the splendid
legacy Burns had left them. (Loud Applause.)
Professer MacCallum, Professor of English Literature in the
Sydney University, proposed “The Immortal Memory of Burns”
in the following speech :
The honour has been assigned to me, as representative of
the Newer Literature in the University of the Colony, to
propose the Immortal Memory of Robert Burns. A fame that
has stood the test of a hundred years, and is greener and more
wide-spread than ever, has a claim to be so described. And it
is not confined to his own countrymen. Burns’s greatness is a
fact for Scotland, and for the world, and is acknowledged by
high and low. Yet it is extraordinary that this should be so,
for never was poet more heavily weighted in the race for
immortality. He seems, at first sight, essentially a local genius.
His language is local, and not merely differs largely from
standard English, but is only in part descended from the old
literary idiom of the Scottish Court, and is one of the hardest
and most distinctive dialects of Scotland. His subjects are
local—almost all of them being suggested by his own experience
of the life of his own country-side. His treatment is not the
result of a large and comprehensive education. He was a man
of few books, and had groped after such knowledge as he
possessed in intervals of long and exhausting toil. These are
all stones of stumbling and rocks of offence that would have


barred access to his poetry, had it not been felt to be a treasure
of inestimable price. And they do interfere, in some measure,
with Burns's general vogue. These disadvantages are summed
up in the complaint, that two classes of Englishmen rouse a
Scotchman’s wrath: those who say they cannot understand
Burns, and those who say they can. And there is a good deal
of truth in the remark. We are angry in the first case because
it seems absurd not to take the little trouble required to follow
Burns’s Doric. We are angry in the second, because, after all,
even when this is done, there is something so national in him
that only his own countrymen can fully appreciate it. (Applause.)
But this localism, if in one aspect a hindrance to his
popularity, is, in another, the very secret of his greatness.
Take for instance his diction, in which he shows such con-
summate mastery. It is not only full of old memories and associa-
tions,, with an after-glow from the ancient days when Braid
Scottis was still a standard speech ; all of which endear the singer
to his brother Scots. It is also part of his charm for the outside
public. His old-world terms, with their strange youth in age,
are racy of the soil; they have the smell and feel of the green turf,
refreshing, indeed, after the trite and dusty town-streets of
current literary usage. And Burns, more than anyone else, re-
vealed the powers of the living speech of the folk; more than
anyone else he pointed to the great domains of language tillt hen
marked as desert by the grammarian and ignored by the lexi-
cographer. He was not the first poet to write in dialect, but he
was the first genius to do so, and his was the epoch-making deed.
The 19th century has seen a great outburst of such literature, in
Britain, on the Continent, in America, and, I may add, in
Australia ; and no one who loves directness, simplicity and vigour,
will mistake its value. But how much of this would ever come
in existence, had it not been for the authority of Burns’s achieve-
ment ? The earlier writers in dialect appeal to his name and
shelter themselves under his example, and he remains not only
the sponsor, but the king of them all. (Applause.)
Of course, however, Burns is not merely the great poet in
dialect. The idiom he employs and the subjects he treats mark
him out as our distinctively Scottish poet. He is the literary
deity of his country. Wherever a Scot is to be found, and I


suppose that is in most parts of the habitable globe, there you
will find a lover of Robert Burns. And this, too, is a strange
thing; for he is by no means a Scotchman of the conventional
kind ; he by no means represents that type of character which
has been so often attributed to us, that we begin to believe that
it is really our own. According to the orthodox superstition the
ideal personage of our nation ought to be thrifty, plodding,
economical, long-sighted and cautious ; with a keen eye for the
main chance, and a great aptitude for getting on ; precise in his
conduct and rigid in his views. And the man whom in point of
fact we delight to honour before all the rest, was headstrong and
reckless, swayed more by feeling than by interest, never pros-
perous and often in debt, irregular in his life and a rebel to the
Kirk. What are we to make of that ?
The truth is that the conventional Scot is a mere abstrac-
tion—or, at least, an exception. He does not represent the
ordinary complex of Scottish nature. No doubt many Scotch-
men have the qualities attributed to us as a race, but they are
generally modified by others and limited in their application.
There are certain departments of life that may be arranged by
rule and calculation, and into which the feelings do not greatly
enter. In these the average Scotchman makes his calculations,
and if he can get his butter equally good at elevenpence, prefers
not to pay elevenpence halfpenny. But there are a great many
departments where you cannot reckon out your results, and a
great many more where the results are affected by emotion. In
them I don’t think Scotchmen generally show excessive caution
or a huxtering spirit. On the contrary, they are often inclined
to take big risks, and their prudence is overborne by their senti-
ment. It was another Scottish poet, the great Marquis, who
said, long ago :
He either feareth over much,
Or his deserts are small,
Who dare not put it to the touch,
To win or lose it all.
And the lines vibrate through all our history. The whole
struggle with England proves them. That struggle was not
maintained for material advantage mainly, and was not dictated
by natural prudence. Acceptance of the English over-lordship


would have meant, certainly, peace, and probably better govern-
ment. The odds were enormous between the scanty forces of the
ill-joined Northern Kingdom and the organised resources of
the Southern. And the misfortunes of the Scots were terrible.
In looking back, we have to glory not in our victories, but in our
defeats. Hardly a pitched battle in which the Scotch did not
lose the day ; they courted and endured disaster. They recked
not of consequence, and took counsel only of their hearts.
Now, these were the times when the Scottish nationality
was in the making, and these marks it still bears. However
much it may be overlaid with later accretions, the perpetidum
ingenium is still as much the national characteristic as when the
phrase was first earned. Enthusiasm and intensity are what we
admire, an intensity that may use prudence as one of its means,
but is not based on it. We like a whole-hearted concentration
on whatsoever a man finds to do. We have a weakness for
fanatics and martyrs, the leaders of forlorn hopes, the heroes of
desperate causes. We value good friends, and value good haters,
value them so highly that our hatred is apt to swing round into
a kind of love that may or may not be mingled with mercy. But,
at any rate, we appreciate intensity, and most Scotchmen have
room in their hearts for both John Knox and Queen Mary.
Now, this intensity Burns had in a pre-eminent degree, and
that is one reason why he is the national poet. In recent times
Scotland has produced three other men of genius in literature —
Hume, Scott and Carlyle—but none of them has such a hold on
our affections as Burns. Hume’s passionless intellect, or intellect
in which the only passion was for disinterested research, appeals
mainly to a few. The great and good Sir Walter, it might
have been thought, would win most suffrages, with his sane and
broad imagination; but it is not so. We have no Scott societies
as there are Burns’ clubs and Burns’ societies everywhere. And
the reason is just that, compared with Burns, Scott shows defect
in the inwardness of passion. Carlyle possesses it, but within a
smaller compass. His range of thought, his range of knowledge,
are far wider; but he is truly impassioned in a narrower realm.
It is only in the moral sphere that his feelings are stirred to their
depths. But Burns is aglow to the finger-tips, and he carries his
fervour into all parts of life. Every verse he wrote—at least,


every verse in Scotch—is alive with feeling. He gives himself
up with abandon to the promptings of his nature, and loses him-
self in the utterance of what possesses him at the time.
Of course, this eager intensity, this absorption in the present
mood, had its dangers alike for the man and the artist, which he
did not entirely escape. From these we may well avert our eyes.
They are the defects of his qualities, and occupy only a small area
in his whole nature. Nothing worth saying on this matter has
been added to Carlyle’s famous protest, which is as wise as it is
charitable, and as just as it is wise :
“ Not the few inches of deflection from the mathematical orbit,” he
bids us remember, “ which are so easily measured, but the ratio of these
to the whole character constitute the real aberration. This orbit may be
a planet s, its diameter the whole breadth of the solar system : or it may be
the city hippodrome, nay, the circle of a gin-horse, its diameter a score of
feet or paces. But the inches of deflection only are measured, and it is
assumed that the diameter of the gin-horse and that of the planet will
yield the same ratio when compared with them .... Granted the
ship comes into harbour with shrouds and tackle damaged: the pilot is
blameworthy, he has not been all-wise and all-powerful: but to know how
blameworthy, tell us first whether his voyage has been round the globe or
only to Ramsgate and the Isle of Dogs.”
We must admit, with sorrow, that some of Burns’s actions
were the actions of a rake. But from the rakish temperament
no man was ever more remote than he. For while the voluptuary
makes pleasure an end in itself, to Burns it came in the glamour
of his own imagination, and was pregnant with things beyond.
In his own most true and pathetic words, it was the “light from
Heaven ” that led him astray.
But this pre-occupation with mood also affected his art. He
had not the self-control, the command of his powers, for a
sustained effort. Few of his pieces run to a hundred lines ; most
of them are much shorter. He had not the watchfulness and
discipline that are required for a drama or an epic. Be it so ;
but this is only his excellence viewed on its negative side. He
never nods, is never forced, but is always genuine and spon-
taneous. He only writes when his feelings enjoin, when the
inspiration is there and he has something to say. (Applause.)
And it is this lyric sincerity, this inevitableness, that gives
him worth to very many besides his own countrymen. He has
lived himself into the joys and sorrows, the experiences and


interests of man as man, and responds to them all. For, what t
variety and scope he has ! Few are the chords he has not struck
There is the rollicking, truculent defiance of the Jolly Beggars :
A fig for those by law protected !
Liberty’s a glorious feast,
Courts for cowards were erected,
Churches built to please the priest.
There is the tremendous satire of Holy Willie’s Prayer, a satire
the subtlety of which may be gaged by this, that the slightest
change of tone would give it the air of a genuine religious con-
fession and make it read like one of the penitential psalms.
There is the lurid grotesqueness of Tam o’ Shanter, the common-
place, the horrible, the comic, the pathetic, all inextricably and
harmoniously blended in its lines. There is the shrewd moral-
ising of the Twa Dogs, and the beautiful humanity of the
Address to the De’il. There is the sympathy with decent,
earnest, devout, Scottish life in the Cotter’s Saturday Night, and
with its merrymaking in Hallowe’n. There is the tenderness that
overflows for the field mouse and the mountain daisy, the delight
in all flowers that can go “to mak a posy for my ain dear
May. ’ There are the love songs, Pandemic or Uranian
(what a multitude of them !) in every key, and always true.
There is the inalienable ring of manhood in “ A Man’s a Man for
a’ that.” (Applause.)
He deals chiefly with humble life, and is most at home
among the poor. That is no disadvantage, but one of his chief
excellences. It is a blunder and affront to regret his poverty,
his toil, his reduction to the simplicities of existence; and that|
not only because with him the people make a gigantic stride to
becoming their own poetic interpreters ; there is another and
a deeper reason. For poverty, whatever may be its drawbacks,
has the great advantage that it forces a man to confront the
primal facts of life ;it makes him live with realities. And this
Burns did. Most of us are sophisticated \ he is the thing itself.
Indeed we owe him an inestimable debt in this respect. In an
aitificial state of society literature is apt to specialise on phases
and fashions, to occupy itself with the details and extremities of
life, which the vital warmth can hardly reach. Burns sits close
by the central fires. He deals with the elemental in our nature,


our deepest passions and principles and interests. That is why
there is so little temporary in him. His themes have been said
to be commonplace. So they are in the sense that the air we
breathe is commonplace—commonplace because universal and
necessary. Conventions, opinions, manners, change and pass ;
but the poet who commands our common instincts and feelings
has got to the bed rock of humanity, and on that he builds his
House of Fame. When the rain descends and the flood comes and
the winds beat on that house, it falls not, for it is founded upon
a rock. So it is with Burns : for nearly all the primary emotions
he has found utterance, and the utterance to most of us is
scarcely less direct and strong than the feeling itself; for his own
fiery heart beat in tune with the heart of mankind.
Sir Walter Scott, in his Journal, quotes some lines from Burns,
and interrupts them with his generous and true ejaculation of
homage—“ Long life to thy fame, and peace to thy soul, Rob
Burns. When I want to express a sentiment which I feel
strongly I find the phrase in Shakespeare—or thee. And the
blockheads talk of my being like Shakespeare !”
Surely this praise from his great successor is the highest we
can give, and with it and Scott’s greeting I close :
Long life to thy fame, and peace to thy soul, Rob Burns !
(Loud applause.)
The Hon. Alexander Kethel, M.L.C., President of the Burns Club
of N.S.W., supported the toast as follows :
A century has passed since all that was mortal of Burns
was committed to the dust. One hundred years now hallow the
memory and crown the fame of Robert Burns. In the century
that has passed how have pride and ambition been humbled !
What mutations of events have overthrown governments ! How
have the highways of human progress been paved with fallen
thrones ! How many celebrities have gone into oblivion J what
bubbles of reputation have burst! How many flashing meteors
have vanished in darkness ! How few of the renowned have stood
the test of time ! While the brightening name of Burns has
shone in beauty and splendour, and his genius enlivens the world
of mind with a radiance even like that of the stars. (Applause).


When Toby Shandy asked Corporal Trim to set down a list of
the virtues of the Widow Wadham, the word which appeared at the-
top of the page was Humanity. In describing Burns, we need go
no further for a keynote to his whole work and character than
Humanity. Every passage of his boisterous life speaks of this
every action, speech or line palpitates with rage or love, laughter or
tears, patriotism or scorn, but above all Humanity (Applause.)
To see Burns as God made him you must look at him in the
concrete. Modern criticism, like modern science, goes peering into the
infinitely little, groping here, prying there, until having reduced our
rainbow into gases and solar spectra, and our brains into protoplasmic
cells, its votaries tracing always downwards, conclude that they
have reached the elements of creation, whereas they have only
displaced some of its atoms. Thus has it often been with Burns.
He has been so bepraised for this and disparaged for that, alike
unfairly by friend and foe, that his Humanity, like the big
letters on a map, is liable to escape notice from its very great-
ness. Some of his well-meaning, but mistaken, friends go whining
about “ Poor Robbie.” Poor Robbie, forsooth ! Poor in what ?
Not a weakness he had, not a fault or failing, but gave to the world
some imperishable mark of his genius. Poor in what ? Scotland
could not have spared him the shedding of a tear or a single-
drinking carouse, for every one of those tears is crystallised into a
gem of immortal verse, and every roaring carouse is made the
occasion to paint a master’s picture of lowly Scottish life as life was
in his day. Burns, with one fault less, would cease to be Burns.
Who can sing of the everlasting Hills whose life has been spent in
the quiet monotony of the plains ? Who can paint the ocean in its
rage or its glory whose experience has been limited to the mill-pond?
Can he stir the hearts of men and rouse a nation to heroic deeds
whose own heart never throbbed with intense love of his country ?
In a word, can a man call up the spirit of living music and immortal
song if every nerve of his own being has not quivered under the
master hand whose touch makes the harp to speak ? So also was it
necessary that Burns should sing of pleasure and pain after having-
enjoyed the raptures of the one and suffered the agonies and remorse
of the other. In his own exquisite words
Dearly bought the hidden treasure
Finer feelings can bestow;
Chords that vibrate sweetest pleasure
Thrill the deepest notes of woe.


The duty of poetry is not only to amuse the people but to exalt and
refine ; its privilege is to inspire the humble with dignity, the sad
with comfort, the oppressed with hope, to show the abundant and
overflowing blessings of familiar things, to create in man a greater
love to God and to each other, and to aid Society in its onward
progress from bad to good and from good to better, for .all time and
to eternity ; and Burns’ songs and poetry fulfil these conditions.
But, after all, some one will exclaim, “ What was this Burns but a
writer ?” Yes, gentlemen, a song writer, as if that were
nothing. Why, what is a song but the coining of the very heart
into links of golden melody, to reach and enchain the hearts of other
men ; and what shall we say of him who bequeathed to his country
and the world nearly three hundred of these immortal breathings ?
wlm coined himself in melody, and died in song. Could his glorified
spirit now survey the scene of his mortal life, how would he rejoice
to mark the onward progress of the human race in his own loved
land \ the iniquitous laws that disgraced the statute books removed,
and just laws enacted in their stead, slavery abolished, religious'
disabilities swept away, and the masses of the people admitted to
the enjoyment of an extended franchise ; and beyond the boundaries
of Britain, he would see long-oppressed Italy free from the Alps to
the Adriatic, France a republic, and all Western Europe enjoying the
blessings of constitutional government. While across the Atlantic,
the handful of colonists who occupied the Atlantic fringe of the
American Continent, the Puritans of New England, the Quakers of
Pennsylvania and the Royalists of Virginia expanded into mighty
communities of free men, extending from St. John’s to San
Francisco, and from the Gulf of Mexico to the Great Bear Lake.
He would also see the free communities of the Island Continent of
Australia revering his memory and honouring his genius, and the
countless isles of ocean melodious with the music of his song.
A hundred years since his death ! No, he is not dead—he is
as much a vital power and a living principle as when he was with us
in the flesh ; the fever pang that freed him from his bonds of clay
let loose his soul upon the world, and gave it wings of fire to bear it
triumphant wherever there are sympathetic souls in the universe.
Head is he not, he cannot die ; only disembodied, diffused, and the
gift of life that was concentrated in himself has become the
inheritance of mankind.


To such as he there is no death, only perpetual, honoured
remembrance ; a spiritual resurrection, a raising again from the dead
of a soul as immortal as our own, to breathe its spirit and its
influence among the men who remain and wonder.
I ask you, then, gentlemen, to join with me in drinking to the
memory of Robert Burns, the Illustrious ! the Immortal! ! (Great
applause.)
After Miss Maggie Stirling had rendered “ The Land o’ the
Leal ” with great feeling, the toast of “ The Land of Burns ” was
proposed by the Premier of Hew South Wales, Hon. G. H. Reid,
M.P., who said —
There may be some who think it strange that the hundredth
anniversary of our famous poet should be made the occasion for
good cheer and festivity, but I feel convinced that if Robert Burns
could be heard upon the matter he would entirely approve of the
arrangements we have made. (Laughter and applause.) His
influence was pre-eminently bright and sociable. lam afraid, in
spite of what Professor MacCallum has said, that there was not
quite so much to be said for a majority of our fellow-countrymen a
hundred years ago. Tradition depicts the Scotchman of those days
as a somewhat dual personage, who was greatly troubled over two
problems of unending and surpassing difficulty. One was how best
to keep body and soul together in this world, and the other was how
thoroughly to reunite them in the most orthodox fashion in the
next. (Laughter and applause.) And this determination on the
part of our fellow-countrymen to make the best of both worlds I
have always thought sufficiently accounted for the marvels of Scotch
achievements in every walk of life. How, as to the great poet, we
must candidly admit that he possessed none of those higher
attributes. We must admit that he must have occasioned in his
day and generation a very large degree of pious horror throughout the
whole of Scotland. But, be that as it may, he is a revelation to all
mankind of the new species of Scot—a man with a heart as merry,
a fancy as free, a genius as melting and musical as any that ever
basked in southern sunshine. Beneath his spell, the rugged
characteristics of our lands and our race unfolded unwonted charms.
Our heaths and hills and glens, the nooks and crannies of the Scottish
soil, bathed in the glory of his immortal muse, revealed hitherto


undiscovered springs of life and joy. The mists of Pharisaism and
the clouds of genuine formality, which for so many centuries had
chilled and dulled the warmer susceptibilities of the Scottish race,
were pierced by the flashes of his poignant wit, and shattered by
the thunders of his bitter scorn, until the grand old land of blood
and storm and strife, of gloom and of cant, brightened and
blossomed forth in a new birth of gladness and humanity. It was
his master hand that unfolded the page of Scottish life and manners
to universal sympathy and admiration. Many great men were born
to Scotland before Burns, and many great men have been born to
Scotland since ; but I venture to believe that to-day, in the ears
of the Anglo-Saxon race, Scotland has its kindliest sound when
proclaimed as my toast proclaims it—the Land of Burns. (Loud
applause).
After the Permanent Artillery Orchestra had played “The
Garb of old Gaul,” the Rev. John Ferguson responded in the
following terms :—-
Ihe kingdom of Scotland is not a big country ; but it is a
great land to be born in. It has given to the world men, big-
headed, big-hearted, big-handed, who by strenuous toil and sturdy
sense have laid the granite foundations of prosperous commerce and
learning in every centre of British enterprize. Scotia’s sons love
her borders well, yet with cheerful generosity do they go forth to
seek in other lands the favours of fortune in substantial reward of their
shrewd endeavour. Hence the Scottish cradle is never empty, nor
the ‘ Scot abroad without his honest bawbee. However far he may
travel, however hard he may work, whatever wealth he may gather,
his heart is ever true to his own, his native soil. And for good
reason. The story of Scotland is a tale of heroic strife for national
freedom. From her earliest hour she gave her hand in pledge to
civil liberty. Her rugged face is written over with the romance of a
people’s continuous battling for the glorious privilege of being
independent. The blood of the warrior patriots is still hot in
Scottish veins. What son of the Land of Burns is there who does
not glory in the Scottish anthem of freedom ? Hot every Scot can
sing ; but rouse a Scot to feel that sing he must, then there is
always this one song, “ Scots wha hae,” upon which he will throw
himself with confidence, and which he will render with a fine glow of
patriotic pride in his own performance. His effort has the merit of


heart sincerity, even though it be without the melody of music.
JSTot in vain did the purple heather get its deeper dye. Our birth-
right is freedom. But Scotia pledged herself to religious as well as
to civil liberty. Her men, and her women, too, loved to think for
themselves, and to be free to stand by their inmost convictions. To
them religion was not mere sentiment, nor the frothy excitement of
rude emotion. They steadied their gaze on God ; they looked far
within themselves ; they studied the Book ; they searched the deep
things of being ; they sought to have religion bound in sturdy
wedlock with metaphysics, yet ever expressing itself in the practical
deeds of love—simply called duty. They loved their Christ, and
fixed the grip of faith and intellect right severely on the principles
of eternal truth. For their King and Head they died ; and the
blood of martyrs was the sacrifice of patriots. To the faithful who
dauntlessly fought for their rights of conscience does old Scotia owe
in no minor sense the grandeur which makes her loved at home,
revered abroad. Burns has been called a rebel to the kirk. What
if the kirk of his day was a rebel to humanity ? If unfaithful to
humanity, then also to Christ. Official religion was rampant. The
spirit of the honest Scot was in Burns. He smote the false face of
the kirk with the scorn of indignant genius. Hypocrisy got its
deserts, and clear vision came to the kirk again.
When men display to congregations wide
Devotion’s every grace except the heart ;
The Power incensed, the pageant will desert,
The pompous strain, the sacerdotal stole ;
But haply in some cottage far apart
May hear well-pleased the language of the soul,
And in His book of life the inmates poor enrol.
Again, Scotland well understood the value of learning—of
learning in the fullest sense. Knowledge was her passion. Parish
schools, grammar schools, universities grew as the nation grew, and
the nation by them. It was an ambition which might be seriously
cherished in every humble cottage that the bairns should get a good
schooling, the lad of parts rise to highest university honours, and if
he got grace, become a minister. Greater honour no Scot could well
dream of. Grand is the witness of history, Scotland stands up for
learning.


However, Scotland would never have come to be the land of
schools and kirks, nor the land of Burns, nor any land at all, but
for the genius of industry with which our forefathers in all their
generations were richly endued. The soil was poor—heathery hill,
moss, moor, and clay land, wet, cold, unkind—a living could hardly
he got on the breast of the land that gave them birth. But they
toiled—aye, they ‘ slaved,’ from early dawn, and before it, till
daylight was blinded by darkness. How they wrestled with the
stubborn soil to raise fodder for their beasts, and food for themselves
and their children. There were no unemployed in Scotland then ;
men had too much to do. And the women worked as hard as the
men. The sweat of their brow became the life-sap of their children.
They turned the clay into corn, the granite into bread. And if
their ‘ mountain dew ’ was strong we must forget it, for they had not
too much joy. Under their hands the muir-land became a rich pasture,
the hillside a fertile field, and in the heart of the unrivalled loveliness
•of the Bonnie Scotland of to-day lie hid the life-strength and life-secret
of countless brave men and noble women. Their names are gone,
but not their song. These makers of Scotland could sing. Thus
they cheered their toil and forgot their sorrow. Thus they enriched
their life with the feelings that make for enduring love, too deep,
too strong, too silent for the formal phrase of words, but which found
vent for itself in the sacrifice of daily sweat, and in the incense of
sweetest song. Burns knew this. The song of battle, as well as the
dirge of heroes dead, was in the storm-wind that raged round mountain
<Jrag and through the forest glade. The secrets of lads and lasses, so
softly spoken in the whispers of the evening, were told by the fairies of
the glen ; and the ingle, blinking bonnily, had in its warmth and
glow the quiet love of the humble home. Burns gave heed, and
learned the songs of centuries, the songs of a people. He sang
inspired by the dead. He sang for the living. In him we hear old
Scotland singing through many a generation.
Burns has made the whole world a Scotland to the Scot. Go
where he may, if he knows his Burns, he has his Scotland. Our
lonely brother at the North Pole does not crave our pity. He can
sing the auld Scotch sangs. If he has imagination (and what Scot
lacks imagination ?) he may warm himself at the peat-fire on his
mother’s hearth. In the Sahara desert even, the pioneer, amid grey
sand and blinding sun, has but to shut his eyes and set his lips to


‘ Green Grow the Rashes 0 !’ when lo,the desert is gone, and Scotland
in its place. That wizard Burns ! In Japan or Mexico, among any
people, in any clime, if the Scot has Burns, he has his haggis, his
barley bree, his so’ens and his kebbuck ; he wanders on the banks
and braes of many a bonnie stream ; in fancy’s flight he hies away
to Nannie ; he cracks in the kirk-yard ; he sits in the kirk, and
hears the preacher’s voice,
‘ * —how he clears the points o’ faith
Wi’ rattlin’ and wi’ thumping,
Now meekly calm, now wild wi’ wrath,
He’s stampin’ and he’s jumping.”
Yea, he joins the circle wide round the ingle in the auld hoose, and
feasts his eyes upon the parent pair. When ‘ Scotia dear, my own,’
rises thus before him, and the fountains of feeling are hard to keep
shut, he gets relief in seeking out some brother Scot; and the two,
with strongly clasped hands, mingle their feeling and their song in
“We twa hae run about the braes,
An pu’ed the gowans fine,
But we’ve wandered mony a weary fit
Sin’ auld lang syne.”
Thus stands our Scotland before us to-night, pledged through
all her history to civil and religious freedom, to liberal learning, to
industry, and to the song of battle and of love. Therefore, let us
ring it out ‘ Scotland for ever.’ Land of brown heath and shaggy
wood, of mist crowned crag and torrent flood, of shadowed loch and
gurgling burn, of stormy shore and cosy glen : land of the bluebell
and the thistle, the eagle and the cushat doo, of forest deer, royal
stag and timid fawn ; land of the lion-hearted, Highlander and Low-
lander, braw men and bonnie lasses; land of kirk and college ; land
of Bruce and Knox, Burns and Scott, Chalmers and Carlyle ; land
of the Bible, oatmeal and Catechism ; land of our fathers, the land
we love, but may not see ; Scotland for evei’, and by true Scotsman
never to be forsworn.
Mr. Robert Anderson, one of the founders of the Burns Club in
Sydney sixteen years before, then recited “ Highland Mary,” after
making these few introductory remarks :
“ All the world has heard of Highland Mary, a servant maid in
the family of Gavin Hamilton, of Coilsford in the neighbourhood of
Ayr. How Burns and Mary became first acquainted we have no


means of knowing, but he loved her as he loved no other woman,
and has immortalized her memory in the finest expressions of his
love and grief. Mary had left her situation for the purpose of
paying a visit to her parents in the Highlands, previous to her
union with the Poet. The lovers met on a Sunday afternoon in
flowery May in a sequestered grove on the banks of the Ayr.
There they exchanged bibles and renewed their vows of fidelity.
The Poet’s bible, after passing through many hands in Scotland,
England and America, is now deposited in the monument to Burns
overlooking the banks and braes o’ bonnie Doon, and I had it in
my hands when I visited that classic ground fourteen years ago.
The inscription in the bold hand writing of the Poet is somewhat
faded, but can be easily read. Ho memento of the Poet excited so
much interest as this bible, and the visitors patiently waited their
turn to handle the interesting relic. There have been many such
partings in this world of ours, but few, if any, have moved the
hearts of men and women to the same extent as the last farewell of
the lovers on the banks of the clear winding Ayr. That scene will
live for ever. Ho event in the Poet’s history made such a deep and
lasting impression on his mind, and he frequently refers to it
throughout his short but brilliant and chequered career.” (Applause.)
The next toast, “ The Songs of Scotland,” was set down to
Hon. Alexander Brown, M.L.C., but that gentleman was unfortun-
ately prevented from being present through sickness in his family.
Miss Maggie Stirling then sang, with great acceptance, “0, Sing
to me the Auld Scotch Songs,” and had to give “ Last May a Braw
Wooer” as an encore.
In the absence of Mr. Dugald Thomson, M.P., through serious
illness, the toast of “ The Land we Live in ” was given by Dr.
James Graham, M.P., and responded to by Mr. James Inglis, the
author of “ The Humour of the Scot,” and other works, and formerly
Minister for Public Instruction.
In proposing the health of “ The Chairman,” Mr. John Rae,
M.A., formerly Commissioner for Railways and Under-Secretary
for Public Works, said :
“ Dr. MacLaurin—one of the leading figures of Hew South
Wales—is admirably fitted to preside at any assembly in the
country, but more especially at a meeting like the present, for he is


intus et in cute a Scotchman, and, consequently, an intelligent
admirer of Robert Burns. I ask you, therefore, to drink a willy-
waught to the health of our esteemed chairman for the admirable
manner in which he has conducted the proceedings of this historic
gathering.”
In consequence of the lateness of the hour—ll p.m., Mr. Rae
handed the following notes to the Hon. Secretary:—
“ As I was one of the 700 admirers of Burns, who met in the
Prince of Wales Theatre on the 25th January, 1859, to celebrate
the Centenary of his birth, and I had the honour of replying to
the toast of his immortal memory, and as I am still alive and
privileged to be present at the Centenary of his death, I may be
permitted to say a few words, to show my veneration for our
national Poet, and my constant desire, since my arrival in the
colony, in 1839, to bring his genius and character before the people
of Australia.
“ In 1842 I procured a copy of the ‘ Land of Burns,’ a beauti-
ful and interesting work—the literary department being by Rob.
Chambers and Professor Wilson, and the illustrations by D. 0. Hill.
I was charmed with the work and reviewed it at some length in a
series of nine articles in the Sydney Gazette; and in 1844, I
delivered a course of five lectures in the School of Arts on the
genius and character of Burns, our national Poet.
“If Burns was not the greatest, he was undoubtedly the most
popular poet that ever existed. The ‘ Chronicle of the Hundredth
Birthday of Burns,’ compiled by James Ballantine and published in
1859, gives an interesting epitome of the proceedings and speeches on
that occasion at 872 meetings held in all parts of the British dominions
and the United States and Copenhagen. We have no information
of the numbers that attended all these gatherings ; but we may feel
assured that our meeting here to-night is but one of a thousand
such in all parts of the world where a Scotchman resides, or the
Scottish language is understood.
“And we naturally ask ourselves what is the cause of this wonder-
ful popularity ? One cause, I think is that we love the Poet as
well as his poetry. He was a manly fellow, with a warm and loving
heart large enough to embrace the whole world in the brotherhood of
man. But his love was not confined to the human race ;it was


extended to the flowers of the field and the lower animals—witness
his exquisite lines to the mouse, and the mountain daisy, his
loving address to his grey mare, and the beautiful morals he draws
from them and many other of his poems.
“ The charm of Burns’ poetry was its simplicity and sincerity, its
freedom from affectation and its patriotism and national spirit. He
was the most natural of all poets, and drew his inspiration from no
foreign source, but from the objects among which he lived—the
flowers of the field, the banks and braes and streams of his native
country, the lads and lasses, their loves and sports and pastimes in
the land he loved and made famous as the land of Burns. He did
not believe in mounting Parnassus ‘by dint of Greek.’ All the
learning he desired was a spark of Nature’s fire to touch the
heart, and that was the secret of his success and his world-wide
popularity.
“ In his epistles, Burns showed his knowledge of mankind and
the world, and his mastery over the language which he has made
classical—their freedom and elegance, their pathos and humour and
their vivacity—remind us of Horace. We love Burns for the good
sense and moral reflections in those epistles, wherein he exults in
the consciousness of his powers and the anticipation of his fame, and
breathes a spirit of benevolence to his fellow-creatures, a spirit of
noble independence and proud contentment with his lot.
“ The prose writings of Burns—a series of letters to his friends—
are almost as wonderful as his poetry, considering that they were
written in English, a foreign language to him. He seems to have
formed his style on Addison, and he could not have adopted a safer
model. Dr. Robertson, the historian, says ; ‘ I think Burns was
one of the most extraordinary men I ever met with. His poetry
surprised me much ; his prose surprised me more ; and his con-
versation surprised me more than both his poetry and prose.’
“If Burns had written nothing but “ The Cottar’s Saturday
Night,” “ Tam O’Shanter,” “ The Twa Dogs,” “ The Jolly Beggar,”
his satires and epistles, he would have been ranked as a poet of the
highest class by his countrymen. But it is in his songs, the most
faultless of his writings, that his fame has spread farthest and will
last longest, and has made him to be acknowledged, as the prince of
song-writers, superior to any that the world has seen. With what


tenderness he sings ! with what humour and pathos and vehemence ?
and with what a variety of subjects ! He has sounded the depths
of the feelings of every rank and condition of life.
“ And all this precious legacy he left to the world without money
and without price ; for even when in straitened circumstances he
declined to accept any remuneration for his writings. And then we
must remember that all his works were completed before reaching the
maturity of his powers, for he died at 37, an age when many of our
greatest writers had not begun their literary labours. Scott was 43
when “ Waverley ” was published.
“ As to the cuckoo cry still kept up about the irregularities of
Burns, I would say “De mortuis nil nisi bonurn lf he was not
without sin, let those who are so cast the first stone at their erring
brother. We must remember that he lived in times and associations
very different from the present, and took his complexion from those
around him. If he had been a common ploughman we should
never have heard about his irregularities. It is only on the gem we
are troubled to see the dust—as Mr. Dunlop says, “ On the pebble
we never regard it.” Burns’ failings are like the spots in the sun
extinguished by the blaze of the luminary. Let us hear no more
about the failings of our Poet, whose writings have done more to purify
the ballad poetry of Scotland and to remove the degrading practices
that prevailed in his time, so graphically described in “ The
Holy Fair,” than all the sermons that ever were preached. Both by
his writings and example Burns was one of the great teachers
of the 18th century, and we are indebted to him and his writings,
and those of his successor, Sir Walter Scott, that Scotland has
been raised to honour and become a place of pilgrimage to travel-
lers from all parts of the earth.”
The health of the Chairman was then drunk with Highland
honours.
After the Band had played “My Love a Highland Lad was
Born,” Dr. MacLaurin acknowledged the compliment, and a most
enjoyable and enthusiastic meeting closed with “ Auld Lang Syne ”
heartily sung by the whole audience.


LORD ROSEBERY’S SPEECH.
Delivered at the Dumfries Celebration on July 21st.
The noble Chairman, who was received with loud and
enthusiastic cheers, said : “Ladies and Gentlemen, —I come here
as a loyal burgess of Dumfries to do honour to the greatest
burgess of Dumfries. (Cheers.) You, Mr. Provost, have laid
upon me a great distinction, but a great burden. Your most
illustrious burgess obtained privileges for his children in respect
of his burgess-ship, but you impose on your youngest burgess an
honour that might well break anybody’s back—that of attempting
to do justice in any shape or fashion to the hero of to-day’s
ceremony. (Cheers.) But we citizens of Dumfries have a
special claim to be considered on this day. We are surrounded
by the choicest and the most sacred haunts of the poet. You have
in this town the house in which he died ; the Globe, where we
could have wished that some phonograph had then existed which
could have communicated to us some of his wise and witty and
wayward talk. (Cheers.) You have the street commemorated
in M‘Culloch’s tragic anecdote, where Burns was shunned by
his former friends ; and you have the paths by the Nith which
are associated with some of his greatest works. You have near
you the room in which “ the whistle ” was contended for, and in
which, if mere legend is to be trusted, the immortal Dr. Gregory
was summoned to administer his first powders to the survivors
of that memorable debauch. (Laughter.) You have the stack-
yard in which, lying on his back and contemplating
Thou ling’ring star, with less’ning ray,
That lov’st to greet the early morn,
he wrote the lines ‘To Mary in Heaven,’ perhaps the most
pathetic of his poems. (Cheers.) You have near you the walk
by the river where in his transport he passed his wife and
children without seeing them, his brow flushed and his eyes
shining with the lustre of ‘ Tam o’ Shanter.’ (Cheers.) ‘ I wish
you had but seen him,’ said his wife, ‘he was in such ecstacy that
the tears were happing down his cheeks.’ That is why we are
in Dumfries to-day ; we come to honour Burns among these
immortal haunts of his. (Cheers.) But it is not in Dumfries


alone that he is commemorated to-day, for all Scotland will pay
her tribute, and this surely is but right. (Cheers.) Mankind
owes him a general debt, but the debt of Scotland is a special
one, for Burns exalted our race ; he hallowed Scotland and the
Scottish tongue. (Cheers.) Before his time we had for a long
period been scarcely recognised. We had been falling out of the
recollection and recognition of the world. From the time of the
union of the Crowns, and still more from the time of the
legislative union, Scotland had lapsed into obscurity. Except
for an occasional riot or a Jacobite rising, her existence was
almost forgotten. She had indeed her Robertsons and her
Humes, writing history to general admiration, but no trace of
Scottish authorship was discoverable in their works j indeed,
every flavour of national idiom was carefully obliterated. Tho
Scottish dialect, as Burns called it, was in danger of perishing*
Burns seemed at this juncture to start to his feet and re-assert
Scotland s claim to a national existence. His Scottish notes
rang through the world ; he preserved the Scottish language for
ever—(loud cheers) —for mankind will never allow to die that
idiom in which his poems and his songs are enshrined. (Cheers.)
That is a part and only a part of Scotland’s debt to Burns. But
this is much more than a Scottish demonstration. It is a
collection of representatives from all quarters of the globe to own
a common allegiance and a common faith. (Cheers.) It is not
only Scotsmen honouring the greatest of Scotsmen. We stretch
far beyond a kingdom or a race. We are rather a sort of
poetical Mohammedans gathered in a sort of poetical Mecca.
(Applause.) And yet, ladies and gentlemen, we are assembled
to-day in our high enthusiasm under circumstances which are
somewhat paradoxical ; for with all the appearance of joy we
celebrate not a festival, but a tragedy. It is not the sunrise but
the sunset that we commemorate. It is not the birth of a new
power into the world, the subtle germ of a fame that is to-
survive and inspire the generations of men. But it is, perhaps,
more fitting that we celebrate the end and not the beginning.
For the coming of these figures is silent. It is their passing
that we know. At this instant that I speak there may be born
into the world the equal of a Newton or a Ctesar, but half of us
would be dead before he had revealed himself. Their death is


different. It may be gloomy and disastrous ; it may come at a
moment of shame and neglect. But by that time the man has
carved his name somewhere on the temple of fame. There are
exceptions, of course, cases where the end comes before the
slightest or any but the slightest recognition : Chatterton
choking in his garret, hunger of body and soul all unsatisfied ;
Millet selling his pictures for a song; nay, Shakespeare himself.
But, as a rule, death in the case of genius closes the first act of
a public drama. Criticism and analysis may then begin their
unbiassed work, free from jealousy or friendship, or personal
consideration for the living. Then comes the third act, if a
third act there be. No, it is a death, not a birth, that we
celebrate. This day, a century ago, in poverty and delirium
and distress, there was passing the soul of Robert Burns. To
him death comes in clouds and darkness—the end of a long
agony of body and soul. He is harassed with debt; his bodily
constitution is ruined ; his spirit is broken ; his wife is daily
expecting her confinement; he has lost almost all that rendered
his life happy, much of friendship, credit and esteem. Some
score years before, one of the most charming of English writers,
as he lay dying, was asked if his mind was at ease, and with his
last breath, Oliver Goldsmith owned that it was not. So it was
with Robert Burns. His delirium dwelt on the horrors of a jail.
He uttered curses on the tradesman who was pursuing him for
debt. ‘ What business,’ said he to his physician, in a moment
of consciousness, 1 w’hat business has a physician to waste his
time upon me? lam a poor pigeon not worth plucking. Alas !
I have not feathers enough on me to carry me to my grave.’
Eor a year or more his health had been failing. He had
a poet’s body as well as a poet’s mind— nervous, feverish, im-
pressionable ; and his constitution, which, if nursed and
regulated, might have carried him to the limit of life, was
unequal to the storm and stress of dissipation and a
preying mind. In the previous autumn he had been seized with
a rheumatic attack. His digestion had given way. He was
sunk in melancholy and gloom. In his last April he wrote to
his friend, Thomson; — £ By Babel’s streams I have sat and wept
almost ever since I saw you last. I have only known existence
by the pressure of the heavy hand of sickness, and have counted


time by the repercussions of pain. Rheumatism, cold and fever
have formed to me a terrible combination. I close my eyes in
misery, and open them without hope.’ It was sought to revive
him by sea-bathing, and he went to stay at Brow Well. There
he remained three weeks, but he was under no delusion as to his
state. ‘ Well, madam,’ he said to Mrs. Riddell, on arriving,
‘ have you any commands for the other world 1 ’ He sat that
evening with his old friend, and spoke manfully of his approaching
death, of the fate of his children, and of his fame, sometimes
indulging in bitter-sweet pleasantry, but never losing the
consciousness of his condition. In three weeks he wearied of
the fruitless hunt for health, and he returned home to die. He
was only just in time. When he re-entered his home on the
18th, he could no longer stand. He was soon delirious ; in three
days he was dead. On the last day we are told, when his
attendant held a cordial to his lips, he swallowed it eagerly,
raised himself almost wholly up, spread out his hands, sprang
forward, nigh the whole length of the bed, fell on his face and
expired. I suppose there are many who can read the account of
these last months with composure. They are more fortunate
than I am. There is nothing much more melancholy in all
biography. The brilliant poet, the delight of all society, from
the highest to the lowest, sits brooding in silence over the drama
of his spent life—the early innocent home, the plough and the
savour of fresh turned earth, the silent communion with Nature
and his own heart, the brief hour of splendour, the dark hour of
neglect, the mad struggle for forgetfulness, the bitterness of
vanished homage, the gnawing doubt of fame, the distressful
future of his wife and children—an endless witch-dance of
thought, without clue or remedy, all perplexing, all soon to end
while he is yet young, as men count youth; though none know
so well as he that his youth is gone, his race is run, his message
is delivered. His death revived the flagging interest which had
been felt in him. As usual, men began to realise what they had
lost when it was too late. When it was known that he was
dying, his townsmen had shewn anxiety and distress. They
recalled his splendour and forgot his fall. One man was heard
to ask, with a touch of quaint simplicity, ‘ Who do you think
will be our poet now ? ’ The district set itself to prepare a


public funeral for the poet who died almost penniless among
them ; a vast concourse followed him to his grave ; the ‘awkward
squad,’ as he had foreseen and deprecated, fired a volley over his
grave ; the streets were lined with soldiers, and among them one
who, sixteen years later, was to be Prime Minister; and while
the procession wended its gloomy way, as if no element of
tragedy wei’e to be wanting, his widow’s hour of travail arrived,
and she gave birth to the hapless child who had caused the
father so much misgiving. In this place, and on this day, it all
seems present to us—the house of anguish, the thronged church-
yard, the weeping neighbours. We feel ourselves part of the
lamenting crowd; we hear those dropping volleys and that
muffled drum. We bow our heads as the coffin passes, and
acknowledge with tears the inevitable doom. Pass, heavy
hearse, with thy weary freight of shattered hopes and exhausted
frame ; pass with thy simple pomp of fatherless bairns and sad
moralising friends; pass with the sting of death to the victory
of the grave; pass with the perishable, and leave us the eternal,
(Loud cheers.) It is rare to be fortunate in life; it is infinitely
rarer to be fortunate in death. Happy in the occasion of his
death, as Tacitus says of Agricola, is not a common epitaph. It
is comparatively easy to know how to live, but it is beyond all
option and choice to compass the more difficult art of knowing
when and how to die. We can generally, by looking back,
choose a moment in a man’s life when he had been fortunate
had he dropped down dead. And so the question arises
naturally to-day: ‘Was Burns fortunate in his death—
that death which we commemorate 1 ’ There can, I fancy, be
only one answer. It was well that he died Avhen he did. It
might even have been better for himself had he died a little
earlier. The terrible lines that he wrote two years before to
Mrs. Riddell and Mr. Cunningham betoken a spirit mortally
wounded. In those last two years the cloud settles, never to be
lifted. ‘My constitution and frame,’ he says, ‘ were ah origins
blasted with the deep incurable taint of hypochondria, which
poisons my existence.’ He found, perhaps, some pleasure in the
composition of his songs ; some occasional relief in the society of
boon companions; but the world was fading before him.
There is an awful expression in Scotland which one never hears


without a pang —So and-so ‘is done,’ meaning that he is physically
worn out. Burns was ‘ done.’ He was struggling on like a
wounded deer to his death. He had often faced the end, and
not unwillingly. ‘Can it be possible,’he once wrote to Mrs.
Dunlop, * that when I resign this frail, feverish being, I shall
still find myself in conscious existence 1 When the last gasp of
agony has announced that I am no more to those who knew me,
and the few who love me ; when the cold, unconscious corpse is
resigned to the earth, to be the prey of reptiles, and become a
trodden clod, shall I be yet warm in life, enjoying or enjoyed ? ’
Surely that reads as if he forsaw this day and would fain be with
us. And, indeed, for all we know, he may be. (Cheers.)
Twelve years before, he had faced death in a less morbid spirit.
Why, he asked—
Why am I loath to leave this earthly scene ?
Have I so found it full of pleasing charms ?
Some drops of joy, with draughts of ill between ;
Some gleams of sunshine ’mid renewing storms.
He had, perhaps, never enjoyed life so much as is generally
supposed, though he had turned to it a brave, cheerful, un-
flinching face ; and the last years had been years of misery.
* God have mercy on me,’ he wrote years before the end, ‘ a poor,
damned, incautious, duped, unfortunate fool ; the sport and
miserable victim of rebellious pride, hypochondriac imagination,
agonising sensibility, and Bedlam passions ! ’ There was truth
in this outburst. At any rate his most devoted friends—and to
be an admirer of Burns is to be his friend (cheers) —may wish
that he had nob lived to write the letter to Mr. Clark, piteously
pleading that a harmless toast may not be visited hardly upon
him; or that to Mrs. Riddell, ‘ I write you from the regions of
hell and the horrors of the damned ; ’ or to be harried as a
political suspect by his official superiors, and shunned by his
fashionable friends for the same reason—walking like a
neglected ghost in Dumfries, avoided and ignored. ‘ That’s
all over now, my young friend,’ he said, referring to the attitude
towards him of Dumfries society, ‘ an’ werena my heart licht I
wad dee.’ That was in 1794. Had he died before then it
might have been happier for himself ; and we should have lost
some parts of his life that we would rather forget. But posterity


■could not have spared him. We could not have spared the
•exquisite songs which we owe to those years; and, above all,
that supreme creed and comfort which he bequeathed to the
world—‘A man’s a man for a’ that,’ would have remained un-
delivered. (Loud cheers.) One may, perhaps, go further and
say that poets, as those whom the gods love, should die young.
This is a hard saying, but it will not greatly affect the bills of
mortality—(laughter)—and it applies only to poets of the first
rank, while even here it has its exceptions, and illustrious
exceptions they are. But surely the best poetry is produced
before middle age—before the morning and its illusions have
faded ; before the heaviness of noon and the baleful chill of
evening. Few men, too, can bear the strain of a poet’s tem-
perament through many years. At any rate we may feel sure
of this, that Burns had produced his best—that he would never
again have produced a ‘ Tam o’ Shanter,’ or a ‘ Cottar’s Saturday
Night,’ or a‘Jolly Beggars;’and that long before his death,
though he could still write lines affluent with tenderness and
grace, the hand of pain and sorrow and care, to use his own
words, had lain heavy upon him. And this leads to another
point. To-day is not merely the melancholy anniversary of
death, but the rich and incomparable fulfilment of prophecy.
{Loud cheers.) For this is the moment to which Burns looked
when he said to his wife, ‘Don’t be afraid; I’ll be more respected
a hundred years after lam dead than lam at present.’ (Loud
cheers.) To-day the hundred years are completed, and we can
judge of the prediction. (Renewed cheers.) On that point we
must all be unanimous. Burns had honour in his life-time, but
his fame has rolled like a snowball since his death, and it rolls
on. (Cheers.) There is indeed no parallel to it in the world.
(Cheers.) It sets the calculations of compound interest at
defiance. (Laughter and cheers.) He is not merely the watch-
word of a nation that carries and implants Burns worship all
over the globe as birds carry seeds ; but he has become the
ehampion and patron saint of Democracy. (Cheers.) He bears
aloft the banner of the essential equality of man. (Loud and
continued cheering.) His birthday is celebrated a hundred and
■thirty-seven years after its occurrence more universally than that
of any other human being. He reigns over a greater dominion than


any empire that the world has ever seen. Nor does the ardour of his
devotees decrease. Ayr and Ellisland, Mauchline and Dumfries
are the shrines of countless pilgrims. Burns statues are a hardy
annual. (Cheers.) Burns clubs spring up like mushrooms after
rain. (Laughter and cheers.) The editions of Burns are as the
sands of the sea. (Laughter and cheers.) The productions of
Burns manuscripts was a lucrative branch of industry—
(laughter) —until it was checked by the untimely interference of
the law. (Laughter.) No canonised name in the calendar
excites so blind and enthusiastic a worship. Whatever Burns
may have contemplated in his prediction, whatever dream he
may have fondled in the wildest moments of elation, must have
fallen utterly short of the reality, as we know it to-day. (Cheers.)
And it is all spontaneous. There is no puff, no advertisement,
no manipulation. Intellectual cosmetics of that kind —(laughter)
—are frail and fugitive. They rarely survive their subject—
they would not have availed here. (Cheers.) Nor was there
any glamour attached to the poet —rather the reverse. He has
stood by himself, he has grown by himself, it is himself and no
other that we honour. (Cheers.) But what had Burns in his
mind when he made his prediction 1 It might be whimsically
urged that he was conscious that the world had not yet seen his
masterpiece, for the “Jolly Beggars” was not published till
some time after his death. But that woujd hot be sufficient, for
he had probably forgotten its existence. Nor do I think he
spoke at haphazard. What were probably present to his mind
were the fickleness of his contemporaries towards him, his con-
viction of the essential splendour of his work, the consciousness
that the incidents of his later years had unjustly obscured him,
and that his true figure would be perceived as these fell away
into forgetfulness' or were measured at their true value.
(Cheers.) If so, he was right in his judgment, for his true life
began with his death. With the body passed all that was gross
or impure; the clear spirit stood revealed and soared at once to
its accepted place among the fixed stars in the firmament of the
rare immortals. (Loud and prolonged cheers, during which his
Lordship resumed his seat, having spoken for 33 minutes.)


LORD ROSEBERY’S GLASGOW SPEECH.
Lord Rosebery was the principal speaker at a great public
demonstration which took place in the evening in celebration of
the centenary in St. Andrew’s Hall, Glasgow, on the evening of
the 21st. Addresses were also delivered by Emeritus Professor
Masson and Rev. Dr. Walter C. Smith. The meeting was held
under the auspices of the Glasgow Burns Exhibition Committee,
and the hall, to which admission was by ticket, was well filled in
all parts.
His Lordship said : Ladies and gentlemen, it is a great
pleasure to find myself in this hall on a non-political occasion.
We are here to-day to celebrate Burns. (Applause.) What the
direct connection of Burns with Glasgow is I am not exactly
sure; but, at any rate, lam confident of this, that in the great
metropolis of the West there is a clear claim that we should
celebrate the genius of Robert Burns. (Applause.) I have
celebrated it already elsewhere. I cannot, perhaps, deny that
the day has been a day of labour, but it has been a labour of love.
(Cheers.) It is, and it must be, a source of joy and pride to us
to see our champion Scotchman receive the honour and admira-
tion and affection of humanity; to see, as I have seen this
morning, the long processions bringing homage and tribute to
the conquering dead. (Cheers.) But these have only been
signs and symptoms of the world-wide passion of reverence and
devotion. That generous and immortal soul pervades the
universe to-day. (Cheers.) In the humming city and in the
crowd of man; in the backwood and in the swamp ; where the
sentinel paces the bleak frontier, and where the sailor smokes his
evening pipe; and, above all, where the farmer and his men
pursue their summer toil, whether under the Stars and Stripes
or under the Union Jack—the thought and sympathy of men are
directed to Robert Burns. (Applause.) I have sometimes asked
myself, if a roll-call of fame were read over at the beginning of
every century, how many men of eminence would answer a
second time to their names. But of our poet there is no doubt
or question. The “ adsura ”of Burns rings out clear and
unchallenged There are few before him on the list, and we


cannot now conceive a list without him. He towers high, and
yet he lived in an age when the average was sublime. It some-
times seems to me as if the whole eighteenth century was a con-
stant preparation for, a constant working up to, the great drama,
of the revolution which closed it. The scenery is all complete
when the time arrives—the dark, volcanic country; the hungry,
desperate people ; the firefly nobles : the concentrated splendour
of the Court, in the midst, in her place as heroine, the dazzling
Queen. And during long previous years brooding nature had
been producing not merely the immediate actors, but figures-
worthy of the scene. What a glittering procession it is ! We
can only mark some of the principle figures. Burke leads the
way by seniority; then come Fox and Goethe; Nelson and
Mozart ; Schiller, Pitt, and Burns ; Wellington and Napoleon.
And among these Titans, Burns is a conspicuous figure; the
figure which appeals most of all to the imagination and affection
of mankind. (Applause.) Napoleon perhaps looms larger to the
imagination, but on the affection he has no hold. It is in the
combination of the two powers that Burns is supreme. What is
his secret 1 We are always discussing him and endeavouring to
find it out. Perhaps, like the latent virtue of some medical baths,
it may never be satisfactorily explained. But, at any rate, let us
discuss him again. That is, I presume, our object to-night. W hat
pleasanter or more familiar occupation can there be for
Scotsmen ? But the Scotsmen who enjoy it have generally
perhaps more time than I. Pardon then the imperfections
of my speech, for I speak of a subject which no one can
altogether compass, and which a busy man has perhaps no-
rignt to attempt. The clue to Burns’ extraordinary hold
on mankind is possibly a complicated one; it has, perhaps,,
many developments. If so, we have no time to consider it
to-night. Bub I personally believe the causes are, like most
great causes, simple; though it might take long to point
out all the ways in which they operate. The secret, as it
seems to me, lies in two words—inspiration and sympathy.
( Applause.) But, if I wished to prove my contention, I
should go on quoting from his poems all night, and his
admirers would still declare that I had omitted the best
passages. —(Laughter.) I know that profuse quotation is-


a familiar form of a Burns speech, but I am afraid to begin
lest I should not end, and I am sure I should not satisfy.
I must proceed, then in a more summary way. Now ladies
and gentlemen, there seem to me to be two great natural
forces in British literature—l use the safe adjective of
British. (Laughter and applause.) Your applause shows me
that I was right to do so. (Laughter and applause.) I use it
partly because hardly any of Burns’s poetry is strictly English,
partly because he hated and was, perhaps, the first to protest
against the use of the word English as including Scottish. Well,
I say, there are in that literature two great forces of w’hich the
power seems sheer inspiration and nothing else—l mean Shake-
speare and Burns. This is not the place or the time to speak of
that miracle called Shakespeare, but one must say a word of the
miracle called Burns. Try and re-construct Burns as he was. A
peasant, born in a cottage that no sanitary inspector in these
days would tolerate for a moment—(laughter)—struggling with
desperate effort against pauperism, almost in vain ; snatching at
scraps of learning in the intervals of toil, as it were with his
teeth ; a heavy, silent lad, pi’oud of his ploughing. All of a
sudden, without preface or warning, he breaks out into exquisite
song, like a nightingale from the brushwood, and continues sing-
ing as sweetly—with nightingale pauses—till he dies. A night-
ingale sings because he cannot help it ; he can only sing exquisitely
because he knows no other way. So it was with Burns. What
is this but inspiration ? One can no more measure or reason
about it than measure or reason about Niagai’a. Under the limita-
tions which I have imposed upon myself to-night we must take for
granted the incomparable excellence of his poetry. But remem-
ber, that the poetry is only a fragment of Burns. Amazing as it
may seem, all contemporary testimony is unanimous that the man
was far more wonderful than his works. (Applause.) “It will
be the misfortune of Burns’s reputation,” writes an accomplished
lady, who might well have judged him harshly, “ in the records
of literature, not only to future generations and to foreign
countries, but even with his native Scotland and a number of his
contemporaries, that he has been regarded as a poet, and nothing
but a poet. . . . Poetry,” she continues “(I appeal to all
who had the advantage of being personally acquainted with him)


was actually not his forte. . , . None, certainly, ever out-
shone Burns in the charms—the sorcery, I would almost call it—
of fascinating conversation, the spontaneous eloquence of social
argument, or the unstudied poignancy of brilliant repartee.”
And she goes on to describe the almost superhuman fascination
of his voice and of his eyes, those balls of black fire which
electrified all on whom they rested. (Applause.) It seems
strange to be told that it would be an injustice to judge Burns
by his poetry alone ; but as to the magnetism of his presence and
conversation there is only one verdict. “No man’s conversation
ever carried me so completely off my feet,” said the Duchess of
Gordon—the friend of Pitt and of the London wits, the queen of
Scottish society. Dugald Stewart says that “ all the faculties of
Burns's mind were, so far as I could judge, equally vigorous, and
his predilection for poetry was rather the result of his own
enthusiastic and impassioned temper, than of a genius exclusively
adapted to that species of composition From his conversation
I should have pronounced him to be fitted to excel in whatever
walk of ambition he had chosen to exert his abilities.” And of
his prose compositions the same severe judge speaks thus—
“ Their great and varied excellences render some of them scarcely
less objects of wonder than his poetical performances.” The
late Dr. Robertson used to say that, “ considering his education,
the former seemed to him the more remarkable of the
two.” “ I think Burns,” said Principal Robertson to a friend,
“ was one of the most extraordinary men I ever met with.
His poetry surprised me very much, his prose surprised me still
more, and his conversation surprised me more than both his
poetry and prose.” We are told, too, that “he felt a strong
call towards oratory, and all who heard him speak—and some of
them were excellent judges—admitted his wonderful quickness
of apprehension and readiness of eloquence.” All this seems to
me maiwellous. It surely ratifies the claim of inspiration Avith-
out the necessity of quoting a line of his poetry.—(Applause.)
I pass -then to his sympathy. If his talents were universal, his
sympathy was not less so. His tenderness was not a mere selfish
tenderness for his oavh family, for he loA r ed all mankind except
the cruel and the base. Nay, we may go further, and say
that he placed all creation, especially the suffering and despised


part of it, under his protection. The oppressor in every shape,
■even in the comparatively innocent embodiment of the factor and
the sportsman, he regarded with direct and personal hostility.—
(Laughter and applause.) But above all he saw the charm of
the home ; he recognised it as the basis of all society, he
honoured it in its humblest form, for he knew as few know, how
unpretentiously, but how sincerely, the family in the cottage is
welded by mutual love and esteem. “ I recollect once,” said
Dugald Stewart, speaking of Burns, “he told me, when I was
admiring a distant prospect in one of our morning walks, that
the sight of so many smoking cottages gave a pleasure to his
mind which none could understand, who had not witnessed, like
himself, the happiness and worth which they contained.”—
(Applause.) He dwells repeatedly on the primary sacredness
of the home and the family, the responsibility of fatherhood
and marriage. “ Have I not,” he once wrote to Lord Mar, “ a
more precious stake in my country’s welfare than the richest
dukedom in it ? I have a large family of children, and the
prospect of many more.” (Laughter.) The lines in which he
tells his faith are not less memorable than the stately stanzas in
which Gray sings the “ short and simple annals of the poor.” I
must quote them again, often quoted as they are—
To mak’ a happy fireside clime
To weans and wife,
That’s the true pathos and sublime
Of human life.
(Applause.) His verses, then, go straight to the heart of every
home ; they appeal to every father and mother. But that is
only the beginning, perhaps the foundation, of his sympathy.
There is something for everybody in Burns. He has a heart
even for vermin ; he has pity even for the arch-enemy of man-
kind. And his universality makes his poems a treasure-house in
which all may find what they want. Every wayfarer in the
journey of life may pluck strength and courage from it as he
passes. The sore, the weary, the wounded, will all find some-
thing to heal and soothe. For this great master is the universal
Samaritan. Where the priest and the Levite may have passed
by in vain, this eternal heart will still afford a resource.
(Applause.) But he is not only for the sick in spirit. The


friend, the lover, the patriot, will all find their choicest refresh-
ment in Burns. His touch is everywhere, and it is everywhere
the touch of genius. Nothing comes amiss to him. What was
said of the debating power of his eminent contemporary, Dundas,
may be said of his poetry—“ He went out in all weathers.” And
it may be added that all weathers suited him ; that he always
brought back something precious, something we cherish, some-
thing that cannot die. (Applause.) He is, then, I think, the
universal friend in an unique sense. But he was, poetically
speaking, the special friend of Scotland, in a sense which recalls
a profound remark of another eminent Scotsman—l mean
Fletcher of Saltoun. In an account of a conversation between
Lord Cromarty, Sir Edward Seymour, Sir Christopher Musgrave,
and himself, he writes—“ I said I knew a very wise man, so
much of Sir Christopher’s sentiment, that he believed if a man
were permitted to make all the ballads he need not care who
should make the laws of a nation.” (Applause.) This may be
rudely paraphx’ased, that it is more important to make the songs
of a nation than to frame its laws, and this again may be inter-
preted that in former days, at any rate in the days of Fletcher,
even to the days of Burns, it was the familiar songs of a people
that moulded their thoughts, their manners, and their morals.
(Applause.) If this be true, can we exaggerate the debt that
we Scotsmen owe to Burns 1 (Applause.) He has bequeathed
to his country the most exquisite casket of songs in the world-
(applause)—primarily to his country, but others cannot be denied
their share. I will give only one example, but that is a signal one.
From distant Roumania the Queen of that country wrote to
Dumfries to-day—(applause)—that she has no copy of Burns
with her, but that she knows his songs by heart. (Applause.)
We must remember that there is more than this to be said.
Many of Burns’s songs were already in existence in the lips and
minds of the people—rough and coarse and obscene. Our
benefactor takes them, and with a touch of inspired alchemy
transmutes them and leaves them pure gold. He loved the old
catches and the old tunes, and into these gracious moulds he
poured his exquisite gifts of thought and expression. But for
him those ancient airs, often wedded to words which no decent
man could recite, would have perished from that corruption if


not from neglect. He rescued them for us by his songs, and in
doing so he hallowed the life and sweetened the breath of
Scotland. (Applause.) I have also used the words “patriot”
and “ lover.” These words draw me to different lines of thought.
The word “ patriot ” leads me to the political side of Burns.
There is no doubt that he was suspected of being of politician—
(laughter)—and he is even said to have sometimes wished to
enter Parliament. (Renewed laughter.) That was perhaps an
excusable aberration, and my old friend Professor Masson —
(applause)—has, I think, surmised that had he lived he might
have been a great Liberal pressman. (Applause.) My frail
thought shall not dally with such surmise, but it conducts us
naturally to the subject of Burns’s politics. From his sympathy
for his own class, from his indignation against nobles like the
Duke of Queensberry, and from the toasts that cost him so dear,
it might be considered easy to infer his political opinions. But
Burns should not be claimed for any party. (Applause.) A
poet, be it remembered, is never a politician, and a politician is
never a poet —(laughter and applause)—that is to say, a
politician is never so fortunate as to be a poet, and a poet is so
fortunate as never to be a politician. (Renewed laughter.) I
do not say that the line of demarcation is never passed—a
politician may have risen for a moment, or a poet may have
descended —(laughter)—but where there is any confusion
between the two callings, it is generally because the poet thinks
he discerns, or the politician thinks he needs, something higher
than politics. Burns’s politics were entirely governed by the
imagination. H e was at once a Jacobite and a Jacobin. He had
the°sad sympathy which most of us have felt for the hapless
house of Stuart, without the least wish to be governed by it.
(Laughter.) He had much the same sort of abstract sympathy
with the French Revolution, when it was setting all Europe to
rights ; but he was prepared to lay down his life to prevent its
putting this island to rights And then came his
official superiors of the Excise, who, notwithstanding Mr. Pitts
admiration of his poetry, snuffed out his politics without remorse.
The name of Pitt leads me to add that Burns had some sort of
relation with three Prime Ministers. Colonel Jenkinson, of the
Cinque Ports Fencible Cavalry—afterwards Minister for fifteen


years under the title of Lord Liverpool—was on duty at Burns’s
funeral, though we are told—the good man—that he disapproved
of the poet, and declined to make his acquaintance. Pitt, again,
passed on Burns one of his rare and competent literary judg-
ments, so eulogistic, indeed, that one wonders that a powerful
Minister could have allowed one whom he admired so much to
exist on an exciseman’s pay when well, and an exciseman’s half-
pay when dying. (Applause.) And from Addington, another
Prime Minister, Burns elicited a sonnet, which, in the Academy
of Lagado, would surely have been held a signal triumph of the
art of extracting sunshine from cucumbers. (Laughter.) So
much for politics in the party sense. “ A man’s a man for a’
that ” is not politics ; it is the assertion of the rights of humanity
in a sense far wider than politics. It erects all mankind, it is
the charter of its self-respect. It binds, it heals, it revives, it
invigorates ; it sets the bruised and broken on their legs, it
refreshes the stricken soul, it is the salve and tonic of character ;
it cannot be narrowed into politics. (Cheers.) Burns’s politics
are indeed nothing but the occasional overflow of his human
sympathy into past history and current events. And now,
having discussed the two trains of thought suggested by the
words “friend” and “patriot,” 1 come to the more dangerous
word “ lover.” There is an eternal controversy which, it
appears, no didactic oil will ever assuage, as to Burns’s private
life and morality. Some maintain that these have nothing to do
with his poems ; some maintain that his life must be read into
his works, and here again some think that his life damns his
poems, while others aver that his poems cannot be fully
appreciated without his life. Another school thinks that his
vices have been exaggerated, while their opponents scarcely
think such exaggeration possible. It is impossible to avoid
taking a side. I walk on the ashes, knowing the fire beneath,
and unable to avoid them, for the topic is inevitable. I must
confess myself, then, one of those who think that the life of
Burns doubles the interest of his poems, and I doubt whether the
failings of his life have been much exaggerated, for contemporary
testimony on that point is strong, though a high and excellent
authority, Mr. Wallace, has recently taken the other side with
anuch power and point. But the life of Burns, which I love to


read with his poems, does not consist in his vices; they lie
outside it. It is a life of work, and truth, and tenderness.
And though, like all lives, it has its light and shade, re-
member that we know it all, the worst as well as the best.
His was a soul bathed in crystal; he hurried to avow everything.
There was no reticence in him. The only obscure passage in his
life is the love passage with Highland Mary, and as to that he
was silent not from shame, but because it was a sealed and
sacred episode. “ What a flattering idea,” he once wrote, “is a
world to come ! There shall I with speechless agony of rapture
again recognise my lost, my ever dear Mary ! whose bosom was
fraught with truth, honour, constancy, and love.” But he had,
as the French say, the defects of his qualities. His imagination
was a supreme and celestial gift. But his imagination often led
him wrong, and never more than with women. The chivalry
that made Don Quixote see the heroic in all the common events
of life made Burns (as his brother tells us) see a goddess in every
girl that he approached. Hence many love affairs, and some
guilty ones ; but even these must be judged with reference to
time and circumstance. This much is certain, —had he been
devoid of genius they would not have attracted attention. It
is Burns’s pedestal that affords a target. And why, one may
ask, is not the same measure meted out to Bums as to others?
The illegitimate children of great captains and statesmen and
princes are treated as historical and ornamental incidents.
They strut the scene of Shakespeare, and ruff it with the best.
It is for the illegitimate children of Burns, though he and his
wife cherished them as if born in wedlock, that the vials of
wrath are reserved. Take two brilliant figures, both of Boyal
ancestry, who were alive during Burns’s life. We occupy
ourselves endlessly and severely with the offences of Burns. M e
heave an elegant sigh over the kindred lapses of Charles James
Fox and Charles Edward Stuart. (Applause.) Again, it is
quite clear that, though exceptionally sober in his earlier years,
he drank too much in later life. But this, it must be remembered,
was but an occasional condescendence to the vice and habit of
the age. The gentry who pressed him to their houses, and who
were all convivial, have much to answer for. His admirers who
thronged to see him, and who could only conveniently sit with him


in a tavern, are also responsible for this habit, so perilously
attractive to men of genius. From the decorous Addison, and
the brilliant Bolingbroke onward, the eighteenth century records
hard drinking as the common incident of intellectual eminence.
To a man who had shone supreme in the most glowing society, and
who was now an exciseman in a country town, with a home that
cannot have been very exhilarating, and with a nervous system
highly strung, the temptation of the warm tavern, and the admiring
circle there, may well have been almost irresistible. Some attempt
to say that his intemperance was exaggerated. I neither affirm nor
deny. It was not as a sot he drank; that no one insinuated ;if
he succumbed it was to good fellowship. (Cheers.) Remember, I
do not seek to palliate or excuse, and, indeed, none will be turned
to dissipation by Burns’s example ; he paid too dearly for it. But
I will say this, that it all seems infinitely little, infinitely remote.
Why do we strain, at this distance, to discern this dim spot on the
poet’s mantle ? (Applause.) Shakespeare and Ben Johnson took
their cool tankard at the Mermaid ; we cannot afford, in the strictest
view of literary responsibility, to quarrel with them for that. When
we consider Pitt and Goethe we do not concentrate our vision on
Pitt’s bottles of port or Goethe’s bottles of Moselle. Then, why,
we ask, is there such a chasm between the Mermaid and the Globe,
and why are the vintages of Wimbledon and Weimar so much more
innocent than the simple punch-bowl of Inveraray marble and its
contents ? (Applause.) I should like to go a step further and
affirm that we have something to be grateful for even in the weak-
ness of men like Burns. Mankind is helped in its progress almost
as much by the study of imperfection as by the contemplation of
perfection. Had we nothing before us in our futile and halting
lives but saints and the ideal we might well fail together. We
grope blindly along the catacombs of the world, we climb
the dark ladder of life, we feel our way to futurity, but we can
scarcely see an inch around or before us. We stumble and falter
and fall, our hands and knees are bruised and sore, and we look
up for light and guidance. Could we see nothing but distant,
unapproachable impeccability, we might well sink prostrate in
the hopelessness of emulation and the weariness of despair.
Is it not then, when all seems blank and lightless and lifeless, when
strength and courage flag, and when perfection seems as remote as


a, star, is it not then that imperfection helps ns ? (Hear, hear.)
When we see that the greatest and choicest images of God have
had their weaknesses like ours, their temptations, their hour of
darkness, their bloody sweat, are we not encouraged by their lapses
and catastrophes to find energy for one more effort, one more
struggle ? (Cheers.) Where they failed we feel it a less dishonour
to fail ; their errors and sorrows make, as it were, an easier ascent
from infinite imperfection to infinite perfection. Man after all is
not ripened by virtue alone. Were it so this world were a paradise
of angels. No ! Like the growth of the earth, he is the fruit of
all the seasons ; the accident of a thousand accidents, a living
mystery, moving through the seen to the unseen. He is sown in
dishonour ; he is matured under all the varieties of heat and cold ;
in mist and wrath, in snow and vapours, in the melancholy of
autumn, in the torpor of winter, as well as in the rapture and
fragrance of summer, or the balmy affluence of the spring—its
breath, its sunshine, its dew. And at the end he is reaped—the
product, not of one climate, but of all ; not of good alone, but of
evil ; not of joy alone, but of sorrow —perhaps mellowed and
ripened, perhaps stricken and withered and soured. How, then,
shall we judge anyone ? How, at anyrate, shall we judge a giant—
great in gifts and great in temptation ; great in strength and great
in weakness ? Let us glory in his strength and be comforted in his
weakness. And, when we thank heaven for the inestimable gift of
Burns, we do not need to remember wherein he was imperfect, we
cannot bring ourselves to regret that he was made of the same clay
as ourselves. (Loud applause.)


' r O(JT>lK*e)v3^
W. M. MACLARDY & CO.,
General Printers, Lithographers, Bookbinders, &c..
82 Pitt Street, Sydney.
■2^X3^


W M, MACLARDY & CO., Printers t 82 Pitt Street, Sydney.


IH TOAST LIST. H
w
Hon. Dr. H. N. MacLaurin, M.L.C., in the Chair.
“ The Queen ” Chairman
“God Save the Queen.”
“ The Governor —Lord Hampden” Chairman
“ A man’s a man for a’ that.”
“The Immortal Memory op Burns” ... Professor M. W. MaoCallum
Supported by Hon. A. Kbthbl, M.L.C., President ol the Bums Club.
Song “The Land o’the Leal”... Miss Maggie Stirling
“The Land of Burns” ... ... ... Hon. G. H. Reid, M.P.
“ The Garb of Old Gaul.”
Reply Rev. John Ferguson.
Recitation “Highland Mary” Mr. Robert Anderson
“The Songs of Scotland” Hon. A. Brown, M.L.C.
Song ... “O, sing to me the Auld Scotch Saugs ” Miss Maggie Stirling
“The Land we Live in” ... Mr. Dugald Thomson, M.P.
“ Advance Australia Fair.”
Reply Mr. James Inglis.
“The Chairman” Mr. John Rae, M.A.
“ My Love, a Highland Lad was bom.”
“ Auld Lang Syne.’








i.
1
"BIUr.-0-T^RE
POULTRY.
Roast Turkey and Ham.
Roast Chicken.
Roast Goose and Apple
Roast Duck.
ENTREES.
Pigeon Pie.
SCOTCH HAGGIS.
“ Warm, Reekin’, Rich.”
JOINTS.
Sirloin of Beef and Horseradish.
Roast Sucking Pig.
Roast Lamb and Mint Sauce.
York Ham. Pressed Tongue.
SALADS.
Beetroot. Lobster Mayonnaise.
Lettuce. Potato.
QUEST. About to enter dining room, spiffing the arotnd from
the lower regions
" A] 7! Hd^iST- (suddenly)'^ III be bad tbfe morn."


,
B'li- -O-FARE
I!
1 1
1 1
VEGETABLES.
1
1
i
I
Mashed Tatles and Green Peas.
■i ii' ■
h
1)
SWEETIES.
Princess Pudding. Golden Jelly.
II; I 1
f
Wine Jellies.
Charlotte Russe. Cream Trifles.
M *
Jls/
£P
Fruit Pies. Rice Custard.
i .. .
Tapioca Custard.
(S /
mm\ ** §USfSWffi
\
Victoria Sandwiches.
/ w \
(Us ■*
lb
—
¥ WwIf
I
DESSERT.
11
Almonds and Raisins. Figs. Nuts.
m
|
Fruit in Seaton.
Jtf %
JUjjli
lal/
Biscuits And Cheese.
Coffee and Whisky Punch.
Tjiin'y ' /!
Ml t
3 /«
Caterer, Mr. Angus Cameron.
vs jggv
naff)
\ WjM
I w
rC^
/
'V.
Waiter,
-“Some Je-I ty sir”?
NorHun? cbicure -“Teflhe s rain*'. , wbwould 1 oUe wi
Teel lie
ben \Y)t Cockle -Leak le again I’d UK a (Mate










1 The most gifted British soul we had in all that century of his.”
‘ ‘ The largest soul of all the British land ... a hard-handed
Scottish peasant.”
“ A fellow of infinite frolic, laughter, sense and heart.’
‘ ‘ A giant original man. ”
— Carlyle.


Farmers’ & Dairymen’s Milk Co.,Ltd.
HEAD OFFICES, DEPOT & CENTRAL CREAMERY:
HARRIS & THOMAS STS,
ULTIMO.
Pure Country Milk!
Delicious Cream!
Superior Creamery Butter!
The Company is noted for the Purity and Excellence
of all Articles Supplied.
The Out-put of Milk alone exceeds 4000 Gallons per
day.
Carts Deliver'Twice Daily in City and Suburbs.
JAS- W- CUNNINGHAM, Manager.
Telephone 1230.


MUTUAL LIFE
Established 1843. RICHARD A. MeCURDY, President
Income:
£9,978,938.
New Business;
(Paid for in 1895)
Company’s Building, Martin Place, Sydney, N.S.W
NEW SOUTH WALES —Martin Place, Sydney. 1 SOUTH AUSTRALIA—73 King William St.,
Adelaide.
VICTORIA —473 Collins St., Melbourne. j AUSTRALIA—St. George’s Terrace,
QUEENSLAND-115 Queen St., Brisbane. Perth.
