

a ‘ • . • . '• *+
Advance Australia Series, No. 2. PRICE, 6d.; Posted, Bd. Edited by W. T. PYKE.
pir. I*l.
124 Collins East.
-Me ZDIBInTTIST. oje-e-
:::Biiaiiaßii«iia>«twi
$
I
4
y
4
4
«
RHEUM A CREAM.— A CERTAIN CURE FOR RHEUMATISM. 10b. per Packet.
DYSPEPTONE.— A Specific for DYSPEPSIA, 3s. Gd. per Box. Prepared by the American “Shakers.” Sole Australian Agent:—
W. H. TERRY, Eclectic and Pharmaceutical Chemist, 84 Russell Street, Melbourne.
Pater & Knapton, Printers, 19i Little Collins Street East Melbourne.
T-T-T— ri~*rx JXXXX3 LXXXa.XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXZXXJLXXXXXXXXXX^J-XXXXX-^^XZJC^L^CXXXXXX:


A SIGNAL VICTORY OVER DISEASE. THE GREATEST REVELATION * NINETEENTH CENTURY.
Successful Treatment of Chronic and Special Diseases, according to the Laws of Nature,
and the Philosophy of Common Sense.
Tko Most Recent Discoveries in the Healing Art. There is Hope for the 'Weak, the Debilitated and the Diseased,
M. 8., Ch.M., &c., the Expert Specialist in Kidney, Nervous, and Private Affections,
Registered by the Medical Boards of Victoria and Great Britain (the only legally qualified Medical Practitioner adver-
tising in Australia who holds the Diplomas of Physician and Surgeon),
May be consulted at his Institute as above, personally or by letter, upon all Diseases of the Human System.
DR. WRIGHT cures Scrofulous Humors, Eruptions, Fits, Spinal Complaints,
Impediments to Marriage, Cold Extremities, Lost Manhood, Physical Decay,
Spermatorrhoea, Incapacity for Study or Business, Female Complaints, Liver,
Heart, Lung and Kidney Affections, Neuralgia, Rheumatism, Effects of Indiscre-
tion, Asthma, Bronchitis, Gravel, Piles, &c.
It matters not what your troubles may be, come and let the Doctor examine your case. If it is curable he will tell
you so; if not, he will also tell you, for be will not undertake a case unless he is confident of effecting a cure. All applying
to him will receive his honest opinion of their complaints. No experimenting; no noxious mineral drugs ; no humbug.
Success in all cases undertaken. Confidence absolute. Sufferers can be Treated equally well at a Distance.
N. 8.—1 wish it distinctly understood that I do not claim to perform impossibilities, or to have miraculous power.
I idaim only to be a skilled and successful Physician, thoroughly informed in my specialty.
Consultation (personally or by letter) FREE. Hours of Consultation : 10 to 2, 4t06,8 to 9.
NOTE THE ADDRESS —
VICTORIAN PROGRESSIVE MEDICAL INSTITUTE
53 FLINDERS STREET WEST, MELBOURNE.
BOX, 253.


Water & Air-Proof Beds
Cushions, Pillows, &c.
Drugs, Chemicals and
Patent Medicines.
Elastic Stockings,
Belts and Bandages,
Surgical Instruments.
APPOINTMENT.
Enemas. Trusses.
Galvanic Batteries, &c.
H. FRANCIS * CO.
Dispensing and CHEMISTS
Manufacturing
Wholesale and Retail
DRD66ISTS
31 BOUBEE ST. E., MELBOURNE
And at 131 Collins St. East (late Wragge’s).
MEDICINES FORWARDED PROMPTLY TO ANY OF THE COLONIES.
Post Orders receive Careful Attention.
Water & Air-Proof Beds
Cushions, Pillows, &c.
Elastic Stockings,
Belts and Bandages,
Enemas. Trusses.
Drugs, Chemicals and
Patent Medicines.
APPOINTMENT.
Surgical Instruments.
Galvanic Batteries, &c.
H. FRANCIS • CO.
Dispensing and CHEMISTS Manufacturing
Wholesale and Retail ! DRUGGISTS
31 BOURKE ST. E., MELBOURNE
And at 131 Collins St. East (late Wragge’s).
MEDICINES FORWARDED PROMPTLY TO ANY OF THE COLONIES.
Post Orders receive Careful Attention,


Advance Australia Series, No. 1*
Edited by W. T. PYEE.
mum series ud unimtu
CONTENTS
MINER
AN ABORIGINAL DISCOVERER
GOLD IN VICTORIA
OTHER PIONEERS
EFFECT OF DISCOVERIES
CANVAS TOWN
BAG FAIR
SLY GROG SHANTIES
THE DIGGERS’ LICENSE
AN IRISH GALLANT
REFORM LEAGUES
BURNING THE LICENSES
THE EUREKA STOCKADE
STORMING THE STOCKADE
EXCITEMENT IN MELBOURNE
WRONGS RIGHTED
ILLUSTRATED.
DEATH OF BURKE,
E. W. COLE’S PUBLICATIONS-
Colo’s Fun Doctor ; or the Funniest Book in the
World. Edited by E. W. Cole. Elegant presenta-
tion edition, cloth, gilt edges, 3/6 ; cloth, plain, 400
pages, 2/6; postage 6d. extra. 50,000 copies of this
book have been sold.
Cole’s Funny Picture Book. The funniest and best
Child’s picture book in the world, containing all the
best Nursery Rhymes, Tales, Riddles, Puzzles, Pic-
tures, etc., for every member of the family. Price
1/6. 55,000 copies have been sold.
The Funniest Book but One. 200 gems of Fun
from the Fun Doctor. Vest-pocket edition, 192
pages, cloth, gilt, 6d., post Bd,
Sayings of 100 Men in praise of Books, containing
also E. W. Cole’s “Essay on Federation of the
world.” Vest-pocket edition, 192 pages, cloth, gilt,
6d., by post Bd.
Conduct and Duty ; a Treasure Book of Intellectual,
Physical, Social and Moral Advice, Selected from
the teachings of thinkers and writers of all times
and countries, by W. T. Pyke. Dedicated to the
natives of Australia. Cloth, gilt, 2/6; paper wrap-
per, 1/-; postage 4d.
Physiognomy Made Easy; or, the Art of Reading
Character by the Face. By Professor Fraser.
Fifty Illustrations. 6d., by post Bd.
Dr. Holbrook’s Memory System ; or, the Art of
Never Forgetting. A book for the student, business
5 man and general reader. 1/6. The best book on
Improving the Memory ever published. Posted 1/9,
The Lightning Calculator and Ready Reckoner.
Containing all the Shortest and best Methods of
Calculating and Measuring, to which is added Eight
Hours Wages’ Table and Gold Reckoner. 1/-, by
post 1/3.
The World of Cant. A book with a purpose. Now
in its 100th thousand. 1/-, by post 1/3.
Cole’s Letter Writer’s G-uide. Containing 300 letters
on all subjects. 2/6, by post 2/10.
Cole’s Dictionary. Etymological, Explanatory and
Pronouncing. 3/6, posted 4/-.
How to Talk Correctly. 6d., by post Bd,
Euchre, and How to play it. 1/-, by post 1/3.
Choice Dishes at Small Cost. A book of Tasty and
Wholesome Fare. I/-, post 1/3,
TALES,
At 1/- each.—Botany Bay (by John Lang), the
Convict’s Wife (by John Lang), The Golden Secret (a
thrilling tale of bush and convict life in Western Aus-
ralia), Margaret Catchpole, Lost for Gold, The Two
Convicts, the Leavenworth Case (a detective tale), Hand
and Ring, Sword of Damocles, The Mill Mystery, Sha-
dowed by Three, The Diamond Coterie, the Rival De-
tectives, Who Killed William Staunton ? (a novel in
40 chapters).
At 1/6 each. —Paved with Gold; or, the Romance
and Reality of London Streets (by Augustus Mayhew,
author of “ London Labor and London Poor ”). Handy
Andy and Rory O’More (complete in one volume). Bar-
naby Rudge and Old Curosity Shop. Monte Christo
(by Alexander Dumasj, 1000 columns. Valentine Vox
and Sylvester Sound (by Henry Cockton) ; these two
famous novels in one vol,, 1000 columns. Harry Lorre-
quer and Tom Bourke of Ours (by Charles Lever);
Lever’s two Irish Tales in one vol., 1000 columns. Mys-
teries of Paris and Wandering .lew (by Eugene Sue);
Sue’s two best novels, 1000 columns.
Postage, 4d. per vol. extra.
EURtiE AND WILLS.—Two
Heroes of Exploration.
CHAP. I.—ACROSS AUSTRALIA,
„ lI.—THE REIURN JOURNEY
„ lII.—SUFFERINGS* DEATHS
OF THE TWO LEADERS
„ IV.—SEARCH PARTIES AND
CONCLUSION
LIFE and ADVENTURES on the
GOLD-FIELDS.
THE CONVICT’S STRATAGEM
EARLY DISCOVERIES IN N.S.W.
HARGRAVES, THE PIONEER
JAMES ESMOND, THE VICTORIAN
PIONEER
CHUMS AND OLD CHUMS
RELAXATIONS
DIGGER-HUNTING ANECDOTES
BEGINNINGS OP REVOLT
THE EUREKA HOTEL MURDER
A LOYAL TOAST


INTELLECTUAL AND ARTISTIC FURNISHING ESTABLISHMENT.
If you require a happy home, in fact, a little paradise for your family, you must, beside using a quantity of ordinary
furniture, necessaries, and love, make it attractive and instructive with intellectual furniture, such as Books, Music,
Pictures, Beautiful Ornaments, &c. COLE’S BOOK ABCAI E has all these in great Variety. It contains to choose
from a million Books, 50,000 Pictures, 30,000 Beautiful Ornaments, 40,000 Pieces of Music, and a large, cheap, and
choice variety of Pianos, Albums, Fancy Goods, &c. Altogether it is the finest show of Intellectual and Artistic
Furniture in Australia.
COLE’S CHEAP EDITION, Is., or Is. 3d. by Post
THE GOLDEN SECRET; or, BOND AETD FREE.
—A Tale of Bush and Convict Life in Western Australia.
SYNOPSIS OF CONTENTS.
BOOK FIRST.—The Gold Mine of the Vasse.— The Great Golden Secret—The Convict Road Party—Number 406—Bond and Free—
The Koagulup Swamp —The Bribe—The Iron-stone Mountains —The King of the Vasse —A Dark Day and Night—On the Trail.
BOOK SECOND. —The Sandalwood Trade.— The Mate of the Canton— Countermining the Miner—The Sandalwood Agency — ln
Search of his Sorrow—The Door of the Cell—Millbank—Sir Joshua Hobb’s Convict Mill—Mr. Wyville—The Upas Tree.
BOOK THIRD. —Alice ‘Walmsley.—Miserere ! — A Flower in the Cell—Following a Dark Spirit—Mr. Baggett—Two Heads against
One —Female Transports—After Nine Years.
BOOK FOURTH.—The Convict Ship.- The Parliamentary Committee —Harriet Draper—A Captain for the Bougemont —Captain
Draper—Koro and Tapairu—The Child’s Grave—The Sailing of the Bougemont— Face to Face—How a Prisoner might Break a Bar—Dead Sea
Fruit —The Fever—Husband and Wife—Woman’s Love and Hatred —The Darkness of Desolation—A New Penal Law —A Prisoner at Large.
BOOK FIFTH.—The Valley of the Vasse. —Alice Walmsley’s New Home —A Man must Face his Sins—Walking in the Shadow—
The Meeting—Mr. Wyville Faces a Storm—The Valley of the Yasse —The Convict’s Pass—The Bush Fire.
YEREY & CROSS,
152 SMITH STHEHT, GOLLITTGWOOD,
55 Nelson Place, Williamstown,
AND
28 ERROL STREET, NORTH MELBOURNE.
Xj-A-E/O-IE J A_SSOK/T3vniE]3SrT OF
Colonial, Elgon, Sooted, I Corn Ms, Worsted Coalings,
E t c.,
o ALWAYS
STOCK- o
OUR
TAILORS
“Oh! tell us, ye Mashers of Melbourne,
To whom for your clothes do you go? ”
“To Yerey and Cross,” is the answer,
“For they are OUR TAILORS, you know.”
“Ye business men, too, of the city,
“ For gay wedding suits and the like, sirs,
Down to mourning, the trappings of woe !
To Yerey and Cross give your orders,
For they are OUR TAILORS, you know.”
“Their fit is so perfect, and —whisper —
Their price is exceedingly low,
Then Yerey and Cross be your motto,
For they are OUR TAILORS, you know.”
Whence came these neat suits, comme il faut !”
“ From YEREY AND CROSS ! cry the merchants,
For they are OUR TAILORS, you know.”
OAPTAIK KEIVN EIT'Si
HOT * SEA-WATER * BATHS
o READY NIGHT AND DAY. o
FOR LADIES—At his Victoria Ladies’ Baths, St. Kilda.
FOR GENTLEMEN—At his Bathing Ship Baths, St. Kilda.
fHESE Baths cure Sciatica, Lumbago, Rheumatism, Nervous Debility. Depression of Spirits, Indigestion, Sluggish Liver, Pams in Kidneys and
Back, Asthma, Rheumatic Gout, Fog Fever and is after effects, Rush of Blood to the Head, Weak Action of the Heart, am aie gooc oi
persons standing for long hours, as a preventative against Varicose Veins ; produce sleep, promote healthy circulation of the B ooc, an impregna e
large quantities of lodine, Ammonia, Phosphorus, &c., into the system ; and are a certain cure for Bad Colds.
A SPECIFIC FOR RESTLESS NIGHTS.
The value of Hot Sea-Baths is not generally known ; they strengthen the system at all times, whereas Hot Fresh-water Baths weaken the
system to an alarming extent. t ~ ~ . „„ . .
The curative and marvellous properties of Hot Sea-Baths are not half enumerated in this advertisement. Consult any me ma man,
will vouch for the truth of the above statements ; besides, the medical faculty have the highest opinion of, and strongly recommend ot BA- ath .




W. S. HUSBANDS,'^p?s^^ s spectacles.
OPTICIAN See., TO SUIT ALU sights. To ensure accurate adjustment of,
’ Spectacles should be purchased
81 OTBEN STREET, C%± from ’ a "? I ?^ pa i r ® d b LL,
practical Optician. *ii**saaili
MELBOURNE. established - - 1862.
Advance Australia Series, No. 2.
Edited hy W. T. PYKE.
«BUSH TALES,* 1
IBY
OLD TRAVELLERS AND PIONEERS
CONTEN
rs—
THE PERILS OF A PIONEER AND HIS 'WIPE
IN THE AUSTRALIAN BUSH.
A CATTLE MUSTER
SMART HORSEMANSHIP
BAD HABITS
A HISTORICAL BUSH FIRE.
A SQUATTER’S NARRATIVE
A MOONLIGHT MUSTER
FIGHTING BULLS
ROBERT PATTERSON’S ADVENTURES
DRAUGHTING
BRANDING
A SPLITTER’S LIFE.
BUCHAN CHARLEY THE BUSHRANGER.
OLD COACHING DAYS
(a SQUATTE It’s TALE OP 50 TEAKS AGO).
KELLY’S COACHING TRIPS
COACHING ANECDOTE
LIFE ON AN OLD CATTLE STATION.
TAILING
A NIGHT ADVENTURE AT FOREST CREEK
DIGGINGS.
AN ANECDOTE
A RENDEZVOUS
A BUSH ANECDOTE
ILLUSTRATIONS-
A BUSH SCENE —BEFORE AND AFTER A BUSH FIRE.—SPLITTERS IN THE FOREST.
ftUIbOUTUE:
E. W. COLE, BOOK ARCADE,
AM) ALL BOOKSELLERS.
TATE’S EXPRESS,
II MARKET STREET, MELBOURNE.
CHEAPER SIMPLER FASTER than the Government or any other Parcels Post, besides which it is fully Responsible for Loss or Damage.
There is No Trouble for either Shipper or Consignee, and Free Delivery is warranted.
To Consignee’s Door at any address in BRITAIN, 9d. per lb up to 10 lbs. ; then 6d. per lb. Large Backets at. Freight Rates. ■
The Continent and America a little higher. Despatches to all the Colonies Daily. London Office W. R. Sutton & Co., Golden Lane, E.C.


WILLESDEN ROOFING
For Sheds, Farm Buildings, Cottages, &c. Supplied in Bolls of 50 and 100 Yards, 27 and 54 inches wide.
WILLESDEN 4-FLY
Is the Cheapest and Best Roof Covering. No boards are required, being battened directly upon the rafters.
The attention of Shippers, Colonists, Architects, Contractors, is directed to the weight of WILLESDEN ROOFING
compared with that of Iron :
100 sq. feet of WILLESDEN ROOFING weighs
100 sq. feet of Galvanised Iron, b.w.g. 26 „ 1001 b.
One ton WILLESDEN ROOFING covers 13,500 sq. feet
One ton Galvanised Iron - . „ 2,170 sq. feet
Structures covered with WILLESDEN ROOFING have been standing exposed to all weathers for
the last nine years without injury.
WILLESDEN ROOFING IS .A. HOH-OOnSTDXJOTOIR, OIP HEA.T.
Extract from Report International Fisheries’ Exhibition Executive Committee, as appearing in the Times, 24th March, 1884 : —“ Willesden
Roofs. —It was with great satisfaction that the Committee could report that these Buildings had from their admirable construction stood well
the test of use and weather, and were at present, to all appearances, as strong and serviceable as when they were erected.”
WILLESDEN 1 and 2-piy WATERPROOF for Wrapping, Lining and Underlining purposes.
WILLESDEN CANVAS, Water-repellent and Rot-proof.
484 Willesden Rot-peoop Canvas Tents made to the oedee op the Yictoeian Goveenment.
FOB FULL PAETICULAES AND PEICES, APPLY TO
SPALDING & HODGE, Wholesale Stationers
BA.3SOC PLACE, MELBOURNE.
BY GAS!»-
Is prepared to meet every requirement of Cooking by Gas, whether Boiling, Roasting, Grilling, Toasting,
or Hot Water for Baths.
They have in stock every description of Stove and Burner, and, in order to meet the requirements of those who do
not care to purchase, StOV6S C&U ho had 01T HIRE (for not less than 12 months) from 2s. per month and upwards.
Testimonials can be seen of the competency of this mode of Cooking, both for ECONOMY, CLEANLINESS and
CONYENIENCE, from bachelors’ Stoves to those that will cook tor hundreds and thousands. Inspection invited.
Office: 57 FLINDERS LANE EAST. THOS. YASEY, Secretary,
C/9 < ESTABLISHED 1840. I X
2, |* HOOD & CO., || I
CO | 5 1 (F. W. WHITE and S. BAIRD), |
gs < I Fraelioal <& a>4sj> easing Che mis Is {© | g
°i2O ? O ; 5
Q, £ K « COUNTRY ORDERS RECEIVE PROMPT ATTENTION. q 3)
8 I MEDICINES FORWARDED TO ALL PARTS OE THE COLONIES, gZhd —|
CD ** w bo » g-
JC A .9 Parcels Post takes Package up to 7lbs. weight. © W ®
“■ 1 S* t HORSE and CATTLE MEDICINES of the FINEST QUALITY, f 2
g» | Q £
? r“ ■
2- <
|- ol 147 ELIZABETH STREET, MELBOUNRE, «g a
;g; X (Opposite Electric Telegraph Office.) H m


wiCJAMES JENNINGS
BRAZILIAN PEBBI
GOLD, SILVER AND STEEL SPECTACLES
MADE TO ORDER.
PATENT p PEBBLES.
CAUTION.—The only Medals given for Colonial Manufactured Spectacles
were Silver from Victoria. Bronze from Sydney, and 'Jokl from
London, 1872-3, awarded to JAMES JENNINGS.
A Large Stock on Hand. The Trade Supplied.
JAMES JENNINGS, 99 QUEEN STREET
M HE Tales, Sketches, and Adventures in the following pages are selected from many old
books and journals long since out of print, and not now to be found upon the shelves
. , . . .......
of the bookseller. They are given in the words of their original writers, with but few
modifications here and there, to adapt them to their present position and their new readers.
In almost every case the authors’ personal experiences are recorded, and as such, they
should be valued as true descriptions of past times. The young Australian especially ought
to feel a deep interest in reading narrations of some of the perils and privations incident to
the settlement of a new country; while to the old colonist now resting after his labours, such
l eading should afford a pleasant retrospective glance at what has been achieved by himself
and his co-mates.
The next volume of this series will be entitled “ William Buckley the Wild White
Man, and the Port Phillip Blacks.” It will be followed at a short interval by another volume,
somewhat on the lines of the one now before the reader.
The field is a large one, and I intend to glean it thoroughly, and would therefore
gladly welcome any help in the shape of contributions of old books, newspapers, cuttings from
journals, in fact anything of interest relating to the Australian Continent or the Pacific
Islands. The attention of any one who would kindly assist is drawn to the preface to
“ Australian Heroes and Adventurers.”
Tiooh Arcade ,
Melbourne.
April 2Vth, 18SS.
WILLIAM THOMAS PYKB.
“To be well dressed is to be largely armed against unhappiness." 11 He that wears good clothes has mounted the first step in the ladder of success."
If you wish to achieve these X TO" C! r FTTAT3 r F JSLt 109 FLINDERS
desirable ends, call on JUlit IjUijil , Iji U xili X OO LANE EAST.
They have the largest establishment for Tailoring in Australia, an immense assortment of Woollens, and the best Cutters in the Southern
hemisphere. They are Government contractors for the supply of cadet uniforms for all the schools and colleges in Victoria.
Cadet Suits, No. 1 Bliss’s Serge, 30s. Call and see our Summer Suits for £3 3s.


WORMALD’S
PURK CARBOLIC
f oilot soap*
THIS delicately-scented Toilet Soap has held
a high place in public estimation for several
years, and is the only Soap in the market which
claims to possess all the valuable detergent,
antiseptic and disinfectant properties of carbolic
acid, and at the same time taking a front rank
among the Toilet Soaps of the day.
Its value has also been fully appreciated by
the medical and dental professions, and in a
letter from a well known surgeon-dentist, the
writer states“ You have supplied, in your
Pure Carbolic Toilet Soap, an article winch
combines so many advantages that it should
entirely supersede the gritty and deleterious
articles sold as tooth pastes and powders.”
This Soap is esteemed a luxurious Shaving
requisite, and possesses the advantage over
so-called “shaving soaps” that it does not dry
on the face, nor cause the least irritation, but
leaves a pleasant feeling- of coolness and com-
fort after its use.
Copies of Testimonials, Analyses, Medical
Opinions, Ac,, may be had on application.
Bold in i-lb. and 1-lb. Bars, and In
6d. and Is. Tablets.
KRUSE’S
fluid Magnesia
The Universal Remedy for
Indigestion, Flatulence,
Acidity of Stomach,
Bilious Headache,
And a most gentle aperient for In-
valids and Children. (See medical
opinions a ccompanying each bottle.)
Sold by all Chemists and Store-
keepers throughout the Colonies.
fEARCE’S
[avender Water
>WITH MUSK*
Is the
MOST EXQUISITE PERFUME
Ever offered to the Australian
Public.
—For—
The HANDKERCHIEF,
The BATH, and
The SICK ROOM.
The Chosen Bouquet of the Elite of
Society.
ASK FOR
Pearce’s Lavender Water
WITH MUSK.


Advance Australia Series, No. 2.
Edited ly W. T. FYKE,
BUSH TALES^)
THE PERILS OF A PIONEER AND HIS WIFE
IN THE AUSTRALIAN BUSH.
Mrs. Struilby tells how fourteen men were bailed up by three. First visit
of Bushrangers.—A night of horror. —Daring intimidation of Blacks.
Second visit of Bushrangers.—Mr. O’Leary shot. —Bush Doctor. Servant
woman carried away by Bushrangers.—Enforced silence in a bed-tick. —
The Capture and end of the Scotchy and Witton Gang.
dear J . You ask me to give you some ac-
count of the first years after our marriage. The
first seven years after our marriage were the most labori-
ous of our lives. Lawrence had great bodily strength,
OLD TRAVELLERS and PIONEERS
and was very adventurous. My own constitution was
then very strong also, and I always accompanied him in
founding new stations or out-stations. I never knew any-
one so unsuspecting as Lawrence; and, except I was with
him, he seldom carried arms at that time, and had no
idea in the world of making himself comfortable in his
hut. He rather prided himself on living in the simplest
way. I believe he could have subsisted on the chase, or
on an occasional sheep and damper and pot of tea the
whole year round. Spirits we seldom ever tasted. Many
a station he formed where white man had never lived


before ; and many a patli in the new country still bears
his name. We then had two encounters with bushrangers,
and I with blacks, of which I shall tell you.
A few months after we were married, Struilby was a
long way off to purchase some articles, and on his way
home called on old Black’s. There, there had been a
cattle-muster, and fourteen men (Struilby among them)
were sitting smoking and talking by the fire. Suddenly
they look round, and at the door saw two men armed with
guns and pistols. They levelled their cocked guns and
swore that the first man who moved or spoke aloud they
would scatter his brains. Lawrence was sitting by the
fire on a solid block of wood ; he complained that one side
was roasting, he was so near the fire. “ Then,” said one
of the bushrangers, “just turn the other, and you!! be
baked by the time we have searched the house, but if you
move you’re a dead man.” They sent in a third man
to search the house for money. They searched a large
box and got some money, but turned out some valuable
cheques (one for £6O) as waste paper —the robber being
too illiterate to read them. Lawrence was indignant that
fourteen men should be bailed up by two. He therefore
said to a man beside him, “ I’ll knock one of them down
with this block I am sitting on, and do you rush at the
other.” It was to an old government man, called Billy
the Groom, he said it, and the reply was, “ By ,
if you move I’ll tell them, and you’ll get your brains in
your pocket.” When they took what they liked, they
mounted and galloped off. When Lawrence returned
home the following day, some of the men came into the
hut to enquire the news, for news is a precious commodity
in the bush. He was telling how three daring bushrangers
were out committing robberies and how they had bailed
up fourteen men at Black’s. Just as he had got so far in
his narration, some person said in a rough voice—“ How
many are there here ?” On looking round, there were
two men with guns cocked and levelled at us. They
ordered all to march out, and whoever did not, should
have their brains blown out. They all went out except
myself. I did not think they would shoot a woman. I
went up to the foremost of them, and laying one hand on
his arm implored him not to rob us. He ordered me
immediately to follow my husband. I persisted in my
entreaties, telling him we were not long married and were
struggling hard to get a little hold on the world. He
looked me hard in my face, and swore by God he would
not rob me. He kept his word ; for, to the amazement
of every person they went off without taking a shilling’s
worth.
Some time after we shifted from that place with the
cattle to what the natives call a“crinby” —a pool with
springs of water. Before, we had been at a place they
call a “ billibong,”—water-holes without springs and
liable to dry up. It was a remarkably out-of-the-way
desolate place. After the cattle were thought to be
sufficiently tailed, (hei’ded and taught together into
certain camps) they started to the bush ; and Lawrence
and all the white men were away on their tracks. They
slept on their tracks one night, and pursued them and
brought them back next day. During the first day of
their absence forty black-fellows came up to the hut,
painted and without their gins, which is a sure sign of
war. They asked me —“Where white-fellows?” I of
course gave them no satisfaction, I was taking my tea,
and they ordered me to give them bread (tong-ong) a
commodity I was very short of at the time. Flour was
then five pounds ten shillings per hundredweight; and, so
far in the bush, it was not to be had for money. How-
ever, I shared what I had with them; but that did not
satisfy, and one of them threw it in the fire. This so an-
noyed me —knowing how glad I should be of it myself —
that, in the heat of the moment, I twisted a leg out of a
stool and rushed them out of the hut, striking the fellow
that had thrown the bread in the fire a heavy blow between
the shoulders. He turned, and, uttering a savage yell,
said, “you be poor fellow before euroka begone next night,”
—you’ll be dead before the sun sets to-morrow night.
When they were gone, I shall never forget the feeling of
loneliness and horror that came over me. Night came on,
but no Lawrence, no white man ; —and I was alone in the
wild back woods, in a frail bark hut without bar or lock.
As the night advanced, I extinguished both fire and lamp,
and kept myself perfectly quiet. About twelve o’clock I
heard my kangaroo dog bark and growl, and I knew he
smelt a black. Presently I heard a small voice softly call
“ Mittis, mittis, you let in black pickaninny, mine piala
(I’ll tell you) news.” I took courage and unfastened the
door, which I had secured as well as I could, by placing
a stool and four pails of water against it. To my great
relief the boy was alone. He had stolen away when the
black-fellows had gone to sleep, and had ventured his life
to give me word that, the blacks were going to kill me in
the morning, “when the sun jumped up;” for they are
afraid to move, except in extreme cases, in the dark, for
fear of evil spirits. But for this fear they can track in
the dark, and no white person they desired to murder
would be safe within their reach. The boy said it was
“ Gentleman Billy ” I had struck, and it was he who was
to kill me. I gave the poor boy some thick milk to drink,
of which blacks are fond, and we spent the night quietly
crouching together. It was a night of horror and darkness
of death, and no one, but such as have been in similar
circumstances, can tell how the heart will warm and cling
even to a faithful kangaroo dog in such danger. Just
before day broke I let out the little black boy. Daylight
had a wonderful effect in cheering my spirits and scattei’-


ing the horror of the night. I knew the blacks so well
that I knew you must never appear afraid of them, and so
I resolved to face the danger before it came on me. I got
the double-barrelled gun (it was a little beauty which
Lawrence had bought for me shortly after our wedding),
and, looking at the caps, I set off looking for the blacks’
camp. They were all up and seated round their fire eross-
legged, like tailors. On my approach they all held down
their heads and began to jabber. I said firmly, “ Good
morning.” None took any notice, but still kept talking.
I said, “ My men, cobon mine been dream last night that
blackfellow was going to kill me when sun jump up.
Now, then, which one blackfellow ? ” No response. I
immediately levelled my gun at the tree near them and
fired one barrel. They saw where the bark flew off and
all started to their feet. I again demanded which black-
fellow wanted to kill me, and bade him come on now, for
I had another barrel for him and my gun never told a
lie. I levelled the barrel first at one and then at another,
repeating the question. They all fell back, crying “ Not
me, mittis, not me, mittis. No blackfellow wanted to kill
you —you murry good woman.” So after a good many
assurances I was allowed to go back to the hut, and was
not disturbed by them that day. About dinner-time our
men returned, and at night Lawrence. He was standing
before the fire drying himself, as it had rained some hours
before his return, when a violent knock came to the door.
Lawrence asked who was there, for we feared that it might
be' blacks. A voice - roughly answered that they were
policemen, who had a warrant to search our hut. On
Lawrence opening the door three men rushed in heavily
armed, and levelling their guns at him told him he was a
bloody big fellow, but to stand back or they would scatter
his brains on the floor. One of them, “ Scotchy,” who was
captain of the party, ordered me to hand him a light, and
in doing so I looked him in the face. He immediately
drew a horse-pistol out of his belt, and, putting it to my
face, vowed if I dared to lift my eyes at any of them again
he would shoot me. They were afraid, of course, I would
identify them if they should be taken. After I had given
him the light, Scotchy was going into our bedroom;
Witton was standing over us with his gun levelled and
cocked, and Russell was walking up and down, sentry
before the door. Lawrence said to me, “ I hope, Selina,
these men will behave as honourably as Scotchy did.”
He turned around and asked “ What was that I heard
you say about Scotchy ? ” Lawrence then spoke of our
first encounter at Morderay. Scotchy looked steadily at
him—it was a picture. There was Lawrence quite cool,
with Witton holding the loaded gun before him, and the
other threw the light full on his face. He said, “ Is your
name Struilby P ” He said it was. He then ordered
Witton to lower his gun, and called in Russell from before
the door. He said, “ Boys, this is Mr, Struilby; ” and
they sat down by the fire, while he went into our bedroom
for our fire-arms, which he said they must take, as they
could not leave weapons to shoot themselves. I assured
them, and truthfully, that it was not for them we kept
fire-arms, but as a protection against the blacks; and I
told them that the double-barrelled gun had been the
means of saving my life that day. Of course they asked
me what I meant ; and I told them with tears —for the
remembrance of the previous night made me weep bitterly
; —how I had been left alone in that wild, lonely place, and
had barely escaped with my life. It was the first of it—
at least the worst of it that Lawrence himself had heard.
I wish you had seen their indignation at the blacks when
they heard it all. They vowed they would go to their camp
and shoot all they could get. We entreated them not to
do so. At length they said they were determined to
frighten them; and they ordered me to bake a damper
while they were gone to the camp, to cany them on their
journey. Of course we were at their mercy, as they had
our fire-arms in their possession, and I had to obey. I
need not tell you that damper is flour kneaded without
barm, and baked in the wood ashes as you would roast
potatoes. Well, they started for the camp, and we soon
heard a terrible noise—the jabbering of the blacks and
the howling of their dogs, and several shots. The bush-
rangers demanded why the blacks had dared to threaten
a white gin. Of course they all denied having done so.
The others told them they knew they had, and that they
had come tc punish them. Indeed, they appeared so
zealous for my safety, that the poor blacks, I suppose,
thought they were officers of justice, and not robbers who
had themselves threatened to shoot myself and my husband
but a few minutes before. They told them they would let
them off that time with shooting some of theii dogs
(dingoes), but if they ever heard of them molesting a
white gin again they would follow them and shoot every
one of them. They then went to work and shot several of
their dogs, occasioning much consternation and grief in the
camp. On their return they told us what they had done ;
and we felt very much relieved to know it was only dogs
were shot. Several of the blacks ran up trees, and others
crawled into small bushes, and remained there all nig.it,
lest the terrible white men should come back and shoot
them. They returned before damper and tea were quite
ready, and sat down to joke and talk. Russell was from
the north of Ireland, near Londonderry, and entered
largely into the affairs of that country in conversation
with Lawrence. The others smoked, and asked Russell
for a song; and he sang a comic song; the chorus of every
verse was “The price of my pig.” It described how an
Irishman spent the price of his “ darlint cratur; ” and
we all laughed at it as heartily as if the turning of the


tune might not have been the death of two of us at least.
But it was a principle of my husband never to carry arms
except he intended to use them; and never to resist,
except he were prepared to kill or be killed. The arms
were all on the wrong side for him to resist successfully
then. They asked had he any tobacco; he produced a
large cake of fig tobacco, that was in a keg. They took a
spade and cut it into four equal parts ; they took three
and left him one. This, together with a damper and a
single barrelled fowling piece, was all they took ; and they
left in the highest good humour. They started, and so
did the blacks a few days afterwards, having kept very
civil while they remained.
The first thing Struilby did after the bushrangers left,
was to send a man to warn our nearest neighbour, who
lived at a place called Booga-booga-long. He had once
been a convict; and was very much disliked for having
been very cruel to government men that he had been set
over. It is wonderful how old convicts know the character
of the settlers, and there is no one they hate so much as
one of themselves that has been cruel to his fellow-
prisoners. This man’s name was O’Leary. He was from
Dublin; and had been married to a nice young woman
about seven weeks. The bushrangers did not then call
on him; and he got fully armed to meet them if they
came. At last he lost all fear of their coming ; and used
to run into the hut and playfully tell his wife “ here they
are,” and they acted over in mirth a battle with the bush-
rangers. They spoke very hardly of Lawrence and me,
because we sat and talked with the robbers, but what
could we do ? They blamed me for not putting poison in
the damper; but that I could not and would not do to
any human creature, and especially to men, who, however
bad, treated us with a degree of honour and humanity.
If Lawrence had known who they were before he opened
the door, he would have fought them fairly; but he did
not suspect, and it was best he did not. About a fortnight
after they visited us, when it was thought they were clean
gone, they visited O’Leary. They had a spirit of determined
revenge towards him, which was still more embittered by
their hearing of his threats if they should come. They
came to his door after night and rapped loudly, and told
who they were, and asked whether he intended to fight
them or open his door. He made no reply, but crept
cautiously to his stand of arms in the inner room; he
cocked his piece, but was too much frightened to use it.
They heard a noise of drawing a gun to full-cock and they
said, “ Once we ask you to open the door. On receiving
no answer they fired a volley. One of the balls passed
through the two doors and through Mrs. O’Leary’s thigh.
She had on a brown cashmere dress in which she had
been married ; and several splinters of the door, together
with pieces of the dress, lodged in the wound. I was
present when the doctor probed the wound, and took out
several of the pieces. After the poor woman received the
shot she fell; and O’Leary cried out to them that he
would open the door, as his wife was shot. They entered,
and went and lifted the poor woman, and expressed deep
sorrow for what had happened. They told her it was the
first blood they had shed; but they had come to punish
her husband for past cruelty to poor fellows that were
prisoners, and were sorry she should be the innocent
sufferer. They always had a strong pack-horse with them.
So they went into the store and took tea, sugar, tobacco,
and flour, and loaded the horse ; and what they could not
carry away they strewed about, leaving the place destitute.
Mx-s. O’Leary was a long time before she recovered, and
was lame for nearly two years. The medical man was a
quack doctor. The whole of his drugs consisted of coarse
salts, bitter aloes, and bread pills. He had been stopping
at a house where there was a very young child—a boy.
The child, by a chain, climbed up to the top of a set of
drawers and swallowed half a cupful of the doctor’s pills.
The alarm of the mother was extreme; but our bush
doctor quieted her by the assurance that they only con-
sisted of chewed bread dipped in fine flour. This was
poor Mrs. O’Leary’s physician. I often went to see her;
and it was perfectly ridiculous to hear how her husband
comforted her in her anguish. In the strongest Dublin
accent, he assured her that her case would be stated in
all the newspapers, and that even the Queen would hear
of it; and the scoundrels would be hanged as sure as a
gun. He appeared to wonder that this did not relieve
her pain ; which I could not but wish Tie had been bearing
instead of the uncomplaining poor woman.
On another occasion, two bushrangers visited our hut
when Lawrence was from home with a Scotchman we had
hired. His wife was washing at a tub when they alighted
at the door, fully armed. They said to me, “ mam, we do
not wish to insult you even by a word; but this woman’s
husband has threatened us should we come this way.
Had we got himself we should have preferred it, but we’ll
take his wife and he can come for her.” I implored them,
with prayers and tears, for God’s sake, not to take the
woman away ; but away they took her on a horse before
one of them. When her husband and Lawrence came
home and heard it, the latter grew pale with rage and,
getting his gun, offered to go to find them and rescue her.
Her husband blubbered and cried, but thought it would
be no use and had his supper. The woman returned next
day. Lawrence thought they might return, and he re-
mained at home several days with his gun over his arm,
resolved to shoot them or be shot. I was in dreadful
anxiety but was also prepared. I thank God they never
showed their faces near us again. They were both taken
and hanged; and I was very glad of it, though they were
civil enough to me. Others of their gang took away
several women, and kept them for weeks in their hiding


places in the bush. There was one man to whom word
was brought that they were coming. He was in bed when
a man, out of breath, shouted, “ the woman lifters are at
hand.” His wife was nervous and trembled and shook.
He said to her, “ now S , I’ll shoot you dead before
they take you ; be quiet or die. Ho ripped up the bed-
tick and put her in it, leaving her a hole through which
to breathe and made all smooth, and then threw down the
bed-clothes. When they came, he rose and let them in.
They asked for his wife. He said she had gone to visit a
neighbour. They saw the bed-clothes thrown down, and
believed him. He made them a pot of tea, and they
stayed and smoked and chatted at their leisure. I have
some idea what her thoughts were during that time.
The reader may be curious to know the latter end of
these unceremonious visitors of Mr. and Mrs. Struilby.
The account of their capture shows the darkest side of
bush life, and the desperate character of the men, with
whom colonists at that time were not unfrequently brought
in contact. The following is Mr. Struilby’s account: —
You ask me, my dear J , if the gang of Scotchy
Witton & Co., were captured, and how ? They were
captured; for Justice even in the colonies, has a long arm
and a sharp eye; and no delinquent finally escapes her. By
self-interest she swears in every man as a special constable;
and, I think, some of the most daring deeds done by man
have been done by some settlers in capturing or killing
bushrangers. I had no hand in the taking of my old
guests, for many reasons ; of which two may suffice. They
left my neighbourhood for a distant district, and I
was so intent on “ tailing cattle ” that I could not get
time for any hunt, except an occasional half-holiday to
capture a haunch of kangaroo venison. I had once been
put in jail on the false charge of absenting myself from
my station without leave which might almost have made
a bushranger of a braver and more reckless man. Again,
I never fancied bushranger hunting expeditions. They
are not at all pleasant, if the game comes to bay. Hid I
ever tell you how I was nearly killed by a kangaroo,
brought to bay by my two dogs, Settler and Fly ? The
old boomer, after a long hunt, choose to come to bay in a
pool ; where, standing six feet high he caught the dogs in
his fore-paws and soused them, till I feared they should
be drowned. I went in to help them with my clasp-knife.
When near enough I attempted blood-letting; but the old
fellow did not like my surgery, and lifting his hind leg
and thrusting it forward, put his immense long nail (he
has got two such on each hind foot) most unceremoniously
into my waistcoat pocket, ripping down my waistcoat,
trousers, and boot. Half an inch would have laid me
open, as the boomerang did Miall Tommy at Baroo, and I
should have no mudgegong to dress my wound. The
muscles of the hind-quarters of a kangaroo give him a
terrible power in his thrust or kick. Well I had rather
face my meek-looking old antagonist in a pool tlian face a
bushranger brought to bay, for they are often deadly
shots. Is it not Byron says, —
“ But when a man gets shot at once or twice,
The ear becomes more Irish and less nice.”
I have not an “ Irish ” ear if that imply apathy to art
assassin’s shot. I certainly should, nevertheless, have
joined in the chase after Scotchy and Witton, had duty
or self-defence called ; but, as I have said, they went else-
where. They- had a terrible grudge against two men»
whom they visited in succession. One was a Mr. Oaks.
Why they nursed revenge for him Ido not know. Gener-
ally it is in such cases, having been reputed cruel to
government men that brings them to seek blood. Oaks
lived at Parramatta, near Sydney, but had a station on
the Crookwell River, on our side of the Blue Mountains.
At his station he had a beautiful library, which he had
collected with much care, for there he and his family re-
sided part of the year. He had just arrived to visit the
station, bringing with him a confidential man as overseer.
This man being dressed in a black coat and hat, they
took for Mr. Oaks, and shot him dead. They burned the
station and library, and pursued the stockman for his life
into the bush. Mr. Oaks hid till they were gone.
They visited the station of Dr. Gibson, where Mr. Fry
was overseer. With this latter gentleman they had a
heavy account to settle. Once when he was going through
the Badger Brush, near Sydney, a gang of two had
attempted to rob the Mail Coach. He was on it, and was
demanded to deliver up. He hesitated, but at length con-
sented. “ Well then,” he said, “all I have is tied up in
this opossum rug.” He was ordered to give it out. “ If
I must, I will,” he said, and opening his rug he drew his
revolver to full-cock, and shot the robber who was
covering the driver, and took prisoner the other, who was
receiving the booty. For this all praised him, but the
enemies of life and property. Scotchy, Witton, and
Russell had been joined by another desperado, called
Reynolds, before they visited Dr. Gibson’s. Fry lived in
strong loop-holed hut, before the door of which he was
standing when my old visitors rode up. They inquired
was he Fry, Dr. Gibson’s overseer ? He said he was.
“ Then,” said little Scotchy, “ we are coming to fry you
in your own fat.” The subject of the pun turned
sharply into his door and secured it, and the bush-
rangers commenced a regular siege. One stationed
himself in the calf-hut, one in the stable, one
behind the house, another somewhere else, and all
blazed away. Fry kept his hutkeeper, an old convict,
loading while he fired. I believe he kept one undischarged
pistol for his special benefit, if he should flinch. One of
his best guns would not go off, and after the battle the
end of a candle was found driven into it. Whether this
was the crime or the blunder of the hutkefcper never could


bo ascertained. When, he fired from one loop-hole, he
moved to another to dodge his assailants. Once he
deliberately waited for a shot at Scotchy, after many had
been exchanged. He brought his gun to bear through a
loop-hole ; but the others were watching for him, and
firing quickly, went so close as to splinter the slab, a
fragment of which wounded Fry over the eye. They
thought he was done for ; but as Scotchy was putting
out his head to fire again, Fry’s shot caught him on the
eyebrow, and carried away part of his skull. As he lay
struggling in his blood, Witton ended his pain by a death-
shot ; and the bushrangers skulked away, without
effecting the cookery they had so wittily threatened.
The Attorney-general lauded “ the intrepid and mem-
orable ” (these were his words) Mr. Fry in open court;
and greatly to Fry’s detriment made him a commissioner
of public lands. The rest of the gang, after a desperate
fight, were taken by the police between the Crook well
and Abercombie rivers. The police were joined by
Mr. Oaks and a gentleman, McOuiness, who was another
object of special hatred to bushrangers. I must tell you
how for the honor of his wife ; though it is a story within
a s tory —a coarse kind of Chinese carving. A servant of
his after chastisement took to the bush, and after some
time returned mounted and dressed as a gentleman,
carrying a beautiful fowling*piece. He was so disguised
that his old mistress did not know him, when he inquired
for Mr. McGuiness on special business. She said he was
out duck-shooting, but would soon be home. As th<?
stranger’s business was urgent, he fastened his horse near
the door and waited.
When Mr. McGuiness made his appearaxxce the stranger
was all alive, axxd caught Mrs. McGuiness’ eye. He
levelled the gun to fire at the husband, but like lightning
the wife sprang and caxxght his arm. An old decrepid
man-servant hobbled out of the corner and caxxght the
oilier, and by no exertioxx could he shake them off. He
dx-agged them round his horse, howevex’, which he kept
between himself and Mr. McGuiness. The latter feared
to fire lest he shoxxld shoot his wife ; and the loaded gun
was still in the desperado’s hands. McGuiness quietly
stooped uxxdor the horses’ belly and discharged his gun
right up through the bowels of the bushx-anger who
dropped dead. This is that William McGuiness who
joined Mr. Oakes, Sergeant Frere, and two policemen in
pursuit of the gang of Witton. They employed a black-
tracker and traced them to a hut, whex-e they had lodged
the px-evious night. They had compelled the hutkeeper
to make tea for them, just as they had compelled us to
do; and they took watch through the night in turns.
They appeared careworn and anxious. At length all fell
asleep. Witton, the coxswain of the often started
convxxlsxvely in his sleep, axxd at length stalled xxp from a
troubled dream, crying, “ Here they come.” How one’s
heart sorrows to think of men so lost, and having such a
hell in their souls ! For, after all, their gaiety is but the
verdure that must soon wither over the thin crust of the
volcano, whose fiery flood is wearing ever nearer the
surface. So it was with my old dare-devil, comic songsters.
Their pursuers tracked them from the hut, for about
twelve miles, till they came to the angle of a rock that
hid their farther view. Here the black, discovering the
fresh dung of a horse, said, “ Make a light (look sharp)
croppy sit down along there.” From the close govern-
mental crop of their hair, convicts are called croppies by
the blacks. Blacks hate croppies, as they often meet
with cruel treatment at their hands. And croppies hate
blacks as heartily, because they so often prove the means
of their detection. Just then smoke curled up at a short
distance, and they saw the three bushrangers boiling their
kettle, while their horses were hobbled out to grass,
Russell shouted, “To arms, here they ai’e.” One of the
policemen in leaping the creek that lay between, broke
the butt of his carbine, for which he was afterwards dis-
missed. The two civilians dismounted and took to the
trees ; the troopers kept to their horses. Sergeant Frere
called to Russell to come from behind his tree, and fight
him fair. He accepted the challenge, and coming out
took deliberate aim at Frere’s breast. At that instant
the Sergeant’s horse threw up his head, and the bail
striking his withers grazed his xuder’s hat. The horse
staggeredand fell to his haunches, and Fx-ere dismounting
commenced the duel with Russell. His first shot did not
take effect. His secoxxd struck Russell in the groin, and
he fell. He rose again, but fell; and after shouting
“ Boys, I’m shot, but fight till you die,” he drew a pistol,
and putting it in his mouth shattered his brains about.
The other two were then covered on all sides, and thx’ew
down their arms in rage and despair; having, in may be,
some hope of life in the chapter of accidents. But every
promise in that “ Bible of fools ” is a snare, especially to
evil-doex^s.
Witton and Reynolds were lodged in contiguous cells
in Goulburxx jail, where they concerted to commit suicide
by hanging at a given signal Reynolds heard the signal
and hanged himself; Witton was prepared to do so, but
was prevented by the turnkey. He was publicly
executed.
From “ Lawrence Struiiby's twenty-five years of Bush
Life in Australiaedited by Rev. John Oraham.


A HISTORICAL BUSH FIRE.
" Where with fire and fierce drought on her tresses,
Insatiable summer oppresses
Sere woodlands and sad wildernesses,
And faint flocks and herds.”
—Adam Lindsay Gordon.
and its fierce concomitants, hot-winds and
bush fires, are the destructive agencies against which
Australian settlers have had to wage a continually recur-
ring battle. A battle in which the settlers have suffered
very grievous losses, but which has brought out many of
their sterling qualities, so that by manly endurance and
persistent effort they have already succeeded in rescuing
province after province from the desolation of dry and
consuming summers. This task of reclaiming the wil-
derness is being carried out chiefly by the systematic
storage of water. As a rule after a period of drought
splendid winter rain-falls come as if in compensation
for the preceding dryness and to wash away the sere
and sad traces it has left on the face of the country. A
good aver-age rainfall is given by a year’s, sometimes two
or three years’, supply descending from the clouds in one
tremendous downpour, so heavy as to tear up courses
for itself along the hill sides to quickly saturate the
parched plains and swell the almost dried creeks into
wide, rushing and unfordable streams. Some of the
rivers are provided against such a contingency by having
two sets of banks, one for summer and another for
winter. However, the flood waters do not remain long
upon the earth and it is only in the vicinity of creeks
and rivers that the settlers have anything to fear from
their deluging visitation.
The widely devastating powers of an Australian
drought stamp it as the crowning defect of the country.
It has been the cause of the most direful calamities
ever experienced by our pioneer settlers ; but in these
days its terrible ravages are confined chiefly to the newly
taken up districts, where it is the ever present hSte noir of
squatting life. During this dreaded period the long con-
tinued oppressive presence of the blazing sun has withering
effect on all vegetation and produces a corresponding pro-
stration in all animated nature, the close of day brings no
cooling dews to refresh the herbage and revive ex-
hausted animal life so that the general depression and
the parched and withered appearance of tho country
becomes every day more and more disheartening. For
want of water once luxuriant pasture lands are now
transformed into grassless wastes; the squatter is forced
to cut down the scrub in order to provide food for his
stock, nevertheless in spite of the most strenuous human
exertions to keep life in the sheep, they die in thousands_
The poor survivors of the flocks become but mere living
skeletons and have even been known to change their
herbivorous nature and in their dire distress to assume,
the habits of a car.ivorous wolf and gnaw at the bones
of their dead companions. The lambs escape the
of existence by being mercifully knocked on the beau
directly they are dropped, and this killing of the young
ones affords much needed relief to their dams. At the
same time the prevailing dryness reduces the squatter’s
cattle to a worse condition than Pharoah’s lean kine.
Should there be left any water in neighbouring pond
or dam its use as a welcome oasis in the desert is but
too often destroyed by the fury of the wretched animals
in quenching their thirst; the tramping of hoofs in the
shallow pond soon make the water as thick and sticky
as glue, the poor beasts too weak to extricate themselves
from the mud, perish miserably. Their rotting carcases
putrefying the water, pollute the air and bring from
afar carrion crows and the dingo in search of the foul
feast provided for them. The roads in some places are
strewed with the bleached bones of draught bullocks
These unfortunate animals yoked in ponderous waggons
have been goaded on by their almost maddened teamsters
until they have at length fallen victims to the all de-
vouring drought. Their bodies lying dead in the trappings
of industry make perhaps one of the most mournful
of the terrible scenes resulting from the long, long
summer.
That such pitiable occurences as we have endeavoured
to depict are not over-painted may be judged by the
official figures of the New South Wales Premier,
November 1885, which state the number of animals
killed by the drought in two years to be 200,000 horses,
1,500,000 head of cattle, and 13,500,000 sheep : a loss
estimated at more than £10,000,000 borne by the squat-
ting fraternity of the one colony of New South Wales !
The hot winds of Australia are another peculiarity of
the climate. They blow intermittently during the long
summers and their duration is generally limited to
three consecutive days. Mr. H. C, Russell, Government
Astronomer for New South Wales, has put forward
the following theory to account for their periodic recur-
rence. It is quoted in “Australian Pictures —“ If
water flowed over the whole of the Australian Continent
the trade wind would then blow steadily over the
northern portions from the south-east, and above it the
like the steady return current would blow to the south-
east, while the ‘ brave west winds ’ and southerly
would hold sway over the other half-conditions which
now a short distance from the coast. Into this system.
Australia introduces an an enormous disturbing element,
of which the great interior plains form the most active
agency in changing tho directions of the wind currents.
The interior, almost treeless and waterless, acts in
summer like a great oven with more chan tropical


wind blowing moderately these days are not unpleasant;
in fact, some persons pronounce them to be beneficial, in
that the dry air destroys noxious germs and effluvia.
But frequently throughout the summer season there
are days in which the hot blasts and the dust raised
by them are almost insufferable. On such a day the
heating power, and becomes 'the great motor
force of our winds, by causing an uprush and
consequently inrush on all sides, especially on the
north-west, where it has power sufficient to draw
the north-east trade over the equator, and into
north-west monsoon, in this way wholly ob-
literating the south-east trade belonging to the region,
and bringing the monsoon with full foi’ce on to Aus-
tralia, where, being warmed and receiving fresh masses
of heated air, it rises and forms part of the great return
current from the equator to the south.”
The sinking of the heated current of air to the
surface brings about the “hot wind” days. With the
morning breaks with a sultry calm, which is undisturbed
until about breakfast time when the movement of the
air points the vane northwards and portends the
coming hot winds. Housekeepers familiar with the
climatic vagaries resort to the expedient of carefully clos-
ing every door and window so as to exclude the glowing


heat —a precaution which is rewarded, especially in large
houses, by a comparatively cooler temperature reigning
inside The denizens of the bush are instinctively aware
of the approaching violent motions in the atmosphere
and seek the coolest shelter. Birds take themselves
to the innermost boughs and sheep congregate in the
shade of the large trees, while the cattle saunter by the
side of some running stream or stand knee-deep in the
cooling water of water hole or creek.
As the wind increases in violence the thermoneter
rises quickly, often to more than 100 degrees in the
shade, and the hot oppressiveness is greatly increased
by whirling columns of dust. Shortly after noon the
storm attains its greatest fury and for a time overcomes
nil nature by the storrid gusts which blow as heated
blasts from a furnace. Its course is marked by cracks
here and there in the parched earth and scarcely a
blade of vegetation on the ground. As the hot wind
moans and whistles through the trees, birds drop dead
from the branches, shrivelled fruit and sere leaves fall
from the orchard trees, while shrubs and plants have
the appearance of bundles of sticks.
These winds are said to resemble in some respects the
Siroco which arises in the great deserts of Africa and from
time to time visits the shores of the Mediterranean with
its scorching breath. But the hot winds in Australia last
only for a short period and their course is sometimes
singularly limited in extent, as is indeed the case with
‘Australian storms in general. Travellers through the
bush have come across hurricane lines, occasioned by
furious hurricanes passing over a narrow belt of country
and leaving the surrounding districts untouched. The
track where they have passed is marked by thousands of
trees levelled to the ground, many of them torn up by the
roots, and their stout branches all turned and twisted by
the fiei’ce whirlwinds.
The greatest danger to be apprehended during the
raging of the hot north winds arises from bush fires.
After a long summer large portions of the country become
dry almost to whiteness, and are as vast sheets of tinder
to the smallest spark from a careless bushman’s pipe or to
the sun’s burning rays striking through a broken bottle.
When the wind blows in force and once the scorched grass
is fairly ignited, the fire spreads to shrub and tree with
terrible fleetness, and in a very short time the extending
flames cause lamentable havoc throughout the country.
Black Thursday is a name that recalls to the memory of
many early colonists of Victoria pitiful scenes of suffering
and desolation inflicted by the widespread ravages of the
bush fires that marked the close of the summer of 1851.
The intense heat of that particular day, coupled with the
terrible and extensive damage and loss of life throughout
Victoria, have caused Black Thursday to become a house-
hold name in the colony. A resident in Melbourne at the
time says : —“ The morning of the 6th of February broke
hot and clear, with a sky of glaring pitiless blue, peculiar
during hot winds, while the air, even at an early hour,
was dry and parching. I had been sitting up with a
friend in a closed room with the curtains drawn, and with
clothes tacked across the window, when at about eleven
o’clock I drew aside the curtains to look at the weather,
and found the glass of the window pane'’ so heated that I
was glad quickly to withdraw my hand. The appearance
of the day then was so menacing and unusual, that we
were roused from the torpor and lassitude occasioned by
extreme heat, and impelled to look around us. The wind
was still rising as the day wore on, moaning and whistling
through the streets and hollows in fiery suffocating blasts
that seemed to issue from a furnace heated seven times.
Clouds of smoke and dust obscured the sun, while the air
was dense with dead leaves and other charred matter,
whirled on high by the wind. The gloom and weight of
the atmosphere continued hourly to increase, as the dust
and smoke grew thicker, wrapping every surrounding
object in semi-obscurity, while above, the sun was dimly
visible through the dense dark vapours, a lurid rayless
globe of bloody red.”
An English lady who experienced this memorable day
thus writes to a friend :
“ Melbourne , Februray, 6th, 1851. —Oh, my dear A.,
what shall we do ? Do not be alarmed —it is only that
the thermometer was at 106° at ten this morning in our
coolest spot. It is nearly two, but I cannot summon up
courage to go and look again, because I have to meet this
sirocco in getting to it; and it really glues up my skin and
takes away my breath. Moreover, we can scarcely see to
do anything (and it is always better to do something since
it occupies the mind and prevents one feeling so hot),
because here is one constant cloud of dust passing
through the air, as it might be drifting snow, or rather
driving snow; but oh, how different in appearance and
feeling! Were it snow we might complain of the cold*;
but then, how we should enjoy the great roaring fire !
For 1 would defy any one to find any alleviation from this
heat, except by ringing the changes on wet and dry; which
we are ever doing by the help of a large cup of tea a-
piece for luncheon. For a time this has a most exhilarating
effect—opening all the pores, and reviving the drooping
spirit; and it just enables me to begin a letter, and so to
feel that the day is not entirely lost: but how long the
effect will last, and how far this letter will go, remains to
be proved. I should tell you that in addition to the dark-
ness produced by the dust, we are obliged to have the
Venetian shutters closed, and the blinds down, in order
to keep as much heat and dust out as possible; but we
are in a wretchedly dirty condition, notwithstanding all
our care: the furniture is quite white with dust —we
breathe dust, we eat dust, we gather dust with everything


we touch. However, it is in vain attempting to depict the
disagreeables of this day; I only wish you could see and
feel it for yourself. I wonder how it will change. Rain
would be an inexpressible blessing; cattle are dying by
hundreds in the bush for want of water and food; and very
anxious fears are entertained for the country at large, if
we have not a good fall of rain before long. I have just ven-
tured again to look at oar thermometer. It has only risen
one degree—lo7° ; but it really feels hotter and hotter,
and the wind is blowing quite a hurricane : it sounds like
the roaring of the ocean ; and bits of sticks, leaves, &c.,
&c., come pattering on the verandah just like rain. Hay
is enormously dear on account of the drought, and is
likely to become more so. Finding that my seven
geraniums were completely dying, and scorching up, I
have just adopted the decided measure of taking them out
of the ground, and putting them in pots in the verandah,
where I can water them daily. I made the attempt with
one just about a fortnight ago, and it is not like the same
plant. It has sent out new shoots, and looks so green and
beautiful as to be quite a treat to the eye in this dreary
wilderness of dried leaves, and dried everything. This
weather takes a great deal out of one; and I should not
wonder if we have to return home in a few years to be
braced up. The last hot wind we had, two or three days
ago, gave one cold ; so now I have, in addition to the heat,
the pleasant accompaniments of a tingling nose and
watering eyes. In fact, my face feels like a sop, —do you
understand ? and I do not suppose it will feel right again
till we have some good sea-breezes, which will go through
and through us, and make us shrink into ourselves : for,
I assure you, we feel very like exotics when we come out
of these fierce furnace-blasts, and can scarcely bear the
bracing breezes to blow without exclaiming, “ Oh, how
cold !” How large lam writing ! it is because I cannot
see, I should think.
Feb. Ith (Friday). —l could go on no longer; the pen
melted out of my hand ; but xxow we have got plenty of
of light, and plenty of air, and the thermometer down
at 56°. I will try and finish my letter to day. The
thermometer continued at 107° till quite evening yesterday;
about eight o’clock the wind changed, and by nine it was
down to 70°. Then we began to open our eyes, and
breathe, and revive. I think I never spent so unpleasant
a day. We managed to eat a little curry for dinner (it is
almost the only dish we can make up our minds to eat in
very hot weather), and drank mud; for the dust kept
blowing in, and floating on the top of the water as the
glasses stood on the table. M. came in this morning,
and said it was the worst day he had experienced in all
the seven years he has been here.
But the narratives of the unpleasantness experienced
in town, the disagreeableness of the dust storm, and
the drying xxp of garden plots, appear trivial when
contrasted with the appaling accounts of the real dangers
and the agonising sufferings which many poor families
in the country passed through on that terrible day.
Scores of small farmers were literally burnt out of
house and home and were forced to flee before the all
devouring flames to escape with naught but their lives.
Selectors, both great and small, battled bravely against
the destructive work of the fierce conflagration, many of
them having hair-breadth escapes and several meeting with
frightful deaths. “A Resident ”in his “ Glimpses of Life
in Victoria,” gives the following graphic particulars :
“ The country had been simultaneously on fire in several
different directions, and had been swept by such a con-
flagration as was never seen before and has never since
been approached in violence or extent. Nor is it likely
that, under the present altered conditions of the country,
that so disastrous a fire could ever recur. The popu-
lation was scanty and the flocks depastured on the wide
pasture lands far too few in number to consume the
grass, which was even in summer high and luxuriant;
while a rank profusion of ferns, grasses, and creepers,
grew tangled masses among the under-growth in the
rarely disturbed solitude of the forests.
The summer of 1861 had been hot and long, and the
country had the appearance of a vast hay field, blanched
by the scorching sun and the inflammable as tinder.
One of the main fires orginated at Bullock Crsek, near
the Bendigo Diggings, where a scrubby distract had been
fired by a shephex’d with a view to clear it. The north
wind when it rose fanned the kindling flames, axxd bore
them on till they were far beyond all control. Other
fires in no way connected with this bx’oke out in different
directions and swept as rapidly onwards. So frightful
was the celerity with which the fire travelled, that the
swiftest horse could barely gallop away from it. Mile after
mile was traversed by the flames, and was left a wil-
derness with only smouldering ashes to mark the site of
once peaceful homesteads. On the great plains many
flocks of sheep fell a prey to the devouring element,
and drays that had been left standing, some perhaps with
their helpless teams still yoked, were totally consumed,
and only the iron work left remaining.
The mighty sheets of fire hurried on, gaining force and
fierceness as they advanced, darting out in long tongues
over the parched flats, and licking up the grass ; as they
reached the forest the flames curled round the ancient
stems, and creeping to the top of the trees flew on from
one tree top to another 1 , while through the tangled un-
dergrowth below roared a sea of fire The flakes of
burning matter were hurled aloft by the wind, and
borne across creeks and gullies, from one hilltop to
another 1 , and lodged on the house-roofs or hay-stacks of
the settlers, finding fresh fuel everywhere. The heat of
the air which seemed all alight with sparks, became


intense, nor was it cooled by the clouds of smoke and
cinders that gradually obscured the brightness of day,
and converted it into a lurid and awful twilight.
Among those who fell a prey to the flames was a
shepherd, whose charred and lifeless form was subse-
quently discovered in a sitting posture reclining against
a rock, and by his side his faithful dog, which had
shared his master’s fate. In another spot were found a
woman with two children quite dead; they were claimed
by a small farmer as his wife and children. Seeing the
fire approaching ho had fled for shelter to a swamp which
was close to his homestead, and by digging down among
the wet reeds had escaped unhurt, he had bid his wife to
follow him with the two children, having carried another
in his arms, but the poor woman never joined him,
having probably lost her presence of mind, and been
overtaken by the fire, or suffocated by the smoke. There
were many other deaths to swell the list of horrors,
and many flourishing farm settlements were completely
consumed with their homesteads, crops, and other
scarcely completed improvements. The damage which
had been wrought could hardly be estimated.”
In the Illustrated London News , May, 1863, an eye-
witness has given the following vivid description of a
bush fire:—
A BUSH FIRE IN AUSTRALIA.
(by AN AUSTRALIAN SQUATTEB)
My companion and I breakfasted when the sun was
little more than half an hour high; and, mounting our
horses, we crossed the river on a punt which does duty
for a bridge, and directed our horses’ heads towards Mel-
bourne. For the first hour we rode slowly, to allow our
horses to come to their wind, of which they were likely to
have need ; for we had determined on sleeping in an inn
on the Melbourne side of the Big Hill, which gave us
about ninety miles of a ride to do. An hour elapsed, and
then we began to canter gently; the canter became
quicker until we had increased our pace to a hand-gallop.
Perhaps there are no horses in the world more deserving
of repute for what is termed bottom than those reared in
Hew Holland; and certainly none which receive worse
treatment or do harder work, Who would think of riding
an unfortunate grass-fed beast ninety miles in Europe,
with nothing by the way but two feeds of oats, or an hour
and a-half’s liberty, to feed on grass ? This, however, is
what we proposed to do, and had often done before. Hor
was this our first day’s journey on the same beasts, as the
day before we had come twenty, and the day before that
thirty-five miles, across the bare plains of the Edwards
River.
The miles began to diminish as we kept on at a long
steady hand-gallop, pulling up our beasts for a few
moments every mile and a half, or two miles, to a walk.
The white bleached plains of the Campaspe, were left
behind. The heavy, sandy she-oak and box forests, also
were passed. The Mclvor Creek was gained ; and in the
roadside inn of the same name our horses had an hour’s
respite. We again mounted and passed on. But what
avails it to name hills, creeks, or plains, that so few
know. Within four miles of the little township of Kilmore,
a bush fire was raging on either side as we descended into
the rich flats which lie to the north-west of that township.
As we advanced we noticed that the hills around us in
every direction were enveloped in a dense smoke, and
mostly to the southward, rising thickly from the summits
of the Big Hill, across which lay our route. The heat was
intense; huge surges of fire were visible in the distance,
rolling with resistless impetus over the plains, leaping on
the wooded hills, blackening all that it passed over, and
and causing affright and destruction in its course.
Coming in view of a station which is situated in this
fine undulating park-like country, a disastrous scene pre-
sented itself to our eyes. The hills, as I have said, in
every direction were enveloped in a dense lurid smoke.
Huge trees—like gigantic funnels of steam-engines—were
belching forth flames thirty, forty, and even fifty feet in
height, which waved and curled in the wind. Horses
were galloping affrighted over the plain, and cattle in
long lines were rushing before us, bellowing as they
poured into the flats. Shepherds were to be descried
as they hurried their flocks for protection towards those
spots where the grass was shortest. Here and there was
a horseman galloping at headlong speed to his home in
the forests : all were seeking safety from the merciless
element.
A wild dog, which had been dislodged, came to the
edge of the forest. Loath to abandon his cover, he stood
for a moment uncertain, lifted up his voice in a long
piteous howl, scoured across the plain, and, in a moment
was hid from our sight by the tall green reeds on the
banks of the creek. Below us was a station; near the
house were a barn and wool-shed, and many stacks of oats
and wheat. The fire was gradually and slowly creeping
towards them; a thread of fire—if I may use the,, ex-
pression—like a thing endued with life, like a brilliant
serpent —was winding its way amongst the grass to the
fated stacks and buildings. We at a distance at once saw
that the struggles of the proprietor and several of his men
to arrest the flames were utterly hopeless; and, therefore,
did not move to assist them, but alighted from our horses
to view the catastrophe. They were as children on the
shores of the sea who would fain bar back the tide. In
vain they plied their green boughs, beating out for an
instant the point of the flames most in advance. The
luminous monster, as if forecasting a prey, noiselessly
stole on. There was but little smoke from this part of


the fire as the grass was short, hut it was very dry, and a
wind was breathing on the fire. In vain were struggles !
in vain were hopes ! but man will struggle: even death
is met with less regret, doing. And the hardy Britons
wrestled with their foe; but in every direction it over-
lapped them, and without a check kept on, and at every
point they were beaten back. They did their duty well,
and retired slowly, leaving nothing untried. And now
the fence which enclosed the stack-yard was almost
gained. I saw the master throw down his bough, and
could fancy I heard him exclaim, “ It’s useless for his
men all imitated his example, and it was time, unless
they had resolved to conquer their foe or be roasted.
They had just time, and time only, to escape from their
perilous position, all blackened and begrimed with the
smoke and ashes: a minute more and it would have been
too late.
The fire had conquered ; it leaped on its prey, it reared
its gorgeous crest upon the stacks, a dense smoke arose, a
mimic volcano spouted its flames, and in two minutes all
was reduced to ashes.
Without proffering useless condolence, we mounted our
horses and pushed on. For three miles we met no fire,
and were about to quit the little enclosed farms, which on
a bright spring morning have sometimes recalled to my
mind the green fields of England ; when before us to the
southward, and on our left, to the east, we met the ad-
vancing flames. The stubble was on fire. The fences
which separated the various farms were glaring red; the
flames were roaring as they swept over these lands,
reducing to ashes in a moment the stacks of the poor
farmers. Here we met a woman and four children on the
road , she was crying, and told us yon burning house had
been her home. I pointed to her in which direction to
fly, and we galloped on. Ti e two fires were now
meeting and burning the large brush fences on
each side of the very wide road. Four hundred
yards would see us in the township, and we clapped
spurs to our horses, but soon repented. I happened to
be leading, and pulled up. “ I cannot stand this,” said
I. “ Nor I,” answered my companion. Not another
word was spoken. We returned at a gallop, our horses
evidently much frightened. I felt as if I was suffocated.
Escaped from the flames, we kept a little to the right,
headed by the fire, and passed by a hut as yet distant
from danger. The owner of it asked me to tell some of
the people of Kilmore to come to his assistance. It was
perfectly useless, such a fire brooks not reristance. We
hurried on, and passed a little boy crying as he ran along
—he was not on the road, but going in the right direc-
tion. I was sorry afterwards that we had not seen him
out of danger. I hope he found his home.
Now we had passed the worst of it, and were soon in
the town, where ourselves and horses were glad of a little
refreshment after our hot work. Who can tell the
amount of ginger-beer we drank, or the number of pipes
we smoked, as we listened to the various accounts, rumours
and opinions concerning the fire; for the fire, of course,
was the general topic of conversation. It extended over
many miles of country; I cannot at this moment recollect
how many, but if I say sixty or seventy I am within the
mark. Indeed, bush fires are often much more extensive.
Some of the squatters in the inn related how several
thousand sheep had been overtaken and burnt in one
direction; others spoke of houses and huts and another
of a woman and four children, who had fallen victims
to the flames; and all concurred in the opinion that to
cross the Big Hill on the road to town was impossible.
That, however, we had determined to essay, though there
were two people present, who had made the attempt, been
forced to return. Business, however, of an urgent
nature forbade our delaying ; besides, we were heated by
what we had passed, and screwed up to the right pitch
for doing whatever was possible. Indeed had we been
cool and unexcited, 1 am not sure but that the smoke
and flames which were visible from the windows of the
inn, would have taken away all hopes of pursuing our
road. As it was, they only urged us on to try what we
could do.
An hour passed, and were again in the saddle. The
sun was setting low, and had lost some of its power; but
it was most plentifully made up for by the scorching
breeze, which blew over the burnt and smouldering plains
and forests. A few yards from our inn door was the
commencement of the forest-road ; and, shoving our feet
home in the stirrups, and drawing our straw hats tightly
over our brows, we stuck in our spurs, and gave our
horses the rein. And truly it was clear to us that those who
had described the road had neither exaggerated its dangers
nor its inconvencies. Hundreds of hollow trees were on
fire , their interiors, when visible, appeared perfect fur-
naces, and they sent forth a heat which, when we were
obliged to pass near them, was truly terrific At times
I thought I should fall from my saddle, which I could
not but think began to feel very crisp beneath me, The
wind every now and then roared through the burning
waste, carrying with it dense clouds of ashes, obscuring
everything nearly to the darkness of night. In these mo-
ments we were obliged to pull up, as the road became quite
invisible, though at other times so distinct that ordinary
nights I have galloped along it without any incon-
venience. Trees, a moment before spouting cataracts
of flame caught by the wind, were falling with heavy
crashes around us, filling the smoky air with sparks and
hot ashes. We knew not the moment that one might
fall on ourselves. Our horses, though long urged in this
furnace-like atmosphere to a smart gallop, were quite
dry ; the sweat, no doubt, carried off by the intense heat


of the atmosphere. Several times I thought it very
problematical whether we should ever make our exit;
and yet there was an excitement about the thing that
did not make me regret having made the attempt. But
the road seemed dreadfully long, the various objects
which recalled our “ whereabouts ” were burnt or in-
visible. Here and there a fallen tree, like a pillar of
fire, lay across our path, obliging us to leave the road
and go around it; and when off the beaten track, our
horses, in the obscurity, sometimes trod on spots where
fire had ci'ept into the earth, along the rotten roots of
trees destroyed by former fires, burning their feet, and
covering themselves and riders with hot ashes. My face,
too, had just that sort of feeling which made me almost
fancy that a rub of my hand would bring the skin off.
It certainly was the hottest job I was ever engaged in.
At last we saw some clear ground before us. This
was the summit of the hill; and on the last rise, as we
emerged from the thickest of the fire, we saw before us
several bullock dx-ays, and their teams standing on the
side of a hill. The drivers were, like us, begrimed
with the ashes and smoke which proceeded from the
burning forest; they were seated on the ground in
silence, their heads resting on their hands ; nor did they
perceive us, until we were within a few yards of them.
When they saw us, they all rose to ask about the road.
Our reply, of course, put an end to their hopes of pro-
ceeding; and we recommended them to chain their beasts
.to the surrounding trees, in order to avoid the hazard of
their wandering in rearch of water and getting burnt.
Our troubles were now past; twelve miles of unob-
structed road lay' before us, and eight of a burning forest
were in our rear. Our horses, in the comparatively cool
atmosphere, became quite refreshed ; and we pushed on
to the Kenlochewe, where, like Jack Falstaff, we might
ask each other, “ Shall we not take our ease in our inn.”
Mr. William Howitt, in “ Tallangetta or the Squatter’s
Home,” describes a young squatter’s adventures, on
Black Thursday, in primal forest round-about Cape
Otway. The tale is told in the words of an old lady
named Mrs. Quarrier and with realistic force :
ROBERT PATTERSON’S
ADVENTURES.
The forest extended fifty miles or more in all direc-
tions, one of the most dense and savage in the whole
colony. It was almost impassable from the density of the
scrub, and from the thick masses of vines (that is, lianas,
or climbing cord-like plants, chiefly parasitical), which
climb from tree to tree, knitting the woods into an
obscure and impenetrable shade. Excepting along the
track from Mr. Roadnight’s station, near the sources of the
Bar won, through the heart of the forest to Apollo Bay,
a distance of forty miles, you might cut your way with
an axe; but would find it difficult to make progress
otherwise. The greater part of the promotory —con-
sisting of steep hills covered with gigantic trees inter-*
sected by shelving valleys, and dark with congregated
fern trees, beetling precipices, and stony declivities —
affords no food for cattle. On Black Thursday, however,
a hurricane of flame opened it to the foot of man : but
presented him, at the same time, with a black and
blasted chaos of charred trees, and gigantic fallen trunks
and branches.
It was in this forest, in the early morn of 6th February,
1851, that a young man opened his eyes and sate up to
look about him. He had, the day before, driven a
herd of fifty bullocks from the station of Mr. Road-
knight thus far on his way towards his own residence
in the country between Lake Corangamite and Mount
Gellibraud. He had reached at evening a small grassy
valley in the outskirts of the forest watered by a creek
falling into the western Barwon ; and had there paused
for the night. His mob of cattle, tired and hungry,
were not inclined to stray from the rich pasturage before
them; and, hobbling out his splendid black horse Sor-
cerer, he prepared to pass the night. A fallen log
supplied him with a seat, a fire was quickly lit and his
quart pot was soon bubbling with its side thrust into
the glowing fire. He had a good store of kangaroo-
sandwiches, and there he sat with his cup of strong
bush-tea ; looking alternately at the grazing cattle, and
into the solemn gloomy and soundless woods, in which
even the laughing-jackass failed to shout his clamorous
adieu to the falling sky. Only the distant monotone of
of the morepork reached his ear. He very soon rolled
himself in his travelling rug, and flung himself down
before the fire, near which his trusty dogs lay, and where
Sorcerer slept as he stood.
The morning was hushed and breathless. Instead of
that bracing chill, with which the Australian lodger out
of doors generally wakes up, Robert Patterson found
the prespiration standing thick on his face, and he
felt a strange longing for deep breath of fresh air. But
motion there was none, except the little creek which
trickled with a fresh and inviting aspect at a few yards
from him. He arose, and stripping, plunged into the
deepest spot of it that he could find ; and thus refreshed,
rekindled his fire, and made his breakfast. But all
around him hung, as it were, a leaden and death-like
heaviness. Not a bough nor a blade of grass was
moved by the air. The trees stood inanimately moody
and sullen. He cast his eyes through the gloomy shadow
beneath them, and a sultry, suffocating density seemed
to charge the atmosphere. The sky above him was
dimmed by a grey haze.


“ There is tomething in the wind to-day, old fellow,”
he said, addressing his horse. “ There is something
in the wind: yet where is the wind ?”
The perspiration streamed from him with the mere
exertion of saddling his horse, and with the act of
mounting him to rouse up his cattle. Horse, dogs, and
cattle, manifested a listlessness that only an extraor-
dinary condition of the atmosphere could produce.
The forest closed in upon them again, and they pro-
ceeded along a narrow track, flanked on each side by
tall and densely growing trees ; the creeping vines mak-
ing of the whole forest one intricate, impenetrable scene.
All was hushed as at midnight. No bird enlivened the
solitude by its cries, and they had left the little stream.
Suddenly there came a puff of air, like the air from the jaws
of a furnace, hot, dry, withering. The young settler looked
quickly in the direction from which it came, and in-
stantly shouted to the cattle before him, in a wild,
abrupt, startling shout; swung aloft the stock whip
which he held in his hand, and brought it down with the
report of a pistol, and the sharp cut as with a knife, on
the rear of a huge bullock just before him.
Crack, crack, went the stinging, slashing whip; loud
was the bark of dogs; and the mob of cattle rushed
forward at headlong speed. The young man gazed
upward; and, through the only narrow opening of the
forest, saw strange volumes of smoke rolling southward.
Hotter, hotter, stronger and more steadily came the
wind. He suddenly checked his horse, and listening
grew pale at the sound which reached him. It was a
low deep roar, as of a wind in the tops, or of a heavy
waterfall, distant and smothered in some deep ravine.
“God have mercy!” he exclaimed, “a bush-fire!
and in this thick forest!” Once more he sprang
forward, shouting and thundering with his whip. He
and the herd were galloping along the narrow wood-
track. But, as he had turned westward in the direction
of his home, the woods —of which he had before seen
the boundary—now closed for some miles upon him;
and, as he could not turn right or left for the chaos
of vines and scrub that obstructed the forest, the idea
of being overtaken there by the bush-fire was horrible.
Such an event would be death.
Therefore, he urged on his flying herd with despera-
tion, Crack upon crack from his long whip, resounded
through the hollow wood. The cattle themselves seemed
to hear the ominous sound, and sniff the now strongly
perceptible smell of burning.
The roar of the fire came louder, and ever and anon
seemed to swell and surge, as if urged on by a rough
rising blast. The heat was fierce and suffocating. The
young squatter’s clothes clung to him with streaming
perspiration. The horse and cattle steamed and smoked
with boiling heat. Yet onward, onward they dashed with
lolling tongues. Sorcerer, specked with patches of foam,
seemed to grow furiously impatient of the obstruction
offered by the bullocks in his path. As his master’s
whip exploded on their flanks, he laid back his ears ;
and, with flaming eye balls and bared teeth, strove to
tear them in his rage.
Robert Paterson knew that the extraordinary heat
and drought of the summer had scorched up the grass;
had licked up the water from crab-hole, pool, and
many a creek. The country only required this fiery
wind to send a blaze of extermination over the whole
land. For weeks, nay months, the shepherds and
sawyers had spoken of fires burning in the hills; and,
in the fern-tree breaks of this very forest, he had been
recently told that flames had been observed in various
directions burning redly by night.
If the fire reached him and his herd before they
escaped into the open plains, they must be consumed like
stubble. The cattle began to show signs of exhausta-
tion, hanging out their parched tongues, and panting
heavily; the perspiration on himself and horse was dried
up by the awful heat, and the dogs ran silently, or only
whining lowly to themselves, as they hunted every
hollow on their way for water. Suddenly they came
upon an open forest on either hand, but at a considerable
distance.
What a scene ! The woods were flaming and crack-
ling in one illimitable conflagration. The wind, dashing
from the north in gusts of inconceivable heat, seemed
to scar the very face and shrivel up the lungs. The fire
leaped from tree to tree, flashing and roaring along,
with the speed and destructiveness of lightning. The
sere foliage seemed to snatch the fire, and to perish in
it in a riot of demoniacal revelry. On it flew, as fast
as the fleetest horse could gallop; and consuming acres
of leaves in a moment, still remained to rage and roar
amongst the branches and in the hollow stems of ancient
trees. The Avhole wood on the left was an enormous
region of intensest flame; and that on the right, sent
forth the sounds of the same ravaging fires ; but being to
windward, the flames could not be seen for the vast
clouds of smoke, mingled with fiery sparks, which were
rolled on the air. There was a sound as of thunder,
mingled with the crashing of fallen trees, and the wild
cries of legions of birds of all kinds; which fell scorched,
and blackened, and dead to the ground.
Once out on this open plain, the cattle were speedily
lost in the blinding ocean of smoke, and the young
settler, obliged to abandon them, made a dash onward
for his life. Now the flames came rushing along the
grass with the speed of the wind, and mowing all smooth
as a pavement; now they tore furiously through some
near point in the forest, and flung burning ashes and
tangles of blazing bark upon the galloping rider, But


Sorcerer, with an instinct more infallible than human
sagacity, sped on, over thicket, and stone, and fallen
tree, snorting in the thick masses of smoke, and stretch-
ing forward his gaping jaws to catch every breath of
air to sustain impeded respiration.
When the wind veered, the reek, driven backward
revealed a most amazing scene. The blazing skirts of
the forest; huge isolated trees, glaring red —standing
columns of fire; here a vast troop of wild horses with
flying manes and tails, rushing with thundering hoofs
over the plain; there herds of cattle running with
bloodshot eyes and hanging tongues, they knew not
whither, from the fire; troops of kangaroos leaping
frantically across the rider’s path, their hair singed and
giving out strongly the stench of fire ; birds of all kinds
and colours shrieking piteously as they drove wildly by,
and yet seeing no spot of safety; thousands of sheep
standing huddled in terror on the scorched flats, with
singed wool, deserted by their shepherds, who had fled
for their lives.
But onward flew the intrepid Sorcerer, onward
stretched his rider, thinking lightning-winged thoughts
of home, and of his helpless paralysed mother there.
With a caution inspired by former outbreaks of bush-
fires, he had made at some distance from round his home-
stead a bare circle. He had felled the forest trees, leaving
only one here and there, at such distance that there
was little fear of ignition. As the summer dried the
grass, he had set fire to it on days when the wind was
gentle enough to leave the flame at command ; watch-
ing, branch in hand, to beat out any blaze that might
have travelled into the forest. By this means he had
hitherto prevented the fire from reaching his homestead ;
and he had strongly recommended the same plan to his
neighbours, though generally with little effect. Now,
the fire was so terrible, and the sparks flew so wide
on the wind, that he feared they might kindle the grass
round his homestead, and that he might find everything
and every person there consumed.
But, behold! the gleaming and welcome waters of
Lake Colac ! Sorcerer rushed headlong towards it; and
wading hastily up to his sides in its cooling flood, thrust
his head to the eyes into it, and drank as if he could
never be satisfied. Robert Patterson did not lose a
moment in following Sorcerer’s example. He flung
himself from the saddle, dived, and splashed,
and drank exuberantly. He held again and again his
smarting face and singed hands in the delicious water,
then threw it over the steed that now, satiated, stood
panting in the flood. He laved and rubbed down the
grateful animal with wave after wave, cleaned the dried
perspiration from every hair, and giving him refresh-
ment in every pore. Then up and away again.
He had not ridden two hundred yards, before he saw,
lying on the plain, a horse that had fallen in saddle
and bridle, and lay with his legs under him, and head
stretched forward, with glaring eyeballs ; but dead.
Near him was a man, alive, but sunk in exhaustation.
His eyes turned wildly on the young squatter, and his
parched lips moved, but without a sound. Robert
Patterson comprehended his need ; and, running to the
lake, brought his pannakin full of water, and put it to
his mouth. It was the water of life to him. His voice
and some degree of strength came quickly back. He
had come from the north, and ridden a race with the
fire, till horse and man had dropped here, the horse
never to rise again. But Patterson’s need was too
urgent for delay. He found the man had no lack of
provisions; he carried him in his arms to the margin
of the lake, mounted and rode on.
As he galloped forward, it was still fire —fire every-
where. He felt convinced that the conflagration—fanned
by the strong wind, and acting upon fires in a hundred
quarters —extended over the whole sun-dried colony.
It was still early noon, when, with straining eyes, and
a heart which seemed almost to stand still with a
terrible anxiety, he came hear his own hone. He darted
over the brow of a hill—there it lay safe ! The circle
within his cleared boundary was untouched by the fire.
There were his paddocks, his cattle and his huts, and
home. With a lightning thought his thanks flew up to
heaven, and he was the next moment in his house, in his
mother’s arms.
Robert’s anxiety had been great for the safety of his
mother, her anxiety was tripled for him. Terror oc-
casioned by a former conflagration had paralysed her
lower extremities; and now, the idea of her only son, her
only remaining relative in the colony, being met by this
unexampled fire in the dense defiles of the terrible
Otway Forest, kept her in a state of the most fearful
tension of mind.
The moment the first joy of mother and son was over,
what a scene presented itself! The station was like a
fair. There was a feeling that the Patterson precautions,
which they themselves had neglected, were the guarantees
of safety. Thither shepherds had driven their flocks,
stockmen their herds, and whole families, compelled to
fly from their burning houses, had hurried thither with
the few effects that they could snatch up, and bear with
them. Patterson’s paddocks were crowded with horses
and cattle; the bush round his station was literally
hidden beneath his own and his neighbour’s flocks. Stock-
men, shepherds, substantial squatters, now houseless men,
were in throngs. Families, with troops of children, had
encamped on the open ground near his house, beneath
temporary tents of sheets and blankets. His house was
crammed with fugitives, and was one scone of crowding,
confusion, and sorrow. Luckily the Patterson store-room


was well stocked with flour, and there could be no want
of meat with all those flocks and herds about them. But
for the cattle themselves there must soon be a famine ;
and the moment that the fire abated, scouts must be sent
off in all directions —but especially to the high plains
around Lake Corangamite —in search of temporary
pasture. Meantime fires were lighted in a dozen places ;
and frying-pans and kettles fully employed; for, spite of
flight, and loss, and grief, hunger, as Homer thousands
of years ago asserted, is impudent, and will be fed.
The stories that the people had to tell were most
melancholy. Houses burnt down, flocks destroyed,
children suffocated in the smoke or lost in the rapid
flight; shepherds and bullock-drivers consumed with
their cattle. Numbers had fled to creeks and pools, and
yet had been severely burnt; the flames driving over the
surface of the water with devouring force, Some had
lain in shallow brooks, turning over and over, till finally
forced to get up and fly. Still, as the day went on,
numbers came pouring in with fresh tales of horror and
devastation. The whole country appeared to be the prey
of the flames ; and men who were, a few hours before,
out of the reach of poverty or calamity, were now home-
less paupers.
“The Maxwells, mother,” Patterson asked—“is there
any news of them ?”
“None, my dear Robert, none,” replied his mother.
“ I hope that they are quite safe. They have long ago
adopted your own plan of a clearance ring, and I doubt
not are just now as much a centre of refuge as we are.”
“ But I should like to be sure,” said Robert, seriously.
“ I must ride over and see.”
“ Must you ? I think you need not,” said Mrs. Patter-
son. “ But if you cannot be satisfied, let some one of the
men go; there are plenty at hand, and you are already
worn out with fatigue and excitement,”
“No, lam quite well and fresh —I had rather go
myself,” said Robert; “it is not far.” And he strode
out, his mother saying—
“ If you find all right, don’t come back to night.”
Robert Patterson was soon mounted on a fresh and
powerful horse, and cantered off towards Mount Hesse.
It was only seven miles off. The hot north wind had
ceased to blow; the air was cooler, and the fires in the
forest were burning more tamely. Yet he had to ride
over a track which showed him the ravages which the
flames had made in his pleasant woods. The whole of
the grass was annihilated ; the dead timber lying on the
ground was still burning; and huge hollow trees stood
like great chimneys, with flames issuing from their tops
as from a furnace, and a red intense fire burning within
their trunks below ; and from them burning earthy matter
came tumbling out smoking and rolling on the ground.
He was about crossing a small creek, when he saw an
Irishman —a shepherd of the Maxwells —sitting on its
banks: his clothes were nearly all consumed from his
hack, his hat was the merest remaining fragment, scorched
and shrivelled. The man was rocking himself to and fro
and groaning.
“ Fehan !” exclaimed Patterson. What has happened
to you ?”
The man turned upon him a visage that startled him
with terror. It was, indeed, no longer a human visage ;
but a scorched and swollen mass of deformity. The
heard and hair were burnt away. Eyes were not visible;
the whole face being a confused heap of red flesh and
hanging blisters. The poor fellow raised a pair of hands
that displayed equally the dreadful work of the fire.
The young squatter exclaimed, “ How dreadful ! Let
me help you, Eehan —let me take you home.”
The man groaned again ; and, opening his distorted
mouth with difficulty and with agony, said, —
“ I have no home —it is burnt.”
“ And your family ?”
“ Dead —all dead !”
“ Rut are you sure —are you quite sure ?” said Robert,
excitedly.
“ I saw one —my eldest boy : he was lying burnt near
the house. I lifted him, to carry him away ; but lie said,
“Lay me down, father —lay me down ; I cannot bear it.”
I laid him down, and asked, Where are the rest ? “ All
fled into the bush,” he said; and then he died. They are
all burnt.”
Robert Patterson flung the wretched man a linen
handkerchief, bidding him dip it in the creek and lay it
on his face to keep the air from it, and turned his horse,
saying he would look for the family. He soon found the
place where the hut had stood. It was burnt to ashes.
On the ground, not far from it, lay the body of the dead
little boy. Patterson hastened along the track of the old
road to the Maxwells’ station, tracing it as well as he
could in the fire and the fallen flaming branches. He
felt sure the flying family would take that way. In a few
minutes it brought him again upon the creek by which
the poor man sat, but lower down.
There stood a hut in a damp swamp, which had been
used years ago for the sheep washing, but had long been
deserted. It was surrounded by thick wattles, still
burning. The hut was on fire; but its rotten timbers
sent out far more smoke than flame. As he approached,
he heard low cries and lamentations “ The family is fled
thither,” he said to himself, “ and are perishing of suffo-
cation.” He sprang to the ground, and dashed foiwaid
through columns of heavy smoke. It was hopeless to
breathe in it, for its pungent and stinging strength
seemed to close his lungs, and water rushed from his eyes
in torrents.
But, pushing in, he seized the first living thing that he


laid his hands on, and bore it away. It was a child.
Again and again he made the desperate essay, and
succeeded in bringing out no less than four children and
the mother, who was sunk on the floor as dead, but who
soon gave signs of life as she came into the air.
The young man was now in the utmost perplexity with
his charge. It was a heart-rending sight. The whole
group were more or less burnt; but, as it seemed to him,
not so much burnt as to affect their lives. Their station
was three miles distant, ml he had no alternative but to
leave them here till he rode on and sent a cart for them.
With much labour, carrying the children one after another
in his arms, he conveyed the woful group to the father.
As the 3'oung man stood bewildered by the cries and
lamentations of the family on meeting the father, a horse
ridden by a lady approached at a gallop. This apparition
contrasted strangly with the lamentable group of sufferers.
“ Miss Maxwell !” Patterson exclaimed, “in the name
of Heaven, what news P How is all at the Mount ? Yet,
on Ihis dreadful day, what but ill can happen !”
“Nothing is amiss, that I know of,” said the young
lady. “We are safe at home. The fire has not come
near us.”
“ Thank God !’ said Robert. “ I was going to your
house, when I fell in with this unfortunate family. Will
you ride back and send us a cart ?”
“ But I beg you will come with me, for I, too, was going
to you.”
' “Tome !” cried the young man, in the utmost astonish-
ment. “ Then all is not right. Is George well ?”
“I hope so,” replied Miss Maxwell; but the tears
started into her eyes at the same moment, and Robert
Patterson gave a groan of apprehension.
“ 1 hope so,” added the young lady, recovering her
self-possession ; “ but that is the point I want to ascertain.
Yesterday, he went with Tuncen into the hills to bring
in cattle, and this morning the fire surprised them when
they had taken two different sweeps along the side of a
range. Tuncen could not not find George again, but
made his way home; hoping his master had done the
same. George has not yet come, and the fire is raging so
fiercely in the hills, that I could think of nothing but
coming to jmu for your advice and assistance,”
“ I will find him if he be alive,” said Robert. He
sprang upon his horse; and telling the unhappy family
that he would send them immediate assistance, both he
and Miss Maxwell galloped away.
No sooner did they reach the Mount, than, leaving Ellen
to send off assistance to the Fehans, Robert took Tun-
cen, the stockman, and rode into the forest hills. It was
soon dark, and they had to halt, but not far from the
spot where Tuncen had lost sight of his master. They
tethered their horses in a space clear of trees and of
fire. When the moon rose, they went on to some dis-
tance, uttering loud cooees to attract the ear of the lost
man; but all in vain. The fire had left the ground
hot and covered with ashes, and here and there huge
trees burning like columns of red-hot iron.
Finding all their efforts for the night fruitless, they
flung themselves down beside their horses, and, with
the earliest peep of dawn, were up and off higher
into the hills. Their way presented at every step the
most shocking effects of the fire. Ever and anon they
came upon bullocks which had perished in it. Here
and there, toe, they descried the remains of kangaroos,
oppossums, and hundreds of birds, seared and shrivelled
into sable masses of cinder. They came at length to the
spot where Tuncen and George Maxwell had parted,
and the experienced bushraan carefully sought out the
tracks of his horse’s feet, and followed them. These were
either obliterated by the fire, or failed from the rocky
hardness of the ground; but, by indefatigable search,
they regained them, and were led at length to the edge
of a deep and precipitous ravine. In the ravine itseif
the trees and grass remained unscathed ; the torrent of
fire had lept over it, sweeping away, however, every
shrub and blade of herb from the heights.
“ God defend us!” exclaimed Robert, “ the smoke
must have blinded him, and concealed this frightful
place. Man and horse are doubtless dashed to pieces.”
He raised a loud and clear cooee; instantly answered
by the wild and clamorous barking of a dog, which, in the
next instant, was seen leaping and springing about in the
bottom of the dell, as if frantic with delight.
“That is Snirrup !” exclaimed Tuncen; and the two
men began to descend the steep side of the ravine.
Robert Patterson outstripped his older and heavier
companion. He seemed to fly down the sheer and craggy
decent. Here he seized a bough, there a point of the
rock, and in the next instant, was as rapidly traversing
the bottom of the glen. Snirrup, the cattle-dog, which
rushed barking and whining upon him, as in a fit of
ecstatic madness, and then bounded on before him.
Robert followed in breathless anxiety, stopped in the next
moment by the sight of George Maxwell’s horse, lying
crushed and dead. Robert cast a rapid glance around,
expecting every moment to see his friend stretched
equally lifeless. But presently he heard the faint
sound of a numan voice.
There lay George stretched in the midst of a grassy
thicket, with a face expressing agony and exhaustation.
Robert seized his offered hand, and George called first
for water. His friend started up and ran down the
valley at full speed. He was soon back with a pannikin
of water, which the sufferer drank with avidity.
He now learned that, as had been supposed, in the
thick smoke, the horse had gone over the precipice, and
was killed in an instant. George had escaped, his fall


being broken by his steed; and he was flung into
the thicket, which again softened the shock of his
descent. But he had a broken leg, and was, besides,
extremely bruised and torn. Life, however, was strong
within him; and Tuncen and Robert lost no time in
having a litter of poles bound together with stringy
bark, made soft with grass and leaves laid in a sheet of
the same bark. They had three miles to bear the
shattered patient; to whom every motion produced ex-
cruciating agonies. It was not long before they heard
people in different parts of the wood loudly cooeeing;
and their answers soon brought not only a number of
men, who had been sent out in quest of them, but also
Miss Maxwell herself.
We shall not attempt to describe the sad and yet re-
joicing interview of the brother and sister, nor the
rapidity with which the different men were sent off upon
the horses tied in the hills for the surgeon ; who lived
ten miles off.
In a few days George Maxwell —his leg having been
set and his wounds dressed —had become easy enough to
relate all that happened to him; the dreadful night
which he had passed in extreme agony in the glen, and
the excitement which the loud ringing cooees of Robert,
which had reached him, but to which he was unable to
reply, had occasioned both him and the faithful and sympa-
thising dog, who barked vehemently, but, as it proved
in vain.
Amid the general calamity Robert Patterson’s heart
was filled with joy by a circumstance which appeared to
be little short of a miracle. For when he rode up to
his own station he beheld his mother —not seated in
her wheeled chair, but on foot —light, active, and alert,
going to and fro amongst the people whose destitution
still kept them near his house. The mass of misery that
she saw around her and the exertion which it stimulated
burst the paralytic bonds which had enchained her for
years. The same cause which had disabled her limbs
had restored them.
Towards the evening of Black Thursday the wind
changing to the south banked the fires and it then became
possible to extinguish them; although in many places
the flames had exhausted themselves by their own fury.
So sudden was the change that it brought unexpected
relief to not a few of the settlers who were wearied with
battling the flames. Amongst these we may mention
a country clergyman whose deliverance appeared to him
most miraculous. He eked out his stipend by working a
small farm and it was now in course of destruction by
the bush-fires- The fl unes were just about to envelope
his cottage and in a few minutes all his material posses-
sions would have been a mound of ashes ; the flakes of
fire flying through the air lighted to his hopless gaze
Ixis valuable hay-stack and happy home ; his wife and
children were in readiness to take to flight at the latest
possible moment —when the wind changed. A sudden
gust against the flames checked their violence and
raised the clergyman's hopes of yet saving his property.
He renewed Ids efforts and with the wind in his favour
very- soon Succeeded in extinguishing the flames.
Ere the relovutionary “buster” from the south rose
in opposition to the north winds, the conflagration had
extended over a space of about three hundred miles
by one hundred and fifty miles, covering some of the
fairest portions of Victoria with desolation and misery.
Sheep, in thousands, and cattle and horses in large
numbers had perished; many houses, fences, and bridges
had been completely destroyed; whole families had
been burnt to death and many a lonely traveller while
fleeing through the smoke ridden bush must have been
overcome by its blinding fumes and suffocating heat and
helpless in his solitude have fallen an easy victim un-
knelled, uncofflned, and unknown.
For days afterwards the country swept by the fire
presented a picture of utter devastation. The ground was
black and strewn with embers and the trunks of some
of the large trees were still smouldering. The general
dismalness was here and there intensified by the lean
and emaciated appearance of the sheep and cattle
which had been rescued from the flames and now by
faint bleating and bellowing seemed to cry for human
sympathy and help.
The magnitude of the fierce conflagrations of Black
Thursday may be further judged by the facts that light
cinders and singed leaves were blown over to Tasmania
and fell in showers on the decks of ships passing through
Bass Straits, while the lurid atmosphere was noticable
as far away as New Zealand.
A remarkable phenomenon occured some time after
Black Thursday. Suddenly in the middle of day a
darkness almost sufficient to eclipse the sun’s rays crept
slowly over some parts of Victoria. A gentleman, in
Gippsland, rode into his stable-yard as the darkness
was coming on, and before he could unsaddle his horse
he could see neither horse nor bridle but was obliged
to do all by touch. This extraordinary blackness
seriously alarmed many people. Some retired to their
bed-rooms hoping to escape their anxious suspense by
sleeping. They experienced great relief next morning
on seeing day break as usual. The phenomenon has
been attributed to the smoke arising from bush-fires
and clouds of fine dust floating high in the atmosphere
and being dense enough to entirely obscure the sun.
It was not long ere the devastated country again put
on its natural garb of beauty for the climate of Victoria
has wonderfully recuperative powers. With the coming
of the autumnal rains, fresh herbage sprang up to re-


place what was consumed and the land was as fit as
ever for pasturage and tillage. After a bush-fire the
charred matter remaining serves to fertilize the roots
of the grasses and a bright green sward comes up
seemingly before the ground is cooled. Such is the
luxurance of these patches that cattle and horses after
having once strayed to them and tasted the sweetness
of the new grass will, however distant the spot, make
every effort to return to it. The stockman on missing
his charge and knowing their propensity forthwith directs
his steps to the last grazing ground of this description
and is almost sure to find the fugitive beasts regaling
themselves with its juicy richness. Squatters to whom
this fact is known have no scruples in setting fire to
the withered grass on the less fertile parts of their
paddocks with a view of preparing more nutrutious pas-
ture for their flocks.
When a belt of country has recovered from a bush-
fire, a strangeness is imparted to the landscape by the
dead-alive appearance of the gum-trees. They are al-
most fire-proof. Their vital sap rises in an inner coat-
ing of bark and does not seem to be affected by heat,
for the tree may be enveloped in flames from the root
to the top-most bough and yet be very far from anni-
hilation. After the fiery-ordeal the gum tree appears
to be merely a blackened shell but in a short period
numerous shoots spring from the half consumed branches
and put forth green leaves. These and the bright
patches of grass surrounding the roots of the tree are
contrasted weirdly by the charred trunk.
Generally speaking the damage actually wrought by
bush-fires is less than is warranted by the first aspect of
desolation. At the present time the flames lack the
abundant fuel of the Black Thursday period owing to
the clearing and settlement of the country, and the
fire-risk has been greatly diminished by the vigilance
of pastoralists and farmers. A man about to burn
off the stubble on his land is expeccted to give notice
to the adjoining settlers and the precaution of making
a few furrows of naked earth around the buildings
will often keep any burning grass from reaching
them. When a bush-fire approaches settled parts
the whole neighbourhood turns out to prevent the flames
from getting the upper hand. The men and boys armed
with green boughs work together and endeavour to beat
out the fire, and they are ably seconded by the women
and children who bring fresh boughs and also supply the
toilers with refreshments. By a general attack from all
points the flames are gradually subdued.
SPLITTERS IN THE FOREST.
WORKING pioneers are the followers of the
timber-splitting industry. Their lot is to clear
the land for settlement by felling the large trees
of the forest and splitting them in convenient
sizes for palings, post and rail fences, &c., &c. The
life is a lonely and frequently a dangerous one.
Many a splitter heedless when in search of
monster trees has penetrated the torest’s deep re-
cesses and got “ bushed.” Others have met with
accidents, often fatal, owing to the falling timber ; in-
deed, such occui'ences may possibly account for the
mysterious disappearance of several splitters who have
been reported as “missing.” Mr. Bonwick tells of the
dreadful end which many years ago befell a settler in
the Victoria Valley. The unfortunate man had gone
out one morning and never returned. After a long
search his body was found beneath a fallen tree. It
appeared from observation that the poor fellow passed
by at the time of a tree falling. Thrown down by its
force, and held by its weight, he had struggled violently
to withdraw himself from the stem without success. The
hungry wild dogs had found him thus defenceless, and
had nearly consumed the body before the party dis-
covered the place. Although a splitter’s life is better
fitted for men in a state of single blessedness; yet
there are married men who take it as a step to-
wards the more congenial life of a farmer. These go
with their wives and families far away from civilization,
in the hope that by dint of much toiling they may not
only earn their daily bread, but may also in time put by
enough savings to take up a selection. A small clear-
ing in the depth of the primal forest, the splitter’s
bark hut, with happy children playing around the bush
home, these make a charmingly picturesque sight and
one calculated to cheer the heart of the traveller after
journeying through the silent bush.
The operation of splitting as described by one who
in the “fifties” cleared a selection, is thus:—
First, it is requisite to seek for a tall, straight, stringy
bark tree of good size, and after cutting a small piece
out to see how the grain runs, the next thing is to “ ring
it,” as it is technically called ; that is, to cut off a strip
of bark all round the tree for about a foot in width,
and applying a saw to the side on which the tree leans,
cut it until the saw is jammed. At this point an axe is
used to cut underneath the butt, in order to leave the
end of the trunk square; after this the other side must
be cut, and the tree will presently fall. Sometimes when
the tree happens to stand very straight, it will need a
wedge to be inserted in the cut made by the saw, and
driven in until the tree falls.


When the tree has fallen, the length of the posts and
rails must be measured off; six feet and a half for posts,
and nine feet for rails, is the general length for each ;
then it is necessary to ring the trunk again; when this is
done the bark must be stripped off in an unbroken sheet,
this is to be charred on the inside and spread out flat to
dry, when it is used for roofing huts, stables, &c. The
log thus cut is there split into as many posts and rails as
it will make. Some venerable denizens of the forest
require it to be split in the first instance with gunpowder,
and many of these tall fellows will yield as many as a
bundled good posts.
SPLITTERS IN THE FOREST.
BUCHAN CHARLEY, ™e BUSHRANGER
(a squatter’s tale of fifty years ago).
Report of Bushrangers—lts effect in the Neighbourhood—The Discomfited
Settler—An Unwelcome Visit—Buchan Charley—His History—Confessions
of a Bushranger—The Mounted Police—Sequel of the career of Charley
and his Gang.
other settlers we had heard on our way to our
station, various alarming reports of bushrangers
and their outrages. But after our arrival the subject
was seldom mentioned, till at last one day, after many
Some trees are said to realize more than 20,000 palings.
This seems too large for an average even for the bush
giants ; but the actual measurements of some of our forest
trees tend to remove the improbability. According to M. de
la Poer Wall, in his Physical Geography of Australia , a
Eucalyptus, brought to earth at Fernshaw, measured 480
feet iu length, 81 feet in girth, and at a height of 300 feet
from the ground had a diameter of 6 feet. In the same
forest there are, no doubt, gum trees rising to 500 feet, a
heighth within a few feet of the tallest spire in the world.
The government botanist, Baron von Mueller has called
these “ the tallest of'all the tall trees’of the globe.”
years of quiet, we received a most unwelcome piece of
intelligence —there were actually bushrangers in our
neighbourhood. They had made-their first appearance at
a station in our district a day or two previously, which
they had pillaged, without, however, injuring any one in
person, though report stated that they had threatened
to shoot the stock-keeper, or, to use their own expression,
to “ ]>ut a ball into him,” for being backward in producing
the saddle-horses.
It appeared that they were three in number, and that
their ringleader was a man who had once been a hired


servant in our district, on a station called “ Buchan.
At that time he was honest and industrious, but had left
his situation, and since then his character had rapidly
changed for the worse ; he had “ got into trouble, or, in
other words, had been committed for trial for an offence
against the law, had been sentenced to hard labor, but
had escaped with one or two others from his “ iron gang,
and, taking to the last resource of desperation, had now
reappeared among the scenes of his former and better life,
to become a general bugbear, under the denomination
“Buchan Charley” the bushranger.
From this time forth all was anxiety : we lived in daily
expectation of a visit, and were never suffered to forget
our danger for an hour. If anything went wrong upon
the station, the same excuse was always at hand; if a
party of strange horsemen were seen to disturb the cattle
on the plains before us, “ they were the bushrangers,” of
course ; if the saddle horses strayed away farther than
usual in the morning, the stock-keeper would prematurely
give up the search and return home in despair “ Buchan
Charley had taken them;” and manifold as his depreda-
tions really were, many more, of which he was perfectly
innocent, were laid to his charge.
But as a subject of conversation, the bushrangers were
quite a boon to the whole population of the district: wool,
colonial prospects, and the breeding of stock, were all laid
aside for a time to make room for the discussion of the
common enemy : —how long they were likely to be “ out;
were the mounted police in pursuit of them ; which of the
neighbours, if attacked, would show fight, and so forth ;
these, and many similar speculations, were in every one’s
mouth.
Most people in the neighbourhood had, however, by
their own account, received correct information of Charley’s
latest movements, and had devised some capital plan for
defeating either a day or night attack. On every station
the guns were discharged and reloaded every evening, and
there was an accumulation of powder and ball sufficient
for a tolerable garrison. It sometimes happens that
matters are in this thoroughly defensive state, and the
settler, chuckling over his precautions, is perhaps finishing
his last cup of hyson, when he suddenly finds himself
“ covered ” with the bore of a rifle, protruding through
the window ; his arms are close to him in a corner of the
l oom; his ammunition is neatly arranged on an adjacent
table, and to stir towards them is instant death. I he
mvsterious stranger on the outside maintains his post
until his companions have bound the victim fast to his
chair, when he joins them in the work of pillage, and
after taking what they please, and perhaps c itting many
a rude jest on the unhappy colonist, they leave him to
call the police at his leisure; to empty the barrels of his
guns, now filled with water (in order to preclude the
possibility of a shot in the rear as they are’ galloping
away); to rearrange his house, and if he thinks proper,
to render it once more proof against a visit from the
bushrangers.
Mighty preparations have frequently ended no better
than this; and so it eventually proved in our case.
About that time we might have been taken for gun-
smiths instead of settlers, and I well remember a most
romantic night that wo passed, with all the furniture of
the house piled up against the doors and windows, while
we lay in arms on the bare floor, in expectation of our
enemies, who, by the bye, we subsequently discovered
were not at that time within many miles of us, and were
little dreaming of the excitement they were creating at
a distance.
At length, one evening, long after we had grown tired
of the rumours of wars, and had discontinued our pre-
parations for defence, “ Buchan Charley ” came in per-
son, accompanied by only one of his party, whom ho
stationed on the outside, while he himself undertook the
head department, and acted as spokesman. Finding that
no resistance was likely to be offered, for we w ;re all, as
he intended, taken by surprise, he behaved, on the
whole, with civility and moderation, for though he
took all he wanted, including tvo of our best saddle-
horses, for which he kindly left his own jaded animals
in exchange, he committed no wanton damage, and re-
frained, and also compelled his companion, who wis a
ruffiianly-looking Irishman of the lowest grade, to re-
frain from committing any personal outrage upon any
one on the station ; and this forbearance has much merit
in the case of a desperate man, who had already incurred
the heaviest penalty of the law, and therefore cared little
about further consequences.
He had lately been plundering a store, and was most
bravely apparelled, better, in fact, than many of. ns
whom he came to rob. llis dress consisted of a new
moleskin shooting-coat, a gaudy waistcoat, with a pro-
fusion of watch-chain, cord trousers, and leather leg-
gings and he wore a “cabbage-tree” hat, the ribbons of
which streamed fantastically over his shoulders, A
powder-flask was suspended at his side, two brace of
pistols were stuck in his huge belt, and in his hand he
carried a short and highly finished double-barrelled rifle,
probably the favourite Man ton or Nock of one of our
neighbours. He was a tall, lathy-looking man, of about
eight-and-twenty, and his countenance had an expres-
sion of calm determination, but of assumed recklessness
rather than depravity.
“ Well,” said the bushranger, as he stalked into our
little abode, “ I suppose you all know pretty well who I
arn, ‘ Buchan Charley ’ as they call me. Now I’m not
going to4’iurt anybody, if you’re civil; but we want the
money, arms, and horses; and those, he added em-
phatically, “we’ll have. A nice place you’ve got of it


here,” said he, with a glance at our book-shelves ; “ I
could stay where lam all the rest of my life.” This
seemed to remind him of the fearful uncertaimty of its
duration ; for he looked grave, and for a minute or two
laid aside his effrontery. In fact, all this volubility only
betrayed the nervous excitement it was intended to
conceal, or perhaps under which he unconsciously acted;
for nervous he undoubtedly was, in spite of his assumed
coolness. My leather hat-case attracted his notice; he
cut asunder the band which fastened the top, evidently
not in the spirit of wanton mischief, but because, in
his agitation, he did not see the key, which was stand-
ing in the lock. His talk was chiefly apologetical, and
calculated to regain, as far as possible our good opinion.
He rambled incessantly from one subject to another.
The disjointed fragments of his conversation, when put
together in a more connected form, gave us in sub-
stance the following history.
111-treatment, he said, had brought him to his present
situation. Having worked bard and steadily for several
years, he had been paid by an “ order,” for which he
could never get the cash, as the house in Sydney, on
which it was drawn, had stopped payment, and he had
no redress. So, finding that, in his opinion, “honesty
was a fool,” as lago says, he tried its opposite, which
soon brought him to a “ road-party.” There his punish-
ment was extreme. Loaded with irons, working hard
upon the sandy roads, beneath a burning summer’s sun,
with a diet of salt beef and “ hominy,” and not even a
sufficiency of that, he could endure it no longer, and
resolved to escape, or be shot in the attempt. He suc-
ceeded in communicating his intentions to a fellow-
prisoner, who agreed to join him, and they resolved to
“chance it” on the very ncr.t opportunity. It was some
time before one presented itself, for between soldiers and
overseers it was difficult to stir a finger without observa-
tion.
At length the moment arrived. They had been sent
to work on a part of the road at some distance from the
stockade, and, as luck would have it for them, the over-
seer happened to keep the gang at work rather longer
than usual, and it was dusk ere they returned;
so, on passing a “patch of scrub” on the road-side,
they managed to slip into it unseen. Here they lay con-
cealed for several hours, during which they could hear
soldiers from the stockade in pursuit of them; but the
night was so dark, and the “scrub” so thick, that there
was little chance of their being discovered.
At midnight they ventured to emerge from their
hiding-place, and repairing to a blacksmith in the
neighbourhood, prevailed on him, partly by .threats and
partly by entreaties (the man having been himself a con-
vict), to knock off their irons. Thus they were once more
fairly at large ; but to sot them up in their new line both
arms and horses must be obtained. From a party of
stock-keepers, whom they dismounted, they soon pro-
cured the latter; and then galloping up to their station,
got possession of their fowling pieces, and thenceforth
were thoroughly equipped.
What sort of a life were they then leading ? was it a
change for the better, even after the horrors of the “iron-
gang?” No; Charley confessed voluntarily it was wretched
beyond conception, and that, if he could have formed
the least idea of what it was to be, he would rather have
remained in his fetters. Lurking in caves and fastnesses
of the bush, the very silence of which drove him to think
—his greatest curse; hunted day and night by the
mounted police; prevented from sleeping, or even tak-
ing a meal in security, by the knowledge that they were
always on his track, with “ his hand against every man
and every man’s hand against him,” he was now more
like a wild beast than a human being, and the never-
ceasing strain upon his mind was, he said, almost in-
supportable; but it was then too late to retract.
Yet there was courtesy even among bushrangers.
About two years before Charley had become what he
was, I had met him on his way to a station where he
had been hired, and had put him upon the right road.
This he remembered, and though he was now under
what, in a state of civilization, would be called the
“ disagreeable necessity ” of taking one of my saddle-
horses, he promised not to injure him, but to leave him
where he might be afterwards recovered, all which he
duly performed. Had I, on the above mentioned oc-
casion, ridden by without noticing him, he would
probably have remembered that also, and, instead of
leaving my horse in a place of safety, would either have
shot him, as he or his gang served many others, or put
him in some inaccessible part of the country, where he
might not have been found again. We never know,
in this fluctuating sea of life, when, or in what manner,
a civility may be repaid.
The mounted police, who, immediately upon a confirmed
report of “bushrangers being out,” are despatched in
pursuit of them, with orders to capture or shoot them down
wherever they can, have a most irksome and laborious duty
to perform, rendered still more arduous by the difficulty
of gaining correct information of their movements. The
shepherds and stock-keepers, occupying the lonely out-
stations, are the best authorities upon these matters,
if they choose to be so; but it unfortunately happens
that many of these men, who have themselves been “ in
trouble,” have a secret leaning towards the runaways,
or at least they remain neutral, and only see what they
think proper, and this renders it very difficult for the
police to worm out of them any intelligence upon which
they can depend. The bushrangers, on the other hand, be-
fore they have been “out” very long, are sure to


have correct informants in many quarters; thus it
frequently happens that while the police, concealed on
some adjacent spot, are watching a suspected hut, ready
to sally forth and surround it on the arrival of the
bushrangers, their track has been noticed by one of the
inmates, through whose means intelligence has been
conveyed to the enemy that “ all is not right,” and so
the bushrangers keep away until they hear better news,
and laugh in their sleeves at their misdirected pur-
suers. The bushrangers moreover are sure to be well-
mounted, for they can take fresh horses from every sta-
tion, whereas the police can seldom obtain a remount;
and, in addition to this, the vast preponderance of energy
possessed by men who are riding for their lives over
those who pursue them for the ends of justice, gives
them another great advantage.
“ Buchan Charley ” indeed talked with the greatest
contempt of the local authorities : the commissioner of
the district was an “old woman,” and the mounted police
a set of “ harmless men,” who could never get a
glimpse of his party, nor dare to follow him, if they
did, through the broken country to which he would be-
take himself.
After all the reality of the unwelcome visit fell far short
of the anticipation, and we suffered no great detriment
from it; money we had none to lose, for it is an article
seldom kept on an establishment at any distance in the
interior, business being transacted by means of cheques
and “orders” on Sydney. They took some articles of
clothing; among other things, a new white hat of mine
(from the hat-case before mentioned), which Charley wore
with great satisfaction to himself, and which moreover
was a mark that long served to distinguish him. The
most annoving part of the affair was the conclusion, when
we saw our unwelcome visitors scamper off, in a cloud of
dost, towards the next station, mounted on our two best
horses, which we had been keeping in condition for very
different purposes.
In one instance only, while they were at our station,
they threatened violence. They had met and dismounted
the son of a settler who was much respected in the
neighbourhood, but had restored him his horse upon
hearing his father’s name. This young man, more from
love of adventure than anything else, joined the mounted
police in pursuit of the bushrangers, who, upon ascertain-
ing this, were much exasperated at what they considered
unhandsome treatment, and sent him a laconic message,
that, “if they came across him, he was a dead man.”
The sequel of their history is soon told. After a career
of ten months, they were at last very cleverly captured by
the police, in an unguarded moment, when they had left
their encampment, unarmed, in search of their horses.
But as they were on their way to jail they managed to
procure a hand-cuff key at a station where they were
halting for the night, and, simultaneously freeing their
wrists, made a sudden attack upon their captors. Each
party rushed to seize the muskets of the policemen, which
were standing in a corner of the room. These in the
scuffle were trampled under foot, and the contest was
long protracted above them. The bushrangers were one
less in number than their opponents, but by far the most
powerful men, and were gradually getting the mastery,
when the sergeant of the police, by a dexterous manoeuvre,
succeeded in regaining his carbine, and in placing it at
the head of his antagonist, the luckless Buchan Charley.
This decided the event; two of the bushrangers sur-
rendered ; but the third, our Irish visitor, fairly fought
his way out of the place, and was not recaptured until
some time afterwards.
They were tried at the ensuing assizes at Berrima;
accusers enough and to spare appeared against them, so
we were saved the trouble of the journey and expenses of
the prosecution—no slight matters, however amply they
might have been repaid by hearing our old enemies con-
victed of “ flat burglary,” and brought up to receive their
fearful sentence, transportation to Yan Diemen’s Land
for life.
For a long time subsequently to their capture, it was
quite a pleasure to awake in the morning, and feel that
“ the bushrangers had been taken,” and that our supplies
might thenceforth remain safe in the store, and our
saddle-horses once more thrive for their owners.
111-fated Charley !—his unceremonious visit often re-
curred to our minds, and, bugbear as he was to us all, we
felt something like pity for his fate, and gratitude to him
for restraining his ruffianly companion, who richly merited
his sentence. But Charley seemed capable of better things,
as if, could he have retraced his steps, he would yet have
repented him of the evil. Even when plunged in crime,
beyond the pale of human mercy, he was not a hardened
villain; and for this reason the more bitter must have
been his remorse, as he paid the lingering penalty of his
last rash step, tempted by the bushranger’s motto, “ A
short life and a merry one.”
H. W. HAYGARTH.
From “ Bush Life in Australia


LIFE ON AN OLD CATTLE STATION.
TAILING.
AACHEN cattle are first brought to a new country they
are subjected to a process called “ tailing, which
consists in watching them with horsemen by day,
and driving them into their enclosures every night; they
grow very much out of condition under this treatment,
but it must be continued as long as they show any in-
clination to ramble back to their old pastures, and usually
lasts from three to five weeks, according to circumstances
Cattle that have been brought overland from a great
distance soonest lose the recollection of their former
haunts; and young stock are more easily managed in this
respect, as their memories are less retentive.
AN ANECDOTE.
Numberless well-authenticated anecdotes might be told
uf the topographical instinct of cattle, but I will oidy
mention an incident of which I was an eye-witness. I
was returning from an overland trip, and passed the night
at an out-station, the occupants of which were anxiously
awaiting the arrival of their supplies. These were always
sent by means of pack bullocks, for the road was so
mountainous as to be nearly impassable for drays. When
on the point of resuming my journey on the following
morning, the expected bullock was seen slowly approach-
ing, with his load upon his back, but without any driver.
We were now all anxiety for the mans supposed fate;
and as my road home was the same as that by which the
bullock had arrived, the investigation of the matter was
entrusted to me, so I got upon the animal’s “back track,”
and pushed off as soon as possible.
Sixty miles from the station, as evening was closing in,
I found the driver, alive and well, but in great tribulation
at the loss of his charge; and deep was his satisfaction
when, in answer to his inquiries, I informed him that the
animal, more sagacious than himself, had reached his
journey’s end in safety.
It appeared that he had missed the bullock on the
previous morning, while he was halting for breakfast, and
could not regain sight of him. Being a “new hand ’in
the country, he was an indifferent tracker, and had been
wandering about in despair near the spot where he first
lost sight of his charge, who, having been bred on the
station, had pushed on alone, and reached it on the
following morning.
I had kept his track all day, and found that he had
never once been at fault, or even stopped to feed ; and
several articles, which had dropped from his load at
OK - J. mniin oil iTrinro in t.VIP rllrpp.f line
A RENDEZVOUS.
Notwithstanding this strong propensity, cattle are made
to forget their old pastures by means of judicious manage-
ment and to settle quietly upon any new station intended
for them, if it is not wholly unsuited to their habits.
As soon as they seem reconciled to the new ground,
and are again trusted wholly at large, they do not long
remain in one herd, as during the time of “ tailing,” but
separate into several droves, and spread here and there
over the whole extent of pasture.
It is remarkable that each of these droves remains
perfectly distinct from the others , and so strictly do they
adhere to this habit, that, although several of them may
chance to mix during mid-day in the dry creek,s and open
flats, to which theyusuall}’ resort, and appear inextricably
jumbled together, yet each animal well knows his own
party; and it is very curious to observe the readiness
with which, upon any sudden alarm, the droves detach
themselves from each other, and make off towards the
forest, each in its own separate direction. The knowledge
of this habit is of great service to the stock-keepers when
they are in quest of any particular animal; for if they
have once remarked the drove to which he belongs, they
may always know subsequently in what direction he will
be found.
The usual feeding times are in the morning and evening,
and during the first part of the night; at mid-day they
congregate on the low grounds in the vicinity of water,
where each drove appropriates one particular spot, apart
from the rest, from which it never deviates. Here they
bask for many hours, lying closely grouped together until
the heat begins to abate, when they draw off towards the
forest in all directions, moving leisurely, and grazing as
they go. A numerous herd, thus spread out in the evening,
and dotting the plain with party-colored hues, forms a
pleasing pastoral sight.
A spot on which cattle are thus in the habit of as-
sembling and basking during the day is called a “ ren-
dezvous,” and is easily known, for, from the constant
pressure of inumerable vast bodies, the surface of the
ground becomes smooth and hard, resembling a blighted
ring in the midst of verdure, these marks still remain
on stations from which the cattle have long been re-
moved, and being seen from a considerable distance,
are frequently used as a means of direction to the lonely
traveller.
A CATTLE MUSTER.
The breeding of horned cattle has the advantage of
requiring comparatively little labour. Two men, a stock-
man and “ hut-keeper,” are all that are needed on a
cattle station during the greater p irt of the year. The
hut-keeper, as his name implies, has nothing whatever tc
do with the out-door work. This devolves wholly on


the stock-man, to whose charge the herd is delivered in
the first instance, and whose duty it is to be able to
muster, or satisfactory account for, the same number
that has been eounted out to him, together with their
increase, when required to do so by his employer.
The muster of a large herd of cattle is a very stirring
business, and may be described as a scene characteristic
of “the Bush” of Australia. Preparations are made
for a day or two previously, and word sent to the ad-
joining cattle-stations, as it is customary for neighbours
to assist each other; and at such a time as this there can
scarcely be too much help, the most indifferent performer
on horseback serving at least to “ stop a gap.
Operations commence at an early hour, as soon as the
sun has acquired sufficient power to draw the cattle
from the forest towards the water. The horsemen sepe-
rate into parties of two or three together, and skirt the
boundaries of the pasture, driving down the cattle in
every direction towards the “ rendezvous ” by crack of
“stock-whip,” an implement of peculiar construction,
the handle being little more than a foot in length, while
the thong, which is made of plated hide, varies from
twelve to seventeen feet; when cracked it makes a report
which may be heard at a very considerable distance,
while its powers of flagellation are formidable even to a
wild bullock.
The cattle, tnus roused, make off towards the low
grounds, where they are met by other horsemen, whose
business it is to keep them together upon the rendez-
vous until the whole party are reassembled, and then,
after a few minutes’ breathing time, they again start off
for the enclosures. The labour now begins in earnest,
for pattle seem to have some instinctive anticipation of
what is in store for them, and when they are inclined to
be refractory, nothing but the most persevering exertions
will drive them to their place of destination.
As they proceed the scene becomes more and more ani-
mated. From the main body of the herd, dimly seen
through a dense cloud of dust, a succession of furious
animals break off on all sides, some making back towards
the “ rendezvous,” others to their old haunts in the
forest: these are instantly pursued, and hunted back by
the stock-men, who may be seen belabouring them with
their long whips in every direction, until driven to des-
peration by over-driving and the severe discipline of the
lash, they frequently turn the tables, and become
themselves the pursuers. The air meanwhile is filled
with the report of the stock-whips, the barking of dogs,
and the cries and shouts of the men, mingled with the
heavy, tramping sound of many thousand of hoofs, as
the herd rushes on towards the enclosures.
The speed and activity displayed by these half-wild
cattle would astonish a stranger, who had been brought
Up in the belief that the ox is naturally a slow and
clumsy animal. On a level plain, or down a gentle
slope, which is most favourable to the action of cattle,
it is as often as much as a horse, and a tolerably fast
horse too, can do to head some of them for the first
hundred or two hundred yards; and, as for agility, it is
no small leap that a cow or bullock will “refuse” when
hotly pursued. In many herds there are animals whom
the enclosures will not hold, though six or seven feet
high, even at a time when the yards are so filled with
cattle that they are obliged to take a standing jump.
Some of them show excellent bottom, and instances
are known of horses being run to a stand-still by them
even in open-country. In addition to the gallop, which
is their usual pace, they have a long swinging trot which
enables them to get very fast over the ground
SMART HORSEMANSHIP.
Cattle-hunting, is excellent sport, and many gooutnierely
with the view of a day’s amusement; with less speed
than in horse-hunting, there is more variety, and from
the variety, and from the constant sharp turning and
close contact to which you are brought with the animal
pusued, greater skill in the saddle is requisite. Serious
accidents are not so frequent as might be expected, and
generally occur from fool-hardiness or want of experience.
However', it is never safe to trust the half-wild cattle too
far; if closely pressed they are always apt to wheel round
and charge at a moment’s notice, when, as their pursuer is
close behind, some disastrous accident may occur, if his
horse should chance to be hard in the mouth, or unused to
the work ; but this is seldom the case, for perhaps no
animal in man’s employment more thoroughly under-
stands what he is about than the “ stock-horse.” From
the earliest period of his breaking, he is taught to wheel
instantly when at full speed, on any ground; and from
the inate sagacity which horses have in discerning their
rider’s object, one that has been “after stock” for a
year or two reaches such perfection in this point as al-
most to justify the ordinary recommendation of an
Australian horse-dealer, that he can “ turn upon a cab-
bage-leaf.” The best exemplification of this faculty is
in the process of driving, or as it is called, “cutting
out ” a single bullock, to which he will not submit
without a sharp tussle, from the instinctive dislike to
separation which all the cattle exhibit. At first starting
he trusts wholly to his speed, but finding, after a trial of
two or three hundred yards, that his retreat to the
herd is still intercepted, he doubles short round in the
rear of his pursuer, who, were he to continue his onward
career, would thereby lose a great deal of ground; but
such is the agility of the stock-horse that he simulta-
neously wheels round, and still keeps on the inside,
without losing an inch : this sort of thing is repeated
again and again, until the baffled animal, by this time


exhausted with rage and well scored with the whip, is
fain to single out, and take any course that his tormentor
may direct.
The purchase and wear and tear of working horses,
and of saddlery, forms a considerable item in the ex-
penses of a cattle-station. A stock-keeper in charge of
a large herd must be supplied with three or four good
horses throughout the year, and at busy times, such as
mustering, branding, &c., more are required. The best
horses seldom hold out long, as their work is peculiarly
distressing; from constant sharp turning when at speed,
they are always liable to strains, and their fast down-
hill galloping, which is rendered necessary by the in-
variable propensity of cattle, when pursued to take the
falling ground, divides the weight unfairly, by throwing it
all upon their fore-legs, which seldom remain sound after
two years’work. But this is a secondary consideration ;
where horses are so plentiful much trouble is seldom
taken to cure an old one, which consequently has to work
on, whether sound or unsound, as long as he can “ head
a bullock.”
This sort of riding is at first very difficult, even
to one who has long been at home on his horse un-
der other circumstances ; the stock-keepers are gene-
rally well practised in it, and, indeed, as it is their trade’
one that was not so would be useless. Their style of
riding, however, does not exactly answer the usual idea
of excellence: they have generally a long and loose seat,
with the foot home, and the toe pointed to the ground
in a line with the knee, and they seldom have a good
hand on their horse; but notwithstanding this they are
very expert at sticking on under difficulties, and have a
most astonishing knack of getting along fast in broken
country, and especially down-hill, in which, prehaps they
are unequalled. The native youths particularly excel in
bush riding, to which they are accustomed from boy-
hood, and pride themselves not a little upon their feats while
“ after stock.” Early practise, however, is not indispen-
sable ; many stockowners who have arrived in the
colony late in life, become themselves excellent cattle-
hunters ; and one of the best I remember to have seen
was an ex-pickpocket from London, who, before he was
transported had hardly ever been in the saddle.
BAD HABITS.
The half-wild cattle have a constant tendency to acquire
bad habits, or what a sportsman would call to ran riot,
and to counteract these forms a great part of the stock-
keeper’s daily labour, as any of them, if confirmed by
time, become insurmountable, and then the only remedy
is to remove to new pastures, which is an expensive
affair, and not always practicable. The most frequent
and troublesome habit is that of breaking off from the
main body, or “splitting;” this, if not checked at first,
gradually spreads through, the whole herd, and is so
infectious, that if a single animal, when the herd draws
near the enclosures, singles off, and is not soundly hunted
back there and then, he is pretty sure to repeat it on the
next occasion, with the additional annoyance of taking
several others in his company. The memory of the half-
wild cattle, which is at all times retentive, is never more
so than under these circumstances : they seldom forget a
bad trick, if once found to he successful. The value of
a herd of cattle is of course considerably lessened by
these refractory habits, as they necessitate a great addition
of horses and labour.
As an instance of the extent of annoyance to which
this evil may come at last, I may mention what occurred
on a station in one of the large grazing districts to the
southward of Sydney. On and about the pastures,
which were very extensive, there were supposed to be
about 4000 head of cattle, speaking in round numbers,
or, as the auctioneers say, “more or less,” for, as will
be shown by the sequel, they were more easily seen than
counted.
From original mismanagement they had become so
wild, and had acquired so confirmed a habit of “ split-
ting,” that to muster them was an impossibility; and
notwithstanding that all the assistance was obtained that
could be got for love or money in the neighbourhood,
often amounting to treble the number of horsemen
usually requisite in such cases, the party considered
themselves lucky if they reached the enclosure with a
third of the drove with which they had started from the
rendezvous, a distance of three or four miles, the whole
extent of which presented one continued scene of confusion,
covered with men galloping helter-skelter after number-
less cattle, which were making off at all points, determined
to go in every direction but the right one.
A MOONLIGHT MUSTER.
The luckless proprietor of this lively stock, a man well
versed in such matters, tried every scheme that long ex-
perience could suggest to gain the control once more over
his cattle, but in vain; and, in short, to use the colonial
expression, “ they would not have gone into the enclosures
for the governor and all the legislative council.” His last
attempt to muster them, at least showed that his failure
did not arise from lack of energy. Finding that his cattle
had become too cunning by day, he resolved to try if he
could not outwit them in the dark, and laid his plans
accordingly. It was arranged that the pastures were to
be undisturbed during the day, but shortly before sundown
the whole party were to sally forth as silently as possible,
driving before them some quiet cattle, which, being
thoroughly under control, might be easily driven into the
enclosures, and thus serve as a decoy for the wild herd.
I forget how it happened, but so it was, that business


took me in that direction with one companion, and as we
were pushing on across the bush, unconscious of the busy
times that were awaiting us, we came full upon the party in
question, where they were encamped at sundown, at a
distance of four or five miles from home, eager for night-
fall to open their campaign. As we were neighbours,
and, what was more to the purpose, well mounted,
our arrival was hailed with joy. We were pressed at
once into the service, and thus we had an opportunity of
witnessing, and taking part in, a scene which was unusual,
oven in a country so thoroughly pastoral as Australia —a
“ muster by moonlight.”
Accustomed as we then were to life in the interior, this
sort of work differed as much from anything we had pre-
viously see in the usual routine of cattle-hunting as night
from day, and no less different was the plan of operations.
All noise was strictly prohibited ; the crack of the stock-
whip, which by day is indispensable, would here have
been treason; and we hardly ever had occasion to put our
horses into a gallop, but placed all our hopes upon
stratagem.
Driving the decoy herd before us, we skirted the edge
of the plains, and whenever we were led to suspect the
vicinity of other cattle, we halted, and, dismounting, so
as to be less liable to observation, awaited their arrival in
silence.
It was seldom long before the lowing of our decoy-herd
was answered from the distant forest, and presently the
wild cattle would come down from all quarters, and mixing
with the others, were driven on with them quietly enough
towards the enclosures, which, suffice it to say, we reached
at length with a large number of cattle, which for once
were outwitted ; and on the following morning we left
their owner in a state of great satisfaction at having at
length hit upon a plan for surmounting his difficulties,
though at the cost of turning night into day.
I well remember how highly interested we were with
the whole scene. The night, as is usual in Australia, was
fine and clear, and as we proceeded, gradually increasing
the size of our drove, we could plainly distinguish the
evolutions of the wild cattle as they mingled with ours,
and mark their vast bodies “ darkling ” amidst the trees,
4ieir innumerable horns glancing in the moonbeams, and
hear the quick tread of their hoofs upon (he sward;
sometimes a few, more wary than the rest, would join us,
and then, as if suspicious of foul play, would single off
again towards the forest, for which we had no preventive,
as silence was our cue, and the pursuit of them might
have alarmed, and occasioned the loss of, the whole.
Sometimes a bull, roaming alone through the pastures,
would enter our ranks, and long ere he came in sight, his
varied tones, now sullen and deep, then rising into a shrill
scream, clear as a bugle, until they died away in wailing
notes, would announce his approach from a considerable
distance.
This is one of the most melodious of Australian pastoral
sounds, particularly on a calm night, when it may be
heard, awakening the echoes for miles round, through the
deep glens, and pathless solitudes.
I was sorry to hear afterwards that the scheme com-
menced so auspiciously, proved eventually a failure; the
cattle, with their usual sagacity, penetrated it in a short
time, and thenceforth it was all lost labor, and their un-
fortunate proprietor found himself once more in statu quo.
As an expiring effort, he erected enclosures of extra
strength and height, and at no little cost, in that very
part of his station towards which the refractory animals
had always been observed to shape their course; but this
plan fared no better than the rest, and at the last muster
there was a deficiency of about 500.
FIGHTING BULLS.
When cattle or horses are spoken of as being “ quiet,”
the word must always be understood with some latitude,
as no comparison can be fairly made with stock that is
kept under confinement; many herds that might well be
considered dangerous in more civilized situations, are
looked upon in the colony as rather docile than otherwise,
and it is decidedly amusing to witness the cool way in
which a new-comer is informed, seemingly against the
evidence of his calm senses, that such and such cattle are
“not wild,” which indeed an animal is seldom allowed to
be, in the interior of the country, except one that, in
colonial parlance, would “ run at a mosquito.”
The bulls are permitted to remain with the herds during
the whole year, but they voluntarily single off during the
winter months, and retire to some dry creek, or “ gully,”
By Special To LADY LOCH
Appointment
MRS. ATKINSOH,
of ||urgical Ippplianccdf,
H. HANSLOW,
Jeweller, Watchmaker, Silversmith, &c.,
STAY and CORSET MAKER,
SO7 JUltzahetlh St., JMCelbozi-rne
102 COLLINS STREET EAST.
(Opposite St. Francis’ Church).
COUNTRY ORDERS PUNCTUALLY ATTENDED TO
Watches Cleaned, 3/6. Satisfaction Guaranteed.


in the forest, where they remain in solitude, and rejoin
the herd at the beginning of spring. Their contests, if
they meet at this time, are desperate. Bulls of the same
herd seem to have forgotten each other during the interval
of separation, and severe, and even mortal injuries are
often the result of an encounter.
A bull is at all times a lordly animal; but when roam-
ing uncoufined, as in Australia, there is a dignity and
freedom in all his movements which a state of domestication
does not develop, and it is remarkable that, wild as is the
nature of cattle in New South Wales, the bulls are seldom
vicious or dangerous, even in spring, when in England
they are not often to be trusted.
Their senses of sight and hearing are very acute, and it
is interesting to watch the sudden change which comes
over a bull, when, as he basks on some vast plain, in the
midst of his harem, he hears in the distance the deep note
which announces the vicinity of a rival. At the first
sound he springs up and looks eagerly round in quest of
his foe, while with his loud and angry roar he seems to
caution him against a nearer approach ; at sight of each
other their rage increases, and, like the Baresarks of
Gothic story, they seem to be preparing for the combat,
by lashing themselves into a state of frenzy, throwing up
the dust into the air with their hoofs, digging up the turf
with their horns, and even going down on their knees in
their excitement, as if, in imagination, they were already
trampling each other under foot All this time they are
gradually approaching to a distance of five or six yards
apart, when each draws himself up, and stands for a
minute or two, “collecting all his might.” There is
something positively sublime in this pause, which makes
the ensuing rush still more terrific. At length they close,
with an impetus which, but that their foreheads are of
the hardest, would be sufficient to split them both, each
manoeuvring to get the advantage of the upper ground,
and bringing either horn to bear alternately upon his
adversary, while the noise of the contest may be heard at
a great distance, for the rest of the cattle, well knowing
what is going on, run bellowing from all directions
towards the scene of action, and surround the combatants,
who thus fight, as it were, in a ring. When they are
evenly matched, the event is long dubious; but if one of
them gains the flank of h’s antagonist, he is nearly sure
JFOUISr LANG,
Tailor, Shirtmaker & General Outfitter,
114 BOURSE ST. EAST 114
Sporting Costumier. Club Outfits Tendered for or Made to Order.
Ties, Scarfs, Collars, Studs, Braces. Belts, Gentlemen’s Underclothing, &c.
BOURKE STREET EAST.
fiJTM iMnD dTdffil lHHni]
to injure or upset him, and a bull is naturally so spiteful,
that if he once gets his adversary down, he frequently
continues to gore and trample him for a long time after
all resistance has ceased, as if his rage were not to be
satiated by submission, or even by death.
It is very annoying to the settler, in the course of a
ride over his “ run,” to find his best bull, perhaps
recently purchased for a good round sum, at his last gasp.
Fortunately this does not happen very often : the weaker
or less skilful animal, finding his efforts unavailing,
generally rushes away with a dismal roar, “ multa gemens
ignominiam,” and is pursued, not only by the victor, but
by many of the other cattle, who, like true courtiers, have
been waiting for the issue of the contest before they
declare for either party. The conqueror then takes
possession of the disputed herd, while the beaten bull
wanders off alone across the plain in search of other
cattle, being at such times most dangerous to meet with,
except in the vicinity of some rock or tree, which may
serve for a means of escape.
DRAUGHTING.
The most disagreeable, as well as the most laborious
work connected with cattle farming in Australia is that
of “ draughting,” or separating and classing a herd, which
is necessary at certain times of the year, especially when
they are to be sold, or removed to fresh pastures. It is,
properly speaking, part of the stock-keeper’s duty, though
many settlers go through it all in person, being fond of
the excitement of the business, which indeed requires
both nerve and activity. A cattle enclosure is usually
subdivided into five yards : two of them facing the entrance
are large, the three others are smaller; the former are
known as “receiving,” and the latter as “ draughting ”
yards, all of which communicate with one another. The
whole herd are first enclosed in one of the large yards,
and thence as many are forced into one of the smaller as
will about half fill it; the gateway is then closed behind
them, and those leading to the other divisions are thrown
open, at each of which a man is stationed, armed with a
“ waddy,” or green sapling, about as thick, and four times
as long, as an Irish shi’lelagh, and operations then com-
mence. It is no easy matter to part the cattle in the
first instance, as they instinctively keep close together,
The MELBOURNE
■WAXWOBZS
Opon Daily, from 9 a.m. till 10 p.m;


and will not single out, except on compulsion ; and when
at length an animal is forced to do so, he is usually well
belabouied, and makes for the nearest gateway, literally
“ like mad.” If this happens to be the right one, he is
suffered to pass unscathed, but if otherwise, he receives
such a rap upon the head from the “ waddy ” of the man
who is defending the gateway, that he is fain to turn tail
and try his luck elsewhere, and he is thus bandied about,
amidst blows and shouts innumerable, until he takes the
right direction.
As the numbers in the draughting-yard diminish, the
risk increases, for the wildest of the cattle remain among
the last, and when compelled to leave the rest, frequently
chai’ge through every obstacle into one of the wrong yards,
whence they are dislodged with still greater difficulty.
The chief share of the danger falls upon the draughter,
who has to go amongst the cattle in the first instance,
and being sometimes threatened on all sides, should be a
very Argus of watchfulness. When pursued, he makes
for the nearest part of the fence ; but when there is not
time to reach it, he throws himself down upon the ground,
and lets the infuriated animal pass by or over him. The
other men, meanwhile, who are stationed at the several
gateways, have no sinecure, especially when three or four
animals rush together pell-mell towards an opening,
through which only one, perhaps, is to be allowed to pass,
and the others are to be stopped, almost at the same
moment.
Practice, however, does wonders; and the stock-
keepex-s, whose chief recommendation for employment,
next to bold riding, is that of being “ good men in a yai’d,”
display wonderful agility and indifference to danger,
drawing aside to let an animal go by, then springing back
again almost simultaneously to stop the with a
dexterity in the use of their “ waddies ” that would do
cx’edit to a Spanish matador.
A stock-yard, or enclosure for cattle and horses, which
no station in the interior of Australia is without, is usually
erected on a flat, or gentle slope, in the vicinity of good
riding ground, so that the animals, when breaking off, as
they are particularly apt to do at the entrance, may not
have the advantage of broken countxy on their side. The
fence is five-barred, and of vexy stroxxg construction, for
w. n. hunter,
SaiJirh anti Harness Ilia mi factum - ,
15 Post Office Place,
And 11 BOURKE STREET WEST, MELBOURNE.
CONTRACTOR TO THE YICTORIAN GOVERNMENT.
LADIES’ & GENTLEMEN’S OLD RIDING SADDLES 4 HARNESS TAKEN IN EXCHANGE
otherwise it would be unable to sustain the vast pressure
to which it is subjected when filled with the half-wild
cattle.
It is built entirely of wood, strong rails of which are
firmly driven into mortised posts, sunk in the ground to
the depth of three feet and upwards, and rammed down
hard at the butt end. Nails are not used in any part of
it The timber generally preferred is the stringy-bark,
blue-gum, or mountain ash.
The size of an enclosure varies with the quantity of
stock it is intended to contain, as, being an expensive
structure, nobody builds a larger one than he actually
requires. A space of about 14 roods in length by 12 in
breadth, will contain some 800 or 1000 head of mixed
cattle.
BRANDING.
One o± the smaller enclosures in used as a branding-
yard, and here the young stock are branded with the
initials or mark of their owner.
Two side fences, called “ wings,” are carried out in
fi-ont of the enclosures, extending to a distance of 10 or
12 roods. These are sufficiently wide at the outer
extremities to admit at once the whole herd of cattle, but
they gradually becoxxxe narrower towards the gateway,
and ax e of great service to the horsemen when riding in
the cattle, by concentrating them, and preventing them
either fi’om breaking away at the sides, or running past
the entrance.
Calves are branded at any age under six months, for
when the herd is numerous or refractory they must be
caught when they may. The roughness of the stockmen’s
proceedings caxx be equalled only by its rapidity —hundreds
of calves are x-oped, mxtilated, and branded in a day.
The stock-owners rxever seem to apprehend any ill effects
from this hasty treatment, or, if they do, they have
obviously made up their minds, in the colonial phrase, to
“ chance it.”
The fence of the branding-yard is more closely con-
structed than that of the other divisions, and is px-ovided
with what is called a “branding-panel,” which is, in fact,
a sort of scx’een, behind which the men take refuge, if
suddenly charged by axx infuriated animal.
BOYLE & SCOTTY
Cricket. Football and Sports
WAREHOUSE,
41 & 43 Bourke Street East, Melbourne.
PRICE LISTS POST FREE.


OLD COACHING DAYS.
ACHING days and ways in Victoria are now almost
a thing of the past, owing to the widely extending
ramifications of our railways. In one respect this is
to be regretted. By the shunting of the old lines of stage
coaches from the highways of the colony, travelling is
bereft ">f one of its greatest elements of romance, and
the country has lost another characteristic of olden times.
To the adventurous spirit on business or pleasure bent,
what more delightful could be imagined than an exhilar-
ating drive through the bush on the box seat of a coach
drawn by a team of six or eight mettlesome horses, and
spanking gaily along at the break-neck speed of 12 or 14 >
miles an hour ? What a charming contrast to the present
monotonous and wearisome but more rapid journey on a
level track, though made in a luxurious cushioned carriage
behind Stephenson’s wonderful iron horse.
However, in many bye-ways of the colony the locomotive
has not yet supplanted Messrs. Cobb & Co’s conveyances,
but they are every year becoming less in number, and
are retreating further away from the great centres of
population.
The name of Cobb has become übiquitous in Australia.
All coaches are called Cobb’s Coaches, no matter who
owns them or whether they are in appearance like the
original Cobh's or not. They derive their name from a
Yankee who introduced a line of vehicles into Australia
during the heighth of the gold fever in 1853 or 1854,
when there were thousands of adventurers travelling to
and from the diggings. His w r as a splendid venture, and
richly deserved the popularity and attending success it
soon attained, judging by the following description of the
vehicle till then in use on the roads of Victoria, which is
described by Mr. Wm. Kelly. He says . —“There had been
some feeble and ill-organised attempts at coaching com-
munication with the interior in 1853, but they were
neither safe, nor speedy, nor regular, and passengers who
paid exorbitant fares in expectation of being whisked up
to Bendigo, were at least three times on every stage
politely asked to alight and walk hip deep through the
mire even in the dark, to £ aze the poor horses,’ until the
system so closely approximated to the mode in which
Irish spalpeens are duped into working their passage on
the Grand Canal —viz., by driving the horses along the
banks—that people at last came to exclaim, like young
Pat, ‘ Arrah, be jabers 1 I might as well walk as be
travelling on fut this aways.’ The mail could not be
safely entrusted to those companies who never made a
through passage without a break-down of greater or
lesser magnitude ; and if the accident perversely occurred
in a district that could not boast a blacksmith, there was
no alternative but to abandon the wreck and trudge on as
one best might.”
This failure in travelling was altogether due to the un-
suitableness of the old-fashioned coaches. The rigid
stiffness of their iron plates and bolts proved to De not a
strength but a weakness, for when the heavy vehicle was
jplted over unmade roads the oft recurring series of sudden
jerks would quickly snap its unyielding joints. The
strong point in the American conveyance was its great
pliability . leather thong and braces were the features in
in its construction which specially fitted the coach for
surmounting the obstacles of the rough roads and open
tracks of the bush. The lightness also of Cobb’s coaches
was appreciated on those routes which were not un-
frequently obstructed by fallen timber. A giant tree
would sometimes be found lying right across the coach
track and completely blocking it. In such a predicament
the occupants of the coach would have to turn out and
construct a sloping piece of timber on each side of the
mammoth trunk, in order that the vehicle might be hauled
and levered safely across. Sometimes when passing through
thickly timbered country much watchfulness had to be
exercised, to escape falling branches and occasionally even
the trees themselves. Indeed, most coaching journeys
called for care, courage, and nerve, on the part of the
drivers, and many anecdotes are told of their coolness and
decision in overcoming the manifold difficulties and
dangers of the way. The American jehus were noted for
their calm good-humor and their skill in handling the
ribbons, though not more so than their apt pupils among
the Australian born youth.
An early resident relates that “ accidents were of rare
occurrence under their skilful management, and still more
rarely fatal. Down steep hills, round sharp corners,
through heavy bogs, or along the winding paths in the
LITTLE’S SOLUBLE /As a Liquid Disinfectant, is Unsurpassed. The Best Wash for
V DOCS and ALL DOMESTIC ANIMALS. Sold by all
a H _ ■■■««■ MB -b. ) Chemists and Storekeepers inis., Is. 6d, Bottles, and A-Gallon
PUCMwI t nS%SiySI«ISlPiril Uir ) Tins » 55. ; Gallon, 98. Gd. each.
new TLE UldlWrEb I HW I ( Seventeen Gold and Silver Medals.
The NEW POWDER DISINFECTANT for all Household,v LITTLE’S SANITARY
Sanitary, and Medical Purposes, in 21b. Tins, Is. Each.V
w rded F RS g xh 9^ t e .^ n ° f lB^ rifc at the Trade Mark PHENYLE POWDER


uncleared districts, where constant watchfulness was
needed to avoid the countless stumps which stood in the
way, some almost hidden by the grass, —by day and by
night—the careful driver guided his heavy laden vehicle
with unerring precision of eye and unfaltering hand. On
one occasion, as one of these great coaches took a sharp
turn on the brow of a steep hill, the brake, so necessary
on many of the Australian roads, suddenly snapped and
broke. The road was narrow, being only a cutting in the
side of the hill, and a slight fence was all that guarded it
against a steep, almost perpendicular precipice on one
side. At the foot of the hill was a bridge divided into
two narrow passages, each admitting only one vehicle at
a time; the slightest swerve of the horses at the narrow
turn to the bridge must have been disastrous, and such
an accident seemed inevitable considering the rapid rate
at which, unassisted by the brake, the coach must have
run down the hill; in like manner the fence at the side
of the road could not have resisted the shock had the
coach been swayed against it, in case the horses had
become unmanageable during the descent. The driver’s
resolution was quickly taken. * I guess I’ll have to
capsize you,’ he said to the astounded passengers in his
calm impassive Yankee tones ; ‘ Look out !’ No sooner
said than done; in another minute he had upset the
coach on a bank, just before the descent commenced, and
in an instant was at at the head of the struggling and
plunging horses. Great was the commotion of the
passengers ; women screamed and fainted, while the men
relieved themselves by swearing, but as they gathered
themselves together they found that of all the party only
one woman was seriously hurt, her arm being broken.
But for the quickness and presence of mind of the driver,
many of the passengers must have lost life or limb.”
Mr. William Kelly in his interesting book “ Life in
Victoria,” gives a very lively description of his coaching
experiences in the year 1858. We transcribe it to these
pages with a few emendations from the original nar-
rative :
KELLY’S COACHING TRIPS.
“ Having entered into preliminary arrangement with
i a b th, I started with him on a pleasant morn-
ing for Ballan, on which occasion I had my first taste of
stage-coach travelling in Victoria. The line was in
Yankee hands, consequently the machine and all the
fixins, save the horses, were of genuwyne manufacture
from throat-latch to crupper. The immobile human fix.
ture on the box-seat, with a hunch-clutch of the reins,
was of true down-east raising too, betraying no symptom
of animation beyond a shifting enlargment of the cheeks,
which I subsequently found was caused by a tobacco-
plug as large as a guinea-hen’s egg. My friend and I
tried the inside, hut even while motionless the position
was barely endurable, for the close proximity of the
seats brought the knees or shins of the passenger un-
avoidably in contact with the sharp edges of that in
front, and how it can be borne while bouncing over rocks
and crab-holes is a mystery scarcely reconcilable even
with the Christain toleration of the most veteran Pil-
grims. We therefore selected the hindermost seat
where we were placed with our backs to the horses
and our feet supported by a swinging-tray, delighted
besides in having it to ourselves.
However, our gratification was doomed to a speedy
dissolution, for as the Post-office clock struck, and the
horses jumped madly off to the wild Indian ‘ Heigh!’
of the driver, we very soon found that it required all
the muscular powers of our arms to retain our places.
The violent oscillation of these oblong vehicles in round-
ing corners or avoiding unexpected obstacles, the feaf-
ful way in which they plunge and dip in uneven ground,
and the heart-heaving bounds they cause in clearing
blind drains and broken tree-limbs, require the most
liberal exercise of imagination to conceive, and can only
be fully appreciated while in occupation of such a seat as
I tenanted during the first stage of my maiden journey.
I have experienced the necessity of holding on from
the weather roll of a steamer in the trough of the sea,
and often, as a youngster in a swing-swing, have shut
my mouth instinctively to prevent the escape of any
organ of any vitality; but I am unable to call to mind
any occasion on which my physical energies and mental
watchfulness were so severely and incessantly taxed as
on that. Conversation was impossible, neither were
the visual organs to be exercised comfortably during
this devil’s dance; nevertheless, I could from fitful
glances at my companion, detect tha* rigid latial com-
Agencies at Brisbane, Sydney. Adelaide,
Freemantle, Tasmania.
TnO O D
GIPPSLAND
a
fl
◄
M
H
Agencies at India, South Africa, Western
Australia, Victoria.
V
W
W
HOP BITTERS
TROOD’S CORDIALS excel for Purity before all others. Trood’s Gippsland Artesian-well Mineral Table Waters,
v i z . Lemonade, Sodawater, Ginger Ale, Lithia, Potash, Carlsbad and Victoria Waters. THOS. TROOD & SON.


pression peculiar to our Gallic neighbours, and catch in
my tympanum dislocated ‘ sacres,’ some so strongly
accentuated by bumps that the latter syllable became
frequently transmogrified into ‘ cray-ehs.’
Keilor was our first stage, where it was announced we
were to breakfast, and whence we had resolved to walk,
unless we could negotiate some transfer of seats. Now
coach breakfasts have never been very ceremonious
meals in the best-regulated countries, nor did I in the
least expect to witness any exhibitions of embrassing
politeness at my matutinal repast in Keilor; in plain
English, I made up my mind fora regular swap-and-cram
affair, but certainly thought the scramble would be con-
ducted in the true British principles of fair play, whereby
everyone would get a like start, and then devil take
the hindmost if they would. However, such was not
the case; everything desirable was appropriated in
transitu. Potatoes were grabbed from the dish on its
passage, while chops, steaks, and fried bacon were har-
pooned in like manner before they reached the table. All
this time my friend and I had not a chance of competi-
tion, being placed with our backs to the wall, emblems
of chagrin and disgust, aggravated by keen appetites
and empty plates, with cannibals in front of us, bolting
their food as if their stomachs and mouths were con-
nected without the intervention of an {esophagus, every
chunk seemed to drop like a penny into a till. I was
ready to burst with suppressed rage and I think a
straight edge laid on my friend’s head would have
touched either shoulder, so marvellously did he shrug
them. For a moment I looked angrily across at a fellow
hacking away at a piece of steak the size of a sheet of fools-
caps large portion of which was reposing on the cloth from
the inability of the plate to contain it. But I checked
myself in the act of asking him ‘if he meant devouring
it all,’ and desired the waiter to bring something for
our breakfast.
4 Wid, thin,’ says that functionary, ‘ sorra thing else
in the house barrin’ a pice uv salt beef, an’ I’m thenking
you’ll find it a tooth-fast’ner if you tuckle it.’
‘ Bring it,’ I rejoined, ‘ and be quick,’ for the mor-
ning’s shaking caused a great vacuum; and, meantime,
seeing the driver had ‘ got through,’ as they term it,
by his taking the tobacco-plug from under the seat,
and stuffing it in his mouth, I asked him if it was pos-
sibe to effect an exchange of seats; whereupon he rolled
the huge quid in his jaws as if it was his source of in-
spiration, but before he could elicit a response a young
fellow in a jumper exclaimed :
‘ What’ll you shout if me and me mate gives you up
the front perch ?’
‘ Ay, that’s the chat,’ chimed in his friend, by way of
chorus.
‘ Brandy or champagne,’ I quickly replied, for delay
did not suit me at any price.
‘ A brick by ’ was the joint and prompt solilo-
quy; and in came a bottle of brandy, standing on a
round of blue-moulded beef. I tried the beef, but, as
the waiter said, it was in reality of tooth-fastening
hardness, I might as well as have attempted cutting a
veneer off a knot of Irish bog as think of getting a
shaving from it; so I* hastily compounded, as did my
companion also, for a crust of bread and a glass of
brandy-and-water, which so charmed the hearts of our
travelling friends that they not only gave us up the front
seat, but insisted on paying for the brandy; for the
man who drinks brandy is the man for Victoria. Cog-
nac is the ‘ Open, sesame !’ especially to the digger,
just as sport is the passport to the admiration of the Irish
peasant.
* Heigh !’ and again we were off with an additional
pair of horses. As we diverged from what was then
called a macadamised road, a few miles above Keilor,
on to the bush track, which was both heavy and hilly, I
could not break the driver’s taciturnity by any device, nor
could I refrain from marvelling at the curious skill
with which he managed to steer us safely, at full
gallop, over watercourses and stony rises, which
to the uninitiated would seem utterly impracti-
cable for a wheeled vehicle at all; obliged to sit, too,
in order to have command of the foot-break, in what
would strike an old four-in-hander as a most awkward
position, and one in which it was difficult to suppose he
could have good command of his horses. However, there
he sat, rather leaning forward, with his arms distended
like a spread eagle, a pair of reins in each hand, and
his right foot hanging loose over the side to press the
break at an instant. And on we raced, up hill and down
TYPHOID !
This Fatal and Distressing Disease CA3ST BE AVOIDED by using Lewis & Whittys
The Great Deodorant and Disinfectant
Sold by Every Grocer, in Small and Large Bags.


dale, in perfect safety, but considerable anxiety and
uneasiness, reaching a solitary place called the Rock
Bank Inn—save the mark ! —in fifty-three minutes —no
bad time for a stage of eleven miles.
Our drive for the next stage was over a fine and
sweetly picturesque country, along wide, level dells,
closely carpeted with grass, winding through wooded
knolls and along little rivulets, and as the track was open
and unbroken, our speed was a sharp, steady gallop,
which I was beginning to enjoy from the smoothness of
the sod and the sense of security, when a cry of * Hold
hard, pilot —hold hard!’ was repeated from behind. The
drag and reins soon checked the loop, and brought us
to a stand-still, when Jonathan looked back angrily
over the roof to see what was the matter, revolving the
tobacco with energetic fierceness on discovering it was a
dropped hat. He said nothing, but, I could see, thought
‘ almightily,’ as we jumped off again ; bnt ere we got
another mile, when the horses themselves seemed to be
revelling in their task, snapping playfully at each other
as they bounded over the velvet lea, the cry arose a
second time, and up started Jonathan like a spring
bayonet, without checking the pace, and, seeing it was
a case of hat again, he hissed out through his clenched
teeth, ‘l’ll be G —d d—d, but you’ll travel in your bare
scalp this time, anyhow ! ’ and on we rushed at increased
speed, as if the reins were electric wires and conducted
his desire to the nags, for he never used the whip, nor
did they break their stride until we came close upon
the precipitous banks of Deep Creek. This is a deep
water-worn gash, intersecting the great plains, very wide
at the suxfface, and eaten down to a narrow channel, at
a depth, in many places, exceeding two hundred feet,
by the torrents which gather from the vast surface
drainage in the wet seasons. In some localities, where
the banks are more shelving from the falling in of the
upper strata, magnificent timber has arisen, with clumps
of shrubs and brushwood flourishing under their shade,
which render it charming to the lovers of natural
scenery. The point at which we crossed quite answered
to this description —a sort of titanic Dargle, wanting
only the exercise of some landscape gardening skill to
rival that sweet Wicklow retreat.
We were obliged to walk —or more properly scramble
—down the quick slopes, and, as Jonathan kept his
seat, he looked as if he had his feet planted against
the horse’s breeches, with the coach on his head, like a
huge shako. There were a few snug cabins, with trim
little gardens, on a small plateau just above the level
of the winter floods, seemingly occupied by sawyers and
their families, but who, as we ascertained, drove a re-
tiring trade in liquid refreshments, prescribed as neces-
sary before encountering the ascent on the opposite side.
Once seated again, we had a short but charming ride >
descending by a tortuous natural avenue, which wound
through some grandly timbered ranges until it reached
that immense and splendid basin of unctuous alluvion
called Bacchus Marsh.
The glorious country immediately beyond it, known
as the district of the Pentland Hills, are extensive
clusters of swelling rises, naturally naked of timber,
but endowed with superior soil, and connected one with
another by wildly sloping curves of fine land. The
drainage from these hills gives rise to rivulets and water-
courses, which generally become dry in the summer
months. Many of those rivulets are most charmingly
fringed with timber, and in the dells through which they
meander delightful vistas are often suddenly opened
out. But my constitutional rapture in these respects
was effectively kept under by the hair-breadth nature of
the driving through these gorges, with the coach going at
full speed, at a slant, like a boat gunnel under and a rocky
water-bed on our lee, with the leaders going directly at
right angles from the wheelers, suggested rather the
gabbling of a short prayer than a proper appreciation of
the perspective. Many a tree side we blazed with the
points of our azletrees during that stage, but we arrived
at Ballan without an accident.”
“ I made my next up-country start in one of Cobb’s
coaches (the Yankee line), which had a formidable
opposition in a colonial establishment owned and con-
ducted by Mr. Foster, who was the successful competitor
for the mail contract. Both coaches were choke full,
and jumped off at scores, as if the journey was a chariot-
match on which a great stake was depending. Round
corners, up hill and down hill, there was no abatement
of pace; nor was there any exercise of whip-cord, for
the horses seemed to comprehend and enter into the
SWALLOW & ARIELL’S Celebrated
WEDDING, BIRTHDAY & CHRISTENING CAKES
Beautifully Ornamented and Suitably Inscribed.
Show Rooms and Head Offices:— (V) TITOTVP AffiTAlT ® Show Rooms and cit y Offices;—
PORT IVtEI-BOXJRItfE. 1 INSPLOIION INVUJIiU. i 4 QUEEN ST., MELBOURNE.


spirit of the competition. At times, when there was a
struggle to see who could enter first on a beaten track
on a bed of macadamised boulders, it was quite as ex-
citing as a pair of opponents in a steeplechase racing for
a tender place in a formidable fence. If the track hap-
pened to be cleverly won, the beaten party fell into
line, with the foaming mouths and snorting nostrils of
his leaders in the laps of the passengers occupying the
hindmost seat of the leading coach. But when it chanced,
as it frequently did, a dead heat, then one set of wheels of
each vehicle were running on velvet, while the others were
madly jolting over rocks and stones that would not go
through a hoop, much less the standard ring of road
boards. We had one sharp but effective specimen of
this style of road-racing beyond Essendon, during which
the tops of the coaches often came into sharp collision,
and a tall gentlemen in the mail had his head driven
clean through the closed leather roof by a violent bump,
which produced instantaneous concussion of the hat, and
presented one of the most ludicrous spectacles I ever be-
held, like a man in a pillory crowned with the dilapidated
caubeen* of Billy Barlow. He took it most good-hu-
mouredly, and as the coach immediately after got on a
smooth track, he remained in the same position more
than a minute for the benefit of all beholders, enjoying
the enforced joke quite as much as any one else.
The breakfast at Keilor was a regular stans uno pede
meal, for both drivers gave warning that any passenger
who was not not seated at the starting signal would be
left behind. All, therefore, took good care to be punc-
tual and the strife commenced again as fiercely as ever.
We soon entered on the plains, which may be called
miniature prairies, extending fifteen miles in one nor-
therly direction to an elevated ridge called Aitken’s Gap.
Up to the gap there is a considerable ascent, but the
rise is cheated of its sharpness by the serpentine tracks
taken by the drivers along the sparsely-wooded hill-side.
Arrived at the top, it was a scene of extraordinary bustle
and uproar, for it was then a special camping place for
drivers and carriers, and the scores upon scores of horse
drays and bullock-waggons that were preparing for a
start, produced an amount of tumult, alteration, blas-
phemy, and compound abominations which would not
• Caubeen in Ireland is understood to mean a smashed hat;
find many readers even if I succeeded in reproducing
it. Beyond the gap the country is more rolling and
capriciously wooded, leaving several fertile tracts, inviting
the plough and the harrow, and abounding in dry water-
courses, which, according to my theory, will keep brawling
all the year round when the adjoining country comes to
be broken up. There were no symptoms of a town as we ap-
proached Gisborne, which is not discernable on either
approach until you come directly over it, being seated
in a deep gorge expanding east and west, and divided
by a pretty rivulet.
Immediately beyond Gisborne commences the notorious
and disastrous district the Black Forest, called, I take
it, after the forest of that ilk in the German dominions,
so famed in romance and reality as the theatre of free-
booting and exploits and wayfaring bloodshed; and
certainly the Victorian forest sustains its title to the
surname by the frequency and atrocity of the various
outrages which are perpetrated within its precincts, form-
ing the chief element in the excessive cost of carriage
to Castlemaine and Bendigo, for the carriers regarded it
with horror ard apprehension, not alone from the danger
to person and property, but from the shocking state of
the roads. It was there all horses were stolen, waggons
rifled, and travellers robbed, after being either bailed
up or butchered. What a ghost-haunted lobby is to
children, the Black Forest was to wayfarers. They
entered one end with palpitating hearts, and only drew
a deep breath when they emerged from the other ex-
tremity. We, of course, were not oppressed with any
sanguinary apprehensions of this character, though,
sooth to say, we were grievously afflicted with nervous
twitchings from other causes, for what between the flying
scratches from branches above and the shooting jolts from
those below, the blind holes, the quagmires, the awful hills,
and the shelving tracks, my lungs were in a state of
partial collapse all the time, nor did I enjoy a full in-
spiration until we pulled up at Wood End, where a few
miserable shanties take the denomination of a town.
Beyond Wood End the scene suddenly opens out, and
an immense expanse of magnficent country is revealed
to view, covered with fleeces of verdure as dense and
luxuriant as any in the pampered paddocks of the most
improving country gentleman. All the way on, through
oS'Gr. W. TAYLOR <fe CO.,
General Auctioneers, Land & Estate Agents,
CITY AUCTION ROOMS—2O COLLINS STREET WEST, MELBOURNE,
Are prepared to undertake SALES of Freehold Property, Household Furniture, Merchandise, &c., in their spacious and well-lighted rooms, 01
on the premises. Liberal Advances made on Hoods for Unreserved Sale.
MONTHLY LISTS OF PROPERTIES FOR SALE OR TO LET ISSUED FREE.
Loans Negotiated. Absentees Represented. Insurances Effected. Charges Moderate. Settlements Prompt
T . A T\TT> SAT .IP.& 003ST3DXJCTEID.


the sweet hamlet of Carlsruhe until we approached
Kyneton, there was a succession of broad meads, and
glades, and parks really beautiful to behold, but on
nearing Kyneton it assumed the air of an old agricul-
tural settlement, subdivided into fields and enclosures far
and wide, evincing evidences of agricultural skill and
industry worthy of its teemful soil, and which, I must say,
perfectly surprised me on the high road to the most pro-
lific gold-field. I rather expected to find farming operations
suspended or paralysed, imagining that Plutus had com-
pletely put Ceres’s nose out of joint, as the saying goes.
The next stage, which carried us through a delightful
country, brought us to Malmsbury, a new and promising
township, perched on the crown and side of a high hill,
and overlooking an illimitable expanse of superb arable
country, which, like the fabulous roast pig crying out
for somebody to come and eat him, seemed to woo us
into occupation as we surveyed it
We changed horses again at Taradale, another em-
bryo township hatched into existence by the diggings.
At that time it scarcely counted one hundred inhabi-
tants, but it soon after spi'ang suddenly into significance
from some very rich quartz reefs that were discovered
there, and have since been continuously worked with
very great profit to the miners and advantage to the
locality. From thence to Elphinstone —four miles—the
country is ridgy, thickly timbered, and of an indifferent
character; and so I may say it continues up to Forest
Creek, where we emerged on a stark-naked unsightly
district, stretching far and wide, looking, I was going
to say, as if it were rooted all over by hogs —but rhino-
ceroses would be a more suitable simile, if these animals
are prone to that propensity- The whole region seemed,
in reality, turned inside out, entrals uppermost, pro-
ducing as repugnant an effect as can be imagined. Not
a tree was left standing, nor a blade of vegetation was
anywhere to be seen over the vast surface, nor was
there any appearance of activity in the gold-field, al-
though there were too thick continuous lines of tents,
slab stores, and weatherboard public-houses all the way
into Castlemaine, a distance of four miles.
My day’s jouimey terminated at Castlemaine, as the
state of the track precluded the possibility of running
through to Sandhurst in one day.
I had a couple of hotels highly recommended in my
memorandum-book, but the coachman over-persuaded
me to stop at the Castlemaine Hotel, as the most com-
fortable of all; and justice compels me to say that he
in no way overpainted the resources of the establishment
or the attention of the proprietor and family. We had
an excellent and substantial tea, neatly put on the table
and very well served. “ The liquors were good in that
house,” and those who felt disinclined to join the
smokers in their room had a most cozy private snuggery
in which to enjoy their tipple. But as there is no un-
alloyed happiness in this life—except, as I am given to
understand, in the married state —I was doomed to
swallow my little pill in occupying a double-bedded
room. It was not a very bitter one, to be sure, for one
so accustomed to promiscuous sleeping as I had been for
the six previous years, but I felt the disappointment because
an unaccredited chamber-maid told me I should have a
room to myself. The room I was shown into, however,
was a spacious one, capitally furnished, the beds being
provided with spring mattresses —the first 1 had seen
in the colony. So I turned in with a very modified
grumble, adding a postcript to my prayers, “that my
sleeping partner might prove to be a decent man, not
too far gone in liquor,” In this state of mind I went off
into a soft slumber, which was not absolutely broken by
the other party’s coming into bed, though I had a dreamy
consciousness that he missed the catch of his toe several
times in endeavouring to get off his boots. At last I
heard the pleasing puff which transforms a burning
mutton-pot into a pastile, and was preparing to sink into
the tranquil realms of somnolence when ray neighbour
jumped from his couch with a roar, as if he had flung
himself inadverently on a bed of nettles. Before I could
get my match-box the night waiter came to the door with a
candle, when my affrighted neighbour most indignantly
demanded — ‘ Why the h—ll they put him into a
brick-jumping bed.’ It was no use expostulating or
explaining, ‘ he’d be jolly well if he was going to
sleep on a lot of wire rat-traps.’ So there he stood,
in his night-shirt and boots, until the mattress was re-
moved and the bed-clothes arranged over the hard straw
palliasse. ”
B OR AX
THE PUREST AND BEST SOAP MADE.
The Most Durable Soap, possessing great Healing and Cleansing properties. Should be in every household, and used
for all purposes. Can be used in Salt Water equally well as in Fresh Water. Is a Cold or Hot Water Soap.
LEWIS <Sc "WHITTIT, SOLE
SOLD BY EVERY GROCER IN THE COLONIES.


ANOTHER COACHING ANECDOTE IS THUS
RELATED BY MR. KELLY.
“ Beyond Benalla we got into a district called the Bay
of Biscay, from its excessive roughness, being one un-
varying succession of deep crab-holes, bearing a remark-
able resemblance to a monster tan-yard some time in
disuse, with the pits partially fall in ; and I can honestly
declare that I would infinitely prefer riding out a gale in
the orginal bay to riding over the same ground again in
a wheeled conveyance. Every now and then, after a
heavy plunge or lurch, the coachman curtly called out,
‘ All a-board ?’ by way of enquiring if any passengers
had been ejected, appearing all the time to derive a ma-
licious satisfaction from the groans and ejaculations of
his bruised and bewildered fellow-travellers. As soon as
it was safe to make use of the tongue, I rashly supposed
that a special paragraph in his daily orisons supplicated
the speedy introduction of improved highways, but to
my utter astonishment he solemnly declared, and I believe
with unfeinged sincerity, 4 that when the roads came to
be ’cadamised on the line, he would resign his employ-
ment and go a prospecting for another rough-and-tumble
drive.’ ‘ Why, lor’ bless your innocent genius, sir,’
said he, 4 if I was to set to work on them ere turnpike
tracks I would die right off o' melancholy, or become a
driviu’ sombulist, for want of ikcitement to keep me
awake. I’d rather drive for my bare tucker* through
the Bush, than take my twelve guineas a week into the
bargain an’ drive on them darned ’cadamised awenues,
with their eternal milestones, which is enough in them-
selves to make a smart man stupid, for want of something
to think or calculate about. 1 reckons my time an’ dis-
tance by my own invention —three miles and a half from
the Dead Brindled Bullock to the Leaning Gum-tree,
two three-quarters from that to Broken Waggon, an’ four
from that into Wangaratta, an’ when these marks are
used up, it wakes up the brain agin to inwent new ones;
but them gravel-walks an’ milestones are enough to make a
shicer of any man.’ A species of Bush reasoning against
modern innovation as amusing as it is original.”
A NIGHT ADVENTURE AT FOREST CREEK
DIGGINGS.
44 When we had finished our habitation, prepared our fire,
taken tea, and were once more about to lay ourselves down
• Tucker is synonymous with grub, or board.
for the night, we were alarmed by the report of a pistol
or agun, and a bullet perforating our tent, passing through
the hat of Brown, and lodging among the embers of our
fire. We were so stunned for a few seconds, that we sat
still, looking with surprise in each others’ faces, until
Rinks, recovering his self-possession and being nearest
the doorway, hastened out just in time to detect in the
clear moonlight, a dark shadowy form bounding off
amongst the trees. Urged on by the impetuosity of excited
feeling and the force of his natural courage, he followed
without hesitation, never for a moment considering
whether the object was the being or not, who had either
by accident or design nearly brought Brown to an un-
timely end. We also joined in the pursuit, leaving our
tent and all that was in it, for the purpose of endeavouring
to capture the villian. We saw him distinctly bounding
from tree to tree, perfectly secure from any aim which
might be taken to bring him down with a pistol, and
keeping just at such a distance as enabled us to hold him
in view, without the possibility of being able to get nearer.
In this way he provoked us to follow for a considerable
distance in the woods, when with a loud and wild Goo-ee
he flung himself into an open space, and sped like an
arrow from our sight. We now came up with one another,
and began, as we thought, to retrace our steps, but found
that we had lost ourselves. We had in our haste taken
no note of the direction we had pursued, and the sameness
of appearance which characterises the general bush
baffled all our attempts at returning to the spot we had
just left. It could not have been more than a few
hundreds of yards from us, yet we wandered hour after
hour in search of it, and it was only by the merest chance
that we came upon a portion of the common road, which we
followed,not knowing whether we were right or wrong until
we stumbled upon our tent. The object of the whole ad-
venture now became apparent. The inside of our
temporary habitation had been ransacked. The beds and
the blankets were carried away, saving the one which
formed the tent; our bundles were opened, their contents
lying upon the ground, but we found nothing else gone,
proving that it was something, other than what was there
of which the plunderers stood in need, fortunately, we
had taken our fire-ams with us, or they would have shared
the fate of our scanty coverings and humble couches.
THOMAS GAUNT, Watchmaker, Jeweller & Optician,
H BOURSE ST. EAST, Corner of Royal Arcade, Melbourne.
JAUNT’S ENGLISH LEVER WATCHES still hold their ground against all c^"P^ fc « r9 ™
ffi- in the world. The favorable opinion formed of Gaunt b Watches by tte - b HoaOLOCtv in the Melbourne
Exhibitions in which he has competed, and his last crowning success-the obtaining
International Exhibition— should convince the most dubious that his watches cannot be excelled.
In the Optical Department can be found every modern appliance for correcting defective sight.
Gaunt's “ Treatise on Spectacles, and How to Select Them,” post free on application.


Although there was little to laugh at in this adventure,
it was impossible to conceal from ourselves the dexterity
of the trick which had been played upon us. We looked
into each other’s faces for a few moments, with silent
astonishment, and then, without expressing it, burst into
a roar, which sufficiently interpreted the general feeling
which pervaded our minds, and which was that of having
been completely ‘done.’ We at once concluded that
there was no intent to kill, although the escape was
narrow, but merely greatly to alarm, and then our subse-
quent conduct might be pretty safely calculated upon.
The actors in this scheme had evidently passed beyond
their novitiate in their profession. They had, no doubt,
frequently planned and perpetrated like adventures be-
fore with success, and, well knowing how to operate
upon the passions, so managed their decoy , that we could
not resist the temptation of following him, in the hope
of bringing him to justice, or gratifying the keener senti-
ment of immediate revenge.
However much we might have felt disposed to sleep
before this adventure, every inclination of this kind had
deserted us now ; so making the worst of a bad job, we
raked the dying embers of our fire together, and resolved
to sit out until daylight should enable us to descend
amongst the diggers to observe the various processes pur-
sued, and gather what information we could, before pitch-
ing our tent and starting on our own account.
A BUSH ANECDOTE.
A solitary traveller was slowly wending his way
through the depth of the lonely bush in the early fifties,
when a loud and piercing shout, or rather shriek, caused
him to suddenly stop and listen intently. Thinking that
a fellow being had met with some mishap and was in
want of assistance our traveller answered the wail with
a loud Coo-ee, hurrying forward at the same time in the
direction from whence proceeded the alarming sounds.
A few minutes brought him to the object of his search
whom he found to be a digger bound securely to the
trunk of a large stringy bark tree. The poor fellow pre-
sented a sorry spectacle indeed, for he was tied in such
a position that he could see neither to the right nor to
the left, being with his face to the tree, and, in addition,
his billycock hat had been pressed over his eyes, or had
worked there in his struggles to free himself. His cap-
tors had certainly not studied his comfort.
“ Hallo mate !” said the new comer on nearing him ;
“ how did you get in this fix ? These are rather hard
lines.”
The captive, who till then, did not seem to know of
the approach of his possible rescuer, on hearing his voice,
called loudly on him to undo the binding ropes. The
other drew near him and raising the billycock from the
captive’s eyes repeated his question.
With many imprecations the story was soon told.
How that he had started from the diggings by himself
and leaving the usual track he had travelled slowly on
until about two hours before, while boiling his billy
for dinner, he was suprised by three men, who com-
manded him to stand and deliver. Of course, he was
obliged to obey under the circumstances. They searched
his swag, took all they could find and were about to leave
him, when a passionate word he uttered caused them to
tie him to the tree out of revenge and leave him as food
for the dingoes.
The stranger listened to the story with great interest;
and after a pause, at the same time regarding him
curiously, he asked : “ Did they take all you had ; surely
you had a good sum concealed somewhere about you ?
You look too old a bird to be completely done.”
“ The villains didn’t take all I had, thank goodness,
was the reply. I have a good round sum planted in my
boots, which they did’t spring. If you loosen these con-
founded cords I don’t mind giving you a tenner and
drinking your health in a bottle of grog at the nearest
shanty.”
“Are you so firmly strung up that you cannot free
yourself ?” said his seeming friend. “ I wonder you did
not free yourself sooner ?”
“ I’ve tried and tried and the more 1 struggle the
tighter 1 am fixed,” replied the prisoner angrily.
“How long is it since you were stuck up F Perhaps
the fellows will return and finding both of us here they
might finish us off with a leaden pill or two.”
“ There is no fear of that. Such fellows don’t let the
grass grow under their feet. Besides it’s two hours ago
and they are ten miles away by this time.”
The “ friend in need ” seemingly reassured by
these words drew nearer and taking a clasp knife
out of his pocket said : “ Well, if that is so, 1
don’t see why I should not finish the job so well
begun. It would be flying in the face of Providence if
I did not avail myself of this golden opportunity. So
here goes. Just lift up your leg old man while I slip
your boots off. Such a lining as you have must hurt
your corns.”
Guessing the other’s intentions the captive struggled
fiercely to free himself. But his struggles were of no
avail tied as he was, and the boots were quickly of his
feet. To rip open their lining was the work of a minute
and in another minute the robber was out of sight and
speeding through the bush with the alacrity of one who
knew the value of both time and distance in such a case.


BONE DUST! BONE DUST!
—OP THE —
BOITE MILLS,
BANDRIDGE;
®EGS to inform Farmers, Gardeners and others that he still continues to manufacture the same genuine
article which has been so extensively used by practical men for more than twenty years, who can testify to the
efficacy and superiority of SCOTT’S BONE MANURES, for which the only Silver Medal awarded at the
International Exhibition for excellence in Bone Dust was obtained by him, with the following certificate:—
London International Exhibition, 1873—Melbourne Exhibition, 1872-3.
This is to certify that Mr. J. B. SCOTT, of Sandridge, has been awarded a SILVER MEDAL
for excellence in Bone Dust.
G. C. LEVY.
Melbourne, January, 1873.
29 Queen Street, Melbourne, 26th Mat, 1884.
To J. B. SCOTT, Sandridge.
Dear Sir, —On the eve of my departure from Victoria to occupy the post of Lecturer on Agriculture at the Technical College, Sydney,
I must say your BONE DUST has often passed through my hands without your influence, and never have I found it to be otherwise than
of first-class quality. During my eight years’ residence in this colony I have played the part of detective in the Manure Market, but my search
for adulteration in this material from your factory was search in vain.—l remain, yours very truly,
R. W. EMERSON MacIYOR, F.1.C., F.C.S., &a.
Lecturer on Agriculture, Technical College, Sydney, N.S.W.
DOMESTIC * FILTERS
TO CONNECT ON TO THE SERVICE PIPES.
J, JEFFERY
(Late EMERY & JEFFERY),
AWARDED
THE ONLY COLD MEDAL,
Exhibition, for specially designed Filters for Hotels
and Domestic Use.
TOORAK ROAD, SOUTH YARRA
(OPPOSITE RAILWAY STATION)


THE CALCUTTA TEA ASSOCIATION
tt»q u™ Published to suddlv the Wholesale Merchants and Storekeepers of the Australian colonies. Retailers can be supplied through the
Merchants at*the CALCUTTA TEA ASSOCIATION’S Wholesale Warehouse, 26 King-street, Melbourne, Victoria; or G. Griffiths & Co.,
Wholesale Merchants, Bridge-street, Sydney. , rr-i.iui.uiji
Every inducement is given to the Merchants and Storekeepers of the Australian colonies to keep our Teas in stock, but should customers not
be able to obtain them from the regular grocer, they can purchase at our Wholesale Warehouse any quantity, fromlift, upwards.
Those livin'* at a distance can have sent direct from the Melbourne Wholesale Warehouses any quantity from 101 b. upwards,freight and carnage
free to the nearest port or railway station, on receipt of bank draft or post office order, made payable to the “ Calcutta Tea Association, or order/’
Our Teas are packed in *lb. and 11b. packets; 5,10 and 251 b. tin canisters; quarter-chests in lead of 25tb.; half-chests in lead 40tb.; and chests 80ft.
The Teas sent out by us are of three prices, and are sold in Victoria and New South Wales in any of the above-sized packages at 2s. 6d., 35.,
3s 6d per pound; Sibthorp’s mixture at 3s. 6d. per lb., in packages of not less than 101 b. and up to half-chests. In Queensland, New Zealand
and Tasmania (owing to a different tariff) they are sold at 2s. 9d., Bs. 3d. and 3s. 9d. . .. . ....
Success IN Life. “A new article is brought before the public and commands success. A score of abominable imitations are immediately
introduced by the unscrupulous, who, in copying the original close enough to deceive the public, and yet not so exactly as to infringe upon the
leeal rights exercise an ingenuity that, employed in an original channel, could not fail to secure reputation and profit.”—Adams.
h Caution —Examine each packet and see that it is marked, “ The Calcutta Tea Association’s Pure Indian Teas.” Without it you have
been imposed upon by worthless imitations. The great success attained by the Calcutta Tea Association through the high quality of their
Pure Indian Teas has been the cause of several unprincipled tea dealers trying to deceive the public by introducing spurious and inferior Teas,
with close imitation of our wrapper, under the name of Assam, Darjeelong, and other imitations ; and the inducement held out by their travellers
to their retailers is much larger profits, with imitation wrappers so closely copied as to mislead the purchaser in appearance.
Consumers will please ask for the Calcutta Tea Association’s Pure Indian Teas, and take no other, as every packet is marked, “The
Catcutta Tea Association’s Pure Indian Teas,” and on no account take loose or open Tea from retailers, as you can be supplied with *ft. and
lib packets; sft., 10ft. and 25ft, tins ; and in bulk half-chests, 4Ulb. to 50tb ; chests, 80lb. to 100 ft.; all bearing the mark, “The Calcutta Tea
Association’s Pure Indian Teas,” which to imitate is felony.
PURE
INDIAN TEA
WILL GO MUCH
Further tk Ordinary Tea,
AND CONSEQUENTLY
Less Need be Used.
It is well to bear this
in mind, because when
Pure Indian Tea is used
too much mnj be put in
the pot, and its very
goodness may create a
prejudice against it.
DRINK THE
3/6 OR 3A TEA
OP THE
CALCUTTA
TEA ASSOCIATION
And you have the
Most Perfect Tea the
World can produce.
ONE TRIAL
WILL PROVE IT.
INDIAN TEA
Properly Blended,
As is so efficiently done
by the
CALCUTTA
TEA ASSOCIATE
—IS—
Purer, Stronger,
More Palatable,
More Economical,
And in every way Supe-
rior to its Chinese
rival.
GIVE THE
Calcutta lea Association’s
PURE
INDIAN TEAS
Fair Trial
N THE TEAPOT.
Jse One-third Less for
an Infusion than you
would for China Tea.
This means really a
Saving of One Shilling
in Three.
Ask your Grocer for the CALCUTTA TEA ASSOCIATION’S PURE INDIAN TEAS, and give them an honest, unprejudiced trial, and
we will stake “ Lombard-street to a China orange” that never again by choice will you revert to the shady, insipid, doctored teas of John China-
man, but will in future drink the
CALCUTTA TEA ASSOCIATION’S PURE, UNADULTERATED, FRAGRANT, FULL-BODIED TEAS.,


POISON IN THE CUP.
'Ot I
fHE Victorian Frees has, from time to time, pointed out that large quantities of teas imported into this market from China were adulterated
to an extent that rendered them nearly as injurious to the consumers as the deadly opium.
Mr. F. Dunn, the recognised tea analyst, gives the result of an analysis of 975 packages of China tea sold at Fraser and Co.’s, and states :
“ It was very difficult to find a perfect and genuine tea leaf in the samples, and that the stuff consists for the most part of decayed, exhausted,
or foreign (other than tea) leaves, foreign stems, tea sweeping held together in little nodules of starch, paste, and pieces of brick, Paddy husks
and nutshells. All this rubbish was faced with plumbago to give it a black appearance.” —Startling, but true!
Mr. Dunn, the able public analyst to the Local Board of Health to the City of Melbourne, states in the printed report to the President of
the Central Board, 2nd February, 1886, that more than one-half of the teas examined by him “ were unfit for use.”
EXHAUSTED TEA IS TEA WHICH THE CHINESE HAVE ALREADY DRUNK, THE LEAVES BEING RE-DRIED.—
Mr. A. B. Griffiths, medallist in chemistry and botany, Ac., says that exhausted tea leaves may be detected by their containing less than i per
cent, of theine. This opinion is borne out by Messrs. Cosmo Newbery and Dunn. Now, with INDIAN TEAS the reverse is the case. There
never has been a similar charge either in London or this market that the shipments received from Calcutta are exhausted. On the contrary; we
find now that the lowest class sent to market, namely, fanning and broken leaf, are eagerly bought up for mixing with shipments of China teas,
for the purpose of giving the latter flavor and color.
HOW THE SO-CALLED CHINA TEA IS MANUFACTURED.—It will be some satisfaction to the tea drinker to learn what are
the general practices adopted by the almond-eyed Mongolian to palm off his inferior production as a genuine tea. The adulterations resorted to
are most fully confirmed by the London Press, and may be classed as follows : —lst, with foreign leaves. 2nd, with lei tea, mahloo, &c. 3rd,
with exhausted and perished leaves. 4th, with chemical or starched substances. sth, with mineral substances. 6th, with minerals used for
coloration, painting or facing the tea. With foreign leaves, Ac. Dr. Dixon says the Chinese actually dry many million pounds of the leaves of
different plants to mingle with the genuine, as those of the ash, plum, Ac. Other leaves employed are—Camellia, Sasanqua, Cloranthus,
Inspecuous, Yalorica, Ehaumus, Theozans, Chrysanthemum, Bose, Canina, Fagus, Sylvatien, Crataegus Oxyacintha, Crataegus, Monogynn, Primus
Communis—enumerated by Hassall, Wanklyn, Bell, and others. Some of these leaves and flowers are used for giving an artificial scent to teas.
A knowlege of micro-structure is indispensable for the detection of these leaves. The presence of these foreign leaves, Ac., is easily detected by
the skilled microscopist, but in the broken and choppy state (which is the usual condition) it is extremely difficult for the tea taster to detect most
of these adulterations, which may account for the ignorance of some assumed Melbourne authorities. Artificial scenting frequently results in
some leaves or petals of scenting media remaining in the tea. Young succulent stalks are used to give as great an extract as the leaf to genuine
tea, but wo also find stalks dry and hard added to give weight, or, in other words, to adulterate. Paddy husks, bamboo seeds, Ac., are also freely
added for the same object; here the unfortunate consumer has often to pay for three-quarters of a pound of actual rubbish in his supposed
purchase of one pound of genuine tea. Lei tea, mahloo, Ac.—Considerable quantities of this tea have already been sold in Australia; indeed, it
was this fact that first brought on the tea controversy. Lei tea is generally made up from willow leaf, and is a very clever imitation of the genuine
article. Mahloo may be made up from anything. Both teas are nauseous, so are only used to mix with the genuine article, thus defrauding the
purchaser. Several parcels reached London during last season, and attention called to them, with the result that they were seized and destroyed
by the Custom House authorities. Consul Medhurst, in his report to the British Government, states that he found no less than 63,0001b5. of
willow leaves manipulated for tea adulteration at one port alone.
exhausted leaves —leaves that have none of the general characters of tea leaves —dust (not tea dust), gum, starch and foreign color,
various kinds, stalks, bark and earthy matter, hair and other matter of animal origin.”—J. Cosmo Newbery, B. Sc., C.M.Q-.
THAT INDIAN TEA IS PURER THAN CHINESE has been settled beyond all dispute by chemists and experts. The fact is, China
retains the exclusive monopoly of being able to make teas to suit a price. No matter how low a quality is wanted, the wily Mongolian will supply
it. Hence we often see Chinese tea selling in the Australian market from 3d. to 4d. per lb. It is not, however, the policy of importers of this
sort of rubbish to parade it openly. The larger proportion which comes to hand is disposed of privately for blending purposes. By that
Ingenious Dodge the unfortunate consumer has often three-quarters of a pound of exhausted China tea leaves (which have already been drunk
by the Chinese), flavored up by a small addition of PURE INDIA TEA, palmed off on him as a pound of good, wholesome half-crown China tea.
Another practice of our almond-eyed friend is to mix his tea with a large quantity of the leaves of the common willow (Eilobium Angustitolium);
indeed, a regular trade is done in many of the Chinese ports in the preparation of lei, or willow tea. The other ingredients added to suit the
demands of the vendors of Chinese teas to the original pure leaf are so numerous that chemists have filled pages in recording the adulteration
found upon examination of shipments received in England and Australia.
INDIAN TEA PROPERLY BLENDED, as is so efficiently done by the CALCUTTA TEA ASSOCIATION, is purer, stronger, more
palatable, more economical, and in every way superior to its Chinese rival. Already it is being enormously used to mix with the lower and weaker
grades of China teas to bring up their strength, color and flavor. Thousands of tea drinkers now use it unmixed in preference to the weaker
Chinese teas. Dishonest vendors are trading on its reputation to hawk questionable Chinese rubbish, and foist it on an unsuspecting public; and
even the most conservative and upright shopkeepers and grocers —who, to their honor be it said, have never stooped to traffic in the lower grades
of adulterated China teas, but have always endeavoured to buy a pure article —are now recognising the undeniable merits of the Indian aspirant
to public favor, and are using it in ever-increasing quantities. The means of judging are now within the reach of every consumer. Ask for the
CALCUTTA TEA ASSOCIATION’S PURE INDIAN TEAS, and judge for yourselves. Do not judge by the appearance or by the smell.
These can be doctored, stimulated, and made to assume any form. There can be no stronger testimony adduced to the unrivalled superiority of
■our INDIAN TEAS over all other competitors.
Messrs. Newbery and Dunn, the Government analytical chemists, report as follows :
“Report op Thheb Samples of Indian Tea received from the Calcutta Tea Association.— The above samples have been carefully
■examined by us. They are absolutely pure, and we may add that even the lowest quality of your tea has a higher extract than
we have examined.”—J. Cosmo Newbery, Frederick Dunn.
It will thus be seen that the highest and best authority procurable pronounces even our lowest priced teas at 2s. 6d. per pound to be
■superior in purity and analysis to any other Packet Teas at 3s. 6d. per pound. Further comment is superfluous.
The teas of the CALCUTTA TEA ASSOCIATION are the produce of upwards of fifty of the most celebrated Indian tea estates,
which, blended together, make the Most Perfect Tea the world can produce. They are blended by competent tea tasters, assisted by analytical
•chemists of the highest standing,
[PlbAse Tubn Oteb.


BAILEE, SHEVILL & CO.
(Established 1851),
AUCTIONEERS,
0 *
<Sc ESTATE AGE3TTS,
coiiins si. w
MELBOURNE,
Collins si. w.
—AND—
MELBOURNE,
14 CHAPEL ST,
—AND—
14 CHAPEL ST.
PRAHRAN.
PRAHRAN.
Out-Door Sales of Furniture and Landed and House Property
CONDUCTED.
Advances made on A.ll
Classes of Merchandise.
PAWNBROKERS’ SALES A SPECIALTY.
LOANS NEGOTIATED. INSURANCES EFFECTED.
j Country Buyers should attend our Daily Sales
at Rooms.


IS CERTAIN DEATH TO ALL INSECT PESTS
It Is PERFECTLY HARMLESS to CHILDREN ad ANIMALS. -
It is invaluable for protecting BOSE TREES from the \q
ravages of the Aphis, or Green Blight. .i.*' - *’ In the
V Y" Hot Sum-
No other Insect Powder possesses the /. mer t ime , when
qualities which render INSEC PI- \ \/ Flies are swarming
a> peculiarly efficacious \ the rooms - il should
r^ r ** T ar iT be dusted on Picture Frames
SOLD EVERYWHERE IN &c. f and diffused in the air with
TINS, at Is., Is. 6d., 1 *o^ closed doors, when every fly will fall
2s. 6d., ss. & 10s. f-JT •/ rn,
4.t aT j dead. It surpasses all other specifics for
NEW AND STANDARD WORKS ON
Advanced Literature
COMPRISING BOOKS
Spiritualism Astrology
Mesmerism Palmistry
Physiology Chromopathy
Psycopathy Folk Lore
Hydropathy Gymnastics
Cremation Botanic Medicine
Freethought Moral Education
Phrenology Anthropology
Physiognomy Ethnology
AND PERIODICALS ON
Magnetism Astronomy
Mnemonics Moral Philosophy
Psychology Mental Science
Psychometry Socialism
Dietetics Ventriloquism
Social Science Oratory
Vegetarianism Optics
Anti-Vaccination Land Nationalisation
Chirognomancy Chemistry
Graphology Geology
Theosophy Rationalism, &c., &c.
New Supplies of FREETHOUGHT
By Beadlaugh, Besant,
INFIDEL DEATHBED, by Foote. Is., post free.
LAW OF POPULATION, by A. Besant. Is., post free.
Ten Pamphlets, comprising Essays and Debates on SOCIALISM,
by Hyndman, Bradlaugh, Besant, &c. ss. the lot, post free.
Packets VEGETARIAN Pamphlets, including Cookery Book.
Is. fid. and 2s.
Packets FREETHOUGHT Pamphlets, well assorted. Is. fid.
PAMPHLETS by Every Mail,
Ingersoll, Denton, &c., &c.
INGERSOLL’S PAMPHLETS (24 sorts). 55., post free.
PAINE’S “ Age of Reason,” “ Rights of Man,” “ Crisis.” lOd.
each, post free.
DENTON’S “Radical Discourses,” eight Lectures. ss. fid. the
lot, or 9d. each, post free.
Works on MESMERISM, MAGNETISM, &c. Is. 3d. to 255.
Standard Works on SPIRITUALISM.
HUMAN PHYSIOLOGY. Works by Trail, Fowler, Nicholls,
Foote, &c., &c.
and 2s.
Packets ANTI-YACCINATION Pamphlets (12 in all). 2s. fid.
CHARLES m. BAMFORD
Oldest Established and only Importer in Australia of Spiritualistic and Advanced Literature,
87 LITTLE COLLINS ST. EAST MELBOURNE.
Complete Catalogue Free (Postage 2d.).
