

3A r p
Bush Wireless m
By REV. JOHN FLYNN
(Superintendent of Australian Inland Mission.)
Reprinted from “Wireless Weekly4th February, 1927.
We are grateful to the proprietors for their practical sym-
pathy with our movement.
Between Marree and Boulia, about
600 miles by trail—we have no
“roads”—there is one township only
(Birdsville) and not one inch of tele-
graph wire. From Farina to Quilpie,
over 600 miles by trail, there is one
township only (Innamincka, which
has almost faded away since it was
surveyed, and given the official title
of “Hopetoun,” since forgotten), and
only a private telephone wire for 130
miles to what is aptly termed Mount
Hopeless. From Camooweal to New-
castle Waters, over 400 miles by
trail; thence to Wave Hill, nearly
300 miles; and on nearly to Hall’s
Creek, by trail about 300 miles;
in all, 1000 miles of cross-
country travel without any tele-
graph facilities except where one
passes under the north-south wires.
In all those 1000 miles one fails to
find a single township!
It is along this last, and longest,
gap in cross-country wire-communi-
cation that the Postmaster General’s
Department has recently spent a large
amount of money in an experiment
with wireless. At Camooweal, along-
side the terminus of the wire, a radio
station has been erected, and another
official radio station functions out in
the wilderness at Wave Hill. The
hope was that many pastoral stations
in between would immediately instal
private radio phone-stations, but up
till now there is only one private
transmission set, at Brunette Downs.
This one private effort has, after
some initial difficulties, been func-
tioning very satisfactorily on phone,
with Camooweal only, but the aver-
age frontier pastoralist is unable to
afford such a fine equipment as Brun-
ette enjoys; Brunette, by the way, is
regarded as the engineering wonder
of Australia’s frontiers.
Heavy dots indicate
A.I.M. nursing
homes and
those encircl-
ed the wire
less stations.
Heavy lines represent railway tracks and
the lighter ones the telegraph lines.


The need for som§ kind of “hurry
up” in bush wireless had been obvious
to us for years, especially after we
began to work for an aerial medical
service. Search was begun for an
inexpensive and simple transmitter,
by which wireless telephony could be
carried on without frequent failures,
over distances up to 100 miles. Early
in 1925, Mr. George Towns, of Syd-
ney, came to know of our aspira-
tions, and he immediately offered his
services, gratuitously, for six months,
in order that some field experiments
might be carried out. I was just
then fitting out a car for some long
journeys in the interior, so the offer
was gladly accepted, and we began
difficulties of wireless in the bush.
Humbly we may claim to have at-
tained that objective! Still, we did
prove that it was practicable for one
to keep in touch with places up to
1000 miles away, using morse, and
to phone over the air up to 300 miles
-—with a car and a long purse to
assist. We used to jack up one back
wheel, on which a special pulley had
been mounted; thus we drove the belt
for a generator mounted on the speci-
ally strong spashboard which had
been substituted! for the ordinary
mudguard, and secured ample high-
tension current for four 1 U.V.202
tubes in our transmitter. We carried
extra accumulators, two short wave
The transmitting plant designed after much experimentation
as the most suitable for the needs of the bushman.
our collection of wireless gear. Amal-
gamated Wireless Officials, the Gov-
ernment Radio Department, and
amateurs of Sydney, Melbourne, and
Adelaide, have given us much assist-
ance from the outset, including some
gifts of apparatus.
But bush conditions created many
special problems, and worries dragged
us about cruelly before we found our
feet. At last we had assembled a
car outfit (BA.C.), so we started out
for final field tests at Beltana, over
300 miles north of Adelaide, then
proceeded to Innamincka, Cordillo
Downs, Birdsville, thence back to
Marree, whence we trucked the car
to Oodnadatta.
At the outset we had a definite
objective, viz., to investigate the
receivers, and a four-valve broadcast
receiver. The last instrument gave
usi heaps of encouragement and
many problems.
From Oodnadatta we proceeded to
Alice Springs where the nursing
home was under construction. We
had hoped to use the electrical equip-
ment of this home, and a 50-watt
transmitter kindly presented to us
by A.W.A., in more extended tests;
but in that part of the world man
merely proposes! Mr, Towns’ time
expired long before the extra gear
could be installed, and my attention
had to be concentrated on day-to-day
difficulties in building, etc.
Meantime, however, we were prose-
cuting our search for the ideal trans-
mitting set for bush use, i.e., some-


thing independent of a car, and in-
expensive; but in this search we were
*.tr from satisfied. Finally, I de-
cided to try a compromise, viz., crude
“1.C.W.” transmitters, capable of
morse signals only, for our bush
friends round about a centre which
would be equipped with a fairly
powerful ’phone set. Under this ar
rangement, all outgoing messages
could be sent by voice, obviating any
difficulty in reception by inexperi-
with Mr. A. Treager, of Adelaide, 1
set out again from Oodnadatta for a
test of bush wireless on above lines.
We were now able to make our-
selves comfortable in the engine room
of the nursing home at Alice Springs,
so we set up the 5 horse-power Lister
•engine, and 32-volt House-lighting
outfit, and assembled the 50-watt
transmitter on the opposite side of
the room (13 x 15, ample for an ex-
perimenal wireless station). After
The bush ambulance
Aeroplanes sum-
moned by Radio
may be used in the
enced listeners; the bush folk would
have to morse inward messages, but
these could be called back by voice
for them to check, which seemed to
promise reasonable freedom from
errors.
The “1.C.W.” transmitter draws its
high-tension current from a spark
coil provided with the usual make-
and-break. The wave is not truly
continuous—hence the name, short for
“interrupted continuous wave”—and
is of no use for telephone purposes.
But the advantage of driving the
whole transmitter from a six-volt
battery was irresistible. I now set
out to find a suitable primary battery,
and decided eventually to test out
Edison cells as used extensively in
automatic railway signalling. These
have a low voltage, only 65-volt per
cell, but their duration of 500 amp.-
hours, with absolute “rest” when not
actually in use, makes them most
attractive.
The Radio Department kindly ex-
tended the original permit issued to
me, and last October, in company
various tests, the 50 watter was tuned
to 89 metres, on which Mr. Harry
Kauper (our Adelaide Wireless
Foster-father) was able to hear
clearly both voice and music, a.
spare spark set was. tuned to ’B9
metres, for use in case of a hitch, and
another small transmitter, tuned to
30 metres, and with separate aerial,
was provided for work with distant
amateurs. Thus 8 A.B. was born.
One of the crude “field” transmit-
ters was installed at Hermannsburg,
80 miles west (8 A.D.), the other at
Arltunga, 70 miles east (8 A.E.)
From the latter, we worked the
former direct on both mornings while
we were installing the station. A
third had been intended for a station
(8 A.F.) in another direction, but we
found it advisable to keep that outfit
for use as a standby in 8 A.B.
Unfortunately, our friend at Arl-
tunga had to leave for a long journey
just after the station was set up. But
from the completion of our system
until our departure, messages were
exchanged daily between Alice


Springs and Hermannsburg. Signals
were always clear about sunrise,
generally more or less satisfactorily
except between 9 a.m. and 3 pan.
Some evenings were hopeless, but we
were operating in the worst time of
the year—late November—before
everything was going properly. We
had to leave this happy experimental
ground early in December, We
realise that nothing is yet definitely
attained, but feel confident that, m
one way or, another, the day is draw-
ing near when the bushman of modest
means will be able to send messages
over the air, to be relayed anywhere
on the planet. Meantime, he is be-
ginning to listen in, and thus increase
the joy of life.
It was in 1912 that the Australian
Inland Mission was founded by the
Presbyterian Federal Assembly. Prior
to that date, the various State
Assemblies had been conducting some
mission work in the isolated regions
of our island continent, and this work
included one Nursing Home at Ood-
nadatta, the then terminus of the
North-South Railway line- —which
commenced to move forward another
stage only on January 21st of this
year. A special feature of all the
early mission efforts was the distribu-
tion of literature.
The revenue to keep our beneficent
wheels turning is provided almost en-
tirely by what we call our “Inland
Legion” of backers, who make a habit
of sending along a cheque once a year.
Originally Presbyterians, for the most
part, the Legion now comprises many
hundreds “of other creeds or none”;
all sorts and conditions of Australians
whose battle cry is THE BEST FOR
THE BUSH!
At the moment with strong assist-
ance from the H. V. McKay Charit-
able Trust, we are organising an ex-
periment with one Flying Doctor for
the interior. Since 1917 we have
advocated an Aerial Medical Service
of about 10 doctors equipped with
aeroplanes and pilots (by arrange-
ment, preferably, with existing aerial
mail organisations, thus ensuring con-
tinuity). and it is a great joy to us
that at last the scheme is to be given
an actual test. It has been calculated
that the test, with one doctor and
equipment for one year will cost any-
thing up to £7,000; this amount is
being provided without any appeal to
the general public; but, in the event
of success in this demonstration, we
hope to see a big drive to launch the
complete scheme next year.
Published by THE AUSTRALIAN INLAND MISSION.
General Secretary, Box 100 G.P.0., SYDNEY.
Branch Secretaries Presbyterian Church Offices, Ann Street,
Brisbane.
“Assembly Hall,” 156 Collins Street,
Melbourne.
Presbyterian Church Offices, 102 Flinders St.,
Adelaide.
“Assembly Chambers,” 12 Pier St., Perth,
