









BUSH RAGAMUFFINS


BY THE SAME AUTHOR
CONRAD THE COCK
TOSH AND TIM
TIMOTHY TINKLES
DORIS AND DAVID ALL ALONE
WITH PUCKER TO THE ARCTIC
LOST IN THE ARCTIC
A MAN-HUNT IN THE ARCTIC
TWO YOUNG ADVENTURERS


BUSH
RAGAMUFFINS
ELIZABETH MARC
ILLUSTRATED BT H. RADCLIFFE WILSON
19 3 5
METHUEN & CO. LTD. LONDON


First published in 1935
PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY
BUTLER AND TANNER LTD., FROME AND LONDON


ELIZABETH ANN MOSTYN
(the littlest bush ragamuffin)
AND
GARRY
(a golden collie sheep-dog)




• 95
• i og
. 117
128
• i3 6
. 143
148
• i59
167
• 183
• i93
CONTENTS
I The Mystery of Ridgeways ..... i
II The Stranger Shall Not Pass .... 7
111 Who Comes? . . . • • • • *3
IV Mr. Pennythorp has an Adventure ... 20
V What Will Father Say ? 33
VI What does it all Mean ?..••• 43
VII Mr. Pennythorp has another Adventure . . 55
VIII Mr. Pennythorp Assists on the Station and has One
or Two Adventures ...... 65
IX Mr. Pennythorp Continues to Assist . . -77
X Mr. Pennythorp goes for a Picnic (and has rather an
Alarming Adventure) ...... 85
XI ‘ They ’ Arrive ....... 95
XII Precious Georgie . . . . • • io 9
XIII Getting to Know George . . . . .117
XIV Who is the Stranger? . . . . • .128
XV On Joe’s Track . . . . • • .136
XVI Oh ! Jan, Jan ! . . . . • • • 1 43
XVII At the Point of the Pistol . . . . ,148
XVIII The Door that was Unlocked . . . • J 59
XIX The Mysterious Motor-car . . . . .167
XX Life is not Dull . . . . . • 183
XXI Who Comes Now? . . . . . . • ! 93




CHAPTER I
THE MYSTERY OF RIDGEWAYS
A MOTOR-CAR, driven by a Commercial Traveller,
bumped and banged over a narrow mountain track
in New South Wales. The track led to a mountain
sheep-station called Ridgeways. As the Traveller (he sold
pianos, or if you already had one, tuned the one you had),
jolted about at the wheel, he talked to himself.
‘ People who live up a road like this don’t deserve a
piano,’ he muttered.
Then he added, as an extra big jolt jerked the wheel
out of his hands ;
* And if they’ve got one, they don’t deserve to have it
tuned. I was nearly over the precipice that time ! ’
There was a high cliff on his right and a precipice on
his left. Then he rounded the corner and jammed on all


his brakes. A farm cart to which a big black horse was
harnessed was drawn across the road, blocking the passage.
And all over the road, piled high, was a mass of rubbish.
Empty tins, broken bottles, twisted barbed wire, sharp-
edged bits of corrugated iron. Any of these things were
calculated to min a man’s tires. Surveying the mess were
a couple of boys.
‘ Hello ! ’ exclaimed the Traveller. £ Had an upset ? ’
‘ Looks like it ! ’ said one boy dejectedly.
‘ Why ! That’ll take most of the day to clear up ! ’ said
the Traveller.
‘ What’s more,’ said the other boy, £ the stuff’s been
spilling all the way down the road ! ’
The Traveller had visions of broken bottles, barbed wire,
sharp-edged tin, all the way up to Ridgeways.
£ Oh well, I’ll call another day,’ he said. £ So long ! ’
He started up his engine and backed gingerly round the
corner. As he disappeared from view one boy grinned at
the other. And then, from round rocks and out of crannies
appeared three more children ; two girls and another
boy. They all seemed pleased about something. They
listened until the sound of the Traveller’s engine died away
in the distance, and then, picking up hidden shovels, they
shot all the rubbish over the edge of the precipice in just
about two minutes.
* * * * *
The Traveller in Pianos, having safely negotiated the
corner, turned and thankfully got off the Ridgeways Road
on to the Happy Valley Road, although this was only a
very little better. He bounced over it for perhaps fifty
miles, when he came to a place called Harpetee, where
he meant to stay the night.
In the Commercial Room of the little Bush Hotel at
Harpetee half a dozen Commercial Travellers were gathered


around the blazing log fire. They made room for ‘ Pianos *
as he entered. They were talking about Commercial
Travelling.
‘ Yes, it’s tough !’ ‘ Sewing Machines ’ was saying. ‘ It’s
always tough. Always on the go ! ’
‘ Wouldn’t mind if I were always on the go ! ’ grumbled
‘ Tea ’. ‘lt’s not going that worries me to a frazzle !
Half a dozen breakdowns in the last two days. What do
you know about that ? ’
‘ That’s what’s coming to you, up and down these moun-
tains. And you nearly kill yourself, and bust your tires
and burn out your brake-linings to get to some Cockey’s
sheep-run fifty miles from anywhere, and he tells you his
sheep do well enough on salt ! ’ said ‘ Sheep-lick ’.
‘ Or they don’t use soap ! ’ said ‘ Perfumes and Toilet
Requisites ’, bitterly.
‘ I tell you, the game’s not worth the benzine ! ’ said
‘ Gramophones ’. * Not now they’ve all got wireless ! I was
in Happy Valley yesterday ’
‘ I was that way to-day,’ broke in ‘ Pianos ’. ‘ Trying
to get to a place called “ Ridgeways ” ’
‘ Oh, I tried to get to Ridgeways,’ said ‘ Gramophones ’.
‘ You take that narrow mountain track that goes off to
the left from the Happy Valley Road. The Station’s about
ten miles up, I’m told. But when I went up, there was a
tree across the road.’
* There was a heap of rubbish there to-day,’ said ‘ Pianos ’.
‘ Well, that’s queer. I’ve tried to get to Ridgeways
several times,’ mused ‘ Tea ’, ‘ and there’s always been
something stopped me. A tree down. And once there
were a whole lot of small rocks that had got rolled down
into the track and jammed into a narrow part. And once
there was a belt of timber alight, and the fire stretching right
across the road.’


£ I tried Ridgeways once,’ said ‘ Perfumes ‘ and I got
about a mile up the road to a place where it runs between
high cliffs, and I came on a boy on a horse. A bare-legged
youngster, as tough as they make ’em. He pulled across
the road, and I stopped. “ Morning,” he said, “ going
up ? ” “ Sure,” I said. “ Got a gun ?” he asked. “ Per-
haps,” I said (for I always carry a revolver, you know).
“ Well,” he said, cool as you please, “ if you meet a mad
bull charging down the road, you’d better shoot him. And
shoot quick. Because he always charges a car.” So I got
into reverse and backed down and out. I know nothing
about cattle and I might have shot their best milker.’
‘ Well, when I went up, I met a girl,’ said ‘ Sewing
Machines ’, ‘ A black-haired, black-eyed little girl. She
galloped bare-back out of the scrub, sitting like a centaur.
“ Going'to Ridgeways ? ” she asked. “ That’s right,” I said.
“ Well, be careful of the dogs,” she said. “We breed collies,
you know, and there are about a dozen of them loose.
We don’t tie them up because no one ever comes, but
they’re dreadfully savage and they’re not used to strangers.”
Then she leaned over and looked down into the car at
my legs. “ Your trousers are old, aren’t they ? ” she asked.
“ No, they’re not old ! ” I said, and I turned round and
came out of it. I had on these same trousers I’m wearing
now, and do they look old ? ’
The Inn-keeper, Jim Durrant, came in at that moment.
He was big, fat and kindly. He had kept small hotels
nearly all over the world ; Thameside ; Portsmouth ; San
Francisco ; Hong-Kong ; Kingston (Jamaica), and a num-
ber of other places he had forgotten. And he had finally
come back to Harpetee where he was born. But where-
ever he was, he was a mine of information and he would
talk as long as you let him.
‘Jim, know anything about Ridgeways ? ’ asked ‘ Tea ’.


4 Don’t know any one who’s been there,’ said Jim. 4 But
I know the owner. Name of Barry. I knew his folk, in Eng-
land. He came in here once, going through to buy sheep,
and directly I see him, his face reminded me of some one.
Very dark, he is. Very striking. And when I heard the
name I said, “ Not one of the Barrys of Coverdale, were
you ? ” “ That was my home,” he said. “ Well, well,” I
said, “ I knew old Squire Barry of Coverdale. I had a little
inn at Dimsdale, the market town near there, back in the
nineties. Squire Barry any relation of yours ? ” “My
father,” he says. “ Why, now,” I says, “ I remember a
litde boy and girl used to come driving in with him. Twins,
they was,” and he laughed and said, 44 That was me and my
sister Meg. And I remember you now. You kept the
‘ Spotted Dog ’, at Dimsdale. And you had a spotted
dog there, named 4 Spot ’. And on market day, one of
the puddings always served at dinner was c Spotted Dog ! ’”
Absolutely !” I said. And then he told me about himself.
I won’t say but what I didn’t ask, being interested. That
when him and his sister was fourteen the Squire had died
—their mother had died earlier —and then they had found
the estate in a bad way. 44 A rare mess ” was what he said.
The old Squire had done himself well and didn’t worry
about the bank balance, so there wasn’t any. The Trustees
sold up everything and with the money they sent John
Barry out here to learn sheep-farming and they put Miss
Meg to school in Switzerland. 44 But when I’d finished
Jackerooing there was precious litde money left to buy
land with, said Mr. John to me, 44 so I took up virgin
land and mountain country at that. And you know what
that means ! You never stop working for the rest of your
life ! I called the place 4 Ridgeways ’ because you are ever-
lastingly climbing ridges to get to it ! ” 44 And what hap-
pened to Miss Meg ? ” I asked. 44 Oh, she married an


American,” he says. “ I’m afraid we’ve rather lost touch.
My fault. I’m the world’s worst letter-writer ! ” “ And
you’re married yourself, maybe, Mr. John ? ” I says. And
he told me he was married fifteen years ago to a Miss Weston,
one of the young ladies at the Station where he was Jackeroo-
ing. “ And so,” I says, “ your children will be half and
half. Fifty per cent English and fifty per cent Aussie ? ”
“ Heaven knows what they are !” he said. “ A set of Bush
Ragamuffins ! Five of them ! And good for as much
mischief as fifteen ! ” And with that he went off laughing.
You ought to hear John Barry laugh ! It does you good,
and you’ve got to laugh too, whether you want to or not ! ’
* Well, I don’t know what Ridgeways may be like,’ said
* Sewing Machines ’, ‘ but if that little girl was a specimen
of the Barry youngsters, they are capable of mischief all
right ! All I know is, I’m not going there again. A man
never knows what might happen to him ! ’


CHAPTER II
THE STRANGER SHALL NOT PASS
SUCH was the general experience and verdict of strangers
who tried to get to Ridgeways. They did not get
there. And they decided not to try again. Why ?
Well, you shall come with me to Ridgeways, and find out.
First, I must tell you what Ridgeways was like. I know
you hate long explanations, and a lot of talk, so I will cut
it as short as possible.
Ridgeways was a small, bush, mountain sheep-station
in the heart of the Blue Mountains in New South Wales,
Australia. But when I describe conditions there, I do not
want you to say, ‘So this is Australia. 5 For Australia is
big, and offers all sorts of climates and conditions. And I
am only writing of a little bit of it.
Ridgeways was, perhaps, ioo miles from the nearest town,
Bathurst. But it was not the miles that mattered ; it was the
mountains that made it so difficult of access, so that no one
would go to Ridgeways unless he had urgent business there.
To get there, you turned off the Great Western Road
that led to Bathurst, and took the mountain-track to Happy
Valley. And when you had wound round mountains, and
up and down them, for perhaps fifty miles, and were five
miles away from Happy Valley Post Office (and the three
or four cottages that comprised Happy Valley Village), you
saw a packing-case stuck on a post on a gate, and on the
packing-case was painted ‘ Ridgeways 5 . The packing-case


was the Ridgeways mail-box, into which a mail-man on
horse-back dropped the Ridgeways mail-bag, once a week.
And now, if you left the Happy Valley Road, and went
through the gate, you would find yourself on the Ridge-
ways Road, which was a much narrower and much steeper
mountain-track. And you would go up and up, sometimes
under high cliffs, with precipices dropping away on the
other side ; and sometimes
through forest scrub ; and
always over ridges. And
after about ten miles of
that, you would come to
the Ridgeways homestead,
which I really think you
might mistake for a barn
with a wide veranda round
it. Anyway, it was ‘ home-
made and largely com-
posed of split wood and
corrugated iron, as were all
the homesteads round about
Happy Valley.
But I do not think you
would have much time to
look at the homestead. You would probably be mainly con-
cerned with a number of huge collies, who would be look-
ing at you. And you would be saying, ‘ Good dog, then !
Nice old fellow ! ’ And hoping he was a nice old fellow,
when there would be a whistle from somewhere ; and the
dogs, with a final cold, calculating, appraising stare, would
slowly wheel, and walk unhurriedly towards a Dutch barn,
and jump up into the hay. And if you happened to look
up, you would see a good many pairs of sharp eyes
critically examining you from the top of the hay-rick.


For, you see, you would be that rare specimen, the
Stranger that had Won through to Ridgeways !
I think you had better meet the Barry children, and
get it over. Bush Ragamuffins, Mr. Barry called them,
and I am rather afraid they looked it. They went bare-
foot, for this, they said, saved shoe-leather. Also, they
preferred it. And they wore as few clothes as possible, for
thus mother had less washing and ironing (for no servants,
save a farm boy, could stand the isolation of Ridgeways).
And also, they got about better. And they wore old clothes
if possible, for if your clothes were already tattered and
torn, you did not get into trouble for tearing them.
There were five of them. At the time this story opens
Jack, the eldest, was 13. Then came Peggie, 12. (Their
real names were John and Margaret.) Next, the twins,
Janet and Jim, round about 10. And some way after,
Gerry, the baby. Six years old, I think. Janet, named
after her mother, was always called Jan, And I imagine
Gerry’s proper name was Gerald, but I am not sure. Oh,
and we must not forget the dogs. No Barry was ever seen
without a leaping collie ! They were the offspring of a
pair of sable Scotch collies that Mr, Barry had brought
out with him. They were Coverdale pets, and he refused
to be separated from them. And now the Barry sheep-
dogs were well known in Happy Valley. There seemed
to be dozens of them. Yarrow and Arran ; Garry and
Garth ; Don and Dell ; Idris and Lyn. And others whose
names I have forgotten.
And you must just know what the children looked like,
so that you have them in your mind’s eye. They were all
wiry, nimble youngsters ; freckled and sun-tanned. (Sun-
baked, Mr. Barry said.) They lived in the open air, you
see, and they were always scrambling up and down the
Ridgeway mountains or racing about, bare-back, on their


tough little ponies. Three of them, Jack, Peggie and Gerry,
were fair, like their mother. Curly reddish hair, and blue
eyes. And the twins were Barrys. Straight dark hair,
heavy brows, wonderful brown eyes veiled by long black
lashes, and fine aristocratic features. The children seemed
apt to fall into colour groups. I mean, Jack, Peggie and
Gerry were always about together, and the twins were
inseparable. But, I think, Gerry went to Peggie for pro-
tection. The twins teased him.
‘ Did they go to school ? ’ I hear you ask.
Well, yes, in a kind of way. School came to them by
post as it does to thousands of Bush children in Australia.
Every Tuesday, Mail day, the mail-bag contained five fat
packages, which were the lessons for the week for each
Barry child. And every evening after ‘ tea ’ (the Australian
evening meal), they all sat down to do them. At least,
they were supposed to do them. But in the daytime they
ran about as wild as the rabbits that scampered in the
mountains, and Mr. Barry said, they were very nearly as
much of a pest !
Of course, if you had asked the Barrys what they did in
the daytime, they would have stared at you. What did
they do ? Why ! They carried on the station, of course !
They helped with the sheep, and the rabbiting, and the ring-
barking, and the suckering and the burning off! And they
kept the boundaries ! What would father do without them ?
And I really believe, if you had asked Mr. Barry what
he would do without his five ragamuffins, he would have
said he did not know !
And now, as to this trouble with strangers
The Barrys never had liked strangers. In the distant
past, when strangers came occasionally, they brought all


kinds of unpleasant consequences in their train. A stranger,
no matter who or what he was, was asked in to dinner.
And that meant clean shirts and frocks, and specially brushed
hair, and speaking when you were spoken to.
Even Mr. and Mrs. Barry disliked their coming.
‘ I am fetched from one end of the Station to the other
to tell a man I do not want any fertilizer ! ’ Mr. Barry
complained. And Mrs. Barry had said :
‘ It takes me half a morning to convince a man that
I do not want a green plush drawing-room suite on the
hire-purchase system ! *
And then, when Jack was about ten, had come the
unspeakable Stranger. He had arrived in rather a smart
car, and he was rather smart himself. He had not stated
his business very clearly at first ; but after dinner he had
said to Mr. Barry :
‘ I really wanted to know if you would like to get rid
of your collie dogs. I could get you a good price for them.’
The children, who were supposed to have gone their
ways, paused on verandas and in doorways, and held their
breaths. To their intense relief Mr. Barry said :
‘ No, thank you. We do not part with our collies.’
‘ Well, 5 said the Hateful Creature, ‘at least let me buy
the old sire, he 5 s long past his prime. You won’t miss
him.’
‘ My dear sir, 5 said Mr. Barry, ‘ you might just as well
ask me to sell one of my children as to sell Yarrow. We
happen to be fond of him.’
‘ What ? 5 said the man, ‘ fond of that old doormat ? ’
And he gave Yarrow a shove with his foot.
Things happened not only quicker than it takes to write,
but quicker than you can imagine. There was a snarl, and
a whirl of bristling fur, and the Odious Outsider was on
his back on the floor with Yarrow at his throat. There


followed pandemonium. Every collie dog at Ridgeways
rushed to assist the Patriarch. The air was full of the
deep angry barking of dogs and the shrill clamour of the
children. Jim, who was only seven then, danced about
yelling, 4 Good dog, Yarrow ! Chew his ears ! ’ Mr. Barry
dragged Yarrow off the man’s throat, but Garry and Garth
flew at him. He jumped on to the dining-table, with
Garry after him, attached to the seat of his trousers. Jack
tugged Garry back by his tail, and he came away plus a
large section of the Stranger’s trousers. After an immense
amount of uproar the dogs were chased out and the Stranger
coaxed down from the table and dabbed with iodine, and
assured that he was not hurt really. Anyway, not so badly
as he might have been. But he was sour about it. And he
went away saying that the Barrys should hear from him again.
And now follows the disgraceful part. The man, who
must have known he fully deserved to get bitten, tried to
get Yarrow destroyed. He failed. But the Barrys never
forgot those terrible weeks of anxiety and suspense. And
expense, too, for Mr. Barry said it cost a mint of money to
save the old dog !
4 Upon my soul,’ said Mr. Barry, ‘ I never want to see
another stranger here ! ’
And that, of course, was quite enough for the Barry
children. They adopted as their slogan, ‘ The Stranger
shall not Pass.’ And he did not. They did not consult
their parents about it. They considered that unnecessary.
4 The strong man,’ said Jan, ‘ acts and does not talk.’
So the Barrys acted, and Mr. and Mrs. Barry noticed
that no more travellers came to Ridgeways.
4 I suppose,’ said Mrs. Barry, 4 it is because we never
buy anything.’
4 Or they found it difficult to get here,’ said Mr. Barry.
And therein he spoke with greater truth than he knew.


CHAPTER 111
WHO COMES?
AND now that we have finished with all the introduc-
tions and explanations, we can get on with the story.
On the day it opens, the Barry children were
immensely perturbed on a serious matter. The matter was
an English letter that had arrived for father in a long en-
velope that morning. It had tumbled out of the mail-bag
with a plop, and Jack, who had unlocked the bag and was
sorting the letters, had picked it up and looked at the address.
‘John Barry, Esqre, Ridgeways Station, Happy Valley,
Via Bathurst, New South Wales, Australia.’
And it bore a big red seal.
‘ Hello ! ’ said father, ‘ that looks like Pennythorp,
Saltmarsh and Pennythorp ! ’
‘ Gracious ! Who are they ? ’ exclaimed Jan.
‘ Solicitors —and my Trustees,’ said father.
He laid the letter aside while the remaining contents of
the heavy bag were handed round. The bag was always
heavy, for all the Ridgeways shopping had to be done by
post. Now, here were the newspapers. Father’s new boots.
The gingham for summer frocks for the girls. A packet of
groceries. Letters from shops. And the inevitable lessons !
They never missed the post ! Then the children had been
dispatched on various pretexts and affairs, and they did not
see the opening of the letter.
But they saw, and felt, its effects. When they returned


to the house, they noted that their parents were evidently
very much perturbed, and they caught snatches of con-
versation, such as :
‘ Yes —it seems incredible ! ’
Now, what was incredible ?
4 Some one must have left father a fortune,’ suggested
Jim.
4 But then, they wouldn’t be worried. They’d be glad,’
objected Peggie.
4 Not necessarily,’ said Jack. 4 Spending a fortune is
sometimes very difficult. That’s what it means about being
44 Penny wise and pound foolish ”.’
4 You don’t find that out till you’ve taken it on,’ said
Jim.
4 And you’d take it on even if you did know,’ said Jan.
They discussed the fortune, and how much it was likely
to be, and what was to be done with it, all the afternoon.
There was nothing further to be gathered by hanging round
the house —(No. They did not eavesdrop. They did not
have to ! Everything that was said at one end of Ridgeways
could be heard at the other, for the split wood had shrunk,
and the walls were all cracks and chinks !) —for Mr. Barry
had gone to mend a boundary fence and Mrs. Barry in an
absent-minded sort of a way was making cakes.
4 And do you know,’ said Peggie, ‘ Mummie put those
cakes into the oven and clean forgot them ? I said to her,
“ What’s burning ? ” and she said, 44 Burning ? Goodness
gracious ! It must be the cakes !” ’
Later on in the afternoon, some more information
oozed through. Jan whistled everybody to come behind
the cow bail and said :
‘ It’s not a fortune. Somebody’s coming ! ’ Then, she
added darkly, 4 That is, if he can get here ! ’
4 Go on, quick ! Who ? When ? ’ exclaimed everybody.


‘ Well, I heard Mummie say, “Oh dear! Must he
really come ? ” And father said, “It seems totally unneces-
sary, but I don’t see how we can stop him, now. He’s on
the way. Very nearly here , in fact !” ’
‘ If that’s the only trouble, we can stop him,’ muttered
Jack,
‘ Well, let’s go in to tea. Perhaps they’ll tell us some
thing ! ’ said Peggie. ‘Jim, you go and wash.’
* I did wash.’
‘ When ? When you got up this morning, or yesterday,
from the look of it ! ’
‘ Well, anyhow, I’ll do .’
‘My hands are clean,’ said Jack. ‘ You girls can have
the bath-room.’
‘ Oh, mine’ll do ! ’ said Jan.
* So will mine,’ echoed Gerry.
‘ Oh no, they won’t, young fellow ! ’ said Jack.
‘ Certainly not ! ’ said Peggie. ‘ Come on, Gerry !
Peggie was supposed to see that her brothers and sisters
washed and got tidy for tea. And usually, after an immense
amount of struggling and screaming, she managed to hold
Gerry under the tap long enough to remove a superficial
coating of dirt. But then, she was backed by all the other
Barry children who were all anxious lest Gerry should be
spoilt.
But when they reached the house a real shock awaited
them. Mrs. and Mr, Barry were sitting on the veranda in
earnest conversation, and there was no tea ready ! Such
a thing had never happened before. Tea was always ready,
when you came in from the paddocks, and lovely to look
upon. A clean white cloth spread upon the big table. A
great bunch of gum-tips and flowers in the middle, and a
tempting array of foods. Meat patties, perhaps. And
always hot scones and cakes and Devonshire-cream, the latter


made according to Mr. Barry’s instructions. For tea was
the important meal of the day. Breakfast was always
hurried ; dinner was a rough-and-ready affair in the
paddocks, as a rule. But tea, you really looked forward
to !
And, to-day, there was no tea ready. When the children
arrived, Mrs. Barry looked up and said :
* Oh —tea ! Peggie, you can find some cold meat and
bread and butter, can’t you. Oh yes, and some jam. And
you could all have it in the kitchen, I think. The table is
not laid in the dining-room.’
And so five disgruntled children gathered in the kitchen
to eat this dull fare. All the Ridgeway machinery out of
gear because of this horrible letter !
The Barry children no longer hoped for anything good
from that letter. If father had been left a fortune, Mummie
would have had a most gorgeous tea ready. She might have
opened a tin of sardines ! The sort of thing that was only
done on birthdays ! Undoubtedly, the letter contained bad
news.
But good or bad, the children were none the wiser when
they went to bed ; and in the days that followed, things
went from bad to worse. They were told nothing, but,
some one was coming ! And the place had to be made tidy.
A bush homestead, when there are five children, becomes
considerably littered, inside and out. There are no dust
men, you see, to come and collect rubbish. Everything
has to be buried or burnt, and that does not happen every
day. So now the children had to weed, and sort rubbish,
and cart it away. And that was not the worst of it. Behind
the big living-room, or dining-room, at Ridgeways there
was a little sitting-room that was the children’s play-room.
And now that was to be cleared, and tidied, and made into
a bedroom for Somebody !


But cleared ! How was it to be cleared ? Where was
everything to be put ? Jack was making an engine. Peggie
collected birds’ feathers, bush flowers, and eggs. Jim was
mad on wireless and Jan on photography. And Gerry had
a home-made permanent railway laid down on the floor.
And then there were the paints and the dolls and the sewing
and the lesson books and
Oh well ! You know all the rest of it ! What is there
in your play-room, and perhaps there are not five of you ?
Of course, the Barrys did not have all the toys you have,
for they were. Bush children, and lived far away from shops,
and then every penny of the Barry money was always spent
on land improvements. But still they managed to accumu-
late up a good deal, even though the dolls’ house was made
of a packing-case ; and the railway stations of cardboard
and tin boxes. Yes, and the dolls, some of them, were
clothes-pegs !
So you can perhaps imagine the sort of thing that went
on while the Barrys vacated their beloved room. Gerry
howled when his railway was pulled up. The twins groused
steadily, and stood about, doing nothing and got in every
one else’s way Peggie was cross, and banged things into
boxes, and Jack was silent and furious as he unscrewed his
beloved engine. And in the middle of it father looked in
and said :
‘ Now, get on with it, children. Clear out all this
rubbish. And don’t look so woe-begone about it, either ! ’
‘ Rubbish ! ’ ‘ Woe-begone ! ’
The room was cleared, but an indignation meeting was
held that evening on top of the Hay-rick. There was every
indication that the visitor was expected to-morrow, and
the question before the meeting was ‘ Should the Stranger
Pass ? ’


i 8 BUSH RAGAMUFFINS
Every one, except Peggie, voted against the Stranger.
‘ I think we’ll have to let him through ! 5 said Peggie.
‘He must be important. Mother and father have made
such a fuss about him.’
‘ But we know they don’t want him ! ’ said Jan. ‘ Why,
father said he was totally unnecessary, only, how could he
be stopped ? Well, we can stop him ! ’
‘ And, if he never comes,’ said Jim, ‘ they will presently
forget all about him, and life will go on as usual, and we
shall get our play-room back.’
‘ Yes ! Get the play-room back ! ’ echoed Gerry.
There was an interlude now while Jan and Jim told
Gerry not to copy, and wondered why he couldn’t think
for himself ? And Gerry asserted that he had thought
about getting the play-room back before Jim spoke at all,
and appealed to Peggie. And Peggie said
Well, you know the sort of thing. Finally, Jack broke
up the discussion by saying :
c Oh, stop quarrelling, you kids ! Keep to the main
issue. The question before us is “ Shall the Stranger
Pass ? ” and I say he shall not. Not because we don’t
want him, or that he has got our play-room or anything
to do with us ; but because we have made a rule and we
stick to it. No Stranger Passes.’
Everybody cheered, except Peggie. And she said :
‘ Oh, well, I suppose so. Only there’ll be an awful row ! ’
‘ I warn you,’ said Jan, ‘ this stranger will probably be
tough ! He’ll think he’s got a right to come. He won’t
be turned back so easily as ‘Tea and Sheep-lick ’.
‘ I’ve thought about that,’ said Jack. ‘ But to-morrow
is Boundary day. We’ll have to cut boundaries, anyhow.
That will give us the whole day to prepare. He’s sure
to be coming from Sydney, which means he can’t possibly
get here till sunset.’


‘ There’ll be an awful lot of trouble if we cut boundaries,’
warned Peggie. ‘ There’s a wombat getting through on
the Stack Mountain, and an old man Kangaroo keeps break-
ing the top wire on Red Mountain ; and trees keep falling
across the fence in Fox Tree Paddock where we are burning
off! ’
‘ Bubble, bubble, toil and trouble ! ’ chanted Jan.
All the children laughed and tumbled down from the
stack. Peggie followed, looking a little disconsolate. Her
harum-scarum brothers and sister were always rushing into
trouble, and it always fell to her lot to try to ward the
blow and cushion the shock !


CHAPTER IV
MR. PENNYTHORP HAS AN ADVENTURE
AND now, for a moment, we will leave the Barrys and
get into touch with * The Stranger
The Stranger was coming from farther than
Sydney. He came all the way from England ; he arrived
in Sydney by the S.S. Port Lewis the very night of the dis-
cussion on the hay-rick. And he proposed to visit Ridge-
ways immediately, and return to England by the Port Lewis
ten days later. His name was Cuthbert Pennythorp. And
he was the Junior Partner of the old established firm of
solicitors, Pennythorp, Saltmarsh and Pennythorp.
But when I say he was the ‘Junior ’ partner, that does
not mean he was very young. I think he must have been
quite old ; about fifty. But he was one of those people
who always look ‘junior’. He was a little man; rather
round, with a jovial round face and fresh complexion. His
eyes always twinkled, and really, he seemed like a schoolboy
with white hair, trying to look solemn. And of course he
had to be solemn a good deal of his time, for he was a
‘ family solicitor ’ and was expected to give serious advice.
Yet, I believe Mr. Pennythorp was still a schoolboy at heart,
for he longed and longed for adventure, and he had never
had the smallest chance of even the tiniest scrap of one !
Every day of his childhood he had gone to an ordinary
school in an ordinary town. Then, when he grew up he
married a nice, but very ordinary wife, and he took a villa


at Beckenham, Kent, exactly like dozens of other villas.
And every day of his grown-up life he had put on a silk
hat and caught the 8.45 a.m. train to London, and the
office.
But of course, he never told any one about his longing
for adventure. Not even his wife. So the Senior Partner
(who was his elder brother) was surprised when he said :
‘ About that matter we were discussing last night. I
really think I ought to run over to Australia and look at
that place, Ridgeways, and see if it will do.’
He spoke rather breathlessly, looking the other way, for
he did not want to see his brother Henry’s stare.
‘My dear Cuthbert ! Go to Australia ! It would take
a long time ! ’
‘ Yes, well, I am due for a long holiday, and the sea
voyage would do me good.’
‘ Well, well ! Of course, cost is no object, in this case.
It might set the poor lady’s mind at rest. You really think
you will go ? ’
4 Yes, yes. I said so. I will go as soon as I can arrange
to get away.’
And so, Mr. Pennythorp went. He felt it was really
imperatively necessary that he should go and have a business
talk with John Barry, and above all, find out what sort of
place Ridgeways might be ; and what its occupants were
like. Nevertheless, he did hope that there would be a spice
of adventure to it.
But the voyage out had been totally uneventful. Mr.
Pennythorp had chosen the long sea route, round the Cape
of Good Hope, because he understood that by this route
one went down to the ‘ Roaring Forties ’ ; and one might see
an iceberg. But the Forties did not roar. They were only
horribly cold so that Mr. Pennythorp stayed in the smoking-
room and played bridge with a number of people who


might equally well have been going up in the train from
Beckenham to London,
Nor did things seem more hopeful when he got to Sydney.
Sydney was just like any other big city, except that its
important streets were rather narrow and completely filled
by trams. Otherwise, it was just the same. Shops; people
looking into them ; people getting in your way. Policemen
holding you up.
But Mr. Penny thorp brightened when he asked the Hotel
Porter how he was to get to Happy Valley, for the porter
had never heard of it. The porter called a chauffeur from
one of the cars for hire at the door, and said :
‘ Ever heard of Happy Valley ? ’
Nope, said the chauffeur. ‘ Bill,’ he shouted to an-
other chauffeur, ‘ Where’s Happy Valley ? *


‘ Other side of Harpetee,’ said Bill. ‘ Only, when you
get there you ain’t happy. Not if you’re driving a car! ’
‘ Ask that man if he’ll take me to Happy Valley to-
morrow,’ cried Mr. Penny thorp, undaunted.
Bill came up to discuss the matter. He was not enthusi-
astic. It was years since he went to Happy Valley. Then
he took a Commercial there. And bust a tire, and had
said he would never go again. It was 200 miles there,
and another 200 back. That meant that he would have
to travel back in the dark. And it wasn’t no road to travel
over in the dark. Would the gentleman start directly after
breakfast ?
And so at eight-thirty the next morning Mr. Pennythorp
settled himself and his many possessions into the car, and
was soon threading Sydney streets. Then they left the city
behind, and got away into the suburbs. But Mr. Penny-
thorp did not like the Suburbs ! People lived horribly in
little tin-roofed bungalows, painted yellow ochre (the bun-
galows, I mean, not the people). And they had dusty
little front gardens and little fenced-in back-yards. An
Australian edition of Beckenham. It made Mr. Penny-
thorp feel depressed and he was glad when the mean little
bungalows were left behind. Then followed a dreary,
empty stretch of country. About thirty miles of it, called
Emu Plains. But instead of emus there were notice-boards
stating that blocks of land were for sale. Ajid then, at last
the notice-boards vanished and the car began to climb up
and up a road that twisted like a stick of barley sugar that
had got flattened. They w r ere entering the Blue Mountains.
At first, it was nice, but fairly ordinary. The trees
and ferns w r ere pretty ; and as one got up into the moun-
tains one caught sight of tree-clad heights and valleys that
were great chasms of blue. But on the ‘ Sydney side ’ of
the mountains there were too many mountain health resorts


and one kept coming upon little suburban-looking towns
full of bungalows bearing such names as Mon Repos ; Mon
Abri ; or Belle Vue. Mr. Penny thorp frowned at them.
How could one hope for adventure in such surroundings ?
But presently, he felt happier. After two hours’ steady
climbing the car suddenly began a long descent. They
were over the Pass, and the bungalow towns were left behind.
The character of the country changed. On the Sydney side,
near the sea, there was plenty of rain, so ‘ vegetation was
luxuriant ’, as they say in the geography books. But now
it was quite different. Mr. Pennythorp gave a great sigh
of relief. ‘So this is Australia ! This is the grey-green
Bush ! ’ he said to himself. And so it was indeed. Ferns
and flowers were left behind. Now there was nothing to
be seen but grey-green gum trees and yellow or red sandy
soil and scrub bushes. The whole country seemed to be
a study in a kind of blue-greyness. Even the dried-up
grass looked grey. The shadows were grey ; the sky was
very blue. There were no warm colours anywhere.
A sort of emptiness went with all this greyness. Just
as the landscape seemed to be waiting to be filled in with
warm colours —a field of red clover or yellow mustard,
perhaps —so did the sweeping heights call for homesteads,
with warm fires in winter and red roses in summer. But
the trees swept up the heights and down the valleys in
unbroken lines of blue-grey. Very rarely, one saw the
curling smoke of a farm.
Funny farms, too, they seemed to Mr. Pennythorp.
He was used to substantial English farmhouses. Red brick
in Kent, and granite in Devonshire, where he spent his
holidays. With lots of well-built out-houses. But here, the
majority of the farms were just what Mr. Pennythorp called
‘ shacks ’, made of corrugated iron and split logs. And as
for farm buildings, they were mostly non-existent. For


cows were milked in the open and horses were never stabled
and farm implements seemed to be left where they were
last used. Arid not a spot of paint anywhere. The iron
and the split wood merged into the common greyness.
When Sydney w r as perhaps 120 miles behind, the car
turned off the Great Western Road and bumped and banged
on to a mountain-track. It banged so violently that Mr.
Pennythorp was flung about like a pea in a baby’s rattle,
and he hit the roof several times. The main road had
seemed bad enough. They had climbed up and down
precipitous heights and crawled for miles and miles round
roads that were apparently only ledges on the mountain-
side, while Mr. Pennythorp wondered what would happen
if the steering gear went wrong, or the brakes jammed.
But he now found that travel on the Great Western Road
had been a joy-ride compared to this ! Sometimes the road
was so narrow and the precipice so close that Mr. Penny-
thorp was certain that one wheel went over the edge at
every turn. And he broke into a gende perspiration at
the thought that they might meet another car ! If so,
what on earth would they do ? They could not pass, and
certainly, they could not back. He longed to ask the
chauffeur what he would do if he met another car, but
did not dare divert the man’s attention from his steering.
‘ If he makes the smallest error of judgement, we are
lost ! ’ thought Mr. Pennythorp.
Besides, it would have been difficult to ask the chauffeur
anything, it was necessary to hold so tight to the seat. And
no matter how tight you held, some of the bumps wrenched
away your grip and you banged the roof with a neck-
breaking crash. And if one were hurt, what would become
of one ? The Bush was growing emptier and emptier.
When they first turned off the Great Western Road they
had passed through one or two mining villages, where


people lived in rough shacks built of old corrugated iron,
or beaten out kerosene tins, or sometimes corn-sacks, stitched
together. But now, one scarcely saw a habitation of any
sort.
Mr. Penny thorp had just formed a gruesome picture of
himself lying smashed to pieces at the bottom of a precipice
when a turn in the road suggested another horrible possi-
bility. The road was blocked by a wide creek. The creek
flowed between deep-cut clay banks. Mr. Pennythorp
craned his head out of the window and saw that it would
be necessary to nose-dive down one bank ; (and certainly
become embedded in the sandy bottom of the creek), and
then, if one ever extracted oneself, to crawl like a fly up the
nearly vertical bank on the opposite side. To Mr. Penny-
thorp there seemed only one course to pursue ; to turn
back.
But to his astonishment and terror the chauffeur seemed
entirely unperturbed. The car plunged down the bank ;
smacked the water so that spray was flung high above the
roof on either side ; and began to surge through the creek
with a hideous shrieking of gears. In the middle, it stopped
and water flooded over the foot-boards and Mr. Pennythorp
thought all was lost. He would drown now, like a cat in
a sack ! Then the gears ground out a more raucous com-
plaint and the car plunged on again ; toiled towards the
opposite bank ; gained it, and chugged slowly up the incline
and panted on to the road.
c Bravo ! ’ shouted Mr. Pennythorp.
Bill, the chauffeur, jammed on his brakes and stopped
and turned.
‘ Anything wrong ? ’ he inquired.
‘ Er—no.’
‘ Oh. Thought you spoke.’
‘Er —are there any more rivers to cross like that ?


‘ That wasn’t a river. Just a creek.’
‘ And they don’t put bridges over them ? ’
‘ No. Not often, they don’t.’
Bill turned and started up his engine again.
‘ Best get on,’ he said. ‘ Road might get bad, and it’s
getting towards sunset.’
*Ye Gods ! ’ murmured Mr. Penny thorp to himself.
‘ The road might get bad ! ’
The road certainly got bad. Worse, that is to say,
than it had been. They crossed three more creeks, and
now, the sun was setting. The western sky blazed crimson,
and a single star shone out like an enormous diamond. In
the south-east the Southern Cross slowly pricked itself out
on a pale blue background. The mountains in the west
stood out black against the fading orange and reds of the
sky. A chill crept into the air. Mr. Pennythorp shivered.
These vast spaces gave one an overpowering sense of loneli-
ness ! He wished he were at Ridgeways !
And as the ardent wish crossed his mind the car jerked
suddenly to a standstill, and the chauffeur leaned out.
‘ Does it say “ Ridgeways ” on that mail-box ? ’ he asked.
‘Yes. I thought we couldn’t be far off if it was this side
of Happy Valley, because Happy Valley is only above five
miles on.’
He climbed out and opened the gate.
‘ There seems to be no sign of a house,’ said Mr. Penny-
thorp, peering out.
‘ Oh, homestead may be miles away ! Often are, on,
these Bush stations. Still, it won’t be far now.’
Mr. Pennythorp pointed.
‘ There is smoke,’ he said. ‘ Would that be from their
chimney ? ’
Bill stared in the direction he pointed.
‘ Why, that smoke’s on the top of the mountain ! 5 he


said. ‘ They’d hardly have a house there. Gee ! It makes
me creep ! ’
‘ Why ? 5 asked Mr. Pennythorp, anxiously, noting a
curious look on Bill’s face that was uncommonly like fear.
‘ Oh—it reminds me of the Myalls.’
‘ Myalls ? ’
c Yes. Wild Desert men. Savages, you know. If you’d
been up in the Territory, same as me, you’d feel creepy if
you saw a column of smoke on the top of a mountain !
It’s too much like a signal fire. The Myalls talk by smokes,
and when they signal that they’ve seen you, they might
come and ask for a stick of tobacco, or they might spear
you in your sleep.’
‘ Bless my soul ! They wouldn’t really do that, would
they ? ’ gasped Mr. Pennythorp.
‘My word ! Why, two of our crowd got speared ! We
were looking for Lasseter’s Reef and two of our men got
off by themselves and the Blacks found them before we did.
But there are no Blacks in New South. Not now. Used to
be in my father’s time. There was a big wagon camp near
here at Harpetee, and one night the Blacks cleaned up the
lot of them, man and boy. Only twenty years ago, that
was. Well, talking won’t buy baby a frock. Better be
getting on if I’m to do a day’s work to-morrow.’
He drove in through the gate, and now the road became,
as he said, ‘ real bad ’. They bumped and they banged.
Why ! The track was nothing but a mountain-path ! And
now it wound through a cutting. Sheer cliff towering on
either side. Suddenly, Bill jammed on his brakes and
stopped.
‘ Now ! What do you know about that ? ’ he asked.
A big tree was down across the road. It’s trunk barred
the way of the car. Its smashed and piled-up branches
defied even the passage of Mr. Pennythorp. He and Bill


stared at it disconsolately. Then Bill went a little way
back along the road.
‘ Look at here,’ said Bill. ‘ There’s a little stock pad
goes up the mountain here. Dare say it’ll lead down on
to the road again. If you was to leave your baggage here,
and follow the pad, it’ud take you to Ridgeways ; or else
it wouldn’t. Still you might try, and if it did, they could
send down for your traps.’
‘ But suppose it doesn’t ? ’ asked Mr. Pennythorp
Bill scratched his head.
* Sure to lead somewhere. And anyhow, Ridgeways
can’t be far. And I can’t get no further, so it’s no good
me stopping here ! ’
Mr. Pennythorp, in the midst of an adventure, found
his heart sinking.
‘ Very provoking ! ’ he said. He longed to ask Bill to
accompany him up the stock pad, and was wondering
what to say when he saw Bill unstrapping his luggage and
depositing it by the roadside.
‘ It’ll take me all my time to get back, as it is,’ said
Bill. ‘ Let’s see. Twenty-five pound was what we said,
wasn’t it ? ’
Mr. Pennythorp drew out his pocket-book and handed
over five five-pound notes. Bill pocketed them and climbed
into his car.
‘ Good-bye,’ said Mr. Pennythorp forlornly.
‘ S’long ! ’ said Bill.
He backed the car down the perilous road, and where
the track widened a little, turned, waved a hand to Mr.
Pennythorp and a moment later the car had wound its
way out of sight. Mr. Pennythorp was alone.
Alone, and it was getting quite dark. Up there, in
the mountain, there were great black shadows. It would
be pleasant to get to Ridgeways and sit before a blazing log


fire and drink tea from a billie-can. (For thus, Mr. Penny-
thorp imagined, ‘ Bush ’ people entertained their guests.)
He began to follow the stock pad (it was really a kan-
garoo pad), and thought that if it got much darker he
would not be able to see it. It seemed to be leading up the
mountain, too, where they had seen the smoke. . . .
Mr. Pennythorp hoped that Ridgeways was not far, for
that story about the Myalls had made him feel quite creepy.
Of course, there were no Myalls in this district, now. And
yet, was it so certain ? Ridgeways was such a long way
from anywhere. And mountains towered around. Range
after range of them. Who knew what might be hidden
in the folds of those hills ? And what might lurk in those
innumerable caverns ? Civilized men were so complacent ;
so sure of themselves. They looked no farther than their
noses. But the wild men were silent and secret. There
might be hundreds of them in these mountains and the white
men would never know. . . .
Mr. Pennythorp was a good way up the mountain-path
now, and he glanced nervously from side to side. Good
gracious ! What was that ?
He stopped and stared. Away to the right, and not
so very far away, either, another column of smoke was
rising. And as he watched, it bent. Three times, the
smoke pillar bent. And yet there was no wind. That
was most certainly a signal !
Mr. Pennythorp turned and began to hurry down the
mountain-path. But then, he stopped again. What was
the good of going down ? He would be no better off. He
was miles from Happy Valley, and now it was quite dark,
below there in the valley, while here on the mountain
there was still a little light. If he went on, he might see
the homestead just over the brow of the hill. He would
chance it, anyway.


Mr. Pennythorp had forgotten that he had ever wanted
an adventure. His heart was hammering—he knew that —
it must be this steep mountain-path ! And —what was
that ?
‘ Thud —thud —thud 5
With a gasping cry, Mr. Pennythorp threw himself back
into the shadow of a rock as something enormous surged
round the corner. ‘ Bang —bang ! ’ and it was gone. Poof!
it was a big grey kangaroo ! Mr. Pennythorp had hardly
realized that these creatures existed ; he certainly never
knew they were so big and formidable ! Well, the thing
was gone —no harm done. . . .
Had Mr. Pennythorp been a bush-man, he would have
known something had startled that Too to send it leaping
down the mountain in such a hurry ! But Mr. Pennythorp,
fortunately for his peace of mind, was no bush-man. He
went on, slowly and furtively, up the path, glancing from
side to side. And now ! What was that ? That dark
thing over there ? Was it the shadow of a rock ? Or did
it move ?
Mr. Pennythorp stared, petrified. Yes, the shadow
moved. As he watched a slight black form slipped back
into the dark shades of the mountain. It made no sound.
Mr. Pennythorp recalled Bill’s words.
‘ They either ask for a stick of tobacco, or they spear
you.’ And he had not got a stick of tobacco ! But he did
not think that man was carrying a spear, either. He grasped
his umbrella weapon-wise, and went on. He would sell his
life dearly !
But about 200 yards farther up, he came to another
dead stop, and his thudding heart seemed to stop too.
For in the middle of the darkening path stood a black
man, with his spear poised !
It was too much for Mr. Pennythorp. With a sound


that was suspiciously like a scream, he turned and dashed
down the mountain.
But it was the first time Mr. Pennythorp had set foot
on a mountain, up or down, and none but the Barry children,
and the Ridgeway white goats, could run down a mountain
like that. Mr. Pennythorp tripped over a stone, pitched
forward, and rolled. A big rock stopped his progress a
few yards farther down. Mr. Pennythorp rolled under it,
and lay still.


CHAPTER V
WHAT WILL FATHER SAY?
ISAY ! Now we’ve done it ! ’
One black man looked at the other in blank dismay.
‘ Well —but who would have thought ’
‘ Better see if he’s hurt ! ’
‘No ! Stop a minute ! He’ll have a fit if he sees us
again. Where’s Peggie ? ’
(For you have, of course, guessed that the ‘ Myalls ’ were
Jack and Jim dressed up, or rather, blacked up, for the part.)
Peggie, Jan and Gerry came hurrying down from the
cave in which they were ambushed.
‘ Peg, for goodness’ sake go and see what’s the matter
with him ! ’ gasped Jack.
Peggie slipped down the mountain while the rest of the
children mobbed up like frightened sheep. The boys hastily
pulled on their shirts, and tried to rub some of the black
off their faces. In the meantime, Peggie had gathered Mr.
Pennythorp’s head into her lap. His round face was quite
white now, and his eyes were shut.
‘Oh ! Oh, please ! Are you hurt ? ’ gasped Peggie.
Mr. Pennythorp gave a sigh. Opened startled blue eyes,
and stared at the queer wild-looking little girl bending over
him. Her curly red hair was tumbled. Her blue gingham
dress was torn ; there was a big smudge of black on her
cheek ; but her eyes were steadfast and kind and her voice
was cultured.


34 BUSH RAGAMUFFINS
c Eh ? 5 murmured Mr. Pennythorp.
He shut his eyes again and wondered what all this was
about. Then, suddenly, he remembered, and his eyes
opened again with a pop.
‘ Look out, my dear ! You must get away from here !
There are black men ’
c No ! No ! It was only—only make believe ! ’ ex-
claimed Peggie.
£ What ? ’
£ We —we were kind of play-acting, you know. The
black men were only my brothers, blacked with the charcoal
from a burnt log.’
‘ Oh,’ murmured Mr. Pennythorp,
He shut his eyes again and a hot flush spread over his
white face. Peggie felt terribly uncomfortable.
‘ Please, are you hurt ? ’ she asked again.
‘ I —l don’t know.’
He sat up and felt himself carefully, and winced as he
touched a swollen ankle.
‘ It’s this ankle,’ he said, and took off his shoe.
‘ You won’t be able to walk ! ’ said Peggie, blankly.
‘ No. I’m sure I shall not. lam going to Ridgeways.
Is it far ? ’
£ Oh no. Not far. About eight miles.’
‘ Eight miles ! Dear dear ! What shall I do ? ’
‘ We will run and ask father to bring a horse for you.’
‘ And where is your father ? ’
‘At Ridgeways. You were going to see him, weren’t you ? ’
£ I was going to see Mr. Barry, of Ridgeways.’
£ That is father.’
£ Bless my soul ! ’
Mr. Pennythorp stared at the tattered little girl ; and,
over her shoulder, at a number of small shadowy figures that
were lurking in the background.


‘ I beg your pardon, my dear. I did not know I was
speaking to a Miss Barry. But what are you all doing in
the mountain all alone ? Have you no nurse or governess
with you ? ’
A slightly hysterical giggle betrayed Jan.
‘ You see, nurses and governesses will not stay in the
Bush. Neither will servants. So we haven’t got them.
Only Billie, the yard boy,’ explained Peggie.
‘Ah ! And how many of you are there ? ’ Mr. Penny-
thorp peered into the dusk.
‘ Come here, all of you ! ’ he commanded.
They came forward slowly. A black-haired girl —yes,
Mr. Pennythorp would have known her for a Barry. A
little red-haired boy, hiding behind her. And two black-
faced boys.
* And now, do tell me, why were you playing at Black-
fellows, at this hour of the evening ? ’ he asked.
They looked at each other despairingly. And then Jan,
who had more assurance than anybody, said, ‘ It’ll have to
come out, you know,’ and turning to Mr. Pennythorp she said:
‘ We did it to drive you away.’
‘ What ? ’ cried Mr. Pennythorp.
‘ We didn’t mean you to hurt yourself, of course,’ went
on Jan. ‘lt didn’t work out quite how we meant. We
didn’t think of you sending your car away. We thought
you would leave it at the bottom of the hill ; and then,
when you found it —er —difficult, to get to Ridgeways, we
thought you would go back to the car and go away.’
‘ I see. And why did you want me to go away, if that
is not an impertinent question ? ’
£ Oh—we don’t like strangers.’
‘ Why ? ’
The children fidgeted. How were they to explain this
thing ?


36 BUSH RAGAMUFFINS
‘ They bring bad luck,’ said Jack.
‘ And Td say they get it ! ’ remarked Mr. Pennvthorp.
4 Still ’
He seemed lost in thought for a moment.
‘ And do your parents share your inhospitable sentiments
towards strangers ? ’ he asked.
They stared at him uncomprehendingly. And then a
light broke upon Peggie. She said :
‘ Oh, you mean do father and mother like strangers ?
Well, no, they don’t really. Once, father said he did not
care if he never saw another stranger. And since then, we
have always driven them away.’
‘Ah ! Excellent ! ’
The Barry children gasped. They thought they had not
heard aright.
4 Eh ? ’ said Jack.
‘ I said, “ Excellent ”, and I meant it,’ said Mr. Penny-
thorp. * But I hope you will not drive me aw'ay now. I
really must see your father.’
The Barrys gave up trying to understand Mr. Pennythorp.
Peggie said :
‘ I don’t think we ought to have tried to drive you aw’ay
at all. Mother and father are expecting you.’
‘ Mummie has made you some nice cakes with chocolate
on them,’ said Gerry.
‘Ah ! That sounds better,’ said Mr. Pennythorp. ‘Do
you know, w’hen we turned in at your gate, I was just looking
forward to sitting in front of a nice fire and having a cup
of tea ! ’
‘Oh ! I’ll make you some tea now. And some bread
twists. We always take tea and flour out with us ! ’ exclaimed
Peggie.
‘ Weil collect up some wood ! ’ said Jack.
‘ No, no I ’ exclaimed Mr. Pennythorp, who felt he had


had enough of the Barry children. I think it would do if
one of you stayed to look after me. Perhaps, you, Miss
Barry, would stay ? And the rest of you run home and tell
your father about my —er —accident. 5
The Barrys were not at all anxious to run home and tell
father.
‘ It would do if one of us went,’ said Jan, and she said
over her shoulder to her brothers, ‘ We could draw lots.’
But Mr. Pennythorp was firm.
‘ I feel it is late for such young children to be out at
all,’ he said. ‘ And in any case, I should like to be quiet.
So I think, please, it would be advisable to do as I say.’
The Barrys sighed. They felt it would certainly be
advisable not to annoy the Stranger any further. They
faded reluctantly away.
Mr. Pennythorp was glad to be alone with Peggie.
Under the rough and tumble of her appearance, he sensed a
certain motherliness. In a surprisingly short time she had
a roaring fire going—the floor of the ‘ Bush ’ is always
strewn with dry wood —then she poured water from a water-
bag into a billie and set it on a tripod of green sticks. And
next she peeled a small green stick and mixed flour and
water in an enamelled mug ; and then wound a long piece
of dough round the stick and toasted it in the fire. In a
moment or two it was cooked and she drew the long twist
off the stick ; filled the hollow middle with butter, and
handed it to Mr. Pennythorp.
Mr. Pennythorp thought he had never tasted anything
so delicious. (You try this for yourself, next picnic, and
see if you don’t agree with him.) A few minutes later he
had a cup of steaming billie tea, too, and then Peggie went
on making bread twists while Mr. Pennythorp watched her.
At first he had been bitterly angry and ashamed at the end
of his ‘ adventure ’ but now he felt a little mollified. For


was this not an adventure after all ? What would they say
at the Club when he told them he had been nearly knocked
down by a ’roo half-way up a mountain a hundred miles
from the nearest town ? And what a strange, fantastic
scene this was ! The dark, silent mountain ; the tall gum
trees and giant rocks wrapped in mysterious shadow ; and
the leaping flames lighting up the figure of this little Bush
girl who knelt, her red curls falling over her face, toasting
her bread twists over the glowing ashes !
And then, the scents ! The good smell of the toasting
bread and steaming tea ; the heavy sweet smell of the
burning gum leaves. Mr. Pennythorp had always associated
eucalyptus with stuff you put on a handkerchief when you
had a cold, and had no notion what a beautiful aroma the
leaves gave out when you burnt them ! It seemed incredible
that only twenty-four hours ago he had come off the Port
Lewis with a crowd of London people with whom he had
played bridge and talked about the income tax !
‘ Well, well ! 5 said Mr. Pennythorp to himself, ‘ truth
is stranger than fiction ! 5
£ And now, 5 he said, when he had eaten all the bread
twists and drunk his third mug of tea, ‘ tell me all about
this feud with Strangers. 5
So Peggie told the whole story from start to finish, and
Mr. Pennythorp was very interested, and asked, merely as
a point of law, and not because he wished to be inquisitive,
whether it was Yarrow’s first bite ? And Peggie said, well,
that Yarrow had once bitten a bull that was chasing Jan ;
and Mr. Pennythorp said that that did not count.
When he had heard all about it he said :
‘ And do you always succeed in driving strangers away ? 5
‘ We have driven them all away except you, 5 said Peggie,
‘ an d I think you would have gone if the rock had not stopped
you ? 5


Mr. Pennythorp blushed, but it did not show with the
firelight playing on his face.
‘ But I might have come back again, you know,’ he
said. ‘ What would you have done if I had come with a
man with an axe, and had that tree chopped away ? ’
‘ Oh, there wasn’t only the tree ! ’ said Peggie. ‘ We’ve
been getting ready all day, you know. We each took a
section of the road. Jack had put c Roarer ’, our big black
bull in his piece. Roarer hates cars, and he always charges
straight at them. And there’s no get-away, on that piece
of the road. Jan had an open patch, but she would have
had a bush fire going by the time you got there. And then
Gerry and I had a piece of road between high cliffs, and
we had a whole mob of sheep packed in there. A mob of sheep
sounds very simple and babyish, but you have no idea how
baffling a thousand sheep can be, penned in between cliffs,
and held by dogs the other end, of course. And Jim did
something rather awful. He took the bridge away that spans
a deep ravine. Of course he put up a red rag ; and really,
no one would have got as far as that. And then ’
‘ Oh, that’ll do ! ’ cried Mr. Pennythorp. ‘ You seem
artists at this job ! And so no one gets through. Not the
butcher and the baker ? ’
Peggie stared.
‘ Why ! Of course we kill our own meat and grind our
own flour and bake the bread ! We make soap and candles,
too. Things we can’t make come by post.’
‘Ah ! So no one comes to Ridgeways ? ’
‘ Only the shearers, once a year.’
‘ And you know them ? ’
‘Oh yes. It’s always the same men.’
‘ Excellent.’
Peggie had ceased to be surprised at Mr. Penny thorp’s
‘ excellent ’. She thought him merely a litde queer.


‘ And so,’ he said, ‘if I had come by aeroplane. If I
had sailed down to Ridgeways out of the sky to visit you,
no one would know I had come ? 5
‘ No one at all,’ said Peggie.
‘Well ! Well ! ’ exclaimed Mr. Penny thorp, ‘it really
could not be better ! ’
And now Mr. Pennythorp seemed entirely to have for-
gotten all the unpleasantness of his arrival. He told Peggie
all sorts of funny stories. At first she was rather shy, and
too nervous to laugh much ; but she broke into giggles over
Mr. Pennythorp’s riddle, Why is a piece of blotting-paper
like a lame dog ? Peggie thought hard, and could not guess,
so Mr. Pennythorp told her.
‘ A piece of blotting-paper is an ink-lined plane, is it
not ? And an inclined plane is a slope up ? And a slow
pup is a lame dog ? Ha ! Ha ! Ha ! ’
And then, there was another.
‘ Can you tell me why, a hypocrite’s eye, can better
descry, than you or I, on how many toes, a pussy-cat goes ? ’
Peggie shook her head at this without trying to guess.
‘ Why ! ’ exclaimed Mr. Pennythorp, ‘ that’s easy ! ’
‘ Since a man of deceit can best counterfeit, so I suppose,
he can best count-her-toes ? ’
It was difficult not to laugh at these things, anyway,
because Mr. Pennythorp himself laughed so heartily. But
behind Peggie’s merriment, there was a dreadful sinking
feeling. For how would the others have fared with father ?
There was only one hope in the situation. Father would
have to start in a hurry. The children would be simply
sent to bed, and dire punishment would be deferred till
to-morrow. And then—perhaps Mr, Pennythorp would put
in a word for them. He seemed very kind.
The agony of suspense was prolonged, for it took Mr.
Barry a long time to reach them ; and the fire had been


FATHER’S FACE WAS VERY STERN INDEED


replenished a good many times, and a second brew of tea made
before a crackling of sticks announced the arrival of horses.
£ Here’s father ! ’ exclaimed Peggie, and a moment later,
Mr. Barry, riding one horse and leading another came into
the circle of firelight. Father’s face was very stern indeed
and he did not look at Peggie at all. He swung off his horse
and shook hands with Mr. Pennythorp.
£ My dear sir ! lam more sorry than I can say about
this ! It is disgraceful ! ’
But Mr. Pennythorp’s jovial face was wreathed in smiles.
‘ Not at all ! Not at all ! Please do not distress your-
self, John ! I may still call you John ? Twenty-five years
since we met, and you were only a boy then, and I was a
young man ! The ankle ? Tut ! Tut ! It was my own
fault ! I should have looked where I was going ! ’
£ But such a trick ! On a stranger ! ’
£ But,’ interposed Mr. Pennyworth, £ I learn that that is
the way they always treat strangers ? ’
£ What ? ’ gasped Mr. Barry. He turned to Peggie aghast.
£ What does this mean ? ’ he asked in what the children
called his £ dreadful ’ voice. £ Dreadful ’ because it was so
deadly quiet and cold.
£ Oh, father,’ gasped Peggie, horrified at the baseness of
Mr. Pennythorp, £ we —don’t you remember you said you
never wanted to see another stranger ? ’
£ Have you driven many away ? ’
£ Oh no —not many —really.’
£ Ah ! Not many perhaps,’ broke in Mr. Pennythorp,
£ but it was all that came, my dear, wasn’t it ? ’
£ Y —yes ! ’ murmured Peggie.
Mr. Pennythorp clapped his hands.
£ Excellent !’ he cried. £ Excellent ! ’ Then turning to
the startled Mr. Barry he said :
£ That’s worth a fortune, John ! ’


CHAPTER VI
WHAT DOES IT ALL MEAN?
MR. BARRY stared. Then a light broke over his face.
‘ Oh, you mean that the people they have
turned back would be travellers and we might
have wasted money on them ? But I assure you I should
not have bought a harmonium on the hire system ! ’
‘No ! ’ exclaimed Mr. Pennythorp. ‘ That is not what I
mean. My meaning shall be explained to you, sir, in the
privacy of your study.’
‘ I haven’t got one ! ’ smiled Mr. Barry. ‘We are a
long way from Coverdale ! But as the children will all be
in bed in disgrace, we shall get a little peace by the fireside
Now, what about this ankle ? ’
‘ You know, it’s surprisingly better, I don’t think I can
quite walk on it ’
Mr. Barry ran experienced fingers over the swollen
joint. When you have lived the greater part of your life at
least a hundred miles from a doctor, you become quite
skilled in medical knowledge.
‘ Nothing broken,’ he said. ‘ I do not think it is even
sprained. It seems like a knock. I shouldn’t be surprised
if you find it all right to-morrow.’
‘ I hope so, indeed ! ’ said Mr. Pennythorp. ‘ I should
be disappointed if I were confined to my room ! ’
He struggled to his feet and looked up at the tall horse
Mr. Barrie had brought for him.


‘ Dear me ! 5 he said. * I really don’t know how I shall
get up ! 5
But before he had time to say any more he found himself
up. Mr. Barry was used to lifting heavy sacks of wheat and
flour, and he just heaved Mr. Pennythorp up and over.
‘ Bless my soul ! ’ exclaimed Mr. Pennythorp, grasping
the horse’s mane. ‘I am up, but Ido not know if I shall
stay up ! It is the first time I have been on a horse in my
life ! ’
£ All you have to do is to sit still,’ said Mr. Barry. £ I’ll
lead the horse. Yes, keep a grip on his mane by all means.
Pride won’t mind ! ’
And Mr. Barry swung into the saddle and gathered up
the bridle reins.
‘We go over rather rough country,’ he said. ‘So it’s
just as well to hold tight.’
‘ But what about the little lady ? ’ asked Mr. Pennythorp,
looking at Peggie who was gathering up the billie and mugs.
‘ Can she ride in front of me ? ’
‘ The little lady,’ said Mr. Barry, ‘ will walk ! ’
‘ But my dear John ! ’ Mr. Pennythorp lowered his voice.
‘My dear John ! It’s eight miles.’
‘ It would make no difference if it were eighteen,’ said
Mr. Barry. £ Peggie ought to have been home long ago.
They stayed out here until this time merely to waylay you.’
£ But, sir ! A child ! Alone in the mountain ! And
it’s dark .’
£ Yes, and there’ll be no moon,’ said Mr. Barry heart-
lessly.
Mr. Pennythorp sighed and swept off his hat in farewell
to Peggie.
£ Poor child ! ’ he sighed. £ But where is she ? ’
Mr. Barry pointed. By the light of the leaping flames
of the fire Peggie could be seen half-way up a tree.


‘ See that nest ? ’ Mr. Barry pointed to a nest in the
topmost branches. ‘ Peggie collects eggs. She’ll be down
in a minute with a couple in her mouth.’ Then he shouted :
‘ Peggie, Mr. Penny thorp is saying “ Good night ” to you.’
Peggie swung round, seated herself on a branch and
looked down. Mr. Pennythorp swept off his hat again, and
the child bowed as graciously as a queen on a dais.
‘ Bless my soul,’ murmured Mr. Pennythorp, ‘ so this is
the Bush ! ’
Peggie watched politely until the horsemen were lost in
the shadows. Then she climbed on up to the nest. She
had seen that nest when she first lit the fire for Mr. Penny-
thorp and had been longing to get to it ever since. Now
she took one egg and slid down the tree again ; gathered
up the tucker-bag, and slipped into the shades of the moun-
tain. She did not follow the horsemen. She knew a much
shorter cut. It was terribly rough and rather dangerous,
but it was only five miles, and Peggie was dying to get home
and pass on the news. Mr. Pennythorp had said that their
slogan, c The Stranger shall not Pass ’, was worth a fortune !
What did it mean ? Her mind was so full of the problem
that she noticed neither the rough road nor the dark. She
reached home, actually, before the horsemen, but there were
various outside jobs to do. Dogs to feed ; chickens to shut
up, lest the foxes got them ; some ‘ poddy ’ lambs to feed
from a bottle. And when she slipped into the homestead the
grown-ups ’ were at dinner and all the children were in
bed. So Peggie hastily went to bed too.
Jan lifted her dark head from the pillow and whispered :
‘ What happened ? Father said nothing to us but “ You
can all go to bed, and I will speak to you in the morning ! ”
Ugh ! ’
Peggie told the tale in whispers, and Jan was as excited


as she had been at the mysterious end to the affair. And
Jan, of course, then insisted on creeping round the veranda
to tell the boys, (all the children slept out on the veranda)
and this was a hazardous task, for she had to pass the dining-
room windows. And presently, she came flying back saying
that she thought father had seen her on the way back, but it
had been worth it, anyhow, because she had told the boys !
And now, of course, Peggie and Jan talked in whispers until
far into the night, and so did Jack and Jim. (Gerry had
been asleep when Jan went round.) And the worst of it
was, it was such long hours the next day before it was possible
to know anything. The Barry family were always up at
five, but the children were not anxious to encounter their
parents and found a number of pressing jobs to do rather
far away from the house. They forgathered at the wood
heap behind the pepper trees just before breakfast.
‘lfwego in a little latish, they may have started. Father
can’t very well get up and whack us,’ said Jack.


‘ It’ll be an awful meal ! ’ said Jan, ‘ not knowing whether
we’re in the soup or not ! I shall feel all wobbly, like an
under-done egg.’
‘ Still, there’s hope ! ’ said Jim. c lf old Pennyworth isn’t
peeved with us, and cracks his old jokes, and we all grin and
get jolly, I don’t see how father can whack us afterwards.’
‘ Better not get too jolly ! ’ warned Jack.
‘ Walk warily, like Agag, or we might get hewn to pieces,’
said Jan.
‘He got hewn, even though he walked warily,’ said
Peggie pessimistically.
A discussion was just opening up as to whether Agag
got hewn, and who he was, and who wanted to hew him,
when the children beheld a sight that sent their hearts to
their boots. Billie, the ‘ boy ’ issued from the kitchen
(which was a separate building from the house) carrying a
generously laden tray and with infinite labour banged and
buffeted his way into Mr. Pennythorp’s room with it.
‘ Gracious ! He must be frightfully ill ! He’s having
breakfast in bed ! ’ exclaimed Peggie. It did not occur to
her that the Ridgeways breakfast hour, 7 a.m., might seem
early to a Londoner.
‘ Oh, crumbs ! Good-bye to a jolly breakfast ! ’ groaned
Jim.
‘ Wish we’d got it over last night,’ muttered Jack.
Gloom prevailed. The Barry children worshipped their
father. But they were also very much in awe of him, and
to be kept in disgrace tried them more than anything.
‘ Wish we could get it over now ! ’ said Peggie. ‘ I wish
the bell would go ’
But the breakfast bell was certainly late ; and a moment
later the children knew why. Mr. Barry came out of the
house and strapped a bulging water-bag on to his horse
that was waiting tethered to a corner post of the veranda.


Billie followed him, carrying a roll of c swag ’ (i.e. camping
necessaries), and this was strapped on the front of the saddle.
Why ! Father was going on a trip ! As he swung up into
the saddle he caught sight of the children making themselves
inconspicuous under the pepper trees.
‘Oh ! There they are ! Come here, children ! ’ he
shouted.
With a number of faint gasps and sighs the Barry children
shot forth. Mr. Barry sat on his horse looking down on five
anxious up-turned faces.
‘ I have to go to Bathurst. I shall be away some days,’
he said. ‘ Remember, you elder children, that you are in
charge. Go round the lambing paddocks at dawn and
sunset without fail. And do what you can to entertain Mr.
Pennythorp.’
‘ Oh yes, father,’ cried the children with enthusiasm.
He wheeled his horse, and then said over his shoulder
as if it were an after-thought :
‘ Oh—and about this hunting away strangers . . .’
There was a dreadful pause. The Barrys grew white or
crimson, according to their temperament.
‘ Of course,’ went on Mr. Barry, ‘ it was deplorable that
a visitor to Ridgeways should receive such discourteous
treatment ; but it may not be such a bad idea to discourage
promiscuous strangers. Provided, of course, your methods
are not too drastic.’ And he tightened up his reins and
was gone.
The children stared at each other.
‘ Well, what do you know about that ? ’ gasped Jim.
£ What sort of strangers did he say we might discourage ? ’
asked Jan.
‘ Promising,’ said Jim.
‘ No, it wasn’t that. It was some other word,’ said
Peggie.


WHAT DOES IT ALL MEAN? 49
‘ I know. I don’t remember the word, but I know
what it means,’ said Jack. ‘ I heard father use it once. He
said a lot of sheep were that sort of lot, and I said 44 What ? ”
and he said, “ Oh, rag, tag, and bob-tail.” ’
4 Which means, we can chase off any old stranger !
Hurray ! ’ shouted Jim.
4 But imagine father saying we may ! ’ gasped Peggie.
‘ Well ? What did Pennyworth say ? He said it was
worth a fortune ? ’
4 But how ? why ? what does it mean ? ’ all the Barrys
asked at once.
4 Tell you what ! We’ll get it out of Mummie ! She’s
all alone ! ’ exclaimed Jan.
The children made a rush for the house and hurled
themselves upon their defenceless mother and pulled her
down on to a sofa. Jan threw her arms round her.
‘ Mummie ! Darling ! Precious ! Tell us what it’s all
about,’ she begged.
Mrs. Barry laughed.
4 Well, and what do you want to know ? ’ she asked.
Jan had her list of questions ready.
4 Why did Mr. Pennythorp come ? Why did he say our
chasing away strangers was worth a fortune ? What has
father gone to Bathurst for ? What does it all mean ? ’
‘ Mr. Pennythorp came to make certain suggestions to
father, and to make certain arrangements. And father has
gone to Bathurst to cable to England.’
4 But why not cable from the Happy Valley Post Office ? ’
asked Jack.
4 Well —because it is all very private. He thought it best
not to use the local post office.’
4 Well, go on, Mummie. Tell us ! ’
4 My dears, I can’t. You see, it really is all very
private and important. And father says it is best not to say


anything at all about it until we see what is going to be
done.’
‘ But, Mummie ! ’
c I know, darling, but that’s what father says.’
‘ Father says ’ That was law in the Barry family.
‘ How long will it be before we know ? ’ asked Jack,
‘ How long Oh—l don’t know How long does
it take to fly from England ? About a week, I think.’
‘To fly ! Some one is going to fly here from England ? ’
screamed Jan.
‘Oh dear ! I didn’t mean to let that out. Now do
stop questioning me, children. Father wall say I’m such a
goose ! Now you elder children have to go round the
boundaries to-day. Father said he assumed they were not
done yesterday ! ’
c He said we had to entertain Mr. Pennyworth, though,’
said Jim.
‘ Yes, but Mr. Penny thorp thinks he won’t do much
to-day. He says he will just practice golf down in the home
paddock, and Gerry can stay and run after his balls. Now,
I’ll get the tucker-bags ready. Oh dear ! Everything’s late
to-day ! Run away children. I’ll call you in ten minutes.’
The children melted off. They had a tremendous deal
to say to each other.
Behind the pepper trees Peggie said breathlessly :
‘ You remember what I told you Mr. Penny thorp said ?
That if he had come by aeroplane, no one would be any the
wiser ? So you see, some one’s coming by air, and no
one is to know ! ’
And now, of course, an enormous number of theories
were put forward as to wiiat it all meant. Jan thought
there might be a plot to destroy the Empire. But what
part her father was to play in saving it, she was not very
clear. Peggie thought there might be a fortune coming ;so


huge and so valuable that it had to be sent by air, with
immense secrecy. Jack thought that his father might have
made a valuable mineral find in the mountains, and, unknown
to them, had cabled for an expert —Mr. Pennythorp —and
was now cabling for Company Promoters, who were coming
by aeroplane. Jim said :
‘ Tell you what. We’ve got a certain amount out of
Mummie. Let’s go round and see if old Pennyworth is up.
We might pump a bit out of him.’
‘ Oh, he won’t split ! ’ said Jack, * Didn’t father say he
was a solicitor, now I come to think of it ? Used to keeping
secrets.’
Jan giggled.
‘ Let’s lose him in the mountains and refuse to let him
come down until he tells ! ’ she said.
‘ That’s it ! Starve him into surrender ! ’ laughed Jim.
‘ Tie him to a tree ! ’ chuckled Jack.
Peggie began to dimple.
‘ He’d soon surrender ! ’ she said. c I would only have
to light a fire a little way off and make bread twists ! He
did enjoy them and they smell so good ! ’
The children had by now scouted round to the back of
the house ; but the erstwhile play-room door was still shut.
Mr. Pennythorp was not up. But various of his possessions
were scattered on the little table outside.
Presently, the breakfast bell rang, but no one heard it.
And after waiting a few minutes, Mrs. Barry went out to
look for the children. She heard excited voices round at the
wood heap, and there they were.
‘ Oh, mother ! Come and look at this camera ! ’ cried
Jim, ‘ Come and take a peep through ! You never saw
such a lens ! ’


‘ Mummie ! Mummie ! Come and look through these
field-glasses ! ’ cried Peggie. ‘ You can see a ’roo sitting
up on the top of the mountain washing his face ! ’
‘ And he’s got a tiny, tiny, paint-box ! * exclaimed Jan.
‘ Look, Mummie ! Paints in tubes. Like tooth paste !
Wait while I squeeze some ! ’
‘ Children ! ’ exclaimed Mrs. Barry, * you mustn’t touch
Mr. Pennythorp’s things ! Oh dear ! What little barbarians
you are! ’
She looked round.
£ Where’s Jack ? ’ she asked.
Jack was to be seen in the distance on a level piece of
ground in the home paddock. Peggie looked through the
glasses.
‘ Oh—l think he’s just trying Mr. Pennythorp’s golf
clubs,’ she said.
c I hope he won’t break them ! And he’ll certainly lose
the balls. Lend me those glasses, Peggie,’ said Mrs. Barry.
She raised the glasses just in time to see Jack take a
mighty swipe at a ball, hit the ground, and then stand
ruefully surveying a broken club. A coo-ee from his mother
recalled him.
A few minutes later four rather crestfallen children
returned to the house and replaced the borrowed goods on
the table. And poor Mrs. Barry wondered what she should
say to Mr. Pennythorp about the broken club.
£ It isn’t even as if I could offer to replace it ! ’ she said
dismally. ‘ Now, is that everything you touched ? ’
‘Oh yes, mother ! ’ they chorused. Then Peggie said a
little apprehensively ;
‘ I suppose Gerry hasn’t got something ? I think I saw
him going off with something ’
‘ Oh, Peggie ! Why didn’t you stop him ? ’ asked Mrs.
Barry.


A frantic hunt ensued for Gerry. And he was discovered
at last down at the dam (an artificial pond made for watering
cattle and sheep) looking at his feet.
And they were a queer enough spectacle. He had
thrust his little brown feet into Mr. Pennythorp’s patent
leather boots, and over them, he had buttoned the white
spats. Or rather, the once
white spats. But now they
were sopping wet and covered
with the red clay that was
churned up round the edge of
the dam.
‘ Gerry ! What have you
been doing ! ’ cried Mrs.
Barry.
‘ Well, I asked Billie what
these things were for,’ said
Gerry plaintively, ‘ and he
said that Mr. Pennyworth wore
them over his boots and he
reckoned they were to keep the
water out. So I put them on,
and they don’t keep the water
out at all ! These boots are
full of nasty mud now !
Ouch ! ’
‘ And don’t you know you’re a very naughty little boy ? 5
Gerry raised astonished blue eyes. The idea had not
occurred to him.
‘Ow ! Not naughty ! Only wanted to try ! Billie said
they would keep the water out ! ’
‘ But what will Mr. Pennythorp say when he sees his
nice white gaiters ? ’ (For, between you and me, Mrs.
Barry had never seen spats.)


Gerry’s mouth began to droop.
‘ And what will father say when he knows you touched
Air. Pennythorp’s things ? ’
‘Ow ! Mummie ! Don’t tell father ! ’
Mrs. Barry sighed and returned to the house carrying the
mud-drenched foot-gear, and wondering how on earth you
cleaned white ‘ gaiters ’. And surely, it was a queer colour
to have them ?
‘Well, now, children, have your breakfast and get off
for goodness’ sake, before you do any more mischief! ’
she said as she vanished into the kitchen to make the eternal
cakes and bread.
But Gerry was unhappy. He did not know what Mr.
Pennythorp might say to him about the spats, and he tugged
at Peggie’s arm.
‘ Don’t want to stay with ole Pennyworth ! ’ he said.
‘ Want to go with you.’
‘ Never mind, darling,’ said Peggie. And then, anxious
lest the little boy should cry and get himself into trouble,
she whispered :
‘ You try to get him to tell you the secret ! ’
Gerry nodded, and ate his breakfast in thoughtful silence.
A few moments later the elder children were off with their
tucker-bags, and then Mr. Pennythorp could be heard
saying :
‘ And now, where’s my little caddie ? ’


CHAPTER VII
MR. PENNYTHORP HAS ANOTHER
ADVENTURE
MRS. BARRY was privately rather anxious about
the ‘ little caddie ’. Would Gerry consent to go
off with a stranger ? Gerry wasn’t very good,
really. Every one spoilt him a little, even Mr. Barry, but
who could help it ? He was such a darling ! But to her
relief he put his small hand in Mr. Pennythorp’s and said,
‘ Come on.’ And the two went gaily off together. Mrs.
Barry sighed with satisfaction. Now she would have a
peaceful day. Mr. Pennythorp had said that he would
like to take lunch out with him so she had put up some
sandwiches for him and Gerry, and now she would have
that thing dearly loved by busy Bush women ; a day all
to herself, when it would be possible to get through moun-
tains of mending ! Mr. Pennythorp would probably play
golf happily all day !
But Mr. Pennythorp did not play golf all day. When
he had practised a few shots, and Gerry had run after the
balls Gerry suddenly put his hand into his and said :
‘ Come on.’
‘ Come where, my little man ? ’ asked Mr. Pennythorp.
‘ Come an’ I’ll show you a “ hand cave
‘ A hand cave ? ’
Gerry nodded.
‘ Cave with a hand in it.’


For a moment Mr. Penny thorp shuddered at gruesome
possibilities. Then, he realized what Gerry meant. The
child must have overheard his father talking last night
when Mr. Barry had been telling his guest about the customs
of the Black fellows. c The hand 5 was a very old aboriginal
sign. Long ago, when the natives were leaving a district
to go to another they always left the impress of a hand
on the wall of a cave. Sometimes the impression was
made with red ochre, and sometimes with white pipeclay.
The meaning of the hand sign has been lost. Perhaps the
way the fingers pointed indicated water. Or the position
of the hand might tell something about the game prospects
of the neighbourhood. The sign is rather rare and the
Barry children were always looking for ‘ hand 5 caves, and
were delighted when they found one. When Mr. Penny-
thorp heard about the ‘ hand ' sign he had expressed an
eager desire to see one ; and Mr. Barry had said :
c Oh, you must ask the children. They are always
hunting them up. 5
And so now here was little Gerry volunteering to take
him to see one ! Kind little boy. They went off towards
the mountain, hand in hand.
It was fortunate that a night's rest had completely
restored Mr. Pennythorp’s ankle, for it was a very long
way. Right up the mountain. They climbed so high that
they crossed the boundary fence and left behind the aridity
of the lower slopes and came to little dripping springs, and
to gorgeous ferns. Great tree ferns towered among the rocks,
and heath, with long red and pink bells, grew in the chinks.
And among a great group of rocks Gerry stopped.
‘ Hand cave's down there ! ’ he said. He pointed to a
very narrow passage between two rocks. ‘ You sit down,
an’ slide,’ he explained. ‘ An’ when you get down, you’re
in the “ hand ” cave.'


Mr. Pennythorp peered into the passage. It was so
narrow and dark that it was impossible to see what was
beyond ; and it seemed to slope down. Well, it was best
to do what the little lad said.
So Mr. Pennythorp sat down, and working himself
forward with his hands, he slid.
But he slid a long way, and much faster than he liked.
In fact he shot. And there was quite a big drop at the
bottom that Gerry ought to have warned him about only,
as Mr. Pennythorp reminded himself, one must not expect
too much of such a young child. And fortunately, no
damage was done, for he landed on his hands and knees
on soft sand. Moreover, it was worth it for he was in
fairy-land indeed ! A broad shaft of sunshine came through
a chink in the rocks above and glinted on white and red
stalactites and stalagmites. The walls of the cave were
black iron-stone that glittered like black opal. And on
the cliff-face, just where the sunlight fell on it, was the
red impress of a hand. Such a little hand. A woman’s
perhaps ? Mr. Pennythorp drew out his sketch book and
made a drawing of it. Why, here, surely was scope for a
paper for the Royal Geographical Society ? This exquisite cave
hidden among the grey rocks and graceful tree ferns, with
its sign manual of antiquity ! Ah ! a happy description, that !
Mr. Pennythorp made a note of it lest he should forget it.
Mr, Pennythorp was so happy exploring the cave that
he quite lost count of time, and presently he remembered
guiltily that little Gerry was waiting for him all alone.
£ Bless me ! ’ he said to himself, ‘ the poor child will be
getting quite frightened up there all by himself! ’
He hastened back to the exit of the cave and looked up.
The wall of the cave rose sheer above him, glistening and
smooth. At the top of it was the opening to the shaft he
had shot down ; and it was at least nine feet up, and Mr.
5


Pennythorp was only 5 feet 5 inches tall ! He could by
no means reach the opening to the shaft ; nor was there
the smallest foothold in the cliff-face to climb up by ! He
looked round for small loose rocks to build himself a pyramid
to climb up on. But there was not a rock or stone to be
seen. Nothing but this fine white sand on the floor of the
cave ! People must bring a rope in order to climb out
of this cave ! Doubtless, little Gerry had forgotten about
that. Oh well, now he must send him home to get a rope ;
or, better still, the farm boy could bring a short ladder.
‘ Gerry ! ’ he called.
No answer.
‘ Gerry ! ’ he shouted.
The name echoed round and round. Gerry—ry—ry.
Mr, Pennythorp sat down, disconsolately. Perhaps the
child had gone to sleep. Or was picking flowers. Perhaps
he had remembered about the big drop, and had run home
for help. Perhaps
At intervals Mr. Pennythorp called, but there was
always no answer. For a long time he persuaded himself
that this was a most fortunate accident. It gave him time
to examine the cave thoroughly.
But presently he began to notice how cold the cave
was. Deadly cold. And the shaft of sunlight had moved
away, and the light was fading.
As time went on, all sorts of queer thoughts came crowd-
ing in upon Mr. Pennythorp. He did not know much
about children, but he had read of extraordinary things
they did sometimes. Suppose the little boy did not tell
where he was ? Forgot ? or perhaps feared to get into
trouble ? Of course there would be search parties out, but
these mountains were immense. People could search for


weeks and not find him. The dogs ? Would they track
him ? He tried to remember all he knew about collies.
Were they good trackers ? They found lost sheep, he knew.
He wished he had petted the dogs, so that they would
know his scent. But he had been rather nervous of those
great collies. And they had looked a little remote and
cold. You never knew —with strange dogs—little Tou-tou,
at home, was a different matter.
How long, he wondered, would it take him to starve,
or freeze to death ? And it was getting so dark ! What
were those great, black, hairy claws he saw moving in that
chink ? Ugh ! An immense spider ! Was he poisonous ?
As a matter of fact, noting the spider possibilities of Ridge-
ways, he had asked Mr. Barry the night before which of
the Australian spiders were poisonous, and Mr. Barry had
said, ‘ Oh, the black fellow with a red spot on his back
can be fatal.’ Now, had this spider a red spot ? Mr.
Pennythorp could not see, and he thought it best not to
disturb the beast. And there might be scorpions and
centipedes, too, might there not ? Oh dear !
Mr. Pennythorp drew out his watch, but it was too
dark to see the hands. He wished he smoked, then he
would have some matches. He used to smoke, when he
was a young man, but his wife, Emily, had thought it an
unpleasant habit, so of course, he had given it up.
Panic was very nearly seizing Mr. Pennythorp when he
suddenly remembered something and pulled himself together.
* Come, come ! ’ he said to himself. ‘ This is quite an
adventure ! ’
And, in the meantime, what was Gerry doing ?
When Mr. Pennythorp disappeared down the shaft,
Gerry stood for a moment to hear the c plump ’ that sig-
nalled his arrival at the bottom. Then he turned and ran


down the ’roo pad that led down the mountain. Half-way
down, he came to the boundary fence, and there he sat
down to wait. Presently, about sunset, Peg and Jack would
come along one way, and Jan and Jim in the opposite
direction. They would all meet there, and go down the
mountain together.
It seemed a very long day. Gerry was glad he had
the sandwiches. They were nicer than usual too. Not
plain mutton, but lots of different kinds. Some were
chicken ; and some egg and cress ; and some tomato and
cheese. Gerry thought he had never tasted anything so
nice. Of course, it was a pity for Mr. Pennythorp. As it
was, Gerry had to eat them all by himself, because you
mustn’t waste , you know !
It was such a long day that Gerry began to feel quite
heroic about it. And he was bubbling with excitement
anyhow. What would Peg and the others say when they
heard what he had done ?
But it seemed an eternity of time before the sun began
to cast slanting rays that hit the trees so that they threw
long shadows. And then the sun got lower, and the tops
of the mountains turned to glowing gold. And then it
disappeared, and all the mountain-tops blazed red. And
then, at last he heard Peggie and Jack coming !
He jumped up and ran to meet them.
c Peg ! Peg ! ’ he cried, £ got any flour left in your
tucker-bag ? ’
‘ Gerry ! What are you doing here ? Flour ? Yes ?
Why ? ’
‘To make bread twists for Mr. Pennyworth ! I’ve got
him ! I couldn’t tie him to a tree, but he’s down Sliding-
down Cave. He can’t get out, but he can smell, see ?So
come an’ make twists outside, an’ tell him he can’t have
any till he tells the secret. He’ll tell ’cos he’ll be so hungry.


He’s had no dinner, ’cos I had it all ! ’Cos I had to make
him proper hungry, see ? ’
It was some time before Peggie and Jack understood.
‘ What ? ’ they said, ‘ Sliding-down Cave —but how did
he get there ? Wasn’t he going to play golf ? ’
And Gerry had to explain at great length how he had
thought out this master-stroke ; and in the meantime, Jan
and Jim arrived, and then the enormity of the thing burst
upon Peggie,
‘ Gerry ! ’ she cried. ‘ What have you done ! ’
‘ Crumbs in bed ! ’ exclaimed Jack, £ the kid’s torn it
this time ! ’
Jan, of course, went off into shrieks of laughter and
Jim said :
‘ I say, though ! The kid’s “ for it ”, of course, but it
seems a pity to lose the chance ! ’
Poor Gerry ! He had been so proud and delighted
and now Peg and Jack were clearly alarmed and Jan and
Jim were laughing at him. Black despair rose up and
choked him. The corners of his lips turned down, and he
lifted up his voice and wept.
‘Ow ! That’s what you all said. Jim said, “ lose him
in the mountains ”, and Jack said, “ tie him to a tree ”,
and Peg said ’
Long experience told the children that Gerry had to
be comforted before anything could be done at all.
‘ Yes, yes, Gerry ! Hush ! It’s all right. You meant
well ! And I’ll go and make Mr. Pennythorp some bread
twists, and perhaps he’ll tell us—we’ll go and see. Come
on.’
Gerry came on, clutching Peggie’s hand, and sobbing
occasionally as they all hurried up the mountain.
And in the meantime, Mr. Pennythorp sat in his cave,
his ears strained to catch the faintest sound. And a lot of


queer sounds there are, too, in the mountain at night !
The gum trees rub their branches together, and screech
and moan. A dingo howls ; or a fox barks ; owls hoot.
The little Teddy Bears —they are scarce in New South
Wales, but there are a few —cry like a child in pain. The
mopoke utters its mournful gruff cry —‘ mo-poke, mo-poke ’.
Occasionally a whole bunch of kookaburras wake up and
break out into their maniacal, screeching laughter ; and
then, there are always the animals passing by. The heavy
thud, thud, of the kangaroos ; the clumsy shamble of a
wombat or the scurry of a rabbit. All these strange sounds
fell upon Mr. Pennythorp’s ears, as he sat clasping his
knees, and almost afraid to breathe. Once, something ran
across his fingers. Something with a great many legs ! He
shook it off with a stifled scream.
And, taking things all round, Mr. Pennythorp had had
nearly enough of his adventure when he heard a little voice
calling :
‘ Mr. Pennyworth ! Oh —I beg your pardon —Mr.
Penny thorp, are you there ? ’
He recognized the voice as Peggie’s.
‘ My dear, indeed I am ! ’ he said.
‘ I’m coming down,’ said Peggie.
He just had time to get out of the way when a dark
form shot down and landed with a kind of bounce on the
sand beside him.
‘Oh dear ! I’m so sorry ! ’ began Peggie.
‘ Have you a ladder for me to get up ? ’ inquired Mr.
Pennythorp anxiously.
‘ No. But the boys will cut down a tree for you to
climb up by. Oh, it will be quite easy ! They’ll get a
young fir tree, you know, and its branches will be just
like a ladder. They’ll lop them off a little way from the
trunk, so’s it’ll be like steps. Look out, Jan is sending


down some wood to make a fire
because the boys have to find
the right tree.’
A shower of wood came down,
and then a larger body, that was
Jan. And then a smaller
one, that Jan caught ;
and that was Gerry. In
two minutes the twigs
were ablaze and in a very
little time more the billie
was boiling and Peggie
and Jan were carefully
pulling twists off sticks.
And a lovely picture it
made —the leaping flames
in that beautiful cave !
Only I really do not think
Mr. Pennythorp noticed
it. He crouched beside
the blazing fire and his
face glowed with satis-
faction as he sipped his
tea.
‘ Dear ! dear ! ’ he said, ‘ this has been quite an
adventure! And what a pleasant end to it, to be sure ! 5
A few minutes more, and down came the slender trunk
of a pine sapling ; and then another. And then, down shot
Jim. The two saplings were arranged so that their branches
intertwined, and it would have been a duffer indeed who
could not take the few steps up that led up to the passage-
way. Jack stood at the top and gave Mr. Pennythorp a
hand up.
‘ Well, really ! You are most resourceful young people ! 5


exclaimed Mr. Pennythorp. ‘ But I do not know how I
am going to get down this mountain in the dark.’
Apparently, however, the Barrys had eyes like cats,
or else they knew every stone and rock on the mountain-
side ; for they piloted him down without the smallest
mishap.
They found Mrs. Barry anxiously watching for them on
the veranda.
‘ My dear lady, I have had quite an adventure ! ’ said
Mr. Pennythorp.
‘ Mr. Pennythorp got down Sliding-down Cave, and
couldn’t get up, mother,’ said Jack.
‘ But, I thought you were going to play golf? ’ said
Mrs. Barry.
‘ Ah, but Gerry offered to show me the cave ! ’
* But, if you couldn’t get up, why didn’t Gerry run
home ? ’
‘ He went to find his brothers and sisters because he
knew I would like some hot tea and bread twists ! ’ said
Mr, Pennythorp. ‘ Such a kind little boy ’
Peggie caught Gerry’s hand and drew him back. The
Barry children faded away.


CHAPTER VIII
MR. PENNYTHORP ASSISTS ON THE
STATION AND HAS ONE OR TWO
ADVENTURES
THE children spent an immense amount of time before
breakfast the next morning discussing how they
should entertain Mr. Pennythorp. Jack thought he
might like to see his engine working ; or very nearly working.
Jim was certain that, coming from London, he would be
more interested in wireless, regardless of the fact that his
wireless did nothing but hoot. Peggie suggested a birds’-
nesting expedition ; she knew where there was a Lyre bird’s
nest, and thought she could get the egg if everybody helped
her ; but it was half-way down a very steep cliff. And
Jan was in favour of amateur theatricals, while Gerry urged
‘Blind Man’s Buff’. The discussions became animated,
and then acrimonious, and finally Mrs. Barry intervened,
and suggested that it might be a good thing to find out
what Mr. Pennythorp would like to do ? To this the children
agreed, hopefully, and, as Jack said, ‘ got badly stung ’ !
For what do you think Mr. Pennythorp wanted to do ?
He wanted to work ! Just plain work !
‘ Nothing would interest me more,’ he said, ‘ than to
witness the ordinary, everyday work of the Station, and if
possible, to assist at it.’
The children begged him to think again. They felt
sure he would regret his decision. But Mr. Pennythorp
65


was firm. He wanted to work. Worse still. He wanted
to eat the very same tucker that the children always ate
in paddocks.
‘ But that is so very plain! ’ objected Mrs. Barry.
‘ They just take flour and salt and butter and some chops
that they grill on a grid they twist up out of fencing
wire.’
Mr. Pennythorp rubbed his hands.
* Delicious ! ’ he exclaimed. ‘ I cannot imagine any-
thing nicer ! 5
‘ And now I feel you did not enjoy the sandwiches I
put up for you yesterday ! ’ laughed Mrs, Barry.
Mr. Pennythorp looked at Gerry, who had suddenly
turned scarlet.
‘ But I feel I shall enjoy my lunch to-day still more ! *
he said.
And so there it w r as. The children sighed and resigned
themselves to carry on with the ordinary programme. The
boys had to go round the lambing paddocks first. Then
they w r ould join the girls in Fox Tree Paddock wiiere they
were ‘ burning off’.
‘ And do tell me,’ asked Mr. Pennythorp, ‘ wiiat is
“ burning off” ? *
They were w r alking towards the paddocks, now, Mr.
Pennythorp, the two girls, and Gerry, and to Peggie and
Jan it seemed incredible that some one should not know
what ‘ burning off’ meant. The children stared at one
another.
‘ He means,’ explained Jan to Peggie, ‘ that he does not
know which kind of burning off w r e are going to do. Bad
grass, or dead wood.’
‘He couldn’t mean that,’ said Peggie. ‘ Because we
only burn off bad grass in hot dry weather, and this is
winter.’


‘ I mean,’ said Mr. Pennythorp, * that I do not know
what “ burning off” means at all.’
* Why—burning off dead wood.’
* But what dead wood ? Wood that falls down under
the trees ? ’
And now it was evident that Mr, Pennythorp’s ignorance
was abyssmal, and Jan saw there was nothing for it but to
explain the whole thing.
‘ You see,’ she said, ‘ you take up a piece of land, and
it is just forest and scrub, like the mountain over there.
And you start to clear. But the way you clear is to ring-
bark all the trees —cut a ring in the bark all round, you
know, and they die. Directly they die, the grass begins
to grow under them, and perhaps you don’t bother to do
anything more. You just leave the trees dead, and the
leaves fall off, and a lot of the boughs ; but you don’t
bother. You just leave the dead wood standing, like those
paddocks over there.’ And she waved to acres and acres
of land that was covered with the bare, dead trunks and
boughs of trees, with never a leaf to be seen. A great
forest of grey, lifeless trees.
‘ But then,’ she went on, ‘ perhaps you want to culti-
vate. Plough up some land and plant wheat, or oats, you
know. So then you burn off the dead wood, and you
have a nice clean paddock. Or you may burn off just to
make a clean paddock for grazing. That paddock you
were playing golf in was all dead wood last year. Of
course you don’t ring quite all the trees. You leave a
few for shade. And you leave the kurrajong trees.’
And she pointed to a number of bright green trees
with leaves shaped rather like the English poplars. They
looked like Noah’s Ark trees.
‘ Yes indeed ! They are so pretty ! I don’t wonder
you leave them ! ’ exclaimed Mr. Pennythorp.


‘We don’t leave them because of that,’ said Jan. ‘We
don’t think about prettiness at all. I asked father to leave
some Bush honeysuckle, once, and he said, “ A new country
is like all quite young things. Not pretty. Beauty comes
later,” And that’s true, you know. All the little things
that get born, the calves and lambs and Gerry, when he
was a baby, take a little time to get pretty. We only leave
the kurrajong trees because they are good fodder. In
drought-time, they can be lopped for the sheep. We are
lopping now. We missed the autumn rain, you know.’
‘ We lop two trees a day, in each paddock,’ said Peggie.
‘ Two trees will keep a thousand sheep going,’
‘ Only, we can’t lop the very big trees. We are not
strong enough,’ explained Jan. ‘ You see that big tree
over there ? That wants lopping. But its branches are
so terribly thick. And its top must be sawn off.’
‘ I tell you what ! ’ exclaimed Peggie, ‘ Mr. Pennyworth
—I mean Pennythorp—could lop it ! ’
Jan clapped her hands.
‘ Why, how stupid of us ! Of course he can ! ’ she
exclaimed.
Mr. Pennythorp looked up into the spreading branches
of an enormous kurrajong tree.
‘ But I—l am afraid Ido not know how to lop !’ he
exclaimed.
‘ Oh, we’ll show you. We’ll lop a little one. Then
you’ll know how,’ cried Jan.
Peggie pointed.
‘ That one over there,’ she said.
The tree they went to did not seem so very little to
Mr. Pennythorp. Its trunk shot up, smooth and round,
a long way before the branches began.
‘ But,’ he objected, £ you will need a ladder to get up
this ? ’


‘Oh no,’ said Peggie. ‘ You just cut steps, like this.’
She swung her axe, and soon there was a deep yellow
wedge cut out of the side of the tree ; and another a little
higher up. Then up into these she climbed, and with one
hand gripping the tree-trunk, and leaning well out, she
cut more steps for herself, higher up, and so on until she
reached the lowest branches.
Then she went up the tree like a monkey. Sometimes
she carried her axe in her hand, and climbed with one
hand. And sometimes she struck the axe into the bough
above her head, and climbed on up to it. She did not
pause until she reached the top of the tree, and then, stand-
ing on the last large enough branch, she struck off the top
of the tree and it came crashing down.
‘ You must always be sure to take off the top,’ explained
Jan. Otherwise the trees get straggly, and after a bit,
they get mistletoe on them, and die.
Peggie came down a little lower. The branch on her
right crashed down. Then she leaned out to the left and
changed her axe over to her left hand.
‘ That’s what I can’t do ! ’ said Jan. ‘ Chop with my
left hand. Peg can. So can the boys. Can you ? ’
I—l am not sure,’ said Mr. Pennythorp miserably.
The branch on the left came down.
You have to be careful,’ explained Jan, c to trim the
tree nicely. You know you said they looked like Noah’s
Ark trees ? That’s because they’re properly trimmed. You
see, Peg leaves only very short branches at the top ; hardly
enough to stand on. And a little longer as you go down.
The bottom branches can be left as long as a foot. Then,
you see, it’s a tidy job.’
‘ Yes. I see. Of course,’ said Mr. Pennythorp.
Branches showered down. Jan darted in among them
and carried them out and scattered them.


‘ One lops, and the other throws out ! ’ she said. ‘ Only
when you lop the big tree, it’ll take two of us to throw
out. It’s such a big tree.’
Mr. Pennythorp sighed, and changed it into a little
cough.
Jan pointed.
‘ Look ! ’ she exclaimed. ‘ Poor hungry little sheep ! ’
A long line of sheep were galloping towards the tree.
They had heard the sound of the axe.
‘ Wait till they get your big tree ! ’ rejoiced Jan. ‘ Won't
they be pleased ? ’
Peggie was now astride the lowest branch.
‘ The only danger about lopping, Mr. Pennyworth —
thorp,’ she said, ‘ is that sometimes a branch splits under
you when you are lopping it. This one, I’m on now,
for instance, might split when I hit it and let me down.
But if you feel yourself going, be sure to drop your axe,
AT ONCE.’
‘ Yes, I’ll be sure to remember,’ said Mr. Pennythorp.
A few more smart cuts, and the tree was absolutely
bare. Just a trunk, and a number of neatly graduated
spikes sticking out. Peggie carefully slid her axe down the
tree-trunk and then dropped down herself. Then she shook
herself violently.
‘ You get full of chips ! ’ she said.
‘ If not ants,’ said Jan.
‘ There ! ’ said Peggie, viewing her work with satis-
faction ; ‘ now you see how to do it, don’t you, Mr. Penny
—Penny thorp ? ’
‘Oh yes. It looks quite easy,’ said Mr. Pennythorp
faintly.
‘ Only you’ll have to take a saw up the big tree, as
well as an axe,’ said Peggie. ‘ That top, and those big
branches would be too thick to chop through.’


‘ Yes. That is my opinion,’ said Mr. Penny thorp.
They approached the great kurrajong tree.
‘ Now let me see. First I cut steps,’ said Mr. Penny-
thorp.
They handed him the axe,
‘ Stand well back, Gerry. A chip might fly and hit
you,’ said Peggie.
Gerry ran far to the rear. The little girls stood well
away, one on either side.
But no chips flew, for Mr. Pennythorp was quite unable
to hit twice in the same place.
‘ Dear me,’ he said. ‘ I do not seem quite to have
acquired the technique.’
‘ Do you mean you do not know how to do it ? ’ asked
Peggie. ‘ Look,’ she took the axe from him, ‘ you make
a slanting cut like this, first. And then a straight one
under it, and the chip jumps out.’
The chip obediently jumped out.
It won’t do that for me,’ said Mr. Pennythorp.
He was woefully right. -The kurrajong tree got scarred
all over, but no chip jumped out. But something else did.
At one moment both girls cried ‘ Oh ! ’ and rushed in and
took the axe from Mr. Pennythorp’s perspiring hands.
‘ He’s gapped it ! ’ they gasped.
They showed him a little triangular chip in the shining
blade.
You’ve gapped the axe ! ’ they said.
To gap an axe was apparently the unforgiveable crime
of the Bush.
I m so sorry I said Mr. Pennythorp. ‘ How stupid
of me. But I will get you a new axe, my dear.’
‘ It’s father’s axe,’ said Peggie.
Well, I 11 get him a new axe ! ’ smiled Mr. Pennythorp.
But gloom had settled upon the children’s faces. Mr.


Pennythorp knew nothing of the axe-man’s pride and delight
in his own tool.
They fetched another axe, and Peggie wondered if she
had better just cut the steps, and Mr. Pennythorp thought
it an excellent idea, and soon there were a dozen gaping
yellow wounds in the kurrajong’s sides. And now Mr.
Pennythorp found that he was expected to climb up that
fat round trunk, carrying an axe and a saw in one hand,
and embracing the trunk with his free arm. After several
unsuccessful attempts, it occurred to Peggie that they could
hand him up the tools when he reached the lower branches.
Then, he could always stick the axe into the branch above
him, and need only carry the saw.
With infinite labour, Mr. Pennythorp reached the lower
branches and got astride one. Then Peggie had to climb
halfway up the tree-trunk and hand him up the tools. He
stuck in the axe as far up the tree as he could and, with
the saw in his hand, tried to climb up to the next branch ;
slipped, and dropped the saw.
‘ Never mind. You go on up,’ shouted Peggie. ‘ I’ll
bring the saw up when you’re at the top.’
Mr. Pennythorp looked up into the green forest above
his head and groaned inwardly. He wished he had done
more birds’ nesting, when he was a boy. But it was Henry
who collected eggs Now his body seemed such a
tremendous weight, and his arms and legs were so short.
‘ Swing ! ’ shouted Peggie from below. ‘ Swing yourself
to and fro on your arms. Then you’ll get your feet on to
that branch at the side !
Presently, the axe fell down.
‘ Never mind ! 5 yelled Peggie. ‘ I’ll bring it up ! ’
It was only by dint of Herculean exertion that Mr.
Pennythorp got to the top of the tree. But presently he
was actually sitting close to the trunk on the last branch


that would bear him. Peggie came up after him like a
little cat, carrying both the axe and the saw with the greatest
ease. She stuck the axe in the branch beside him and
handed him the saw.
‘ The top first, please,’ she said. ‘ You’ll have to stand,
won’t you, and lean out a bit ? I’ll get down out of your
way.’
And she vanished.
‘ Stand, and lean out a bit ! ’ murmured Mr. Pennythorp.
He sat clasping the trunk. He was an immense distance
off the ground. He looked down for a branch to stand on.
It made him feel giddy to look down into that forest below
him. And he had to chop all that off!
He felt around with his feet and got a footing on a
lower branch ; worked his way out on it and twining his
arm round the higher branch, he started to saw through
the tree-top. It was a long, laborious, terrifying job. As
the saw bit its way through the trunk he heard anxious
directions from below.
‘ Mr. Penny—Penny thorp, lean out further ; and give
the top a push when you’re nearly through, or else it’ll
come down on you and bring you down with it ! ’
Yes ! Mr. Pennythorp had thought of that. Been
thinking of it all the time
Then there was a horrible splitting, grinding noise.
The tree-top rocked, and Mr. Pennythorp with it. He
dropped the saw, and gripped his branch with both hands.
Crash ! The tree-top went. For a moment Mr. Penny-
thorp was lost in a smother of falling leaves and twigs, and
he shut his eyes. Then he opened them, and nearly
screamed. A moment before he had been surrounded by
a forest of friendly, protective green, now he stood survey-
ing an empty world ! He was head and shoulders above
all the greenery, both of his own tree and all around. A
6


wave of sickness swept over him. He shut his eyes again.
‘ Mr. Pennythorp ! 5 cried a voice below, 4 I won’t bring
the saw up again yet. You won’t want it now till you
get to the bottom branches. You can chop the top ones,
can’t you ? ’
‘ Yes, yes ! ’ said Mr. Pennythorp.
He opened his eyes, and moistened his dry lips. The
axe was sticking in the branch beside him. He took it
and hooking his arm around the branch, tried to chop.
Crash ! The branch fell away. He was left clinging to
a few inches of branch and the sawn-off tree-trunk,
4 Now the other side,’ called Peggie. 4 Can you do it
with your left hand ? ’
4 No ! I’m sure I can’t ! ’ shouted Mr. Pennythorp.
4 You’ll have to work yourself round the tree then ! ’
Mr. Pennythorp had the axe in his right hand and his
left arm was tightly wound round the tree. He tried to
stick the axe into the opposite branch. Did not make a
deep enough cut, and the axe went down.
4 I’ll bring it up when you’re 44 set called Peggie.
4 No, Peg, It’s my turn to go up ! ’ objected Jan.
Good gracious ! These children wanted to climb up the
tree.
Mr. Pennythorp got a grip of the opposite branch with
his right hand, and then tried to transfer his weight on to
a lower branch on the opposite side. But as he stood on
it there was a crack, and the branch shot away from under
him. Mr. Pennythorp was left kicking in the air, hanging
by his arms.
It was an unforgettable moment. In vain, the poor
gentleman strove for a foothold. And in the meantime,
his arms seemed about to crack. There was a thundering
in his ears and a red mist swam in front of his eyes. Then
he was somehow conscious of small, strong, compelling


PENNYTHORP ASSISTS ON THE STATION 75
hands. Of quiet little voices that said, ‘ Here ! ’ and ‘ Now
here ’ and ‘ Put your foot there ’ and ‘ Now move your hands *.
His feet were pushed into forks of the tree ; his hands
guided hither and thither. And presently, a voice in his
ear said, £ Hold tight round the trunk and slide down ! 5
and a moment later, ‘ Dump ! 5 he arrived at the bottom
of the tree. There he collapsed, and actually knew nothing
for a second or two. But then, he produced a white silk
handkerchief and mopped his brow.
£ Dear, dear,’ he said. £ How stupid of me ! 5
£ Oh no ! 5 cried Peggie, who was kneeling beside him,
white faced. £ lt was our fault ! We should have known
better. Some people can’t stand heights. Father told us.
When Jim was very small, he couldn’t. And we used to
tease him. And father said that some people could not
stand heights, and that they should never be asked to go
up trees ! ’
£ Anyway,’ said Jan, £ you have done all that was neces-
sary. We can chop off the rest of the branches. And saw
through the lower ones, too. It was only the top we couldn’t
get.’
The children ran to throw out the top of the tree and
the two branches to the sheep that were hurrying up. Mr.
Pennythorp got up and stood back, surveying his handiwork.
And so these children proposed to climb up this tree that
had got the better of him ? ‘No ! ’ said Mr. Pennythorp
to himself. £ Not if my name is Cuthbert Pennythorp ! ’
He advanced resolutely to the tree and clambered up
into the lower branches.
Now hand me up the axe, my dear,’ he said to the
astonished Peggie, £ I shall make a better job of it this
time.’
And so he did. The tree got a rough lop. No one
could say it was neatly trimmed. But the sheep got the


green stuff and Mr. Pennythorp came down triumphant,
his face beaming. When he got home, he thought, he would
tell Mrs. Pennythorp about it.
* Oh, Cuthbert ! 5 she would exclaim, ‘ how could you
expose yourself to such risks ? ’ and he would reply :
‘ Tut ! Tut ! my dear. One does such things every
day in the Bush ! 5


CHAPTER IX
MR. PENNYTHORP CONTINUES TO ASSIST
A ND now,’ said Mr. Penny thorp, ‘ you must initiate
/-\ me into the art of “ burning off”.’
‘ He means, show him how to burn off,’ mur-
mured one child to the other.
A belt of smoke marked the burning-off area. Billie had
been at work in the paddock the day before, so the fires were
all alight.
‘ Well,’ said Peggie, ‘ some of us pile up, and some of
us throw in. Which would you rather do ? ’
Jan, noting the puzzled look on Mr. Pennythorp’s face,
translated.
‘ She means that some of us pick up wood and pile it
round the trees ready to light up to-night, before we go home.
And others go over there, where you see the fires, and where
nearly all the trees are burnt down, and throw the fires
together. Otherwise the bits of burning wood get scattered
and the fires go out.’
‘ Oh, I should like to go among the fires, if that wouldn’t
seem selfish ? ’ asked Mr. Pennythorp, his eyes shining.
When he was a small boy, he had always longed to play with
fire ; but nurses and mother would not let him. And now
when he was grown up his wife always reproached him for
poking the fire.
‘ It wastes the coal, Cuthbert ! ’ she always said.
‘ Oh, it wouldn’t be selfish at all ! ’ said Peggie. c ln


fact, it’s rather hot and smoky round the fires. Gerry and
I will pile up while you and Jan throw in.’
Mr. Pennythorp spent a delightful morning. The air
was crisp and cold. The sky was blue, and the sun shone.
He and Jan rolled burning logs together with a crowbar,
and picked up all the loose wood around and threw it in.
Soon the paddock was dotted with innumerable bonfires.
At half-past ten the children stopped for what they called
£ smoke-o ’, when the billie was set on a burning log to boil,
and then they all sat round a blazing fire and ate bread twists
and drank billie tea. Mr. Pennythorp ate his lunch and
stared round at the quiet mountains, and the big paddocks,
and far far away the glinting tin roof of the one little home-


stead. So this was how John Barry lived ! He and his
wife must have felt like the first man and woman when they
took up this country except that they had a few sheets of
iron to make their roof and a few coils of wire for their
fences, and an axe ! What courage ! Well, well ! It was
different from Beckenham !
But he had been right. His thoughts flew back to his
London office where he and his brother Henry had inter-
viewed a beautiful woman, wrapped in costly furs, with wild
terror in her eyes. And he had said :
4 What about your brother, John, in Australia, Mrs.
Pollock ? ’
And she had said :
4 Oh—John —you know I have not seen him since he
went to Australia, so long ago ! And he never writes.’
4 What sort of place does he live at ? ’
4 Really, I hardly know. It is called Ridgeways. I
seem to remember John said he had taken up virgin country,
in the blue mountains.’
4 Then it might be isolated ? ’
‘ It might.’
4 And he might be disposed to help ? ’
4 He might—oh yes ! I know John would help, if he could.’
And then they had discussed details, and the next
morning he had startled Henry by stating that he would
go to Australia and look at Ridgeways himself. And here
he was. And he had found Ridgeways isolated indeed, and
the Barry children at war with strangers ! He smiled gently
to himself.
Mr. Penny thorp was grateful for ‘ smoke-o One got
up a tremendous appetite working in the paddocks ! And
this ‘ throwing-in ’ entailed a great deal of running about.
After another couple of hours of it he inquired if it were
nearly dinner-time.


‘ Why yes, it must be,’ said Jan, shading her eyes and
looking at the sun. ‘ The boys ought to be here by now,
but we won’t wait for them. I’ll grill the chops ! ’
Jan coo-eed to Peggie and began to prepare dinner.
Mr. Pennythorp did not dream of standing about and wasting
time, but hurried away to throw in more wood. Presently
Peggie and Gerry joined Jan and the Barry children began
to chatter like bush magpies. For a little while they forgot
Mr. Pennythorp.
‘ There ! Those chops are done ! Call Mr. Penny-
worth ! ’ exclaimed Jan.
Peggie looked round.
‘ Where is he ? ’ she asked.
Then she exclaimed :
‘ Oh, Jan ! Look where he is ! Didn’t you warn him
not to go among the burning trees ? ’
She pointed to an area where a dozen or so of dead
trees were burning merrily ; but they had not fallen yet.
In ‘ burning off’, the first thing one does when one reaches
one’s work is to look around and see which trees are alight,
but not down, and studiously to avoid them !
‘Oh crumbs ! ’ said Jan. ‘ I didn’t warn him because
we were working together. I never thought of his going off
there by himself! Mr. Pennyworth ! Mr. Pennyworth ! ’
‘ Penny thorp ! ’ corrected Peggie.
‘ Mr. Penny Oh ! There goes a tree ! ’
Crash ! A tall tree smashed to the ground, hurling
broken branches in every direction. And where was Mr.
Pennythorp ? He was nowhere to be seen !
‘ It’s got him ! ’ gasped Jan.
Peggie turned white and sick, and felt her legs tremble.
Jan shot off to the danger zone, Peggie and Gerry following.
When they reached the tree, at first it was difficult to
see Mr. Pennythorp. Then they heard him call.


‘ It’s all right, my dears. Don’t be frightened. Here I
am. Not much hurt ! ’
And there he was. And by a perfect miracle not much
hurt.
‘ I saw the tree coming. I had no time to run, so I
threw myself into this little hollow ! ’ he explained.
He was lying in a sort of little dry ditch that had been
scooped out by running water. His head and shoulders
were one side of the tree-trunk, and the rest of him the
other. The tree was pressing him lightly, but not uncom-
fortably. He was very neatly ‘ boxed ’.
At first, the girls just gasped with thankfulness. Peggie
felt inclined to cry.
‘ We thought you would be dead ! ’ she exclaimed.
£ Tut ! Tut! Scarcely hurt, my dear ! Nothing to
make a fuss about at all ! I expect these little mishaps
constantly happen in the Bush ? Now, the only problem is,
how am I to get out ? You see, I can’t get out this way ’
(and he kicked his legs), c because the ground rises up. And
I can’t get this way’ (and he hitched his shoulders), ‘ because
—well because, you see, my dears, I am too rotund ! ’
Yes, they saw. As they explained the matter to Mrs.
Barry afterwards : ‘ The bulgy part of Mr. Pennyworth was
on the wrong side ! ’
Oh, it 11 be all right ! ’ said Jan. ‘ The tree’s well
alight. It’ll burn up soon, and you’ll be able to get up.’
‘ Put, my dear ! It’ll burn me up too ! ’ gasped Mr.
Pennythorp.
So it would ! Jan had not thought of it.
The children began frantically to consider what was to
be done. The tree-trunk was too thick for them to chop
through. And the wood too old and hard. And even if
they could chop it, the blows of the axe would drive the
trunk down on to Mr. Pennythorp. The little gully in which


he lay was quite shallow and there was no possibility of scoop-
ing earth out under him to get him lower down. The
ground just there was hard dry clay. And in the meantime,
the middle of the trunk was hollow ; there was a fresh wind
blowing, and the flames w'ere roaring up the funnel towards
Mr. Pennythorp.
‘ Put the log out ! 5 exclaimed Peggie.
But how ? The nearest water was a couple of miles
aw’ay. The little there was left in the water-bag only made
a sizzle, and did no good. Sand ? Where was sand ? This
particular paddock was all red clay ! Where w r as the nearest
sandy w r arren ? None nearer than the mountain, three-
quarters of a mile away perhaps ! Should they run and
bring what they could ? But they could not carry much
at a time ; and little flames breaking out of the cracks
farther and farther up the log ! If they did not do something,
Mr, Pennythorp would be roasted before their eyes.
‘ Are you sure you can’t get out ? ’ asked Peggie.
‘ For goodness’ sake, try ! ’ entreated Jan,
They laid hold of Mr. Pennythorp’s shoulders and tugged.
The poor gentleman struggled and gasped. But it was no good.
‘ If I ever get out of this alive,’ vowed Mr. Pennythorp,
‘ I’ll batten ! My poor wife always said I ought to !
Terror suddenly leaped into his eyes.
‘ This log is getting hot ! ’ he said. ‘My dears ! It’ll
all be over very soon if we can’t do something ! ’
‘ Oh, where are the boys ! ’ exclaimed Peggie, wringing
her hands.
They looked frantically round the paddock, searching
the distance beyond the smoke-hung burning-off area.
Nothing to be seen. No sign of movement. The girls were
giving it up in despair when Gerry exclaimed :
‘ Why, there they are ! ’ and pointed to the log where
Jan had cooked dinner. And there were the three boys,


THE FLAMES WERE ROARING UP . . . MR. PENXYTHORP WOULD
BE ROASTED !


Jack and Jim and Billie, seated contentedly beside the log
eating the chops that Jan had prepared !
The girls yelled. The boys jumped up. They had never
thought of looking for the burners-off among the standing
burning trees ! They had just assumed that the girls and
Mr. Penny thorp had gone on somewhere else and had left
them some chops to eat ! Now they came running up.
Rescue was a work of only a few minutes. Jack raced
back for a crowbar. Billie rolled a small log up beside the
big one. They dug the crowbar under the tree-trunk, and
using the small log as a lever they all threw their weight on
to the bar. The tree-trunk was raised only a few inches,
but the girls tugged again at Mr. Pennythorp’s shoulders and
the rotundity came through ! Mr. Pennythorp came out,
as Jim said after, like a tight cork being pulled out of a
ginger-beer bottle ! He sat back, gasping and mopping his
face, while flames burst out all along the log.
‘My word, mister ! ’ said Billie, ‘ your luck’s only
middling ! You’ve spoiled your good suit ! ’
Yes ! Mr. Pennythorp’s nice grey flannel suit was all
smeared with red clay and black charcoal. But he seemed
quite indifferent to it.
‘ Excuse me, my dear,’ he said to Peggie. ‘ I don’t
think I can walk just yet. I—l feel quite faint ! ’
‘No hurry,’ said Jack. 4 I don’t think that tree there
will come down just yet.’
Mr. Pennythorp looked where he pointed. Another
blazing tree was threatening to fall. He jumped to his feet
and ran like a frightened rabbit. A moment or two later
they were all back at the log.
‘ Well ! ’ said Mr. Pennythorp, perhaps half an hour
later, when he was eating his third chop, ‘ after all, it was
quite an adventure ! Thank you, my dear. Yes ! I’ll have
another cup of tea. A little more sugar in it, if you please ! ’


CHAPTER X
MR. PENNYTHORP GOES FOR A PICNIC (AND
HAS RATHER AN ALARMING ADVENTURE)
THE next two or three days were uneventful. Mr.
Pennythorp had really been a little hurt by the tree,
and he stayed at home, tucked up on the long chair
on the veranda, looking at the ever-changing shades of blue
on the mountains.
Then came Saturday.
Saturday was always a looked-forward-to day by the
Barrys. No paddock work was done. It was ‘ tidy-up ’ day
in the morning when gardens, cow-bails, yards, and so forth,
were put in order. And the afternoon was a holiday. And
this Saturday was rather special. Father might be expected
to return that evening, and then, surely, they would know
all about it ? All through the week the talk and specula-
tion had gone on, and now, it seemed to the Barrys, the
suspense was getting unbearable !
I think the situation was getting a little on Mrs. Barry’s
nerves too. When children are excited and ‘ strung-up 5
and when there are five of them, all round about the same
age, their elders are apt to feel the strain too. Perhaps
that was why Mrs. Barry suggested that the tidying might
be skipped, for once, and that the children could go for a
picnic in the mountains for the day.
‘ Why not go to “ Ferny Gap ”? ’ she said. ‘ You have
not been there this winter. I will make you some mince-
pies to take ! ’


‘ Ferny Gap ! Mince-pies ! Ferny Gap ! Mince-pies ! *
shouted Gerry, galloping around.
Of course, Mr. Pennythorp wanted to know the reason
for all the excitement so Mrs. Barry told him.
‘ Ferny Gap is our most lovely spot. It is rather a long
way, and high up ; but when you get there you see a
beautiful view through a gap in the cliffs. The gap is
framed by tall tree ferns, and through it you see range after
range of the blue mountains. I have often wished I could
paint it ! ’
£ Dear me ! I should very much like to go ! * said Mr.
Pennythorp, ‘ I might take my paints and try to get a
sketch.’
‘ Yes ! Do come ! ’ chorused every one, for Mr. Penny-
thorp had endeared himself to the Bush Ragamuffins.
c Do you feel up to it ? ’ asked Mrs. Barry.
‘Oh yes ! I feel quite myself again ! I really must
not miss this ! 5 He beamed upon the children. ‘ That is,
if these kind children really do not mind burdening them-
selves with an old man ? 5
‘ Yous not old ? ’ asked Gerry, slipping his hand into
Mr. Pennythorp’s, and looking up at his rosy cheeks.
‘ You could ride a lot of the way up, on “ Mintie
said Jan. Mintie was Jan’s white pony, and it was the first
time she had been willing to lend her to any one except
to Jim.
So it was settled. Jan ran off to catch ‘ Mintie ’. Mrs.
Barry disappeared into the kitchen, and Peggie with her
so that the picnic lunch could be got ready quickly. And
Mr. Pennythorp went to get into suitable clothes for moun-
tain climbing. These seemed peculiar to the children. He
w r ore ‘ plus fours ’, and it w r as the first time the Barrys had
seen such queer ‘ breeches ’, and he donned a white sun-
helmet. The children had been very interested in the


helmet, and they had all tried it on a number of times. It
was white, except for a number of little black finger-prints
round the brim ; and it was lined with green, and had
cork where it fitted on to the head. Mr. Penny thorp, with
his rosy cheeks and blue eyes, looked very nice in it.
In the meantime, Jack and Jim were in anxious confer-
ence. They were discussing whether they could take their
father’s gun, and have a shot at the white goats that were
to be found on the tops of the Ridgeways mountains.
‘ Better ask mother,’ said Jack.
‘ She might say “No said Jim. ‘ And father told us
to entertain Mr. Pennythorp. Of course, he would like a
shot ! ’
The discussion went on for a long time. The boys
were expressly forbidden to touch the gun and cartridges.
And they longed to more than they wanted to do anything
on this earth ! Finally Jim, with deep misgiving, agreed to
Jack’s counsel to ask mother. £ Women are so nervous about
these things ! ’ said Jim,
But when Jack, with infinite precautions, approached
his mother on the subject, a pleasant surprise awaited him.
Mrs. Barry said :
‘Oh yes ! I quite forgot ! Father said, before he went,
that Mr. Pennythorp might like to have a shot at the goats.
And he said that if he took out the gun, you boys could
have one shot each, but only one, mind. You had better
see about it, Jack.’
Jack and Jim looked at each other and gasped. Father
had said that, and mother had forgotten ! Forgotten !
Oh ! Woman ! They raced round to the front veranda
to find Mr. Pennythorp. He was lying in the long chair,
all ready, waiting ; with his hands clasped over what Jan
now called ‘ the rotundity ’. Jack eagerly told him the
good news. Did he know there were white goats on the


Ridgeways mountains ? They would take father’s gun for
him, so that he might have a shot at them.
But Mr. Pennythorp’s reply filled the boys with blank
dismay. He did not shoot. No, he did not want to try.
Yes, yes, doubtless it was easy, but he liked to see the little
goats on the mountains and he would grieve to see them
shot. And, indeed, he had rather a horror of fire-arms.
Once, his brother Henry had nearly shot him with an air-
gun. The air-gun had been taken away from them then,
of course. But he had never been able to get over his dislike
of fire-arms ever since.
The boys crawled away, their world in pieces. They
sat down on the wood heap to confer. The Pennyworth
stock had gone down —well—to a farthing’s-worth !
‘ You can call me an ass ! ’ said Jack bitterly. ‘ Why
didn’t we take the gun without asking old Pennyworth ? ’
‘Jack ! Jim ! Come on ! ’ called Peggie.
The boys sat on the wood heap and sulked while they
saw Mr. Pennythorp on ‘ Mintie ’, and the two girls and
Gerry start away from the house.
‘ All right, we’ll catch you up ! ’ shouted Jim.
When the party was over the brow of the hill Jim said
‘ Wait a minute ’ and disappeared into the house. He
reappeared with the gun.
‘ He might change his mind, you know ! ’ he said.
‘ Good enough ! ’ grinned Jack. ‘ Only —oh well, all
right ! ’
Taking the gun involved all sorts of complications. The
boys were afraid that if Mr. Pennythorp saw it, he would
send them back with it, so they dawdled along behind
the others. On the way up to Ferny Gap they laid their
plans.
‘ We’ll hide the rifle while we have dinner,’ said Jim,


and slip off directly after and have our shot each. Only
it’s tough luck, only having one shot. Perhaps, as Mr.
Pennythorp doesn’t want to shoot, we might have one or
two more ? ’
‘ M’m ! I rather think we’re in the soup as it is ! ’
muttered Jack. ‘ Better try to get your goat first shot !
If you want to be sure of one, you have to lie under cover
the best part of the afternoon, and shoot the second you see
a speck of white. They are as quick as lightning ! ’
When Ferny Gap was reached, and the party ahead had
stopped, the gun was duly hidden, and Jack and Jim caught
up. The girls were cross with them, for they had had to
bear the burden of entertaining Mr. Pennythorp. Peggie
was hot and worried and Jan was snappy and her dark
eyes were smouldering.
‘ I’ll pay you out for this ! ’ she whispered to Jim.
‘ All right, tiger cat ! ’ he muttered.
It was fortunate that Mr. Pennythorp never seemed to
see anything unpleasant, or he would have noticed that all
was not well between the Barrys. But he was taken up with
the beauty of the scene ; giant ferns of all kinds, towering
above them ; and in tiny grottos, and underneath rocks,
crept and nestled dainty maidenhair, and all kinds of ex-
quisite tiny ferns.
And then too, lunch was very good, and every one grew
more cheery over the mince-pies. Peggie began to make
plans for the afternoon. There was another ‘ hand ’ cave
near here, only it was rather a climb to get at it. Still, the
boys could help Mr. Pennythorp up ?
To her dismay, the boys were vague and unenthusiastic.
Which meant they had some secret of their own ! The girls
looked daggers at them, but to no avail. Jack and Jim were
good at looking the other way !
After lunch Jan went to fill the billie at a spring
7


that was nothing but a drip under a rock. An opera-
tion that took some time. As she went she whispered to
Peggie :
‘ Watch the boys ! Don’t let them slip off! ’
Peggie nodded. She had every intention of watching
the boys. But presently Jack exclaimed :
‘ Hello ! Look at “ Mintie ”! ’ and he and Jim dashed
off down the mountain.
What was the matter with ‘ Mintie ’ was not apparent
to Peggie. Jack and Jim untethered her, and led her
behind some rocks, and retethered her. And then, of course,
they did not reappear !
Fortunately, Mr. Penny thorp scarcely seemed to notice
the boys’ absence. He was anxious, now, to make a col-
lection of ferns. He thought he could dry them, and take
them home to Mrs. Pennythorp. The girls were delighted
at the idea. One could make beautiful fern and orchid
collections at Ferny Gap ! So they all scattered, and for
the greater part of the afternoon, were lost to each other’s
view completely, for the ferns towered over one’s head, and
it was hard work battling through them. At one moment,
Mr. Pennythorp, catching sight of an orchid high up on the
side of a rock, began a perilous climb after it. And he was
just grasping his treasure, with his white helmet just showing
above the top of the rock, when there was a crashing report.
And something happened to Mr. Pennythorp. His grip on
the rock relaxed, and he slid down and collapsed among
the ferns at the bottom. As he did so, Jack’s voice, shrill
with terror, was heard exclaiming ;
‘Jim ! Jim ! That wasn’t a goat you shot ! ’
Peggie and Jack were beside Mr. Pennythorp simultane-
ously. Gerry, a little distance away, began to howl. Jim,
who had been kneeling behind a rock, leaped to his feet, and
then found himself unable to move. He stood swaying,


sick and giddy, his hand pressed to his trembling lips. Jan
rushed to him and seized a cold hand.
‘Jim ! You’ve killed him ! Come, quick ! Let’s run
away ! You’ll be hanged ! ’
As Jim did not answer, she tugged at his arm.
‘ Come ! Come ! I’ll take care of you ! They shan’t
get you ! ’
Peggie arrived at this moment. Peggie, always so
flurried and flustered about little things, was magnificent
at times like these.
‘ He’s not dead, Jim. He’s breathing. Jan, get some
water.’


Jan snatched the can and ran. Jim stumbled after
Peggie to where Mr. Pennythorp lay.
A pale-faced Jack was kneeling beside Mr. Pennythorp
who lay flat on his back. The poor gentleman looked so
white and so quiet ! Jack had opened his shirt, and when
the children came up he was examining the sun-helmet.
‘ I can’t make out where he’s hit,’ he said. ‘ Look, the
bullet went clean through the helmet, high up.’
Peggie dipped her handkerchief into the water Jan
brought and laid it on Mr. Pennythorp’s temples, and a
moment or two after he opened his eyes, stared around in
bewilderment and sat up.
‘ Dear me ! What’s all this ? ’ he asked.
‘l’m afraid you’re hurt ? ’ asked Peggie anxiously.
‘ Hurt ? ’
‘ Yes —you see —Jim thought you were a goat ! ’
‘ A goat ! My dear ! Ridiculous ! ’ gasped Mr. Penny-
thorp.
Jan, far in the background, gave a hysterical giggle.
Peggie looked at her sternly.
‘ I mean, he thought your white hat was a bit of white
goat,’ explained Peggie, ‘ And he fired at it, and the shot
went through it. And we are afraid you are hit somewhere ? ’
‘ Is it your head ? ’ asked Jack.
Mr. Pennythorp felt his head carefully.
‘ No,’ he said. ‘lt does not seem to be my head.’
He felt himself all over.
‘ I don’t seem to be hurt at all ! ’ he said.
‘ I expect the shot knocked you out ? ’ suggested Jack.
‘ Yes ! That must be it ! ’ agreed Mr. Pennythorp. £ lt
knocked me out ! 5
Mr. Pennythorp felt better when he had drunk a little
water. But he looked a little austerely at Jack and Jim.
‘ Be so kind,’ he said, ‘ as to bring the gun here ! ’


The gun was brought and handed over in anxious silence.
‘ And any remaining cartridges,’ added Mr. Penny thorp.
Pockets were emptied.
‘ Thank you,’ said Mr. Penny thorp. ‘ I shall return this
gun to your father myself. And now, as we had not the
pleasure of the company of you two boys coming up the
mountain, I think we can forgo it going down. Will you
be so good as to precede us home ? ’
Jack and Jim faded away. The sun was westering now,
and it was time to go home ; and so bags and billies were
packed up and the Barry girls and Gerry escorted Mr. Penny-
thorp down. But it was rather a silent, strained journey.
Mr. Pennythorp made a few polite remarks about the
scenery, but he was quite clearly offended. Peggie found
herself hoping that father would not have returned. Perhaps
if he did not come back for a day or two, Mr. Pennythorp
might feel less bad about it ?
But as they neared the house the girls saw * Pride ’ tied
up to the veranda ; and a moment later Mr. Barry himself
came out, and hurried to meet them, with the boys behind
him, very much in the background. Father and Mr.
Pennythorp shook hands, and Mr. Pennythorp handed over
the gun with an old-fashioned little bow.
‘ Your gun, John. Many thanks for the loan of it.’
‘ Did you have any luck ? ’ asked father.
‘We didn’t get a goat,’ said Mr. Pennythorp. ‘ But I
had luck ! ’ And then, as he saw Mr. Barry looking rather
mystified, he added, ‘ A very pleasant day, you know.’
But Mr. Barry had news to tell and was not much con-
cerned with mysteries.
‘ Well, I cabled explicit air directions,’ he said, ‘ and
I got a reply the next day. They were starting at once.
They should be here any time now.’
‘ Excellent ! ’ exclaimed Mr. Pennythorp, rubbing his


hands. ‘ Excuse me, John. I will just go and change, and
then I will be with you on your pleasant veranda, and hear
all your news.’
‘ There isn’t much else ! ’ laughed Mr. Barry. ‘lt has
just been a case of ’ammer, ’ammer, ’ammer, on the ’ard
’igh road ! ’
Mr. Pennythorp disappeared laughing. The children
looked at each other and sighed with relief. So that w r as
over !
And Mr. Pennythorp, in the privacy of his room, took
off the sun-helmet and held it up to the light. Well !
Well ! He would show them this at the Club. And they
would say, ‘ Why, Pennythorp, it’s a bullet-hole ! ’ and he
would say, carelessly, c Oh yes ! There are a few stray
bullets knocking around, in the Bush ! ’


CHAPTER XI
‘THEY’ ARRIVE
AND now, the Barry children forgot all about the
stress and worry of the day, for father had said ‘ they 5
might arrive any time now. c they ’ were on the
way !
Everywhere, too, there were signs that ‘ they 5 were
expected. Store-rooms and salt-room had been cleared out
and made into bedrooms. In the larder, there were patties
and pies ; the sort of food that can be served and eaten at
any time of the day or night. And, most exciting of all, a
great square patch had been marked in whitewash in the
middle of the Home paddock, to show ‘ them ’ where to
land !
* Father ! ’ said Jan, ‘ suppose “ they ” arrive at
night ? *
£ M’m. I was just thinking about that,’ said Mr. Barry.
‘ It’s possible they might too. I think they will come right
through. I think you children had better collect wood and
make big piles at the four corners of the paddock in case
we have to light flares.’
‘ John, I wonder if I have enough rooms ready ? Do
you think they will come alone ? ’ asked Mrs. Barry anxiously.
‘ Oh, I should think so ! ’ said Mr. Barry. ‘ The pilot
would look after them, wouldn’t he ? ’
Mrs. Barry looked at Mr. Pennythorp, who had just
joined them, and he shook his head.


‘ I hardly think they will come alone,’ he said. ‘So
very precious, you know ! ’
The children raced off to collect wood. As they worked
they talked at the top of their voices.
‘ They ’ were precious ! * They ’ couldn’t come alone !
* They ’ must be children, then ?
Peggie had an idea.
£ lt still might be a fortune ! “ They ” might be pearl
necklaces ? ’
‘ Goose ! Pearl necklaces wouldn’t want bedrooms ? ’
‘ No, but the pilot and armed guards would ! There
might be two pilots. Usually are, nowadays.’
Jan dropped the armful of wood she was carrying with a
little scream.
‘ Heavens ! I have it ! “ They ” are pedigree Pekinese !
For propagation in Australia ! ’
‘ Pedigree rams, more likely ! ’ said Jack. ‘ Yes —that
would account for the secrecy. —Not wanting strangers
poking around.—A new strain, you know ’
‘So that’s the fortune ! Improved wool ! Ugh ! ’ cried
Jan.
Every one was giggling except Gerry, who dropped his
armful of wood with a howl.
‘ Don’t want to pick up wood for old rams ! ’ he bellowed.
The children shouted with laughter. Gerry had a grudge
against rams ! One had butted him and sent him sprawling
a little while ago. Now, whenever he saw a ram, he ran.
‘ Lots of rams ! Great big rams ! ’ shouted the twins.
‘ Wow ! Peggie ! ’ yelled Gerry, running and clasping
his eldest sister round the knees.
£ It’s all right, darling ! It won’t be rams ! Jan !
Don’t be mean ! ’
£ Hush ! ’ cried Jack.
Everybody held his breath. Yes ! A drone ! Coming


nearer. Five faces were turned skywards, Gerry holding to
Peggie’s skirt. Five pairs of eyes searched the darkening
sky. The drone was growing louder, but not a speck could
be seen ! Then, c Plop ! ’ Jan shrieked, and shook herself
violently.
‘ A horrible cockroach ! Banged right in my face ! ’
A chuckle behind them betrayed Billie who had just
come up with an armful of wood.
‘ Started up ’is engine again ! ’ he said, as the cockroach
droned off.
For a moment the children were all a little cross. But
then Jan laughed and began to throw small sticks at Billie
and the bonfire building became a romp. And then, as
the bell rang for tea, the great piles had to be finished in a
hurry.
Father was really maddening, that evening, at tea !
Mrs. Barry had evidently told him that the children were
dying to know who ‘ they ’ were, and so, of course, he
teased mercilessly. He told them solemnly that ‘ they ’
were one absurd thing after another, and had them hoaxed
every time. He said it was Camera men from Holywood,
coming to take a film of the ‘ Bush Ragamuffins ’. Then
he said that their Aunt Margaret, having heard how wild
and uncouth they were, was sending over a ‘ planeload of
tutors and governesses. Then he said that a travelling
circus, having learned that Bush children dwelt at Ridgeways
in their native state, unspoiled by any contact with civiliza-
tion, had offered him a huge sum for the loan of two or three
of them to exhibit to the world. That they had promised
to return them intact in five years’ time, and had under-
taken that they should have at least one good meal a day.
At which Gerry began to howl, saying he wanted breakfast
as well ! Finally Jan began to throw bread pellets at her
father, and the meal ended uproariously. Every one was


excited. Mr. Pennythorp rubbed his hands and beamed.
Mrs. Barry laughed like the children and looked as young
as Peggie ; and father’s dark eyes danced.
c Now, get to bed, the lot of you, for goodness’ sake ! ’
he said. ‘ Let me have a little time to compose myself and
screw up courage to meet “ them ” ! *
The children went to bed, but not, as you can imagine,
to sleep ! Again and again, some one would start up,
certain that he or she heard a drone. And as it happened,
the Bush was full of sound that night. There had been a
little fall of rain the day before, and the frogs were acclaiming
the fact. Men who live in country that easily bogs, so that
they have to dismount and lead their horses, say that frogs
say :
‘ More mud, more mud. You’ve got to walk, you’ve
got to walk ! ’
But to me it always sounds as if some one were sawing
wood.
But the Barry children did not mind the noise of the
frogs for they were determined to stay awake all night.
But as the hours crept on, one after another slipped off to
sleep. All except Jan ; and she lay with her dark gleaming
eyes staring into the night; a thousand queer fantasies
slipping through her brain. She had theories that she had
not whispered to any one. Suppose ‘ they ’ turned out to
be a fugitive prince and princess ? It might very well be
so, in this topsy-turvy world ! Suppose they had to hide
some one like Bonnie Prince Charlie ? How glad he would
have been of an aeroplane to carry him to some Highland
fastness !
Or suppose some one had made some wonderful inven-
tion ? How to imprison the sun’s rays, and turn them into
heat and power. And wanted to experiment in the sunlit,
mountain-girt valley of Ridgeways ? And the Barry children


I
were to hold the road
against all prying
strangers ?
Or suppose
But what was that?
Jan slipped out of
bed. Snatched the
matches from the chair
by Peggie’s bed, and
pattered across the
veranda. The sky
was dark and cloudy.
The moon, glinting
through the drifting
clouds now and then,
was just setting. It
must be near dawn.
And away, above the
clouds, was a sound
that was growing into a roar. An aeroplane engine !
‘ Peggie ! Jack ! Jim ! 5 screamed Jan, and off she
went, a will-o’-the-wisp little figure, leaping along in her
white pyjamas, racing as fast as exceedingly fleet little feet
could carry her to the landing-field. In a few moments
the first bonfire was crackling. Then a second, and a third ;
And by that time, Ridgeways had streamed forth, and Jack
lit the last pile.
By then the roar of twin engines was deafening. A
great ’plane swam into view below the clouds ; circled
round and round, looking for a resting-place ; headed
towards the four fires, and began to spiral down ! Just as
it came to earth the greying sky in the East flushed pink,
and the mountain-tops turned crimson. Dawn was breaking!
The plane taxied to a standstill. The children raced


oo BUSH RAGAMUFFINS
across to it. Just as they got there the two pilots were
climbing out.
‘ Hello ! Hello ! 5 said one of them, flashing a delightful
smile at the children. 4 We’re the early birds, aren’t we ?
Are you the worms ? Have we hit Ridgeways, by any
chance ? ’
He turned as Mr. and Mrs. Barry hurried up, raising a
hand to his helmet.
‘ Mr. Barry ? How d’y do, sir ? My name’s Carlton.
And here’s my colleague, Captain Darnley.’
Every one exchanged greetings.
‘ Did you have a good trip ? ’ inquired Mr. Barry.
‘ Oh, excellent. Not a thrill ! And passengers still


A GREAT ’PLANE SWAM INTO VIEW BELOW THE CLOUDS


|||
asleep, I think ! ’ and he glanced at the little closed saloon
behind the pilot’s cabin.
‘ How did they stand the journey ? * asked Mrs. Barry.
£ Oh, I gather they’re pretty used to air-travel. But we
shall be glad to hand them over. Eh, Darnley ? Precious
cargo, you know ! Will you take delivery ? ’
He sprang up to the saloon door,
and tapped sharply on the glass.
From within, came a shrill
scream. Captain Darnley chuckled.
‘ She does that everv blessed
morning !’ he said. ‘ Every time we
wake her ! ’
The saloon door swung open
and there leaned forth a very pretty
young woman with dark tumbled
hair, and large frightened black eyes.
‘ Mon Dieu! Is it that we
cr-r-rash ? ’ she cried.
‘No ! No ! Mamselle ! We
arrive,’ shouted Mr. Carlton. He
was that sort of Englishman who
thought that foreigners understood
you best if you shouted.
The French lady gave a differ-
ent sort of little scream, and banged
the saloon door shut again.
‘ Ales enfants ! Awake ! Awake ! We arrive ! We meet
Monsieur and Madame, your Aunt and your Uncle ! We
make the exquisite toilet ! ’ she was heard to cry.
Captain Darnley sat down on the ground. Leaned up
against the ’plane ; crossed his long legs and produced the
makings of a cigarette.
‘ Interval, forty minutes,’ he said.


At that moment Mr. Penny thorp arrived. He had not
been so quick at getting dressed as the Barrys. Mr. Barry
introduced him to the two pilots.
‘ Mr. Pennythorp. My sister’s solicitor.’
Mr. Pennythorp shook hands with the two airmen and
inquired at great length about their journey. And then the
door of the saloon was swung open and out stepped
Well, it was such a thing as the Barrys had never seen.
A boy, about Jack’s age perhaps, but not so tall nor so
broad 5 his face was white and thin, and his eyes were
dark and very old-looking. He wore a long overcoat,
beautifully tailored, with a decided waist ; and a bowler
hat. He might have been a good-looking boy, had it not
been for his air of profound disgust. He stood at the top


of the gangway with his hands deep in his pockets and stared
at the astonished Barrys, and then round at the glowing
mountains.
‘ Christopher Columbus ! 5 he muttered in a tone of utter
dismay.
* George ! 5 exclaimed Mr. Pennythorp in horror, ‘ come
and say “ How d’you do ”to your Aunt and Uncle ! Mrs.
Barry, permit me to introduce Master George Pollock. But
I fear that he got out of the wrong side of his bed this morning.’
Master George eyed the solicitor coldly. Then he lifted
his hat and gave a limp hand to Mr. and Mrs. Barry, and
favoured the children with a hostile stare.
‘ I think this poor child is tired,’ said Mrs. Barry.
The hostility of George’s stare was transferred from the
Barry children to Mrs. Barry.
c Meaning me ? ’ he inquired. £ I’m not at all tired,
thank you. I always sleep best when I travel by air-plane.
I am very definitely hungry, though.’
‘ Well, we’ll have breakfast soon,’ said Mrs. Barry com-
fortably. ‘ But we must wait for your sister, and —and
your governess.’
‘ Sissie’s governess ! ’ corrected George. c And really, it
is not necessary to wait. Mademoiselle will spend half an
hour in a futile attempt to curl Sissie’s hair. And another
half powdering her nose. Her own nose, I mean, not
Sissie’s.’
‘ I think we will wait,’ said Mrs. Barry. £ And now,
would you like to take off your good coat and run and help
milk the cows ? ’
£ I beg your pardon ? ’ gasped George.
Mrs. Barry glanced at her husband and saw that he
was smiling. The airmen were frankly chuckling, and Mr.
Pennythorp was pursing up his lips. But neither Mrs. Barry
nor the Barry children saw any joke.


‘ But you told me that George’s father had several
places in the country, John ? ’ she asked, flushing a little.
‘ Yes. But Ido not suppose George has learned to milk
a cow yet,’ said Mr. Barry. ‘ However ’ and he caught
George’s eye, ‘ we will soon teach him.’
For two seconds John Barry and George Pollock stared
at one another. Then George looked away. His attention
became riveted upon his cousins. He eyed the Bush Raga-
muffins from their bare feet to their tumbled heads. The
Barrys were in a variety of undress. Some of them wore
scanty, sleeveless pyjamas. Jan’s tunic had got torn, when
she was lighting the flares, and it was ripped all down the
back.
‘ You folk go in for sun-bathing ? ’ asked George.
‘ What’s that ? ’ asked Peggie.
George sighed, and looked away over their heads at the
tops of the mountains.
The Barry children were aware of a sinking of the heart
accompanied with rising indignation. Jack was getting
fidgety with his hands. But at that moment the saloon door
was flung open again and out came Mademoiselle and Sissie.
Once more, the Barrys gasped. Mademoiselle was
exactly like the fashion-plate ladies in the picture papers
and shop catalogues. The Barrys had not believed that
people dressed, and looked, like that, really. This young
woman wore a bright red dress and red shoes with white
stockings. A short white pique coat with red buttons ; and
an absurd little red hat perched on one side of her sleek
black hair ! And gloves ! Yes ! Actually, gloves ! White
gauntlet gloves with red honey-combing at the wrist ! The
children’s mouths dropped open and stayed there !
It was some time before they could wrench their eyes
away from the beautiful French lady to look at Sissie. And
then, well, Sissie hardly seemed to exist. She looked so
8


plain and unimportant. A pale, freckled small girl in a
white dress and white socks and black patent leather ankle
strap shoes. Her fair hair hung straight, and had success-
fully resisted Mademoiselle’s efforts to curl it. She might
be eight or nine. Her only redeeming feature were her eyes.
They were big and brown, shaded by long dark lashes. She
hung back behind Mademoiselle, for all the world, as Peggie
said after, like a frightened calf.
Mademoiselle ran impulsively to Mrs. Barry.
‘Ah, Madame! You must excuse! Here we are, all
undressed ! We have no time to make the toilet ! What
would you, when we arrive so at the ends of the earth before
breakfast ? ’
‘ But—Miss —Miss ’
‘ Le Blanc,’ said George.
‘ Miss Le Blanc ! You look charming ! You make us
feel uncomfortable ! ’
‘Ah ! Madame is too good ! But what could we do,
when so much must be petrol and so little must be clothes ?
But n'importe ! After dejeuner , we will visit the shops, is it
not ? ’
‘lt is not ! ’ remarked George. ‘ Look around you,
Mademoiselle ! ’
Mademoiselle looked around for the first time. The
sun had just risen and the mountains had shaken off the
mists of early morning. She gave a little shriek.
‘But, Mon Dieu! It is desolation.’
George yawned.
‘ That’s why they sent me here ! ’ he said.
‘ Ah, but this ! I had thought for a mountain retreat,
yes ! But a little town —people —shops —a little casino,
perhaps ! ’
Mr. Carlton, who had evidently grown used to Made-
moiselle’s ways, turned to Mrs. Barry and said :


‘ Mrs. Barry, I can’t tell you how drawn I feel towards
that breakfast you promised us. More especially as Darnley
and I must hop it again as soon as possible.’
Then he said to Mr. Pennythorp :
c Mrs. Pollock thought maybe you would like to return
with us, sir ? It would save your time, I expect.’
‘ Dear me ! That was very thoughtful of Mrs. Pollock.
But she always is thoughtful ! Do you know, I have never
travelled by air ? It will be quite an adventure ! Yes, yes !
I will pack up at once ! ’ cried Mr. Pennythorp.
‘ Oh ! ’ exclaimed Peggie and Jan.
Mr. Pennythorp beamed down upon them.
‘ Yes, my dears ! I shall indeed be sorry to leave you.
You have given me such a very pleasant holiday ! ’
And the Barry children, and Mr. Pennythorp himself,
all believed that that was quite true ; and if Mr. Pennythorp
was satisfied I see no reason why we should question the
matter.
The whole party now moved towards the homestead.
As they approached the house George said to Peggie :
‘ Tell me, what is that place ? ’ And he pointed to
Ridgeways.
‘ Why, it’s Ridgeways,’ said Peggie.
‘ But that place we’re coming to must be just one of
your sheds ? I’d hate to think it was the house you live
in? ’
‘ Why, what’s the matter with it ? ’ asked Jan.
‘ Gee ! ’ murmured George.
Mrs. Barry called Peggie aside.
‘ Peg, we must have breakfast in relays. There’s not
enough ready. You children fade away, and I’ll see about
you afterwards.’
And so, as the visitors mounted the veranda, Peggie
motioned her brothers and sister back. They withdrew to


the shade of the pepper trees, frantic to discuss these extra-
ordinary happenings. But then, they found they were not
alone. A small thin hand was slipped into Peggie’s. Peggie
looked down into Sissie’s plain upturned little face.
‘ Please, may I stay with you ? ’ she asked.
‘l’m afraid not, dear. You must go and have your
breakfast.’
‘ I would rather have it with you.’
‘ But they wall miss you.’
‘ No, they won’t. They would only miss Georgie. It’s
him they are trying to steal.’
‘ What ? ’
‘ Yes, people are trying to steal Georgie. Mummie used
to cry about it all the time. That’s why ’
At that moment some one who had missed Sissie appeared
on the veranda. It was Mrs. Barry.
c Come, dear,’ she said. ‘ I want you to sit beside me
and tell me all about your beautiful England. And America
too. I forgot your father is American, and you spend half
your time there ! What a much-travelled little girl ! And
I have never been out of Australia ! ’
The docile Sissie was led off. The Barry children stared
at one another.
‘ Crumbs ! ’ murmured Jim, ‘ some one wants to steal
Georgie ! ’
‘ Precious Georgie ! ’ giggled Jan.


CHAPTER XII
PRECIOUS GEORGIE
TWO hours later, the Barrys had the whole story.
Peggie, who had been helping her mother, while
the others clustered round the aeroplane, rushed
from the house, climbed to the top of the hay-rick, and
coo-eed. Not only did she coo-ee, she used the special and
urgent call which means ‘ Come-immediately-for-I-have-
astounding-news ’. Of course, the Barrys turned as one man
and raced for the Dutch barn. Peggie, pink with excitement,
tumbled the tale out.
‘ Mummie said she had not wanted us to know about
the stealing part. So she had told us nothing at all until
“ they ” came. Then she was going to see what George
knew about it himself. And if he knew nothing, then we
should have been told that these were our cousins, come to
pay us a visit.’
‘ There’s jolly little precious Georgie doesn’t know,’
remarked Jan.
‘ Oh, shut up, Jan ! Go on, Peg ! ’ cried everybody.
* Well, now, I’ll begin at the beginning. You know
about Auntie Margaret ? I am named after her. Father
is very fond of her, only he never writes ; at least, only once
in a blue moon ’
‘Oh ! Cut out all that ! go on ! ’
‘ \es, yes ! Well, Aunt Margaret grew up and married
a rich American. And they have lots of houses ] and yachts,
and things. You see, they are really very rich.


‘ Well, a gang of bad men in America, a little while ago,
started stealing children. They steal a child, and say they
will return it if they are paid enormous sums of money.
And then, when the poor fathers and mothers pay the money,
perhaps they don’t return the child ! ’
Here Peggie broke off, noticing Gerry’s eyes growing
large and round.
‘ Oh —it’s all right, Gerry. No one wants to steal us !
Father would have to have millions and millions ’
‘ Go on, go on ! ’ yelled the rest.
‘ Well, one day, when Aunt Margaret was having her
hair brushed by a maid —I don’t know why she had to have
it brushed for her ; perhaps she had hurt her hand ’
‘ Oh, Peg ! Go on ! ’
4 Yes, well, don’t fluster me. I forget where I was now.
Oh, the maid. Well the maid who was very fond of her
told her that the man she was going to marry —the maid
was going to marry, I mean, not Aunt Margaret, Aunt
Margaret is married to the American —said he knew a man
who said that the next child to be kidnapped was George
Pollock ! ’
Peggie paused dramatically. Every one gasped.
‘ Well, George was at school in America, and Aunt
Margaret took him away, and flew —really flew —home to
England, and had George watched day and night. And
there were detectives watching him too. And Aunt Margaret
took a new house, a long way away from their proper London
house, but it was all no good. One day the maid called
her to the window and pointed to a man standing opposite
the house and told her that that was one of the Gang. So
they had followed them to England !
‘ Well, Aunt Margaret nearly went crazy, because
mothers are fond of their children no matter what they are
like and she went in despair to see Mr. Pennythorp, because


she had known him ever since she was a girl. And he
suggested that George might be safe here, because he had
heard that Ridgeways was a long way from anywhere.
And then he came to see. Then he was pleased when he
found that we drove away strangers because that meant
that no one knew anything about Ridgeways. That was all
he meant about the fortune. That George would not get
kidnapped here, so he would not have to be ransomed.’
‘Oh ! ’
The Barrys’ faces fell a little. This was a sad end to
the fortune !
‘ Then don’t we get anything out of this but Precious
Georgie ? ’ inquired Jan.
‘ And Mademoiselle, and Sissie,’ added Peggie.
‘ But what did they come for ? ’ asked Jack.
‘ Aunt Margaret wrote to Mummie —Mademoiselle
brought the letter —to say she hoped she would not mind,
but she thought it would be so sad for Sissie to be parted
from her brother ! ’
The Barrys all began to giggle, except Gerry, who saw
no joke.
‘ But, look here ! It isn’t a joke ! ’ cried Jan. ‘ Mr.
Pennyworth is going to-day, but do we get our play-room
back ? Not we ! It’ll be given to Miss The White.’
Jack said thoughtfully :
‘ I’m not sure that there isn’t a chance of some fun.
Suppose the Gang finds out where George has gone ? It
ought to be quite easy. Of course, they see Aunt Margaret
go to Pennythorp, Saltmarsh and Pennythorp. They pay
some one to give them a copy of the letter Mr. Pennyworth
writes to father to say he is coming to see him on urgent
business concerning Mrs. Pollock. Then they see George
and Sissie and Mademoiselle whisked off by ’plane, and by
that time they know exactly where they are going and all


about it. I expect that maid, who is telling Aunt Margaret,
is also telling them, and getting money both ways.’
‘ Then, do you think —oh ! do you really think the
Gang will come here ? ’ gasped Jan.
‘ Of course they will, unless they’re dud at the game.’
The faces of the Barrys w'ere illumined with fearful joy.
They had brought the frustration of strangers to a fine art,
but always with rather a guilty conscience. But now, it
w r ould be not only legitimate sport, but stern duty !
* * * *
It was lucky that the ordinary routine of the station
was in abeyance, for the Barrys forgot all about w r ork and sat
in a heap, all talking at once. And they were elaborating
at least the twentieth plan for confounding the Gang and
the preservation of George when Billie’s head and shoulders
appeared at the top of the ladder.
‘ Air bus about to take off! ’he cried. * Stout gen’l’man
wants to say “ good-bye ” to ’is young friends.’
There was a chorus of ‘ Ohs ’. So great had been the
excitement about George that the children had forgotten
about the great ’plane lying in the paddock. They tumbled
down the stack and streaked across the paddock in a hurry.
Every one was there except George. Peggie caught sight
of him as she ran past. He was lying in Mrs. Barry’s long
chair on the veranda turning the pages of a catalogue.
Such an ordinary event as the departure of a specially
chartered ’plane was of no interest to him.
The children w r ere dreadfully sad at saying good-bye to
Mr. Penny thorp. And he seemed so sorry to go !
‘ Really, I can never thank you enough ! ’ he said,
patting Peggie’s hand. ‘ Especially the children. A business
visit such as this might have been such a dull affair. But it
has all been quite an adventure ! ’
‘And —er ’ he said over his shoulder as he mounted


the gangway, I left one or two little things on my bed that
might be useful here. No use in London ’ and he sighed.
‘ But never mind !’ he added. £ lt has been an adventure ! ’
‘ I hope you will have no adventures on the way home,’
said Mrs. Barry.
‘ And so say all of us ! ’ said Captain Darnley. ‘ Air
pilots, Mrs. Barry, are like ships and women. Happy if they
have no history ! ’
And here, in case
you think I have some
gristly adventures in store
for Mr. Pennythorp, I
will just state that there
were none on the way
home ; and ten days later
that gentleman once
more donned his silk hat
and caught the 8.45 at
Beckenham for Town.
But it was not the Mr.
Pennythorp of yore who
went up and down and
to and fro and talked
about the income tax.
The new Mr. Penny-
thorp had a gleam in
his eye and a smile about his lips, and his conversation fre
quently seemed to end with :
k Oh but that was nothing, my dear sir. Quite a common
occurrence, I assure you, in the Bush ! ’
But, to go back to the Barrys.
The aeroplane took off amid intense excitement. The
pilots and Mr. Pennythorp waved, and the great machine
roared up and up and over the mountains. When it at


last became a speck that was merged into the blues of the
distance, Mademoiselle gave an unexpected shriek, and
threw herself upon Mrs. Barry’s shoulder.
£ Ah, Madame ! How it is terrible ! ’ she cried. ‘ I had
not realize ! But now it comes to me, pouf! Like that !
This so slight hold upon the civilized world, gone ! We
are alone ! Alone ! ’
‘ The mail comes in once a week, you know,’ said Peggie.
Mademoiselle’s big eyes were brimming with tears, but
she smiled upon Peggie.
‘Ah ! The kind little heart ! Letters ! There is already
something ! ’
They turned back to the house, Sissie clinging to Made-
moiselle’s hand with an air of profound dejection.
Mademoiselle patted her eyes with a tiny red-edged
handkerchief.
‘ There ! There ! Courage ! ’ she said. ‘ But imagine
to yourself, dear Madame ! First this terrifying journey ;
and then to find oneself in aso great wilderness ! Madame
is perhaps accustomed. One accustoms oneself to anything,
is it not ? But as for me ! I who am so used to the life
of the great cities ! No ! I can never habituate myself!
Always the bleeding heart ! Ah ! Had it not been for my
so great devotion to Ceecee, and this poor Madame Pollock !
But never shall I turn my back upon duty ! These poor
children have need of me and I will, if necessary, defend
them with my life.’
‘ Oh, let us hope it will not come to that ! ’ said Mrs.
Barry soothingly, herding Mademoiselle on to the veranda
and into a chair. ‘ Now, lam sure you will feel better after
a cup of tea.’
£ Doubt it,’ murmured George, into the pages of the
catalogue he was reading, £ she only drinks coffee.’


By this time the Barry children had got round to the
back of the house.
‘ Well ? Can you beat it ? ’ inquired Jack.
Peggie was half-laughing, half-frowning, in a way she
had.
‘ She is a goose ! ’ she said. ‘ But you know, I can’t
help liking her. I think she’s kind, only so excitable and
intense ! ’
‘ All capital letters and high notes ! ’ commented Jan.
c All shrieks and thrills,’ muttered Jack.
Jim said suddenly :
‘ She’s the most beautiful woman I ever saw ! ’
Peggie and Jack looked at him in astonishment.
‘ Why, she’s all big eyes ’ began Jack.
Jim hardly noticed him. He was staring away into the
distance, trying to remember something.
‘ I know ! ’ he exclaimed. ‘ I know who she reminds
me of. You remember that picture of Lady Hamilton ?
The one looking over her shoulder ? In the Art book ? ’
‘ Why, yes ! ’ agreed Jan, ‘ she is like that ! ’
They were interrupted by a squeal from Gerry who had
gone into Mr. Pennythorp’s bedroom.
‘Oh ! Peg ! Jack ! Come and see what Mr. Penny-
worth has left behind ! ’
There was a rush to the little bedroom, and laid out
on the bed was treasure indeed. The field-glasses, camera
and tiny paint-box and sketching-block. And a wonderful
new knapsack fitted with all kinds of gadgets. It contained
a flat thermos flask, collapsible drinking-cup, silver spoon
and fork and salt and pepper containers ; a knife that was a
tool chest in itself; a compass ; and folded into a miracu-
lously small space, a tiny silk tent ! Mr. Barry, hearing the
exclamations of delight, looked in at the door.
‘ Oh, father! Come and see! Isn’t Mr. Pennyworth


kind ! Do you think he bought all these things for us ? ’
the children clamoured.
Mr. Barry examined the treasures.
‘ I rather imagine he bought them for himself,’ he said,
‘ then, he saw how much pleasure they would give you.
And, as he said, they would not be much use in London.
Poor old Pennythorp ! ’
£ Why, father ? ’ asked Jan, her sharp eyes on Mr.
Barry’s face.
He smiled down on her.
‘ Have you never heard of Peter Pan ? ’ he asked as he
went out.
The children looked at each other. Why, of course
they had heard of Peter Pan. The little boy who played
in Kensington Gardens, and never grew up. But what had
that to do with Mr. Pennythorp ?


CHAPTER XIII
GETTING TO KNOW GEORGE
THE day of the Pollocks’ arrival continued to be
breath-taking. There was the stupendous business
of THE UNPACKING.
First of all, Mademoiselle handed to Mrs. Barry a number
of parcels which were addressed to ‘ The Children ’. Now
I have no idea how Aunt Margaret had known just what
the Barry children wanted, but, undoubtedly, she sent the
very things each child was yearning for. A beautiful model
engine. A wireless set; huge paint-boxes ; books. Oh !
some wonderful books ! And a marvellous railway for
Gerry. Yes, and a big box of chocolates such as the Barrys
had never seen nor dreamed of. The children went nearly
crazy with excitement and delight.
And then, they got nearly as much pleasure out of
unpacking George’s and Sissie’s things. Mademoiselle had
complained that they had only been allowed to carry a
meagre supply of clothes. But to the Barry children it
seemed that their guests’ wardrobes were comparable only
to those of the Princes and Princesses in the fairy-tales. It
fell to Peggie and Jan to unpack their cousins’ things, and
they spread newspaper on the veranda and laid everything
out there so that they could see what there was, and where
to put it. Sissie had run off, hand in hand with Gerry, to
look at the poddy lambs. George was still, apparently, deep
in a gunsmith’s catalogue. Jack and Jim were not supposed


to have any hand in the matter, but they seemed to be
somewhere in the background, and whenever they heard a
long-drawn ‘ O—oh ! ’ they peered around corners, or
happened to be passing.
The Barry girls’ acquaintance with clothes was confined
to such simple affairs as strong Oxford twills, and ginghams,
and shantung frocks for 4 tidy And here among Sissie’s
things was daintiness that seemed too exquisite to be real.
Such frills ! Such embroidery ! Such fine lace and cob-
webby fabrics ! And stacks of silk and satin garments,
enough for ten little girls.
And then, George’s things were even more astonishing.
Heavy silk pyjamas. Silk shirts, and socks, and dressing-
gowns ! Satin-lined Eton suits and dinner jackets, with
pleated silk shirts to wear with them and patent leather shoes.
It seemed dreadful to put these things away in the
rough, home-made, packing-case chest that the Barrys had
been a little proud of. Peggie went to ask her mother what
to do about it ; and Mrs. Barry, already distracted with
Mademoiselle’s requests for wardrobes and chests and
shelves, hurried round with a little worry-line on her forehead.
‘Oh ! This will never do ! ’ she exclaimed when she
saw the array of things on the veranda. 4 These beautiful
things would get spoilt in the Bush ! We must pack nearly
everything away, Peggie.’
‘ Oh, Mummie ! ’ cried Jan. 4 Do let Sissie have her
beautiful things ! Look ! ’
She held up a white crepe slip that was a mass of billowy
frills.
4 Yes, it is lovely ! ’ murmured Mrs. Barry. She fingered
the tiny work of art wistfully, and sighed a little. 4 But
Jan dear,’ she went on, 4 think of our scrub bushes ! I can
see shreds of this lovely lace all over the paddocks ! ’
4 But —say —Aunt Janet ’


George was looking up from his catalogue. There was
resentment in his dark eyes.
‘ Sis won’t stay put ! She’ll grow ! Those things won’t
be any use to her back in Europe if she can’t get into
them ! ’
‘ They’re quite unsuitable, my dear,’ said Mrs. Barry.
‘ Peggie, those little white silk frocks —no —not the frilly ones,
Jan ! Those plain ones, over there. We might keep out
a couple of those for best.’
‘ Hup ! ’ muttered George.
The Barry girls looked at him curiously. His head was
bent again over his catalogue, but his heavy black brows
were knit together. It almost looked as if he wanted Sissie
to wear her pretty things ! The Barrys thought boys took no
interest in clothes.
£ Look, Mummie, look ! ’ exclaimed Jan, holding up a
little party frock in white tulle.
‘ Darling, I must go ! I could stay here all the morning !
Peggie, be sure only to leave out practical things ! ’ and Mrs.
Barry vanished.
Peggie, left in charge, became sternly practical. Respon-
sibility always weighed heavily upon her. There ensued a
vigorous argument with Jan over each garment. Jan
thought that such a lot of pretty things were quite practical ,
whereas Peggie was sure they were not. In the end, nearly
all the billowy daintiness was packed away, and neither girl
noticed an increasing fidgetiness on the part of George.
‘ And now,’ said Peggie, ‘ we’ll sort out George’s things.’
George watched, over the top of his catalogue, wdiile the
girls got happily to work.
‘ There’s nearly nothing he can wear here ! ’ exclaimed
Peggie. ‘We might leave out these white shorts and white
silk shirts for best ? ’
‘ Those are tennis things,’ said George.


‘ And there’s practically nothing else that’s any use at
all ! ’ said Peggie. ‘ Look, Jan, he can’t wear these lovely
silk pyjamas ! Oh ! Oh ! Look ! His initials are worked
on the pocket ! And all these silk shirts ! They would be
no use in the paddocks. He will have to wear some of Jacks
khaki shirts and shorts.’
‘No, Jim’s,’ said Jan. ‘Jack’s would be too big.’
‘ Before this discussion goes any further,’ remarked
George, ‘ I had better state that I have no intention of wear-
ing any one’s clothes but my own.’
The girls looked up in astonishment. Who ever heard
of a boy caring what clothes he wore ?
‘ But you couldn’t work in any of these things, George ! 5
protested Peggie. ‘ Fancy trying to carry an iron bark
fencing post in this lovely blue silk shirt ! The stain would
never come out ! Never ! ’
‘ Who said that I was going to carry an iron bark fencing
post ? Or that I was going to work, for that matter ? ’
‘ What ? ’ Both girls stared, open-mouthed. The mov-
ing shadows, that were Jack and Jim, paused.
‘ Everybody works, here, you know,’ said Peggie with
quiet simplicity.
Mademoiselle, who, of course, heard all this (for, as I
told you, everybody could hear everything all over Ridge-
ways) darted from the play-room where she was attempting
to find room for rows and rows of cut-glass bottles and
little pots.
‘But, Mon ami! What a manner to speak! You do
not do these things at home ! No ! Agreed ! But in
Rome, one does as the Romans, is it not ? ’
‘ln Rome, I might do as the Romans. I don’t know
till I see them,’ said George coolly, ‘ but in the Bush I do
not do as the Bush boy merely because I have the misfortune
to be dumped here.’


Then, a number of things happened simultaneously. A
woeful sound arose from a distant dam.
‘Oh ! Wow ! —Wow —wow ! *
Peggie and Mademoiselle recognized the voices of their
respective babes and rushed, with Jan, to meet two small
dripping figures, plastered with red clay, who were approach-
ing hand in hand, weep-
ing.
‘ I only wanted to
paddle ! ’ wailed Sissie.
c Sissie fell in, and s'
then I fell in,’ howled (hH
Gerry, who as a matter J 1
of fact had effected a
gallant rescue.
4 Ah, Cee-cee ! Ah
Mon Dieu ! Mon Ange !
Come to my heart ! ’
And Mademoiselle
clasped the weeping
Sissie to the breast of a
perfectly good frilly
white muslin frock.
For she had made a
much more exquisite
toilet directly her boxes
were unpacked.
Of course, now, everything of the female gender at
Ridgeways was fully occupied for the next half-hour. The
two small children had to be pacified ; clean clothes found ;
hot baths prepared
But the males of Ridgeways were occupied quite other-
wise. George had just finished saying ‘ because I have the
misfortune to be dumped here— ’ when a small whirlwind


darted from somewhere at the back of the house ; seized
George’s chair ; jerked him out of it ; snatched the catalogue
he was reading, and hurled it to the ground.
‘ Now ! ’ spluttered Jim, { will you come and find out
what the Bush boy does, behind the cow-bail ? ’
‘ Say,’ said George. ‘ That store list belongs to your
father.’
He quietly picked it up, shook out the tumbled leaves,
and laid it on the chair.
‘ Why behind the cow-bail ? ’ he asked. ‘ Can’t we
fight here ? ’
* No,’ said Jack, coming up. ‘ Some one would stop it.
But you’d better drop it, Jim. He’s our guest.’
‘ Oh, don’t let that worry you any,’ said George. For
the first time since he had arrived at Ridgeways, he smiled.
It transformed his face, and Jack stared at him. Who did he
remind him of? Why! He was like his father, John Barry !
George went on :
‘ I have no smallest objection to doing as the Bush boy
does, in this instance.’
They disappeared round the house. Billie, drawn by
that instinct that warns boys that there is a fight on, happened
along. Behind the bails, George took off his coat and
rolled up his sleeves.
The fight lasted three seconds. The first second, Jim’s
nose bled. The second, his left eye closed up ; the third,
he crashed down on his back and stayed there. When he
next remembered where he was, he found he had taken the
count, and George had rolled down his sleeves again and
was getting into the coat that Billie was respectfully holding
for him.
‘ I say. You can fight ! ’ said Jack grudgingly.
‘ It is not so much that I can fight, as that he can’t,*
said George.


Jim got up shakily, mopping his nose. He always took
a beating badly. He could not bear even to lose a game.
‘ All right !’ he said. ‘ You score. But I’ll not rest till
I can thrash you ! ’
* You’ll have no rest for a long time, then,’ said George.
‘He he ! Haw haw ! ’ chuckled Billie.
George stood looking at the mess he had made of Jim
with something like consternation on his face.
‘ Gee ! ’ he said, e what made you fly off the handle
like that ? ’
‘ What was it you said about the Bush boy ? ’ asked Jack.
c Oh well, I’ll say I was rude ! Something seemed to
get me rattled ! Perhaps I got up too early ! ’
George returned to the house, and the other three boys
attempted to remove the scars of war.


* Well, it’s lucky there’s no cut anywhere ! You only
look as if you’d been robbing a bee’s nest,’ said Jack cheer-
fully.
‘ Hup ! ’ grumbled Jim. ‘ Father’s sure to find out, and
I shall be “ for it ” ! ’
‘ Well, you didn’t hurt him any,’ comforted Jack.
Jim was not comforted.
In the meantime, Mr. Barrv had no need to ask what
had happened. He had seen the fight from afar, and went
to the house for his morning tea chuckling.
‘ Funny, isn’t it,’ he said to Mrs. Barry, ‘ that if you
put strange animals together, they must fight before they
settle down ? Dogs, cattle, no matter what ? ’
‘ The boys hav’n’t been fighting with George ? ’ exclaimed
Mrs. Barry.
‘ No, hardly that. But Jim tried to. Still, it was time
he took a tumble.’
The colour mounted to Mrs. Barry’s face.
‘ You know, John, George doesn’t seem a very nice
boy ! ’
‘ Give him time ! ’ said Mr. Barry. ‘ Can’t you visualize
He paused, and considered. His mind flitted back to
Coverdale ; and to the English country houses of that ilk.
The big, quiet rooms ; silent-footed servants ; beautifully
laid-out flower gardens and sweeping park ; all the gracious
dignity and unostentatious ease of English country life !
But could he picture that for Mrs. Barry ? He knew he
could not. And it was best to forget it, too. A slight sigh
escaped him.
* Well, anyway, Janet dear,’ he said, ‘ I do not think
we had better try to hurry him. If I have a jibbing horse,
I drop the reins on his neck. Boredom’ll cure when spurs
won’t.’


‘ Then you speak to him, John ! 5 said Mrs. Barry. ‘ I
must go and look to things in the kitchen ! What a morn-
ing! 5
Mr. Barry strolled round to the front veranda and stood,
leaning against a veranda post, and smoking thoughtfully,
watching Peggie and Janet who were once more cooing over
Sissie’s things. They held some of them up for him to
see, and he bent to examine some embroidery.
‘ I expect that was done by some French nuns, in a
Convent,’ he said. ‘ Meg’s things used to be ’
George looked up from his catalogue.
‘ The Little Sisters of St. Francis,’ he said. ‘ They
embroider all Sissie’s things.’
‘ Yes,’ nodded Mr. Barry. ‘ I thought so. These women
who have no children of their own find a vicarious happiness
in making beautiful things for other people’s children.
Exquisite work, it is too. And now, which of your things
are you keeping out, George ? ’
George shot his uncle a grateful glance ; slipped off his
chair and made a quick and business-like choice among his
plainest and most serviceable clothes.
‘ Would that do ? ’ he asked.
‘ Admirable, I’d think,’ said Mr. Barry. ‘ I see a good
many pairs of riding-breeches. You ride ? ’
£ Oh—no, Uncle John. Not what you’d call riding. I
hunt a little in England and play polo in America, but I’m
always falling off.’
Ah, well, if you care to yard the horses for me presently,
you can. You see, you can take my horse, standing there
by the cow-bails. The horses are in that paddock over
there ; fifteen of them. And there are the yards. But
there’s no hurry.’
He walked away, and Peggie and Jan looked at each
other.


c That’s the first time I’ve ever heard father say any one
else could ride “ Caprice ” ! ’ said Jan.
‘ I wouldn’t ride her if I were you, George ! ’ warned
Peggie. * Sometimes she plays up terribly.’
‘ I’m quite used to falling off,’ said George.
He did not know, as he walked towards * Caprice ’, that
all the menfolk of Ridgeways were watching him. He
went up to the mare very quietly. Stood speaking to her
for a moment, then mounted without fuss and walked her
slowly away.
A little while after there was a thundering of hoofs and
fifteen horses swept round and into the yards, George slipped
off his horse ; put up the rails and led * Caprice ’ back to
where he found her and returned to his chair on the veranda.
No one said anything at all, for everything was said. If a
man can fight well and ride well, and does not boast about
it, he has the freedom of the Bush, even if he does not know
a scrub wallaby from a kangaroo. With the menfolk of
Ridgeways, George, as Billie remarked, had bought his
ticket.
But he still had to reckon with the women. While
George was rounding up the horses, Jan had discovered the
plight of her twin. She said nothing, but her dark eyes
blazed. For a long time, there was to be war between Jan
and George !
But otherwise, as the days went on, George and
Sissie settled down in some fashion. One hardly knew
Sissie was there. She trotted around with Gerry, or after
Peggie, and she scarcely spoke. For some time, George
seemed a lost soul. He sat on the verandas, turning the
pages of books, and watching the busy life of the station
from afar. But gradually, he began to take a tentative
interest ; particularly if there were any horse work to be
done. And the Barry boys noticed, a little jealously, that


Mr. Barry always asked George to yard the horses or ride
to a distant paddock.
But it was not until shearing-time that Ridgeways got
to know George really well.


CHAPTER XIV
WHO IS THE STRANGER?
SHEARING was the event of the year at Ridgeways,
as it is, of course, on any sheep station, big or little.
To the Barry children, it meant tremendously much.
Shearing brought a number of things in its train. First,
and foremost, a wool cheque ! All through the long year,
whatever one wanted had to wait for the wool cheque.
And then, it meant hum and bustle and people. The same
shearing-team came year after year to Ridgew r ays. Ben
Barton, the wool classer and expert ; three shearers ; the
wool presser, and cook. There was no c rouse-abouts ’, for
Jack and Jim and Billie ‘ picked up ’ the wool. Even the
girls helped sometimes when the boys were out mustering.
All the children loved to get into the shed, for the men were
old friends, and had done this and that, all over Australia,
and there was no end to the tales they had to tell. Even
George grew interested as he watched the preparations for
shearing and asked Peggie the names of the men who were
coming. Peggie told him. ‘ Ben Barton, the Boss of the
Board. (The Board is the wooden floor where the shearers
work.) Then Jim Hayes, and Cecil Barnes, and Les Hart,
the shearers. Ted Bennett, the wool presser ; (he puts the
wool into the great bales; you use a special press). And
Sid Moyle, the shearers’ cook. He’s a prize fighter, of
course.’
‘ Why “ of course ” ? ’ asked George.


‘ Oh, shearers’ and drovers’ cooks find it best to be able
to fight well. Or if they can’t they employ “ bull-dogs ”,
men to wash up for them that are called “ slushers ”, but
they take care to employ fighters. Otherwise the men are
always grumbling. One likes his food hot, and another likes
it cold ; one likes it burnt, and the other raw.’
Jack, who was listening, laughed.
* I remember when Sid Moyle first came,’ he said.
‘ Ben had had another man before that ; only he sacked
him because he said he couldn’t keep his eyes on him. He
was that greasy, they slipped off. So he took on Sid. And
this was Sid’s first shed with the team. So, of course, the
men tried it on him and the first meal he sent in was stew.
And Jim Hayes said :
‘ “ Wot d’yer call this, stoo ? ’
‘ And Sid said :
‘ “ You come outside, lad, and I’ll tell you what it is.”
‘So Jim went outside, but the others hadn’t time,
because dinner is always a hustle. Men have to eat their
food and then clean their combs and cutters in the hour.
And presently, Jim came back.
‘ “ And was it stoo, Jim ? ” asked Ben.
‘ “ It was stoo,” said Jim.
‘He looked it too. I never saw a man in such a mess.’
‘ If George tried hard, he might be able to become a
shearers’ cook, one of these days,’ said Jan.
‘ Gee whizz ! That’s an idea. Perhaps you could
teach me to make bread for a start ? ’ suggested George.
Jan had experimented with bread the day before, and
had burnt it to a cinder.
Every one laughed. No one, indeed, had much time
for quarrelling. New yards had to be built round the wool-
shed and every one was hard at work cutting rails and
carting them in ; and they were only just ready when the


day came, and the first three hundred sheep waiting in the
yards, for the first day would only be a half-day.
The shearers’ car arrived at 7.30 a.m. As it approached,
the children pointed out the men to George. ‘ Ben’s driving
and Les Hart beside him. There’s Ted, and Cecil and Jim
in the back. Hello ! Where’s Sid Moyle ? ’
The shearers’ car drew up, and the men tumbled out
and the children and the dogs rushed around them.
‘ Hello, Ben, how goes it ? ’
‘ Good-o, Master Jack. How’s yourself? ’
‘ Fine weather, Les ? ’
‘ Too right, if we don’t get a cold snap, same as last
year ! ’
‘ Where’s Sid, Ben ? ’
‘ Oh, Sid’s sick Morning, Miss Peggie ! ’
‘ These are our cousins, Ben ; George and Sissie Pollock.’
‘ Pleased to meet them ! Coin’ to learn to shear,
mister ? Yes —Sid’s sick.’
‘ Why —that’s too bad.’
‘ Too right, it is.’
‘ Who’s cook, then ? ’
‘ Why, Sid had a man staying with him reckons he can
cook. So he’s coming along. Got an ole Ford of ’is own.’
‘ Is he a local man, Ben ? ’ asked Jack, quickly.
‘ No. Stranger to me. Sid said he happened along
asking for work. An’ the very next day Sid fell sick.
“What’ll I do?” says Sid. “To-morrow, I’m due to go
with the shearers to Ridgeways.” “ Don’t let that worry
you,” says the stranger (he’d stayed around doing a few
odd jobs for his tucker). “If it’s cooking they want, I can
cook.” And so when I went to pick up Sid, he told me
that Joe Yates could take on for him. Joe Yates, that’s
his name.’
‘ Is he Australian ? ’ asked George.


* Hundred-per-cent Aussie,’ he says. ‘ But he’s just come
from the States.’
‘ The States ? What’s he been doing there, then ? ’
£ Oh, went as ship’s cook, some years ago. Good-day,
sir ! ’ (as Mr. Barry came up). ‘ Yes, here we are again
The children looked at each other, and faded away.
All of them, that is, except Sissie and Gerry. They did not
receive the signal, for they were accounted too young to be
called to such a serious council.
‘ Well, I’m jiggered ! ’ said Jack. £ lf that isn’t cool !
£ Rather cute, though ! ’ remarked George. £ They’re
artists at their job. They find out when we shear. Then
send a man to poison the cook, and substitute himself.’
£ Poison him ? ’
£ Why, sure ! As I came away I heard Ben say to Uncle
John that Sid had ££ summat the matter with his stummic ” ! ’
The Barry children gasped.
£ Their trouble is,’ went on George, £ friend Joe has an
American accent. So he pitched a yarn about having been
some years in the States. So we shall get a hundred-per-
cent Aussie with a Yankee accent ! ’
£ We’d better tell father at once ! ’ exclaimed Peggie.
To her dismay, no one agreed with her.
£ Why worry Uncle John ? ’ asked George.
£ Surely father’s got enough on his mind, shearing-time ! ’
said Jack.
£ Besides, we can handle it ! ’ said Jim.
£ Resourceful Children Frustrate Gang ! ’ cried Jan,
hopping about.
£ Oh, but I say ! ’ protested Peggie, £ suppose anything
should happen to George ? ’
£ The thing that never seems to have occurred to any
one,’ said George, £ is that I can take care of myself! I


tried, unavailingly, to make mother see that ! Every one
seems to assume that, because one is heir to a few millions,
one must be a born boob ! But only a baby in a cradle
could be kidnapped ! After all, how’s this guy going to
set about it ? ’
‘ Perhaps he reckons he can entice you away ? ’ suggested
Jack.
‘ Poor simp ! ’
‘ Well,’ said Peggie, ‘he might offer you poisoned
sweets.’
‘ Hup ! “ Thank you, kind Stranger ! So good of you
to give the little boy lollies ! Gobble, gobble ! ” I don’t
think ! ’
‘ He’ll sand-bag you,’ suggested Jim.
c He’s got to come up behind me first ! ’
‘ I tell you what ! ’ cried Jan. ‘ Mummie often sends
us out with cakes for the shearers. Couldn’t we put some-
thing into his cake ? I don’t mean kill him, of course. But
something to make him think Ridgeways didn’t agree with
him ? ’
‘ Holy Moses ! ’ cried Jack, c that girl will develop into
a poisoner ! I tell you, Jan, your foot’s on the slippery slope
that ends in the gallow r s ! ’
Jan tossed her head.
‘Oh w r ell ! You can make fun if you like ! It’s a
matter of life and death for George.’
£ Oh, thanks, fair cousin ! The past weeks in your
company had not led me to suppose that you were interested
in the preservation of my life ! ’
The quarrel w r as beginning along the usual lines when
Jack said, ‘ Hark ! ’
They all listened.
‘ Yes,’ said George, ‘ here comes the baby-snatcher !
That’s an old Ford all right. Hark at her on the hill! “Can


do it —can do it —can do it —can do it, can do
it, Phut ! Can’t do it !” *
They all ran laughing down the hill leading to the
wool-shed and half-way up was the Ford, stuck. A curious
specimen of a man was looking at the works. He was
smallish, thin, wiry, with a white face and white hair and
strange wild-looking blue eyes. He was not old. Probably
in the late thirties.
‘ Hello ! Struck trouble ? ’ grinned George.
He slammed down the bonnet.
‘ Oh, I guess she kin stay put !’ he said. * I’ll carry up
my dunnage. When I want to go I kin back her down the
hill and turn her at the bottom.’
George nudged Jack.
‘ A quick get-away ! ’ he muttered. ‘ Think he’ll offer
the little boy a ride in his car ? ’
At that moment Ben came up with Mr. Barry.
‘ ’Day,’ he said. ‘ This is the cook, sir. Joe Yates.’
Mr. Barry looked at the man sharply.
‘ So you’re cook ? ’ he asked.
‘ Cook ? Yep ! Ship’s cook. Drovers’ Cook. Shearers’
cook. Millionaire’s cook. Who says I can’t cook ? 5
‘ Right,’ said Mr. Barry. ‘ Come along, and we’ll show
you the galley.’
‘ The Boys are about ready for Smoke-o,’ said Ben.
* * * * *
And there was no doubt, too, that Joe could cook. He
cooked such food as no shearer had ever tasted. Smoke-o
consisted of little iced cakes and chocolate eclairs ! Ben,
with his teeth deep in an eclair, congratulated himself upon
his find.
‘ This is some cook ! ’ he said. ‘ You’d hardly think
it’ud pay him ? ’
He finds all the food, you see,’ explained Peggie to


George. ‘ The shearers just pay him so much a week
each.’
4 Hup ! ’ chuckled George. ‘He can afford to do things
well ! Bet he isn’t only paid what the shearers pay him ! ’
That afternoon, the shearers were regaled on cream buns
And just after the bell
went to start work again,
George drew Peggie
aside.
‘ Look ! ’ he said,
holding out a cream bun
generously spread with
chocolate icing. ‘ Plot
develops along usual
lines. Now we know
why shearers get cream
buns ! Joe asked Sissie
if she weren’t a little
American girl. And if
that little American boy
were her brother ? And
he gave her two special
buns, one for herself,
and one for me ! ’
The colour faded
from Peggie’s cheeks.
‘ But you don’t think she ate it ? ’ she gasped.
‘ Why not, Goose ? There’ll never be any poison in
Sissie’s bun ! She’s only the decoy. And there won’t be
any in this one either. This is only a little bit of sugar for
the bird ! This is to create an atmosphere of trust and
greed. Want it ? ’
‘ Heavens ! No ! ’
‘ Good-bye, bun,’ said George, taking a huge bite.


‘ George ! 5 shrieked Peggie.
‘ It’s the goods ! ’ chuckled George. ‘ You ought to
make love to Joe, Peggie. But he isn’t interested in the
little Australians. Oh no ! It’s the little Americans that
take his fancy ! Never mind. I’ll always give you a bite ! ’
Jan raced up.
‘ I say ! Come and look at this ! Can you beat it ?
she asked.
She led them round the back of the wool-shed, where
they could see the galley. Sissie was standing on an up-
turned boiler at a table ; a large white apron tied round
her. She was shelling peas.
‘ Say ! Sis ! ’ said George. ‘ What’s the great idea ?
Are you Joe’s slusher ? ’
She raised her big solemn brown eyes.
‘ I’m helping Joe,’ she said.
‘ What made you want to, dear ? ’ asked Peggie.
‘ ’Cos Joe’s got a little girl like me, ’t’ome ! ’ she said.
Joe darted from his galley frowning.
‘ Now now ! Let her be !’ he exclaimed. ‘ She’s help-
ing old Joe. Ain’t you, girlie ? ’
Sissie nodded. George herded the Barry girls away.
£ Plot develops to skedule ! Now we turn on the sob-
stuff ! ’ he grinned.
‘ Oh ! ’ worried Peggie, ‘ but do you think Sissie’ll be
all right ? ’
‘ Why not ? No one wants to steal Sis ! ’ said George.


CHAPTER XV
ON JOE’S TRACK
SHEARING, at Ridgeways, was an affair of a fortnight,
and day after day, things went on in the same strange
fashion. Joe was such a good cook that he managed
to satisfy the shearers without having resort to his fists ;
which was lucky for him, for he did not look like a prize-
fighter. And the extraordinary friendship between Sissie
and Joe grew daily stronger. Sissie trotted everywhere after
Joe, ‘ helping ’ and tasting his excellent cakes. Mademoiselle
was distressed about it.
‘ It is not proper that Cee-cee should make the eyes at
a so common man ! 5 she exclaimed.
‘ Oh, I don’t think we need worry, Mademoiselle,’ said
Mrs. Barry. c These men are rough, but they are kindly and
it seems to take Sissie out of herself. It is the first time I
have seen her friendly with any one.’
Poor Mademoiselle. Her emotional and effusive man-
ners were only a cloak for extreme nervousness. She was
very much in awe of Mrs. Barry, and so now she hastily
withdrew, leaving Sissie and Joe to themselves. Mademoiselle
was very much at a loss at Ridgeways. Her employment
had been to teach Sissie and George French, and to act as a
companion to Sissie. And now both children spoke French
excellently, and Sissie had no more need of companionship.
Since she had come to Ridgeways she ran around with
Gerry ; and now she had Joe ! Mademoiselle, as Jan said,
136


did not ‘ fit ’ at Ridgeways. She tried. She would offer
to help with the mending, and carry off an enormous pile of
socks. And she would spend a whole day mending one
sock ! The mend would be a work of art ! Exquisite !
But the sock would be in holes again the next day ! Then,
she would beg to help with the cooking and explain that
she could make a cake. And she would occupy the kitchen
all the morning using all the utensils, and taking all the
eggs and cream. And at the end of it would appear one
small cake. Marvellously decked, and delicious, of course.
But it would be eaten up in just two seconds ! Useless for
a hungry family of boys and girls. And then, she would insist
on doing the flowers. She would spend half the day in the
mountains finding gum-tips, hop bush and wattle. Then all
the corners of Ridgeways would be rifled to find empty jam-
jars and tins ; then for an entire afternoon the house would
be littered with branches and leaves. Finally, the living-
room would look like a bower ; but in the morning no one
would remember to put water into all the jars and pots so
that all the greenery died !
‘ You know, she is really so kind ! ’ said Mrs. Barry to her
husband, £ but she is more of a hindrance than a help 1 ’
So Mademoiselle found her desire to assist somewhat dis-
couraged and she wandered about, perhaps with a little
embroidery, or a book, looking rather unhappy.
And so, Mademoiselle, as Peggie said, did not count.
At the present moment Peggie wished she counted, for she
was terribly worried. There seemed no doubt at all as to
who Joe was, and what was his real business at Ridgeways.
Peggie could not understand why her father did not notice
it. Mrs. Barry, of course, was too busy in the house to
notice anything.
For Peggie was not at all sure that George could take
care of himself.


‘ You see,’ she said to Jan, ‘ when he finds he can’t
entice George by means of Sissie, Joe might do something
terrible ! Do you remember the way that rabbiter stole
the chickens, once ? He lit sulphur under them, so that
they fell off their perches, and then he just pushed them
into a bag ! ’
Jan giggled.
‘ Wouldn’t George be annoyed if he found he’d been
pushed into a bag ? ’ she asked.
‘ No, but do be serious, Jan. It would be quite easy
to slip round the veranda at night, and turn on some gas
over the boys’ beds and carry George off! ’
‘ Gracious ! ’ exclaimed Jan. ‘ We’d better make dummy
figures to put in the boys’ beds and they’d better sleep on
the hay-rick. Like—like —oh ! Which story was it in
Grims, when the children got into the Ogre’s castle ? ’
‘ Oh, that’s no good , Jan. It’s no use telling you any-
thing ! You only fly off with some mad idea ! ’
‘ All right ! Don’t get huffy ! I’ll be serious. You
and I will have to keep watch. It’s no use telling the
boys. Jack would say he’d wake at the smallest sound,
and half the times he doesn’t hear the alarm ! ’
‘ Well, I’ve been keeping awake half the nights, as it is.’
‘ I don’t think anything will happen until the last night,’
said Jan. ‘ They cut out to-morrow night; then the
shearers go off before dawn, so’s to be in time for their next
shed. And Joe is not going with them. . . . Sid Moyle
is well now and is going to join them. I heard Joe say
he’s going off just after them. He’ll have to give them
breakfast, you see, although it’ll be in the middle of the
night when he cooks it.’
‘ Yes—l see,’ said Peggie. ‘ He’ll let the shearers go
first. Otherwise they would all be here to join in the hue
and cry ! Jan, don’t you think we ought to tell father ? ’


‘ Yes I do,’ said Jan. ‘ But the boys would be furious.
And I really don’t see that anything can go wrong if you
and I both keep watch. We’ll take it in turns, so’s we
don’t sleep.’
And so, that night, Peggie and Jan took it in turns to
keep watch. But they found it a very hard job. Both
girls were tired. They had been helping in the shed all
day. And they both caught themselves dozing again and
again.
‘ Well,’ said Peggie, when they were comparing notes
the next morning, ‘ it did not so much matter last night.
But to-night, we must keep awake ! Even George thinks
something might happen to-night. What do you think he
has got ? A tiny revolver, loaded too, and he says he is
going to sleep with it under his pillow. He says his father
gave it to him and told him not to hesitate to use it if he
thought it necessary ! ’
‘ I tell you what,’ said Jan. ‘ Let’s watch on the boys’
veranda together to-night ! Directly the boys are asleep,
we’ll slip round, and we can both sit in mother’s long chair,
with a rug round us, and pinch each other if we go to
sleep ! ’
That seemed a good idea. More especially as it might
have been difficult to keep awake. There were always
great rejoicings the night Ridgeways ‘ cut out ’ and all
the shearers came into the house for supper. So that
made a big wash-up, and the girls were tired.
But there were not many hours left to the night when
they crept round the veranda with their rug. And they
curled up together and talked in whispers while the time
slipped by. They struck a number of matches to look at
George’s wrist-watch, which they had borrowed ; and,
about an hour before dawn, they heard a stir in the men’s
camp. Presendy, the sound of an engine throbbed its way


through the stillness. And then, two beams of light shot
forth and caressed the mountain, and then swept round.
The lorry was off.
4 Now for it ! ’ whispered Jan.
The Ford had not 4 stayed put ’ down the mountain,
after all. Ben Barton had gone down and towed it up.
And now the two girls listened for the sound of the Ford
engine. And, in about ten minutes, it started up. Peggie
and Jan sat, breathless, clutching each other’s hands.
Surely, that was a step ? Yes —Peggie only just repressed
a scream —but the sound died away. Presently, the lights
of the Ford moved across the yard. The girls knelt up in
the chair, watching as the car wound its tortuous way down
the mountain-track, and the beam from its lights flashed
from side to side, now picking out a mountain crag on one
hand, and now on the other.
4 He’s gone ! ’ whispered Jan.
‘ Better wait till dawn. It might be a blind. He
might come back ! ’ murmured Peggie.
For perhaps another three-quarters of an hour the two
girls waited. Then the eastern sky lightened. Dawn !
Peggie sighed.
‘ Thank goodness that’s over ! ’ she said. 4 Why didn’t
he try to do anything ? ’
‘ Probably knew we were on the watch. He’ll go and
give a report. He knows all the ways of the house now.
They will act later on, when we’re not expecting it.’
Peggie shivered.
c Oh, don’t ! ’ she said. 4 And now it’s time to get up,
and I could sleep for a week ! ’
The two girls made their way in the grey dim light
back to their veranda and looked longingly at the two
white beds that had not been slept in. And the third bed
in the corner where Sissie slept so peacefully !


But, did Sissie sleep peacefully ? Why ! The child was
up already ! Sissie had never been known to get up before
she was called before !
‘ She must have wakened and missed us,’ said Jan.
‘ I expect she’s round the house, somewhere, looking for
us.’
Peggie and Jan ran round the house. In the kitchen
Billie was lighting the fire. But nowhere was there any
sign of Sissie. Peggie hurled herself at her father’s bed-
room door.
‘ Father ! Father ! Come quick ! Joe has kidnapped
Sissie ! ’ she cried.
Instantly, Ridgeways was awake and every one rushed
on to the verandas. Mademoiselle shrieked ; George,
dazed and bewildered, was repeating, ‘ Sissie kidnapped ?
What for ? ’ Mr. Barry, his face grey, turned to his wife
and exclaimed :
‘ Why didn’t we think of it ? No one has been watch-
ing Sissie ! ’
And Mademoiselle was crying.
‘Ah ! Cee-cee ! The poor little heart ! Nevair was
there such a gentle little ! Oh ! I am utterly to blame !
Why have I let her out of view one instant ? Nevair can
I face this poor Madame Pollock ! Nevair ! ’
Every one, of course, talked at once. And George
almost monotonously reiterated :
‘ But, say ! Why should they take Sis ? ’
‘ Why not ? ’ snapped Jan. ‘ I suppose your mother
would pay as much ransom for her as for you ? ’
‘ Gee ! I guess she would ! But I never thought of
it ! ’ said George.
Turmoil and consternation reigned for a few seconds.
Mr. Barry had no car. He rushed to get his horse. But
it was useless to hope to catch Joe, of course. The only


thing to do was to ride the fifteen miles to Happy Valley
Post Office and ’phone the police at Bathurst, too miles
away !
In the meantime the elder children had rushed together.
Every one was frantically suggesting something ; each idea
madder than the last, when Jack said :
‘ Tell you what ! Sutcliff’s Leap !
‘ Yes ! Yes ! Try that ! 5 shouted everybody. That is,
everybody except George, and he looked bewildered. The
children all rushed to get into some clothes, and George
caught Jan’s arm.
‘ What’s Sutcliff’s Leap ? ’ he asked.
Jan, dancing with impatience, tumbled out the explana-
tion.
‘ Sutcliff was a Bush-ranger ; and once he was being
chased by the police and he jumped across a gap in the
mountains. That jump cuts off thirty miles of road. And
if we could jump it, we might catch Joe before he gets off
the Happy Valley Road, and on to the Great Western
Road.’
‘ There’s sure to be a fast car waiting for him on the
Great Western Road ! ’ shouted Jack. ‘ We’ve got to stop
him before he gets there ! ’


CHAPTER XVI
OH ! JAN, JAN !
A FEW seconds later, the children tore off. All except
Gerry, who still slept in his little corner of the veranda,
blissfully unaware of all the commotion.
The Barry children had often run up and down the
mountains in a hurry, but they never travelled so fast as
now ! The Ridgeways mountains were steep and strewn
with great rocks and cleft here and there by deep ravines
that became raging torrents after rain. Now the gullies
were dry, but each one had to be climbed up and down,
and the children chanced broken legs and leaped from
boulder to boulder.
But not until they reached the mountain-top did they
face the real problem. Here was Sutcliff’s Leap. The
mountain-top had faulted, and the peak was cleft in two
by a deep crack —now a tree-filled ravine. The children
stood and stared down. How on earth had Sutcliff jumped
this, laden with gold, as he had been ? For he had stopped
the mail on the Great Western Road that was carrying
the miners’ gold from the Turon. Then he had hidden
in the mountains and had finally evaded his pursuers by
leaping across the cleft peak of the Ridgeways mountain.
‘Oh dear ! ’ gasped Peggie. ‘ I did not know it was
so wide ! No, Jack, Jack ! Don’t try ! ’ and she clutched
her brother’s arm as he drew back for a spring.
‘ There ! I might have jumped it if you hadn’t stopped


me!’ complained Jack. ‘l’m dashed if I shall be able to
now ! ’
‘ Couldn’t we get something across ? ’ suggested Jan.
Jim had an idea.
‘ That spotted gum! ’ he said, pointing to a young gum
tree growing at the very edge of the precipice. ‘lf one
climbed to the top it would bend. And then, if one got a
bit of a swing on, one would drop the other side, easily ! ’
As he spoke, he began to swarm up the long slim limbs
of the tree. When he neared the top the bough began
to bend. He swung to and fro and the bough bent over
the gap and letting go precisely at the right moment, Jim
dropped on the other side. Jack followed immediately,
and got the job through even quicker than Jim. George
hesitated, as the tree sprang back towards him.
£ I never was any good at these monkey tricks ! ’ he
said.
He climbed up, and swung. The tree did not swing out
far enough. George was evidently a little light to get a
good swing on the tree, and it needed an immense amount
of shouted directions and a lot of work on his part before
the top of the tree bent low enough to span the gap at all.
Then, when it did, George bundled his landing. He did
not let go at the right moment, and the bough sprang back,
nearly jerking him off, and he had to swing it out again.
This time he managed to let go at the right time (urged
by yells of ‘ drop ’ from all the Barrys) and he landed white
as a sheet.
‘ Holy smoke ! Tm not going back that way ! Don’t
you girls try ! ’ he shouted.
But Jan was impatient and a little contemptuous. She
was up the tree like a small squirrel, and catching the still-
swaying branch, she swung out on it, giving it a violent
jerk.


‘ Careful, Jan ! *
screamed Peggie. But
it was too late. The
bough snapped with a
pistol-like report. For
a moment as the tree-
top toppled, it seemed
that Jan might reach
the opposite side. She
only fell a few inches
short; near enough to
catch at some over-
hanging scrub on the
cliff-face just below
where the boys stood.
For a second she hung
there, then the scrub
tore out at the roots
and Jan went hurtling
down.
‘ Oh, Jan, Jan ! 5
shouted the children.
Peggie on one side, and the three boys on the other
raced along the top of the cliff to find a way down. And
a few moments later, they were all scrambling, sliding,
dropping, jumping down the cliffs. George seemed utterly
reckless. He flung himself down and reached the bottom
of the ravine first and ran to where a wisp of blue dress
showed among the tall ferns. When the Barry children
ran up he had Jan in his arms.
‘Jan ! Oh Jan, darling ! Speak, Jan ! Say you’re not
dead ! ’
The lashes, lying on the little white cheeks flickered. Jan
opened her eyes and looked up wonderingly into George’s face.


‘ Hello, George—what’s the matter ? Never seen you
cry ’ she began.
George dashed his hand across his eyes.
‘ Where are you hurt, Jan ? Can you kick your legs ? ’
asked Jack.
‘ I believe so —yes —it’s only my head that hurts.’
‘ Oh —we thought you were killed ! ’ gasped Jim.
The children found themselves laughing and crying
hysterically. Peggie pointed to the bushes on the cliff-
face that had broken Jan’s fall, or assuredly she would
have been killed !
It was Jan who exclaimed :
‘ But you ought not to be here ! What about Sissie ? ’
Sissie ! In the intense anxiety of the moment, they
had forgotten Sissie. And Jan would have to be got home
somehow. She was white and sick —might be in for con-
cussion !
Jack thought quickly.
‘ Well, Peggie’ll have to go home for help —fetch Billie
and mother. This
ravine runs into Mag-
pie Creek; you can
get out that way,
Peg. And one of us’ll
stay with Jan.’ He
snatched up three
twigs as he spoke and
.v offered them in his
closed hand to Jim
and George.
‘ The short twig
stays,’ he said.
George drew it.
‘ All right,’ said


Jack. ‘ Give me that revolver, George. I suppose we’ll
manage to get up this cliff again. Come on, Jim.’
Jim smiled a little tremulously at his twin. George
put his hand in his pocket and drew out the revolver. He
did not move from his kneeling position. The boys darted
for the cliff-face. Peggie slipped away down the ravine,
a line of swaying ferns marking her progress. Jan said ;
* George, you needn’t stay.’
‘ Yes, I need,’ said George. ‘ You might faint. You
look as if you are going to.’
‘ But you want to go about Sissie.’
‘ Jack will do as much as I could. I care about Sis.
But if any one was to be with you, I wanted it to be me.’
‘ Funny ’ murmured Jan. ‘I wanted it to be you,
too.’
‘ Is it fairly comfortable, if I hold you like this ? ’ asked
George.
She smiled at him and closed her eyes.


CHAPTER XVII
AT THE POINT OF THE PISTOL
JACK and Jim struggled painfully up the cliff. It was
a climb no one would have attempted in the ordinary
way, and again and again the boys wondered if they
would slip back and join Jan at the bottom of the ravine.
They pulled themselves over the edge at the top, torn,
scratched and panting.
‘ Don’t suppose we’ll catch him now ! ’ muttered Jim.
‘ There was only just a chance before.’
‘ Still, the old Ford was old ! ’ said Jack. ‘ That gang
is careful of detail ! But they may come down on it for
the Happy Valley Road is hard on any car, let alone an
old Liz ! ’
The boys raced over the flat plateau that formed the
mountain-top. It was beautiful here. Grass trees, ferns,
and many-coloured flowering scrub bushes grew between
the chinks of the rocks. The farther side of the mountain
sloped gently down, only cut now and then by gullies, and
the boys tore along at top speed. Presently they left the
flat rocks and flowering shrubs and plunged once more into
the belt of tall ferns. And then again these were left behind,
and they were among the trees, with a carpet of dry gum
leaves underfoot. And now they could see the Happy
Valley Road winding like a little white ribbon far below.
Had any car passed along it ? The shearers’ lorry, on emerg-
ing from the road to Ridgeways, would have turned off to


the left, for their next shed was in the direction of Happy
Valley Post Office ; whereas Joe, who would be making
for the Great Western Road, would turn to the right. And
it would be very unlikely that any other car would have
passed along the Happy Valley Road that morning. Traffic
was not congested in that part of the world !
But when, at last, panting, the boys reached the road,
bitter disappointment awaited them. The fresh tracks of
the Ford were clearly cut in the damp red clay. There had
been a recent fall of rain, and so tracking was easy.
Without a word Jack and Jim dropped into a steady
trot along the car tracks. Ceaseless mountain climbing
rendered the Barry boys as hard as the Ridgeways mountain
goats, and they covered mile after mile of the winding road
always hoping, as they rounded each curve, to catch sight of
the black Ford. Around one curve, they came to a sudden
stop. The tracks told a story. The back off-wheel track
grew smudgy. A little farther on, the car had stopped. A
puncture. Here were Joe’s tracks around the car ; and
here was where he had jacked the car up. He had no spare
wheel ; here were the marks showing where the tyre had
been taken off and dragged.
The boys broke into a run again.
‘ That means delay, we might catch him yet ! ’ said Jim.
‘ Not much chance—the Great Western Road is only
half a mile farther on ’ said Jack.
But around the next bend a surprise awaited them. The
car tracks disappeared. On one side of the road was sheer
cliff; and on the other a little grassy stretch led away into
the Bush. A careful examination showed the car tracks
across the grass.
‘ Clever ! ’ commented Jack. ‘He reckons he’ll be
followed, and he’s cutting across country to join the Great
Western Road higher up.’


Tracking was difficult now. Sometimes, looking close,
it was impossible to see any track at all, and it was only
discernable in the distance where the light glanced differ-
endy on the grass that had been pressed down. At one
time Jack and Jim, following the direction they thought the
car would have taken to join the road, lost the track alto-
gether and had to go back and pick it up again. Then they
saw why they had lost it. The car had not cut across
country to join the road ; it had turned back into the Bush
and the folds of the mountain.
‘ What do you make of that ? * asked Jim.
‘ Don’t know. Don’t like it,’ said Jack, paling a little
as all sorts of horrible possibilities flashed through his mind.
The track was easier to follow now. It had turned off
the grass and wound its way over the red sandy soil through
the Bush. The boys’ pace quickened. Then Jack suddenly
stopped and sniffed.
‘ He’s lit a fire ! ’ he exclaimed.
Jim sprang up on to a tall rock.
‘ Smoke rising over there ! ’ he shouted, pointing to a
cleft in the mountain.
The boys darted through the trees, making straight for
the smoke. Soon they caught sight of the Ford, its side
curtains tightly buttoned. Joe was bending over his fire.
At the sound of running footsteps, he sprang round.
‘ Hello ! What’s wrong ? ’ he asked.
‘ You know what’s wrong ! ’ exclaimed Jack. ‘ What
have you got in that car ? ’
‘ Why, have you missed one of your sheep ? I tell you
‘ Open the door, Jim,’ said Jack. He made no move
himself. His hand was in his pocket, clutching his revolver.
He meant to keep Joe covered.
Jim walked to the door of the car and threw it open.


Inside was a roll of Joe’s blankets and curled up on them,
fast asleep, was Sissie.
Jack took a quick look at the child. Sissie seemed to be
just naturally asleep.
‘ Well ! Stone the crows ! How did she get there ? ’
exclaimed Joe.
‘ Oh, cut it out, Joe. We know all about it ! 5 said Jack.
‘Jump up now, and get the old Liz going. Give her a
swing over, Jim. You can drive to Bathurst, Joe, with me
sitting beside you, and when you get to the police station,
you can explain how Sissie got there ! ’
Perspiration broke out all over Joe’s face.
‘ Don’t be funny ! ’ he gasped.
Jack produced his gun.
‘ Who’s being funny ? ’ he asked.
‘ Now ! Put that gun away ! ’ exclaimed Joe. ‘ You
don’t want to get handling a thing like that ! It might go
off! ’
‘ It might,’ said Jack.
‘ Well, but wake up the little miss ! She’ll tell you how
she come here ’
‘Oh yes ! She’ll say what you’ve told her to say, no
doubt. You got a pretty good hold over her, didn’t you ?
Besides, I’m not having her wakened up. Let sleeping
kids lie.’
Jack spoke with a lifelong experience of younger brothers
and sisters. Sissie, he was convinced, would be frightened
out of her wits if she were wakened in these strange sur-
roundings. She would certainly cry. Whereas, if left
alone, she might sleep until they got to Bathurst, where there
would surely be some woman to look after her! Sissie,
whose young life had been largely spent in steamers, rail-
road cars, motor-cars, and aeroplanes, could sleep through
anything.


Joe climbed blunderingly into the driving-seat. Jack
jumped in beside him. Jim tore at the starting-handle and
got her going at the fourth attempt and sprang up beside
Jack. Joe laid trembling hands on the wheel, backed the
car and turned.
c Don’t try any monkey tricks, Joe,’ advised Jack. ‘As
you remarked just now, this gun might go off! ’
Joe said nothing at all. He was deathly white, and he
looked more haggard than usual. But he seemed to have
surrendered to the inevitable. In fact, he was so quiet that
Jim whispered in Jack’s ear :
‘ Think it’s a trick ? Look out for trouble on the Great
Western Road. He’s sure to have friends meeting him.’
Jack nodded. Ten minutes later, they turned out of
Happy Valley on to the Great Western Road. But there
was no sign of a waiting car. Joe turned west, towards
Bathurst, obediently, and the old Liz chugged along by the
side of the road, Joe looking neither to the right nor the left.
Now, passing cars provided a thrill. Jack and Jim
never knew whether there would be a grinding of brakes
and the occupants would jump out and overpower them.
It was particularly nervous work when a car was coming up
behind.
But all cars shot past them and Joe, apparently, took
no interest in them.
But when they were about ten miles from Bathurst, the
road ran through a deep cutting, and Jack, looking up at
the sheer banks on either side, thought it w’ould be an
awkward place for a scrap with an enemy car. And even as
the thought crossed his mind a car, coming towards them
and travelling at racing speed, darted in at the other end
of the cutting. Instantly, the man sitting beside the driver
of the strange car leaned forward and pointed at the approach-
ing Ford. The driver twirled his wheel, and the ‘ enemy *


INSIDE, FAST ASLEEP
WAS SISSIE


car threw itself across the track, pulled up, and out jumped
three men, the foremost holding up his hand to Joe to stop.
‘ Whew ! Police ! 5 gasped Jack.
‘Yes, a police car. They must have got father’s ’phone
message,’ said Jim.
Joe jerked Lizzie to a violent standstill. The police
sergeant walked up to him.
‘ Your licence, please ’ he said.
Joe’s hands were shaking so that he could scarcely un-
button his coat and it took him a long time fumblingly to
produce the licence.
In the meantime the sergeant had looked at the number
of the car ; and into the back at the sleeping Sissie. And
had wanted to know who Jack and Jim were, and whether
three children had been kidnapped because he had under-
stood it was only one ?
‘ Better wake up the little girl and see if she’s all right,’
said the sergeant.
‘ She’ll howl ! ’ warned Jack, whereat the policeman
looked dubious. The idea of a weeping child evidently
worried him as much as it did Jack.
Joe turned despairingly to the sergeant.
‘ Stone the crows ! Here’s a mess for a man to be in !
They’ve got the idea that I stole the little ’un ! ’
The policeman produced his note-book ; solemnly
warned Joe that anything he might say might be used as
evidence against him. And then said encouragingly :
‘ Well ? ’
‘ Blow it ! ’ exploded Joe. ‘ There ain’t going to be no
evidence ! Listen here ! I never touched the little girl !
Her an’ me took to one another ! ’
He paused, pulling nervously at his cheek, and looking
round at the three policemen. The sergeant with his open
note-book ; and the two stalwart young constables, standing


STOP !


with their arms folded and an incredulous smile on their
faces.
‘ Well, didn’t we, young master ? ’ he asked, turning to
Jack. 4 You can’t say but what that’s the truth ! Her and
me took to each other ! ’
‘No wonder she took to you. You kept giving her
cakes ! ’
‘ Well there ! You think she took to me because of the
eats. Well, it wasn’t then ! It was ’
Joe paused, confused.
‘ Yes ? ’ encouraged the sergeant, 4 why should any child
take to you ? ’
Joe’s eyes wandered all round, from the sleeping Sissie to
the circle of unsympathetic faces ; and back to Sissie again.
4 Why, because I took to ’er !’ he said. 4 And ’er and
me was in the same box, all alone. I’ll tell you how it was.
I signed on as ship’s cook in a cargo boat and went to
Vancouver. And while I was there I fell in with a girl,
what I married. But after a while, my wife and me didn’t
get on. And at last I come away. But I had a little girl —
she’s back there in the States —and she was the image of
little Sissie here. Fair hair an all ! When I first went to
Ridgeways, I couldn’t speak to nobody. Never can speak
to nobody. But when I see little Sissie I took to ’er and she
took to me, because she’s like me. All alone ! Nobody
thinks nothing of ’er, back there.’
Jack and Jim looked at each other. Joe’s yarn rang
true ! Was it possible, that it was true ? Was this man old,
before his time, and haggard and half-mad because of this
sorrow about the loss of his little girl ?
And Sissie ? Was it true that no one thought anything
of her at Ridgeways? That she did not count ? Yet,
presumably, Sissie counted to Sissie ?
The sergeant turned to Jack.


AT THE POINT OF THE PISTOL 157
‘ Fact, about the little girl ? 5 he asked.
Jack, profoundly uncomfortable, said :
‘ Well —perhaps ’
‘ She’s about to speak for herself, I think,’ remarked one
of the policemen.
Every one looked at Sissie. She was kneeling up in her
little silk pyjamas, and the Barry boys realized for the first
time that she was really a pretty child now that there was
more expression in her face. But she was blinking in wide-
eyed terror. Jack gasped with horror. Quite certainly she
was going to cry ! Why wasn’t Peggie here ?
He grew scarlet, trying to think of something to say.
But he was forestalled by Joe. Joe’s nervous terror
miraculously disappeared.
‘ Why ! There’s my little cobber awake !’ he crooned.
‘ Come, Sweetie, and tell ole Joe how you come for a ride
in his car ? ’
There ! Sissie began to cry! Fat tears rolled down her
cheeks. Joe climbed over and gathered her into his arms.
‘ There ! Dearie ! There ! Don’t ye cry ! Why, you
’an me’s mates, ain’t we ? Tell ole Joe ! ’
Sissie told ole Joe.
‘ Wanted to be your little girl ! ’ she wailed.
The sergeant, who suddenly had ceased to look stern
and cynical and seemed more like a kind old father, bent
over her.
‘ There ! There ! Don’t cry ! There’s a good girl !
Just tell me how you got into the car ? 5
‘ Tell ’im, dear ! ’E don’t mean no ’arm ! ’ urged Joe.
‘ Climbed in when Joe was turning the handle,’ wailed
Sissie.
‘ And when was that ? ’
‘ ’S’morning. When Joe was starting. Ran down to
say good-bye. An’ Joe didn’t see me ! ’


‘ So you thought you would go with Joe and be his
little girl ? Why ? Did he ask you to ? ’
‘ No —no. Only I wanted to. No one loves me. They
only love George ! *
* And so you hid in the car ? ’
Sissie nodded.
‘ An’ then I went to sleep. An’ then ’
The sergeant shut his note-book. The policeman who
had been driving climbed into his car and started his engine.
Then he backed away out of the fairway, kindly letting a
waiting, highly interested, Rolls Royce pass on its way.
‘ Well, I’ve noted particulars,’ said the sergeant to Joe.
‘ You’ll have to come up to answer a charge if called upon,
but I don’t think you will be. How’s the little girl to get
back to Ridgeways ? ’
‘ Oh, I’ll take her back,’ volunteered Joe. ‘ That is,’ and
he looked at Jack, ‘ if I ain’t so mighty uncomfortable goin’
as I was cornin’ ? ’
Jack grew hot and cold by turns. Suppose Joe ‘ split ’
about the revolver ?
‘Oh no ! Jim and I’ll sit in the back, Joe ! ’ he said
hastily. ‘ You can have Sissie beside you ! ’
‘ Yes ! I’d a sight rather have Sissie ! ’ said Joe.
The police sergeant nodded. He and the remaining
constable climbed into the police car which turned, and
sped away back to Bathurst. Joe carefully wrapped a coat
around the still-tearful Sissie and lifted her on to the front
seat. Jack and Jim packed themselves among the rugs at
the back and the Ford turned and chugged its way back
towards Happy Valley.
‘ Gee ! ’ said Joe to Sissie, ‘ we didn’t look for this, did
we ? You an’ me ’aving a joy-ride together ? ’
‘ Don’t want to go back ! ’ wailed Sissie.


CHAPTER XVIII
THE DOOR THAT WAS UNLOCKED
IT was late in the day before the Ford toiled once more
up the last hill to Ridgeways. By that time, Mr. Barry
had returned with the news of Joe’s ‘ arrest ’. He had
stayed at Happy Valley Post Office most of the day, waiting
for a police call ; and then had had a talk on the ’phone
with the sergeant. As a result, he came riding thoughtfully
home. And on the threshold of Ridgeways he learned about
Jan’s accident.
Jan was at home now. Mrs. Barry, Billie and Gerry
had gone back with Peggie to fetch her, and she had been
half-carried home ; having to stop constantly and lie down,
because her head swirled. Mademoiselle had been left to
get things ready for Jan, and she had prepared her own
room ; making it into a bower of flowers ; and she had
also made some very tempting but very rich dainties for Jan
to eat.
‘ Oh, Madame ! ’ she had cried, when poor white-faced
fainting Jan had arrived, ‘ let me devote myself to this poor
little ! With my heart so in pieces because of the little Cee-
cee I will yet watch day and night ’
‘ She needs quiet ! Please don’t fuss, Mademoiselle ! ’
said Mrs. Barry who was nearly distracted with the events
of the day.
Jan, lying on Mademoiselle’s bed, murmured faintly :
‘ Let Mademoiselle look after me, Mummie.’


‘ Very well, my dear. But do not talk at all ; just get
her quietly into bed, Mademoiselle. She might have cold
bandages on her head.’
Left alone with Jan, Mademoiselle seemed to become
very much more competent. Jan was soon comfortable
with some of Mademoiselle’s beautiful eau de Cologne on her
head. George somehow managed to get into the sick-room
too, and he sat beside Jan, renewing the cold bandage.
Then Mr. Barry arrived. At that time Jan had fallen into
a light doze, and George and Mademoiselle slipped out to
hear his news.
It affected every one differently.
George said :
4 Gee ! Sis thought no one wanted her ! Why—it’s a
fact that we kind of took her for granted ; but I didn’t
know she thought she was sort of hanging loose ! ’
Peggie murmured :
4 Poor little Sissie ! ’
Mrs. Barry said :
4 Yes ! Poor child. But it was really very naughty and
rather ungrateful ! I think we have tried ’
Mademoiselle was in tears.
4 lt is true ! It is true ! This poor little has been
neglected ! Ah ! It is me to blame ! I had wished to
devote myself—but I am so un’appy ! ’
Mr. Barry began :
4 I only want to say ’ and paused.
Mrs. Barry turned quickly. There was a certain con-
straint in John Barry’s voice. Mrs. Barry knew that her
husband was feeling something very deeply.
4 I do not want anything said to Sissie, when she returns,’
he went on. 4 Neither reproaches, nor ’ And he smiled
at Mademoiselle.
4 Nor protestations and tears ! I shall keep Joe here if


I can, and I want Sissie to see as much of him as she
likes.’
‘ But John ! Joe is such a strange, uncouth man ! ’
‘ Yes. But he succeeded where we failed, didn’t he ?
He unlocked a door ? ’
He looked across at Peggie and George.
‘ We might all try, without being too obvious, to be a
little kinder. A little less self-centred. Eh, George ? ’
£ Gee ! Uncle John,’ murmured George in deep contri-
tion, 4 you’ve slobbered a bibful ! ’
It was just at this moment that the chug-chug of the
Ford was heard toiling up the Ridgeways Road. Everybody
hurried out to meet it. Jack and Jim leaped out and hurled
themselves upon Peggie and George with eager inquiry about
Jan. Mrs, Barry picked up Sissie, kissed her, and handed
her over to Mademoiselle.
‘ She needs a clean frock ! ’ she said.
And Mademoiselle gathered Sissie into her arms.
‘ Come, my precious little cabbage ! ’ she crooned.
Mr. Barry, left alone with Joe, apologized for the mis-
take.
It was so amazing, you see,’ he said. ‘We never knew
her take to any one before.’
‘ It was kind’a worth it,’ said Joe, his queer restless eyes
searching the mountain-tops. ‘ I felt bad about leaving her.
I cared about her a lot. And if she ran off after me, that
shows she cared about me a lot, don’t it ? That means
something, you know, when you ain’t got nothing.’
‘ Where’s your next shed ? ’ asked Mr. Barry.
Joe shook his head.
Ive got no shed, sir. This job with Ben was just a
chance. Work’s hard to come by ’
‘ I can’t afford much labour here,’ said Mr. Barry, ‘ but
there are plenty of rabbits and foxes in the mountain.


You wouldn’t do badly with the skins if you care to trap
them ? We could tucker you here.’
4 That suits me, sir ! Thank you ! ’ exclaimed Joe,
looking as if he had suddenly glimpsed Heaven.
‘ Then little miss and me can go rabbiting together ! *
he added, exultantly.
* * * * *
Peggie had run back to the house. She slipped into
Jan’s room and knelt beside the bed. Jan opened her eyes
and Peggie whispered the news about Sissie.
‘ And, Jan,’ she finished up, ‘ Sissie looks different. And
Joe is going to stay. Father says Joe has succeeded where
we failed. That he’s unlocked a door ’
‘ Yes,’ murmured Jan.
4 I don’t know what he means.’
4 Once,’ whispered Jan, 4 Sissie wasn’t anything. Now
she’s something. She’s begun. The door Joe has unlocked
is love.’
* * * * *
For the next week or so, Ridgeways was strangely quiet.
Jan was really very ill ; and not only had the house to be
kept quiet for her, but everybody realized what a bright
light went out when Jan was not present. Jim was dumpy
and cross.
4 All the fizz has gone out of the ginger-beer ! ’ he said.
Curiously enough, the children found themselves missing
George, too. George was almost all the time with Jan.
The erstwhile enemies had become fast friends. And life
was dull without his queer sayings and caustic humour.
And then, 4 Pretty Mamselle ’, as Gerry called her, hovered
round Jan continually. Jan had always seemed to under-
stand Mademoiselle better than any one else at Ridgeways,
unless, perhaps, it was Mr. Barry, who understood most
people.


One day, when George was out, and Mademoiselle was
sitting by the window reading a letter, Jan noticed fat tears
rolling down her cheeks.
£ Mademoiselle ! Darling ! What’s the matter ? ’ she
cried.
‘ Oh ! ’ cried Mademoiselle, dabbing her eyes with her
little handkerchief, ‘ I am so un’appy ! ’
‘ But why, darling ? Come and tell me ’
Mademoiselle ran over and kneeling beside Jan’s bed
she laid her dark head on her shoulder.
£ But you do not understand. For you it is different.
For you this is ’ome, isn’t it. But for me it is a great empti-
ness ! These great forests, so empty of flowers. These
mountains with no little streams that murmur. This —this
bigness ! And nothing in it ! ’
£ Poor Mademoiselle ! Poor Mademoiselle ! ’
Jan stroked the smooth shining curls. Yes ! It was
dreadful for Mademoiselle. She had nothing. Nothing
at all. She had even lost Sissie. Sissie was her own child
now. And she wanted nothing but Joe, and an occasional
romp with the boys. Before, Sissie did occasionally cling
to Mademoiselle’s hand !
And the trouble was, Jan could see no way to make
things better. . . .
£ Never mind, Mademoiselle. Life won’t always be like
this ! One day you will get married ’
Poor Jan ! She had apparently made a dreadful mistake !
Mademoiselle broke into a storm of weeping.
£ Ah, but there it is ! I shall nevair marry myself,
nevair, nevair ! 5
And then she tumbled out the whole story. And Jan
listened wide-eyed. It was so romantic. And so sad.
Mademoiselle was in love. She had fallen in love in America
with a young Frenchman who was on a visit there with


his American mother. But he was a noble ! A Count !
Count Henri de la Croix. And his mother was a duchess,
and would not permit that her son married a little nobody
such as Mademoiselle ! But Mademoiselle and her Count
loved each other so much ! So much !
Jan was horrified. How ridiculous of the American-
French Duchess ! Mademoiselle would make such a beauti-
ful Countess. The Duchess must be a vulgar woman !
‘ Oh ! ’ cried Jan, ‘ I can see you in a beautiful silver
dress and wonderful jewellery entertaining your guests in a
great house ! You would be so lovely and gracious and
kind ! ’
Whereat Mademoiselle wept again and cried :
‘ Nevair ! Nevair ! 5
But after that, Mademoiselle became a little happier
for she had some one to confide in. She read bits of Count
Henri’s letters to Jan. And Jan listened wide-eyed and
open-mouthed, wondering if any young man would ever
write such burning epistles to her !
And now, Jan shared Mademoiselle’s anxiety about the
mail. Every Tuesday, Mademoiselle was frantic to know
the contents of the mail-bag. And then, if there were a
letter from Him, she would be in a whirl of delight until the
letter was read and read and re-read. Then there would
come the inevitable reaction, and tears !
But it was much worse if there were no letter ! The
American-French Duchess travelled a great deal and appar-
ently hardly ever let her handsome son out of her sight.
And so there would be times when no letter could be posted
and the mail-bag would contain nothing for Mademoiselle !
Then Jan had a dreadful time ! Mademoiselle would cry
that she would renounce the world and go into a convent.
And Jan would picture her beautiful face framed in a white
veil and her dark eyes heavy with sorrow. Or, she would


exclaim that life was unbearable, and that she would return
to Paris and drown herself in the Seine. And Jan would
wonder why the Seine ? Perhaps Mademoiselle did not
know that there were some big rivers in Australia ? Jan
carefully refrained from telling her.
Or again, sometimes Mademoiselle would exclaim,
‘ Come, come ! Courage ! * and decide that she must recon-
cile herself, and that one must not ask happiness of this life.
But always after that, she would weep harder than ever.
On the whole, it was just as well that Jan was getting
better, for Mademoiselle’s emotionalism was becoming really
rather a strain. And how good it was to get out once more
into the paddocks. And how glad every one was to have
her ! The dogs went crazy the first time she went out. And
George ! George said it was Christmas and the fourth of
July rolled into one !
To Jan, everything seemed different. So much more
beautiful than it used to be ! The paddocks were full of
delight and the mountains of mystery. Her brothers and
sister seemed kinder, more interesting. And surely George
had utterly changed ? He seemed to Jan so much more
like her father. Older. Protective. Courteous. But when
she remarked on the change to Peggie, Peggie said :
‘ Oh, do you think so ? He seems to me much the same.
I always thought him rather like father.’
But there could be no doubt at all about the change in
Sissie. Sissie had actually become naughty ! She pulled up
the turnips in Billie’s garden to give to a ‘ poor calf’. She
borrowed Mademoiselle’s tiny embroidery scissors to cut
little tabs of paper to put on the plates of Joe’s traps. And
lost them in the paddock. And she was actually discovered
with a pocketful of sultanas that she had taken from the
store-room. And I wish I could say she had taken them for
some one else, but they were just for Sissie !


Mrs. Barry reported her misdoings to Mr. Barry and
he said :
4 Good ! She’s coming on, then ? ’
And at that moment Sissie came in carrying an enormous
lamb that she was sure was being insufficiently cared for by
its mother.
4 Sissie ! Take that lamb back where you found it ! ’
commanded Mr. Barry.
4 But Uncle John, it was lying down, so weak ’
4 It was just resting in the sunshine, dear,’ said Mrs.
Barry.
4 Oh, but Aunt Janet, it was so hungry. It ate up all
the lettuces ’
4 What ? ’ cried Mr. Barry.
4 And still it was hungry ! ’ finished Sissie.
She gathered up the lamb and marched off with it.
4 All the lettuces ! ’ groaned Mr. Barry.
4 She is coming on, isn’t she, father ? ’ inquired Jan.
4 See what she does with that lamb,’ said Mr. Barry.
Jan darted off and then returned.
4 She’s got it wrapped up in a pink silk shawl in the
middle of her bed and she’s feeding it on green peas. You
ought to come and look, father. It does look pretty.’


CHAPTER XIX
THE MYSTERIOUS MOTOR-CAR
IT was a few weeks later, when the children were racing
towards the house for tea, that Mr. Barry said, laughing :
* Upon my word ! There are seven Bush Raga-
muffins now instead of five ! Look at them ! 5
George’s shirt was torn half off his back. Sissie’s blue
linen dress was in a shocking state.
‘ If some one comes to kidnap George now,’ said Mr.
Barry, he II have to ask his name ! He won’t know which
boy to choose ! ’
‘ No one seems to have made any sort of attempt,’ said
Mrs. Barry.
Mm. Doesn’t say they won’t, you know,’ said Mr. Barry.
I think that the Barry children were secretly a little
disappointed that the Gang had made no effort to break
through their watch and w r ard. They had turned back one
or two obviously harmless travellers j and one or two swag-
men , but that was more from a sense of duty than necessity.
For these people were clearly innocent and harmless.
But it happened that on the very day that Mrs. Barry
had remarked that no one made any attempt to kidnap
George, Jack whistled every one to council on the hay-rick.
‘ Fr esh car tracks on the road,’ he said.
‘ What ? What ? ’
Yes. Some one came half-way up. As far as Pine
Tree Grove. And then turned and went back. Last night.’
167


‘ Sure it was last night ? Not this morning ? ’
‘ Yes. It rained at ten last night. And the tracks are
since the rain. And Joe says they were there when he
crossed the road at dawn. Joe’s all of a twitter. He thinks
some one is after Sissie.’
George no longer thought it impossible that any one
should steal Sissie.
‘ I would say,’ said Mr. Barry when he heard of it at tea,
‘ that some one was going to Happy Valley in the dark and
turned up here by mistake.’
‘ Not many people travel on the Happy Valley Road by
night ! ’ said Jack.
After tea the children laid their plans. They decided to
post sentinels and keep a day-and-night watch. An in-
effectual attempt was made by the Barry children to keep
George out of it.
‘ But it’s you they want ! ’ protested Peggie.
‘ Well, why shouldn’t I stop them hankering after me ? ’
asked George.
Finally it was decided that watch should be kept in
couples. Jack and Peggie, Jan and George and Jim and
Billie. Gerry and Sissie were not let into the secret. Nor
was it considered necessary to worry the grown-ups.
At first it was an enthusiastic business. But when, after
forty-eight hours, nothing had happened, every one began to
get somewhat tired. They had allowed each couple a three-
hour watch ; and at first, the night watches had been breath-
lessly exciting ; slipping away from the house ; creeping off
step by step, in terror lest some one should wake or a dog
bark ; and then, patrolling the dark road, being very sure
never to venture on to the track itself, lest a footstep should
be seen.
But when the third night came a deadly staleness began
to creep over the children. It is not easy, at any time, to


do without three hours of your natural sleep ; and it is very
difficult indeed when you are growing as fast as you can.
On the third night Jan and George did not turn up at mid-
night to relieve Peggie and Jack, and Peggie ran home for
them, and found them fast asleep. Jan had put the alarm
clock under her pillow, so that it should not wake the house.
But it had also failed to wake Jan. And then Billie began
to grouse. He said he agreed with Mr. Barry that some fellow
had just got bushed. And that he could not work day
and night too at five shillings a week. It would be different
if he got seven shillings and sixpence. And Jim said he had
always said that the whole thing was rot. But that he would
go on if he could keep watch with Jan. But he didn’t see
why she was so thick with George.
(Here the discussion was side-tracked to permit the
passage of a three-cornered argument between Jan, Jim and
George as to whether Jan was thick with George. And if
so, why ? And anyway, why not ?)
When they got back to the matter at issue, George voted
that they gave the whole thing up.
c The whole notion is plumb crazy !’ he said. ‘ I’m not
going to lose any more sleep over it.’
Every one agreed, except Jack. And he said nothing.
Peggie noted that with misgiving. Jack never gave any-
thing up ! Later, when she got him to herself, she asked
him what he was going to do.
‘ Are you going to give it up, Jack ? ’
c Of course not ! ’
‘ Then, what ? ’
‘ I’ll watch by myself. I’ll sleep on the road. Then, if
a car comes up, it’ll wake me.’
Peggie gave a horrified squeal.
‘ But it might not wake you till it had run over you ? ’
Jack burst out laughing.


‘ I meant by the side of the road ! Not on it, goose !
No ! Fm afraid a car would not be so obliging as the sheep
on Mount Edinburgh. Ever hear about that ? Ben told
me. Once a man had ten thousand sheep on Mount Edin-
burgh, which is part of the Grey Range in Queensland. And
the dingoes were getting them. So he yarded them (made
rough brush fences, you know) and lit fires all round ; and
then lay down to sleep himself across the narrow entrance to
the yards, so’s to be absolutely sure they were safe. And when
he woke in the morning there was not a sheep in the yards !
So he looked for tracks to see where they’d broken through
and found every single sheep had jumped over him ! ’
Peggie laughed.
‘ Well, let me be there too, Jack. Then we can sleep by
turns. We’ll take a sack stuffed with hay to he on, and a
rug.’
‘ Oh, all right. If you want to. Only I could do the
job by myself. But better let the others go on thinking we
are giving it up, else they’ll think they have to carry on too,
and they’ll do nothing but grouse ! We’ll slip out when
they’re all asleep.’
Peggie and Jack had not long to wait until the others
were asleep that night ! At teatime, every one was yawning,
and the whole family bundled off to bed immediately after ;
and darkness had not long fallen when Peggie and Jack ran
with silent feet down the Ridgeways Road.
About a mile from the house they passed the ‘ barrier ’.
A big tree they had felled across the road to stop any car
coming up. And they went on till they reached Pine Grove
where the car had stopped ; and where, also, a little moun-
tain path led away and was a short cut, on foot, to Ridge-
ways. By running along it, one could reach the house before
a car, travelling along the road, could get there. Especially
a car hampered by having to clear away a big tree from its


path ! Here Jack and Peggie planned to camp, and they
put their sack and rug behind a rock. Neither wanted to
sleep just yet, though. It was a lovely night, and their
weariness had slipped from them. They walked on down the
road together as far as 4 Look-out Hill ’. From this point one
could see the lights of an approaching car a long distance
away.
But when they turned the corner the mountains beyond
were wrapped in impenetrable darkness ; and they turned
back together.
‘ Til walk back with you. And then you can sleep for
two hours ; and then come and relieve me at “ Look-out
Hill said Jack. 4 Got the alarm clock ? *
Peggie nodded.
4 It’s ticking away in the sack among the hay ! * she said.
4 Gee ! ’ muttered Jack, 4 it’s a dark night ! Mind you
don’t walk over the precipice I Better let me go first. Keep
close behind me ; and keep your hand on the cliff wall.’
Peggie kept close for a minute or two. Then she got a
splinter in her foot, and stopped to pull it out, so that Jack
went round the next corner some way ahead of her. The
next moment Peggie heard a gasp, and a curious scuffling
noise. With her hand on the cliff she ran, and found Jack
locked in a deadly struggle with a man. The man seemed
to be trying to drag Jack to the edge of the precipice. He
had thrown a sack or something over Jack’s head. Jack was
fighting blindly for life !
As Peggie looked back on those moments afterwards, she
was struck by the soundlessness of it all. No one said a word.
Or, if Jack said anything, it was smothered.
Jack was big and exceedingly stalwart for his thirteen
years ; and his assailant did not seem to be a very big man.
The two rocked together at the edge of the precipice.
Peggie hurled herself into the business. She threw her


arms around one of the man’s legs and pulled with all her
might. It threw him off his balance, and the next moment
he was down with Jack on top. Peggie tugged the sack off
Jack’s head and shoulders and the more equal fight went on
on the ground, each man trying to grip the other’s throat.
Then the moon sailed out from behind the clouds and
fell full on the man’s face. It was Joe !
‘Joe ! ’ screamed Peggie.
Joe’s fingers relaxed. Jack had also recognized his man,
and he let go Joe’s throat.
‘ Eh ? ’ gasped Joe.
‘ Joe ! What are you doing ? ’ cried Peggie, half-crying.
For a moment she thought Joe must be the bad man they had
once thought him.
‘ What was I doing ? ’ asked Joe, distinctly aggrieved.
‘ Why, I thought I was making a mess of the feller that
wanted to steal Little Sissie ! And it was only you, Mister
Jack ! Would you mind getting off my chest, please, sir ? ’
Jack got off and scrambled up rather ruefully.
‘ I believe you’d have had me over the precipice if Peg
hadn’t run in ! ’ he said.
‘ I might have, too,’ agreed Joe. ‘ I’d got you trussed up
a treat. I’ll have that sack back, please, Miss. The right
feller might come along.’
‘ Rather him than me ! ’ muttered Jack. ‘ I didn’t know
you were on this job, Joe ? ’
‘ I’ve been on it all along, Master Jack. Only Billie told
me you didn’t want no grown-ups in, so I kep’ in the back-
ground. But I thought you’d gone off the job. That’s
what Billie said. That’s why I never thought of dropping on
you ! ’
‘Oh well, all right. Hello, Peg ! What’s wrong ? ’
Peggie had sat down suddenly by the roadside. The
moon showed her face to be ghastly.


JACK WAS LOCKED IN A DEADLY STRUGGLE


‘ Oh —I don’t know ’
‘ Peg ! Did you get hurt ? ’
She shook her head.
‘ No. I feel all cold and shaky ! ’
Jack knelt down beside her and began to rub her cold
hands.
‘ Poor old Peg ! Poor old Peg ! ’ he kept murmuring.
‘ Tell you what, Little Miss ought to be in bed ! ’ said
Joe. ‘ You come and ’ave a mug o’ tea, Miss Peggie. And
then you run home and go to sleep and don’t worry no more ! ’
* Yes, yes ! Joe and I will keep watch ! ’ urged Jack.
As a general rule, Peggie did not like to give in. But she
did feel very queer indeed.
‘ Come and see my little cubby-hole ! ’ said Joe. ‘My
word, Master Jack ! You’re a fine bush-man. Here have
I had my camp back here every night and you didn’t see it.
None of yous ! ’
Jack felt rather ashamed. But as a matter of fact Joe’s
cubby-hole would have been hard to see. It was a tiny den
among a great clump of rocks. And the fact that there was a
burning log beside it would not have indicated a camp fire,
for the forest had been alight along that stretch of road.
Now Joe set his billie on the smouldering log, and soon
they were all having tea. Afterwards, Peggie felt much
better, and able to go home.
‘ And now,’ said Joe, ‘ we’ll take it turn and turn, Master
Jack. You lie down there and I’ll come back in two hours
and we’ll boil the billie again and then you can take on.’
Jack lay down gratefully. As a matter of fact, he was
feeling a little sore and shaken. Joe’s fingers had been like
a steel grip on his throat, and he had been very near the
edge of that precipice ! He fell asleep almost immediately
and knew nothing more until he heard Joe’s voice saying :
‘ Smoke-o, Master Jack ! ’


c Why,’ said Jack, waking up regretfully, ‘ I thought you
weren’t coming back for two hours ? ’
* And it’s a good two hours, too ! ’ exclaimed Joe. ‘ I
reckon it seems like two minutes ? ’
Jack sniffed.
‘ Hot damper !’ he said. ‘ You’ve been home some time,
Joe?’
c Quarter-hour, perhaps. Oh, I reckon the road’s pretty
safe now, Master Jack. It must be three o’clock. They
wouldn’t be likely to come now.’
‘ Think one of us ought to be down on the road, though ? ’
asked Jack. £ The worst of this cubby-hole is it’s round a
corner. We couldn’t even see the lights of a car coming.’
‘ No. But we’d hear the car. And even if they got past,
they couldn’t get far, ’long of that tree.’
But he was wrong about hearing the car. Jack’s teeth
were just in his second piece of damper when a great car
swung round the bend, it’s dazzling head-lights boring into
the darkness. And long before Jack and Joe had had time
to begin to get up, it’s red tail-light was vanishing in the
distance. The complete silence had been due to the fact
that it was free-wheeling down a grade. And now they
caught the soft throb and purr of the engine as the big sedan
began to climb again.
There could be no doubt as to the purpose of that car !
The curtains of the saloon were drawn. There were two
men seated in front; one wearing the peaked cap of a
chauffeur, and the other a burly, rough-looking man. There
was no knowing who or what might be in the saloon behind.
What was to be done ? The car was now no more than
a shifting beam of light, that darted here and there among
the shadows of the mountains and clothed with white radiance
now a rugged crag and now a group of graceful gum trees.
Joe went frantic.


‘ They’ll get Sissie, sure ! ’ he moaned.
‘ George, more likely. He’s the heir ’ said Jack.
‘ George be blowed ! Who’d want George, if he could
get Sissie ? ’
They were running up the road as they talked.
‘ Anyway, the tree across the road will stop them. We
may get there before they’ve cleared it away. Although two
men ’
‘ Look at that now ! ’ exclaimed Joe. ‘ They’ve
stopped ! ’
The climbing beam of light had become stationary and
a long finger lay caressingly upon a grove of young pines.
‘ They’ve stopped where they stopped before ! Oh, Joe,
see what that means ? They know the short cut ! They’ll
go to the house on foot, and the tree won’t stop them. And
they’ll come down on the house from the mountain-side, and
the dogs won’t hear them. They’re all down by the
yards ! ’
Jack and Joe stopped and stared at each other in dismay.
Pine Tree Grove, which the car had reached in such a short
time, was three miles farther up the road.
Joe broke into a run again.
‘ Well, they’ve got to get to the house !’ he said. ‘ We’ll
get to the car before they get back, likely. Only what’ll they
do to the kids, so’s to get them away ? Chloroform them, or
summat ! ’
They ran on, panting and gasping, round and round the
interminable bends and twists of the mountain ; up and up
the rough road.
And then, round one curve, they both stopped with a
cry of frozen horror. Two great eyes of light sprang upon
them. There was a grinding of brakes. The great car
jerked to a standstill a few inches from them. And long
before Jack and Joe had time to realize what had happened


Im/w 1 I
the two men sitting in front had leaped down. They heard
a sharp command.
‘ Hands up ! Hands up ! Quick, now ! ’
Joe’s hands went up automatically. Jack hesitated, and
instantly a bullet whined over his head and spat into the
cliff-face above him. Jack’s hands went up without his
knowing that he had raised them.
The door of the car opened a little way. A dark man
leaned out.
‘Do not hurt them. Just see that they have no weapon,’
he commanded.
The search did not take long, but it seemed to Jack that
iron fingers had probed every rib in his body.
‘ All right,’ said the chauffeur.
‘ Right here,’ said the other man who was searching Joe.
‘ Now,’ said the dark man, ‘ remember you are covered
until we are out of sight.’


He slammed the door of the car. The chauffeur slipped
back into his seat. The other man jumped on to the foot-
board and covered Jack and Joe with his revolver while the
car slipped round the bend and away down the mountain.
Jack and Joe leaped up, and began to run after the car.
But after a moment, Jack stopped.
‘ This is no use, Joe. What’ll we do ? ’
But Joe was dazed and stricken. All he could say was :
‘ They must have done summat to them, or they’d have
called out ! ’
Jack had to do all the thinking.
‘ Sutcliff’s Leap’s no use, in the dark ! ’ he said. ‘ Be-
sides, that car will have got past long before I could get
there ! Besides, what could Ido ? Come on, Joe, we must
run home ! A horse and Happy Valley Post Office is all
we can do ! ’
That run home, by the fitful moonlight, up the steep
mountain road was a never-to-be-forgotten agony. Jack was
in pretty good training, but before the moonlight glinted upon
the homestead roof his breath was coming in agonized gasps.
Joe was left far behind.
Jack reached the house at last and ran round first to the
girls’ veranda. The moonlight fell upon the three little
white beds. They were all occupied. The three girls slept
peacefully. Sissie was smiling in her sleep. She was safe
then ! Thank Heaven for that ! Poor old Joe ! He’d go
crazy with delight ! So they had only taken George ?
Jack ran round to the back and stopped astonished. For
George and Jim were in their beds. George raised his head
at Jack’s running footsteps.
‘Oh Boy !’ he said, ‘ come off the night prowl ! I tell
you it’s a poor guy’s game ! ’
He rolled over and hitched up the bed-clothes and
tumbled off to sleep once more.


For a moment, Jack leaned against a veranda post. A
queer desire seized him to shout with laughter, like the
kookaburras, who were heralding the dawn in the distant
trees. And yet, he felt ill. He realized that he must be
very tired.
But down the mountain he went again, to meet Joe. He
found him sitting on a rock by the wayside, his head in his
hands.
‘ It’s all right, Joe !’ he shouted. c Those folk only came
to scout around. They haven’t touched Sissie and George.’
‘ What’s that you’re telling me ? ’ exclaimed Joe.
Jack told him again, and Joe threw his hat into the
air.
‘ Stone the crows ! Don’t it show a man never ought
to lose heart! There was me moping around like a sick
canary and there was Sissie asleep in her bed all the time ! ’
They walked home together, Joe excited and chattering
and Jack silent and terribly tired. But weariness slipped
from him when he found Ridgeways awake and he had his
great news to tell ! Billie, George and Jim were sick with
envy ! Mr. Barry was at first incredulous. Then he ex-
claimed :
‘ Upon my word ! It’s time to take this matter seriously ! ’
‘ And this is the second time they have come ! ’ murmured
Mrs. Barry.
‘ Yes. They must be making very careful plans. Well,
there is only one road to Ridgeways and I think they will
have difficulty in getting up it again.’
‘ Are you going to ’phone the police, father ? ’ asked
Peggie.
‘Jack can take a letter to the Happy Valley Post Office
asking them to ’phone Bathurst to send out some men at
once. In the meantime, I will not leave the place. I hope
to goodness I fall on those fellows ! ’


‘ But John ! * cried Mrs. Barry, * they are ruthless !
You’ll get shot ! ’
‘ If so, so will some one else ! ’ said father.
The boys exchanged delighted grins. So there was to
be war !
Jan gave a little squeal of excitement.
‘ Oh, where’s Mademoiselle ! I must tell her ! ’ she
exclaimed.
Mademoiselle, of course, had not appeared yet. Mrs.
Barry made a little gesture of impatience. Nothing tried her
more than Mademoiselle’s late morning habits. She would
write or read half the night, using up all the kerosene that
cost such a lot of money ! And then she would sleep half the
morning !
Now Jan flew off to her room and thumped on the
door.
‘ Mademoiselle ! Mademoiselle ! Such news ! ’ she
cried.
There was no answer, so she opened the door and peeped
in. Then she came flying back, white-faced.
‘ Father ! Some one has kidnapped Mademoiselle ! *
Yes ! It was a fact! Mademoiselle was gone. Her bed
had not been slept in. Her toilet things were gone. And
some of her clothes, and one small suit-case. On the table
lay a letter addressed to Mrs. Barry,
Mrs, Barry opened it. And then said :
‘ Well, this seems to be to all of us, so I’ll read it aloud.’
It ran :
‘ My dear, dear Friends at Ridgeways,—
‘ Alas ! You will now be saying, “ This naughty
Mademoiselle ! ” Ah, but hark ! I am so happy ! And


because I am happy, I think you will rejoice with me !
Ever since I come to Ridgeways I weep, for I am in love,
and it is forbidden that I marry my loved. And then, last
mail, I receive a letter ! Ah ! What a letter ! I run and
throw my arms around Mrs. Barry and she says, “Ah!
But my cakes burn ! ” And Ido the same to Peggie, and she
says, “Ah ! Be careful, my pockets are full of the eggs.” And
Jan ! My little Jan says, “Ah ! Darling Mademoiselle,
what is it ? You have the good news ? ” Yes ! It is true !
But I dare not tell ! For my letter says that my Henri has
come to Australia to run away with me !
But,” he says, “ be very very careful, for Mother has
also come ! ”
‘My Friends, the father of my Henri is French. And by
French law, the mother and father can forbid the marriage.
So Henri plans to marry quickly, before Madame his mother
discover why she has come to Australia. For she thinks it is
pleasure trip she is upon. She is American, and Globe-
trotter. And she is not aware I am in Australia.
‘So now, my Henri makes his plans. First he sends his
chauffeur to be sure of the way And then he writes to me
to be among the pine trees, half-way down the road, at
three o’clock to-night.
‘ But he is full of fears ! Madame his mother is astute.
She can read the mind of Henri ! Suppose, after he has
departed from Sydney she discovers, and telegraphs to Mr.
Barry to cause us to be stopped ?
‘Ah ! But he does not know my good friends at Ridge-
ways ! He will bring armed men, so that nothing shall
stop us, he says ! But lam certain that this good Monsieur
Barry who sees how I suffer will not interpose himself!
‘ And so, I bid my dear friends farewell. I embrace
lovingly this good Mrs. Barry and Peggie. A great hug to
my darling Sissie, and so great a kiss to my beloved Jan.


And George ? “ Oh, have Mercy !” he will say, “I am
too big ! ”
‘ It is with tears I bid you all adieu !
‘ Renee Le Blanc.’
A breathless silence followed the reading of this letter.
Then Jan rushed and threw her arms round her father.
‘ Oh, father ! father ! Isn’t it lovely ! ’ she cried, and
he said :
‘Yes. I think it is ! ’
Mrs. Barry said :
‘ Poor child. I hope she will be happy
And Peggie said :
‘Oh ! Of course she will ! Why shouldn’t she be ? ’
Jim said ;
‘ Now we shall have nothing pretty to look at ! ’
‘ There’s me ? ’ suggested Sissie.
Every one laughed, and Sissie looked mystified.
‘ That’s what I didn’t understand about the man in the
back of the car ! ’ exclaimed Jack. ‘ His accent ! He spoke
American English, with a French accent ! ’
‘ Holy Moses ! ’ muttered George.
‘ Darling Mademoiselle gone ! ’ murmured Jan. ‘ Life
will get dull ! And no one really comes to kidnap George ! ’
‘ Now isn’t that a pity ! ’ grinned George.


CHAPTER XX
LIFE IS NOT DULL
RIDGEWAYS had now reached its most unpleasant
time of year. Christmas, and the two succeeding
months.
I am sorry to have to confess that Christmas is unpleasant
in the Bush. But the thermometer stands at about ioi ;
there are innumerable flies ; dust-storms, and probably bush
fires all round. And of course, no one will forgo the tradi-
tional turkey and plum pudding !
The summer had been exceptionally dry ; and the
longed-for thunder-storms that come round about Christmas
had failed. There was hardly any water left in the dams ;
and only a drain in the house tanks. Ridgeways was
reduced to strictly rationed water.
And the drought brought its inevitable corollary : bush
fires.
No one knows how bush fires start. But no matter how
careful every one is, they rage in the Bush every summer.
And in a dry summer, they are horrible. A paddock of
dry grass catches, perhaps ; the fire roars across it with a
crackle ; reaches the mountain and goes streaking up. It
might be imagined that when it reached the top of the
mountain it would stop. But burning logs roll down, and
light up fresh timber and so it goes on and on. Now, in
February, Ridgeways sweltered under a burning sun, with
the mountains all around alight. If any wind blew, from


no matter what quarter it came, it brought smoke and
scorching hot air from the fires.
‘ Uncle John, will this burn up all your sheep ? ’ asked
George.
‘ No. The grass is not rough enough to catch in the
cleared paddocks ; and in the mountain paddocks, where
there is dead timber and rough grass, there are plenty of
dry gullies where the sheep will find shelter. We have
never lost sheep here in a bush fire.’
‘ They do in the wheat-growing districts though,’ said
Jack. ‘ And in any district where the sheep can’t get
shelter.’
‘ Last year we had to go and help save the crop at Happy
Valley Station,’ said Jim.
‘ May do again this year,’ said Mr. Barry ; ‘ one year they
lost crop, stock, everything. Even the homestead.’
This conversation took place at breakfast. And immedi-
ately after all the children hurried off round the boundaries.
The boundaries had to be walked daily now that the moun-
tains were alight; for burning trees constandy fell across
the fences and smashed them. And that meant that hundreds
of rabbits got in unless they were quickly mended. And
boundary walking was a hot, and rather dangerous task
just now, too. One had to pass through belt after belt of
burning timber. And one’s water-bag always got used up
long before the day was over ! The children always arrived
home hot and tired and terribly thirsty.
On this particular day, news awaited them when they
reached home.
‘Jack, you are in charge of the Station,’ said Mrs.
Barry. ‘ One of the Hurst boys come riding from Happy
Valley Station. They want help to get off their crop.
And father and Joe and Billie have gone. Father expects
to be away at least a week.’


‘ Wish I could have gone too ! * said Jack.
Happy Valley Station had a large area under wheat.
And Jack longed to drive the big eight-horse combine.
‘ Things are pretty lively here,’ said George, to whom
bush fires were new.
Things were destined to get still more lively.
The children had divided themselves into three groups ;
and each had taken a third of the boundary. Peggie, Sissie
and Gerry formed one party ; then Jack and Jim, and
George and Jan. They all were high up among the moun-
tains part of the time ; and they all, from time to time,
glimpsed the Ridgeways Road, winding through the valley
and up to Ridgeways. And on the day after Mr. Barry had
gone, they all saw the same thing. Something moving on
the Ridgeways road.
Moreover, it was something so very queer. Apparently
a very small mob of sheep ; not more than a dozen ; in
the charge of two drovers.
It was not until sunset that the children managed to
get together. Then the three elder boys and Jan met ; and
Peggie and the children cut across through Pine Tree Grove
from the opposite side. By this time, the drovers had
reached Pine Tree Grove, and were resting in the shade,
and proposing to camp there for the night. They asked
Peggie if there were any water handy.
‘ So,’ said Peggie, ‘ I showed them Fox Tree Dam, which
isn’t so far from there, and asked them where they were
going with the sheep ? And they said they were taking
them to Mr. Barry at Ridgeways.’
‘ A likely story ! ’ scoffed Jack. ‘ Father isn’t expecting
any sheep. I know that ! And he would have told us if
he were. And besides, who ever heard of any one buying
a mob of a dozen sheep ! ’
* And that isn’t all,’ went on Peggie, evidently boiling
13


with excitement. ‘He asked me whether there was an
American boy here, named Pollock ! 5
‘ What did you say ? ’ shouted every one.
* Well, I said “ Yes ”. I didn’t know what else to say !
I couldn’t say “ No ”, could I ? ’
‘ Look here ! 5 exclaimed Jim, £ I suppose it was one of
the Hurst boys that came over ? ’
‘ Well, father wouldn’t know anyway ! ’ said Jan. ‘We
hav’n’t seen the Hursts.’
Then she explained to George.
‘ They’re new people. The last people, the Bartons,
sold up a few months ago.’
‘ Since I came ? ’ asked George.
‘ Oh yes, some time after you came.’
‘ Well, it might have been one of the Hursts that
came over. But these guys may be on the job. It seems
to me I heard Billie say they knew nothing about farming. 5
‘He heard that from Ben Barton. The Bartons were cousins
of Ben’s. So I suppose he was interested in the new people,’
*Oh yes ! I remember now,’ said Jan. ‘ Ben said the
new people were “ townies ” and had never been on a farm
in their lives ! ’
‘lt looks pretty obvious, doesn’t it ? ’ asked Jack. ‘ And
father’ll get over there, and find things in a hopeless mess,
and stay and put it right.’
‘ln the meantime, George is delivered to the wolves ! ’
exclaimed Jan.
‘ Wolves in the shape of two poor guys trying to pass
themselves off as drovers with half a dozen sheep ! Talk of
a wolf in sheep’s clothing ! ’ chuckled George.
‘ But, I say ! It isn’t a joke ! ’ cried Peggie, her cheeks
growing white. ‘ These men are sure to be armed.’
‘So are we,’ said George. ‘ I’ve got my revolver and
Jack can take Uncle John’s gun. Let’s go home and get


them, Jack, and then go down and ask these guys what they
want with George Pollock ! ’
‘Oh no ! No ! 5 cried Peggie, who foresaw all sorts of
frightful possibilities. ‘ You would get hurt ! And they
would be sure to get George ! 5
‘ Get your grandmother ! Don’t be a goose ! Why *
The discussion was about to become acrimonious when
Jan jumped up and began to dance around and shake her
hands as she always did when she was excited.
‘Oh ! I know ! I know! I’ve got an idea ! ’ she cried.
The boys knew there would be nothing grandmotherly
about Jan’s idea. So they stopped quarrelling with Peggie
to listen.
‘ The old duffing ground, through the gap ! ’ she cried.
‘ What on earth has that got to do with it ? * asked Jack.
‘ What’s a duffing ground, anyway ? ’ asked George.
Jan sighed, and reconciled herself to a long explanation.
‘ People who steal sheep are called “ duffers And
they have hidden yards to put the sheep into, and these are
called “ duffing grounds ”. And there’s an old “ duffing
ground ” in these mountains. It’s a little grass-covered
plateau surrounded by mountains, and you can only get to it
through one small gap. The old sheep lifters used to drive
their stolen sheep in there and close the gap. Then when
they had altered the brands, they would take them on to
the stock road.’
‘ Well, what’s the idea ? Steal the sheep ? What’s the
good of that ? These drovers won’t be interested in the
sheep ! ’ every one chorused.
‘ But they are supposed to deliver the sheep. And they
want an excuse to get up to the house and scout around
and find out which boy is George Pollock. Because it would
be a sell for them if they took the wrong boy ! 5
‘ It would be more of a sell for the boy, I’d say ! ’ said


Jim, making a significant movement of his hands, reminiscent
of wringing a chicken’s neck.
‘ Oh, don’t be horrible, Jim ! ’ exclaimed Jan. ‘ Let me
get on ! What I think is, if the sheep went up the mountain
and through the gap, the men would follow, to get them
back again ! ’
‘ Ha ! ’ cried George, ‘ now I see it ! And once through,
they don’t get back ! I stand in the gap and hold it !
Horatio’s a pup to Pollock Junior ! ’
‘ No, we close the gap with a rock that’s there for the
purpose,’ said Jack. ‘ Sorry, you can’t be the little hero,
George. They didn’t have six shooters in Horatio’s day,
though ! It seems a sound idea, Jan. The only trouble
is how do we get the sheep through the gap ? They’ve got
a couple of dogs that seem to know their business, so far as
I can judge.’
‘ Garry,’ said Jan.
*Oh yes ! Garry ! ’ chorused everybody.
Garry, a great yellow collie, and the finest of all the
sheep-dogs, was with them. He pricked up his ears and
slowly flopped his tail as his name was spoken.
The children began to laugh. Garry could take sheep
from any other dog ; and take them anywhere. One or
two of the Ridgeways sheep-dogs were bundlers. Don, and
Garth, notably. And when these dogs were mishandling
their job, Garry was always sent to take their sheep away
from them and carry on. He simply used to dash up ; bang
the other dog out of the way ; tear round the sheep and
herd them off in the required direction.
‘ Well, look ! We’ve only just got time to put this
through before dark ! ’ exclaimed Jack, ‘ Better get them
boxed to-night, and keep them out of mischief. We must
show Garry where to yard, first.’
It happened that they were on the very mountain where


the duffing yard was situated, and that that particular
stretch was not on fire. They all went running and scram-
bling up ; and presently, they came to what looked like
sheer cliff rising up to an immense height. But, almost
hidden behind bushes was a long irregular crack in the
cliff-face ; just room for a sheep or a man to get through.
‘ There, Garry. Fetch them there ! Good dog ! * said
Jack, pointing.
‘ F etch them there,’ was ABC to Garry, He began to jump
around, his ears pricked, looking for the sheep he was to yard.
‘ Now, Peg,’ said Jack, ‘ you take Garry down. Point
to the sheep, and inquire if the men found the water all
right. When Garry goes off with the sheep, you can’t control
the beast at all, see ? ’
‘ What about their dogs ? ’ asked George.
‘ Kelpies,’ said Peggie over her shoulder as she ran off.
(A kelpie is an Australian sheep-dog. He is small ; a
little bigger than a fox-terrier; an excellent dog with sheep, but
no fighter. And, as the Barrys would say, nothing like a collie !)
Peggie went running, sliding, scrambling down the
mountain ; Garry leaping beside her; trembling with
excitement as he always did when he knew there was sheep
work to be done. Presently, they got down towards the road
and sighted the two drovers with their little mob of sheep
coming back from water. Directly Garry saw the sheep his
ears went back ; he walked, wolf fashion, crouching low ; and
he kept licking his lips. His eyes were all the time on Peggie.
Peggie did not think it necessary to parley with the men.
She gave the tiny movement of the hand that was signal
enough for Garry, and he shot forward like a yellow streak
of lightning. Before drovers or drovers’ dogs knew what
was happening Garry whipped round the sheep and had
them galloping up the mountain. Peggie faded into the
background. The drovers yelled and shouted. They might


go BUSH RAGAMUFFINS
as well have talked to the wind. Garry was profoundly
happy ! Usually he was not allowed to gallop sheep.
People kept telling him to £ take them steady ’ and ‘ let
them feed along ’. But now, no one checked him and he
sensed the need of haste. So he hurried. Those sheep went
up the mountain faster than they had ever moved in their
lives. They reached the cliff-face at full gallop ; stopped
when there seemed to be no way through. But Death
snapped at them first on one side and then on the other
and they found the gap !
In the meantime, the two drovers were hurrying up the
mountain, trying, in the fading light, to track their sheep
for they had long vanished from sight. Presently they met
a black-haired girl strolling down.
‘ Sheep ? ’ she said. ‘Oh yes. They went through this
gap. I’ll show you.’


She obligingly turned, and led the men up the mountain
to the gap. When they came to it, the men stared at it
amazed.
* Seems funny they should go through there ! ’ said one.
‘ It’s such a little passage.’
‘l’m afraid one of our dogs was chasing them,’ said the
girl. ‘ It’s the only way they could get away, you see.
We’ve got him held now.’
The two men dived through the gap, their dogs jumping
through with them.
Instantly three boys and another girl emerged from
behind some rocks and hurled themselves upon a big rock
that was so poised that it fell forward and filled the gap. It
could only be moved out again with a crowbar.
‘ Good work ! ’ said Jack.
Garry stood back with his head on one side, gently
wagging his tail.
* * * * *
The drovers collected up their sheep. Then their dogs
tried to put them through the gap. But the leading sheep
refused to go through.
‘ What’s the matter ? ’ asked one drover of the other.
‘ Do you suppose that dog’s holding the gap ? ’
‘ Shouldn’t wonder,’ said the other. ‘ He’d hold any-
thing, he would ! A dog that’ud take a mob of sheep away
from a man. You go through first, Ted.’
‘ No, you go first. I’ve got my best trousers on.’
‘ Well, I’ve got my best leg on ! ’
Finally, Ted peered into the gap.
‘ Why, it’s all dark ! It’s got shut up ! ’ he said.
They investigated.
‘ What do you know about that ? ’ asked Ted.
‘ Well, I don’t know. Unless it’s a land-slide. Plenty
of land-slides on these mountains.’


‘ Happened mighty sudden.’
‘ Well, they do happen sudden, too.’
* * * *
The two drovers went round and round the duffing
ground, looking for another gap. Presently, they got back
to where they started.
‘ Why ! ’ gasped Ted, ‘ if nobody finds us, we’ll die here !
There’s no way out ! ’
‘ That little girl will say, surely ? ’
* She might not! You never know. She might not
think any more about it ! ’
‘ If we make a good big fire, some one’ll see the smoke ! ’
‘ But there’s smoke all over the mountains ! ’
They collected wood and made a fire, nevertheless.
The first thing an Australian bush-man does, if he is lost or
dismayed, is to light a fire. Besides, even though the days
were so hot, the nights were cold. Ted and his mate Clive
sat beside the crackling sticks, reviewing the situation. They
had twelve sheep ; and there was a drip of water under one
of the rocks in the cliff-face ; so they would last out a fairly
long time !
Then they heard a coo-ee, and they both jumped up
and ran to the gap.
There was a small space left above the rock that blocked
the gap ; and through this was pushed a bundle. It was
Ted and Clive’s swag. Attached to it was a note. A
scrawled message on the back of an old envelope, written
apparently with a piece of charcoal. It ran :
‘ You will have to stay there till father returns. We will
push through food every day.’
Ted turned the envelope over. It came from England,
and was addressed to George Pollock.
‘ ’Ere ! Clive! This is the boy !’ he said, pointing to
the name.


CHAPTER XXI
WHO COMES NOW ?
THE children ran home rather late for tea and found
Mrs. Barry somewhat anxious. But they thought it
best not to worry her about the strange drovers, so
they said nothing.
But now, feeding the drovers and their dogs was really
rather a problem. The Barry children consumed six pounds
of flour every day, and Mrs. Barry demurred when Peggie
asked for more.
‘ But Peggie ! You want another two pounds of flour
and a dozen more chops ? My dear ! You must be giving
your food to the dogs ? 5
‘ No, Mummie ! Really. It’s all for people.’
Yes, but I hav n’t the meat. You forget the men are
away and we can’t kill ! I’ll give you more flour if you’ll
be sure not to waste it, but you must make do with rather
less meat than usual.’
doggie went to break the news to the others who were
waiting at the wood-heap.
‘ 1 suppose we’ll have to give them our meat ? ’ she asked.
t f ear • exclaimed three boys almost in unison.
{ I m not that fond of these guys ! ’ said George.
‘ The a £ e of chivalry is indeed past ! ’ said Jan. ‘ Wasn’t
it Saladin who gave his water to a dying enemy ? ’
‘ The Black Prince,’ said Jack.
‘ Napoleon,’ said Jim.


‘ Well, there’s nothing like that about Pollock Junior ! ’
said George. ‘ Those guys can make themselves some nice
damper, and be thankful ! ’
And so, about an hour later, when Ted and Clive jumped
up in response to a coo-ee, they found a bag of flour being
pushed through the gap. Attached was a note from Peggie.
It ran : * Sorry we have no meat. Father is away so we
can’t kill. Perhaps you would like to kill one of your
sheep ? ’
‘ Here ! Look at this, Clive ! Kill one of our sheep,
she says ! ’ exclaimed Ted.
Clive scratched his head.
*My word ! ’ he said, ‘ that would be an expensive
meal ? ’ „
‘ There’s still a bit of bacon in my swag,’ said Ted.
But presently there was another coo-ee. A shrill, piping
affair, and a small brown-paper parcel came through the
hole. It contained home-made toffee. And on a sheet of
paper was written in large round hand-writing :
‘We send you our tofee, like the Black Prince.’
‘ Black Prince ? ’ asked Ted.
‘ Must be something about a nigger Prince they’ve seen
on the films,’ said Clive. ‘ Give us a bit.’
‘ It’s signed “ Gerry and Sissie said Ted. ‘ Must be
little ’uns.’
Ted and Clive made breakfast and went to sleep ; and
the long hot day wore through. The children went round
the boundaries ; all except Gerry and Sissie who had
stayed at home on some mysterious business of their own.
But that evening a tremendous surprise awaited the
Bush Ragamuffins. As they sat down to tea, Mr. Barry
came riding up. Mrs. Barry ran out to meet him.
‘ Back already ? ’ she cried. ‘Oh ! This is splendid ! ’
‘ Yes, they were quite unnecessarily scared. The fire


WHO COMES NOW?
won’t touch them,’ said Mr. Barry. ‘ But they are town
folk. Don’t know anything.’
The children exchanged glances. Should they tell father
now why he had been summoned ‘ quite unnecessarily ’ ?
But no. They would wait until they got Mr. Barry to him-
self. For they would also have to explain why they had not
told Mrs. Barry
And father had brought home the mail-bag. Moreover,
it was the Christmas Mail !
The Christmas mail always arrived at Ridgeways five or
six weeks after Christmas, for it was very very few people who
remembered to post to Australia six weeks beforehand.
Now, all sorts of excitement was tumbled out of the bag on
to the floor.
For one thing, there was a lovely letter from Mademoiselle.
Only, she was no longer Mademoiselle, but La Contesse
de la Croix. And she was so happy ! Madame La Duchesse
had reconciled herself! Now they were all back in beloved
Paris. Mademoiselle —I beg her pardon—Madame La Con-
tesse, sent a wonderful book of pictures. It was the Christmas
number of Ulllustration, and Jan and Jim went crazy with
delight over the beautiful plates within. Also some little
handkerchiefs that were so exquisitely embroidered that
they must have taken the Little Sisters of St. Francis years
and years to work ! Aunt Margaret sent beautifully illus-
trated books. And from Mr. Pennythorp came a huge
Compendium of games and a doll for each girl. Then
George pounced on a letter from America addressed to him.
‘ Hello ! ’ he said, ‘ this is from Pollock Senior ! Pop
don’t often write. Too hot on the dollar hunt.’
‘ George ! ’ exclaimed Mrs. Barry.
‘ Sorry, Ma’am ! I ought to say my father is usually
too much occupied with business to write to his unworthy
son.’


He flashed a smile at Mrs. Barry. They were beginning
to understand each other.
He twitched the envelope open. It was evidently a
short letter on half a sheet of notepaper. George glanced
through it, and consternation spread over his face.
‘ Gee !’ he exclaimed. ‘Oh ! Gee ! ’ Then he began
to laugh.
‘ What’s the matter ? ’ asked every one.
‘ Here’s what Pop says,’ he said.
‘ I guess it is about time you were taking some interest
in this sheep-raising business; so have instructed Dalgety s
to send you a dozen pedigree sheep. Two rams and ten
ewes. Have consigned them to you care of your Uncle.
Kindly tell him that I have instructed Dalgety to pay £lOO
each for the cattle ; and ask him to pass them before he
accepts them. Let me know, in due course, how you get on
with them.’
The Barry children gasped. And then they all began
to giggle.
‘ But I don’t see any joke,’ said Mr. Barry.
He picked up another letter.
‘ Here’s a letter from Dalgety’s,’ he said. ‘ es, about
the sheep. They say they should have arrived yesterday ;
and want a telegram to inform them of their arrival.’
He looked at Mrs. Barry.
‘ They hav’n’t come,’ she said.
‘ Well, I hope they’re not lost ! ’ exclaimed Mr. Barry.
‘ I don’t want twelve hundred pounds’ worth of sheep lost
in the mountains with bush fires all round.’
* Oh —they’re quite safe, father,’ said Jan. ‘ Er —that’s
the joke.’
‘ Holy Moses ! ’ whispered George to Jack. ‘ Uncle John
ought to have seen the pace Garry took that twelve hundred
pounds’ worth of sheep up the mountain ! ’


‘ But, what is the joke ? ’ demanded Mr. Barry.
The joke was rather laboriously explained, and as the
children anticipated, Mr. Barry did not see it. He was too
much of a sheep-man to be able to joke about pedigree
stock !
c Good Heavens, Jack ! Tm ashamed of you ! Don’t
you know a pedigree ram when you see it ? 5 he cried.
‘ Well, you see, father —I didn’t see much of them.
They went by rather fast.’
‘ I hope to goodness Garry took them steady ! ’ exclaimed
Mr. Barry. ‘lf those sheep were hustled this weather it’ll
bring the yoke down into the wool ’
Gerry created a diversion.
‘ Wow ! Wow !’ he howled. ‘ Gave them my toffee ! ’
No one understood.
‘ What ? Gave who your toffee ? What for ? ’ asked
everybody.
Sissie explained, ruefully.
* We gave those horrid men our toffee because we thought
they were enemies ! And now they’re not ! ’ and her lips
began to droop at the corners.
A shout of laughter saved the situation. Then Mr.
Barry, Joe and Billie went up the mountain armed with
crowbars to release the men. But none of the children were
interested in drovers or sheep !
* * * * *
An hour later Mr. Barry, Joe and Billie and two rather
mystified drovers came down the mountain. Garry brought
the sheep down. He treated them lovingly and reverently
as if he knew their value to the last halfpenny. If any sheep
tried to hurry, Garry hastened round the lead, and stopped
it. They came down like a funeral procession, with Garry
looking as solemn as an undertaker. He wore the bored
and responsible expression of the Collie-on-the-job. ‘No


hurry ! No hurry !’ he seemed to say. ‘ Yes, stop to pick
a bit, by all means. A little further to the right, if you please ;
but oh ! don’t hurry ! *
It was dark before they reached the foot-hills of the
mountain and Mr. Barry stopped and looked around.
‘ I always think that the burning mountains are a
wonderful sight at night ! ’ he said. ‘ One would say that
those mountains were lit up with thousands and thousands
of Chinese lanterns. As if we held carnival ! ’
‘ Those fires’ll travel to-night,’ said one of the drovers.
‘ There’s a wind getting up behind the mountain.’
Mr. Barry listened.
‘ Is that wind ? ’ he asked.
‘ What else can it be ? ’ asked Ted.
‘ It’s more like a drone. An aeroplane ’ said Mr.
Barry. ‘ But we’re right off any of the mail routes ’
But an aeroplane it was. A moment later a big ’plane
roared over the mountain-top, lit up by the lurid light
thrown by the fires. It travelled across the Ridgeways
valley ; then turned, and droned back again.
c Looks like they’ve lost their way,’ said Ted.
‘ Perhaps they want petrol ; and we have none ! ’ said
Mr. Barry.
Joe plucked at Mr. Barry’s sleeve.
‘ Think there’s anything wrong, sir ? ’ he whispered.
‘ Why ? ’
‘ Well, I’ve lived in the States, sir. And these gangsters
stop at nothing. They’ll send out a car armed with a
machine gun to get what they want if there’s enough money
in it. And that’s a big ’plane. Twin engines ; and a big
saloon ; might contain a dozen men.’
‘ Well, if so, we’re helpless, Joe ! We’ve a mile to go.
And look ! ’
He pointed. The ’plane was spiralling down. And all


the Ridgeways children were racing to the landing-paddock.
As the ’plane taxied to a standstill the children were all
round it.
Mr. Barry and Joe and Billie left Garry and the drovers
in charge of the sheep and ran. But when they reached
the ’plane they heard shrieks of excitement and delight.
And the next moment a very beautiful woman, very like
Jan, threw herself into Mr. Barry’s arms.
‘ Meg ! Goodness gracious ! What next ! ’ cried Mr.
Barry.
‘ Oh, John ! Dear John ! It’s wonderful to see you !
And my bairns ! You know, I didn’t know them ! ’
‘ I should think not indeed ! They’re Bush Ragamuffins
now ! ’
‘ But they’re so big, and strong and well ! And Sissie’s
quite pretty and George so handsome ! ’
‘Oh ! Come off it, mother ! ’ groaned George.
Mr. Barry mopped his forehead.
‘ I’ve just run a mile at top speed !’ he said. ‘Joe had
a horrible idea that you might be kidnappers ! ’
Even in the semi-dark Mrs. Pollock could be seen to
blush. She glanced at the two pilots, Mr. Carlton and
Captain Darnley. They were both laughing.
‘ Oh, John ! You will think me such a goose ! Every-
body does, now ! But that story was all a make-up ! I’ve
given you all this trouble and anxiety for nothing ! That
horrible woman just did it to get money out of me. Of
course, I paid her for any information ’
‘ Bless my soul ! Some people are pretty heartless,’ said
Mr. Barry.
He drew his sister’s arm through his, and they went up
to the house.
‘ The only thing is, Mummie,’ said George, running
alongside, ‘ you hav’n’t come to take me away, have you ? ’


‘ Why, George ! ’ cried Mrs. Pollock, ‘ don’t you want
to be with me ? ’
‘ Oh, sure. But I want you to be here. You could be
here all’ those months in the year that you’re not in New
York with Pop.’
c Why not, Meg ? We could build you a dear little
bungalow ’ murmured Mr. Barry.
‘ And times we went home, all the Barrys could come with
us,’ cried Sissie.
‘ We couldn’t all get away at once,’ murmured Peggie,
‘ because of the Station.’
‘ We could take turns ! ’ cried Jan.
* * * * *
Much later, long after midnight, when chattering excited
Ridgeways had slipped into silence and sleep, Mr. and Mrs.
Barry stood together on the veranda looking towards the
mountains.
‘ We’ll build Meg’s bungalow over there, on that little
knoll, among the pines,’ said Mr. Barry, pointing.
‘ It will be lovely to have her ! ’ murmured Mrs. Barry.
She slipped her hand into her husband’s.
‘ Oh, John ! It will be splendid for the children to go
home ! But, will they want to come back, do you think ? ’
Mr. Barry gazed away at the burning mountains.
‘ Jack and Peg are Bush,’ he said. ‘ They will come
back. Gerry —he’s too young to tell. As for Jim, when
he gets among the picture galleries of Europe, he will never
leave them. And little Jan ’
He paused, and glanced smiling at the dark head on
the pillow.
‘ I rather fancy Jan will do what George does,’ he said.
* They will both come back —sometimes.’
(v)f,p,C f\l
M S&4


r
*




ttllllWlililllHi* 11,111,111
3 1508 01559457 0


