

4 CURRAWONC CHILDREN'S 800


'
■
*


BUSH PARTY
Mother Goose Island
by
J. W. HEMING
ILLUSTRATED BY DES CONNOR
THE CURRAWONG PUBLISHING CO.
32 JAMIESON STREET,
SIDNEY.


To My Son
RICHARD
Who first heard the Story as a Bedtime
Serial, his slumbers ending each Episode.
Read Also
THE PIRATE FAIRIES
J. W. Heming
OSCAR AND OLGA
Paul Buddee
RUPERT AND RITA
Paul Buddee
WHITESPOT
Robert Record
QUEER ANIMALS
QUEER BIRDS
Registered at the 0.P.0., Sydney for
transmission by post as a booh.
Wholly set np and printed In Aastralla
by F. H. BOOTH & SON PTY. LTD.
81 BURTON STREET, SYDNEY.


BUSH PARTI]
A Fainj Stonj
J. W. HEMING
CHAPTER ONE THE INVITATION
RICHARD was four.
Four is a nice age to be. You do much thinking
when you are four —and older people forget to think
sometimes. The older you grow the less you think. The
adults forget to remember when they were four and
what they thought about and did; they forget to
remember a lot of things.
Richard used to play in an empty garage. It was a
nice, big open space and he could scatter his toys about
and not mind if they were untidy. Grown-ups were
fussy about such trifling things.
Sometimes when he was tired of playing he would
sit on a cushion which Mummy had provided to keep
him from sitting on the cold concrete, although there


were also mats. He would sit on that cushion in the
comer and look drowsily at his toys and think very
deeply. He would wonder about many things—about
grown-ups and buses and toys and his playmates and his
brother and mother and father.
He lived in the city and he thought that he must have
seen everything; he never thought about the great bush-
lands spreading out from Sydney and so full of inter-
esting things for those who have eyes to sec.
One day he was sitting in the corner and watching
the dust particles dancing in a beam of sunlight shining
through the window. These always caused him to
wonder; to wonder what they were and why they
danced only in the sunlight and were nowhere else.
They were in other places, of course, but he could not
see them unless the strong light of the sun shone upon
them.
Lazily his eyes rested on the tiny dust atoms and he
was suddenly surprised to see that the particles had
stopped moving willy-nilly and were massing together
and taking form. He watched closely and saw the
dust slowly form into the shape of a little black man.
Richard was not afraid. His parents had never tried
to frighten him by telling him they would give him to
a black man or a policeman, who are usually very kind
persons. They had never tried to frighten him at all,
so he knew no fear when the little black man stepped
out of the ray of sunlight and came towards him.
The little black man, who was one of the “little
people” of which you may have heard in the legends
of the Australian blacks, was named Wingaree. He
had a long white beard and kind eyes and he smiled
most of the time. He was a great chief, but Richard
did not know that.


t ..
> i .
v
; 7>: : ; «*•:.-
t . • ■*..!. 4. V. • . * . • *,♦'
*. V-'-'
i * • ••
v v v*- : *.V ' .*•>•.•••
. v* ••: • : .* »>- rv.v;.- S **/y K
“Hello, 1 ' said Richard.
“Hello,” said Wingaree. “Are you coming to my
party?”
Richard thought for a moment. Evidently he was
expected to go and he liked parties.
“Yes,” he said.
“It is in the bush,” said Wingaree.
tw The bush?” said Richard. “I have never been to
the bush.”
t : '..ye-**-■
Dmj/ slowly formed into the shape of a little
black man.


Wingaree gasped and almost staggered.
“Never —been —to —the —BUSH?” he stammered.
“My, my!”
“What is it and how do I get there?” asked Richard.
“I’ll have to take you,” said Wingaree in his soft
voice. “I have a lot of calls to make but I’ll have to
take you —to the edge at any rate. You really must not
go another day without seeing the bush. Come along.
We must hurry.”
He held out his hand and Richard took it. They
stepped into the ray of sunlight. It was very strong
light and Richard shut his eyes. He felt a sensation
like flying through the air, so he opened his eyes again.
He was no longer in the garage. He was standing
amongst tall, lovely blue gum trees, there was green
grass beneath his feet, and above the trees the bluest
of blue skies. Wingaree released his hand.
“Now you can find your way yourself,” he said.
“Any of the bush creatures will show you the way—
they will all be there. Now I must fly—l’ll see you
later.”
When Richard looked round for him he had dis'
appeared off somewhere giving out invitations.
Richard felt rather deserted. He just stood there and
gazed first at the tall blue gums, then at the beautiful
red waratahs, the gymea or great lilies which seemed
to be splashed with blood, the golden wattle, the
boronia. There were wild flowers everywhere, Richard
liked to see them and he did not think it strange that
all were in bloom, though in an ordinary place some
bloom when others do not. But this was a fairy place;
there were even white and blue and purple waratahs.
Richard walked towards one large red waratah to


examine it closely and as he came nearer it moved a
little to greet him and a tiny voice came from it.
“Hello, little man,” it said. “You just wait around
here and someone will be along shortly. 1 ’
Richard nodded and just then he saw a rabbit
hopping along merrily. The rabbit is not a native of
the Australian bush, being really an immigrant, but he
has become a part of it now.
This one wore a short jacket made of birdVnest fern,
with buttons of wattle, and a little hat made of gum
leaves turned up at the side.
“Are you going to the party?” Richard asked.
“My word—my word!” said the rabbit, pausing in
his hurry. “Everyone will be there. Aren’t you
going?”
“I’d like to,” said Richard, “but I don’t know the
way. Will you show me?”
“My word —my word!” said the rabbit. “Follow
me.
He hurried on and Richard fell in beside him, having
to run at times to keep up.
“Where do you live?” asked the rabbit.
“In Sydney,” replied Richard, looking at the lovely
flowers all around them as they went along.
“Sydney? Sydney?” said the rabbit. “Never heard
of it. Good place for burrows?”
“I don’t think so,” said Richard. “I have been in
the underground railway.”
“Never heard of it,” said the rabbit. “And mind
you, I’ve travelled. Been most places and seen most
things. Very clever gentleman I am. I know a trap
when I see one and I have beaten many a ferret. And
as for rabbit'proof fences, let me tell you they are no


proof against me. No, sir. Well, we take a short cut
here. Follow me.”
He dived into the large opening of a burrow and
vanished from view.
It was a large hole but not nearly large enough to
admit Richard. He got down on his hands and knees
and tried to get his head in, but it was no use. He could
hear the rabbit scurrying along inside.
He stood up and sighed.
Are you going to the party ?


CHAPTER TWO THOUGHTLESS GUIDES
“WHAT are you looking so glum about?” said a tiny
voice.
Richard glanced all around him but could see no
creature.
“Where are you?” he asked.
“Here —here—on your hand,” said the voice.
Richard looked down and there on his hand was a
large ant, its bright eyes twinkling up at him. It was a
bulldog ant and it had two very sharp claws just below
its eyes with which it could bite very hard. Fairy ants
seldom bite, however, and then only naughty boys who
disturb them.
“Ooooh!” said Richard. “Where did you come
from?”
“I leapt on your hand when you were trying to get
in the burrow,” said the ant. “My name is Gulosa and
I belong to one of the oldest families in the world.”
“How old are you?” asked Richard.
“Oh, I am not so very old, but my ancestors go back
through history for millions of years. Still, lam not
proud. Of course, I should be, seeing that we ants
have one of the best social systems and civilisations in
the world. But there it is—l could never be a snob—
I don’t mind talking to you in the least, big and
awkward though you are. Do you like my red and
yellow coat?”
“It is very pretty,” said Richard.
“I think,” said Gulosa, “that it would be better, just
for the sake of appearances, if you called me ‘sir.’ Not
that I am a snob, understand, but there is a limit to these
things. Well, you haven’t answered my question.
What were you so glum about?”


“I was going to a party and I don’t know the way.”
The ant scratched the top of his head with one of his
six legs.
“Hum!” he said. “I’m afraid I can’t help you there.
I know the party you mean, of course, but I won’t be
there. lam far too busy for parties and, besides, it
doesn’t do to be seen in all kinds of company. Don't
A large grey kangaroo


think that I am a snob, but there is a place we must
draw the line. But here comes the Major—he may be
able to do something for you. Put me down so that I
can get out of the way of his big clumsy feet.”
Richard put his hand close to the ground and Gulosa
jumped off. While doing so Richard’s eye was caught
by a large grey kangaroo hopping easily across the
grass. It was dressed in military uniform and had a
large, fierce moustache, and it paused to look at Richard.
It brought its paw up smartly to the salute.
“Oho, there,” the Major said. “What have we here?
A deserter from the human species?”
“No, thanks,” said Richard, not understanding very
•r.ell. “I want to go to the party.”
“What’s stopping you?” asked the Major. “Quick
march, my boy, quick march.”
“I don’t know which way to go.”
“You don’t expect me to carry you, do you? That’s
not the way a soldier moves. Fall in with me and we’ll
advance on the party.”
He hopped along and Richard ran along behind,
watching the black tip of his tail rising and falling with
each leap.
They came to a creek about six feet wide and rather
deep and the Major leapt it easily. Richard pulled up
dead. He could neither leap so far or swim and he had
been told not to go near the water. He watched the
black tail tip vanish into the distance.
He was startled as he stood there dismally to hear a
burst of laughter above his head. He looked up and
there on a bough sat a kookaburra, laughing heartily.
“Ho ho ho —this will kill me,” he chuckled. “You
do look a sight—ha ha ha. If you could —ha ha ha —
only see yourself—he he he—ho ho ho.


Richard felt offended. He did not like to be laughed
at any more than you or I. His big brown eyes filled
with tears and at once the kookaburra stopped laughing.
“Don’t mind me,” he said. “Just my fun. Don’t let
it worry you, old man. Perhaps I can help you?”
“I was going to the party,” said Richard, brightening
up at the kind words. “I wanted someone to show me
the way.”
“Can you fly?” asked the kookaburra.
“I don’t know—l’ve never tried,”
Ho ho ho, this will kill me !


“In that case I wouldn’t try if I were you, old man.
Pm going to the party, too, but if I led you by walking
we’d never get there. I fly, of course. But someone
will show you the way.”
“I’ve been told that before,” said Richard. “Then
there is this creek in front of me.”
“Can you swim?”
“I haven’t tried.”
‘Then don’t,” said the kookaburra. “Water is very
damp. But there is a place higher up where you can
step across on stones. Why not try that?”
‘Thank you,” said Richard. “I will.”
‘Happy again?”
‘Yes.”
‘You don’t mind me laughing?”
‘No.”
“Good. Wa wa wa wa, oo oo oo 00, ha ha ha ha ha
ha ha.”
Richard was smiling himself as he walked up the bank
of the creek. The kookaburra was a very cheerful sort
of fellow. And very well-dressed, too.
Richard found the spot where the stones were. The
water was very shallow here and it gurgled through the
rocks with a musical noise. Off to one side was a still,
little billabong—a quiet, peaceful, cool-looking pool
that tempted Richard to paddle in it. But he knew
that if he did he would stay there and perhaps miss the
party. So he stepped on the stones and crossed to the
other side.
There he stopped to look at a large citrus butterfly
sunning its wings on a bush. It was three inches across
and was black and green with a golden-yellow body.
It was so lovely that Richard wanted to touch it and
he put out his hand to do so.


said a voice. “Please do not touch. It
hurts my wings to touch them.”
Richard drew back his hand suddenly.
“Are you going to the party?” the butterfly, whose
name was Papilio, asked.
“If I can find the way,” said Richard. “Are you
going?”
“Of course,” said Papilio. “Parties are my favorite
sport. Someone has to add a touch of beauty to the
place and so I go along.”
“Someone has to add a touch of heauty. }>


“You are very pretty,” said Richard, “but I don t
think you should say so yourself.”
“Why not?” asked Papilio, spreading his wings to
their fullest extent. “Isn’t that lovely? It pays to
advertise, you know, I am beautiful and I know it.
You might think I have no need to tell people about it,
but some creatures are so blind. Well, if we are going
to the party we had better be going. Follow me.”
Lazily he moved his wings and flew into the air.
Then, swooping and diving, he set off swiftly through
the trees. Richard started after him but soon gave it
up as useless. The conceited creature had no thought
for anyone but himself and was flying much too fast.
Richard sat down on a stone and placed his chin in
his hand, preparing to wait. Something would come
along shortly that would not expect him to go down
burrows or jump creeks or fly in the air. A stir in the
water of the creek caught his eye and, while he watched,
the most peculiar creature he had ever seen scrambled
up on to the bank.
It was about eighteen inches long and had fine, long
thick hair, underneath which was a short fur. The fur
on the front of it was like silk, on its tail it was long
and coarse. It was black and grey and had short legs
with webbed feet, the back two of which were turned
the wrong way. It had a flat head ending in a duck’s
bill and when it opened this Richard saw that it had
teeth inside. It seemed to he a mixture of all the
animals Richard had ever heard of and it regarded him
with its small, but brilliant, light-brown eyes. It looked
so funny that Richard started to laugh.
“Laugh away,” the platypus snorted sourly. “Pm
used to it, but you wouldn’t laugh so much if you could
take a good look at yourself.”


“Laugh away,”
the Platypus snorted. /
Richard stopped laughing. “What’s funny about
me?” he asked.
“Everything,” said the platypus. “You stand on two
legs instead of four and so can be knocked over very
easily; you have a big slab of a body and a little head
on the top of it; you have no fur coat; you can’t swim
like I can and when you want to dig a hole what do
you do—get a shovel? I can dig the largest holes with
ray bare hands. I can build my own house—can you?
I can make my own living and I’m not as old as you.
See? So what is there to laugh at in me? Having got


all that off my chest I feel much better. Now what’s
funny about me?”
“I’m sorry,” said Richard. “I did not mean to hurt
you. You are not funny at all.”
“I should say not,” said the platypus. “In fact, I
am very wonderful. They call me a remarkable animal
—I am famous all over the world. Do you realise that
lam a mixture of animal, bird, fish and reptile? That
will show you! When the first skin of a platypus was
sent to England they wouldn’t believe it —they thought
it was a fraud. Now, what can Ido for you?”
“You can show me the way to the party.”
“What party?” said the platypus sharply. “What is
this? I haven t been invited to any party. They can’t
do this sort of thing to me—l won’t have it. Don’t
tell me I have been overlooked. I’ll see into this—you
see if I don t. But wait —I haven’t looked in my mail"
box to"day.”
He moved across to a tree which grew upon the
bank of the creek and pushed his bill into a small hole
m it. This was his lettenbox where the magpie postmen
delivered his letters every day. His bill came out hold"
mg a small stick on which were cut several notches.
He placed it on the ground and danced a turn or two.
Ummm'hum, ’he said. ‘There it is—the invitation
to the party. Well, you must excuse me—l will have
to dress.”
He dived into the creek and Richard was alone again.


CHAPTER THREE MICHAEL OTOSSUM
fJICHARD was surprised a moment later to see the
ground move in front of him. Suddenly some dirt
shot up and a head came out of the ground and two
very bright eyes stared at him.
The head was clothed in white and brown hairs, it
had a stumpy black nose and a large moustache. It
had small pointed ears and whiskers along its cheeks.
It was a very spruce sort of animal.
‘'Excuse me,” said the wombat, “for coming up in
this way, but I heard you on my roof talking to Platty
and I thought I would pop up and ask you how my
whiskers look. My crowning glory, you know, and I
want them to be extra special for the party.”
“Are you going to the party?” asked Richard eagerly.
“I said so,” the wombat said gently. ‘The question
is—how do my whiskers look?”
“I want to go to the party, too,” said Richard.
“Would you show me the way?”
“Certainly,” said the wombat. “Would it be asking
too much to tell me how my whiskers look?”
“I cannot travel in a burrow,” Richard said. “So if
you are thinking of going that way ”
“I hate to be rude,” said Mr. Wombat. “Would
you mind telling me how my whiskers look? I hate
shouting, but here goes —HOW DO MY WHISKERS
LOOK?”
“Your whiskers?”
The wombat sighed. “My moustache and my side'
levers. Do they look all right?”
“I don’t know,” said Richard. “How should they
look?”


The wombat waved his arms a little helplessly.
“Well, they should look—well, you know! They
should have a sort of gayness about them and be trim
and —oh, I don’t know. Can’t you tell?”
“No.”
“But surely you—oh, what’s the use!” said the
wombat with disgust and vanished into the earth again.
Richard decided that if ever he was to get to the
party he had better start to move, so he stood up and
set off through the trees. The trees seemed to get
thicker and he never thought of asking them the way
and began to think he was lost.
At last he threw himself down against a tree and for
want of something better to do began to chip at the
bark with a stone.
a squeaky voice said after the fourth
knock. “Who is knockin’ at my door? Shure, I’m
acomin’ roight along.”
Richard stopped chipping and looked all about him
but could see no creature. He seemed to hear sounds
within the tree, however, and in a moment was startled
when a little door opened in the trunk just near where
he had been chipping. A small head popped out and
two bright eyes regarded him.
Are ye lookin’ f’r me?” said the squeaky voice, “I
am an Irish' Australian by name of Michael O’Possum
distantly related to the O’Briens and the O’Flahertys
but a native of this counthry ye will understand. And
phwat can Ibe doin’ f’r ye? I warn ye before ye say
a worrd that if ye calls me Possum and forgets the O
I will be mortally offended. There seems to be an ideah
round the newspapers o’ late that I’m not an O but
just a Possum. And Oi’U be tellin’ ye I don’t loike it ”


“I wanted to know the way to the party,” said
Richard, when Michael O’Possum paused for breath.
“Shure and ye’ll be goin’ to the party. I was just
dressin’ for it and if ye behave yourself and don t call
me Possum without the O I might let you come in my
taxi. How do I look, me bhoy?”
Michael slipped out of his doorway and used his long
bushy tail to lower himself to the ground. His general
color was grey with black and white patches, he had
a little white nose and black hairs on his chin, while
he had two black circles round his eyes. Inside his
ears was brownish pink. He had long black eyebrows
and a fine black moustache; his' feet and chest were
yellow and the point of his tail was white. As he had
put on a green hat and coat made of leaves he looked
very handsome,
“You look very nice,’’ said Richard. “Can I really
come in your taxi?”
“Shure!” said Michael. “But we’ll be havin’ another
passenger. For where is the spalpeen? Asleep, I’ll be
bound.” He lifted his head and squeaked up into the
tree. “Koalemus —we’re waiting.” He turned once
more to Richard with a chuckle. “He doesn t like that
name, ye know, because in the native tongue it means
‘stupid fellow,’ though he’s not stupid, of course.
Just my little joke.”
A moment later a native bear came carefully down
the tree. Richard laughed with glee. He had seen
pictures of koalas and he once had a doll imitation of
one. But here was the real thing, looking very sleepy
and chewing a gum tip. He had a little coat made of
red gum tips.
“What is all the rush?” he said in a hoarse, slow
voice. “The taxi has not arrived yet.”


“I wanted ye to meet a friend o’ moine,” said Michael.
“I’ve known him f’r years and ye’ll be sure to loike
him.” He turned to Richard. “And phwat is your
name?
Richard rather thought that the last question con'
tradicted the statement before it, but he said his name.
There was the real thing.


“Shure —Richard—-and roight ye are. Well, this is
Aussie Koala.”
“How do you do?” drawled Aussie. “You know,
Michael is a great nuisance. He is always bustling and
never seems to sleep.”
“Whoile ye niver bustle and sleep all the time,” said
Michael, who could hardly stop talking for a second.
“I could be sleeping now,” said Aussie, instead of
wasting time here.”
“And phwat is the diffrince with wastin’ time here
and wastin’ it sleepin’ upstairs? Anyhow, here comes
the taxi.”
Richard looked round, expecting to see a motor car,
but instead he saw a large bird on long legs. It was
about six feet in height and was something like an
ostrich, except that it had a shorter neck and not quite
such long legs and was of a dull brown color. Richard
remembered having seen a picture of it on coins, because
it is part of the Australian coat-charms, sharing that
honor with the kangaroo.
The emu stopped beside them and fixed his eyes on
Richard, for he was a very curious bird and would go
into great danger to find out things and Richard was
a new object to him.
“Am I on time?” he asked.
“Shure,” said O’Possum. “Could not have been
better if ye had really tried.”
The emu ducked his bill at Richard. What is this
animal?” he asked.
Michael scratched his chin with his fore-paw.
“Shure, I don’t know his breedin’,” he said.
“I am not an animal,” said Richard indignantly.
“And for whoiy not?” asked Michael quickly. “Is
there anything to be ashamed of in bein an animal?


“No, not at all,” said Richard quickly. “But Pm a
person.”
“Never heard of it,” said the emu. “Do you fly,
climb trees, live in a burrow, under the water or what?”
“I don’t do any of those,” said Richard.
“Thin phwat do ye do?” asked the amazed Michael.
“I think,” said Aussie Koala, in his slow drawl, “that
he is a fairy—like the ‘little men,’ you know. He looks
something like them but he is a different color, though
being a different color is nothing.”
“That’s it —he’s a fairy,” said Michael to the emu.
“I just thought of it. We’re takin’ him to the party.”
CHAPTER FOUR THE PARTY
JJUT the emu always wanted to know the ins and
outs of everything.
“If he is a fairy,” he said, “why can’t he take himself
to the party?”
Aussie and Michael turned and stared at Richard.
“Yes,” said Michael, “whoiy can’t ye?”
“I don’t know where it is,” said Richard.
Michael turned to the emu with a satisfied smile.
There ye are, Drom,’ he said. “He doesn’t know
where it is.”
But if he is a fairy he the emu began.
Oh, stop asking questions,” said Aussie. “We’ll
be late for the party. All aboard, everybody.”
He suited the action to the word by swarming up the
emu’s legs to his back and sitting astride with his arms
round its neck. Michael did likewise but Richard had
more trouble. At last, with a helping hand, or rather,
tail, from Michael, he managed to get aboard.


“To the party!' 1 said Aussie. “And don't spare the
legs.”
Drom the Emu set off and soon they were travelling
along at tremendous speed as his legs flew over the
ground. Creeks he took in his stride, fallen trees he
leapt over, while the koala clung to his neck, the
opossum clung to the koala and Richard clung to any*
thing handy while he rocked from side to side and
expected to hit the ground at any moment.
They came to a river and the mad ride ceased for a
moment. The emu went carefully down into the water
They were travelling along at
tremendous speed.


and then set out for the farther bank, swimming power'
fully and speedily. This was a delightful sensation to
Richard, because his feet hung over the side in the
water and it was cool and pleasant. It was a nice kind
of boat.
On the other side they set off again and this time
Richard thought he would prefer less speed.
“Couldn’t he go a little slower?” he shouted in
Michael’s ear.
“Go slower,” Michael shouted to the emu. “Richard
wants to see the counthry.”
“What for?” asked Drom, never slackening a
fraction.
“He just wants to see it,” yelled Michael.
“Others will get on if Igo slow,” said Drom. “You
know how hard it is to get taxis nowadays.”
I don’t want to see the country,” yelled Richard,
“but I don’t want to fall off and hit it, either.”
Drom slowed down. He could not very well ask
“Why?” to that request.
Now Richard could be more comfortable and really
could see some of the wonderful country through
which they were passing. They passed through long
groves of blue gums with their lovely and unusual
flowers, some of which were just pushing off their calyx
lid so that the blossoms could burst out into view; they
passed through gardens clothed in scarlet geraniums,
flowers which really belong to South Africa but grow
in profusion in Australia; he saw Australian orchids
and they rode through clouds of insects, because with'
out the insects the flowers cannot live; there were
places where the flowers were all mixed and the colors
and scents were so marvellous that Richard knew he
must be in Fairyland. He did not know that there


are many places in the Australian bush where Nature
makes a Fairyland of rioting wild flowers.
They passed over many-colored carpets of ground
orchids, the Running Postman with his gay red
flowers, daisies, milkmaids and Nancies; there was the
native heath with its red, pink and white flowers or
red and white bells. Waratahs, Christmas bells,
boronia, native fuchsias, wax flowers, trigger plants,
wild violets, bluebells, buttercups, pincushions, hone/-
flowers, geebungs, spider-flowers, tea-tree, flannel-
flowers, ferns of all kinds and —oh, but there are
hundreds of other Australian native flowers of all colors.
Go out into the bush yourself and see them.
After a long ride, which Richard was glad he had
not had to walk, they seemed to be nearing the party
as the paths became slowly more crowded with other
creatures hurrying along decked out in their best.
Overhead the sky was constantly shadowed with birds
and Richard felt sure that underground things were
scurrying along their “tubes.”
‘There will be a lot at the party,” he shouted at
Michael.
“Shure —everybody!” said Michael, although
Richard guessed he was stretching things as usual as
all the birds and the beasts could not fit into one place.
Beside, the ant had said he would not be there.
The paths became so crowded with creatures that
the emu had to step carefully and slow down to a walk
to avoid hurting some small thing, and through the
trees Richard could see other crowds proceeding along
other paths.
Suddenly they burst into a huge clearing. The grass
was short and green and all round were rows and rows
of lovely flowers. The air was full of the scent of them.


||yi j


Scattered over the grass were hundreds of animals and
birds and even reptiles. Behind the bushes of flowers
were rows of trees so that the short ones were in front
and slightly taller ones behind, going on like this till
the tallest trees were at the back. These trees were full
of birds and insects and spiders and tree'dimbing
animals.
“I knew we were late,” said Michael. “We’ll be
lucky to get a seat.”
“Don’t grumble so much,” said Aussie. “The chief
hasn’t arrived yet and there’s tons of room.”
Up at one end of the clearing was a pile of logs,
nicely arranged to form a rostrum, on which was set
a throne cut out of rock and scintillating with Aus'
tralian gems. There were lovely opals, the arms were
made of solid gold, the seat was of limestone Devonian
marble, there were various kinds of native slates and
it had some Australian sea shells in all their beauty
scattered through it, so that it glittered in the sunlight.
Such a throne, thought Richard, must belong to a very
great man.
Drom the Emu moved into the clearing and stopped
suddenly—so suddenly that Richard fell off, his clutclv
ing hands bringing Michael and Aussie with him. They
landed with a thud, but the grass was very soft and
they were not hurt.
Michael got up looking very annoyed.
“And f’r whoiy did ye do that? ’ he asked. “Ye
have creased my coat and all.”
“Stop grumbling,” drawled Aussie, “and let’s find a
seat. You can stop here, Richard, because you are tall
enough to see over the others’ heads —you and Drom.
But we shall have to find a tree. See you later.”


Aussie and Michael scuttled off for the trees, Michael
leading and Aussie following leisurely, and yawning
now and then on the way.
Drom the Emu strutted off and left Richard, but he
did not leave him alone. All around him were creatures
of many kinds while the clearing rang with a great
chattering in hundreds of voices.
Over to one side on another rostrum an orchestra
was playing—or singing, Richard could see it, but he
could hear it only faintly, owing to the noise. It was
made up of many birds, each using his own musical
throat to produce a melody that combined with other
melodies to make harmony.
Nearer to him there was a great crowd of creatures
all eddying round one spot and Richard decided that
this must be the supper-table. With visions of cream
and rainbow cake in his mind he made for it.
CHAPTER FIVE THE CHIEF
J|ICHARD found out that it was the supper-table
right enough, though a very low one so that all
the creatures could reach the delectable viands.
Richard did not mind that, as he was not so tall him-
self, but he was not very enthusiastic about the food.
There were nice gum tips for the koalas, eucalyptus
and white cedar leaves for the tree-kangaroo, centipedes
and beetles for the lyre-birds (these were not to
Richard’s fancy at all), figs for the cassowary, mice for
the snakes, berries and figs for the bower birds, eggs
for the spiny echidna, bulbs for the native companion,
tender shoots of plants for the mallee hen, fruits for the
flying fox, peppermint-gum sap for the cicada (wrongly


called a locust), gum buds, leaves and fruit for the
opossums, grain for the cockatoos, grass and herbs for
the kangaroos, nice green grass for the emus, shrimps
for the platypuses, succulent roots for the wombat and
a nice bit of raw sheep meat for the warrigal or dingo.
None of these things particularly appealed to
Richard and he was turning away with a hungry feeling
in his inside when he saw a small and slightly higher
table standing all alone with no one near it.
He wandered rather wearily across to this and the
moment he saw the contents of the table his weariness
vanished and he forgot the chattering noise, which was
going through his ear drums like a knife.
The table was loaded with good things, or rather,
they might not be good things but they are the things
a little boy likes. There were lollies and cream puffs
and ice-cream and ginger beer and rainbow cake and
a lot of other things dear to the young heart and not
so kind to his inside.
There were so many good things, which seemed to
have been put there just for him because no one else
seemed to care for them, that Richard was stumped
as to where to start first. After a long pause for
thought, while his eyes danced over the table, he
decided that the best method of attack was to eat the
nicest things first and if he became too full up to eat
all the things then those he could not eat would not
matter so much.
He tried a chocolate and it was very good. He ate
a cream puff and that was also good. He helped him-
self to a large plate of strawberry ice-cream and that
was delicious. He ate some lollies and they were
pleasant, but not so pleasant as he expected. He tried
some rainbow cake, but after a few nibbles he put it


aside and attacked another cream puff. Even this did
not seem so good as had the first one. He realised
that he did not want any more—his eyes and his mouth
still were unsatisfied, but his stomach was t more than
satisfied. He staggered a little as he crossed the grass to
a spot near the throne and sat down with a bump, not
at all well, and feeling rather disappointed that he had
not been able to drink a large glass of ginger beer.
Suddenly silence fell—so abruptly that Richard was
shocked by it, his ear drums still ringing from the
previous noise.
He looked around for the cause and all eyes were
turned towards the throne. Thence he also looked
and saw sitting in the beautiful chair the old black man
he had seen before and who had invited him to the
party —the great chief of the little people—Wingaree.
Suddenly the silence was shattered by a great cheer,
and if you have ever heard a cheer by hundreds of
birds and animals you will realise what a din it made.
The orchestra began to whistle again, some birds
putting in the high notes and some the low, and every-
one stood up. Richard thought he should do this, too,
though he found it very hard.
The anthem did not last very long and then all sat
down again, Richard with a bump which shook up all
the good things he had eaten.
Wingaree held up his hand and commenced to speak.
“Welcome, my people, to my party, 11 he said and his
voice carried to every part of the clearing. “You are
here to enjoy yourselves and make friends with the rest
of the people. For many hundreds of years we have
had our party and because of it the creatures of the
Australian bush live happily together and are not
vicious killers. Even Man is beginning to understand


us and not want to hunt us down and kill us, as he did
my people and your people in days gone by. For that
reason I have invited a child of Man here to-day and
I know you will be as friendly to him as you have
always been to each other. Of course we have our
villains occasionally, but so do all peoples, including
Wingaree held up his hand.


Man, and they are always punished as sure as the great
Sun lights the world and gives us life. Every year at
this party you eat and drink and dance and sing and
are merry and also, one of the most important things,
you air your grievances. So that, being so important,
we will take first. Have you any complaints?”
“Yes,” squeaked a voice from the rear, “Oi want to
know just phwat you are doin’ about people droppin’
the O from O’Possum?”
A mighty roar of laughter went up, because this was
a yearly complaint of the Opossum family and no one
ever took it seriously. A kookaburra seated just above
Michael’s head laughed loudest of all and Michael
pointed up his little nose nastily at him and snarled.
Richard looked about over the sea of heads. They
were all there. There was the fussy Rabbit, Major
the Kangaroo, Mr. Wombat with his whiskers twirled
to a turn, Papilio the Butterfly, and the Platypus very
handsomely dressed in ferns. There were others there
Richard had not met —the lovely, regal lyre-bird
especially catching his eye, and also his ear, because
every time it spoke it used a different voice like one
of those men who appear on the stage with a doll on
their knees.
“I have a complaint,” said a voice quite near to
Richard, and, looking up, he saw a large brown spider
sitting on a bough.
Beside it was a rather pretty spider, much smaller,
of white and black. It was standing on its back legs
now with its white front legs raised as though in salute.
It was the Attid spider, who did not build a web but
captured insects by leaping upon them.
“Let us hear your complaint, Attid,” said Wingaree.
The Attid cleared his throat. “Well, Chief,” he


said, “it is not a new one. We spiders are still looked
down upon by the world of Man; he s*ill kills us on
sight through not understanding that he is doing him'
self harm. As you know, there are only two spiders
in our great country which are dangerous—the Red
Back and the Funnel Web. Ido not plead the cause
of these spiders, but I do plead for all other spiders, who
cannot harm Man but can do him a great deal of good
by killing off his greatest enemies—the fly and the
mosquito. We spiders are regarded as ugly but we are
not. We go about our own business of doing good
in our own way and ask for nothing but to be left
alone. Large and small, we request this boon. 11
“I will do what I can to teach Man, 11 said the chief,
“but he is so large and sometimes so stupid that he does
not often notice the little helpers he has around him. 11
“I have a complaint, 11 came a voice with a buzz in it
and a large dragon-fly flew up to the throne and perched
himself on the chiefs hand.
“Speak, my friend,” said the chief.
“It is somewhat similar to that of the spiders,” said
Odonata the Dragon-fly. “We have a bad name which
we do not deserve. We are one of the greatest bene-
factors of mankind—and they call us Horse-stingers!
Wouldn’t that slay you? As we have no sting it is
somewhat ridiculous, especially as our food is flies and
mosquitoes and the larvae of mosquitoes. Actually they
should do everything they can to breed us in greater
numbers. We hover over horses—to kill the flies
which torment it. We live strange lives, but few men
are interested. We want a greater population and the
cutting cut of that nasty name—Horse-stinger.”
“You have a just complaint,” said the Chief, “and I
will see what can be done about the matter. It is hard


to get Man to change his ideas once he has got them
fixed in his brain. He calls himself the most adaptable
of animals and maybe he is—in some ways. In other
ways you creatures can leave him far behind. Are there
any more complaints? - ”
There was no reply, so Wingaree smiled.
“Then what would you like to do next?”
“Tell us a story,” the lyre-bird called out. “One of
the fairy stories of your own people.”
Wingaree nodded and began.
CHAPTER SIX THE GRAND MARCH
‘•you have all noticed how the tiny koala clings to
his mother and how she always carries him with
her. This was not always so. ’Way back in the far-off
times the mother koala did not carry her baby. My
people never touched her in any way because it was
not allowed. Men who tried to attack her had terrible
things happen to them. You all know what a bunyip
is—the bad spirit of the bushlands!
“In those days a bunyip lived in the Wollondilly
and a koala who lived nearby made friends with him.
Each night they used to meet and talk about many
things, the bunyip being very old and being able to
tell stories that amused the koala. It is not a good
thing to make friends with a bunyip and the other
bears did not like such behavior of one of their kind,
because they are very gentle animals. They spoke to
the offending koala but she took no notice and left her
young one every night to go and talk hours to the
bunyip. Then one large bear decided to do something
about it and he painted himself like the sorcerer of my


people. The marks he painted on his forehead are
there to this day.
“In this way he managed to call up a good spirit.
The spirit decided that something must be done to
prevent the koala from making these long nightly
journeys to meet the bunyip and neglecting her baby,
so he caused the young one to leap upon its mother’s
back and cling on and never let go, clinging so tightly
it could not be shaken off.
“The mother thought that she would also call up
the spirit and ask to be relieved of her burden, so she
got some pipeclay and painted herself as a sorcerer, but
the spirit was so annoyed that he visited her punishment
on all koalas. And so the young hampering koalas
still cling to their mothers.*’
At the end of the story there was great applause
and everyone turned to look at Aussie, but he had
shinned up a tree out of sight and that caused a laugh.
The next item on the programme was given by the
ly re-Bird, who danced, and later imitated every other
bird’s call except that of the kookaburra. The birds
were very interested to hear themselves imitated and
this act had a great reception.
After that came the Grand March of the Birds.
They formed up in pairs and marched slowly round
the clearing, headed by the beautiful rifle birds or
Birds of Paradise, followed by the quite as lovely or
lovelier (for beauty is in the eye of the beholder) lyre-
birds. It was the most colorful procession that Richard
had ever seen, for every color of the rainbow was
displayed and every varied shade of color, while there
v. ere mottled colors and stripes. Some of the birds,
like the grey thrush, had not much color but they had
been bountifully gifted by God with liquid voices. There


were willy wagtails, grey fantails and “Yellow Bob
robins; the shepherd’s companion with its song of
“Sweet, sweet, pretty creature,” butcher birds with
their flutedike voices, and magpies. Then there was
that bird of many names, the peewee, or peewit, or
mudlark, or Murray magpie, or magpie-lark, or grallina
in his neat black and white coat, who does so much
good to cattle by keeping down the terrible liver fluke
they pick up when drinking from ponds.
There were black jays and Apostle-birds, the six
kmds of currawongs or bell-magpies with their far-
carrying call of “Curr-a-wong.” We cannot mention
all the birds here because Australia is very rich in these
lovely things and possesses more than seven hundred
species. All of you know the lovely cockatoos and
parrots and galahs and corellas, those birds who can
talk; and then there is the little warbling grass parrots
or budgerigars, who would make a story on their own.
There were satin bower birds and paradise parrots —a
riot of turquoise and reds and golds; rosellas and ducks
and swans and pelicans, cormorants and snake birds,
herons, egrets, bitterns, coots and ibises. There were
huge eagles—one wedge-tail having a wing span of
nine feet. He was proud of it, too, and he showed
off his mighty power. He was an outlaw of the air,
being unprotected by law.
Richard thought he would never tire of such a
marvellous display. He had never been to the Zoo,
where most of these birds can be seen by even city
boys. The flying fox, who was not too sure to what
part of the animal kingdom he belonged, tried to push
into the marching line. The pelican took offence to this.
“Away with you,” said the pelican. “You do not
belong here.”


C - * —- , f


“Why not?” asked the Fox. “My word I do
“You are not a bird.”
“Aren’t I? Then what am I?
“A very silly fellow.”
“Oh,” said the Flying Fox. “And where do the very
silly fellows line up?”
But the pelican had moved on and before the Fox
were the lovely red and blue kingfishers, so the ratdike
bat decided to push in there. At least, he did until a
kingfisher prodded him with his corahred bill and then
he changed his mind.
He stood watching for a gap for he did want to be
in this parade and show off. He heard a noise like
water being poured from a bottle, which
made him very thirsty, and there before him was the
coucal, which makes a noise like that.
There was a gap before some bower birds, who are
great collectors of shiny objects to deck their nest, and
the Flying Rodent slipped in there and began to strut
along on his hind legs, trying to look like a bird.
“Oho,” said a bower bird behind him. “Who
brought this thing in? Throw it out. It sleeps upside
down. It does not shine, it is certainly not beautiful
and it has no feathers.”
The Fox pretended to take no notice, but the bower
bird in his shining blue satin coat is a very clever
fellow. He builds his house or bower with great skill —
and then paints the inside! Fancy a bird doing that!
He mixes water and charcoal and then lays the paint
on with a piece of bark held in his bill, the bark being
frayed, making quite a good brush. So he was not to
be put off. He leaned over and spoke in the Fox’s ear.


You see that big eagle spreading his great wings?”
he said. “He is a friend of mine and I’m sure would
thank me if I told him where he could find a nice juicy
rat to carry away to his nest for supper.”
“Oh'oh!” said the Fox and leapt sideways out of the
line.
He watched the scrub-Fowl, the MalleeTowfl and
the brush turkey file by. He was a persistent little
fellow and he had not quite given up the idea of being
in the parade.
The time was not just yet, however, for strutting
past were the big birds such as the emu, cassowary,
jabiru and native companion and the Flying Fox did
not like the look of them.
And now was the end of the parade, for all the
smaller birds were flying in circles above with the
butterflies and moths, and right at the end were fairy
penguins from Phillip Island. They walked sedately
in their evening dress suits of blue jackets and white
shirt fronts and waistcoats, and the Fox, who had no
wish to be on the very end, slipped in before them.
The penguins made no remark but one leant forward
and nipped the Fox hard on the back of the neck.
Ow!” said the Fox, and so startled the cassowary
in front that he ran a little and threw grass up from his
heels in the Fox’s face. The flying rat sat down on
the grass and rubbed his eyes and the back of his neck
and the parade went on without him.
After the parade was over the orchestra switched
into a lively tune and the animals began to dance round
the clearing. Some of them were very good dancers,
some of them were not, and as they were all different
si2£s it was somewhat awkward to find partners.


Richard laughed when he saw Major the Kangaroo
and Michael OTossum trying to tread the steps of the
waltz;, but Michael solved the problem at last by sitting
on the Major’s tail and not having to do any dancing
at all. The birds swooped together like whirling rain'
bows and the koalas sat in the trees and went to sleep.
It was while the dance was on that Richard suddenly
found Wingaree beside him.
“Don’t you dance?” the kind little Chief asked.
“I don’t know,” said Richard. “I have never tried.”
“Have you enjoyed the party?”
“Oh, yes —especially the cream puffs.”
Wingaree laughed softly. “I should really have got
you fairy cream puffs and fairy ice-cream and then you
could have eaten as much as you liked without feeling
One bit him on the back.


the effects. But that will teach you not to eat too
much of such things.”
“I think I had better go home now,” said Richard.
“I feel sleepy.”
Wingaree nodded. “Perhaps you should,” he said.
“You are a wise little boy to know when it is time to
go to bed.”
“If I go to bed when I am sleepy I wake up earlier
and have a long day,” said Richard, “and I grow bigger
and stronger.”
“Very true —very true,” said the Chief.
He turned to the crowd of dancing figures and
clapped his hands and immediately everyone stopped
and the orchestra ceased its music.
“My people of the bush,” the Chief said. ‘The
little Man is going home now to his nest but some day
he may come again.”
“Good'bye—good'bye,” came in hundreds of voices.
“Good'bye,” said Richard with dignity. “I am glad
to have met you and I love you all.”
There was a cheer and in the silence which followed
Michael O’Possum’s voice cut through.
“Oi don’t belave that ye live in a nest. Ye are no
bird. Ye live in a tree.”
“A burrow,” said the Platypus.
“A nest,” said the birds.
“It is all those,” said the Chief. “He goes into a door
which is a hole like a burrow, he climbs the stairs like
going into a tree and he lies in a bed which is soft and
cozy like a nest. So you can all be satisfied. Come,
Richard.”
He took Richard’s hand and they commenced to fly
through the air, though they had further to go this
time.


“I would like you to take me another trip some time,
Richard remarked.
“Maybe I will—maybe I will,” said the Chief, for
you have been a brave and a good boy. Maybe we will
go to Mother Goose Island or meet the Fairy Pirates.
Who knows?”
That was the last that Richard heard and when he
opened his eyes he found himself on his cushion in the
garage.
Richard wondered for a moment if he had dreamed
it all, but he knew he could not have done so, because
how could he dream about things of which he had
never heard before?
He knew now that there was a Fairyland of the
B U sh —and so there is. Why don’t you get Mum or
Dad to help you find it some day?
THE END
They commenced to fly through the air.


MOTHER GOOSE
ISLAND
LIGHTNING crashed across the purple sky of the
Land of Fantasy and lit up a scene of storm and
strife; it glittered on the silver sheets of rain and
seemed to spit venomously at the roaring thunder; it
also threw its lurid light upon a small ship tossing in
the grey waters near an island covered with blue and
yellow trees. The ship was rushing fast towards the
rocks of the island and, as the next flash came, its
accompanying thunder was rivalled by the tearing and
splintering of the ship’s timbers as it piled itself up on
the rocks . . .
The storm blew itself out and went off to other parts
of the Land of Fantasy—the North Wind filling his
lungs with air and puffing out his cheeks and sending
the watery clouds on their way; the Lightning reached
for another box of fire-bolts to hurl at the land; the
Rain ceased to weep and gave the clouds a chance to fill
up again; the Thunder lay down with a few low growls
and fell into slumber. So, as time went on, the great
Sceneshifter rolled up the black curtain of Night and
turned on the spotlight of the Sun, which rose slowly
to shine upon a strange scene.
There was the wooden ship perched up on the
jagged rocks with broken masts and smashed keel—but
there was no sign of any living thing upon her. But
stay! The ship was wrecked on a jut of land and
behind this promontory was a small beach—and upon


this beach lay several figures which had been cast up
by the waves and left there like the wreckage which
surrounded them.
They were a peculiar set of people, those four men
and four women, and looking at them we open our eyes
with surprise as we recognise them as old friends. All
is silent over the island—the silence which follows a
beautiful piano concerto when the performer finishes
and before the spellbound audience applauds a silence
waiting breathless for a rush of sound. For soon the
birds will wake and even now the people on the beach
are beginning to move. See that old lady in the
voluminous dress and the poke bonnet —surely that is
Mother Goose that we have seen so often on the covers
of our books when we were very young. And that
lovely girl in the three-tiered wide skirt and high lace
bodice, the tiny little hat askew on her head, the little
colored ribbons and bows placed about her—surely
that is Bo Peep without her sheep.
And that handsome man dressed as a prince, with a
little fair moustache, the red hearts all over his jacket
that must be the Jack of Hearts. That little twisted
man, draped over a rock, dressed all in black in
wrinkled clothes that do not fit —it is the Crooked
Man. That pretty maiden in the dress the color of
buttercups, with green panniers at the side, colored
bows all round and a very lovely poke bonnet —there
is certainly Mary, Mary, Quite Contrary. And near
her is a girl, not so pretty, but dressed in a lilac frock
and bonnet, with yards and yards of taffeta in the skirt
—even without her bowl and with no spider around
we know her as Miss Muffet.
Then there is that gooddooking country boy in his
bright yellow smock and blue pants —that is Tom, Tom


the Piper s Son. And last, but not least—in his own
opinion—is the stupid looking fellow in the check
smock with lace at the sleeves and the bottoms of his
trousers and a big red tie at his throat and a silly little
peaked hat with a feather—that must be Simple Simon,
the one who met the pieman.
The old eyes of Mother Goose were open, but there
was no life in them yet, for she was in the land between
Sleep and Wake. Suddenly she sat up and stared at a
palm tree, then round her at the other figures—and
suddenly she was awake.
“Goodness!” she said to the sand. ‘The wreck!”
The Crooked Man abruptly fell off the rock, then
sat up in a very crooked fashion. He stared around
him.
“We were wrecked,” he croaked. “Wrecked we
were —wrecked were we—it won’t go crooked no
matter how I say it.”
“You were the cause of it all,” said Mother Goose
sourly.
The Crooked Man looked at her cross-eyed.
“Er —good morning, good Mother Morning—l
mean, Goose.”
“Far from it,” snapped Mother Goose. “Far from
a good morning—and all because you decide to take us
on a journey in your crooked ship.”
“Well, I did it, didn’t I did it —yes, did I?”
“You needn’t have ended it so suddenly.”
“Perhaps a crooked course I sailed— l mean I
crooked a sail of course—no, I mean I —”
“Skip it,” said Mother Goose.
Mother Goose,” said the Crooked Man reprovingly,
‘if you’ll allow me to so say, you are becoming slangy.”
Don t blame me,” Mother Goose said as she climbed


to her feet. “Blame Walt Disney—l have been work'
mg for him in America in his Silly Symphonies. Well,
we seem to be all here but we had better see if they are
all alive. You can help—if you are alive.”
“I think I am,” croaked the Crooked Man. At
least I was last time I mirrored a saw, I mean sawed a
mirror—or something like that.’
“Bo Peep is breathing,” said Mother Goose as she
bent over the shepherdess. “Get some water.”
“Yes —some water get.” The Crooked Man zig'
zagged towards the sea, then stopped on one foot.
“What will it I carry in?”
“Oh, never mind,” said Mother Goose. Have a
look at the others.”
The Crooked Man staggered to the side of Miss
Muffet and turned her face upwards. She opened her
eyes and they flickered at him.
“It —it’s the spider!” she said.
The Crooked Man sighed. He knew he was no
beauty but he did not think he deserved that.
“No, it’s you —I mean me,” he said. “No spider
there is this mom —neither are there wheys and curd,
worse luck.”
He moved on to Mary Maty. Mother Goose had
succeeded in waking Bo Peep and had moved on to
shake Tom Tom.
Suddenly Simple Simon sat up like a rake upon which
someone had trodden. He blinked about him and put
out his hand as though feeling for rain.
“It is morning!” he said in surprise.
“Give him a leather medal or an Iron Cross or some'
thing—he has made a great discover/,” remarked
Mother Goose.
The others were all slowly awakening.


“How did I get here?” asked Simon,
“You tell him, Crooked Man,” said Mother Goose.
“Turn on your radio and give him the dope.”
“My Simon dear,” said the Crooked Man, “last island
during a ship our storm was cast and we were evidently
wrecked up on this night.”
“Eh?” asked Simple Simon,
“Perhaps I wrong have it,” said the Crooked Man.
“I mean that last night during a wreck—no, you work
it out.”
“How?” asked Simon. “Is this an uninhabited,
desert island?”
“I fear—well, to-morrow you’ll have to call round
for answer the.”
The Jack of Hearts and Tom Tom both sat up to'
gether, their eyes fell on Bo Peep and immediately they
sprang up and rushed towards her—to pause each side
of her and scowl at each other.
Stand back, Knave, said lorn. “She needs mv
help.”
“YOUR help!” said Jack scornfully. “Go and eat
fish.”
Personally, said Mother Goose, “I’d be only too
pleased to eat ANYTHING.”
“I tell you she needs me,” said Tom to Jack.
What! said Jack. l lf she wakes up and sees your
face she’ll have hysterics.”
“If she sees your face first,” snarled Tom, “she’ll
think she is still asleep and having a nightmare.”
“Pigstealer,” snapped Jack, very rudely.
Tartpincher!” yelled Tom, just as unmannerly,
“Good morning, gentlemen,” came Bo Peep’s soft
voice, for sh had been awake all the time, watching
them.


“Darling!” said Tom.
“Hog!” snarled Jack.
“Who —me?” asked Bo Peep mischievously.
“No, this piper’s brat,” said Jack, as he and Tom
helped the shepherdess to her feet.
The Crooked Man was helping up Mary Mary and
Simon was helping up Miss Muffet. Mother Goose sat
on a rock and regarded them thoughtfully.
“Well, children, here we are,” she remarked.
“By jove, I believe she’s right!” said Simon.
“Possibly quite,” said the Crooked Man.
“And where is breakfast?” asked Mary.
“Yes, where is breakfast?” asked Simon, looking
about as though expecting to see it set out on a table,
steaming hot.
I could do with my curds and whey now,” said
Miss Muffet.
“My pig would be handy,” said Tom.
“Or some of my tarts,” said Jack.
“Even one of my sheep would not be amiss,” said
Bo Peep as she dropped on the rock beside Mother
Goose.
“Well, there was my little crooked cat —” began the
Crooked Man, but Mary cut him off.
Ugh! she said with a shudder. “You would put
us off our food.”
That’s a good idea, anyhow,” said the Crooked
Man. ‘There no food is to be put on.”
“Oh, where is my pieman, now?” asked Simon.
It seems,children, said Mother Goose, “that
food has always played a large part in your histories.”
Well, I lived on it,” said Miss Muffet dryly
Didn t you?”
“It looks like an island,” remarked Jack.


“Entirely surrounded by water,” said Tom sarcas'
tically.
k The thing is,” said Jack, ignoring Tom, “is it unim
habited?”
“I can answer that,” said Simon. “It IS inhabited.”
“How do you know?” asked Jack.


“Well, WE are here,” said Simon wisely.
“Idiot!” said Jack. “Well, if we are the only inhabi-
tants we must find some way to five.”
“You don't have to do that,” said Simon. “You
just live—no one ever tells you the way.”
“There may be goats on the island,” said Mother
Goose. ‘There are usually goats on these islands.”
“I hope you are not being personal,” said Simon.
‘That would be bad taste.”
“Any taste would be welcome,” remarked Jack, and
added enthusiastically: “I have an idea!”
Everyone staggered as though from a blow and sat
down with a bump.
“He has an idea,” gasped Tom.
“What a pity there are no doctors on the island,”
said Mary. “We could have him attended to.”
“It is what I have always wanted,” said Jack. “This
is my big chance!”
“How easily satisfied you are,” said Mother Goose.
“All I want is home.”
“Don’t worry about them, Jack,” said Bo Peep
kindly. “What is the idea?”
“Yes, let us hear,” said Mary. “So long as breakfast
has something to do with it.”
“Forget breakfast for a moment and think of lunch,”
said the Crooked Man.
What is the difference?” asked Mary.
I— er — we U, 1 don’t know,” replied the Crooked
Man.
Jack stood in the centre of them all and looked about
him with gleaming eyes.
“We have found Arcadia,” he said; “Utopia, what
you will —the ideal life. Away from the rest of the
world where Tom will not have to steal pigs, nor I


tarts; where Mary’s garden will always be lovely; where
Bo Peep will never worry about her sheep and Simple
Simon will not need a penny to get his pie; where there
are no spiders to worry Miss Muffet —”
“I haven’t worried about them for many years,” said
Miss Muffet. “You can get used to anything in time.”
“Here every man will be equal,” said Jack. “Even
Tom will not be regarded as a thief.”
“What about yourself?” asked Tom. “You stole
some tarts.”
“Ah, but there is a difference,” said Jack. “I was
not caught and you were.”
“All this is not making me a little the less hungry,”
said Mother Goose.
“We must search the island for food, said Jack,
“but first we must decide who is in command.”
“That is easily settled,” said Mother Goose. I am.
You are all Mother Goose characters so I must be the
boss.”
“I think a man should be in command,” said Tom.
“The best man, of course, and I don’t mind accepting
the leadership.”
“And I could be a prime minister or something,”
said Simon.
“Yes —you can be the something,” said Mary. “I
think the leader should be the one with the most brains
—and that is me, of course.”
“Not unless your brains are fit for cooking, said
Miss Muffet.
“Well —er —modest as I am,” began the Crooked
Man, but Miss Muffet cut him short.
“A woman should rule,” she said.
“Putting yourself up for election?” asked Jack.


“I think we should vote as to who will be leader,”
said Bo Peep gently.
“That’s a good idea,” said Mother Goose.
Why is it? asked Tom. “If everyone voted for
himself then we would get one vote each and be no
further ahead.”
“I would not vote for myself,” said Bo Peep.
In that case, said Mother Goose, “whoever you
voted for would be elected leader.”
And that s not fair, said Mary, knowing she would
not get the vote, “so we won’t have a leader.”
“We won’t go very far without a leader,” said Jack.
Who wants to go very far,” said Mary. “I’m com
tent to stay here.”
’There is no food here,” said Jack.
“Well, you lead yourself off and get some,” said
Mary. “Then you can bring it back to me.”
“You won’t get any food unless you work for it,”
said Jack. “Everyone will have to do some sort of
work. We must have some sort of laws—a constb
tution.
ha Yf a ver y em Pty constitution already,” said
Mother Goose dismally.
Let us feed on a goat,” suggested the Crooked Man.
Simon might not like us eating him,” said Mary.
t I say!” exclaimed Simon.
The first things we must get are food and shelter,”
said Jack. *
We need an axe to build a shelter and some sort
ot a weapon to get food,” remarked Tom.
There should be a lot of things we can use on the
wreck, said Jack. “We must get them before the tide
rises agam and it breaks up. We cannot climb down


that steep cliff so someone will have to swim to the
wreck.”
“I refuse —I have a reason,” said Simon.
“Are you afraid of getting wet?” asked Jack
sarcastically
“Well, no,” said Simon, “but I don’t think I would
be much good —I can’t swim.”
“Neither can I,” said the Crooked Man.
“Nor I,” said Tom.
“I can do the dog paddle,” said Mother Goose.
“Well, who CAN swim?” asked Mary.
“Well —er —I can swim,” said Jack, somewhat
reluctantly.
‘Then you are elected unopposed to be swimmer'
in'chief,” said Mother Goose.
“All right,” said Jack, “but you people will have to
help. There is a raft on board. I will swim to the
wreck and ferry back the raft and then you others can
take your turn to ferry it to the wreck, load it and
ferry it back again. That will make up for my swim.”
“That’s fair enough,” said Bo Peep.
“Who is going to be the judge of what is fair and
what is unfair?” asked Miss Muffet,
“Now I will start off on my swim while you others
are drawing up some sort of a constitution,” said Jack.
“Remember, not too many laws —and make the punish'
merits clear. Bo Peep, will you come down to the water
to see me off?”
“Of course,” said Bo Peep tenderly.
“The water is only three yards away,” said Tom
sourly. “We can all see you off from here. We want
her to help draw up the constitution.”
“Your constitutions are not in so much danger as
mine,” said Jack. “I want her to look out for sharks.


“Never fear,” said Tom, “even sharks won’t touch
some things.”
“Dear, will there be sharks?” Bo Peep asked Jack
fearfully.
‘There may be,” said Jack. “Good-bye, darling.”
He walked into the water and soon it was up to his
neck. He struck out then with a strong stroke, swim-
ming steadily towards the wreck. The others watched
him and Bo Peep kept her eyes on the water, afraid
she might see a black fin going towards him. But
nothing like that happened, because there were no
sharks in those waters —and Jack knew it, but he was
in love with Eo Peep and so liked to make her anxious
for him.
He swam on, his head becoming smaller and smaller
and gradually getting closer to the wreck. At last they
saw him pulling himself up the side, to vanish along
the deck. After a time he was seen again, and he threw
over the side the life-raft which had been on the top
deck ready to float off, but which they had not thought
of in the storm. He found one of the spars of the ship
for a punting pole, piled a few things on the raft,
climbed on it himself and, keeping close to the rocks
and the shore so that he could use his pole to propel
the raft, he worked his way towards them.
He is a useful young man—for a prince,” Mother
Goose said.
Anyone could do that,” said Tom scornfully.
‘I thought you couldn’t swim,” said Mary, and Tom
just grumbled to himself.
The raft scraped on the beach and Jack jumped off
and began unloading it. Bo Peep was close behind him
and she touched his arm fondly. He turned and smiled
at her, shaking his wet hair from his eyes.


I V> “N /
“I have brought you something to eat,” he said —
and was nearly pushed into the water when the others
rushed at him.
When they had all eaten some food they took their
turns at pushing the raft to the wreck, loading it and
bringing it back. The morning went by and the tide


began to rise. It would lift the ship off the rocks into
deeper water and then it would sink, so they had to
work fast. While some were doing this work others
were building a small house halfway up the hill, so
that when night came the ladies would have shelter.
It was while Jack was engaged in this work and the
house was nearly finished that he happened to glance
up at the top of the hill and got such a surprise that he
dropped a hammer on his toe. Standing there was a
funny little fat man with a white cap and a check apron.
“Who —who are you?” Jack asked.
The little man smiled, threw back his head and began
to sing “I care for nobody—no! not I, since nobody
cares for me.”
When the others heard the voice they all looked up
and saw the little man.
“It’s the jolly miller!” gasped Mother Goose.
“Who’s he?” asked Miss Muffet.
‘There was a jolly miller lived on the River Dee,”
recited Mother Goose. “He worked and sang from
morn till night, no lark so blithe as he. And this the
burden of his song forever used to be—”
“I care for nobody—no, not I,” sang the little fat
man, “since nobody cares for me.”
“But here what does he is doing—” said the Crooked
Man, very tangled up.
“What is he doing here?” asked Bo Peep.
“We’d better ask him,” said Mother Goose, walking
up the hill, followed by the others.
What are you doing here?” asked Mother Goose
of the miller. “This is not the River Dee. Why are
you here?”
“Because I care for nobody and nobody cares for
me, sang the fat man. “So I live on an island, all on


my own. Where no one can touch my grain when it's
grown. When I was a jolly miller upon the River Dee,
The little boys, the little birds, they all would worry
me.
“I see,” said Mother Goose as he paused for breath
and smiled at them. “You came here to get away from
other people.”
She got to the top of the hill and saw on the other
side a little valley in which was a tiny mill and a
field of wheat, shining yellow in the sun and sighing
as the wind combed its hair.
“But what is the use of a mill,” asked Tom, “and
wheat and flour if there is no one to sell it to?”
“I have a dog, I have a cat,” sang the jolly miller.
“No man could ask for more than that. And the reason
I make so much flour? Why, I can eat it by the hour.”
“You mean you eat all your flour yourself?” asked
Miss Muffet. “Isn’t that silly?”
“If now of silly things we talk,” said the miller,
“Why, what of people who won’t walk —on to a hill
where they could see, A mill and food in great plernty?
What do those people do instead? They work all day
to build a shed. And work a raft to get some food,
When I have plenty just as good.”
“If you knew we were doing all this,” said Jack
indignantly, “you should have told us long ago.”
The miller threw back his head and laughed, then
turned and walked down the hill towards his mill,
singing: “I care for nobody—no, not I, since nobody
cares for me.”
“He might be a jolly miller,” said Bo Peep as they
all followed the fat man, “but I think he is also very
selfish and I don’t see how he can be jolly when no one
cares for him and he cares for nobody.”


As they went down the path they saw many notices
fixed to the trees reading: “No one lives here, so go
away,” “Trespassers will waste their time, 11 “Nothing
to-day, thank you, 11 “Flour Quota Sold for this Year, 11
“Go round the back —and don’t come back, 11 and many
other similar signs.
Over the door of the mill was a large sign, “The
Jolly Miller—Keep Out, 11 and on the door mat was the
word “Unwelcome.” The castaways took no notice of
the signs, just as people usually do, and they followed
the fat man into the mill and found a large room which
seemed to have nothing in it but musical instruments.
There was a grand piano with a dog asleep on the top
and on a drum was a cat; pipes and flutes and whistles
and comets and mouth-organs, an organ, a harp and
all sorts of weird things for making weird sounds were
spread around the place.
“Who plays all these? 11 asked Mother Goose.
“I cannot play a note myself, 11 sang the miller. “But
I like to have them on the shelf. In any case to blow a
thing, I could not do and also sing. 11
“Then why have them? 11 asked Jack,
“Because I sold the fairies wheat, When they
required things to eat. These things all play them-
selves, you see. It’s just a piece of wizardry. Perhaps
you’d like to see the way. All right, come on, Piano —
play. 11
The piano immediately started to play a lively tune
and, as the castaways stared in amazement, the miller
began to sing very loudly and dance. The dog jumped
from the piano and danced with him and the cat sat
up and sang. The noise was not very tuneful, so
Mother Goose led the way through a far door into a
room piled high with flour sacks round the milling


machinery—the grinding wheel. A flight of stairs led
from this room and up they climbed, to come to a small
bedroom with a large bed. It was very untidy and
was evidently the miller’s bedroom.
“Don’t you think,” whispered Mary, “that the miller
is a little mad?”
“I was wondering that,” said Mother Goose, “but he
seems quite happy, so perhaps we are the mad ones.
He seems to have the help of the fairies and that would
be a good thing.”
“He might be able to get us home,” said Tom.
“Perhaps he has some way.”
“I like it here,” said Jack, looking fondly at Bo Peep.
“I am in no hurry to go home.”
“Well, I am!” said Mother Goose. “Let’s ask him
if he can get us home.”
She went down the stairs and through the grinding
room to the music room, where the miller was just
finishing his dance. The dog and cat took no notice
of the new arrivals. Evidently they cared for nobody,
too.
“Tell me,” said Mother Goose to the breathless
miller as he sat resting on the floor—there being no
chairs, “have you a boat?”
“I have no boat—l have no crew,” the miller sang.
“I wish I could get rid of you. It is so clear, it is so
plain. You give me nothing but a pain.”
“Perhaps the fairies have a boat?” Mother Goose
suggested.
The jolly miller laughed heartily.
“And don’t you know that fairies fly?” he sang.
“They need a boat no more than I. But maybe they
will make you one. Then you can go —that WOULD
be fun.”


He walked over to the cat and whispered in its ear
and a moment later it sped out the door and vanished
from sight.
“I’ve told my cat he’ll get a rat, If he can get a boat
like that. He’ll ask the fairies, never fear, So soon you
may be far from here.”
In a very few minutes the cat was back and the
miller picked it up, so that it could whisper in his ear.
He grinned broadly as it did so and burst into loud song.
“The news I’ve had is very good—just take your
way into the wood. There you’ll find a ship and bay.
And gladly I now sing ‘Good Day.’ ”
‘Thank you,” said Mother Goose, and they all
trooped out of the mill and into the trees.
As they went along the path they could hear the
miller singing:
“I don’t like strangers round the place—l’d like to
smack ’em on the face. And when I say to them
‘GoodTye,’ You never see me sigh or cry—ln fact I
don’t care if they die —I don’t care if they die.”
“I didn’t like that jolly miller at all,” said Bo Peep.
“I hope he is not sending us into danger.”
“We’ll have to chance it,” said Jack. “Keep close
to me.”
At the end of the path they came to a small round
bay which was on the opposite side of the island to that
on which they were wrecked. There was a little jetty
there and tied up to it was a lovely ship. Well, it was
more of a boat than a ship, as it had no sails and was
just an open craft filled with soft cushions. The ladies
cried out with delight and clambered aboard.
Jack stood upon the jetty and looked round to see if
there were any fairies. He had never seen a fairy and
he wondered if one would be as beautiful as Bo Peco.
x


He did not think any fairy could be so lovely, but then
he was in love and so somewhat biassed.
There was no one in sight, however, so he followed
the others on to the boat and cast off the rope which
tied it to the jetty.
At once the boat began to move very quickly, skid'
dmg across the waves and heading straight out to sea.
It kept going straight for some miles.
“This is not going home,” said Mother Goose.
“Where are we going to? Maybe that miller did not
tell the cat to get a boat to take us home, but just to
get rid of us.”
“Rid of us!” gasped Miss Muffet.
The boat stopped suddenly, throwing them all
together in a heap. When they sat up they saw they
were miles out to sea and were going nowhere,
“We’ll never get home at this rate,” said Simon.
“We won’t get anywhere.”
Bo Peep screamed. She had made an alarming
discovery.
“We will get somewhere,” she cried, “but it won’t
be home. The boat is fading away —and only one of
us can swim!”
Almost everyone screamed then and there was such
panic for a moment that if it had not been a fairy boat
it would have surely been upset. Jack kept his head.
He stood up on the end of the boat, which was rapidly
dissolving away from around them, and shouted.
“Fairies —don’t do this to us. If the miller promised
you a bag of flour or some wheat to take us out to sea
and dump us there then we will give you twice as
much if you will take us home. We will fill the boat
with honey and nectar, which I know you love.”
The boat stopped dissolving. The sides had almost


reached the water. It remained like that while they
waited anxiously—then it began slowly to grow again.
All breathed sighs of relief.
“We live in Rhymeland,” shouted Jack. “My father
is one of the kings and he is rich and my uncle is Old
King Cole and he is rich, too. Take us to Rhymeland.”
The boat set off again and this time it was going in
the right direction.
“What a nasty old rascal that miller turned out to
be, said Mother Goose. “I hope he loses all his sugar
coupons. Fancy wanting to drown us all.”
“I can quite understand no one caring for him,”
said Miss Muffet.
“We should have been all drowned now if it had not
been for Jack,” said Bo Peep proudly.
“Oh, anyone could have done that,” said Tom.
‘There is one thing that anyone cannot do,” said
Bo Peep, “and that is marry me. But Jack can do it.”
“Darling!” said Jack, and Tom ground his teeth.
“Perhaps that’s one thing no one else wants to do,”
the piper’s son said spitefully, and decided he would
fall in love with Mary, who, he was sure, was already
in love with himself.
“I’m housey we sorry that built,” said the Crooked
Man. “I mean, I’m sorry we built that house. It was
all of time a waste.”
“It is a wonder the clever Jack did not think to walk
up the hill,” said Tom. “Maybe he felt like a long
swim and it was a good chance to show off.”
111 pitch you over the side in a moment,” said Jack,
and then you can do a bit of showing off with your
swimming. But you can only run, can’t you?”
“Children—children,” said Mother Goose. “Stop
shooting off your faces or I’ll bump you off.”


‘‘Mother Goose,” said the Crooked Man, “please do
Walt Disney pictures no more —Hollywood is for you
bad.”
“Oh, straighten yourself cut,” said Mother Goose
rudely. “Look, there is the land —our land.”
The eight turned and looked and raised a cheer. For
there was home. Bo Peep immediately began to make
plans for her royal wedding, Miss Muffet licked her lips
at thought of curds and whey, and the Crooked Man
would be glad to get a crooked stick to walk with;
Tom thought of nice roast pork; Mother Goose
wondered how her geese were faring; Simon wondered
which was the nearest pie shop where he could get
credit, for he had no penny; Mary wondered how her
garden was going, and Jack could think of nothing else
but Bo Peep.
When the people of Rhymeland had heard that the
Crooked Man’s ship had been lost they were very cast
down and were just preparing ships to go in search of
the wanderers, and also a day of mourning if no one
was found. When the boat was sighted coming in and
the travellers were recognised a great crowd gathered
to welcome them.
The eight people on the fairy crait stood up and
cheered and forgot all their adventures on Mother
Goose Island, as they had named it.
As the Crooked Man said: “It’s an ill good that blows
nobody any wind.”
THE END


3 1508 01593464 4


Nl A?a3.2 H4gg
—r~- - -
