

MM 173
31508023092184


>; $ ; : I y I: ■ ■ •' - •' t
•l< wf i M


PLATYPUS SERIES
Price 2/6, (post free, 2/8)
Obtainable from all Booksellers and Newsagents
in Australia, New Zealand and South Africa.
London:
1 lie Australian Book Coy., 16 Farringdon Avenue.
FOR BOYS AND GIRLS
Each volume well illustrated
Australian Nursery Rhymes, edited by Zora Cross.
Barrett (Charles) Bushland Babies. 15 illustrations.
Mack (Amy Eleanor) Bushland Stories
Mack (Amy Eleanor) Scribbling Sue and Other Stories
Mack (Louise) Girls Together: a Sequel to "Teens"
Mack (Louise) Teens: a Story of Australian Schoolgirls
Mackness (Constance) Gem of the Flat
Pedley (Ethel C.) Dot and the Kangaroo
FICTION
Abbott (J.H.M.) Castle Vane: an Australian Novel
Abbott (J.H.M.) Sydney Cove: a Historical Novel
Bassett (Mary E. Stone) Judith's Garden
Bassett (Mary E. Stone) The Little Green Door
Boldrewood (Rolf) The Squatter's Dream
Caine (William) Mendoza and a Little Lady.
Hawkes (Clarence) Piebald, King of Bronchos: The Story
of a Wild Horse
Lawson (Henry) Joe Wilson
Lavvson (Henry) Joe Wilson's Mates
Lawson (Henry) On the Track
Lawson (Henry) Over the Sliprails
Lawson (Henry) Romance of the Swag
Lawson (Henry) Send Round the Hat
Lawson (Henry) While the Billy Boils, Ist Series
Lawson (Henry) While the Billy Boils, 2nd Serie
Paterson (A.8., "Banjo") An Outback Marriage
Paterson (A.8., "Banjo") Three Elephant Power
VERSE
Kendall (Henry) Selected Poems
Lawson (Henry) Humorous Verses
Lawson (Henry) Popular Verses
Lawson (Henry) Winnowed Verse
Paterson (A.8., "Banjo") Snowy River
Paterson (A.8., "Banjo") Rio Grande
Paterson (A.8., "Banjo") Saltbush Bill
Paterson (A.8., Editor) Old Bush Songs
MISCELLANEOUS
Barton (G. 8.) The True Story of Margaret Catchpole,
Boxall (G.E.) History of the Australian Bushrangers
Vol. 1 To the Time of Frank Gardiner *
Vol. 2 To the End of the Kelly Gang
Fitzgerald (J.D.) Studies of Famous Australian Crimes,
2 vols., each complete in itself.






HAROLD WOODLANDS.
1 3 FEB IC3I
BUSHLAND BABIES


%
TIIE KOALA AND HER BABY


BUSHLAND BABIES
CHARLES BARRETT
C.M.Z.S., M.8.0.U., Author of From Range to Sea,
The Isle of Palms, In Australian Wilds, Etc.
With 26 illustrations
AUSTRALIA:
CORNSTALK PUBLISHING COMPANY
ARNOLD PLACE, SYDNEY
1924


Wholly set up and printed In Australia by
Eagle Press, Ltd., Allen Street, Waterloo.
Registered by the Postmaster-General for trans-
mission through the post as a book.
Obtainable In Great Britain at the British Australian Book-
store, 51 High Holborn, London, W.C.I, the Bookstall in the
Central Hall of Australia House, Strand, W.C., and from
all other Booksellers; and (wholesale only) from the Australian
Book Company, 16 Farringdon Avenue, London, E.C.4.


BEATRICE AND DONALD
WHO LOVE THE BUSHLAND BABIES




CONTENTS
I COLIN AND THE SWALLOWS I
II IN BLOSSOMVILLE 9
111 FAIRIES IN FERNLAND 45
IV HOMES IN HOLLOWS 74
V WHERE THE CUCKOOS CALL 93
VI THE BIG RIVER 106
VII WATER-BABIES 128
VIII LAND AND SEA 14^




ILLUSTRATIONS
(From Photographs by the Author and Others)
THE KOALA AND HER BABY .... Frontispiece
THE SWALLOWS' NEST .... facing page 4
THE BABY DOVES IN THEIR NEST . . „ 5
BLUECAP OUT IN THE WORLD . . „ 22
THE BABY BRONZE CUCKOO ... „ 22
MRS. YELLOWBOB AT HOME ... „ 23
MRS. YELLOWBOB AND THE FLEDGLINGS . „ 23
THE KOOKABURRA PERCHED ON A TREE-STUMP „ 38
THE BABY KOOKABURRA .... „ . 38
GOLDIE'S HOME IN THE APPLETREE . „ 39
THE SCRUB-WREN AT HIS NEST . „ 39
A LITTLE HONEY-EATER LOST ... „ 70
KAKADOE AND HIS WIFE .... „ 70
YEERINGA THE KESTREL'S BROOD . . „ 86
THE OWLET WAS LIKE A LITTLE TURK . „ 90
WANDO, THE COCKATIEL BABY ... „ 90
AN OLD "BEARDY" LIZARD .... „ 106
THE LITTLE CHAT ON THE THISTLE . . „ 106
A GLIMPSE OF MIRROR LAKE ... „ 114
THE PIGEON BABIES IN THE NURSERY . „ 118
NEST AND EGGS OF SALTBUSH CANARY . „ 118
THE CYGNET IN ITS NURSERY . . „ 134
YOUNG MAGPIE-LARK „ 134
THE BABY DOTTERELS JESSIE SAW . . „ 146
THE WOOD-SWALLOW BABY ... „ 154
THE LITTLE RABBIT „ 154




CHAPTER I
COLIN AND THE SWALLOWS
IT all began with the Swallows. When they
came to Wilangi in wattle time Colin w&s
there to greet them. He had always loved Swal-
lows. Everybody does. They are dear little
pilgrim birds, who come south with the sunshine
and a message from spring, when winter is
donning his sandals and crying to us, "Fare-
well." They must be happy always, I think;
they twitter so cheerily.
Colin was only eight. His home was not here,
where he welcomed the swallows, but far away,
beyond the hills, in a city by the sea. He had
never been in the Bush before: it was a country
new and strange to him, and full of delightful
things. Wilangi, too, was a pleasant place,
with its wide verandahs, shady and cool; its
quaint old rooms and gabled roof, and a garden
so big that Colin could almost lose himself in
it. One path led into the orchard; another under
crooning boughs into a great paddock with a
creek flowing through it. Colin envied his cousin,
who lived at Wilangi all the year round. He
was glad that he had a long holiday to spend
at her Bushland home.


Nature, the kind old nurse, took a fancy to
Colin when he was a baby. On a summer after-
noon, when the nursery window was wide open
and Colin lay in his cot trying to capture a sun-
beam in his tiny hands, Nature peeped in and
smiled at him. She sent a brown butterfly from
the garden to float about the room. Colin cooed
with delight; and his dimples were so pretty
that his mother bent over and kissed him. Then
a swallow came in and flew to a bracket on the
wall, just opposite to Colin's cot. It perched
there and preened its feathers. Presently its
mate came flying through the window, and, to-
gether on the bracket, they twittered as if they
were discussing something very important. And
so they were.
Next day the swallows came again, and com-
menced to build a nest on the bracket. Colin
watched them bringing mud-pellets, gathered
from a pool under the garden tap. They worked
busily every day till their cradle was finished, all
but the lining. Then the little builders brought
soft feathers in their beaks, and arranged them
neatly in the nest, excepting a few that would
stand nodding above the rim.
Colin cooed and dimpled whenever he saw the
swallows. I suppose he thought they were
fairies. No, he couldn't think that, of course;
he was only a baby. But he was always happy
after the swallows came. So they were allowed
to rear their brood in peace, though Alice, the


nursemaid, grumbled a little, because she had to
take from the bracket her favourite blue china
vase. When four tiny white eggs, speckled with
red, rested in the nest, Colin was held up to see
them. They were so dainty that a rough finger-
touch would have crushed them. The mother
bird stayed at home now. She sat patiently on
the nest, and her mate brought her food from
the outdoor world. They greeted each other so
prettily, and Colin liked to hear their soft notes
of love and contentment.
At last the eggs hatched, and the old birds had
to hunt from dawn till dusk every day to keep
their brood from hunger. The baby swallows
never seemed to be satisfied. They ate and ate,
and always cried for more. Three meals a day!
Why, they had dozens and dozens. It was funny
to see how they gobbled down little winged in-
sects as fast as their parents could bring them
to the nest.
The swallow babies were born blind, like
puppies and kittens, and their eyes did not open
till they were nine days old. Three weeks later
they were able to flutter from their cradle and
follow their father and mother through the win-
dow into the garden. Colin saw them go, and
he was sorry, for he thought that they would
never return. But they did. About noon each
day, for a week, the little birds came, and rested
for a few hours in the old nest on the bracket.
Then they left it forever to begin their happy


life in Birdland. In autumn, though some of
their friends remained to spend winter in the
south, they went north to the land of palms;
but when wattle gold gleamed in the Bushland
again, they returned and were married, and
built nests on rafters in the stable, or just be-
neath the verandah roof.
When Colin was old enough to chase butter-
flies and climb on the gate, the garden became
his playground. His mother would show him
a picture book of animals, and tell him stories
about them. Then he would run into the garden
and look for wild birds. He liked best to be
among the tea-tree which grew thickly in a far
corner, and was always full of birds. There the
Java doves nested one season, building so
close to the ground, that Colin, standing
011 tiptoe on a soap box, could see right
into the nest. He saw two white eggs
resting on a little platform of twigs. And
when they had hatched, he went every
morning to peep at the baby doves.
When they grew up and left their nursery,
Colin hoped that they would stay in the garden;
but the young doves flew over the garden wall,
and he never saw them again.
In the centre of the lawn, there was a big
earthern bowl, filled with water. Colin called
it the "bird bath." Every day in summer-time,
birds came to the bowl to drink or bathe. Colin
loved to see thrushes and starlings perch on the


, - W
Wr
1 0 *
THE SWALLOWS' NEST BENEATH THE VERANDAH


THE BABY DOVES IN THEIR NEST


rim, or splash in the cool water as merrily as
he did in his own tub, just before bed-time. It
was better fun watching them, he thought, than
playing with tin soldiers or riding on a scooter.
A drowsy afternoon at Wilangi. There
were no sounds but the soft twittering of swal-
lows, busy feeding their young, and a murmur
of bees in convolvulus bells. Colin, coiled on a
cushion in the lounge chair, was slipping into
dreamland when a dull "plomp" aroused him.
A baby swallow had fallen from one of the nests
under the verandah. Colin lifted it tenderly.
He was sorry for the trembling little thing. Its
parents were at the nest now, and they seemed
to be asking Colin to' give them their luckless
baby. The nest was beyond his reach; but he
ran all the way to the stables, where Jim Driscoll
was whistling over his task of harness cleaning.
"Queer little cuss, ain't he?" laughed Jim,
when he heard the tale of woe. "Let's give him
to the cat."
Colin shrank from the stable boy, and put the
baby bird into his pocket.
"Oh! it's all right," and Jim laughed again.
"Only teasing you, Colin. Come on."
Jim carried a step ladder to the verandah, and
let Colin climb up and place the swallow in the
nest. Its brothers and sisters—there were four


of them —thought that their parents had come
with food, and held their beaks wide open. They
looked so funny that Colin laughed and nearly
tumbled off the ladder.
When Jim had returned to his work, Colin
lay in the chair again, feeling very happy. The
old swallows were happy, too, twittering up at
their nest. A sunbeam, slanting through the trel-
lis, kissed Colin's face. The wind fanned him
softly, and the murmur of bees was like a lullaby.
"It's jolly to have no lessons to learn," thought
Colin. "I'd like to be a swallow, and fly all day
in the sunshine What's that?"
Someone was singing, quite close to Colin, yet
he could see nobody. The song was like bird
music, but Colin heard the words clearly:
It is spring, sweet spring,
When the wattle gold falls,
When the bluebells ring
And the Bluebird calls.
When buds on the trees
Are kissed by the sun,
And loud hum the bees,
Sweet spring has begun.
Colin was puzzled. He had never heard such
a song before, nor such a sweet, bird-like voice
as the singer's. He looked all round, down the
garden path, and into the cool green shade of


trellised creepers. There was no one to be seen.
Colin, though fond of reading about them, didn't
believe in fairies. But now he half expected
to see a tiny, green-hooded being pop out of a
blossom and greet him. What happened was
just as strange.
One of the swallows, whose baby Colin had
rescued, flew on to his chair, and sang the blos-
som song over again.
Colin sat still as a mouse in hiding.
"You have always been our friend, Colin," said
the Swallow, when the song ended. "You love
us, and so we love you. When my baby fell out
of the nest just now, I knew you would save it.
You are so kind, Colin, that I want you to come
with me on a little journey through Birdland.
I'm sure you'll like it. Come along. We'll start
now."
"Oh, thank you," Colin answered. "But how
far away is Birdland? Can I get back in time
for tea?"
He was so surprised, you see, that he hardly
knew what to say.
"Cheerie-wee" sang the Swallow, stretching
his wings. "Birdland, dear Colin, is so big that
you couldn't see half of it though you travelled
for a hundred years. We live in all parts of the
world, even round the South Pole. But the best
of Birdland is in Australia j and I'll show you
the nicest places. If you come with me, you'll
see lots of beautiful baby birds, and lots of nests


full of eggs. I know that you won't steal any:
you belong to the Gould League."
"I'll come with you," cried Colin, jumping up.
"But I can't fly."
"That's all right, Colin, I'll fly along slowly,
and you can walk where I lead. We'll have
plenty of things to see, you know. I'm going
to introduce you to some of my friends, and ask
them to tell you all about their nests and their
babies."


CHAPTER II
IN BLOSSOMVILLE
THE sky was blue and smiling after rain. A
summer shower, just before noon, had made the
leaves glisten. And the lilac and the roses were
sweeter than ever. The garden looked clean as
a new pin, and all the birds were singing
blithely, when Colin set out with the Swallow
to see the wonders of Birdland.
Colin stopped near the garden gate, to pick
a flower. When he looked up the Swallow was
missing; but he appeared a minute later.
"I had to fly back to my nest," he explained.
"My wife spoils the children, you know, Colin;
and I had forgotten to tell her that little Muralie
was not to have any more moths till sundown.
He is rather greedy, and gets more than his share
of nice things."
Colin laughed. He wondered what moths
tasted like.
Out of the garden and through the paddock
the Swallow led Colin. Then over the creek and
along a white dusty road that was bordered with
tall gum-trees. They had travelled more than
mile, when the Swallow flew on to a slender


bough, and told Colin to sit down and rest.
"Do you know where we are going now?"
"To Birdland," answered Colin. .
, «- *
"Of course we are," said the Swallow. "But
what place in Birdland? You could never guess
right. We are going to Blossomville. And while
we rest in the shade which you like, as I like sun-
shine, I'll tell you the story of our beautiful city:
"Once upon a time, but not so very long ago,
there was an old orchard, which nobody owned
or cared for. So Nature gave it to the birds. It
was a big, rambling orchard, with rows and rows
of fruit trees, apples and plums and pears and
cherries, and many other kinds. There were gaps
in the fence all round, and the bits that remained
standing were overgrown by blackberry bushes
and sweet-briar roses. The gate still swung on
one rusty hinge; but the path which led from
it through the orchard was carpeted in weeds.
No one had trodden it for years. No knife had
pruned the spreading boughs, and only birds took
toll of the fruit.
"Once the orchard was famed far and wide
for its apples and pears. The place belonged to
a rich old man, who had no one in all the wide
world to love but a little, brown-haired girl. They
lived in a bungalow near the orchard, and were
happy as any folk could be. But one morning in
spring, when birds were nesting and the scent
of the lilac was on the air, the old man's daughter
was taken from him. He shut up the house, and


went to a far country. He never came back
again. The orchard was left to run wild. That
was its owner's will; and he would not let anyone
live in the bungalow."
"What a sad story," said Colin.
"Yes," the Swallow agreed. "But now the
orchard belongs to us. We call it Blossomville.
In spring, the trees are veiled in white and pink
flowers, and petals lie thick on the ground. Lena,
the rich old man's daughter, loved to be in the
orchard. Her pet cow grazed there on a grassy
plot, hedged by alrrtond-trees, and ate her morn-
ing meal from an old tin. Lena would swing on
a bough and pelt her with blossom. I wasn't
alive then, Colin, but my grandfather often saw
Lena when he was skimming over the glade."
"Are there many birds in Blossomville?"
"It is one of our finest cities," replied the
Swallow, proudly.
"As big as Sydney?"
"I've never been to Sydney. I'm sure it isn't
as beautiful as Blossomville; though it may be
bigger. There are nests everywhere in our city,
so many, Colin, that you couldn't count them all:
nests in the trees and the bushes; nests in the
grass and among the brambles along the old
ruined fence. Every year, hundreds of tits and
robins and wrens are born in Blossomville."
"Let us hurry," cried Colin, "I'm not a bit
tired; and I do want to see Blossomville before
I go home."


So they continued their journey to Birdland.
The way was down the white road for another
mile, then through wild country to an old track
that ended before an orchard gate.
The Swallow perched on the gate-post, and
sang its sweetest song. Colin walked up the
track. The gate was swinging from a rusty
hinge, and creaked dismally when he pushed it
open.
"Welcome to Blossomville," said the Swallow.
"There are some of my friends coming to greet
us. I sent them a message by the swift, before
we left Wilangi. He was going this way to
meet a storm. The swifts like stormy skies.
They fly faster than your aeroplanes, Colin, and
wheel and dive splendidly."
"I wish I could fly." Colin gazed enviously rt
a lark, which rose from the long grass and went
soaring into the blue.
"If you could," said the Swallow, "I would take
you over the tree-tops, and you would see the
homes of the eaglehaw\k, and other big birds
that build their nests among high branches. You
would see merry little lorikeets holding parties
among the gum-blossoms; and hosts of insects,
too, feasting on nectar. The tree-tops, Colin
dear, are our green mansions. I would love you
to see them ; but you can't, of course, because
you have no wings. Never mind. When you
grow up, remember what I've told you, and go
sailing over the trees in an aeroplane,"


"Yes, I will," said Colin. "It must be scrump-
tious to fly over them."
"Scrumptious!" cried the Swallow. "What's
that mean?"
"Oh! it's just a word," laughed Colin. "Cousin
Jessie says it when she gets anything very nice."
The Swallow's friends came flocking to the
gateway. They sang and chattered, all together.
Colin had never heard such a queer jumble of
sounds before. There were all sorts of birds in
the company: cheeky little tom-tits, whose
voices were like the tinkle of broken glass; blue
wrens, which warbled sweetly and held their
long tails over their backs; yellow-robins, with
large bright eyes; fantails, whose acrobatic
flights charmed Colin; grey-thrushes, black-
birds, and scores of others. Some of them kept
in the background, as if they were half afraid.
A big brown Kookaburra was the boldest of all.
He flew up and perched on a tree-stump, close
to Colin, and began to chuckle.
"What are you laughing at?" asked Colin's
friend, sharply.
"Only at you," gurgled Old Jack. "You've lost
one of your tail feathers, Mr. Swallow."
The Swallow twisted his head and looked at
his tail. He really had lost a long feather.
"Oh! bother," he cried, "I must have knocked
it out when I dived through the wattles yester-
day. I was after a Bogong moth, a fine fat one
and I got him, too."


"What's it matter, anyhow?" asked a Gold-
finch. "We all lose feathers in moulting time."
"I lost half of my tail once," remarked a blue
wren. "A cat pounced on me, over there by the
bungalow. The narrowest escape I ever had in
my life. I hate cats."
"So do I," chorused the other birds.
Now Colin was rather fond of cats. He had
a pet Persian at home, but, wisely, he said
nothing about her.
The Swallow asked the Kookaburra, who was
Lord Mayor of Blossomville, to call for order.
"How can I tell you about my young friend
from Wilangi while there is such a noise?" The
Swallow spoke from his perch on the gate-post.
Colin stood near, amazed by all that he saw and
heard.
"Colin is not a Bush boy," said the Swallow,
when the Blossomville birds became silent. "He
came from a big city down by the sea. He never
robs nests. When one of my children fell out
of the nest, Colin saved him. I want you to give
him a Birdland welcome."
All the birds rustled their wings, and each
kind uttered the tribal call. Then they sang
loudly till the Lord Mayor gave them the signal
to stop.
"That's fine," whispered the Swallow to Colin.
"You're free now to wander in Blossomville. I'll
ask some of my special friends to show you their


homes, while I'm away, and tell you all about
themselves."
"Where are you going?" asked Colin.
"Back to Wilangi I must see how the babies
are getting on. But I'll be here again to-morrow;
and if you are tired of Blossomville, I'll take you
to Fernland, another of our cities."
"I must go home with you now," declared
Colin. "They'll think that I'm lost." He wanted
to stay in Blossomville; but what would happen
at Wilangi when they missed him?
"Don't worry, Colin." The Swallow spoke
softly. "I'll tell them you're safe, and will be
home in a day or two. Now I must speak to my
friends about you. The Yellow Robins are a
quiet family. They live close by. See, there is
Mrs. Robin, just off her nest."
The Swallow asked the Yellow Robins, the
Blue Wrens, and some other families to entertain
Colin. They all said that they would be "de-
lighted." Then the Swallow, with a cheery good-
bye, darted away at full speed. Before he was
out of sight, a Wren hopped up to Colin, and
a Robin flew on to the gate-post.
"Please come with me," urged Bluecap.
"My home is nearest," said Yellowbob.
Colin looked from one to the other. He didn't
know what to do. It was like getting invitations
for two birthday parties on the same day. He
was still undecided, when the Lord Mayor set-
tled the question for him.


"Go with Bluecap, Colin," said Kookaburra,
"and let me know if he boasts too much of his
fine feathers. He's a vain little dandy."
Bluecap flicked his long tail, and glanced at
his wife, who was hunting for caterpillars in a
currant bush.
"Come along, Mr. Colin," he chirruped. "I'll
show you something worth seeing: the bonniest
baby birds in Blossomville."
With his tail straight out, he flew to a clump
ot dead grass, overarched by a sweet-briar rose.
Colin followed along the path, and saw a domed
nest, with a side entrance. Bluecap popped his
head in, and told his three children not to be
frightened. Then one of the fledglings climbed
up to the doorway, and clung there, blinking.
He was a comical little chap; but Colin declared
politely, that he was beautiful.
"Yes, he's a darling," said Bluecap. "And so
are my other sons. I only hope they will be as
clever as their father, and get on in the world.
Shall I tell you my story?"
"Oh, yes, please."
"I knew you would like to hear it. You see,
I am one of the leaders of Blossomville society.
Sit down under that apple-tree, Colin, and listen.
Just one moment, please; there is Mrs. Bluecap.
I must see what she's brought for the children."
Colin saw a little brown bird, with a beak full
of green caterpillars, fly to the nest. Bluecap


greeted her, and then returned to his perch, on a
spray close to Colin's head.
"Early in spring, three years ago," began Blue-
cap, "my parents came to Blossomville. They
searched all day for a nesting site; and wished
they had gone somewhere else. All the best
spots seemed to have been taken already. Still,
they must start nest building soon, or the other
blue wrens would all have families abroad be-
fore them. So they went on seeking, and at
length they discovered a snug little place, under
a blackberry bush. They were just in time. A
pair of brown tits came along, and scolded
father and mother rudely. The Tits are always
scolding, Colin; and I hope you'll have nothing
to do with them. They're greedy, too. Well,
there was plenty of nice dry grass about, and
my parents began to build at once. I believe
mother did nearly all the work; father sang to
her and chased away any bold birds that dared
to come near. I did the same when my own
little wife was making our home over there.
My mother worked hard and the nest was soon
finished. The lining was pretty. I remember
there were some rosella feathers just by the
door. There were four eggs-—white with reddish-
brown freckles —but one was broken somehow.
Fifteen days after the last egg was laid, my
brothers and I were born. Then father and
mother Were kept busy. Baby wrens have big


appetites. And father said that I was the
hungriest chick he had ever reared.
''Our eyes opened when we were a week old,
and a few days later we had a nice lot of feathers
on our wings and bodies; but our tails were
stumpy. If you had seen me then, Colin, you
would have laughed. And now, see how splen-
did lam ! No other wren in Blossomville has
such a fine tail, or a cap so lovely as mine. It
was a great day when we left the nest. Cur
parents were anxious and flurried; so were my
brothers. But I didn't worry at all. I scrambled
out and fluttered on to a twig. The others tum-
bled to the ground, and crouched there, shivering
their wings and cheeping. It made me smile
to see them. Fancy the silly birds being
frightened!
"We all had a good time, after that. It was
fun learning to fly. Of course, I was always the
best of the brood: quick and clever. And I got
more to eat than my brothers. When we were
five weeks old, our tails were nearly as long as
father's. We could fly pretty well, and were
able to catch moths and grubs for ourselves.
But we stayed with the old folks for another
month, then we had to leave them and seek our
own fortunes.
"I soon lost sight of my brothers. I felt rather
lonely at first. It was so strange to be out in
the world without even a friend for company.
And I was so hungry. But it was no use moping.


So I flew on to a small stump and gazed around.
I saw a blue wren, just like father, and called
to him. He darted at me so fiercely that I fled as
fast as my wings could carry me. I never made
that mistake again. My wisdom grew with my
feathers. One day was much like another till
I moulted, and my long tail turned from brown
to light blue. I was five months old then. One
morning, when I was hunting, as usual, for food,
a great bird attacked me, swooping down from
the sky. I dived into a bush, and the butcher-
bird missed a meal by inches. His hooked bill
snapped close to my tail. A miss is as good as
a mile off, Colin; but it was a terrible adventure,
and taught me to be wary. I've had many narrow
escapes since then. We all have them* Peril
is part of our lives, and we don't worry about it
till the shadow of death is near. That is the way
of the wilds.
"A month before my first birthday I was one
of the smartest wrens in Blossomville, with a
shining blue cap and lovely coat, and the tail of
which I am still so proud. Our ladies dress
plainly in brown; but they admire our beauty.
It is only right that they should, for we are
their lords. I fell in love with a dear little bird;
and I had to fight to win her. My rivals were
strong and fierce; but I beat them all, and flew
away with my bride in search of a nesting place.
My first family was reared not twenty hops
from where you are sitting."


Colin thanked Bluecap for his story. HP
thought him a very boastful bird, and a
vain one, too; but, really, he was beautiful.
Yellowbob called from the gate-post: "Hurry
up Colin. I've been waiting for hours while
you listened to old Bluecap. He talks and talks,
but never talks sense. Hurry up, Colin dear, or
you won't see my babies before the sun sets."
Colin ran down to the gate.
"I'm sorry," he said, "but Bluecap told me
such a long story."
"His stories are longer than his tail," snapped
Yellowbob. "I suppose he showed you his fam-
ily. Wait till you see mine! Come along."
The Robin led Colin to a clump of gums and
dogwood, in a corner where no fruit trees grew.
In the fork of one sapling, Colin saw a robin's
nest, with the mother bird on it. She nodded in
a friendly way, and told Colin that there were
three eggs in the nest, which was a deep cup of
bark, draped with green lichens.
"That is my cousin," Colin's guide remarked;
"I do hope she will have good luck this time.
Her first nest was blown down, you know; and
a cuckoo placed its egg in the next one. We
must put up with the wind, I suppose; but I
think the Lord Mayor should banish all cuckoos
from Blossoinville. They are lazy, good-for-no-
thing birds, and give us no end of trouble, look-
ing after their babies —there's a young bronzie,
on that dead twig over there. They won't work;


but just fly around and eat, and babble all the
time."
"I've heard them calling in the garden at Wil-
angi," remarked Colin.
Suddenly Yellowbob alighted on a tree-trunk,
and clung to it sideways.
"Look," he whispered. "There's my own little
mate, with our two children. Isn't it a charming
picture?"
"It's lovely," Colin agreed.
Mrs. Yellowbob and the fledglings were
perched on a slender branch, not a dozen feet
away. One of the youngsters had its back to
Colin; the other glanced at him sleepily.
"They're just out of the nest," explained Yel-
lowbob. "Have you ever seen a finer pair?
Twins, Colin. Last time we had triplets. But I
like twins best; they don't worry me so much."
"How old are they?"
"Peep! Pip! Pee," said Yellowbob. "They're
only babies still. Wait till they go into yellow
waistcoats, like mine! Talk of blue wrens!
Who'd have ugly blue feathers when he could
get soft grey and primrose colours? Not I, Sir
Colin. We like to be in shadowy places, and we
dress modestly, instead of showing off in the
sunlight, like the wrens. It makes me cross to
see them. But I won't talk scandal. Let me in-
troduce you to my family."
Mrs. Yellowbob gave Colin a graceful little
bow, and held out one of her wings. Colin


touched it softly. Then he stroked each of the
baby birds. They gaped at him and shivered
their wings.
'They're asking you for something nice to eat,"
said Yellowbob, laughing. "Aren't they cute?"
"Krilgi has three new feathers," piped mother
Robin, "and, just fancy, he can say 'peep peep'
quite plainly."
Yellowbob was delighted. He flew off at
once, and returned quickly with a small white
moth in his beak. Krilgi, after jostling his
twin brother away, swallowed the dainty, and
make a funny little noise.
"There," cried Mrs. Yellowbob, "Didn't I tell
you? He said 'peep' as plain as could be."
"We had such a terrible fright last week," said
Yellowbob. "I wonder the twins didn't lose
their voices. I was away hunting when it hap-
pened. The twins were not out of the nest, and
their mother had just flown down to catch a
caterpillar when a great black cat came sneaking
through the grass. My brave little wife pretended
to be hurt, and fluttered about just in front of
the ugly beast. He pounced at her, but she
dodged him and tumbled along. And so she
kept on till the cat had been lured far from the
nest. Then she flew up into a wattle-tree, and
scolded him. The cat was so angry that his tail
swelled till it was like a bottle-brush flower. He
arched his back and spat and snarled. But my


' BR WML, ■:
BLUECAP OUT IN THE WORLD
THE BABY BRONZE CUCKOO


MRS. YELLOWBOB AT HOME
MRS. YELLOWBOB AND THE FLEDGLINGS


wife didn't mind, for our babies were safe from
the ogre."
"Oh! I am glad that he didn't find your nest,"
said Colin.
"So am I," quoth Yellowbob. "Cats are worse
than snakes, Colin. I wish they were all dead,
the horrible, ugly brutes."
"But it was funny to see him with all his fur
on end," Mrs. Yellowbob laughed. "And as he
stalked away, he passed under Willy Wagtail's
nest. Willy was down on him in a flash, and
tweaked a hair out of his tail. You should have
seen the great coward run! I nearly tumbled ofif
my perch with laughing."
Colin was in no hurry to leave Yellowbob and
his family. He liked them because they were
quiet and graceful; and their haunt was a cool,
green place. The twins were learning to fly.
They made such a fuss over it that Colin felt
rather sorry for them. Krilgi was quick on
the wing, but he couldn't perch neatly after a
flight. His claws slipped; and he had to struggle
and use his beak before he was safe on a twig.
Once he tipped over backwards and went plomp
on the ground. He was a game little fellow,
though; and as many times as King Bruce's
spider climbed its silken rope, he flew from bush
to bush, till at last he was able to alight without
losing his balance.
"Dear me!" piped Yellowbob suddenly. "Look
at the shadows, Colin. It's time I took you to


see our neighbours, Willie Wag and his wife.
They're got such a nice little home, on a gum-
tree bough by the pool. It's only a couple of
minutes' flight from here."
On their way to the Wagtails' haunt they saw
many birds. Three young robins were perched
on a dogwood, practising for a concert. As Colin
passed, one was silent, while the others sang a
duet.
The Wagtails were charmed to see Colin.
Their nest was a shallow cup, formed of dry
grass and covered with spiders' webs. It was
fixed to a branch which stretched right over a
quiet little pool, and held three creamy-white
eggs, banded with grey and olive spots.
"They'll hatch out on Sunday," remarked
Willie Wagtail. "And I won't be sorry. I've
been singing 'sweet pretty creature' to my wife,
night and day for such a long time. Only this
morning I was up before sunrise, sing, sing, sing-
ing. Often when the moon shines, I think it is
day, and I whistle 'sweet pretty creature.' The
little wife likes to hear me, you see, while she
patiently sits on the nest."
"But you'll have to work harder than ever
when the babies are born," declared Yellowbob.
"I know."
"Who cares?" asked Willie. "I'm a Blossom-
ville bird. There's plenty to eat in our city.
You're a bit of a snail at insect hunting. Just
watch me for a moment."


Willie shot from his perch, and a second later
was at the nest offering a moth to his mate.
"Very neat," said Yellowbob. "But you ought
to see me catch grubs."
"I think you are both very clever," laughed
Colin, "but why don't you eat apples and pears?
They're much nicer than moths and crawly
things."
"We leave fruit to silly birds like the parrots,"
said Yellowbob. "It's all right in Blossomville,
which belongs to us; but we'd only be shot if
we went to other orchards and began pecking at
apples and pears. Anyhow, insects are delicious.
Shall I catch one, and let you taste it?"
"Oh, no, thank you," cried Colin, "I'm not
hungry."
Yellowbob looked at the shadows again. "It's
time we were going," said he. "Good afternoon,
Willie, I'll fly round on Sunday, to have a peep
at the babies."
Then he flew slowly through the trees, and
Colin followed as fast as he could walk. They
came to a glade where brown butterflies were
flitting round a bush veiled in flowers, and a
brown lizard lay in the sunshine.
"Do you know where the Diamond-birds are?"
asked Yellowbob.
The Lizard lifted his head lazily.
"Guess I do. Same old place; down by the
raspberry patch. I was over there yesterday


morning, and saw Spotty taking a beakful of
flies into the burrow.''
"Thank you," said Yellowbob. "Would you
mind showing Colin the way there? I'd love to
go; but it's so late, and I must catch something
for tea. The twins, you know."
The Lizard looked foolish. He glided up and
whispered to Yellowbob.
"Lost your tail 1" laughed the Robin. "How
sad. Do tell Colin how it happened."
"It's nothing to laugh about," said the Lizard
crossly. "Of course, it will soon grow again.
What worries me is that I may get two tails.
My uncle did. When Kigab, the Kestrel, caught
him, he escaped at the cost of his tail. And two
new ones grew from the stump. He was a freak."
"Did it hurt when your tail broke off?" asked
Colin.
"No," the Lizard answered. "The cat caught
me napping; and I left my tail wriggling under
her paws. It scared her so that she ran up a
tree. It's one of our little tricks, Colin. If you
tried to catch one of us —but I know you wouldn't
—you'd get a bit of tail and nothing more."
"And that is the end of your tale," said Yel-
lowbob. "I really must go now. Good-bye."
Yellowbob flew off; and Colin went with the
Lizard to find the Diamond-birds' home. It was
barely a hundred yards away; but the Lizard
would glide through long grass and under bushes
so that it was not easy to keep him in sight.


Colin felt lonely, and wished that his friend the
Swallow would return to be his guide in Blos-
somville. Perhaps the Lizard would leave him
in the lurch. It didn't like being seen without a
tail.
"There you are," said the Lizard, as they came
in sight of a low bank. "See that old log stick-
ing out of the ground? Spotty's home is just
underneath it. I'm off now, Colin, good-bye."
And the Lizard glided swiftly from view.
Colin walked up to the log, and was peering
into a hole in the bank below it, when a small
bird came darting out, so suddenly that Coliti
jumped. The Diamond-bird perched on the end
of the log. It was very pretty: black and grey
above, with big white spots near the tips of its
feathers, and a flake of crimson where the tail
began; its throat and chest were yellow.
"What do you want?" asked the pretty bird.
It hadn't been in the crowd that welcomed Colin,
and thought that he was a nest-robber.
"I just want to see your babies, please," Colin
answered.
"Well, you can't," chirped Spotty. "Go away,
or I'll send for the police."
Colin laughed.
"There isn't a policeman anywhere near."
"Oh! I don't mean your policeman. The mag-
pies keep law and order in Blossomville," Spotty
spoke angrily. "They'll peck bits out of you if
you try to rob my nest."


"But I don't want to rob it," cried Colin. "I'm
a member of the Gould League; and the Swallow
brought me here because I saved one of his
babies that fell out of the nest."
The Diamond-bird flew down, perched on
Colin's shoulder, and touched his cheek softly
with its beak.
"A Gould League boy? Why didn't you say
so before? I'm delighted to see you. My name's
Spotty. What's yours?"
"I'm Colin. I'm eight years old; and I'm
spending a holiday with my cousin at Wilangi."
Spotty entered the tunnel, and a moment later
came out again, followed by his wife. He intro-
duced Colin. Then the babies were brought out,
and ranged on a curving branch. There were
five of them. They were too young to do any-
thing but cling to their perch, and blink sleepily
at Colin.
"Oh! what darlings!" cried Colin, "I wish I
could see them in their nursery. Aren't they
afraid of the dark?"
"Not a bit," declared Spotty. "They like it.
See how they are blinking in the sunshine. When
they are old enough to leave home, of course,
they will get used to it, and spend most of the
time in tree-tops, up near the sunny sky."
Mrs. Spotty took the babies back into their
underground home. Then her mate told Colin a
"Though we are born in dark holes under-
lot about diamond-birds.


ground," said Spotty, "we like to be among high
branches when we have grown up. We love the
blue sky and the song of the leaves. Now I'll
tell you how we make our nurseries. When the
blossom was falling, I came here with my wife.
We nest here every year; for the ground is firm,
but not too hard. Well, we worked, turn and
turn about, till the tunnel was a little bit longer
than your boot, Colin. Then we scooped out a
cave for the nest. I pecked down the earth, and
Mrs. Spotty scraped it away through the tunnel.
When the mining was finished, we gathered
dry grass, and soft bark from the old gum-trees,
and made a round nest, with a doorway near
the top. It nearly filled the cave."
"How could you make it in the dark?" asked
Colin.
"Oh! easily enough," Spotty replied. "We just
know how to do it. And our nests are as neat
as those of birds that build in bushes and trees.
Come along after our brood has flown, and you
can dig mine out and see for yourself how cleverly
it is made. Well, soon there were five pearly-
white eggs in the nest, and my little mate had to
stay at home to keep them warm. I brought her
food. When our babies hatched out, we both
went hunting. We are proud of our family; you
won't see plumper baby birds anywhere in Blos-
somville. In a day or two, they'll be out in the
world. And if you are here next springtime,


Colin, perhaps you'll hear them calling in the
tree-tops."
Spotty darted from his perch to a gum-sap-
ling a dozen yards away, and returned two min-
utes later, with his beak full of insects. He called
to his mate, and when she appeared, entered the
tunnel himself. Colin heard the babies welcome
him. Mrs. Spotty had flown to the sapling, and
when her mate was back on his perch, she was
ready with another lot of flies for the babies.
"They were ready for tea," exclaimed Spotty.
"But they won't get any more after this. It's
time they went to sleep. And I want to take
you along to the sand-pit, where my cousin
Wit-e-chu and his wife live."
Colin followed Spotty to a corner of the or-
chard, where, of old time, a big hole had been
dug and tons of sand carted away from it. The
Wit-e-chus' nest was at the end of a hole drilled
in the sandy bank. The birds were at home, and
welcomed Colin. Wit-e-chu had already heard
of him, for the Lizard had passed that way after
bidding Colin good-bye.
Wit-e-chu and his wife were not spotted, but
their heads were streaked and some of their
feathers fringed with white, and they had bright
red specks on the sides of their wings.
When they called to each other, Colin knew
how the birds got their name, for the notes
sounded just like "wit-e-chu."
"I was scared when I saw Colin," Spotty con-


fessed to his cousin. "I thought, at first, that he
was a nest-robber. You remember, Witty, when
I lived on the creek, what a fright I had!"
"I do," answered Wit-e-chu. "I was frightened
myself. A tall man came, Colin, with a thing on
long legs. It had a great staring eye. He placed
it in the creek, with the eye pointing at Spotty's
perch, just above the nesting tunnel."
"Yes," cried Spotty, "and when I flew on to
the perch, I heard a strange noise 'click-click';
and thought I was shot. It made me jump, I can
tell you."
"It was only a camera," laughed Colin. "It
couldn't hurt you."
"I know," said Spotty, "we see plenty of them
in Birdland now. But that was the first; and
when the tall man caught one of my babies and
perched it on his finger, I could have pecked his
nose off, I was so angry."
Colin laughed again.
"My uncle Claude is a tall man," said he, "and
he used to take photographs of birds at their
nests. I think it must have been Uncle who
took your picture from the creek. He lives at
Olinda."
"Perhaps it was he," agreed Spotty. "I saw
him often afterwards. He was always kind, and
never robbed our nests or harmed our babies. I
wish all men folk who come to Birdland would
bring cameras instead of guns. Don't you,
Witty ?"


"I just do" answered Spotty's cousin. "Guns
are such terrible things, worse than hawks and
owls. Talking of owls, Colin; it's getting late.
Where will you stay to-night?"
Colin was puzzled. He couldn't find his way
back to Wilangi without the Swallow to guide
him. He must stay in Blossomville. But where
could he sleep?
"I'll tell you," said Spotty. "You can go to
the bungalow. My old friends the Robin Red-
breasts —you call them scarlet-breasted robins—
live there; their nest is in the woodpile. You can
sleep under the verandah, Colin."
Colin thought that his bed would be hard; and
he might be cold without even a blanket for
covering. But he tried to look cheerful and said
that it would be all right. So Spotty guided him
to the bungalow. The woodpile was near the
back door, and the Robins' nest was on one of
the old grey logs, with another jutting over it,
like a gable roof. Mrs. Redbreast was at home.
She looked very happy and comfortable; and
when Colin arrived she called to her mate, who
was not far away. Spotty told them that Colin
wanted a lodging for the night; then he said good
evening, and flew away.
"Glad to see you, Colin dear," said Robin Red-
breast. "What do you think of our home? We've
got three eggs. Would you like to see them?''
Mrs. Redbreast slipped off the nest, a neat cup
of bark, with bits of lichen ornamenting the rim.


It was lined with feathers and dry grass. The
eggs were pale green, with spots of brown and
blue-grey.
"We expect the babies soon/' said Mrs. Red-
breast. "This will be our second brood. I hope
you will stay in Blossomville for a while, Colin.
You will love our babies, I'm sure."
"I think I've seen you before," said Robin Red-
breast, gazing hard at Colin. "In autumn, we
always leave the Bush, and go down towards the
sea. We like to have a change, and spend the
cold months away from the hills. You must have
seen us about in the parks and gardens."
"So I have," answered Colin, "Only last winter,
a robin came to our garden."
"That was me" said Mr. Redbreast. "I knew
I'd seen you somewhere before. I'll come again
next autumn, and bring some of my relations.
We'll sing to you, Colin. But don't mistake any
of those cheeky flamebreasts for us. Look; I
wear a black cravat; Flamebreast doesn't, and his
waistcoat is not nearly so bright as mine."
"But I love you all," urged Colin, "and I hope
that lots of robins will visit our garden."
"All right," said Redbreast, "I don't mind; but
please remember that I wear a black necktie, so
that you'll know me again."
The Robins told Colin how to make a bed of
bracken. He gathered armsful of dry fern—there
was plenty around the woodheap—and piled it
on the bungalow verandah, under one of the


windows. It was dark when the bed was ready,
and Colin felt tired and sleepy. He bade his little
bird friends good night, and nestled down in the
bracken. He was not cold, for the night was
warm and still. But he lay awake till the young
moon was sailing, like a silver canoe, in the dark
blue sea of the sky. The stars were friendly.
They gleamed steadily or winked at him, just
above the big gums. Colin was not afraid till he
heard the night birds calling. Then he burrowed
deeper into the rustling ferns and wished that he
were snug in his bed at Wilangi.
"More pork; more pork," called the Boobook
Owl. Then "Oom, oom, oom," said Podargus.
Colin had heard these strange sounds around
Wilangi homestead; and he knew that they
were the calls of birds. But he was alone now.
He drew the bracken right over his head and
shivered.
"Don't be afraid, Colin. We know who you
are; and we won't harm you."
Colin uncovered his head. A Boobook Owl
was perched on the window-sill, looking down at
him.
"Sit up and talk to me," said the Owl. "You
won't see much of me when the sun is shining.
The night is our day, Colin dear; it is much nicer
to be about in the cool moonlight hours, than in
the day-time. At least, I think so; and so do all
my kin."


"But the night-time was meant for sleeping,"
said Colin, "I couldn't keep awake like you do."
"You could, easily, if you slept during the day,"
declared Boobook. "When the sun goes to bed,
owls begin to wake up. We go hunting when
the sky is dark, or lighted only by moon and
stars. We capture moths, Colin. I know that
you like butterflies; but you don't like those big
fat-bodied moths that come into your room some-
times, and butt their silly heads against the ceil-
ing. We would gobble them up if you asked us
to. I've eaten a lot of plump moths to-night; and
presently I'll fly of! to look for more."
When the Ow*l finished speaking, it called
"More pork, more pork."
"Why do you call like that?" asked Colin.
You're not a mopoke."
"I should think not," cried Boobook indig-
nantly. "A Podargus, indeed ! What an insult!
You men folk are so stupid; you think that old
Poddy, who can say nothing but 'Oom, 00111,
oom,' utters our wonderful call. Now you have
seen me saying it Colin, you will be able to tell
all people, that 'More pork' is my tribal call."
"That's just what my Uncle Claude says,"
Colin answered. "But all the others think that
he is wrong."
"Well, he is right. He must be clever, not a
silly like the others, whoever they may be. But
I must be off, Colin. It's nearly dinner-time.
More pork, more pork."


The Owl left its perch, and, silently as a shadow
moves, flew toward the gum-trees. Then Colin
nestled down in the bracken again, and drifted
into dreamland. He slept till the sun was high.
All the birds about the bungalow had sung their
matins and were busy seeking breakfast when
Colin stepped off the verandah, rubbing his sleepy
eyes. He looked around, and wondered where
,he could be. This was not Wilangi. Then his
memory, also, awoke.
Colin remembered that he had come to Blos-
somville with the Swallow; had made friends
with robins and wrens, the diamond-birds and
the boobook owl; and had slept in a bed of
bracken. He felt hungry; but there was no
breakfast awaiting him, though his bird friends
had eaten theirs. He wished that the Swallow
would come, and take him back to Wilangi.
"Good morning, Colin dear." It was Robin
Redbreast speaking. He had flown round from
the woodpile a dozen times since sunrise, to see
whether Colin was waking.
"You did have a long sleep," he went on. "I
thought you would never wake up. I expect
you're ready for breakfast."
"I am hungry as anything," Colin replied, "but
what am I to eat?"
"Eat!" echoed Redbreast. "Well, you can't
eat moths and things, like we do, I suppose.
We'll have to find something else. Let us go
into the city. There's plenty of food there."


Colin went first to the tank, beside the back
door of the bungalow. He washed his face and
hands, had a drink of the good rain water, and
felt more comfortable.
Redbreast left Colin at the orchard gate, where
he was met by the Lord Mayor.
"Oh! here you are at last," was Kookaburra's
greeting. "I've been looking for you everywhere.
Why didn't they tell me you'd gone to the bunga-
low. I'll peck some feathers off someone."
"Don't be angry, please," urged Colin. "Every
bird has been kind to me. But Ido want some-
thing to eat."
The Lord Mayor chuckled. Then he looked
worried.
"Something to eat? What do you eat at home?"
"For breakfast," said Colin, "porridge and
cream, boiled eggs, and bread and butter and
jam."
"Anything else?" asked the Lord Mayor.
"What sort of things are porridge and cream,
and bread and butter and jam? Boiled eggs?
Don't tell me that you eat eggs"
"Only hen eggs," Colin cried hastily. "Eggs
laid by our old chookies, you know. They don't
mind us taking them. They lay such a lot."
The Lord Mayor chuckled again. Colin was
pleased to hear him, for he feared that the men-
tion of boiled eggs had made him very angry.
"You can't have eggs for breakfast in Blossom-
ville," said Kookaburra, "nor any of the other


things you named. What do you say to straw-
berries ?"
"They will do nicely, thank you," replied Colin.
He was so hungry that he would have eaten a
raw potato or a green apple. He went with the
Lord Mayor to a strawberry patch. Though it
was rather early in the season, there was some
ripe fruit. After eating all that he could find,
Colin still felt hungry.
"I wish you were a bird, Colin," remarked the
Lord Mayor. "Then you could eat grubs and
worms and other nice things."
"Colin needn't go hungry; there's plenty of
man-food down by the creek."
Colin looked round to see who was speaking.
A wallaby was sitting up, just behind him.
"Hullo!" cried the Lord Mayor, "where did you
hop from, Jilgo?"
"I've just come from the hills across the creek,"
answered the Wallaby. "Someone told me that
Colin was here; so I came along to see him. You
seem to be bothered over his breakfast. Slow
Jim, the sundowner, has left a sugar bag, half
full of food he got at Wilangi, dow'n by the
bridge. He wanted to travel light to Dorman's
homestead; so he left the bag behind. I'll show
Colin where it is, and he'll have enough food for
a dozen meals."
Colin went off with the Wallaby, in quest of
breakfast once more. It was not a very long
journey, for the creek flowed close to the orchard,


THE KOOKABURRA PERCHED ON A TREE-STUMP
THE BABY KOOKABURRA


goldie's home in the appletree
THE SCRUB-WREN AT HIS NEST


and the bridge was within coo-ee of Yellowbob's
home. And there was the sugar-bag, lying against
a gum-tree bole. Colin opened it eagerly, and
soon had a feast spread on the grass. There were
three big loaves, a hunk of cheese and some cake,
Colin sat down and began to eat bread and cheese
as if he had been starving for a week. He didn't
forget, however, to offer Jilgo the cake.
"Thank you, Colin," said the Wallaby, "but
I've had my breakfast; and besides, you'll need
all you have there, if you don't go home very
soon. I must be going now; I promised to meet
my brothers before noon. Good-bye. Hope you
have a nice time in Birdland. Perhaps you'll
come to the hills, some day, and see the babies
of Furland. Really, Colin, they are much prettier
than any bird babies. A fur baby is soft and
beautiful. But birds! Great grasstrees! Did
you ever see anything so ugly as a robin or a
wren, just out of the egg? It makes me hop to
think of it."
"But they are pretty as soon as their feathers
grow," Colin spoke sharply in defence of his fav-
ourites. "And aren't fur babies ugly before their
fur grows?"
"You come to Furland and see for yourself.
So long." And Jilgo bounded away, over the
bridge and through the trees, clearing a huge log
in his path as easily as Colin could step over a
fallen bramble spray.
"S'pose I've made him cross," thought Colin,


"and it was very kind of him to tell me about this
bag of tucker, and show me the way here. But
he shouldn't have said that baby birds are ugly."'
Colin finished eating at last, and, with the
sugar bag slung over his shoulder, wandered
back to the orchard. He found the Lord Mayor
on his favourite perch, the gate-post.
"Plenty to eat now, Colin," gurgled Kooka-
burra. "That's right. You'll be able to stay in
Birdland for a few days. You haven't seen much
of it yet. Why, you haven't seen my family. I'm
going to take you home with me now. Just three
minutes' flying from here. I'm chief of the city;
but I prefer to live outside, away from the crowd,
you know. My home is in a big tree, that stands
on the slope of a hill. Put your bag under that
briar bush; it will be safe there. I've given
orders; and one of our magpies will be along
soon, to guard it."
The Lord Mayor's home-tree was a gaunt,
dead gum, whose leafless branches, Colin
thought, looked like giant arms reaching toward
the sky. The Lady Mayoress was perched on a
broken bough which jutted from the trunk below
a hollow."
"There you are, Colin," said the Lord Mayor.
Our nest is in that hollow. What a pity you
can't fly up and see our babies. They are nearly
two weeks old; such fine little fledglings. They'll
be learning to laugh before very long."
Colin stood gazing up at the Lady Mayoress;


And presently she entered the hollow. But she
was out again in half a minute, and swooped
down to the stump on which her mate was
perched. They gurgled and chuckled in chorus
for a while; then the Lord Mayor asked Colin
whether he had ever seen a baby Kookaburra.
"Yes, at Wilangi," answered Colin. "Jim
Driscoll got one from a nest in a tree by the milk-
ing shed. It couldn't stick on a perch, but
wobbled about and fell off. Its head and beak
were so big that it was top heavy. Uncle made
Jim put it back in the hollow."
"I should think he did," cried the Lady Mayor-
ess. "Poor little fledgling. If Jim Driscoll tries
to take my babies. I'll peck his head 01* drop a
snake on him."
Colin tried to turn the subject.
"What colour are kookaburra eggs?"
"Beautiful pearly white, and we have two or
three to a clutch," answered the Lord Mayor.
"And what do you live on?"
"All sorts of things; snakes and lizards, fat
grubs and "
"Baby birds" shrieked a grey thrush as it
flew from a sapling where, unseen, it had been lis-
tening to all the conversation.
(i You wicked storyteller," gasped the Lord
Mayor. He was furious, and darted after the
Thrush, with fierce threats of vengeance. But
the chase was hopeless. Wingan, the Thrush,
dodged cleverly, doubled back into the sapling,


and eluded all Old Jack's efforts to catch him.
xAnd he kept taunting his pursuer, calling loudly,
"Baby birds; you eat baby birds; all of us know
it. Lock, lock souey."
"Isn't he awful?" said the Lady Mayoress to
Colin. "It's a wicked slander; we don't eat baby
birds."
"Oh, yes you do," cried Wingan. "Ask Blue-
cap, Colin dear; and Mrs. Yellowbob; and Tom-
tit."
Kookaburra made one more wild dive at Win-
gan, and then flew back to his perch. He was
so angry that, for a minute or two, he could
only gasp and make other strange noises.
"I'll banish the rascal from Blossomville," he
said, at length. "If he shows a feather in the
city, I'll put the police on him."
A silvery laugh came from the sapling.
"Who cares for your old magpies?" piped
Wingan. "Not I, they're nest-robbers, like your-
self."
"Let us go back to the city," said the Lord
Mayor. "I can't stay and listen to these insults.
Don't tell anyone what the Thrush said, Colin.
Of course, you don't believe him. We are the
most popular of all Australian birds. And no
wonder. Don't we kill snakes? And don't we
cheer lonely bush wanderers with our merry
laughter? Don't we do everything to win your
favour? And am I not Lord Mayor of Blossom-
ville?"


Colin agreed that the kookaburras were uni-
versal favourites with men folk. But he had
heard Jim Driscoll accuse them of eating baby
birds, and he half believed it now, after what
the Thrush had said.
He parted from the Lord Mayor at the orchard
gate, where he was delighted to find the Swallow.
The bird from Wilangi took him to a quiet
spot, where they could talk freely.
"Have you been enjoying yourself?" was the
Swallow's first question.
"Very much, thank you," Colin answered. "All
the birds have been kind; and I slept under the
bungalow verandah. But tell me how they are
at Wilangi, please. Did they miss me? Can
I stay away longer?"
"Of course they missed you," the Swallow re-
plied. "But I saw your cousin Jessie, and told
her all about you going to Birdland with me.
She wants to come too, and see the baby birds.
She loves them more than dolls, she says. Well,
you must go back to the homestead, Colin. They
won't let you be away at night. But I've promised
to look after you; and so it's all right. Jessie
and you will make little journeys in Birdland,
and I'll bring you safely home each day at sun-
set. Now we'll set out for Wilangi."
Just as Colin was passing through the orchard
gate, a goldfinch came up in a great hurry, and
asked him not to leave Blossomville until he
had seen the prettiest nest and eggs in the city.


"My home's in an apple-tree," said Goldie,
"It won't take you a minute to come and see it."
So Colin went back, though the Swallow was
cross at being delayed, and said that Goldie
should have given his invitation earlier. He
whispered to Colin that the goldfinches were not
native birds. Their ancestors had come from
England many years ago. They were new
chums. But they had prospered, and now were
so numerous that they had nests in all the big
cities of Birdland.
Colin thought that Goldie, with his golden-
barred wings and bright red chin, was a hand-
some little fellow. And when he saw the nest
in the apple-tree, he said that it was lovely.
"Next time you come to Blossomville," said
Goldie, "I hope you'll call on me. I know a fine
patch of thistles, with bonnie blue flowers. We
have our parties there. And you'd love to see
us feasting on the seeds."
"Oh, please do hurry up," cried the Swallow
impatiently. "It will be noon before we get to
Wilangi."
"I'm coming," answered Colin. "Good-bye,
Goldie; I won't forget to visit you when I come
here again."


CHAPTER 111
FAIRIES IN FERNLAND
"I'VE been to Fernland, and the fairies hope
that you will come and see them to-morrow, if
it's fine."
The cousins were strolling in the garden when
the Swallow gave them this pleasant message.
"But who arc the fairies?" asked Jessie. "I
thought that we were going to Fernland to see
baby birds."
"All the Birdland babies are fairies," answered
the Swallow. "Perhaps there are other fairies in
the Bush, but I've never seen them. Our babies
are prettier than the tiny folk whose pictures
you showed me, in your story book."
"I don't believe in fairies," cried Colin.
"I do," Jessie declared. "And I know that we'll
see them some day, in the Bush. We'll go with
you to-morrow, Mr. Swallow, and take our lunch.
We can boil the billy by the creek."
"All right," the Swallow said, and flew up to
his nest under the verandah.
Jessie was awake before the birds had ended
their sunrise songs. She was out of bed and


at the window in a moment. Would it be wet or
fine to-day? I think that she would have cried
a little had the sky been dark with rain clouds.
But it was clear and softly shining. And the
wind was so gentle that it barely stirred the
leaves of an old pepper-tree growing close to
the window. Jessie heard the swallows singing,
and the morning chorus of the magpies in the
gum-trees floated up from the paddock. The
air was cool and fragrant. A white butterfly,
just awake, clung to a flower stalk, its wings
outspread and gleaming in the sunshine. Jessie
stayed long at the window. She had never felt
so happy before, at dawn on a perfect summer
day. The outdoor world was so fresh and
beautiful. The wind had a message of joy for
Jessie; all the birds were singing to please her;
and the flowers seemed to smile and beckon her
into the garden.
"To Fernland; to Fernland. Colin and I are
going to Fernland to-day." Jessie was so joyful
that she sang a song herself. A rap on the door
made her jump.
"Are you awake, Jess?" called Colin. "It's a
lovely day, and I'm off with Uncle to see Jim
bring in the cows."
"To Fernland; to Fernland. We're going to
Fernland to-day," sang Jessie. "Of course, I'm
awake, Master Colin. I was up before you
stopped snoring."
"I don't snore," cried Colin indignantly. "I


don't believe you're dressed yet. Hurry up or
you'll be late for breakfast. Then we won't be
ready when the Swallow comes."
Jessie laughed and said that she would be
ready long before Colin was back from the milk-
ing shed. And so she was. Colin found her in
the kitchen, packing cake and beef sandwiches
in a billy, which she told him he must carry to
Fernland. Breakfast was early this morning, so
that they might start on their journey before
the sun was high. When they went on to the
verandah, there was the Swallow, perched on
the back of the lounge chair, patiently waiting.
"I thought you were never coming," was the
little bird's greeting. "Isii't it a glorious morn-
ing. But it will be warm before noon, and you'll
find it delightful, wandering through shady spots
in Fernland. It is cool and pleasant there on the
hottest summer day. Let us start at once, and
we'll be in Fernland before the sun has climbed
half-way up the sky. If only you had wings
like me! I feel like a snail, flying no faster than
a dead leaf when the wind plays with it, and
stopping every few minutes."
"I'm sorry we can't fly," said Jessie. "But
we can do lots of things that you can't do,
Swallowkins. You can't sew, or read; and you
can't swim either."
"Cheerie, weerie, wee." The Swallow went
skimming high over the trees, then wheeled and
dived and circled around them so swiftly that


Jessie and Colin hardly knew whether he was
near them or a mile away.
"That's flying," said the Swallow, as he
alighted, softly as thistledown, on Jessie's
shoulder. "Isn't it wonderful to have wings?"
After showing off his skill, on the wing, the
Swallow was not so eager to hurry. He would
fly ahead of Jessie and Colin till they could just
see him, perch on a twig and wait for them.
Then another short flight and a rest. The
cousins walked quickly. And thus the journey
continued for an hour, when they reached the
eastern bank of Myrtle Creek. It had been easy
going all the way. Now they had to follow the
creek, breaking a path through the bushes and
ferns and tangled creeping plants, which clung
about their arms and legs as if they wished to
keep the travellers out of Fernland. The Swallow/
of course, had no obstacles; he glided serenely
overhead, and, though he did not say so, he
pitied his friends because they could not take
his own unseen path through the air.
Colin cut a finger of his right hand on the
edge of a sword-grass stem. Red drops oozed
from the cut; but Colin didn't mind. He just
wrapped his handkerchief about the hurt finger,
stamped down the sword-grass, and made the
way clear for Jessie. They scrambled on for
half a mile, and came to a glade, where lay a
great tree, uprooted not long ago, for some of its
leaves were still green.


"This place belongs to the thrushes," ex-
plained the Swallow. "Wingan, Colin, whom
you saw in Blossomville, was born here. The
nest was in the hollow stump, just over there,
at the bend of the creek. The old birds are still
living there. I'll call them."
The Swallow's call was soon answered, and
two grey thrushes came up from the creek-side,
where they had been hunting among the wattles.
They seemed pleased to see Jessie and Colin.
"So you are going to Fernland," remarked
Wingan's father. "What a pity you didn't
come last month, before our tree was blown
down. The Ringtails got a terrible fright. They
live down there in the wattles; and the tree's
top branches crashed so close that their home
was knocked over. Little Silvertip, their son,
wasn't hurt, luckily; but they were both injured,
poor things. The baby climbed to the top of
a sapling, and clung there, shivering. I was
sorry when I saw him; but I couldn't help him.
He stayed in the sapling till the Ringtails' cousins
came and took him home with them. They live
in Fernland."
"And what became of his father and mother?"
asked Jessie.
"Poor Mrs. Ringtail died," answered the
Thrush. "Her husband fell into the creek, and
we heard that he was swept down to the bridge
near Blossomville, and is now living in the
beautiful city."


"What about the Sugar Squirrels?" asked the
Swallow. "They used to live in this old tree."
"So they did. They were away visiting some
relations when it fell. When they returned and
saw it down, they made an awful fuss. But they
soon found a new home. You'll see them if you
go out to Kingfisher Hill to-night. They are
living in the big gum-tree, which has a dead
bough stretching over the creek."
"We must be home before sunset," the Swal-
low observed, "so we shall not be able to see
them."
"Never mind," remarked Jessie. "There are
some Flying Squirrels—Dad says they're really
possums—in the gums about Wilangi; and I'll
take Colin out to see them some night. They
are darlings. I had one once, as a pet. He was
so fluffy and soft, and had a beautiful long tail.
He used to 'fly' on to my shoulder from the
mantelpiece."
"They don't really fly, you know," said the
Swallow. "They have no wings, but only loose
skin on the sides of the body, which they spread
out. They glide from tree to tree in the moon-
light, and look very pretty. But, goodness me!
you can't call it flying. Still, I like them; though
I don't see much of them. They are awake when
I am asleep. They like moonshine more than
sunshine; which seems very strange to me."
"My Billy Squirrel slept all day," said Jessie,
and woke up about tea-time. He was fond of


milk and sugar, and used to cling to the stalk
of a pot plant in the dining-room, while I fed
him."
The wanderers continued their journey. They
hadn't far to go. The entrance to Fernland was
quite close to the thrushes' glade. Five minutes'
toiling through bracken and bushes, and Colin,
who was in the lead, suddenly found his feet
sinking into moist green moss. It was like walk-
ing on a Persian rug, as Jessie remarked when
she stood beside her cousin.
They were on the threshold of Fernland, the
Swallow told them; and if he had called it Fairy-
land, they would not have wondered. The
ground was carpeted in golden-green moss, all
dewy and glimmering, and blue- and scarlet-
hooded toadstools were dotted about, like fairy
tents. A log lay half buried in the moss; it was
fringed with velvety-brown fungus, shaped like
an open fan. There were ferns with feathery
fronds growing beside the log; and yellow
flowers, swaying gently on slender stems, shone
softly here and there. It was only a little glade,
where the sunlight, drifting through lofty
branches, made golden pools on the moss, or lay,
like bits of yellow ribbon, wavering between
shadows. It was so quiet and beautiful, that
neither Jessie nor Colin spoke for a while. They
just stood still and gazed about them, as if the
place were, indeed, a haunt of fairies, and one


might appear in a moment, and bid them wel-
come. The Swallow's voice broke the spell.
"Over there," he said, "beyond the musk-trees
and the wattles, and those tall lilly-pillies with
the purple berries. Over there is Fernland. It
is so beautiful, I think you will want to stay,
and become Fernland fairies yourselves."
They stepped softly across the glade, bright-
eyed with wonder, and eager to see what lay
behind the whispering trees. A veil of clematis
flowers, silvery-white and glistening, and masses
of red-brown Tecoma blossom won their eyes.
Then a black cockatoo flew, screeching, from
its perch on a gum-tree, and they followed its
flight with their eyes till the Swallow spoke
again.
"Come on; come on!" he urged. "It's nearly
noon; and we haven't seen anything yet."
There was no track, but with the Swallow as
guide, the way into Fernland was easy enough.
Jessie would linger to gather a long spray of
clematis, which she wreathed about her hat.
Colin took her hand then, and, side by side, they
passed from sunshine into a place of twilight
and shadows, where the air was cool and laden
with the fragrance of sassafras and musk. Be-
tween the trees they went, still stepping on moss
and leaf mould, so that their passage was silent.
They followed the creek, and it led them away
and away into the heart of Fernland. The
Swallow was with them all the time; but he had


told them to keep by the creek, and it was like
a new friend. It flowed softly, with a ripple song
for the ferns that bent over to dip their fronds,
and the wattles that, in springtime, had showered
gold upon it. They came at length to a spot
where the trees were far apart and dark decaying
logs lay among beautiful ferns; where the creek
widened suddenly and became so shallow that
little silver-bodied fishes were plainly seen,
swimming against the current and almost touch-
ing the clean white sand. The water was clear
and cold and sweet. Jessie, making a cup of her
hand, drank deeply. Colin bent down and let
the creek kiss him. The Swallow skimmed low
and dimpled the water, dipping his beak to drink.
"Now, Colin, you make a fire and boil the
billy. And while Jessie and you have dinner,
I'll fly around and tell the Fernland birds
that you are coming presently, to see them and
their babies." The Swallow darted away.
Colin soon had a fire burning. The blue smoke
drifted up and faded among the tree-tops —smoke
from dry gum-leaves and twigs that was pleasant
to smell. Jessie liked it because she was a girl
of the Bush, and Colin, also, thought it was nice
when it didn't puff into his eyes and make them
smart. They rested on a big log, and while they
ate their lunch, gazed about. Jessie had ofte.i
been in fern gullies, but never in one so fine as
this. To Colin it was wonderful, for he was
a child of the city, where ferns are grown mostly


in pots or tubs, and are only poor relations of
the beauties of the Bush.
Across the creek, just where it left its high
banks to flow over sandy shallows, a great tree-
fern had fallen, and formed a bridge. Another
fern, growing up from the bed of the creek, close
to the bank, leaned against the "bridge," and
shaded it with long, drooping fronds. Myrtles
and musk-trees grew here, tall light-woods and
some other trees. But the lilly-pilly was most
plentiful, and millions of its berries, faded from
purple to pale lilac or creamy blue, strewed the
moist earth. There were so many seedlings that
cartloads might have been taken away, and you
would not have noticed any gaps in their ranks.
High in the blue, the lilly-pillies held their
branches, so that they formed a roof, with scores
of little windows, glazed by the sky.
This was the lovely place where Jessie and
Colin boiled the billy and ate their cake and
sandwiches. They stamped on the fire. But the
ashes still glimmered and glowed; so Colin
heaped upon them wet sand from the creek.
When he stooped down to gather it, he saw a
host of little beetles whirling madly on the
surface of the water. They were like bits of
polished gun-metal, and as quick as quicksilver
globules scattered on a sheet of glass. Colin
tried vainly to catch one. Then he called Jessie,
and she laughed.
"They're whirligigs," said the Bush girl.


"You'll never catch one with your hand, Colin
dear. I've tried, and tried, and tried."
Just then a dragonfly, with gleaming brown-
gold wings, all netted like delicate gauze,
skimmed past. Its body was blue and its great
goblin eyes startled Colin. He had never before
seen such a giant "horsestinger," nor one so
splendid as this. Fernland was full of wonders.
They sat at the foot of a myrtle-tree, waiting
for the Swallow to return. There were ferns
quite near them; but those on the other side of
the creek seemed to be much more beautiful,
taller and with nobler crowns of fronds that
were like plumes from the wings of a giant bird.
One fern, whose bole was no thicker than Colin's
thigh, was so tall that its crown was hidden
among lilly-pilly boughs. There were big ferns
and small ferns; ferns along the creek-side; and
ferns growing on the tree-trunks from velvet
cushions of moss. Some were shaped quaintly,
like a sheep's tongue, only longer; and some,
clinging tightly in forks of the bigger trees, were
like a Red Indian's head-dress of eagle feathers.
They had almost forgotten the Swallow when,
a flash of blue above the creek, and he was on
a low branch of the tree against which they were
leaning.
"Well," he twittered blithely, "here I am. And
you'll have a fine time in Fernland. I met old
Menura, the Lyre-bird, who rules over this green
realm; and he has sent messengers everywhere,


to tell the birds that you are his friends and
guests. They will welcome you, and show you
their homes and their babies. But, first, you
must call on Menura. His baby has grown up;
because it was born before the coming of spring.
But you shall see the nest; and perhaps Menura
will sing for you, and dance on his play-mound
up on the hill-side. He is the king of Australian
birds, and his fame has spread all over the world.
His tail is splendid, and no other bird can sing
so many songs as Menura."
Menura's haunt was not far from the tree-fern
bridge, which the cousins crossed, one at a time.
Jessie went first, and she said that it was easy.
But Colin was half afraid that he would slip
and get a ducking. The fern trunk trembled
and swayed. Colin stopped in the middle, and
looked down. He saw the little silvery fishes
dart away, frightened by his shadow. They were
like shadows themselves, as they glided from
sight. Colin envied them for a moment. To
live in that crystal water, with a bed of fine
white sand to rest on when weary of play, with
nothing to fear but a shadow, must be delightful.
He didn't know much about fishes, you see; else
he would not have wished to be one. They have
perils and troubles, like all the other creatures
in the wilds.
When Colin was over the bridge, he looked
into the water again, and there were his little
fishes, staying their silver bodies against the


current and stirring the finest sand grains with
the swift waving beats of their fins.
Menura's home, so the Swallow said, was the
loveliest bit of Fernland. It was really a bower
of tree-ferns, whose fronds were longer and wider
and greener, and their brown, furry trunks taller
and stronger, than any others in all the wide
realm. A bower so beautiful, so quiet and cool,
that you could dwell in it all through springtime
and summer and have no wish to go elsewhere.
Menura was proud of his palace. He gave Jessie
and Colin a royal welcome. With his tail held
proudly over his back, he bowed gracefully. Then
he asked the visitors to look round his private
domain. He showed them everything, and
answered questions very politely, though some
of Colin's, I fear, were rather strange to ask a
king.
Menura's nest, placed close to the ground on
the trunk of a fallen tree-fern, with a living fern
supporting it behind, was a large domed structure
of twigs and sticks and fronds. It was lined with
rootlets and feathers, and must have been a cosy
nursery for baby Menura, who had left it months
before, and was now a fine young prince, well
able to look after himself.
"Drilga—that is my son, you know," remarked
Menura, "was rather troublesome; but he was
strong and healthy from the time when he
hatched out of the big purple-grey egg. His
voice was shrill. He screeched when he was


frightened, and when he was hungry also, and
wanted his mother. He scared a nest-robber
once, a silly boy from the city, who was camped
with others, down on the creek. The boy found
our home somehow. He couldn't see what was
inside, so he thrust his hand in, hoping to get
an egg. Drilga screeched his loudest, and the
boy fled. He never came back again. No other
bird in the Bush can shriek so loudly as a baby
Lyre-bird. And we are the cleverest mimics in
the world. Would you like to hear me?"
"Yes, please," said Jessie and Colin together.
Menura was pleased. He strutted to the centre
of the bower, and began his performance at once.
First he gave the tribal call; then, in quick suc-
cession, he imitated the calls and songs of twenty
Fernland birds, finishing with a clear silvery
whistle, most pleasant to hear.
The visitors were so charmed by this one-bird
concert that they begged for an encore. And
Menura, as proud as a peacock, sang and whistled
to them again. He gave the harsh notes of the
gang-gang cockatoo; the liquid song of the
Wingan the thrush; the high piping "pee!
pee! pee!" of the tree-creeper, and many another
call.
"How clever you are," cried Colin. "Why, I
have tried hard to whistle like my canary, often
and often; and I can make only funny noises."
"It's as easy as scratching up moss," Menura


declared. "For us Lyre-birds, I mean. We've
always been musical."
"I like music," said Jessie. "But I don't like
learning to play the piano. I hate the five-finger
exercise."
"I don't know what that is," said Menura. "We
haven't got fingers, but we use our claws a lot,
hunting for food, under the moss and in decayed
logs. Now, follow me up the hill-slope, and I'll
dance on my own little mound."
Menura's dancing mound was a circular clear-
ing in the midst of bracken, which grew thickly
on the hill-side. When the Swallow asked him
to dance, Menura ran on to the mound, and
strutted and capered till he was tired. Jessie
and Colin wanted to laugh, but they could not,
of course, for fear of offending the king. .So
they clapped their hands, and Menura was
pleased. He asked his visitors to return with
him to the bower, so that he might show them
the pilot-birds' nursery.
"Guinea-a-week! Guinea-a-week!" The call
came from an unseen bird.
"There he is," cried Menura. "My friend, Pyco.
He's a clever alert little fellow. You'll always
find him somewhere about when you see me."
The Swallow was becoming impatient. It was
time to be moving, he said, else they would not
have seen one quarter of Fernland before the
sun was down the sky. So they left Menura
at his dancing mound, and, climbing over the


hill, came in sight of the creek once more. It
was flowing beneath them round the hill; and
to reach it they had to scramble through a wild
tangle of ferns and creepers, which hid logs and
big stones.
Colin stumbled over one of the obstacles, and
for a minute he disappeared under a great mass
of wire-grass. The ground was damp, and Colin's
clothes were stained with mud and moss when
he scrambled into the light again. Jessie couldn't
help laughing at him. But she laughed too soon;
for, just as they reached the foot of the hill, she
stepped on to a log, sloping from a boulder to
the earth, and it crumbled under her feet. She
fell forward into a clump of bracken, and would
have rolled into the creek, but for Colin's swift
action. He caught her by the dress and saved
her. Now both had mud on their clothes, and
on their hands and faces. The Swallow was very
concerned, and asked them to be more careful.
"Oh! it doesn't matter," Jessie declared. "It's
only mud, and will easily brush off when it
dries."
"But I promised to look after you," said the
Swallow. "And if you go home like that, what
will they say?"
"Don't worry about us," urged Jessie. "It's
fun having a fall if you're not hurt. Listen!
Why is that little bird scolding? He seems to
be very cross with somebody."
"That's Serry, the Scrub Wren. He's always


making a fuss over something." The Swallow
flew down from his perch, the tip of a sword-
grass stem, and made some remarks in bird
language. Then a small brown bird, with a white
stripe over each of its eyes, appeared from the
undergrowth.
"Sorry I frightened you," said the Scrub Wren
to Jessie and Colin. "But my house is hidden
in the sword-grass, and, till the Swallow told me
that he had brought you to Fernland, because
you are friends of the birds, I thought that you
were nest-robbers. Please have a peep at my
family."
Serry's nest was well hidden, and guarded
by the sword-grass stems which are armed with
tiny teeth, like those terrible spears that are
used by blackfellows in the far north.
"It's rather untidy," remarked Serry, when
the nest was revealed. "We make it like that
on purpose, so that robbers will think that it is
only a mass of bark and leaves, flung into the
grass by the creek in flood time. But, inside,
it's as neat and cosy as any bird home in Fern-
land. See for yourself."
Jessie found the doorway, a small hooded open-
ing, and gently put a finger inside the nest. It
was soft and warm, and contained three baby
wrens whose feathers had just begun to sprout.
"Aren't they darlings?" It was the mother
Wren speaking. She had just come home from


a hunting trip, and had eaten her beakful of in-
sects when she saw the visitors.
"I would like to see them so much," said Jessie.
"I love all baby birds."
"They're not old enough yet." Mrs. Serry spoke
rather sharply. "If you call on us next week,
perhaps I'll let you take one out of the nest for a
minute. Some mothers are careless, but I look
after my chicks. Zee! Zee! Zee! Zee! Zee!!
There's something moving in the ferns, just be-
side you, Jessie. I think it's a snake."
Jessie jumped away from the fern, and looked
round for a stick. Before she could get one, a
black snake, as long as a broom handle, glided
into the open, coiled itself comfortably, and
flicked its forked tongue at Mrs. Serry.
"You make a fuss about nothing," the Snake
hissed. "Do you think I'm after your babies?
Jumping frogs! I don't want them. They wouldn't
make a mouthful, all put together."
"Go away, you horrid thing! Zee! Zee! Zee!
Zee! Zee!! If you come near my nest, I'll ask
Jessie and Colin to kill you."
The Snake's tongue flickered faster than ever.
But Jessie was facing it now, with a long stick
raised, and, hissing fiercely, the serpent glided to
cover. Jessie aimed a blow and missed. The
Scrub Wren, flying over the bracken where the
Snake had disappeared, scolded for a minute or
two; and the Swallow, away on a hazel twig,
twittered all the time.


"I hate snakes," said Jessie, "but I'm not afraid
of them when I've got a stick. Dad says they're
not all poisonous; but I know the black snake is.
One of them bit my dear little foxy, Don, and
he died."
"We hate them all," declared Serry. "They
eat baby birds when they get the chance. But
they're scared of the kookaburras. Little snakes
are, anyhow."
"But the Thrush told me, in Blossomville, that
kookaburras eat baby birds themselves." Colin
was surprised to hear a small bird say a good
word for the big brown kingfishers.
"So they do—sometimes," Serry agreed. "But
if they weren't fond of eating snakes, I guess we
would be worse off. It's fine to see Old Jack on a
gum-bough, with a snake dangling from his
beak."
"Well, we haven't time to gossip and talk
scandal," the Swallow remarked. "I want to show
our visitors a bit more of Fernland. You Scrub
Wrens are so talkative."
The Wrens were so annoyed at this that they
flew into the sword-grass, and stayed there, sulk-
ily calling "Zee ! Zee ! Zee ! Zee !" Colin and Jessie
cried them farewell, and followed the Swallow
down a sun-chequered avenue to a thicket of
bracken. Some of the fern was dead, and some
was green and glossy. Among the fronds, not
two feet from the ground, they found a nest, with
three eggs in it; pretty pinkish-buff coloured


eggs, with red and brown spots on them. Colin
was bending over the nest, when he was startled
by a volley of harsh notes, and two slender-billed
birds, with golden barred wings, came flying
about his head. They were New Holland Honey-
eaters.
"What are you after, you horrid boy?" de-
manded one of the birds.
"It's all right, Melorny," said the Swallow,
"Colin and Jessie are just making a little tour of
Fernland, they won't do any harm. How's the
honey harvest this season? I know a fine grove
of banksia down by the sea, if you want to have a
feast any time."
"Plenty of nectar in Fernland just now," an-
swered the Honey-eater. "But who are these
intruders? I'm suspicious of all boys, and girls,
too, who come poking around our nests. They're
after no good as a rule."
The Swallow fluttered his wings. "Haven't I
told you," he snapped, "that they are visitors. Do
be civil and make your mate stop scolding."
Melorny, before replying, flew on to the rim of
the nest and examined the eggs closely. "Well
they haven't been touched," he said at length.
"I'll take your word for it that these visitors are
not nest-robbers. But we can't be too careful, as
you know very well. Last season we lost two
clutches, one after the other, though the nest was
carefully hidden."
"You make such a noise when anyone comes


near, I don't wonder at your nest being found.
Keep quiet and out of sight, when you see an in-
truder; and, ten moths to a mayfly, he won't dis-
cover your nursery." The Swallow looked wise
as he gave this advice.
"Anybody would think that we didn't know our
own business," cried Melorny. "You just mind
your own, and leave us alone. If swallows weren't
liked by silly men folk, where would you be?
Boys could rob your nests as easily as I can rifle
a honeysuckle cone. We make a noise to frighten
robbers away."
"And the robbers just laugh at you, and clear
off with your eggs," said the Swallow. "All you
noisy birds are the same. It is wiser to be quiet
—I think."
The Swallow and the Honey-eater kept on ar-
guing till their voices were tired; and Colin and
Jessie were weary of waiting for the bickering
to end.
"Why don't you build your nests high among
the branches, like the shrike-tit?" That was the
Swallow's final question.
"Because we choose to do as we please," cried
Melorny. "We don't want your advice, and we
don't want your friends."
"Come along. We'll leave these silly birds to
themselves." The Swallow shot from his perch,
and Jessie and Colin, with a polite farewell to the
Honey-eaters, followed after him, afoot. Pre-


sently they heard a faint and pitiful sound, the
cheeping of a baby bird in distress.
"A little bird lost," said Jessie. "We must find
it, Colin, and put it back in the nest, if we can."
They searched the undergrowth, and looked
among all the low branches about them. But
they could not discover the baby bird, though it
was close to them all the time. The Swallow
came flying back, to see why his friends delayed.
He had gone a hundred yards ahead, perched on
a spray and waited. He was just a tiny bit cross,
till he learned the truth; then he called "Cheerie,
weerie, wee," and joined in the search for the
nestling. He found it quickly enough, after hear-
ing the plaintive notes that had won the pity of
Jessie and her cousin. It was a baby honey-
eater, scantily feathered, and much too young to
be out in the wilds alone. Clinging to the stem
of a bracken frond, it continued to cheep, and it
looked very frightened when the rescue party
appeared.
"Bats and beetles," exclaimed the Swallow.
"Why, it's a baby New Hollander. Wonder
where its nursery is. Let's look."
Colin found the nest, well hidden though it
was, in a clump of fern, a good way from the
spot where the nestling was discovered. It held
an addled egg and a fledgling, the twin brother of
the poor little wanderer which Jessie now carried
so tenderly in her hand. The mother bird was
hanging, dead, from a frond above her home.


She had caught her head somehow in a loop of
horsehair twined about the stem, and in her
struggle for freedom, had been strangled. The
tragedy made Jessie and Colin feel sad. What
would become of the babies?
Jessie put the rescued fledgling in the nest,
where it snuggled down beside its brother.
"Shall we leave them?" asked Colin. "Perhaps
their father is alive and will come back to them
soon."
"I think he has gone to find another mate,"
the Swallow said. "We'll leave them now; and
I'll send a message to Menura, so that they'll be
looked after, even if their father doesn't return.
Poor little things; I feel sorry for them."
"So do I," Jessie exclaimed. "Do such tra-
gedies happen often in Birdland?"
"All sorts of things happen," said the Swal-
low, "just as they do in your own cities. We have
many perils to face. But don't worry about the
baby honey-birds; they'll be all right, as soon
as I get word to the king. He's a kind old bird
and lets none of his subjects suffer, if he can help
it."
"What made the nestling wander away?" asked
Jessie.
"Oh! it was hungry, I suppose," the Swallow
replied. "Or something frightened it so much
that it scrambled from the nest, and couldn't get
in again. So it strayed away and away. It's
lucky you heard it calling for help. It would


have died very soon of hunger; or some bird
enemy would have caught it and made a meal off
the poor little creature."
As they were toiling through a belt of tea-tree,
on the edge of a swamp, where mosquitoes at-
tacked them fiercely, Colin's keen eyes sighted a
nest like a fairy cradle, swinging gently from a
slender bough. It was woven of grasses and
covered in golden-green moss, all dry and curly.
A brown bird, with a yellow patch on each side
of her head, was on the nest. She looked down
at Colin and was ready to fly when the Swallow
called to her, and she settled again.
"Good day, Yellow-face," was the Swallow's
greeting. "Hope you are in a better humour
than your cousins were when we saw them a
while ago. Melorny was quite rude to me, just
because I gave some good advice. My friends
here —Colin is a Gould League boy—are having
a ramble through Fernland. Would you mind
letting them see your beautiful jewel-like eggs?"
"Delighted," said Mrs. Yellow-face, who was
flattered by the Swallow's description of her eggs.
She slipped off the nest and, perched on the spray
that supported it, began to preen her feathers.
The nest was not very high up, and Jessie first,
and then Colin, peered into it after an easy climb.
The eggs—there were only two —were of a pale
salmon-pink colour, spotted with greyish purple
and chestnut red. They really looked like jewels,
resting in a pretty casket. When the children


praised their beauty, Mrs. Yellow-face was more
pleased than ever. She offered to tell them some-
thing about the honey-eater family; and, of
course, they were eager to hear her story.
"We are a noble and beautiful family/' Mrs.
Y r ellow-face began. "We are typical Australian
birds, you know. Greenie is one of us; and
Spinebill, who drills holes in your garden flowers,
to get at the nectar in them. Indeed, there are so
many in our family, that I can't remember the
names of all. Wherever you wander, in Aus-
tralian wilds, you are almost sure to meet some
of my relations. But I must tell you about my
own species (isn't that the word that naturalists
use?). We are always cheerful and lively; and we
sing very nicely. But we are prouder of our nests
and eggs than anything else. I don't want to be
boastful; but you'll travel far in Birdland before
you see another nursery as beautiful as this of
mine; and as for eggs! well, just look at my pair
again!"
"They are lovely," exclaimed Jessie.
"Every nest-robber wants our eggs. Some
friends of mine built in a garden tree, and the
nest was robbed; but another was built, and three
eggs were soon resting in it. These were stolen
also; but my friends would not leave the garden.
They tried again and again, and at last the enemy
had pity, and a brood was reared. I can't under-
stand why men folk treat birds so cruelly. Why
can't they leave us alone. The orchardist says


that some of us steal his fruit. Why can't we eat
some? The orchardist has heaps and heaps; he
can't eat them all himself. When my chicks are
greedy, I peck them."
"But the fruit is sent to market," Jessie said
laughing. "It is sold to thousands of people. And
if you birds were allowed to eat all you wanted,
the orchardists would have none left to sell. They
wouldn't be able to earn a living."
"I don't know what you mean by 'sell' and
'market'," retorted Mrs. Yellow-face. "Australia
is our country. We were here before Captain
Cook landed; before the orchardists came. And,
anyhow, birds eat millions of insects that feed on
your crops and fruit. You can't do without us."
"That's what the Gould League leaders say,"
remarked Colin. "I love all birds; so does Jessie."
When they said good-bye to Mrs. Yellow-face,
she was settled cosily on her nest.
The Swallow guided them down a deep gully,
where the tree-fern crowns, like green umbrellas,
sheltered them from the sun. Their footsteps
made hardly a sound. It was silent and still in
the shadowy place. But, climbing up the head
of the gully, they passed beneath three black
cockatoos, perched on a lofty gum-bough. The
birds would not stay, though the Swallow called
to them, but, with harsh cries, flew off through
the trees.
"I'll take you home by a short cut," the Swal-
low said, when they were out of the gully. "I


A LITTLE HONEY-EATER LOST
KAKADOE AND HIS WIFE


f . - V
'
"


want you to see the nursery of my special friends,
the mistletoe-birds. It's in a gum-sapling, close
to the old coach road."
The children were feeling tired after their long
ramble in Fernland. It was easy going now in
open country, with no dense thickets or jungle
to try their strength and patience. They came to
the foot of a low hill, dotted with saplings and
gnarled old trees, and tufted with gorse bushes,
whose blossom was like masses of gold. There
were sweet-briar brushes, too, with fragrant pink
flowers. Some of the gum-boughs were burdened
with great clumps of mistletoe.
"Where is the nest?" asked Colin. "Oh! what
a lovely bird! —Is that one of your friends, Swal-
low ?"
Colin was close to the sapling that held the
Mistletoe-birds' nest. And one of the owners
was perched on a branch, almost within his reach.
A very small bird it was, bright eyed, alert and
beautiful. The sunlight gleamed on its glossy,
steel blue coat; its throat and breast were scar-
let, and its "waistcoat" shining white.
Jessie cried out with delight when she saw the
Mistletoe-bird. The little fellow seemed to be
quite at his ease. And I am sure that he was
proud of his beauty. When his friend, the Swal-
low, introduced Jessie and Colin, he welcomed
them so prettily that they liked him more than
ever.
The nest was like a pocket of felt, and swung


from a branchlet, ten feet above the ground. The
Mistletoe-bird flew to it, put his head inside for
half a minute, and then returned to his former
perch.
"I was just telling my mate about you," he ex-
plained. "She wants you to come again soon.
We expect the eggs to hatch out in a day or two.
Sorry you can't have a look at them; but you'll
be able to see the babies; and you'll love them.
Mistletoe-birds are worth knowing. There are
plenty of us, but we don't care to be seen too
often, and so people think that we are rare. The
chief home of our family is India. But I wouldn't
like to live there. Australia is the finest country
in the world, for birds as well as for men. When-
ever you want to see one of us, go where there is
mistletoe on the gum-trees. We eat mistletoe
berries, and plant the seeds on gum-boughs far
and wide. The plant is our friend and partner.
We help each other, you see. The mistletoe pro-
vides us with food; and in return, we spread its
seeds through the bush. That's fair; isn't it?
Well, good-bye, for the present. I do hope you
will pay us another visit; you really must see the
babies."
"Thank you very much," said Jessie. "We'd
like to; and we will come if we get the chance."
Before they reached Wilangi the sun was
down the sky. The Swallow with a cheery "good


night/' darted under the verandah to its nest.
Jessie and Colin, weary, but brimming over with
the joy of a perfect day in the Bush, went in-
doors. Over the tea-cups they told their adven-
tures, and begged that the next trip to Birdland
might come soon.
Jessie's mother smiled. "Whenever your Swal-
low friend pleases," she said. "I wish I could
come with you, children dear, and see the Bush-
land babies; for I love them almost as much as
you do. Now off to bed, chicks. You should
sleep to-night as soon as your heads are pillowed;
and if you don't wake before noon to-morrow,
well, I shall not be surprised."


CHAPTER IV
HOMES IN HOLLOWS
'ANOTHER of those blessed hawks. I'll fix him."
Jim Driscoll dived into the stable, and was out
in half a minute, carrying his gun. He was tak-
ing aim at a kestrel, perched on a pine-tree bough
by the poultry yard fence, when Jessie rushed
out and seized the barrel of the gun.
"Don't you dare to shoot it, Jim," she cried.
"You big stupid! Can't you leave our bird
friends alone?"
Jim lowered the gun and sulkily watched the
kestrel leave its perch, and fly over the pepper-
trees, out of sight.
"Why didn't you let me kill the brute, Miss
Jessie?" Jim grumbled. "Hawks are death on
chickens. You should see our chicks scatter when
a hawk flies over."
"It was a kestrel, Jim," explained Jessie. "And
kestrels don't do us any harm. You ask my
Uncle Claude. He's forgotten more about wild
birds than you'll ever know. Kestrels feed on
mice and lizards mostly; they don't touch chick-
ens. If I see you again trying to shoot any of
our birds about the homestead, I'll ask Dad to
take your gun from you."


"If he does, I'll clear out," Jim threatened. "I
know more'n any of you about birds and things.
I've been here long enough anyways."
"Don't be silly, Jim." Jessie spoke softly.
"We don't want to lose you; but we like to have
birds around the house, and in the garden and
paddocks. There are lots of rabbits and foxes
for you to shoot. Only, please leave the birds
alone."
Jim was mollified. He promised not to shoot
around the homestead. "But all the same," he
added, "I reckon them hawks 'll have the chick-
ens."
It was two days after the journey to Fernland,
when Jessie saved the kestrel. While she was
reading under the verandah that afternoon, the
Swallow flew down from its nest, and spoke to
her.
"I'm glad that you stopped the boy, who was
going to shoot the kestrel," said the Swallow.
"He's no particular friend of mine—the kestrel, I
mean —for he takes a small bird now and then;
but he's not a bad sort of bird. He told the
Galah how you had saved him; and old Kakadoe
told me. They both live away in the Skeleton
Creek country, where there are thousands of dead
gum-trees, with lots of nice hollows for nurser-
ies. We call the place Yankaramonda —that's
Cockatoo language, and it means The City of
Dead Trees. All the cockatoos and parrots, and
many hawks, rear their broods in Yankara-


monda. Owls go there, too, to nest; and ducks,
and scores of other birds."
"Oh! I would like to see it; and so would Colin.
It must be the place where Uncle Claude took
photographs of baby galahs."
Jessie dropped her book and waited eagerly
for the Swallow's reply. She hoped for an invi-
tation to Yankaramonda; nor was she disap-
pointed.
"I don't care to go there myself,'' remarked
the Swallow. "But old Kakadoe is a friend of
mine; I'll ask him to be your guide. It's getting
late in the season; still, there are sure to be
broods in some of the hollows. You and Colin
be ready to start out after breakfast to-morrow."
«/
The dawn found Colin waking. He was so
eager for the day's adventure, he could not sleep
well through the night. He was out of bed and
at the window when the earliest sunbeam came
stealing into the room. Every morning it came;
but Colin had never welcomed it before. He
leaned from the open casement now, and saw the
beauty of a Bushland dawn. The eastern sky
was silver-blue above the wonderful rose colour
about the rising sun. Silver and blue, soft rose-
pink, golden-red and grey were the colours of
dawn. Dark against the glory of it, the gums
whispered as the wind touched them, fresh from
the gullies of Fernland and the far blue hills.


Magpies were singing among the branches; in a
rose bush under the window, small birds were at
their matins. The swallows were wide awake,
too, seeking already a meal of insects for their
broods. The air was cool and fragrant; it was
like a kiss, or the touch of soft hands, so Colin
thought when his head went out of the window.
It was good to be waking at dawn; to see the
sun climb out of bed, and hear the birds greet it
with songs that seemed fresher and sweeter be-
cause they were sung at sunrise.
Colin stood by the window till he heard Jim
Driscoll's whistle as the boy strolled to the milk-
ing shed. He shouted a greeting to Colin, and
an invitation to come down and see him milk
"Beauty," the little red-brown cow, that tried
every morning to kick the pail, and upset Jim
from his stool. Colin slipped into his clothes and
reached the shed in time to win a cup of warm,
frothy milk. He helped Jim feed the ducks, then
wandered back to the house. Two hours to wait
for breakfast! Colin could think of nothing that
would speed the time. So he lay down on the
lounge chair, under the cool verandah, and
watched the swallows at their nests, and the
blue wrens in the garden. He fell asleep at last,
and the breakfast gong wakened him.
Kakadoe and the Swallow were waiting when
the children came into the garden. Jessie carried
a basket and Colin the old tin billy, filled with
mutton sandwiches, cake and sugar and tea.


"This is my friend, Kakadoe," said the Swal-
low.
"Pleased to meet you/' Jessie spoke most polite-
ly ; while Colin bowed.
Kakadoe nodded briskly, and said:
"You want to visit the City of Dead Trees?
It is worth seeing. But I want you to promise
me, first, that you'll never tell the trappers how
to get there. They war against us all over the
plains; on Yankoor Creek; round Munley way;
on Winton's run; everywhere except Yankara-
monda, which they haven't discovered yet. I
hate trappers. Why doesn't the Government of
Australia have them all captured and banished.
They spread nets for us in the paddocks and
wheat-fields; they steal our babies from their
nurseries. And farmers are nearly as bad; for
they shoot us and spread poisoned grain about
our feeding haunts. There's something wrong
with the scheme of things, when galahs are so
persecuted."
Kakadoe screeched the final words of his long
speech. He was angry; and an angry cockatoo
is a sight to make a dog turn tail. But Jessie
and Colin, of course, were not the least bit afraid.
They tried not to smile, and promised Kakadoe
that they would faithfully keep the secret of the
way to the cockatoos' city. He calmed down at
once, scratched his poll, and asked for a nut.
Jessie ran indoors, and returned with a handful
of shelled almonds. The old Galah ate them


greedily, and became so friendly that he flew on
to Jessie's shoulder.
"You'd better be moving," advised the Swal-
low, who feared that his friend would ask for
more nuts. And so the old bird did.
"More nuts!" laughed Jessie. "All right. I'll
bring a pocketful, and you can eat them as we
go along." She got the almonds; and after he
had eaten six of them, the Galah announced that
he was ready to start on the journey to Yan-
karamonda. "It isn't far for a bird," said he,
"but you wingless creatures are so slow, it will
be two hours, at least, before we get there."
Due north they travelled after crossing the
home creek, through timbered paddocks and
then into wild country. The Galah made short
flights ahead of the children, waiting for them
after each. And so they went on and on till the
sun was high overhead. The way seemed end-
less to Colin and Jessie, because the heat was a
burden to them, and the ground often rough with
stones and mouldering tree-trunks. Suddenly
they came into the open country, a place almost
treeless, but covered in dry grass, which shim-
mered in the sunlight. A mile away there was a
belt of green timber.
"Our city is just over there, behind the big
river gums," said Kakadoe.
"I thought we would never get there," cried
Jessie. "Isn't it hot?"
Colin mopped his beaded forehead. He was


footsore after the long tramp; but he stepped out
briskly now that the journey's end was in sight.
The brown grass was teeming with grasshop-
pers. They leaped up in every direction. One
in its whirring flight, struck Colin full in the
face.
"I'll have to tell the ibises about these 'hop-
pers'," Kakadoe remarked. "They're getting too
thick. Don't know where they come from. We
can't eat all the grasshopper eggs; but I thought
that this bit of country had been cleaned up.
Yes, I'll send w'ord to Ibisville to-morrow."
They reached the trees, and passed through
them on to the bank of a wide creek. The water
was shallow and muddy, and flowed rather slow-
ly. It was studded with dead gum-trees, whose
trunks and branches were white and shining,
bleached by the sunlight of unnumbered sum-
mers. Some of the trees on the banks, also, were
dead; the living ones formed but a thin belt on
either side of the creek.
"Here we are at last," said Kakadoe. "For
miles the creek is full of dead trees, and our
homes are in their hollows. Every year hosts of
parrots and cockatoos are born in the dark nur-
series. See that big tree, with one broken bough?
There's a hollow near the top; and that was
where I was born, a long, long time ago. I like
the old home; its as deep and comfortable as any
I've seen. My mate was caught by the trappers,


out on the plains, or there might be a brood in it
now."
Jessie and Colin lunched by the creek, while
Kakadoe ate his almonds. Resting in the shade
of a noble old tree, whose boughs stretched over
the water, they watched the birds whose homes
were in hollows. Flocks of galahs wheeled over
the trees; and many were busy among the dead
timber. A small company of wood-duck swam
past; and black-duck and teal were cruising
around. None of them showed any fear of the
intruders. Kakadoe had spread through the city
the news of their coming, and the story of how
Jessie saved the kestrel.
Near the hollow trunk of a tree that looked,
so Jessie declared, at least a thousand years old,
was a pile of fire-blackened stones. Kakadoe
said that, once upon a time, before he was
feathered, a sundowner came to the creek and
camped in the hollow tree.
"He was an old, old man, with grey hair and
a long grey beard. He wandered about all day,
picking flowers, or watching birds and butter-
flies. He used to catch fish; but he hadn't a gun,
and he never harmed one of us. Those stones
formed his fire-place, where he boiled the billy
at dawn, at noontide, and when the sun was
setting. He did nothing else, except what I've
told you about. And he was a cheery old fellow,
whistling and singing as he rambled along the
creek. One morning he found a bee-tree, and


stood beside it for nearly an hour, watching the
bees stream in and out of the doorway, a small
round hole, fifty feet above the ground. At last
he made up his swag, slung it across his back,
and tramped away from our city. We never
saw him again."
"He was a 'hatter,' I suppose," remarked
Jessie. "Dad says that there are lots of lonely
men in the Bush, who follow the wallaby track,
because they like the wilds, or don't like hard
work. Some of them go a bit queer."
"Our old man was queer enough," said the
Galah. But we liked him because he was harm-
less and gentle. There was another man, who
used to come here often, from Monwarra Station,
twelve miles away. He drove across the plains
in a sulky, camped for the night, and returned
to the station next day. He came for fishing;
but he liked to cruise among the dead trees and
look for ducks' nests in the hollows that could
be reached without climbing. His boat is still
moored to the bank, just round the bend there.
But he will never use it again, for he went to
the west a year ago, to manage a sheep station
there."
"How lucky for us that he left his boat here,"
said Jessie. "I was just wondering how we could
get to the trees in the Creek."
"I can't row, Jess," Colin exclaimed. "Can
you ?"
"Oh, yes," Jessie replied. "It's easy enough.


Let us have a look at the boat, though; it may
be too leaky to hold us."
They walked round the bend, and there, tied to
a stake in the bank, lay a little flattie, half full
of water. They hauled it ashore, and managed
to turn it over. Then it was launched again.
The oars were discovered, lying in the grass near
by.
Jessie handled the oars cleverly, and soon had
the boat in midstream. But water kept oozing
in, and Colin had to bail with an old jam tin
every few minutes. It was an exciting voyage
that the wanderers made on the creek of dead
trees. Kakadoe, perched at the bow, acted as
pilot. The boat was stopped at dozens of trees,
whose hollows were bird nurseries. Colin climbed
to some of the nests; Jessie had to be content
with peeping into hollows that were no higher
than her head when she stood up in the flattie.
One tree, with many spouted branches, was
like a township of bird homes. Seven hollows
were tenanted by galah families, and three by
parrots. A pair of wood-swallows had their
nest in a fork; and close to the end of a slender
branch, was the frail nursery of two happy
brown-flycatchers. The lowest hole in the tree-
trunk, only a few feet above the water, was
empty now; but Kakadoe said that a brood of
biack-duck had been reared in it. Jessie put
her hand into it, and felt a soft bed of downy
feathers.


"Most of the ducks in our city choose stumps
for their nests, or hollows low down in the
trees," Kakadoe remarked. "Some kinds make
their homes along the bank, amid tall grass; and
some go to the big swamps, where they nest in
the lignum bushes."
A mile from the bend, they glided past a tree
that was higher than all those about it.
"That's where the falcons nest," said Kakadoe.
"It's their ancestral home; and soon you will see
the nursery of Yeeringa, the Kestrel, that Jim
in the "doorway," and perched beside the Galah,
Driscoll wanted to shoot.''
The boat glided on. Jessie dodged the trees;
but they struck a snag once, and were nearly
upset. And after that, water flowed in so freely,
that Colin had to bail all the time to keep the
flattie afloat.
"We had better get to the bank, I think," re-
marked Jessie, "or we'll sink. It's a crazy old
boat, and I'm getting tired."
"So am I," declared Colin, as he dipped up
the water in his jam tin.
Water flowed in quicker than ever, and the boat
sank just as its bows touched the edge of a little
knoll. The creek was shallow here; and Jessie
and Colin escaped with nothing worse than wet
feet. They were nearly two miles from the
camping place.
"Never mind," said Kakadoe, "it's a pleasant


walk under the gum-trees, and I can show you
lots of nests."
They had walked but a dozen paces, when
Kakadoe called a halt. He flew up to a hollow
in a living tree, thirty feet from the ground, and
called down it. A second later Yeeringa appeared
in the "doorway," and perched beside the galah
on a splintered bough. They talked together
for a while; then Yeeringa flew down.
"I'm glad that you came to see me," the Kes-
trel said. "I want to thank you, Jessie, for saving
my life yesterday. Jim Driscoll is a dead shot;
and he'd have blown me to pieces if you hadn't
stopped him. I've told my babies about it; and
they all want to see the kind girl who saved
their father. They're nicely feathered, and I'll
give them their first outing now, in honour of
your visit."
Up to the hollow again flew Yeeringa, and
went inside. Presently a young kestrel appeared
in the opening. He clung there for more than
a minute, looking very frightened. But Yeeringa
urged him to try his wings, and gave him a little
push. The fledgling overbalanced, and with
wings flapping wildly, came slanting to the
ground. He landed in a heap, and made such an
outcry, that Jessie ran to pick him up. But the
youngster was only scared. He lay on his back
and menaced Jessie with beak and claws. His
father scolded him from the hollow, and the
fledgling became quiet. One by one the others


came down, till there were four of them. Yeeringa
joined the quartette, and, at his bidding, they
fluttered on to a fallen bough, and perched there,
in a row.
"How pretty they look," cried Jessie. "And
they fly so cleverly, though they have never been
out of the nest before."
Yeeringa was proud of his family, and he made
the strongest one show off. "Fly over the creek
and back again" was the order. The young
kestrel shifted his claws, looked at the flowing
water, and huddled himself up.
"Fly! Fly!" screeched Yeeringa.
The fledgling left its perch and flew for a few
yards; then it fell into the creek and struggled
to the bank. It was safe, but with its feathers
all wet and muddy, it cut a sorry figure.
Yeeringa was very angry, and would have
pecked his son had not Jessie intervened.
"He's a brave little bird, I think," said she.
"Why, it took me days to learn to swim. And,
if I had wings, I would be scared to make a flight
above water until I had used them scores of
times."
Bidding the kestrels good-bye, the wanderers
walked on, in the shade of spreading boughs, till
they reached a dry billabong, dotted with dead
trees. Here they saw betcherrygabs entering
and leaving hollows, and a pair of cockatoo-
parrots busily feeding their brood.
"This is one of our suburbs," Kakadoe e:x-


YEERIXGA THE KESTREL'S BROOD




plained. "The little green and yellow love-birds
have a city of their own, far away across the
plains. Only a few pairs come here to nest. They
are more numerous even than my own people, the
galahs. Often, I've seen flocks of them, so great
that they were like a beautiful cloud floating
swiftly above the plain. They are like big butter-
flies. The trappers capture them in thousands.
And the poor captives are sent across the ocean,
or to Melbourne and Sydney, and other Aus-
tralian cities."
"I've often seen them in the market," said Col-
in. "Mother told me that if two were kept in a
cage, and one died, the other would be so sorry
that it would soon die also."
"And so it would," declared Kakadoe. "They
hate to be alone. Galahs go about in big flocks;
but we are more sensible than the love-birds.
I wouldn't pine away just because my mate was
taken from me."
"Oh!" exclaimed Jessie. "Look at that funny
little bird, with all its head feathers standing on
end, as if it had seen a ghost. Isn't it a fright?"
The baby bird's mother overheard Jessie's re-
mark, and it made her angry. She was a cocka-
too-parrot, beautiful in French-grey feathers,
with an olive-yellow patch on each side of her
head, and a crest of fine feathers.
"My Wando is just perfect," screeched
Wando's mother. "His crest is growing longer


every day. \ou are very rude to call him a
fright."
Jessie was sorry that she had offended the
Cockatiel, and she hastened to say so.
"I look a fright myself, when my hair is in curl
papers," she admitted. "I suppose birds don't
curl their feathers."
"Dear me! no," replied the Cockatiel. "We
clean our feathers, and arrange them neatly when
they become ruffled; that's all. Curls are ugly,
I think, though some birds do have curly feathers
in their crests. Well, I must be going; it's time
for Wando's dinner."
Kakadoe led the way now to a stump, with a
hole in it about the size of a football. The hollow
was empty, but it had been the home of a family
of tree-creepers so the Galah said. Soon they
heard one of the birds calling, a high piping "Pee!
pee ! pee ! pee! pee !"
"There he is," cried Kakadoe, "creeping up the
trunk of that crooked gum-tree. Tree-creepers
always creep up; the tree-runners climb dozen.
I don't know why. You can ask old Scando if
you like. Might stop him making a row. It's
enough to give one a headache! There; he's off
again."
"Pee! pee! pee! pee! pee!" Scando's clear notes
pulsed through the air. He flew 011 to the stump,
and looked curiously at Colin and Jessie. He
was a small bird, simply dressed in grey, relieved
by white on the throat.


"Why can't you keep quiet?" demanded Kaka-
cloe.
"Quiet!" the Tree-creeper echoed. "My voice
is trained and musical. But you cockatoos screech
so that I feel like scratching your crests off. You
are the noisiest things in the Bush."
Kakadoe fell into a rage at this, and flew at
the Tree-creeper. But that small grey bird was
off in a flash. Kakadoe chased him for a while,
but soon wearied and returned to the stump,
which he attacked savagely with his beak.
"Letting off steam," Jessie thought, trying in
vain not to smile.
Kakadoe mumbled something, and made the
chips fly for another minute. After that he be-
come more amiable; and before the camping
place was reached, he was again a merry com-
panion.
They rested for a while in the shade of rustling
boughs.
"What are the old trees saying?" asked Jessie.
"They always seem to be whispering secrets to
each other, except on quiet days, when the wind
is asleep."
"They talk only when the wind comes flowing
through their leaves," Kakadoe explained. "They
are dumb till the wind gives them voices; then
they gossip as fast as they can, so as to make up
for the hours of silence. I often listen to them;
for some of the very ancient trees remember
things that happened a long, long time ago, before


white folk came to Australia. Hark! this very
tree that gives us shade, is telling a story now.
I will tell it to you myself, for, of course, you
don't understand the language of the whispering
leaves." >]
~ * -
Kakadoe flew up to a high branch of the tree,
and perched on it, with his head bent sidelong,
for nearly five minutes. Then he came down,
and repeated all that he had heard the leaves say.
"More than a hundred summers ago," he began
"a tribe of brackfellows roamed along this creek.
Their mia-mias were made of bark from the
gums, and so were their frail canoes. They spear-
ed fishes, and gathered mussels from the mud
in the shallow places. One day in the spring,
when the sky was clear and shining, and the
air laden with the scent of wattle bloom, a young
gin lay on the knoll over there, playing with her
picaninny. She was very happy, for her black
baby was a plump and merry little rascal, and his
cunning ways were pretty to see. But a blue
butterfly floated past him out over the creek,
and the picaninny toddled after it. Before his
mother could stop him, he stumbled and went
splashing into the water. The gin shrieked, and
dived into the creek. She could not see her baby
at first, because he was held under by a snag.
But she dived twice and the second time her
groping hands touched the little naked body.
Then the snag had to free its captive; the pica-
ninny was saved."


WANDO,
THE
COCKATIEL
BABY




"I am so glad that the baby wasn't drowned,"
said Jessie. "Do the trees know many other
stories?"
"Lots," replied Kakadoe. "But we haven't
time to hear them now. I want to show you the
owls' home. It's in a hollow in a tree that you
can't reach, because it stands in the centre of a
billabong, and we haven't a boat now. But I'll
ask the owls to bring one of their babies for an
airing. They had four eggs, but only three
hatched."
It was half a mile to the owls' haunt, where no
sounds were heard but the crooning gossip of the
trees. The nest tree was a stone's throw from
dry land. Kakadoe flew to it, peeped into the
hollow, and returned to the cousins.
"Nobody home," the Cockatoo announced. "I
might have known it. Why, it's nearly a month
since I was here last, and the owlets were getting
their feathers then. Perhaps they are somewhere
around. I'll have a look."
Within two minutes Kakadoe was back,
screeching joyfully. Pie guided the wanderers to
a spot close by, and there was the queerest young
bird they had ever seen. Perched on a dead bough,
with its shoulders hunched and its wings droop-
ing, the owlet looked like a little Turk. Its big,
staring eyes and its big beak were half buried in
feathers. And its broad back was covered with
fluffy white down. The wing feathers looked
beautiful, so soft they were and delicately col-


oured in pale fawny brown, tinged with yellow,
and pencilled with dark brown and white.
The queer fledgling clung to its perch, and
gazed solemnly at the intruders. Then it slowly
turned its back upon them. Kakadoe screeched
at it, but the owlet remained in the sulks.
"Isn't it soft and fluffy?" remarked Jessie. "I
would like to nurse it, dear little thing."
"He won't be a 'dear little thing' when he's a
bit older," declared Kakadoe. "Look at his ugly
beak, and those terrible talons. You have never
seen a delicate owl, or any other kind of owl,
catch its prey. I have. Ugh !"
They walked back to the camping place, and
after a brief rest in the shade, began the journey
to Wilangi. The colours of sunset had faded
from the west before they reached the home-
stead, and Jessie's mother was waiting for them
at the sliprails. They started at once to tell her
of all the wonders they had seen; of bird homes
in hollows, and trees that tell stories of olden
days.
"Better than Fernland," was Colin's verdict;
but his cousin did not agree.
"It was just lovely," said Jessie, "yet I like
Fernland best."
"You're only a girl," laughed Colin, as he ran
up the verandah steps.


CHAPTER V
WHERE THE CUCKOOS CALL
"SOME day we'll go to Cuckoo Creek; it isn't
far from Fernland."
Jessie looked up from her book —she was read-
ing under the verandah —and saw the Swallow
perched on the back of the chair. He preened his
feathers, and twittered cheerily.
"Cuckoo Creek!" Jessie was puzzled. "I've
never heard of it, Swallow dear."
"You've been there, though," declared the
Swallow. "It flows through the hills, not a mile
from Menura's realm."
"Oh! I know now," cried Jessie. "That's Mulga
Creek."
"We call it after the cuckoos," the Swallow
explained; "because they are always there in
springtime and summer. Their voices echo
through the gullies; and they are not very pleas-
ant to hear. Tits and wrens and other small
birds hate the cuckoos. Shall I tell you why?"
"I know," said Jessie. "It's because the cuckoos
are too lazy to build nests, and look after their
babies. They put their eggs in the nests of other
birds, and leave them to be hatched out by the
silly things."


"That's right; and the other birds have to feed
the baby cuckoos. But there's something worse
than that." The Swallow looked angry. "Cuckoo
nestlings," he continued, "are nothing less than
murderers. Before their eyes are open, they throw
eggs or chicks of their foster-parents out of the
nursery."
"What cruel, ungrateful creatures they are,"
cried Jessie.
"We hate them," said the Swallow again.
"They ought to be banished from Birdland. But
when will you come to Cuckoo Creek?"
"To-day if you like. It's quite early; and Colin
is just down in the paddock, with Jim Driscoll.
I'll call him, and ask Mother if we may go."
Jessie went off on her mission, and soon re-
turned with Colin.
"It's all right," she said gleefully. "We are
ready to start now."
Wild flowers in the paddock delayed them;
for Jessie could not hurry past the little "billy-
goat" orchids, coloured like wallflowers, or the
long stemmed trigger-plants, all strung with
quaint pink blossoms. She showed Colin how
to release the "trigger" with a pin point. When
they reached the southern fence, there were
purple flowers to be gathered; and a golden
winged butterfly lured Colin to the chase. Cica-
das shrilled among the gum-boughs, for the sun
was fierce on this summer morn; and the fairy
fiddlers, with goggle eyes, love to fill the Bush


with their music when wise folk seek the shade.
The Swallow skimmed low far ahead. Jessie
knew the way to the creek, so there was no need
for their Birdland guide till they came to the
vale which, he said, was the haunt of many
cuckoos- It was not a long journey from Wil-
angi; before noon they were walking by Cuc-
koo Creek, a place visited so rarely that there was
no track to follow. Bushes and trees crowded the
banks. At one spot the crooked branch of a gum-
tree stretched over the water, like a protecting
arm; and beneath it stood a young man, who
shouted a greeting.
"That's Tom Dawson," remarked Jessie, "one
of the Kuldook boys. He comes sometimes and
sets lines for blackfish."
"Hullo!" cried Tout, as they drew near,
"Looking for nests? Plenty of cuckoos about.
Want to see a yabbie?" He pointed to a stump
close by. The yabbie was perched there, with its
nipper-claws ready for action. It looked so fierce
and funny that Colin laughed.
"Yabbies," said Tom, "are silly beasts. I catch
lots of them. Just tie a bit of raw meat at the
end of a fishing line and toss it into the water.
If there are any yabbies around, one'll grab it
in a jiffey, and hang on. Good fun, hauling them
out. Well, I must be getting back; got to ride
over to Wilangi this afternoon. So long."
Tom went swinging down the creek, and the
cousins deeper into the vale. Cuckoos were call-


ing all about, and Jessie said that there were
three kinds —the pallid, the fantailed, and the
bronze. She knew the notes of all three.
They were pushing through a patch of jungle,
when the Swallow alighted on a wattle twig, and
told them to stop. A moment later they heard a
blue wren singing, and caught the gleam of his
azure cap.
"How are you, Maluro?" asked the Swallow.
"Any young cuckoos about?"
Maluro stopped singing and flicked his long
tail. "Any cuckoos!" he cried. "Why there's
one in my nest. My mate and I have no peace
now. Our own babies are dead, but we have
the greediest chick in Birdland to feed. He eats
as much as two young wrens, and is always ask-
ing for more."
Maluro guided them to his home, placed low
down in a bush. Maluro's mate was there, feed-
ing a baby cuckoo, whose beak was so wide open
that it looked as if he wanted to swallow his fos-
ter-mother.
"He's a bronze cuckoo," said Maluro. "We
returned from a little trip one morning, and
found a greenish coloured egg in the nest, which
also held two of our own. Well, all the eggs
hatched, and we were joyful till the next day.
My mate and I left home early, to capture moths
and caterpillars for the brood. When we returned
there was only one chick, the cuckoo, in the nest.
Our own babies lay gasping on the ground be-


neath. The cuckoo had thrown them out. We
couldn't get them back again; and the poor little
things died very soon. We missed them sadly,
of course; but we had to feed the baby cuckoo.
He's had plenty; see how big he is."
"But why didn't you turn him out?" asked
Jessie, indignantly. "I don't understand why
other birds are so stupid as to rear the cuckoos'
babies, after their own chicks have been thrown
out of the nests by the little demons."
"I don't know why myself," Maluro admitted.
"We just have to I suppose. It's the law of Bird-
land. We all hate the cuckoos; and when we see
one flying around, in nesting time, we gather in
flocks and chase it away."
The Swallow, who seemed to know everything
about Birdland and its inhabitants, said that,
every nesting season, there were thousands of
these tragedies. When a cuckoo nestling was
born before the hatching time of its foster-
mother's eggs, it cast them from the nest. It was
easier than throwing out chicks.
"They are blind and featherless when they do
it," continued the Swallow. "It seems to make a
baby cuckoo mad, to have anything in the nest
but itself. It feels about, and gets the egg or the
nestling into the hollow of its back. Then it
struggles up, legs outspread, to the rim of the
opening, and with a jerk, gets rid of its burden.
Once, last season, I saw a boy pick up two wrens
and put them back in their nest, from which a


cuckoo chick had thrown them. He waited to
see what would happen. Very soon the wren
babies were lying on the ground again."
They had walked barely a hundred yards from
Maluro's home, when Colin discovered a brown
tit's nest, which was occupied by one nestling—
another bronze cuckoo. It filled the nest, which
was all out of shape, and ready to fall in ruins.
"No rooms to let," said Jessie. "It's easy to
see that the nursery was never built for such a
big baby."
Cuckoo fledglings don't like being bothered
When Colin touched this one with a twig, it
snapped its beak fiercely.
"Just like a cuckoo," remarked the Swallow.
"They are never in a good temper."
Among the creek-side wattles, they watched a
brown tit feeding a young cuckoo that was
twice as big as its nurse. It was clinging to a
slender bough, close to the nest which had been
its nursery.
"It's old enough to look after itself, I think,"
declared Jessie.
"Cuckoos are too lazy to hunt for themselves
while they can get other birds to feed them,"
said the Swallow. "Look, there's another over
there, calling for dinner. And he's been able to
fly for weeks past."
"Do all the cuckoos put their eggs in tits' or
wrens' nests?" asked Jessie.
"Oh! dear, no," the Swallow replied quickly,


"bronze cuckoos like domed nests; so do
the fantails; but the pallid cuckoo chooses
open nests. Ask some of the honey-eaters
whether they love the birds that call in
your garden. But I must tell you that
one kind does make a nest and rear
its own babies. I've met them in the far north,
where I go to spend the winter, because there is
sunshine there when the south is cold and dreary.
The Coucal is a big, pheasant-like bird. It builds
a covered nest of sticks and grass-stems, and lines
it with leaves. There is an opening at each
end."
"Well, if one cuckoo is able to make nests, I
can't see why all the other kinds don't go in for
housekeeping," remarked Jessie. "Fancy a mother
not wanting to look after her own babies!"
"It is strange," the Swallow agreed. "But
cuckoos are the only birds that let others rear
their children."
They came to the head of the vale, and found
a faint track leading up the hill-side. It had not
been used, the Swallow said, since old Winton,
the fossicker, had tired of his quest for gold, and
become a drover once more. That happened
long ago.
"His hut is just over the rise," the Swallow
continued. "Would you like to see it?"
Jessie had seen scores of bark huts; but Colin
had never seen one. So they followed the grass-
grown track till it ended at the edge of the clear-


mg on the western slope of the hills. There stood
old Winton's deserted home: a hut built of logs,
with a bark roof, all overgrown by creepers. The
door was off its hinges; the windows just peeped
through clustering ivy; and the chimney, made
of rusty kerosene tins, was tilted as if the wind
had tried to blow it down. The fossicker had
been a lover of flowers. Roses bloomed by the
doorway, and climbed about a broken ladder lean-
ing against the wall. There was a bed of violets,
too; and a tangle of other familiar flowers about
an almond-tree.
When Colin entered the hut, his feet raised
clouds of dust, and big moths fluttered against
him. The walls were covered in pictures, pages
from weekly papers, faded and torn. A wooden
board above the fire-place had been the old man's
bookshelf. One little volume still rested there,
its cover grey with dust. Colin picked it up,
turned a few pages, and gave a cry of delight.
"What have you found?" asked Jessie, as she
came into the hut.
''Look at this." Colin held out a photograph,
which he had found between the pages of the
book. It was a portrait of a young butcher-bird
on a bough, with its head up and its beak wide
open.
"Must have been frightened when the picture
was taken," Jessie said laughing. "I suppose it
was a pet of the old man's, and somebody with a
camera came along one day. We had a butcher-


bird at Wilangi year before last. He was always
quivering his wings and calling for food. We
fed him 011 scraps of raw meat. It was funny to
see him spike them on the points of nails driven
through the back of his cage.''
"What did he do it for?" Colin looked puzzled.
"Jim said that, in the Bush, Derwent Jacks —
that's what he called them—catch beetles and
things and hang them on the spikes of thorny
plants. He saw a moth once, 011 a barb-wire
spike down at Morama's place."
"Butcher-birds are cruel," remarked the Swal-
low, who was sunning himself on a spray of the
almond-tree. "But they have lovely voices. You
should hear them sing in the autumn. There's a
nest in a gum-sapling just down the hill. Three
babies in it last time I flew past."
Both Jessie and Colin were eager to see the
young butcher-birds; so the Swallow guided
them to the tree. The nest was there, all right,
m a fork about twelve feet from the ground; but
it was empty.
"They're not far away. Listen! The babies
are learning to sing." The Swallow darted be-
tween the trees, and soon found the fledglings,
three of them, ranged on a horizontal bough.
Their heads were held up as if they were waiting
for an order to begin "singing" again.
Colin stepped softly towards the bough, and
the birds began to shiver their wings and call
loudly. Very soon their mother appeared. She


was angry, at first, but became friendly when she
learned that the wanderers were only admiring
her family.
"They've just left the nest," Mrs. Butcher-bird
explained. "I wish they would make less noise.
They don't give us any peace from the time they
awake till the sun goes down. I'm almost too
tired to fly; I've been hunting all day."
"What do you give them to eat?" asked Jessie.
"Oh! lots of nice things. We'll come down to
Wilangi later on."
Jessie looked troubled. She had three canaries
in a big cage, which was kept at one end of the
verandah. And Jim Driscoll had often warned
her about butcher-birds. "They're fair brutes
for canaries," said he. "Scares 'em till the silly
things flutter against the wire, then pull their
heads off."
And now one of the feathered monsters spoke
of visiting the homestead. Jessie thought it best
to say nothing.
"Don't tell anybody that you saw us," said
the Butcher-bird. "Last year a wood-cutter stole
all my babies. People know that we are fine song-
sters; they want to keep us in cages just to hear
us sing."
"Jim will shoot you if you come near Wil-
angi." Colin knew Jim's opinion of butcher-
birds, and he didn't like to think of the three
fledglings losing their mother.


"Yes; he's sure to shoot you," Jessie said,
quickly.
"Well, I'll keep away." The Butcher-bird
ruffled its feathers, and, with a curt "good-bye,"
Hew off.
Jessie felt happy again. It was clever of Colin,
she thought, to tell the canary-killer that Jim
would kill it if he had the chance. Her canaries
were safe now.
They returned to the creek, where Colin, who
was always lucky at finding things, picked up a
snake's sloughed skin. It was nearly perfect;
you could see even where the eyes had been.
"That belonged to old Klingarong, the Black
Snake," said the Swallow. "He lives by the
swamp over there. After he has shed his skin,
he's as proud as a blue wren with a new cap.
And, really, he does look fine in his new skin.
But I hate snakes."
Jessie laughed. "Who doesn't?" she asked.
"Some of your own folk," the Swallow replied.
"The Kingfisher told me. He saw a man capture
five snakes once, and carry them away in a sack.
He caught one of them by the tail."
"He was a snake charmer, I suppose." Jessie
had heard Jim Driscoll speak of an old man who
could do "a heap of tricks" with snakes. She had
never seen him herself.
"Ugh! What's that?" Colin jumped. But it
was only the stem of a creeper that had brushed
against his leg. They were pushing through the


"Jungle" again, where snakes might be lurk-
ing.
Jessie had to laugh at her cousin. Bush girls
don't worry much about snakes.
"They generally glide out of your way, if they
can, Dad says," Jessie had taken the lead, and any
serpent must have been scared by the noise she
made, plunging through creepers and ferns and
bushes of prickly bursaria.
Those bushes were covered in creamy-white
flowers, and hosts of beetles were feasting among
them. Some were little shining green insects;
others were black, with scarlet bands; and one
was a golden-mailed giant, which, when Colin
tried to catch it, whirred away like a toy aero-
plane.
The leaves of a gum-sapling were crowded with
cockchafers, yellow with green and opal tints.
When one was touched it tumbled to the ground,
scrambled along for a yard or two, and then took
wing.
Jessie told Colin that cockchafers came from
the fat white grubs that were so often dug up in
the garden.
"And don't the kookaburras love them?" said
the Swallow.
"Rather," agreed Jessie. "I've seen an old
Jack nearly get his head cut off, darting under
the spade for a grub, when Jim was digging up
potatoes. Dad likes to have laughing-jacks
about the homestead. We feed them; and one is


so tame that he comes on to the verandah for
scraps of raw meat. But he likes grubs best.
Once, we gave him a sardine. Jack snapped it
up, but dropped it quickly. He gurgled for a
minute, and then flew away down the garden. He
was back in a jiffey with a white grub in his
beak. He stretched his head towards Dad, swal-
lowed the grub, and then laughed merrily. Dad
laughed, too, and said that Jack had brought the
grub to show the kind of tucker he liked."
Coming up the home paddock, they met Jim
Driscoll. "See any cuckoos ?" Jim received a
chorus answer to his question. And as they all
walked towards the homestead, the story of the
cuckoos 1 crimes was told by Jessie.
"They're bluffed sometimes," Jim declared. "I
found a tim-tit's nest once, with three tit's eggs
in it; and underneath 'em, in the grass and stuff,
was a cuckoo's egg. I reckon the tits were
pretty cute. When they found the cuckoo's egg
in their nest, they just got busy and covered it,
so's it wouldn't hatch."
Jessie was delighted to hear of a cuckoo being
"bluffed," as Jim expressed it. "But aren't the
little birds silly" she said, "to hatch cuckoos'
eggs, and then look after the nestlings while their
own babies die of cold and hunger."
"Blessed if I know why they do it." Jim
wrinkled his forehead, for a minute, and then
gave a little laugh. "I s'pose they've just got to,"
he added, "same as I've got to clean harness and


things, when I'd rather be out fishing or shoot-
m g."
All the same, I think they're sillies." Jessie
gave her opinion with a wise nod of the head, as
if there were no more to be said on the subject.






CHAPTER VI
THE BIG RIVER
"I CAN'T go with you; but I'll send a message
to Wilga, and he will be your guide."
The Swallow had just heard from Jessie the
news, that she and Colin were to make a long
journey—from Wilangi to Swan Hill, then a
voyage down the Murray to Camballa station.
"We'll stay with Uncle Bob for a week," Jessie
added. "And when we come back to Wilangi,
we'll see you again."
"My family will be on the wing before then."
The Swallow looked up at his nest, which was
filled to overflowing. The young swallows were
nicely feathered now, and eager to fly into the
wide world. Their mother had told them that the
Bush was beautiful; and when they grumbled at
being crowded in their nursery, she said : "Do be
patient. Very soon you will be able to fly; to
skim in the sunshine, and catch as many insects
as you like."
It sounded delightful. The babies were more
eager than ever to leave home. And now they
heard their father say that the time was near,
when the joyous new life would begin.


"Yes," the Swallow repeated, "our nest will
soon be empty. But I'll be here when you return,
Jessie dear. And I'm sure that you'll be able to
tell me, that Wilga, the crested pigeon, showed
you lots of wonderful things."
Everybody was awake early on the morning
when Jessie and Colin were to begin their long
journey. Jim drove them to the White Store,
where they found the coach just ready to leave
for Wilangiville. The driver made room for both
on the box-seat. He was an old friend; for, when
Jessie was a baby, Tack Robart was one of the
station hands; and he had seen her often since
then.
"Didn't know you had a brother," Jack said,
after he had greeted Jessie.
Colin was introduced.
"A cousin from the Big Smoke," said the coach-
driver. "Well; he's got a bit of Bush colour
now. Guess he was pale as white paper when he
happened along to Wilangi. How d'ye like the
Bush, youngster?"
"I think it's lovely, Mr. Robart," Colin re-
plied.
"Not too much 'mister,' if you please," cried
the coach-diiver. "Jack's my name, to pals. Hop
up, Colin; and you, too, Jessie. We'll get a move
on."
They had travelled only a mile, when Jack
reined in the horses, and pointed his whip handle.
"There's an old beardy lizard."


Colin had seen it before Tack spoke, and as
soon as the coach stopped, he jumped down, and
ran to the stump on which the lizard was perched.
It was on the ground in a flash, and scuttled out
of sight among the roadside bushes.
"You want to get up pretty early to catch one
of those chaps napping," laughed Jack, as Colin
climbed back to his seat.
The old coach rumbled and bounced over every
bit of rough road; it tilted sideways, like a yacht
in a gale, when deep ruts imprisoned its wheels;
and once it came near to capsizing. But Jack was
quite unconcerned. He whistled "Annie Laurie,"
when he wasn't answering questions from the
box-seat passengers. At least, the tune was some-
thing like "Annie Laurie." Jack admitted that
he wasn't "much at music," and the travellers
believed him till he fell to imitating bird calls
and songs. Then Jack's talent was revealed. He
whistled so cleverly that the old coach seemed to
be an aviary filled with native birds.
"However did you learn them all?" Jessie
asked. "You did the magpie best, I think. It
was just perfect. Jim Driscoll's pretty clever, but
he can't whistle half as well as you."
"Oh! some of them are easy enough," replied
Jack. "But it took me a month o' Sundays to get
the Maggie off pat. But, look here, are you
kiddies going all the way on your own? I've
been wondering."


"'Only to Morganville," said Jessie. "Uncle Bob
is to meet us there."
"0.K." Jack Robart seemed very pleased, and
he began to whistle again.
"They call me Whistling Jack down at Mor-
ganville," said the coach-driver presently. "Not
far out, eh? I used to whistle when I was a kid-
die ; but I didn't get on to the birds till I was
doing a fencing job near the Longarup Lagoon.
They used to come about my camp, and we got
to be pretty pally, me and the birds. After a
bit, I could call up a good many of them, just by
whistling their notes."
"Whistling Jack" was a pleasant companion
for a long coach journey. He told stories of
the road; of the bushranging days; and of camps
in the Gulf country, where he had hunted long-
horned buffaloes, and lived among blacks who
ate flying foxes and any old thing at all.
"That's the place for birds," Jack continued.
"Millions of 'em. Why, I've seen magpie-geese
so thick you could have walked over 'em for a
mile. The niggers used to gather their eggs in
thousands."
"We never see a pied goose around Wilangi
now; but Dad says, that there were big flocks of
them once on the lagoon."
"That's right," the coach-driver agreed. "I
shot whips of 'em when I was a boy. Everyone
blazed away, and at last the geese cleared out for
good—what was left of 'em. Haven't seen one


down south for years. Maybe you'll sight an odd
pair on Mirror Lake."
"Where is Mirror Lake?" Jessie asked.
"Couple of miles from 'Camballa'. It's a rare
good place for ducks and coots, and such-like
birds. But the skeeters 'll eat you alive, if you
don't stick to the boat." Jack made a wry face,
and cracked his whip over the horses.
Colin was sorry when the journey ended, and
they had to bid "Whistling Jack" good-bye. "So
long" was all the driver said; but I think that he
was sorry to lose the company of his young pas-
sengers, who liked birds as much as Jack himself
did.
"Hullo! Jess. Is that you, Colin? You've cut
it pretty fine; train leaves in ten minutes." The
speaker was a short, broad-shouldered man,
whose face was brown and wrinkled. He had a
stubby grey moustache, and kind grey eyes,
which smiled a welcome.
Colin had never seen him before, but he knew
at once that he would like Uncle Bob, of "Cam-
balla."
When they were seated in the train —they had
a compartment to themselves—Uncle Bob opened
a neat little hamper, and they enjoyed a picnic
meal. The journey to Swan Hill was long and
wearisome. They had to change trains once; for
the Morganville line was only a tributary of the
great railway "river."
The real fun, so Jessie declared, began when


they went on board a little paddle steamer at
Swan Hill wharf. But they were asleep before
the boat started, all but Uncle Bob, who sat on
deck, smoking and making plans for "the kid-
dies."
Colin was awake soon after sunrise next day.
He lay in his bunk, listening to the paddle wheels
going "Chunk! Chunk! Chunk!" Presently the
noise ceased, and the steamer stopped. Colin
dressed in a hurry, and went on deck. They were
at one of the little wharves, which are scattered
along the Murray, and a lanky Bushman, in a
blue shirt and moleskins, was taking delivery of
a bag of sugar, a roll of barbed-wire, and some
packages. "Morning," he said lazily when Colin
appeared. "Up early, ain't you?"
"Good morning," Colin spoke shyly. He liked
the look of the man on the wharf; but already the
steamer was moving again, and there was no
time to make friends.
Jessie and Uncle Bob came on deck just as the
paddles stopped again, and the steamer glided
up to the river-bank, opposite a long pile of fire-
wood.
"We can stretch our legs for an hour, if you
like," said Uncle Bob. They're going to take that
wood aboard."
It was pleasant rambling among the gums near
the woodpile. The woodcutters were there, and
three children. But there was no home in sight.


"Where do you live?" Jessie asked a barefooted
boy, who was about the same age as Colin.
"Just over the rise," the Bush boy replied.
"Where are you going?"
"Camballa," answered Jessie. "We want to
see the birds on the lake, and other things."
The boy kicked up a stone with his brown toes,
then darted a glance towards the river. The
woodcutters and the boat's crew were hard at
work, putting the fuel on the steamer; and Uncle
Bob was lending a hand.
"Wanter see a black's canoe?" the boy asked.
"I've got it in a hollow tree, just round the bend.
Dad doesn't know. He'd lam me if he did. Come
on. I'll let you have ago in it if you're game
to."
Jessie and Colin followed the boy through the
trees till the steamer was out of sight; then their
guide made for the river, halting before a giant
gum, whose trunk had been hollowed by fire. It
was all charred, and Jessie's white dress became
streaked with black when she brushed against it,
in her eagerness to see the canoe. Colin's keen
eyes found something that Jessie had missed. A
swallow's nest clung to the charred wood, close
to the place where the prow of the bark canoe
rested.
"Lots of 'em nests in hollow trees," the Bush
boy remarked. "Dad won't let us take the eggs;
'cause swallows is death on skeeters and flies.
But let's get the canoe out."


They dragged the hollowed sheet of bark from
its hiding-place down to the river, where it was
easily launched. But there were cracks in the
bark, and water oozed in freely. The Bush boy,
carrying a long pole, stepped into the frail cralt,
and pushed off. He had to balance smartly a
score of times, and his bare feet were soon cov-
ered by water. Suddenly the canoe dipped at the
prow, and was swamped in a moment. The boy
swam ashore.
"I'll have to dodge away home," he said. "Dad'll
be wild if he sees me. So long." He ran off,
with water dripping from his clothes. The
cousins, following the river-bank, found their way
back to the steamer. Uncle Bob had missed them
and was inclined to be angry; but he laughed
when he heard about the wreck of the bark
canoe.
"Serves the young imp right," he said. "But
it won't hurt him. These river-side youngsters
are like water-rats; and they're always up to some
prank or other. Only, don't you go cruising on a
slab of bark."
"I can swim," Jessie spoke proudly.
"I can't," confessed Colin
They were on board again now, and the paddles
were churning merrily. After breakfast. Uncle
Bob found three canvas deck-chairs, and they sat
in a shady spot, watching the river and its banks.
There was so much to see, that the hours seemed
to pass on swallow's wings. Where flood water


V IWFlMKEIil ■■Vif
M w MMStSlfll w : *mW!"
L £***&> '. wr
my SMl .LoogW . .'yl, JBa&alKlg Hfe mfc, '-% if----4B1
rf -'Jf\\*" f W Mi mm Mr I ff» f*
«4 #■ fT^' f•'r .*)OEf* ffikSHMSft 18 ftW*m*•Jm'i
m' iff" W" : y :fclnl!jjffifL fil ,Swi#JraB *'
(&& J^»BaBmrr
roS" IMHflnVI la 4/
■ y I a ■« IV /
hKf * H w
mnr fT''r,w *"' ' B®v R |#» ' mm *»'«« B| ' '" « f
ft' 11 - —«{ -}-" fJHWf aA] 3
81 *131 - ' * * ( ' " ? Mr •,• ■$ j
: * ' '- « I :
II fii' y wi #
MK. Hal
VHP4' >••
*** i^HB
' : ' ■," /jy ■■HA
ipwbkw. ._. *tk4> jKrara|'
■MS r% Y
ur Ml x? L A
k\ Ti ; : i|
Av\ ifc"/
?Jk f *
* •" - : 5~
A GLIMPSE OF MIRROR LAKE




lay about the ancient gums, it was most beauti-
ful ; and birds that were wonderful to Colin, be-
cause he had seen none like them before, cruised
among the trees. There were swans and black
ducks, coots and pelicans, and grey teal. Her-
ons gazed down from lofty branches at the boat,
which broke the silence of their haunts.
"You'll see plenty of those fellows on Mirror
Lake," Uncle Bob remarked. "And lots of nests,
too, or I'm a Dutchman."
Towards evening, the steamer swung round a
bend, and glided to a landing-place, where a tall,
bearded man was lounging against a post.
"Hullo! Chris!"
"How goes it, Boss?"
Uncle Bob and the tall man were shaking
hands, while Colin and Jessie waved a farewell
to the little paddle-boat, which had brought them
at last to Camballa.
"And these are the kiddies." Chris Topam gave
each of them a warm greeting. "If you want to
see birds," he remarked, "you've come to the
right place. Millions of 'em around 'Camballa.'
Too many, I think. Those blessed bower-birds,
Boss, have been walking into our fruit. Then
they have the cheek to come and perch in the
pepper-trees, and try to bluff me that they've
never been near the orchard."
Uncle Bob chuckled. "Don't worry, Chris," he
said. "I don't grudge them a share of the fruit.
Any bowers close handy?"


"One down in the horse paddock, among those
prickly bushes. Pretty good, too."
"That's fine. Colin will be your friend for
keeps, if you show him a bird at the bower.
"Hullo! Darkie, old chap; don't smother me!"
Uncle Bob was greeting a Gordon setter, which
had raced down the track and leaped at him,
barking joyfully. The dog, at his master's word,
sat up and offered a paw to Jessie and then to
Colin.
Camballa homestead was close to the river;
a long, low building, with two wings, and a wide
verandah. Trees grew all about it; and there was
a big garden in front, with a path leading down to
the billabong. A ledge under the verandah was
laden with swallows' nests.
"It's like Wilangi, declared Jessie, "But the
country is different."
"When can we see the bower-birds?"
Colin s question made them all laugh.
"You are in a hurry; young man," said Chris.
"But you can see some of the varmints now, if
you like. Just get under one of the pepper-
trees."
Colin was off in a second. He looked up and
found a bird gazing at him. It was about the
size of a magpie. Its plumage, above, was dark-
brown, spotted with buff; the under parts were
creamy-coloured. And on the nape of its neck
the bower-bird had a lovely ornament of rose-


lilac feathers, which gleamed like opal when
sunbeam glanced upon them.
Colin just stood and gazed at the beautiful
bird. It wasn't frightened, but uttered some harsh
notes; then it called plaintively.
Jessie joined her cousin under the pepper-tree.
The bower-bird remained on its perch. But as
soon as Chris Topam came up, it flew away.
"They know me," Chris laughed. "If it wasn't
for the Boss, I'd shoot the lot of 'em."
"You couldn't be so cruel." Jessie was indig-
nant.
Chris laughed again. "Well; I'd clear them out
somehow," he said. "Why don't they get an
honest living; and quit robbing orchards?"
"Boys are worse than birds, I think," said
Jessie.
"Right enough," Chris agreed. "But, you see,
Miss Jessie, boys are scarce hereabouts; and
bower-birds are as thick as bees in a hive."
Camballa's mistress was away in the city,
spending a holiday with Colin's people. But the
housekeeper welcomed the wanderers, and, if
Chris is to be believed, she spoiled them. But
Chris often said things that he didn't really mean.
It was his way. He would scold "Darkie," and
threaten to break his bones, when the dog came
leaping about him and "Darkie" wagged his tail
and barked, to show that he wasn't the least bit
afraid. Chris had been his best friend from the


day when "Darkie" was a clumsy pup, always in
mischief or trouble.
The morning after their arrival, Chris took
Jessie and Colin for a ramble through the horse
paddock. He showed them dead gum-trees from
which the blackfellows had cut their bark canoes.
"They've all gone now," he remarked. "Haven't
seen a black on Camballa these twenty years.
But there was a fair mob of them when I was
a boy. I used to go with them after wild cattle.
Crumbs! they could ride. We had glorious gal-
lops through the mallee. I wonder I didn't break
my neck a dozen times. Those were the good old
days—when I was a boy 1 Ah, well! Let's get
down to the scrub corner, and see that bower."
The bower was hidden among prickly bushes,
but Chris had made a path to it; and if Jessie had
been more careful, she wouldn't have left a piece
of her dress fluttering on a thorn.
"Bother," she said. "I'll have to do some mend-
ing to-night."
Colin escaped with a couple of scratches, till
he tried to reach a big stick nest, which was deep
in one of the bushes. He was sorry for the ven-
ture. The thorns seemed to jump at his hands;
and they clawed his arms to the elbows.
There were three of the stick nests in one bush.
They were ragged looking spheres, with a spout-
ed opening at one side.
"Belong to the Happy Jacks," Chris explained.
"Queer birds they are; go around in little mobs


THE PIGEON BABIES IN TIIEIR NURSERY
NEST AND EGGS OF "SALTBUSH CANARY


,


of half a dozen or so. They are always on the
move, hopping from bough to bough; and they
make plenty of noise. But the funniest thing
about them is, they work overtime, building five
or six nests, when they need only one."
"What are the others for?" Colin asked.
"Don't know for certain," Chris replied, "just
for sleeping in perhaps. Happy Jacks are queer,
and that's a fact. The Boss calls them babblers;
and its not a bad name for the noisy creatures.
Now dodge along here, and we'll see that bower."
The spotted bower-birds' playground was de-
serted ; but fresh flowers scattered about, showed
that its owners had been there recently. The
bower, roughly made of twigs and grass stalks,
was eighteen inches in length; the walls were
thick and about a foot in height. At each end
of the bower lay a heap of shining objects:
bleached bones, pieces of emu-egg shell, bits of
blue glass, snails shells, and quondong seeds.
"They're always on the lookout for anything
shiny," Chris remarked. "They like to find them
themselves, though. If you put a diamond or a
gold ring down there, the birds would throw it
away. Talking of jewellery, if you lose a ring,
or a coin gets out of your pocket, in bower-bird
country, it odds that you'll find it at a bower later
on. I've known that happen more than once."
"Look!" cried Colin, who had been turning
over the bower-birds' hoard while Chris was


speaking. "Look! a glass stopper from a lemon-
ade bottle."
"And here's something from Uncle's study, I
guess," said Jessie, holding up the pearl handle
of a paper knife.
They were still searching among the shells and
bones, when a bird flew over their heads, and
dived into a bush not twenty feet away. Jessie
caught just a glimpse of it.
"Was it a crested pigeon?" she asked.
"Like as not," said Chris. "There's a pair of
them has a nest close by."
"It may be Wilga," cried Jessie, looking at
Colin. "Don't you remember what the Swallow
told us?"
"Yes. Wilga Was to be our guide." Colin
was so excited that he jumped up and nearly
trod on the bower.
Chris looked puzzled. "Who is Wilga?" he
asked. "Never heard of anyone with that name
on the river. Sounds like a blackfellow's moni-
ker."
Jessie hardly knew what to say. If she told
Chris about the Swallow and their visits to Bird-
land, he wouldn't understand. Their bird friends,
to everyone else, were only ordinary feathered
creatures. Because, you must know, the birds
can speak only to those who love them so much
that they never dream of harming even a spar-
row. And here was a man who wanted to kill


bower-birds. No, he never could believe the
story of the Swallow and Birdland.
" 'WilgaV the name of the crested pigeon/'
Jessie said at last.: "A friend of ours at Wil-
angi said that we should see it up here."
Chris was still puzzled; but he asked no more
questions. That evening, however, he told the
housekeeper about it. She laughed at his won-
der.
"Why, it's plain as a pikestaff," said she. "The
children have been reading some fairy story about
the wild birds."
Chris shook his head and confided to "Darkie,"
that "there was something very queer about it,
all the same." Chris didn't believe in fairies.
Next day Chris had to leave for Deep Creek,
fifty-seven miles away; and Uncle Bob had so
many letters to write that he could not be out
of doors during the morning. Jessie and Colin
were left without a guide.
"May we go down the horse paddock?" Jessie
asked. "We can't get lost, Uncle."
"Well, promise me that you won't go beyond
the fence." Uncle Bob looked stern. "If you
aren't back by dinner-time, I'll have to wire for
the black trackers-"
"Why, Uncle, I'm a Bush girl. And it's not a
mile to the end of the paddock."
"All right, Jess. Off you go. Keep Colin out
of mischief, and don't let him climb trees."
With a whole morning before them, the wan-


derers passed through the sliprails, and walked
down the paddock to Scrub Corner. But, instead
of taking the little path to the bower-birds' play-
ground, they crossed a sunny hollow, and sat on
a log close to some spreading bushes.
"Yes," Jessie spoke loudly on purpose, "It was
Wilga, I'm certain. We'll wait here, Colin, and
perhaps he'll come along soon."
Jessie had hardly ceased speaking, when a
whirring noise startled them. Looking up, they
saw a crested pigeon, perched on a twig, just
over their heads.
"I'm Wilga," said the pigeon. "And you are
Jessie and Colin, little friends of all the birds.
The Swallow sent me a message about you. I'm
very glad you have come to 'Camballa.' And if
you will come with me, I'll show you some won-
derful things."
"We mustn't go out of the paddock," Jessie
explained. "We promised; so of course we can't
possibly go."
"I never asked you to," said Wilga. "My nest
is in that big bush by the dead gum-tree. There
are bird homes everywhere in the paddock, which
is one of the suburbs of our great city, Brongala-
wingi."
"What a long word," cried Colin.
"It means City of the Big River." The pigeon
spoke a trifle sharply. "And there is no other
Birdland city half as wonderful; no, not even


across the wide blue seas, where I have never
been."
"How do you know that yours is the best, if
you haven't been overseas?" Jessie asked quietly.
"The swifts have told us. They are great tra-
vellers, you know; and so are the other birds,
who rear their broods in far off lands; but always
return to the best land of all —Australia. Now,
come and see my home. My mate and I are very
happy; we have two lovely chicks! Come and
see for yourselves."
The pigeons' nest was just a hollowed plat-
form of twigs, about four feet from the ground,
in one of the prickly bushes that both Jessie and
Colin had learned to respect. The baby pigeons
were dozing. One became lively when he heard
his father's voice; but he closed his eyes again
when he found that it was not meal-time.
"Poor little fellow feels the heat," was Wilga's
excuse for his sleepy son.
"He's very pretty," Jessie said. "How old is
he?"
"Seven days," replied Wilga. "His crest hasn't
begun to sprout yet, but he'll have a fine one, I'm
sure —just like mine."
"Do you ever feed with the fowls?" Colin asked
this question because Chris had told them that a
"mob of topknot pigeons" came around some-
times when the poultry was being fed, and took a
share of the grain.
Wilga raised his crest and looked very angry.


"Feed with fowls!" he cried. "Never! I'm
Chief of all the pigeons in this suburb. Some poor
birds may do it when they're starving. But Wilga,
the Chief! Never! Never!! Never!!!"
Colin apologized for his question; but Wilga
was so much offended that, for a while, he could
hardly speak politely. At iast he came out of the
sulks, and was as friendly as ever.
"You see," he explained. "Fowls are such silly,
common things. They have feathers, truly; but
we don't regard them as birds. Fancy living in
yards; and letting men folk take the eggs as fast
as they are laid! Tame ducks and turkeys are
just as silly. Please don't think of them as
birds."
"All right, we won't," Jessie promised.
Wilga was just as pleased now, as he had been
angry before. He guided the wanderers to one
nest after another, until they lost all count of
them. One of the prettiest, owned by a pair of
honey-eaters, swung from a slender bough far
cut of reach. The mother was at home, and she
looked very cosy and contented, rocking on her
cradle in the tree-top. Two wood-swallows had
their nest in the hollow top of a stump. Stand-
ing on tiptoe, Colin could just see the three eggs.
The birds came skimming around him; but a
word from Wilga calmed their fears.
"Neat little nursery, isn't it?" said Mrs. Wood
Swallow, "some of my friends and relations are
too careless in choosing sites for their homes.


Would you believe it! My cousin and his wife
once built on a bit of loose bark, under a branch
that stretched over water. They thought that
their home was safe from all enemies. But a
snake found it and ate the eggs. Now, my nest
is safe."
"What if a crow flies over the stump?" Wilga
remarked. "He'd drop down and have your eggs
or babies in a flash. You should follow my ex-
ample, and make your home in a thorny bush."
The wood-swallows paid no attention to
Wilga. Birds are like men folk; they don't value
good advice unless it agrees with their own
views; then they think that they are very wise.
Now, I can tell you what happened to
the wood-swallows' nursery, after Jessie and
Colin had left Camballa and forgotten all about
it. A crow did fly over —and that was the end
of three pretty eggs.
Wilga led the children away from the old
stump, to a spot where no bushes grew, but the
ground was covered in withered grass. The
brown stems gleamed like amber in the sunlight,
and whispered when the wind swept over them.
A small bird rose from the grass, flew a few
yards, and alighted on a tall stalk, which bent
beneath its burden. Colin gave a cry of delight.
The bird was beautiful, with crimson crown and
breast-feathers, and a white throat.
"It's a saltbush canary," said Jessie, who had
seen some of the lovely little birds when she was


staying with some friends at Jerilderie. "There's
another kind with orange-coloured breast. Dad
calls thern bush-chats. They're cousins to the
little black and white tangs, which nest in the
gorse bushes."
"They don't come here very often; and there's
only one nest in the paddock," VVilga said. Then
he shouted something in bird language, and the
"canary" flew back to its nest, which was hidden
in long grass. Jessie and Colin bent down, and
the three baby chats, who were only a few days
old, held their beaks wide open, while their heads
wobbled like those of Japanese toy birds.
"Aren't they funny?" Jessie whispered to Colin.
"Who could imagine such ugly ducklings to be
the babies of our lovely little friend, Redcap?"
"Redcap," of course, was Jessie's own name
for the bush-chat; but it suited him, and he was
rather pleased when he heard it.
"We generally build our nests in bushes," Red-
cap remarked. "I like a boxthorn hedge my-
self, when it's not too close to a house. My
cousins, who live by the sea, where the skylarks
sing, nest in those prickly bushes that seem to
blossom all the year round."
"Gorse bushes," said Jessie. "There's a verse
or something about them, I heard once. Oh, now
I remember: 'Kissing's out of fashion when the
gorse is out of bloom'."
Redcap was no wiser. He knew what kissing
meant, for the birds kiss each other with their


beaks; but fashion was a word that puzzled him.
They don't have fashions in Birdland. At least,
the birds of to-day are dressed like their grand-
parents, and their great-great-grandparents. The
colours and patterns of their plumage haven't
changed much in a hundred years; which shows
how wise they are.
Wilga glanced up at the sun. "Afternoon,"
he announced. "I must be getting back home.
See me again soon, and I'll show you other parts
of our great city."
"Thank you very much, Wilga. We have had a
lovely time this morning." Jessie waved her
handkerchief, as the pigeon went whirring down
the paddock; but Wilga never turned his head.
"Well, what luck?" Uncle Bob had finished his
letters, and was on the verandah, watching some
birds in the pepper-tree. "Good luck; I can tell
by your smiling faces. After dinner, if you don't
say no, we'll make a little trip to Mirror Lake.
Is it Yes or No?"
"Yes" cried the cousins, eagerly.


CHAPTER VII
WATER-BABIES
"WE'LL make a bee line for the Lake," said
Uncle Bob, taking the reins from Chris, who
had driven the jinker round from the stables.
It was rather a tight squeeze on the seat; but
Colin made himself little, so he declared, and,
except for a jolt now and then, they were all
pretty comfortable. The wheels crushed many
small bushes, sank into loose sand here and
there, and rattled merrily over open places that
were tufted with spiky-grass and clumps of
"turpentine." Seven miles and a bit had been
covered, when, right ahead, through scattered
gum-trees, still water gleamed, like a great flake
of cloudless sky.
"There it is," cried Uncle Bob. "One of the
prettiest lakes in Australia. It's a magnet to
wildfowl, draws them from far and near. And
the fun of it is, they're safe as a bank from punt-
gunners and pot-hunters, because the lake is
a sanctuary. But Chris and I have to keep an
eye on it, or gunners would soon get busy. Ever
see a punt gun, Colin?"
"No, Uncle."


"Well, I hope you never will. It's a murderous,
long-barrelled weapon, fired from the bow of a
boat. The gunner fires into the 'brown' of a
mob of duck, and scores are killed or wounded."
They stopped in the shade of a gnarled old
tree, and were greeted by two young cockatoos,
perched on a low bough. Their plumage was
rose-pink and white; and their crests white and
crimson and yellow.
"They're the loveliest cockies I've ever seen,"
cried Colin.
"Major Mitchell's/' said Jessie. Dad calls
them pink cockatoos."
"Not many of them about now," Uncle Bob
remarked. "Chris found a nest last year, in the
'spout' of a box-tree down on Youland Flat. He
took a couple of the fledglings and tried to rear
them. But one died, and he let the other go.
Chris isn't a bad sort, you know. He likes a
bit of sport; but he's fond of birds, all the same.
Why, I've known him dive into the Murray, to
save a kitten that fell off the boat on which he
was travelling. Yes, I like old Chris."
"So do I," said Jessie. "But I do wish he
wouldn't shoot bower-birds."
"Let me catch him at that game." Uncle Bob
laughed and shook his fist at an imaginary Chris.
Leaving the horse hobbled, but contented with
a generous helping of feed, they walked to the
shore of Mirror Lake. The wind was asleep,
and trees and sky and lignum bushes were mir-


rored in still water. The lake was teeming
with birds; singly or in flocks, they were pad-
dling quietly around, or feeding. There were
ducks and teal, coots and grebes, and many
other kinds, all beautiful. They seemed to know
that their haunt was sanctuary; for none showed
signs of alarm while the intruders stood silently
gazing at them. But wild creatures are never
sure of man in wild places. And when a flattie
was launched, hundreds of birds that were cruis-
ing near shore rose with a noise of beating
wings; coots dived into the reeds and bushes;
and little black-tailed native-hens went patter-
ing over the water.
Uncle Bob rowed with long, easy strokes,
making the small craft glide quietly towards the
centre of the lake: the ripple song at the prow
was no louder than a whispering of leaves when
the wind is gentle. And thus they moved about
the lake, around the lignum clumps, through
water-weeds with trailing stems, and across the
open places. It was like a dream voyage, Jessie
thought, as she dipped her hand in the water, for
the pleasure of its cool caress. Colin was very
wide-awake. His eyes flashed everywhere, and
his wonder grew. He could not cage in memory
all the birds on Mirror Lake.
As the boat glided past a lignum bush a crest-
ed grebe dived. After a long swim under water,
it came to the surface again.
"Nest around here." Uncle Bob guided the


boat to the bush, where a round mass of water-
weeds, like a little raft, was stranded. Jessie
removed some of the weeds on top, and there lay
three white eggs.
The owners of the nest cruised around, about
a dozen yards away. Jessie admired their collar-
ettes of chestnut-coloured feathers, fringed with
black.
"Don't they look smart?" she exclaimed.
"Pretty enough," agreed Uncle Bob. "But the
birds don't wear them always—only in the nest-
ing season."
Close to the grebes' home, Colin discovered the
nest of a pair of coots. It was a platform of
stems and leaves, just above the water, among
some rushes.
"Five eggs," cried Colin gleefully. "They're
coloured like stones, with purply-brown freckles
all over them."
In his eagerness, Colin leaned over the bow,
and caught hold of the tall rushes. The boat
moved suddenly, and Colin just escaped a duck-
ing. He fell on his knees, and would have top-
pled overboard, but for Jessie's quick action. She
gripped his coat-tail, and hauled him back.
Uncle Bob tried to look angry; but a smile
would play about his lips. Colin smiled, too.
"Do you want to become a water-baby?"
"No, Uncle; but I would like to see some."
"What! Water-babies? All right. Colin, we'll
have a look at Swan Corner."


Swan Corner was on the far western side of
the lake. It wasn't a corner, really, but a bit
of the lake, screened by gums. And one of these
old trees, "knee deep" in water, was the sight
of a cormorant colony. As the boat glided up
to it, all the birds flew away, making a great noise
as they left their nests and went bustling into the
open.
The nests were high up; but Colin reached
them easily, climbing from a bough that was
only a few feet above the water. Most of the
nests held eggs. In some, however, there were
chicks, dusky little things, with no pretence to
good looks. Colin took one from its nursery,
and held it out for Jessie to see.
"It's like an ugly duckling; but I suppose its
mother thinks that it is just perfect."
"Of course she does," said Uncle Bob. "But
I don't, nor does Chris. Cormprants and Chris
are natural enemies. He says that they are glut-
tons, and that if we broke up this rookery, there
would be plenty of fish in the lake. Perhaps he's
right; but I think there is something to be said
in favour of the rascals. Anyhow, Jess, they are
safe here. And good luck to them."
Colin climbed down to the boat, and the voy-
age was continued.
Swan Corner wasn't crowded, like other parts
of the lake. The swans had it all to themselves
most of the time; and they were a small company.
An old nest was found beneath the drooping


branches of a gum-tree. It was so big that Colin
stood in it.
"It's late in the season; but, if we scout round,
we may find a baby swan yet."
"Hope we do, Uncle," observed Jessie. "They're
the dearest, softest little creatures. I do want
Colin to see one."
One of the swans seemed to be friendly. It
came close to the boat, and looked at Colin, as if
it wished to speak to him.
"I believe it's one of the Swallow's friends,"
Jessie whispered.
"I'm sure it is," Colin declared. "I wish the
birds could talk to us always, and not just when
we are by ourselves."
The swan moved away, very slowly, and every
minute turned its head to look at them.
"Queer old bird that. Seems as if it wanted us
to follow it. See I its looking round again.
Crumbs I it's going straight for a nest!"
Uncle Bob headed the flattie for a swan's nest.
They reached it with the friendly bird only a
yard ahead, but still gliding on, its long neck
proudly curved.
As the boat's nose struck the nest, which was
like a huge bowl, Colin jumped into it, and nearly
squashed a baby bird.
The cygnet looked so pretty, in its pale-col-
oured down, Colin wished that he could take it
with him when he returned to his home in the


city. "I can't, of course," he thought. "But
Mother would love it."
Jessie took the baby swan from Colin, and put
it against her cheek, to feel the softness of its
down. Then it was placed in the nest again, and
left in peace.
They went ashore, and, while Uncle Bob went
off to look at a fox-trap, the cousins gathered
dry bark and twigs for the fire. Colin was filling
the billy, when he was startled by a rush of
wings. The swan settled on the water right in
front of him.
"Colin, dear," the Swan said, "why didn't you
come here alone?"
"Without Jessie!"
"No. Jessie is always with you. I meant with-
out the big man."
"That's Uncle Bob. He likes birds. Why, if it
hadn't been for him, the Mirror Lake birds would
all have been shot, long ago."
"But he's a man, Colin, and we can't talk to
men; only to boys and girls, who love us, and
are friends of the Swallow."
"Every bird seems to know the Swallow," said
Jessie, who had joined her cousin by the water's
edge. "Who is the Swallow? He's never even
told us his Birdland name."
"The Swallow, Jessie, is—the Swallow. I can't
explain. You see, he's not a king, or a prince
even. Long ago he came in the train of spring.
And wherever he went he sang a song, which


THE CYGNET IN ITS NURSERY
YOUNG MAGPIE-LARK




pleased us so much, we all tried to sing" it. It's
a song of spring. Shall I sing it for you?"
"Yes, please do," cried the cousins. And the
Swan sang:
It is spring, sweet spring,
When the wattle gold falls,
When the bluebells ring
And the bluebird calls.
When buds on the trees
Are kissed by the sun,
And loud hum the bees,
Sweet spring has begun.
"Why! it's the song the Swallow sang to me,
when I was lazing under the verandah at Wil-
angi."
"Just the same, Colin," said the Swan. "Isn't
it fine? The Swallow learned it from a paradise-
bird, in New Guinea. He sang it over and over
again, as he came flying south with spring. Sang
it in Queensland's palm groves, along the north-
ern rivers, in Sydney's gardens, and all the way
to Blossomville. The little song made him fam-
ous."
"But what is the Swallow's name?" Jessie
asked once more.
"It's really a secret. But he wouldn't mind you
knowing it, perhaps." The Swan spoke as if he
were not quite sure whether the Swallow would
mind or not. But he told them the name.


"Ber-rin-nin" Jessie echoed the word. "What
does it mean?"
"That's what we'd all like to know," said the
Swan. "It was given to the Swallow by the
natives. He had forgotten his real bird name, you
see. Why, I don't know."
"It's very funny, I think," Colin declared.
"Fancy forgetting your own name!"
"Yes, it's funny," agreed the Swan. "And the
Swallow doesn't like it. He would rather have
no name at all. But, until he can remember his
bird one, he must be Ber-rin-nin."
"Welcome Swallows, is the name we give
them," Jessie observed. "And they are welcome.
Everyone loves swallows."
"What did you think of my baby?" the Swan
asked, as if he wished to change the subject
quickly.
"I'd like to steal the darling little fluffy thing.
It's prettier than a duckling."
"I should thing he was, Jessie," said the Swan.
"Ever so much prettier. He's the youngest. The
others are out with my mate. Look! you can
see them swimming near the nest."
The cousins gazed across the water, and saw a
stately swan, with five cygnets in her train. They
made a charming picture, and Jessie longed for
a camera.
"Years and years ago, before the white men
came, the blackfellows camped on the shores of
Mirror Lake. They were very fond of swan


eggs, and robbed all the nests they could find.
And our nests are so big, that we can't hide them
easily, except in the midst of tall reeds."
The Swan stopped, and a moment later moved
away from the shore. "The big man is coming,"
he cried. "Good-bye. Tell the Swallow that I
showed you my nest and one of the babies."
"Good-bye," said Jessie and Colin in chorus.
Then they returned to the camp-fire, where Uncle
Bob soon joined them.
"I've found two nests," he said. "Not far away.
You can see them while the billy boils."
One of the nests, made of mud, and shaped like
a small pudding basin, was saddled on a bough
overhanging a little creek. It was empty, but
they found the young magpie-larks, whose nur-
sery it had been, feeding by the water-side. Their
parents were flying above, crying "Kuee-deep!
kuee-deep!"
Jessie captured one of the babies, and placed
it on a dead bough. It was scared, and clung to
its perch, cheeping, and shivering its wings. So
they put it back by the creek.
The other nest belonged to a pair of black-and-
white fantails. It was in a bush growing in the
lake, close to the shore, and held a merry brood.
The young fantails were just ready to fly. And
fly they did when Uncle Bob touched their home
with a stick. They hadn't far to go, luckily, to
reach dry land, or they might have come to
grief.


The old birds were angry. They scolded the
ramblers, and darted about them, till the babies
were safe on the bank.
"Plucky as bull-ants, aren't they?" remarked
Uncle Bob. "I've seen two of these fierce little
birds tackle a magpie, which flew too near their
nest."
Colin remembered the fantails he had seen in
Blossomville. They were just as fierce and brave
as these Mirror Lake birds.
After a meal by the lake-side, the ramblers
embarked again, and while the flattie glided past
bushes and reed-beds, they kept a sharp look out
for bird homes.
Colin was lucky. He found another grebes'
nest and, soon afterwards, the home of a pair of
Native Hens. There were eggs in both. But
the sight that pleased them most, was a mother
teal, cruising among the bushes with her babies
following, like a fleet of fairy boats.
"Real water-babies," said Jessie. "Look, Colin.
They've having a steeplechase!"
A great log, just showing above the water, lay
in front of the teal family. The mother went
over it first, and each of her babies followed,
clearing the obstacle cleverly.
It was near sundown when the lake voyage
ended. The drive home was pleasant. All the
way, they talked of Mirror Lake and its water-
babies.
"You must come again some day, when the


birds are building; when the swans are flocking
to their 'Corner,' and before the ducks have made
warm beds of down in the old hollows, which are
empty now."
"Next springtime, Uncle," said Jessie. "I'll
come, and so will Colin, if he likes to spend his
holidays at Wilangi again."
"I'll always spend them there, Jessie. Even
when I'm grown up."
Jessie laughed.
"xAlways? Colin. When you grow up you'll
forget about Wilangi and the Swallow. You'll
forget me, perhaps. For you'll want to travel far
and wide in Birdland overseas."
"I'll never forget," Colin declared.
"Why, there's our old friend, the Swallow!"
Jessie was in the lounge chair, with Colin
seated beside her. They had been back at Wil-
angi for nearly a week. All the swallows' nests
were empty, and, until now, they had been wait-
ing in vain for their friend, Ber-rin-nin, to ap-
pear and give them a welcome.
"Hullo, Ber-rin-nin," was Jessie's greeting.
The Swallow perched on the back of the chair,
preened his feathers, and sang the song of spring.
"Who told you my name?" he asked when the
song ended.
"The Black Swan of Mirror Lake."


"Well, he shouldn't have told the secret. I don't
like the name at all."
"Never mind. We won't call you anything but
the Swallow, the Welcome Swallow."
"That's very nice of you, Jessie. Now I must
tell you the news. But you must be tired of wan-
dering in Birdland."
"No, no," they cried.
"Very well. You shall, if you like, go to Sugar-
gum Valley, which is not very far from the sea.
Koalas live there, and possums, wallabies and
wombats —and lots of birds. It's a great park,
where all wild creatures are safe from trappers
and hunters."
"A sanctuary," suggested Jessie.
"That's right. It's down by the sea, as I've
told you."
"What a long way from here. Never mind;
we can fix it. When shall we start, Swallow
dear?"
"Whenever you like, Jessie. But I can't go
with you. I'll send a message to my friends, the
emus, who live under Red Hill, near the koalas'
township. Cheerie, weerie, wee. I'll come to-
morrow, and you can tell me when you will go to
the park."
The Swallow darted into the sunshine, and
went skimming over the trees.


CHAPTER VIII
LAND AND SEA
DOES it matter how it was arranged? Jessie
could tell you; but she hasn't told me. I must
begin the new chapter of their adventures from
the time when the wanderers started from the
railway station.
A long motor ride, it was, from ranges to the
sea; along good roads and bad ones, through
tame country, and across great paddocks that
had never felt the plough. Colin enjoyed every
minute of the journey; but his cousin was rather
glad when it ended. You see, it was stormy along
the sea beach, and the wind whipped their faces,
and tore at their hats. Colin didn't mind. Jessie
had a great love for nature and the wilds, but,
somehow, she didn't like the wind when it be-
came boisterous. The wind can be very gentle;
it can also be rude and play pranks.
The motor was jolting along a muddy road,
with deep ruts and pools here and there, when
two spur-wing plovers rose from an open, grassy
place, and flew off with querulous cries.
Dick Ransome, who was driving, stopped the
car, and jumped out.


"Nest or young 'uns about/' he remarked, and
began a search of the spot from which the birds
had flown. Dick was a Gippslandsr, and an old
friend of one of the Wilangi men, who had
written asking him to drive "the youngsters"
from the station to the park. Dick was waiting
in the motor-car when the train arrived, and
greeted them with a question, "Where are the
others? Thought three of you were coming!"
"No, only Colin and I. Chris couldn't leave,"
replied Jessie. We'll be all right. We can camp
in the hut. There is a hut, isn't there, Dick?"
"Yes; a pretty good one. I've fixed everything.
Plenty of tucker, a billy, and all that you'll need.
S'pose I'll have to keep an eye on you."
"Two, if you like, Dick," laughed Jessie. "But
I'm a Bush girl, and I guess we'll be all right."
"All serene," cried Dick. "Hop in."
And now they were barely a mile from the
beach, with the car at anchor, and Dick looking
for the plover's nest, or their family.
"Quick! Here they are!"
The cousins ran up to Dick, and gazed all
about on the ground.
"Can't see anything but grass and stones, and
clods of brown earth," said Jessie presently.
"Where are they, Dick?"
"Right under your eyes," was the reply.
The cousins searched the ground again, then
looked at Dick, to see if he were fooling them.
Dick was smiling. He bent down and picked


up one of three small brown objects, which lay
among the dry grass tussocks, and told Jessie to
stroke it.
"It's a baby bird."
Jessie took the plover nestling and placed it
on the ground again. It lay still. Nor did either
of the others move, even when they were handled.
"They're pretty hard to find," Dick remarked.
"And they're cunning. Soon as anyone comes
along, the old birds order the chicks to squat;
then they clear out themselves, making a lot of
fuss.
Jessie remembered that Chris had once shown
her three baby dotterels, whose home was a tiny
hollow among the shingle, on a reach of the river
near home.
"They were coloured just like brown and grey
pebbles," said Jessie, "and were huddled together.
They didn't move a feather. When I tried to
find them again, after we had been for a walk
along the river, I couldn't. And it took Chris a
long time, though he had seen them first."
The old plovers were calling from afar. They
came flying over as the car started, and alighted
where their babies were playing possum.
From a green rise, graced with old gum-trees,
the car sped down a sloping road to the sea.
Waves were racing up the level beach, and foam
flakes flying before the wind like flocks of silver-
grey birds. The sky was banked with storm
clouds.


Colin wanted to jump out of the car, and make
friends with the plump little birds that were
twinkling about the beach, dodging the waves,
or paddling in shallow pools. Dotterels, Dick
called them.
"They're just like fairies, I think," said Jessie.
"And they seem to be enjoying the fun. I sup-
pose, really, they are looking for food."
"That's the ticket." Dick steered the car to-
wards a group of small birds. They rose, flew
about twenty yards, and alighted again.
Sea-curlews were probing the wet sand with
long curved beaks. They paid little heed when
the car passed near them, ploughing through
clinging sand to reach a long stretch of firmer
beach.
"Good going," Dick was after. The car, how-
ever, became stuck, and they had to get out.
"Have a cruise round while I'm getting her
clear."
The cousins took Dick's advice, and rambled
by the margin of the sea. Colin was keen on find-
ing the nest of two oyster-catchers —redbills,
was Dick's name for them. They pattered up
and down the beach, with wheeling flights now
and then, their plaintive notes mingled with the
calls of silver-gulls.
After a long search, above high tide mark, Jes-
sie discovered, not a nest, but two baby redbills,
crouched under a bush banked high with sand.
For the wind kept scooping up the loose, dry


sand, and showering it everywhere. After a wave
had flowed up the beach and made it gleam,
wind-driven sand was powdered over it. The
wind really was spiteful. It pelted Jessie and
Colin with sand grains, and made their eyes and
cheeks smart.
"Poor little birdlings; you must be scared."
Jessie stooped to pick up one of the redbill chicks.
Next moment both the babies were scurrying
down to the sea. The old birds met them, and
led them right to the fringe of surf.
"Righto!" It was Dick's voice hailing them.
The car was on firm sand again.
Passing a rocky headland, washed by the waves
at high tide, they saw a flock of blue cranes. The
long-legged birds rose from their lofty retreat,
and flew inland. Round the headland the car
ran on to a curved beach of shining white sand.
It was firm and shelving. Big shells were strewn
about the beach, and sea birds were patrolling
the water's edge. The sea was calmer in this
little bay, still and blue, with a fringe of silver
foam along the shore.
"Isn't it glorious?" Jessie exclaimed. "Even the
old wind is gentler here. Colin, wouldn't it be
scrumptious to go surfing!"
"Pretty cold," observed Dick.
Colin hardly heard Jessie's remark. He was
watching the flight of an osprey. It soared high
in the blue, and the sun gleamed on its white


plumage, as if it were a great snow-flake, or a
fragment torn by the wind from a cloud.
The osprey was still soaring when the car
swung from the beach and passed between walls
of tea-tree to a gateway.
"Here we are," Dick cried, as the car stopped.
The cousins jumped out, and Colin opened the
gate for the car to pass through. A short run
over turf along a river, and they reached a cot-
tage, at the foot of a scrub-clad hill. A woman
came from the verandah to meet them; a round-
faced woman with kind grey eyes, and hair sil-
ver-white, like foam of the sea.
"My mother." Dick spoke with a note of pride
in his voice. "I fixed it all, Jessie. Mother'll keep
two eyes on you."
Jessie laughed. Then she and Colin entered
the cottage with Dick's mother.
It was tea-time. During the meal they talked
over plans. Dick was for staying as guide, but
his mother said: "Let the bairns roam by them-
selves, Dick. You can come for them this day
week."
"Who'll show them the way to Red Hill and
Possum Peak?"
"Jessie's a Bush girl, Dick."
Dick laughed; but he was disappointed.
When the cousins stepped from the verandah
next morning, Ground-larks were running
through deWy grass; and blue wrens and tit-
warblers were singing their matins in the bushes,


THE BABY DOTTERELS JESSIE SAW




close to the cottage door. All the world was
waking.
Colin strolled down to the river, while Jessie
went indoors again to help Dick's mother prepare
breakfast.
"Good morning, Colin."
Colin started at the greeting, and looked all
round. There was nobody in sight.
"Must be a bird." Colin spoke his thought
aloud.
"Yes, Colin dear, it's a bird. Can't you see
me? Here I am."
Colin was standing near a clump of tea-tree,
all white with blossom, as if snow had fallen
upon it. A small bird was perched on a spray;
and as Colin discovered it, the honey-eater thrust
its long, curved bill into one of the flowers.
"I'm Bindo the Spinebill," the small bird said,
when its bill was withdrawn from the flower.
"The Swallow sent me a message. He wants
me to show you the way to Red Hill, and lots of
other places."
"He told us that the emus would show us
around."
"Well, he must have changed his mind, Colin.
The message came to me. I'm Bindo. I know
every bush and tree, from Possum Creek to
Sugar-gum Town."
Colin was very pleased. "11l tell Jessie," he
said. "And after breakfast, we'll come with you,
wherever you like to take us."


"I must have my breakfast, too." Bindo, with-
out another word, began to rifle the flowers; and
Colin returned to the cottage.
The cousins hurried through breakfast, and,
saying that they wouldn't be home till noon,
walked down to the river. Bindo was waiting for
them, on his perch in the tea-tree.
"Follow me," he said, and flew over the stream.
"How can we follow?"
"There's a bridge, Jess," replied Colin, pointing
up the river.
They crossed the bridge, and Bindo, flying
slowly, and alighting every few minutes so that
they could catch up to him, led the ramblers
through tea-tree groves, and round a hill that
was gay with pink heath and golden pea-bush
flowers. They were going down into a valley
when Colin saw* an emu, with five striped chicks
running after her. Bindo called to them, and the
emus stopped.
"Jessie and Colin, friends of the Swallow."
"How did you come to meet them, Bindo?"
the mother Emu said rather crossly. "The
Swallow sent me a message."
"And he sent me one, too," declared Bindo.
"I suppose there was a mistake. Doesn't mat-
ter. I will be their guide."
"No, I will."
The Emu shook her feathers, and all the baby
emus tried to look fierce.
"Please don't quarrel," beseeched Jessie. "We


are glad to know you both. I'll tell you what!
We'll go with you this morning, Madame Emu;
and with Bindo after dinner."
"That's just what I'd like," said the Emu.
Bindo was still annoyed. "All right," he
snapped. "Meet me at the bridge." He flew off
then, and Jessie and Colin followed the Emu fam-
ily down into the valley.
They crossed a patch of swampy ground, star-
red with blossoms of the white butterfly iris, and
came to a grove of gum-trees.
"Sugar-gum Town," the Emu observed. The
koalas live here."
"Native bears?"
"Yes, Jessie. There are so many of them, and
they eat so much, that they killed all the trees at
Tomaru Flat, where they used to live. They
cleared every leaf from the boughs."
"Eat too much yourself," a squeaky voice came
from aloft.
They looked up and saw a koala, squatting in
the fork of a tree.
"Hullo, Grumpy."
"Hullo! Long-legs."
"Don't be rude, Grumpy," said the Emu.
Grumpy grunted and turned his broad, woolly
back on the party below.
The Emu snapped her beak, and with a word
of farewell to the cousins, led her brood through
the gum-trees and away up the hill.
"She's a silly old bird, don't take any notice of


her. I don't." The Koala had turned round
again, and he spoke quite pleasantly.
"A silly old bird," he said again. "This is our
town. Have a good look round. I'm too tired to
come with you. Besides, I don't like being on
the ground. It's damp, and I might catch cold."
"A Tear' with a cold in the nose would be
funny," Jessie whispered.
Colin laughed, and the Koala looked at him
suspiciously.
"Come over here," another "bear" cried. "Over
here," squeaked a third one. "Here," "Here,"
"Here." Koalas were calling all round them.
Every tree had tenants.
The cousins could hardly accept all these in-
vitations. They wandered from tree to tree,
smiled up at the "bears," and stopped at last by a
gum that was very poor in leaves. It was the
home of a white koala, and a little brown "joey,"
which clung to its mother's back, tightly gripping
the fur.
"Snowy's my name," said the old Koala, blink-
ing her rose-pink eyes. "Isn't my baby a beauty."
"A darling. Please let me nurse him." Jessie
looked up, and the "bear" looked down at her.
"Nurse my baby! No! No!! No!!!" Old
Snowy climbed to the end of the tree's highest
bough.
"Look out; it will break!"
Colin's warning came too late. The bough
cracked, and down came Snowy and her "joey!"


They crashed into a bush. Snowy was on her
feet in a second, and with the baby still clinging
to her back, scrambled up a big stump. She
squealed and grunted all the time.
"We'd better move on. The poor old thing's
frightened."
"I'm sorry she fell, Jess." Colin spoke loudly,
so that Snowy might hear. But she just clung to
the stump and grunted.
Close to old Snowy's tree, was a small sugar-
gum, with only one koala to feed upon its
leaves. He was friendly and a chatterbox.
"Hullo! Jessie, Hullo! Colin. Glad you
came to see me. Fine tree this, isn't it. Nicest
leaves in our town. Try some, will you? Lots
of us here. I'm the Mayor's son. Father's away,
looking for sugar-gums. We've nearly eaten this
place out. I'm the son of the Mayor. Oh! I've
just told you that. Fine tree, mine, isn't it?"
"Very fine," Jessie agreed. "And what a nice
big town this is. How old are you; and please
tell us your name."
"How old? Don't know. My name is Fuscus.
Pretty name, isn't it?"
Fuscus picked some leaves and chewed them
lazily.
"We don't eat much in the day-time; but I'm
hungry. Try some of these leaves; they are
nice."
"No, thank you," Jessie said. "But we would
like you to tell us something about koalas."


"That's easy." Fuscus stopped eating, and
looked very important. "They say we are lazy.
Well, what's the use of being busy? I'm happy
enough in my tree. I climb about the branches
at night; and it makes me tired. We lead a quiet
life here. But it was awful in the old days, when
the trappers camped on Red Hill. They can't
come here now. And the blackfellows all went
a long time ago. I've never seen one myself. They
used to eat koalas!"
"How terrible!" Jessie gave a little shudder.
Fuscus grunted and began to chew gum-leaves
again. "See me to-morrow," he said. "I'm tired."
The ramblers laughed and walked away. On
the outskirts of Sugar-gum Town, they discov-
ered a young ring-tail possum. He was cling-
ing to the slender, swaying stem of a sapling,
and his eyes grew big with terror as they ap-
proached him.
"We are Jessie and Colin ; we won't harm you."
Jessie spoke softly.
"I'm only a baby," said the possum. "Mother
left me all by myself. And I'm only a baby
yet."
Jessie stroked the little creature; fear left him
when he found that the cousins really were
friends.
"Chalgo's my name; and I'm only a baby." The
possum curled his tail tightly about the sapling,
and swung, head downward. "Isn't that clever?"
he said. "And I'm only a baby yet. I was born


in a big, round nest, in the tea-tree over there,
where mother is now."
Chalgo chattered away, till Jessie said that
they must be going.
The sun was nearly overhead, and they had to
be back at the cottage by noon. They walked
round the sugar-gums, and were passing a clump
of tea-tree, when a wood-swallow skimmed over
them, and alighted on a branch.
"You are Jessie and Colin, the Swallow's
friends, aren't you?"
"Yes; we are the friends of all the birds,"
Jessie replied.
"I'm the Wood Swallow. You are just in time
to see my baby in the nest. She is going to fly
very soon. Come and see."
The Wood Swallow's nest was in the tea-tree,
a frail saucer of twigs, built in a fork no higher
than Colin's head. The fledgling stood up as soon
as it saw them, and stretched out its head.
"The others have flown," the Wood Swallow
explained. Leilamar hurt her wing when she
was only a week old; but she's nearly right again
now."
"I can fly; I'm sure I can fly," piped Leila
mar.
"Wait till to-morrow," said the old Wood Swal
low, and darted from his perch.
They were walking down the track from Red
Hill towards Possum Peak, outside the boundary
fence, when Colin stopped before a hole in the


high bank —the path was cut along the hill-side.
"Only a rabbit burrow," observed Jessie.
"None in the park, Dick said; but there must be
plenty outside. That's a bunny home, I'm sure."
They climbed the bank, and the moment Jessie
reached level ground, she spied a baby rabbit,
crouched beside a log. They walked up to it, but
the little creature didn't run away. He seemed
to know that the ramblers would do him no harm.
"Where's your mother, Bunny?" Jessie asked.
"Down the burrow," replied the Rabbit. "I've
run away from home, and I 'spect she'll be after
me soon. I want to see the world; but it is so
big, I don't know where to go."
"You'd better go home."
"No! No! No! Mother would bite me."
"Don't be a silly," cried Jessie. "Come on. I'll
take you home." She stooped, picked up the
baby, and clambered down the hill-side followed
by Colin.
Mother Rabbit was just coming out of the
burrow. When she saw her lost child, she called
out joyfully. Jessie put the baby in the mouth of
the burrow, and it was out of sight in an instant.
Its mother, after thanking Jessie for bringing the
truant home, dived down the burrow herself.
"I am glad we found it. Poor silly little thing;
it would have been eaten by a fox, or carried off
by an eagle-hawk."
"But aren't rabbits pests?"
"Of course they are. But we mustn't harm


THE WOOD-SWALLOW BABY
THE LITTLE RABBIT




them, Colin. We are friends to all the wild folk.
You saved a little swallow; and now I've rescued
a bunny baby. It was so pretty and soft. I
hadn't the heart to leave it, a truant from home."
The road presently led them among dunes, with
marram grass growing along the hollows. And
there they found a nest in the sand, sheltered
by waving grass stems.
When Colin bent over the nest, two ground-
lark nestlings opened their beaks hungrily. They
gasped and "cheeped," and wobbled their heads.
"Sorry, birdies," said Colin. "But I can't catch
insects for you."
"Who asked you to?"
Colin looked round quickly and found a grey
bird close to his heels. The Lark had run up
silently. It had been foraging beyond the dunes,
cn a flat where clover flowers lured the bees, and
hosts of tiny insects lived among the grass.
"Nobody asked me," said Collin. "Only your
babies seem to be starving. Just see how their
beaks are gaping for food."
"Starving! Why, they've had seven beaksful
of insects since I saw you near the Rabbit's
home."
"I'm sorry; but they really look hungry, don't
they?"
,The Ground-lark flicked its tail, and flew
away. It was back again soon, its beak crammed
with moths and midges. The food was shared
between the nestlings, which ate as greedily as
if they had been hungry for a whole day.


The Lark went off again to its hunting-ground.
Jessie and Colin continued their journey, and
ieached the cottage just after noon.
Dinner over, Dick's mother guided the cousins
to a tea-tree gully, where the track to Possum
Peak began.
"It's easy to follow," they were told, "but don't
wander into the scrub, or you may get bushed."
The tea-tree was in flower, and thousands of
honey-eaters were busy among the white blos-
soms. Bindo was there and came flying to greet
them, as soon as Dick's mother had gone.
"Nozu you'll see things." Bindo fluttered his
wings and darted at an inquisitive tit-warbler.
The chase was over in half a minute. Bindo flew
back, saying that he wouldn't waste time over a
midget.
"You couldn't catch him," laughed Colin.
"I'll catch him one of these days," retorted
Bindo. "And then his feathers will fly. We
don't want the tit-warblers in our valley. They
are a perfect nuisance. It's a good thing they
don't like nectar, for if they did, we should
starve."
Colin and Jessie smiled, as they glanced at the
blossoming tea-tree. There seemed to be room
for a million birds in the pleasant valley.
Bindo led them up the track to Possum Peak,
a wind-swept height, with trees all about it, and
granite boulders rising from a sea of bushes: a


wild, bleak spot, with the sea far below, foaming
against grey rocks.
"Look! a wallaby!" Jessie pointed down the
slope.
The Wallaby gazed at them for a while, then
came pounding up the hill. "Jessie and Colin,"
he said. "I am glad to meet you. My cousin
sent me word that you were coming."
"Your cousin?"
"Yes, Colin. He showed you where the old
sundowner had left his tucker-bag, near Blossom-
ville."
'T remember," cried Colin. "He said that I
ought to see fur-babies; they were much prettier
than baby birds."
"He must be a stupid old creature," Bindo snap-
ped out. "Bushland babies in feathers are the
prettiest of all."
"When they get feathers, they are not ugly;
but before that " The Wallaby laughed and
went pounding down hill through the bushes.
They saw other wallabies, feeding quietly, or
sitting erect in the scrub. But there were no
possums on the height.
"It's only a name," explained Bindo. "I've
never seen a possum here; nor heard of one liv-
ing anywhere near the hill. It's a name, that's
all. Names are so silly—l mean the names given
to places by humans. Our names are always
clever and suitable."
"All our names are not silly," Jessie retorted.


"Can you think of anything prettier than Wil-
angi ?"
"Yes, Blossomville."
''l don't agree with you, Bindo. But Blossom-
ville is a good name for a town in Birdland."
"It's the loveliest place in Australia, I think. I
was born there."
"Why ever did you leave it?" Colin asked. "If
I were a bird, I'd love to live in Blossomville."
The Spinebill looked pleased. "It's a long, long
story," he said. "Look! The sun is on the
hills."
Bindo flew slowly before them, and they came
again to the tea-tree, which was still loud with
bird voices. Here the cousins left Bindo, with a
promise that they would meet him next morning,
for a little journey to Peirlan's Creek, where bell-
birds might be heard.
They promised; but the promise could not be
kept. A letter from home awaited Colin at the
cottage. He opened it eagerly, and had read but
sentence, when the letter fell from his hand.
"Jess! Jess! I have to go home!"
"When?" cried Jessie.
"Soon as I can. Father says I've had enough
Bush wandering to last me for twenty years.
School begins next week."
"But Colin, dear, you'll come to 'Wilangi' again
You will come next spring, when the swallows
are nesting and the Bush is calling to me."
"Yes, Jessie, I will. And I'll never forget our
Swallow, nor the Bushland Babies."


Eagle Press Ltd., Allen St., Waterloo


N ATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA


