

33 IT -XjJl W S
OF THE
QUEENSLAND SECTION
OF THE
AUSTRALASIAN HOME READING UNION.
CIRCLES.
1. A Circle may consist of any two or more members, who, having chosen the
same course of reading, shall notify to the Group Secretary, or, where the Circle is not
included in the Group, to the Sectional Secretary, their wish to be registered as a Cade,
2. Each Circle shall appoint a Leader, whose duty it shall be to conduct all
communications on behalf of the Circle with the Group or Sectional Secretary, to
furnish to the Sectional Secretary and to the Group Secretary a complete list of
members, to collect and remit all Circle subscriptions to the Group Treasurer (or, if
the Circle does not belong to a Group, to the Sectional Treasurer), to receive from
the General Secretary and to distribute the Journal to the members of the Circle, and
to forward to the Group Secretary (or, if the Circle does not belong to a Group, to the
Editor of the .Journal) all papers of merit read at meetings of the Circle.
GROUPS.
3. Any combination (of Member’s or of Circles) having a minimum of 25
members in the aggregate may fcrm a Group, and shall notify in writing to the
Sectional Secretary their desire to be registered as a Group.
4. The affairs of a Group shall be managed by a Board chosen by the members
thereof (together with an elective Chairman and Vice-Chairman), and it shall be the
duty of such Board to diffuse a knowledge of the aims of the Union throughout the
district in which the Group is situated, to enrol members, form Circles, arrange
General Meetings of the Group, Lectures, Excursions, &c , and to transmit to the
Editor of the Journal any papers of merit read at the meetings of the Group, or of
Circles included in the Group, and generally to do whatever they deem likely to
forward the interests of the Union within their district.
5. A Group shall elect annually at a General Meeting a Chairman and Vice-
Chairman, who shall, ex-ojicio , be members of the Group Board, and the Group may
also elect at a General Meeting a Delegate or Delegates to the Sectional Committee
in proportion of one Delegate to every 25 members. Such Delegates may be members
of the Union resident in Brisbane, thou Ji not members of the Group.
6. The Group Board shall elect annually a Secretary-Treasurer, who may or
may not be a member of the Board, but who shall in any event have a vote at the
meetings of the Board, and whose duty it shall be to conduct all correspondence on
behalf of the Group with the Sectional Secretary, to furnish the Sectional Secretary
with a complete list of Circles within the Group, to receive the subscriptions of 3s. 6d,
from all members of the Group, to remit to the Sectional Treasurer 2s. 6d. out of
every subscription received (the balance of Is. being retained to meet the local
expenses of the Group), and to keep a true account of all receipts and expenditure
of the Group.
7. Every Group shall have power to make any By-laws they may think
desirable for their own government, provided such By-laws do not conflict with the
spirit of these herein contained.
SECTIONAL COMMITTEE.
8. The Central Office shall be in Brisbane.
9. The Committee shall meet for the dispatch of business at least once in each
calendar month, as they may appoint. A Special Meeting may be called by the


n) Afp
e> o
F U3^
Secretary when such is required by urgency of business, and shall be called on the
requisition of any two Chairmen of Groups or four Leaders of Circles.
10. Three shall be a quorum at any meeting of the Committee. Questions
arising at any of the meetings shall be decided by a majority of yotes. In case of
equality of votes the Chairman shall have a second or casting vote.
11. The Committee shall in the first week of November of each year elect a
President, two Vice-Presidents, and a Secretary-Treasurer, who shall hold office for
one year and shall be eligible for re-election.
INDIVIDUAL MEMBERS
12. Individual Members not belonging to a Circle or Group may be enrolled
as Members on application to the Sectional Secretary, shall communicate with him,
and shall forward him a subscription of 2s. 6d. each.
N.B. —The Sectional Committee meet at the School of Arts, Brisbane, on
the second Tuesday in each month, at a “ime to be fixed by the Committee.
TO FORM A BRANCH OF THE A.H.R.U.
Communicate with the Sectional Secretary in Brisbane and join the Union yourself.
Then get from him a book of tickets and a list of courses, and call, at your own house,
or at some convenient place, a meeting of those interested. Enrol members, and
let the members then choose whal course or courses of reading they will take.
Members of one Circle should take the same courses and read the same books at
the same time. Choose a leader for ernh Circle, and arrange for the election of
officers according to the rules.
If possible get a member to give an introductory lecture, or read a short paper
upon each set of books chosen, so as to explain the method, scope and bearing of each,
and describe the life and estimate the influence of the author.
The first few meetings should be made thoroughly attractive. It may be
necessary to let them be social evenings until an interest in the reading is developed ;
but systematic and thorough reading shornd be encouraged, and set portions should be
agreed upon for discussion at regular meetings. These should be held at least once
a month, oftener if practicable.
Where there are several Circles, their leaders should arrange periodical
re-unions, to which every member of every Circle in the Group should be invited.
These meetings might be made very interesting —debates, papers, recitations, &c.,
might form part of the programme —and every means should be taken to stimulate
thought and widen the sphere of intellectual interest.
Leaders of Circles should note all difficulties, and if necessary send them to
the Editor of the Journal, who will submit them to a competent specialist and
publish the answer.
The formation of a new Branch or Circle should be notifie 1 at once to the
Sectional Secretary, and names of the members sent in, so that the Journal may be
duly forwarded.
Individual members in any part of the Colony may be enrolled without
attaching themselves to any Groan or Circle, and on payment of their subscription
shall have sent to them the “ A.H.R ” (the Journal of the Union).
Membership of the Union will secure to any member a hearty welcome at any
Group, or Sectional Meeting.
Assistance in the formation of Circles or Groups will be given by the following
members of the Union :—Messrs. R. H, Roe, M.A. ; J, Shirley, B. Sc. ; T. E.
White, S. W, Brooks, T, R. Brown, L. E, Groom, M.A., L.L.M.; W. Hill, Mrs.
L. Cooper and Mrs. M. H. Foott. Full information concerning the Union may be
obtained on application to Mr, L. E. Groom (31 Town Hall Chambers), or Mr. W.
Hill (c/o A. Shaw & Co., Brisbane).
