





aJHiYTi'
BY-LAWS
OF THE
JA ELBOURNE CIUB,
VICTORIA.
INSTITUTED 1839.
MELBOURNE:
FERGUSSON & MOORE, PRINTERS, 48' FLINDERS LANE.
MDCCCLXVIII.
s2j£><d < s




Accounts —
INDEX.
PAGE.
Ballot for Members —
Bed Rooms —
Billiard Rooms —
By-Laws —
Secretary to check monthly accounts 12
Secretary to place before Committee list of Accounts due - - x 6
Secretary to request payment from Members owing over - 16
Clerk to make out and deliver to Members - - - - 18
Chairman to be nominated -------- 7
Rule 3, as to the time of ballot and scrutineers - - - - 8
Two ballot-boxes g
Scrutineers to examine boxes ..g
Cards with the name of one candidate thereon to be provided - 8
Chairman to deliver a card to each Member g
Members to deposit cards in one of the boxes g
Ballot to close at three o’clock ------- 9
Scrutineers to examine boxes, and chairman to note the votes - 9
Cards, etc., to be destroyed ------- g
Chairman and scrutineers to certify the result of the ballot - 9
Any difference of opinion to be reported - - . - - 10
When all beds engaged, Members requiring beds to give notice 4
Honorary Members to give up their bed rooms - - - . 5
Markers to be in attendance when required - - - - 5
Markers to keep tables, etc., in good order 5
Junior Marker to be.under the directions of the Senior Marker 6
Markers to charge games to losing players 6
Marker to extinguish lights and fires ------ 6
Members in possession of a table ------ 6
Pyramids - . . . . - . . _ - 6
Pool 6
Who to pay for - -- -- - --_-6
Disputes 7
Charges 7
Allowance to Senior Marker after hours 7
Penalty for cutting the cloth - 7
In force from Ist November, 1868 x
All existing, repealed - - - - - - - - x


Cards —
Clerk—
Cook —
Entrance Hall —
General Re?narks —
Hall Porter —
PAGE.
Where played .......
Charge for .5
Rule 30 5
In the absence of the Secretary, to perform his duties • • 18
To see that the tables are supplied with stationery • - - 18
To keep an account of articles supplied to Members - - - 18
To take charge of the periodicals, books, etc. - - - - 18
Fuel 19
To keep the kitchen, etc., clean • 19
To inspect and weigh provisions and see that they are correctly
entered in the tradesmen’s books - -19
Not to participate in any contract or receive any perquisite - 19
Responsible for the good quality and dressing of articles of food 19
To obtain supplies from the Secretary, and to reject articles not
of good quality ....... - 20
Responsible that the servants under him are in attendance • 20
To see servants’ meals served punctually ... - • 20
Kitchen-maid to extinguish lights and fires - - - - 20
Members to deposit walking-sticks, great-coats, etc. 1
Strangers not to view the Club, unless accompanied by a Mem-
ber or the Secretary • 1
Servants to perform with cheerfulness and alacrity any services • 24
Officers and servants to be appointed during pleasure - - 25
Servants’ dinners .... - 23
Servants not to quit the Club-house - 25
Gratuities by officers and servants prohibited - • - 25
Tradesmen offering the same shall not be dealt with - - • 25
Leave of absence of servants - - - - - 25
Servants not to hold conversation when on duty - - - - 25,
Articles found in the Club 25
Servants not to enter or go out by the front-door • - - 25
To remain in the Hall 21
To obtain the wishes of persons calling on Members, and apprize
the Members - 21
Responsible for the cleanliness of the Strangers’ Room,
Entrance Hall, etc. - - - - - - 21
To enter in a book the names of Members daily entering the
Club 22
Parcels for Members - 22
Letters for Members 22
Delivery of letters of Members to other Members - - - 22
Despatch of letters - - - 22
Luggage not to be left in the Hall - - - -22
To have charge of walking-sticks, cloaks, etc., in the Hall - 23
Servants of Members - - ■ • 23


PAGE.
Honorary Members —
Members introducing liable for the accounts of - - - - 10
To give up their bed rooms ----.- *-5
Housemaids—
Head Housemaid to have charge of the linep - • - 23
And keep proper washing books 23
To give out linen - - -23
Head Housemaid to report want of attention - - - -24
Housemaids to have care of the bed rooms 24
To repair linen - - • - 24
Miscellaneous—
Members damaging Club property
Suggestions or complaints of Members 10
Servants not to be sent out of the Club • ■ - - - 10
No eatables allowed lip-stairs - - n
Public Dining Room —
Breakfasts and luncheons ------- 2
Table d’hote dinner hour 2
Private Dinners —
Members requiring, to give notice of - 3
Table-money ------ .... 3
Reading Room —
No conversation allowed j
N ewspapers and books not to be removed - 3
Books to be replaced on the shelves - 4
Rule 28. . 4
Pamphlets or notices not to be left in the Club without leave - 4
A catalogue of books to be made 4
Secretary —
To have charge of the-Club property - - - . . - n
The general control of the servants - 11
To report resignation and misconduct of servants - - - 11
To give orders to tradesmen -
x o give orders 10 tradesmen - - - - . - n
To ascertain that the articles supplied are correct - - - n
To redress urgent complaints - - - - - I 2
±0 rccircbb urgent cuiiipiciiiits j 2
To inspect premises and make urgent repairs * - . , 12
To make himself conversant with the state of the markets - - 12
io nictKc mmsen conversant witn tne state ot tne marßets - • 12
Accounts of tradesmen to be paid monthly - - - - 12
To visit the servants occasionally at their meals - - - - 12
As also the servants’ apartments - 13
As also the rooms of the Club - - - - - - * 13
To keep an account of stationery -13
To check the monthly accounts before payment - - - * 13
To prepare bills of fare - • - - 13
To place in the dining room a list of Members sleeping in the
house - 13
Not to absent himself --------- 13
Not to engage in any business I 3
Not to participate in contracts for supply of provisions - - 14


Secreiary —( Continued.)
Special and House Dinners--
Slippers —
The Waiters —
PAGR.
To enter in a book the names and addresses of Members - - 14
Also honorary Members • - - 14
To attend Committee meetings - - - - - 14
To keep Minutes of general, special, and Committee meetings - 14
To give notices of meetings, etc. -------14
To give notices to new Members - - _ - - - - - 14
To give notice of persons who have retired, applying for re-
admission - 14
To receive all moneys, and enter the same in the “ Daily Receipt
Book” - -- -- -- -- --15
To pay moneys into the Bank - ' - - - - - - *5
To keep Check Bank Pass Book” - - - - - -15
To produce weekly, to a member of the Finance Committee,
the books for examination - - - - - - -15
All disbursements to be made by cheque - - - •• * 15
To obtain receipts for payments 16
Petty cash - -- -- -- -- -16
To keep “Petty Cash Book” 16
To place before the Committee, a list of accounts due to the
Club
To request payment from Members owing more than £lO - - 16
To give written orders for supply of articles - - - - 16
To have charge of cellars and receive wines, etc. - ' • 17
To give out wines, etc, - - * 17
To take from Members only coin, bank notes, etc. - - -17
Members passing cheques not their own 17
To report any breach of the Rules, etc. - - - - - 17
To see the By-laws observed by the Clerk and servants - - 18
To find security in £5OO 18
Toasts ■ ■ * ' ‘ 2
At a house dinner - 2
At a special dinner - ... 2
Notice of to be given - • - - - - • 3
The Head Waiter to attend in the dining room at breakfasts,
luncheons and dinners 20
And to be responsible for the plate 21
To take orders for breakfasts, etc, - * * - - - 21


BY-LAWS.
The Committee of Management of the Melbourne
Club do hereby, pursuant to and in exercise and
execution of the power and authority conferred on
such Committee by the Twenty-third Rule of the
Club, make the By-Laws following;
i. These By-Laws shall come into operation on the By-laws in force
on ist Novem-
first day of November, in the year of our Lord One ter, 1868.
thousand eight hundred and sixty-eight.
2. All By-Laws heretofore made and now in force ah existing
By-laws
shall be, and the same are hereby rescinded, from rescinded.
and after the coming into operation of these By-Laws.
Entrance Hall.
i. Members are requested to deposit their walking- Members to
deposit walking
sticks, great-coats, umbrellas, clogs, &c., m the Hall sticks, great-
coats, &c.
previous to entering the apartments of the Club.
2. No stranger is to be admitted to view the Club- Strangers not to
view the Club,
house, unless accompanied bv a Member or the unless accompa-
nied by a Mem-
Secretarv. | er or , the
Secretary.


Public Dining Room.
i. Breakfasts may be ordered from eight o’clock
in the morning, until one o’clock in the afternoon,
and luncheons from one until three o’clock in
the afternoon; but should any Member desire to
breakfast before eight o clock in the morning, he
must give notice to the Secretary, before nine o’clock
of the evening preceding.
2. The table d'hote dinner hour, from the com-
mencement of the month of April to the end of
the month of October, shall be half past six o’clock
p.m., and from the commencement of the month of
November to the end of the month of March, seven
o’clock.
Special and House Dinners.
i. The only toasts which shall on any pretext be
given at any special or house dinner, shall be as
follows: —
i. At a house dinner, the chairman shall give the
Queen’s health.
3. At any special dinner, in addition to the Queen’s
health, the chairman may propose the health of the
guests of the evening, and in the event of the guests
being foreigners, the health of the sovereign of the


country to which they belong, but shall refrain from
all political or religious allusions.
Private Dinners.
i. Members desirous of dining in a private room Members
must give notice thereof to the Secretary before .notice of.
twelve o’clock at noon, and the dinner will not be
served within half an hour before or after the table
d'hote dinner commences.
2. Table-money will be charged for dinners in a Table-money,
private room at the following rates: —For four persons
and under, 2s. 6d. each person, and for each person
over four, is.
Suppers.
i. The Cook is not generally required to be in Notice of to be
attendance after ten o’clock p.m., but Members glven ‘
requiring supper after that hour will be served by
giving notice to the Secretary before nine o’clock.
Reading Room.
i. No conversation shall be carried on in the No conversation
j • t-, allowed.
Reading Room-
2. No newspaper or book shall be removed from Newspapers and
the room to which it has been appropriated. removed. 1 to be


Books to be S- Books taken from the shelves or bookcases, after
shelves? ° n the having been read, are to be replaced in the position
they were taken from.
Rule 28. 4. By Rule 28—No Member shall take away from
the Club-house, or deface, tear, or injure any news-
paper, book, pamphlet, or other article, the property
of the Club,
Pamphlets or 5’ No pamphlet, advertisement, or notice of any
Idiin S theCiub e kind, shall be laid on the table, or put up in the
without leave, Club> without the leave of the Committee; but any
pamphlet, or paper, which it may be wished to make
known to the Club, should be sent to the Secretary,
to be laid before the Committee, in order that their
approval be first obtained.
a catalogue of 6. A catalogue of the books shall be made and
books to he b ept, anc [ a book shall also be kept, in which shall
be recorded the names of the donors of books, with
the particulars of their donations.
Bedrooms.
When all beds i. In the event of all the bed-rooms being occu-
Membe? any pied by Members, any Member requiring a bedroom
requiringabed _ . r - , c
to give notice, must give notice to that effect to the Secretary before
twelve o’clock at noon, and the Member who has
occupied a bedroom for the greatest number of nights


consecutively, will be required to give it up, provided
he has notice to do so. before noon.
2. Honorary Members must give up their bed- Honorary
Members to
rooms when required for the use of Members; prO- give up their
bedrooms.
vided they have notice to do so, before noon.
Cards.
i. Cards are to be played only in the rooms appro- where played,
priated for that purpose.
2. Members playing will be charged one shilling charge for,
each.
3. By Rule 30 — No game of 100 or chance shall Rule 30.
be played, nor dice used in the Club-house, except
to play at backgammon.
Billiard Rooms.
i. The billiard markers shall be in attendance Billiard markers
. , . . . , to be in
whenever their services are required, excepting m attendance when
case of illness or leave of absence.
2. The senior marker shall be responsible that Marker to keep
the billiard tables, balls, cues, lamps, glasses and good order’,
shades are kept clean, in good order, and fit for use,
and that. the tables when not in use are covered up
with the cloths provided for that purpose.


Junior marker
to be under the
directions of the
senior marker.
Markers to
charge games
to the losing
player.
Markers to
extinguish lights
and fires.
Members in
possession of a
table.
Pyramids
Pool.
Who to pay for.
3. The junior marker shall be under the immediate
control and direction of the senior marker, who shall
at once report to the Secretary any want of attention
or neglect of duty on the part of the junior marker.
4. The markers shall keep a true and correct account
of the games played by Members, and charge each
game played to the Member losing the same, unless
otherwise directed by the players, and shall in such
account distinguish those games played before and
those played after one o’clock a.m.
5. The markers shall see that all lights and fires in
the Billiard Rooms are safely extinguished before they
retire to rest.
6. Any Member having possession of a table shall
be allowed to play two games of twenty-five or one
of fifty, and by consent of the majority or those who
desire to play, a second game of fifty may be played.
7. A match of pyramids is to be considered equal
to one game of fifty.
8. Any four Members or more wishing to play a
game of pool shall have the use of the tables before
those who desire to play at billiards.
9. The charge for the game of pool shall be made
to the Member taking the pool, or in case of a
division, a ratable proportion of the charge to each
Member dividing.


io. Any dispute which may arise shall be settled Disputes,
by the marker or the majority of non-players.
ii. The Charges for Games shall be as follows: Charges.
Daylight.
Gaslight. After One
O clock A.M.
I S. D.
The Common Game of 25 ]
S. D.
o 6
S. D.
I O
The Winning Game of 15 \ o 3
A Cramped Game of 10 \
The Common Game of 50
The Winning Game of 35 y 0 5
o 9
2 o
A Cramped Game of 25
Pool, per Ball - - o 4
o 6
i 6
Starring - - - -04
o 6
i 6
Pyramids, per Pool - -06
o 9
2 O
12. The senior marker shall
paid
games Allowance to
played after one o’clock a.m. as follows :—For each
fifty game at billiards, one shilling and threepence; House,
for each ball at pool, tenpence. And such payments
shall be made to him monthly with his wages by the
Secretary.
13. Any player cutting the cloth within four months Penalty for
r • i 1 in cutting the
alter it has been put on, shall pay one guinea, cloth.
After that period and within eight months, ten
shillings. After eight months, five shillings.
Ballot for Members .
1. The chairman of the ballot for any Member or chairman to be
Members of the Club shall be nominated at a nommated '


Meeting of the Committee before the day of ballot.
And in the event of the Member so nominated being
unable to attend, he shall appoint a substitute, and
in case of his neglecting or omitting to do so, it
shall be competent for the Members present in the
Club-house at two o’clock on the day of the ballot
to appoint a chairman.
Rule 3, as to the 2. By Rule 3—'The ballot is to take place between
andTscrutineers, two and three o’clock p.m., and two scrutineers are
to be appointed by the chairman.
Two ballot- 3. There shall be two ballot boxes, one marked
“Admit,” and the other “Reject,” which shall be
placed in some one convenient room.
Scrutineers to 4. The scrutineers, before the ballot is entered
examine boxes. ghall eXamine eac b box, see that it is empty,
lock the same, and hand the keys thereof to the
chairman.
Cards with the 5. A sufficient number of cards with the name
candidate" 6 of one candidate written on each card shall be
thereon to be # t i r i
provided. supplied to the scrutineers, one or both ot whom
shall initial and hand them to the chairman.
Chairman to 6. The chairman shall deliver to each Member
applying to him, one of such cards for each candi-
date to be elected, and shall take down the name
of the applicant.
Members to 7. The Member to whom such card or cards are
onrof'thfws. delivered, shall then and there place the same in


one of the two boxes. After a Member has
deposited his card or cards in the box or boxes,
he shall not be permitted to rectify any alleged
mistake he may have made, nor shall the chairman
or scrutineers, at any time, alter the distribution of
the cards as they may be found in the ballot
boxes.
8. At three o’clock the door of the room wherein Ballot to dose at
three o’clock.
the ballot is conducted shall be closed, but any
Member or Members then in the room, who may
not have voted, may vote.
o. When all votes have been taken, and the room Scrutineers to
. . ' ; # examine boxes
cleared of all persons except the chairman and and chairman to
x . note the votes.
scrutineers, the scrutineers shall unlock the box
marked “Admit,” and shall carefully separate,
examine, and count the cards therein in the presence
of the chairman, who shall note the numbers for
each candidate. The same course shall then be
pursued in reference to the box marked “ Reject.”
io. After all the cards in each box have been cards, &c„ to.be
i n destroyed.
examined and noted, and the result of the ballot
ascertained, such cards or other evidence which
might tend to disclose the state of the ballot shall
be destroyed by the chairman and scrutineers before
leaving the room.
XI. The chairman and scrutineers shall then certify Chairman and
v- j scrutineers to
the result of the ballot, which the former shall for- o r t f ult


ward to the Secretary, who shall lay the same before
the. Committee, at a meeting to be held as soon as
practicable thereafter.
o'mioi ff tobl ce ° f 12 ' an Y difference of opinion with regard to
reported. the ballot arise between the chairman and scrutineers,
or any of them, the matter shall be reported to the
Committee for their decision.
Honorary Members .
Members i. In the event of any honorary Member leaving
introducing liable
for the accounts the Club without payment of his house account, the
Member introducing him shall be liable for the
amount thereof.
MiscellancoHS.
Members i. Any Member damaging any article, the property
damaging Club .
property. of the Club, shall pay the cost price of the same.
Suggestions or 2. Members are invited to make any suggestions or
complaints of # J 00
Members. complaints in writing in the book provided for the
purpose.
Servants not to 3. No servant of the Club (the Messenger and
be sent out of \ o
the ciub. Boots excepted) shall be sent out of the Club, at
the instance of any Member, upon any errand, or for
any other purpose, under any pretence whatever, and
Members requiring the Boots to be sent must com-
municate with the Secretary.


4. No eatables beyond sandwiches, biscuits, or No eatables
allowed up-stairs.
muffins, shall be allowed in the rooms up-stairs,
except at a public, private, or house dinner, or in
case of the illness of a member.
The Secretary.
i. The Secretary shall have the charge of the To have charge
whole property of the Club, and be held responsible perty! U pn>
for the efficient conduct of the Establishment.
2. He shall have the immediate and general control The general
. . , , . control of the
and superintendence of the servants, the apportioning servants.
of their individual duties (when the same may not be
defined herein,) and the granting to them such
occasional indulgence as may not in any way
interfere with the interests or convenience of the
Club.
3. In cases of resignation, incompetency, or serious To report
. resignation and
misconduct on the part of any of the servants, he misconduct of
servants.
is to report the same, and upon the dismissal of any
servant by the Committee, he is to recommend any
individual whom he may consider eligible to supply
the vacancy.
4. It shall be his duty, m communication with the To give orders to
. . . tradesmen.
Cook, to give the daily orders m a pass-book to
the tradesmen for the supply of provisons; and he, And ascertain
1 1 , . that the articles
or the Clerk or Cook shall ascertain, by comparing supplied are
. . correct.
the articles supplied with the pass-books, that the


quantities, qualities, and weights are correct:; and, if
found to be so, the person ascertaining the same shall
sign or initial the orders in the books.
To redress 5. He shall attend to, and, if within his power,
urgent .
complaints. redress the complaints of Members which require
immediate attention.
To inspect pre- 6. He shall inspect the premises from time to time,
raises and make , . , .
urgent repairs, and pay especial attention to the tanks, pipes, and
drains, to any leaks caused by loss of slates, injury to
lead or ceilings, or other cause; and, when any urgent
repairs are required, he may, after obtaining the
consent of some Member of the Committee, have them
effected; but no expense is to be incurred, except for
repairs which admit of no delay.
To make himself 7. He shall make himself conversant with the state
conversant with
the state of the of the markets with respect to the prices of all articles
markets. . .
of provisions, which are subject to variation from
time to time or season, and for which there is no
contract, so as to ascertain that all charges made by
the respective tradesmen are just and moderate, it
being understood that the best quality only of every-
thing is to be supplied to the Club, at the lowest
Accounts of reasonable prices. The accounts of each tradesman
tradesmen to be
paid monthly, shall be paid monthly.
To visit the 8. He shall visit the servants occasionally at their
servants # J
occasionally at meals, to ascertain that they conduct themselves with
their meals.
good order, are clean in their persons and properly
dressed.


o. He shall visit the servants’ apartments not less As also the
servants'
than once a week, to see that they are kept thoroughly apartments,
clean.
10. He shall visit the rooms of the Club once every As also the
rooms of the
morning at least, to see that they are properly club,
arranged for the day.
n. He shall have the charge of and keep an To keep an
account of
account of all stationery purchased for the Club, and stationery.
give out the same to the Clerk as required for use in
each room.
12. He shall check the monthly accounts of the To check the
monthly accounts
tradesmen before payment, and see that they corre- before payment
spond with the pass-books, and that the charges
made are just and reasonable; and, if found correct,
he shall initial the same.
13. He shall prepare and place in the Dining To prepare bills
of fare.
Room the daily bills of fare.
14. He shall prepare and place in the Dining To place in the
Dining Room a
Room daily a list of all Members who have slept m list of Members
J m sleeping in the
the house on the previous night. bouse.
15. He shall not be absent during the day except Not to absent
in case of illness or leave of absence, but on the
business of the Club, and then only when the Clerk
is present to act for him.
16. He shall not enter into any business whatever Not to engage in
any business.
without the sanction of the Committee in writing.


Not to participate 17. He shall not have any interest or participation
in contracts for J r 1
supply of in any contract for the supply of provisions or any
provisions. x x j r j
other article to the Club, or receive any perquisite,
or accept of any present or gratuity from any of
the tradesmen employed by the Club, under the
pain of immediate dismissal.
To enter in a 18. He shall enter in a book the name and address
book the names
and addresses of of every effective and non-effective Member of the
Members.
Club.
Also honorary 1 9. He shall enter in a book the name, address,
Members. ,
rank, profession or occupation of every honorary
Member.
To attend Com- 20. He shall be in readiness to attend the Com-
mittee Meetings.
mittee meeting when they may be sitting.
To keep minutes 2 i. He shall keep full and accurate minutes in the
of General, x
books of the proceedings of all General, Special, and
Meetings. Committee Meetings.
To give notices 22. He shall give all notices of General and Special
of Meetings, &c.
Meetings, and of propositions to be brought before
such Meetings, as also notices of Committee
Meetings.
To give notices 23. He shall give the necessary notices to all newly
to new Members.
elected Members, enclosing a copy of the Rules and
By-Laws.
To give notice of 24. He shall, when any person who has retired
persons who have .
retired applying from the Club applies to have his name replaced
for re-admission.
upon the books under the latter part of Rule No. 7,


put up the natne of such person in the Dining Room
for one week preceding the consideration by the
Committee of any such application.
2<. He shall receive all moneys, and enter in the To receive ail
° J , moneys, and
book provided for the purpose, to be called “ The f '?TkfpaOy em
Daily Receipt Book," the sum so received from each Receipt Book.’
Member, and obtain the initials of the Member
paying the same to the amount so paid, and by
such book shall show the amounts paid into the
Bank on each occasion.
26. He shall pay into the Bank daily all moneys To pay moneys
„ into the Bank.
received by him on account of the Club, and shall
keep a “ Check Bank Pass Book ,” wherein shall be. To keep “Check
. . . Bank Pass-
entered the sum so paid in, showing how the same Book ”
is made up, whether of cheques, notes, or coin,
specifying the description of each, and shall obtain
the initials of the officer of the Bank in such book
to the amount so paid in.
27. He shall produce weekly to some one Member To produce
of the Finance Committee “ The Daily Receipt Member of the
Finance Commit-
BookP as also “ The Check Bank Pass Book," and tee the books for
examination.
such Member shall examine the same and ascertain
that all moneys received have been paid into the
Bank, and make a note in the books of such
examination.
28. All disbursements of the funds of the Club ah disburse-
ments to be made
(except as hereinafter provided) shall be made by by cheque.


cheque, to be drawn upon the Bank at which the
Club account is kept, and signed by two Members
of the Finance Committee and countersigned by
the Secretary.
2- °kt a i n from persons to whom any
payments. sum Q f mo ney shall be paid (except sums of money
expended as petty cash,) good and sufficient receipts
and discharges for the same.
Petty cash. 30. No greater sum than shall be placed in
the hands of the Secretary at any one time for the
purpose of being disbursed as petty cash.
To keep “Petty 3 1. He shall enter in a book to be called “ The
Cash Book.”
Petty Cash Book ” all receipts and disbursements
which he shall make of petty cash.
To place before 32. He shall place before the Committee weekly,
the Committee a J
list of accounts a list of the names of those Members who owe
due to the Club.
accounts to the Club, and the amount due by
each.
To request pay- 33. He shall, in the event of any Member owing
ment from Mem-
bers owing upwards of £i o for an account extending over more
upwards of £iOi
than one week, request payment thereof from such
Member, and in default of his paying the same,
report the fact to the Committee.
To give written 34. He shall when it is necessary to provide
orders for supply
of articles. any article for the use of the Club, not coming
under the head of provisions, issue and sign an
order for obtaining the same from a printed book


provided for that purpose, and in the butt of such
book shall show the date of such order, to whom and
for what article issued.
He shall have charge of the cellars and store- To have charge
u ot the cellars, &c.,
rooms, and keep the keys thereof in his own custody, and receive
? L J > wines, &c.
receive all wines, spirits, ales, soda-water, and stores,
&c., from the persons supplying the Club there-
with, and enter in the Wine and other Books in the
form therein prescribed a full and particular account
of the same.
?6. He shall daily give out from the Club cellars To give out
wines, &c.
all wines, spirits, ales, soda-water, and stores, &c.,
that may be required, and make true and correct
entries in the Wine and other Books of the quan-
tities so issued.
?7. He shall take from Members in payment of To take from
0 ' Members only
accounts only coin, bank notes, or cheques drawn coin, bank notes,
upon and payable immediately at one of the Banks
in Victoria. And in the event of any Member being Members passing
Cheques not
desirous of passing a cheque not drawn by himselt, their own.
the Secretary shall not take the same unless such
Member shall endorse his name thereon.
28. He shall at once report to the Committee any Ito report any
. . breach of the
breach of the Rules or By-laws, or any irregularity, Rules, &c.
or any other matter or thing that may occur relating
to the affairs of the Club, and out of the ordinary
course of business.


To see the By- 39. He shall see that the Clerk and servants
laws observed by
the Clerk and observe the By-laws, and report to the Committee
servants. ±
any omission to do so on the part of any or either
of them.
- He shall find security in the sum of to
the satisfaction of the Committee, for the faithful
discharge of his duties.
The Clerk ,
in the absence of i. In the event of a vacancy in the office of
the Secretary to ■
perform his Secretary or m his absence, the Clerk shall perform
his duties, and he shall also hold himself in readiness
to give the Secretary any assistance he may require.
To see that the 2. He shall see that all the tables are properly
tables are sup- ... . # r tr j
plied with supplied with stationery, and obtain from the Secretary
stationery. . J
a sufficient supply for each room, keeping an account
of the quantity placed in each room on each
occasion.
To keep an 3* He shall make and keep an account of all
account ofarticles . 1 . .
supplied to articles and provisions supplied to each Member, and
Members.
weekly make out the accounts of Members, and
deliver the same to them.
ofthepeHodicMs 4 ‘ He shal * ta^e charge of the periodicals and
books, &C. ’ books, the property of the Club, and also those
supplied from the circulating library or otherwise, and
report to the Secretary when any are missing.


5- He shall see that all fuel, whether of coal, coke, Fuel,
charcoal or wood, is correctly delivered according to
order.
The Cook .
i. He shall be responsible that the kitchen, scullery, To keep the
and cupboards are kept thoroughly clean, and that clean!"’ &c ’’
they are whitewashed twice at least in each year, or
oftener if required, and that the chimneys are swept
as often as is necessary, the sinks kept clear and con-
stantly washed, the apparatus for keeping the baths
and washing places supplied with hot water, and that
the lift, kitchen ranges, and utensils are kept in proper
order.
2. It shall be his duty to ascertain, by inspecting To inspect and
and weighing all provisions brought into the kitchen, r Trossions, and
. , . . , . , . , see that they are
that they are in strict accordance with the orders correctly entered
. -ill , , in the trades-
given, and that the amounts are correctly charged m men’s books,
the tradesmen’s books. These books are to be signed
daily by him after careful examination, and his signa-
ture shall be considered by the Secretary as a voucher
that the entries are correct.
3- He shall not have any interest or participation Not to participate
in any contract for the supply of provisions, or any o" “(Lveany 1 ’
other article to the Club. perquisite.
4 He shall be responsible for the good quality as Responsible for
well as the dressing of every article of provisions InddreLn^of 7
j r i articles of food.
served from the kitchen.


To obtain sup- 5. He shall obtain the necessary supplies for carry-
plies from the # #
Secretary, and to i n a 0 n the duties of his department from the Secretary,
reject articles not 0
of good quality. an d h e j s required to reject any article that is not
perfectly good in quality or correct in weight.
Responsible that 6. He shall be responsible that the servants under
the servants . . .
under him are him are in attendance, and he is required to report to
in attendance.
the Secretary any want of attention or neglect of duty
on the part of any of them.
To see servants’ 7. He shall see that the meals of the servants are
pum;tuaiiy. e of good quality, well dressed, and served punctually
in the servants’ hall.
Kitchen maid 8. The kitchen maid shall keep all the kitchen
to extinguish # .
lights and fires, utensils perfectly clean, and have a sufficient supply
of towels, rubbers, &c., clean and ready for use when
required; and see that all lights and fires in the kitchen
and scullery are safely extinguished when the Club-
house closes.
The Waiters.
1. The Head Waiter shall attend in the Dining
The Head A * AAAC X 0
in the Dining nd Room during breakfasts, luncheons, and dinners, and
L°tTiuncheons, see that they are correctly and punctually served by
and dinners. the j Ul q or Waiters, and be responsible for the cleanli-
ness of the room and the orderly conduct of the
Waiters, bringing to the notice of the Secretary any
irregularity that may occur.


2. The Head Waiter shall be responsible for the And be respon-
sible for the plate.
plate under his charge, and the cleanliness thereof.
He shall count it daily, and immediately report to the
Secretary any deficiency.
3. The Waiters shall take orders from the Members The Waiters to
take orders for
for breakfasts, luncheons, dinners, and wines, and breakfasts, &c.
hand such orders to the Clerk to enable him to
charge the Members giving the order.
The Hall Porter.
i. The Hall Porter shall remain in the Hall, and To remain in the
Hall.
shall not leave the same without leave of the Secretary,
who is required to make arrangements that some
servant of the Club be left in charge thereof, with
directions to remain therein until the return of the
Porter.
2. He shall obtain from strangers calling for the To obtain the
. .... . . wishes of persons
purpose of seeing Members their wishes, and apprise calling on Mem-
bers, and apprize
the Members wanted. All messages to Members who the Members,
are in the house shall be sent to them by the boy,
who is placed under the superintendence and diretion
of the Hall Porter.
3. He shall be responsible that the Strangers’ Responsible for
Room, Entrance Hall, steps and pavement in front the ° f
r /-,, iiT 1 Room, Entrance
of the Club, be kept clean, and the door-mats Hail, &c.
dusted daily.


To enter in a 4. He shall insert in a book once a day the
book the names J
of Members daily names of all Members as they enter the house,
entering the Club. J 7
and ascertain that none but Members have access
to the Club-rooms, except strangers accompanying
Members to view the house, and gentlemen calling
upon Members, who are to be shown , into the
Strangers’ Room, but only if the Member inquired
for be at the time in the house.
Parcels for
Members
5. He shall enter in a book the time at which any
parcel is left at the Club-house for any Member,
and deliver the same to such Member, or have it
placed in his bed room.
Letters for
Members.
6. He shall receive all letters addressed to Mem-
bers, the Committee, or Secretary, and take charge
of the same until properly delivered.
Delivery of Let-
ters of Members
to other
7. If a letter for any Member shall be applied for
by another Member, who may wish to forward it, the
latter must sign an acknowledgment for the same in
the Porter’s book, in case of any future question on
the subject.
Members.
Despatch of
letters.
8. He shall be responsible that all letters placed in
the despatch-boxes are sent to the Post Office at the
prescribed periods.
Luggage not to
be left in the
Hall.
9. He shall not allow any large boxes or luggage
to be left in the Hall for a longer time than absolutely
necessary.


io He shall have the charge of all walking-sticks, To have charge
of walking sticks,
cloaks, umbrellas, &c., placed in the Entrance Hall, cloaks & c ., in
’ ’ 9 v ... the Hall-
- is to endeavour, as much as lies in his power,
to prevent mistakes by the Members relative to
them. He shall also have the charge of all parcels
and luggage brought to the Club temporarily for
Members.
ii. Any servant of a Member attending at the Servants of
IVI embers*
Club, is to remain in the Entrance Hall until his
services shall be required by his master.
The Housemaids.
i. The Head Housemaid shall have the care of the Head Housemaid
. to have charge of
table, house, and bed linen, blankets, counterpanes, the linen.
&c, the property of the club, and keep in a book a
true and correct account of the same. She shall
keep proper washing books, and enter in them, at And keep proper
. . . . . , , washing books.
the time, all linen, &c., delivered to and returned
by the laundress, and note any deficiency or
damage which may be observed when returned. She
shall also be responsible that the washing is properly
performed, and the charges correct.
2. The Head Housemaid shall daily give out to And to give ou
linen to the
the Waiters such table linen as may be required for Waiters as
required.
the use of the day


Head Housemaid 3. The Head Housemaid shall report to the Secre-
te report want of x
attention. tary any want of attention or neglect on the part
of any or either of the under Housemaids.
Housemaids to 4. Each Housemaid shall have the care and be
nave the care of
the bed rooms, responsible for the proper order and cleanliness of
the several rooms to which she is appointed to
attend, and shall pay particular attention to the
ventilation.
Housemaids to 5. Such repairs as the linen may require shall be
repair linen.
performed by the Housemaids, and they are par-
ticularly enjoined not to issue any linen for use which
may be out of repair, not clean, or not sufficiently
aired.
General Remarks.
1. The following Regulations apply to the servants
generally, and the attention of all is particularly
directed to them.
Servants to 2. Although an outline of the duties of some of
perform with
cheerfulness the servants has been drawn out, each servant is
and alacrity any
services. clearly to understand that, at all times, he or she
is to perform with cheerfulness and alacrity any
services that may be required of him or her by
the proper authorities, though such services may
not be pointed out, or attached to his or her par-
ticular duty.


3. All officers and servants of the Club shall be Officers and
servants to be
appointed by the Committee during pleasure, who a [ during
shall have the power of discontinuing their services
at any time, on giving one month’s notice; and also
of immediate dismissal, in the event of inefficiency,
irregularity of conduct, or disobedience of the Rules
or By-laws of the Club.
4. Breakfast shall not be served to any of the ser- Servants’
dinners.
vants after nine o’clock, nor dinner after one o'clock
in the day, nor tea after six o’clock, except to such
as may have been prevented from attending at the
regulated hour.
No servant shall quit the Club-house without Servants not to
J quit the Club-
leave from the Secretary. house.
6. No servant of the Club shall, directly or indirectly, Gratuities by
officers and
receive any money, present, or gratuity from any servant d
Member or tradesman employed by the Club, under
pain of immediate dismissal. Any tradesman who Tradesmen
* ' offering the same
shall offer the same, directly or indirectly, shall no shah not be dealt
longer be dealt with by the Club.
7. Male servants obtaining the indulgence of leave Leave of absence
• of servants.
shall return before one o’clock a.m., after which
hour they are not to be admitted into the Club.
Female servants obtaining such indulgence shall
return before ten o’clock p.m., and any servant not
returning at the times aforesaid (unless by special
permission) shall be reported the next morning to the
Secretary.


Servants not to
hold conversation
when on duty.
Articles found in
the Club.
Servants not to
enter or go out
by the front door.
8. Servants on duty in the Dining Room are
strictly forbidden to hold conversation with each
other except upon matters connected with their
business.
9. If any money or other article presumed to be
the property of a Member (although the owner may
not be known) shall be found by a servant in the
Club-house, it is to be taken immediately to the
Secretary, who will take measures to ascertain to
whom such property may belong.
10. The servants shall not have ingress or egress to
or from the Club premises by the front-door, excepting
after the hour at which the back-doors and gates are
locked.
The foregoing By-Laws were made and passed by
the Committee of Management of the Melbourne Club,
this Twenty-eight day of September , in the year of our
Lord One thoiLsand eight hundred and sixty-eight.
W. H. F. MITCHELL,
President.
FERGUSSON AND MOORE, PRINTERS, MELBOURNE.
MSI 1


1508
00016407




79. Melbourne Club.
a tear without loss in upper wrapper, Melbourne, Fergusson & Moore, 1868.
By-laws of the Melbourne Club; Instituted 1839, pp. vi + 26, printed wrappers,
2001
