

r / 3 if 9




BY-LAWS
WITHIN THE
UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY.
CHRISTO —ECCLESI/C —LITER IS.
SijSneu :
JOHN SCOTT & CO., PRINTERS, 22 BOND STREET.


For information respecting Fees, Scholarships, &c.,
see pages 25 to 29.


m BSS/F
1-1
||j|ndlpjzw ; f H>olleg£
Principal:
Councillors :
BOWMAN, EDWARD, M.A.
BROWN, ANDREW
CAMPBELL, Hon. GEORGE
CAMPBELL, JOHN
CAMERON, Rev. JAMES, D.D.
COSH, Rev. JAMES, M.A.
Reverend JOHN KINROSS, D.D.
DODDS, Hon. ALEX.
DYMOCK, D. L.
GOODLET, JOHN HAY
GRIMM, Rev. GEORGE, M
SMITH, CHARLES
STEEL, Rev. ROBERT, D


T N pursuance of the power vested in us, by the Act passed in the
31st year of Her Majesty’s Reign, for the Incorporation of Saint
Andrew’s College, as a College within the University of Sydney,
We, the Principal and Councillors of Saint Andrew’s
College, for the purpose of harrying into effect the provisions and
objects of said Act, do hereby revoke the several By-Laws and
Rules made by the Principal and Councillors on the 21st day of
October, 1873, and do instead thereof make and establish the several
By-Laws which are contained in the printed Schedule hereunto
annexed, signed at the end thereof by the present Principal of
said College.
3Ln HUitncss tuhereof We hereunto affix
our Corporate Seal, this Fifteenth day of March in the
year of our Lord 1888.
By Order of the Council,
JOHN KINROSS, D.D.,
Principal.


ST. ANDREW’S COLLEGE,
6 W itfii+v tfa& tyXnivwsity o| Si^Vnet^
B IT- LAWS.
I.—MEMBERSHIP.
i. The Members of St. Andrew’s College
shall be the Principal, Councillors, and
Students, together with those who, having
been Students of the College, continue on its
Books, by payment of an Annual Fee of
One Guinea.
2. The Annual Fee may be compounded
for, at any time, by the payment of Three
Guineas.
3- Students may be Resident or Non-
Resident.


4. Each Student, whether Resident or
Non-Resident, shall, before admission, pay
an Entrance Fee, the amount of which shall
be fixed by the Council, and also produce a
satisfactory certificate of character.
5. All Students shall matriculate in the
University, on the earliest opportunity, after
their admission into the College.
11. -INSTRUCTION.
6. All instruction given in the College
shall be under the superintendence of the
Principal, according to such arrangements as
the Council may from time to time appoint.
7. All Students shall have afforded to
them systematic religious instruction, in
accordance with the standards of the Presby-
terian Church, under which shall be included
one or more of the following subjects :
(i.) The Evidences of Natural and Revealed
Religion. (2.) The Doctrines and Duties of
Christianity, and (3.) The Study of the New
Testament in the original; it being understood
that the Principal shall have the power of


exempting Non-Resident Students from
attendance in the case of any one or more
of these branches.
8. .Suitable tutorial assistance shall be
provided to the Students in preparing for
the University Lectures and Examinations,
that they may attend on these with intelligence
and profit.
9. Provision shall be made within the
College for accommodating the classes in the
various departments of Theological Study
required for the Ministry of the Presbyterian
Church, according to the arrangements made
with the General Assembly of the Presby-
terian Church of New South Wales.
111.-RESIDENCE.
10. Resident Students shall have rooms
assigned to them in the College according to
priority of application, and shall continue to
reside throughout the currency of the several
terms. They shall also have the option of
remaining during Vacations under such
regulations as the Council may determine.


11. The rate of charge for Board per
annum shall be fixed by the Council, and
shall be payable, either in one sum at the
commencement of the academic year, or by
instalments at the commencement of each
Term.
12. Any fee chargeable for access to
other advantages furnished by the College,
whether to Resident or Non-Resident
Students, shall be fixed by the Council, and
be payable at such times as it shall appoint.
13. Meals shall be provided for Resident
Students within the College at fixed hours,
when punctuality must be observed.
14. All Resident Students shall attend
daily prayers in the College.
15. Every Resident Student shall be
within the College at nine o’clock p.m.,
unless allowed to be out later by the
Principal.
16. Visitors to Students shall be required
to leave not later than ten o’clock at night.
iy. Resident and other Students shall be
required to obey the regulations of the


College, while within its walls, and be subject
to its discipline, and shall be expected to
protect the property of the College.
18. Every Student shall discourage within
the College, to the utmost of his power,
every deed and word of a profane, immoral,
dishonourable, or ungentlemanly character.
19. The wilful infraction of any By-law
shall be regarded as a breach of discipline.
20. Persistent breaches of discipline, or
any other serious misconduct in or out of
College, shall subject the Student to be
suspended by the Principal at his discretion
for a period not exceeding the remainder of
the then current Term, or until the next
meeting of the Council. And the Council
may then further suspend or expel such
Student.
IV.—THE PRINCIPAL.
2i. The Principal shall exercise a careful
supervision over the studies and conduct of
the Students, and shall do his utmost to
promote their comfort, and to form them to
correct moral and religious habits.


22. During the University terms, the
Principal shall reside in the College, and shall
not absent himself for more than three days
without leave of the Council.
V. SCHOLARSHIPS.
23. Scholarships or Bursaries shall be
awarded after such examinations as the
Council shall determine.
24. No Student can hold more than one
Scholarship without an express resolution of
the Council.
VI. GENERAL MANAGEMENT.
25. The Council shall meet, for the despatch
of the ordinary business and management
of the College, within the College Buildings,
or at some place in Sydney, at such
times as shall be appointed by themselves,
or in default of such appointment, by the
Principal ; but a meeting for such purpose
shall be held, at least, within every three
calendar months.
26. A Special Meeting of the Council
shall be convened by the Principal, on the


written requisition of any three Councillors
stating the object of such intended meeting ;
or such Special Meeting may be convened
by the Principal on his own responsibility.
27. Notice of each meeting, whether
ordinary or special, shall be issued by circular
to every Member, at least four days before
the holding of such meeting ; and the notice
for any Special Meeting shall indicate the
objects for which the same is called.
28. The Principal, if present, shall be
Chairman of every meeting of Council, and,
in his absence, or pending any vacancy in
the office, a Chairman shall be elected by the
members from among themselves ; and the
Chairman of every such meeting shall have
a deliberative as well as a casting vote.
29. If, after half-an-hour from the time
appointed for any meeting of Council, the
quorum required by the Act shall not be
present, the meeting shall lapse, and another
meeting shall be called, for an early
convenient day thereafter, by the Principal.
30. If any Councillor shall be absent
from six consecutive Meetings of the Council


without leave, or cause shewn, his seat shall
be declared vacant, and steps be thereupon
taken to appoint a successor.
31. The Principal, or, in his absence, the
Chairman for the time being, shall take an
accurate record of the proceedings of each
meeting, and afterwards engross the same in
the Permanent Minute Book, which, on
being confirmed at the meeting immediately
following, and signed by the Chairman, shall
be held authoritative.
32. The Council shall appoint a Treasurer,
to whom shall be entrusted, under control of
the Council, the receipts and disbursements.
The Council shall keep a Bank Account,
into which all monies shall be paid within
six days of the receipt thereof. Any
demands on the Council, after being' passed
for payment, shall be discharged by cheque
only; all cheques to be signed by two
Councillors, and countersigned by the
T reasurer.
33- The Treasurer shall prepare a yearly
Balance Sheet, made up to the 31st December
of each year, which, after being duly audited


by two Councillors appointed for the purpose,
he shall present to the Council at the
meeting immediately following that date.
34. The Minute Books and other
Documents belonging to the College shall
be committed to the custody of the Principal,
and shall be open to the inspection of any
Councillor on application to him.
35. The Common Seal of the College
shall be in the custody of the Principal or
Treasurer, and shall not be affixed to any
Document except by order of the Council,
and the order minuted.
36. The Annual Certificate required by
the Colleges’ Endowment Act, 18 Vic., No.
37, Sec. 5, shall be under the hands of two
Councillors appointed for that purpose by
the Council.
VII.-ELECTION OF PRINCIPALS AND
COUNCILLORS.
37. When by death, resignation or other-
wise, a vacancy occurs in the office of
Principal, or Councillor, and the same shall
have been entered on the minutes, a meeting


of the remaining Councillors, and of such
Graduates as may be on the books of the
College, if any, shall be duly called in name
of the Council by circular, or by public
advertisement in one or more of the Sydney
daily newspapers, and said meeting shall not
be held sooner than three weeks after the
issuing of such notice, with the proviso that
no such meeting shall be held dtiring the
month of January.
38. Every such meeting of Councillors,
or of Councillors and Graduates, of whom
five shall form a quorum, shall be deemed a
meeting for the purpose of electing a Principal
or Councillor.
39. At any such meeting the Principal, if
present, shall preside, and failing him, any
member of the Council whom those present
shall appoint ; the Chairman, in either case,
having a deliberative as well as a casting
vote.
40. The name or names of persons to be
proposed for the office of Principal or
Councillor shall, at least ten days before the
day of election, be forwarded by a duly qualified


elector to the Principal, or in the event of
the office of Principal being vacant, to such
Councillor as may be appointed by the Council
for the purpose, who, on receiving the same,
shall give intimation thereof to the electors
either by circular or public advertisement.
41. At such meeting each person so
nominated shall be duly proposed and
seconded, unless intimation of withdrawal be
given. If only one candidate be proposed,
the Chairman shall declare him duly elected ;
but, if more than one, the vote shall be taken
by ballot, and the Chairman shall declare the
candidate having the majority of votes duly
elected, or, in the event of an equality, shall
decide by his casting vote.
42. The proceedings of such meeting
shall be duly recorded in a Minute Book kept
for the purpose, and a copy of the Minute
shall also be entered in the Permanent
Records of the Council.
John Kinross, D. D.


ENDOWMENT ACT.
ACTS RELATING TO COLLEGES WITHIN
THE UNIVERSITY.
An Act to provide for the establishment and e7idowment
of Colleges within the University of Sydney. —
18 Victoria , No. 37.
[Assented to 2nd December , 1834.^
it is expedient to encourage and
assist the establishment of Colleges within
the University of Sydney, in which
College systematic religious instruction,
and domestic supervision, with efficient
assistance in preparing for the University
lectures and examinations, shall be


provided for Students of the University:
be it therefore enacted by His Excellency
the Governor of New South Wales, with
the advice and consent of the Legislative
Council thereof as follows :
I. —Whenever any College shall have been established and
incorporated by any Act of the Governor and Council, as a College
within the University of Sydney, and the founders of or subscribers to
such College shall have complied with the conditions mentioned in
the next section, such College shall be entitled to the endowments
hereinafter severally mentioned, which said endowments shall be paid
by the Treasurer of the Colony under warrants signed by the
Governor.
lI.—No such College, although incorporated, shall be entitled
to such endowments unless and until the sum of ten thousand pounds,
at the least, shall have been subscribed by its founders, and of that
sum not less than four thousand pounds shall have been paid and
invested in such manner as shall be approved of by the Governor and
the residue shall have been to his satisfaction secured to be paid,
within three years next following; nor unless the whole of the said
ten thousand pounds shall be devoted exclusively to the erection of
College Buildings, on land granted for that purpose by Her Majesty
to the University in trust for such College, (if any shall be so granted,
and if not, then upon land otherwise conveyed to and accepted by
the University in such trust), and it shall have been agreed by the
founders that the entire amount shall be so expended, if the
University so require, within five years next after the first payment on
account of either of such endowments.
lll.—There shall be paid out of the General Revenue, in aid of
the Building Fund of every College so incorporated, a sum or sums
not exceeding in the whole twenty thousand pounds, nor more than
shall have been from time to time actually expended by the College
Qut pf its subscribed funds for the purpose of building.


Endowment IV.—There shall be paid out of the said General Revenue
tor Princi- annually to such incorporated College in perpetuity, a sum of five
pftl s salary. . . .
hundred pounds for the use of and as a salary to the Principal of such
College or in aid of such salary.
asTo such 5 V.—Every such Principal shall be entitled to the annual salary
Endowment hereby provided for, on the production of his own certificate, at the
time of each payment, that he has during the period to which it
relates performed the duties of his office: Provided that he shall
transmit to the Colonial Secretary, once in each year, a certificate to
the like effect under the hands of such persons as shall be for that
purpose appointed by the constitution or rules of the particular
College.
firstselected VI. —Where any person selected to be the Principal of any such
Principal. College shall be out of this colony at the time of his appointment, no
such certificate shall be required until after he shall have actually
entered on his duties, but he shall be entitled to the salary, (and the
College to which he shall have been appointed may receive the same
accordingly for his use) from the day of his embarkation for this
Colony. Provided that every Principal shall actually enter on his
duties within six months after such embarkation, unless the Governor,
upon being satisfied that unavoidable obstacles have intervened, shall
think fit to extend that term to nine months.
Accruing Vll.—Until the subscribed fund shall be required for the
proceeds of .
subscribed erection ot College buildings as aforesaid, the interest or other
expended in P roceeds accruing from the investment thereof or of the portion
building. remaining unexpended from time to time, may be applied to the
general purposes of the College, as the governing body of such College
may determine.
Students of VIII.—AII Students in any such College shall, immediately upon
be members entering therein, matriculate in the University, and shall thereafter
sft 61 " cont i nue to be members thereof, and submit and be subject to the
attend discipline thereof, and shall be required duly and regularly to attend
tbf lectures of the University on those subjects an examination and


proficiency in which are required for Honours and Degrees, with the
exception (if thought fit by any such College) of the lectures on
Ethics, Metaphysics, and Modern History.
By an Act passed during the Session of 185 S, Clause IX lficates
has been repealed. religious
attainments
X.—The term Principal shall include Master, Warden, or any
other head of a College.
Passed the Legislative Council 1
this twenty-ninth day of I
Novetuber, one thousand eight |
hundred and fifty-four. J
CHARLES NICHOLSON,
Speaker.
WM. MACPIIERSON,
Clerk of the Council.
In the name and on the behalf of Her Majesty,
I assent to this Act.
CHAS. A FITZ ROY,
Governor-General.
Government House,
Sydney,
2nd December , 1854.


INCORPORATION ACT.
An Act to Incorporate St. Andrew’s College as a College
within the University of Sydney.
[Assented to 12th Dece?nber, iS6yi]
Mfrmas by an Act Eighteenth Victoria
number thirty-seven provision has been
made for encouraging and assisting the
establishment of Colleges within the
University of Sydney and whereas it is
proposed to institute and endow such a
College within the said University to be
called “ St. Andrew’s College” wherein
may be afforded to Presbyterian and
other students residence and domestic
supervision with systematic religious
instruction in accordance with the princi-
ples of the Presbyterian Church of New
South Wales and also efficient tutorial
assistance in their preparations for the


University lectures and examinations and
whereas it is expedient that the said
College be incorporated Be it therefore
enacted by the Queen’s Most Excellent
Majesty by and with the advice and
consent of the Legislative Council and
Legislative Assembly of New South
Wales in Parliament assembled and by
the Authority of the same as follows :
I.—So soon as it shall be made to appear to the satisfaction of
the Governor that a sum not less than ten thousand pounds has been
subscribed for the Endowment aforesaid and that the amount has
either been paid or secured to be paid for that purpose in accordance
with Section 11. of Eighteenth Victoria number thirty-seven and that
a Principal and twelve Councillors for the government of the said
College in accordance with the constitution thereof as in this Act set
forth have been duly elected and appointed the same shall be
notified by proclamation in the New South Wales Government
Gazette under the hand of the Governor and immediately upon such
notification and from thenceforth the Principal and Councillors of
the said College shall be and they are hereby constituted a Body
Politic and Corporate by the name of “ The Principal and Councillors
of Saint Andrew’s College ” by which name the said incorporated
body shall have perpetual succession and a common seal and shall
sue and be sued or otherwise appear and answer and be answered and
may take and hold to them and to their successors by grant will or
otherwise in perpetuity or for any term of life or years as well chattels
and other personal property as lands buildings and hereditaments and
the same or any part thereof may alien or otherwise dispose of or
demise and also shall or may do all other things incident or
appertaining to a body politic and corporate.


Restraining tt t> •i j i , . __
disposal of ■ fioviued always that it shall not be lawful for the said
rivedfrom cor P oration or an y person or persons seized of or entitled to lands in
the Crown. trust for the Corporation or for College purposes to alienate mortgage
charge or demise any lands or hereditaments granted to or in trust for
the Corporation or for College purposes by Her Majesty or her
successors without the consent in writing of the Governor with the
advice of the Executive Council for the time being.
Constitution lll.—The Principal who shall also be a Councillor and shall
always be a duly ordained Presbyterian Minister holding and
prepared to subscribe (when called on so to do) the standards of the
Presbyterian Church of New South Wales shall be chosen and
appointed by the said twelve Councillors of whom four but not more
shall be ordained Ministers of the Presbyterian Church of New South
Wales and all tutors and professors of the College shall be chosen and
appointed by said Principal and Councillors.
IV.—The Principal and said twelve Councillors for the time
being of whom five shall be a quorum shall together form a Council
to be called the Council of St. Andrew’s College in which shall be
vested at all times the government in every respect of the College and
all matters relating thereto. No temporary vacancy or vacancies in
the office of principal or in the number of Councillors of the College
shall be deemed in any way to affect the constitution of the College
or its privileges or status as an incorporated body.
V.—The first twelve Councillors shall be elected by the
subscribers to the funds of the College every subscriber of One
Pound paid to have one vote every subscriber of Ten Pounds to have
two votes every subscriber of Twenty-five Pounds three votes and
every subscriber of Fifty Pounds or upwards to have four votes all
such votes to be given by ballot and subscribers not present at any
meeting for such purpose who may authorise in writing any other
subscriber shall be allowed to vote by proxy.
Vl.—All future vacancies either in the office of Principal or in
the number of Councillors shall be filled up by election by the
remaining Councillors and such graduates of the University as still


continue on the books of the College Provided always that no
person shall be deemed eligible as a Councillor who is not a member
of the Presbyterian Church of New South Wales.
VII. —The Moderator for the time being of the General
Assembly of the Presbyterian Church of New South Wales shall be
the Visitor of the College and shall have the right to visit the College
at any time to examine into the manner in which it is conducted and
to see that its laws and regulations are duly observed and executed.
VIII.—The Principal and Professors or Tutors shall be liable
respectively to removal or suspension for a sufficient cause by the
Council subject to an appeal to the Visitor in any case involving the
moral character of any of them Provided that if the ground of
complaint shall concern the theological or religious doctrines or
teaching of the Principal and Tutors or Professors or any of them the
Councillors shall not adjudicate thereon but shall remit the same for
trial to the Presbytery of Sydney subject to an appeal to the General
Assembly of the Presbyterian Church of New South Wales.
IX. —The Council of the College shall have power from time to
time to make and establish all such By-laws and Rules for carrying into
effect the several provisions and objects of this Act as to the said
Council shall seem expedient and such laws and rules from time to
time to alter and revoke or to substitute others in their places
Provided that every such By-law and Rule shall be transmitted to the
Governor within thirty days after being made to be by him laid before
the Houses of Parliament of the colony as soon as conveniently may
be thereafter.
X. —The College of St. Andrew’s hereby incorporated shall be a
College of and within the University of Sydney and all students in
the College shall immediately upon entering therein matriculate in
the said University and shall be subject to the discipline thereof and
shall be required duly and regularly to attend the Lectures of the
University on those subjects an examination and proficiency in which
are required for Honours and Degrees with the exception (if thought
fit by the Council) of the lectures on Ethics Metaphysics and Modern


History But Students after taking their Degrees at the University
may continue in the College for a period not exceeding four years for
the purpose of prosecuting such branches of learning as may not be
taught in the University.
Xl.—And whereas in the deed of Grant to the University of
Sydney of land in trust for certain Colleges when the founders of the
same shall have complied with the conditions of public endowment
as therein mentioned a portion of the said land is vested in the Senate
of the University in Trust for a College in connection with the
“Church of Scotland” the phrase “Church of Scotland” shall be
understood to signify the Presbyterian Church of New South
Wales.


COLLEGE FEES.
£ s. d.
ENTRANCE FEE ... 22 0
ANNUAL FEE FOR RESIDENT STUDENTS... 60 O O
ANNUAL FEE FOR NON-RESIDENTS 9 9 0
The Annual Fee is paid by instalments at the commencement of
each Term, and for Resident Students includes Board, Residence
and Tuition, but not Washing.
The University Fees (in Arts) amount to about £25 per
annum.
The Academic Year contains Three Terms :
LENT TERM. —Commencing (in March) on the Tenth
Monday in the year, and terminating (in May) with the
Saturday before the twenty-second Monday in the
TRINITY TERM.—Commencing (in June) on the Twenty-
Fourth Monday in the year, and terminating (in August)
with the Saturday before the Thirty-Fourth Monday in
the year.
MICHAELMAS TERM. —Commencing (in September) on
the Thirty-Ninth Monday in the year, and terminating
(in December) with the Saturday before the Fifty-First
Monday in the year.


SCHOLARSHIPS.
I. —BOWMAN SCHOLARSHIP.—A sum of £l,OOO was
bequeathed in 1873 by the late ROBERT BOWMAN, ESQ., M.D.,
of Richmond, for the Foundation of a Scholarship.
1878. —R. K. Jeffreys.
1883.—J. T. Thorburn.
1888.— W. T. Dick.
1888.-A. Stewart, | Non . Residmts .
J. Cosh, j
2.— FRASER SCHOLARSHIP.—In 1884 a sum of £l,OOO
was bequeathed by the late HON. JOHN FRASER, M.L.C., for a
Scholarship. Before 1884 MR. FRASER gave £5O per annum for
several years.
1876.— Robert Steel.
1878. Robert Jackson.
X BB3. —J. W. Boag.
1888.—A. McNeil.
3. —GOODLET SCHOLARSHIP.—In 1874 the sum of £5O
(to be continued for three years) was given by JOHN HAY
GOODLET, ESQ., for a Scholarship, open to Students for the
Ministry.
i 87- — I Charles Crane.
1884. —R. Miller.


4.—MARKS SCHOLARSHIP.—In 1874 the sum of £5O (to
be continued for three years) was given by the HON. JOHN
MARKS, for a Scholarship, open to Students from any of the Public
Schools in Illawarra.
1878. —Hugh McLelland.
1881.—George M. Colley.
S.—THE GORDON SCHOLARSHIP.—A sum of £l,OOO
was given in 1882 by the late S. D. GORDON, ESQ., M.L.C., for
the Foundation of a Scholarship, for Students who have taken the
B.A. degree.
6.—THE LAWSON SCHOLARSHIP.—A sum of £l,OOO
(in Bank Shares) was bequeathed in 1882 by the late GEORGE
LAWSON, ESQ., of Yass, for the Foundation of a Scholarship for
Students who have taken the B.A. degree.
1886.—R. Miller.
1888.—J. T. Thorburn.
7.—THE STRUTH SCHOLARSHIP.- A sum of £l,OOO
was given in 1884 by J. STRUTH, ESQ., for the Foundation of a
Scholarship.
1886.—J. P. White.
1888.—C. Purser, B.A.
B.—THE HORN SCHOLARSHIPS.—In 1883 the late MR.
JOHN W. HORN, of Corstorphine, Edinburgh, bequeathed eighty
shares of the Australian Gas Company, to found three Scholarships.
1888. —3rd year. —L. Hollis.
2nd year.—R. M. Kinross
iBBB.—Robert Dick.


9.—THE COUTTS SCHOLARSHIP.—In 1884 the sum of
,£l,OOO was bequeathed by the late REV. JAMES COUTTS, M.A.,
of Newcastle, for the Foundation of a Scholarship. A Student of
the name of Coutts to have preference.
10. —In 1885 the sum of £lOO was bequeathed by the late
MR. HUGH HOSSACK, Catechist at Port Macquarie, to provide
two Scholarships in Divinity, for those who have graduated at the
University of Sydney, to be held for two years.
11.—In 1886 the REV. COLIN STEWART, M.A.,
bequeathed his property to the College, in Trust for (among other
objects) founding Scholarships to aid Students for the Ministry of the
Presbyterian Church, an equal amount to be devoted to Students
preparing for Matriculation, and to those who have Matriculated.
The value of all the Scholarships is /50 per annum for Resident
Students and £25 for Non-Resident, and are tenable by Non-
Matriculants for two years, and by the other class for four years. In
1889 there will open at least two Scholarships for each class of
Students.
1888.—John Edwards. t Ist
J. H. Smairl. J
Thomas Brown, 'j
P. C. Cameron, > Preparing for Matriculation.
David K. Telfer, J


Classics
... The Principal.
Mathematics ...
... G. C. Halliday, B.A., Tutor.
Logic and Ethics
... The Principal.
Religion..
... The Principal.
PRIZES,
I.—THE DEAN PRIZE. —A sum of £lOO was given in 1879
by ALEXANDER DEAN, ESQ., for the Foundation of an Annual
Prize for General Excellence.
2. —FRASER PRIZE of for Modern History.
i 87- —Hugh McLelland.
1887.—-J. A. Dick, ->
A. Stewart, / lua1 ua '
Of the above Scholarships, the Bowman, Fraser, Gordon,
Lawson, and Hossack, are restricted to Students for the Ministry
of the Presbyterian Church. A First Class in Classics, or
Mathematics, at the University Examinations, is a necessary
qualification for the Gordon, but not for any of the other
Scholarships. In the event of competition they are given- to the
candidate who gains the highest number of marks at the University
Examinations. The Horn Scholarship is open to all the Students
of the year (in 1886 to the Ist and 2nd year), and is given to the
Student who obtains the highest number of Marks at the College
Examinations in Logic, Moral Philosophy, or Divinity. The
Fraser Prize is open to all the Students of the College.
cottEGE
Tutorial instruction is given in the subjects of each year of the
Arts course.
Subjects of Religious Lecture for 1888.
1st year Greek Testament —Luke, Farrar’s “ Life of Christ.”
2nd ,, ,, ,, Matthew, Row’s Manual.
3rd ,, ,, ,, Acts, Flint’s Theism,


As most of the College Scholarships are
determined by the place of the candidate at
the University Matriculation Examination,
which always takes place in the beginning of
March, the following, published by the
University, is subjoined :
MATRIC tJXATION EXAMINATION,
In accordance with the University By-Laws, candidates are
required to pass in Latin Arithmetic, Algebra, Geometry, and one
of the following subjects, viz. :—Greek, French, German.
1. —Latin. —Translation into English of passages from set
authors, and of passages at sight, and of simple English
sentences into Latin. Candidates are expected to show an
accurate knowledge of Latin accidence. Subject —Livy,
Book I.
2.—Arithmetic.
3. — Algebra. —To simple equations inclusive
4.— Geometry.— Euclid, Book I.
5. —One of the following languages, in. which the examination
shall be similar to that in Latin, viz. :
(a) Greek. —Subject —Xenophon, Cyropoedia, Book I.
(b) French. —Subject—Corneille, Le Cid.
(c) German. —Subject—Freytag, Der Staat, Friedrichs des
Grossen.
In this examination proficiency in writing English will be taken
into account,


ADDITIONAL
Classics.
Horace, Odes, Book 11., and Ars
Poetica.
Euripides, Hecuba.
Latin and Greek Translation at
sight.
Latin and Greek Prose* Corn-
position.
General Classical Paper. +
HONOURS.
Mathematics.
Higher Arithmetic and Algebra.
Geometry, viz. :—Euclid, Books
1.-IV., VI. and XI., with de-
ductions, and the Geometrical
treatment of Conic Sections.
Trigonometry.
AUTHORS
Pass.
PRESCRIBED
FOR 1890.
Honours.
Latin— Cicero, Second Philippic.
Greek — Xenophon, Memorabilia,
No additional books will* be pre-
scribed, but additional Latin
and Greek passages will be
set for translation at sight.
Book IV.
French — Corneille, Cinna.
German — HaufF, Die Karavand.
Candidates’ forms of application, which may be obtained from
Messrs. Gibbs, Shallard & Co., 84A Pitt Street, or from the
University, must be forwarded to the Registrar of the University,
together with a fee of £2, not later than fourteen days before the
first day of examination.
* There will be no examination in Latin or Greek verse composition.
t In this paper questions may be set on Ancient History, Comparative
Philology, Literary Criticism, or other subjects connected with classical
Study.


St, Jinked College.
BY-LAWS.
I.—MEMBEPSHIP.
1. The members of St. Andrew’s College shall he the
Principal, and Students, together with those
who, having been Students of the College, continue on its
Books.
2. Students may he Resident or Non-Resident.
3. Each Student, whether Pesident or Non-Pesident,
shall, before admission, pay an Entrance Fee, the amount
of which shall he fixed by the Council, and also produce a
satisfactory certificate of character.
4. All Students shall matriculate in the University, on
the earliest opportunity, after their admission into the
College.
lI.—INSTRUCTION.
1. All instruction given in the College shall he under
the superintendence of the Principal, according to such
arrangements as the Council may from time to time
appoint.


g Ail Besident Students—and such Non-ResUent Stu.
dents as choose to avail themselves of it—shall receive
systematic religious instruction, i 9 accordance with the
Standards of the Presbyterian Church, under which shall
be included the following subjects(l.) The Evidences
pf Natural and Revealed Religion, (2.) The Doctrines
and Duties of Christianity, and (3,) The Study of the New
Testament in the original,
3 . Suitable tutorial assistance shall be provided to the
Students in preparing for the University Lectures and
Examinations, that they may attend on these with intelli-
gence and profit.
4. Provision shall be made as soon as practicable for in-
struction in other branches of a liberal education than
those taught in the University—such as Modern Lan-
guages, Moral Philosophy, and Civil and Ecclesiastical
History ; and, whenever arrangements shall be made with
the Church for that purpose, in the various departments of
Theological study necessary in preparing Students for the
Holy Ministry.
lII.—RESIDENCE.
1, Resident Students shall have rooms assigned to them
in the College according to priority of application, and
shall continue to reside throughout the currency of the
several terms,
2, The charge for Board per annum shall be the same for
each student—the rate to be fixed by the Council—and
ghfil} be payable, either in one sum at the commencement


election, by a duly qualified elector, of such
shall be given without delay by the Secretary either by
circular or public advertisement.
5. At such meeting each person submitted for election
must be duly proposed and seconded. If only one candi-
date be proposed and seconded, the Chairman shall declare
him duly elected; but, if more than one, the vote shall be
taken by ballot, and the Chairman shall declare the candi-
date having the majority of votes duly elected, or, in the
event of an equality, shall decide by his casting vote.
6. The proceedings of such meeting shall be duly re-
corded in a Minute Book kept for the purpose, and a copy
of the Minute shall also be entered in the Permanent
Becords of the Council.
The Caxton Steam Machine Printing Office, 156 Pitt Street, Sydney.


