

BY-LAWS AND STATUTES
OF AND RELATING TO
ST. PAUL’S COLLEGE,
WITHIN THE
UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY.
"Deo, Patriæ, Tibi."
Sydney:
JOSEPH COOK & CO., PRINTERS, GEORGE STREET.
1882.




BY-LAWS AND STATUTES
OF AND RELATING TO
ST. PAUL’S COLLEGE,
WITHIN THE
UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY.
“ Uefl, 2Ei6t.”
gydrreij;
JOSEPH COOK & CO., PRINTERS, GEORGE STREET.
1882.




BY-LAWS.
1. The Members of Saint Paul’s College, in addition
to the Warden, Yice Warden, Fellows, and Students, shall
be those Graduates of the University who, having been
Students of the College, continue on its Books.
2. Every Person, having been a Student, but whose
name is no longer on the College Books, may by leave of
the Council, and on payment of a fee of two guineas, have
his name restored.
3. Every Person shall on admission as a Member sign
a Declaration in the presence of the Warden or two of the
Fellows, in a Book kept for that purpose, that he will con-
form to all the By-Laws and Rules of the College.
4. A copy of the By-Laws and Rules of the College
shall be given to every Member on his admission; and
whenever any amendment shall be made in the By-Laws
and Rules, such amendment shall be exhibited on the
College Notice Board, and shall remain so exhibited until
a copy shall have been given or sent to every Member.
5. Students maybe Resident or Non-Resident, Non-
Resident Students shall have the same privileges and be
subject to the same discipline, so far as it may be applicable
to them, as Resident Students.
Britts Thijitlitiits.
6. The Terms and Yacations shall be the same as those
of the University.


7. During Term .Resident Students shall continuously
reside in the College.
8. The Warden or Vice-Warden may grant to any
Student, under special circumstances, temporary exemption
from the preceding Rule.
9. Any Resident Student may reside in, and any Non-
Resident Student attend at, the College during the Vaca-
tions by consent of the Warden, and under such regulations
as the Council may establish.
10. Every Person desiring to be admitted a Student of
the College shall make application in writing to the
Warden, and such application shall be accompanied by a
statement of the Candidate’s age, and a Testimonial as to
conduct from a Clergyman, or from his last Master or
Tutor.
11. If the Candidate have not already matriculated in
the University, he shall not be actually admitted on the
Books of the College until after his Matriculation.
Jnstruijttmj*
12. The course of Instruction provided for all Students
shall be as follows :
First. —Instruction in Divinity, according to the teaching
of the Church of England.
Second. —lnstruction in such subjects, Non-Theological,
as shall be best calculated to assist the Students in
preparing for the University Lectures and Examinations.
liuhtiitj.
13. Instruction in Divinity shall be given by the War-
den or Vice-Warden or by any other person appointed by
the Council.


14. The Lectures and Text-books shall comprise one or
more of the following subjects : —Exegesis of the Old and
New Testament, the Canon and Inspiration of Holy
Scripture, the Articles and Liturgy of the Church of
England, the Evidences of Religion Natural and Revealed,
and Church History.
15. An Examination on the subject-matter of the Lec-
tures shall be held once at least in each year. The names
of those who pass the Examination shall be arranged in
two Classes in order of merit. To the Student at the head
of the First Class there shall be awarded a Prize of Books,
stamped with the Arms of the College.
16. The selection of the Text-books and of the subjects of
the Lectures, as well as the frequency of the Lectures and
Examinations, shall be subject to the control of the
Council.
17. All Members of the University may attend any of
the Divinity Lectures.
18. Instruction in subjects Non-Theological shall be
given by the Warden or Vice-Warden or by any other
person appointed by the Council.
jltfltifm’hljijtk mth Jfxfjiliilu'uts.
19. Scholarships and Exhibitions shall be awarded after
such Examinations as the Council shall determine.
20. The Warden shall report in writing to the Council
the result of such Examinations; and the Council shall
thereupon elect to the Scholarship or Exhibition the Candi-
date who shall have shown the greatest proficiency in
the Examination.


21. The Warden shall announce the times and subjects
of Examination, and the conditions under which the Ex-
amination will be conducted; and, where the subjects
have not been prescribed by the Founder, they shall be
selected by the Council.
22. Nothing in the preceding three Rules shall prevent
anv Founder from establishing a Scholarship or Exhibition
on any conditions which he may think fit to impose, and of
which the Council shall approve.
23. All Scholarships and Exhibitions shall be held
subject to good behaviour ; and any Scholar or Exhibitioner
who shall fail to pass any University or College Examina-
tion shall be liable to forfeit his Scholarship or Exhibition.
24. Prayers shall be said daily in the College Chapel
during Term, at which all Resident Members, unless ex-
cused by the Warden, shall attend, and a record shall be
kept of their attendance.
25. The Holy Communion shall be administered in the
College Chapel once at least in each Term.
26. Meals shall be at such hours as the Warden, subject
to the control of the Council, shall from time to time
appoint.
27. Visitors shall be admitted to Meals upon such terms
as the Council shall from time to time arrange.
T| mints.
28. No Student shall have more than one room, except
by permission of the Warden, and on paying such fee as
the Council shall determine.


29. The furniture of each room shall be provided by the
Occupant.
30. Any College room may at any time be visited by
the Warden, or Vice-Warden, who may order the removal
of any thing therein which he shall deem objectionable.
31. The Council may set apart annually a sum of money
for the purchase of Books for the College Library, which
shall be open under such regulations as may be made by
the Council.
32. Punctual attendance is required from the Students
at all prescribed Lectures and Examinations.
33. The College gates shall be locked every night at a
stated hour, which shall be fixed by the Council.
34. Any Eesident Student who shall enter or leave the
College after that hour, unless by permission of the Warden
or Vice-Warden, shall be regarded as guilty of a breach of
discipline.
35. The name of every Student who returns into College
after the gates are locked, and the time of his return, shall
be registered.
36. No Visitor to any Student shall enter the College
after the gates are locked; and all Visitors shall leave the
College before a stated hour every night.
37. Every Student shall be responsible for the orderly
conduct of his Visitors.
38. Students shall wear their Academic dress at Chapel,
Hall, and Lectures.


39. Every Student shall do his best to secure from
injury the buildings, grounds, and other property of the
College.
40. Every Student shall discourage within the College,
to the utmost of his power, every deed and word of a pro-
fane, immoral, dishonorable, or ungentlemanly character.
41. The wilful infraction of any By-Law shall be re-
garded as a breach of discipline.
42. Every breach of discipline shall subject the Student
to be summoned before the Warden, and admonished.
breaches of discipline, or any other
serious nnscond Lre^ia« l tjjout of College, shall subject the
Student to be i |u mi null I In I'lH 1 n i nl the Council,
and, in extreme cases, to be suspended m i |n llml In 1,1 n
Council.
44. All Fees shall be paid to the Bursar, and their
amounts and the times of payment shall be fixed from
time to time by the Council.
45. Any Graduate of the University who, having been
a Student of the College, continues on its Books, shall pay
an annual fee.
fUanar^m^tii
46. The Council shall meet at the College, or some
place in Sydney, at such times as shall be appointed by
themselves, or in their default by the Warden.
47. A Special Meeting of the Council, or of the Fellows,
shall be convened by the Warden, Vice-Warden, or Bursar,
upon the written requisition of one Clerical and two Lay
Fellows.


Notice is hereby given that the Warden and Fellows have
altered By-law No. 43, so that it now reads as follows :
43. Persistent breaches of discipline, or any other serious
misconduct in or out of College, shall subject the Student
to be suspended by the Warden at his discretion for a
period not exceeding the remainder of the then current
Term, or until the next meeting of the Council. And the
Council may then further suspend or expel such Student.
W. HEY SHARP,
Warden.
M. METCALFE,
March, 1883. Bursar,


48. Special Meetings of the Council may be convened
at any time by the Warden.
49. No Special Meeting shall take place, unless every
Fellow resident in Sydney, or within fifty miles of it, shall
have had four days’ written notice of the time and place of
such Meeting, and of the business then to be Drought
forward
50. Of every other Meeting, two days’ notice to every
such Fellow shall be given.
51. At all Meetings of the Council the Warden if pre-
sent shall preside. In his absence, the Fellows present
shall elect a Chairman.
52. At every Meeting of the Fellows a Chairman shall
be elected by those present.
53. At every Meeting of the Council, or of the Fellows,
the Chairman shall have a Deliberative, as well as a
Casting Vote.
54. If after the lapse of half an hour from the time
appointed for any Meeting a Quorum be not present, such
Meeting shall stand adjourned to such day and hour as the
Warden shall appoint.
55. If any Fellow be absent from six consecutive
Meetings of the Council without leave or some cause
allowed by the Council, his seat may be declared vacant;
and a Meeting be called for the election of a Successor.
56. Vacancies in the office of Fellow, until twenty
Graduates shall have become qualified as Electors, shall
be supplied by the remaining Fellows and all Graduates
(continuing on the Books of the College) jointly.
57. Every such Graduate resident in Sydney, or within
fifty miles thereof, shall have notice of any Vacancy, and
of the time and place of the Meeting convened to supply it.


58. Every sucli Meeting consisting of Fellows and
Graduates jointly shall be deemed a Meeting of Fellows,
within the 47th, 52nd, and 53rd Rules.
59. Except for purposes of College Discipline, the
Warden shall not be deemed absent within the meaning of
Section 5 of the Act of Incorporation unless he be beyond
the distance of fifty miles from Sydney.
60. The Warden shall not absent himself from the
College in Term time for any period exceeding three days,
without leave of the Council.
61. The Vice-Warden shall not absent himself from the
College in Term time for any period exceeding one day,
without leave of the Warden.
62. The Seal of the College shall be in the custody of
the Warden, and shall not be affixed to any document,
except by Order of the Council.
63. The Annual Certificate required by the Colleges’
Endowment Act, 18 Victoria, No. 37, Section 5, shall be
under the hands of one Clerical and two Lay Fellows.
Jltirsar,
64. At their first meeting in October the Council shall
elect a Bursar for the ensuing year, commencing on the
first day of January. In case of a vacancy in the office
during the year, a new Bursar shall be elected.
65. The same person may be re-elected as Bursar; and
any Fellow may be elected to that Office.
66. It shall be the Bursar’s duty to keep accounts of
all Receipts and Expenditure in detail, which, made up to
the 31st December, shall be laid before the Council at
their first meeting after that date.


67. The Bursar shall attend all Meetings of the Council;
and every Resolution and Proceeding of the Council shall
be recorded in the College Journal by him or by such other
person as the Council may appoint.
68. The Journal shall, at the close of each year, be
delivered to the Warden, and be open to inspection by any
of the Fellows on application to him.
W. HEY SHARP,
Warden.
MICHAEL METCALFE,
Bursar.


ANNO DECIMO OCTAVO VICTORIÆ REGINÆ.
Preamble.
Endowment
in aid of Col-
leges.
Conditionsof
Endowment.
No. xxxvii.
An Act to provide for the Establishment and Endow-
ment of Colleges within the University of Sydney.
(Assented to December 2nd, 1854.)
WHEBEAS it is expedient to encourage and assist
the establishment of Colleges, within the University
of Sydney, in which Colleges systematic Beligious
Instruction and Domestic supervision, with efficient
assistance in preparing for the University Lectures
and Examinations, shall be provided for Students of
the University: Be it therefore enacted by &c., as
follows:
I. Whenever any College shall have been established
and incorporated by any Act of the Governor and
Council, as a College within the University of Sydney,
and the Founders of or Subscribers to such College
shall have complied with the conditions mentioned in
the next section, such College shall be entitled to the
Endowments hereinafter severally mentioned, which
said Endowments shall be paid, by the Treasurer of
the Colony, under warrants signed by the Governor.
11. No such College, although incorporated, shall
be entitled to such Endowments, unless and until the
sum of ten thousand pounds, at the least, shall have
been subscribed by its Founders, and of that sum not


less than &c. Nor unless the whole of the said ten
thousand pounds shall be devoted exclusively to the
erection of College Buildings, &c.
111. There shall be paid out of the Greneral
Revenue, in aid of the Building Fund of every College
so incorporated, a sum or sums not exceeding in the
whole twenty thousand pounds, nor more than shall
have been from time to time actually expended by the
College, out of its subscribed funds, for the purpose
of building.
IY. There shall be paid out of the said Greneral
Revenue annually, to such incorporated College, in
perpetuity, a sum of Five Hundred Pounds, for the
use of and as a salary to the Principal of such College,
or in aid of such salary.
Y. Every such Principal shall be entitled to the
annual salary hereby provided for, on the production
of his own certificate at the time of each payment,
that he has during the period to which it relates,
performed the duties of his Office: Provided that he
shall transmit to the Colonial Secretary, once in each
year, a certificate to the like effect, under the hands
of such persons as shall be for that purpose appointed,
by the Constitution or Rules of the particular College.
YI. Where any person selected to be the Principal
of any such College shall be out of this Colony at the
time of his appointment, no such certificate shall be
required until, &c.
VII. Until the subscribed fund shall be required
for the erection of College Buildings as aforesaid,
the interest or other proceeds accruing from the
investment, &c.
Endowment
for Building.
Principal’s
Salary.
Conditions.
Payment to
first Princi-
pal.
Accruing
proceeds
of Fund.


Students to
be Members
of Univer-
sity.
Principal.
VIII. All Students in any such College shall,
immediately upon entering therein, matriculate in the
University, and shall thereafter continue to be mem-
bers thereof, and submit and be subject to the
discipline thereof, and shall be required duly and
regularly to attend the Lectures of the University, on
those subjects an examination and proficiency in
which are required for Honours and Degrees, with
the exception (if thought fit by any such College) of
the Lectures on Ethics, Metaphysics, and Modern
History.
(The 9th Section is repealed, by the 22nd Viet.
No. 8, passed on the 25th August, 1851.)
X. The term “ Principal ” shall include the Master
or any other Head of a College.


ANNO DECIMO OCTAVO VICTORIÆ REGINÆ
An Act to Incorporate St. Paul’s College, as a
College within the University of Sydney.
(Assented to Ist Decembeb, 1854.)
WHEREAS considerable funds have been sub-
scribed for the institution and endowment, in the
Diocese of Sydney, of a College within the University
of Sydney, in connection with the United Church of
England and Ireland, to be called St. Paul’s College,
wherein due Religious Instruction in accordance with
the Doctrines and Discipline of that Church shall be
afforded, and provision be made, as soon as may be
practicable, for the Residence of Students, under
proper Academical control: And whereas it is
expedient that the said College (to be governed by a
Council consisting of the persons hereinafter men-
tioned) should be incorporated: Be it therefore
enacted by &c., as follows :
I. So soon as it shall be made to appear to the
satisfaction of the Governor, that a sum of not less
than ten thousand pounds has been subscribed or
contributed for the Endowment aforesaid, and that
the amount has either been paid, or secured to be
paid, for that purpose, and that a Warden and six
Fellows for the government of the said College, in
accordance with the constitution thereof, as in this
Act set forth, have been duly appointed and elected
respectively, the same shall be notified by Proclama-
tion in the New South Wales Government Gazette,
under the hand of the Governor; and immediately
Preamble.
College In-
corporated.


upon sucli notification, and from thenceforth, the
Warden and Fellows of the same College shall be,
and they are hereby constituted a Body Politic and
Corporate, by the name of “ The Warden and Fellows
of St. Paul's College ” —by which name the said
Incorporated Body shall have perpetual succession,
and shall have a Common Seal, and shall sue and be
sued, or otherwise appear, and answer and be
answered; and may take and hold, to them and their
successors, by grant, will, or otherwise, in perpetuity,
or for any term of life or years, as well chattels and
other personal property, as lands, buildings, and other
hereditaments, and the same or any part thereof may
alien, or otherwise dispose of, or demise; and also
shall or may do all other things incident or appertain-
ing to a Body Politic and Corporate.
? 11. Provided always, That it shall not be lawful
for the said Corporation, or any persons or person
seized of or entitled to lands in trust for the Corpora-
tion, or for the purposes of the College, to alienate,
mortgage, charge, or demise any lands or heredita-
ments granted to or in trust for the Corporation, or
for College purposes, by Her Majesty or Her
successors, without the consent in writing of the
Governor, with the advice of the Executive Council,
for the time being.
111. The said Body Politic and Corporate shall
consist of a Warden and eighteen Fellows, of whom
six shall always be Clergymen in Priests’ orders of
the United Church of England and Ireland, and
twelve shall be Laymen ; which said eighteen Fellows
shall elect six from their own body, to be called Senior
Fellows, who shall appoint the Warden, who shall
not be one of themselves; and the Warden and six


Senior Fellows for the time being shall together form
a Council, to be called “ The Council of St. Paul's
College," in which shall be vested at all times the
Government in every respect of the College, and all
matters relating thereto.
IY. The Bishop of the Diocese of Sydney shall be
Visitor of the College, with all such powers as by law
appertain to the office of Visitor of a College.
V. The Warden shall always be a Clergyman in
Priest’s Orders of the aforesaid United Church; and
he shall have power to appoint a Vice-Warden, who
shall in the Warden’s absence have all the powers
and discharge all the duties of the Warden.
VI. The Warden and Vice-Warden shall be
respectively liable to removal or suspension, foi
sufficient cause, by the Senior Fellows, subject to an
appeal to the Visitor; and the Vice-Warden shall
also be liable to removal or suspension by the Warden,
subject to an appeal to the Fellows.
(The 7th section is in effect repealed by the Amend-
ing Act; for which see post.)
VIII. All Vacancies in the office of Warden, or in
the number of Fellows, or Senior Fellows, occasioned
by death, resignation, removal, or other cause, shall,
as soon as conveniently may be after the vacancy, (on
notification of the fact under the hand of two Fellows
or Senior Fellows, to the other Fellows), be supplied
in the manner following, that is to say—in the office
of Warden by the Senior Fellows ; in the office or
place of Senior Fellow, by the twelve other Fellows,
from their own body; and in the place or post of
Fellow, by the remaining Fellows.
Visitor.
Warden.
Removal,
vacancies,


Election of
Fellows.
wtthfn to the
University.
Clergy resi-
dent in Col-
lege.
Power to
make By-
Laws.
IX. Provided that the first eighteen Fellows shall
he elected by the subscribers to the funds of the
College, in such manner as they shall among them-
selves appoint; and that all vacancies in the number
of Fellows, so soon as there shall be twenty Members
of the College who are Graduates of the University,
continuing on the books of the College, shall be
supplied by election by such Graduates, in such
manner as the Council may appoint.
X. The College of St. Paul’s hereby incorporated
shall be a College of and within the University of
Sydney; and all Students in the College shall,
immediately upon entering therein, matriculate in
the University, and shall submit and be subject to
the discipline thereof and shall continue in the College
so long only as they shall be Members of the Univer-
sity, and shall be required duly and regularly to
attend the Lectures of the University, on those
subj ects an examination and proficiency in which are
required for Honours and Degrees, with the exception
(if thought fit by the Council) of the Lectures on
Ethics, Metaphysics, and Modern History.
XI. In case a Church Constitution for the aforesaid
United Church within this Colony shall be hereafter
established, by any Act or Statute passed for that
purpose, every Clergyman resident in the College
shall be subject to all such regulations as may (by or
in pursuance of such Church Constitution) be enacted
for the government of the Clergy in general.
XII. The Council of the College shall have power,
from time to time, to make and establish all such By-
laws and Rules for carrying into effect the several
provisions and objects of this Act, and particularly


for declaring the causes which shall create vacancies
in the office of Fellow, or Senior Fellow, and diiecting
who shall preside at Meetings of the Council, and of
the Fellows, and for the management of the College,
and prescribing the duties of the several Officers
thereof, and of the Warden and Vice-Warden, and
the ordering of all things in and connected with the
College, and the discipline thereof, to the promotion
of Religion and Learning, as to the said Council
shall seem expedient; and such Laws and Rules, or
any of them, from time to time to alter or revoke, 01
to substitute others in their place.
XIII. Provided that every such By-law and Rule
shall be transmitted to the Governor, within thirty
days after being made, to be by him laid before the
Legislature of the Colony, as soon as conveniently
may be thereafter.
XIV. Provided also that the Warden or Vice-
Warden of the College, subject only to the Laws and
Rules so made, shall have the general superintendence
and control of the Students, and of the Institution.
XV. The Votes at all Meetings of the Fellows, or
Senior Fellows or Council, (except Votes for a Senior
Fellow or the appointment of a Warden), shall be
taken exclusively of the person presiding, unless
there shall be an equality of votes; and in every
case where all the Fellows or Senior Fellows resident
within fifty miles of Sydney, have had notice of the
time and place of intended meeting, one Clerical and
one Lay Member of the Council, with the Warden,
shall constitute a Meeting of the Council, and two
Clerical and two Lay Fellows, with one presiding
Fellow, shall constitute a Meeting of the Fellows;
and the votes and proceedings of the majority, at
To be laid
before Legis-
lature.
Students.
Quorum at
Meetings.


Chairman,
Temporary
vacancies.
any such, meeting, shall be taken and accepted as the
votes and proceedings of the Council or Fellows
respectively.
XYI. Provided that it shall be lawful for the
Council, by any By-law or By laws by them made,
and assented to by the Fellows, to ordain and appoint
that the person presiding at any Meeting, whether
of the Council, or the Fellows, or the Senior Fellows,
shall have a deliberative as well as a casting Vote; —
and to alter the mode of supplying vacancies in the
office of Fellow, by ordaining and appointing that
such vacancies, until twenty Graduates have become
qualified as Electors, shall be supplied by the
remaining Fellows and Graduates (continuing on the
books of the College) jointly.
XVII. No temporary vacancy or vacancies in the
office of Warden, or in the number of Fellows of
the College, shall be deemed in any way to affect the
Constitution of the College, or its privileges or status
as an Incorporated body.


ANNO VICESIMO PRIMO VICTORIA REGINÆ.
An Act to enlarge the Council of Saint Paul’s College.
(Assented to 15th December, 1857.)
WHEREAS by an Act passed in the eighteenth
year of her Majesty for the Incorporation of St.
Paul’s College, it was enacted that the Fellows of the
College should elect six of their own Body, to be
called Senior Fellows, who with the Warden should
form the Council of the College. And whereas it is
deemed expedient by the Warden, Senior Fellows, and
Fellows of the said College, that the Council thereof
should in future consist of the Warden and all the
Fellows without distinction; but that change can
only be effected by the authority of the Legislature.
Be it therefore enacted by &c., as follows:
I. After the passing of this Act, the distinction
between “ Fellows,” and “Senior Fellows ” of St.
Paul’s College shall cease, and no Senior Fellow be
elected ; and the Council of the College shall consist
of the Warden and eighteen Fellows for the time
being—and in those Fellows, the powers now residing
exclusively in the Senior Fellows shall be vested.
11. Every vacancy hereafter arising in the number
of Fellows shall be notified to the remaining Fellows
by the Warden, on the requisition in writing of any
Preamble,
Distinction
of Senior
Fellows abo-
lished.
Vacancies in
the office of
Fellow,


Quorum of
Fellows.
two Fellows; and he shall, as soon afterwards as may
be practicable, convene a Meeting of the Fellows to
supply such vacancy.
111. Before any meeting of the Council or Fellows
shall take place, every Fellow resident within fifty
miles of Sydney shall have reasonable notice of the
day and place of Meeting ; —and two Clerical and two
Lay Fellows, exclusive of the Warden or Presiding
Fellow, shall constitute a Quorum.




