

By Mirage
and Mulga




BY
MIRAGE AND MULGA.


Hone [?]


BY
MIRAGE AND MULGA:
THE SOLDIERS
CHEER-UP BOOK
T. WARLOW
ADELAIDE:
Hussey Ac Gillingham Limited, Printers and Publishers, 106 and 108, Currie Street
1916.




CONTENTS.
Pag*.
Prelude ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ix.
Sir Thomas Pioton’s Funeral ... ... ... ... xi.
The Pioneers :
Chap. I.—Tn the “Never Never” ... ... ... 1
Chap. ll.- Fiery Demons ... ... ... ... 4
Chap. lll.—The Camp ... ... ... ... ... 10
Chap. IV.—The Smatterton Hurdle Race ... 11
Three Men on a Cruise:
Chap. I.—At Sea 17
Chap. 11.—Sydney Cove ... ... ... ... 21
Chap. Hl.—The Black Cliff 27
Chap. IV.—Eve’s Paradise ... ... ... ... 34
Chap. V.—Tasmania ... ... ... ... ... 37
Chap. Vl.—The Native Devil ... ... ... 42
A Mild Type op a Queensland Toad ... ... ... 51
Drought:—
Chap. I.—The Journey ... ... ... ... 01
Chap. lI.—A Carouse ... ... ... ... ... 03
Chap. lll.—Minnie's Ride ... ... ... ... 05
Chap. IV.—The Phantom ... ... ... ... 70
Chap. V.—Anxious Times ... ... ... ... 73
Chap. Vl.—Happy Times ... ... ... ... 74
The Cochin Hen’s Christmas Present ... ... ... 77
The Lost Child ... ... . . ... ... ... 85


ILLUSTRATIONS.
Facing Page
The Author Frontispiece
Water at hast ... ••• 1
A Night Attack 8
A Queensland Brumby Performing ... ••• H
Will they Come? ... ••• ••• •••
A Morning Surprise ... ••• ••• 51
“Minnie walk now” ... ••• ••• *ll
The Cochin meets her AVaterloo ... ••• ••• 77
Found! ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 8 5
PUBLISHERS' ANNOUNCEMENT.
J\f u. Thomas AVari.ow, the author of “By Mira ye and
Mulga,” is one of those thorough-going Britishers irho came
to the colonies many years ayo and blazed the trad; of civi-
lization in the far reaches of the great Australian hash. 1 f
he were young enough he would have been amongst the first
to offer his services for King and Country , hut he feels that
he might do his “little bit ” by putting in a permanent form
a collection of his interesting experiences far removed from
Hie hum of city life. He is giving some copies to Irish
soldiers, and is donating 2s. to the Wounded Soldiers' Fund
for each copy sold at 3s. 6d.
]\Jr. Warlow has arranged with Mi. 11 .G. Ithodes and
Ihe Publishers to receive all moneys anil hand the proceeds
hi imjent canes.
HUSSEY & GILLINGHAM LIMITED.
Currie Street,
Adelaide.


PRELUDE.
“By Mirage and Mulga” is written exclusively for the
benefit of the Australian Contingents, the Author hoping
that it will act as a “cheer-up” stimulant when hard graft
gives place to moments of leisure.
Discretion will be used as to their disposal on
account of the Contingents, as every book sold will help
to swell the funds, and the public is kindly invited to
throw in its mite and purchase what will give a “cheer-up”
glimpse of the wonders that occur in the backblocks of this
land of promise.
As it is nearly sixty years since the Author took to
hush-life, and, still enchanted by its allurements—as a father
to his children his heart sympathizes more especially with
the thousands of brave lads who have and are leaving their
bush homes to join the Contingents; and to them the book
is dedicated, with many an earnest prayer for their and
their comrades’ welfare.
Knowing little of town-life, the Author’s theme in the
different stories smells of the bush from beginning to end,
and, when finished with one, more bush follows. It is his
hope, however, that in reading them a pleasant hour may
be passed in camp or at sea. It is his hope and prayer also
that the same beneficent Providence that has watched over
and guided his footsteps through all dangers and temptations
will guide you, brave lads, and after victory return 3011
safely to your homes.
It is gratifying to see the great interest the Govern-
ment and all and everybody are taking in the welfare of you,
brave boys; from general to private no soldier appears to be
forgotten, and it would now be almost impossible such a
contretemps as the following could take place.


The great-uncle of the Author (General Sir Tom Picton)
was killed at the Battle of Waterloo; his remains were
conveyed to London, but virtually remained nnbnried until
the year 18G2. Following this Prelude is an account of his
burial.
In the days of Waterloo the transit of troops, food,
var material, etc., was much more difficult than at present,
and at times there was a long wait before a meal was
served.
Some short time before a great battle such an event
happened to General Picton’s men. The head of the
Commissariat was to blame. Picton sent for him and told
him that if his men were not fed within the hour he would
hang him. The officer appealed to the Great Duke, who
listened patiently to his plaint and then said, “Did General
Picton say he would hang you?’’ “Yes, your grace.’’
“Then my advice to you is, get back as quick as possible
and obey the order, for there is no doubt about General
Picton keeping his word.”
And now the Author wishes all the Contingents a
Happy New Year, and may our Heavenly Father guide and
keep you, and may His blessings be extended to you in all
dangers by sea or land, give you victory over the whole
combination of Huns, and an early return to your homes
crowned with laurels.
Yours, in sympathy,
Ttie Author.


SIR THOMAS PICTON’S FUNERAL.
At tlio Battle of Waterloo fell, gallantly fighting,
General Sir Thomas Picton—“the stern Picton” of military
s t or y one of the ablest and most trusted of the lieutenants
of Wellington. Tradition records that Picton, hastening to
join his chief in the Netherlands in the early summer of
1815, halted for a few hours for refreshment at a certain
inn at Canterbury. In less than a month his coffined corpse
lav in the very room in which he had dined on his way to
Brussels. The remains were brought to London, hut
through the occurrence of some seemingly inexplicable
contretemps the body of Picton remained for more than
twoscore years practically unburied; and it was not until
nearly seven years had elapsed from the pompous
inhumation of the Great Duke at St. Paul’s that it was
fortunately remembered that all which was mortal ol Picton
lay mouldering on a shelf in the vault of a humble edifice
off the Uxbridge Bead—a chapel-of-ease to St. George’s,
Hanover Square. The military authorities were incited to
move in the matter; the few remaining kindred of the
gallant soldier took action, and at length the body of
Picton, placed on a gun-carriage, covered by the Union
Jack, surmounted by his hat and sword, and escorted by a
troop of cavalry, was carried to St. Paul’s and reverently
laid in that great shrine of genius and valour. No lengthy
train of mourning coaches or private carriages followed the
hier; the procession attracted but scant notice as it passed
somewhat quickly through the Strand and Fleet Street ;
and possibly, could there even have been a herald there
to proclaim that the dead man was one of the heroes of
Waterloo, few among those who heard the announcement
would have been much the wiser for it. Had Picton been
brought to St. Paul’s in the year of his death the greatest
soldiers of the age would have borne his pall. The tribute
to his memory, however, was deferred until his chief was
dead—until the legends of Waterloo had been half effaced
by those of the Crimea and India, and until he himself
and the majority of his valorous comrades had been half
forgotten.


INTRODUCTION.
The sketches which make up this little book are just
what their sub-title indicates. They are Australian pic-
tures—plain, real, and painted mostly at first hand by
one who has known the Australian bush for over fifty-six
years.
It was recently noted by an acute observer, in relation
to stories of adventure, that “Generally speaking, the men
who ‘write don’t know and the men who know won’t
write.’ ” The truth of this remark lies in the application
of it at the hands of every reader of life and adventure
in remote lands.
Is it not mostly the men who haven’t been there who
give us the thrilling facts of daily existence in Khatmandu
and the weird, wild wonders that lie like pebbles waiting
to be picked up along the shores of the Gulf of Martaban?
The poet’s eye, in a fine frenzy rolling, sees the light
that never was on sea or land, but such a licence of
imagination is denied to his poor relations the proseman,
the tale-pitcher, the yarn-spinner—round the camp-fire.
And here, by the by, it is as well to mention that
“Pioneers round their Camp Fire” was the title originally
selected for these sketches by their author. And it is a
title that might fittingly have been retained, for, as a
matter of fact, the materials out of which these stories
are woven were in most part supplied by actual narration
from the lips of those hardy explorers who gave Queensland
her first start in the industrial race of nations.
It has been stated to the credit of Thomas Moore that
lie wrote his famous “Lallah Rookh”—that gorgeous pano-
rama of Persian life, colour, and character—without ever
setting foot in Persia. To such a degree of credit or
discredit—as the reader pleases to view it -the author can
lay no claim. “By Mirage and Mulga” was written on
Ihr spot; he saw, heard, felt, rejoiced, or suffered, just as
the action of the story portrays. If his manner of telling
his experiences should prove as interesting to his readers
as the actual scenes he depicts were to himself, he may be
tempted to try his hand at a further series—his stock is
illimitable —of “Pioneers round the Camp Fire.”


WATER AT LAST.




BY MIRAGE AND MULGA.
THE PIONEERS.
CHAPTER I.
IN THE “NEVER NEVER.”
“That’s the creek at the far end of the plain. Just
take the glass and have a look. The lake, 1 think, must
he filled from it.”
’Tis midday in the far-west of Queensland, near the
border of South Australia.
The speaker is a man of medium height, well built,
and apparently about forty years of age; dressed in a
pair of mole-skin pants, flannel shirt, blucher boots,
leggings, felt hat, and belt adorned with many pouches.
His companion is similarly dressed, but there the
similarity ends. He is younger, taller, stouter, has the
advantage of an exceedingly handsome face, and in many
ways betrays something of a “Johnnie,” showing plainly
that he has not long parted with town life.
That no idle curiosity has brought these men to the
“Never Never” is evident. They appear to have travelled
far; their horses look jaded as they graze on the luxuriant
grass and herbage growing in abundance all around.
The younger man took a long, steady look through
(he field-glass, and replied: “I believe you are right.
Starlight.”
“Well, Alt'., we will take another squint at the sketch,
then I’ll take the bearings; and I make no doubt of being
able to strike the lake without much trouble. You see,
this is the patch of scrub about which old Bloomfield told
us, and he ought to know, having been the first to take
up country out here, ft is just as he described it—about


tour miles from the track. I don’t believe there is the
least chance of our having made a mistake. Everything
corresponds with what he told us. I fancy it’s the place
we want—any amount of run; and J know, by my maps,
that nobody has a better right to it than we have—bar
the Government and the blacks. By that time the monkeys
’ll be well up, we’ll have given our horses a spell, and
will save our riding some miles back to meet them. If
we can only knock six months out of this country, and
the teams arrive in time, we will have a good lambing
and shearing and the wool back in the teams before we
need trouble our own country. You see, Air., Bloomfield
will let us have that big barn arrangement of his in which
to stock the wool, and by shearing here we will save over
a hundred miles of carriage—a big consideration should a
drought overtake us. It’ll also give ns twelve months in
which to form our own country and knock it into shape/’
They mounted their nags and rode slowly over the
plain, Alf. uttering not a word, but puffing away
contentedly at his pipe.
“What do you think, old man?” asked Starlight.
“Why, the thing is as clear as a pike-staff,” replied
Alt'., moved into speech. “No better arrangement can be
made. The governor will be knocked into a cocked hat
wondering how it has all been done, when he hears of the
wool being down by Christmas !”
The “governor” was Alf.’s father, an old Sydney
nabob, who owned as many stations in the different colonies
as Jimmy Tyson, yet still desired to add to his landed
possessions by taking up a few more thousands of square
miles of country in the backblocks of Queensland.
Thousands of his sheep were on the road, travelling out
to new country, with Starlight as their pilot and manager.
Alf. was one of his assistants and chosen companion.
The “old bloke” (Bloomfield) was a friend of Alf.’s
father; also a large stationholder, passing his time travelling
from run to run, never entering a town except on business.
When asked why he didn’t give up bush-life for civilization,
he replied: “1 was born in the bush, and I’m going to die
in the bush, and I’ll be buried in the bush.” This prophecy


may be regarded as having been translated into a fact
even while he lived, for nobody, even though dead as a
mummy, could be more “buried” than ho was.
As the two men rode along, smoking in silence, there
was a loud squeal and the next moment a flock of cockatoos
rose from a belt of scrub and split up; some went one way,
some another, finally, however, converging towards one and
the same point of the compass, and chorusing and screeching
shrill enough to deafen an alligator.
“Good sign, that,” said Alt'., joyfully; “it’s a moral
there’s water close at hand.”
“And there it is, or I’m a Dutchman,” replied
Starlight, pointing between two ridges which they were
approaching. “1 can see it shining like silver. It must
be the lake.”
In a few minutes they reached the ridges and a
beautiful view opened out before them. A grand sheet
of water was a few hundred yards away, mirroring the
heavens, and a winding creek rippled along a mile or so
to the right, its banks fringed with trees, all heights and
shades. To the south-west nothing but a vast stretch of
plain, carpeted with “Mitchell” and blue grass. To the
north, round hillocks covered with herbage. The whole
surroundings seemed a dream-paradise in all its virgin
purity—a fit dwelling-place for angels, lint since the white
man has come all this virgin beauty must go !
Starlight is used to these scenes. Alf. is not; he is
lost in admiration.
They unsaddled, and after a jolly good roll and a
drink not to be confounded by the city man with “a roll
and coffee”—the horses commenced cropping the grass. The
men made a fire and boiled the billy. Having finished the
“feed” they lit their pipes and lay back on the grass to
emphasize each unspoken, but ecstatic, thought with a whiff
of real enjoyment.
Suddenly Alf. jumped to his feet, his countenance aglow
with pleasure, and shouted: “Bedad ! Starlight, it’s a
shame to murder such country as this!”
“Not a bit, Alf. boy. The country was made for men,
and it appears to me that ire are those men, and if our


forty thousand sheep don’t do it justice, I am sure it will
do them. I’ll take the glass and have a stroll for a few
miles, and if not too tired you can explore round the lake.”
Then the sun went down. Alf. slung the billy again
and prepared supper, cut grass for bedding, rigged up a
few boughs brought to keep off the night dew, with other
little necessaries towards ensuring a comfortable night’s
camp.
Starlight returned humming a tunc. He gave a
pleasing description of all he had seen, and showed Alf.
plans he had laid out for settling the two first mobs of
sheep.
Then they hobbled the horses and made all precautions
against being surprised by Myall blacks, divested themselves
of their boots and loggings, and lay down on their blankets.
Starlight appeared to be more particular than is usual
in camp minutiae, putting out the fire, and even now and
again jumping up to have a look at the horses.
“What are all these precautions for?” asked Alf.
“We cannot be too careful, my boy, for T saw the
tracks of blacks some five miles away, and it is always
best to be on the safe side. And now, if you don’t feel
too sleepy, 1 will give you a bit of the history of an
exploring expedition I was once on. I want to sleep with
(me eye open to-night.”
“Fire away, old boy,” Alf. said; “i’ll sleep with both
eyes open, for I don’t relish the blacks being so handy.”
CHAPTER II.
FIERY DEMONS.
“Well, the blacks are handy,” said Starlight, “and if
as treacherous a tribe as our party fell in with when on
an expedition in the north of Queensland they ore worth
watching.”
“We are far in the west of Queensland now,” said Alf.,
“but we’ll watch all the same. We have all snug and
firearms loaded, so spin the yarn to pass the time.”


“The tribe T refer to were called ‘The Fiery Demons.’
Our lender (a Mr. Hartley), a botanist named Woods, an
old soldier named I? idley, myself, and two black boys
named Dob and Murray, constituted the members.
“Hartley had a sheep station near the coast north of
Dowen, and as his run was getting unsuited for sheep he
concluded to look for pastures new. Thus the expedition.
“After leaving the coast country we fell in with and
followed a portion of the track over which Leichhardt
travelled when he went from Moreton Day to Pott
Essington. Finding this track bearing too much to the
north, we left it, explored the heads of the Mitchell and
Lvnd Rivers, and then shaped our course to the south of
west, travelling for some days over very indifferent
country.
“Now a change had come; Ave had got into the midst
of splendid plains, covered with Mitchell and blue grass.
Water, hoAvever, was scarce; two or three small holes Avere
all Ave had passed for some days. We travelled one day
Avithout seeing a drop or a place to hold it, and were
thinking avc Avould have to camp that night without any,
as it Avas Avell on in the afternoon. A feAV miles further
we saw a dark line under the sun. Doh sang out that it
Avas timber. Wo started both boys off to see if they could
find water near it, and jogged on quietly in their wake.
Making sure we Avould find Avater, as the grass and herbage
kept getting greener, Ave quickened the pace of our horses
and met the black hoys coming galloping back in a most
excited manner, saying they had found the head of a river
and Avater bubbling out of the ground, concluding their
neAvs Avith, ‘My word ! We been plenty felloAv drink.’
“We Avere soon at the water, and found a splendid
place for a camp. Emus and kangaroos appeared to he
plentiful in the neighbourhood, Avhieh added to our delight,
for we had been without hoA r ine aliment for some days.
We camped on a high bank near the river, the freshness
of the surroundings and the sound of the rippling water
filling our hearts with contentment. During the night we
caught a feAv red wallabies; sheldrakes and ibises we found
in numbers. So Ave furnished our larder liberally.


“The next day we split. Hartley and Woods made
for the head of the river; 1 took Bob with me and crossed
it; Ridley and Murray were to run it down. Bob and I
found splendid open forest country, and plains intersected
with belts of gydga and light mulga; the country was
covered with the most .nutritious herbage and grass I had
over seen and water sufficient for all the sheep in Australia.
“Reaching camp, we found Hartley and Woods had
arrived, the latter up to his neck in numerous specimens
of flora, including acacias, bossisea, and native tobacco
plant, while mincing round him were three pet hedgehogs,
which accompanied him on all his expeditions, and he had
them trained to perfection.
“Hartley and I had just finished comparing notes of
our day’s work when Ridley and Murray arrived. They
had seen recent tracks of blacks, and Murray was under
the impression the blacks had seen them.
“ ‘Well,’ said Woods, ‘we are in for a fight. I’ll make
my preparations for defence. We are in the country of the
Red-heads, or demon blacks.’
“Ridley appeared delighted at the prospect, and with
the help of the black boys had a breastwork around the
camp in a very short time. Hartley and I looked to the
ammunition and loaded all our firearms.
“By the time our preparations were made night was
upon us, but objects could be seen plainly for some
distance, as it was bright and clear.
“Woods was busy with his hedgehogs, as if preparing
them for an exhibition ; Ridley and the boys were scouting;
and Hartley and I were making additions to our breastwork,
when our attention was drawn to what appeared to be a
bail of moving fire in the long grass about three hundred
yards from our camp.
‘lt must be one of the Red-heads,’ said Hartley.
‘l’ll have a shot at him.’
“Just at this crisis we saw Ridley and the boys make
a sudden spring from behind some stunted bush, grapple
the Red-head—for such he was and drag him towards the
camp. He struggled desperately and yelled like mad, his
yells sounding like ‘Mareka! Marekal’ When inside the


breastwork, we found lie was quite a youth, body as black
as charcoal, but hair as red as the tail of the fiery comet ;
his eyes were almost bursting out of his head, and, youth
as he was, he gave us some trouble until we had him
properly secured. While struggling, he uttered not a word
.—dumb as a mute—and when left tethered to a tree his
eyes appeared to he the only part of his anatomy that
had any power of motion. The way be rolled them about
was a caution, and they appeared to increase in size at
every roll.
“Woods had not interfered, but was still busy with
his hedgehogs.
“ ‘ Kello !’ I said, ‘what are you doing with the
hedgehogs ?’
“ ‘Route the Fiery Demons, for we’ll have the whole
tribe on top of us !’
“ ‘ But what are you going to do?’ 1 asked.
“ ‘No time for talk. Hand me those steel springs.’
“These springs were shaped like saucers, standing on
four short legs. 1 gave them to him, and he placed them
on the ground at short distances from each other. He
then got a tin, containing what he called ‘illuminating
galvanic paste,’ called the hedgehogs to him, smeared them
over with the paste, and gave a peculiar cry, which was
evidently a signal to his spiral friends, for he had no sooner
released them than they shuffled on to a saucer apiece and
appeared to settle themselves very comfortably. Woods
placed them at different points of the compass, and said :
‘Now, I’m ready. By heavens! not a moment too soon, the
Red-heads are on us. Look ! Look !’ lie cried, and picking
up a flask he ran towards the nearest hedgehog.
“Looking in the direction Woods had pointed, it
appeared as if the whole country would soon be in a blaze;
from every point of the compass great balls of fire were
rolling towards us. A fire would have been more welcome,
for we knew that every ball was the head of a demon
thirsting for our blood. We lay close to the breastwork,
rifles through the openings ready to fire, when as if by
magic every one of the Red-heads vanished.


“Hartley was rising to got a better position, when
11 id ley sang out, ‘Down for your life !’ Not a moment too
soon came the warning, for a shower of spears as thick
as hail came whizzing over us, followed hy a yell that
would make the heart of a stone man quake. Hundreds
of Red-heads could he seen twisting through the grass like
snakes, making direct for our camp.
“Hartley cried, ‘Now, hoys, let them have the lead !’
“Simultaneously we fired. Four • unearthly yells
answered the salute, and we knew that every shot had
told.
“ ‘Four gone,’ said Hartley; ‘hut there arc many
hundreds more, and Clod only knows how wo will pull
through. Where can they he?’
“ ‘Laying flat on the ground,’ said Ridley. ‘They are
preparing for a rush; it will he a hand-to-hand fight in a
minute.’
“The words were no sooner uttered when a piercing
yell rose on the night air, and the whole demon tribe
sprang towards the breastwork. We poured the contents
of our rifles and revolvers in their midst, saw one after
another fall, hut no stop to the headlong pace of the mob.
On they came, their eyes gleaming, their mouths open
as wide as a railway tunnel as they uttered yell after yell.
“No time to load; they were at the breastwork. I
saw Ridley smash one huge brute as he scrambled over.
With our rifles as clubs the rest of us tackled half-a-dozen
more. I was alongside of Hartley. Red-head after
Red-head we knocked back as he climbed.
“Ridley and the black boys had managed to load their
revolvers, ami, firing in quick succession, the Red-heads
once more disappeared, which gave us time to rally.
“Woods had not joined in the fight, and we were
wondering what had become of him when, like the bursting
of a meteor, our vision was blinded by hundreds and
thousands of brilliant lights, each distinct in itself, and
in appearance about the size of a small pea, rising gradually
from the ground. It was the grandest sight I ever saw in
pyrotechnics. ’The lights became more and more numerous
and kept rising until they gained an altitude of about seven
feet.


A NIGHT ATTACK.




“We discovered that the lights emanated from Woods’
hedgehogs. At a signal from him they began to move;
their every movement was followed by millions of sparks—
bine, green, and all colours—shooting hundreds of yards
in the air.
“They had advanced but a few paces when the
Red-heads jumped from their ambush; they gazed at the
spectacular sight, their eyes as large as cricket balls, every
red hair on their heads standing erect, their bodies
quivering and shaking, making their bones rattle like so
many tinpots jangling. Their months were wide open.
We could see their tongues hanging out as red and as
long as a yard of beefsteak. As the hedgehogs approached
they retreated; finally, they turned, they ran, they jumped,
they screamed with terror. No hurricane could have
outpaced them, no thunderclap drown the echo of their
screams.”
A 1 f., up to this had not spoken a word, but Starlight
having stopped, he asked: “What became of youi
prisoner ?”
“Well, Woods rubbed some of his illuminating galvanic
paste over the captive’s body, and as he could do no further
harm we released him. He was a sight for the gods, but
an evident terror to himself. He stood at first as if
petrified; then performed. He began to shake and twist
his body in the most grotesque contortions possible; his
eyes, rolling in a contrary direction to his other movements,
appeared to be bursting from their sockets; then he ga\e
a jump about ten feet high, next a howl that knocked the
bark off a tree; anon, he gave a kick that would have
done credit to a mule, knocking down a sapling; then he
made three jumps a kangaroo might envy, next he threw
his head round and took a long, steady look at us, executed
another spring, and finally dashed towards the river roaring
like a hull.”
Said All'.: “Have yon come across any of the tribe
since ?”
“Dead ones !” said Starlight.


CHAPTER III.
THE CAMP.
The night passed peacefully, and daybreak found them
getting breakfast.
“You see, Alt'.,” said Starlight, “I know the country
to the north, so we will explore to the west, follow the
creek up for some distance, and then run south a few
miles. In that round, I fancy, we will find sufficient water
for our requirements.”
Alf. appeared to be listening intently, but with a
vacant stare. Starlight couldn’t make him out. He went
up to him, and putting his hand on his shoulder, exclaimed,
“My dear boy, what is the matter?”
Alf. jumped like a man roused from a sound sleep, and
cried, “Good gracious, Starlight! Is it morning? The
scene with the Red-heads and their loud yells took my
senses away, but thanks to you they have now returned.
If your plans are laid out for the day, let us follow them
by all means. I am ready for anything.”
They saddled up and rode off.
Satisfied with what they had seen, they returned to
camp about sundown, tired out. They turned in after tea
and fell fast asleep.
Daybreak again. Half an hour after sunrise they
packed up and were away, making in a straight line
to where they expected to pull the leading mob of sheep.
They struck the track, but not seeing or hearing any
living object, they followed it down to a waterhole and in
a short time came to where the camp was pitched. There
was a happy greeting, and as flock after flock arrived and
went into camp, and the shepherds gathered round the
camp fire, one of the glories of the bush was manifest.
The men had been travelling ten months, and still were
some two hundred miles from their own country.
A week passed. Starlight and his men were up to
their neck in work. All the sheep had arrived at tin!
camping ground, and arrangements were made to carry
out and secure a good lambing and shearing.
******
Night-time and all are quiet.


A QUEENSLAND BRUMBY PERFORMING.




CHAPTER IV.
THE SMATTERTON HURDLE RACE.
At last Starlight spun a yarn. He said:
“‘How are you?’ were the words spoken to me on
my arrival at Dugong’s Station on Bungalow Creek, a
tributary of the Smatter River, four hundred miles nearer
the coast than we are now. A few mouths before I had
bought a mob of sheep from him, travelled them for sale,
didn’t sell very well, and had altogether a bad time of it.
“it was over now, and the pleasant, hearty welcome 1
received from Dugong made me forget all my troubles for
the present.
“ ‘Just in time for the races, Starlight,’ said Dugong,
as we sat down to lunch; ‘will drive you over to-morrow.
There will be plenty of room in the buggy, and I fancy it
is about time you had a few days’ enjoyment.’
“ ‘Thank you all the same,’ I said. ‘1 am going to
give the turf best and steer for a colder country. This
last trip has been a corker, and I am thinking about taking
a trip to New Zealand or Tasmania, or further,- if
necessary. I feel I want a change, for I have been living
on little else than the smell of an oil rag for the last few
months—no tucker to buy, and sheep as poor as crows,
not as much fat on them as would grease the end of a
gimlet.’
“ ‘Trip or no trip, come to the races to-morrow,’ he
replied.
“ ‘All right,’ I said, ‘I will go.’
“So next morning Dugong, his brother, another friend,
and I went on our way to the little township twenty miles
away.
“ ‘Glad to see you here. Starlight, my boy; hear you’ve
had a hard trip. Going to run anything? If not, take
a mount on my nag, for T am going to run one for the
hurdle race to-morrow. He’s a regular clipper; you are
just the weight. Ride him steady and straight at his jumps
and he’ll clear a jolly house.’
“This was from a friend of mine named Grace, the
owner of the station on which the sports were held,


“ ‘Thank you, Grace,’ I answered. ‘Not tlii.s time. 1
don’t feel in clover. I’m thinking of taking a trip down
country.’
“Don’t leave before you arc ready,” he cried.
“Well, we had good fun.
“ ‘Bedad !’ said the policeman to me, on my asking how
he was, ‘l’m blue mouldy for the want of something to do.
Sure, I’ve not seen a stagger from any man on the course;
faith, I think the grog must he mighty weak, entirely,
for do you sec that fellow with the new moles on ?’—
pointing at the same time to a man that was walking
across the course. ‘Faith, if he’s drunk a drop, he’s drunk
a cask, and, look at him, he’s as light and airy and steady
as a fairy.’
“Five o’clock, and all was over for the day—nags off
to their respective stables, and our crowd cleared for
Grace’s Station, some two miles away. Grace and 1 had
been chums for many years, hut he got married and that
split us up.
“We were soon at the station. Heins were thrown to
the black hoys and all matters horsey turned over to them,
and we made for the homestead, Grace leading.
“We had a pleasant night and did not retire to our
respective couches until midnight. Up by daylight next
morn ing.
“ ‘Look here, Starlight,’ said Grace, pointing to his
horse, ‘if you don’t ride him for me I hope the coach will
break down thirty miles from any place, in a teeming rain,
and land you up to your neck in a hog.’
“‘All right,’ I replied; ‘hut don’t blame me if he is
beaten.’
“ ‘Beaten ! He can’t be heat, bar accidents,’ Grace
shouted hack.
“When the time came for saddling up for the race,
Grace got as excited as if he was preparing for a Melbourne
Cup, instead of a little country hurdle race. Dear old
Grace, his heart is in the sport just for the mere love
of it.
“Before starting he gave me as many instructions as
would fill a three-volume novel,


“ ‘lt is .all very well,’ T replied, ‘but I don’t think I
pan do just what I like with the moke. What had I better
dop Keep him back, go from the start, or how? He
appears to me to ho badly broken in, and his tail switches
about like the gusty flames of a house on fire. Have you
ever given him a jump?’
“ ‘Oh ! by the powers,’ said he, ‘he’s jumped over his
stall, over the stockyard, over the pigstyos, and all the
fences round the station, and never touched either stockyard,
stye, or rail.’
“ ‘Who rode him?’ I asked.
“ ‘The cat rode him half-way, jumping on his hack to
catch a martin, and that started him; and the dogs
frightened him the other half, biting at his heels, as if
they had had nothing to eat for a month, and he came
hack to the stable as fresh as a daisy, not a hair turned !’
“‘And is that all the training he’s had?’ I ventured
to ask.
“‘And enough, too, I think,’ Grace replied. ‘He has
had any amount of corn; the black boys have shoved a
couple of tons of that in to him.’
“ ‘Why,’ I said, ‘he’s got no mouth.’
“ ‘No mouth !’ he cries. ‘lf you had seen him nearly
swallow the black boy the other morning you would have
said he was nearly all mouth. He’s grand wind, and a
digestion like an emu; he ate a yardful of paving-stones
when being handled. He’s any amount of foot. Just keep
alongside of the grey; let him lead you over the two first
leaps, and you’ll jolly well come in rods ahead. There is
the last bell. I depend on you, Starlight, my boy.’ And
off goes Grace.
“Here was a go. I found myself on a green colt, whose
sole training had been by cats and dogs, who had hardly
any mouth, and had two tons of corn to carry inside him !
“There was no help for it. I had to ride him, and
for the sake of my old friend I braced myself up for the
occasion, thinking that I might smash over or through the
jumps somehow.
“I let the others take their preliminary canters first,
and quietly followed up behind the last one,
B


“Having drawn far places, we heard the starter’s cry
of ‘Draw up !’ some twenty yards or so before we got
abreast of him. Another shout from the same individual
told the rider of the chestnut to keep hack. The next shout
that came from him was ‘Off !’
“It was all very well to say ‘Off ! and the rest went
‘for their natural,’ hut I was left at the starting-post.
My mount wouldn’t budge an inch, hut kept kicking
daylight through everything that came in his way.
“Grace came running up just as the colt kicked the
head out of a beer barrel, shouting, ‘I did not think he
would serve you like that, Starlight. The other horses
are over the second hurdle,’ he yells. ‘Here, Cubbe, you
black imp, where’s the cat?’
“ ‘Mine got her, boss,’ is Cubbe’s cry.
“ ‘Throw her on, then !’ roared Grace, next moment
almost ‘bursting his boiler’ yelling to me to keep the colt’s
bead straight. He may have yelled a dozen more different
orders, but there was no waiting to get the drift of them,
for the colt made a dash forward the moment the cat touched
him, stretched out his neck, laid hack his ears, and away at
railway speed.
“For most part of the first round I had no more power
over him than 1 would have had trying to pull a steam engine
going full-tilt. I managed to face the jumps with him—
he galloped through some and over others—and wo kept
gradually gaining on those ahead.
“Seeing them, he pricked up his ears, which up to that
time had been lying straight along his neck. A few more
hundred yards and we caught up to the bay, jumped with,
and then passed him, after which we kept gaining on the
leaders, hand over fist.
“I calculated that at the speed my moke was going
I would have no difficulty in passing them on the post
for the last time round, and was about to steady him until
f got through the crowd of people. But on seeing them
he saved me the trouble, for he stopped dead altogether,
nearly dislocating my neck, and would have larded me
dead, too, if I had not been sitting well back,


“His standing-time was short. I heard a shout of
‘Cuhhie, let the dog loose!’ A sharp bark followed, and
off the colt went again, leaving behind him a straight-out
l ick about twenty yards long.
“We passed the grey at the first hurdle, galloping clean
through it, sending the pieces flying over the chestnut’s
back, causing him to kick the height of a country cabin
and to speed along like old boots. 1 bad doubts about
pulling him at all, for his rider was good and game and
went for the next hurdle a docker. His horse, however,
struck and fell over. I couldn’t pull my moke, so 1
called out, ‘Lie close, old man; I’ve got to jump over you.’
Almost before the words were uttered wo were over hurdle,
horse, and horseman, and away with the lead !
“Another few hundred yards and I felt the colt inclined
to slacken his pace, while 1 heard the grey thundering
away behind, and evidently gaining on us, so I touched him
gently with the spurs. He replied by shaking his head.
I let the whip fall gently on his flank; his protest was a
kick, but he made no effort to go faster. What was to he
done? It was half a mile from the winning-post, there
was another hurdle to jump, and the grey was almost
alongside and gaining ground at every stride.
“A thought came into my head—a happy inspiration it
proved to be. T mewed like a cat, put my whip-hand
behind me, and scratched him on the back. This shifted
him as if shocked by a galvanic battery; it was more
effective than all the whips and spurs in the universe.
Away he went at a tearing pace, jumped the last hurdle,
clearing it by about fifty feet, passed the winning-post like
a streak of greased lightning, and was half-way to the
station before I could pull him up. When I got him back
at the weighing-yard, Dugong and other people on the
course were in roars of laughter at Grace, who was trying
to execute a sword dance. He had a hottle of ‘fizz’ in one
hand and a tumbler in the other, and was trying to time
his own music, which consisted of a natural whistle. Now
and again he stopped and sang out to the publican to
‘Give all hands a drink.’


WILL THEY COME ?


THREE MEN ON A CRUISE.
CHAPTER I.
AT SEA.
Sauntering along Queen Street, Brisbane, T met two
friends—Alt'. Hornblower, some years in the colony, and
originally from England; and G. Schwartz, many years
from Holland. After recounting to one another events
since parting on the Cooper, we talked of present times.
“And Starlight,” said Hornblower to me, ‘we are
thinking of taking a cruise; will you join us?”
“You vhos come,” said Schwartz, in broken English;
“we mit not go mitout you.”
“Only too happy,” I replied. So we strolled to a
shipping office and were soon booked for Hobart, Tasmania,
via Sydney.
Coming out of the office we met two young ladies,
1 lornblower's cousins.
It was a bright night, the stars wer shining beautifully,
there was little wind, the water was like a lake until we
cleared the bay, and we had a smooth sea after. There
was, however, a long inshore swell that made the steamer
bob about and us to feel as if we were riding a proppy
horse. Soon after tea we turned in, as there was nothing
to be seen and few passengers to make matters lively. The
sea air made me feel as if I had not slept for a month.
Schwartz was of the same mind and feeling, but he
appeared to be troubled about Alf., and said, “Stargaze,
vot ish the matter mit him? I vhos say, ‘Cood night,
Hornyblo.’ He no speak: he no say, ‘Good night,
Schwartz.’ Vot vhos the matter, Stargaze?”
“Well,” J replied, “I don’t think there is much the
matter, but T will go and hunt him up before I turn in.”
I found Alf. leaning over the taffrail, looking gloomy
enough, and I asked him, “Are you sorry you left that
little girl in Brisbane, Alf. ? You look to be in the
dumps,”


“Never in the dumps, my hoy,” was his reply. “I
don’t feel altogether well, and my Cousin May gave me
a letter I should have had some time hack which has a hit
upset me. But 1 will be alright soon. What has become
of Schwartz?”
“Turned in, Alf.,” 1 said, “and lam going to follow
his example, so good-night.”
I found Schwartz waiting for the news before finally
turning into his hunk. As soon as J shut our cabin dooi
lie asked, “You vhos been seen Hornyblo?”
“Yes, I have seen him.”
“Vot vhos the matter, Stargaze?”
“I don’t think there is'much the matter, Schwartz. 1
think the change from hush to town life has something to
do with it.”
“Dot vhos not it, Stargaze. The little voman dot buy
all bis clothes vhos the cause. 1 no like dot voman. She
vhos been gib him one letter before going on shore. He
looks, and ven he do read dot letter his face it go white
like noding. He walk, and den he sit down a great deal.
“Ho tells me, Schwartz, old man, there’s nothing the
matter. But in the name of all that’s good, what are
you doing with that rig? Going to bed?”
The rig consisted of light flannel drawers and singlet,
each about an inch thick; a woollen nightcap, double that,
and made so as to leave the face exposed and the head
and neck covered. Schwartz now finished his night dress
by pulling over his shoulders what I took to be braces; but
he told me that it was a lifebelt of his own invention; and
over all he put on a large robe, something like a dressing-
gown.
“Schwartz vhos all right now,” said he, with a happy
smile.
“Well,” I said, “if that is the correct way to travel
I’m out of it altogether.”
“Mina goot frien, Stargaze,” he said, “I tell you von
short tale. Here vhos von ship; dere vhos the capitino,
dere vhos his wife, dere vhos one pretty vomans, dere vhos
two mates, four sailors, and Schwartz. We sail from


Rotterdam, vere we vhos all born, and we goes everywhere.
Young vomans had one big seal, just like a schild. Now,
she say, ‘You vhos come mein schild, Schnider.’ We sit
down and we talk. Dot seal would flop, flop, after her.
Den she leave the book, and say, ‘Schnider, you vhos fetch
dot book.’ Dot seal would fetch it; everything she say
he do. Yon night we vhos talking about when we lay at
Rotterdam. Soon Schwartz sleep, dream of dot young
voman, and Schnider, ven smash! vot was dot? I vhos
feel my way about in dore dark. All vhos water. I heai
dot capitine cry loud; I hear der sailor chop mit der axe.
1 vhos find dot young vomans, 1 vhos find dot capitine’s
wife, and dey say, ‘Schwartz, vot vhos der matter? Our
cabins vhos all water.’ Schwartz say, ‘Dot so? Mine vhos,
too.’ Daylight came. Von hurricane blew. No more hear
capitine, no more hear sailor. Schwartz broke open dot
skylight and vent on deck. Stargaze, mine frien, 1 vhos
not forgot about dot.”
He stopped, and I trusted that it was all over, and
remarked, “Well, I suppose after that you got a boat and
rowed to the shore mit your pretty vomans.”
He reflected, then said, “Mine lifebelt save Schwartz."
The two-hour bell, the four-hour bell, the dipping and
diving of the steamer, the general nausea smell and close
confinement of cabin, made me roll about more than
sleep, and I was glad when day began to show. Soon as
I could J was up and on deck. There was not much to be
seen. The mainland was far away; the only objects of
interest were a few islands, and I kept watching them.
They were getting more distinct every moment as the mists
rose from the waters and the shades of night passed away.
Every rock was glittering, and the spray as it struck and
scattered in all directions looked like so many gold-fringed
dropping stars.
About 4 p.m. avc steamed past one or two very pretty
islands and some nice sloping ridges on the mainland, Avith
houses dotted over them. The surroundings soon changed.
A dirty-looking haze enveloped the land, and the sea
changed to a dull green. The Avind rose, a light rain
began to fall, and night came on apace. ‘There Avas a


choppy sea on, and the steamer was dipping her nose and
then her stern into it as if she were thirsty at both ends
and didn’t know which to satisfy first. A few commercials
were among the passengers, and it would be impossible to
get more genial companions to travel with.
The smoking saloon was well patronized, and a new
chum was giving his experience with a wonderful horse.
Alf. Horn blower loomed up from the outer darkness and
listened.
“You are right, my boy,” he said. “I knew that horse
when he was a green colt. The man that broke him in was
a stockman named Wild Harry, who never would, if he
could help it, ride a horse broken in by anybody but
himself, and it was very few that could ride horses that
Wild Harry had handled. They were too tricky. This
particular horse was a big, upstanding colt, nearly
thoroughbred. Whenever Harry saw him he’d say, ‘I must
get that fellow; he’ll make a regular ringtail roarer.’ He
did get him, and broke him in when about three years old.
“There was a small township not far from the station,
and races were being held, for which Harry trained his
horse. A few days before the races came off some men
from inside came along with racehorses and stayed at the
station. The horses looked splendid, and appeared trained
to perfection.
“The race day came round. Harry’s horse looked all
that could be desired. The inside men, when they saw
him, were evidently of that opinion, and as Harry’s boy
was leading him at the back of the course they sneaked
over and asked to have a look at his mouth. The boy
smiled and said, ‘Go ahead !’ What their intentions were
can only be surmised; what happened was this. One of
the men took hold of the bridle, but before he could raise
his hand to touch the animal’s mouth the horse stooped his
head, and with a sudden snap caught him by the waistband
of his trousers and carried him to a waterhole close by,
dipped him in it, then laid him on the bank. His mate,
coming up to interfere, was served in the same way. After
this exploit he quietly walked back to the boy and rubbed
his head against his shoulder. He won all his races.


“Harry was asked for the loan of him one day hy a
very flash horseman.
“ ‘Willingly, old man, if you can ride him,’ said Harry.
The man looked at him with half a sneer on his face, and
then mounted. That was all the ride he had. The horse
gave a stretch, threw his head round, and, lifting him out
of the saddle, carried him to the puh. verandah
“But that wasn’t all.
“ ‘Now then, come here,’ said Harry. The horse came.
Taking a needle and a piece of thread, Harry threw them
into the air. The horse let fly as they descended and kicked
the thread clean through the eye of the needle, and catching
it in his mouth ere it reached the ground knotted the
thread.
“Yes,” said Alf., “that was a wonderful horse.”
We believed it.
We turned in, but the row overhead with winches and
ropes made sleep impossible. Early next morning Sydney
Heads were in sight, and happy we were to have something
fresh to look at. Entering the Heads nothing was to be
seen but a dark mass of land, which just now had more the
appearance of a family of giants shrouded in mist.
From the bridge the captain guided the steamer to
her haven of rest, shouting, “Starboard !” then “Port a
little!” “Steady!” while clip, clip from the signal hell to
the engine-room was heard, followed by a scream from the
whistle. On the main deck everything Avas hustle and
bustle. A few minutes more and the steamer was fast to
the wharf. We were landed, and under Alf.’s guidance
were soon driving to what he called the best hotel in
Sydney.
CHAPTER II.
SYDNEY COVE.
After a rest we knocked about Sydney viewing the
sights. We were walking where the waters of the hay
were far below us, and came to a lady’s chair hewn out of
lock. Schwartz was not only a great botanist, but


conversant in a general way with archaeology and geology,
and J asked him how the rock came by its name.
Before he could reply a friend we had picked up
related its history.
“You see,” he said, “this is a remarkable chair.”
“Well,” I replied, “it may be, and it will take an
earthquake to knock the remarks out of it, for I am sure
they will never be got out any other way.”
Without taking any notice of the interruption, except
by a quiet smile, he proceeded:—“Yes, it is a remarkable
chair, and a remarkable lady would come and sit in it, and
that is how it came by the name. She was a lady who
never knew her own mind or what she wanted for two
minutes together.”
I thought that her wants must have been easily
satisfied if she found them within coo-ce of the chair, and
wondered if she used to bring a cushion. The scenery,
however, had me, and I doubt if I caught the correct hang
of the history of the lady and her chair. As my friend
continued, my thoughts wandered to other scenes, and 1
got lost to everything but the beautiful surroundings. The
forenoon had been cloudy, but now the sky was bright and
the sun had been shining for about an hour. It was long
past the meridian and getting boxed up among the hills,
scattering its rays round in every direction, as if to find
its position after its long confinement behind the clouds.
1 he water near us was as smooth as glass, and a stream
of pale-blue light appeared to cover it, until the eye
wandered far out. Then both water and colour changed;
the former could be seen rippling and dancing, sending
shoots of brilliants from ripple to ripple, and as each caught
the sun’s rays it took the colour of gold, intermingled with
shades of dark and light green. Then on the dancing goes,
now and again sending up drops of spray as if so many
sea-nymphs were having target practice and shooting forth
coral gems from the depths My eyes ranged over the many
islands and different shores; buildings like fairy castles
peeping out frcm amongst the trees also attracted my
notice, until the signal whistle of some river steamer once


more drew my attention towards the buzz and hustle, which
made me exclaim, “All life, all beauty.” I was roused
from rny reverie by my friend, who was evidently concluding
his narrative of the lady and her chair, for looking at me
in a comical manner not knowing that my thoughts had
been elsewhere—he said, as if answering a question, “Not
very beautiful, but 1 believe she was a hit lively at times.”
During the evening we had a look in at one of the
theatres, and also passed half-an-hour at a shooting gallery.
Schwartz was the chief attraction here for a short time:
he fired many crack shots. Making a remark how the stock
of a gun should he set on, he precipitated a hit of an
argument between himself and the boss of the show.
“You come along mine Dutchland,” said Schwartz;
“dere you vhos see some shooting.”
Then, laying his gun on the counter, he made an
attempt to explain to the boss the formation of the
shoulder, and how the gun and the stock should correspond
to meet this when the arm is raised. He twisted himself
about and wriggled like an eel, saying, “Dis vhos the
shoulder, so; dis vhos the arm held mit the gun,
so; dis vhos the gun,” taking it in his hand once
more and pointing all over it; “dis vhos not right, dot
vhos right.” Again twisting it round, “Dot vhos nother
way; dot vhos hold steady; you vhos see.” As nobody
replied, Schwartz got excited and began to rave away in
whole Dutch for a time. Next he stood bolt upright, and,
glaring at the boss, frightened him half out of his show.
Pausing thus for a moment, as if to get breath or give the
boss time to recover, he delivered his second lesson,
commencing by saying: “Come, mine frien, you vhos see
some little tings,” giving the gun a flourish that made me
dive behind a post, for I thought the thing might go off,
loaded or unloaded, and watch the conclusion of the play
from a safe position.
Schwartz held the gun to his shoulder with one hand,
while with the other he explained what made it throw high,
throw low, and throw all over the place. At last he wound
up by saying, “Now, mine frien, I vhos shoot you.”


“Not if I know it,” cried the boss, now thoroughly
roused. “Give me the gun. 1 have lost three ‘tanners’ by
your blooming performance and know less about a gun
than I did before.”
AVe left, and as we were going out at the door Schwartz
said, “Mine good frien, you vhos not understand I vhos
shoot, I hit bull’s-eye; you shoot, you hits nothings. I
vhos say, ‘Good night.’ ” „
The following morning Alt', was in my room by daylight.
I jumped up at once, happy to see Alf. looking so
cheerful. As he stood before me in all his manliness,
smiling at some remark I made, nobody would think that
there was a canker-worm eating away at the poor fellow’s
heart.
Breakfast over, and our friend having arrived, we
started for a boathouse and were soon making a selection
among the craft. Seeing a clipper-looking boat, with not
too heavy a sail, we decided that she would do. The
proprietor asked us if we would sail her or should he send
a boatman with us. “The only man I have available
to-day,” he went on, “is a very old man named Barney;
but, barring his age and his yarns, he is the best boatman
in the harbour.”
We decided on a boatman and said that Barney would
do.
Barney was called, and his answer was heard in loud
tones, as if coming from the bottom of a well. “Hi, hi,
sorr !” and there appeared on the scene as weather-beaten
an old salt as would be found among old Neptune’s
prize-crew.
Barney was up to his neck in business in no time, and
gave an approving smile when helping to put a couple of
well-loaded, lunch-baskets on board.
1 was in the bows of the boat pulling in the painter;
the proprietor was shoving the bows off, and while doing
so he remarked, “If you want a yarn, from three days to
a hundred years old, and as long as a ship’s main bowline,
that’s your man”—nodding towards Barney.
“I expect we’ll try him,” 1 replied, and the sail being
now hoisted we got away,


“Where to, sorrs?” cried Barney, easing the sheet
and letting the boat go well before the wind.
“Anywhere you think best, Barney. We want to see
the sights of the bay,” said Alf. “So we give you carte,
blanche, old man, and L don’t mind relieving you of the
steering.”
“Never had such a cart, an’ never heard of it,” said
Barney; “but I’m the boy that can show yez the sights,
land yez in a noted nook to lunch, and tell yez the history
of every square foot of the bay, from the wharf to the
heads, and of events buried dec]) down eighty years back
in nooks and corners and crevices that would lay. there
and blue-mould if Barney didn’t resurrect them.
I consider myself a stranger, so do not expect to get
credit for anything 1 may say. In fact, concerning the
mildest adventure or the least (to me) commonplace incident
1 might relate, it appears people would look at me as much
as to say, “What are you giving us?” or “1 don’t like to
call you a story, old man, but my idea is that you wag a
pair of false jaws.”
The only thing 1 can see, in order to get along quietly,
is to allow people to stuff me, take in all they say, laugh
when they laugh although a fellow may puzzle his brains
for a month in the vain hope of finding out where the
joke came in—and appear to be enchanted with all they
narrate. I feel that, if 1 am not the goose that laid the
golden egg, I am looked upon as a goose witli a gullet
that could swallow anything and with an in’ards capacious
enough to retain all the stuffing that might be rammed
into me.
Barney is not a bad hand at tipping it in, regardless
of expense. My digestion is not up to his first dose, which
made me feel squeamish, but the yarns came so frequently,
and each embellishment outstripped the preceding one, that
1 soon got used to them. My friends took matters easy
and quietly from the start. r l hey were seasoned.
The wind was light, Alf. was still at the helm, and
Barney was conning the ship and pitching away at the
same time. While relating some feat he had performed,
my Sydney friend gave him a bottle of fizz, with the request
to open it and help himself.


I fancy there was magic as well as fizz in the bottle,
tor the first glass transmogrified ns from “sorrs” to
jintlemen,” and Harney being told to wet the other eye
we were elevated to the position of “yer honors.”
Barney returned the glass, saying, “Now, yer honors,
I’ni going to settle down to business, ft’s dry work, so it
is, but I know yer honors won’t forget to oil the poor ould
engine now and thin.”
“All right, Barney,” Alf. said, “we’ll keep you oiled,
so fire away.”
W e were well down the bay now, wind still light, when
Barney, wiping his month on his sleeve after another nip,
said to Alf. :
“Faith, yer honor handles the craft as well as 1 could
myself. Will ye let her come-to a taste and I’ll take a
pull on the sheet, and yer honor can steer over beyant for
that cliff you sec, just a taste on the starboard bow. We’ll
drop anchor under the big black rock that looks like a
blackfellow. Ye can see it there now, yer honor, just
forninst the bowsprit; and look, yer honors, we can catch
fish there that nobody knows of but myself, and, bedad,
w hen we get to the nook and we have them roasted on
the coals, I’ll give yez a trate that the likes was never
heard of. Sure it’s a history I can tell yez about the
same rock and the big steps that lade down to the say
that will charm yez honors’ hearts and bring sympathy to
yez honors’ eyes.”
1 was enchanted with all I saw—tin; gentle ripples on
tlu>, water skipping about like children at play; the
beautiful bays, each one appearing more enchanting than
its fellow; the vegetation along its banks, of as many
different hues and colours as a kaleidoscope might present;
but, as Harney said, “It bates the picture chaps to paint
it.”
“Sure,” he said, “1 came down forninst that bay”—
pointing to one more picturesque than many of the rest—
“just for the love of it, and. maybe to catch a fish, and I
made the time to suit the sun—either early morning or
early evening. For, bedad, your honors, I never heard of
anybody yet that the sun suited. Folks sit in its rays


find say it’s too hot, sit out of them and say it’s too cold;
tlien they sit they don’t know where, and wish it wouldn’t
go down so quick, or that it had been down an hour ago,
and that is the way they go on yer honors. But, as I was
saying, I came down to suit it, and faith it seems pla zed
to be suited now and thin, for it shows me fresh colours
on the wild flowers and many different shades and velvet
on the trees and the green grass, and all that is so beautiful
that I find myself saying, ‘Barney, me boy, yer own green
sod in the Quid Dart is in the shade.’ And then I look
beyant, yer honors, on the illigant houses, peeping out from
among the trees and flowers, and looking like ivory and
silver and gould. But, oh ! yer honors, I’m done intirely
when 1 comes to the gould, for I’ve seen and handled so
little I know nothing about it. But I just kape drinking
in the beautiful braze, yer honors, and take a sniff of the
swatc scints, and maybe I have caught some illigant fish,
and I sez to myself sez I, as they come up through the
water, ‘Barney, it’s a pity they are not what they look
like, and, by the powers! that same is diamonds.’ And
then 1 think, ‘Why wasn’t yez a poet born, Barney, and
a picture-maker, and then yez’ud bo in some big library
and hanging on some big wall, or maybe an unnatural
curiosity in some museum.’ ”
I ventured to remark, “How do you think you’d look
hanging on a tree, Barney?”
“Arrah ! don’t joke, yer honor; that same makes my
neck ticklish and me throat very dhry.”
CHAPTER III.
THE BLACK CLIFF.
“Sure, yer honors, yez may not belave me, and for that
same 1 would not blame yez, being strangers; but most of
the people in Sydney are that ignorant of things and
little matters that happened only sixty or seventy years
ago, lit alone any longer, that it makes Barney’s heart
ache, and I believe T’d die if I couldn’t resurrect them now
and thin.”


At this point he stopped to cry out to Schwartz, “Yez
have got a nibble, sorr; aise the line. Faith, he’s
floundering; ye have him, sorr!”
Schwartz pulled in his fish. The sun’s rays shone full
on the black cliff, and Barney shouted out, “Look, yer
honors, that’s the rock where the sun is shining; and look
up, yer honors, forninst the top, and ye’ll see a piece
standing out bould to the say, and can’t yez consave that
it’s just Joike one of the black devils going to dart a spear,
that same rock?”
I ventured another remark, saying, “I can conceive
anything, Barney; it looks like life. I fancy I can see
the spear shaking.”
“Just loike enough,” he said. “I’ve thought the same
many a time, for that fellow was the devil intirely.”
And then he commenced:
“It was in the early days, and all over there was a
dense scrub, and,” pointing to the rock, “that black fellow
and about half a dozen more had a camp not far from it.
Oh ! and bedad they were plucky beggars, too. They would
come up to the settlement in their canoes and steal all
they could lay their hands on. Faith, their cuteness was
equal to that of Quid Nick himself. They’d get down a
chimney or through a keyhole, but they’d get in somehow
and steal out of the huts and houses. Many a poor fellow
got into a mess through them. They’d steal the boots and
trousers of some of the sarvints, and one of them would
put them on before laving and make marks with the boots,
so as to make belave it was some of the servants that did
the stealing. Howsomever, one very cold winter the
thaving went on worse nor before, and sure, where I was
living me boss was robbed altogether intirely. He says to
me, ‘Barney, you are cute; maybe you can find the thaves.
Faith,’ he says, ‘catch them and there’ll be twenty goulden
guineas for yez.’ So 1 went to work, and many a shapeless
night I had watching. Sure, if I watched in one place
things would be stole in another, and if I watched in that
place, bedad the place would Ite ransacked where I watched
the night before. Faith, I might have been watching until


now, and plenty more wid me, if it had not been for the
boss’s darter, and a swate young; crathur she was. I had
to perfect her when taking her ride in the early morning.
Well, one morning, just as we got away from the house,
she turned round in her saddle and said, ‘Barney, what
does a hlackfellow look like?’ ‘Sure, miss,’ I said, ‘if it
wasn’t for his shock head and the indacent way he has of
going about, and barring his black, he’d look like and
might he taken for a whitefellow.’ ‘Yes, Barney,’ she said,
quite swate, ‘hut what does he look like when dressed in
whitefellow’s clothes? There are no black sarvants about,
are there?’ ‘None, miss, bar two, about four miles away,
and when dressed in whitefellow’s clothes they look loike
the clothes, miss, bar their black heads and hands.’ At
this she smiled so swate, and said, ‘Barney, I think it is
the blacks that is doing all the staling from our place,
anyway.’
“At this I pricked up my ears, and she told me that
during the night she thought she saw somebody’s shadow
pass the winder near her room, and, looking out, she saw
a man with a black head and feet, hut bar that all white,
and when he’d got about fifty yards away he was joined
by some other men, who appeared to he dressed in black.
“ ‘Bedad, miss, I have it !’ T cried. ‘Don’t brathe a
word to any mortal son of a gun, and maybe Barney won’t
stop the thaving.’ She was a swater crather at that
moment than at any other, and said, so pleasing, ‘I depend
on you, Barney.’
“ ‘Faith, then, miss,’ T said, ‘lave it to Barney.’
“Will, then, I had a dog that would thrack a muskatee
and scint along until he had hould of him by the nose. So
off I wint with Thracker, and took him to where the little
missie tould me she had seen the white black joined by the
black ones. Putting his nose to the ground, he gave a
short hark, so I knew he had the scint, and I tould him
to run them down.”
Barney stopped and turned his attention to my Sydney
friend, who had hooked a fish.
“Hould, sir; hould, yer honor! That fellow is hooked.
Play him, yer honor; hould him, yer honor; slack, yer


honor; pull in now, quick, yer honor.” Ami thus he wont
on until a large fish was landed in the boat.
My friend remarked, “I’ve had more ‘honors’ in the
last few minutes getting that fish on hoard than I have
had all my life playing whist.”
This over, the bottle was appealed to, and Barney
continued :
“As 1 was saying, I told Thracker to run them down.
The clog sniffed about for a bit, and then ran along in
full-cry, meself keeping up. We had gone about two miles
when we came to a place where the bushes were so thick
that you could not shove the point of a stick into them.
Thracker, with his nose to the ground, skirted the bush
for about half a mile, then entered and followed a path
where, by jabers ! your honors wouldn’t think a mouse
could go. 1 squeezed through after him, and in a few
hundred yards we came to a deep, narrow bight that ran
in from the bay, and I could see where canoes had been
tied up, and just then, bedad ! Thracker gave a sharp
hark, and 1 knew he had found something. I wint over,
and, sure enough, in a hole under a hape of hushes, there
was flour and tay and tobaccy, and oh! and bo jabers!
hundreds of other things. And I shouted out, ‘Barney, ye
are a millionaire!’
“Hould, yer honor!” Barney suddenly cried to Alf.—
his yarn breaking like a piece of thread—“Hould, yer
honor, there’s a grand fish nibbling yer bate. Play him,
bedad ! Ye have him hooked !” And a lively time Alf.
had with him for a few moments. At last, after a great
deal of pulling and hauling the fish was landed in the boat,
and Barney was in high glee. “This was the fish T tould
yez about. Up anchor, boys, and we’ll sail for the nook.
Your teeth will water when yez smell him roasting, and
I will do the rest of the resurrecting business as we sail
along.”
Barney’s sailing orders being attended to, be
proceeded :
“T made thracks for home after finding the ‘plant,’
touching nothing. And didn’t we lay the beautiful plan
to catch the tbaving blacks. We got a boat round close


to where the canoes would have, to come in, and Onld Nick
himself couldn’t see ns, although we could see anything
entering the bight. We planted in the boat just at dark,
feeling sure they’d come for the tucker that night. There
was meself, a young officer, and two sogers, and bedad ! we
was watching a long time, and beginning to think they had
scinted us, when we heard the dip of a paddle, and sure
enough a canoe shot into the bight. ‘Aisy,’ said the officer;
‘let the boat drop out and we’ll close them in.’ But her
nose was hardly out of the hiding-place when they saw us
and made for the bush, at the same time, wid a whiz and
a whirr a spear and nuallo-nuallo passed close to us. Then
a crack followed from the sogers’ muskets, and a yell from
something else, and we dashed on shore and found we had
shot a black-gin. T hear her scream every time I pass
that bight, and the echo sounds over the water every night.
Sure, her yells made the water tremble, but it was through
fright; she wasn’t hurt much. I thought she’d destroy
herself intirely trying to get away. We got her up to the
house, and found she was a gin that had disappeared from
the settlement some twelve months before.
“After this the thaving was given up, but we couldn’t
make the old gin tell us where to find the camp. One day
there was the mightiest hullabaloo in the worrould. The
little missie was gone—gin and all—and nobody could tell
where. We were wondering what to do when Thracker,
the dog, comes running up loike mad, and bedad ! he nearly
pulled the trousers off me to get me along. Four of the
sogers and the young officer had come up to search, and
me boss was in a great way intirely, and I said, ‘Maybe
and yer honor will follow. Thracker has it.’ So we started
after Thracker, and be jabers we had to run loike mad
to kape up wid him. The cuteness uv him was a miracle.
He took us to a high bank, where we could see far down
the bay, and he yelped and yelped and stuck one of his legs
out pointing to the opposite shore. Bedad ! and as we
looked we could just see a canoe dodging along. ‘The boat!’
yells me boss. ‘Away to the boat. Oh ! save me darter !’
We ran madder than when after Thracker, and soon was in
a four-oared boat pulling madder still, Thracker in the


bows watching. Me boss was steering and swaying and
bending bis body forward, as if lie would lift the boat to
them in one jump, and at every bend he’d cry, ‘Save me
darter ! Oh ! save me darter !’
“The black devils saw us at last, and, yer honors, I’m
telling yez the truth, that canoe seemed to lift out of the
water and fly, and soon after they run it into a cove. Then
me boss yelled madder, Thracker yelped madder, and we
pulled madder, bending the oars like whips.
“In a few seconds more we landed, and leaving one of
the sogers with the boat, dashed on after Thracker. It
was a hot race, yer honors, and sure it makes me fancy
I’m getting baked like a batch of bread in an oven every
time I think of it. We caught up with them on the cliff
which I pointed out to yez, and, hearing a yelp from
Thracker, those behind the black that was carrying little
missie turned and let fly their spears, and then the sogers
fired and dropped three of them. The young officer dasher!
in to get hould of little missie, and the black, seeing no
escape, shot the darlint over the cliff and turned at bay.
The young officer plunged his sword through the black,
who staggered and fell over the cliff also. Me boss
screamed, ‘Me darter’s kilt !’ and fainted, and the officer
had vanished we knew not where.
“Itmining along the cliff to see if he had fallen over,
we heard a yelp from Thracker, and coming up to him we
saw the bould young fellow with little missie in his arms,
clinging to some bushes, with the say and rocks below him
hundreds of feet. All this happened before a dog could
wag bis tail twice and before we could give them help, and
before ten more seconds had passed, faith ! the bushes broke
away and we saw the bould boy, with little missie still
clasped in his arms, making jumps down the side of the
cliff that would have bate a champion kangaroo—five feet,
twenty, fifty, bedad it would look loike seventy before he’d
touch anything, and poor ould Thracker following, touching
where he touched, and then, like Jack and Jill, went
tumbling after.
“Bedad ! yer honors, it gives me a choking gasp to
think of it now, and I belave and feel loike it was all being
done over again, and it makes me that dhry and toired as


if 1 was being bate with sthicks and running me hair off
to get away from them.”
“Have a good stiffener after all that, Harney,” I
suggested; “it will freshen you up and help you to pick
up the pieces, for 1 suppose they were broken into
thousands?”
He gladly accepted a bottle of beer, emptied it without
bothering a tumbler, threw it overboard, and continued :
“Bedad ! then, your honor, if ye’ll just houkl yer whist
for a taste ye’ll find there wasn’t a bone broke! One
soger stopped with the boss, who was coming to, and the
rest uv us dashed back to the boat, for we couldn t see
anything of the poor crathers now. Sure, when getting
there, Ave rowed back as if our lives Avere depending upon
getting round the cliff in a given time. It Avas a long pull,
and took nigh on an hour to get Avhere the bould boy
jumped doAvn the rocks, and Ave Avere expecting to see them
dashed to pieces sure enough, kilt intirely, or sailing out
to say, and indade, yer honors, instead of that, avo fancied
Ave saAV somebody Avalking ahead on a slice sandy beach. So
we made the boat fast, and after climbing over a feAV rocks,
I said, ‘Whist, boys, 1 hear voices,’ and look, yer honors,
it took me breath away, and, bedad! aac were all stiuck
dumb, and it’s listening avc had to take to, for Avho should
come in vioAV but the soger officer and little missie ! We
Avere nearly kilt entirely on hearing him say, ‘You have
promised to be my oavu dear little Avife, darlint. 1 must
now see the ould man.’ ‘You will always be good and true
to me, Edgar?’ avus her reply, as she sat down, and Edgar
followed, squatting close to her, and it’s whisperings he
Avas spaking in, and she nodding and smiling and getting
as red as a peony all the time. At last she said, ‘Hoav long
will it take them to get the boat round?’ Bedad! just the
same as if they had been drove there in a coach and was
Avaiting for a boat to take them for a sail. Barney could
stand it no longer, it Avas all so much like a drama, so I
jumped up, and coming to them, I touched me forelock and
said, ‘The boat is at yer service, yer honor. 1 hope theie
is no harm done.’ ‘Nothing, Barney,’ he said. ‘Only me
throat feels very dry.’ And there’s the nook, yer honors;
run her in and avc’ll make fast.


CHAPTER IV.
EVE’S PARADISE.
We found that Barney was correct in describing this as
;i beautiful place. He now attended to the cooking. My
Sydney friend found a nice cool shade in which his wife
might rest—the only lady of our party—and Alf. and
Schwartz made a fire.
I wanted to have a prowl by myself, so I asked Barney’s
advice as to the best route to take in order to get good
views of the surroundings, and if there was anything choice
thereabouts in the way of gardens and cultivation.
“Plenty, yer honor,” said Barney, “and uv all sorts
and sizes. Sure, ye will have to go a taste of a distance
before coming to the gardens. See, yer honor, kape along
this crake for about a mile, then ye’ll come to a beautiful
round hill; carry that on yer left shoulder for about half a
mile, then ye’ll come to a thrack and a little rocky rise; go
right along the thrack carrying the rocky rise on your back,
and in a taste of a distance ye’ll see the purtiest glen and
wild flowers and things that will charm yez.”
“1 think I can follow your directions, Barney,” I said,
“but reckon I’ll be tired when i como to the glen carrying
all that load; cannot you give me something to put on my
head just to balanceP”
“No, bedad ! but I’ll give yez something to ate when
ye return that will make yer honor think the fairies have
been feeding yez with honey and giving it an extra relish
with their smiles.”
I came to the hill that 1 was to carry on my left
shoulder, and found wildflowers growing luxuriantly;
clusters scattered about everywhere of all descriptions,
shades, and colours. The hill was still on my shoulder until
I came to Barney’s track and had a look at the rocky rise
which I was instructed to carry on my back. It appeared
to me to he erected by human hands. In any case, 1 would
not like to have to carry it. I gathered some beautiful
ferns and flowers, and soon had a big heap for Schwartz
to classify. The rise itself I let remain, not feeling
competent to fulfil Barney’s instructions as to the carrying


business. As I strolled along the track for a few hundred
yards, thinking what an old ass Adam must have been to
have lost bis paradise for the sake of an apple—a paradise
to which this place at its best couldn’t hold a candle —thus
thinking and strolling I became entranced by a sudden sight
of Barney’s glen, which 1 found to be more like a well-
laid-out park than anything else, every tree, shrub, and
Mower having a cultivated appearance. ith every foot
that I advanced the surroundings got more enchanting; so
much so that I fancied myself Adam, and said in a loud
tone, “This Adam would be satisfied to live for ever in
this paradise.” Just as T was getting thoroughly charmed
I saw a tree loaded with fruit of a kind about which there
could be no mistake, and, once more giving voice, 1
exclaimed, “There’s the very apple-tree!”
The words were hardly past my lips when I heard a
gentle voice murmur, “Yes, and you are welcome to them.”
I jumped about twenty feet. Turning round, I saw a
beautiful figure in a tight-fitting pale-pink dress standing
a few yards off. I put my bands to my eyes to feel if they
were open, thinking it might be all a dream. Finding it a
reality, I struck an attitude and cried, “Eve, by Satan !”
The words were no sooned uttered than a large black snake
wriggled past my feet. “Excuse me, Eve,” 1 bad been
going to say, but stopped in time to substitute “Madam, f
don’t allow these gentry to escape when 1 have a chance of
destroying them.” Without any further delay 1 laid the
reptile at her feet—dead as Caesar.
When this little incident was finished the murmurs
again fell on ray ears, exciting my heart so that it jumped,
and I felt my eyes drooping as her sweet lips parted, sayitig,
in a louder tone, “If Adam bad done likewise, instead of
eating the apple, what a different world we might be
living in.”
“Yes, madam,” said 1 ; “that apple business did for us,
but 1 fear I am unwittingly intruding.”
“Not at all,” she said, smiling. “You are a loud
thinker. 1 heard all and was much amused. I suppose,”
she continued, still smiling sweetly, “You are down here*
with Barney, picnicking? He’s a privileged character, and


you are welcome to anything you may wish to take with
you.”
I thanked her, but did not say much, for my voice
after hers sounded like the cry of an owl. However,
happening to mention my Sydney friend’s name she said
she knew the Ansards and would walk back with me.
We soon reached the camp, and our new lady friend
appeared to enjoy immensely the two hours which she spent
with us.
It was now time to start for town, and as we had not
much cargo to take on board we were soon away. It was
lucky we knew how to manage the boat, for Barney came
to grief in the middle of a stiff narrative, and, trying to
recover himself, got bogged altogether, fell over, and finished
up by coiling himself in the bottom of the boat and going
fast asleep.
We arrived at the boathouse stains about sundown, and
after carrying Barney on shore and delivering over the boat
we made for our hotel, Ansard and his wife accompanying
us. As this was to be our last night in Sydney we arranged
to go forth and explore the town.
We had dinner and an hour's rest. Then we started,
and found that the city had a very lively appearance, as
if something beyond the common were taking place. The
streets, being mostly narrow, the lights from one side
appeared to meet their fellows from the other half-way,
giving them the appearance of having a channel of light
running through their centre. The shops were beautifully
illuminated, and many varieties of articles were exposed to
view, forming a pleasing contrast to the large, dismal-
looking, gigantic structures. The streets were full of
people passing to and fro, as if it were “fair” time, chatting
loudly and gaily, others arm in arm talked in low, deep
tones; while merry laughter and shouts from groups of
people standing at street corners would make one believe
that there was not a care or trouble in the world
Occasionally was to be seen a woman standing at the door
of a pub., every now and again glancing in, and the heavy
sigh that escaped from her and the low muttered words of
“Oh, Jack ! Why don’t you come home?” fold its own


tale, and a pitying, shuddering agony crept over a fellow
when he thought of her troubles and the home-coming of
Jack. Then again one’s thoughts would turn to the time
when Jack was the watcher for his darling Jenny or Sue.
Hut this train of thought soon changed. A cheap-jack
occupied a piece of waste land, and was standing in the
middle of a cart, surrounded by spluttering fat lamps.
Wares of all sorts, sizes, and descriptions were in and
around the cart, and all sorts and conditions of people
stood round. Vanity Fair it was, indeed ! Our attention
was drawn his way on hearing him sing out, “Now, ladies
and gentlemen, this is the bargain of the evening—a brand,
spanking, new crinoline of the first water, and warranted
all steel hoops. Now, you young men that have a sweetheart,
step forward, for I’m not going to ask ten pounds for it,
nor nine, nor eight, nor seven, nor even one. You good-
looking young man with the doxy, take it for ten bob. Not
ten?—nine, eight, seven, four; take it for a tanner!” We
saw a young fellow go up, hand in the tanner, and, as he
received his purchase the Jack cried out, “Put it over
your charmer’s rig, my lad, and she’ll look like a bird in
a cage.” We retreated to our respective cages, after
arriving at which we had a yarn and then turned in.
CHAPTER V.
TASMANIA.
The day was breaking when 1 was awakened by a
terrible noise and clatter, as if the hotel were being
bombarded. Looking out of the window, I made out that
the elements were having a royal battle; the wind was in
force, driving before it hail and rain at the rate of eighty
miles an hour. The thunder boomed and crashed; the
lightning never seemed to cease, flash followed on flash and
filled the room with sufficient light to enable one to see a
mosquito scratching himself on the ceiling and now and
again cocking bis head with a vain expression on bis face.
Shrieks, as of so many tortured demons, reverberated from


crevice and corner, while the hissing of the wind and the
pelting of the hailstones against the window made a fellow
think the day of judgment was at hand. My door was
opened and All. came into the room. He appeared to have
lost a couple of stone during the night, and his voice was
hardly audible as he said, “Starlight, dear boy, isn’t this
awful P .1 have had a fearful dream. I wish I had my
letters and telegrams.”
“My dear Alf., I hope your dream is not the result of
0111 boating expedition. Remember, they rufi contrary and
your dream may not bring bad news.”
“It will, Starlight; but I won’t speak about it now. I
am glad we decided to go to Tasmania, for my blood wants
cooling. We’ll have a rough time outside if this storm
lasts. It will be in keeping with my feelings, and I hope
to enjoy it.”
“Where is Schwartz?” J asked.
M left him packing up. His room looks like a
gi eenhouse, and he was tailing on to shrubs and flowers and
things he got down the river yesterday—names as long as
telegraph wires.”
katci matters got a little better, the wind having
settled down to a steady gale with light rain. We got to
the steamer, and soon had all made snug in our cabins.
Returning to the deck, we found Ansard and his wife
coming on board. The steamer was now very crowded, as
it was the largest that had sailed touching at Tasmania
ami ports before making for the South Seas. Curiosity
e\ idently brought some, friendship others, and the copious
teals shed by a few led a fellow to believe that stronger and
dearer ties than either of the former bound them to those
from whom they were parting, perhaps for ever. A noise
and racket, above all others, now took place, as those who
were not passengers were hustled on shore, and the ropes
which connected the steamer with the wharf were cast off.
Phis was the signal for yelling out orders, for hells to ring,
for whistles to scream, for loud tramping of feet, and for
general hurried movements. Hatches had been fastened
down, and all matters made snug to meet a gale. We were
not far away before the salt spray opened the programme


by scattering itself over ns in showers of small shot, driving
nearly everybody below. A few miles further, and the shot
thickened; nearing the Heads it joined company with heavy
spray and came in splashes, ai d after passing these the
green seas didn’t bother themselves about us, but just rolled
over us, each roller in one grand sweep, shaking the steamer
until she trembled like a dog with ague. A few miles
further still and we were in the thick of it. There was a
terrible sea on. It was a grand sight, however, and well
worth a good wbtting. Talk about pitching ! We were
doing that same properly; one moment we’d be lifted high
enough to catch hold of a cloud, the next we’d be down in
caverns hundreds of fcqjb deep, with a towering mass of
water hanging over us and grinning like a cat, as if
exulting in its own powers and our helplessness. At times
the world seemed to have disappeared. Night was corning on,
and as the darkness increased phosphorescent lights danced
about on top of the foaming billows like silver phantoms.
Alf. and I were the last passengers to leave the deck.
On reaching the cabins we found the stewards making
efforts to prepare the evening meal. The fiddles were on
the tables, but they could not keep the plates and dishes
in their places, and to watch their antics was something
amusing. There would be a heavy lurch to port, and away
one lot of plates would go, chased by cups, saucers, spoons,
knives and forks. Then she’d bob her stern down with a
crash, and away would go a round of beef, pelted along by
carrots and potatoes, cabbages following after, spreading
their wings like great eagles and gathering the truant
comestibles under them like a hen would her chickens.
Next up would go her stern, while her f orepart would
disappear, and everything would come racing back again,
followed by the stewards.
Time passed, and we managed to get a feed somehow,
enlivened by groans and other horrible noises. After the
table was cleared Schwartz and I tried to have a game of
chess, while Alf. steadied the board, binding it useless, we
faced the deck once more.
There was little sleep for anybody that night. Towards
morning we had a run through the storm, and after a
somewhat prolonged passage we reached Hobart.


Although we were all strangers we were highly pleased
with our quarters and general surroundings, and after a
few hours’ chat with some of the islanders felt very much
at home and passed our time very pleasantly, visiting
everything worth looking at. A rivulet runs through the
centre of the town, which on the whole is a pretty place.
I he Gardens are approached through the Domain, and are
situated on the River Derwent. Ansard and his wife were
so pleased with all they saw in Hobart that they resolved
to stay.
Door Alf. is gloomy. He hates town, and asked
Schwartz and me to go up to the bush with him. We
consented, and after providing ourselves with ammunition
and every requisite we started. For some miles from Hobart
we had the bluff side of Mount Wellington frowning upon
us on our left; then, after following a small creek, struck
a track; following it for a mile or so we made a detour,
also to the left, for the special benefit of Schwartz, who
wished to inspect the flora peculiar to that part of
the island. W© made a few more irregular detours, and
coming to a spring and some beautiful pastoral land
we camped.
There is a pretty plant here called “The Star of
Bethlehem,’ but Schwartz called it “Auguillarnoiana”—at
least, I think that was the name. We also fell in with the
colonial “Jack-in-the-box”—a peculiar plant.
I said to Alf. : “I am going to take a rise out of
Schwartz, for 1 think I have found something that he knows
nothing about. It will help me to pay off old scores, for
he said, with all my bush experience, 1 was as ignorant
as an ass about flora. So J called out, ‘Here, Schwartz, I
have found a plant T want you to name for me.’ ”
Now the peculiarity of this plant is that if you touch
it below the joint, and before the male pollen is shed, it
throws itself over for about two feet, as if to gather strength
for what is to follow. Then it springs up as if shot out
of a gun to an altitude of about three feet; after which
performance it throws itself about in all directions.
Schwartz walked round it, stooped over it, knelt before
it, and cut many learned capers.


“Good gracious, Schwartz!” I exclaimed, “can you not
give it a name? Do you see anything peculiar about it?”
Ho examined it more closely. Then 1 touched it with
a small reed I had in my hand, saying at the same time,
“Look, Schwartz, at this funny mark.” He did two
things—he both looked and tried a jump; he was in time
for the look, hut too late in the jump. Back Jack went
like as if shot, then up he jumped like a sky-rocket, out
went his arms like so many porcupine’s quills, encircling
Schwartz in their embrace, while the straight portion of
Ids stem kept waving itself round him, and with every
wave the pollen would fall on him in showers. He could
not get off Ids knees, and as the pollen fell on him he kept
dodging his head to escape it. One time it would he under
his arm, at another between his knees, then in his trouser s
pockets, and at others I couldn't tell where. As soon as
Jack had expended his pollen down he went and closed his
box, leaving Schwartz looking as if he had seen a ghost.
I tried to keep a serious expression.
We both inwardly enjoyed the scene. At last Schwartz
gained his feet. He looked up at the clouds, down at the
ground, tried to stare the sun out of countenance, looked
this way and that, and then, fastening his eyes on me,
said, “Mine goot frien, Stargaze, vhot vhos dot?”
“I leave that question for you to answer, Schwartz;
that is what I called you for. But why were you cutting
such capers?”
“I vhos no cut capers; dot plant was cut. capers mit
Schwartz.”
The sun was setting, so we returned to camp, had our
evening meal, then took a quiet stroll until dark. Once
more we had a second edition of what Schwartz could do
in the acrobatic line.
A If. and I had our guns, and were looking for ’possums,
bandicoots —anything, in short. We had left Schwartz
sitting down sorting a few choice flowers he had come
across, and were watching the grass waving some few yards
ahead, as if some animal were running through it. Alf.
was just going to raise his gun, when a yell from Schwartz
brought us up all standing.


“Halloo!” I cried, “Schwartz has fallen against some
ol bis hard words and hurt himself.”
"Xo,” said Alf., quite seriously; “it cannot be that
look at him.”
I looked, and his afternoon performances were not a
patch on those he was now cutting. He rolled over, jumped
to his feet, turned half-a-dozen somersaults, and then he
dashed for the camp.
Come on, Alf.,” I cried. “He must have a colony of
snakes round his logs.”
£ ot to ramp soon after him, but before we could
speak he was stripped and into a waterhole a little below
the spring.
Down we dashed after him, thinking ho was going to
drown himself. But no. When we arrived he was quietly
floating on his back, moaning, and millions of soldier ants
were floating round him.
He kept diving and swimming about for a* time, then
he swam to the bank, and as soon as he saw us he cried :
“Mine frien Hornyblo, mine frien Stargaze, dis
vhos dere toufel! I’m dead!”
“Well,” I said, “you are very lively for a dead man.”
He uttered, in a most doleful tone, ‘You no joke,
Stargaze; 1 vhos no more live now.”
CHAPTER VI.
THE NATIVE DEVIL.
W lion in Hobart we were told of some good hunting
country flying beyond the Meander, and on our informer
saying, “There is also good shooting on a station belonging
to a man named Hunter,” Alf. had replied, “Thanks, my
boy; he is my cousin.”
\>o had intended taking matters easy; now, however,
we decided to push on to Hunter’s station.
AVe passed a few notable places, crossed the Jordan,
got through Jericho, and on the fifth day reached a ridge
ol high land, thinly timbered. l (1 rom this elevation we saw
two peculiarly-shaped mountains- landmarks which told us


we were on the boundary of our hunting-ground. A good
camp was not difficult to find. We chose a well-sheltered
ridge, with a large waterhole at the foot, and by sundown
we had the camp in order. We passed the evening in
planning out a programme as to our movements. Then
Schwartz commenced to sing, which soon put n.s to sleep.
I was the first to wake the next morning. On looking
at Alf. I made up my mind that we would not have much
hunting. His face was livid, he was breathing heavily, and
every now and again he murmured, “Yes, dear Alice, I’m
coming.” F put the fire together and went after the horses.
When T came back Schwartz was having a swim and
Alf. was preparing breakfast. I asked him how he had
slept and how he felt.
“I am much stronger, Starlight,” he answered. “This
air braces me up, and as we have come here for sport we’ll
have it.”
“We will try for it, at any rate,” is ray reply. T
wanted, however, to get him to Hunter’s place, so I said,
“I saw sheep tracks when after the horses. We must be
on or near your cousin’s run. What do 5 7 0 u say, shall we
go there at once?”
“I think it is the best thing we can do, Starlight.”
We arrived at the station in about three hours, found
it most pleasantly situated, with a long stretch of open
country showing ahead, while blue lines of mountains were
to be seen in the far distance and wavy sheets of water
like miniature lakes sparkled in the morning sun.
“I wonder whether Hunter will know me?” Alf, said.
“I have not seen him since we were at school together, and
his wife I have never seen. She was born here.”
We tied our horses up, and as we walked towards the
house we heard a lady’s voice singing. The tones were so
low and sweet that I was fascinated and pulled the others
up, saying, in a whisper, “Let us listen.”
Alf. and Schwartz were as much charmed as I was,
and we listened with bated breath, and might have been
listening yet if we hadn’t heard footsteps approaching ns
and a man’s voice cry out, “Hallo ! mates, where have yon
sprung from?”
0


We turned round and saw a browned, but good-looking,
man of medium boigbt and rather slight build coming
towards us.
“That’s Hunter,” said Alf. “I’d know him among a
hundred. I wonder whether he knows me?”
Hunter did know him, for after looking at each of us
for a few moments he settled his eyes on Alf., scanned him
all over, and then made a dash forward and caught him in
his arms. He stood him at arms’ length, smiled, gave a
loud laugh, and cried, “I’ll be shot if it isn’t Hornblower !”
“Yes, Hunter, it’s me, old boy, and these are my
friends.” The introduction was soon over. The same
ceremony was as swiftly repented with Hunter’s wife, and
in ten minutes we felt as much at home as if we were the
owners of the station.
At lunch, hunting and other matters were planned, and
as we would not camp at the station it was decided to
have a series of picnics.
As soon as lunch was over Hunter said that he had to
go out to one of the sheep stations. The others consented
to go with him, but I demurred, saying, “I had better
stay.”
The fact was T wanted to get Mrs. Hunter interested in
A 1 P.’s condition, and as we were later on strolling round
the garden I gave her a description of his symptoms since
leaving Brisbane. She was much distressed, and I could
see big tears roll down her cheeks when I mentioned the
incident of the morning. My mind was now relieved.
About an hour before sundown the three returned.
At dinner Hunter gave us a grand description of the island
matters in general, and of a creature, about the size of a
kangaroo, with striped skin, patches of black and white,
huge jaws, a pouch like a kangaroo, and jumping something
similarly to that marsupial. The name of the animal is
“The Native Devil,” he said, and a dead enemy to sheep.
As they are mostly found in the mountains, we were
to have an early start and commence our hunting by
tackling the devil.
Soon after this we started for our camp, promising to
bp early at the station,


Next morning we were up to time and found fresh
horses waiting for us. Soon after breakfast, Hunter, Alt'.,
Schwartz, myself, and two native boys started for the
mountains. About noon we sighted three devils. They
were on the side of a mountain, and we tried to get above
them so as to drive them on to the open, level country.
Having managed this, the race commenced. Alf. and 1
tackled one, and the rest of the party made for the other
two. 1 have often heard the expression, “Go to the devil !”
and no doubt many obey that command. In our case it
was “Go after the devil!” and if other fellows go to him
half as fast as we two went after him 1 am not surprised
at their coming early to grief. I never saw a kangaroo
that could beat our devil for jumping, and he ran away
from us at the rate of a steam-engine for the first mile or
so. I had a much faster horse than Alf., and seeing some
ugly, rocky country ahead, 1 cried to him, “I’ll leave you,
Alt'., to come after, and I will try and turn him before
he reaches those rocks.”
“Alright,” sang out Alf. “I won’t be far behind.”
By this time I could feel that I was riding a clipper,
who was as eager to go as I to let him; so we buckled to,
and 1 tell you it was a life-and-death chase. I was gaining
on the devil. 1 could see the foam dropping from his
mouth in bucketfuls; his underjaw was working up and
down like the flappers of a mill, while his upper one
appeared to exit the air like the bowsprit of a ship. Now
and again he gave vent to loud grunts. I was nearing the
rocks, and could see one with a piece sticking out from it
like a spike, and for which the devil seemed to be making
straight. Also that it was all “up the country” so far as
catching him was concerned if he reached that rock first.
So I kept a little to the left, as I could see an opening on
that side, and I urged my horse to his very top speed for
a last and final effort, for it was impossible to say whether
the devil meant to dash through the opening or scramble
over the rocks. A few minutes more and I was neck and
neck with him; he tried an extra spurt, and I was thinking
about pulling up, for the opening, to which I was close up,
was fearfully broken. In another moment the devil would


have had it all his own way, for I could not have followed
him. At this critical moment, however, lie made a terrible
and fatal leap, for he landed with tremendous force against
the sharp rock, the spike entering his mouth and pinning
him as if he were nailed there.
“1 tell you, 1 was glad to pull up. For a few moments
1 could not speak, and the noble animal I rode did not
appear to object to a spell either. There was a beautiful
cool breeze blowing, which soon revived the pair of us, and
not seeing a move out of the devil 1 rode up to him and
found him as dead as a door nail.
I had not given Alf. a thought since leaving him.
Now, however, that the excitement was over, and a dead
devil alongside of me, I experienced a sudden shock that
almost froze my blood. I felt somehow as if the whole
world had left me, and that I was floating in space, lint
where was Alf.? Where was Hunter? I looked back.
Nothing was to be seen but a few trees and bushes. I
dismounted and climbed high up the rocks, but no Alf. was
in sight. The rest of -the party must have gone in another
direction; at any rate, their absence did not trouble me
as Alf.’s did. I waited a few moments, had another good
long look, braced myself together, cast away all fanciful
thoughts, and resolved to follow my tracks back again until
1 met him.
1 reckoned I had retraced my steps about three miles
without coming across a sign of Alf. or his horse, when
all of a sudden I noticed a cloud of dust rise about a quarter
of a mile ahead, as if something were kicking up the
ground, and my heart almost stood still as I saw a riderless
horse jump to his feet, stagger for a bit, then recovering
himself and seeing me galloping towards him, made in the
direction where I took the station to be. The riderless
horse stopped when he had gone about a quarter of a mile,
turned round, gave a snort, and whipped off again for a
short distance; turned round once more, gave another snort,
and off he went altogether. I jumped off my own horse
and rushed over to an object that I had discerned lying
on the ground. In a few seconds I was sitting down with
poor Alf.’s head lying on my knees. 1 called him by name,


but I got no response. I kissed mid stroked him, but 1
could not get a murmur.
After a while his head moved. He tried to speak, but
could only murmur very faintly. This little, however,
ielieved me. There was life in Alf. still, and I began to
hope and feel like King Richard at the moment when he
said that he was “himself again.”
Alf. was quiet once more; not a move, hardly a breath
escaped from him, but he looked as if be were in a sweet-
sleep, and there was a slight flush on his face. So I took
oil my coat, made a pillow of it, and put it under his head.
Then I fossicked round and found his saddle; the girths and
tree were broken. A quart pot was hanging to the saddle
a trifle bent, but not leaky. I was glad of this, as I had
something now in which to carry water. I went in search
of that fluid, and found a small hole some four or five
hundred yards away. I filled the pot and returned, sat
down by Alf., and bathed his forehead and face, and got
him to swallow a little water.
The sun had now set and darkness would soon be our
only companion. The station, I reckoned, must be some
twenty miles away, so that it was impossible for me to walk
and carry Alf., while if I left him the devils might eat him.
The only hope I had of getting speedy help was through the
horses we had been riding. These were sure to gallop
straight home, and that would soon fetch Hunter and the
boys, as they would have their tracks to follow.
A clump of bushes grew near. I broke them down,
covering Alf. with them to keep off the chilly night air as
much as possible. 1 had put my coat over his chest, taken
his head on my knees, and was keeping my body bent over
him to ensure warmth.
I never could sing a note, but now I tried to hum a
song J had heard Alf. sing, thinking the words might catch
his ear. Occasionally I put my face near to his and talked
as if in conversation with somebody, in the hope of
attracting his attention. Now and again 1 heard a faint
murmur or a low, smothered groan, but no other sound
emanated from Alf. for many weary hours.
It was just about daybreak, and I was beginning to


feel stiff, for I had not moved my position save to ease
Alf.’s head, during the whole of the night. My body felt
numbed, and I was thinking about getting on to my feet to
have a stretch when I heard Alf. speak my name. My
heart gave a big jump, all discomfort passed away at the
sound, and I answered, “Alt'., dear boy, I am so happy to
hear you speak. We will soon have help now; it is near
daylight.”
“Yes, Starlight,” he said, “I am glad you arc happy.
I’ll soon be happy, too. I’ll soon be with Alice.”
1 thought that his mind was wandering, so I did not
answer. He continued: “Starlight, we have been dear
friends, and 1 must tell you all.”
“Oil, Alf., 1 cried, “tell me where you are hurt.
Tell me what I can do to ease your pain; tell me, Alf., that
you know 1 am with you, that it is Starlight speaking to
you.” I felt a lump rising in my throat, so I had to stop.
“It is all right, Starlight,” he said. “I know it all.
I’m not wandering, but I’m past doing anything for in this
world. My eyes are getting dim, but I can see Alice, and 1
must tell you. Oh! there, there! She is there!” he cried.
“She is smiling on me.” He tried to get up, but with a
low groan of agony he sank back into my arms.
“Oh, Alf., dear boy, don't go on like this,” I said. “It
is daylight, and Hunter will soon be here.” I was fairly
choking trying to keep back the flood of emotion that was
struggling for an exit, for now I knew too well all would
soon be over with poor Alf. Yes, his cry of agony, his
poor helpless body revealed that his back was broken.
In a short time he again rallied. I bent my head
towards him, as I could see that he wanted to speak.
“Listen, Starlight,” he said. “Alice is gone. Come
nearer, dear boy, nearer, while I tc]l*you. Yes, she is gone.
She was told that I was untrue, and I was waiting, waiting,
longing for her. I was going home, Starlight, to our own
dear Devonshire home in Old England, to claim her. 1
received the cruel news on the steamer in Brisbane that
she believed me to be false, and her letter was then put
into my hand—a letter, written on her deathbed. Oh !my
God ! to think the darling 1 was waiting for should be


snatched from mo; that cruel hands could pen the false
words that were to make my lily droop until its blossoms
were crushed, its silver leaves closed and enveloped by the
dark shades of night—an everlasting night ! But, Starlight,
look! She is up there! Waiting, ever waiting, so that she
may lie the first to welcome me to the happy land. Up there,
Starlight, we will be united, for row she knows 1 was true.”
Poor Alf. stopped. 1 thought all was over, so still, so
calm he lay. I held my breath; great drops (if perspiration
bedewed my brow. 1 felt as if I bad no right to be holding
that angel head on my worthless bosom. I was gently laying
it on the coat pillow when T heard a whisper, as if coming
from the grave. Again its was Alf.’s voice speaking. I
bent my head over until it touched his lips. He said,
“Starlight, coat pocket, case; open, read.”
T knew what he meant, and took the case out of his
pocket. I opened it and found that it contained a small
Testament, a letter, a lock of hair, and the miniature of a.
most beautiful girl. 1 put the miniature to his lips. He
tried to smile his thanks as he whispered :
“Bury them with me; and, Starlight, read, see mark,
Alice, Testament.”
I was in a great funk. Many years had passed sinee I
last opened a Testament, and 1 trembled like a leaf.
However, T opened at the mark he indicated, but before
reading I took off my hat and had a look round to gain
courage. It was a beautiful morning. A heavy frost had
fallen during the night; the sun was shining on it, giving
if the appearance of melting silver. The trees and bushes
were waving, the birds were singing, the distant mountains
were changing their hues every moment. The whole
landscape had the appearance of one vast, grand picture.
As I took another look T could see the rock that stopper!
the devil’s gallop, and this gave me extra courage. 1
thought: “It’s a rummy position for you to be in, Starlight;
but you must do it.” While so thinking my eyes caught
Alf.’s, who was eagerly watching me, and I thought he
divined my thoughts, for there was a half-smile on his face.
I bent my head as close to him as possible and I read the
chapter to the end.


Poor A]f. was clinging to me and his eyes were closing
as T shut the hook and pressed it to his lips. I then put
all his heart’s treasures back in the case, placed it on his
pure bosom, covered it over, made his head as comfortable
as possible, and was mournfully waiting for the end, when
T heard horses galloping, and looking in the direction of the
sound I could see Hunter, Schwartz, and a native hoy
coming along at railway speed.
Knowing how fond Schwartz was of A If., and his
excitable temperament, I said to him, “A bit of an accident.
Schwartz; he cool.” But before I could well get the words
out he was kneeling alongside of Alf. with tears streaming
down his cheeks, as he cried, “Oh! vhos dish mine Alf. P
Vhos hish mine HornybloP Oh! mine Alf., mine Alf., you
vhos no more! Blow the horns!” He kissed Alf. again
and again, and jumped back about twenty rods, kicked one
leg about three feet higher than his head, brought it down
and up with the other, struck straight out from the shoulder
with both of his arms, gave another jump, stood stock still
for many seconds like a sentry on duty, shook his head to
and fro very mournfully, and finally walked over and sat
down quietly beside Hunter and me, with tears streaming
silently down his face, but with no further sound or murmur.
Hunter’s demeanour was the reverse of this. His blank
look, dry eyes, muttered speech, and half-frightened manner
showed plainly his mental agony.
Now I gave all my attention to Alf. His last moments
were at hand. I saw him open his eyes. I thought that I
saw his lips move, so I bent down an ear close to them and
just caught the sound of the two last words he ever uttered,
“Alice—Heaven.”
******
The cruise was ended. We buried Alf. in the garden
at the head station.
Schwartz went to Rotterdam with about a hundred
tons of pressed flowers and shrubs, and a couple of thousand
varieties of other matters in the flora line, but he would
have no further connection with “Jack-in-the-box.” He
gave me an invitation to his house if ever I went to
Rotterdam, and told me I would then see Schneider,


A MORN ING SURPRISE.




A MILD TYPE OF A QUEENSLAND
TOAD.
The camp-firo was deserted for some time. Starlight
and Alf. had been inspecting a block of country and tbo
rest of the party were engaged some distance away. But
they again got together, and one of the men, named Bogers,
was called upon to entertain them for the evening. He
began thus:
“I was born under a bullock-dray, and when about
three months old I lost my father and mother. It happened
in a violent thunderstorm on ,Tim Crow cattle-run, neai
tbe head station.
“The storm came up suddenly and upset the bullock-
dray, killing my father and mother. We were found by the
stockman, and T was taken charge of by the owner of the
station, and my parents were buried near the scene of
their deaths.
“When old enough, I was left to manage the station
until it passed away from my benefactor. I then had to
shift for myself.
“Soon after T took charge a long drought came on,
and the cattle got so poor that the native dogs would not
eat them, let alone the blacks. We were hard up, too, fol-
iations. Cranky Jack, the stockman, fell away almost to
a shadow, and at daybreak of a morning would wake all
hands, crying out, ‘My stomach is scratching my backbone!’
and when he was about you could hear his bones rattle like
a tin pot with stones in it. He got thinner and thinner;
in fact, he got so thin that he used to stand his knife up
and lay in the shade of it.
“At last it rained, and the blacks predicted an old-man
flood. All the vermin in the country for miles around
gathered near the head station, more especially toads ami
frogs. In the house, on the beds, and in every hole and
corner.


"At dusk, one would pop out from one corner, Ins
mate from another, while another would arrive from the
ceiling, coming flop on to the floor, and, gathering his legs
under him, would look at you as much as to say, ‘What do
you think of that?’
"Cranky Jack’s hut was besieged by them, and one day
when he was away they got into his wife’s bed and nearly
drove her mad during the night. How long I had been
asleep T don’t know, but I woke long before daylight and
heard somebody screaming frightfully. T listened, and the
screaming still continuing T slipped on my clothes and
dashed down to Mrs. Jack’s hut.
"When I got to the hut it was in darkness, but I heard
a feminine voice proceeding from the bedroom. She was
crying out, ‘Oh ! Jack, Jack, come quick ! Oh ! will nobody
come to save me? I can’t find the matches. Oh! let go,
you villain !’ And she let out another yell that would have
done credit to a dingo.
"I cried out, ‘What the deuce is the matter, Mrs.
Jack? Open the door and let me in.’
“ ‘Oh !’ she screamed, ‘is that you, sir? Oh ! I’m kilt.
They are in bed with me, and on the floor with me, and I
can’t find the matches. And I don’t know where lam now ;
but I think my head is up the chimney and there’s
something on my leg !’
“I said, ‘Open the door, woman. I have matches.
They are only toads.’
"At last she gathered herself together, got to the door
somehow, and opened it.
‘‘Sure enough, they were toads—a nation of them, with
their uncles, cousins, and aunts.
"I almost choked with laughing. Her hands and face
were smothered in black. She had a splendid head of hair,
and as a rule kept it well, but now it was all roads.
“ ‘Mrs. Jack,’ I said, ‘you are a fright! I never
thought you would let a few toads put you in that state.
Why, any one of your hairs would do for a roping-pole.
What would Jack say if he saw you now?’
" ‘Ah, sure, sir, don’t chaff me. Sure, I was having a
beautiful drame, when I felt as if something dabbed a hand
on my face and then on my shoulder.’


“I stayed with her until she got matters straight,
calmed her fears, and got her hair into order. Then I
went hack.
“But there was one toad that I remember. He was
nearly a foot long, pea-green, with a dark stripe down the
hack, intelligent eyes, and as knowing looking as a jailer.
“He was always in my bedroom. I used to give him a
nod, saying, ‘Good morning, old chap; still here?’ never
thinking he was studying me.
“No place would do him hut the edge of the washing
table, and from there he would jump on to the basin, cock
his eye at me all the time I was washing my face; then
he would pop on to the dressing-table, watch mo comb ray
hair, clean my teeth, and other necessaries.
“We became chums, and T used to stroke him, offer him
a smoke, and chaff him on his looks-—compliments he soon
began to return by stroking my hand, hopping on to my
shoulder, combing out my beard, and kissing his hand to
me when leaving the room.
“One morning, while sitting at breakfast, the
housekeeper sang out, ‘Oh, sir; look here, sir! Oh! by
the powers of my mother’s cat, look, sir! T never saw
the like !’
“ ‘What is the matter?’ I cried.
“ ‘The toad, sir !’
“We went to the bedroom, and found her standing
with the door and her mouth open and rather frightened
looking. We looked in and saw a sight. The housekeeper
had just emptied the wash-basin, leaving half a tumbler of
water alongside it, and the toad hopped on the stand and
tried to empty the tumbler of water into the basin.
“Then he got the soap, lathered himself, and jumped
on to the towel-rack, seized the towel and commenced
rubbing himself hard. It was grand to see him put the
towel back; the efforts he made. At last he got the end
of it in his mouth and climbed up the wall backwards,
taking it with him. When high enough, he slung himself
over the roller, and there it was.
“After this he sprang on to the dressing-table and
combed himself. Then he took the brush and gave himself


a vigorous brushing. Finding the toothbrush, he began
rubbing away at his gums, but the brush would slip and
disappear into his interior. Once he lost it; it slipped
down his throat. But hy giving himself a kick with one
on his hind legs and keeping his mouth wide open he shot
it out like a sky-rocket.
“All the time he was at his antics the housekeeper kept
crying. ‘Sure, he’s the devil !’
“We left the toad reclining in a chair and the
housekeeper kicking her heels in the air.
“We got up a dance one night at the station, and a
week or so after the black boy ran up to the house, panting
like a worked-out bullock, gasping, ‘Massy, massy! You
come, you come quick. My word, big corroboree that fella,
old fella toad !’
“ ‘Who is having a corroboree?’ T shouted hack.
“ ‘That fellow old-man toad. You know that fella long
time. My word, big fella cfl-bon, I been see him. Plenty
more fella jump about.’
“I started off with the darky, and about half a mile
from the head station, by the light of a blazing log and
the moon, I saw a sight.
“Three or four toads were shoving a stick up and down
some sort of instrument, and our old house-fellow was
putting a number of others through the set.
“It was not an elegant performance, but it would have
made a fellow’s fortune if he could have exhibited them.
“I got tired of watching them, and a curious sort of
itchy feeling crept over me. It made a lively imagination
fancy that all the inhabitants of the infernal regions had
taken the shape of toads and frogs, and come on the earth
to astonish the natives. Ro I gave the hlack boy a firestick,
which he threw among the revellers, putting a stop to any
further sport for that night.
“It had all come about from the dancing at the
house. The old fellow had slipped away, after taking
lessons from our performance, to train his mates for this
grand entertainment.
“He was very quiet for some time after this, and T
again forgot all about him, as I was busy mustering another


inob of fats, and before starting them on the road had to
go to the nearest coach-stage, some sixty miles away, to
meet a relation of the owner, named Snodgrass, who was
coming to live on the station.
“The fat cattle were ready when i returned. 1 took
charge of them and left Snodgrass to manage during my
absence. He occupied my room, and Mr. Toad also had
his quarters there. For some time the latter had been
behaving handsomely, inclined, if anything, to be dumpy,
and the housekeeper told me on my return that after I
went away she thought he was going off the hooks
altogether. 'Sure, I thought the hasty was fretting aftei
you, and for that same I fed and nursed him. However
that may lie, he got over his fretting and came out in his
proper colours.’
“Snodgrass had brought from home with him some
boxes of cigarettes. If ever he left them open in his room
he would find them gone when he returned and the room
smelling strongly of smoke.
“Snodgrass was talking the matter over at the
breakfast-table, when he thought ho heard somebody
striking a match. The sound appeared to come from his
room. He jumped up and went to see. A few seconds
after a loud laugh rang through the house, and the rest
of the station hands, who had been breakfasting with him,
ran to see what it was all about. The toad was sitting
in a chair in the act of lighting a cigarette. He seemed
in no way disconcerted at being found out, merely giving
a puff and gently beckoning them with his disengaged hand
a clear intimation to enter, and as if inviting us to join
the symposium and continued to puff.
“‘Well, I’m damned !” was all Snodgrass said.
“After this Snodgrass and the toad became chums. Of
an evening he would jump on to the dining-room table, take
a cigarette, light it, and smoke away with the best of
smokers. He would also partake of a drop of brandy,
sipping it out of a tumbler, finish up with a loud croak,
and then fall off to sleep until the next evening.
“Snodgrass was rather pleased when he took long
sleeps, for there was no rest for him at other times. His


bedclothes, when Mr. Toad was sober, would be pulled off
him ;il daybreak, every article in the room that the toad
could handle would be thrown at him, and sleep was
impossible. So up Snodgrass would have to get, which was
all the toad wanted. As soon as Snodgrass left the room
the toad would jump into his bed, pull the sheet over
himself, shut his eyes, and commence a sort of croaking
snore.
“‘lt was a snore,’ as the housekeeper said when
describing it to me. ‘Sure, sir, the croak without the
snore is bad enough, but no baste could do both and live.
Between you and me, sir, Mr. Snodgrass is not a bad hand
at it, but the toad, sure, there is no bating him. Jiedad !
ii all the bowlings of a camp of blacks and a pack of native
dogs were pressed into the lungs of a squealing cat, and
the Jot was bust up from a forty-ton gun, it would be
beautiful music to the row that the toad makes when
trying Ids double-action snoring business. His croak alone
w ould sometimes frighten a body out of seven years’ growth,
but his double-action business would break down a stone
wall. And now I’m coming to what I want to tell you
most, sir. He will never snore or croak any more, for he
is dead, sir, and a beautiful funeral he had!’
“‘What! Dead?’
“ ‘About a week ago,’ was her reply. ‘And sure I
think he broke a blood vessel trying the double-action
business, for I found a few drops of blood alongside of him
one morning, and from that out he pined away until he
went altogether.’
“A few days after I was taking a walk with Snodgrass
to have a look at his grave, and while we were strolling
along Snodgrass told me how the toad’s end had come about.
All hands had been out during the morning. Coming home
to lunch, they found him on the writing-table, reclining on
a sheet of writing paper, a pen in his hand, and the end
of the holder was supported by his shoulder. There was a
bottle of ink alongside of him and some scratches on the
paper. He turned his head and looked at them when they
came near, and gave a sad, intelligent smile. Then his
head dropped, a long-drawn sigh escaped him, and all was
over.


“ ‘1 believe,’ continued Snodgrass, ‘that the beggar was
writing bis will, or trying to do so. You see, we had a
lawyer staying with us while you were away. He was going
to the Gilbert township to commence business. During the
evening he was all jaw and law, especially on wills and
bequests, and I noticed that the toad never left his elbow
during the whole of the time. And this is his grave.’
“ ‘Here lies the king of toads,
What he died of nobody knows;
But, for his genius, may be be blessed,
And his ashes here for ever rest.’ ”
Rogers stopped and began to fill his pipe. We smoked
and wondered for a while.
“But he had a relation,” Rogers continued, “called
‘The Doctor.’
“He was much younger than the Mild Type, and up
to the time of the latter’s death had done nothing
remarkable.
“But they were very fond of one another, and would
often nestle together, with their arms around each other’s
necks, while the Mild Type would appear to be instructing
the Doctor on subjects which we were unable to identify—
just as a fond father would impart knowledge to a son.
“After his death, no place would suit the Doctor during
the boat of the day like his brother’s grave.
“Wo saw him at work one day about two yards from it,
and it seemed to us he was tunnelling. In about a week
lie bad a tunnel run to it. He constructed next a small
room or cell, right over it, fitted it up nicely, and there
lie would go and camp from an hour after sunrise until
the evening; from that time until morning his quarters
Mould be my room.
“At this time there was a lot of sickness about, and
almost every second man you met had fever and ague. 1
had a slight attack, but soon got over it. Three of the
station hands were very bad, one man named Bob Lock
especially so. When the fever left them and the shakes
were on the bones of the poor fellows would rattle like so
many bells ringing.


“I used up all the medicine on the station, but to no
purpose. The nearest township was nearly three hundred
miles away, and 1 was thinking about sending there for a
doctor, but didn’t.
“I had been watching by Bob all one night. Towards
daylight he appeared to fall off into a quiet sleep, so I
thought I might as well take a doze also. I lay back in
the chair 1 was sitting in; my eyelids began to droop,
when I was startled by Bob giving a snort like a broken-
winded horse. On opening my eyes I saw the Doctor
sitting on the pillow. Dob appeared to be very restless,
and seemed as if he had swallowed something that did not
agree with him. The Doctor had a serious expression on
his face, and when I moved towards the bed waved his
hand for mo to keep back. I sat down again, and was no
sooner in my seat than he jumped on Bob’s breast and gave
three taps with one hand on the pit of his stomach.
Immediately after the third tap Bob’s mouth opened and
two young frogs popped out, jumped on to the floor, and
made tracks out of the room.
“The Doctor appeared to be thinking, and I moved
towards the bed, when another hand wave from the Doctor
warned me to keep back. I thought I could do no better
than keep quiet and wait. In a few minutes the two frogs
came back again, jumped on the bed, squatted, and
appeared to be having a confab with the Doctor. This
lasted for a few minutes, and then one of them jumped on
Bob’s chin and tickled his under-lip; this made him open his
mouth, and as soon as he did so the frog jumped in and
disappeared.
“The Doctor remained on his chest, and after the frog
had been out of sight for some time he gave three more
taps, and a moment later out jumped the frog as Bob
opened his mouth. They all now cleared, the Doctor giving
me a slight nod as he left the room.
“I went over to the bed and found Bob in a quiet
sleep, so I left him, as it was time to look after the other
two patients. Neither of them were any better, and it
was painful to sec the poor fellows suffer. I was going to
bathe their heads with vinegar when I saw the Doctor come


jumping into the room, followed by the two frogs. Without
taking any notice of me, they jumped on the bed of the
nearest patient and went through the same performance
as with Boh.
“I did not know what to make of it all, until suddenly
I remembered that in the Gulf Country people had been
cured of the disease by swallowing frogs. A string used to
be tied to the hind legs of the frog to be swallowed ; after
it had been caverned for a time sufficiently long to enable
it to perform its cleansing work satisfactorily, it could bo
pulled back again into daylight. The idea was that the
frog thoroughly cleansed the stomach of impurities that
either generated or continued the disease. It was told me
as a fact, and my hair almost stood on an end, not with
fright, but with delight, as it struck me that the Doctor
knew all about it, and was doing his level best to cure our
fellows. Not wishing to be in the way, T went back to
Bob’s room and found him sitting up in bed.
“I said, 'How do you feel, Bob?’
“ ‘Never better,’ he replied; ‘but I feel very weak and
hungry.’ The last of these trifles were soon overcome, and
in a week from the time that I saw the Doctor performing,
all hands were on their feet, with no sign of sickness about
them, and instead of sending for fever and ague mixture,
I had to send for more rations, and left the township doctor
out of the order, for the doctor we had on the station was
worth fifty gold mines and as many ordinary doctors to
boot.
“And now, boys, that is all 1 have to tell you about
toads, and I am going to turn in.”
Then we all turned in, and listening to the dingoes
and the curlews we dropped off to sleep out in that lonely,
ghostly bush.
“Out in the wastes of the Never Never,
That’s where the dead men He !
There where the heat waves dance for ever,
That’s where the dead men lie !”


“MINNIE WALK NOW.”


DROUGHT.
CHAPTER I.
THE JOURNEY.
It was now Williams’ turn for a yarn, and lie rambled
off as follows :
“My story dates back some years, when the west of
Queensland from the Warrego was called The Never-Never
Country.’ I was swinging in a hammock, under the
verandah of the homestead situated on country to the
north-west of the river mentioned, and as an introduction
to my story 1 will ask you to listen to a lady who was
speaking in the sitting-room:
“‘Angus, will this drought never break up? How
parched everything looks, and the heat is something
terrible,’ said the wife of Angus Mclnverness.
“She was a lady in every way suited to be the wife of
a pioneer settler—young, strong, cheerful, well educated,
and thoroughly conversant with the ups and downs of
station-life.
“Mclnverness himself was a good fellow and.very fond
of his wife; but when in town, and away from her influence,
he was apt to go on the ‘ran-tan.’
“This part of the country, as 1 have said, was called
The Never Never.’ The nearest township was over three
hundred miles away.
“I had travelled to this place with the Mclnvernessos
from the interior of New South Wales. We brought cattle
and horses and formed a station. We had been in the
country but a few months when the drought set in, and
matters began to look very blue. There was not a drop of
moisture night or day to cool the heated air; not a cloud
to be seen to deaden the rays of the fiercely-burning sun.
No wonder that Mrs. Mclnverness asked, ‘Will this drought
never break up?’


It was a question that Angus could not answer.
“The Mclnvernesses had two children—a girl over
three years and a baby boy a little over twelve months.
“They were now all sitting under the verandah of the
homestead, and in spite of all the drawbacks they appeared
lo be a happy group. Angus was swinging in the hammock
I had deserted, with his little girl in his arms; Mrs.
Me Inverness was reclining in a squatter’s chair, her baby
boy playing at her feet. She appeared to be in deep
thought. A remark made by Angus caused her to raise
her head, and, looking at him, she said, ‘The teams, with
supplies, cannot possibly reach us by Christmas; but 1 am
quite willing, dear, to put up with poor Christmas cheer
so long as 1 have you here with me.’
“ ‘ Jiut 1 must go,’ replied. ‘lf the drought continues
the teams will not get out for months, and in a few days
the water at Reedy Swamp will be all gone, and that will
make it sixty miles of a dry stage. You see, the moon
will be pretty full. I can travel by night, camp on Muddy
Creek, fifteen miles from the river, be in at the store early
and out again to the same camp by night. You know, the
mailman told us that there’s still some water in the creek.’
“ ‘Yes,’ said Mrs. Mclnverness, ‘and you know he told
us it was almost impossible for onyone to pass the public-
house that has just opened without being dragged in; there
are so many men there knocking down their cheques.’
‘Well,’ he answered, ‘they won’t knock me down or
drag me in either, I will be too anxious to get back to
you, old girl, and the little ones.’
“Mrs. Mclnverness, after looking long and steadily at
him, was about to make some further remark, when she
was interrupted by the black servant, a girl little over
sixteen years, who was much attached to her mistress.
“‘What’s up, Minnie?’ Mclnverness said, as the girl
came near the verandah.
“ ‘Stockman wants to see you, Messer Mclnverness
’bout what feller yarraman you take to-morrow.’
“ ‘Yes, all right,’ replied Mclnverness.
“ ‘I see you have it all arranged, so it’s useless my
saying any more,’ said Mrs. Mclnverness.


“ ‘You will be all right, dear, and at the longest I will
not be away over a week,’ was Angus’s answer as he wen)
to consult with the stockman about horses.
“I did not like this arrangement, for 1 knew
Mclnverness’ weakness better than his wife did. So I tried
to persuade him to let me go, or the stockman.
“ ‘I would,’ he replied, ‘but there is no danger, and
Minnie will be a companion for Mrs. Mclnverness. They
have often been left by themselves, and by the delay you
might lose those blocks of country. I am siorry that the
stockman has to go away, but there is no help for it, and
1 will make all the haste back T can.’
“I knew there was no use arguing, so matters were
arranged for us all to start on our respective journeys in
the morning.
“At daybreak next morning we made a start. Mrs.
Mclnverness kept watching until the clouds of dust raised
by the horses’ hoofs settled to mother earth. She then
returned to the house, and found Minnie on the verandah
with the children. Taking the baby in her arms and the
little girl by the hand, she laid him alongside of her as she
knelt by the hammock in which Mclnverness was so fond of
resting and fervently prayed for his safe return.
CHAPTER II.
A CAROUSE.
“Four days have passed.
“Scene: A pub. down the river, where the roads
branch off. It is breaking day. Men are knocking at the
door to rouse the publican. The door is opened. There
is a mad rush to the bar.
“ ‘Rum, landlord, rum !’ is their cry.
“Amid all this Mclnverness drove up. He was
immediately surrounded, a dozen glasses were held out to
him, a score of voices yelled for him to have a drink.
“ ‘Thank you; not now, boys,’ he replied. ‘I must
get on to the store.’ For a time he held out against all


temptation, and having watered his horses lie was ready
for a fresh start. The horses were beginning to move, when
a rather respectable-looking man walked up to him.
“‘Good morning, McTnverness. How are you?’
“‘ls that you, Roberts? How are you?’
“They had a few minutes’ talk, then McTnverness said,
‘Well, good-bye, old man, I must be off. I want to get
hack to my last night’s camp by sundown, as there will
not be a drop of water on the road in a few days if this
weather lasts. The native well at the station will also he
dry, all hands are away and will not he hack for some
time, and Mrs. McTnverness has only Minnie with her.’
“ Well,’ replied the other, ‘you paint a doleful picture,
McTnverness; hut come and have breakfast, that will make
no difference, as yoii must get it somewhere.’
“McTnverness’ evil genius prevailed, and ho followed
his friend into the coffee-room. Breakfast was being
prepared, but before the hell rang for them to sit down
to it, short as the time was, the mischief was done.
McTnverness, at his friend’s request, had what he called
‘an appetizer.’ Breakfast over, his friend treated him to
what he called ‘a refresher.’ Then McTnverness made
another struggle to go, but the demon had him, the spark
had caught the tinder, and McTnverness said, ‘Come,
Roberts, a glass with me before T go.’
“Tn came the glasses, two inches of fighting rum in
each; the friends chink them together, a ‘Good luck’ is
repeated, and they gulp down the contents.
“No hand to save ! no hand to dash it away ! No
deliverer nor guardian angel at hand !
“With McTnverness the demon was now rampant. Six
inches of rum had done their work. His eyes were now
dancing in his head.
“The sun was high above the distant timber—one
great red ball, like a living coal of fire, and the heat was
so intense, the ground so parched, the air so stifling, the
noise so deafening, that it would confuse the head of the
coolest and most temperate of men, let alone the disordered
brains of the now debauched McTnverness,


“A noise and a bustle of men and horses outside was
heard, intermingled with the din and riot within. One
of the horsemen, coming to the coffee-room door, asked
Mclnverness to be the judge of a race that was just going to
take place. _ _
“ ‘Yes, come on, Mclnverness,’ his friend chimed in.
‘Just have another nip and we will see this race over before
you start.’
“How the demon laughs as Mclnverness says, It is not
right for me to stop, but 1 suppose an hour will not make
much difference.’
“They nip, the race is run, and the men, now almost
mud with excitement, rush again into the bar, and
Mclnverness, alas ! is one of them.
“For this his wife and children are forgotten; the
memory of their last fond embrace is crushed out by the
demon drink; the impression of their last fond kisses is
washed away by the fiery fluid that maddened him.
“Time waits not—neither for vice, for virtue, nor for
unfulfilled good intentions. One, two, three, four days
pass, and Mclnverness is still at the pub. What about the
‘dear wife’ he is so fond of when at home? How have
these long, dreary days passed with her? Listen, then.
CHAPTER III.
MINNIE’S RIDE.
“It is early morning. Solitude deep and solemn reigned
around the home of the Mclnvernesses.
“Mrs. Mclnverness is praying. The black glides in
and drops on her knees beside the kneeling wife.
“<I pray, too, Missie!’ she sobbed. ‘I pray you let
Minnie go. I bring Messer Mclnverness back supposing he
no come to-day.’
“This interruption caused Mrs. Mclnverness to rise,
while the black face, almost handsome, betraying eyes
glistening with tears, love, and devotion, looked up at her,
and again she sobbed out, ‘See, Missie, I pray you, 1 pray
you let Minnie go 1’


“‘You would perish,’ replied Mrs. Mclnverness, ‘my
dear girl, you would perish,’ and unable to control her
feelings, she lifted Minnie in her arms and pressed a deep,
fervent kiss on the dark forehead. The white arms of the
mistress encircled the dusky form of the servant, pressing
it to her bosom in a fond embrace, cognisant of nothing but
the noble heart that lay concealed beneath.
“The gentle breezes look on and smile as they rustle
and flirt with the leaves; the bushes bend in silence.
“As the day draws to a close the anxiety of Mrs.
Mclnverness increased. Minnie had been pleading all day
for permission to go, and at last Mrs. Mclnverness said she
could go a little way.
“‘Me get-am yarraman; go now; soon me come back
a-long-a Messer Mclnverness,’ is Minnie’s encouraging
reply.
“As the sun drooped l>ehind the trees she was mounted
and away, and pushed on until she came to Reedy Swamp,
where she hoped to find Mr. Mclnverness on his return trip.
All she did find was a puddle of mud, which neither horse
nor rider could drink.
“ ‘No good me go back,’ is Minnie’s soliloquy. ‘Missee
die if he no come. I go long-a Muddy Creek; find him
there.’
“She remounted and pushed on until the horse began
to tire; he was then allowed to make his own pace, as she
felt sure that he would give in before they reached the
river if she kept on urging him.
“By noon the following day they reached Muddy Creek.
The horse was fairly baked, and Minnie was not much
better. 1 here was a little water there, hut it was fearful-
looking stuff, almost as thick as cream, and had a green
scum all over it. The poor girl was almost dead with thirst,
a little water-hag she carried having given out. However,
the state of the water didn’t seem to trouble her, for after
looking round an agonizing groan escaped from her lips,
‘No Messer Mclnverness here! Poor Missie ! Minnie cry
now!’ After a short while she calmed down and made the
best of the water by filtering a little through the sand. The
poor horse could he persuaded to drink only a little of the


uninviting fluid. After a spell Minnie again mounted,
but she only got a slow pace out of the horse, which, after
a few miles, stopped and refused to go further.
“ ‘Me walk now !’ said the brave-hearted, loyal Minnie.
Dismounting, she took off the saddle and bridle, hung them
on a tree branch, patted the horse on the neck, murmured
‘Poor yarraman,’ and turned him adrift. Then picking up
her water-bag she continued her rescue journey ion foot.
“It was near midnight when she reached the pub.
Wearied as she was, she stopped not to rest, but made for
the publican, whose house was not yet shut. She stated
her story in such a simple and pathetic manner that even
his heart was touched, and he took her with him to
Mclnverness’ room. Angus had just woke up out of a
drunken sleep.
“When he saw Minnie his eyes almost hurst out of his
head, and he trembled as if with ague.
“Minnie put a hand on his shoulder, shook him, and
said, ‘Come quick, Messer Mclnverness, or Missie dead !’
“He wanted to ask questions, hut all she would say
was, ‘You come quick or Missie dead !’
“An angel must have been prompting her, for her words
sounded so solemn that Mclnverness bounded to his feet
from his sitting posture on the bed perfectly sobered. But
he was as wild and haggard-looking as a condemned
criminal.
“The words had given the publican a start also, for his
heart could be heard heating like the ticking of a clock,
and he said in a low voice to Mclnverness, ‘You had better
go at once. The waggon is loaded and ready, the moon
is shining, and it will not take long to get the horses out
of the paddock. You will have time to get home by
Christmas morning, and all may be right.’
“ ‘Yes,’ cried Mclnverness. ‘Gracious mercy, I hope
so ! Good heavens, what a brute I am ! What have 1
been doing? Oh ! My God ! My God ! protect my wife and
little ones,’ and he dashed from the room, Minnie and the
publican following. It was a strange scene.
“Mclnverness was soon away, driving fast and furious,
at a pace that would have soon knocked his horses up. The


night air reviving him, he saw this, and steadied down to
an easy trot.
“Minnie appeared happy now, and being altogether
done up coiled herself in the back of the waggon and slept.
“By the time they arrived at Muddy Creek day was
breaking, but no refreshing breeze came with it. Thick
and almost boiling vapour suffocated everything. Not a
bird was heard singing its morning note, and the muddy
puddle in the creek emitted a most sickening smell.
“No use stopping, so Mclnverness pushed on to get as
far as possible before the extreme heat of day. The sun
was up, but a thick ball of black cloud hid it from view.
The cloud kept rising with the sun. A jolt of the waggon
having woke Minnie, she looked around, and the first words
she had uttered since leaving the pub. escaped her :
“ ‘See, Messer Mclnverness,’ she said, ‘soon thunder.’
“‘Merciful heaven, send it!’ he cried, ‘and rain with
it,’ and continued, ‘Oh ! Minnie, we have only two small
kegs of water, and as Reedy Swamp is altogether dry the
horses will hardly be able to hold out.’
“About noon fifty miles were covered, but there was
twice that distance to go yet, and the horses showed signs
of weariness, occasioned more by the heat and thirst than
by the travelling. The black cloud, larger now, and much
nearer, behaved in a most tantalizing manner—at one time
lowering heavily and darkly, at another rising and opening
out, allowing the fierce rays of the sun to strike down like
a fiery furnace. Anon a breeze would seem to scatter it,
and portions, some dark, some light, would go swirling
here, there, and everywhere. How anxiously the travellers
watched the clouds, every twist and turn, only their own
hearts could tell.
“At last Mclnverness recognized the necessity of
spelling for a time. The horses were panting terribly, and
the perspiration dried in large white patches as it oozed
through their skins. The man and girl took a pot of tea,
and the horses were allowed to run out in hobbles, and were
given as much water as could be spared.
“Mclnverness asked Minnie many questions, but he
received very few answers. She trembled when he spoke to


her, and appeared to bo in dread of some great ealaraity.
As the horses were restless, Melnverness did not spell long.
Soon after the animals were harnessed and away, the clouds
got dense and black, and the storm that had been brewing
all day broke and swooped down on them. Rain descended
in torrents, thunder resounded through the timber. When
it was over the horses were watered, and with lighter hearts
our travellers once more continued their journey Minnie
almost cried with pleasure and Melnverness muttered a
deep ‘Thank God !’
“The short twilight faded into the shades of night, but
soon the moon arose, the stars shone out clearly, and as the
road was good Minnie drove while Melnverness attempted
to snatch a sleep. Minnie’s silence had made him terribly
uneasy and anxious, and as soon as his weary frame
essayed to court the drowsy god, horrid dreams took
possession of his mind. He was moving very restlessly,
long-drawn moans escaped him, and at last he shrieked out,
‘My darling! My darling! T am coming. Merciful heaven,
spare my wife and little ones !’
“He sat bolt upright, a wild, vacant stare in bis eyes.
“Next morning they reached Reedy Swamp, and
although the storm had not been anything like so heavy at
Ibis place there was sufficient water for the horses. An
hour’s spell and a run in hobbles, and the horses looked
as fresh almost as when they started, and appeared as
anxious as Melnverness to get home.
“Fifteen miles more covered, and they were out of the
wake of the storm. Not a trace of it was to be seen;
everything was parched and dry and the heat was again
intense. At noon they gave the horses all the water they
had in the kegs, keeping only a water-bag full for their
own use. They went slowly until the cool of the evening,
and towards sundown a cool breeze sprung up, and the
horses appearing willing they pushed on. Soon after daik,
and just as the moon was showing above the trees, they were
getting near to where a track turned off leading to what
was called the seven-mile waterhole. At this place Minnie
broke the silence, saying, ‘Soon home now, Messer
Melnverness; you go quick,’


CHAPTER IV.
THE PHANTOM.
“Hardly were Minnie’s words spoken when a shadow
flitted across the road, making down the creek track. At
the sight of it McTnverness pulled the horses up with a
sudden jerk. The animals trembled in their harness, and
Minnie was wild with excitement. In a moment the shadow
was out of sight, but its whereabouts was soon known, for
a scream, loud and shrill, followed by moans of agony,
echoed through the night air in a manner that would chill
the hlood of the bravest.
“Minnie sprang from the waggon with one great bound
and darted away in the direction of the sound like a hunted
deer, crying, ‘Oh ! Missie, Missie McTnverness, Minnie
come !’
“McTnverness tried to follow, but his recent dreams, the
figure, the shriek, the death-like moans, Minnie’s plaintive
wail, and, above all, the sound of his wife’s name, conjured
up in his still sodden brain such a picture of horror that
his eyes almost started out of his head, his limbs trembled,
his arms were twisting about and beating the air, and at
last, with a cry like a fiend, he sunk to the earth.
“Other sounds echoed through the forest. They were
sounds of horses galloping at a mad pace through the hush.
Soon horses and riders were on the scene.
“I was one of the horsemen and Jim the stockman was
the other. We pulled up on seeing the waggon, dismounted,
and looked round with eager, searching eyes. Jim saw the
prostrate body of McTnverness. His position, the adjacent
waggon, and the jaded state of the horses told us as if in
so many words much of what had happened. Giving
another hasty look around, T said to Jim, ‘The horses are
too much knocked up to move. That last cry was from
him; Mrs. McTnverness must have gone down the track.’
So after having a hasty look at the prostrate body of
Mein verness we jumped on our horses and galloped along
the track.
“Presently we steadied to listen, and we heard on the
night-air a strange, plaintive melody, so sweet and at times


so thrilling, that T said to Jim, ‘The air must he full of
humming birds, or some sprite must he playing a melodeon.’
“‘No, it is Minnie,’ he replied. ‘She must he with
Mrs. Mclnverness.’
“In another few moments avc saw them. Minnie Avas
sitting doAvri, Avith Mrs. Mclnverness* head on her knees,
the baby boy in her lap. She Avas leaning over him, sio
that her tears fell on his poor little feverish brow. She
Avas trying to keep his mother cool by Avaving a foAv parched
boughs over her. We could not help being strongly affected,
and Jim’s voice quivered and his eyes moistened as avc
Avhispered together for a feAV moments as to Avhat Avas best
to he done.
“We decided that Jim should go back to Mclnverness
and unload the waggon and fetch it on, so as to convey
Mrs. Mclnverness to the station. I dismounted, quietly
approached Minnie and tapped her on the shoulder. She
looked at me for a moment and then murmured, ‘You got
Avater,’ and her eyes glistened with joy as I held a bag of
water in front of her. I was frightened to speak, so
deathlike Avas the appearance of Mrs. Mclnverness and the
baby. In silent aAve I held the water-bag for Minnie Avhile
she bathed their foreheads and moistened their lips.
“At last the little boy began to moan and his hands
kept grasping at emptiness; next minute he shook his
head, his eyes opened, and a short, sharp cry escaped him.
Mrs. Mclnverness Avas also moving. The Avater had brought
back life to their fevered bodies, and the bov’s cry appeared
to endow his mother Avith fresh energy. She sat up, her
eyes glaring wildly, but vacantly. Another cry escaped
her lips, and she sprung to her feet Avith, “Oh ! heaven, have
mercy. Let me go to my darling !’ Before the words were
Avell out of her mouth she made a dash for the thick scrub,
and would have soon been out of sight had T not caught
her in my arms. But she Avas strong, Avith the supernatural
strength that fever lends to the spirit, be the body ever so
weak; she struggled frantically to get away. The struggle
was soon over. Nature gave Avay, and she sank in my arms
helnless. As T laid her alongside of Minnie she gasped
out, ‘Oh, Angus, Angus ! I’ve been living on the hope you
left me, but it has faded and died !’
D


“By tins time Jim had reached the waggon and was
having a scene there with Mclnverness. The latter had
regained consciousness and was sitting .up, but was unable
to stand. His eyes were dim, his brain was dazed. After
dismounting and going over to him, it was some minutes
before Jim could muster courage to speak, so miserable, so
woe-begone, so imbecile were Mclnverness’ look and
appearance. At last Jim said, ‘Look here, Mclnverness, it
is of no use taking on like this. The mischief is done, and
the best thing you can do now is to pull yourself together
and repair matters as much as possible.’
“Jim got no further, for Mclnverness shrieked out,
‘Who are you? What are you? It’s all an ugly dream. T
did not murder them. See, see how beautiful they look !
How dare you say they are dead—my darling boy, my
precious wife, my angel girl ! See, they are dancing, they
are merry, they are laughing as a happy couple as they
plight their love in a sweet kiss under the mistletoe bough.
Oil, oh, oh ! for a merry Christmas!’ With a wild struggle
to gain his feet he overbalanced himself, and before Jim
could reach him fell to the ground. Putting a blanket over
him, and seeing there was no danger of his moving for some
time, Jim brought the waggon on, and after filling it half
full of leaves we placed Mrs. Mclnverness and the baby in
it, with Minnie as their protector. AVe then started for the
station, picking up Mclnverness on our way, and before
daybreak we had them housed as comfortable as possible—
Airs. Mclnverness in the hammock, Minnie, with the boy
in her arms, sitting close to it, near to her being hung a
boat water-bag, out of which from time to time she took
a wet sponge and bathed the little fellow’s forehead;
another female was doing the same to Airs. Mclnverness.
Mclnverness, who bad not spoken a word since his wild cry
of the previous night, but bad only emitted grievous moans,
lay on a stretcher-bed made up on the side verandah.”


CHAPTER V.
ANXIOUS TIMES.
“The morning was dull. A rather strong bre.ze was
whistling through the trees, with that long, low, distant
moaning which heralds a storm. The wind increased as the
day advanced, creating quite a tumult of bluster outside,
which roused Mclnverness from a quiet sleep. He raved
at times like a maniac, at others he spoke calmly; but his
wandering mind was far away. At one time he was judge
at a race meeting; at another inviting all hands to have a
drink. Now his eyes opened wildly; he looked around with
a vacant, unearthly stare; his forehead was bathed in
perspiration; his lips moved, and he sprung from his couch,
crying, ‘Oh! my God! My God! Have they buried them
out of my sightP’ It was as much as our united efforts
could do to hold him, but we managed after a hard struggle
to overpower him, and as we laid him once more on his
stretcher, Jim whispered, ‘What a curse this drink is!’
“A more pleasing figure. It was that of Mclnverness’
little daughter. She was dressed in white, with a blue sash
round her waist. The breeze, as she came on to the open
verandah, fluttered round her, ruffling her curls, swelling
out her dress, and waving her sash till it assumed the
appearance of wings, and the little one herself was
transfigured into a fairy goddess. Indeed, no fairy ever
acted more charmingly. At first she looked around in a
half-frightened manner; then a serious expression stole over
her face, and she shook her head as if she understood what
it all meant, and that it was her duty to make all matters
as pleasant as possible. She appeared to think for a few
moments, lisped a few unintelligible words as a sweet smile
dimpled her cheeks, and walked over to Jim and myself.
Taking hold of my hand, she gave it a pull. I stooped down
to hear what she had got to say, then lifted her in un-
arms, and bent her little face over her father’s. She raised
her tiny hands, placed them gently on her father’s head,
and kissed his forehead. After that I let her go. She ran
over to Minnie and kissed her, the baby, and her mother,
resting not until she had given a kiss and said a pleasant


word to everybody. Her sweet, childish prattle brought smiles
to our faces and helped much to enliven the weary day.
“Towards evening the storm that had been threatening
all day broke over the station. The rain came down in a
perfect cataract. We were all jubilant, and as the storm
passed away and the stars shone out, all being quiet with
the patients, Jim and I took a stroll outside. The night
was lovely and cool, which gave us fresh hope and new life.
“A week passed before our invalids showed any great
signs of improvement, and this was the last week of the
distressing year. The newborn year was now a few hours
old; everything was beautifully fresh and green, as if in
honour of its birth. All this welcome change was occasioned
by a good downpour of rain that followed in the wake of
the storm that happened on Christmas night.
CHAPTER VI.
HAPPY TIMES.
“Early dawn as it was, two men were walking up and
down the path outside the station verandah; one was
Mclnverness, the other myself. Mclnverness’ head was
drooping, his face was fearfully haggard-looking. He was
speaking to me in low, deep tones about recent events.
At last he said, ‘How did you fall in with the Bentlys and
the stockman?’
“ ‘We came together on the Wanna Plain, 1 was
making a short cut, and the tracks of some horses had
brought the stockman that way. Bcntly and his wife were
making inside, but had no intention of coming here. He
told us it was no use going out, as the country was as dry
as a brick. So we made up our minds to turn back. They
decided to come with us, and it appears we just arrived in
time, Mrs. Mclnverness must have left a few hours before
we arrived, and that was just after daybreak. All the
water about the station was in a billycan, which was placed
on a chair by the side of your little girl’s bed. The little
girl herself was in bed, asleep. Luckily, Bently had filled
his bags and kegs at the gum-holes. The stockman and I
had as much as we could carry also, and we had need of it,


for on going to the well we found it dry. How Mrs.
Mclnverness managed is a miracle to me. Our arrival
awoke your little girl, and Mrs. Bently went to her, and,
taking her in her arms, said, “Where are your mother and
baby?” The substance of the little one’s reply I will give
you as far as I can in her own words. , She told Mrs.
Bently that her mother had been walking along the track,
and then back to the house with baby in her arms, ever
since Minnie left. That mother was moaning over baby
and saying it was going to die; and that some hours before
our arrival her mother had said that she would have to go
a Long way for water, and her daughter was to be a good
girl. Then, pointing to the chair, she said her mother was
sitting on it crying, and after crying she would laugh.
Then, kissing Mrs. Bently, she said, “That is what mamma
did to me until 1 went to sleep.” From this we could
plainly see that matters were wrong somewhere. So we
drove the horses to the seven-mile water, thinking we might
lind her there. Nobody had been near it. Bently stayed
there, in case Mrs. Mclnverness might come, while Jim
and 1 hunted through the bush. At sundown, not finding
any traces, we made our way back to the station by the
short cut, searching as we went. We had a pot of tea, and,
dark as it was now getting, we started out again, searching
each side of the track as best we could. My opinion is that
Mrs. Mclnverness, overcome with heat and fever, fainted
somewhere near the track that turns down to the waterhole.
After coming to her senses, and thinking her baby dead, she
gave that fearful scream which you heard as well as we did.’
“ ‘Stop !’ cried Mclnverness, when I had got this far.
‘I can see it all. It was no phantom. Oh ! my God ! My
darling wife! My angel girl! My precious boy! Your
besotted husband, your drunken father, to be the cause of
all this misery!’ Tears streamed down his cheeks; he
staggered and fell on his knees. He held one hand stretched
upwards, the other supported his head. 1 took the up-raised
hand in mine to help him to his feet. But I myself was
rooted to the spot. I felt powerless to do anything but
listen to the earnest prayer that was pouring in thrilling
tones from the depths of his heart. His words seemed to


float through the air to join the psalms of the birds, to
mingle with the waving of the bushes, and to float away
towards heaven on the sunbeams. And when his over-
charged heart had spent its strength and he could say no
more, J found myself repeating, in a loud but solemn tone,
a heartfelt ‘Amen.’
“As the echo died away, 1 heard a whirl and a flutter,
and a flock of doves flew over and settled on the ground a
few yards from us. I watched them for a few moments,
and with feelings of hope I said to Mclnverness, ‘Come,
we have nothing to fear. Heaven has heralded us an
answer of peace by those sweet messengers.’ As he rose to
his feet his face appeared somewhat to have lost its haggard
expression, and as we walked together hand in hand towards
the house he murmured, ‘Merciful Father, I hope so.’ The
doves followed, cooing and picking as they gambolled along.
“ ‘Can you doubt Him?’ I replied. ‘Listen, they are
wishing us a happy New Year.’
“During our talk Bently had been after his horses; the
tinkle, tinkle of the bells hanging on their necks was now
heard as he drove them through the bush, and their jingling
sound on the clear morning air appeared to chime in with
the coo, coo of the doves, and everything seemed to
harmonize so beautifully, and such a heavenly sweetness
appeared to pervade all Nature, that Mclnverness’ face
glowed with a newborn light, and he said, in heartfelt tones,
‘No, who dare doubt? Who would not trust Him?’
“In a manner it was a most happy New Year. The
baby boy was soon strong enough to creep about and to
keep Minnie constantly feeding him. Mrs. Mclnverness
gained strength gradually, but surely, and the apparent
sincere reformation of Mclnverness himself helped more
than anything else to give her new life and hopes.
However, the thought of having some time or other to face
such another drought was too much for her nerves, so
Mr. Mclnverness decided to sell the station.
“This was done. After travelling with them into New
South Wales, I stayed there for a time. Before leaving 1 had
the pleasure of seeing them fully restored to health, settled
on a good farm, and Minnie rewarded for her heroism.”


THE COCHIN MEETS HER WATERLOO.




THE COCHIN HEN’S CHRISTMAS
PRESENT.
The camp-fire was burning brightly and the members
of an expedition to tbc Northern Territory were squatted
around it. The long dusty ride of eighty miles since sunrise
was forgotten, the bells on the horses’ necks were ringing
merrily, the moon was shining brightly, and all Nature
was wrapped in sweet repose.
The leader of the expedition, who was evidently imbued
with the serenity of the surroundings, exclaimed, “A most
beautiful night, lads, to listen to a good tough yarn, and
as Brown informed us during our day’s journey he could
entertain us oil, I think, the most improbable of subjects,
poultry, I vote for the yarn.”
Chorus: “And so do all of us.”
“1 was born on a poultry farm,” said Brown, “and
the first thing I learnt to do was to feed chickens, and, after
1 got big enough, cows also, and, I may say, I have been
feeding one thing and another ever since, not forgetting
myself. What I am now about to relate occurred on the
station I first received experience with sheep.
'“ ‘I say, Jenny, this is too bad; here have I had one
of the boundary-riders helping Jack to peg away at the
garden so as to have a few vegetables for Christmas, and
after all our planting and trouble your ragged old barndoor
fowls have picked them all to pieces. Upon my word, it’s
too bad !’
“ ‘Now, Gussey, dear, stop, and understand those
barndoor fowls were on the station when I came; so do not
let us have our first tiff over a lot of mongrel poultry that
have not laid an egg for months.’
“It was on a mild September morning, 'some seven or
eight years ago, when this conversation I have repeated took
place. The station was beautifully situated on Fiddler’s
Creek, a tributary of a nameless river in Central


Queensland. The owner was Augustus Dod, and, as ht
said to his wife when first driving her from the coach-stage
to her new home in the bush, ‘We have no bank, mortgage,
or anything of that kind to contend with; it is all our own,
dear, and we have a thousand or two to carry on with.’
“Her parents lived near Sydney, and in that town she
was educated.
“In reply to Dod she had said, ‘Only be good and kind
to me, Gus., dear, and I will never, never complain, though
we have to live on “Johnny cakes - ’ and “leather jackets.” ’
“But to proceed with my yarn.
“One morning, while both sat at breakfast the mail
arrived. The letters were brought in, and while the wife
was reading over hers Dod took the first that came to
hand, and in a moment was deep in its contents. Very
pleasing they seemed to be, for a smile kept brightening
up his features. At last he jumped from his chair, and
going over to Mrs. Dod with the letter in his hand, said:
“ ‘See, darling, those sheep I sent down last have
bx’ought a grand price, so we will have a trip to town at
Christmas.’
“ ‘And, Gusscy,’ said his wife, ‘let us buy some nice big
Cochin fowls that will not fly, and get rid of those
barndoors.’
“They got the fowls.
“Mrs. Dod was in her glory, for she was awfully fond
of pet animals and birds, and in her goodness of heart
appealed to Dod, who had decided to get rid of the
mongrels, not to be cruel to them, but to kill them while
they slept.
“Bramah, Spanish, French, and many other strains
could be seen hopping round the hen-coop wherein quietly
squatted Mr. and Mrs. Cochin. Matters looked ugly for
them if let out, for there was a decidedly pugnacious look
about the outsiders, which portended war. However, as
usual with more enlightened beings, there was more bluster
than actual deeds. Amidst the commotion, Nelly, the
black gin, came along and txirned the Cochins out of the
coop, and instead of fighting they commenced strutting,
bobbing, and bowing, especially an old French hen, with


her feathers standing as erect as quills upon the fretful
porcupine. She was trying to mash—that is, make love—
to Mr. Cochin. However, his lady would not stand that
sort of thing, so she wont with a ‘Cluck, cluck, clucketv
cluck,’ to her spouse in a bouncing manner, and said, ‘lf
you have brought me all the way from my beautiful cage
down south, where I lived in refinement and as a lady
should live, to this place, where T have not a decent
surrounding or anything with the semblance of a nest to
lay in, and before my very eves go strutting about and
galavanting before such .a lot of mongrel bipeds as these,
I can tell you there will be a row in the house if you carry
on such pranks any longer. Besides, as T leel broody after
all this jolting about in an old bullock-dray, and my morals
shocked by the driver’s expressions, you can cut your sticks
from here at once and make me a nest, while I settle with
these misrepresenting specimens of feathered insolence.’
“You see, the others had been laughing at Mrs. Cochin
and the capers she cut during the controversy with her
spouse.
“Mr. Cochin came hack in a short time and found his
lady in a most unladylike position, and with portions of
her finery flying to the four winds, having a set-to with
Frenchy. On seeing his giant frame appear on the scene
Frenchy cleared for her natural, and Mrs. Cochin bounced
on to an empty nest.
“ ‘What is the use of sitting on an empty nest, and
old Biddy has taken away the egg you laid yesterday ?’ said
Mr. Cochin.
“ ‘Cluck !’ replied Mrs. Cochin, her pecker being
properly up. ‘When I say “Cluck !” T mean it. lam none
of your French beauties, with legs like pipe-stems and
feathers like broomsticks. T was brought here to be a
mother—l was meant to be a mother—and if I sit here
until I hatch my feathers, I will he a mother, so there !’
“ ‘Certainly, love, I won’t prevent you. Certainly, you
will have your own way, I know; but, still, you will only be
laughed at, and if I may suggest ’
“ ‘Rooster !’ yells Mrs. Cochin, not giving him time to
finish, ‘will you mind your own business? You can suggest,


but I am going to sit here; and if I have no eggs given to
me before a lamb can wag his tail half-a-dozen times T will
admit the journey has not knocked all the sense out of you !’
"Soon after the Biddy before referred to by Mrs.
Cochin, and who was Mrs. Bod’s maid, appeared, saw Mrs.
Cochin sitting, and informed Mrs. Bod.
"Mi’s. Bod came along with Biddy, and Mrs. Cochin
heard them talking about eggs, saw them take some from a
box and quietly slip them under her. She gathered them
nicely together, gave a pleasing ‘cluck,’ and looked at Biddy
as much as to say, ‘Thank you.’
"Presently Mr. Cochin and Frenchy came near her
nest.
“‘Cluck, cluck!’ cried Mrs. Cochin.
"Mr. Cochin’s attention was too much taken up with
Frcnchy to hear.
‘‘Cluckety cluck !’ cried she again, in a shrill treble.
‘‘‘Yes, my love; what is the matter now?’ cried Mr.
Cochin, the second call arousing him to the desirableness of
fulfilling his neglected duty.
“ ‘Rooster Cochin,” clucked his lady, ‘you have no more
heart than a log of wood that is perfectly hollow. I am
preparing a pleasure for you that will make you as proud
as if you had two tails, and there you are flirting with that
fright and strutting like an idiot, instead of looking after
me.’
“ ‘My dear,’ replied Mr. Cochin, with tears in his eves,
‘you know how very anxious T am to share all your troubles.’
“. 'Oh ! yes. You are very anxious, I know,’ clucked his
offended lady; ‘but it is to get away. Why, you don’t even
notice my agitation and the loving look in my eyes, of
which you used to be so fond.’
“ ‘Bon’t say that, darling,’ Mr. Cochin replied. ‘I
noticed it at once, and was just going to remark to Miss
Spanish ’
“ ‘Miss Spanish !’ clucked Mrs. Cochin, interrupting
him once more. ‘I thought as much. A Miss Spanish !
Another string to vour bow! Rooster Cochin, you will rue
this. Remember, there is such a place for ladies’ protection
as a divorce court- Oh ! if I had this bcautifn] clutch


hatched, I would make Miss Spanish tremble. A
white-lobbed, one-sided combed -——
“ ‘Now, my love,’ chimed in Mr. Cochin, ‘what are you
thinking about? She is a he-u —’
“He could get no further, for Mrs. Cochin clucked in
a more excited manner than ever. ‘Of course ! Of course !
Cluck, cluck! You think so. I will annihilate her beauty,
and herself, too, when I get off these eggs, so let her take
warning.’
“‘My dear, I only saw her home,’ he said; ‘she is so
small, and the cat had her spotted. Do not forget, dear,
how I love you. Remember the wounds I suffered from,
received in your defence; when my rival for your affections
got decapitated, cooked, and served for a meal, how I called
you to help me pick his bones.’
“ ‘All very well, Air. Rooster. You don’t get over me
with your palaver; you think T did not see you strut and
peck at her beak,’ said Mvs. Cochin.
“‘I, my dear!” said Rooster; ‘I w T as only knocking
away a stray feather that appeared to he hanging over her
> . 1 j
ear.’
“ ‘Bosh !’ she clucked. ‘Clear out to your draffy
imbeciles-—all or any of them.’
“ ‘Darling,’ soothingly clucked Rooster, ‘don’t be so
harsh. You know lam never happy away from you. Your
troubles are my troubles; he sweet and gentle, dear.’
“ ‘Sweet and gentle, liddle-de-de ! Cluck, cluck, sweet
and gentle ! And you doing just as you like, flirting and
pecking with all the mongrels about the place, and right
before your injured wife’s eyes.’
“ ‘Darling, just let me have a squat on those eggs; I
am anxious to serve you,’ replied Rooky.
“ ‘You !’ retorted Mrs. Cochin. ‘You ! Why you, you
great omadhaum, you would crush the innocents like a
steam roller would a snail.’
“ ‘Mrs. Cochin !’ came from Rooky.
“Not even a ‘cluck’ from her could he get.
“ ‘My darling, do listen.’
“His endearing efforts made no impression. She was
silent.


Rooky watched her out of the corner of his left eye,
his head drooping, and his heart beating a thousand strokes
to the minute. To ease the strain he started a fresh vogue:
If T have offended you, dear, T am now repenting for it
T am on the stool of rectitude, darling. I swear hy my
great-uncle’s ear-lobs and ray mother’s comb, my tail is as
limn as a dishcloth. Your past noble kindness and present
tenderness have knocked me into a cocked hat.’ After all
this he then said, 'My darling,’ very tenderly.
My own Rooky !’ still more tenderlv from her and
peace.
"'See, Rooky,’ she went on. ‘T told you I soon would
have eggs given to me. Was not Biddy good? And,
Rooky, in three days it will he Christmas, and, by my
comb! I am bound to have them hatched and the chicks
strong enough so that they can chirrup a merry Christmas
to our dear mistress.’
Yes, dear,’ said Rooky. ‘Rather a quick hatching.
But come and have some of this nice corn.’
Cluck, cluck, I’m coming. You come and have a
look at the eggs.’
TTe had a look, and with a loud, cackling cry and
horror depicted in every feather, said, ‘Ducky, by all the
powers, they are china eggs !”
They may he, Rooky,’ she clucked, ‘but T am going
to batch them by Christmas morning if they are Chinamen
themselves.’
“This brought on roosting-tirae, and Rooky settled
down to slumber and his long-feathered mate squatted on
her eggs.
Christmas morning found Rooky down the yard
tinting with Miss Spanish, Frenchy, and goodness knows
how many more, when a ‘Cluck, cluck, cluckety cluck’
sounded in his ears.
“By my father’s hackle, it’s Mrs. Cochin,’ he cried,
and ran to her, the rest following. As soon as he met her
he said, ‘Heard your voice from the bottom of the yard,
dear, and ran to meet you; and, oh ! what beautiful chick's.’
“‘I am proud of them,’ said Mrs. Cochin, ‘although
they are of variegated colours with heads like Chinamen.


Looking contemptuously at Hooky, she continued, ‘I believe
it takes, the feathered bipeds with whom you have been
flirting a whole three weeks to hatch three or four miserable
substitutes for chickens from a setting of eleven eggs, while
I’—cocking her head and tail proudly—‘can hatch
twenty-one chicks from a setting of seven china eggs.’
“Rooky shook his head and appeared to think there
was something wrong in the whole business. The rest had
not a word to say, not even the slightest cluck from any,
although Mrs. Cochin’s bounce and manner were enough to
aggravate a forty-acre paddock full of the very best-behaved
poultry.
“Rut it wasn’t to last long. Rooky gave a cluck and
a hop, hearing somebody behind him, and turning round he
saw Mrs. Rod and Riddy coming round the end of their
roosting-place. Just as Mrs. Cochin, having said her say,
was strutting away, clucking for the chicks to follow, they
came up, and Biddy, pointing to her and her chicks, said :
“ ‘Just look, mistress, the poor, deluded old thing has
taken to them just as if they were her own. I put them
under her last night after taking them out of the incubator.’
“All the mongrels soon found their voices when they
heard what Riddy said, and there was a cluckety sort of
laugh, I can tell you, from Frenchy, Spanish, and the rest.
Even Rooky could not help giving a long-drawn crow, and
Frenchy, looking at the disgusted faces of both, said,
‘Well, I am only a French biped with feathers like
broomsticks, but by the down that is on the chicks, and
that is a downy way of expressing myself, I would sooner
be what and like I am, arid take three decent weeks to
hatch a clutch than to be made a foster-mother for an old
incubator.’
“ ‘Ditto, Sister Smut !’ cackled all the rest, with a
cluckety cluck chorus.
“Mrs. Cochin and Rooky had it all their own way,
however, after a few days.
“Mrs. Rod, with black Billy and Nelly, had taken
charge of the garden, and although the barndoors had their
wings cut they could not be kept out of it. Good as Mrs.
Rod was her patience was sorely tried.


“At Easter, however, a large party of friends were
staying on the station, and they were all decapitated like
Hooky’s rival, and after going to the pot and being served
up as a meal no doubt Rooky and his wife had a share of
their bones.
“In course of time there was no other breed on the
station but Cochins, and during the same time all other
matters had progressed swimmingly, a young Dod having
also arrived.
“One Sunday evening, when Mr. and Mrs. Dod were
walking arm in arm, Diddy following with the image of
Mrs. Dod in her arms, they found the poor old original
Airs. Cochin of our story, squatted, and a large carpet
snake was sliming her all over, evidently with the intention
of swallowing her. Dod was in time to save her from such
a late, but not in time to save her life. After killing the
snake, he found her to be dead also, but how the end came
about he could not tell. He had her buried under a
peach tree, alongside of what remained of her much-loved
spouse, who had gone some time before.
“It was late in the evening as they were sitting under
the verandah of the homestead, conversing about the fate
of their favourites and the very recent and sad end of
Lady Cochin. Airs. Dod remarked, ‘And only think, dear,
it is nearly six years since that commotion in the yard
when we gave her the first incubated chicks. And only
think of our nearly having a tiff over the barndoors. I do
not want to take any credit to myself, for you arc a darling,
good old Dod; but if I had answered you sharply that
morning and sulked, do you think we would have been so
happy as we have been all these years?’
“ ‘I don’t know,” said Dod; ‘but 1 do know you are a
forbearing darling little wife, and I love you more and more
as the years roll by.’
“The moon was shedding its light on the verandah, and
as its beams played around them they could be seen as well
as heard. Her hand was fondling his whiskers and her head,
yielding to a gentle pressure from his hand found a resting-
place on his bosom, and as murmurs of ‘Dear old Dod’ were
heard, I drop the curtain and end the yarn.”


FOUND !




THE LOST CHILD.
(An Australian story, founded on fact.)
In a city like London—or any other town or city, for
that matter —the cry of a child in a house or in the street
is no great curiosity, and the ear gets so accustomed to the
sound that even in the dark night or murky evening
wayfarers are not usually inclined to trot out of their way
when they hear on the night air the sound of the little
one’s shrill treble or plaintive wail.
The writer, being a bachelor, and having lived for many
years in isolated parts of Australia, where an infant’s cry
would fall on the ear in the shape of a luxury, may be
excused if he indulge his curiosity by doing so when living
within the precincts of these more-favoured portions of the
globe.
One night, not many hundred years ago, and in a dark
thoroughfare of the great metropolis, he was in a manner
rewarded for his pains by finding one innocent who had
strayed away from its home; and the cries and sobs from
the heaving breast of the little one sent his mind wandering
to similar scenes in that distant land, and memory flashed
back to one case in particular, as it showed a mother’s love
and devotion for her offspring not always met with.
This particular case occurred far away from any town,
and among rugged mountains so broken and upheaved that
one might be inclined to remark, “This is a hurried piece
of work; no spirit-level in use when this place was tumbled
together. No use looking for gentle slopes, inclines, or
declines in these parts.”
In this rugged country, however, many men make a
good living by felling the high trees which abound in
numberless quantities and splitting them into shingles for
roofing houses, posts and rails for fencing land, and sawing
others into boards and posts for building purposes in the
distant townships.
The men that do this sort of work are called bushmen
or timber-getters. They live in tents and slab huts, ant 1


either c-art their timber to the nearest township and other
places for sale or take contracts from the different station-
holders. They are a rough, but hardy, lot of men, and
most kind-hearted and hospitable. Their main weakness is
to have a grand carouse at the nearest public-house when
they have made a cheque.
The father of my lost’child was one of these bushmen.
In many ways he was above the ordinary type; but the
weakness for having a carouse he could not overcome.
Happily for him—.and rather a rarity in the wilds of
Australia, as most men following this occupation are
bachelors—he had a good, true, Christian woman for a wife,
whose kind manner, winning ways, and godly example kept
him somewhat in bounds. They were blessed with one
young hopeful, a boy of about four years.
Christmas is kept in the hush of Australia as well as
in England and other places, and every effort is made to
make it as merry as possible, even in the most sequestered
nooks and corners and be the people ever so few. It
wanted but a short time to the coming of the festive day
when Evans (the name of our hero’s father), having
finished a large contract and received a big cheque for his
labour, drove in his spring-cart to the nearest township,
some fifteen miles away from his camp, in order to buv
necessaries to make the coming event as pleasant and
merry as possible. During his short stay in the town he
managed to keep sober, but could not resist the temptation of
taking a couple of bottles of brandy with him on his return.
He arrived home safe, but a trifle unsteady, having tapped one
of the bottles on the way. However, the evening passed
very pleasantly, and on the following morning, having a
small job to finish, he started for the scene of his labour.
His boy accompanied him. Another companion also
followed—it was the boy’s dog and playmate, who won id
on no occasion be separated from him. The father had his
boon companion also; not following, but put carefully away
in his pocket. It was in the shape of a half-pint of brandy
—or “tanglefoot,” to give it a colonial name—which had
been transferred from bottle to flask.


Arriving at his place of destination, and after working
for about an hour, he went to look up more suitable timber
for his work, telling his little son that he would soon return
and not to stray away. alas ! his boon companion
kept him from returning for many a long hour. After
having found the timber he wanted, he sat down and had a
smoke, then a nip—others followed, which soon emptied the
flask and put him to sleep. When he woke the sun was
well down among the trees. He jumped up and shook
himself; in doing so his foot struck the flask. This simple
incident sent a burning throb to his heart, and a loud cry
issued from his lips: “My boy ! Oh ! my boy,” and memory
rushing back in all its dread reality, led him to wonder
what might have happened to him during his absence, and
made him start with a run to the scene of his morning’s
labour. When he arrived the sun was just setting. He
looked around, searched in many directions, but could see
nothing of his son. He coo-eed, he shouted, he howled in
a dozen different ways his son’s name; echo alone answered.
Then he would listen —oh ! how'painfullv. Unable to stand
his maddening thoughts longer, he made a dead rush for
home, with the hope of finding him there. He artived,
“but found him not.”
“Oh ! wife. Our bov !” he almost screamed when he
saw her standing at the hut door alone. “Ts he s°fe? Oh !
tell me is he safe?”
The blanched face of the wife told a different tale, and
his frantic manner drove her almost frantic, too. She nut
her hand over her heart, as if to keen it from burstin",
and a deep, thrilling crv broke from her, “Oh ! my child !
My child ! Ts he lost?”
For a few short seconds they looked at one another
with that dull, glazed, impenetrable stare that makes one
think the heart has ceased to beat. It has passed away,
and a different scene takes place. The wife is on her knees
her hands are clasped and raised towards heaven, her head
is bent back; her eyes, all aglow, now are riveted on the
stars, which come peeping out as evening darkens into
night; while her heart is pouring forth a deep, thrilling
prayer to God for guidance.


Oh ! ye people in towns and cities, ye churches where
thousands offer np words of the month day after day and
call it prayer, would that ye could hear a few such prayers
as the heart of this lone Christian woman was pouring forth
in the stillness of the evening; truly would ye then know
what it was to pray, truly would ye learn how the heart
can speak.
It is over, and the husband’s arms are clasped around
his wife. As he raised her to her feet a heavenly 1 i<zht appears
to shine from her eyes as she whispers, “Husband, we will
trust in God’s help.”
Not lost moments that prayer, for life and energy have
taken the place of dull despair. The husband starts off to
search the bush as well as the night would let him, and to
make fires. The wife is off to the township on horseback
to get the aid of black trackers and to send some men out
to search who are camped some six miles from them.
Quick and dashing was that night’s ride through the
lonely bush and scrub, and well the noble horse bore his
burden. The township was reached; the news was spread
far and wide that a child was lost in the bush. In an
incredible short space of time, considering the hour, black
trackers had their horses saddled, and they and many more
willing hands were soon accompanying the mother and
urging their horses at top speed to her forest home, which
they reached some short time before day broke.
The father returned soon after they arrived. “Any
luck?” was the cry from the group gathered round the hut.
A sad shake of the head from him was all the answer he
appeared able to give. But it was enough for them to
know the result of his night’s search.
Soon the gray dawn was breaking in the eastern sky,
and the search commenced in earnest. The black trackers
accompanied the father to where he left his son, so that
they might be able to pick up his tracks, while the rest
spread themselves out so as to work and search in a wide
circle. Most painful and dreary the search went on—no
guide to go by; up one gully and down another the men
hunted; over range after range they plodded their weary
way, frightened of going too far or not far enough. No


sign to be seen of footprints in any direction; no cry, no
sound, to give them hope. The day was hot, water scarce ;
what chance could the poor child have of living it through?
Thoughts like these occurred to the poor mother’s heart,
for she was out with the searchers; but her heart was not
void of hope, and she was praying, ever praying, for success
to attend their efforts, and she plodded on, seeking,
seeking.
Night came on apace, and darkness once more buried
the forest in dim obscurity. The searchers had returned
to the hut. Quietly they unsaddled their horses; a few
words passed from one to another, giving each an account
of the day’s proceedings. But nobody brought hope. He
was only a weak child, and this was his second day
wandering in the forest, with little food and peihaps no
water. If ever found, dare they hope of finding him alive?
Hardly, for now the black trackers had returned. They
had found the boy’s tracks and followed them for some
distance, one time towards the hut, another in an opposite
direction, until they lost them, the hardness of the ground
making it almost impossible for a footprint to be seen.
Soon the wearied men lay down to snatch a few hours
repose. The father strolled out into the forest to give vent
to his feelings, and many a loud sob and deep-drawn sigh
escaped him and was heard on the still night air, telling
of the bodily pain and heartfelt anguish he was suffering.
But the greatest sufferer of all was the heart-stricken,
devoted mother—the mother who had lost her only lamb.
Where was she? A faint light in the hut showed her bent
form wrestling with and pleading to the whole host of
heaven to protect her darling during the dark hours and
restore him to her arms. Her prayers were so deep, so
thrilling, that even the rough men outside, who may have
never offered up a prayer since their childhood, were heard
to mutter, “Lord have mercy upon us and crown our efforts
with success.”
At last the night passed, and as the day broke all hands
moved in different directions to renew the search with the
some monotonous plodding as on the previous day. The
eye scanned the ground, looking for the slightest mark that


would give them -a clue; the ear eagerly listening for the
merest sound that might guide them. J3ut nothing was to
be seen, nothing heard. It was midsummer in this part of
the world, and the hot, burning sun dazzled the eyes and
the heated air made it almost impossible to breathe; the
burnt ground cracked, and the dry leaves that lay in thick
patches were crushed Into dust beneath the horses’ hoofs
and men’s feet. But on the brave hearts went—no sitting
down, no hanging back; but on they went with the (Leary,
dreary search. At intervals they met, reported progress,
then once more separated and renewed their painful task.
'I bus another day passed, and in ones and twos the men
straggled back to camp, and as one after another arrived
the question was asked, “What luck, boys?” The sad face
and a silent shake of the head was a sufficient answer that
luck there was none, and that hope was almost dead.
The father now arrived with two of the trackers; they
brought no better news. And now there was a loud sob heard
and the poor mother staggered up to the hut, hardly any
life left in her. The husband approached, threw his arms
around her, and they gave vent to their feelings in a flood
of tears. So touching was the scene that the great, strong,
rough men might be seen to drop a tear also. There were
yet two black trackers out, and their appearance was eagerly
looked for. The night was far advanced, and they being so
late led the watchers to hope they had met with success.
And if all else were dead or benumbed with grief in that
fond, suffering mother’s frame, her cars were all alive to
the least sound. The slightest rustle of a leaf, the gentle
twitter of a bird, and she was all alert, bounding forward
with hope beaming from her eyes. Alas! forlorn hope!
The night breeze whispering among the trees, the dismal
cry of the curlew or night-owl, were the only sounds wafted
to her ears as she kept listening, listening. Oh ! that
painful, dreary time; how long every minute seemed. Oh!
that painful straining and listening, with the heart
burdened down with grief, the senses dulled with agony.
\\ ho could describe it; who could weigh the burden that racked
that fond mother’s frame, that made her heart-strings feel
as if the tension were more than she could bear? God pity


her; none else can. And He alone can aid, and in Him her
trust was still placed. Listen ! For the proof her quick ear
was the first to catch the unmistakable sound of the approach
of the black trackers. Now their voices were heard, and as she
eagerly went forth to meet them she was as eagerly and as
earnestly praying. “Oh !my Heavenly Father,” she was heard
to say, “I place my trust in Thee ; I lay my burden at Thy feet
Oh ! let me not waver in singing praises to Thy holy name,
and as Thou rolled hack the waters in ages past to aid Thv
suffering children so roll hack the dark billows that are
sweeping over the troubled heart of Thy servant, and if
it is Thy will restore my lost lamb. They come! They
come! Oh ! my God, for strength to hear, for fortitude to
believe in Thy goodness, Thy mercy.”
Their dusky forms were now in view. The mother rushed
to them, eagerly scanned their features to catch a ray of
hope, and as eagerly listened for their words to confirm it.
And some slight hope they did bring. Just before dusk,
and after many hours of heating about the hush, with
nothing definite to lead them in any particular direction,
they had dropped across a small waterhole about three miles
from the hut and near a flat. There was a drop of muddy
water in it, and the soft mud showed the fresh tracks of a
dog; hut they could see nothing of the hoy’s tracks at the
water. Further up the flat they saw signs that led them
to believe he had gone that way. They searched about and
coo-eed for some time after dark; they lighted some large
fires, and then considered it best to return to camp with
the news.
This was their report, and, slight as it was, it gave
hope and cheered the mother’s heart, and she closelv
questioned the trackers as to the direction and other details.
Roon after this all was silence. The wearied men dronned
off to sleep one after another; even the worn-out father had
found a slight respite from his anguish in a troubled sleep.
Rut the devoted mother needed no sleep; she was as tired
as the rest, her heart had the heaviest burden to bear, her
limbs almost gave way under her, but her heart had imbibed
a grand stimulant—hope, bright hope, had entered, cheering
and invigorating, driving away sleep and weariness, giving


fresh fuel to the life fluid, and strengthening her limbs for
further exertion. Well she knew her little one’s dog would
never leave him while life remained. But delay was
dangerous, and her star of hope beamed ahead bidding her
onward. So, dark as the night was, she once more went
forth, and by the stars she directed her course towards
where the trackers found the marks of the dog. She was
nrovided with a lantern, a hag of water, and light food.
Soon after leaving she fancied she saw some small bright
object ahead, and though often she would stumble over
dead timber, turn hither and thither to get round fallen
trees, she surmounted all difficulties and plodded on, never
for a moment losing sight of her beacon. Slow, indeed, was
the progress made in the dead hours of night through the
weary forest; hut her lamb was perishing perhaps not far
away, and she must find it. Hverv bird she disturbed from
its slumber made her heart pimp; everv distant sound
would make her eagerly listen, and her heated brain fancied
it was the wail of her lost darling.
Weary, wearv. the hours passed. Her eves were heavv.
oh ! so heavy. Would Nature hold out? Is heln to come?
A few hours must decide matters, for unless she found her
treasure before the morning sun reached the tons of the
trees that devoted mother would have laid down her life
for her child—her spirit would have taken its flight to
search for it in a better land.
Too well the mother knew this; too well everv throb of
her heart told her that Nature was nearlv exhausted. She
dare not go much further; frightened of going beyond the
place where the dog’s tracks were seen. To sit down would
he to go into her long sleep. Hone she .still had, and her
fancy pictured her beacon brighter and nearer, and that
it still beckoned her on. So on she plodded for some short
dista nee until she arrived at a small sandv hole: here she
stopped. The ground for some distance round was soft and
loamy. Thinking she was near the flat the trackers spoke
of .she stooped, and bv the light of her lantern closely
examined the ground. In a moment a sudden change came
over her. She was all excitement, she dropped on her
knees, her head was bent close to the soft earth, a great


tremor shook her frame. A great cry from her rung
through the forest, for the mother’s heart could contain its
feelings no longer, and her lips uttered quick, joyful sounds,
and echo sent back the words; “Oh ! God be thanked, 1
have found traces of my child.” As her heart was pouring
forth its gratitude a short, sharp bark was heard, and her
little one’s dog came bounding up to her. She embraced
it, she kissed it, she hugged it; but no time was to be
lost. She put it down, and, patting it, said, “On, good
Carlo, on.” Away the faithful animal bounded, looking
back after every few leaps to see if she were following.
A short half-mile and the search was indeed over, for the
lost treasure was found.
The gray dawn was breaking. By its pale light the
mother saw her darling. He was lying on his side, his little
billycan alongside of him, and a few leaves of an old hymn-
book clasped in his hands. The last spark of life seemed
to be about expiring, and his little mind was wandering,
but it was in good company—it was with the angels. In
hardly audible tones he was plaintively muttering, “Momie
tells me angels arc good, and if she don’t come to her little
boy soon 1 will come to hoo. I is a bad boy for going
away; daddy told me to stop. But I wanted to sing one
of my hymns with the wildHowers, and that pretty little
birdie that came to eat my crumbs kept me going away,
and I did want it to give Momie for a Christmas box. 1
know I is a bad boy, but I love hoo angels so much, if it
wasn’t for poor Momie and Daddy crying for their little
boy, I would like all-is to be with hoo.” And then in a
more plaintive but slightly louder tone he would murmur,
“Oh, Momie, Momie, if hoo don’t come soon 1 must go to
the angels and my other Daddy up there,” and the poor
little fellow tried to raise his hand and point upward.
Soon his mother had him clasped to her bosom, with
tears and kisses moistening his parched lips, and after
bathing his hands and face with some of the water she
brought with her, and getting him to swallow a little, he
went off into a deep sleep.
Dawn at the camp found all hands ready to follow up
the last night’s traces. Arrangements were soon made for


searching the bush round and in the vicinity of the water
puddle, Hut now the mother was found to be missing, and
the frantic father did not know what to do. However, the
blacks soon picked up her tracks, and it was considered
advisable that two of them should go with him and follow
the tracks, while the rest adhered to the course already
decided upon.
In the early morn her trail was not difficult to follow,
and the three almost ran along it. After a short time a
glad shout was heard and a prolonged coo-ee conveyed to
tiie listening ears of the other seekers that something
important had happened and brought them along in hot haste.
Again it was the faithful dog that was the cause of the
joyful shout. It had met them, and was clasped in the
father’s arms when the others arrived. Only for a few
short moments he held it, for the dog was struggling to be
released, and as soon as he touched the ground he bounded
forward with a joyous bark, the rest following. The
distance that separated them from those they were seeking
was soon covered, and in a short time the father’s arms
were clasped around his wife and boy as they lay under
the shade of a clump of acacia trees in a deep sleep, too
deep for even his caress to wake them.
They were soon conveyed home, and one of the men
started for the township to secure the services of a doctor.
It was a weary time for the father before he arrived, but
at last his horse was heard galloping up to the hut. A few
words passed between him and the father and he then gave
all his attention to the patients.
The doctor almost despaired of bringing back to health
and vigour the boy’s wasted form and benumbed faculties.
His little heart still beat, his pulse gave a very low irregular
thud, the breath from his lips was just perceptible, showing
the spirit still lingered in his wee, wasted frame as if loth
to take its departure—loth to make desolate the heart of
the devoted mother. All that it was possible to do to renew
life and strength was done, and the doctor’s answer to the
anxious look of the father was one of hojm.
His attention was now turned to the mother, who
appeared to be sleeping the sleep of death, and for a moment


he stood, and then gave a sudden start as he glanced
towards her-so still, so placid, so calm, like death itself
was her sleep. He approached and bent over her, and then
any fears he may have had vanished. She was gent y
breathing, and with every breath there was a slight but
perceptible heaving of the bosom; her pulse was low but
regular, her temples were cool. These signs, accompanied
by a slight flush which spread over her features, were
sufficient for the man of physic to know that Nature in
its own wonderful way was renewing and giving fresh me
to her wearied frame, and that sleep, sweet sleep, was
doing its very best to recuperate her wasted energies.
Towards evening the mother showed signs ot waking.
She moved restlessly; at last her eyes opened. She appeared
to think for a few moments, then she raised herself slig it y
and cast a quick; sharp glance towards her boy’s cot. A
happy smile passed over her face as she murmured, It
was no dream. I thank Thee, my Heavenly Father. 1
found him ! I found him !
The father was by her side in a moment, his arms were
around her to help her to her feet, and while his lips were
pressed to hers in a fond kiss, he whispered, “Yes, dour
wife, safe. Our boy is safe.”
She glided from his arms to the boy’s cot, and, kneeling,
bent her face over his.
The doctor watched without making a sign or saying
a word. But on seeing Evans about to follow his wife he
beckoned him away, and as they strolled out of the hut
he told him to let them rest, that the mother’s care and
love would do all that was now needed.
So they left them alone while they sat outside enjoying
the cool evening air and watched the men saddling their
horses, with happy smiles on their faces, and with low but
pleasant talk cheered one another as they got ready for
their ride back to town. They were all as happy as if each
had found a gold mine for himself, and cheered up the
father with many a pleasant wish. With many a heaity
shake of the hand they parted and passed quietly along the
forest track. The doctor came in for his quota of well-
wishes also, and their last words were, “Don’t bring bad


news, doctor.” He laughingly replied, “I have brought
many of you boys back to life, so you need not fear.”
The last man was out of sight; the father and doctor
sat talking; the short twilight was on the wane, and the
dark shades of night were spreading through the forest like
great giants; but there was a beautiful cool breeze blowing
and the men thoroughly enjoyed the rest and quiet talk.
At last their quiet talk was broken by the cry of two
laughing jackasses perched on a tree over their head.
This broke up the conversation. The doctor rose, saying
it was time to have a look at the patients, when a faint
cry was heard from the hut, and both men entered with
a quick step, and found the mother on her feet and her
little one in her arms; his head was resting on her bosom;
a faint, a very faint, smile was to be seen on the wee,
wasted features; but so attenuated were they that there
appeared to be little else left than his great large eyes.
But he could cry—that fact was evident to all; and then
smiling after crying was not at all a bad sign— at least,
so the doctor said as he approached and patted the little
wanderer on the head. More stimulants were given him
and soon the mother had her darling once more fast asleep
in her arms.
That night they all had a good rest, and early on the
following morning the doctor took his leave, as all matters
were progressing favourably.
It was a happy day for the father and mother. The
little fellow was able to speak plainly; but when asleep his
mind still slightly wandered, and he spoke of his mother
as one of the good angels, which no doubt she was.
Towards evening he had gained sufficient strength to
ddl his parents about his adventures, and how the angels
came to him when he got tired and went to sleep. He
said they told him that if his father and mother did not
come they would give him wings, so that he could fly away
with them—far, far away to a beautiful land.
Ho went on prattling until his father was completely
overcome. Then the mother placed him on bis father’s
knee, and as he nestled close to him he whispered, “I know,
daddy, hoo will forgive your little boy for going away—


won’t you, daddy?” The father's answer was a loving kiss
as lie pressed his hoy to his bosom.
The wife then came and sat close to them. The husband
put one arm lovingly around her and drew her closer still,
while be whispered, “Wife, dear, I have signed the pledge,
and made a vow on our dear boy’s lips that 1 will never
touch drink again, and 1 have prayed to the angels that
preserved him for us to give me strength to keep it and
:ogister it in heaven.”


WHOLLY PRINTED AND BOUND IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA
BY
HUSSEY & GILLINGHAM LIMITED.
106 AND 108. CURRIE STREET. ADELAIDE.
A 356 4 1 .
