

BYE-LAWS
FOR THE INTERNAL MANAGEMENT
OF THE
gwtert imim UMiepw JWWfo
Duties of Superintendents.
1. To see that the School is opened and concluded at
the appointed time with singing and prayer.
2. To arrange the classes after the School is opened,
continue in attendance during the hours of teaching,
and see that the children are arranged for the Morning
Service.
3. To admit new scholars, and appoint them to their
classes; and remove the scholars from one class to
another as he may judge necessary.
4. To visit the classes, and see that they are supplied
with teachers, and conducted in an orderly manner.
5. To place at the disposal of the General Visitors
all that is necessary for making their quarterly report
to the Committee.
6. In the absence of the Secretary, to see that his
duties are performed.


Duties of Scho.ol Secretary.
1, To be in attendance at least five minutes before
the time of commencing School.
2. To keep the various books used in the School, lay
before the Superintendent any official communications
he may receive, and see that the School is supplied
with the requisite articles of stationery.
3. To furnish the Absentee Visitors on application
with a report of the absentees.
4. To present to the Committee and Teachers’ Meet-
ings a monthly report of the state of the School.
5. To present the teachers’ roll-book for examination
at the teachers’ quarterly meetings, when the attend-
ance of each teacher shall be read.
6. To provide each teacher with a book in which to
minute the lessons committed to memory.
7. To present the minute and teachers’ roll book at
the quarterly committee meeting for inspection.
8. In the absence of the Superintendent, to see that
his duties are performed.
Duties of Teachers.
1. To attend punctually at the stated hours of
School.
2. To take their places in their respective classes
during the time of opening and concluding the School.
3. To keep their respective classes in good order,
not allowing any talking, nor learning lessons aloud,
nor eating of sweet meats or fruit.
4. To remain with their respective classes, and


avoid any conversation with other teachers during the
hours of teaching, except on business immediately and
necessarily connected with the School.
5. To consider themselves under the guidance of the
Superintendent in attending with the children during
Divine Worship.
6. To consider it part of their duty to urge upon the
children a strict observance of good order, on returning
to their homes, after the School is dismissed.
7. To give timely notice to the Superintendent,
when prevented by sickness or otherwise from fulfilling
their appointments, and if possible pT-ocure a suitable
substitute.
Duties of Absentee Visitors.
1. The Absentee Visitors shall attend the School once
on each Sabbath, receive from the Secretary the list of
absentee Scholars, visit their homes to ascertain the
cause of their absence, and endeavour to promote the
interests of the School by obtaining additional Scholars.
Duties of Librarian.
1. The Librarian shall take charge of the Library,
make a complete Catalogue of the books, keep them in
good order, and enter in a proper book .issue* and
return of dvery volume lent, with the period during
which they are kept; he shall also furnish to the Com-
mittee a quarterly report of the state of the Library,
and the number of books issued therefrom.
No corporal punishment shall be used by a Teacher;
but should any scholar be found guilty of lying, swear-


JAfp
6i&uo
F'tON>6>*'
ing, stealing, fighting, Sabbath-breaking, or otherwise
misbehaving, if after repeated reproof he or she should
not reform, such scholar may be publicly expelled the
School. In all such cases the Superintendent shall
exercise a discretionery power.
