





BYRON:
HIS BIOGRAPHERS AND CRITICS;
BEING THE SUBSTANCE OF A DISCOURSE,
DELIVERED BEFORE
Australian falptk
ON MONDAY EVENING, NOVEMBER 15th,
B. BURDETT SMITH, ESQ., PRESIDENT, IN THE CHAIR,
BY J. SIIEI?I 1) A. Y MO QBE.
Principal of tljc (tfitij College,
AUTHOR OF “QUARTZ AND GOLD,” “SPRING-LIFE LYRICS,’’ BTC., ETC.
JOHN FERGUSON, 426, GEORGE STREET,
1869.
AND ALL BOOKSELLERS.


SYDNEY:
Printed by J. A. Engel, 'Guttenberg’ Printing Office,
103, YORK STREET.


BYRON:
HIS BIOGRAPHERS AND CRITICS.
Mr. President, Ladies and Gentlemen,
In this very month [November] —one hundred and four
years ago—-a royal English frigate, under close-reefed topsails,
was cleaving her way through angry waters, off the north-east
coast of our island-continent. For four days had she been
struggling against foul weather, her commander being evidently
anxious to gain some opening in the dark bronze-like and far-
extending wall of rock, which rose sheer and high above the
ocean. Let us suppose it is noon. We may with such scanty
light as historians and biographers have thrown upon the sub-
ject, be enabled to realise the scene*. Eight bells have gone;
the commander, in cocked hat and naval uniform, with a prim
wig on his head—his keen eyes sharply examining the gloomy
coast-line'—seems at last to perceive a place where a landing may
be effected. He orders his gig to be manned; and, although the
sailors are at first dismayed, the order is promptly executed—for
when did British sailor ever shrink from duty however danger-
ous or disagreeable ? The resolute captain gained land at the loss
of his boat and nearly of his life; and stood, the first English
circumnavigator of the globe, on the Australian Continent. I
need not pursue the scene further. I have only sketched it as
typical of the stormy life and adventurous spirit of Commodore
Byron, known in the nautical parlance of his time by the soubri-
quet of “ Foul-weather Jack.” He was probably the most obsti-
nate and certainly one of the most unfortunate me n of his day.
*Cf. “Voyages Round the World,” p. 211; Bennett’s “Australian Dis-
covery and Colonisation,” p. 56; Lang’s “History of New South Wales,”
T°l j» ■ McCulloch’s “ Dictionary of Geography,” Art; “Byron’s
Island ; and Conversations Lexicon, Art. “ Byron, Commodore John.”


He had suffered some half-dozen shipwrecks, and discovered
Disappointment Islands; but casualties and failures seemed only
to stimulate his spirit to new conflicts with the elements, or fresh
enterprises. Socially, too, his life was chequered. lie married
into the Cornish family of the Trevanions, believing that his
wife would be an heiress; but the head of the Trevanions, though
somewhat advanced in years, indignant at something in the con-
duct of “Foul-weather Jack,” got married himself, and had the
gratification of transmitting his name and estates to an heir. If
the world generally did not feel much reliance on the heraldic
motto of Commodore Byron —Greek Biron —the good old King
George 111. did. That monarch was ever the friend of sailors —
of Foul-weather Jack as well as of the immortal Cook*. I have
read somewhere, that through his Majesty’s interference, (for
monarchs could do more with ministers in those days than they
can at present), Commodore Byron was made Governor of New-
foundland, and died Vice-admiral of the White in 1786. He left
a son behind him, who had embittered his last days. This son
inherited his father’s handsome features (with improvements),
his courage (but with less steady firmness), and his resoluteness
(but less honorably directed); and a considerable estate. He un-
fortunately applied all these gifts of nature and fortune to a course
of reckless dissipation. His soubriquet tells his story —he was
called by his contemporaries “Mad Jack,” or the “ Mad Captain; ”
and the only extenuation of his excesses seems to lie in the fact,
that there was a touch of insanity in his folly; he may, there-
fore, let us charitably hope, be morally irresponsible for some of
his acts. I will not dwell further on his liason with the Mar-
chioness of Carmarthen, the daughter of the Earl of Holderness,
beyond stating that he married her—squandered her private for-
tune —practically deserted her—and finally broke her heart. She
left him one child—a daughter, named Augusta Mary—who, in
the course of time, sorrowfully shared in those mysterious retri-
butive sufferings, which “ the sins of the father bring down on
the heads of the children.” But of her, anon. After the death
of his wife, the Mad Captain’s necessities compelled him to look
out for an heiress; and he found one in the person of Katherine
Gordon of Gight —a Scotch lady. In this second marriage, as a
French critic puts it, he repeated himself— he profligately wasted
his wife’s fortune and deserted her. He did not, however break
her heart; he only embittered her life and inverted her nature.
Instead of being generous and trusting, she became mean and
suspicious; her effusive and somewhat ridiculous vanity turned
into self-contained pride; all that was fervid in her nature passed


away, and she became a cold, irritable, old woman—before she
was old in years. Besides, there was “a dark strain” in her
blood. Her father had died young-drowned—and his memory
was freed from the shadow of suicide by the merciful verdict of
a coroner’s jury. However, the heiress of Gight gave an heir to
the dishonours of Captain Byron, on the 22nd of January, 1788,
in her shabby-genteel apartments, Holles-street, London. In the
very month of the very year, in which the mother-state of the Aus-
tralian Colonial Heptarchy was founded, this child was born. A
poor sickly little heir it was to a poor chequered inheritance. Its
mother’s gloomy state of mind and stupid prudery had injured it
physically before it came into the world; and its first infant days
were not passed in a cheerful home. The child at all events
received the ineffaceable mark of ineffable love—he was made a
Christian, and was enrolled in a Christian Eegister as George
Gordon Byron. The Mad Captain soon finished his career. He
died miserably, leaving a wretched widow and a sickly child in
comparative poverty behind him. Did the widow, at last enfran-
chised from his legal control and moral influence, do the best she
could for herself and her son ? Quite the contrary. Her nature
was changed. She was either gloomy and morose, or boister-
ously energetic. She had still about £l3O a year left from the
wreck of her fortune; and with this she could have lived com-
fortably in her cottage at Aberdeen, where she had retired before her
husband’s death; but she was unfortunately superstitious. Some
wise woman (which means some fortune-telling imposter) had
filled her mind with grand ideas about the future of her son, who
was now, like a snow-drop in winter, putting forth tender mani-
festations of that spiritual beauty, which afterwards in his best
moods touched and glorified his face. In a paroxysm of affection
his mother determined to do something for him. Had he not a
great-uncle a Lord? Had not that Lord quarrelled with his only
son? Would he not do something for her child—half mad-man
though he was —since it was his nephew who had scattered the
wealth of the Highland House of Gight? He would - he should!
She made an appeal to him—a pathetic and (for her) humble
appeal. How this Lord was a melancholy and morbid man. He
lived ostracised from society in the gloomy halls of his abbey-
cluiteau at Newstead, in_jSTotts. He had several years before
killed a relation and neighbour in a tavern brawl, in London. I
say emphatically killed, since he was found guilty of manslaugh-
ter, with circumstances projected from the story which look to
us of the present day like the sharp shadows of a greater crime.
He pleaded his peerage and thus saved his worthless head from
the block, or his neck from the hangman, as the case might be.
He moved through his gloomy woods like an ogre —hating the


world and seeking love from no one. To tills Lord the widow of
Captain Byron appealed for the means of educating his nephew’s
child. And with what succese? The brutal reply, that a shil-
ling of his (if he could help it) should never be given to the
Scotchwoman or her brat! Need I ask you to fancy how this
insult rankled in the soul of Mrs. Byron? It acted like the spell
of a magician. Instead of applying the small means she had
towards the healthful nurture and education of her child, she
fritterd away her resources with little regard to recognised rules
of domestic economy. She sent him to school for a week, and
kept him at home a fortnight. She isolated him from the com-
panionship of children of his own age, and left him to that of
nurses or servants, full of strange lore (of the spectral kind).
While his mind opened, amid these sad surroundings, to a lively
sense of kindness, he began to display symptoms of an irritabil-
ity that was certainly inherited. This maternal system of treat-
ment developed and sharpened that irritability. He lived either
in a hurricane or a fervid calm. His mother at one time caressed
him and petted him—at another stormed at him like a fury, even
upbraiding him with his lameness, caused by her own folly. We
have read the graphic picture of those early days in Disraeli’s sketch
of Cadurcis; and we have the facts more reliably and skilfully
narrated by him whose masterly sketch inspired the romancist.
We have Macaulay’s own account, corroborated in every particu-
lar by Moore, Sir Walter Scott, Galt, and others. I will, there-
fore, read yon one extract to establish, on the unimpeachable
authority of this subtle examiner, one of the best Critics of the
century, the principal statements I have up to the present made.
“The pretty fable,” writes Macaulay, “by which the Duchess
of Orleans illustrated the character of her son the Regent might,
with little change, be applied to Byron. All the fairies, save one,
had been bidden to his cradle. All the gossips had been profuse
of their gifts. One had bestowed nobility, another genius, a third
beauty. The malignant elf who had been uninvited came last,
and, unable to reverse what her sisters had done for their favour-
ite, had mixed up a curse with every blessing. In the rank of
Lord Byron, in his understanding, in his character, in his very
person, there was a strange union of opposite extremes. He was
born to all that men covet and admire. But in every one of those
eminent advantages which he possessed over others was mingled
something of misery and debasement. He was sprung from a
house, ancient indeed and noble, but degraded and impoverished
by a series of crimes and follies which had attained a scandalous
publicity. The kinsman whom he succeeded had died poor, and,
but for merciful judges, would have died upon the gallows. The
young peer had great intellectual powers; yet there was an un -


sound part in his mind. He had naturally a generous and feeling
heart: but his temper was wayward and irritable. He had a head
which statuaries loved to copy, and a foot the deformity of which
the beggars in the street mimicked. Distinguished at once by the
strength and by the weakness of his intellect, affectionate yet per-
verse, a poor lord, and a handsome cripple, he required, if ever
man required, the firmest and the most judicious training. But
capriciously as nature had dealt with him, the parent to whom
the office of forming his character was intrusted was more capri-
ous still. She passed from paroxysms of rage to paroxysms of
tenderness. At one time she stifled him with her caresses: at
another time she insulted his deformity.” Poor spoiled child,
your lot is a hard one. Little do you learn at school—little of
real good can you learn or see at home. But you have discovered
a new Book and found a new Teacher in your lonely walks. The
new Book is the wild mountain landscapes near your home, and the
new Teacher is Nature, speaking to you in a mystic language
which a divine faculty within you—called genius—can interpret.
You must learn much and suffer much, however, before genius
will inspire you to give full, or adequate expression to the im-
pressions which these scenes leave on your youthful mind !
But you may ask me, ladies and gentlemen, why I dwell
thus somewhat minutely on the ancestors, the early years, the
home influences, of George Gordon Byron ? For this purpose:
to enable you to judge him as he really was—that you may be
able (from the facts cited, and the inferences which are fairly
deducible from those facts) to come to a philosophic conclusion
on the temperament of the future Poet. You have no right to
judge him without first justly estimating the temperament which
God, in His inscrutable wisdom, gave him—or permitted to be
made manifest in him. Will not temperament be taken into
account at the Supreme Tribunal? Who shall be its arbiter on
earth ? Who shall audaciously say, modified or directed as it is by
circumstances, that its quality does not inform, or at least tinge
and tone, all our moral actions. Biographers have dealt with
temperament as mere dilettanti; philosophers have amused them-
selves with describing—more or less successfully —its manifesta-
tions. They have called it nervous, sanguine bilious, lymphatic,
with numerous combinations —compound and complex. But
who has ever found the magician’s wand by which its operations
can be permanently shaped and controlled? Who has ever dis-
covered the golden philosophic key by which the mystery of its
influences may be unlocked ? The Reverend Clergy of every age
and church have brought their exegetical knowledge to bear on
it; schoolmasters pretend to understand and direct it; prison-
reformers and the apostles of social science think they can inter-


pret its obscure significations. In vain; though not all in vain. No
true exponent of the Philosophy of Temperament has yet appeared
among mankind. Did such a one appear, and did he establish his
doctrine as infallible science, he would become the social Savior
of the world! But we can distinguish the lights and shades of
temperament, although we cannot give perfect rules for its man-
agement and direction; we can, at all events, study—if we enter
on the study with unprejudiced minds —its effects on individuals
—see how far it shapes their actions, illumes or shadows their
lives. We may judge, too, how far, like physical peculiarities,
and even disease itself, it is inherited; and perhaps, observe how
circumstances affect it. The Roman sage uttered a solemn truth
when he said: Ad res pravas scepe libidine trahimur, see plus incon-
siderantia; nonnunquam etiam circumvenimur artibus malorum homi-
num, a quibus impellimur et cogimur. For this very reason, have
I alluded to Foul-weather Jack, to the Mad Captain, to the Gor-
dons of Gight, and the Trevanions of Cornwall, that you may be
able to form a good idea of the kind of temperament the Poet of
the united races was likely to possess, and how —and how much
—after-circumstances tended to develope it. This I hold is a
rigidly just fundamental principle by which to examine the life
of a man, whether good or bad —and (if the ladies will permit to
say so) the life of a woman also, though it has been sarcastically
suggested, that temper has more to do with the life of the latter.
But both are intimately allied.
We must hasten forward. The Parcce are spinning the thread
of the future Poet’s destiny. The grim old lord (already alluded
to) dies (1798), and the delicate limping boy of the Aberdeen
Grammar School hears himself called up to class by his dominie,
one summer’s morning, as “Georgius GordonDominus de Byron.”*
Let us merely glance at the events of the next few years. His
mother removes to News tend; but is hardly settled there, before
she is seized with a desire to get a surgical operation performed
on the unshapely foot of her son. After subjecting him to much
needless suffering, this attempt failed, as well as others during
the next three years. He is placed under the care of Dr. Glennie,
of Dulwich; but his mother repeatedly interferes with teacher
and pupil —his guardian, the Earl of Carlisle is either too pusil-
lanimous, or too careless, to counteract this conduct; and, in
consequence, the little Lord Byron —after nearly two years’ resi-
dence —leaves Dr. Glennie’s school, with little classical and less
mathematical knowledge, but with the fruits of miscellaneous
reading in history, poetry, travel, and romance, garnered up in
* Of. Moore (vol. 1, p. 31), Galt, and Biographical sketch to Galignaui’s,
“Byron’s Works,”


his mind, and guarded by an excellent memory. We next see him
at Harrow, and find him idle in school, but full of fire during
play-time. His own poetic sketch of this period of his life—
while under the good Dr. Drury —will suffice for our objects this
evening:—
Yet, when confinement’s lingering hour was done,
Our sports, our studies, and our souls were one:
Together we impelled the flying ball;
Together waited in our tutor’s hall;
Together joined in cricket’s manly toil,
Or shared the produce of the rever’s spoil;
Or plunging from the green declining shore,
Our pliant limbs the buoyant billows bore ;
In every ele-uent, unchanged, the same,
Ali, all that brothers should be, but the name.*
In 1805 this impulsive, good-natured, irritable, vain, yet consti-
tutionally modest youth, is sent to Trinity college, Cambridge.
If he had entered college with anything like a fair share of the
stock-knowledge which is required to win distinction at a Univer-
sity, it is probable his ambition would have prompted him to carry
off a wreath in undergraduate learning. He did not, however,
possess that knowledge, and we consequently find him pursuing
the same course of random reading which had been his chief
mental aliment at Harrow on the Hill—histories, books of adven-
ture, particularly narratives of shipwrecks, and the English Poets,
being’the works read with the greatest avidity. Cambridge was no
alma mater to him —she was rather a stepmother; whether through
his own fault, or the fault of his impulsive temperament, I will
not pause to consider. Men of genius (I mean the real thing, and
not talent) seldom shine at Universities. The waking soul will not,
as a rule, catch inspiration in semi-monastic corridors; its fire of
emotion must be enkindled under the bright eye of day, or evoked
through sympathy with the beauty of external nature. Byron
was idle, prodigal, gay, perhaps dissipated, at Cambridge; but, I
am convinced, that intense passion of his boyhood—that beauti-
ful day-dream of his youth —his love of Mary Chaworth, kept
him, during the greater portion of his Cambridge life, free from
those gross indulgences of passion which blast the finest organi-
zation—from that demoralization which never (if we except the
few years of his vicious insanity at Venice) cankered his better
* From “Childish Recollections,” Murray’s edition in one vol., p. 407
A perusal of t e whole of this poem will repay the student of Byron’s ju-
venile character.


nature. How could Mary Chaworth understand the temper of
the radiant soul she might with a smile have impelled to move in
a regular orbit? She was a young lady of eighteen—finished—
and he was a lad at college, somewhat awkward and shy. We
need not, then, wonder at the sequel. “Do you think I could
care anything for that lame boy?” he overheard her ask—heard
it like a death-knell. It sped, as he himself described it, like a
shot through his heart.* That early disappointment embittered
the fountain of feeling at its source. To sustain himself—or his
heart—from utter prostration —so exquisite were his sensibilities
—he called in the aid of those fiery elements of character, which
had occasionally manifested themselves during his stay at Har-
row. Worse follows. A lurid scepticism darts out of his disap-
pointment. He enters on the first scene of that dramatic melan-
choly, which he enacted through the rest of his short life. He
tastes the first bitter-sweet draught of that egotism, which induced
him to make himself appear to the world worse than he really
was.f He begins those dreary communings with his own soul,
which afterwards became an exquisite torture to him; and the
first shade of that dismal shadow of affected misanthropy creeps
over and mars the brightness of his really bright and loving spirit.
He now sought to relieve his pent breast of its intense feelings;
but although the intense feeling was there, language to give ade-
quate expression to his emotions was yet wanting. That, as it
ever does, came slowly. Mere children may prattle in numbers,
and the prattle may be both rythmical and full of good rhyme;
but there is little of the true language of poetry in it. His first
poetic efforts pleased his few friends, and their applause stirred
depths in his being, like the spirit “troubling the waters.” He
pants for fame with feverish thirst. Although only eighteen
years of age he is able to embody his longings thus: —
* Moore, vol. 1, p. 83. The reader may like to be reminded of Miss Cha-
worth’s career in life. “In August, 1805,’’ we are informed in Murray’s
complete Works of Byron, “she was married to John Musters, Esq. [who
assumed the name and arms of Chaworth]; and died at Wiverton Hall, in
February, 1832, in consequence, it is believed, of the alarm and danger to
which she had been exposed during the sack of Colwick by a party of riot-
ers from Nottingham. The unfortunate lady had been in a feeble state of
health for several years, and she and her daughter were obliged to take
shelter from the violence of the mob in a shrubbery, where, partly from
cold, partly from terror, her constitution sustained a shock which it wanted
vigour to resist.”
t See Dallas, apud Moore, vol. 1, p. 193. This will remind the reader of
the passage in the Confessions of St. Augustine, where the self-accusing
writer declares that he boasted of sins he had never committed, lest he
should appear less successful in iniquity than his companions.


The fire, in the cavern of Etna concealed,
Still mantles unseen in its secret recess;
At length, in a volume terrific revealed,
No torrent can quench it, no bounds can repress.
Oh thus, the desire in my bosom for fame
Bids me live but to hope for Posterity’s praise ;
Could I soar, with the Phoenix, on pinions of flame,
With him I would wish to expire in the blaze.
The feverish desire of a distempered imagination, some will say!
Be it so: I only want to show the desire existed in his eighteenth
year; and that desire was more fully developed in his nineteenth,
when he sent his “Hours of Idleness” to the press. These ju-
venile poems show ability. An acute and impartial critic could
discover in them indications of genius. There is gold in the
quartz. But how was the little hook received ? Quietly, as it de-
served, hy the public; hut with a scream of derision from a great
literary censor—Francis Jeffrey, of the Edinburgh Review —which
the little work did not merit, and which the great critic should
have been too magnanimous to indulge in. Fie should have
thought of his own prose at nineteen (or his own poetry at any
age), and the consciousness of literary crudity would have sug-
gested critical charity. But political passions blinded the Lessing
of the modern Athens. He must write down the lordling; because
the young lord dared to express ideas which were not in accord
with the oracles of the Edinburgh. A mighty machine is employed
to crush a fly; an elephant is got ready to tread a gnat; a park
of artillery is employed to kill a starling. When the mighty ex-
periment is made, no fly —no gnat—no starling—is crushed. A
young eagle—keen of eye, sharp of beak, swift of wing, and
fierce with clasping talons—hovers over the operations. To leave
allegory and come back to Jeffrey, the article in the Edinburgh
Review provoked a power, which the charioteer-in-chief of that
vehicle of criticism little imagined was in existence. “English
Bards and Scotch Reviewers” opened the eyes of Great Britain.
It was a satire; a cruel satire in some respects; an unseemly libel
in most. But it was the utterance of genius in a rage—a David
using his skill and courage against a Goliah. The author was
ashamed of His anger afterwards, and thoroughly detested his
satire. Its success brought him no peace. There was, also, the
hitter memory of the friendless manner in which he took his seat
in the House of Lords rankling in his soul; so he determined to
leave his native land—the very best thing he could have done
under the circumstances. He was fortunate in having as the
companion of his travels an upright gentleman—a man of culti-
vated taste and high moral tone —a model English gentleman —
the Hon. John Cam Hobhouse.


We cannot (time will not permit) follow them in tlieir pil-
grimage towards tlie Rising Sun —in tlieir journey through Por-
tugal, Spain, Sicily, Sardinia, Malta, Albania, Illyria; we cannot
with them visit Thebes, Athens, Delphi, Parnassus, and Constan-
tinople ; we cannot in classic scene, or on holy ground, watch the
eye of the young Poet kindling with eestacy, or note the beauty
of soul, which gives grace and finish to beauty of feature, deve-
loped during this progress. I must reserve a review of that poetic
pilgrimage for ar other evening. Byron is again (1811) in Eng-
land. To his friend Mr. Dallas—who made enquiries as to the
literary results of his tour —he showed his “Hints from Horace.”
Dallas was amazed. He felt hot and cold by turns. With pale
surprise, he asked, “was there nothing else?” when Byron, with
a carelessness thoroughly unfeigned, mentioned two fyttes of a
sort of poem which were lying in his portmanteau—mere des-
criptions of scenes. Dallas looked at them, and before he had read
a score stanzas, he discovered more than he had ever expected.
He found that the Spirit of Song had accompanied his friend on
his journey—had evoked and regenerated his great powers of
mind. Through the influence of this gentlemen, the “Hints
from Horace” were for a time suppressed, and Childe Harold was
given to the world. I need not dwell on the success of that poem.
To use his own expression, he “ awoke one morning, and found
himself famous.” But fame could hardly solace him for the shocks
his heart had received. He arrived in England to hear of his
mother’s illness—before he reached Newstead that mother was
dead. Notwithstanding the jars and discords of earlier days, he
had a deep affection for her. His letters during his absence from
England—written without the faintest presentiment of after pub-
lication —unmistakeably prove it. The death of two of his friends,
Matthews and Wingfield (and no one was ever more loyal to his
friends), gave additional poignancy to his grief. Tie arrived in
England—to quote himself —“without a hope and almost without
a desire.” Saddened child of genius—the victim of circumstances
and morbid sensibilities—well might it have been for thee, if
that fever against which thou didst struggle (while abroad) had
laid thee in a quiet grave in classic lands! Well for thee; but not
for the literature of our country which thy Muse afterwards glo-
rified !
If politics had been purer in his day, we might have had a
reformer in Byron. Of: his three speeches in the House of Lords,
the second was an undoubted success.* It is hardly necessary to
* I will quote a single passage from this speech, not as indicative of any
political predilections of my own, but to show how liberal Byron was, be-
fore Liberalism was at all fashionable or (in England) even popular. "Upon


add that he was ever the friend of Civil and Religious Liberty.
All through his life he was the exponent —both in Poetry and
prose—of some of its most beautiful canons. But his imagina-
tion was too active —his fancy too exuberant —ever to rest content
with dry matters-of-faot, or the equally dry matters-of-fictiou,
which make up the sum total of political life. He must invoke
divine Poesy to relieve his mind; and his treasury of oriental
associations is not yet exhausted. “The Giaour,” “The Bride of
Abydos,” and “ The Corsair,” in turn dazzle the world; and the
world (and chiefly that portion of it called the upper ten thou-
sand) is well content to be dazzled. It makes an idol of this weak
young man. A r es> weak! Fine quality of brain is no guarantee
of fine temper of heart, particularly when the possessor of both is
“lord of much hot youth,” and an English Baron to boot. He
who never had a childhood, in the sense most of us look back to
that sanctified period —roseate morn of our consciousness; he who
never experienced, in its purest fragrance, the regenerating breath
of a mother’s love, or the toning influence of a father’s authority;
he who during his fervid boyhood had seldom come in contact
with anyone (save perhaps the high-souled and prophetic Miss
Pigot) that understood his temperament; he—embittered—dis-
appointed—stricken —as we have seen him—was the worst sub-
ject for the ordeal of intoxicating adulation he had to pass through
that can be well imagined. He did not merely falter during
this trial—he fell at once. Another instance, my friends, of the
truth of the poetic allegory, which places “youth at the prow”
and “pleasure at the helm” of a gilded vessel, sailing pleasantly
along the stream of time, with fragrant zephyrs filling her sails,
and fanning the cheeks of her crew. There are signs of a storm
creeping up the horizon. The present flattery as much as the
after censure —both in excess—contributed to the partial demo-
ralization of Byron’s intellect. Macaulay puts this well. “He
came into the world,” says the master critic; “and the world
treated him as his mother had treated him, sometimes with fond-
ness, sometimes with cruelty, never with justice. It indulged
the consequences of jour not acceding,” said his Lordship, “to the claims
of the petitioners [the Roman Catholics of Ireland], I shall not expatiate;
you know them, you will feel them, and your children s children when you have
passed away. Adieu to that Union so called, as Lucus a non lucendo, a
union from never uniting, which in its first operation gave a death-blow to
the independence of Ireland, and in its last may be the cause of her eternal
separation from this country. If it must be called a Union, it is the union
of the shark with his prey; the spoiler swallows up his victim, and thus
they become one and indivisible. Thus has Great Britain swallowed up the
Parliament, the Constitution, the Independence of Ireland, and refuses to
disgorge even a single privilege, although for the relief of her swoln and
distempered body politic.” Moore’s Life and Works of Byron, vol. vi., p. 333.


him without discrimination, and punished him without discrimi-
nation. He was truly a spoiled child, not merely the spoiled
child of his parent, but the spoiled child of nature, the spoiled
child of fortune, the spoiled child of fame, the spoiled child of
society. His first poems were received with a contempt which,
feeble as they were, they did not absolutely deserve. The poem
which lie published on Ids return from his travels was, on the
other hand, extolled far above its merit. At twenty-four he
found himself on the highest pinnacle of literary fame, with
Scott, Wordsworth, Southey, and a crowd of other distinguished
writers beneath his feet. There is scarcely an instance in his-
tory of so sudden a rise to so dizzy an eminence. Every thing
that could stimulate, and every thing that could gratify the
strongest propensities of our nature, the gaze of a hundred draw-
ing-rooms, the acclamations of the whole nation, the applause of
of applauded men, the love of lovely women, all this world and
all the glory of it were at once offered to a youth to whom na-
ture had given violent passions, and whom education had never
taught to control them. He lived as many men live who have
no similar excuse to plead for their faults. But his countrymen
and his countrywomen would love him and admire him. They
were resolved to see in his excesses only the flash and outbreak
of that same fiery mind which glowed in his poetry. He at-
tacked religion; yet in religious circles his name was mentioned
with fondness; and in many religious publications his works were
censured with singular tenderness. He lampooned the Prince
Regent; yet he could not alienate the Tories. Every thing, it
seemed, was to be forgiven to youth, rank, and genius.”
He makes an effort [Autumn of 1813] to settle down—the
effort of the hopeless; for the dead love of Mary Chaworth is
still a consecrated spot in his affections; and proposes marriage
to a Miss Milbanke, but is rejected—rejected, it is true in a kindly
and gentle manner; but rejection—from what we know of him—
must have been a barbed and poisoned arrow to his proud spirit.
He had, however, the courage genius gives; if he felt his pride
wounded he conceals the pain. He keeps up a correspondence
with the lady who rejected him; and one year later he is accepted
by her. She became his wife on the 2nd of January, 1815.
Of the moral tragedy in which the poet played a part before
the marriage altar, I cannot give you a better idea than by read-
ing his own rendering of the scene:—
I saw him stand
Before an altar with a gentle bride ;
Her face was fair, but was not that which made
The Starlight of his Boyhood;—as he stood
Even at the altar, o’er his brow there came


The self-same aspect, and the quivering shock
That in the antique Oratory shook
His bosom in its solitude; and then—
As in that hour— a moment o’er his face,
The tablet of unutterable thoughts
Was traced, —and then it faded as it came,
And he stood calm and quiet, and he spoke
The fitting vows, but heard not his own words.
And all things reel’d around him ; he could see
Not that which was, nor that which should have been—
But the old mansion, and the accustom’d hall,
And the remember’d chambers, and the place,
The day, the hour, the sunshine, and the shade,
All things pertaining to that place and hour,
And her, who was his destiny, came back,
And thrust themselves between him and the light:—
What business had they there at such a time ?
What happiness could result from such a union! But he was
settled in life!
Settled in life! Married! Ah, my friends, bad is the advice,
founded on false reasoning, which sanctions this kind of domestic
settlement! What chilling Lares and Penates freeze even its spring-
tide. Why—why —are thoughtless maidens taught to believe, that
the rake of half-a-dozen years will tone down to a respectable
husband under the mellowing mystic light of the honeymoon ?
It is cruelly false teaching. Apart, however, from Byron’s irre-
gularities —and I do not think them to have been in excess of
those of young men of his age and position—his genius all but
utterly disqualified him to be a husband under any circumstances.
Art is inexorable; she does not permit to her highest votaries the
blessings and the bliss of commonplace existence. In her supreme
hierophants—her Dantes, her Shaksperes, her Miltons, and Byrons
—she infuses such contempt of petty importances —of conven-
tional relationships and responsibilities—as to unfit them for
most of the duties and respectabilities of ordinary life.* “The
* Here is a specimen of Carlyle’s interpretation of a phase of Life:—
“ That very spectacle of an Immortal Nature, with faculties and destiny
extending through Eternity, hampered and bandaged up, by nurses, peda-
gogues, posture-masters, and the tongues of innumerable old women (named
‘force of public opinion’); by prejudice, custom, want of knowledge, want
of money, want of strength, into, say, the meagre Pattern-Figure that, in
these days, meets you in all thoroughfares; a God-created man all but ab-
negating the character of Man; forced to exist, automatised, mummy-wise
(scarcely in rare moments audible or visible from amid his wrappages and
cerements), as Gentleman, or Gigman; and so selling his birthright of
Eternity for three daily meals, poor at best, which time yields—is not this
spectacle in itself highly romantic, tragical, if we had eyes to look at it?”
Miscellanies, vol. 4, p. 2.


truth is,” says Byron’s Biographer (Moore), “ I fear that rarely,
if ever have men of the higher order of genius shown themselves
fitted for the calm affections and comforts that form the cement
of domestic life. ‘ One misfortune (says Pope) of extraordinary
geniuses is, that their very friends are more apt to admire than
love them,’ To this remark there have, no doubt, been excep-
tions, —and I should pronounce Lord Byron, from my own expe-
rience, to be one of them, —but it would not be difficult, perhaps,
to show, from the very nature and pursuits of genius, that such
must generally be the lot of all pre-eminently gifted with it; and
that the same qualities which enable them to command admira-
tion are also those that too often incapacitate them from concilia-
ting love. The very habits, indeed, of abstraction and self-study
to which the occupations of men of genius lead, are, in themselves,
necessarily, of an unsocial and detaching tendency, and require a
large portion of indulgence from others not to be set down as
unamiable. One of the chief sources, too, of sympathy and so-
ciety between ordinary mortals being their dependence on each
other’s intellectual resources, the operation of this social princi-
ple must naturally be weakest in those whose own mental stores
are most abundant and self-sufficing, and who, rich in such mate-
rials for thinking within themselves, are rendered so far inde-
pendent of any aid from others. It was this solitary luxury
(which Plato called “banqueting on his own thoughts”) that led
Pope, as well as Lord Byron, to prefer the silence and seclusion
of his library to the most agreeable conversation. And not only
too, is the necessity of commerce with other minds less felt by
such persons, but, from that fastidiousness which the opulence
of their own resources generates, the society of those less gifted
than themselves becomes often a restraint and burden, to which
not all the charms of friendship, or even love, can reconcile them.
Nothing is so tiresome (says the poet of Yaucluse, in assigning a
reason for not living with some of his dearest friends) as to con-
verse with persons who have not the same information as one’s self.”
In another passage he tells us, that it is in the very nature and
essence of genius to be for ever occupied intensely with Self, as
the great centre and source of strength; and he adds: —“ To this
power of self-concentration, by which alone all the other powers
of genius are made available, there is, of course, no such disturb-
ing and fatal enemy as those sympathies and affections that draw
the mind out actively towards others; and, accordingly, it will
be found that, among those who have felt within themselves a
call to immortality, the greater number have, by a sort of instinct,
kept aloof from such ties, and, instead of the softer duties and
rewards of being amiable, reserved themselves for the high, ha-
zardous chances of being great. In looking back through the


lives of the most illustrious poets,—the class of intellect in which
the characteristic features are, perhaps, most strongly marked,
we shall find that, with scarcely one exception, from Homer down
to Lord Byron, they have been, in their several degrees, restless
and solitary spirits, with minds wrapped up, like silk-worms, in
their own tasks, either strangers, or rebels to domestic ties, and
bearing about with them a deposit for posterity in their souls, to
the jealous watching and enriching of which almost all other
thoughts and considerations have been sacrificed.” This section
of the philosophy of life seems to have been understood by
Newton, Gassendi, Galileo, Descartes, Bayle, Locke, Leibnitz
Boyle, Hume, and other sages, who all led single lives; and il-
lustrated by Dante, Milton, Shakspere, Byron, and other men of
genius, who made unhappy marriages. Byron is about the most
unhappy of all in these melancholy chronicles. His marriage
and its consequences have filled volumes of criticism. The sanc-
tified stillness of the grave has not been able to awe scandal-
mongers away from dishonouring the dead.
When the millennium comes, will every one mind his own
business ? What has Society to do with the private arrangements
of individuals? Nothing! Still this prying, restless, unappeased
Society is ever feverishly in quest of its intoxicating cordials of
scandal, its precious bon-bons of tittle-tattle and family history,
its tonics of detraction and white mendacity. Talk of our taste
for “sensation!” There is no sensation equal in intensity to that
furnished by revealing a skeleton in a cupboard—particularly if
the cupboard happens to belong (or to have belonged) to a dis-
tinguished individual —and more particularly if curiosity had
been drawn to its probable ghastly contents. You may say that
the harpies only exist in poetic mythicism; but if you had eyes
to see, you could find those creatures in drawing-rooms, wearing
voluminous chignons, and floating about in ample robes. Witches
have gone too, although representatives of the sisterhood may be
found in “brown silk dresses.”* They no longer ride on broom-
sticks but they are armed with a terrible weapon —a tiny crow-
quill or gold-pen —with which they perform fearful feats. It bites
like an asp, and the ink that flows from it is deadlier than the venom
of the most venomous reptile. One of these weird sisters was able a
few vears ago, with this tiny instrument, to rouse a whole people
to civil war —one of the most grandly-terrible conflicts in the Re-
cords of Time. And she it is who lately, with some subtile skill,
has attempted to unfold a horrible episode in the life of the great
Poet ..bout whom I have been discoursing this evening. Such a
story, even if true, should never have been told at all, because it
* See “ Sunny Memories of Foreign Lands.”


desecrates the sanctities of the grave, and will dye the cheeks of
two fair innocent English girls with the blush of deepest shame,
and send the keenest of keen arrows into a hundred hearts. But
we must not —staggered though we are with the intrepid bold-
ness and indelicacy of her who tells this story —refrain from
examining the statement as it comes to us; and see whether we
have any—and wdiat —reasons for doubting it—nay denying it
-—of cutting out the cankered core of alleged facts which seem
to give it probability.
‘When a person tells a story which is sure to throw the world
—-New and Old —into a paroxysm of astonishment, is not the
narrator severely bound by the most rigid laws of criticism and
morality in his, or her, statements ? And when, in a few pages,
many glaring misstatements of facts are made, have we not a
right to be suspicious of the narrator in the leading, or sensa-
tional, particular ? In this ghastly story about Byron, we see a
cluster of these suspicious misstatements. Here are a few of
them:—
1. She (Lady Byron) lived two years with her husband.
Here are the actual dates: married, January 2nd, 1815; left him,
and returned no more, January 15th, 1816.* She, consequently,
lived with him one year and thirteen days.
2. “ The whole history of Lord and Lady Byron in its reality
has long been perfectly understood in many circles in England; but
the facts were of a nature that could not be told.” Hot a single
individual in the whole range of English society has indicated
the slightest previous knowledge of this story. The Solicitors of
Lady Byron’s representatives evidently know nothing about it.
Lord Lindsay who was as likely to hear the matter as anybody else,
if it had been known “in many circles,” gives Lady Barnard’s
version of the causes of the unhappiness existing between Lord
and Lady Byron. But the matter can be put to the test. Let the
Times and other leading newspapers of Great Britain challenge
the whole English nation—specially>“the many circles” —and
every individual of them—to say whether a whisper of this thing
had been heard before the weird woman had “floated” it. I
firmly believe it will not receive a particle of corroboration.
3. “By a singular concurrence of circumstances, all the
facts of the case, in the most undeniable and authentic form, were at
one time placed in the hands of the writer of this sketch, leaving
to her judgment the use which should be made of them.” This is
contradicted by the penultimate statement, in which the writer
* See her own letter in Moore’s “ Byron,” vol. 6, p. 277,


recommends that “all the necessary facts should be put into the
hands of some persons” to be published after her (Lady Byron’s)
death. No right whatever is reserved for herself to publish,
after she had returned the alleged MS. statement to Lady Byron.
4. “He [Byron] had not really, anxiously expected to be
accepted, and the discovery of the treasure of affection which he
had secured was like a vision of a lost heaven to a soul in hell.”
This is nonsense. If he had no affection for the treasure—but
for the £lO,OOO as elsewhere hinted—what was there to become
demoniac about? He was simply playing a false part, engaging
himself to one he didn’t love; but no discovery afterwards made
could possibly produce the alleged horrors.
5, The true statement of facts about the destruction of
Byron’s Autobiography is thus given by Thomas Moore:—’“With-
out entering into the respective claims of Mr. Murray and myself
to the property in these memoirs (a question which now that they
are destroyed can be but of little moment to any one), it is suffi-
cient to say that, believing the manuscript still to be mine, I
placed it at the disposal of Lord Byron’s sister, Mrs. Leigh, with
the sole reservation of a protest against its total destruction; at
least, without previous perusal and consultation among the par-
ties. The majority of the persons present disagreed with this
opinion, and it was the only point upon which there did exist
any difference between us. The manuscript was accordingly torn
and burnt before our eyes, and I immediately paid to Mr. Murray,
in the presence of the gentlemen assembled, two thousand guineas,
with interest, etc., being the amount of what I owed him upon
the security of my bond, and for which I now stand indebted to
my publishers, Messrs. Longman and Co. Since then, the family
ot Lord Byron have, in a manner highly honourable to themselves,
proposed an arrangement, by which the sum thus paid to Mr.
Murray might be reimbursed me; but from feelings and consi-
derations, which it is unnecessary here to explain, I have res-
pectfully, but peremptorily, declined their offer.” The Countess
Guiccioli nowhere contradicts the truth of this. Why, then, the
suggcstio falsi in the eighth paragraph of the ghastly story?
6. “ Aurora Baby is Byron’s ideal of his wife ! ” Shade of
the illustrious bard ! if aught could bring thee unrest in thy
Elysian retreat, it would be this ridiculous assertion! It is
known in a hundred places, and a household tradition in several
hundred families in Northumberland and Durham, that Aurora
Baby was intented for the moral and physical portraiture of a
young lady—a Miss Howard from the neighbourhood of Carlisle,
and who was living, a venerable matron, somewhere in Cumber-
land, early in 1848—whom he had met at Seaham after his


marriage. I heard this often in the years ’45, ’46, ’47, and ’4B
from the Humbles of Sunderland, the Todds of Jsewcastle-on-
Tyns, the Atkinsons of Arbour House, near Chester-le-Street,
Durham, the Rev. Mr. Watson of Houghton-le-Spring, and many
others (including the late Sir Wm. Lawson). The majority of
these informants lived short distances from Seaham, and were
well up in all the Byron gossip of the past. Many of them are
yet living, and as this statement of mine—made deliberately and
solemnly here to night —will in a few months reach them. I
trust to have before long their testimony to its accuracy. But
there is intrinsic evidence in the poemitself of its utter inapplic-
ability to Lady Byron, under any phase of her existence. I will
read the passage :
And then there was—but why should I go on,
Unless the ladies should go off?—there was
Indeed a certain fair and fairy one,
Of the best class, and better than her class, —
Aurora Raby, a young star who shone
O’er life, too sweet an image for such glass,
A lovely being, scarcely form’d or moulded,
A rose with all its sweetest leaves yet folded ,
Rich, noble, but an orphan ; left an only
Child to the care of guardians good and kind ;
But still her aspect had an air so lonely I
Blood is not water; and where shall we find
Feelings of youth like those which overthrown lie
By death, when we are left, alas ! behind.
To feci, in friendless palaces, a home
Is wanting, and our best ties in the tomb ?
Early in years, and yet more infantine
In figure, she had something of sublime
In eyes which sadly shone, as seraphs’ shine.
All youth—but with an aspect beyond time ;
Radiant and grave —as pitying man’s decline ;
Mournful —but mournful of another’s crime,
She look'd as if she sat by Eden’s door,
An I grieved for those who could return no more,
She was a Catholic too, sincere, austere,
As far as her own gentle heart allow’d,
And deem’d that fallen worship far more dear
Perhaps because’t was fallen ; her sires were proud
Of deeds and days when they bad fill’d the ear
Of nations, and had never bent or bow’d
To novel power; anl as she was the last,
She held their old faith and old feelings fast.


Sue gazed upon a world she scarcely knew,
As seeking not to know it; silent, lone,
As grows a flower, thus quietly she grew,
And kept her heart serene within its zone.
There was awe in the homage which she drew ;
Her spirit seem’d as seated on a throne
Apart from, the surrounding world, and strong
In its own strength—most strange in one so young.
Why do I quote this in full? To show you a sample of the
disingenuousness of the story-teller. She leaves out two
stanzas (those describing Aurora as an orphan and a Catholic)
which cannot possibly apply to Lady Byron, in order to force
an argument with the portion quoted. 1 look upon it as simply
impossible for the writer to believe in her own theory on this
point, in the face of her own suppression; but the illustration
suited a purpose.
These misstatements are very suspicious; still I will not say
—as a countryman of her own has said* —that the whole story is
likely to he a concoction. She (the writer) may have some foun-
dation for it. It is well known that Lady Byron had for many
years before her death, showed symptoms of a peculiar mental
malady. Although, ordinarily, her heart was full of the gentlest
charities of humanity, and her mind spiritually serene, days of
mental gloom would overshadow her. During those periods her
best feelings seem to have been frozen; she lost all interest in
the things about her; she looked a human petrifaction. Here is
a letter of William Howitt, which tells you all this; and, I think,
no one of the present audience believes that William Howitt is
capable of making a false statement. Here are a dozen extracts—
from such of her own letters as have been published —which indi-
cate an intellectual tendency to take austere views of life and its
responsibilities, and which give us some notion of the peculiar form
in which mental disease would manifest itself—if it manifested it-
self at all—in such a snbject. In one of those periods of desolation,
may she not have said something —given some memoranda—to
the strong-minded woman from another land, who was a very
likely figure to occur to her imagination during the dark days of
hallucination. This supposition would at all events, explain the
spectral appearance of Lady Byron —the shadow of the grave on
* “We all know that the lady is a mere sensationalist writer; that
nothing from her pen is considered by the American public as historically
reliable, and that she will at any time sacrifice truth, if by so doing she
can attract notoriety.” 1 A Member of Congress ”in the Tines of Sep-
tember, 1869.


lier face—which is with such melodramatic pathos described in
the story. That Lady Byron was in an abnormal condition when
she made “ the confession,” may be inferred from this fact—
the strong-minded woman was all but a stranger to her. Here
is “ Sunny Memories of Foreign Lands,” Look through it, and
you will find that the strong-minded woman had—on the occasion
of her first visit only met Lady Byron once, when she had “ a few
minutes highly interesting conversation,” on religious matters,
with her, (See vol. 11., p. 103). Ho other meeting then took
place. I have another edition of the book, 1862, and Byron is
quoted approvingly, just as in the earlier edition. If the strong-
minded woman had in 1856 become acquainted with the horrible
story, it is strange none of the horror shows itself when she re-
issued her book in 1862. She still gushingly prefers Byron’s
appreciation of real flesh and blood to all the beauty of “ their
stone ideals.” The terrible story was not such an ogre then, as
it seems to have become afterwards.
But we have better evidence than this cluster of her mis-state-
ments, and the absurd confirmations drawn from Byron’s
“ Manfred ” and “ Cain,” written five or six years after. At no
period of his life was the sound part of his mind in more health-
ful exercise than during the year in which the crime must—on
the hypothesis stated—that is to say, between his refusal and his
acceptance —have been committed. To that year’s mental work,
we are indebted for the Hebrew Melodies ; and although the noble
author has under-rated these full-flowing and soul-fraught lyrics,
they are at once an exponent of his sublime conception of the
power and majesty of God, of the immortality of the soul, and
the excellence of moral beauty. Other productions of the year
indicate the mens sana, but I regret to say not existing in corpore
sano. He was seriously ill during a considerable portion of that
period. There are hints of it in his Journal and in letters to
Moore :
[The Speaker here read several extracts to show that Byron was periodi-
cally unwell from Autumn 1813 to the end of Summer 1814.]
I have still better testimony. The late Mr. Isaac Nathan, Profes-
sor of Music, who lived for years in this city, published the
Hebrew Melodies, he and Braham being the authors of the music.
This occurred in 1814. Nathan saw Byron almost every day, and
was on very friendly terms with him. I have myself read one
of Byron’s letters to Nathan, written in the August of that year,
in which the writer calls Nathan “One of the Magi,” because he
had given him some some simple but efficacious remedy for the


di&ease which was torturing him.* I hope to he able to publish
that letter hereafter. It will prove that it was all hut impossible
he could have committed the crime in the alleged year. In fact,
till a cure was effected, he would not listen to any suggestion
about marriage. There are persons in London, who can proba-
bly, throw light on this point. Did Dr. Bailie attend Byron pro-
fessionally in 1814? If not, who did? Whoever did, he has
probably left among his papers some memorandum of the case.
If that were published it would convince the most sceptical that
whatever objects of dissipation Byron pursued in the early por-
tion of 1813, in 1814 he was too seriously illf to continue such
pursuits. His correspondence in Moore’s Memoir makes this
satisfactorily clear to me. Besides he begun this year with a
moral action worthy of note. He gave to one Thomas Ashe, a man
who had published an indecent book, called “The Book,” the
means (£170) of escaping from his degraded occupation and im-
migrating to thiscountry. Tin's was not the act of an unnatural
sensualist.
Byron’s life during this period —1814—affords intrinsic evi-
dence of the beginning of a moral renovation. His deeds of
kindness, or charity, are numerous; his letters breathe a contempt
for those dissipations of high life which enervate the intellect
and darken the soul; he begins to breathe aspirations—it may be
weak and fitful ones—towards the purer and better life. It was
not certainly at this time those gloomy creations, “Manfred” and
“Cain,” presented themselves to his imagination, or that caprici-
ous, adventurous, wild “Young Juan” was intellectually con-
ceived. Any argument in reference to his life at this period,
founded on those productions, is illogical and unjust, as it anti-
cipates by several years the moral views imbibed at Venice, and
the diseased state of mind which resulted from it. Equally
groundless is the argument drawn from his poems to his sister.
Those poems embody pure and loving thoughts, shadowed by a
manly sorrow, or rendered fitfully fervid through an intense
sense of gratitude for kindness in his days of adversity.
But why gather intrinsic evidence from the life and writ-
ings of this spoiled child of genius and society ? Why not go
at once to the unsullied source of my argument this evening—to
the pure and blamless life of Mrs. Leigh jherself ? I do not
* I am in communication with members of the late Mr. Nathan’s family,
besides friends and acquaintances of his, and hope to be able to throw
considerable light on this point in a few weeks.
t Prope prioris anni finem morb: gall: erat inquinatus, a quo duriter per
novem menses cruciebatur.


remember to have ever heard or read anything to parrellel
the cruelty with which this lady’s character has been assailed.
Assuming that Byron in 1814 was the incarnate demon he is
represented —that his passions drove him morbidly mad—are we
to assume at once that his sister became the victim of his font
caprices, and fell likewise ? She, a gentlewoman by birth, care-
fully nurtured in rather a strict school, married to an honorable
and brave soldier, the mother of children, sacrilegiously trampled
on all the sanctities of her life and its surroundings, and became
the vilest thing on earth ! Believe it—think it —not, in the name
of all we owe to the purity and good name of our mothers and
sisters, of our wives and daughters, of Englishwomen in general.
Not one vehement voice has been raised against this grim
scandal on the side of Mrs. Leigh. No one, standing as it were
beside her grave, has attempted to ward off “ the thing of evil”
about to dishonour it ? "Whatever doubts the life of an erratic
man may suggest, the unsullied fame of a well-nurtered English
wife and mother should flout them, so far as they affect her.
Dwell for a moment on some of the facts. She became the
guest of Lady Byron after, immediately after, the separation —
continued her friend through life—finally, I believe, died in her
arms. She was also the guest and companion of a scrupulously
virtuous and scrupulously exemplary Queen —the “ good
dowager,” Queen Adelaide. These are facts, and still w T e are
asked to believe “ many circles ” knew of her hideous shame !
How marvellously reticent the “ many circles ” must have been,
not to whisper a word against her to her Eoyal Hostess ! When
I think of the hundred efforts this noble woman made to save
her brother from the dark angel which at times mastered him—
when 1 think of her sacrifices to prevent his autobiographical
notes being published, because calculated to annoy others—when,
above all things, I call to mind the two dear daughters she has
left behind, I experience a mingled sense of anger and sorrow —
too intense for words. May heaven help those daughters, and
may the blended blushes of shame and indignation which now
dye their cheeks, be changed hereafter into the celestial aureole
of Martyrs!
Nor are we without intrinsic evidence to satisfy our minds
on the point under consideration. Here is a passage from a letter
written (October 9th, 1821), by Byron—a random letter —to his
publisher, Mr. Murray: “Send—Faber’s Treatise on the Cabiri
Sante Croix’s Mysteres du Paganisme (scarce, perhaps. .). A
common Bible, of good legible print (bound in russia). I have
one; but it was the east gift of my sisteh (whom I shall proba-
bly never see again); I can only use it carefully, and less fre-
quently, because I like to keep it in good order. Don’t forget


this, for lam a great reader and admirer of those books.”* The
last present his sister gave him—the day before he left England
-—was a copy of the Word of God ; and yet we are asked to be-
lieve she was his partner in foul sin! Could such hypocrisy exist?
Would recklessly rash and fearless Byron be a party to it ? If
Guiccioli some years later, made him such a present, would he
not laugh in her face? In another letter, written some years
before, he tells us—ingenuously and at random —that his sister
and wife had entered into a conspiracy to convert him; by send-
ing him theological and religious essays. I hold it to be morally
impossible for a man of Byron’s temperament and habits, to be
guilty of such hypocrisy as the America woman’s sensational
story would compel us to suppose, if we gave it any credence;
and I think you will all hold it morally impossible, that Augusta
Leigh (nee Byron) could have taken the part she did in his affairs
—in correspondence with him—in alliances with Lady Byron for
his reformation —if she were the foul thing, which the American
woman boldly states her to have been.
But I need hardly proceed further. So far as this much-
wronged lady is concerned she will have a hallowed place in your
memory, as she certainly has in mine? It may, however, be
well to state, that when Byron’s better mood prevailed, the
religious influence which, in spite of himself, and doubtless
through God’s grace, his wife and sister exercised over him,
often showed itself, more particularly in reference to the educa-
tion of his illegitimate daughter. I will quote a few passages on
this point from his letters.
To Mr. Hoppner he wrote April 3rd, 1821, as follows: —
Abroad, with a fair foreign education and a portion of five or six
thousand pounds, she may marry very respectably. In England such a
dowry would be a pittance, while elsewhere it is a fortune. It is, besides,
my wish that she should be a Roman Catholic, which I look upon as the
best religion, as it is assuredly the oldest of the various branches of Chris-
tianity. I have now explained my notions as to the place where she now
is—it is the best place I could find for the present; but I have no preju-
dices in its favour.
Later, (May 11th, 1821), writing to the same gentleman, he
more fully gives his views on this subject; and as he always
put his thoughts in a pleasant free-and-easy style of prose, when
he wrote from fullness of feeling, I think his ideas on the sub-
ject of Female Education will interest you. “If I had known
* See the letter at length in Moore, vol. v., pp. 261—5.


your notion,” he tells Mr. Hoppner, “ I should have adopted it
[placing his illegitimate daughter with Mr. Hoppner], As it is,
I shall let the child remain in her convent, where she seems
healthy and happy, for the present; hut I shall feel obliged if
you will enquire, when you are in the cantons, about the usual
and better modes of education there for females, and let me
hnow the result of your opinions. It is some consolation that
both Mr. and Mrs. Shelley have written to approve entirely my
placing the child with the nuns for the present. I can refer to
my whole conduct, as having neither spared care, kindness, nor
expense, since the child was sent to me. The people may say
what they please; I must content myself with not deserving
(in this instance) that they should speak ill. The place is a
country town in a good air, where there is a large establishment
for education, and many children, some of considerable rank,
placed in it. As a country town, it is less liable to objections
of every kind. It has always appeared to me, that the moral
defect in Italy does not proceed from a conventual education, —
because, to my certain knowledge, they come out of their con-
vents innocent even to ignorance of moral evil, —but to the state
of society into which they are directly plunged on coming out of
it. It is like educating an infant on a mountain-top, and then
taking him to the sea and throwing him into it and desiring him
to swim. The evil, however, though still too general, is partly
wearing away, as the women are more permitted to marry from
attachment: this is, I believe, the case also in France. And after
all, what is the higher society of England ? According to my own
experience, and to all that I have seen and heard (and I have
lived there in the very highest and* what is called the best), no
way of life can be more corrupt. In Italy, however, it is, or
rather was, more systematized; but now, they themselves are
ashamed of regular Serventism. In England, the only homage
which they pay to virtue is hypocrisy. I speak of course of the
tone of high life, —the middle ranks may be very virtuous.”
He writes thus to Moore, March 3rd, 1822: —“1 am no
enemy to religion, but the contrary. As a proof, lam educating
my natural daughter a strict Catholic in a convent of Romagna ;
for I think people can never have enough of religion, if they are
to have any. I incline, myself, very much to the Catholic doc-
trines ; but if I am to write a drama, I must make my characters
speak as I conceive them likely to argue. As to poor Shelly,
who is another bugbear to you and the world, he is, to my know-
ledge, the least selfish and the mildest of men —a man who has
made more sacrifices of his fortune and feelings for others than
any I ever heard of. With his speculative opinions I have
nothing in common, nor desire to have,”


Notwithstanding all this tender solicitude, his little daugh-
ter died; and we have, in the sorrow which her death occasioned
him, another instance of the fine sensihilites of his nature. There
is an exquisitely-toned expression of mingled love and grief in
the directions he gives Mr. Murray, in reference to her interment
in England. I can hardly describe how strangely two paragraphs
of this letter affect me; and it is partly to relieve my own feel-
ings, that I now read them, as well as to show what a kindly
disposition he had, even after “the heart’s hardening process”
had been in operation for some time. “ I wish her to be buried
in Harrow Church.” He writes: “ There is a spot in the church-
yard, near the footpath, on the brow of the hill looking towards
Windsor, and a tomb under a large tree, (bearing the name of
Peachie, or Peachey,) where I used to sit for hours and hours
when a boy. This was my favourite spot; but, as I wish to erect
a tablet to her memory, the body had better be deposited in the
church. Near the door, on the left hand as you enter, there is a
monument with a tablet containing these words :
When Sorrow weeps o’er Virtue’s sacred dust,
Our tears become us, and our grief is just :
Such were the tears she shed, who grateful pays
This last sad tribute of her love and pu-aise.
I recollect them (after seventeen years), not from any thing
remarkable in them, but because from my seat in the gallery I
had generally my eyes turned towards that monument. As near
it as convenient I could wish Allegra to be buried, and on the
wall a marble tabht placed, with these words: —
In Memory of
Allegra,
Daughter of G. G. Lord Byron,
who died at Bagna Cavallo,
in Italy, April 20th, 1822,
aged five yeaisand three months.
• I shall go to her, but she shall not return to me.’
2 Samuel,xii. 23.
The funeral I wish to be as private as is consistent with decency;
and I could hope that Henry Drury will, perhaps, read the
service over her. If he should decline it, it can be done by the
usual minister for the time being. Ido not know that I need
add more just now.”
Peace be with the little Allegra! She —“the sinless child of
sin” —had, I believe, more to do with Byron’s matrimonial trou-
bles, than the world imagines. A sort of prophetic instinct tells
me, that when Lady Byron’s papers are published should that
event ever occur—the mother of Allegra, and not Augusta Leigh,


will turn out to have been the real cause of dissension between
the Poet and his wife. But this conjecture, though founded on
a comparison of dates, and a critical examination of his letters,
must not divert me from the main object I have in view this
evening—namely, to put the Poet before you in such a way as
will enable you to judge of him as he really was, and with just
regards to the circumstances in which he was placed. From what
has been already said, I think his memory is vindicated from the
ugly horror of that scandal, which so recently scared us all. The
surroundings of the story are suspicious; there is intrinsic evi-
dence before you to refute it; there are considerations which
lead you to believe, fully and unreservedly, in the virtue and
moral strength of one of the parties, whose reputation has been
blackened; and, above all, there are circumstances in the life of
the story-teller, which compel us to shrink from accepting any
statement from her, not supported by the strongest evidence.
You all know a book, called ‘‘Uncle Tom’s Cabin.” That book is
in many respects, what this Byron scandal will probably turn out
to be—a fiction founded on facts, but without the facts giving
much, if any, justification for the peculiar philosophy which per-
meates the fiction. I have no time to discuss this matter now —
besides the subject is hardly worth discussion; but I can, at least,
declare my candid opinion, that few books ever appeared, con-
ceived in worse spirit, worked out with such little regard to con-
sequences, and fuller of mistakes and mis-statements, than this
world-lauded “Uncle Tom’s Cabin.” But this is a digression.
After his daughter’s death a great change seems to have come
over Byron; the death of Shelly, soon after, added intensity to
that change. He felt within himself the struggle of the two
angels of his existence —the Ormuz and Ahriman of his being—
the Spirit of Light and the Spirit of Darkness —which had long
fought for the mastery. Aspirations of a purer life awoke a
burning desire for action. He had already struck a blow for the
enfranchisement of glorious Italy; but the day for the regenera-
tion of that richly-dowered land had not yet come. She, the
widowed mother of two civilizations, must wait many a year
before she can chant the paeans of the Free. Often did Byron feel
the thought—although he could not have heard the words—of
this stanza:—
Oh, for a steed, a rushing steed,
And a blazing scimitar !
To drive from fair Italia’s plans
The Austrian’s fierce hussar ;
To mock his boasts, and strew his hosts,
And scatter his flags afar *
* From a lyric by Thomas Davis. Quoted from memory, and probably
not a correct rendering.


But Greece gave him tlie opportunity, which Italy denied him.
How generously—how entirely—he consecrated his life to the
service of that glorious land, you all know. I need not dwell on
the vicissitudes of that Greek expediton, nor tell you how it
evolved some of the best qualities of Byron’s nature. Self-sacrifice
overcame sensuality; hardship subdued sensuous indulgence; stern
duty awoke a sense of responsibility; and the dream of the Poet
had to give place to the severe mental dicipline of the Man of
Action. In this ever glorious struggle, he fell —died in the
cause of Grecian Freedom, as truly as if he had fallen in battle.
And so ends Childe Harold - his last pilgrimage ! Oh, my
friends, does not such a man—thus gloriously dying in the thirty
sixth year of his age —after having stamped the impress of his
genius on our literature for all time—deserve at least the quiet
expression of our pity for his faults and errors. Surely, we can
all join—all men and women who love letters —in granting an
amnesty to the illustrious dead—in guarding his tomb from
desercration. In this strain, kind-hearted, serene-souled Bogers,
the Poet of Sanctified Memory, bids us reverence Byron's last
resting-place: —•
“ Thou art gone;
And he who would assail tbee in thy grave,
Oh, l?t him pause ! For who among us all.
Tried as thou wert—even from thine earliest years,
When wandering, yet unspoilt, a highland boy—
Tried as thou wert, and with thy soul of flame ;
Pleasure, while yet the down was on thy cheek.
Uplifting, pressing, and to lips like thine,
Her charmed cup—ah, who among us all
Could say he had not err’d as much and more? ”
But this tender sympathy will not prevent us from listening in
breathless ecstasy to those sublimer interpretations of his Muse
when she celebrates God in Nature —when her breath passes, like
a mighty presence, over the face of deep—wdien she makes the
hoarse ocean full of grandest harmony, and the snow-crowned
mountains echo to the voices of the Deep. That Muse has lifted
me to dizzy eminences of contemplation, which, only for her, I
should have never reached, and given me visions of Ideal Beauty,
which have often brightened my soul under stress of sorrow.
We have all partaken of the rich fruits of the wayward Childr’s
genius, and hence we all owe him gratitude. Let our gratitude,
then, and our admiration of his many enobling qualities, and
our sorrow at the circumstances, which partially shaped and gave
direction to his actions, and our innate sense of all that is due to
the living and the dead, inspire us to defend his memory from
dishonour, and maintain his claims to one of the first places
amongst the world’s poets.


That I do not exaggerate the might of his genius, I will
quote a single stanza in which he—“ absolute monarch of
words” though he was —could not find language adequate to the
expression of the burning thoughts which, in moments of su-
preme inspiration, filled his soul. How grandly he expresses
this want:—
Could I embody and embosom now
That which is most within me, —could I wreak
My thoughts upon expression, and thus throw
Soul, heart, mind, passions, feelings, strong or weak.
All that I would have sought, and all I seek,
Bear, know, feel, and yet breathe—into one word.
And that one word were Lightning, I would speak;
But as it is, I live and die unheard.
With a most voiceless thought, sheathing it as a sword.
Often is this desire of verbal excellence satiated. Here
is a passage:—
The moon is up, and yet it is not night—
Sunset divides the sky with her—a sea
Of glory streams along the Alpine height
Of blue Friuli’s mountains; Heaven is free
From clouds, hut of all colours seems to he
Melted to one vast Iris of the West,
Where the Day joins the past Eternity ;
While, on the other hand, meek Dian’s crest
Floats through the azure air—an island of the blest I
A single star is at her side, and reigns
With her o’er half the lovely heaven ; hut still
Yon sunny sea heaves brightly and remains
Boil’d o’er the peak of the far Ehsetian hill,
As Day and Night contending were, until
Nature reclaim’d her order :—gently flows
The deep-dyed Brenta, where their hues instil
The odorous purple of a new-horn rose,
Which streams upon her stream, and glass’d within it glows.
Fill’d with the face of heaven, which, from afar
Comes down upon the waters ; all its hues.
From the rich sunset to the rising star,
Their magical variety diffuse :
And now they change ; a paler shadow strews
Its mantle o’er the mountains ; parting day
Dies like the dolphin, whom each pang imbues
With a new colour as it gasps away.
The last still loveliest, till—’t is gone—and all is gray.
Thus, in strains of highest grandeur, or in moods of tender pathos,
sang our glorious Childe Harold: and, swan-like, singing, died !


CONCLUDING NOTE.
The classical aphorism, pier deque scribuntur orationes
habitce jam, non ut haheantur, will only apply to the
preceding pages, so far as the addition of notes and
the suppression of passages are concerned. I have had
to omit many illustrations, drawn from Byron’s cor-
respondence, as well as my notices of some of his
leading reviewers and critics. In my next lecture,
“ Childe Harold—His pilgrimage,” I will make amends
for these omissions, I have only to add, that lam
indebted to the skill and ability of the Phonetic Short-
hand Writer, Mr. Waller Vanes, for his full report of
my discourse, which is now substantially before the
reader.
College, Lyons’ Terrace,
December Ist, 1869.


