

fHI fiKH filfflfifi,,
BY THE
REV. T. McKENZIE ERASER, ALA.,
OX THE MORNING- OF SABBATH, 18th MARCH, 1860,
WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO
THE LOSS OF THE
I “ LOisriDoisr.”
PYBLISHED BY BBQYEST OF THE CONGREGATION.
SECOND EDITION.
(felony;
Published by Gr, Wise, Printer, comer of Moorabool and Ryrie-streets. iP
M.HCCC.LXYX.




CALAMITIES NOT JUDGMENTS.
A SERMON
PREACHED IN
TIS IK®, -gIIMM,
BY THE
REV. T. McKENZIE FRASER, M.A.,
ON TUB MORNING- OF SABBATH, 18th MARCH, 1866,
WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO
THE LOSS OF THE
“LOISriDOINV’
PUBLISHED BY BEQUEST OF THE COBOBEOATIOB.
SECOND EDITION.
felmtg *.
Published by G. Wise, Printer, corner of Moorabool and Ryrie-streets.
M.DCCO.EXYI.


The First Edition of this Sermon having gone off very rapidly, and in
consequence of numerous enquiries still being made for it, the
Publisher has been induced to bring out a Second Edition; and,
that every person may be enabled to possess a copy, the price has
been reduced to SIXPENCE.


5 S /PffyS
x€ s-rr
SERMON;
Luke xm. 4-s —“ Or those eighteen, upon whom the tower in Siloam
fell, and slew them, think ye that they were sinners above all men
that dwelt in Jerusalem ? I tell you, nay ; but, except ye repent,
ye shall all likewise perish.”
Very mysterious are the providences of God. u His way is
in the sea, and his path in the great waters, and his footsteps
are not known,” And no light is thrown upon them by the
great Prophet-Saviour, except on two very important points,
viz., that they are not to be accepted as infallible tokens of
God’s favour or displeasure, that calamities are not always
judgments; and that they are designed quite as much for the
benefit of others as for the chastisement of the sufferers. The
Galileans, whose blood Pilate had mingled with their sacri-
fices, were probably some of those who had been involved in
the insurrection under Judas of Galilee, who resisted the pay-
ment of the tax or tribute imposed by the emperors, and rose
in rebellion against the authority of Rome, While they were
engaged in public worship in the temple at Jerusalem, a
band of soldiers attacked them by order of Pilate, and killed
them in the midst of their devotions, perhaps literally mixing
their blood with the sacrifices they were in the very act of
offering. Those who brought the report of this outrage to
Christ, supposed, in common with the other Jews, that special
calamities were the punishment of special sins, and that this
wholesale slaughter must have been a direct proof of the
Divine displeasure. But Christ checks this harsh judgment,
and tells them that these men were no worse than other
Galileans, adding with perhaps a prophetical reference to the
coming destruction of Jerusalem, when the worshippers
should be slain in the courts of the temple, and the altar
sprinkled with their blood, “ except ye repent, ye shall all
likewise perish.” The other incident or accident, the fall of
the tower in Siloam on eighteen men, though not recorded
in history, seems to have been well known to our Lord’s v'


hearers, and from it Christ draws the same lesson; though
the subjects of a special calamity, they were not the objects
of God’s special wrath; they were sinners, but not greater
sinners than others. And then, as his manner was, he tells
his hearer? to take their eyes off from others and to fix them
on themselves ; he teaches us , too, how to use the calamities
of others for our own spiritual profit, to regard them as loud
calls to an earnest repentance. For instead of exalting our-
selves above and against the sufferers, as if we were more
righteous than they, and on this account exempt from like
tribulations, we are on the contrary to recognize that what-
ever befalls others, might justly have happened to ourselves.
Christ does not deny the connexion between sin and suffering*
but he does deny man’s power to trace that connexion, and
man’s right to interpret any one’s character by the nature
and severity of bis afflictions.*
There is a deep-seated tendency in human nature to in-
terpret calamity very harshly. When a man is overtaken
by some terrible visitation of Providence which ruins his
fortune, or desolates his family, or destroys his health, or
blasts his prospects, how often do false friends and uncharita-
ble neighbours say or feel: “ Ah, I thought something of this
kind would happen to him ; it is a judgment upon him fo r
his pride, or his meanness, or his treatment of me,” as the
case may be. For instance, some years ago one of the
Scottish Lords of Session died of a very dreadful and painful
disease—cancer in the tongue. On hearing of his death, a
very pious and estimable friend of mine, a man of highly
cultivated mind too, asked me whether I could not see there
a plain and evident judgment of God on account of a decision
which he had given against the Free Church of Scotland.
“Look,” said he, “the blasphemous member which spoke
the impious sentence, is the very spot which God has branded
with his vengeance. The very nature of his disease mark s
the heinousness of his sin !” A person was stricken with a
very peculiar and repulsive disease. A gentleman, in re.
lating the circumstance, said, " That man was one of my
* Trench on the parables.


Bitterest persecutors, and look at him now! Sir, it is the
judgment of God ! ” Now, these illustrations may seem very
childish, but they show that the feeling which Christ rebukes
in the text is not confined to ignorant and illiterate minds ?
but that there is in human nature itself a tendency to judge
men’s characters by their sufferings, and to impute particular
calamities to particular sins. Do the disciples behold a man
who has been blind from his birth ? Immediately the ques-
tion is raised, “ Master, who did sin, this man or his parents,
that he was born blind ? ” And the answer is, u Neither the
one nor the other, but this calamity has been permitted for
the sake of the miracle which I am now about to perform.
Neither did this man sin, nor his parents, but that the works
of God might be made manifest in him,” Is the patriarch
Job overtaken by sudden and dreadful afflictions, his flocks
swept away, his children killed, his own health destroyed, and
his body covered with foul and leprous sores ? His friends
naturally impute his sufferings to some awful hidden crime?
and urge him to confess his iniquity, saying’, “ Remember,
who ever perished being innocent ? or when where the righte-
ous cut off ? They that plough iniquity and sow wickedness,
reap the same. If thou wert pure and upright, surely He
would awake for thee, and make the habitation of thy righte-
ousness prosperous.” But God, while convincing Job of his
sinfulness, shows his friends that he is a better man than
they, notwithstanding all his sufferings and all their pros-
perity, aye, threatens them with his anger unless this much
slandered Job shall intercede for them. Or does some great
calamity overtake a colony or a nation ? Is it desolated by
war, or afflicted by drought, or swept by the pestilence, or
starved by famine ? Instantly a thousand explanations are
broached, each more confident and positive than the other,
of the precise reason or the special sin which has called down
the judgment. Far be it from me to deny the doctrine of
special judgments, which, indeed, is but one aspect of the
doctrine of a special providence. No, the Bible is too full of
illustrations of God’s special judgments upon sin for any


candid and honest mind to deny it. No man who reads that
Bible can refuse to acknowledge that the destruction of Korah,
Dathan, and Abiram was a special judgment; or that the
plagues of Egypt, the fiery serpents, the pestilence after
David’s census, or the death of Herod by worms, were special
inflictions‘of God’s vengeance against particular sins; for
the connection has been expressly revealed to us in these
instances. And there are cases in which the sin and the
judgment bear so clear and evident relation to each other,
that, without any express revelation, we can at once see God’s
hand wielding the rod or smiting with the sword. But
these cases are exceptional. As a general, nay, universal
rule, the punishment of sin does not take place in this life ;
were it so, that punishment would be a most inadequate one ;
for the remorse of the wicked is not proportioned to their
guilt; their consciences, when often violated, become seared
and hardened, and cease to trouble them, so that the oftener
they sin the less remorse do they feel; nay, they actually
take pleasure in wickedness; and how often does a course of
sin, instead of being followed by punishment, bring with it
prosperity and honour, power and wealth ? And even the
terrible judgments, with which God sometimes overtakes the
wicked, are not to be considered as at all, in any proper sense,
the punishment, the only and adequate punishment, of their
sin. Alas, no ! Sin is an evil of such terrible magnitude,
that nothing the sinner can endure in this life can be con-
sidered its real punishment. Who can believe that the
destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, though an awful judg-
ment, was in any sense the real and proper punishment of
those wicked cities of the plain ? Why, in a few seconds the
deluge of fiery sulphur would for ever put an end to the
earthly sufferings of those wicked men; and was this an
adequate punishment for their horrible iniquity? Nay, it
was only then, in eternity, that their real punishment began;
their destruction was intended as a warning to the world,
not as any adequate punishment for their sin. No, God’s
general rule is to make no special distinctions between men in


this life, to be kind to the unthankful and the evil, to make
his sun to shine and his rain to fall on the evil and the good,
on the just and on the unjust. “All things come alike to
all; there is one event to the righteous and to the wicked, to
the good, and to the clean, and to the unclean ; as is the
good so is the sinner, and he that sweareth as he that feareth
an oath.” “There is a just man that perisheth in his
righteousness, and thei e is a wicked man that prolongeth his
life in his wickedness.” “ There he just men to whom it
happeneth according to the work of the wicked ; again, there
be wicked men to whom it happeneth according to the work
of the righteous.” And the very fact that this is so, is the
strongest of all proofs that this world is not the last or only
scene of God’s moral government, and that a day is coming
when he will judge the world in righteousness, fix eternal
lines of separation between the righteous and the wicked, dis-
entangle the ravelled skein of providence, and vindicate all
his ways as holy, and all his works as just. And what Christ
does in our text is to rebuke those who are always finding out
special judgments in extraordinary calamities, continually
taking God down from the throne of his calm and omnipotent
majesty, and forcing him into strange and abnormal modes
of action; who, in every unusual occurrence, behold him step-
ping out of the course of his providence, and anticipating the
day of judgment on a small scale ; who would fix men’s eter-
nal condition by their temporal lot, or by the mode of their
death ; who pretend to know the mind of the Lord, and thrust
themselves among his counsellorswAo groundlessly as-
sume that the greatest sufferers must be the greatest sinners ;
and who daringly dictate to the Almighty the course of mo-
ral government he shall pursue. Nay, says our Lord, all
your deductions Are wrong ; your whole reasoning is based
upon false views of God’s administration. He does not
pledge himself to put a visible difference between the righte*
ous and the wicked here, or to anticipate the revelations
of the great assize by strange and striking acts of judicial
vengeance. But look well to yourselves. Instead of settling


other men’s destiny, make sure of your own. For I tell every
impenitent sinner among- you that, be the mode of his death
what it may, by the sword of the civil magistrate or the fall-
ing of a tower, whether he die peacefully in his bed or be
swallowed up by the waves of a raging ocean, if he dies un-
repentant and unforgiven, he shall perish eternally.
This line of thought has been suggested by those woful
tidings which have reached our shores during the past week,
and which have carried lamentation and distress into hundreds
of families in this colony. Since the wreck of the Royal Char-
ter, nothing has caused such a shock as the loss of the noble
steam-ship London, with two hundred and twenty souls, many
of whom were returning to their adopted country and to friends
and relatives whose fond hearts were -waiting with anxiety to
see their beloved ones again. U ! with what strong anticipa-
tion were they filled as they sailed away from the shores of
Old England, and the gallant ship ploughed her way across
the deep towards their new Australian home ! There was
the husband returning to his wife, and the father to his
children, and counting the days that would yet elapse before
he should be once more in the embrace of his beloved ones.
There were daughters returning to the arms of an aged
mother, whose affectionate care was adding new comforts and
luxuries to their home, in eager anticipation of their return.
There was a son who had left his anxious parents behind,
full of high hope and golden visions of success in the new
career before him on the distant plains of Victoria. There
was the Christian pastor looking forward to re-union with
the flock which he had watched and tended ; wondering
what spiritual changes had occurred among his people,
whether this sinner’s heart had been softened, whether that
anxious enquirer had found peace in believing, whether that
backslider had been restored, and whether that aged Chris-
tian was still pursuing his walk of humble and consistent use-
fulness ; aye, studying perhaps long beforehand the very
words he would address to them when he should stand before
them as God’s ambassador once again. And there } too, was the


popular actor, looking' back upon the past, when rapturous
plaudits had greeted his entrance, and forward to the future
triumphs he was to achieve upon the Melbourne stage,—
“-And in fancy joined the social throng,
In the festive dance and the joyous song.”
Alas ! all these hopes were doomed to disappointment. Of
the two hundred and thirty-nine souls that had sailed in that
gallant ship, only nineteen were rescued from a watery grave;
the rest lie in the depths ot ocean, till the day when the sea
shall obey the command of that resistless voice—“ Give up
thy dead.” And the sad story has fallen like a funeral pall
over our hearts, and spread a gloom like midnight over the
length and breadth of our land. Men walk restlessly to and
fro, saying to each other, “Have you heard the terrible
news ? Had you any friends there ?” Sad and mourning
hearts ! we pity you, we feel for you, our own hearts bleed
for you; and your sad bereavement brings you nearer to our
sympathies and affections. Yet what can we do for you but
pray, and commend you to the loving human heart of One
who has himself borne your griefs and carried your sorrows,
and who in all your afflictions is himself afflicted.
It is not within my province to recapitulate the painful
narrative which others have so well and feelingly
or to recount the scenes that were witnessed in those awful
hours. Nor shall I attempt to recall the various traits of
character that were brought to light during that time of
terrible reality, when there was no further motive to conceal*
ment or hypocricy, and every one appeared in his true
character; the calm self-possession of that brave captain*
whose presence of mind was never shaken in the wild uproar,
and who chose to die at the post of duty rather than embrace
a last chance of safety; or the noble self-devotion of that
loving husband who refused all hope of life, in order to fulfil
the pledge he had'given to his beloved ones to stand by them
to the last. 0 does not that touching incident remind us of
the love of One who calls himself our husband, who says, “ I
will never leave thee nor forsake thee,” “ when thou passest


through the waters I will be with thee, and through the
rivers, they shall not overflow thee j” and if “ many waters
cannot quench even human love, neither can the floods
drown it,” how much more confidently can you, 0 believer,
cry “ Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow
of death, I will fear no evil, for Thou art with me.” Thank
God for human love S Thank God for a love which is at
once human and divine ! In that remorseless Spanish Bay,
which has engulfed so many a gallant ship, and which has
been for centuries the seaman’s terror and the sailor’s tomb?
those brave and loving hearts now lie at rest,
“ To thee the love of woman hath gone doi
Dark flow thy tides o’er manhood’s noble
O’er youth’s bright locks and beauty’s flowi
Yet must thou hear a voice—Restore the
Earth shall reclaim her precious tilings fron
;one down ;
L’s noble bead,
Restore the Dead, thou S'
Our present concern, however, is with the spiritual instruc-
tion which we may gather from this awful event of the
Divine Providence. For God’s Providence is a book which
we may read as truly as God’s Gospel, and it is declared to
the reproach of blind and stupid men, ‘‘ Lord, when thy hand
is lifted up, they will not see.” Let us then hear God’s voice
in the tempest.
I.—And the first thing with which we are struck in read-
ing the accounts of this catastrophe is, the insufficiency of
human foresight and earthly resources. If ever there was a
case in which every possible precaution bad been taken to
secure the safety of human life and to promote the comfort
of the passengers, it was that of the noble vessel which has
foundered in the deep. She was constructed on the best
principles of naval architecture. The fame of her previous
voyages had secured her universal confidence. She belonged
to a firm to which only one serious casualty had occurred in
a century’s experience. She was provided with every ap-
pliance which modern caution has suggested for the safety of
her human freight. Passages by her were eagerly sought
and commanded a high premium. Insurance offices gladly


accepted her responsibilities and undertook her risks; and, as
the public prints inform us, even during- the tempestuous
weather which destroyed her, her owners and underwriters
were least of all prepared for the terrible disaster. Nay, even
in the midst of that long’ tempest, the very passengers and
crew seem to have retained their confidence in the skill of
their commander and the safety of the gallant ship, till within
a few moments of the catastrophe which hurried them into
eternity. All that human sagacity could plan and human
skill achieve had been thoughtfully and bravely done. Yet a
mightier agency was at work, before whose resistless power
human skill had to succumb ; and in that awful hour how
utterly impotent were all the resources of foresight and
science ! And now look at the opposite side of the picture.
While that noble vessel was in the very act of foundering’, a
frail and over-loaded open boat put off from her side. What
prospect was there of safety for that feeble craft, when the
splendid ship, to which it was but as a child’s toy, could not
live in such a sea ? So small was the chance of escape, that
some who were offered a seat among the little company
deemed themselves safer in the sinking vessel. Truly it was
but hoping against hope! Vet, mark again how human
foresight was baffled by the Providence of God. That feeble
open boat, tossed like a feather on the waves, lived through
the storm, while the proud vessel, the very type of security
and the acme of skill, perished! Surely this was the finger
of God. Even so it is with all our plans and calculations.
I am not such a fool as to say that human forethought and
resources are useless ; the man who does nothing, under pre-
tence of trusting God with everything, is guilty of a fanatical
tempting of God’s providence but, I say that, however per-
fect our plans and however complete our resources, they are
all insufficient without His blessing*. “ Except the Lord
build the house, they labour in vain that built it; except the
Lord keep the city, the watchman watcheth but in vain.” I
once heard it said that the science of the century had reached
such a pitch that it could defy the seasons and the elements.


Vain boast! “He that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh,
the Lord shall have them in derision.” Human skill and
resources can no more render us independent of God in the
nineteenth century, than the vain attempt to scale the
heavens by the building of the tower of Babel could thwart
the purposes of God in the age which succeeded the Flood.
How often have our best plans failed and our utmost resources
been baffled through causes utterly beyond our own control ?
Something has occurred which we could never have foreseen,
some accident has happened which no human power could
have prevented ; and then we found ourselves as absolutely
in the hands of a Sovereign God as the most ignorant and
helpless of his creatures. By all means let us labour with all
our might, and plan with all our sagacity,—great is the interval
between pride and recklessness; but in that space stands
humility, equally removed from both; and the voice of this
sad catastrophe cries to a sorrowing colony, “ Abandon all
human confidences; let not the wise man glory in his wisdom,
neither let the mighty man glory in his might.” Are you a
traveller ? By all means adopt every precaution and consult
the means of safety; yet set not your trust in the nautical
skill of the captain nor the goodness of the ship, but commit
yourself to Him who sitteth upon the floods and holdeth the
waters in the hollow of his hand. Are you in sickness ? By
all means send for the physician; yet trust not in medical
science, but in that God who killeth and maketh alive, who
casteth down and raiseth up again. Are you a hearer of
the gospel ? By all means use the ordinances of God’s ap-
pointment to the utmost; yet trust not in prayers and
sermons, in sacraments and preachers, but in the living God,
without whose quickening Spirit they shall prove but empty
cisterns, not wells of salvation. “Some trust in chariots
and horses/’ —some trust in ships and science, in soils
and climate, in plans and prudence, in preachers and
privileges, — u but we will remember the name of the Lord our
God.”
2.—Again, this sad occurrence teaches us the powerlessness


of wealth in the time of extremity . In that dreadful hour,
when the waves were dashing’ over the doomed vessel, filling
the saloon like a lake, and drowning’ some even in the ship
itself, we are told that gold and silver, valuable watches,
chains and jewellery, were lying about; no one cared to touch
them, all was dust now. At the moment when the boat con-
taining the nineteen survivors was about to be cut away, we
learn that a wealthy young lady, her face livid with horror,
shrieked out —“ A thousand guineas if you will take me in ! %
But, it is added, in that solemn hour millions of money would
have been accounted valueless. “ Skin for skin,” said Satan,
(and though he is a liar, he then spoke the truth,) yea, all
that a man hath will he give for his life.” A thousand
guineas ! and for what ? For life ? No, but for the faintest
chance of life, and the offer refused! All were on a level
there, on the margin of eternity,—the wealthiest and the
poorest, the pampered millionaire and the penniless adventurer
Happy those only who escaped with life! 0! ye who worship
Mammon, and for its sake, would sacrifice your very souls; a
time will come when ye, too, shall undergo this horrible ex-
perience,—when, for another day ot life, another hour, another
minute, 0 God ! another gasp of air, you would pay down
every shilling you possess; when, with the clutch of death at
your throat, you would walk through the world a beggar, if
you could withdraw yourselftrom a yawning abyss more fright-
ful than the heaving’ ocean, from the edge of that bottomless
pit into which you are about to fall. ‘One more offer of
mercy, one more chance of salvation, and I will strip my-
self of everything ! ’ And the offer will be refused. “Thy
calf) 0 Samaria, hath cast thee off,” The golden idol thou
hast worshipped, is not only powerless to deliver thee, but
spurns thee, rejects thee, laughs thee to scorn in thy ex-
tremity, reproaches thee, and calls thee fool, for having
sacrificed thy soul for a handful of golden dross ! “ They that
trust in their wealth, and boast themselves in the multitude of
their riches, none of them can by any means redeem his
brother, nor give unto God a ransom for him, (for the redemp-


tion of their souls is precious, and it ceaseth for ever,) that he
should still live for ever, and not see corruption.” “ Make to
yourselves friends with the Mammon of unrighteousness, that
when ye fail they may receive you into everlasting habitations.”
3.—Further, there is one circumstance about this dark
story that shines like a bright spot of light in the midst of
the gloom and sorrow of the narrative, for it shows the power
of living faith and true piety in the hour of danger. In that
vessel were three Christian ministers. Of two we hear little
or nothing in their spiritual character. Not that they were
not really good men ; probably they were then setting the
affairs of their own souls in order, seeing to the foundation of
their hope, or finding enough to do in laying hold for them-
selves on the faithful saying and worthy of all acceptation-
But there is one there whose faith vises to the greatness of
the occasion j who has not then to wrestle with God for his
own salvation, but who has long felt so satisfied upon that
point that he can now afford to take it for granted,—to look
upon his own soul as so safe in the keeping of Christ, that he
can lose sight of self altogether, and throw himself into the
work of exhorting, sustaining, and comforting others in that
dark and dreadful hour. He is not like a child clinging to
its father in the terror of distress, and crying “ Hold me fast*
or I am lost;” he is rather like a child feeling so safe
in that father’s strong arms that it has ceased to have any fear
for itself, and cries to its brothers and sisters, “ Come and share
my safety.” He is not like one clinging to a rock and trying
to save his own life; but rather like one whose feet are firmly
set upon the rock, who has no doubt about his own safety, and
who stretches out his hand to grasp some struggling swimmer
and draw him safe to land. He is not like Peter sinking
amid the waters and crying “ Lord save me, I perish ;” but
rather like the same Peter when, the tongue of fire flaming on
his head, he stands forth on the day of Pentecost, not to pray
for himself, but to proclaim to the trembling and terror-stricken
multitude repentance and the remission of sins. From the
first hour of danger to the close of all, the ministrations of that


humble yet eminent Wesleyan pastor, Danial Draper, are in-
cessant. He works at the pumps, like a common seaman, for
the salvation of the body; he prays and preaches like an
Apostle for the salvation of the soul. At midnight, like Paul
and Silas, he prays and sings praises to God, and the prisoners
hear him. Above the roaring of the tempest is heard that
brave and manly voice singing in tones as fearless and unfalter-
ing as had ever pealed forth from the pulpit of Wesley
Church,
“ Rock of ages, cleft for me,
Let me hide myself in Thee.”
He holds a general prayer meeting in the saloon. He wist
not that his face shone. But others saw it, and felt drawn
by his faith to his Saviour. What affecting words are those
which many of us have doubtless read, “ The women sat
round him, reading bibles, with the children; and occasionally
some man or women would step up to him and say, ‘ Pray
with me, Mr. Drapera request that was always complied
with. Up to the time the ship went down he ministered
constantly to those among whom he moved. He was heard to
say repeatedly, ( Oh, God, may those that are not converted
be converted now—hundreds of them. ’ ” 0 blessed and
exalted faitb, which can rise above all personal anxieties, and
like an angel of God can minister hope and consolation to the
trembling hearts around ! 0 what were the thousand guineas
which that poor woman so vainly offered for a chance of life ;
what the whole value of that noble ship and all that it con-
tained, in comparison of such a faith as this ? One short hour
of that man’s trust and hope was worth a lifetime ! “ Blessed
is that servant whom his Lord when he cometh shall find so
doing.” The faith that clings to Christ for itself in the hour
of death and danger is genuine; the faith that rises above
self, and occupies itself with the salvation of others at such an
hour, is more than genuine,—it is sublime.
“ Servant of God, well done!
Rest from thy lov’d employ!
The battle fought, the victory won.
Enter thy Master’s joy.”


0 brother Christian, of what kind will be your faith in the
mortal hour ? Will it have enough to do in clinging, weak
and trembling, to the Saviour of sinners, and, all engrossed in
its own difficulties, find no room for other interests ? Or will
it then be occupied in commending Christ to others; shall
you be able to call your children around your dying bed and
say, “Bo ye followers of me, as I also am of Christ ?” Is your
salvation now a fact so sure and certain, that you will then be
concerned for others rather than yourself ? And, holding
yourself up as a trophy of Divine grace, can you die with the
invitation on your lips, “ 0 taste and see that the Lord is
good ?”
4.-—Still further, we are reminded of one of the truths pro"
claimed in our text, that the mode of one's death is no criterion
of his spiritual character. “Those eighteen on whom, &c.’’
u I tell you, Nay,” says the Lord Jesus. And “ I tell you
Nay,” echoes the voice of God in the tempest. “We tell you
Nay,” re-echo two hundred and twenty dying cries from the
sinking ship. For here we have the clearest evidence that
men of all character were involved in one common doom, that
one event happened to the righteous and to the wicked; the
profligate libertine and the eminent saint went down together
into the same watery tomb ; some sank into the deep with an
oath, and others with a prayer; yet the same fate overtook
them all. To some on board that vessel an ocean grave was
the gate of Paradise ; to others the same billow was the door
of Hell. The mode of death was the same to all, but ifc
afforded no test of character, no proof of God’s favour or dis-
pleasure. The fact is, that the manner of one’s death is a point
of very minor consequence. Doubtless there are some deaths
which are in themselves so utterly odious and disreputable, and
so directly the result of sin, that they stamp the character
with the seal of God’s disapprobation ; if a man dies in a fit of
debauchery or in a gambling house brawl, there is but little
room for even the faintest hope there. But in other cases, where
death does not proceed from directly moral causes, the mode ig
of little or no moment. What matters it to you, 0 believer


that you perish in a storm, or are killed by the falling of a tree
or a flash of lightning, if you are all right with God ? All the
speedier the passage to glory. And what will it benefit you,
0 impenitent man, to die quietly in your bed, with weeping
friends and mourning children watching for your last sigh, if
the first step into eternity plunges you into the lake of fire ?
1 refuse to accept the dictum of judgment-mongers, or to
interpret a man’s spiritual character or eternal state by the
accidental circumstances of his death. For myself, I care
little how I die; whether my grave be in the dust or in the
brine, whether I be consumed at once by the flames or by slow
degrees through wasting sickness, if only I be found with my
loins girded and my lamp burning, as one on the watch for
the coming of his Lor<L
s.—Finally, we reach the true reason of these wholesale
calamities, to impress upon the living the necessity of imme-
diate repentance, The Saviour’s words seem to imply that
this was the real reason of the destruction of those eighteen
men by the fall of the tower in Siloam, not as a stigma upon
the dead, but as a merciful warning to the living. “ I tell you
nay, it has rather been sent for your sakes than for theirs,” and
u except ye repent, &c.” This is perhaps the easiest and
most rational explanation of calamities which occur upon a
large scale. Nay, the Apostle Peter tells us that this was one
main reason for the destruction of the cities of the plain,
that they might be “ an ensample unto those that after should
live ungodly.” And if this be the case in regard to God’s
evident judgments, how much more true is it with respect
to mere calamities on a large scale ? They are evidently
and palpably loud calls to repentance, They say to you
and me, ü ße ye also ready, for in such an hour as ye
think not the Son of Man may come.” They say, “ Let the
wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts,
and let him return to the Lord, and he will have mercy upon
him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon.” They
say, not merely “ except ye be forgiven,” but “ except ye repent)
—forsake all known sin, obtain a changed heart and holy


character, ye shall all perish ; rich or poor, learned or
illiterate, amiable, or disagreeable, all the impenitent shall
perish “ except a man be born again, he cannot see the
kingdom of God.” My beloved brethren, hear the voice*
For while an awful, it is yet a loving voice. odo listen to it
It tells you that time is short at the longest, and uncertain at
the best. It tells you to make sure of salvation while all is
favourable to calm and earnest enquiry. It says to you, “ To-
day, if ye will hoar his voice, harden not your hearts,” To you,
0 impenitent ones, it says,” How shall ye escape if ye neglect so
great salvation ?” And to you, believers, it says “ Work while
it is called to-day, for the night cometh wherein no mau
can work.” What use, then my dear friends, are you
making of this awful event?” Let u^search and try our ways,
and turn unto the Lord.” For, if it startles a careless world
from its apathy, if it teaches the children of sin the urgent ne-
cessity of instant and thorough repentance, if it reaches the
conscience of an eager, pleasure-seeking colony, and drives
human souls to that u Man who is a hiding place from the wind
and a covert from the tempest,” this calamity will not have
been sent in vain. And, in the shrieking blast and the raging
billows, in that broken cordage and those tattered sails, in
the sullen plunge of the doomed ship into those yawning
depths whose whirling eddies allowed not even
“ A solitary shriek, the bubbling cry
Of some strong swimmer in his agony,”
in all these, yes high above them all, rises the voice of infi-
nite Mercy to the living, and it cries to you ,” Seek ye the
Lord while he may be found, call upom him while he is near.”
1 Behold now is the accepted time, behold now is the day of
Salvation.”
My God! I know that I must die :
My mortal life is passing hence.
On earth I neither hope nor try
To find a lasting residence :
Then teach me by thy heavenly grace,
With joy and peace my death to face


My Gt-od ! I know not when I die,
What is the moment or the hour,
How soon the clay may broken lie,
How quickly pass away the flower
Then may thy child prepared he
Through time to meet eternity.
My Giod ! I know not how I die,
For death has many ways to come,
In dark mysterious agony,
Or gently as in sleep to some ;
Just as thou wilt! if I hut he
For ever blessed, Lord with thee.
My God I know not where I die,
Where is my grave, beneath what strand :
Yet from its gloom I do rely
To be delivered by thy hand ;
Content I take what spot is mine,
Since all the earth, my Lord is thine.
My gracious God! when I must die,
Oh bear my happy soul above,
With Christ my Lord eternally
To share Thy glory and Thy love!
Then comes it right and well to me,
When, where, and how my death shall be.”
G. WISE. Printer, corner of Moorabool and Ryrie.sts., Geelong


