

| Soid for the 2nd Light Horse Comforts Fund.
H ' I- t ■ -/ ' - ' - * |H
■ ' \ x /J J' /V" m
■ '■■ 1 „•• j , v- r i ■ ■**■-•-" v~-~ \ u. • / f v J
I x €■- ( t >" £ ■' - I
** . /> A o _jf. * y _./ /? w w /
I i i ': 4 -J± s* A 4 fy -AZ-mTirtf- ■ -f J*J* Ji
■ ■ v *-- '"1 / • .J
I Calendar for 191 a and Diary of the War I


(SMBKI©£\IS , t©B 11©1 I©
& DIARY or m WAR
To be sold for 2nd Light Horse Comforts Fund,
Designed end Compiled by J. E. Bourne, Brisbane.


ERRATA
APRIL Bth, 1917 —Second line read “America” instead of “Germany.”
APRIL 19—After submarining read “ 1917.”
APRIL 30th —after 1916 read “Irish rebellion Quelled. 1917—America.”
JULY—Notable dates—fourth line should read “At once below the
dignity of man,”
JULY Bth— Twelfth line from top after General Botha insert “July 9th”
The Music of the Light Horse Foot-falls
on the Paved Way.
“ Like to mountain water dribbling,
In some fern-embowered creek,
From a natural rock-bound basin,
O’er the lip and down a short fall,
Ever passing on its way ;
The Klip Klop of the Light Horse foot-falls
On the wood-paved way.
“ Like the dribbling of the rain-flow
From the roof into the spout
Giving peace and sense of heart glow—
Rain again, farewell the drought—
Gives the hopeless a new ray,
The Klum Klop of the Light Horse foot-falls
On the wood-paved way.
“ Let the crowd of men applauding,
When the Light Horse come again,
To mingle Klom Klip with their clapping,
Like flooded creek replete with rain,
Give cheers of Hoop ! Hurray !
With the Klom Klop music of their foot-falls
On the wood-paved way.”
—P. F. Hockings.
Few realise that the words “ Hip, hip, hooray ” are a corruption of the
cry of the old Crusader, “ H.E.P. Hoschea,” “ Jerusalem is lost, let us
recover it.” (Hierolsolyma est perdita, Hoschea).
—Mr. Courtenay Luck, in letter to “ Courier.”


i "• between Sinai and ih- Holy J and.
j&nuaim, |9|l
1918 JANUARY 1918
Sun Mon Tue Wed Thu Fri Sat
BBOBBQB
IB[oEofl3fßQ3fß
mmmmmmm


Notable Dates, January.
1916.—Gallipoli completely evacuated.
The guns were silent, and the silent hills
Had bowed their grasses to a gentle breeze;
I gazed upon the vales and on the rills,
And whispered ‘ What of these ? ’ and ‘ What of these ? ’
These long-forgotten dead with sunken graves,
Some crossless, with unwritten memories.
Their only mourners are the moaning waves.
Their only minstrels are the singing trees.
And thus I mused and sorrowed wistfully,
I watched the place where they had scaled the height ;
That height whereon they bled so bitterly- —
Throughout each day and through each blistered night.
I sat there long, and listened —all things listened too,
I heard the epics of a thousand trees ;
A thousand waves I heard, and then I knew
The waves were very old, the trees were wise
The dead would be remembered evermore—
The valiant dead that gazed upon the skies,
And slept in great battalions by the shore.”
—The Last to Leave —by Leon Geller
1917.—British and Australian troops enter Palestine and capture
“ Pass with conquest that Red Sea,
And stretch out your victorious hand
Over the Fair, and Holy Land.”
—Francis Thompson.


JANUARY (1).
Ist, 1915.—H.M.5. u Formidable ” sunk in Channel
by German submarine. 1916.—Russian victory
on Strypa. River Styr crossed at Czartorysk.
1917. —Germany regards Allies’ reply to Peace
proposals to be a bar to further discussion.
Crown Prince’s forces attack French at Cham-
brette Farm near Verdun, and are driven off by
disastrous gun fire. Russo-Roumanian retreat
continues. Total British losses since beginning
of Somme offensive 520,017.
2nd, 1915. —Stock Exchange re-opens. 1916.
British occupy Naundi in German Cameroons.
1917.—Germans still advance in Moldavia.
Total number of prisoners taken by the Allies,
on all fronts, in 1916, 582,723.
3rd, 1916.—Russians advance near Czernovitz.
1917.—Berlin announces satisfactory year’s yield
of bread-corn, also ample supply of fodder
taken from Roumania. Italians capture 42,000
Austrians, and 260 guns in 4 months. Germans
claim to have sunk 196 warships since beginning
of hostilities. Russo-Roumanian forces still
retreating.
4th, 1915.—Arrest of Cardinal Mercier, Archbishop
of Malines, Belgium, by Germany. Russian
victory over Turks in the Caucasus. 1916.
Sir Edward Grey denies charge of murder against
crew of FI.M.S. “ Baralong.” 1917. —British
report General Haig to be now in command of
largest army ever levied on English soil, including
nearly 2,000,000 trained and officered men.
British forces successfully engage enemy near
Kissaki, East Africa. British transport
“ Ivernia ” sunk by hostile submarine in the
Mediterranean. Food riots reported to be of
daily occurrence in Vienna, and women and
children are robbed of food in the streets.
Germans claim that the Dobrudja, except for
a narrow spit, is freed from Entente forces.
British forces raid Keupri, taking 28 prisoners.
sth, 1916.—Military Service Bill introduced in
House of Commons. 1917.—Germans defeat
Russians at Gurneti and Romanul, taking
1,400 prisoners and 6 machine guns. British
front near Loos pierced, and 51 prisoners taken.
Greek Government rejects Entente’s demand
for reparation for recent fighting in Athens.
Italians on Carso advance 200 metres, and hold
position, despite all efforts to drive them out.
6th, 1916.—Russians progress on Strypa. 1917. —
British troops raid German trenches near Arras,
cutting through to third line. Russians begin
offensive on Riga front with some slight success.
7th, 1915.—Sale of Absinthe prohibited in France
during war. 1916.—British submarine sunk off
coast of Holland, crew rescued and interned.
1917. —Italian forces make sight additional
gain on Hill 308 on Carso. Russians continue
offensive on Riga front. Crown Prince’s troops
attack west of Meuse at Verdun, and serious
fighting proceeds round Mort Homme Hill and
Hill 304 ; Allied forces successfully hold in each
sector.
Bth, 1916.—General Aylmer marching to relief of
Kut-el-Amara, defeats Turks on both banks
of ligris ; heavy rain impedes progress. Galli-
poli completely evacuated. 1917. —King Con-
stantine notified by Entente that 48 hours will
be allowed for the acceptance of demand for
reparation for recent attack on Allied troops
at Athens. Russians lose battle of Sereth with
4,000 prisoners, but have slight additional
success on Riga front,
9th, 1916.—H.M.5. “ King Edward ” strikes a mine
and is abandoned; all crew saved. 1917.—French
successfully air raid supply depot at Illfrut,
in Alsace. Russian Premier resigns after pro-
longed friction in the Duma. Spanish Cabinet
resigns, but King Alfonso refuses to accept
resignation. Russians driven back with loss
of 5,500 prisoners.
10th, 1917. —Greece accepts terms of the Entente.
Intense bombardment on both sides of the
Ancre. British raid German lines east of
Beaumont Hamel, capturing part of a trench
and 143 prisoners.
11th, 1916.—Enemy take Mount Lootchen, com-
manding Cettinje, capital of Montenegro. 1917.
—ln second attexk within 24 hours, British
take nearly a mile of trenches at Beaumont
Hamel, with 176 prisoners. French repel attack
on Courieres Wood. Italian advance stopped
by snow in the Trentino. In Albania, Gemeni,
on the Coritza, taken from the Austrians, British
and Australian troops cross border from Sinai
Peninsula, and take the fortified town of Rafa,
in Palestine, with 1,600 prisoners. British take
a number of Turkish trenches on right bank of
Tigris, north-east of Kut-el-Amara. British
battleship ‘'Cornwallis” sunk by submarine in
Mediterranean, with loss of 13 men. Russians
force Germans back on Riga front, taking a
village on River Aa, which proves a rich store-
house of arms and ammunition. On the Sereth,
Russian troops drive enemy back across the
Putna River.
12th, 1916.—French occupy Corfu, in order to
prepare for Serbian troops. Great explosion
in Lille. 1917. —Continued heavy fighting in
the Ancre Valley ; slight British successes.
Allies occupy the island of Cerigo in the Hygean.
Russia continues attack on German flank at
Riga. During Austrian air-raids north of
Monfalcone, Italian gun fire brings down one
machine.
13th, 1915. —Invasion of Persia by Turks, Tabriz
occupied. 1916.—Enemy take Cettinje, capital
of Montenegro. Allies blow up bridge at Demir-
hissar, and cut Greco-Bulgarian line. 1917.
Continued British successes on the Ancre. Russo-
Roumanian forces driven back by Germans.
Battle of Serth grows in intensity. Italian
aviators bomb fortifications of Trieste. Russian
squadron sinks 40 vessels conveying food to
Constantinople. Hostilities between Greek and
Allied troops, owing to circulation of rumour
that Entente intends to depose Constantine.
14th, 1917. —Japanese battle-cruiser “ Teukuba ”
blown up in Yokuska harbour. Cause of ex-
plosion unknown. Two Austrian submarines
recently fallen into Italian hands, employed as
units in Italian torpedo force. Russians lose
heavily at Vadeni, but repulse two heavy German
attacks on Riga front.
15th, 1917. —British lose in their efforts to take
Serre. Hard fighting continues in the Mace-
donian sector, with varying results. Germans
retire with heavy losses at Sereth.
16th, 1916.—British shell Lille.
17 th, 1916. —Austrians announce unconditional
surrender of Montenegro. 1917. —British cap-
ture several positions near Beaucourt, on the
Ancre. Near Lens, the Canadians, in a day-
light raid, take over 100 prisoners. Greek
Government accept unconditionally the Allies
ultimatum- Russians take Vadeni from the


(b).
Germans. German sea-raider sinks 21 vessels.
and seizes 3, in South Atlanctic. Pope protests
against Belgian deportations. Danish West
Indian Islands purchased by United States of
America.
18th, 1917. —German attacks on Chavalier Wood
decisively repulsed. Violation of Swiss neutrality
dreaded in Switzerland. Victims of German
sea-raider (supposed to be the “ Moewe ”) landed
at Permanbuco, Brazil.
19th, 1915.—First Zeppelin raid on England,
Yarmouth, King’s Lynn, and other east coast
towns bombed. 1916. —Allied Ministers hold
War Council in London. 1917.—Disastrous
explosion in powder works, London ; cause
unknown. In Roumania, Germans shell Trotus
Valley railway, also pentrate Russian trenches
in the Zbrzow sector. Heavy artillery duels
on banks of the Meuse.
20th, 1916. —Russians score notable success on
Caucasian front ; Turks retreat towards Erzerum,
Asia Minor. 1917. —Germany presents report
to State Department, staling Belgian deporta-
tions a social need, and a service to the conquered
population. Germans, after fierce fight in a
snow storm, force Russians out of Nasreati,
on the Sereth.
21 st, 1916.—Allied fleet bombard Dedeagatch.
Montenegro officially refuses Austria’s terms.
1917. —The British take over part of the French
front on the Somme sector, to the extent of 12
miles. Russian defeat at Nanesti in the nature
of a rout. Germans decide to hold all Americans
on captured vessels, to test status of armed
merchantmen. France institutes sugar cards,
also decrees two cakeless and two sweetless
days per week.
22nd, 1916.—Turks seek shelter of the Forts of
Erzerum. 1917. —French repulse two German
attacks on Verdun. German Envoy at San
Francisco sentenced to two years’ imprisonment,
and fined $lO,OOO for violation of U.S. neutrality.
Canada exceeds number of troops asked for by
War Office by 120,000 men. Total of Roumania
prisoners taken to date numbers 200,000.
23rd, 1916.—Aeroplane raid on Kent. 1917.
French successfully raid Neuville-St. Vaast, and
take many prisoners. The failure of two Germ
raids near Armentieres and Ploegsteert is an-
nounced. Off Zeebruge, 14 German destroyers
are attacked by British flotilla, and seven
reported sunk. German attack near Riga re-
pulsed with heavy loss. Bulgarians cross estuary
of the Danube, and capture large island.
24th, 1915.—British naval victory off the Dogger
Bank. German cruiser “ Blucher ” sunk, and
a destroyer damaged. 1917. —Aerial fighting
resumed on a large scale by Allies in France.
Twelve German fliers brought down in one day.
Lieut. Guynemor brings down his 26th aeroplane
near Maurepas. Belgian deportations continue,
125,000 reported to date. In the Dobrudja,
Russians annihilate the Bulgars who recently
crossed the Danube. In the Riga sector the
Germans press back the Russians for 1J mile.
25th, 1916.—Heavy fighting on the Western trout.
1917.—Germans take trenches and 500 prisoners
at Hill 304, near Verdun. Severe fighting at
Mort Homme Hill. Germans continue to win
on Riga front, taking 1,700 prisoners. German
warship bombards Sufiold coast during night,
no casualties. Allies receive apology from
Greece for recent events in Athens, when visiting
troops were fired on by Greeks.
26th, 1916.—Austrians capture San Giovanni di
Medina, in Albania. 1917. —British take 1,100
yards of Turkish trenches, and many prisoners,
S.W. of Kut-el-Amara. Russians twice driven
out of positions along River Aa, losing 500 men.
French claim to have won back all lost ground on
Hill 304 at Verdun.
27th, 1916.—Military Service Bill receives the
Royal Assent. 1917. —British attack German
trenches in Somme Valley, and take 350 prisoners
near Le Transloy. Lieut. Guynemer brings
down five enemy aeroplanes in three days,
bringing his total to 30. Reports state that
700,000 inhabitants of invaded France are work-
ing under enforced labour by Germany.
28th, 1916.—8ig German attack in the West,
Germans take village of Frise. 1917. —Hill
304 continues centre of fighting in Verdun region.
At Les Eparges, on the Meuse, French enter
enemy trenches after bombardment, and find
many dead, and much booty. Russians deal a
smashing blow at German line, close to Rou-
manian frontier, and take many prisoners.
British auxiliary steamer “ Laurentic ” sunk
off Irish coast by U-boat.
29th, 1917. —Germans repulse further Russian
advance. On Riga front progress stopped by
snow storm. Drawn battle reported on banks
of Zlota Lipa. Further British gains at Kut-el-
Amara on 4,300 yards front.
30th, 1917. —Germany announces sinking of Allied
troopship in Mediterranean by submarine.
The vessel, which was crammed with soldiers,
sank in ten minutes. French check German
attack on Hill 304, near Verdun.
31st, 1916.—Zeppelin fleet of six or seven Zeppelins
raided Eastern, North Eastern, and Midland
counties. Heaviest death roll from air raids
in England. 1917.—French report gains in
Alsace, having raided two lines of enemy trenches
near Leintrey. British repulse German outposts
on the Ancre, and take a number of prisoners
at Le Transloy. French claim to have shot
down 417 German aeroplanes during 1916.
Germans state that 4,000,000 tons of shipping
lost_by Allies since beginning of the war. A
plot by three conscientious objectors, to poison
the Premier, Mr. Lloyd George, was exposed at
Derby. Washington receives German note
announcing unrestricted warfare at sea after
(February Ist. A barred zone is defined, into
which American vessels will be allowed to go
weekly under certain conditions. Note recalls
all previous U-boat pledges to the U.S.A.


Fe:bry0r^,
Group of Turkish Prisoners taken at Rafa. Q. —
1918 FEBRUARY 1918
Sun | Mon | Tue | Wed | Thu | Frl | Sat
aOBBBOD
WSL 3H mm jy| 9H§ IB flv SB^.^B
B Ba 1 St H B ■ B#J| B Bf.B IB B H B?B B v HIM
OSiliglBB
mmmmmmm


Notable Dales, February
3rd and 6th, 1917. —Australians (mostly Queenslanders and New South
Welshmen) with the British, score success at Gueudecourt.
Rolling out to fight for England, singing songs across the sea ;
Rolling North to fight for England, and to fight for you and me.
Fighting hard for France and England, where the storms of Death are
hurled ;
Fighting hard for Australasia and the honour of the World !
Fighting hard 1 You Lucky Devils ! Fighting Hard !
—Henry Lawson.
25th and 26th, 1917. British cross Tigris, repelling six counter-attacks
and take Kut-el-Amara.
"On, on, you noblest English,
Whose blood is fet from fathers of war-proof.
Be copy now to men of grosser blood,
And teach them how to war.”
—Henry V.


FEBRUARY (1).
Ist, 1916.—Missing British liner “ Appam ” brought
into Norfolk, Virginia, by German prize crew.
Passengers and crew all safe. 1917. —Germans
claim to have bombed, with success, towns along
the Western front, Peronne, Baupaume, St.
Quentin, Albert and Dombasli, British raid
lines north of Beaumont-Hamel with great loss
to Germans. On first day of unrestricted
U-boat warfare, ten ships are sunk and eight
lives lost. Russians drive Germans from re-
cently-captured post near Kainzeau.
2nd, 1917. —America hands passport to German
Ambassador, Count Von Bernstorff, and recalls
Ambassador Gerard from Berlin, breaking off
diplomatic relations.
3rd, 1916.—Zeppelin L.19 wrecked in the North
Sea. 1917.—-Hot fighting on Somme sector
near Gueudecourt, where British and Australian
troops pentrate German trenches, and take
many prisoners. British improve position near
Beaumont-Hamel. German advance checked
on River Aa, owing to Russian use of armoured
cars. British take trenches and many prisoners
on Tigris.
4th, 1915.—Germans declare a Blockade on England.
1917. —American steamship “ Housatanic ” tor-
pedoed by German submarine. British advance
on the Ancre considerably hampered by mud.
Russians repulse five German attacks in the Aa
sector. American Atlanctic Fleet, of nineteen
battleships, ordered to be ready for immediate
action. Germany releases 78 Americans captured
by raider in South Atlantic.
sth, 1917.—British capture 500 yards additional
trenches near Gueudecourt in direction of
Baupaume. Brazil joins Chili and the Argentine
in emphatic protest against unrestricted U-boat
warfare. Twenty-three German ships, interned
at Manila, found to be extensively damaged by
their crews.
6th, 1917.—British still advance near Gueudecourt,
taking 1,000 yards trenches. Small French
successes at Verdun, and Lorraine. German
attacks in Galicia repulsed. Forty-five vessels,
including many neutral ships, sunk since February
Ist. Switzerland leases fleet of ships to transport
food from abroad.
7th, 1917. —British take Grandcrourt. Germans
cross the Sereth, but are driven back by Russians.
Three Scandinavian nations, with Spain and
Switzerland, protest against U-boat warfare,
but continue diplomatic relations. British liner
“ California,” and twelve other ships sunk.
Ambassador Gerard and all his staff detained
in Germany pending safe arrival of Count Von
Bernstorff, and German crews of captured vessels.
Bth, 1917. —Heavy fighting continues on Somme
front, Germans" losing crest of Sailly-Saillisel
Hill dominating St. Pierre Vaast Wood. On the
Ancre British take Bailliscourt Farm, also a
trench near Grandcourt. Russians take trench
near Kirlibaba in Carpathians. British steamer
“ Turino ” sunk off Irish coast by U-boat.
Uruguay, Panama and Bolivia fellow lead of U.S.A.
in breaking with Germany. Decree published
in Spain places all wireless under Government
control. Ambassador Gerard requested by
German Foreign Office to sign proposal re-
affirming old treaties of 1799 and 1828. Question
referred to Swiss and Spanish intermediaries.
9th, 1916.—General Smuts takes over command
in East Africa from General Smith-Dorrien.
\ 917. —French repel German attacks on Hill
304, Verdun. British destroy number of dug-
outs south-east of Ypres, and take prisoners.
General Socceu tried by court-martial, and
sentenced to 5 years’ penal servitude and de-
gradation in connection with battle on Argechu
River, when Bucharest was lost to the Germans.
10th, 1916.—Germany threatens to treat all armed
merchantmen as belligerents. 1917. —Eieut.
Guynemer brings down his 31st aeroplane.
Allies bombard factories and railways in the
Sarre Valley. British infantry attack on a
mile front in Somme sector, and gain slope of
Serre Hill, on road to Baupaume. British
resume offensive south of Kut-el-Amara, taking
line of Turkish trenches on the Hai River.
11th, 1917. —An Austrian attack launched at
Goritz repulsed by Italians. British success at
Kut continues. Ambassador Gerard reaches
Zurich with staff of 120 and proceeds to Bern.
12th, 1917. —Additional British gains along the
Ancre, 600 yards of trenches being occupied
west of Uiraumont. German raiders enter
Russian position east of Kovel, but are repulsed.
With a 300 mile, funnel-shaped safety lane of
patrol boats, the British Government claims to
have made the arrival and departure of liners
from channel ports and Liverpool safe. The
sinking of ships by U-boats declines from day
to day. Five German Army Corps concentrate
on Dutch frontier, and thus influence Holland
in remaining neutral. Italian line east of Goritz
completely re-established. Italian sea-planes
successfully bomb Austrian base at Pola. Two
German munition factories in East Prussia
blown up, with much loss of life. Eleven labour
leaders arrested in Petrograd charged with
fomenting revolution.
13th, 1917. —British penetrate German positions
east of Souchez, inflicting severe damage, i o
north-east of Neuville St. Vaast, dug-outs are
razed, and prisoners taken. French penetrate
trenches north of Rheims, and bomb munition
works near Quennevieres. Germans capture
Roumanian position south of Vale Putna, taking
prisoners and vast stores of war material.
Germans in Macedonia take hill position in
the Cerna bend. Italians occupy Ersen north-
ward of Koritza. British successfully raid
Palmes in Doiran region. Four more ships
sunk, including 12,000 ton White Star Liner
“ Afric.” Russia calls up 1918 class, thus
giving nation another 1,000,000 troops. Germany
through Swiss I.egation, offers to re-open question
of submarine warfare with U.S.A. Spanish
Ambassador takes over American Embassy at
Berlin. All Austrian craft ordered to fly German
flag when outside the Adriatic, hoping to avoid
break with America. America passes Naval
Appropriation Bill for $368,000,000.
14th, 1916.—H.M.5. “ Arethusa ” strikes a mine
on east coast and becomes a total wreck. 1917.
British continue to gain on Somme near Grand-
court. Russians lose 1,200 prisoners to Germans
near Mesti Canesci. 1 otal number of ships
submarined during month reaches 101.
Scandinavian nations in identical note protest
against Germany’s new U-boat policy. Count
Von Bernstorff sails from New York, en route
for Berlin.
15th, 1916.—Germans capture some trenches from
the British. 1917. —British ga n three-quarter
m.le of trenches on a six-mile front since beginning
of year. In Galicia east of Lemberg, Russians


FEBRUARY (2).
thwart a German ihbve to blow up a number of
trenches. Report from Rio de Janeiro that
British cruiser “ Amethyst ” engaged three
German raiders, which withdrew damaged.
Italians in Macedonia win back Hdl 1050 north-
east of Monastir. Ambassador Gerard arrives
at Paris. American seamen (72) brought in by
steamer “ Yarrowdale,” liberated after repeated
demands.
16th, 1916.—Russians take Erzerum. 1917. —
Germans, under Crown Prince, take four lines
of French trenches near Butte-du Mesnil in
Champagne, with 858 prisoners. British an-
nounce newly mined zone of coasts of Germany,
Holland and Denmark, blocking exit to Atlantic
of German U-boats, and warn shipping to avoid
as dangerous. Salart Bey, new Turkish Grand
Vizier announces that Turks will fight to the
last man to retain Constantinople. A large
loan from Germany to Turkey is reported.
17th, 1917. —British achieve an advance of half-
mile on a 2-mile front on both sides of the Ancre,
and bring in a number of prisoners. British
take fortifications on Tigris and 2,000 prisoners.
America, through Swiss Minister, refuses to
endorse renewal of treaties of 1799 and 1828,
as proposed by Germany.
18th, 1915.—German Blockade comes into force.
German submarines start ruthless piracy. 1916.
—Complete conquest by British troops of the
German Cameroons. 1917. —British repel three
German attacks in Miramount region. Heavy
losses reported on both sides. Russian troops
capture a hill near Serga Oena, at bayonet point,
without firing a shot. British liner “ Worcester-
shire ” sunk by submarine. Berlin claims that
one submarine sank three cruisers and a transport
in one day. Germany warns America that the
arming of Merchantmen will be regarded as a
warlike act. The American mine-layer “San
Francisco ” arrives at Santiago de Cuba.
I9th # 1916.—Russians take Mush and Skhalat
from the Turks. 1917. —British attack Turkish
troops at Sanniayat, and occupy two lines of
trenches on left bank of Tigris, but are driven
back to their original positions. Indian and
Australian Governments prohibit the departure
of women and children for Europe. America
appropriates $25,000,000 to pay Denmark for
Danish West Indies.
20th, 1915.—British and French naval attack
on the Dardanelles. 1917. —British damage
German defences near Armentieres and Ypres,
as well as near Hill 304 in Verdun sector.
Konitza, on Albanian border, occupied by
Italians. British Government takes possession
of all leather in the United Kingdom, as well
as all stocks of raw jute. Russian submarine
in Black Sea sinks nine vessels. British and
Australian troops take Turkish garrison at a
post near Bir-el-Hassana, on Sinai Peninsula.
At an explosion in munition factory, Archangel,
Russia, 1,500 persons were killed and 3,000
wounded.
2lst, 1916.—Battle for Verdun began. 1917.
Port of Plymouth closed to neutral vessels.
British raid trenches near Gueudecourt, and also
do much damage to defences near Ypres and
Armentieres. Sir Edward Carson states losses
for three months, due to U-boats, to be 343
vessels, with a tonnage of 725,000 tons.
22nd, 1917. —Total of 350,000 men massed in
Macedonia, and numbers of Allied troops arriving
daily in Salonika. Germans raid Russian
trenches near Dorna-Watra in Carpathians, also
take 250 Russian prisoners in Galicia. British
attack between Vardar and Lake Doiran, in
Macedonia, repulsed. Belated news reach Lorn
don of an explosion in Dresden on Christmas
day. Over 1,000 women and children workers
killed.
23rd, 1916.—Germans make progress in Verdun
attack. 1917. —British take strong position
south of Petit Miramont ; also take a trench
north-west of Transloy. Intense artillery duels
reported from Lorraine, Alsace, and Champaigne.
Germans enter Russian positions in Galicia, but
are ultimately dislodged. Turkish trenches
taken by British on Tigris. Lloyd George
announces list of restricted imports. Number
of commodities being prohibited. Sailings of
American liners postponed indefinitely, pending
arrangements for arming and protecting all
American vessels. American Universal Service
Measure provides for supply of 500,000 men
within a year, increasing supply to 4,000,000
with a year’s intensive training.
24th, 1917. —German line gives way on both sides
of the Ancre, before British artillery. A British
advance near Serre is also announced. Seven
Dutch vessels torpedoed as they left Falmouth
Harbour. Dutch Government characterises the
action as “ the greatest humiliation to which
a neutral nation could be subjected.” An un-
known raider sunk two British vessels south-west
of Colombo.
25th, 1916.—French take up new line north of
Verdun. 1917. —Germans effect most extensive
retirement in two years, during heavy fog,
yielding three miles in the Ancre sector to the
Allies, including towns of Petit Miraumont, Pys,
and Serre, v/ith the famous Butte de Walencourt.
British cross Tigris on bridge built in nine hours
under continuous gun fire, taking four lines of
Turkish trenches near Sannayat, in the face of
six determined counter-attacks. Definite assur-
ance given by the Allies that the blockade of
Greece will be lifted when satisfactory reply
received from King Constantine to the demands
of the Entente. Bishop of London proposes
to close all but eight of the churches in the
' City, in order that the Clergy may be able to
go to the Front.
26th, 1916. —Germans take Fort Douaumont*
1917. —British press back Germans, and gain
nearly 25 square miles of ground on the Ancre.
Walencourt-Gaucourt occupied by the Allies,
and British at Le Barge, only two miles from
Bapaume. Germans foil Russian attempt to
force a way through the Carpathians, by blocking
the way from Mount Ploska to Mount Pantyr.
Kut-el-Amara falls to the British, thus opening
up the way to Baghdad. Much war material,
many guns" and 2,000 prisoners taken. Cunard
liner “Laconia” sunk by U-boat. Central
Powers claim to have destroyed 4,998,500 tons
of neutral and enemy shipping since beginning
of war.
27 th, 1916. —Russians capture Kermanshak in
Persia. 1917.—British continue to gani on the
Ancre, occupying Ligney, south-west of Bapaume.
British defeat Turks in battle about fifteen miles
from Kut-el-Amara. Russia repulse Turkish


*
FEBRUARY (3)
forces on the Caucasian front. President Wilson
makes it clear that the sinking of the “ Laconia ”
is the " Overt Act,” for which he had been
waiting.
28th, 1917. —British troops reach Bapaume ridge.
Gommecourt, Shilloy and Puisieux-au-Mont, are
also taken by the Allies. Germans re-take
peaks in the Bukowma, which were lost to the
Russians earlier in the year; holding heights
along the Vale Patna road, and taking 1,300
prisoners and many guns. Turkish army in
Mesopotamia hemmed in by British 30 miles
from Kut-el-Amara, retreat being cut off by
Tigris. Germans offer to lend seven vessels to
Holland to replace those recently sunk, if Dutch
will undertake to buy them at end of war.
Documentary proof of German plans for an
alliance with Mexico and Japan, by which war
was to be made on America, if she did not continue
neutral, is now in the hands of President Wilson.


' ’ ■ , ■; ■ - . ‘ ' ■ I
191 S.
1918 MARCH 1918
Sun Mon Toe Wed! Thu Fri Sat
8888808
fQEDEBEBEEHBB
fßiiiglii


Notable Dates, March
Bth to loth, 1917. —Russian Revolution.
“ Here you maintain several factions,
And, whilst a field should be despatched and fought,
You are disputing of your Generals.
One would have lingering wars with little cost.
Another would fly swift but wanteth wings.
A third man thinks, without expense at all,
By guileful fair words Peace may be obtained.”
—Henry VI.
Blush for shame ! For your own ladies, and pale visaged maids.
Pike Amazons, come tripping after drums.”
14th, 1916. —Anzacs arrive in France. ' Kmg J ° hn ’
The soul of the world they will feel and see, in the chase and the grim
retreat ;
They 11 know the glory of victory— and the grandeur of defeat.”
—Henry Lawson.
The first intimation many people had that the Anzacs had arrived on
the Western Front was the number of Australians in London on furlough
from France.—“ Sydney Sun,”
“ Lean brown lords of the Brisbane beaches,
Lithe-limbed kings of 1 lie Culgoa bends,
I rinces that ride where the Roper reaches,
Captains that camp where the grey Gulf ends -
Never such goodly men together
Marched since the kingdoms first made war.
Nothing so proud as the Emu Feather
Waved in an English wind before.”
—Will H. Ogilvie.
ITth, 1917.—Bapaume carried by assault by Australians, assisted by intense
British bombardment.
“ Sound, sound the clarion, fill the fife !
To all the sensual world proclaim.
One crowded hour of glorious life
Is worth an age without a name.”
—Scott,


MARCH (1).
Ist, 1915.—Allies declare their intention of pre-
venting food and other commodities reaching
the enemy. 1917. —Germans continue retreat
along the Ancre line. General Maude continues
success on the Tigris, Turkish losses estimated
at over 20,000. Six ships sunk by U-boats.
Japan denies that Germany’s intrigue to ally
Mexico and Japan would be entertained by
Government. Russians re-capture heights
along the Kimpoling Road on Roumanian
frontier.
2nd, 1915.—Russian victory at Przasny. 1917. —
British still pushing forward on the Bapaume
line. Germans raid Russian trenches in Volhynia,
and take prisoners. German Admiralty an-
ounces that no warning will be given to any
ship found in forbidden area of Atlantic.
3rd, 1916.—Russians capture Bitlis, Asia Minor.
1917. —German attack on outposts north-east
of Gueudecourt repulsed. British troops ad-
vance on Ancre front. British river gun-boat
on the Tigris destroys four Turkish steamers
and two barges filled with ammunition, Russians
capture Hamadan, in Persia. Emperor Charles
of Austria-Hungary dismisses Field Marshall
Von Hoetzendorf.
4th, 1916. —Battle for Verdun continues with great
violence. 1917. —British take over from French
all remaining lines on Somme sector. Austrians
near Goritz storm Italian lines, but are repulsed
with heavy loss. Germans repulsed by French
near Eix, on Verdun front. Russians drive
back Turks for 80 miles in Mesopotamia,
threatening Bijar. Germany’s claim to have
sunk transport in Mediterranean, unconfirmed.
Germany closes many Belgian factories, and
deports all workers.
sth, 1916.—Zeppelin raid on East, and North
Eastern counties. 1917. —Italians capture
mountain peak 2,700 metres high from Austrians.
German Reichstag endorse attempt to embroil
United States with Japan and Mexico, and
expresses regret at the interception of documents.
On his inauguration as President for second time
President Wilson draws attention to grave
crisis, saying that America may be forced into
war.
6th, 1916.—Germans take village of Forges, near
Verdun. 1917. —German attack on Somme front
repulsed. Italians repulse Austrian attack in
St. Pallegrine Valley. Russians make a night
attack on trenches near Bryezany in Galicia,
and are completely repulsed by Germans. Su-
preme Court of U.S.A. decides that prize ship
“ Appam ” must be returned to her English
owners. Ernst Sckunna, a German, and Dr.
Chandra Chakraberty, a Bengalese, arrested on
charge of planning uprisings in India, China,
and the Far East, on Germany’s behalf. Havana
reports that Germany instigated the rebellion
in Cuba. Austro-Hungarian note to America
on the submarine campaign regarded as unsatis-
factory.
7th, 1917. —Thrilling air-battles reported from over
Somme front. General Sir Douglas Haig se-
curing all information and photographs required,
although losing eleven machines. 1 wenty-three
British merchant vessels reported sunk during
week. Twelve vessels fought off their assailants,
and 6,005 passed the blockade without incident.
British Government offer self-government to
any part of Ireland desiring it, but declares that
no compulsion would be employed to compel
Ulster to accept it. Number of American ship-
bu Iders pledge their entire co-operation for
the naval construction programme.
Bth, 1917. —French announce retaking of trenches
in Champagne sector, won by Crown Prince on
February 15th. General Maude, with British
cavalry within 14 miles of Baghdad. Turks
retreating before Russians in Persia. Food
conditions in Germany reported critical. Count
Von Zeppelin dies. Dardanelles Report pub-
lished in London. Fifty-nine interned American
seamen from “ Yarrowdale ” pass through
Switzerland on route for America.
9th, 1916.—French re-capture some of the ground
lost near Verdun. General Aylmer attacks
Turks seven miles from Kut-el-Amara, but falls
back owing to lack of water. 1917. —Italians
repulse Austrian attacks on the Carso. Germans
close Dutch-Belgian frontier. President calls
extra session of Congress to consider defence of
merchant marine.
10th, 1915.—British troops capture Neuve Chapclle.
1916.—General Smuts advancing in East Africa.
Germany declares war on Portugal. 1917. —
Hard fighting continues on Verdun front. British
capture town of Irles and nearly three miles of
trenches on the Ancre. Russians vainly counter-
attack near Gena. Battle for possession of
Baghdad in progress along Diala River, six miles
from city. Belgian relief ship “ Storstad ”
torpedoed. Austria grants autonomy to Albania,
under her Protectorate. Three persons sentenced
to imprisonment for attempt to poison Lloyd
George.
11th, 1916.—General Smuts defeats Germans near
Taveta. 1917. —After a three days’ battle, the
British, under General Maude, capture Baghdad.
Repeated food riots reported from Petrograd.
Total war loss to date estimated at 10,000,000
men. Count Von Bernstorff arrives in Christiana,
Norway, and Ambassador Gerard reaches Havana
on their respective ways. G. L. Gupta, a
Bengalese student confesses to having been
employed by Von Papen, to foment sedition
in India.
12th, 1917. —French capture Hill 185 in Champagne
district. General Maude reports important
capture of artillery at Baghdad. General Smuts
reports campaign against Germans in East
Africa virtually ended. Deputation from Man-
chester calls on Austm Chamberlain, Secretary
of State for India, to protest against increased
tariff duty in Ind*a, on cotton goods.
13th, 1916.—Bivtish take Moski, in German East
Africa. 1917. —British continue success on Ancre
front, winning crest of ridge west of Bapaume,
and capturing the village of Grevillers, and the
fortifications of Loupart Wood. Germans suc-
cessfully raid Russian trenches in Galicia, taking
prisoners and machine guns. British continue
pursuit of Turks on ligris. About 60 U-boats
were captured or destroyed between January
Ist and February 13th.
14th, 1916.—British troops re-occupy Solium on
Egyptian frontier. Germans renew assaults on
Verdun. 1917. —General Haig continues to gain
ground near Bapaume. French advance in
Macedonia repulsed. Russian troops in Meso-
potamia capture city of Kermanshak. British
forces advance 30 miles beyond Baghdad.
Norwegian ship, en route to Belgium, sunk
without warning, outside blockade zone. Smal-
lest losses yet reported for one week, since


MARCH (2).
opening of submarine campaign. China severs
diplomatic relations with Germany, and seizes
five German ships interned in her harbours.
Lloyd George wins Indian cotton tariff battle,
by promising to re-open question after war.
American steamer “ Alyonquin ” shelled without
warning, and sunk.
15th, J9l7.—British troops occupy German tren-
ches east of Bapaume, and begin to envelope
Peronne. British advance on a two-mile
front near Doiran in Macedonia. After
complete silence for three days, the Russian
Revolution is announced. Ihe Czar abdicates
for tnmself and Rs son. Ministers are imprisoned
and new Cabinet formed, which pledges itself
to conduct the war vigorously.
16th, 1916.—Germans receive check at Mort
Homme. Adm ral Von Ihrpitz resigns. 1917.
—French win some .success near Monastir in
Macedonia. Turkish army in Mesopotamia in
precipitate retreat. Grand Duke Michael ab-
dicates Russian throne, to which he had been
nominated by the Czar. Great Britain, France
and Italy formally recognise the Russian Pro-
visional Government. Ambassador Gerard re-
plies to New York’s welcome by urging America
to prepare for war.
17th, 1917. —An extended German retreat begins
on the West front. French hold Roye, and
British occupy Le Transloy, and Grand, and
Petit Achiet-le-Grand. Italians repulse Austrian
patrols at many points. British continue to
advance in Macedonia. Air raid in Kent, r 80
miles from London ; no damage. Zeppelin
L.39 shot down near Compiegne, 45 miles from
Paris. Captain Guynemer brings down three
aeroplanes in one day, making his total thirty-
four. Food shortage in Demark owing to the
interruption of American trade.
18th, 1916.—Allied airmen successfully bombard
Zebrugge. French raid Mulhausen. 1917.
German retreat on a front of 100 miles to a depth
of 12 miles, still continues. British occupy
Peronne. French take Noyon and Nesle. Rus-
sian army defeats Turks in Armenia, taking the
city of Van. Large quantities of grain reach
Petrograd, and prices are again normal. Minis-
ters re-affirm Russia’s intention of continuing
the war. Three American vessels, “ City of
Memphis,” “ Illinois,” and “ Vigilancia ” sunk
by German submarines.
19th, 1917. —Since German retreat began, 250
towns and villages have been occupied, and 1,300
square miles re-won by the Eentente. General
Maude routs the Turks on the Diala, driving them
towards the Russians. Dutch steamer “ Selien ”
carrying Belgian relief, sunk by German sub-
marine. During a German naval raid on Rams-
gate, a British destroyer was torpedoed. Mani-
festo issued by Russian Government extends
freedom to all exiles. Russian Government
decides that no Romanoff can lead the Russian
army. French Cabinet, under M. Briand,
resigns, and is succeeded by one under M. Ribot.
Seven interned German seamen from the “ Kron
Prinz Wilhelm ” and “ Prinz Eitel Friedrich ”
attempted to escape, but are re-captured.
20th, 1916.—Sixty-five Allied airmen bombard
Zebrugge—all return safely. Russians take
Ispahan. 1917.—Fourteen more villages oc-
cupied by Entente on West front. German
army devastating country on line of retreat,
french troops in Macedonia capture Hill 1248,
taking two towns and 1,200 prisoners. French
battleship sunk by U-boat. British Imperial
Council holds its first meeting in London, Aus-
tralian representative alone absent.
21st, 1916.—Russians make general attack from
Gulf of Riga to Dvinsk. 1917.—German retreat
almost reaches the Hindenburg Line. Fifty-one
villages occupied by the Allies. Austrians
attack the Costabella line after heavy bombard-
ment with gas shells, and are repulsed. Serious
riots reported from Berlin, owing to food shortage.
Germany and Austria-Hungary refuse safe
conduct to American ships delivering relief
supplies to destitute Syrians and Americans at
Beirut.
22nd, 1915.—Russians take Przemysl. 1917. —
American oil-tanker “ Herald ton,’’ bound for
Holland, sunk without warning. German secret
agents posing as Socialists and Anarchists,
attempt to undermine discipline of Russian
Army. Monastir shelled by Bulgarians. Ger-
man raider "Moewe” returns to* port after
second cruise in Atlantic, claiming to have sunk
and captured 35 steamers and 5 sailing ships,
including British ship “Esmeralda.” Bonar
Law pledges the Government to another effort
to settle the Irish question. Severe epidemic of
smallpox reported throughout the Central
Empires.
23rd, 1916. —British line extends from Suchez to
Arras. 1917. —Germans flood city of La Fere.
French advance in vicinity of St. Quentin.
British reach within 15 miles of Cambrai. Bread
ration in Germany reduced. Potatoes and meat
ration slightly increased. Czar and Czarina
detained in Palace at Tsarskoe Silo. Many
secret police arrested.
24th, 1916.—Cross-Channel steamer “ Sussex ”
torpedoed. 1917.—French capture forts of Leiz
and Vandoul near La Fere, and advance near
St. Quentin. British occupy Roisel. Germans
bombard Soissons. Heavy artillery activity
reported on Goritz front. Grand Duke Nicholas
deprived of his position as Commander-in-Chief
of Russian Army, being a Romanoff. French
Government protests against wanton destruction
of private property by German Army during
retreat. Cardinal Mercer awarded Grand Prix
of French Academy of Moral and Political
Sciences, “ For the greatest and finest acts of
devotion .”
25th, 1917.—French make progress between St.
Quentin and Soissons. Germans mass troops
and guns on Riga-Dvinsk front, in preparation
for drive at Petrograd.
26th, 1917. —French envelop Forest of St. Gobain,
and advance north of Soissons. British take
village six miles from Bapaume. Vigorous air
fighting continues over German lines, British
losing seven and Germans five aeroplanes. Field
Marshal Von Mackensen goes to Constantinople
to re-organise Turkish Army. All grain supplies
in Germany taken over by Military. British Hos-
pital Ship “ Asturias ” sunk by U-boat. French
War Loan of $30,000,000 over-subscribed 20
times. All Crown lands and State grants
handed over by Grand Dukes and Royal Princes
to Provisional Russian Government. Radical
Wing of Socialists in Reichstag demand speedy
Peace, and no annexation of foreign territory,
British and Australian mounted forces encounter
strong Turkish force near Gaza, and after a
severe fight, capture 900 prisoners,


MARCJI (3)
27 th, 1915.—French capture summit of Hart-
mannswnlerkopf. 1916.—-British capture first
and second line of German trenches at St. Eloi.
1917.—British advance towards Cambrai, taking
three towns. French occupy forest of Coney,
and three villages, cutting two of four railway
lines which feed St. Quentin. Russian troops
retreat before gas attacks on Roumanian front.
Germany claims to be launching U-boats more
quickly than the British can capture them.
Germany rumoured to have offered separate
peace to Russia. John Dillon, Irish Nationalist,
hints, in House of Commons, that serious events
will transpire in Ireland if Home Rule any
longer delayed.
28th, 1917. —General Nivelle begins new offensive
south of Laon, driving into German lines
between Rivers Oise and to outflank
German position in St. Gdbain Forest. British
continue progress towards Cambrai. Early
spring thaws prevent German drive on Petrograd
from Riga sector. Fifty Russian sea-planes
drop bombs on aqueduct, which supplies Con-
stantinople, damaging it severely. General
Sarrail reports 2,104 prisoners taken in recent
offensive outside Monastir ; German and Bulgarian
attacks repulsed. Lloyd George and Mr.
Asquith declare in favour of Woman Suffrage
and House of Commons expresses approval of
suffrage reform by large majority.
29th. 1916.—French make successful counter-attack
at Verdun, and drive Germans from part of
Avocourt Wood. 1917. —Germany places re-
sponsibility of war with U.S.A. on America,
justifying submarine warfare as a defensive
measure. French win back trenches at Verdun
lost to Crown Prince on 18th March. Russian
Government devise measures for temporarily
administering Polish affairs. Women in Russia
are made eligble to all Government posts,
including Ministerial offices. Economic depres-
sion in Spain, due to U-boat blockade ; martial
lav proclaimed.
30th, 1917. —Forty Americans taken from tor-
pedoed boat “ Esmeralda,” interned in Germany.
Great precautions against spies and plotters in
America. British advance on a six mile front
between Cambrai and St. Quentin. French
make progress in the Vregnet Maigwal sector.
Russia mvites Poland to decide which form of
Government she would prefer. Norway protests
against extension of German barred zone in
Artie Ocean.
31st, 1916.—Zeppelin raid on Eastern counties.
Crown Prince of Serbia receives enthusiastic
reception in London. 1917. fighting
continues in Champagne sector. British occupy
railway centre of Vernand. General Maude
reports capture of Sheravan on the Diala. New
German raider appears in South Atlantic, sinking
11 Ships. Russian Government abolishes capital
punishment, and removes restrictions on Jews
and foreigners. Danish West Indies transferred
to America.


CHprif,
1918 APRIL 1918
Sun Mon Too Wed Thu Fri Sat
EQIQIQfBaiHD^]
88858003830389
mmmmmmm
mmmmmmm


Notable Dates, Apri
1917. —America declares war on Germany.
“ We would not seek a battle, as we are ;
Nor, as we are, we say we will not shun it :
So tell your Master.”
Henry V,
I tell you Brother Jonathan, that you’re a Briton too ’ I’
1915.—The Landing on Gallipoli. ipper.
“ We leaped like lovers from the ships :
Red thunder smote us on the lips :
No more ! My sword and I were blown
Vain thistledown, before the Throne ! ”
—Jessie Mackay, N.Z.
“ Anzac 1 ’Tis like a trumpet blast at morn.
A clarion call to wake the coming years,
After the war-worn world has reached its goal;
For there, amid the battle-dust was born
Mocking disaster, undismayed by fears,
Star-white and radiant —our Southern soul
Alice Gore-Jones, Brisbane.
1917.—Destroyers “ Swift ” and “ Broke ” gallantly engage and
six German destroyers.
The little Revenge ran on sheer into the heart of the foe
For half of their fleet to the right and half to the left were seen
And the little Revenge ran on thro’ the long sea lane between.’
—Tennyson.
1916. —Lord Kitchener reports Irish rebellion quelled
“ The General of our Gracious Empress,
As in good time he may, from Ireland coming,
Bringing Rebellion broached on his sword.”
—Henry V.


April (i).
Ist, 1916.—Zeppelin raid on Nofth-Lastern counties.
1917.—Austrian attack near Goritz repulsed.
British gain two rmles on a five-mile front near
St. Quentin. French advance near Soissons.
Twenty-two Russian aeroplanes raid the Danube
port of Braila, setting fire to shipping. Russian
Government orders all persons imprisoned with
the Czar and Czarina to be transferred to Fortress
of St. Peter and St. Paul, leaving the Royal
famity isolated. England increases her embargo
on exports.
2nd, 1916.—Germans make progress before Verdun.
Zeppelin raid on North and South-Eastern
counties, 1917. —Armed American freighter
“ Azetic ” sunk by U-boat. Kleist, an interned
German, convicted of conspiracy to destroy
merchant vessels, by means of incendiary
bombs. British advance on a ten-mde front.
General Maude pushes forward in Mesopotamia,
to effect a junction with the Russians. Daylight
saving commences in England, for the summer
months.
7 th, 1917.—Crew of Geffnah auxiliary cruiser
“ Cormoran,” interned in Guam, blow* up their
vessel to prevent its seizure by United States.
Ihe arrest of German spies and plotters continues
in America. The greatest air-battle of the war
took place over and behind German lines during
last forty-eight hours. Operations of British
Scouts successful in obtaining photographs of Ger-
man positions. In battle which resulted Germans
lost 46 aeroplanes and 10 balloons, and the French
and British forty-four machines. More than
eight tons of bombs were dropped on German
communication and supply depots. Seven relief
ships, all unarmed, sunk Vxthout warning since
February Ist, in Germany’s safety zone, including
Norwegian ship “Camilla.” Agitation in Ger-
many for electoral reform. Kaiser orders pro-
posals to be submitted, and to be carried into
effect after the war. Cuba declares war on
Germany and seizes four interned shxps.
Bth, 1917.—Austria-Hungary breaks off diplomatic
relations with Germany. American flag hoisted
on Western front by Corps of American aviators.
French Government orders civil population to
evacuate Rheims, owing to continued shelling
by Germans. British troops advance slightly
on Bapaume-Cambrai road. British Admiralty
reports one German destroyer sunk, and another
severely damaged off coast of Belgium. The port
of Zeebrugge attacked by destroyers and sea-
planes.
9th, 1916.—Germans launch new attack on Verdun.
3rd, 1917. —War resolutions blocked in American
Senate by small section. Germans again bom-
bard Rheims. French and British continue to
advance. Russia repulses trench raids. Crop
outlook throughout Europe, Ind a, and Australia
is poor. French Government fixes price of wheat.
American members of Belgian Relief Committee
leave Belgium through Switzerland, except those
working in districts occupied by German Army,
who will be detaxned.
4th, 1916.—French make progress in Cailette Wood,
near Verdun. Zeppelin raid on East Anglia.
1917.—American Senate passes war resolution
by vote of 82 to 6, after 13 hours’ debate. In
spite of snow, squalls, and deep mud, British and
French advance in their several sectors. German
advance over Stokhod River in Galicia, the.
Russians losing heavily. British Food Controller
orders one meatless day per week at all restaurants
throughout England. Reichstag calls for Com-
mittee to revise German Constitution. Washing-
ton reports food shortage, and advocates system
of control.
French evacuate Bethincourt. 1917. —Fourteen
Austrian ships interned in American ports taken
over on announcement that Austria-Hungary
had severed relations with America. British
troops begin great offensive north and south of
Arras. Field fortress of Vimy Ridge captured
with over 6,000 prisoners, and German positions
penetrated to a depth of two or three miles.
Two villages also captured. British Admiralty
claim to have been destroying U-boats at the
rate of one a day since February. .Socialist
members of Reichstag endeavour to persuade
Russian Government to a separate peace.
10th, 1915.—French take Eparges, near Verdun.
1917.—United States destroyers capture schooner
on the way to Mexico loaded with munitions.
British offensive round Arras unchecked. British
sth, 1916.—Zeppelin raid on North-East coast
driven off by anti-air craft guns. 1917.
American ship “Missourian” sunk in Mediter-
ranean. British horse transport “ Canadxan ”
sunk near Qeuenstown. French President wel-
comes America’s entry into the war. Germans
launch assault west of Rhiems, and push French
back a few points on Aisne Canal. British
continue to advance slowly, taking two villages.
British and Russian armies join in Mesopotamia.
Russians drive Turks from Persia. Heavv
artillery duels reported along Italian front.
Russians in Galicia repulse six German attacks
on trenches.
and Canadian troops advance two miles on a
twelve-mile front, taking 11,000 prisoners, 100
guns, a large number of machine guns, and other
supples. German attack on Ypres sahent re-
pulsed. The liner “ New York ” strikes a mine
off Liverpool, but reaches port safely. Brazil
severs relations with Germany, in consequence
of the torpedoeing of the steamer “ Parana.”
Russian Government calls on all classes to unite,
and aid in„ the defeat of the enemy. All estates
and investments belonging to the ex-Czar are
transferred to Government.
6th, 1915.—Warmbad, German South-West Africa,
captured by British. I9l6.—British relief force
pushing on towards Kut-el Amara. 1917. —
America declares war on Germany. Lloyd
George welcomes America to ranks of Entente.
Seizure of all wireless apparatus in America
authorised by President. French win back
trenches lost on the Aisne Canal. British take
village of Lempire. Bulgarians attack French
lines in Macedonia without result. Combined
British and Russian troops continue pursuit of
Turks in Mesopotamia. German aeroplanes
drop bombs on Kentish coast. Holland refuses
to allow armed merchantmen to enter her ports.
llth, 1917.—Mr. Balfour, Admiral de Chair, General
Bridges, and Governor of Bank of England,
to join a French commission headed bv M.
Vivxani and General Joffre, and proceed to United
States for conference on maintenance of food
supply, finance, and America’s participation in
the war generally. General war census decided
on by New York, every man and woman, between
ages of 16 and 64 to give record of present
occupation, and of services they could perform
in time of war. Heavy falls of snow hamper
operations in Arras sector. In counter-attacks


Afkfr. (i>)
tlefit Si. Quentin, Germany claims to have taken
1,000 prisoners. Spanish steamer, “ San
Fulgencio ” sunk without warning. Food situ-
ation in Great Britain admitted to be critical.
Argentine and Buenos-Aires decide to mobilise,
but remain neutral for the present.
12th, 1917. —United States Navy agrees to do most
of patrol work in Western Hemisphere, using
British and French ports in West Indies as
bases. Protection also guaranteed to British
oil-fields at Tampico, Mexico. American gunboat
“ Scorpion ” interned at Constantinople. In Arras
sector, British pierce German lines between Viny
Ridge and Givenchy, capturing villages of
Wancourt and Kemnel ; German counter-attacks
fail ; Canadians take 36 guns. Two Argentine
ships sunk by raider off Brazil. Austrians and
Bulgarians make private overtures of peace,
but meet with no encouragement. Brazil seizes
all German ships in her harbours. Mr. Lloyd
George, in a speech in London, urges the
importance of America's assistance in building
ships and furnishing supplies.
13th, 1917. —Italians bombard Galliano railway
station, and explode a counter-mine in Cesinon
Valley. Two hospital ships sunk in war zone ;
one was torpedoed, and all on board saved,
the other struck a mine and sank with loss of
fifty-two lives. Servian people nse agamst
Bulgar rule, and take refuge in the hills, destroy-
ing bridges, railways, and communications
wherever possible. Paris announces two meatless
days per week after Ist June. Spain demands
indemnity for the sinking of the Spaniard ship
“ San Fulgencio.” Bolivia breaks off relations
with Germany. Brazilians ordered to leave
Germany within 48 hours by their Minister.
General Haig reports that the British are
“ astride ” the Hindenburg Line, having driven
Germans back a mile on a twelve-mile front,
occupying six villages, and threatening important
coal-mining centre of Loos. British advance on
front near Cambrai and Le Catelet. French
carry trenches south of St. Quentin.
14th, 1915. —Zeppelin raid on North-East coast.
1916. —British aeroplane raid on Constantinople.
1917. —British advance on wide front, north
and south of Bapaume-Cambrai road. Great
push forward at Arras and St. Quentin. Lens
surrounded on three sides. German counter-
attack on St. Quentin repulsed. Fires and
explosions behind German lines indicate another
retreat. French artillery very active in Cham-
pagen. Forty guns captured by British. Village
of Gricourt taked at point of the bayonet. Aus-
trians and Germans on Eastern front throwing
peace propaganda into Russian trenches. General
Maude reports battle north-east of Baghdad
temporarily suspended, owing to a mirage ;
at its close Turks retreat six miles, with heavy
loss. England warns citizens of possible food
shortage, and urges economy. Fifteen thousand
Swiss workmen riot over cost of food, and
demand Government distribution.
15th, 1917. —British advance through Lievin and
enter Lens. Germans destroy mines and mining
machinery as they retreat. Attack on British
positions on a six-mile front along Bapaume-
Cambrai road repulsed. Belgian troops win
two lines of German trenches at Dixmude.
Heavy artillery actions continue in the Cham-
pagne and St. Quentin sectors. Over twenty
German aeroplanes brought down in three days.
German Consulate and Legation attacked by-
mob in Buenos-Aires, also the offices of two
pro-German newspapers destroyed. Mexico
declares she will preserve her neutrality at all
costs. Germany notifies Spain that imports
from U.S.A. will be permitted provided nothing
is re-shipped to the Allies, but exports to America
will be considered contraband of war.
16th, 1915.—Zeppelin raid on East coast. 1917. —
General Nivelle launches great offensive on
front of 25 miles between Soissons and Rheims,
capturing first line of trenches all along line,
taking 10,000 prisoners and large quantity of
war material. French also attack on Alsatian
plain with decisive success. British advance
halted by heavy rain during day, but at night
Villeret is captured, widening the gap in the
Hindenburg Line north of St. Quentin. To
date 14,000 prisoners and 194 guns are taken
around Arras. Following up his victory of 14th,
General Maude reports that he has pursued the
Turks to the Jebel-Hamrin Hills. All merchant-
men of British registry are requisitioned, and all
British ships will hereaiter sail under Admiralty
orders. German town of Frieberg bombarded
by air-craft in reprisal for sinking by Germany
of hospital ships. Strikes begin in Berlin
co-incident with the 25 per cent, reduction of
bread ration. Canada removes tariff on import
of American wheat. Internal unrest increases
in Russia.
17th, 1916.—Russians take Trebizond. 1917. —
German counter-attacks near Craoune repulsed
with serious loss, 3,500 prisoners taken by
French in the day’s assault. In Berlin, 126,000
workers are on strike, including many munition
workers. Russian Council of Workmen’s and
Soldiers’ Delegates favour Universal Suffrage,
suppression of all classes and titles, and confis-
cation of all Church and Monastery held lands.
British and Australian forces in Palestine report
an advance on Turkish positions on a front of
64 miles, capturing Samson Ridge ; casualties
on both sides very heavy ; the magnificent
steadiness of Australian horse-holders under
heavy fire saves disaster.
18 th, 1915.—British capture Hill 60. 1917.
French capture heights overlooking \isne River.
Germans driven out of six villages between
.Soissons an:l Rheims, abandoning artillery and
ammunition dumps. French seize and hold
important village of Vailly. East of Craonne
Germans are repulsed, losing heavily. British
advance temporarily halted by heavy snow
storms and rain. Avance made west of Le
Catelet, and one village taken. Germany claims
3.000 French prisoners. Serious anti-German riots
reported from Constantinople when wounded
soldiers return from Mesopotamia. Germans
burn the Roumanian towns of Braila and Focsani.
Both British Houses formally recognise and
applaud the entry of U.S.A. into the war.
Brazilians in Porto Allegre burn German Club,
hotels, and large business houses.
19th, 1916. Stern American note to Germany on
polic}' of ruthless submarining. Germans throw
240.000 fresh troops against General Nivelle
without checking his advance. French still gain
in Champagne, and take three villages on A-sne,
also win the field-fortress of Fort de Conde.
British make slight gain south-east of Loos.
Since occupation of Vimy 228 guns have been
captured. British troops in Mesopotamia take


APRIL (3).
230 prisoners, and drive Turks back one mile.
Bread ration of German soldiers reduced from
one-half to one-third of a loaf da ; ly. German
Government promises adequate food and freedom
from punishment to 300 000 Berlin strikers, if
they will return to work. Turkey notifies
severance of diplomatic relations with U.S.A.
Swedish workmen strike over price of food.
20th, 1916.—Russian troops arrive in France.
1917. —A series of terrific counter-attacks by
fresh German troops fails to win back trenches
on Western front. French take 19,000 prisoners
and 500 guns in five days. General Maude routs
Turkish Army in Mesopotamia, taking 1,237
prisoners. The passage of the strategically
important Shatt-el-Adhein River is effected
by British. A large number of German soldiers
try to escape into Holland, but are attacked
by Uhlan frontier patrol and forced to return.
Strikers at Krupp’s and Spandau munition
works refuse to return to work. “ America
Day,” to celebrate entry into war, marked in Eng-
land by service at St. Paul’s, attended by King
and Queen.
21st, 1917. —British Commission, with Mr. Balfour,
arrives in America. Object of Commission is
to make co-operation easy and effective, and to
bring the war to a successful issue. French
repel five German counter-attacks, and advance
near Rheims, British repel three counter-
attacks, and take the village of Gouneline.
Belgian Relief Commission steamship “ Ring-
horn,” outward bound from Rotterdam, with
safe conduct, is sunk. Relief steamer “ Kongsli ”
damaged by mine or torpedo. Two, possibly
three, German destroyers sunk during raid on
Dover ; no damage sustained by British, who
save 118 German seamen. King Constantine
threatens to declare war on the Allies unless
they guarantee that he will not be deposed,
and that French troops shall occupy no more
Grecian territory. Social Democrats" hold large
meetings in Berlin, to encourage the Russian
Peace Party. Twelve hundred delegates of
Russian soldiers, officers, and workmen’s soci-
eties meet at Uinsk, and pledge themselves to
drive the Germans from Russia. In Sweden,
food shortage demonstrations, result in appro-
priation by Government of $29,000,000 to buy
supplies.
22nd, 1915.—Germans use asphyxiating gas in
attack on Ypres. 1917.—British push nearer
Cambrai, and close in on Havincourt Wood.
French make slight gains on Rhiems-Soissons
front. German warships bombard Calais, and
three aeroplanes drop bombs on Dunkirk ;
several civilians are killed. Argentinians march
in war parade, cheering Allies, and demanding
war wdth Germany. America’s entry into war
celebrated with great rejoicings in Paris.
23rd, 1917.—British assault German advance
position east of Arras, capturing defences north
and south of the Scarpe, occupying village of
Gavrelle and Guemappe, and bringing in 1,000
prisoners. German attacks on Champagne sector
repulsed, also on trenches in north of Belgium.
Report confirmed as to the attack by Greek
irregulars on Venizelists having been organised
from Athens.
23rd, 1917.—Turks in Mesopotamia driven from
positions on Tigris. General Maude occupies
important railway town of Samara, capturing
16 engines and 224 railway cars. Turkish forces
in Palestine defeated in battle near Gaza, and
withdraw their right wing from strongly en-
trenched position between Gaza and Beersheba.
Street fighting occurs in China between Szechen
and Nunnan troops. All German munition
factories placed under military authority, counter-
act effect of socialistic propaganda and prevent
strikes.
24th, 1916.—Irish Rebellion breaks out. Sir
Roger Casement taken prisoner. Martial law
proclaimed. Liberty Hall occupied by the
Military. Zeppelin raid on Eastern counties.
1917.—America issues $2,000,000,000 in bonds,
the bulk of which is to be lent to England, France,
Italy, and Russia, to pay for supplies which they
will buy in America. French War Commission
reaches America, consisting of ex-Premier
Viviani, Field Marshall Joffre with his staff,
and military and financial attaches. The dele-
gation is in favour of sending an American Army
to France as soon as possible. Desperate
fighting continues in Arras sector. British
advance line east of Monchy, and between the
Monchy and Sensee River. Forty German
aeroplanes brought down, with loss of only
two British machines. Bombing behind German
lines successfully carried out. South of Arras-
Cambrai road British advance on wide front,
capturing two villages, and reaching St. Quentin
Canal. Artillery duels continue along" entire
French front, and four 105 German howitzers
are captured. British Admiralty reports attack
by three British seaplanes on five German
destroyers off Zeebrugge ; one destroyer believed
to be sunk.
25th, 1915.—Che Landing, Gallipoli Peninsula.
Australia w-ins an immortal place in history.
1917.—American steamship “Mongolia” claims
to have sunk a U-boat. Joffre and Viviani are
given an ovation in Washington. Lord C unci iff e,
Governor of Bank of England, receives
$200,000,000 loan from Secretary McAdoo,
and deposits cheque to credit of Great Britain
in American Federal Reserve Bank. The battle
line east of Arras sways back and forth, as both
sides mass their forces for a decisive battle.
Fifteen more German aeroplanes are destroyed.
Germans claim to have brought down 39 Allied
aeroplanes in two days. U-boat activity during
week, greatest since beginning of submarine
campaign. Lord Devonport, British Food Con-
troller, admits gravity of the situation. British
destroyers “ Swift ” and “ Broke ” meet flotilla
of six German destroyers in North Sea. Germans
driven off, and several of their ships sunk ; both
British ships return to port seriously damaged.
German destroyer flotilla raids Dunkirk, and
engages French and British patrols ; one French
torpedo boat sunk. In Russia disorder is general ;
soldiers home from the war lead peasants against
landlords, forcing them to give up their land.
In Constantinople, popular sentiment is in
favour of breaking with Germany ; fully 35,000
people are on the verge of starvation.
26th, 1917.—At formal reception by President
Wilson of French Commission, M. Viviani
explains that his party, like the English Com-
mission, does not come to advise the U.S.A.,
but to furnish the information it requests.
Troops under the Crown Prince attack French
lines west of Cerny and around Craonne. French
maintain all previous gains, and take Ville-aux-
Hois. Germans throw thirteen large shells


APRIL (4).
into Rheims Cathedral. In Macedonia, British
troops attack west of Lake Doiran, and carry
a mile of trenches, which they hold against
four counter-attacks. Mexico warns German
residents that any concentration near American
border will result in immediate arrest.
27th, 1916.—Situation in Ireland very grave.
General Maxwell invested with powers ;
rebels still in possession of important public
buildings. 1917. —Allied Conference in Wash-
ington finds that the Entente and America
agree as to basic principles upon which the war
is to be conducted. In addition to financial
assistance, America undertakes to concentrate
on shipment of supplies to Europe while American
Army is being raised. Persistent fighting round
Arras, British win a few positions and the
quarries east of Haricourt; thirteen German
and six British aeroplanes are put out of action.
Artillery duels continue round Rheims. French
capture 130 guns between Soissons and Auberive.
Heavy fighting continues near Lake Doiran
in Macedonia, where British hold all their gains.
In Russia, 114 officers, including 23 Generals,
are replaced after visit of War Minister to the
front. German destroyers attack Ramsgate,
and are driven off by land batteries. In a speech
at the Guild Hall, Lloyd George says that
submarines can make England feel the pinch,
but they can never starve her out, as 3,000,000
new acres of land have been planted for
1918.
28th, 1917. —American Senate, by large majority,
rejects the voluntary system, and provides for
immediate calling up of all men between ages
of 21 and 40. Lieut. Thomas and crew of four
gunners lost when American oil-tanker “Vacuum”
sunk by U-boat. British advance on seven-mile
front north of Scarpe River, despite stubborn
resistance. French capture more of the import-
ant Chemin-des-Dames plateau near Ostel.
Turks initiate an offensive in Mesopotamia bv
an assault on Erzingan, and a Russian position
is also taken in Armenia. Bulgarian attempts to
regain positions on Lake Doiran are frustrated.
Guatemala breaks off diplomatic relations with
Germany. All Latin-American Republics, ex-
cepting Mexico and Argentine, have joined the
Allies. German police prepare to put down by
force expected rising by Socialists on Ist May.
Two hundred American Congressmen join in a
telegram to Lloyd George, requesting him to
settle the Irish question. The “Times” an-
nounces that Government will grant Home
Rule as soon as the Irish can agree as to what
measures they desire.
29th, 1916.—Fa1l of Kut-el-Amara, after siege
of 143 days ; General Townshend surrenders,
owing to exhaustion of supplies. 1917. —General
Joffre advises the despatch from America of
only one unit at a time. British troops take
another mile of German Oppy line near Arras.
Canadians maintain their hold on Arleux-en-
Gohelle. Russians recapture ground lost to
Turks near Erzingan. General Petain defender
of Verdun, is appointed Chief of Staff of French
Armies. Germans claim to have sunk 1,600,000
tons of shipping during February and March.
All German newspapers published in Bohemia
are suppressed, in order to discourage general
strike on May Ist. A procession of 1,000
wounded, maimed, and convalescent soldiers
parade the streets of Petrograd, to protest
against a separate peace.
30th, 1915.—Zeppelin raid on East coast. 1916.
America takes possession of interned German
vessels. French attack on front of several miles
in Champagne sector, and gain heights of Mont
Carnillet and Haut Mont. In Russia, the
maintenance of Army discipline is placed in
hands of .soldiers themselves, with a committee
to settle disputes between officers and men ;
the salute is made voluntary. Maximilian
Flarden warns Germany that America’s entry
into the war must be taken seriously, as it
indicates the moral weakness of Germany’s
position. He urges democratic reforms, as the
only basis of future peace.


Distribution of Christmas Billies.
Sun I Han j Tue | WeJ | Thu | Frl | Sal
191$.
1918 "may m~
; 1 ' ■
Sun | Mon | Tue| Wed | Thu | Fri | Sal
BBBDBBQ
mmmmmmm
8888888


Notable Dates, May
7th, 1915.—Sinking of the “ Lusitania.”
“ Speak, O Sons of Lincoln, speak,
Silence in such an hour is crime.’ ’
—Harold Begbie.
13th, 1915. —King George commands removal of the names of the
Crown Prince and Austrian Emperor from Roll of Knights of the
“ I vowed base knight, when I did meet thee next,
To tear the garter from thy craven’s leg.”
—Henry VI.
“ Take away that Star and Garter.”
—Aytoun.
25th, 1916. —5,041,000 men Volunteered for Military Service in Great
“ Now all the youth of England are on fire,
And silken dalliance in the wardrobe lies :
Now thrive the Armourers, and honours thought,
Reigns solely in the breast of every man.”
—Henry V.
“ For who is he, who’s chin is but enriched
With one appearing hair, that will not follow
These culled and choice-drawn cavaliers to France ?
Henry V.
31st, 1916. —Battle of Jutland.
Caught like fire the main
Where rending planks were heard, and broadsides peeled,
That shook were all the seas.”
—Francis Thompson


MAY (1).
Ist, 1915.—A British destroyer and two German
torpedo boats sunk off Dutch coast. 1916.
Irish rebellion over ; all rebels surrender. 1917.
—Loan from America to France and Italy
arranged, each to receive $160,000,000. Russian
loan also to be arranged. Fight German aero-
planes brought down by British airmen. During
April 19,343 Germans captured, including 393
officers. An aeroplane of undetermined nation-
ality bombs Dutch town of Zierikyel, damaging
100 houses and killing three persons. Attempts
of German Socialists to celebrate May Day, by
a munition strike, fail, owing to military
precautions. Pennsylvania railway management
decides to employ women whenever they can
do work formerly done by men.
2nd, 1916. —Five Zeppelins raid North-East coats.
Mr. Asquith announces introduction of Compul-
soty Service Bill. 1917.—German attacks
succeed along the Aisne near Chemin-des-
Dames. Thirteen German aeroplanes brought
down by British with loss of only four machines.
Resumption of fighting on Moldavia front in
Roumania, indicates re-organisation of Russian
army. Turks in Armenia capture Mush from
the Russians. General Maude, in Mesopotamia,
forces Turks from entrenched position in Jebel-
Hamin Hills, taking 359 prisoners. Armed
American steamer “ Rockingham ” sunk, by
submarine. A torpedo from a German seaplane
sinks British steamer “ Gena.” Germany offers
reparation to Argentina, and regrets sinking
of Monte Protegido.” Switzerland appeals to
America to continue the export of wheat, as
Switzerland depends on American wheat for food.
British destroyer sunk by mine in the Channel.
3rd, 1915.—Russian retreat in Galicia. 1916.
Zeppelin L.20 destroyed off coast of Norway.
Irish rebels, Pearce, Clarke and McDonagh,
shot. Mr. Burrell resigns. 1917. — H. C. Hoover
arriving in America from Europe reports sub-
marine menace growing, and food conditions
in Europe grave. French repulse German assaults
along Chemin-des-Dames. British attack on
entire battle front, and win positions on fifteen-
mile front. Canadians take village of Fresnoy.
4th, 1916.—Zeppelin L.7 destroyed by naval
gunfire off coast of Schleswig. 1917.—British
improve position in Arras sector. French storm
Craonne, gaining control of entire Craonne
plateau. Great activity on Eastern front marked
by mine explosions, and local raids by Germans
and Austrians on Roumanian front. Germany
requires American citizens to report to police
daily, thus first admitting existence of a state
of war. Chaotic conditions exist in Russia.
In Sweden danger of revolution considered
serious, two warships being kept in constant
readiness to aid if necessary in escape of King
and Queen. Argentina accepts Germany’s
apology for the sinking of the “ Monte Protegido.”
German Empress goes to Vienna to plead with
Emperor Charles to suppress peace manifestations
in Austria. New Cabinet formed in Greece,
with M. Zaimis as Premier. It is rumoured that
King Constantine is prepared to abdicate.
Rioting in New York at a meeting of Irishmen
to pledge their loyalty to U.S.A., radical element
demanding anti-English resolutions. John
Hodge, English Labour Leader, sends signed
appeal to American workmen, urging them to
use their utmost efforts to win the war. Austrian
Ambassador leaves U.S. for Vienna.
sth, 1916.—Zeppelin destroyed by Allied fleet off
Salonika. 1917.—Great Britain formally joins
France in request that the U.S. should send
troops to France as soon as possible .Women
of America are told by Secretary Houston that
effective thrift is the best aid they can render
in the national emergency. French cut salient
of four miles from Hindenburg Line near Laon,
taking 4,300 prisoners. Fighting extremely
severe on a front of 50 miles. Germans make
repeated attempts to eject British from recently-
captured Hindenburg defences at Bullecourt,
but are beaten off. Germany reported to be
constructing from three to five improved U-boats
per week, which is said to be much faster than
they can be destroyed. Hughes is re-elected
Premier of Australian Commonwealth, his party
winning a number of seats. The election regarded
as a victory for war party. Martial law pro-
claimed in Bohemia, and the publication of all
newspapers suspended. British and French
members of Commission to American Conference
receive enthusiastic reception in House of
Representatives.
6th, 1917. —Colonel Roosevelt announces that
force of 150,000 volunteers is ready, and that
all the financing has been arranged without
expense to the nation. French capture ridge
south of Laon ; severe counter-attacks repulsed,
and 6,100 prisoners taken. Continued attacks
on British at Bullecourt beaten off. Mush
abandoned, and Russian lines in Armenia
drawn back for strategic reasons. Artillery
duels and local attacks go on along the Rou-
manian front and at Kovel. Great Britain
prepared to accept national food rationing along
lines laid down by Mr. Hoover in rationing
Belgium, if people will not reduce food con-
sumption voluntarily. German newspapers print
an alleged secret treaty between Great Britain
and America, by which Germany is to be allowed
no colonies. Police compelled to use sabres in
quelling food riots in Stockholm.
7th, 1915.—The unarmed Cunard liner “ Lusitania ”
torpedoed by German submarine off Old Head,
Kinsale ; loss of nearly 1,000 lives. 1917.
Canada adopts same food regulations as U.S.
Mr. Balfour states that French, British and
American plans for co-operation are complete
in all essential matters. Germans make final
vain effort to dislodge French from Laon. French
take 200 prisoners. British repulse further
German attacks at Bullecourt. Germans renew
attacks on Russian trenches, from Caucasus to
Riga sector. General Sarrail reports Venizelist
volunteers in the Salonika Army, storm Bulgarian
trenches on a three-mile front. Four bombs are
dropped from aeroplanes north-east of London.
Norway reports sinking of two ships by torpedoes,
and the burning of a nickel factory, whose entire
output was being shipped to Germany. Junker
policy in Reichstag demands resignation of
Bethmann-Hollweg, as his policy of compromise
is a menace to the nation. Special train on
which French Commission travelling in U.S.
runs off track at Areola, Illinois ; no one is
injured.
Bth, 1915.—Germans occupy Libau, a Russian
Balkan Port. 1917.—Alien enemies in America
interned on farms, being well housed, and given
an opportunity to work at fair wages. American
Government refuses passports to Socialists
wishing to proceed to Stockholm, to advocate


MAY (2)
a separate peace for Russia. Town of Fresroy,
an important strategic position in the Oppy
line south-east of Lens, is re-captured by the
Germans from the British. Continued heavy
artillery duels round Chemin-des-Dames. Per-
sistent rumours of U-boats in South Atlantic
are given colour as ships flying the American
flag have carried them supplies. Great Britain
cuts out its meatless days to conserve the supply
of grain. German intrigue for separate peace
is at work in Italy. From Zurich comes the
report that three shots were fired at the Kaiser
while motoring in Berlin ; Kaiser unhurt. Winter
wheat yield in U.S. smallest for 13 years, and
barely enough for needs of America.
9th, 1917. —An American inventor claims to have
devised means to combat submarine menace.
America buys seven interned Austrian ships
from their American owners. British troops,
mostly Canadians, attack Bavarians, holding
Fresnoy, during the night, and entirely regain
lost ground west of town. British heavily
bombard Fresnoy in prepartion for further
attack. Small actions successful at Bullecourt
and Gavrelli. French advance north-east of
Chevreaux, near Rheims. Furious, but in-
decisive, fighting all along the Chemin-des-Dames
ridge. Russian affairs still in greatest disorder.
Field Marshall Joffre and M. Viviani receive
ovation in New York. Though report shows
largest number of ships sunk for the week since
beginning of U-boat capamign, the tonnage figures
are below those of last two weeks.
10th, 1915. —Zeppelin raid on Southend. 1916. —
Russian troops occupy Kasr-I-Shirin on Persian
frontier. 1917. —America announces that peace
terms will be considered by the Allies and the
U.S. conjointly. Members of Italian War
Commission arrive in New York. After a day
and night’s hard fighting, British gain slightly
near Lens, British troops in Macedonia capture
a mile of trenches between Lake Doiran and
Vardar. Strikes of British machinists are
interfering with production of munitions.
British Admiralty announces that a fleet of
light cruisers and destroyers encountered a
flotilla of eleven German destroyers in the
North Sea, and pursued them to their base,
without being able to overtake them. French
Deputies decide that full reparation by Germany
for damages inflicted on the invaded districts
of France should be an article in the terms of
peace. Joseph McGuiness, formerly a Sinn Fien
prisoner, wins a seat in House of Commons.
Field Marshall Joffre unveils a statue of Lafayette
in Brooklyn, U.5.A.., amid much enthusiasm.
Boxing contests, to which admission is charged,
declared illegal in New York after November 15th.
11th, 1917.—Under international agreement, a
small board is to be appointed to do all the
buying for U.S. and the Allies in America, thus
putting an end to competitive bidding. Italian
Commissioner states needs of Italy to be ships,
war material, and provisions. British troops
in south-western outskirts of Lens meet three
terrific Gerean counter-attacks, in two of which
liquid fire is used ; a lodgment was effected at
one point, which later in the day was re-gained.
French capture position near Chevreux by a
clever thrust in the night, and repel two counter-
attacks with heavy loss to the attackers. General
Sarrail claims small successes at many points
jn the Balkans. Herr Batocki, German food
dictator, admits crops disappointing in Turkey,
Bulgaria, Hungary and Roumania, and that
further America’s co-operation with England
prevents importation of food stuffs from neutral
countries. Petrograd invites the peoples of
the world to a Socialist Peace Conference in
the neutral city of Stockholm.
12th, 1915.—Anti-German agitation in England,
owing to “ Lusitania ” outrage. General Botha
captures Windhuk, capital of German SW.
Africa. 1917. —British advance on front of
three miles on the Drocourt-Queant line. The
approaches to Bullecourt, Rouex, and the Cavalry
Farm are captured, and firmly held ; 700 prisoners
and much trench artillery taken. Servian
army in Macedonia begins to fight its way up
Dodropolie Heights, east of Cerna. Russian
troops in Mesopotamia cross the Diala north-
east of Baghdad, and are menacing the rear of
the Turks recently defeated by General Maude
in their refuge in the Jebel-Hamrin Hills.
13th, 1915.—King George commands removal of
names of Kaiser, Crown Prince, and Emperor
of Austria from Roll of Knights of the Garter.
1917. —After very heavy fighting, British and
Australian troops hold greater part of village
of Bullecourt.
14th, 1916. —Russians suffer reverse near Erzerum.
Austrians launch an offensive in Trentino ;
Italians compelled to fall back. 1917. —Great
Britain agrees to turn over to U.S. all shipping
being built in America for British interests ;
1,024,000 tons is involved. After very hard
fighting, the village of Roeux falls to the British.
During February and March, 17 unarmed French
merchantmen sunk by German submarines.
M. Kerensky, Russian Minister for Justice,
announces “ that as affairs are going now it
will be impossible to save the country.” Minister
Gutchkoff resigns because of delegates inter-
ference in military matters.
15th, 1916.—Trial of Sir Roger Casement for
treason commenced in Bow Street, London.
1917. —Russian affairs increase in confusion ;
General Brusiloff, hero of the Galician offensive,
and General Gurko, commander on the West
front, resign from the army. Chancellor Beth-
mann-Hollweg bluntly refuses to discuss Ger-
many’s peace aims in the Reichstag. President
Wilson assures Labour leaders, assembled at
Washington, that present laws safe-guarding
conditions of labour will not be set aside.
16th, 1916.—Naval engagement between British
destroyers and monitors, and German destroyers ;
enemy withdraws. 1917.—A squadron of
American torpedo boat destroyers reach
Queenstown, and at once take up patrol duty
on the seas. One of the squadron acted as
convey to an Atlantic liner on the vayage across.
President Wilson warmly attacked for alleged
tendency to usurp legislative functions. With
troops fresh from rest on Russian front, Von
Hindenburg hurls massed attack on British
forces on a two-mile front from Gavrelle
to the Scarpe ; attack repelled after fierce fighting,
and shattered remnants of German regiments
driven back to their trenches. Italians sweeping
forward on a wide front on the Julian Alps.
Three miles of Bulgarian trenches captured in
Macedonia. Losses by submarines continue,
but are slightly less for the week. British
Government outlines proposed measure for Irish
Home Rule. The proposed exclusion of the


MAY (3)
six north-east counties of Ulster to be subject
to re-consideration at the end of five years.
Lord Robert Cecil and Mr. Asquith, in House
of Commons, state that though the Allies are
in sympathy with the Russian policy of no
annexations or indemnities, no guarantee can
be given, and the liberation of oppressed peoples
in Germany’s conquests and colonies cannot
be abandoned.
17th, 1915.—Zeppelin raid on Kent ; Zepellin
damaged by naval aviator. 1916.—Italians
make a stand at Zugna Forta. New Air Board
constituted, with Lord Curzon as President.
1917. —Desperate German offensive on French
regarded as effort to mask further retreat. Whole
of village of Bullecourt in hands of the British.
Crisis in Russia averted, all Army Commanders
deciding to remain at their post, and reporting
return of many soldiers to their regiments.
John Redmond rejects Premier’s proposal to
exclude Ulster provinces from operation Irish
Home Rule measure, but accepts proposal for
Convention of Irishmen to decide upon from
of Government for Ireland.
18th, 1916.—E1-Arish, on line of communication
between Egypt and Syria, bombarded by British
warships and aircraft. 1917. —Germans aban-
doning their peace overtures, make sweeping
attack on Russian position at Volhynia, which
is successfully repelled. American Red Cross
Base Hospital No. 4 reaches England on its way
to France. Sea battle reported in the Adriatic'
in which cruisers, destroyers, submarines, and
aeroplanes, representing five nations, were
engaged ; British, French, and Italian craft
drove off Austrian squadron, but not before it
had succeeded in sinking 14 British mine-sweepers
and taken 72 prisoners. Lord Devonport,
British Food Controller, declares the British are
depending on U.S. for food supplies for the next
six months. 10,000,000 Americans called on
to register by June Ist, from which first draft
of 25,000, under Major-General Pershing, will
proceed to France at once.
19th, 1916. —Italians retreat in the Trentino.
1917. —Italian infantry, by desperate drive,
wins Hill 652, the dominating point on Mo ate
Vedia. Bad weather, and the necessity for
recuperation, causes a lull on the Western fronts
of Arras and the Aisne. Russian Provisional
Government rejects Germany’s offer of a separate
peace, and declares that Russia will stand by
her Allies. A force of marines is to be attached
to General Pershing’s Expeditionary Force,
bringing the number up to 40,000 men.
20th, 1916.—Russian cavalry joins up with British
forces on the Tigris. 1917.—Three men found
guilty of fomenting strikes, in order to delay
munition work, are sentenced to a year’s
impri-onment, in the U.S.
21st, 1916.—Daylight saving comes into force in
England. 1917. —Further French and British
successes reported from war front. British
holding the Hindenburg Line for 11 miles, from
Oueant Ridge to Beaurains. French operations
in Champagne reported as important and
brilliant. Proposed Irish Convention, represent-
ing all factions, includes suggestion that the
sittings shall be in private, and that the Crown
shall select Chairman. Steamship “ Mongolia ”
carrying Base Hospital No. 12 to Europe, from
America, returns to port, bringing bodies of two
purses accidentally killed by fragments of
gun-cap during practice at sea. Close fighting
reported between Austrians and Italians on
Tsonzo Heights.
22nd, 1917.—British make slight advance, while
Fr nch hold their own on Western fronts.
Finland’s influential classes favour a complete
separation of the Grand Duchy from Russia.
President Wilson asks for censorship powers
“ to deal with a few persons who cannot be relied
on to preserve patriotic reticense on subjects
whose publication could be of injury to the
nation.”
23rd, 1915.—Italy declares war on Austria. 1917.
: —ltalian artillery and trench mortars open heavy
bombardment on the Austrians on the rocky
plateau between Goritz and the sea. French
in three dashing night attacks, obtain possession
of all country and positions between Soissons
and Auberive. King and Queen welcome
American surgeons and nurses at Buckingham
Palace. Hudson Maxim states that he has
invented and perfected a device which will
make all ships immune from submarine dangers.
24th, 1916.—Germans re-take Douaumon Fortt.
1917. —British transport “ Transylvania ” sunk
by submarine with loss of 413 lives. French liner
“Soutay ” torpedoed with loss of 45 lives.
Italian forces on the Carso take 9,000 prisoners
in their drive towards Trieste ; previous assaults
on Austrian trenches resulted in capture of 7,000
prisoners. America proposes to raise $100,000,000
for Red Cross work. M. Viviani and Field
Marshall Joffre are enthusiastically welcomed
on their return to Paris. In farewell address
to the American people, Mr. Balfour praises
the remarkable work done in forty days, since
declaration of war by U.S.A.
25th, 1915.—British Coalition Cabinet formed.
1916. —Military Service Act becomes law ;
volunteers number 5,041,000 ; the greatest
volunteer army ever raised in the world’s history.
British troops seize El-Fasker, and dispel troops
of Sultan of Darfar. 1917. —Germans strew
entrance to Queenstown Harbour with mines,
in anticipation of arrival of American fleet.
Germans gain small success, with heavy losses,
in attacks on French lines south of Laon. Italians
push forward their line for one mile on a six-
mile front on the Carso plateau, taking 18,000
prisoners in ten days. With help of leading
steel merchants in U.S., General Goethals
undertakes to construct 3,000,000 tons of shipping
in 18 months, to carry food to the Allies.
26th, 1915.—H.M.5. “Triumph” lost in the Dar-
danelles. 1916.—Whitsuntide holidays post-
poned, to enable munition works proceed at full
speed. Bulgarian-German forces enter Frot
Rupel on Greek frontier and threaten Kavalla.
1917. —The Marshall of New York decides that
all enemy aliens shall be barred from employment
on city's water front from June Ist. Increased
activity on Aisne and Arras battle fronts, indicate
an early German attack in force. Italians
storm Austrian second line of defences, and hold
the Carso plateau to the north, against violent
counter-attacks.
27th, 1915.—Zeppelin raid on Southend, and Fast
Coast. 1917. —German forces, under Crown
Prince, pierce French lines on summit of Teton,
but are driven back by rally of French infantry,
which regains all lost ground. German air
squadron of 16 aeropkmes, sweeps over towns
on English south-east coast ; 76 persons aw


MaV (4)
kdled, mcluding 49 women and children ; 174
are wounded, including 62 women and children.
Italians push on towards Trieste, capturing strong
positions from which the investment of Drino
may begin. By a vote of 136 to 3, Brazil passes
a Bill revoking country’s neutrality in the war.
A serious crisis in the relations between Germany
and Austria reported. Hungarian Premier and
Austro-Hungarian Minister for Finance resign.
28th, 1915.—H,M,5, “Majestic” torpedoed in
the Dardanelles. Sir Henry Jackson replaces
Lord Fisher as First Sea Lord. 1917. —Italians
push on towards Duino, crossing the Trinavo.
Because of the enormous demands of working
men, Russian Minister for Finance declares
country facing economic ruin. American House
passes Food Census Bill, with amendment by
Miss Jeanette Rankin, providing for employment
of women in gathering information. First
speech by woman ever made during legislative
session.
29th, 1917. —Italian drive towards Trieste continues
successfully.
30th, 1915.—Italians invade the Trentino, Austria.
1916.—Verdun battle continues. French aban-
don Bethincourt-Cumieres road, and evacuate
their first line of trenches. British occupy Nevtf
Langenburg in German East Africa. 1917.
German attack on French trenches south of
Mont Blond repulsed, the enemy abandoning
their dead and wounded in th?ir retreat. Two
German aeroplanes brought down. Much unrest
reported among Russian peasantry, the Com-
munal authorities everywhere taking over land,
houses, farm implements, and even seed, in
many cases without compensation.
31st, 1915.—Italians attack PoH, Austria, and set
fire to the Arsenal. 1916.—Great naval battle
off Jutland ; victory remains with the British
fleet, though the losses were heavy on both
sides. 1917. —Brigadier-General White and
seven other British officers begin a recruiting
campaign in New York, to enlist some of the
estimated 600 British subjects in America.
Italians in their advance on Trieste find Austrian
soldiers chained to captured machine guns.
Emperor Charles of Austria gives a pledge of
reform and conciliation towards ‘ all who
abandon intention to threaten us.” All male
citizens of U.S. liable for service are prohibited
from crossing boundaries, or taking passage
for another countrv.


Evening Battle Hymn.
Trench by trench, along the line
Dies the spluttering musketry ;
And the gunners at their guns
Lay the heavy shrapnel by.
Now the weary flymg-man
Glides in circles from the sky :
And across the dimming bay,
Move the armoured ships away.
God of Battle 1 God of Right !
Guard and guide Thy troops this night !
“ Here and here among the hills
Cdeam the tiny supper fires ;
There and there a hard-spent man
To a barren bed retires.
Now across the darkened bowl,
Pass the stars on their patrol,
Staring down on War’s still feast,
Mangled man and broken beast.
God of Battle ! God of Right !
Guard and guide Thy troops this night ! ”
—Sydney de Loghe, in “ The Straits Impregnable.
With grateful acknowledgments to the following for permission to reprint poems
Miss Alice Gore-Jones, Brisbane, The Proprietor of the “ Bulletin,” Sydney,
and Messrs. Hassell & Son, Adelaide, for the “ Anzac ” Sonnet;
Sydney de Loghe, Esq., and the Manager of the Australasian Authors' Agency,
Melbourne, for the Evening Battle Hymn ;
Messrs. Angus & Robertson, Sydney, for Leon Gellert’s poem, “ The Last to
leave.”
J. E. BOURNE.


Camp in an (%
|yß©:, |®)|l
Him june m~
Sun j Mon | Tue Wed j Thu j Fri | Sal
8888880
BBBBDDO!
I flftV nn in iei fki itivi m
i BLS9 1111 ■■■ IKißkliri
wmm pii iji is| p P I Kp I w Pf H
B3O3o3[o®]ol®
‘ ■ mrJti V wJ&mm WjM fls W*wM Irm - f


JUNE (1).
Ist, 1915. —Lord Kitchener receives the Order of
the Garter. 1916.—Austrians advance in the
Irentino. 1917.—French Government refuses
to recognise attempt of extreme Socialists to
discuss peace terms at Stockholm. Austria
makes violent but unsuccessful attempts to
regain lost ground on Carso plateau. Russian
affairs show no signs of improving. Three
American sailing ships sunk by submarines.
2nd, 1915.—Italians cross Isonzo River. Russians
defeat Austrians at Mikalojof. 1916.—Germans
attack on the Ypres salient near Hooge ; British
lose some ground. 1917. —Germany negotiates
for purchase or control of island of Margarita
off coast of Venezuela for naval base. Italians
still advance towards Trieste. Grave dissatis-
faction reported to exist in Germany, as it is
realised that the U-boat campaign has brought
the desired peace no nearer. Out of conflicting
reports from Russia, it is concluded that while
military conditions are improving, the civil
situation is growing worse.
3rd, 1915.—Germans and Austrians re-take
Pryemzel. Amara, on the Tigrus, in Meso-
potamia, taken by the British. 1916.—Cana-
dians counter-attack on the Ypres salient and
retake most of the lost ground. 1917. —A Pro-
visional Government is formed in China ; Presi-
edt Le-Yuang-Hung is virtually a prisoner in
Pekin, and 11 provinces are in revolt. American
Commission arrives at a Russian port. Fierce
fighting rages on battle fronts of Arras and Aisne.
A British thrust towards Lens fails. French
repel five fierce onslaughts by Germany.
4th, 1916. —Great Russian offensive from Pripet
to Roumania frontier, 13,000 prisoners taken.
1917. Canada faces a political war crisis in
the opposition that has developed to compulsory
army service. General Alexieff, Commander-
In-Chief of Russian Armies resigns, and is suc-
ceeded by General Brusiloff. Germans regain
electric power station south-west of Lens, after
Canadians had held the position all day under
fierce artillery fire. British re-take advanced
post near Cherisy, taken by Germans on previous
day. Italian reserves re-capture ground lost
on the slopes of Monte San Marco. American
War Tax Bill provides for prohibitive tax on
whisky and other spirits for beverage purposes.
Bankers are instructed to see that no funds are
transferred from enemy alien accounts to neutral
countries.
sth, 1916. —H.M.S. “ Hampshire,” with Lord
Kitchener and his staff on board, strikes a mine
off Orkney Islands, while outward bound for
Russia. Lord Kitchener and his staff drowned.
1917. —The armed merchantman “Mongolia”
engages in her second fight with submarine off
Irish coast. Artillery duels near Ypres continue
with unabated fury. Nearly 10,000,000 respond
to call to register for military service in America.
Italians gain an advanced position between
Castagnavizza and Jamiano. Sixteen German
aeroplanes raid English towns and villages.
Two machines are brought down by British guns.
6th, 1915.—Zeppelin raid on East coast, 1916.
Austrians lose 12,000 men, and retire before
Russian attack. 1917. —Active operations re-
sumed on front east of Arras, British troops
carrying about a mile of German position on
slopes of Greenland Hill. Italian advance
checked, and 6,771 prisoners taken by Austrians
jp counter-attacks. In Russia, the Cronstadt
Secessionists Administration announces that it
is exercising all the military, social, and economic
functions of an independent state.
7th, 1915. —Flight-Lieut. Warneford attacked,
bombed, and wrecked a Zeppelin at a height of
6,000 feet, Between Ghent and Brussels. 1916.
—Russians re-take Lutsk and 13,000 prisoners.
1917. —American armed steamship “ Silvershell ”
sinks a German submarine. U.S. collier
“ Jupiter,” with cargo of wheat, reaches a French
port safely, conveyed by American warship.
British carry Wytschaete salient overlooking
Ypres, which has been held by Germans for
two years. The offensive was preceded by a
terrific mine explosion ; territory five miles long
and three miles deep is captured. After tre-
mendous struggle, Italians succeed in stopping
Austrian thrust on Carso plateau. The Cron-
stadt Government surrenders unconditionally
to Government at Petrograd.
Bth, 1915.—Mr. Bryan, U.S.A. Secretary of State,
resigns, having taken exception to the strong
note sent by President Wilson to Germany on
the “ Lusitania ” question. King George bestows
V.C. on Lieut. Warneford by telegram. 1916.
French lose Fort Vaux. 1917. —Victorious
British troops strengthen position captured on
Wytschaete Ridge ; prisoners numbering 6,400
have already been brought in. General Pershing
and large staff reach London, and are enthusi-
astically welcomed by British authorities and
the people. America plans to build a fleet of
100,000 aeroplanes, with which to strike an
overwhelming blow at German Army. Two
hundred girls students of the Petrograd Technical
Institute enrol in a regiment of women, that
will fight at the front under the same conditions
as the men. Two Austrian Generals, 10 officers,
and 15 privates, appear in Kishineif, declaring
that they are Peace Deleagtes. They are placed
under arrest by orders from Petrograd. German
Commander on Eastern front send wireless
messages inviting Russian armies to a separate
and secret armstice ; the offer was rejected.
Stockholm announces that “ owing to various
circumstances,” the meeting of International
Socialists is postponed until September. Ameri-
can wheat crop forecasted to fall much below
average. San Salvador and neighbouring towns
destroyed by earthquake. Messages in a bottle
washed ashore on Orkney Islands tell of loss of
long missing American steamer “Frederck.”
Two American steamships, “Manchester” and
“ Southland ” torpedoed and sunk.
9th, 1915.—Italians capture Monfalcone. 1916.
M. Eriand, General JoftTe, and General Roques,
attend Allied War Council in London. 1917.
Mr. Balfour returns to London, and states that
the visit of Commission to U.S.A. “will mark
an epoch in the history of the two great English-
speaking Nations.” Despatch from British head-
quarters in France state that at the battle of
Messines, the British casualties are placed at
the minimum ; the battle was won by a single
British Army. Another Austrian attack to
regain positions lost to Italians is repulsed,
enemy losing many prisoners. American Red
Cross Commission, embracing many medical
and sociological experts, on its way to France,
to prepare for arrival of American troops.
10th, 1917.—A new form of offensive weapon used
by British at Messines consists of projectiless
containing oil, which explodes on concussion,


JUNE (2).
and cause conflagrations over wide area. Union
of Commerce and Industries in Petrograd
declare against a separate peace. British gain
more ground on the Messines Ridge, near Ypres.
In China, General Chang-Lunn and several
thousand troops reach Pekin, and demand
dissolution of Parliament.
11th, 1915.—American note to Germany demands
the safety of the lives of American citizens.
Russians defeat Austro-German forces on the
Dniester. 1916.—Momba, in German East Africa,
occupied by General Smuts. Further Russian
success towards Czernowitz, 35,000 prisoners
taken. 1917. —British infantry smash entire
system of German trenches on a mile front
beyond Messines, capturing many prisoners and
seven field guns. Italians win success on crags
of the Dolomite Alps, in attack on the Trentino
front. Two hundred men, first fruits of British
recruiting campaign in America, leave for training
camps in Canada. Lord Northcliffe takes up
his duties as head of British War Mission in
America. American Navy’s confidential file
stolen and transmitted to Senator Frelinghuysen
of New Jersey.
12th, 1915.—French capture Souchez railway
station, and repulse attack on Verdun. 1916.
Russians nearing Czernowitz. Strong Italian
offensive in the Tyrol. 1917. British extend
their gains east and north-east of Messines,
occupying two miles of enemy trenches, and
taking village of Gaspard, capturing 7,432 pris-
oners, 47 cannon, 242 machine guns. In response
to the demands of the protecting Powers, Great
Britain, France, and Russia, King Constantine
I. abdicates in favour of his second son, Alexander.
Weekly reports show that submarine menace is
again becoming serious. American Mission to
Russia reaches Petrograd. A revolt of Pacificists
in the Russian Army is quickly quelled by loyal
troops. American tank steamship “ Petrolite ”
sunk by submarine. Russians capture Kalusz,
and push on to Dolina.
13th, 1915.—Germans claim victory over Russians
at Moscika, and capture of 16,000 prisoners.
1916.—Memorial Service for Lord Kitchener
held in St. Paul’s Cathedral. 1917. —British
steamship “ Manchuria ” seriously damaged in
collision with U.S. monitor “ Amphitrite.”
Major-General Pershing reaches Paris, and is
welcomed by Field Marshall J off re. In an
aeroplane raid on London, a school house is
bombed, and among the victims are 138 women
and 120 children killed. South Atlantic liner
“ Sequana ” torpedoed with loss of 190 lives.
A fire, which caused a terrific explosion, occurs
in sugar refinery, Brooklyn, and numbers of
employees killed. Chinese Parliament dissolved,
and civil war considered certain. Russians
advance in Galicia, capturing several important
heights north of the Dniester, driving the Germans
back to Ehilus, and taking Perchinsko.
14th, 1915. Kaiser announces there will be no
winter campaign, as the war will end in October.
Zeppelin raid on North-East coast. 1916.
Allies’ Economic and Commercial Conference
held in Paris. Naval action in Baltic, between
Russian flotilla and German convoy ; several
German ships sunk, including one cruiser. 1917.
—German troops in the Messines region abandon
their positions between St. Yves and the River
Lys. Russians beat off two attacks on Kalusz,
and capture Novicka.
loth, 1915. Allies make successful air raid 6n
Karlsruhe, capital of Baden ; all Allies’ machines
return but two. 1916.—French take trenches
at Mort Homme. General Smuts occupies
Wilhelmstat, German Aast Africa. 1917.
British force Germans out of new positions
east and south of Messines, and capture a further
portion of the Hindenburg Line north-west of
Bullecourt. Russians repulse attacks in the
Lodziany region, and take many Austrian
prisoners.
16th, 1916.—0n Tigris, British occupy trenches
within 200 yards of Turkish position at Sanna-i-
-yat. 1917.—British driven back in counter-
attacks east of Loos from trenches north-west
of Bullecourt, but make gains south of Ypres.
Italians in the eastern Trentino carry Corno
Cavento. French cavalry occupies five towns
in Northern Thessaly. Russians take eastern
end of Lodziany.
17th, 1916.—Russians capture Czernowitz. 1917.
—Germans penetrate French salient north-west
of Hurtebise Farm, but French re-take all but
a small part of the first line. British evacuate
several villages on the Bulgarian front, after
seening them afire. French extend the occupation
of Thessaly. Russian Duma, in secret session,
voted for an immediate offensive by Russian
troops. Russians driven out of Kalusz by
German reinforcements, and lose Novicka, but
re-take it.
18th, 1916.—General Von Moltke dies of heart
failure. 1917. —Germans make strong attack
along Russian front south of Brzeyany, and in
the region of Halicz.
19th, 1971. —Germany cedes to Holland a number
of German ships interned in Dutch East Indies,
in payment for vessels destroyed by U-boats.
French repulse German attempts to regain
positions in the Champagne district, between
Mont Carnillet and Mont Blond. All contingents
of American expeditionary forces arrive safely
in France. A Russian and a Roumanian Com-
mission confer with American officials in Wash-
ington on conduct of the war.
20th, 1917. —British re-take lost positions east of
Monchy and Monchy-le-Preux. Canadians re-
pulse attacks on new positions near Lens. Ital-
ians resume offensive in Trentino, and capture
Austrian position on Monte Ortigara.
21st, 1916.—Grand Sherrif of Mecca proclaims
Arab Independence, and captures Mecca, Jeddah
and Saif. 1917.—Argentina demands an in-
demnity for sinking of vessels, “ Oriana ”
and “ Toro.” French re-take part of lost ground
at Vauxaillon, and push on their lines near
Mont Carnillet on a 600 yards front. Italians
explode a mine in Val-Castiana, Ampezzo sector,
under the spur of the Lagazroi, and destroy the
Austrian garrison.
22nd, 1915.—De Wet sentenced to six years’
imprisonment and a fine of New British
War Loan announced. Lemberg captured by
the Austrians. 1916.—Greek Government
resigns ; Mr. Zaimis forms a Ministry. Greece
agrees to the demands of the Allies, and arrange
for the demomlisation of the Army. 1917.
Germans pierce French hnes on a front of 1|
miles along the Chemin-des-Dam.es, from west
of Royere Farm to Epine de Chevregny.
23rd, 1915.—Lloyd George introduces ‘ Munitions
Bill,” forbidding strikes and lockouts. 1916.
Germans make advance on Verdun. Russians


JUNE (3).
advance in Bukovina. 1917. —Fercnh re-capture
greater part of salient east of Vauxaillon. Spain
bars submarines from her territorial waters.
Announced that 12 Greek vessels, with tonnage
of 31 542 had been sunk since April Ist.
24th 1916.—Russians take Kimpolung and Kuty
and occupy whole of Bukoving. 1917.—British
torpedo-boat destroyer sunk in the North Sea.
25th 1916.—Italians capture Asiero and Posina.
1917. —Russians repulse strong attacks in
Galicia in direction of Zlochoff.
26th 1917. —Canadians capture La Coulotte and
push on towards Lens. French on the Aisne
take positions north-west of Hurtebise Farm.
Austrians suffer heavy losses in attempt to take
positions in the Ortigara sector.. Spain suspends
constitutional guarantees. Catalonia and the
Basque provinces demand autonomy.
27th 1917. —French armoured cruiser ‘ * Kleber ”
sunk by mine off Point St. Mathieu 38 men were
lost.
28th 1914. —Assassination of Archduke Francis
Ferdinand Hdr to the Austro-Hungarian throne
at Sarajevoi the capital of Bosnia. 1917. —
An investigation into German plots for sinking
Norwegian ships by concealing explosives in
artificial lumps of coal resulted in arrest of a
number of Germans in Norway, and a formal
protest to the German Government. Canadians,
in drive on Lens, push on half way through
Avion.
29th, 1915.—Measure for national registration of
males and females between the ages of 15 and 65,
introduced in House of Commons. 1916.
Russians defeat Austrians near Kolomia, and
take 10,000 prisoners. Sir Roger Casement
found guilty of treason, and sentenced to death.
1917. —British carry German line between Oppy
and Gavrelle, on a front of 2,000 yards. Germans
take French positions at Verdun, on both sides
of the Malancourt-Esnes road, and storm Ava-
court Wood. Turks drive Russians across River
A bis Hirman on the Persian frontier. Greek
Cabinet under M. Zaimis resigns, and a new
Government formed by M. Venizelos, which
severed diplomatic relations with the Teutonic
Allies ; Turkey announced she considered this
equivalent to an act of war, and deported all
Greeks, and confiscated their property.
30th, 1916.—Russians capture Kolomea. 1917. —
Russian torpedo boat blown up by mine in the
Black .Sea. A secret German wireless station
found on an island outside of Arendal. British
advance a mile towards Lens over a front of four
miles. Germans make small gains at Mort
Homme Hill.


K t -^
|| «-*V a
ixCNul Stretchers on Camels for wounded men Wf/iMlI
1918 JULY 1918
Sun Mon Toe Wed Tho Fri Sat
8088888
[QEEIBEBfDBB
ED 00 E0 03030303
8888888


Notable Dates, July.
British women demand right to aid in war work.
“The honest, earnest man must stand and work,
The woman also —otherwise she drops
At once the dignity of man,
Accepting serfdom.”
“ She who did this thing was bom to do it—
Claims her license in her work.
—Elizabeth Barrett Browning.
Armentieres ; 23rd, 1916, Poziere..—Anzacs and British Territorials
Twas not the shed of blood, but feailess mirth,
That set a wondrous pattern to the earth.
—Leon Gellert
.—Australians capture Mouquet Farm.
Went forth in youth’s imperial pride.
Laughed at grim fate, and greatly died.” O’Hara


J ULV
29th, 1916.—Serbians obtain success over Bulgarians
near Monastir. 1917. —Peru refuses Germany’s
offer to submit the circumstances of the sinking
of the Peruvian ba.rque “ Lorton ” to a Prize
Court, and demands payment for damages and
an indemnity.
30th, 1914.—Stock Exchange closed. 1916.
Germans make flame attack on British ; lost
ground eventually recovered. Pope addresses
“ peace letter ” to the belligerents. 1916.
Franco-British advance east of Delville Wood,
on the <Somme. 1917.—Russians stiffen their
line and hold the heights to east of River Zbrocz.
Germans advance towards Seletvn. Germans
advance east of the Upper Moldavian Valley,
and attack on both sides of the Fokshani-Ajoud
railway.
31st, 1914.—Mobilisation in Russia. 1915.—Rus-
sians evacuate Lublin. 1916. —British occupy
Dodoma, German East Africa. Austrians retire
from Brody. Zeppelin raid on Eastern and
South-Eastern counties. 1917.—Roumanians
take fortified positions on right bank of River
Putna, north-west of Soveia. French and British
smash German lines in Belgium on a twenty-
mile front, from Dixmude to Warneton, taking
ten towns, and crossing the Yser in many places.
French on the Aisne capture German trenches
over a front of nearly one mile.


Men of 2nd Light Horse Regt, bringing in German I
ryi Prisoners after Romani,, VM
ffl
B
B
B
D
Qwawsi li.
1918 AUGUST 1918
Sun Mon Too Wed I Thu I Fit Sat
BBQQBDCQ
Oil BOSSES ill @0 IS
ioio|3B3®BElo3


Notable Dates, August.
Ist, 2nd, 3rd, 9th, 10th, 12th, 19i4. —Declarations of War.
“ So ran that battle clangour round the world,
From famous field to field.”
—Francis Thompson.
4th, 1914. —Great Britain demands that Belgian neutrality be respected
“ Thou tread’st higher in thy deed,
Than stair of throne can lead,
To help in hour of wrong,
The broken hearts of nations to be strong.’
—E. B. Browning.
“They tempted her, and found her England yet ! ”
-—Henry Lawson.
6th to 10th, 1915. —Quinn’s Post, Lone Pine, Chanuk Bair.
“ Days matter not, nor years to the undaunted ;
To live is nothing —but to nobly live !
They are as Gods, who life for others give !
—Florence Earle Coates.
20th-25th, 1914. —Germans enter Brussels. Germans destroy Louvain.
“ The patient drip of women’s tears
Which joined the patient drip of faithful blood
—Francis Thompson.
23rd, 1914.—The British stand at Mons.
“ The game’s afoot ; follow your spirit, and upon this charge
Cry, * God for Harry, England, and St. George ! ’ ”
—Henry V.
“ O God 1 thy arm was here ;
And not to us, but to thine arm alone, ascribe we all !
—Henry V.
4tn-sth. 1916. —Romani.
“ Not with bowed head, although a tear
Stain the bright dews of evening there
But with the love and deathless pride
Their faultless fame has sanctified.”
—J. B. O’Hraa


AUGUST (I).
Ist, 1914. —Germany declares war on Russia, and
invades Luxemburg. 1917.—Russians begin
offensive in Galicia near Trembowla, but continue
retreat in the south. Germans retake St. Julien,
Belgium, from the British, and gain a footing
at Westhock.
2nd, 1914.—Germany delivers ultimatum to Bel-
gium. British naval reserves called up. 1916.
French success at Verdun. Zeppelin raid on
East coast. 1917.—Germans advance in Buko-
wina, and take a stand before Kimpolung.
British regain Ypres-Roulers railway station,
and repulse German assaults between the railway
and St. Julien.
3rd, 1914.—Germany declares war on France.
1916. —French re-take Fleury, and trenches
near Thiaumont. Roger Casement hanged.
1917. —Austrians capture Czernowitz. Russians
evacuate Kimpolung. British occupy St. Julien,
and improve their position south of HolleDeke.
4 th, 1914.—Great Britain sends ultimatum to
Germany demanding that Belgium’s neutrality
be respected. At 11 p.m. declares war on
Germany. 1915.—Fa1l of Warsaw. Anniver-
sary of the declaration of war. 1916.—Battle
of Romani, east of Suez Canal, 14,000 Turks
defeated and put to flight ; great gallantry of
Australian Light Horse ; heavy losses inflicted
on enemy, and 3,500 prisoners taken. 1917. —
All of Galicia, except narrow strip between
Brody and Zbaraz, wrested from the Russians.
Austrians cross Russian frontier north-east of
Czernowitz. French push forward east of
Kortekeer Cabaret, and check Germans near
Verdun. British expel Germans from trenches
near Monchy-le-Preux, re-establishing their lines.
sth, 1914.—Lord Kitchener appointed Secretary
of State for War. 1915.—Fa1l of Ivangorod,
Poland. Russians evacuate Riga. 1916.
British advance before Pozieres. 1917. —Ger-
mans occupy Varna. Canadians advance south-
west of Lens. British advance at St. Julien,
and repulse attacks at Holleboke. Russians
resume offensive east of Czernowitz, and capture
a wood near Baian, but retire south-west of
that region.
6th, 1915.—Landing at Suvla Bay ; Australians
in glorious assault capture Lone Pine from the
Turks, pushing on to advanced posts on Sari
Bair ; another force of Australians, New Zea-
landers, and Indians, pass up Rhododendron
Spur, and entrench within a quarter of a
mile of Chanuk Bair ; another force hold Quinn’s
Post, to divert part of Turkish reinforcements.
1916’.—Italian offensive on the Isonzo, 4,000
prisoners taken. 1917. —Russians capture two
villages in Volhynia. Russians evacuate Pros-
kurov and Kamenetz-Podolsk, the capital of
Podolia. Four German Imperial Secretaries,
and five Ministers of the Prussian Cabinet resign.
7th. 1914. —First Treasury Notes issued. 1915.
New Zealanders and 7 Gloucester race each
other up steep cliffs of Chanuk Bair, and fix
themselves firmly on the crest ; every officer
and non-commissioned officer of the 7 Gloucesters
was killed ; the gallant adventure failed through
lack of adequate support ; casualties among the
British forces 12,000. 1916.—Bank holiday
postponed ; no break in munition making.
French make good advance near Thiaumont.
1917. —Austro-Germans begin offensive against
Russo-Roumanian armies in Moldavia, and
,stprm Russian positions north of Foksham.
Bth, 1915.—Naval General Service Medal insti
tuted. German fleet driven from Gulf of Riga.
1916.—Italians advance on Gorizia. British
attack Guillemont. French make progress at
Verdun. Russians take Tlumacz, and break
the enemy line on an eighteen mile front. 1917.
—Russians take two villages in the Chotin region,
and re take positions near Sereminki, in Volhynia.
French take German trenches north west of
Bixschoote. Russians defeat Kurds near
Hoshaba, south-east of Van, also near Dizy.
west of Urm. Russians afll back between
Fokshani-Marasechte railway and the River
Sereth.
9th, 1914.—Montenegro declares war on Germany.
1915. —British capture trenches at Hooge.
1916. —ltalians capture Gorizia. Zeppelins raid
East coast. 1917.—French advance south of
Langemarck.
10th, 1914,—France declares war on Austro-
Hungary. 1915.—Zeppelin raid on East coast.
Important progress on Gallipoli. 1916.—Rus-
sians take Stanislau. 1917.—British steamer
“ City of Athens ” sunk by mine off Cape Town ;
nineteen passengers lost. British capture West-
hock Ridge. French extend their positions in
the Bixschoote region. Germans win ground
north of St. Quentin. Italians repulse attacks
in the Coalba Valley, at Brenta, and north of
Caterina.
11th, 1915.—Germans advance on Kovno, in Vilna
district. 1916.—British air-raid on airship sheds
at Brussels and Namur. 1917.—German attacks
in the valleys of the Sereth and Suchawa repulsed.
Roumanians retire south-west of Ocna. British
win more ground east of Ypres. French re-take
lost trenches at Fayet.
12th, 1914. —Great Britain declares war on Austria-
Hungary. 1915. —Germans capture Siedlee,
Poland. Belgrade bombarded. 1916.—Rus-
sians advance on Sereth. French take German
third line of defence for 1,000 yards. 1917. —
Austro-Germans in Moldavia capture Grozesni
and the dominating heights. Russian attack
at mouth of River Buzen repulsed.
13th, 1915. —Zeppelin raid on the East coast.
Germans repulsed from Kovno. 1916. —British
advance on Martinpuich. Italians pierce enemy
lines, and advance near Nad-Logem. British
destroyer “ Lassoo ” sunk of Dutch coast.
]917. —lurks begin an offensive in region of
Mount Salvus, Dag, and Pelimer, in the direction
of Kharput.
14th, 1915.—British transport “ Royal Edward ”
sunk by German submarine in the Sea,
with the loss of 1,000 lives. 1917. —Austro-
Germans seize the bridge-head at Baltautu,
and capture Stracani, north-west of Pantziu.
British push German posts across the Steenbeke
River, and re-establish their lines.
15th, 1915.—Registration Sunday ; every man
and woman in Great Britain compelled by law,
to register on this day. 1917.—Text of Pope
Benedict’s letter to the rulers of belligerent
countries, urging Peace, made public in England.
Canadians take German positions on a two-mile
front east and south of Loos, including Hill 70.
16th, 1914.—British Expeditionary Force lands
in France. Japan demands Germany’s surrender
of Kiau-Chau. 1915.—German submarines fire
shells on Whitehaven ; there were no casualties.
1916. French and British advance on Guillemont
1917. —Russians and Roumanians forced to cross


AUGUST (2).
to the east side of River Sereth, and retire on
the Moldavian border. Brxtish capture Lange-
marck, and push on half a mile beyond. Fernch
drive the Germans from a tongue of land between
Yser Canal and the Martjewaart. Revolts in
Finland put down by Russian troops.
17 th, 1914.—Belgian Government removes to
Antwerp. 1915. —Fall of Kovno. Germans
attack the forts at Novo-Georgiewsk. 1917. —
In the aerial fighting of 17th-18th, the Allies
brought down 37 machines, and the Germans
26. Netherlands Government state that a
British submarine violated Dutch neutrality by
sinking the Dutch steamship “ Batavier XL”
in her territorial waters.
18th, 1915.—Zeppelin raid on East coast. German
battle cruiser “ Moltke ” sunk by British sub-
marine. Russian naval victory m Gulf of Riga.
1916. —Franco-British advance on Western front.
1917. —Austrians drive Russo-Roumanians from
entrenched positions south of Grozesci. French
complete their conquest of German territory
south of St. Sansbeck and Breenbeck Rivers.
19th, 1914.—Russians defeat Germans at Eydtku-
huen. East Prussia. 1915.—Germans capture
Novo Georgiewsk. White Star Liner “ Arabia ”
torpedoed without warning. British submarine
ran aground on Danish Island of Saltholm ;
German destroyers fired on unarmed crew.
19] 6.—German High Sea Fleet appears, but
retires before British Squadron ; two British
light cruisers lost. Submarine E23 torpedoes
and sinks a German battleship of the “ Nassau ”
class. 1917. —British advance 500 yards east
of Langemarck. Italians begin offensive on
thirty-seven mile front from the region of Tolmino
to near the head of the Adriatic Sea.
20th, 1914.—Germans enter Brussels, which was
abandoned by Belgians. 1915. —Italy declares
war on Turkey. 1917. —French break German
lines north of Verdun, on 11-mile front, gaining
Avocourt Wood, Mort Homme Hill, Talon
Ridge, and the Corbeaux and Cumieres Woods.
British repulse German counter-attacks north
of Epehy. Italians cross Tsonzo River north
of Goritz.
21st, 1914.—Germans impose a fine of £8,000,000
on Brussels. 1915. —Cotton declared contraband
by British Government. M. Venizelos accepts
the Premiership of the Greek Government.
1917. —French capture Cote de I’Oie, Regeuville,
and Samogneux. Canadians carry German
positions on a one-mile front at Lens. Italians
capture defences between Coreti and Selo.
22nd, 1914.—French withdraw from Charleroi.
1917. —Germans begin offensive between Tirul
Marshes and River Aa, pentrating the Russian
positions. British capture important strategic
positions for a mile along the Ypres-Menin road,
and pentrate German trenches further north.
Italians advance on the Isonzo front, in a great
drive on Trieste. Zeppelin raid on Yorkshire ;
Gotha machines raided Dover, Margate, ard
Ramsgate, killing 11 persons, and injuring 13 ;
18 German machines brought down. British
bombard Zeebrugge, Bruges, and many points
at back of German lines in Belgium and Northern
France. Germans bomb Calais and Dunkirk.
French aviators raid .Stuttgart, Colmar, and
bases near Metz. British naval seaplanes
drop bombs on German destroyers along the
Belgian coast, hitting one destroyer and sinking
one trawler. Italians raid Pola. Germans at-
tack Vandeliancourt Hospital, killing 10 wounded
men, one nurse, and 19 hospital orderlies ;
British-American hospitals on French coast were
also attacked. Italian Floats, mounted with
huge new guns, bombard Trieste, and (while
British monitors shelled rear slopes of Hermada)
Italian and British monitors shelled Pola. Four
German mine-sweepers destroyed by British
light craft off coast of Jutland.
23rd, 1914.—British stand at Mons. Japan de-
clares war on Germany. 1915. Allied fleets
bombard Zeebrugge ; great damage done to
Military Works. 1916.—Zeppelins raid East
coast. 1917.—Russians evacuate Riga. Ca-
nadians take important positions south of Lens.
24th, 1914.-—Germans capture Namur. 1916. —
French capture Maurepas and push on. British
moving on Thiepval. Zeppelins raid East
and South-East coast. 1917.—Germans reach
River Aa at some points on Gulf of Riga. French
capture Hill 304 on Verdun front, and advance
1J miles beyond it. British forced back from
ground won on Ypres-Menin road. Germans
repulse Russo-Roumanian attack near Soveja,
Roumania.
25th, 1914.—Germans destroy Louvain. Allies
fall back towards Cambrai. 1915.—Germans
take Brest-Litovsk, Poland. 1917. —French cap-
ture three German fortified works near Bettin-
court. British forced to give up ground captured
near St. Quentin. Italians take Monte Santo.
26th, 1914.—Allies conquer Togoland, West Africa.
1915.—Squadron-Commander. Bigsworth, R.N..
dropped bombs on a German submarine off
Ostend, and sank it. 1917.- —French gain on a
24 mile front east of the Meuse. British advance
half a mile east of Hargicourt. National Confer-
ence held at Moscow.
27th, 1914.—British marines land at Ostend.
H.M.S. “ Highflyer ” sinks '‘Kaiser Wilhelm
der Grosse,” off Rio de Oro. 1915.—Germans
break through the Zlota-Lipa line. 1917.
Germans take important positions east of Zerno-
witz, and advance on Riga front, north-west
of Jacobstadt. President Wilson, in reply to
Pope Benedict’s peace note, rejects the proposal,
and declines to have anything to do with German
autocracy.
28th, 1914.—British naval victory in Heliogoland
Bight; German cruisers and destroyers sunk.
1915. —Attempted air raid on Paris driven off.
1916. —Roumania declares war on Austro-
Hungary. Italy declares war on Germany.
Germany declraes war on Roumania. Rou-
manians advance in Transylvania. 1917.
Trieste civilians evacuate the city. A counter-
revolutionary, monarchistic conspiracy unearthed
at Moscow, many arrest made, including two
Grand Dukes, and many adherents of the old
regime exiled, and taken over the Swedish frontier.
29th, 1914.—New Zealand troops occupy German
Samoa. 1916.—V0n Hindenburg succeeds Von
Falkenhayn as Chief of German General Staff-
-1917. —German submarines appear in Gulf of
Riga, and bomb several places along the coast-
Kerensky dismisses General Korniloff on hi s
demand that all civil and military powers be
vested in him as Commander-in-Chief of the
Russian Armies. Korniloff responds to order
of dismissal by moving an army a,gainst Petro-
grad ; Baltic fleet places itself on side of Pro-
visional Government ; Korniloff arrested, and
Kerensky appoints himself Commander-in-Chief,


AUGUST (3).
30th, 1915.—Germans advance on Grodno. Rus-
sians obtain success on the Strypa. 1910.
Turkey declares war on Roumania. 1917.
A whole Russian Division abandons : ts position
in region of Tokshani.
31st, 1914.—Allies retire upon line of the Siene,
Oise, and Upper Meuse. Russians advancing
on Lemberg. 1915.—Russian victory near Luzk.
1917. —Germans in the Ypres sector avoid battle
during day, to conserve their air fleets, but
under cover of darkness bombard indiscrimately
behind British and French lines. British airmen
are fighting German infantry, and charging
machine gun emplacements, while barely skim-
ming the earth. Japanese military experts
declare that the critical period is passed, and
the only way in which victory can be lost is to
voluntarily allow it to slip from our grasp.


' Captured Camels, Romani
1918 SEPTEMBER 1918
Sun { Mon | Tue | Wed { Thu | Frl | Sat
DBBDBBD
aaSSSSS
September.


Notable Dates, September.
15th to 25th, 1916.—Great Franco-British advance on the Somme. Tanks
used for the first time.
“ Tis certain he hath passed the River Somme.”—Henry V.
“Hurrah for Merrie England now! Hurrah for France the grrnd '
As we face the foe together, all abreast, and hand to hand.
—Gerald Massey.
20th, 1914.—Germans bomb Rheims Cathedral.
“ He that hewed timber afore out of the thick trees, was known to bring
it to an excellent work. But now they break down all the carved work
thereof with axes and hammers. They have set fire upon Thy Holy Places,
and have defiled the Dwelling Place of Thy Name, even unto the ground.
Thus have they burnt up all the houses of God in the land. Psalm 74.
24th, 1914. —First Queensland Expeditionary Foice leaves Pinkenba.
Is it months or years since we saw them pass
In the flush of their manhood’s pride ?
While the cheering crowds and the waving flags
Were a blur in the clear moontide.
For our eyes were dim with unshed tears,
And our hearts held an aching pain,
For we knew that some whom we saw that day
Would never return again.
We mothers gave at the country’s call
Our best when the summons came,
And well have our soldier lads upheld
The honour of Queensland’s name.
Did they fail as they breasted the craggy height ?
Did they flinch at the storm of shell ? j
Did they reel from the fiery bayonet charge
As they entered that zone of hell ?
With a song and a cheer they closed with the foe - -
Those boys with the courage of men —
Each hero fought as a hero fights —
With the nerve and the strength of ten !
*****
To the well-loved land of the sunny skies
Comes a message across the sea ;
A whispered word from the honoured Dead
“ Dear land, we died for thee !
We died that the homes our fathers made
And the freedom that they won
May rest secure beneath that flag
Which proudly meets the sun I ”
—A.C.H.


SEPTEMBER (1).
Ist, 1915. —Germany agrees to warn passenger
liners before attacking by submarine. 1916.
Allied naval demonstration at Athens. 1917.
Roumanians ousted from hills north-east of
Fokshani. Greek troops take part in raid in
the Vardar sector. French repulse German
attacks between Amy and Hurtebise. German
troops appear for the first time on the Carso
front. Many persons of both sexes are arrested
at Dresden, for distributing hand-bills, urging
workers to strike and declare a revolution.
2nd, 1914. —Russians capture Lemberg, after
bitter fighting. 1915. —Germans take Grodno.
Four Turkish transports sunk by British sub-
marines in the Dardanelles. 1916.—Allies demand
control of Post and Telegraph system in Greece.
Bulgaria delares war with Roumania. 1917. —
Germans cross the Diva River near Uxkul, and
push northward, and also advance towards
Riga from the south. Italians advance in the
Brestovizza Valley. German air-raid on east
coast. French achieve a notable success on
the Aisne, breaking up counter-attacks, and
capturing men and machine guns.
3rd, 1914.—French Government removes from
Paris to Bordeaux. 1916.—British take whole
of Guilemont and part of Guinchy. French
take Clery and the trenches from Le Forest to
Combles. Zeppelin destroyed at Cuffiey, near
Enfield, by Lieut. Robinson, R.F.C., when 13
Zeppelins attempted to attack London. 1917.
Germans occupy Riga. Germans drop bombs
on naval station at Chatham, killing 108 persons
and wounding 92. Germans bomb British
advanced post south-west of Havrincourt, and
obtain a temporary success. German news-
papers remind their countrymen that New Guinea
and Samoa were immensely valuable to Germany
before the war, and that they are not over-
distant to hold safely while Turkey affords a
natural bridge to Africa and the South Seas,
and the Dutch Indies lie en route.
4th, 1915.—Allan liner “ Flesperian ” torpedoed
without warning by German submarine. Ger-
mans cross the Dwina and menace Riga. 1916.
Notable advance by French and British forces.
19] 7. —Russians retire north-east of Riga.
Germans cut a nine mile gap in Russian line.
Canadians advance 250 yards on a 600-yard front
at Lens. Italians capture Monte San Gabrielle.
First moonlight air-raid on London, 11 persons
killed and 62 injured.
sth, 1914.—Allies sign treaty, agreeing not to
make separate peace. Germans take Rheims.
1915.—Czar assumes supreme command of
Russian army. Grand Duke Nicholas appointed
to command in the Caucasus. 1916.—British
gain possession of the whole of Leuze Wood.
French advance south of the Somme. 1917.
A German submarine bombards Scarborough,
killing three persons and injuring five. Italians
capture an Austrian position south of Ocrogio,
and repulse enemy attacks on Carso plateau,
from Castagnevizza to the sea. Russians, in
their retreat towards the north-east, cross the
Livonian River. Forces east from Riga retire
to Segevold, Lemberg and Detembrayd. Ameri-
can vessels attacked by submarines off the coast
of France ; during the battle one submarine
was destroyed.
6th, 1914.—Battle of the Marne begins. 1915.
French aeroplanes bombard Saarbrucken, with
good results. 1916. —Russians advance on
Halicz, and take 4,500 prisoners. 1917.—-
French repulse violent attacks in the region of
Cerny. Monte San Gabrielle, on the Italian
front, changes hands several times between
6th and 9th.
7th, 1914.—Turning of the Germans back from
advance on Paris. Germans occupy Mauberge.
1915. —Russian victory near Tarnpool. Raid
on East coast by three Zeppelins. Ostend
bombarded Allied Fleet. 1917. —British
forced to relinquish positions gained north of
Frezenburg. The Atlantic transport liner,
“ Minnehaha ” sunk, and 50 members of the
crew lost.
Bth, 1915.—Zeppelin raid on Eastern counties and
London, causing fires and damage to buildings.
1917.—French launch new offensive on right
bank of the Meuse, and occupy several important
positions. Germans repulsed in Lorraine, east
of Rheims, and north of Courcy.
9th, 1914.—British Army re-crosses the Marne.
1915.—Russian successes in Galicia. 1916.
British in possession of the whole of Guinchy.
1917. —General Krymoff, commander of the
troops sent by Kormloff to take Petrograd,
is arrested, and comnutts suicide ; Korniloff
taken into custody.
10th, 1915.—Germans takeDubno. 1916.—Austro-
German troops take Silistria, Roumania. 1917.
—Russians take offensive in region of Segevold,
and force Germans back in a southerly direction.
Turkish reinforcements thrown into the cam-
paign along the Isonzo front.
11th, 1914.—AustraLan Expeditionary Force cap-
tures German New Guinea and the Bismarck
Archipelago. 1915.—Zeppelin raid on East
coast. 1916.—M. Zaimis, Greek Minister,
resigns. 1917.—British, on the Somme, carry
a German trench near Villeret, and advance
their line nearly a quarter of a mile. Russians
begin an offensive in the south-east section of
Bukowina.
12th, 1916. —French move forward and carry all
trenches to the Peronne Road. 1917. —French,
in Champagne, drive across two lines of German
trenches between St. Hilaire and St. Souplet,
and enter the third line. Germany’s offer to
Poland of a separate kingdom, is abandoned,
on the failure of her efforts to induce the Poles
to fight for Austro-Germany, and a decree
published at Lublin and Warsaw, transfers the
supreme authority to a Regency Council of three
members, appointed by monarchs of occupying
powers.
13th, 1915.—Admiral Sir Percy Scott appointed
to take charge of the aerial defences of London.
1917. —Germans enter French trenches on a
500 yards front north of Caurieres Wood.
14th, 1914.—Australian submarine AEI, patrolling
the coast during the expedition to New Guinea,
completely disappears, and has not since been
heard of ; she had a complement of 35 officers
and men, in charge of Commander T. F. Besant.
1915. —Germans forced back across the Strypa.
1916. —A whole Greek Army Corps voluntarily
surrenders to the Germans, and is removed to
Germany. Serbians make an advance towards
Monastir. 1917. —Russians, on the Riga front,
capture Kronberg, Keitzen, Sisseral, and Prine.
Italians gain the north-western crest and
the peak of Monte San Gabrielle. In Russia,
a Republic is proclaimed by the Provisional


SEPTEMBER (2).
Government. British aeroplanes in Macedonia,
bomb enemy dumps at Rupel, Vetrina, and
Genista, causing considerable damage.
15th 1916. Great British advance on the Somme.
* Flers Martinpuich, Courcellet, and the greater
part of Bouleaux Wood captured ; tanks used
for first time. 1917.—British advance in Bel-
gium east of Westhock. French retrieve losses
north of Caurieres Wood, but lose height near
Chaume. The duplicity of Sweden, in acting
as intermediary for Germany, while professing
neutrality, is denounced by America and the
Argentine’ New military aeroplane motor com-
bining power, speed, lightness, and reliability,
produced in America. British airman shoots down
Lieut. Holmdorf, the foremost German airman.
16th 1914 —Russians retire from East Prussia.
! 915— Submarine E7 is feared to have been
lost *in the Dardanelles. 1916.—Russo-Rou-
manian forces retire in the Dobrudja. Russian
victory north of Halicz. 1917.—Chili takes over
200,000 tons of nitrates belonging to Germany.
For the purpose of converting Chilian loans, the
U.S. has purchased the nitrates from Chili.
French successfully raid German trenches at
Mont Flaut, destroying dug-outs, and observation
posts Four German aeorplanes destroyed m
aerial combats. Italian Director of Aeronautics
expresses opinion that aircraft will decide the
war and considers it preferable that the destruc-
tion by aircraft of the enemy’s munition factories,
war material, and communication lines, should
end the war, instead of the continued sacrifice
of human life.
17th 1917 —ltalian troops move eastward through
Albania, and menace Bulgarian right flank
Civilians in Flanders are leaving the towns of
Roulers, Ostend and Courtrai, British raid
Cherisy and penetrate to the far-western out-
skirts ' ’ Italian political crisis. Five Ministers
leave the Cabinet. Owing to Italian aerial
enterprise the Austrian dug-outs and trenches
on Monte San Gabriele are mere graveyards,
and will shortly become untenable.
18th 1915. Vilna evacuated by Russians, and
occupied by Germans. 1917.—Roumanians in
the Suchitza Valley, capture part of fortified
position near Varnitza from the Germans. British
improve their positions east of St. Julien, and
raid trenches in Inverness Copse. Germans,
after violent bombardment south of the Miette
River, reach French lines towards the Neufchatel
Road. In Flanders, the Germans continue to
pillage the inhabitants sending household
utensils, fuel, blankets and clothing to Germany.
Italy repulses four counter-attacks on the
Bainsizza Plateau.
19th 1915 —Bulgaria declares an armed neutrality,
* and mobilies. 1917.—United States Consular
Office at Dunkirk wrecked by German bomb.
Canada forms Coalition Cabinet. Under the
Conscription Act, 25,000 men are being prepared
for service at the front, and others will be sent
immediately. The unrestricted flood of rumours
is leading the Allies to expect a definite German
peace move shortly. Italy is assured of sufficient
winter food, as there is an excess wheat crop.
Swiss newspapers urge Government to prevent
continuous influx of rich but hungry Germans
and Austrians, who are eating up the limited
food supplies of Switzerland. The Norwegian
steamers, li Askelad and Rein sunk by
submarines,
20th, 1914.—Germans bomb Rheims Cathedral.
1917.—The British strike agam in Flanders,
and gain all objectives on an 8-mile front.
Australians used as storm troops, and p erce
German lines to a depth of 1 mile ; the attack
is a veritable triumph of men over concrete, of
guns over “ pill-boxes/’ and of British forethought
and grit over German tactics. In the lake region
of Macedonia, the French gain a height north-
west of Momulista. Agonising details of the
sufferings in Serbia have been received ; 30,000
Serbian women, children and boys from the Wish
district have been deported, and interned in
Asia Minor, where 8,000 have been delivered to
the Turks.
21st, 1917.—1n Austria, hundreds of Russian
prisoners are daily dying of starvation. Germany
believed to be planning a quick stroke with her
Baltic Fleet on the Russians before the ice forms.
British holding all recent gains in Flanders,
notwithstanding very strong enemy counter-
attacks. The wonderful dash and coolness
under fire of the Australians engaged wins the
admiration of both French and English ; both
in the magnitude of the operations, and in number
of men engaged, this ranks as the greatest
Australian battle of the war ; Crown Prince
loses 32,000 men in dead and wounded, also
10,000 in the bombardment previous to the
attack.
22nd, 1914.—Battle cruisers “ Aboukir,” Hogue ”
and “ Cressy ” sunk by German submarine.
1915.—Raid on Stuttgart by French air squadron,
as reprisals for German bombardment of open
towns. 1917. —Germans capture Jacobstadt on
bank of Dwma, midway between Riga and
Dvmsk. A storm has released hundreds of
mines in the North Sea, many having drifted
ashore at Jutland. A British destroyer tor-
pedoed at approach to English Channel by
German submarine. Austrians sustain very
heavy losses on the Carso. Boxes containing
capsuled microbes of anthrax and glanders,
and quantities of high explosives, discovered
in grounds of German legation in Roumania ;
Bulgarian legation proved to have co-operated
with Germans in the matter. In Macedonia,
French and Albanian troops successfully raid
Shumbi Valley.
23rd, 1914.—British naval air raid on Zeppelin
sheds at Dusseldorf, 1915.—Russian victory
in Volhynia. Russians re-occupy Luzk. 1916.
—Zeppelins raid London, the East, South-East,
and Midland counties; two Zeppelins brought
down in Essex, one in flames by aeroplane, the
other by anti-aircraft gunfire ; the crew set
fire to the wrecked Zeppelin and surrender.
1917. —The majority of British merchantmen
are now supplied with smoke boxes, which are
thrown overboard, and produce dense volumes
of smoke, and completely baffle submarines.
A British or American armed steamer sinks a
German submarine while it is engaged in
shelling a neutral sailing vessel off the Shetlands.
A second submarine sunk by British destroyer.
An extremist Socialistic propaganda, fed by
German secret service funds, is discovered in
Italy. In German East Africa, the Belgians
pursue the retreating enemy along the whole
front towards Mahenge.
24th, 1914.—First Queensland Expeditionary Force
starts from Pinkenba. 1917. —The 20th meeting
pf Irish Convention meets nt Cork, and refers


SEPTEMBER (3).
various schemes to a Grand Committee. Aus-
trians explode powerful mine under Italian
position in the Mt. Nero region ; prompt Italian
barrage prevents enemy infantry advancing
through gap. In the Somke region, two violent
gas and artillery attacks on Roumanian troops
fail, as the wind causes the enemy to be “ re-
gassed.” German raid, with extensive use of
flame-throwers, is repulsed by French near
Beaumont-Hamel.
25th, 1914.—Australian troops occupy Kaiser
Wilhelm’s Land, German New Guinea. 1915. —
Great Allied advance in France ; British attack
Grenay and Vermelles, capture Loos, and ad-
vance towards Hooge. Good French advance
in Champagne. 1916. —Further Franco-British
advance ; British take Les Boeufs and Mcrval.
M. Venizelos leaves Athens, with a number of
army and navy leaders, and many supporters,
for Salonica. 1917. —An extensive air-raid, in
which a number of Gothas participated, took
place on London ; the machines approached in
three groups ; the night was clear and moonlight.
Numbers o English aeroplanes were aloft and
thrilling air battles took place, the anti-aircraft
guns also being very efficient. The churches
were open, and many thousands took refuge
in tubes and crypts, and in the theatres, where
the actors continued playing during the raid.
Six persons killed and 20 injured. The import-
ance of the recent British gains in Flanders
consists largely in the fact that the high ground
will enable the troops to keep dry feet during
the coming winter.
26th, 1915. —French in possession of Souchez.
Allies* gains consolidated. 1916.—British cap-
ture Thiepval, and the combined British-Franco
forces take Combles. 1917. —Owing to shortage
of fodder in Bohemia, 151,000 cattle are being
slaughtered monthly. Hungarian harvest has
given only a quarter of average yield. Under
cover of thick fog, enemy powerfully counter-
attacks northward of the Ypres-Menin Road,
and northward of Polygon Wood, gaining posi-
tions, from which he is later ejected. Bulgaria,
Turkey, and Austria are reported to be bringing
pressure to bear on Germany with a view to
peace. British press urges reprisals on German
cities for recent air raids on London, thus forcing
Germany to retain a number of aviators for
home defence.
27th, 1914.—General Botha successfully invades
German South-West Africa. 1915.—French
reach German second line of defence. British
still advance. 1910.—British take Zollern
Redoubt, north-east of Thiepval. 1917.—British
still hold heights overlooking Flanders, in spite
of bitter counter-attacks. American war re-
venue bill passes both Houses.
28th, 1915. —British attack German third line of
defence. French advancing in Champagne.
Turks suffer defeat at Kut-el-Amara, and retire
on Bagdad. Anglo-French loan for £100,000,000
issued in New York.—l9l6.—Proclamation of
Provisional Greek Government by M. Venizelos
and Admiral Condouriotis. 1917. —Viscount Ishii
in a speech before the members of the New York
Chamber of Commerce, promises that Japan’s
part in the war will be of a character to satisfy
the U.S. and the other Allies completely, a
nation-wide conspiracy to hamper the United
States Government during the war, is charged
against 166 leaders of the I.W.W. British
Controller of Shipping, in urging the need for
ships from the U.S., states that it is of the
utmost importance that America should realise
that the shortage of shipping is the most vital
fact in the present situation. Kerensky challen-
ges his opponents to prove his rule unfit. In
justifying refusal of Germany to make public
her war aims, Chancellor Michaelis declares that
* such action would have a confusing effect,
injure German interests, and prejudice the
complex questions to be discussed at the time
of the peace negotiations.”
29th, 1915.—British advance on Bagdad. French
gain Hill 140, the highest point on crest of Vimy
Ridge. 1917. —8010 Pasha, associate of former
Khedive of Egypt, is seized in Paris as an enemy
alien ; he is charged with having, through U.S.
and foreign banks, used large sums of German
money to influence the French Press. Violent
artillery duels continue along the whole Western
front. Belgians drive back enemy on the Yser,
and as a result of Allied air fighting, 11 German
aeroplanes are destroyed.
30th, 1915. —French make good progress in Cham-
pagne district. 1917. —British forces, after con-
solidating their position on the Flanders Ridges,
start another artillery engagement. In Argonne,
the Crown Prince makes three attacks, tut
gains nothing. Italians capture the heights
south of Podlaca, in the Isonzo sector, and take
1,400 prisoners. Austrian counter-attacks fail,
and two enemy aeroplanes are brought down
east of Ternova.


§)®tobe;r,
1918 OCTOBER 1918
Sun Mon Tue Wed Thu Fri Sat
mmumwMm
mmmmmmm
|)j|||E|||gg


Notable Dates, October.
I3th, —Nurse Cavell shot.
“ Sleep in peace with kindred ashes of the noble and the true,
Hands that never failed their country, Hearts that never baseness knew. ,,
—Aytoun.
God of the Free, receive my soul! And slaves, fire !
—Mangan.
15th and 20th, 1914—First Canadian and Australian troops hasten to
England’s aid.
“ So from the hearth the children flee, by that Almighty Hand
Austerely led ; so one by sea goes forth, and one by land ;
Nor aught of all men’s sons escapes from that command.
It is not yours, O mother, to complain, not, mother, yours to weep,
Though never more your son again, shall to your bosom creep,
Though never more again, you watch your baby sleep.
Some profit yet survives of all your pangs and tears.”
—Robert Louis Stevenson.
22nd, 1915. —King George calls on all men to enlist.
“ Hark, Countrymen ! Either renew the fight,
Or tear the lions out of England’s coat.”
—Henry VI.
28th, 191.6. Australia, by large majority, decides against Conscription
“ We would not die in that man’s company
That fears his fellowship to die with us.”
—Henry V.
If you ain’t cold-footed blighters, then your dooty’s pretty clear :
You oughter serve your county jest like men, and volunteer.
O’ course, you ’av’n’t got to, but I’m tellin’ you you ought,
If you don’t you’re scabs an’ blacklegs to the blokes wot went an’ fought
When the world begins to settle, an’ all finished is the war,
You’ll look preety sick an’ seedy, when the chaps come back once more.
They will never treat you friendly, an’ they’ll say a deal to hurt,
An’ those blokes ’ll surely show you wot you are, A BIT O’ DIRT.”
—A Returned Man.
30th and 31st, 1917.—British and Australians capture Beersheba from the
Turks.
The tramp of squadrons, and the bursting mine,
The shock of steel, the volleying rifle crack,
And echoes out of ancient battles dead.”
—Francis Thompson


OCTOBER (1).
Ist, 1915.—German and Austrian officers arrive
daily in Bulgana. 1916. —British attack on
the Somme, over a front of 3,000 yards ; Gaucourt
I’Abbaye taken. Zeppelin raid on East coast ;
one Zeppelin brought down by an aeroplane at
Potter’s Bar. Period of daylight saving ended.
1917. —The charge against prominent men in
the U.S., of having given direct aid to 8010 Pasha
for Germany’s propaganda, is considered proved.
London reports greatest attack by German
aeroplanes since war began ; the battle with the
anti-aircraft guns lasted for hours, before
the enemy was driven off. As a result of the
previous night’s raid, when 9 persons were
killed, and 42 injured, even the Conservative
newspapers clamour for reprisals. Prepara-
tions for British drive in Flanders continue
vigorously. In reprisal for Bar-le-Duc bom-
bardment, the French drop half-a-ton of pro-
jectiles on Stuttgart, capital of Wurtemberg.
The board of Trustees of Columbia University
drop from their teaching staff Professors Cattel
and Dana, for their anti-war attitude.
2nd, 1916. —Russian success in Galicia, over 4,000
prisoners taken. 1917. —Great Britain prohibits
the exportation to Norway, Sweden, Denmark,
and the Netherlands, of all articles, excepting
printing matter, and the personal effects in
actual possession of the owner. The embargo
shuts off all supplies from these countries. The
body of Lieut. Vosse, a famous German airman,
found within British lines ; British air-men drop
messages behind German front, giving notification
of his death. Six heavy German assaults
repulsed in Flanders, also two unsuccessful
assaults against the French in the Craonne
sector of the Aisne front, and two failures of
attacks upon the French in the Beaumont sector
of the Verdun front. In anticipation of further
air raids, London residents seek the protection
of hotel lobbies and tubes, taking with them
wraps and food. President Wilson directs the
secret service to co-operate with the Food
Administrator in running down food hoarders
and food riot-inciters.
3rd, 1915.—Germans retake part of ground won
by British in the Great Advance. 1917.
British airmen attack Zeebrugge, while the
French bombard Freiberg, Volkelgen and
Hoftenbach ; two enemy aeroplanes are brought
down. Germany orders the darkening of Dussel-
dorf and Westphalia. Attempt of Crown Prince
to create a diversion at Verdun to draw attention
from Field Marshal Haig’s drive in Flanders,
amounts to very little. American Government
forbids the use of the Post Office to the “ Mil-
waukee Leader,” as it contains treasonable
utterances. Von Bulow, formerly German
Chancellor, summoned unexpectedly from
Lucerne to a conference with the Kaiser.
4th, 1915.—Russia sends ultimatum to Bulgaria,
demanding the expulsion of all German and
Austrian officers within 24 hours. Germans
re-capture greater part of Hohenzollern Redoubt,
won by the Allies in the Great Advance. 1917.
—ltalians repulse Austrians on Bainsizza Plateau,
and repulse attacks at Vildifumo, capturing large
quantities of ammunition and explosives. A
German submarine and a Bulgarian torpedo-
boat mine-d and sunk off Varna, on the Black
Sea. Wireless messages exchanged between
U.S.A. and Hawaii, a distance of 5,000 miles,
a world’s record. Vicount Ishii, speaking in
America, said, “ the day of suspicion has passed,
and the time has come when East and West
must give and take.’' He also announced the
definite promise of Japan to defend China’s
political and territorial integrit\'. Anti-Govern-
ment demonstrations, mostly by women, occur
at Essen, demanding food and peace, and the
return of their men folk ; police and military
quell the outbreaks. Germans launch a
powerful attack on a mile front northward of
the Ypres and Menin Road ; the infantry,
advancing in three waves, are driven back in
disorder, with heavy casualties ; the attack is
twice strongly renewed within three hours,
and is everywhere repulsed, except at Polygon
Wood, where the enemy occupies two advanced
posts.
sth, 1915.—Lord Derby appointed Director of
Recruiting. Allied forces land at Salonika, on
invitation of Greek Government. M. Venizelos,
Greek Premier resigns. 1917. —Germans made
five fresh attacks with fresh troops between the
Ypres-Menin Road and Polygon Wood; the enemy
also attacked at ; all six attacks
end in complete failure, except for the post
won in Polygon Wood. We repulse raiders
southward of Lens. An air-raid, on a larger
scale than hitherto, takes place over London
and the Essex and Kentish coasts ; the raiders
travelled in four grups, and many thrilling battles
took place ; in the raid 10 persons were killed
and 38 injured, and all our pilots landed safely.
Russians advance one mile in the Konenberg-
Spitali-Grounduli sector. On the Aisne front,
and on the left bank of the Meuse, violent
artillery battles continue. Germans attack
furiously between Chaume Wood and Binzonvaux.
The fight results in victory to the French. Brit-
ish naval aircraft bomb Zeebrugge lock gates.
6th, 1915.—Austro-German forces invade Serbia.
French advance on German second line, village
and hill of Tahure taken. 1917. —British com-
pletely successful in new offensive on wide front
eastward of Ypres, gaining all objectives ;
Australians participate in the attack, and
help to gain positions of great importance
on the main ridge northward of Brodseinde,
which is the keystone of the enemy defence line
beyond Zonnebecke. Italians repulse repeated
enemy attacks on western slopes of Mont San
Gabriele. British naval air raids on St. Denis-
Westrem, result in a fire visible for 30 miles.
Austrians on the Isonzo lose 110,000 in killed,
wounded, and missing, and over 20,000 machine
guns. French and British send additional
warships to the Adriatic, to assist Italian
operations. British warship “Drake” tor-
pedoed off coast of Ireland.
7th, 1915.—Austro-German forces cross the Danube,
Save, and Drina, in their invasion of Serbia.
1917. —General Smuts, in a great speech, before
the Presidents of the Chambers of Commerce
of the United Kingdom, declares that the issue
is no longer in doubt, as the enemy is now
on the defensive. General Headquarters in
Russia issues semi-official message to allay
uneasiness in Allied Press regarding Russia’s
ability to fulfil her duty as an ally. In Meso-
potamia, the British capture 600 wounded and
3,200 unwounded Turks, burying 200, and taking
13 guns and 12 machine guns. The taking of
Ramadie protects our flank against Bagdad
from the Turk. Peru and Uruguay formally


October (2).
Sever their relations with Germany. A new
German battleship in trials off Heligoland, is
mined and towed into port seriously damaged.
German submarine interned at Cadiz escapes
without munitions. American destroyer sinks
enemy submarine, after thrilling engagement.
Bth, 1915. —Germans attack Loos, but are repulsed
with heavy losses. Austro-German forces attack
Belgrade. 1916.—British advance to Les Boeufs,
and capture Le Sars. German submarine U53
torpedoes merchant ships off American coast.
1917.—After heavy artillery activity in the
Jacobstadt region, the enemy retires from ad-
vanced trenches westward of Sotip on the
Roumanian front, and takes up a more
favourable position. Stormy weather, with
heavy rain and much mud, are the conditions
under which the battle of Abraham Heights
was won ; the New Zealanders climbed the slopes
on a grey foggy morning, storming the German
trenches, and pill-boxes, which had been shattered
previously by the artillery. German raider,
supposed to be the “ Seeadler,” operating in
the Pacific.
9th, 1914. —Germans occupy , Antwerp. 1915.
German transport sunk by British submarine
in Baltic Sea. 1916.—Roumanians retreating
in the Dobrudja. 1917. —As Australia possesses
the essential minerals from which Germany
built up the huge trade in dyes, it is hoped that
she may be able to help America in the new
industries contemplated in that direction, to
their mutual advantage. The German Chan-
cellor’s attempt to evade debate of certain
questions, by absenting himself from meetings
of the Reichstag, is provoking angry discussion.
On the Salonica front, the British obtain success
near Seres. British Shipping Controller an-
nounces increased emoluments for men of
mercantile marine.
10th, 1915.—Austro-German forces take Belgrade.
1917. —French join up with the British in
attacking positions south of the forest of Hau-
thulst, on a black night, with drenching deluge.
The men who staggered up at dawn to participate
in the fight, plastered from head to foot in wet
mud, joined the other thousands of men who
had been lying out in shell holes all night, numbed
with cold, and waist high in water ; yet all gained
their objective, routed the enemy, and sent in
many prisoners. Dr. Michaelis pacifies the
Reichstag. It is suggested that the increased
Sinn Fein activity is due to German money.
11th, 1915.—Bulgarians invade Serbia. British
capture Wumbiagas in the Cameroons. 1916. —
Great Italian success on the Carso. Allies
demand that the Greek fleet be handed over
to them ; Greece complies under protest. 1917.
—French hold their gains in the Verdun region.
Despite unfavourable weather, 80 Allied aero-
planes participate in a battle over Zonnebeke
and Zandvoorde, returning safely, after dropping
tons of explosives. Franz Von Papen, formerly
German military attache at New York, indicted
for complicity in bomb plots in America. Agree-
ments between War Industries Board and steel
manufacturers in America reduces price of steel
almost one-half.
12th, 1914.—Germans levy fine on Antwerp of
l9ls.—Russians, under General
Ivanoff, break enemy’s lines on River Strypa.
Greece breaks her agreement, and declines to
help Serbia. 1916.—British attack the low
heights before Bapaume-Peronne Road, 1017.
—By a series of quick, successive attacks,
British extend their line on the Western front,
and in another great offensive in Flanders, again
take a big slice of territory and 500 prisoners.
Vice-Admiral Von Capelle, German Minister of
Marine, resigns, as a result of recent mutiny in
German Fleet. German seamen reported to
have been shot for refusal to perform U boat
duty. Owing to great demand for ships to
carry provisions, etc., to the Allies, the American
Government is requisitioning ships of a tonnage
as low as 1,500 tons, instead of 2,500, as originally
ordered.
13th, 1914.—Belgian Government removes to Le
Havre, in France. Maritz rebels in South
Africa. Germans occupy Ghent, Belgium. 1915.
—Zeppelin raid on London. Allies agree to
help Serbia. Nurse Cavell shot by Germans.
Zeppelin raid on London causing many casualties.
M. Delcasse, French Foreign Minister, resigns.
1917. —American War Department strictly en-
forces order that no wives or other relatives of
American soldiers be allowed to proceed to
France, Mud and rain check military activities
in Flanders. British hold their big gains without
attempt by Germans to dislodge them. German
forces land on Islands of Oesel and Dago, thus
completing conquest of Gulf of Riga, and directly
menacing Petrograd. Increased dissatisfaction
against Chancellor Michaelis expected to lead to
his resignation. In a fire that destroys three
grain elevators in Brooklyn, 800.000 bushels
of grain are consumed, at a loss of $2,000,000.
14td, 1914.—French and British troops occupy
Ypres. 1915.—Great Britain declares war on
Bulgaria. 1916.—British advance near Sch-
waben Redoubt, south of the Somme. French
take Genermount. 1917. —American steamship
<c Lewis Luckenbach ” sunk by submarine off
coast of France. Germans forced to retire
from Island of Dago in Gulf of Riga, but retain
hold on Island of Oesel. Great Britain stops
all commercial cables between England and
Holland, until Holland stops Germany’s export
of sand, gravel, and metal fillings to Belgium,
via Holland. Allied warships shell German
positions on Belgian coast. A resident of Man-
chester offers £\, 000 to first British airman
who bombs Berlin.
15th, 1914.—First Canadian troops arrive in
England, 1917. —French steamship “ Medic ”
torpedoed, and 250 of the 500 passengers lose
their lives. Only Moon Island, Gulf of Riga
(which is, however, strongly fortified) lies
between the German forces and the mainland.
The Kerensky Government making desperate
efforts to rally the Russian Navy, and with some
success. Marguerite Gertrude Zelle Macleod,
known in Berlin, Paris, and other capitals of
Europe, as Mata-Hari, a Javanese dancer, is
shot in a Paris fortress as a German spy. A
bag and number of boxes seized by British
authorities at Halifax, from Swedish representa-
tives, have been removed to Washington, where
they will be held until Swedish Government
discloses their contents. This Sweden refuses
to do.
16th, 1914. —Terrific b?Ttle on the Warsaw-
Przemysl line. 1915.—Petrograd announces that
five German transports were sunk by British
submarines in Baltic Sea. 1917. —Fritz Kuhn,
banker, and friend of Count Von Bernstorff, is


OCTOBER (3).
arrested and interned at New York ; both men suffer
are connected with the company through which
8010 Pasha received funds for German propa-
ganda. The censorship of seditious papers
being rapidly pushed by Post Office Department
in America. Spirited fighting reported on the
Aisne front, and a successful raid by Irish troops
north-west of Bullecourt. Germans obtain a
foothold in French lines south of Courtecon,
but are promptly ejected. German Emperor
arrives in Constantinople, and is enthusiasticallv
received by the Sultan, the Imperial Princes,
and the Grand Vizier,
17th, 1914.—Four German destroyers sunk by
H.M.S. “ Undaunted ” (Captain Fox) and a few
destroyers. 1916.—Allied troops land in Athens.
BU7.—American destroyer submarined, but
manages to make port. French transport,
under escort in the Mediterranean, sinks as a
result of explosion of munitions on board. There
were 599 passengers, including Algerian troops,
and 67 crew ; over 250 lost. Swiss cheques for
payable to 8010 Pasha, and corresponding
with monthly instalments promised by Herr
Von Jagow, late German Minister for Foreign
Affairs, have been traced in Paris. Fieut.
Fouch, a comrade of Capt. Guynemer, avenges
the latter’s death by shooting down the German
aviator who caused his drowning.
18th, 1915.—Allies invade Bulgaria. Italy declares
war on Bulgaria. General Sir C. C. Munro
succeeds Sir lan Hamilton as Commander-in-
Chief of Expeditionary Forces in the Mediterran-
ean. Sir Edward Carson resigns from British
Cabinet. 1916. —British and French advance
on the Somme, and capture Sailly-Saillisel.
Allies capture ground between La Maisonette
and Biaches. Roumanian success in the Predeal.
1917.—The rapidity of the German landing in
the Gulf of Riga is explained by the fact that
flat-bottomed sloops, motor driven, and prepared
originally for landing on the French coast on
the outbreak of war, were used ; Russian re-
inforced naval forces make strenuous defence,
and compel enemy to retire in direction of
Moon Island. British airmen raid Roulers
military barracks, causing enormous number of
casualties among newly-arrived German regi-
ments. German submarines on coast of Finland,
deliver arms to Finns, so that they may assist
in attack on Petrograd.
19th, 1915.—German attacks on British and French
positions repulsed with heavy loss. Group
system of recruiting announced in Great Britain.
1916,—Serbians advance on Monastir. 1917.
German dreadnought runs into a mine field in
the Gulf of Riga. In Mesopotamia. British
aeroplanes bomb Kifrh causing much damage.
The visit of the Kaiser to Sofia and Constanti-
nople is understood to have been for the purpose
of inspiring the Turks and Bulgarians with
renewed faith in the cause of Germany, and to
counteract the effects of the sufferings anticipated
for the winter. German aeroplanes bomb Nancy
for two successive days, killing a number of
civilians ; six German aeroplanes are destroyed,
and five fall uncontrolled in thejr own lines.
20th, 1914.—First Australian and New Zealand
Expeditionary force leaves Melbourne, convoyed
by Engligh, French, Australian and Japanese
battleships. 1915.:—Germans advance on. Riga-
Russians capture 4,000 prisoners north of Pinsk.
Bulgarians take Veles, Serbia.. 1 917.— Russians
suffer reverse at Moon Island, Gulf of Riga ;
Germans claim 10,000 prisoners. Allies continue'
to drive wedge into German front in Flanders.
Extensive Zeppelin raids take place in France
and England ; four Zeppelins are brought
down in France ; in England, 27 persons are
killed and 53 injured. Russians abandon Moon
Island. Russian Provisional Government pre-
pares to leave Petrograd for Moscow. German,
Turkish and Bulgarian troops are sent to re-
inforce the Austrians on the Italian front.
21st, 1914.—Czar prohibits State sale of alcohol,
for all time. 1915. —Russians, under General
Ivanoff, defeat Germans near Tarnopol, taking
7,500 prisoners. British Fleet bombards Dedea-
gatch. Russian Fleet bombards Varna. 1916.
British attack on 5,000 yards front, and capture
two strong redoubts/ Count Stuergkh, the
Austrian Premier, shot dead by Dr. Frederick
Adler. Enemy gains ground in the Dobrudja..
1917.—American transport “Antilles” struck
by torpedo, and sinks in five minutes. Germany
continues to bleed Belgium, not only financially,
but also in working men and material. Zeppelins
violate Holland’s neutrality by crossing over
escorted by seaplanes, on their way to raid
England. France reports that six Zeppelins
were brought down during the recent raid.
The British thrust threatens the whole German
position, from Lille to Verdun, and only bad
weather can delay a German retreat to the Meuse.
22nd, 1915.—Bulgarians take Uskub. Italians
advance on River Isonzo, and take 1,000 prisoners.
King George, in a message to his people, calls
on all men to enlist. 1916.—German and
Bulgarian forces take Constanza, Roumanians
retire in good order. 1917.—British naval air-
craft drop bombs on the aerodromes of Vbeseghem
and Houttave, obtaining satisfactory results.
British ships bombard the naval works at
Ostend ; photographs show that results are
satisfactory. French and British conduct satis-
factory local attacks in Flanders, re-capturing
the ruins of the brewery adjoining Poelcappelle.
23rd, 1915. British submarine sinks German
cruiser “ Prince Adalbert ” in the Baltic Sea.
1916. British advance east of Gueudecourt
and Les Boeufs. 1917.—After artillery prepara-
tion lasting several days, a great French attack
in the regions of Allement and Fort de Malmaison
develops brilliantly, despite fog and rain ; 7,500
prisoners are taken and 25 guns, while Fort de
Malmaison, consisting of cement caves and
tunnels, many 40 feet below the surface, is
reduced to ruins. British destroyer sunk as
a result of a collision. British armed mercantile
cruiser “ Orama ” torpedoed and sunk.
24th, 1914.— Germans make fruitless efforts to
reach Calais. 1915.—French capture formidable
German works called “The Courtine.” 1916
French victory at Verdun ; German line pierced
on a four-mile front to a depth of nearly tvo
miles; Fort Douaumont and 3,500 prisoners
taken. 1917.—The “Mary Ross” sunk during
fierce fight between two German cruisers and
British destroyers. Women on the “ Mary Ross ”
wave white garments on deck ; Germans ignore
all appeals for assistance. Italians drive back,
with severe losses, a strong Austro-German
attack on Mount Piana in the Cadore. Russian
naval forces prevent Germans landing at Werder,
and claim to have put out of action a number
qt enemy torpedo boats, mine sweepers, and


OCTOBER (4).
transports, also two dreadnoughts and one
cruiser, losing only the “ Slava ” and the
“ Grom.”
25th, 1915. —Veles re-captured by Franco-Serbian
troops. 1917. —The steamer “ Ranfor,” carrying
corn to the starving Belgians, a total wreck on
the Norwegian coast. Dr. Michaelis, the German
Chancellor, resigns. On the Flanders front,
effective bombardments are carried out, and
futile counter-attacks repulsed. The French,
with wonderful artillery precision, shatter German
galleries in the quarries of Mont Parnasse, which
were five-eighths of a mile long, and 300 yards
broad, and capable of sheltering an entire
division.
26th, 1914.—Maritz defeated by South Afircan
troops. 1915.—Austro-German and Bulgarian
forces join at Liubichwatz, Serbia. British
transport “ Marguetti ” torpedoed in the vEgean
Sea. 1916.—Ten German destroyers make an
attack in the Channel. Two enemy destroyers
believed to be sunk ; British destroyer “ Flirt ”
lost, and British destroyer “ Nubian ” torpedoed
and grounded. Empty transport “ Queen ”
sunk. 1917. —Bulgarians kill 1,000 persons and
destroy 10,000 homes at Monastir, by continuous
bombardment with incendiary shells. French
at Gobineaux, capture two enormous guns,
each served by 40 men, which fire torpedoes
containing 200Tbs. explosives; each gun had
100 torpedoes. The escape of the Russian Fleet
from Riga Bay is announced, and is regarded as
a remarkable feat. Great battle raging on
Italian front.
27th, 1914.—Further rebellion in South Africa led
by De Wet and Beyers. 1917. —In consequence
of British air reprisals on German munition
factories, coal fields, railway stations, and
goods sheds at Saarbrucken, Burbach, and
Courtrai, Germans prepare to move Krupp’s works
to Posen. Other military works will be removed
from Western Germany. In a further French
advance, 2,000 prisoners are taken in one day,
and several additional villages.
28th, 1914.—General Botha routs rebels in the
Transvaal. # 1915.—Accident to the King while
inspecting his army in the field, in France.
1916.—Conscription proposal for Australia nega-
tived by large majority of votes. 1917. —
British, in successful dash, capture four villages
from the Bulgarians southward of Seres. The
French take Austrian prisoners at Pogradetz.
America announces new and important dis-
closures of secret German activities and Swedish-
German collusion. New agreement between
Germany and Holland comes into force, whereby
Holland will supply foodstuffs, particularly
butter and cheese, in exchange for coal, iron
and steel. Holland is suspected of double-
dealing by the Entente on the cement question.
The sweeping French victory against picked
men of the German army is causing intense joy
in France. British make good progress north-
ward of Ypres.
29th, 1914.—Prince Louis of Battenburg resigns
position as First Sea Lord, and is succeeded by
Lord Fisher. 1915.—General Joffre attends
a War Conference in Downing Street. New
French Ministry formed, including M. Briand,
Premier and Foreign Minister, and M. Gallieni
as War Minister. 1916.—Roumanians take the
offensive in the Juil Valley. 1917. —Italians
meet with great disaster on Julian front, the
enemy pentrating their left wing ; some units
retire without fighting ; Austrians occupy Gorizia 1
Italians withdraw across the Isonzo. Nava;
Flight-Lieu tenant Brandon, an Australian, who
was awarded D.S.O. for bringing down a Gotha
in England, is killed, in a collision with another
pilot over Kent. French continue to advance
in Belgium, taking several villages, and occupy
Froidment Farm.
30th, 1914.—Turks bombard Odessa. 1917.
British Yeomanry and Australian Light Horse,
with great dash and gallantry, captured Beer-
sheba from the Turks, taking 1,600 prisoners and
15 guns. So long as Italians retain Monte Santo,
San Gabriele and Vodice, the enemy’s hold on
Gorizia is uncertain.
31st, 1917. —In a battle near Gaza, the British and
Australian troops take 444 prisoners, including
26 officers. Six British and French destroyers,
patrolling the Belgian coast, attack three
German destroyers and 17 aeroplanes. Two
direct hits are obtained on enemy destroyers
which immediately retire to protection of their
land batteries. British anti-aircraft guns break
up aeroplane formation. Belgians co-operate
with French in brilliant success in flooded area
in Flanders, crossing floods in flat-bottomed
boats carrying machine guns, and establishing
a new line beyond the inundated land. Italians,
under General Cadorna, rally their forces, and
check the invaders.


Royal Horse Artillery n.
Roue;mbe:r,
P l9lB NOVEMBER wT
Sun | Mon | Tue j Wed | Thu | Fri | Sal
mmufflEßißis
[0 [DEEDED®®
8888888


Notable Dates, November.
6th, Bth, 10th, 12th, 14th, 15th, 17th, 18th, 19th, 1917. —The Campaign
Palestine.
“ ’Tis not the grapes of Canaan that repay,
Brit the high hopes that failed not by the way.”
—James Russell Towel.
O Lads ! Dear Lads ! Our christs of God’s anointing !
Press on in hope ! Your faith and courage prove !
Pass —by these High Ways of the Lord’s appointing !
You cannot pass beyond our boundless love.”
—John Oxenham.
19th, 1914. —Burial of Lord Roberts in St. Paul’s Cathedral.
“ Within their chiefest Temple I’ll erect
A Tomb, wherein his corpse shall be interred.”
—Henry VI.
23rd
1917. —Great British surprise attack near Cambrai.
O Dieu de batailles ! where have they this mettle ?
Is not their climate ioggy, raw, and dull ?
Can sodden water decoct their cold blood to such valiant heat
—Henry V.
1917.—Battle of Bourlon Wood.
26th
“ Once more into the breach, dear friends, once more ;
Or close the wall up with our English dead.”
—Henry V.


NOVEMBER (1).
Ist, 1914.—H.M.55. “ Monmouth ” and "Good
Hope ” sunk by Germans off coast of Chili.
1915.—Austro-German forces capture Kragnic-
vatz, the great Serbian arsenal. The King
returns to London, after visit to army in France.
Bulgarians threaten Nish. 1917. —Germans
capture Udine, and claim to have gained a foot-
hold on Venetian soil. The Allies’ prompt offer
of practical help has a heartening effect on the
Italian troops. On British front, the Canadians
do splendid work in region of Passchendaele
and Poelcapelle. French continue heavy can-
nonade on right of Meuse, and re-take trench
on the Caurieres Ridge.
2nd, 1914.—The North Sea declared a military
area. 1915.—Bulgarians advancing on Monastir.
Germans fomenting trouble in Persia. 1916.
French re-enter Fort Vaux, which was evacuated
by the Germans. Italian victory on the Carso,
5.000 prisoners taken. 1917. —The British and
French send reinforcements to the Italian front.
3rd, 1914.—Futile German raids into English
waters. 1915.—Russian success on the Strypa,
5.000 prisoners taken. British cavalry operating
in Serbia. 1916.—A1l Verdun forts now in
French hands, having cost Germany hundreds
of thousands of lives. 1917.—F100d waters on
the Tagliamento River give Italians slight
advantage. Germans wantonly and brutally
destroy all Italian property in the invaded
districts. Germans drop 30 bombs on Dunkirk
Artillery struggle maintained north of the Aisne.
On British front, local fighting takes place at
Ypres-Roulers railway station, and 191 prisoners
are tkaen.
4th, 1915. —M. Zaimis, Greek Premier, resigns.
Heavy fighting on French front. 1917. —
Enemy aircraft cross the cqast in relays and
attack London, the raid lasting some considerable
time. British air raids on steel works, railway
stations, furnaces, and power house at Volklingen,
and the aerodromes of Sparapelhock and
Varsrenaare, are successful. Enemy mines
laid in Australian waters, and sweeping operations
are being carried out. On Italian front, 60,000
troops cut off and out-flanked, lay down their
arms and surrender, bringing the number
of prisoners taken by the enemy to 180,000
and 1,500 guns.
sth, 1914.—Great Britain declares war on Turkey.
Cyprus annexed. 1915. —Bulgarians enter Nish.
Lord Kitchener goes to the Near East. 1916.
Italians still advancing, and taking many
prisoners. 1917. —Italian position very grave,
but army withdraws safely, a masterly retreat
being conducted by General Cadorna. British
Admiralty reports having sunk an enemy auxiliary
cruiser and ten armed patrol boats in the Cattegat,
between Jutland and Sweden. Between 20,000
and 30,000 Allied troops nearing Italian front.
6th, 1914. —Lody, the German spy, shot in the
Tower of London. 1915.—Russians attack
Germans on the Riga front. 1916.—British
submarine torpedoes two German dreadnoughts.
P and O. Liner “ Arabia ” sunk without warning
by German submarine ; all passengers and crew
saved, except two men. 1917. —Gaza, Palestine,
captured from the Turks by British and Aus-
tralian troops. Italians holding the enemy at
Tagliamento. The loans from U.S.A. to Russia
amount to £38,000,000. M. Kerensky relies
on winter to prevent invasion by Germany,
and also to give time to re-mould the Russian
structure, an 4 re-habilitate the country.
7th, 1914.—Fa1l of Tsingtan. 1915. Italian liner
“ Ancona ” torpedoed without warning, by-
submarine flying Austrian flag ; 200 lives lost.
German cruiser “ Undine ” torpedoed by British
submarine, off coast of Sweden. 1917.—Owing
to the abandonment of heavy guns and ammuni-
tion, the Italians have to rely on a supply being
brought up by the Allies. In recent operations
at Gaza and Beersheba, Palestine, the prisoners
taken numbered 207 officers and 2,429 men.
Critical conditions exist in Ireland, unrest being
fomented by untrue stories of arrests, etc.
Bth, 1914.—Russians advance in Prussian Poland.
1917. —The Poletariat garrison in Petrograd
depose M. Kerensky’s Government. Chinese
troops offer for service in Europe. The first
Americans fall in France. British forces in
Mesopotamia capture Tekrit. America’s second
Liberty Loan is over-subscribed by £323,506,400.
Askalon, Palestine, captured from the
Turks.
9th, 1915.—Enemy forces hold main line through
Nish and Sofia to Constantinople. Mr. Asquith
re-affirms Allies determination to fight until
success crows their efforts. 1916.—-Roumanians
advance in the Dobrudja, and re-occupy Harsova.
1917. —The British in Flanders advance one
mile. Anarchists occupy Petrograd. Diaz super-
sedes Cadorna as Commander-in-Chief of the
Italian Army.
10th, 1914.—British Admiralty announces that
German raider “ Emden ” sunk by the Australian
cruiser H.M.S. “ Sydney ” ; before being demol-
ished, “ Emden ” ran up white flag ; first time
in history white flag used in naval engagement.
1915.—Russian victory on River Styr. Russians
advancing on Teheran, Persia. 1917.—Wadi
Sukerier, Palestine, crossed by British and
Australian troops, on their way to Jerusalem.
In Mesopotamia, the British, by a night march,
surprise and attack the enemy’s advanced
position at Mashshad-ad-Daur, capturing the
position, with 87 prisoners and 3,000 rounds of
artillery ammunition of German make.
11th, 1914.—Germans take Dixmude, Belgium.
1915.—Germans retire west of Riga. Russians
re-take Kemmern. New British War Committee
announced, to consist of five members, and act
during Lord Kitchener’s temporary absence.
1916.—Mr. Wilson returned as President U.S.A.
after very close contest with Mr. Hughes. 1917.
—The Entente Supreme War Council sits at
Versailles. Italians blow up the Dommen
bridges over the Livenza River, also railways,
roads, and water supply sources, in order to
delay the enemy, whose transport difficulties
are increasing.
12th, 1915.—Dissolution of Greek Government.
1916. —Great British victory in France ; advance
made on five mile front, and 3,300 prisoners
taken ; St. Pierre Divion, a strongly fortified
village taken. 1917.—Kerensky victorious ;
Bolsheviks defeated in battle near Petrograd.
Lloyd George urges the need for Allied unity of
control. Anzacs capture Gath, Palestine.
13th, 1916.—British still advancing, Beaumont
Hamel taken by storm, and many prisoners
secured. 1917. —The American Federation of
Labour pledges its fullest support in the prose-
cution of the war. Ail foreign Embassies and
Legations leaving Petrograd. Battle near Petro-
grad ends in total victory for M. Kerensky.
The “ Frankfurter Zeitung ” admits the air
supremacy of the Entente. Mr. Hughes an


November (2).
iiOUnCeS plans for a large ship-building scheme
in Australia, and notifies the expected arrival
of 14 ships ordered from America.
14th, 1914.—Lord Roberts dies at British Head-
quarters in France. 1915.—French advance
on Veles, Serbia. 1916.—British capture Beau-
court-sur-Ancre ; prisoners taken total 5,000
in three days. 1917. —Petrograd isolated. China
protests against the agreement between United
States and Japan with regard to China’s future.
Jaffa-Jerusalem railway occupied by British
and Australian troops.
15th, 1914.—Russian advance into Prussian Poland
continued. 1915.—British forces nearing Bag-
dad. Shah of Persia declares himself friendly
to the Allies. 1916.—French recover nearly
all ground recently lost, including Pressoire.
Roumanians retreating along whole Transylvanian
front. 1917. —Complete failure of enemy’s
intense attack on Western front. Anzacs capture
Ramleh and Lydda, Palestine.
16th, 1916.—Trenches on edge of St. Pierre-Vaast
Wood remain in German hands. British in
eastern Macedonia drive ahead to Karakaska.
Allied army, under General Sarrail, only four
miles from Monastic. A squad of Turkish
aeroplanes claims to have successfully bombed
buildings on the Cairo railway.
17th, 1914.—First British War Loan of £350,000,000
issued. 1915.—Bulgarians take Prilep, Servia.
Bulgarians driven back on the Cerna, Serbia,
losing 4,000 men. 1916.—British pushed back
along the Flers-Thilloy road, and lose five
machine guns. French aviators engage in
fifty-four air-battlqs with German machines
along the whole Somme front on November 16th.
Both wings of the Allied army forge ahead in
Macedonia. In the Dobrudja, General Sakharoff
is checked by large reinforcements to General
Von Mackensen. Italians repulse attack on
San Marco Heights. German U liner ‘ ‘ Deutcsh-
land ” starts from America on her return journey.
1917. —Anzacs capture Jaffa, Palestine. In
Italy, the fighting spirit of the army revives,
and the enemy is held on the Piave. Petrograd
is reported to be in flames. Heavy artillery
activity continues in Flanders.
18th, 1914.—Libau, Russian Black Sea port,
bombarded by Germans. 1916.—Allied gains
reported from the Somme front, on outskirts
of Grandcourt, and north of the Ancre. British
and French aeoplanes bombard Ostend and
raid Zeebrugge. Six German machines brought
down. General Sarrail’s troops cut their way
towards Monastic with bayonets, in driving
sleet and snow. In Carso sector, Italians drive
back Austrians east of Vertoibizza, in spite of
snow storms. 1917.—Beit-vr-et-Tahta, 12 miles
north-west of Jerusalem, captured. Conditions
in Russia extremely chaotic. In Italy, the Austro
German advance has been stopped by the arrival
of the Allies. Italians holding all positions from
the Asiago Plateau to the Piave. British naval
aircraft attempt to bomb Vytkerke aerodrome,
but were prevented by the high wind ; they
bomb the aeroplane sheds at Handzaeme,
bringing down two machines, and destroying two.
19th, 1914.—Funeral of Lord Roberts in St. Paul’s
Cathedral. 1915.—Lord Kitchener has audience
with King Constantine. Allies decide to impose
restrictions on Greek trade until the attitude of
her Government towards the Allies has been
decided upon. 1916.—Germans cut the railway
near the Iron Gates, and endanger the Russian
army. The Allies take Monastic, Germans
retreat towards Prilep. Marseilles swept by
high tidal wave ; great loss of life. Russian
troops near Pinsk, bring down a Zeppelin,
capturing a crew of sixteen, and 600 pounds of
bombs. 1917.—Beit Liki, five miles north-west
of Jerusalem, captured from the Turks. German
submarines interned in Uruguayan waters. The
reported lull in submarining encourages the hope
that the menace is being mastered. Each day
the Allied reinforcements reach Italy in greater
number. Some French troops, to relieve railway
congestion, repeat Napoleon’s achievement, by
marching over the Alps.
20th, 1915.—Bulgarians advance on Monastic.
1916.—Infantry fighting, with hand-grenade
battles, continuing for four consecutive days,
is reported from Dixmude sector. Allies counter-
attacks, to recover St. Pierre Vaast Wood,
unsuccessful. German and Austrian troops ap-
proach Craiova, capital of Wallachia. French
aviator reported to have bombarded Munich,
flown over the Alps, and landed near Venice,
435 miles from his starting place on the Western
front. 1917. —Despite enormous enemy pressure,
Italian resistance is developing grandly ; enemy
sacrifices are terrific. Constant raids and Counter-
attacks occur on the Western front, near Mouchy-
le-Preux, Passchendeale, and Langemarck.
Terrible events occur in Moscow, and Russia
is torn in three by rival leaders, the Northern
part by M. Lenin, the Middle by General
Korniloff, the South by M. Kaledin.
21st, 1914.—Basra, in Persion Gulf, occupied by
British, 1915.—Turks routed at Ctesiphon,
near Bagdad, suffering great losses. 1916.
Roumanian army caught between two sections
of Von Falkenhayn’s invading force. Serbians
follow fleeing Bulgars north and north-west of
Monastir. French occupy Krani on Lake Presba.
Francis Joseph, Emperor of Austria, and King
of Hungaty, dies at Schonbrunn Castle, near
Vienna, aged 86. 1917. —General Maude,
Commander of British forces in Mesopotamia,
dies, after a brief illness, in Mesopotamia.
French advance appreciably on the Meuse and
in the region of Chaume Wood. Italians continue
to contest gallantly enemy’s stubborn attacks
in the mountain regions of the Trentino.
22nd, 1915.—Italians progressing towards Gorizia.
1916. —Lull in operations on West front, due
to intense fog. Germans raid British trench
south of La Bassee, taking a score of pr soners
and a mach ne gun. Servians pursue Germans
across the Bela Voda, five miles from Greek
frontier. Austrian artillery active in Isonzo
sector, bombs being dropped on Monfalcone
and Goritz. White Star liner ‘ Britannic,”
in use as a hospital ship, torpedoed in the
Sea, with loss of 50 lives. 1917.—Grand Duke
Nicholas offers his services to General Kaledin,
and is given command of the Cossacks. Success-
ful British dash between St. Quentin and River
Scarpe. A quantity of war material and many
prisoners taken. French repulse strong German
attack north of Chaume Wood. Italians still
resisting stubbornly, but pressure increasing.
In Macedonia, British airmen drop bombs in
the Strumna Valley.
23rd, 1915.—Enemy forces take Mitrovitza and
Prishtina, Serbia. Serbian forces retire towards
Albanian frontier. 1916.—General air-battle on


NOVEMBER (3).
Western front, Germans losing five machines
and ‘British one. Bombs dropped on Zeebrugge
dock yard. Roumanian army retires to Alt
Vailey. In the Dobrudia. the defence is
strengthening. Greece refuses demand of Allies
that all arms and munitions be given up. Allied
troops advance north of Monastir, taking
Dobromir. Italian force from Albania advance
towards Ochrida. 1917. —British in Flanders
smash the Hindenburg line, and advance along
a whole front towards Cambrai, taking thousands
of prisoners, and a number of guns. The advance
of a large number of tanks without any prelimin-
ary artillery fire was the surprise feature of a
most dramatic episode. French also make
brilliant dash, taking prisoners and carrying
strong defences.
24th, 1914.—Zeebrugge bombarded by British
battleships. 1915.—Allies present note to
Greece, demanding that Allied forces in Mace-
donia be neither disarmed nor interned. 1916.
—lntense air-fighting continues on Western
front, French aviator alone being engaged in
forty fights in 24 hours. German and Bulgarian
troops force a crossing of the Danube in several
places. All Wallachia believed to be lost to
the Roumanians. Greek royalist troops refuse
to leave Katarina, and General Sarrail orders
instant evacuation, to avoid his having to employ
force. Germany and France arrange for ex-
change of 20,000 interned civilians. 1917. —
Russian army on the Caucasian front win a
considerable victory on the Diala River, taking
prisoners 1,600 Turks. The rest of Russia
remains in a complex and incoherent condition.
Great British thrust still advancing, and an
enormous number of prisoners, machine guns,
trench mortars, etc., are coming in. An explosion
in at Grieshiem-on-Main,
embracing 21 factories, amounts to a great
German national disaster.
25th, 1916.—British naval planes invade Bavaria,
dropping 2,000 pounds of bombs on the blast
furnaces at Dillingen ; on return trip they bring
down German aeroplane. Greek Provisional
Government, under M. Venizelos, declares war
on Austria and Germany. A squadron of German
war vessels bombard Ramsgate, and after
sinking a patrol ship return to port. Turks
advance in the Mush region in Armenia. 1917.
—ltalians defeat enemy’s encircling movements
with severe losses, and hold on firmly. The
British, in advancing, pierce the strong
Maisineres-Beau-Revoir entrenchments, where
the fortifications were built over arches, in a
double series of galleries, with vaults and con-
verging tunnels ; owing to the attack being a
surprise, the country is unspoiled, as the
Germans had no time to devastate it. Released
British prisoners in East Africa tell of brutal
treatment by 'more especially to
Indians and natives.
26th, 1914.—H.M.5. ‘Bulwark” blown up in
the Medway. 1916.—Armies of Von Mackensen
and Von Falkenhayn effect junction near the
Alt ; Roumanians in full retreat. Italians
operating in Servia, push towards Ternova,
north west of Monastir. Sir Hiram Maxim,
inventor of the gun which bears his name, dies
in London, aged 76. 1917. — F_erce fighting
continues in the neighbourhood of Boulon Wood,
the enemy making repeated attacks with fresh
troops to regain the high ground ; a strong attack
in the morning compelled the British to give
ground slightly, but later in the day the line
was completely re-established. The weather
prevented all flying, except at very low altitudes.
The Australian air squadrons participated in
attacks on enemy troop trains and transports
on the roads in the neighbourhood of Cambrai.
The Northumberland Yeomanry, when skir-
mishing, discovered a great belt of wire, they
dismounted and crawled through, capturing
guns and troops in the Bullecourt sector. They
also captured a great tunnel at Queant.
27th, 1916.—Germans advance towards Bucharest,
and take Alexandria from the Roumanians,
with enormous grain supplies. Greece appeals
to other neutrals, declaring the Government is
being coerced by the Entente. Two German
Zeppelins are lost, with their crews, in an early
morning raid on Durham and the North and
Midland counties. 1917. —German aeroplanes
bomb Dunkirk, but no damage was done.
Picked Austro-German troops, wearing Italian
uniforms, gain a footing on San Marino, but
the Alpini counter-attacking with magnificent
dash, and hurl them back with heavy losses.
Violent struggles continue between the Brenta
and the Pave Rivers, with varying fortune.
On the West front, the Germans mass over
5,300,000 men. In Palestine, the Turks
stubbornly resist British advance ; the site of
the ancient Mizpah is stormed, and British troops
reach Shafat, four miles from Jerusalem.
28th, 1914.—Turks marching on the Suez Canal.
1910. —French Zouaves and Servian Infantry
take Hill 1050, the strongest German point
in the Cerna Bend, north-east of Monastir.
British Government refuses to grant safe conduct
to Count Tarnowski Von Tarnow, the newly-
appointed Ambassador to the United States.
Roumanian Government leaves Bucharest for
Jassy. 1917. —Hopeless political quagmire con-
tinues to exist in Russia. British re-conquer
40 square miles of France, with 10 vdlages and
100 guns ; the enemy, with fresh troops, makes
determined attacks near Bourlon Wood. British
Fleet, with guns having a range of 25 miles,
co-operate with the land forces in the attack
on Jaffa, Palestine. The British Yeomanry,
New Zealand Mounted Rifles, and Australian
Light Horse, vie with one another in brilliant
cavalry and bayonet charges ; the Australian
light Horse capture a quantity of ammunition
and stores. In Flanders, the British troops,
with dauntless determination, fight on without
rest or sleep ; the tanks were again first to
advance in the battle of Bourlon Wood. French
advance on 2\ mile front, carrying first and
second lines of trenches, and taking prisoners 800.
29th, 1915.—British forces retire from Ctesephon,
near Bagdad, owing to heavy Turkish reinforce-
ments. 1916.—Russians launch big offensive
to relieve pressure on Bucharest. Greek Crown
Council supports Government in refusing Allies’
demand to give up arms and ammunition. Under
Defence of the Realm Act, British Government
takes over all Welsh coal mines. Admiral
Sir John Jellicoe is appointed First Sea Lord,
being succeeded by Admiral Beatty as Com-
ander of the Grand Fleet. 1917. —Italians de-
finitely repulse enemy pressure, and take 200
prisoners. Owing to rapid recovery of the
Italians, it has not been necessary to use Anglo-
French reinforcements, which will be reserved


November (4).
to participate in decisive battle. In Belgium,
violent artillery actions continue north of
Chemin-des-Dames. British position at Bourlon
maintained. A tank unluckily broke through
the bridge over the Masnieres Canal. The
Canadian Cavalry repaired the bridge, and rode
forward, taking the Germans by surprise, and
hacking their way through the enemy.
30th, 1914.—Great Russian victory in Galicia.
1915. Prizrend, Serbia, falls to the Bulgarians.
Lord Kitchener returns to London from the
East. 1916.—United States urges Great Britain
and France to re-consider their refusal to grant
passport to Tarnowski, newly-appointed Austro-
Hungarian Ambassador to the U.S.A. Bulgar-
German troops drive Serbians from slopes of
Ruin Mountain near Grimishte. Allied offensive
in Ypres sector repulsed. Greeks re-capture
control of post and telegraph offices, and expel
French officers. Germans in Roumania get
control of great stores of gram. 1917.—Renown-
ed Austrian Third Division severely beaten by
Italians at Colboretta. French troops continue
to pour through Alpine passes into Italy, using
the roads in many cases, which were constructed
by Napoleon. The survivors of the torpedoed
steamer ‘ Rochester ” arrive in America, after
terrible sufferings. In wet and stormy weather,
and intense cold, the British attack at early
dawn, Fontaine Notre Dame and Bourlon
villages, rescuing a party of officers and men
who had been isolated during the night, and
taking 200 prisoners. French conduct successful
operation north of Hill 344, fully completing the
gains of November 25th. Reported that Allies
have sunk 39 U boats in 14 days. The capture
of the Hindenburg tunnel shows that mines
were sown for 13 miles, to a depth of 40 feet, which
were arranged to explode by means of switches.
Fortunately the British electricians discovered
the danger.


k Group of Turkish prisoners taken at Magdhaba. 1
December 23rd, 1916. \v(
PmS DECEMBER m~
Sun | Mon | Tue | Wed I Thu | Fri | Sat
OHDOBBO
[0Q3BQ[0®Ea01
©e:<2e:mbe:r,


Notable Dates, December.
19th, 1915. —Withdrawal of British and Australian troops from Gallipoli,
practically without casualties, and unobserved by the Turks.
“ Their eyes were holden.”
—Luke 24, 16
10th, 1917.—General Allenby enters Jerusalem by (he Jaffa gate, escorted
by French, Italian, American, English, Scottish, Irish, Welsh, and
Australian troops, on its being surrendered by the Turks after being in their
possession for four hundred years.
Our feet shall stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem
Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy Palaces
—Psalm 122.
Bth, 1917—Australian Light Horsemen carry out clever operation near Jaffa.
“ I hear the enemy : out, some light horsemen, and peruse their wings.”
—Henry VI.
14th, 1917.—Heroic self-sacrifice of the Alpini and Bersaglieri on Asiago
Plateau.
He
Rose to such height of Chivalry,
That, with the need, his loyal soul
Swung like a needle to its pole ;
And, setting duty first, he went
At once, as to a sacrament.”
—John Oxenham.


DECEMBER (1).
Ist, 1914.—De Wet captured. 1915.—General
Townshend retiring on Kut-el-Amara, Meso-
potamia. 1916.—British troops make successful
night raids on German trenches south of
Armentieres. Injßoumania, battle for Bucharest
extends along a 600 mile front, from Poland to
the Danube. In Greece, French marines meet
Greek Royalists on the slopes of the Acropolis.
British and Italian Marines patrol the city.
Panic reported throughout Athens. Chinese
Government prohibits further sending of coolies
into Russia. 1917. —Co-incident with the news
of Germany’s acceptance of M. Lenin’s offer of
an armstice, comes the announcement of the
downfall of the Lenin Government. British
repulse raids near Avion and Plollebeke, besides
slight local success at Bourlon Wood. British
airmen dropped 1,130 bombs on Coutrai, Roulers
and Menin railway stations.
2nd, 1914.—Austrians take Belgrade. 1915.-
Enemy forces take Monastir and over-run Serbia.
1916. —Battle for Bucharest continues. A truce
is arranged between Allied troops and Greek
Royalists, after short reign of terror ; King
Constantine promises to give up six mountain
batteries, and the Allies agree to ask for no
more. In Serv_a, a continued fight rages for
occupation of LI ill 1050. In two years of the
war, 29,297 prisoners have died in Germany.
1917. —Enemy makes repeated attacks near
Cambrai, incurring heavy losses. Lord Lans-
downe’s letter against the prolongation of the
war is the political sensation of the hour. German
torpedo boat, belonging to the Zeebrugge flotilla,
strikes a mine just outside Dutch territorial
waters and sinks. Forty thousand Greeks, who
were forced into Macedonia by the Bulgarians,
have succumbed to hunger and other privations.
One of the most serious effects of the Russian
crisis is that Roumania is cut off from her Western
Allies.
3rd, 1915.—General Joffre made Commander-in-
Chief of the French Armies. 1916.—Continued
bombardments and trench fighting along whole
Western front, especially in the Ypres, Somme,
and Verdun localities. "Russians lose their hold
in the Kirlibaba and Dobrudja sectors. Rou-
manians pushed back on River Arges. 1917. —
Arrangements concluded for an armstice between
Russia and Germany. An official message an-
nounces that in November the British took
26,859 prisoners and 221 guns. Germans attack
on a wide front south of Cambrai, between
Vendhuile and Crevecoeur ; shortly afterwards
heavy attacks develope at Bourlon Wood and
Moeuvres to Masnieres; after many hours’
fierce fighting and very heavy loss, the enemy
succeeded in entering positions at different points,
but situation saved, and enemy driven back,
by British dogged tenacity ; the Germans
attacked simultaneously in five divisions, and
took 4,000 prisoners, but had ultimately very
little to show for a very costly effort.
4th, 1915.—Anglo-French War Council held at
Calais. 1916.—British attack on Somme front,
east of Le Sars, near Bapaume, is repulsed.
Bulgarians driven from strong positions east
of the Cerna and routed by Serbians. Re-
organisation of the British Cabinet, with probable
War Council, consisting of Mr. Asquith (Premier),
Lloyd George and Bonar Law. 1917. —President
Wilson, in a message to Congress, declares that
nothing shall turn the United States from tfie
War until Germany is beaten ; he recommends
war with Austria. It is proposed that total
prohibition be introduced throughout the U.S.
until the end of the war.
sth, 1916.—Tw0 German aeroplanes brought down
on Western front. Situation of Bucharest
virtually hopeless. Russians checked in Car-
pathians, Dobrudja, and Transylvania. Serbians
capture Stravina in their advance in the Cerna
region. Italian cargo steamer “ Palermo ” tor-
pedoed off Spanish coast. Mr. Asquith resigns,
and Bonar Law declines to form Cabinet. 1917.
—Deadlock of armies at Cambrai. Three
Germans on trial in U.S. plead guilty to inciting
to sedition in India. The expulsion of Von
Letlow from East Africa, definitely completes
the conquest of the only remaining German
colony. The steamer “ Apapa ” bound from
East Africa to Liverpool, with 160 passengers,
is sunk by two German submarines.
6th, 1915.—tn the sea of Marmora, a British sub-
marine fired at and damaged a train on the
Isinid railway, and sank a Turkish destroyer
and a supply ship. German submarines raided
the Harbour of Funchal, Madeira. 1916.
Germans, under Crown Prince, win French
trenches near Le Mort Homme, on the Meuse.
Bucharest falls, with the loss of 6,000 prisoners.
Ploesci, the great oil centre, also falls to the
Central Powers. Serbian and French successes
north of Paralovo are announced. 1917.—Tw0
German aeroplanes, taking part in raid on
England, forced to descend, owing to damage
by anti-aircraft guns. British troops withdraw
slightly from the Noyelles-sur-l’Escaut and
Bourlon Wood salients, with a view to strengthen-
ing their position, Plalf Halifax destroyed
by the explosion of a munition ship. America
declares war on Austria. Italians continue
stubborn resistance against overwhelming
numbers. Air raid on England by five groups
of machines ; two Gothas destroyed by our
defence.
7th, 1915.—French retire from Krivolah, Serbia,
to Demir, Kapu Pass, north of Greek frontier.
1916, —Lloyd George is announced as the new
British Premier. Roumanian army escapes
through Wallachia. Serbians lose positions
recently gained from Bulgarians. Germans,
under Crown Prince, gain crest of Hill 304 at
Verdun. In Great Britain, Labour agrees to
give Lloyd George full support in return for
five places in the Cabinet. 1917.—Hebron, 17
miles south of Jerusalem, occupied by British.
Seriousness of the set-back at Cambrai empha-
sised. Press demands prompt decision of the
man-power question. Enemy alleged to be
concentrating on West front, with a view to
striking a decisive blow before the arrival of
reinforcements from America. British Food
Controller quotes statistics to show that the
health of the people was never better. British
repel 10 hostile attacks on the Masineres front
in 24 hours, Germans suffer heavily.
Bth, 1914.—British naval victory off Falkland
Islands. German cruisers “ Scharnhorst,”
“ Gneisenau,” and “Leipzig” sunk, Admiral
Sturdee commanding. 1915.—Turks attack
British forces at Kut-el-Amara. 1916.—A Rou-
manian army trapped in the Prahova Valley,
yields an additional 27,000 prisoners to the
Central Powers. The main body of Roumanian
troops still in retreat. Turin reports an explosion


December (2).
in tne Alexandria munition factory, with 50
deaths, cause unknown. 1917. —Increased pres-
sure on the Italians. Ecuador severs relations
with Germany. China asks to be allowed to
take an active part in the war. Australian Light
Horse in Palestine carry out a clever operation,
which results in a bag “of 150 prisoners, north-
east of Jaffa. Austrian raiders attack Italian
coast, but are driven off by Italian armoured
trains. The River Piave running very low and
assisting the enemy, which is crossing by pontoon
bridges built during the night, and by wading ;
Italians praying for rain.
9th, 1914. —General Beyers drowned whilst crossing
the Vaal River in flood, while in a wounded
con ame - Collapse of South African rebellion.
1915. Allied forces retreat in Macedonia. 1916.
South of Kirlibaba, the Russians take two
heights and 500 prisoners. Russian munition
factories at La Satannaya completely demolished.
Chili gets five submarines from Great Britain
as partial payment for two super-dreadnoughts
seized while building in British yards at beginning
of the war. 1917.—Counter revolution m
Russia, the Bolsheviks declare war on General
Kaledin and the Cossacks. Formidable con-
centrations of enemy on West front. British
Press allege shortage of mobile troops. America
declares war on Austria. Terrible blizzard adds
to the horror of Halifax explosion. Roumanians
forced to accept armstice, but decline to fraterni.se
with the enemy. On the Asiago Plateau, despite
the use of asphyxiating, emetic, and lachryinal
shells by the enemy, the Italian artillery continues
to mow down the unending waves of humanity.
10th, 1914.—French Government returns to Paris.
1916. Bulgarians cross Danube to menace flank
and rear of retreating Russo-Roumanian army
Allies attribute to King Constantine recent
uprisings in Athens. New British Cabinet
announced, with Lord Devonport as Food
Controller. 1917. —Jerusalem surrenders to the
British and Australian troops under General
Allen by ; general rejoicings. Chinese troops
occupy Harbin, in Manchuria, and Japanese
troops occupy Vladivostock, so as to prevent
the establishment of German submarine bases
in the East, and to forestall their seizure by the
Bolsheviks Two German aeroplanes, returning
from raid on England, collide and fall at Gentbrugg.
11th, 1916*. —British liner “Caledonia,” in use as
a transport, sunk, and captain taken prisoner.
Germany reports return of “ Deutschland ”
to Bremen, carrying a $2,000,000 cargo.
Germans impose a levy of $140,000,000 on
Bucharest. Roumanians driven across River
Jalornitza, losing many thousands of prisoners.
In Macedonia, General Sarrail drives back the
enemy for half a mile. Britain announces a
radical solution of the Greek embroglio. 1917.
The influence of the Bolsheviks is waning.
The American destroyer “Jacob Jones?” was
sunk in 15 minutes, 500 miles from land, 43
survivors land at the Scilly Islands. Austrian
troops released from Russian front are being
used on Western front. A strained position
exists between Britain and Holland, owing to
the latter’s refusal to allow defensively armed
merchantmen to enter harbour.
12th, 1916.—Under cover of dense fog, British
air-raiders drop quantities of bombs on German
stations in Brussels, Zeebrugge, Oudenarde,
and Louvain. Germans take Mizil and Urzie-
cheni in Roumania, and 10,000 prisoners, French
bring down an aeroplane on the Strnmna front,
and take five small Bulgar villages on the Vardar
River. Germany claims to have sunk 16 am-
munition steamers bound for Russia in the last
few days. Italian Government announces the
institution of two meatless days per week.
Central Powers present notes to neutral powers
for transmission to the Entente containing
peace proposals. 1917. —Re-adjustment of
Cambrai lines completed. Failure of enemy's
attempts to break through at Bullecourt.
British airship comes to grief near Emmen,
Netherlands, owing to engine trouble ; the four
airmen will probably be interned. Two German
assaults on Bois de Chaume and Calonne break
down after sharp bombardment.
13th, 1914.—British submarine 81l enteres the
Dardanelles, dives under five rows of mines,
and torpedoes Turkish battleship “ Messudujch.”
1915.—Turkish attacks on Kut-el-Amara re-
pulsed with heavy loss to enemy. Allied forces,
after retreating from Serbia, reach Greek
territory safely." Greeks agree to Allies occupying
and fortifying Salonika. 1916.—Roumanian Army
retreats to Buzen River, but is defeated, with
further loss of 7,000 prisoners. General Nivelle
appointed to command French armies of north
and north-east. Archduke Charles Stephen of
Austria selected as Regent of Poland. In a
fight with Greek Royalist troops, the French lose
Katerina, and the French line is pierced in many
places. Italians press back Bulgarians in
Macedonia. 1917.—Military critics forecast a
great German offensive on the Western front,
and declare that England needs another million
men. Austro-German troops massing on Italian
front with overwhelming superiority in artillery.
Result of Russian civil war still doubtful. First
Ford of the Admiralty expresses the opinion
that the maximum menace from submarines has
now been reached.
14th, 1914.—Serbians re-capture Belgrade. 1915.
—Sir Douglas Haig succeeds Sir John French
as Commander-in-Chief of the British Forces
in France and Flanders. 1916.—Austrian
Ministry resigns, after holding office for a little
over one month. British take number of German
trenches near Monchy-au-Bois in the Ancre
sector, inflicting heavy casualties. Germans
progress in Roumania, taking Cernavoda Bridge.
German peace overtures received with mistrust.
Great Britain votes an additional war credit of
;£2,000,000, 000. British transport “ Russian ”
sunk by U boat in Mediterranean. 1917. —
The Chief Rabbi congratulates King George on
the occupation of Jerusalem. Naval Allied
Council formed, with representatives from
England, United States, France, Italy and
Japan. Monketar Bey, the Turkish delegate,
who is conferring with British delegates at Berne,
on a matter of the exchange of prisoners, has
asked the authorities at Constantinople for full
power to negotiate, if possible, for a separate
peace, with the British delegates. Monketar
Bey admits that the fall of Jerusalem is a great
blow to the Turks. In the Asiago Plateau,
the Alpini and Bessaglieri heroically sacrifice
themselves, to enable their comrades to retreat
in safety.
15th, 1916.—French drive Germans back for two
miles over a 7-mile front, and capture 7,500
prisoners at Verdun, Vacherauville, Louvemont,


DECEMBER (3).
Chambrettes Farm, and the forts of Hardaumont
and Bezonvaux are also taken by the French.
The Greek King grants the latest Entente
demands, and withdraws all troops from Thessaly,
leaving only a few at Peloponnesus. Wallachia
passes to ' the Central Powers. Roumanian
retreat continues. 1917. —Armstice between
Russia and Germany signed at Brest-Lotovik,
to last from December 17th to January 14th,
1918. Peace negotiations will begin immediately.
Lloyd George, in a speech to heads of Air Service,
at Gray’s Inn, said, “We have challenged a
sinister power which was menacing the world
with enslavement, and we must complete the
task we have undertaken.’’
16th, 1914.—German naval raid on East coast,
Hartlepool, Whitby, and Scarbourough shelled.
1915.—Italian troops land in Albania. 1916.
Great Britain announces that the Entente
Powers have agreed to grant safe conduct to
Count Tarnowski, newly-appointed Austrian
Ambassador to the U.S.A. British troops take
offensive near Kut-el-Amara, and occupy Turkish
positions on the Hal River, to south of Kut.
French Government decides on total prohibition
throughout France of whiskies, brandies, and
liqueurs, but not of wines and beers. In America,
a nation-wide total prohibition amendment is
proposed for next session of Congress. 1917.
The enemy has 5,000 guns on the Italian front,
between Asiago and the sea. Magnificent work
by Australian flyers on the Western front is
reported.
17th, 1914. Egypt proclaimed a British Protec-
torate. 1915. —Russian victory in Persia.
Hamaden occupied by troops under Grand Duke
Nicholas. 1916.—1n face of heavy counter-
attacks, the French hold all their gains of 15th,
also capturing 1,600 additional prisoners and
81 guns. Baltchik, on the Bulgarian Black Sea
coast, is shelled by Russian fleet. Roumanians
retreat to Danube loop in the Dobrudja, and
across the lower Sereth and Calmatuiul Rivers.
Bulgarians take Fetechti, and Germans capture
1,150 more prisoners with 19 locomotives, and 400
railway cars, mostly loaded. 1917. —Two Italian
torpedo boats cut eight cables protecting the
entrance to Trieste Harbour, and removing
the mines, approach cautiously among the
dark mass of battleships, find the Austrian
ship “ Wien ’’ unprotected by nets ; two torpedoes
were fired, which split the sides of the “Wien ”
in two ; other torpedoes were launched at another
battleship, and the Italians made off, followed
by violent fire from the shore batteries.
18th, 1914. Prince Hussien Kamel appointed
Sultan of Egypt. 1916. —Counter-attacks at
Verdun, under Crown Prince fail ; the three
days’ attack cost the Germans 11,387 men in
prisoners alone, and the loss of 115 cannon, 107
machine guns, and 44 bomb throwers. The
remnants of the Roumanian army are reported
to be safe behind the Russian lines near Sereth
for re-organisation. Russia now holding a front
of 1,000 miles from the Baltic to the Black Sea.
General Leman, the gallant defender of Liege
against the Germans at the beginning of the
war, has been released, and has arrived in
Switzerland. A new explosive bullet, invented
by an Australian (Mr. Pomeroy) is held responsible
for the destruction of several Zeppelins recently.
An enemy submarine bombards Funchal
(Madeira Island) for 20 minutes, causing some
deaths, and destroying houses and churches.
British and German Governments agree to
exchange prisoners; the first lot will arrive in
England on January Ist, numbering 850.
19th, 1914.—Allied airmen drop bombs on Zeppelin
sheds, Brussels. 1915.—British forces at Anzac
and Suvla Bay withdraw with all stores, etc.,
practically without casualties. 1916. Italian
forces in the Carso sector capture a crater south
of Bos Comalo. The oil wells captured by
Germans in Wallachia found to be so slightly
damaged that the oil from them can be at once
shipped to Germany. French advance near
Rhiems repulsed by Germans. 1917. —Canada
carries conscription by a sweeping majority.
Heavy falls of snow hamper operations in
Flanders.
20th, 1916.—V0n Mackensen makes stand 10 miles
from Danube. China announces strict neutrality.
President Wilson asks on what terms the bel-
ligerents will consider peace. 1917. —Nine vessels
of a convoy bound from Scotland to Norway
attacked by enemy destroyers and sunk. There
is a great sweeping in of masses of German
reinforcements from the East to the Western front.
21st, 1916.—Russia holds her own in Dorna Watra
region. Famine, political complications, and
anti-war activities are reported in Austria.
Germans fail in raid on trenches in Arras sector.
British Government release 576 Irish rebels,
and return them to their homes. Re-building of
destroyed French villages commenced by Ameri-
can Relief Society. 1917.—West front entirely
ice-bound, the country covered by snow a foot
deep. Troops resting after continuous fighting
since April 9th. Italy’s position improved by
heavy falls of snow. Extensive air raid on Eng-
land on a starry and cloudless evening, 10
persons killed and 75 injured.
22nd, 1916.—Russian forces retreat in the Dobrudja.
1917. —On the first count, Australia again votes
“No ’’ on the conscription issue. Advance in
Palestine made difficult by atrocious weather
conditions, greatly complicating the question
of supplies.
23rd. 1915. —Germans retake positions on Hart-
mansweilerkoff. 1916.—F00d riots in Dresden.
Berlin reports having returned 322 exiled Belgians
to their homes. French beat off attacks in
Champagne district. Severe hand-to-hand con-
flicts on Western front between British and
Germans. French and British Ministers of
Commerce call for the tilling of all vacant land
in both countries. Three British destroyers
sunk in North Sea. 1917.—M. Lenin escapes
to Switzerland, and M. Kerensky re-a.ppears at
the head of some thousands of troops, and
marches on Moscow. Three thousand Russians
are operating under General Marshall in Meso-
potamia, despite the armstice. Gigantic Austro-
German concentration on the Asiago Plateau.
24th, 1914. —First German air raid on England;
Dover bombed, no damage. 1916.—Russians
driven from Tsakcha. Russians storm a peak
on the Moldavian frontier, taking prisoners and
guns. Scandinavian nations and the Pope
praise the Wilson peace note. England, France
and Russia favour' decisive finish before consider-
ing terms. Switzerland urges consideration of
terms. 1917. —Admiral Jellicoe retires, and is
succeeded by Admiral Wemyss. Italians stem
desperate Austro-German offensive on the Asiago
Plateau ; enemy losses estimated at 20,000,


December (4).
25th, 19l4.—British air and naval raid on Cux-
haven, Germany. 1915.—Turks attack General
Townshend’s forces at Kut-el-Amara, and are
repulsed with heavy losses. 1916.—Russians
win victory in Carpathians, securing 226 prisoners
Italians drive Austrian forces from Point 86,
south-east of Goritz. British and Australian
troops take Turkish position at Maghdabah,
20 miles from El-Arish, with nearly 2,000 pris-
oners, and a large quantity of war material.
1917. On French front, lively artillery fire
takes place on Christmas Day, on right bank of
Meuse. Italians prevent a break through of
Austrian divisions fresh from Russian front.
British fliers bomb successfully the docks at
Bruges, the aerodromes of St. Denis and Westrom,
and the town of Marnhiem.
26th, 1916.—Germans claim to have taken 5,500
Russian and Roumanian prisoners in the
Dobrudja. British report “ satisfactory pro-
gress ” in raids on German trenches near Les
Boeufs, and in the Guedecourt sector. Austro-
Hungarian destroyers raid Straits of Otranto,
and sank two Allied patrol boats, and damaged
four Allied warships. 1917.—Turkey offers to
join the Allies on condition that her conquered
territory be restored. The Bolsheviks consider
peace possible only by social revolution through-
out the world.
27th, 1915.—Russian troops capture Kashan,
Persia, and march on Ispahan. 1916.—Russian
forces routed on Moldavian border. In the
Dobrudja, the Russo-Roumanian forces begin
a northward retreat. Germans claim to have
brought down nine Entente aeroplanes in a
single day. British report successful trench
raids between Lens and Loos. Greece begins
demobilising in accordance with promises made
to the Allies. 1917. —Germany obviously ex-
ploiting Russia to procure a general peace.
British and Italian aeroplanes bring down 11
out of 25 German raiders at Treviso. German
Jews support German War Loan on condition
promise of no opposition to establishment of
Jewish state in Palestine free from Turkish
control.
28th, 1915. —The Indian Army Corps leave France
for another scene of action. 1916.—Germans
capture 10,000 Russians in retreat from Rimmik
Sarat. Heavy bombardment on banks of the
Meuse, in Verdun sector. Germans driven off
by French from attack on Hill 304. French
aviators drop immense quantities of bombs on
railway stations, factories, and blast furnaces
behind German lines, with satisfactory results.
British sea-planes cut off Turkish communications
in Asia Minor, between Turkish army and its
base on Bagdad main line. 1917.—Turks
attack north of Jerusalem, and are driven back
with heavy loss. M. Trotsky states that Russia
will conclude separate peace if the Allies do
not join negotiations within 10 days.
29th, 1915. The P. and O. liner “ Persia ” tor-
pedoed without warning by German submarine
in the Mediterranean ; 200 lives lost. 1916.
German cordon drawn round retreating Russian
forces, and 1,400 prisoners taken. French line
near Verdun pierced by Germans, and 222 pris-
oners taken. German postal authorities an-
nounce the establishment of a submarine postal
service to U.S.A., South America, East and West
Indies, India, China, and the Philippines, by
the “ Deutschland ” and sister ships. 1917. —
Trade Union Congress, claiming to represent
2,500,000 British workmen, adopt previously
formulated statement of Labour’s War Aims,
and subsequently present resolutions arrived at
to the Prime Minister. Australian fliers win 6
Military Crosses in three months. France calls
up her 1918 class.
30th, 1915.—General Sarrail arrests German,
Austrian, Bulgarian, and Turkish Consols at
Solonika, 1916. —Continued withdrawal of Rus-
sian troops before German onslaught. In spite
of repeated French attacks, Germans retain
greater part of Mort Homme Hill. Allies drive
Austrian troops out of Meschishta, near Lake
Ochrida. Germany claims to have destroyed
138 merchant ships by U boats in November.
Coronation of Emperor Charles and Empress
Zita of Austria, as K.ng and Queen of Hungary,
takes place at Budapest. Entente declares
German peace proposals not sincere, being only
a calculated war manoeuvre. 1917.—United
States Government assumes control of all
railways in the country. The chief clauses in
the Brest-Litovsk peace proposals provide for
the restoration of occupied territory and auto-
nomy for Poland. Japanese trade with America
has increased 400% since 1914.
31st, 1914.—The Military Cross, for distinguished
service on the field, instituted by King George.
1916.—Russian resistance crumbling along entire
front of 250 miles in Moldavia. French War
Office states that 75,500 German prisoners were
taken at Verdun during 1916. Drastic demands
made by Entente on Greece. 1917.—Lloyd
George appeals to the nation for further sacrifice,
and economy, both of food and money. Serious
defeat of the Turks in Palestine ; British occupy
ancient Bethel, and put an end to attempted
counter-attacks on Jerusalem. Enemy renews
attack near Uambrai, and is completely repulsed.
Recent happenings (point to the complete domin-
ation of German influence in Russia. Kaiser
surrenders to the Chancellor the constitutional
right to make peace ; this action is considered
to be an immense bid for democratic sympathy.


Notable Dates, June.
—Military, social and economic turmoil in Russia.
“ Civil dissension is a viperous worm
That gnaws the bowels of the Commonwealth.”
—Henry VI.
Death of Lord Kitchener.
Toll for the brave, the brave that are no more,
All sunk beneath the wave, fast by their native shore.’ ’
—Cowper
1917. —English advance on West front.


EL-ARISH
MAGDHAB/
EBA.
RAMLEH.
pf JERUSALEM. |
. J
'fAC 3f ■'
