

Perh- ppiyv^
CALUMNY REFUTED,
THE COLONISTS VINDICATED,
AND THE
RIGHT HORSE SADDLED :
BRIEF REVIEW
MISGOVERNMENT IN NEW ZEALAND
THE CAUSE OP THE
NATIVE REBELLION
C. PARTRIDGE,
A SETTLER OF OVER TWENTY-FIVE YEARS’ STANDING
Price Two Shillings.
AUCKLAND
CREIGHTON AND SCALES, PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS,
QUEEN STREET,


*
' #
.
*


CALUMNY REFUTED,
THE COLONISTS VINDICATED,
AND THE
RIGHT HORSE SADDLED:
BRIEF REVIEW
MIS-GOVERNMENT IN NEW ZEALAND
THE CAUSE OF THE
NATIVE REBELLION.
C. PARTRIDGE,
A SETTLER OF OVER TWENTY-FIVE YEARS’ STANDING
Price Two Shillings,
AUCKLAND
CREIGHTON AND SCALES, PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS,
QUEEN STREET.


. . - - ■ - ' J
'
<i . . .
■
...
: .... , _ -. . .....
. . . .


MIS-GOYERNMENT IN NEW ZEALAND
THE CAUSE OF
THE NATIVE EEBELLION.
The New Zealand Colonists, now numbering about 150,000
souls, who have established many respectable sea port and inland
towns and villages, who have a large area of land under
cultivation, extensive pastures teeming with flocks and herds, with
a revenue of one million pounds per annum, and an export and
import trade, contributing largely to the commercial prosperity
of the mother country, are not a little surprised at the absence of
correct information displayed by the English press, and especially
by many members of Parliament in their debates on New
Zealand affairs, who with one or two exceptions are totally in
the dark on the subject of the “little war" existing in the
Colony, upon which they are called to legislate.
The cause of this otherwise unpardonable ignorance, has for
some time past been perfectly understood by the most enlight-
ened public men in the Colony, and some few leading men in
England are beginning to see through the dust and fog raised by
interested adventurers, the opponents of truth, to cloud the poli-
tical vision of British statesmen.
The truth is, a conspiracy has long existed in high quarters in
the Colony, having its counterpart in the mother country, for
the support of a systematic scheme of fraudulent deception,
practised on the British public, and on British statesmen. A
few men of wealth and influence in the Colony have united them-
selves together by a solemn compact, perfectly understood, though
not expressed in so many words, to do all in their power covertly
to defame the Colonists, eulogise the Natives, and blind the eyes
of the public. Motives easily comprehended operate to unite
many underlings in the Colony with these few wealthy and in-
fluential men in the same cause, which if triumphant would
inevitably retard for many years the progress of the Colony, and
end in the extermination of the native race.
However we may deprecate the motives of these men, we must
at least give them credit, in the propagation of their peculiar
dogmas, for their industry, perseverance, and duplicity, which
would do honour to a company of Jesuits. This conclave consists
A 2


partly of ambitious and designing adventurers, actuated solely by
self-interest; and partly of amiable dupes, the tools of the former,
who use them to advance their political designs, taking advantage
of their mental weakness, and peculiar idiosyncracies on the
question of Native rights and liberties.
The opinions they hold in common, and which may be termed
their political creed, are as follows :
1. The natives can do no wrong; that is, political wrong. They
may rob the settlers, commit murder on defenceless women and
children, which acts they admit are wrong and indefensible in the
abstract, but perfectly justifiable on political grounds, under their
peculiar circumstances.
2. The “Treaty of Waitangi” is strictly binding on the
British Government, and all the natives are entitled to live under
its protection and enjoy its privileges, but it does not in the least
bind the Natives, who can violate their part of the contract with
impunity, without losing their claim to its beneficial clauses.
3. The native population, now about 50,000 in all, men, women,
and children, possess the fee simple of every rood of land in these
islands (a trifle larger than Great Britain and Ireland), the
nature of their title is peculiar, they can always sell it to any
individual, and even occasionally to the Government without ex-
tinguishing it, as by a peculiar sort of right it reverts to them
again, or becomes the property of some other chief when sold to
an European (this is a peculiar privilege they wrung from Gover-
nor EitzEoy at Taranaki, and lately from Sir George Grey, at
Waitara.
4. Although the sovereignty of the country was ceded to the
Queen, and the natives became British subjects, yet the chiefs
are allowed to retain what they call their “ Mana,” or jurisdiction
over their tribes, which extends to all the property of every
individual of their own tribes, as well as to chiefs inferior in
power to themselves. This authority, the assumption of which
is at direct variance with the sovereignty of the Queen, creating
in fact an imperium in imjperio, is perfectly justifiable in the case
of the Natives of New Zealand, who are not at all bound by the
Treaty of Waitangi, but can assume to be British subjects or
not for the nonce just as the occasion suits them.
5, Human nature amongst the New Zealanders has assumed a
different degree of development to anything ever known in the
world before ; consequently all the experience of ancient and
modern sages, both sacred and profane, on the art of Government,
must be set at naught, and living as they do in the Antipodes, all
the rules must necessarily be reversed ; for example, a book which


all Christians revere, teaches that Magistrates and those in
authority should be a “ terror to evil-doers, and a praise to them
that do well”; but in New Zealand they are deputed to reward
evil-doers with flour and sugar, and to treat well-doers with
contempt; this is the grand secret, and has always been the rule
during Sir G-eorge Grey’s management of the Natives, and is
fully endorsed by the clique.
The above are the fundamental articles of the creed of the
Philo-Maori sympathisers, who, under the pretext of doing justice
to the Maori, are united in the cause of defaming the Colonists,
and exalting the virtues of the savage, whose tendencies to mur-
der and rapine are encouraged by the countenance they receive
at their hands. Those in the habit of conversing with them on
Native topics will corroborate the fact that they defend every
principle embodied in the foregoing creed, after the fashion of
“ Uriah Heap ” when hard beset, with a wriggle and a twist,
although they avoid summing up in so many words the articles
of their political faith.
The reason why their plot has so far succeeded as to deceive
the public of England is accounted for by the fact that no expense
or trouble has been spared to forward their object. Having in the
Colony more than one newspaper devoted to their interests, and
some of their men being possessed of the peculiar talent of lying
like truth, laying on just sufficient of the genuine to gild the
false, and make the worse appear the better cause, are indefatigable
in their united efforts to compile a monthly summary of perverted
facts and mendacious statements, skilfully compounded to deceive,
and got up expressly for exportation, to gratify the morbid taste
of the English political dyspeptic, and spurious lovers of humanity
whose generous sympathies, though not easily awakened by the
real sufferings of the immediate poor around them, are powerfully
excited at the recital of imaginary grievances, concocted by
mendacious politicians, and by them said to be inflicted on savages
some 15,000 miles away.
It is a fact well known in Auckland that at least one news-
paper in the Colony is backed up and supported on the sole
condition of becoming the tool of this party, giving all their aid
and influence (which happily is now on the wane) to the men
who seek to defame the Colonists, eulogise native plunderers and
murderers, and so tend to subvert the authority of the Queen in
these islands. It matters not to them that they obtain no credence
here, they know that nobody of any pretensions to discernment
in the Colony places any faith in their political summaries which
are concocted monthly for the English Mail and gratuitously
forwarded to the leading public journals, members of Parliament,
and the amiable dupes of Exeter Hall, for whose especial benefit
the religious garb is hypocritically assumed and interwoven in


their language. It is openly asserted here that the Governor
himself pays tor 500 copies of the monthly summaries of his
favourite newspaper to be forwarded every mail to England,
addressed, as per list furnished by him, to influential public
mem, Editors of newspapers, clubs, and member of Parlia-
ment, thus ensuring a very extensive circulation of spurious
intelligence, concocted especially with a vieAv to servo party
purposes, without regard to truth, and consisting mainly of
fulsome adulation of his own miserable expedients in the manage-
ment of the Natives, which it is an insult to common sense to
dignify with the name of Government.
It would be needless to dwell on the condition of the Aborigines
of New Zealand prior to the settlement of Europeans amongst
them, so much having been written on the subject that to enlarge
further on this topic than is required to illustrate the causes that
have led to the war, would render this pamphlet too voluminous
for the purpose intended, which is, by a reference to incontro-
vertible facts, to reveal at a glance the origin of the present
unhappy relation existing between the settlers and the Natives,
and to point out the best remedy to extricate ourselves out of
it.
In order to arrive at a correct opinion of the causes that have
led to the rebellion, we must revert to the condition of the Natives
upon the arrival of the first settlers amongst them, and then
carefully consider the leading facts that have transpired in our
intercourse with them, both before and after the pretence of
British authority was established in these islands.
It is not the intention of the author of this pamphlet to pro-
pound a theory of Government for savages, or to offer abstract
opinions on disputed points, but simply to refer to facts known
and patent to all who are acquainted with the history of the
Colony, which will of themselves, when carefully weighed, reveal
the whole truth without entering into the labyrinth of conjecture
to solve the mystery of the Native rebellion, and penetrate the
flimsy web of sophistry so ingeniously contrived for party pur-
poses to bewilder the superficial observer and mislead the British
Statesman and the British Press.
The New Zealand Natives, before the arrival of the first
European settlers, were divided into independent tribes, living
principally round the sea coast, inhabiting the bays and rivers
which were of easy access and abounding with fish, which was
one of their staple articles of food ; their aggregate numbers at
that time were variously computed by different writers at from
80 to 100,000 souls, including Avomen and children. The tribes
were at deadly enmity Avith one another, and continually at Avar.
Their wars were principally to revenge the death of chiefs Avho


were killed and eaten in previous wars, to carry away the women,
and take the men for slaves, and they invariably terminated in a
cannibal feast on the bodies of the slain. Since Captain Cook
visited New Zealand the natives have cultivated the potato to a
considerable extent, from the seed he left them, and the pigs he
presented them with being for some years tapued by the Chiefs,
became very numerous, and running wild are dispersed all over
the island. Previous to the introduction of the pig, the rat was
the largest quadruped indigenous to the country.
Subsequent to the establishment of Port Jacksou as a penal
settlement, a few vessels at first from that port occasionally traded
with the natives round the coast for flax and spars, and latterly
this trade had increased considerably. The Pay of Islands was
their favourite port of call, and many American and English
whalers visited there in the season. The natives were soon enabled
to furnish a sufficient supply of potatoes and pigs for all the vessels
that required provisions, receiving in exchange clothing, blankets,
prints, tomahawks, spades, and tobacco, and such other articles as
they required. It was their custom for the slaves taken in war,
and the women, to do all the laborious work, preparing the
ground, planting the potatoes, and scraping the flax, at which
work they were constantly kept employed except in time of war,
and the chiefs stored up the produce in raupo huts, until some
vessel called and traded with them.
In those days all property was held by the strong arm—might
was right—and force was law. The greatest chief, if taken pri-
soner in war, and his life was spared, became a slave and for ever
lost caste; even if he could succeed in regaining his liberty and
return to his own people, he was no longer a chief. The natives
were expert in the use of their canoes, which were highly prized,
being indispensable to their mode of life, scattered as they were,
round about the sea coast and rivers. There were no settlements
in the interior of the country away from tidal navigation, and
they were but little acquainted with the interior, except in certain
tracks where they crossed from ore coast to the opposite side in
some of the narrow parts of the island. These roads or tracks
were only about a foot wide, as they always walked in single file
whatever their numbers might be travelling together. The nar-
rowness of the roads is a great objection with European travellers,
as the luxuriant herbage on each side retains the moisture long
after a shower of rain, and almost meeting at the top wets the
traveller completely through from his knees downwards. It is
not however much inconvenience to the native, who travels Avith
only a blanket or mat over his shoulders, leaving his nether parts
bare to buffet the Avet fern.
In these palmy days of “ Old Ncav Zealand,” land not under
crop was not valued ; a tribe possessed of a good pig run, or fishing


ground, were often envied by their neighbours, their homesteads
became a prey to the conqueror, and they were driven off to seek
some other place to settle down. This however, was not such a
great evil as may be supposed, where there were millions of acres
of land unoccupied, and a dozen natives can build a temporary
hut large enough to protect 100 from the weather in less than a
day, and roaming about is a custom they are used to from their
birth. They can procure fish anywhere round the coast, and if
compelled to live without the luxury of a potato, or a meal of
flour, they can always obtain fern-root, which is a very good
substitute, and will of itself sustain life a long time.
These few introductory remarks will, I think, be sufficient to
show the condition and habits of the natives at the time the first
settlers and missionaries arrived amongst them. The reader will
bear in mind that there were millions of acres of land uncultivated
and unexplored, consequently to which there was no title. Their
cultivations were confined to a few patches scattered round about
the coast, occupation alone giving a valid title, and that only such
a title as was liable at any moment to be upset by any stronger
tribe who coveted it.
new and important era now commences in the history of the
New-Zealander, and the attention of the reader is particularly
requested to the fact of his previous condition, up to the time of
the first settlers and missionaries arriving in this country. Not
an acre of land had ever before been bought or sold; it was valued
as a stream of water, for its use only ; anyone might quench his
thirst at the stream, and anyone might settle on the unoccupied
land, immense tracts of which lay waste and unheeded in a state
of nature. If any further proof be required as to the tenure of the
land at this time, it is plainly seen in the fact that from time
immemorial, natives from the Marquise, Tahiti, and other sur-
rounding islands, were occasionally driven from their own coast
in their canoes by bad weather, and arrived in New Zealand,
where they settled down on the land, and in process of time
became amalgamated with the New Zealanders ; who have a tra-
dition that they themselves first arrived in the country by the
same causes. Also long after Captain Cook visited New Zealand,
occasional runaways from vessels settled in the country, and took
what unoccupied laud they required, without payment. The idea
of selling land had never before occurred to them; they would as
soon thought of selling the sea, or the sky, or the air we breathe,
and none would be anxious to buy what they could possess without
purchase, and from which they were liable to be driven at any
moment by their more powerful neighbours.
But the first settlers and missionaries had imported into New
Zealand the new idea of a permanent interest in landed property,
transferable by deed, about which the natives were totally iguor-


ant; and these new-comers seeing immense tracts of valuable
land lying waste, and having themselves become permanent
settlers, it was natural and quite right they should endeavour to
make a provision for their increasing families, fast multiplying
around them, having also the view in perspective that it would
soon become a British settlement; but a seeming insuperable
difficulty lay in the way; it appeared impossible to secure them-
selves against the robberies of neighbouring tribes when at war
with the tribe amongst whom they had located themselves ; and
this insecurity operated as a check against any permanent and
expensive improvements.
They were, however, in times of peace partially able to remove
this obstacle, if they could not entirely overcome it to their satis-
faction. By assembling all the chiefs together from the surrounding
tribes, and making presents to them, they secured their friend-
ship, and promised exemption from the evils of war, being esteemed
as friendly neutrals, having a ta/jm put upon them, which made it
a serious crime for any native to injure them. This tapu, or
protection of the chiefs, was of great importance. It generally
prevented the slaves and wandering natives from plundering them,
the authority of the chiefs in those days being absolute; it was
still an expensive affair, as they expected occasional presents, such
as a blanket or shirt, and always a little tobacco when they called.
It is evident this protection could not extend to cases where
powerful tribes at a distance made a raid on the settlement; the
European settlers at such times were generally robbed, and their
lives were in danger if they resisted. After some sad experience
of the native love of plunder, the settlers learnt a little wisdom.
They not only paid the chiefs in the immediate neighbourhood
where they settled down (which payment was at first made in
consideration of protection, and as an immunity from plunder);
but they endeavoured to conciliate every powerful chief by some
present, even though he lived a long distance oft’, as he might,
probably, at some future time, come on a marauding expedition
to the settlement. It was usual also to obtain their signatures to
the deed of conveyance, which, to the honour of the natives it
must be admitted they rarely or never disputed. The Europeans
considered their written document a valid conveyance of the land
described within certain boundaries, to hold good against the
encroachments of other Europeans, and the natives who received
part of the payment perfectly understood by it that their new
friends were to hold peaceable possession for ever, without
molestation from them. After the first few contracts of this
nature, the natives, who always had an eye to business, did not
require to be summoned when any fresh European arrived who
wanted land. They had in perspective an instinctive perception of
blankets, guns, powder, prints, tobacco, &c., by such an event, and
upon the first news of a fresh arrival, hastened to besiege him,
being all eager to set forth their claims to beautiful tracts of


land, which they wore anxious to sell. Having no title to it
themselves other than the strong arm, they were clamorous to
realise something substantial for it, before the beautiful illusion
might be dissipated by the arrival of some more powerful chief,
who would at once pronounce them to be “ tan gain taJii Icatoa ,” a
set of thieves, who had no claim, as it all belonged to him. As
soon as a bargain was struck with him, and the payment made,
the small fry, who had not a word to say in las presence, and who
had retired from the field (keeping in view the old Scotch proverb,
“ I bide my time”), re-appeared, and urged their claims with great
vehemence; indeed they were often told by the chief who had
just sold it, and declared it belonged solely to himself, to go now
and make their claim, as he had got all he could. It was always
good policy to satisfy these claimants, as a trifle to each would
suffice after the great chief had signed the deed, and it was worth
something to get rid of their importunity and secure their good-
will. Prom the nature of these first transactions in land, it is
plain that the payment was made to obtain a peaceful settlement
and immunity from plunder, and not until the New Zealander had
learnt something from the European, did he ever entertain the
idea of selling the land; I repeat, he would as soon have thought
of selling the sea or the sky.
They had been used to toil hard in tilling the laud for potatoes,
in scraping flax, and in cutting down spars, and rolling them to the
rivers to trade for the articles they required —tobacco, blankets,
prints, flour, and sugar, having now almost become necessaries.
Is it then to be wondered at, the aptitude they displayed in
learning a lesson of self-interest in this new source of wealth
opened up to their view. It became at once the all-absorbing
topic of their thoughts and conversations the embodiment of a
beautiful idea, perfectly in harmony with their feelings, and rich
in perspective of inexhaustible wealth, ease, and plenty. The
candid reader requested to bear in mind two important facts.
First. That the total number of natives, men, women, and
children, at this time did not probably exceed 80,000; and,
secondly, That the islands of New Zealand are somewhat larger
than Great Britain and Ireland. 80,000 inhabitants would be
about equal to a fourth or fifth-rate town in England. "What
should we think of the whole of the United Kingdom being claimed
by just as many savage cannibals, who did not altogether culti-
vate so much land as is contained in some two parishes in Eng-
land? We will suppose further that they never made any
improvements in roads, public buildings, or any of the arts of
civilized life ; that they were cruel and bloodthirsty in their
wars, often-times drinking the warm blood of their victims,
prisoners of war, as it oozed from their wounds when being slain
for a cannibal feast; tyrannical in their domestic habits, allowing
each chief to topic as many young women as he chose for his wives,
who were punished with instant death, and sometimes cruelly


tortured, upon the mere suspicion of infidelity. At perpetual
war with one another, and continually in dread of their lives, they
lived pent up in filthy pahs, swarming with vermin, and suffo-
cating with stench.
This was the condition in which the first missionaries and
settlers found the New Zealand natives, A marked improve-
ment, however, soon took place in their habits, through the
influence and teaching of the missionaries, and through their
intercourse with the settlers, who found profitable employment
for them in. various ways —in procuring spars, and in raising and
collecting native produce for export —which enabled them to
procure good flour and sugar and comfortable clothing. These
articles having become necessary to them, operated as a powerful
incentive to industry.
At the time the British Government took possession of New
Zealand it cannot be denied that the natives had vastly improved
in their moral and physical condition, from their intercourse with
Europeans, who, by their intercession, were sometimes instru-
mental in averting some of their sanguinary wars, and in cement-
ing peaceful relations between the tribes. Some vices had, no
doubt, been introduced amongst them by the lowest class of
settlers; but at that time not many instances of drunkenness
occurred amongst the native race, being warned of the evil of
intoxicating drinks by the missionaries.
Before Captain Hobson took possession of New Zealand in
behalf of Her Britannic Majesty, a great number of settlers were
established in the Northern Island, having peaceable possession
of farms, many of which were under cultivation, and the kauri
forests resounded to the sound of the axe, and afforded occupation
to hundreds of natives guided by European skill, as a considerable
demand for sawn timber had arisen amongst the settlers, who
now began to build comfortable houses for themselves. A cordial
feeling existed between the races, and the prestige of the Euro-
pean name was generally sufficient to maintain their peaceable
rights unmolested, even against turbulent chiefs, who were pre-
vented from their plundering propensities by the more orderly,
who now felt their best interests promoted by living on terms of
good fellowship with the settlers.
Singular it is that about this time, when the natives were
beginning to emerge from their barbarism and to appreciate the
advantages of civilized life, when prosperity dawned on their
country, and not a murmur of discontent was heard, there came
a small sound, a sort of prelude or note of warning, from some
good and humane but misinformed people, who assembled at
Exeter Hall to lecture and to bo enlightened on the condition of
the various aboriginal inhabitants of distant countries. Their


fears were greatly excited—not for the lives of their own country-
men and women, who had courageously gone forth to explore a
new country, and to introduce the arts of civilised life amongst a
ferocious set of cannibals; no, their own people were not the
objects of their tender solicitude, but they had wrought them-
selves up to a desperate state of excitement lest the poor natives
should be defrauded out of their land, and, not having an Euro-
pean idea of its prospective value, might be overreached in a
bargain with the artful settlers. Poor fellows, those natives,with
only about forty millions of acres of land lying entirely waste.
What a pity they should be allowed to part with a single rood !
And then to think that an Englishman, with his wife and family,
should be allowed to settle down on a nice piece of land. What
a burning shame! We must petition Parliament, declare their
titles void, send out commissioners, impose heavy fees, delay for
years the settlement of their titles, and ruin them for their pre-
sumption. What if the prophet did foretel that the “ desert
should blossom and flourish as the rose?” The time is not
arrived yet, and we will prevent it. A Glovernor must be at once
sent out who will soon put an end to their “land-sharking.”
Only to think that a poor Englishman who, if he had stayed at
home, could never have possessed a single rood of land, except a
parish inheritance of 6 feet by 3 feet, which he could not enjoy
till after death —to think that he should be permitted to acquire
a freehold which would in time, with industry, lead to an inde-
pendence, while thousands of our poor are starving at home.
Such were the sentiments industriously spread abroad by the
pseudo-philanthropists of Exeter Hall; loudly reiterated in Par-
liament by those who would be charitable without expense, and
who coveted a saintly popularity ; and echoed throughout some of
the leading journals, whose editors were virtuously indignant that
such glaring impositions were permitted to be practised on poor
ignorant savages. It must be borne in mind that at this time the
settlers were a very small minority, living entirely by sufferance
in a savage community, and tolerated only so long as they kept
on good terms with the chiefs. I have before stated how the
Europeans effected their first settlement on lands which were
secured to them for ever by a payment made to all the surround-
ing chiefs. This payment was at first in reality nothing more or
less than compounding for terms of peaceful occupation, a kind
of “ black mail,” the amount of which was generally estimated
in proportion to the power and importance of the chief, the
distance he dwelt from the settlement—in reality, his means and
disposition to annoy the settler. But, in a very short time, the
natives having learned from the Europeans the idea of selling the
land, purchases began to be made in a more formal manner, by
deed, the chiefs of course claiming the whole country as against
Europeans; and here commences a complete babel of confusion
and internal squabbling amongst themselves about the division of
this newly acquired property, and the ownership of that which


before belonged to no one in particular, but to everyone who
chose to make use of it.
A question naturally arises here as to the abstract right of a
handful of savages to the fee simple of a noble country, contain-
ing many millions of acres, and capable of maintaining a dense
population. The scope of this letter does not admit of doing
justice to an argument on this point; but the principle involved
in the affirmative of such an absurd proposition, may be very
easily tested by supposing an extreme case, by which we shall
find the rule to guide us in all cases. Suppose a fertile country
of fifty millions of acres is occupied only by half-a-dozen savages,
who claim it all because they happened to be born there; and
suppose there is a small island containing many millions of
inhabitants who have not sufficient land to raise the necessaries
of life, and the people are perishing for want; —who will be so
presumptuous as to assert that the surplus population going forth
to till the fertile lands of the wilderness offend against the laws
of God, or in any way trespass on the rights of the half-dozen
aborigines ?
It is plain then that one savage has no right to act the dog in the
manger, and hold millions of acres in barren waste because he
happens to be born in a desert; for this simple reason—that he
cannot make use of it —and that he deprives thousands of his
fellow-creatures of a subsistance. The rule in all such cases is
plain —justice and common sense point out that it would be
wrong to deprive the savage of his natural rights, to abridge his
comforts, or to render it more difficult for him to subsist. A
savage people have only natural, rights ; if they are a few in num-
ber and occupy a large territory, they are entitled to land amply
sufficient for all their wants, but no more. Their own rude laws
prescribe their boundaries within the limits of their power to
hold against the surrounding foe.
To transfer land by deed is not a natural but a civil right,
acquired by law, which implies civil government, a combination
or state of society where the people have surrendered their
individuality to be merged in a community, consenting to abide
by written and well-defined laws. It must be clear to everyone
that we cannot convey to another what we do not possess our-
selves. The only title to land a savage can transfer is the
precarious one he himself holds by, that is, present possession,
with the liability to be driven off by the first plunderer who is
strong enough, and that in a country where there is no law.
Every people have a right to live on the face of the earth, and
if a savage people by their brutal wars depopulate their country,
the industrious and orderly people who overflow their borders,
have a moral as well as a physical right to take possession of it.


“ The earth is the Lord’s, and the fulness thereof.” The com-
mand to “ Go forth and multiply and replenish it” has not been
obeyed by the savage Hew-Zealander; his cruel wars have tended
to devastate and destroy, instead of to multiply and replenish it.
He has been “ w r eighed in the balance and found wanting,” and
he must give way to a people who fulfil the words of prophecy,
whose habits of industry and peaceful labor will make the “ desert
to blossom and flourish as the rose.”
When Captain Hobson in 1840, first raised the British flag in
Hew Zealand, he met several of the chiefs at Waitangi, Bay of
Islands, and on behalf of the Crown entered into a treaty,
(known as the treaty of Waitangi), with those wdio were present,
w r ho signed it for themselves and also in behalf of all other chiefs
who were absent. It may not be amiss to notice hero that the
independent tribes who did not sign, repudiated the treaty
altogether, not having delegated their authority to the chiefs who
were present, between whom and themselves deadly feuds existed.
They kept aloof for a considerable time, narrowly watching the
progress of events, and finding that the Maoris had by far the
best of the bargain, many of them subsequently capitulated and
signed, after much intreaty, like coy maidens, pretending reluc-
tance in order to secure some valuable present which, through the
Governor’s weakness, they invariably managed to squeeze out of
him. Their signatures after all were of no avail for the purposes
of Government, as the tribes would not be bound by their own
chiefs, except it answered their purpose ; it enabled them to avail
themselves of British law in all matters where they required its
aid and protection against a European by assuming to bo British
subjects, and the Courts of Law invariably leant to their side,
overruling all technicalities and errors in their favour. On the
other side of the question the Queen’s writ was powerless, and in
no ease could an honest debt be recovered if a native refused to
How far Captain Hobson’s instructions authorised this extra-
ordinary exercise of diplomatic power is best known to the Home
Government who employed him. Experience has proved the
treaty to be an entire failure so far as any benefit has accrued
to the British Government resulting from it; but it is the general
opinion that this failure is justly attributable to the dishonesty
and incapacity of successive Governors and those whom they have
employed in the management of native affairs, rather than to the
treaty itself. It -was doubtless a monstrous piece of folly to
admit that to a few natives, about 80,000 in all, belonged the
whole of the islands of Hew Zealand, a territory larger than the
United Kingdom. This admission is, how r ever, capable of much
modification by the cession of the sovereignty, and the right of
pre-emption to the Crown, but the folly of our Governors in the
management of native affairs has hitherto failed to profit by these


provisions. It is well known that the intention of Captain
Hobson and those who assisted in drawing up the treaty was to
model it after the pattern of the United States G-ovemment as it
regards the acquirement of land. None were allowed to purchase
except the agents of the Crown, and when the G-ovemment required
land for any purpose it was understood that the chiefs should
obtain payment according to the rate they had heen accustomed to
get. It was never intended that the Government were to pay
according to its progressive value which it acquired entirely in
consequence of the arrival and occupation of Europeans. Much
less was it ever contemplated by the treaty that the natives
should possess a title equivalent to the fee simple of the land.
Such follies as these were left for the consummation of subsequent
fanatics who were placed in authority over the Colony. It is
often asserted by Maori sympathisers that the fact of their
plundering settlers who did not pay them for their w r aste land is
evidence that it belonged to them, and that they esteemed it as
their exclusive possession ; but the argument will not hold good,
because in those early times they laid every settler under tribute
and invariably robbed him if in their power to do it with impunity,
especially if he travelled with any goods they coveted, although
he did not require land. A new-comer was to them a pigeon to
be plucked, an orange to be squeezed, and when all the feathers
and juice was out of him he might squat down where ho pleased.
I have clearly shown that at first the land was as free to any
one to occupy and cultivate as the stream of water was to quench
the traveller’s thirst. That when the first settlers wished to squat
on it, they made presents to the chiefs in order to live peaceable
and obtain exemption from plunder—that this custom caused the
chiefs to assemble whenever a new settler arrived, and after a
short time the competition amongst these new-comers, and their
eagerness to secure certain land which they selected led to the
form of direct purchase by deeds of conveyance, which were in
the case of valuable selections required more for the purpose of
securing them against other Europeans trespassing on their
boundaries than against natives. The evidence of this progres-
sive method of acquiring land is apparent to this day, and every
purchase made even now furnishes proof of it in the absurd
claims set up by all the natives far and near who hear of the
Government negociating for a piece of land. Claims of every
kind and description are set up by all the Maoris within fifty, or
sometimes one hundred miles round. One asserts that his father
was killed in war on some part of it; another, that he eat a piece
of the chiefs head who formerly lived on it, and if he is
not paid he will eat the first white man who settles on it;
another, that his canoe was wrecked on the coast, and
his father was drowned, so he put his “ tapu” on the ground ;
another says he once gathered oysters and pipies on the beach ;
another can point out a tree, in the branches of which his


grandfather rested after death ; another caught rats on the land
and eat them ; another caught eels in a swamp ; another cut down
a tree, and his people made a canoe out of it; another encamped
on it one night and drank of a stream that runs through it; and
another, hard put to it for a claim, says he w r alked across it and
manured it. Fifty others claim as the brothers of some of the
above claimants. (A native calls them all brothers who are of
his tribe.)
The absurd nature of the foregoing claims—and every one of
them have been urged before the Commissioners—will convince
any reasonable man that they had no valid title to it at all, and
w r ere hard put to it to find out how it happened to belong to them.
I maintain it is good evidence of what I have before advanced as
to the mode the first settlers adopted in acquiring land, also of
the native idea of the proprietary of land before the Europeans
taught them to make it a marketable commodity, and no doubt if
the first settlers had told them the light of the sun and the air
we breathe belonged to them in New Zealand, and paid them for
it, they would have continued to exact payment for it to this
day.
I am not so ambitious as to suppose that any amount of
evidence would convince Maori sympathisers, or wring from them
a confession of their errors. They have adopted the Creed, are
anxious to subvert the authority of the Queen and substitute
Native supremacy, which has already been accomplished in many
districts by the New Institutions of Governor Grey. I would
ask if any of the claims enumerated above would entitle a poor
man in England to a foot of ground in the parish where he was
born ? Why then does it confer a title on cannibals ? It can
only be accounted for on the supposition that the maudlin senti-
mentalists of Exeter Hall have initiated the new fashion of
worshipping savages.
I will now endeavour to show the natural consequences of this
act of the British Giovernment, whereby they endowed the New
Zealand Natives with all the land. This I call blunder the first ,
and which has been followed up by a series of blunders ever since,
by successive Governors and their imbecile agents, whose eligi-
bility for office, provided they could talk the native language, was
in the exact ratio to their hypocrisy, disregard of truth, dis-
honesty, and unscrupulous deference to the whims and caprices
of their superior in office. A Government carried on without
regard to established principles by a system of dastardly expe-
dients, must needs have servants whose consciences are entirely
in the keeping of their superiors in office—indeed, it would be
difficult to imagine a more complete system of Jesuitical rule
than that established in the Native Department ol New Zealarm
before Constitutional Government was granted. But lam di-


grossing from the point to be considered. Nothing could possibly
have exercised a more baneful effect on the native mind or operated
more to destroy his character for industry and independence than
this first blunder—acknowledging him to bo the owner of all the
land. Those who lived in New Zealand in early times cannot
fail to observe a marked change for the worse, which has gradually
crept over him ever since. Before then, the Natives were thriving
and industrious in their habits, raised a surplus produce of
potatoes sufficient to supply all the vessels that put in to refit,
prepared many tons of flax for exportation, and were able to
supply the navy with as many spars as they required, willing to
work for any European for a small remuneration, they were good
servants, expert in boating and fishing, deferential to their em-
ployers, and anxious to please. The payment for land previous
to the pretence of the establishment of British authority here was
comparatively small, and not sufficient to place them in circum-
stances entirely independent of labour; but as soon as they were
the acknowledged lords of the whole territory, native industry
became quite para'yzel, abundance from this new source flowed
in upon them without labour, and they spent all their time in idle
scheming and quarrelling amongst themselves about the owner-
ship of the land, laying about smoking all day, playing at cards
and draughts, and laughing at the Pakeha for being such fools as
to buy land of them.
In reverting back to the commencement of the Colony, some
amusing details might be gathered from our early reminiscences
of New Zealand jurisprudence. In ,1840 a gentleman of the
name of Eisher duly installed himself as Judge, first at the Bay
of Islands, and afterwards for a short time in Auckland. It is
said he had previously some little practice as attorney amongst
the convicts of New South Wales ; how he came to assume the
title of Judge I don’t know, but it was reported he was sent to
New Zealand because Sir George Gipps wanted to get rid of him.
A man was summoned to his Court at Kororareka, and cast in a
small debt and the Court expenses, which amounted to three or
four pounds. Not considering it a just decision, the poor man
would not pay it, and said' he would go to gaol first. In those
early days the expenses was an important item, the Courts by
fines and fees were almost self-supporting, they could not afford
a debtor’s prison, and it was not an easy matter to draw on the
Government chest, which was usually bled to syncope by indis-
pensible demands.
It was not a Court of Record, and where the fines went nobody
knew. Perhaps a precedent might bo found in the back States of
America of a similar judge opening shop on his own hook to eke
out his income by fines and costs, without troubling the State
chest; at any rate Judge Fisher and another Magistrate met the
delinquent on the beach, seized him by the collar, one on each


side of him, turned his pockets inside out, and took what little
silver there was, then by a vigorous application of his boot to his
seat of honor, told the man that was a lesson for him for con-
tempt of Court, in refusing to pay, which he hoped would be a
warning to him another time ; he might now go about his business.
I cannot vouch for every particular of the above, but I was
informed of it by the man himself soon after the event; he is not
now in the Colony. This summary method of execution is not
exactly in accordance with our notions of British liberty, but the
man said it was after dinner, and the judge and his friend the
J. P. had both indulged a little too freely in wine.
Another remarkable case was tried by this same Judge Fisher
in Auckland. One of the settlers lost a fine pig, which he had
been fattening up for bacon, after searching everywhere for it, he
passed by a butcher’s yard, and hearing a familiar grunt, jumped
over the fence and saw his own pig tied up, going to be killed as
soon as the furnace boiled; the man immediately fetched several
of his neighbours, and a constable, who all identified the pig as
belonging to him. The constable cautioned the butcher not to
kill the pig, and went to take out a warrant, as the butcher and
the pig must be brought before the Court on the morrow, when
he must prove how he came by it. The butcher, who was a bold
man, when the constable and the people went away for the war-
rant, settled the little matter as he thought securely by killing
the pig and scraping all the hair off him, so that when they
returned it could not be identified. The people swore to the pig,
and the butcher was committed for trial before Judge Fisher.
He was liberated on bail, and it was reported that every day
before the trial a fine joint of meat found its way to the judge’s
table free of charge. On the day of trial a jury of twelve men
were empanelled, who patiently heard all the evidence, and were
unanimous in their opinion, and about to return a verdict of
guilty, not in accordance with the judge’s charge. They did not
require to retire, but were whispering audibly to one another, the
word guilty being distinctly heard, when the judge jumped up
and told them he didn’t want their verdict, the prisoner was dis-
charged, the law would bear him outr, he had precedent for
deciding the case without them in New South Wales. The jury
were surprised, and so was the prisoner too, who got away as
quickly as possible from the Court. This fact can now be verified
in Auckland, by some of the jurymen who were empanelled on the
trial. The Supreme Court was opened soon after upon the
arrival of Chief Justice Martin and the Registrar, when an end
was put to such follies as the above. The Supreme Court has
ever since maintained its character as an impartial tribunal,
gained the respect of the people, and is justly esteemed as a boon
to the Colony, and is an institution which in its transmission to
these shores has preserved its likeness to the parent stem more
perfectly than any other branch of G-overnment,


The British Government by confirming Captain Hobson’s
authority committed themselves to the “ Treaty of Waitangi,”
involving concessions such as no other European power would
have granted. With unparalelled liberality they resigned the
territorial rights of these islands acquired by discovery, to a
handful of savages, and those savages divided into different tribes,
rankling with mutual jealousies and ever at war. Still, notwith-
standing, much might have been done to repair the evil of this
untoward concession by pursuing a wise and just policy afterwards.
The chiefs had now ceased to work; none but the slaves —and they
only through compulsion—pursued any laborious occupation.
Native industry became quite paralyzed; every thing was forsaken
and neglected for their daily meetings and eternal “ korero” on
the one absorbing topic— land. The apple of discord, the bone
of contention had been thrown in their midst, and many sore and
bitter quarrels arose amongst former friends ; bloody scenes were
enacted, and are to this day as virulent and uncompromising as
ever. How can it be otherwise ? They have no title to the land,
and admit only that of force among themselves, so that the first
intimation made by the Government that they require to purchase
certain lands, is the signal for war in many districts, and not
until many are killed, and often some eaten, is the matter of
ownership decided. It would not perhaps be far off the mark if
we estimated in round numbers that 1000 natives have been slain
in their internecine wars, since the Treaty of Waitangi was
signed, solely owing to disputes about the ownership of land.
Take for example one instance—over 100 were killed at Taranaki
alone on both sides in revenge of Eawiri, who was shot with six
of his tribe while they were unarmed measuring their own land,
before Governor Browne interfered to endeavour to prevent further
bloodshed. About forty were killed at Mongonui in 1843 ; and
between Auckland and the East Cape they have been constantly
at war about land, and are to this day. What a blessing it would
have been for the natives if the Government had taken all the
land from them except what they required for their cultivations,
or bought it all up of them when they would willingly have sold
for a trifle. We who are living in the country know it, for we
see the fruitful source of evil it has been to them from the begin-
ning, and ever will be so long as they have an acre for sale. Still,
in the face of all these facts, which cannot be controverted, when-
ever we read an English newspaper, or the Parliamentary debates
on New Zealand affairs, we find with few exceptions nothing but
the oft-refuted, worn-out, stereotyped slanders on the Colonists,
every writer and speaker following in the same wake, like a long
team of horses, each with his nose in his leader’s tail, whining in
tones of pity and condolence because the poor injured natives’
lands are to be confiscated for the small crime of commencing war
against the Queen by laying an ambush and murdering eight of
Her Majesty’s soldiers who were peaceably walking the highway.
Subsequently, in cold blood, they have murdered unarmed men,
b 2


women, and children, who have been hacked to pieces with the toma-
hawk while peacefully pursuing their daily avocations, and to this
day they refuse terms of peace, and set the Governor at defiance.
These are the crimes they would condone, and these the savages
whose lands should beheld sacred, preserved a perpetual wilderness,
a solitary desolation, rather than yield their genial fruits to the
honest labour of the English peasant. So say the Maori sympa-
thisers of the compact and creed in the Colony, and of the Press,
the Parliament, and Exeter Hall, in England; but so say not I,
nor any true friend of the Native race, or of his own countrymen.
We say, take away the apple of discord—remove the hone of con-
tention from their midst —confiscate all the rebellious natives' lands.
When they sue for peace, and not till then, with dignity and grace
becoming the Crown of England, return them amply sufficient for all
their real wants, but no more.
The first cause of complaint the settlers had against the
Government was the Proclamation in 1840, issued by Sir George
Gipps, the Governor of New South Wales, declaring that all
titles to land were null and void except those derived through the
Crown, and calling upon all those who had bought land of the
native chiefs to forward their title-deeds at once to the Colonial
Secretary or their lands would be forfeited. Commissioners were
appointed to examine into and report on the claims, and the pro-
gramme set forth that the settlers were to be graciously allowed
to keep as many acres of land as their payment made to the natives
would amount to at the rate of ss. per acre. The surplus land
was to be forfeited to the Crown. This was the sample of justice
the settlers were first treated to who had risked their all, and
even their lives, as pioneers in the great cause of Colonisation.
This mandate, issued by a Convict Governor, caused great alarm
to the settlers, as much of the land was not worth 6d. an acre,
and thousands of acres have been sold years after at less than
2s. Cd., and would not now after the lapse of a quarter of a
century, realise ss. ia the market if put up to auction. It was in
fact an act of confiscation, against the injustice of which the
voice of Exeter Hall was never raised. But the wmrst remains to
be told, to the eternal disgrace of the Government, for this
atrocious proclamation was put in force with the addition of
ruinous fees exacted upon each case. £5 was paid into court before
any claim would be entertained, and other fees, in all which wmre
paid in cash before a Crown grant issued amounted in many
cases to about 2s. Gd. per acre on the land granted, which was
literally more than much of it wmuld sell at for years after. The
natural consequence of this arbitrary measure was the ruin of all
the poor settlers who had small homesteads. They were dragged
about from one place to another to attend Commissioners Courts,
and had to pledge their cottages and gardens to raise the neces-
sary fees. It entirely broke up their homes and estates which
were dotted round about the coast near the the native settlements,


where their example of industrious thrift operated as a stimulus
to native labour. If the land granted realized any surplus after
years of delay and all these ruinous expenses were paid, it was
in most cases absorbed by the innkeepers at whose house they
stayed during their delay in Auckland while dancing attendance
at the Commissioner’s Court.
But in tracing the cause of the first war, we must not lose sight
of the effect on the native mind produced by this harsh and illegal
treatment of the early settlers. The Maoris, who narrowly
watched all the proceedings of the Government, asked their wffiite
neighbours how it was that the Governor took the best part of the
land from them all ? The answer was that he said they had bought
it too cheap. “ 0, then,” said the natives, “he will give it us back
again, and Ave will return it to you, as Ave do not want it.” But
when they found that the Government robbed the settlers and
stuck to the plunder themselves, they reflected for a while, and
then said “ Well, if that’s the Avay the Governor serves his oAvn
children, how will he serve us, when he is strong enough to
conquer us r” “ and so you are all slaves, ‘ taurikarika katoa, ’ for
gentlemen (“ rangatira”) would rawer submit to be robbed.” It
Avas no use telling them Ave were free men, and that “ Britons
never never will be slaves ” after that; avc Avere loAvered in their
estimation, and the Government ever after Avere viewed with
jealousy and suspicion. The consequences of these arbitary acts
were not felt so much by the natives at that time because they
\A r ere all busy selling laud to the Governor, and receiving large
payments, which diverted their attention from everything else. As
soon, however, as the treasury Avas empty and the land purchases
ceased,murmuring ana discontent became apparent, Avhich shortly
broke out into loud complaints against the Government.
It must be confessed that Governor Hobson laboured under
many difficulties. The revenue was not sufficient in those days
to disburse the ordinary expenses of carrying on the Government,
even including the paltry subsidy allowed from England, so that
there Avas an empty treasury and no funds to buy land. The
natives were at this time very urgent to sell land, and the Governor
might have bought up nearly the Avhole island, with the exception
of the native reserves, for £20,000. The funds were not forth-
coming, and the opportunity Avas lost.
Every means Avas resorted to by the Colonial Government to
raise a revenue out of the land-huxtering business, and the want
of funds to buy did not stop the trade so long as they could rob
the old settlers by legal quibbling, and seize their surplus land
after issuing a Crown grant for a tenth part of what they bought
of the natives ; and by openly bribing a tribe Avho had no claim
to dispute the titles of claimants Avho purchased of the tribe
occupying the land they sold. This scheme Avas attempted at


Mongonui, but without success ; it caused a native war in 1843,
for which the Government agents were responsible, which resulted
in the death of about 40 Maoris. After the native tribes who
sold to the settlers vindicated their title by the ordeal of battle
(the tribe the Government pitched against them being beaten),
the titles were acknowledged, and the settlers got a moiety of what
they had bought, after the robbing rate of the “ Land Claims
Act.”
The Colonial Government at this time occupied a very undig-
nified position: depending on the land revenue for supplies, they
were brought into competition with the ruined land claimants,
who were compelled to sell at any price to pay their debts. These
forced sales operated as a check to the Government sales, and
created an antagonistic feeling against the land claimants, whose
titles were consequently delayed, and when issued so clogged with
extortionate fees, that it would have been far better for them if'
the Government had at first confiscated the whole. At that time
the current cash value of a scrip order on the Treasury, (which
was transferable, and available to purchase land at any Govern-
ment sale) was only 2s. 6d. in the pound sterling, and thousands
of pounds were sold at only Is. 6d. in the pound. The reader
will here see at a glance how the old land claimants were treated.
These scrip orders were issued to them at the rate of four acres
of land for every pound sterling they proved before the Com-
missioners they had paid the natives ; £25 paid the natives
entitled the settler to a scrip order for £lOO, for which they paid
fees averaging £lO. This scrip being of the cash value of 2s. 6d.
in the pound would bring £l2 10s., deduct from that £lO for fees
paid the Commissioner, and the claimant had left £2 10s. for the
£25 he paid the natives some years before. This is quite enough
on this stale topic. Let those who would understand how British
justice is administered in the Colonies look to the above facts and
figures, which I challenge the world to disprove.
Before dismissing the old claimants, it must be admitted that
they were not all treated alike. Some obtained grants for
10,000 acres, who did not pay the natives so much as others who
only got 500 acres. It is said that “ kissing goes by favour,” so
did grants of land in New Zealand ; and as the favoured ones got
what was due to the others, it made a fair average; so they have
no right to grumble.
The land claimants of the North were the peculiar favourites
of the natives, because they occupied the land they purchased,
and through them for years they had obtained their supplies ; and
although they sometimes robbed them, it was more in the Irish-
man’s way who knocked his friend down for love* than out of
(Query : Love of plunder?—Printer’s Devil.)


revenge, except in cases of indiscretion with tapu’d women, when
it served them right. The natives were quite astonished at the
harsh treatment their friends, the old settlers, received from* the
mother country, who, it cannot he denied, in this unnatural
instance acted the step-mother, and went a step too far. To rob
their friends was poaching in their preserve ; it was a peculiar
privilege belonging to themselves, which they did not intend to
alienate when they ceded the sovereignty to the Crown. It
created a bitter feeling against the Q-overnment, which rankled
in their minds. The financial state of the Colony was never lower
than soon after the arrival of Governor Fitzroy. The Treasury
was exhausted, which caused a cessation of all land purchases
from the natives. About this time some thieves broke into the
Treasury Office one night, and forced open the iron safe, expect-
ing to find a rich booty; but they found only some paper
promises and twopence-halfpenny in specie. The matter was
hushed up for the sake of the Gfovernment credit. In consequence
of this utter exhaustion of the sinews of war and Gfovernment, the
natives’ land revenue was reduced to nil. This was felt more
particularly at the Bay of Islands, and was considered a serious
grievance. The Maoris imagined that the Gfovernment would
always be ready to buy land, and that the golden shower would
never cease. Their pleasing dreams were dissipated, and they
awoke to the sad reality of an empty exchequer. They reflected
that by consenting to sell only to the Crown they lost their former
good customers, the immigrants, who now began to pour in, who
paid one pound per acre to the Gfovernment, while they sold at
only one penny or twopence. In this state of ruind, ready for the
first outbreak, they only wanted a leader bold enough to seize
the advantage, and urge them on to hostilities. Johnny Heke
was the man for the occasion, and they did not wait long for a
pretext. They were on terms of amity with all the settlers, and
their hatred was directed only against the Government. In
April, 1844, two American whalers were fined £3OO for a breach
of the customs regulations, and the captains of those ships told
the natives that they would now lose all their old friends, as the
Americans would not come there again to be fined, and the Maoris
would soon have to pay dear enough for their tobacco. They
knew that in consequence of the duty on tabacco, the price Avas
doubled; and they had an idea that the flagstaff, being under
the control of the Customs, had something to do with it, so they
resolved to cut it down. This was too much for Captain Fitzroy,
although he overlooked the AVairau massacre, and pardoned the
murderers of more than twenty unarmed gentlemen, and had a short
time before, in open Council, declared he Avould rather cut off hia
own right hand than go to war with the natives, yet this blow
aimed at the British “ flag that braved a thousand years ” Avas too
much. The dignity of the Crown was at stake ; the Governor
deemed it a sufficient causus belli , and Avar was declared. Troops
had been sent for to Sydney, but not urgently demanded, but


through the representations of E. D’Oyley, Esq., a gentleman
who had put in there on his way to England, the 99th Eegiment
aqd other detachments were speedily sent, and arrived very
opportunely. The natives became alarmed, and sued for peace.
Terms were proposed and accepted. The natives in token of
submission surrendered twelve stand of arms, and were very
urgent that the soldiers should be sent back. Governor Eitzroy
betrayed too much eagerness to yield to all their demands, which
the natives attributed to fear. He even returned them the twelve
muskets, and immediately sent the troops baca to Sydney. After
a short interval the natives, finding the troops were sent back,
became more turbulent than.ever. They were sent for again, and
the war began in earnest. It was carried on with various success,
the flagstaff, the ensign of -British authority, being twice again
erected, and each time cut down by Johnny Heke; and there it
ignominiously lay for years after the native hero’s death, which
occurred in consequence of wounds received in battle. The war
was entirely a Government affair, and the property of the settlers
was not at first injured by the natives,even after they were known to
have assisted tl* troops ; and but for the indiscretion committed
by firing at them from the “ Hazard,” after the township was
deserted by the troops and the fighting had ceased, it is confidently
asserted that not a house would have been burnt down, as the
plunder was all they required.
After the storm of battle, which ended in the sacking and
burning of the flourishing town of Kororareka, there came a lull,
which was but of short duration. Eresh troops arrived, and the
war was, after a short interval, vigorously prosecuted against Heke
and Kawiti with doubtful successfor a length of time. The township
of Kororareka was for a long time deserted by Europeans ; and
although it has a splendid harbour and a commanding situation,
has never thoroughly recovered this untoward event. The settlers
who were dragged into the quarrel and compelled to fight, were
entirely ruined, having lost their all, and to this day have never
received any compensation. B. E. Turner, Esq., having a large
property in buildings, was one of the principal sufferers; and
J. S. Polaek, Esq., the owner of a splendid house in those days,
which Avas occupied during the quarter sessions as the Court
House, at the commencement of the war lent the building to the
Government; it Avas used as a rendezvous for the officers, and a
depot for ammunition. Through the carelessness of some person
the ammunition exploded, and Mr. Polaek narroAvly escaped
with his life, being severely Avounded in the head by falling
timbers. No compensation has been aAvarded him for bloAving
up his house, worth £2,000, with the Government poAvder, Avhile
in their occupation. About this time several deputations of pro-
fessed loyal natives Avaited on the Governor to urge him to give
hem permission to sell their land to the settlers, as he declined
to buy for the Crown. The Governor’s Executive Council


consisted of Messrs. Sinclair, Swain son, and Shepherd—the
Colonial Secretary, Attorney-General, and Treasurer. Mr.
Clarke, the Protector of Aborigines, was his Excellency’s
favourite counsellor, as he once declared in the Council Chamber
that he “ relied more on his private advice than the other three put
together
Between them the Governor was counselled to yield to the
ui'gent demand of the loyal natives, and a proclamation was issued
on the 10th of October, 1844, in the Government Gazette , to the
effect that the Crown’s right cf pre-emption would be waived
over the natives’ lands in favour of any purchaser who obtained
a certificate to that effect of the Colonial Secretary, one penny
per acre being the fee or fine to be paid to the Government.
The people of Auckland, though eager to buy land of the
natives, had already seen so much of the Commissioners’ Court
proceedings that made them very cautious until they were satis-
fied as to the undisputed ownership, that they might be quite
safe ; consequently, when the natives called round to find pur-
chasers, they -were requested by the people to get the authorities
to state in writing what lands belonged to them. The Governor
o o
was anxious the people should buy, as it was the only way to
prevent the rebellion becoming general, the natives being every-
where disaffected. It was generally thought by the Auckland
people to be a wise concession at the time, and that it saved the
Colony; for if a general rising of the natives had taken place,
they could then easily have swept us all into the sea. Those
Maoris who had land to sell were furnished by the Government
with a written document, stating that the within named chief
or chiefs were the real owners of such and such lands which were
therein described, and that any person wishing to purchase them
might obtain a certificate waiving the Crown’s right of pre-
emption in his favour- This written document was signed
“ Andrew Sinclair, Colonial Secretary, by his Excellency’s com-
mand,” and countersigned by Mr. Clarke, Protector of Abori-
gines, whoso decision as to the ownership of the land was final.
This was a positive invitation to the settlers to induce them to
purchase. After all necessary precaution was taken as to the
ownership of the land, the public of Auckland did not imagine
there could be any dispute afterwards raised about the title.
The waiver was withdrawn by the Queen’s Representative, and
gazetted in due form, and each purchaser obtained a certificate
that his purchase was approved. It was not then supposed for
a moment that Governor Eitzroy designedly entrapped them into
making these purchases with a view of swindling them out of
their money, although it turned out so under the clever manage-
ment of his successor, whose policy wo shall presently review.
Governor EitzEoy was anxious to do all the good in his power,
but had very little assistance from home in troops and money


Vhen the first war broke out, and he was possessed of one serious
failing, which rendered him totally unfit to govern the Colony.
His peculiar weakness, either occasioned by fear, or love, or both,
was an undue leaning to the native race. There was no such
thing as justice for an European where the Maoris were concerned.
The Wairau massacre, which occurred in June, 1843, created a
thrill of horror in the breasts of every loyal man and woman in
the Colony, was unavenged ; and the cruel perpetrators of these
cold-blooded murders met the Governor, who saluted them as
friends, and treated them as though nothing had happened. Mr.
Spain, the Queen's Commissioner, had carefully investigated the
the New Zealand Company’s claim to the Waitara at Taranaki,
decided the validity of the purchase, and made his award. The
Governor, by arbitrarily reversing this decision, justly incurred
the resentment of that influential body, and they procured his
recall. Captain Grey, who succeeded him, arrived in Auckland
in November, 1845, with more extensive powers. Detachments
from several Regiments stationed at the neighbouring Colonies
now poured into New Zealand. The 58th Regiment, with
Colonel Wynyard, had about a month before landed at the Bay
of Islands, and the 65th were not long after them ; so that with
all these additional troops, and the promise of an increased subsidy
from home, there was every prospect of a speedy and final settle-
ment of the war, and the colonists began to breathe more freely.
Some sharp skirmishing took place at the Bay with the natives,
who were clever at laying an ambuscade and surprising small
parties of our troops, who but for the timely warning of our
faithful ally Tamati Walker, would probably have been entrapped
more than once. In January following, Ruapekapeka, the strong-
hold of the natives at the Bay of Islands, was stormed and taken
by the troops, which concluded the war.
The circumstances attending the advent of Governor Grey
could not have been more propitious to forward his own ambitious
views. Everything conspired to smooth the way to the successful
issue of his Government. The difficulties of his predecessor had
all been removed; money and troops were ample for the exigencies
of Government, and the tempest of war, well-nigh spent, soon
blew over. An unclouded political atmosphere, and a serene sky
afforded full scope for spontaneous action. Under such favoured
circumstances the spirit and genius of the Governor is developed
in his unbiassed acts, and by these alone will the faithful historian,
as a just judge, sum up the man.
It will be remembered that Governor Eitzroy, being entirely
without funds, and several months salary being due to the clerks
and servants of the Government, as a last resource issued deben-
tures for one and five pounds, which were negotiable at a small
discount, being legal tender for the duties of Customs. When
Governor Grey arrived, several thousands of pounds were in


circulation and widely distributed amongst the merchants and
shopkeepers who took them of the Government employees, as
being the nearest approach to cash they could arrive at. One of
the first acts of Governor Grey was carefully to ascertain all the
arrears of pay due to the Government officials, and to public
contractors, pay them up in these debentures, and the next day
issue a Gazette depreciating their value about 40 per cent, by
proclaiming that they would no longer be received as legal tender
in the payment of duties of Customs, also that they were to be
called in, not for the purpose of paying them off, but to be reissued
in sums not less than £lO, bearing 8 per cent, interest, and payable
some time within twenty years.
Loud complaints were uttered at this breach of faith ;
the merchant surveying his Government paper, and regret-
ting that he did not know in time to release his goods
from bond. The retailer and poor shopkeeper regretting
that some knowing officials, usually long-winded customers,
had paid him so punctually the day before in this waste
paper, which the merchants would no longer take ; and the
poor labourer hawking them about the town at half price to feed
his starving family. They all shortly after found their way into
the usurers’ hands at the rate of about 12s. in the pound, some
having been publicly sold by auction to test their value, which
realised that sum.
This act of our new Governor, which might be termed his coup
d'essai in New Zealand, was loudly canvassed at the time. Some
said it was an act of repudiation and savoured of dishonesty, others
that it was smart, and all acknowledged that it was well-timed ,
just after all obligations were paid off in a currency depreciated
about 40 per cent.
The next public act of Governor Grey, which attained notoriety
and created no small stir in Auckland, was the disallowance of
the claims to land purchased under the penny-an-acre proclama-
tion issued by his predecessor. He resolved to run a tilt against
all who had at any time purchased lands of the natives, and he
selected this class of claimants for his first encounter. I have
before mentioned the concession made by Governor Fitzroy to
the natives, waiving the Crown’s right of pre-emption over the
land ; and that many persons had staked all their little property
to raise money to buy land of the natives, which they were
encouraged to do by the Government, who furnished the natives
with written testimonials of ownership to induce the public to
purchase; and it is believed this well-timed concession saved the
Colony. Each purchaser received a printed certificate, filled up
and signed by the Colonial Secretary, stating the number of acres
and other particulars. Everything was plain and straightforward,
the title was ascertained by the Government, the natives acknow-
ledged the payment, and were perfectly satisfied, and the certifi-


cates were issued from the Colonial Secretary’s office. It will be
seen that the faith of the Crown solemnly pledged by the Queen’s
representative, as witness “ Our well and truly beloved Robert Fitz-
roy" was ruthlessly broken, as witness “ our well and truly
beloved George Grey."
Through this act alone of a Governor far away in New Zealand,
the name of our beloved Queen became a mocking and a byword,
and the pledged faith of Eoyalty, a perfidious swindle. Our
friends in England will doubtless wonder how such things could
ho permitted in a British Colony where the laws are supposed
to be the same as in England. Nothing is easier, the Governor
before we had a Constitution, was King, Lords, and Commons,
united in himself. In those days of slow-sailing vessels in 1846,
the Governor could depend on a twelvemonth’s start before the
answer to any complaint sent home against him would reach here.
The complaint must go through the Colonial Secretary’s office
here, in order that the Governor’s explanation might go home with
it, or it would not be received. This afforded every opportunity
for delay, it might be months, and we have heard of letters being
altogether suppressed. But Governor Grey did not require to
use any of these means ; he had a specific of his own admirably
adapted to suit his purpose with the Colonial Office at home. The
Secretary for the Colonies is responsible to Parliament for the
peace of ail the Colonies, his duties in these days of our extended
Colonial Empire are more than any one man can possibly attend
to ; of course the Under-Secretary, and his numerous Subs, read
all the despatches, write all the replies, and transact all the
business, except in very important matters, and so long as all goes
on smoothly, the signature is all that is required of the great
functionary himself. Upon the arrival of every mail the political
summary of events is carefully condensed from the despatches,
and any important change, or prominent topics of interest are
orally communicated by the Under-Secretary.
Not so pleasant however is it when a Colony becomes the theatre
of war. Then the Minister must read and study for himself, until
he is master of every question likely to be mooted in Parliament,
where he is expected to stand up and reply to all the bantering of
the opposition. Nothing then is so much dreaded at the Colo-
nial Office as the prospect of war in any of the Colonies ; it not
only adds immeasurably to the labour of all the underlings, but
it necessitates the close application and study of a confused mass
of evidence, which tasks the powers of the Minister, and cannot
be performed by proxy.
It is plain then, from past experience, that nothing is easier for
a Governor to do, where an aboriginal population and Europeans
are mixed in a distant Colony, than to frighten the authorities at
home, and extort from them the sanction of almost any measure


however repugnant to liberty or justice, if it be represented as the
only means of preventing ttie expenditure of “ a vast amount of
blood and treasure
Here we have the key to the secret of the Governor’s success
with the Home Office—the Gorgon monster which has done for
him good service in more instances than one, whose serpent locks
had only to be shaken to scare them into stony immobility while
we are plundered of our property. The Home Office never did
consent to this measure of spoliation. The Blue-book will prove
that more than one Secretary of State directed that the “ faith of
the Crown must be kept inviolate” and all the purchases recog-
nized which had already taken place, but if the Governor thought
it best to prevent any further dealings on thy same terms to do
so.”
But this reply did not satisfy the rapacity of our Governor,
whose sense of honour never soared so high as to esteem public
faith worth keeping. He had resolved upon his course of spolia-
tion, however the solemn pledge of Eoyalty might sink into
contempt. He had but once more to raise the scare-crow, the
bloody-head and cross-bones and frighten the Horae Office out of
their silly notions of honour and propriety; and he succeeded—
obtained from England’s Minister a tacit acquiescence, wrung
from his fears, commingled with a sense of shame and stained
honour.
For this one act our Governor obtained great credit from the
Aborigines’ Protection Society and Exeter Hall. He was a
minister of peace, and stayed the effusion of blood. So ho said,
and so it was by some believed ; but the sequel remains to be told.
Eighteen years have elapsed since these events. All the purchases
were justly admitted by the natives, and the laud surrendered,
but not to the lawful owners. Not one drop of blood was spilt, or
one ounce of treasure spent, to compel the natives to fulfil their
engagements, but widows and orphans were robbed of their pro-
perty, the savings of hard-earned industry, and the vile trash of
peasants were wrung from their honest palms to swell the Gover-
nor's coffers.
For such deeds he obtained a handle to his name, and we who
were plundered naturally ask the question are these deeds worthy
of promotion, and is this the :t man whom the Queen delighteth
to honor P” It may be urged in extenuation of the above
swindle that Commissioners were appointed to investigate
the claims, and the purchasers had the alternative offered
them of paying according to a scale of fees from ss. to
10s. per acre, instead of Id. to Government according to
the proclamation. The answer is that the Commissioners
appointed by the Governor were his tools, and in some cases, as in


the instance of Widow Forbes, the Commissioners’ decision, if
distasteful to the Governor was overruled, and in many cases the
land was not worth the fees demanded. Where land was covered
with valuable timber and the purchasers would not pay the fees, the
Governor disposed of the case in a summary way by licensing
any applicant to cut the timber, thus denuding the property of
its value, and arbitrarily anticipating the law by assuming in
in himself the powers of judge and jury.
After the campaign against the penny-an-acre purchasers had
been conducted to a successful issue, another class of land claim-
ant’s next attracted His Excellency’s attention. These were the
Ministers and teachers of the Church of England Mission. Mr.
George Clarke, one of the teachers, being chosen by Captain Fitz-
roy, Prime Minister, Protector of Aborigines, sometimes inter-
preter to the Commissioners, and general Factotum, succeeded in
obtaining a Crown Grant for 10,000 acres of land, and several
others of that body were also liberally dealt with by Governor
Fitzroy, who was guided solely by Mr. Clarke’s advice in every-
thing relating to the Native race, and all matters of laud claims.
It is but just to state that all these purchases had been fully investi-
gated by the Commissioners and proved to have been fairly
acquired, and the Native title extinguished. There was not a
murmer of discontent made by the Natives, who even permitted
them to live on their land unmolested all through the war that
was raging round them. In obtaining, therefore, these grants
which were largely in excess of the maximum quantity allowed
by the “ Land Claims Act” —but still within the limit of the
Governor’s power to make, who was empowered to use his own
discretion, according to the peculiar circumstances of each case,
they only got what they were justly entitled to, indeed—some of
them not half so much, yet the jealousy of other claimants was
excited who were not so liberally dealt with.
Governor Grey was put to his wit’s end to know how to com-
mence the assault, for these were not common men, unknown in
England, whose rights might be trampled upon with impunity,
but a body of divines wary and far seeing, jealous of their rights
and privileges, and firmly entrenched behind their parchment
skins, fortified by the great seal of the colony, and the sign
manual of his predecessor, and duly registered. Knowing the
uncertainty of all mundane things, especially of Governors , they
had left nothing to chance, but “ whatsoever their hands found to
do, they did it with all their might,” and made hay while the sun
of his predecessor shone brightly on them. They could, therefore,
afford to “ Smile at Satan's rage and face a frowning world."
But Governor Grey was not so easily turned aside from his
purpose when he had deliberately formed his plans, except when
he was dealing with Natives, and they could turn him inside out,


upside down, or any way they pleased ; these were only Euro-
peans after all, although they were belonging to the Church
Mission, but they felt that the Governor’s attack on them was
directed more at their character than the few paltry acres, which
he could have bought from the Natives at far less trouble and
expense, and which they would have resigned, had not such an
act have implicated their character, and have been a tacit ac-
knowledgment of their guilt.
After walking round the entrenchments, and surveying the fortifi-
cations in every nook and corner without discerning any vulnerable
point of attack, our Governor wisely resolved to abandon his first
intention of open assault and proceed on the principle of General
Pratt by “ Sap”
Violent means often fail when “gently does it." He set before
them in a strong light the opinions entertained by the world of
their craving after land; —the occasion it gave the ungodly to
slander their holy calling —contrasting their conduct with the
disinterestedness of the Eoman Catholics, who would not, by pur-
chasing one foot of land, give the world cause to suspect the purity
of their motives—painted in glowing colors the views entertained
by other religious denominations, and insinuated that to make the
least of it, their conduct in this particular savoured strongly of
the “ mammon of unrighteousness ” diametrically opposed to the
Apostolic estimate of good which counted all worldly riches but
“ dross and dung.” Notwithstanding all this and much more
sago counsel and advice, his honied words and soft persuasive
eloquence were all in vain, only pouring water on a goose.
“ They would not be charmed
Charmed he never so wisely. ”
There appeared nothing so very repugnant to their feelings
after all in the “ Mammon of unrighteousness” especially when
dressed in the garb of nature’s lovely plains, and shady groves in
beautiful variety of foliage, and sunlit streams threading their
silvery course through meadows rich in pasture and dotted with
sheep and cattle. Even the dross and dung was no objection
when spread over the barren part of the land.
Like the Patriarchs of old they loved the pastoral scene around
their homesteads ; besides, they had not taken the vow of celibacy
like the Catholics, but had large families growing up to be pro-
vided for and consulted, who were not at all disposed to make
the sacrifice, however they themselves might feel inclined to
yield.
Our Governor being a man of expedients, although foiled was
nothing daunted; it was plain “ soft sawder” would not do, so he


resolved to try some other method. A bright idea now presented
itself. 0 yes ! —he soliloquised —it must succeed ;it answered very
well against the land claimants in the time of the other Governors,
ray predecessors and cannot fail now, indeed it was the only redeem-
ing quality of their government, and amongst all the folly of their
enactments the only precedent worthy the imitation of a great
Governor.
Yes, I must send my emissaries round, my faithful and
that cunning rascal to tamper with the Natives and stir them
up ; a few hints about the low price they sold at, and an assurance
of more payment or the land returned to them if they only make
an insolent demand, in violent terms, the better if accompanied
with threats—yes, that’s the plan. I can then make it the sub-
ject of a special despatch, with the war alternative; cautiously
worded, insinuated only, and deductive by a certain mental process,
not stated in plain terms but inferential, and non-committal, should
the event belie the inference ; thanks to my tortuous brain in this
accomplishment, great Machiavel himself could not exceed his
humble follower. But this plan failed. Emissaries were sent
round, but the Natives had no faith, the land stolen from the
claimants was not returned to them. Not even bribes could
induce the Natives to sell their best friends.
A letter was then written to the Bishop requesting him to
exercise his influence, and induce them to give up their Crown
Grants, and consent to take fresh ones for a smaller quantity.
This insidious plan of attack was supposed to be progressing
favourably, and like General Pratt’s sap approaching near to the
enemies’ works, when the mine prematurely exploded, and the
whole affair was made public by Mr. Win. Brown, a member of
Council in session 1847,. who taxed the Governor with using
undue influence to compel the Church Missionaries to give up
their Crown Grants and moved for certain papers, alluding speci-
ally to the Bishop’s letter. The Governor acknowledged having
written to the Bishop on other matters, but denied point blank
having alluded to the subject of the Missionaries’ land. Mr. Brown
apologised if he had been misinformed, which, as the Governor
denied the soft impeachment, he was bound to conclude was the
case.
The business of the Council being over for the day, Mr. Brown
sought his informant, and was by him put in possession of the
letter, which he took in his pocket the next day to the Council
Chamber, but knowing the cunning of the man he had to cope
with, and wishing to draw him further out, he contented himself
with merely alluding to the papers he had moved for without
specifying the letter; this moderation deceived His Excellency,
who supposed the hon. member had spoken only from a report
he had heard about the letter, and was without any proof; he


therefore assumed a boldness on the subject which increased in
proportion to the apparent timidity of Mr. Brown, who
shrank from pressing it. It was not until after the third day
this subject had been mooted in Council and the Governor's
denial emphatically reiterated, that Mr. Brown published the
letter in the Southern Cross. The shock fell like a clap of thunder
on the Governor, whose discomforture was the more complete,
and vastly aggravated by being defeated with his own weapons.
Immediately after the closing of the Council His Excellency
departed for the South, and did not return for many months. A
long correspondence ensued between the Governor, the Home
Secretary, and Mr. Brown on the subject of the letter to the
Bishop —his Excellency accusing Mr. Brown of surreptitiously
obtaining the letter which Mr. Brown denied, as it was made no
secret of by the Bishop, and known to all the reverend gentlemen
interested. Those who wish to dip deeper into the subject can
gratify their curiosity by consulting the blue-book for the time.
Erom this time forth the public put no faith in the Governor’s
word, and not long after a petition for his recall received 520
signatures in Auckland alone, which in those days, the population
being very small, after deducting Government officials and inter-
ested persons, might be considered the unanimous wish of the
people. The reasons alleged in the petition were His Excellency’s
want of veracity, and bis secret false despatches. I omitted to
mention that the validity of the Crown Grants belonging to the
mission being referred to Chief Justice Martin and Mr. Justice
Chapman were confirmed, and I believe the matter was then
suffered to remain at rest.
Another illegal act of Sir George Grey’s, who delighted in
irresponsible power, was closing the Court of Bequests, and that
with such indecent haste, that although verdicts had been given
for the recovery of hundreds of pounds, the money and expenses
were lost, there being no power to authorise execution. The
Court of Bequests ordinance had received the sanction of the
Queen, wherein it was recited that “ There shall he a Court held
in Auckland ” or within so many miles. For this act of despotism
he was rebuked in a despatch from the Home Secretary, but the
reason why the Court was abolished is a mystery to many to this
day, I will endeavour to explain it.
In carrying out the details of the penny-an-acre robberies, Sir
George Grey adopted a summary process with those who were
refractory and objected to his illegal imposts, I have before
stated that he leased the lands to any unscrupulous person who
would cut down the timber, to despoil it of its only value. A
Mr. Polaek and another settler had bought under the penny-an-


acre proclamation, some land in Lucas’ Creek with timber to the
water’s edge. The land was hilly and barren—utterly valueless
except for its timber. Mr. Polack let it upon lease to a man
named Harris, not the husband of Mrs. Cramp’s myth, but a
veritable wood-cutter, who forgot to pay the rent, but gave several
promissory notes for it, in sums of £5 each. These he refused to
pay, alleging that Sir G-eorge Grey only charged £5 per annum,
and the rent he had in Eitzroy’s time contracted to pay was £5
per quarter. He appealed to Sir George Grey, who gave him a
free license to cut the timber, and said the rent claimed by Mr.
Polack was an imposition —the land did not belong to him. Mr.
Polack sued him in the Court of Requests upon one of the dis-
honoured bills, and Mr. Harris had free quarters with Mr.
McElwain for three months. Mr. Polack offered to release him from
prison, if he would bindhimself not to cut any more of the wood, but
if not he should sue him separately on each of the bills, which would
keep him in prison .18 months. The man would not agree to
these easy terms to release himself, but acting on Sir George
Grey’s advice, to whom he appealed, refused to pay, and would
cut the timber. The Governor being privately piqued by Mr.
Polack standing up for his rights, and suing Harris a second
time, in order to carry his point, just as he was going to the
South, gave Mr. Berry, the Commissioner, while standing on the
beach, a verbal order to close the Court.
Those Europeans who had dealings with the Natives for land
in the northern part of the island were most of them hona-Jtde
settlers, as I have before stated requiring it for actual occupation,
and not as the purchases were made in the South on speculation :
they were consequently compelled to be very cautious in satisfy-
ing every claimant who could raise a mob sufficient to annoy or
frighten a poor settler out of some payment by threatening to
burn his house down. The agents of the New Zealand Company,
who were purchasing only for speculative purposes were not so
particular in satisfying every Native who attempted extortion,
not contemplating that any British Governor would send round
emissaries to the Natives in order to induce them to oppose and
defeat the settlement of claims before the Commissioners. It
has been constantly asserted by Native sympathisers that the Com-
pany’s purchases were loosely made ; but it should be considered
that a large proportion of them were in a part of the island where
very few natives would venture to dwell, having been decimated and
driven off by the powerful tribes of Waikato. As soon, however,
as several industrious settlers had established themselves on the
land they had purchased, the conquered Natives, emboldened by
the protection their presence afforded, returned a few at a time
and by 'permission of the Europeans squatted down on some part
of the land they had sold to Colonel Wakefield, the agent of the
Company. A second payment of £4OO had also been made to
Potatou, the first Maori King, who claimed by right of conquest.


As soon as Potatou’s tribes heard of the return of William King
and his tribe a large force was preparing to go and attack them
again, but many of the Chiefs having embraced Christianity dissua-
ded them from it. These illustrious fugitives being left alone undis-
turbed by their former enemies, and perceiving that a weak and
pusillanimous government yielded everything to native bounce and
menace, they assumed a threatening attitude, and claimed the best
part of the land again after having sold it and signed the deed of
conveyance, notwithstanding they never would have dared to return
and dwell there but for the protection of the settlers ; and further
that they had no right, according to their own law, to receive a sin-
gle penny for it in the first instance, having forfeited all their claims
to the Waikato chiefs who conquered them. Maori sympathisers
wereplentiful in these early times, and had it all their own way in the
Native Department of the Government, being chosen, it would
seem, on account of their strong bias in favour of native supre-
macy, which, judging from the policy of Sir George Grey, would
appear, to a man possessed only of common sense, to be the chief
object of his mission to this colony. Many of the employees in
the “ Land Purchase Department” in the busy times of govern-
ment land-jobbing , were reported to lead a jolly easy life wandering
about at the public expense, rusticating after the Maori fashion
at their encampments, having the credit of being great admirers
of their women, and basking in the charms of native beauty at
the pahs * where duty called them.
One favourite occupation of some of our leading
government officials consists in making proselytes amongst the
new arrivals; those especially selected to be indoctrinated
in the delusions of the sympathisers’ creed, are scientific
gentlemen who occasionally in their researches pass through
New Zealand. The ability and tact displayed in this art
is an eminent qualification for sinecure office. Gentlemen of
independent property travelling for pleasure, of pacific habits,
given to sketching and taking notes, anxious to be thought
literary, and vain of talents not above mediocrity, are considered
high quarry, and pounced upon at once by the Government
hawks, and carried by assault, or secured by a well-planned coup-de-
main. A few sleek well-fed amiable savages, the Government pets,
including some of th efair sex, which are always to be found about
Government House ready to be produced as specimens, are intro-
duced as fair samples of bulk ; they have learnt to sit decently at
table, make a polite bow, and drink their wine without spilling,
and if the usual precaution is taken to give them a good blow-out
before hand by way of lunch they do not surprise a stranger by
the quantity they demolish. The credulous literary gentleman
is convinced at once; the stories he had heard of their cannibalism
must have been idle nursery tales invented only to frighten
(Query; Harems ? Printer’s Devil.)


children ; lie now lias ocular demonstration of the eminent vir-
tues of the whole race; a few hints are confidentially whispered
about the tyranny and injustice of the settlers, when out comes
the note-book, and memorandums are dotted down ; he succeeds
in obtaining a photograph of these tatooed amiabilities, and
departs by the next mail for Europe. Not many months elapse
before we see these little memorandums expanded into an octavo
pamphlet detailing the horrors practised by the blood-thirsty settlers
on the meek and patient Christian Natives; or possibly these
mysterious notes of awful detonating power, bottled up and
hermetically sealed during the voyage, have exploded in a lecture
at Exeter Hall, severely scorching the Colonists, and painfully
exciting the bile of Lord Lyttelton, Mr. A. Mills, and other M.
P.’s, besides disturbing the_cquanimity of an innumerable number
of nervous old ladies.
The Governor’s Council previous to the Constitution being
granted, consisted of a majority of nominees, so that all acts of
Council so called were his own. The Native Land Purchase
Ordinance of 1846, is a document well worth the perusal of the
curious, and being a reflex of the mind that produced it, will
afford a correct sample of that kind of liberty Sir Greorge would
wish to establish if unfettered by a greater power. Under the
provisions of this act a fine of £lOO is the penalty for occupying,
renting, or even for encamping for a single night on any Native
land, so that a weary traveller who lies down under a tree and
lights a fire, subjects himself to £lOO penalty. This, too, in
a new country, where there are no hotels to accommodate travel-
lers. To enforce these penalties was His Excellency’s peculiar
privilege, which as Lord Absolute he held in terrorem over Britons
who as the song says “ never will be slaves,” People wonder
what kind of charm Sir George Glrey has to hoodwink the British
Minister, and get his assent to a measure fraught with so much
treason to the liberties of Englishmen. Doubtless another
instance of the omnipotent tear alternative.
The compass of this letter will not admit of entering into a
detail of all Sir George Grey’s acts, which are felt to be illegal,
oppressive, and repugnant to the laws of England. Having
already exceeded the limits originally intended, I will briefly
allude to the main features of his Government. The establish-
ment of the Pensioner villages has been a boon to the Province
of Auckland, the merit of which it is a pleasure to accord him ;
but it is a melancholy reflection that in exploring the sterile
desert of his administration, we can find only one oasis to
gladden our hearts.
Nineteen years have elapsed since Sir Greorge Grey first
stepped ashore as Governor of this Colony, and the land claims
are not all settled yet, "What a shame and a reproach that a man’s


lifetime should be utterly wasted, frittered away iu fruitless
endeavours to obtain justice, when one word of the Governor’s
would have sufficed. No earnest disposition was ever evinced
to settle the question. What boots it that Commissioners are
appointed ? to blind the home authorities, mere tools of torture
in the Governor’s hands to heap the purgatorial fires on the
heads of defenceless men, the pioneers of the colony, whose rights
are Avithheld with the hope that they may die Avithout obtaining
redress, as many have already done. Why should justice bo
withheld from any class of British subjects, AA r hen the remedy is
simple and at hand? Why not open to them the Courts of jus-
tice that they may lay their case before a jury, and have fair
play ? Surely the expense attending this plan of settlement,
which has been adopted iu Ncav South Wales, is sufficient to
prevent the prosecution of frivolous and untenable suits. This
boon is not granted, because justice is the very thing Sir George
Grey is determined they shall not get.
The old settlers Avho lived in Ncav Zealand long before Captain
Grey arrived, and witnessed all his public acts, should surely be
better able to form a correct estimate of his character, than the
British Parliament, the Home Secretary, or even the shining
lights of Exeter Hall. I haA r e stated in the commencement of this
letter the means adopted to mislead the public in England.
The articles furnished to his Excellency’s paper, which is Avidely
distributed in every influential quarter in the mother-country,
being specimens of special pleading Avith more than the usual
amount of suppressio veri and suyyestio falsi Avheu intended for
exportation, where the i-eader cannot possibly cross-question the
Avitnesses. Some finv facts are intenvoven in a tissue of false-
hoods, not capable of deceiving those in the Colony, but just
sufficient of truth is mingled to give an air of credibility to the
AA’hole at a distance from the Scene of events.
Our opinion of the Governor is formed from his public acts, of
Avhich Ave are the Avitnesses, and not founded on artful despatches
or newspaper summaries. There is nothing so very Avouderful to
those behind the scenes, that the Governor has succeeded in
building up a temporary reputation at Exeter Hall; but lioav long
Avill it stand ? The materials Avill not cohere ; they are already
crumbling around his feet, melting at the glance of truth. He is
in England reputed to be the friend of the NatiA r e race, but will
his public acts establish such reputation? Satan may appear as
an angel of light, but appearances are sometimes deceptive. Are
the Maori sympathisers aAvare that our model Governor encour-
ages the prostitution and concubinage of Native Avomeu Avith
Europeans by his public acts, and that he has invented a laAV in
this Colony to prevent lawful Avcdlock ? If a Native Avoman
becomes the mistress of a Avhite man, she can retain her land
Avhich she inherits in her oavii right, but if she marries that man


and the Chiefs endow her with a marriage portion, Governor
Grey immediately seizes the land as forfeit to the crown. This
practice, which he has carried out, accounts for so many half-caste
fatherless children growing up in the country round about the
Native settlements, with no one to civilise or educate them. A
very hard case occurred some time ago in Auckland, which will
serve to illustrate the kind of friend our model Governor is to the
Native race. A Mr. Murant was legally married to a Native
woman, and the chiefs endowed her with a few acres of land upon
which they had lived and had in cultivation, therefore no question
could be raised as to ownership. They built a raupo house for
the new-married couple, they had not enjoyed it long when
Governor Grey pounced upon it, and ordered it to be surveyed
and sold by auction with other Government land, and this order
was carried into effect. On the day of sale, the auction was
numerously attended, but when this land was put up not a. single
bid could be obtained, although it was a very valuable site at a
junction of two roads near the city of Auckland. A feeling of
indignation pervaded the breasts of the audience, such as might
be imagined in Exeter Hall, if a slave was about to be publicly sold
at Smithfield market. Hisses and cries of shame were heard in
the room, although in onr small community every one was known ;
and any one who opposed the Government was a marked man,
and was sure to experience annoyance and insult in various ways,
if not serious loss in these days of despotic rule.
People in England can have but little conception of the power
a Governor possesses in a young Colony. About half the popu-
lation are either Government employees, or in some business
Avhich is sustained in a more or less degree by Government con-
tracts, so that there can be but very few really independent men,
where forty or fifty thousand pounds per annum is spread amongst
the merchants and tradesmen of a small community according to
the peculiar discrimination of a Governor who never forgets his
friends or his enemies. People supposed that after this abortive
attempt to dispose of the land, it would be returned to the poor man
and his lawful wife, but not so ; it was again put up to auction on a
future day, which was attended with the same result, the people
washed their hands of it, and w ould not in any way become a
party to such a nefarious transaction; but this time, Andrew
(Sinclair, Esq., the Colonial Secretary, whom it Avas supposed Avas
instructed, purchased it at the upset price.
Soon after the consummation of the above act of friendship (?)
towards the native race, the reputation of our model Governor rose
rapidly at Exeter Hall, just in the inverse ratio to its decline in
the Colony. Extra pains being taken to write him up, and extraor-
dinary exertions made just at this time in sundry publications,
no doubt av ell paid, to counteract the obloquy which it Avas feared
Avould be cast on him through poor Murant’s case. So very dili-


gent were his disinterested supporters in distributing their flatter-
ing representations amongst influential men in England, that the
feeble report of poor Muraut’s treatment was scarcely heeded,
and considered impossible, a vile slander upon a Governor whose
amiable qualities were the theme ef so many publications. Ever
after it became the custom for Native women to live in concu-
binage with the white men, and very few marriages since took
place between the races, which condition of morality not being
opposed to their former habits before they were better instructed
by the Missionaries, did not cause much irritation amongst the
Natives, who were thus driven back to their old heathenish habits,
and the efforts of the missionaries were totally paralyzed by the
illegal acts of a Governor whose high-sounding praise was the
theme of Exeter Hall.
It would occupy too much space to enter fully into the dispute
about Waitara, which has been so ably stated in an admirable
lecture delivered by the Kev. Samuel Ironsides, at Adelaide, on
the 19th of September last. The plain simple narrative style of
this lecture, delivered by a gentleman who was present at all the
scenes he relates, bears upon it the face of truth, so unlike the
confused and garbled accounts got up for party purposes. Mr.
Ironsides was one of the first after the sad event who visited the
scene of the AV airau massacre, and performed the funeral rites of
those unfortunate gentlemen who were amongst the very first
in point of intelligence and respectability in New Zealand; but
who fell victims to an overweening confidence in Maori justice
and moderation, having thrown down their arms to disarm Native
suspicion in order to lead them to a peaceable discussion of the
dispute, were butchered in cold blood. And these gentlemen, so
highly esteemed, so deeply deplored by all who knew them, fell
unavenged, and the cowardly policy that condoned this brutal
outrage brought the well-merited contempt of the whole Native
race on the Government,
Governor Browne went to war to enforce a principle of justice,
which was of vital importance to the Colony, and although his
detainers, who cannot deny this, assert that it was too soon and
ill-timed, I will venture flatly to contradict them—the misfortune
was, it was not soon enough. The whole Native policy of his
predecessors was grounded on a false system ; murderers and
villains not only went unpunished, but were rewarded with bribes,
and tons of flour and sugar were sent to reform them, instead of
the terrors of the law, until the natural fruits of such a policy
made it impossible for the people of Taranaki to live on terms of
peace with them. William King and his followers were dictators
who would not allow any other independent chief to sell his own
laud. Eawiri and six of his men had been previously assassinated
for the same thing by Katatore, an emissary of William King.
The very homesteads of the settlers became the theatre of Native


wars, but the Government did not interfere. The fact is, it never
would have been the right time to commence the war, according
to those who wished to overturn the Queen’s Government, and
establish Native supremacy. This was the object in view by
many Native sympathisers that they might become large land-
owners, live a lazy life under the dominion of the Maories, on
terms of dalliance with the charming variety of Native female
beauty.
It is the general opinion in New Zealand that Governor Browne
would have settled the war in a very short time if he had been
let alone, but he was distracted by opposing counsel, unseemingly
thrust upon him by those whose high office and position should
have prevented their interference in political matters. He was
literally besieged by a party of Maori sympathisers, who would
persuade any man out of his senses if he listened to them. The
army too Avas beset by the same pack, and Generals Gold and
Pratt reduced to the situation of non-combatants, except on the
defensive, and then they were to avoid fighting if they could run
away.
The enemy Avas made perfectly acquainted Avith all the move-
ments of our army, even to the exact position of General Pratt’s
renoAvued sap. If the rebels Avere at any time hemmed in, and
could not possibly escape, they had only to hoist a flag of truce,
Avhich Avas immediately granted to afford them an opportunity to
get aAvay ; so that under such directions from the Governor and
leadership of the Generals in command, it was impossible to
expect any great results. It Avas in fact only playing at Avar
against an enemy Avho Avere terribly in earnest, and the only
thing that occasionally spurred our troops on to anything like
activity was the occasional murder of unarmed men and boys, that
were waylaid when in pursuit of their daily avocations. Our
troops Avere not wanting in courage, and their officers were ready
to lead them on to victory, but they Avere commanded by men
who kneAV little of Avar beyond the barracks and the precision of
military parade.
Notwithstanding the utter incompetency of Generals Gold
and Pratt to fill the positions they occupied with any renoAvn to
themselves or great advantage to our cause, still enough Avas effected
by the bravery of our troops and those officers over them Avho
had before smelt poAvder, to force the enemy to sue for peace in
earnest, and a truce Avas granted them upon terms sufficiently
humiliating to themselves and honourable to the British army.
A most deplorable event for the colony uoav took place. The
native sympathisers and those Avho Avere eagerly looking for
Maori supremacy, AA r ho furnished the natives during the Avar Avith
constant information, not only of every movement of our troops


but of the secret counsels of the Government, which they con-
trived to possess themselves of by intrigue, had succeeded in
creating a false impression in England that led to the removal of
Governor Gore Browne at the very time when his judgment and
firmness were most needed, when the foe was prostrate and ready
to surrender unconditionally. In fact the war was all but
ended, and the AngJo-Maon oligarchy were quite in despair.
The first intimation received here of the reappointment ot Sir'
George Grey was attended with the worst results, the natives
everywhere rejoiced : they said, “ Governor Browne kept his word,
but Governor Grey was an old woman ;he only talked ; they could
manage him." As soon as Governor Grey arrived, the hopes of
the Maori sympathisers revived, and their visions of Anglo-Maori
oligarchy and native harems loomed in the distance. Every
engine was set at work to undo what Governor Browne had
done.
Sir George Grey issued a proclamation stating the terms of
the truce, warning the natives to “ Bring in and deliver up the
murderers, restore the plunder , take the oath of allegiance, deliver
up their arms, and put an end to the folly of the King movement."
The natives well knew whom they had to deal with now, and
would not comply with any one of the terms of truce, and Sir
George Grey relinquished them all, one at a time, and at. length
almost entreated their pardon, and begged them to spare us and
not fight any more. This abject position on the part of the repre-
sentative of England only served to stimulate the natives to fresh
outrages, and to increase their contempt for the Government.
Every one knew that Sir George Grey’s panacea was nothing
more than the flour-and-sugar system over again, but on a much
more extensive scale, and perhaps none knew better than Sir
George Grey that the “ new institutions”—more correctly
designated the new humbug , could have no beneficial effect what-
ever. Two years were frittered away in puerle experiments. The
General Assembly voted ample means to give the Governor every
scope to pursue his own course, being selected by the home
Government for his extraordinary wisdom in the management of
savages.
All this time the troops were inactive, and the expenses of the
colony put on a war footing, while the natives, taking advantage
of this breathing time, were making vigorous preparations for
another campaign. It must be remembered that all native affairs
up to this time had been entirely under the control of the
Imperial Government. All the calumnies about the settlers
coveting the native land were uttered in ignorance, for net an
acre of land since the Treaty of Waitangi was signed, has ever
been bought without the sanction of the Queen’s representative.
After more than two years had been frittered away in useless
experiment, and a vast amount of treasure spent, worse than


Wasted, because it lias been spent in bribing the worst class of
natives to keep them quiet, and they know very well what it all
means —the biggest villain gets the greatest share, and those who
are inclined to be orderly and peaceable are overlooked. A native
chief, one of the best and most orderly, once met the Governor,
who shook hands with him, and praised him for his loyalty ; the old
chief said, “ Yes, Governor, it’s all very good, but I cannot afford
to remain quiet and loyal much longer ; look at and
and all of them kicking up a row, and trying to foment a
rebellion, and you give them plenty of money, and flour, and
sugar, and rice, while I am starving on my loyalty and attach-
ment to the Queen. I get nothing. I must begin to make a stir,
I can’t hold out much longer.” Another petty chief, who was a
notorious villain, ran after the Resident Magistrate with a toma-
hawk, at Kaipara, and swore he would kill him. The magistrate
ran into a house and closed the door just in time to save his life,
when the native began chopping it down; some other Maoris
happened to be passing by, and prevented further mischief. This
is only one of a similar class of outrages of common occurrence in
districts under the beautiful working of the “ new institutions.”
The native had no cause of complaint against the magistrate, he
was only seeking promotion, he wanted a salary and to be made
a magistrate of, which I am informed he obtained shortly after
this exhibition of his eminent qualifications. To enter into all
the details of native outrages would be sickening, and the suffer-
ings and peaceable forbearance of the European settlers, who had
to put up with every affront during two years of costly experi-
mentalising while General Cameron and 10,000 bayonets lay idle,
until Sir George Grey, the very cleverest of men, at length found
that Mood must be spilt before things could mend, and he, the
Representative of the Crown, not of the Colony, declared war.
THs declaration was caused by the massacre of several of the
troops, who were cut off by an ambush when peaceably
walking the road on the nth of May, two officers and six men
were killed. Immediately after this event, the Governor surren-
dered the Waitara to the natives unconditionally, not the result
of any investigation, as was agreed with Governor 'Browne, but
of his own accord, and although a pretence was made of some
new feature in the case coming to light, yet it is well-known that
nothing has hitherto been revealed that was not known before.
How, then, do we account for this extraordinary act? I know
what the people say, let every one judge for himself, whether
they have hit the line of truth. All the Governor’s plans were
signally defeated, and the utter failure of bis Machiavellian
schemes were brought to naught, by the strong unsophisticated
natural acuteness of the Maoris, whom he treated as children.
The people say he gave up the Waitara in a fit of despair, deter-
mined by impugning the justice of the principle for which
Governor Browne fought to throw the blame on his predecessor,
and thus by acknowledging our own wrong to justify the Native


Rebellion. But let it be distinctly understood that no new facts
about the Waitara had been brought to light, and no public investi-
gation had taken place , when it was given up, neither has there to
this day been anything new discovered. Sir George Grey states
it was done by advice and consent of his Ministry, but the
people know that the Ministry objected to this measure, and only
two reluctantly yielded to the Governor’s earnest persuasion in
giving their consent.
When the Constitution was granted to New Zealand, native
interests were expressly exempt from the control of the Legis-
lature. The whole power rested with the Governor, who
received his instructions from the British Minister. Therefore,
not until very recently, long since the failure of Sir George Grey’s
plan of pacification, and the war had been commenced by him,
have the Colonial Legislature had any control whatever over
native affairs.
After the protracted, expensive, and unsuccessful attempt to
govern the natives by the Imperial Parliament, overtures were
made by the Duke of Newcastle to the Colonial Legislature to
induce them to join with the Governor in the administration of
native affairs; the Duke, sagaciously perceiving that until the
people who were deeply interested in the success attending a just
and proper system of governing the natives had, through their
Representatives, a voice in the matter, the whole responsibility
and expense justly rested upon the Home Government; and
consequently, if through the influence of Exeter Hall they select
very clever men of peculiar whims and caprices to play pranks
and jump jim-crow, they must pay the piper.
Governor Grey has been too long accustomed to despotic rule
to bear restraint. An old horse all his life running wild, could
not be broken in to trot nicely in harness with reg.lar old
stagers ; he would chafe and foam and have his own way, or else
bolt. Now, if ho only kicked out of harness and bolted clean
away we should not grumble, but we object to be dragged
into the mire against our own will and have to pay for repairing
the broken trap, and then to be told it is our own free act.
Under the control of the Colonial Legislature the native
rebellion would have been speedily ended and the British misrule
of a quarter of a century would have given place to peace and
prosperity, the natural results of a wise administration. But
just as we are getting into the right track again and the evils are
being successfully grappled with, the Home Government wish to
assume the reins once more, and throw the country back into the
state of anarchy and confusion previously existing.
Nothing could exceed the willingness of the colonists to assist
the Government, and their cordial cooperation and liberality was


manifested not only in supplying the means, but in their own
personal services throughout the war. Every male between the
age of 16 and 55 were called upon to serve in the militia unless
they were previously enrolled in some Volunteer corps. What a
grievance it would be thought in England if the militia laws
compelled everyone to actual service in battle, and as every man
had to serve for himself there could not be found substitutes.
The sons of the rich and the poor alike shared the same fate,
and the most lucrative employments were resigned without a
murmur, to aid in the struggle. Only the third-class men and
the aged were left in the towns, and they had to do garrison
duty.
The immediate circumstances that gave rise to the war against
William King were only the last links in the chain of events that
became inevitable from the cowardly policy pursued previously,
when Eawiri and six of his men were shot while peaceably
measuring their land which they had sold to the Government.
The cruel desertion of his tribe by the Government after Katatore,
at the instigation of William King, had murdered their friendly and
loyal chief, who was also a magistrate, and six of his men, while they
were fulfilling their contract with the Government, sunk the
British authority into the lowest contempt. There was nothing
to be gained by an alliance with us, but everything to lose. Not
only were all the bribes and presents lavished on those in rebel-
lion, but they gained a prominent distinction in the eyes of their
own people as heroes who bearded the British lion.
Nothing would have been easier than to have quelled the
rebellion at first, by assisting the loyal natives, who were in good
faith entitled to our aid. We neglected the opportunity, and our
treatment caused many of them to join the rebel William King
against us. The whole policy of our Government has tended to
unite the broken fragments of adverse tribes in one body against
us. Frequently during the late war the northern tribes have
volunteered to assist ns, but their tenders of services were entirely
overlooked, or but coolly received Our old faithful ally, Tamati
Walker, would have furnished all his men, and hundreds of the
Ngapuhi tribe would have joined us ; yet they were all rejected,
although, bebig hereditary enemies of the Waikatos, their fidelity
was unquestionable; and our former experience of their assistance
should have induced our Government to accept their active
alliance in the prosecution of the war. New Zealand natives are
naturally fond of the excitement of war. They cannot be calm
spectators only; they will either join one side or the other; and
our neglecting to secure them gave the enemy opportunity ti
solicit their alliance and aid ; consequently many of the young
men belonging to loyal tribes joined the enemy.
We do not augur any favourable results from the late conduct
of Sir George Grey, who has now assumed the dictatorship in native


affairs, and, contrary to the advice of his Ministers, has solicited
peace of the natives, giving them until 10th December to make
np their minds; so that they not only obtain fresh breathing
time to prepare for another campaign by getting in their crops,
but the best part of the season will be over, and after a month or
two the winter will again stay proceedings. The people of
Auckland are quite in despair at the vacillating policy of Sir
George Grey, which is attributed by the natives to fear of them,
and which is sure to lure them on to their destruction. Surely
it is time the Aborigines Protection Society and philanthropists of
all classes in England should know that the settlers of New Zealand
are quite as anxious for the permanent welfare of the native race as
they are ; and that any interference of theirs only aggravates the
evil by aiding and abetting them in their rebellion. There are a
number of vagabond sympathisers in the Colony, who interpret
this outside interference to them with many additions, which
makes them hold out and refuse terms of peace. These are the
men who would subvert the Queen’s authority, and substitute
native supremacy, that they may become polygamists, and lead
a life of indolence.
The plan of planting military settlements throughout the
native territory and occupying the land confiscated from the
rebels, emanated from the late Premier, A. Domett, Esq., a
gentlemen who has given the subject a practical consideration,
and one who is quite qualified to give a candid and un-
biassed opinion upon native affairs. So much has been said
upon the difficulty of holding the conquered territory, by a great
variety of scribblers who are totally unacquainted with native
customs, that very erroneous views are current amongst those
who draw their opinions from such a source. If I, as an old
settler, may be allowed to give an opinion, it is that the natives
will respect no title to land in New Zealand more than that
acquired by conquest, especially if followed up by a speedy
occupation of the conquered territory; not even if all the chiefs
in the island were paid for it would they esteem the title so good
as that acquired by conquest. For many reasons, then, I hold
that no measure that can be devised will have such a beneficial
effect on all sides as that of confiscating all the land of those who
take up arms against the Queen, and when they sue for peace in
earnest, restore them ample for all their wants.
The reasons I have for holding such an opinion are Legion.
First. They are rebels in arms fighting against the Queen’s
Government, under whose mild rule they have been invariably
treated justly. Second. They have burned the houses and
destroyed the property of the settlers, tearing down their fences,
stealing their cattle, and laying utterly waste their farms upon
which so many thousands had been spent. Third. They have
no other property upon which we can make reprisals but their


laud. Fourth. It is the only punishment that will deter other
wavering tribes from taking up arms. Fifth. It will be removing
the apple of discord from amongst them—taking away what is an
evil to themselves; what they do not want; what was conceded
to them with unparalleled liberality by a great power to whom it
belonged in right of discovery, according to the acknowledged
laws of civilized nations. Sixth. It is the only remedy we have,
to compel them to pay the expenses of the war which they have
forced upon us, and it is actually pledged as security for the debt
incurred. And, lastly, to this plan of confiscation being carried
out in good faith the honor of the Government is pledged, to
thousands of young men who came to take up arms in the
struggle upon that understanding; and to the colonists, who look
to the confiscated land to pay the expenses of the war.
General Cameron took 184 rebel prisoners and they are
suffered to escape, he has also taken possession of the territory of
the rebels. Shall that too be allowed to escape out of our hands
after the vast amount of blood and treasure that has been expended
to acquire it ? If so, all the work Avill have to be performed over
again, and the efforts of our brave G-eneral and his troops xvill
have been in vain, the debt incurred, and above all, the valuable
lives of many heroic officers and men will have been sacrificed for
nought.
The land has been and is now the greatest curse the natives
have. The G-overnment well know that in many districts if they
attempted to purchase land it would be sounding the tocsin
of war throughout every ti’ibe for miles around ; not that they are
unwilling to sell—they would all sell —but the little matter of
ownership has to bo settled first, which we know would end in a
war, and perhaps even now in a cannibal feast. As I have said
before, they have no title—it can be proved from themselves—for
each tribe swears the others have no claim to it. Why then should
those who profess to be friends of the Maoris wish to prevent the
confiscation of the land taken from the rebels. By all fair means
the waste lands should be alienated from the natives ; it would be
the greatest boon you could confer on them, if they were deprived
of all they do not want for actual use.
So much do the natives respect the title acquired by conquest,
that the whole territory might be settled peaceably and no
molestation offered to the settlers after peace was once proclaimd.
Here is room on good soil to locate millions of immigrants Let
those who wish well to the native race advocate wholesale
emigration to New Zealand. The very presence of such numbers
would overawe the Maoris, who would see the hopelessness of
their own insignificant minority contending against such a host,
A million spent in emigration is better than two millions spent iu


war. Let the Home G-overnment take it up in earnest and
assist respectable families to come out. The commerce of
England would soon reap the benefit of an extensive system of
emigration to this Colony, putting aside the political reasons for
such a course of action.
Creighton and Scales, Printers and Publishers, Queen-street, Auckland 1


.
r,
,
0
. ■
0
