

CAMDEN VAL MILK CO. LTD. SPECIAL MILK


The new factory in course of erection for Camden Vale Milk Co. Ltd.


Camden Vale Methods
Our cows are washed before milking.


Ensure Health
Before washing, the cows are groomed and cleaned.


Healthy Workers
The workers wear clean, sterile clothing .


Healthy Conditions
In our milking bales there are no corners to catch dust.


ACHIEVEMENT.
CAMDEN VALE MILK CO. LTD.
Supply Special Milk—Bottled and Sealed.
THERE is nothing very novel about the delivery of
milk in bottles, but the delivery of the purest quality
milk produced, in accordance with modern scientific
methods, is something that all the authorities in Sydney,
New South Wales—in fact, throughout Australia—have
been clamouring for, for years past.
The purest quality milk can only be produced as a
result of very careful procedure and correct feeding of the
cows in a given herd.
The Directors, by virtue of their association with the
Camden Park Estate Ltd., set themselves the task of
producing the kind of milk the medical profession and
the discriminating students of the milk problem have been
long demanding. As a result of much investigation and
the expenditure of large sums of money, they have achieved
their ideal, and now offer to the public purest pasteurised
milk of highest quality, delivered in sealed glass bottles.


The herd is watched and guarded .


Each and every cow is regularly subjected to the tuber-
culin test, and the health of the whole herd is under
constant supervision. The moment a cow is suspected
of even indifferent health, that cow is at once segregated
or isolated for observation, and her daily output of milk
goes to waste —which is but one indication of the extra
expense involved in producing purest quality milk.
The story of the production of pure milk under scien-
tific regime is readily presented by pictures, but, with the
advancement of knowledge, many people, particularly
mothers of children, have a greater interest in accurate
details. A pure milk supply is recognised as of the utmost
importance, and the details of the method, as evolved and
carried out at Camden Park, are interesting and have been
demanded; hence the issue of this booklet. To say the
same thing in another way, most mothers of children
to-day, as a result of advanced education, recognise that
there is no true substitute for the ideal food for baby;
that is, mother’s milk; but, unfortunately, are also forced
to recognise that many mothers are compelled to find, if
possible, an efficient substitute for the ideal. All scientific
authorities proclaim that the only true substitute is
pasteurised cow’s milk, bottled and sealed under modern
conditions. These same authorities also stress the impor-
tance of pasteurisation. For instance, Professor M. J.
Rosenau says; “Pasteurisation is the cheapest form of
life insurance that the customer can take out.” Pasteuri-
sation takes nothing from milk, nor does it add anything
to it except SAFETY. You will be interested in seeing
the process of pasteurisation. The Directors of Camden
Park Estate Ltd. will welcome an opportunity of showing
you how milk is pasteurised in a modern, sanitary milk


Like most good things, so simple! The use of modern milk
pails—the top half closed, has been a factor in reducing the
bacterial content of Camden Vale Special Milk.


plant. If you will visit this modern milk plant, you will
be amazed at what science and care are doing to prepare
your most vital food. The following opinions regarding
pasteurisation are worthy of your careful consideration:—
\
Dr. Lafayette B. Mendel, Yale University:
‘“Clean milk is not necessarily ‘safe’ milk, nor are all milk
bacteria essentially harmful. I have become convinced that at the
present time the greater safety lies in the exclusion of dangerous
micro-organisms by effective pasteurisation, and that pasteurised
milk can he employed under conditions that are in no respect
detrimental, but rather advantageous, to public health.”
Dr. R. Adams Dutcher, of Pennsylvania College,
states:
"The advantage which is to be gained by the destruction of
pathogenic organisms more than counterbalances any slight nutritive
loss, which may have been brought about by pasteurisation.”
Dr. Charles J. Hastings, Medical Officer of Health,
Toronto, Canada;
‘‘lt is inconceivable how any thinking person will, in the
light of modern knowledge, jeopardise his own reputation by
advancing arguments againist the scientific pasteurisation of milk.
In my judgment, any municipality failing to safeguard its milk
supply by means of scientific pasteurisation is, in the light of
modern knowledge, guilty of criminal negligence.”
Dr. R. J. Ochsner, Bureau of Child Hygiene, Cleveland:
‘‘Very many factors have influenced the general infant mor-
tality rate in Cleveland, but the decided reduction in deaths from
diarrhoea and enteritis since 1917 is, I believe, largely due to better
milk for bottle babies and to pasteurisation.”


Camden Vale
Absolute Cleanliness


The Directors of this Company do not merely content
themselves with careful breeding, careful selection, correct
feeding, and scientific examination of the health of the
cows. The next step is to ensure that the milk from
these cows is obtained under modern scientific conditions.
The first essential is that the premises where the cows are
milked shall be scientifically designed and lighted, properly
ventilated and yet dust-proof. The floors and walls—
as is to some extent indicated in the illustrations—are of
concrete, and there are no square corners or square posts.
In other words, the practice followed in the construction
of a modern operating theatre, where prevention of
accumulation of dust is guarded against, has been followed
in the building of the milking bales. The bales proper
are constructed of rounded concrete posts with pipe rails,
and stand pipes are placed throughout the building, so
that every advantage may be taken of a continuous pure
water supply for cleansing purposes.
Before a cow is actually milked, the udder of the cow is
thoroughly washed, and then the milk is drawn into
modern milking pails, which, by virtue of a special lid,
minimises the risk of the introduction of foreign matter
into the milk, after it has been drawn from the cow. The
next step is the cooling of the milk, and straining through
sterilised cotton wool pads, followed by treatment in glass
enamelled pasteuriser.
Just here, the fact that pasteurised milk is not boiled
milk, should be stressed. Many people have fallen into
the error of thinking that boiling milk constitutes
pasteurisation. Actually, pasteurisation, as approved by
the most modern scientific authorities, consists of holding
the milk at a temperature of from 140° to 145° for thirty


Purest Milk
Clean Yards


minutes. This proper pasteurisation does not in any way
uu the /?° d value or digestibility of milk, yet destroys
all harmful bacteria. It must be understood, no matter
what the method of production and preparation may be,
milk is liable to contain some harmful bacteria when it
comes from the cow, but this bacteria is cared for by
pasteurisation It has already been said that pasteurised
wT S S- ’ dehvered m sealed glass bottles by the Camden
Vale Milk Company, is the best substitute for baby's
natural food (mother’s milk), but no attempt should be
made to re-pasteunse the milk in the home, because the
practice is unnecessary, and distinctly dangerous to health
and just here, for the sake of those not thoroughly con-
versant with the subject, it should again be stressed that it
is of the greatest importance that mothers should if
possible nurse their babies, and continue to do so, until
e child is six or nine months old, simply because breast
feeding is natural feeding, is the simplest, cheapest, and
safest method. After that period of ideal rearing, to
bottle feed may become necessary, and requires great care
and thoughtful practice.
Bottle feeding demands more time than breast feeding
and involves a few simple rules. One is. never warm the
mi k as it comes from the Camden Vale Milk Co. in
sealed glass bottles, until just before feeding time It is
a dangerous practice to keep milk warm or tepid for over
half an hour, and for this reason the use of a Thermos
bottle for instance, is considered objectionable. The
second basic rule is to thoroughly cleanse and scald the
feeding bottle immediately after use. and again immediately
before feeding One cleansing, and one only, after use,
is not a fair risk. When the bottle is not in use, keep in
a cool place covered and away from flies.


From Best Cows
Clean Clothing


No Doctor will willingly take chances, and therefore
to-day, almost without exception, Doctors advocate
pasteurised milk for baby, particularly in summer time,
and any Doctor who has visited our Plant, or the Camden
Park Estate, will advocate "Camden Vale" milk in
preference to any other. The milk, as soon as delivered,
should be taken into the home and kept in a cool, clean
place.
Before uncapping, wash the top of the bottle carefully,
and dry with a clean cloth. If only a portion of the
milk in a Camden Vale bottle is used, replace the card
cap, and leave the unused portion of the milk in the bottle,
and return to a cool storage place. The milk should not
be transferred, under any circumstances, from the sealed
glass bottle into cracked jugs or any other storage vessel.
On no account should Camden Vale milk bottles be used
for any other purpose than to hold milk, and before
returning the empty bottle, it should be rinsed, first in cold
water and then thoroughly washed in warm water.
These instructions will be supported and endorsed by
any Doctor, and they are therefore not an unnecessary or
tedious procedure, and constitute merely an important
form of protecting your own children. It soon becomes
habit to follow the proper practice, and the moment the
habit is established, the thought of labour or hard work
is eliminated.
Reverting again to the actual protection methods utilised
by Camden Park Estate, it has been said that the cows are
Washed before milking. In addition, they are actually
groomed and cleaned, before entering the milking room.
Also the milkers wash their hands in hot water, before


Into Sealed Bottles
The Modern Method.


milking each cow, and milk with clean dry hands. More-
over, the milkers wear clean sterile white clothing for each
milking, and the milk flows into modern utensils, which
enter the milking room in sterile condition.
Pasteurisation has been explained and stressed, but
before pasteurisation takes place, the milk is removed,
immediately it is drawn, and passed over a cooler, which
reduces it to a temperature of 5 CPF. or less in the milk
room. In the building itself, arrangements are made, so
that impure air is immediately drawn off, and an ample
and sufficient quantity of clean air is always available.
The cows water at clean troughs, and have absolutely
no access to surface water or swamps. Moreover, all
manure is immediately removed. Now if a comparison
be made between these modern methods and the regrettable
slapdash methods of some sources of production, it will
be at once understood that it is impossible to offer the
highest standard at the price of the lowest quality milk
but where a child’s life or an invalid’s life is at stake,’
wt V ?7-„ S ht dlfference m c °st represented by Camden
Vale Milk is more than appreciated, which is evidenced
oy tne tact of a daily growing demand for our product.
ft may also interest readers to know that the whole of
° l ur I her J d 1S fed Wlth a regulated well-balanced ration, and
the herd grazes over some hundreds of acres of pasture land
equal to anything in the State of New South Wales land
as a matter of fact, famous practically since the foundation
of the State, pasturage which has many historical
associations arising originally from its attractive richness


The only Safe Method.


National Value of Pure Milk.
EDUCATIONIST’S LETTER TO DIRECTORS.
Just what the value of purified milk to the youth of
the country means, is contained in a letter from the
president of the N.S.W. Public School Teachers’ Federa-
tion to the Camden Vale directors.
The scrupulous cleanliness of the dairy, the hosing
and washing of the cows before milking, and the protec-
tion of the milk from dust appeal strongly to one as a
consumer,” he says.
At the factory, one appreciates the tests for water-
content and dirt, which ensure that the suppliers have a
high standard of honesty, the machinery for bottling and
sealing, and the dust protective covering of the processes
of pasteurisation, cooling, bottling and butter-making.
‘One fears, however, that so much care means added
expense, and one hopes that, if not possible to make the
business commercially profitable without raising the price
of the finished product, means will be devised to make it
available to those to whom the H.C.L. is such a bugbear.”
Romance of Industry.
It is the romance of the milk industry.
The product is supervised from the birth of the calf
to the moment when it is released from the pasteuriser
into bottles hermetically sealed for distribution.
Such is the story of Camden Vale.
Thereafter it is a matter for the consumer.


A New and Important Change
An Ice Chest on Wheels.


Pure milk, Camden Vale ensures from dairy to
doorstep.
There are no loopholes.
There is no living for the microbe that spreads disease.
Its life history is the subject of constant study.
No mercy is shown.
It is hunted down and destroyed.
Such is the success of Camden Park.
Such are the labours of the Macarthur-Onslows to give
pure milk.


Experts Praise New System.
SAY CAMDEN VALE WILL DO BIG SERVICE.
When Camden Park’s new dairy was opened on
Saturday, the State’s leading hygienic experts spoke of
its value to milk industry.
Said Mr. W. L. Maundrell, president of the Milk
Vendors’ Association:
“The system guaranteed payment to the vendor at the
depot.
“And payment on the spot ensured that the proper
quality of milk would be delivered.’’
While vendors brought in pure milk it was a matter
for legislation to ensure that milk would be delivered
“satisfactory to the community.’’
The bottling process at Camden Vale ensured that the
State’s children would be served with the purest product.
Outside of this, Mr. Maundrcll's slogan was “educate
the consumer.’’
The Royal Welfare Society was represented by Mr. S.
R. Innes-Noad, M.L.C.
He, too, stressed the necessity for legislation.
The Macarthur Onslows were doing what legislation
should do.


“Pure milk is a vital matter to the growing race/’ he
said.
“The consciences of public men should be aroused to
the sense of duty ensuring that the standard of the milk
supply will be maintained.
. The provision of bottled milk, free from any possi-
bility of contamination, is a national service."
, commended what Camden Park was doing in this
direction.
tt Mr. X. V. Bloomfield, chief dairy inspector, was
glad to avail himself of an opportunity of witnessing
the initiation of the most important advance in the dairy
industry for many years."
As he well said at Saturday s opening: "It remains only
to educate the consumer.
The production and delivery of hygienic milk is
honoured more in the breach than the observance.
Camden Vale is guaranteeing both hygienic production
and delivery.” ,


BUTTER
A few years ago, owing to an acute shortage of supplies,
it was found necessary to obtain large quantities of butter
from sources outside New South Wales. This butter was
high in colour (which is not a fault) and of inferior
quality.
A great number of the public wrongly came to the
conclusion that butter of a golden colour was necessarily
of an inferior grade, and would only buy the pale brands.
It has, however, been definitely stated by Dr. Finlay
and other leading authorities in dairy science that the
golden-coloured butter such as is produced on the Southern
Tablelands is much richer in essential vitamines than that
produced on the poorer pastures, which will only give a
product pale in colour.
We commend this butter to the discriminating public
of Sydney, and contend that the “Laurel” Brand is second
to none in purity and flavour.


ERIC N. BIRKS, Adviser. 28 Bond Street. 'Phone: 8W7496.
