

Camperdown
Public Park
(From the Suburban Independent
of SATURDAY, APRIL sth, 1884.)
A year or two ago what has been
called a “ land mania” set in. Every-
body showed a desire to own a piece
of land. The result was that people
who had estates to sell put them into
the market; and, notwithstanding that
suburban properties were, in many in-
stances, cut up into small allotments,
very good prices were realised on the
whole. Comparatively few extensive pro-
perties near the city were left unsol J and
undivided. In many ways these land
sales were encouraging; people bought
allotments, hoping some day to build
upon them and have houses of their
own. It made them thrifty and in-
dustrious ; and the necessity of saving
no doubt removed many temptations.
That was the bright side of the picture.
The dark was the fear that, at
some future day, these small allot-
ments would be so built upon, and the
places so thickly populated, that there
would scarcely be breathing room ; and
that discomfort and disease and misery
would follow. Statesmen who could
look a little ahead saw the danger, and
passed an Act compelling a certain
width of street and lane. This was a
necessary regulation, and will prevent
a deal of the mischief inseparable from
narrow thoroughfares. But something
more was needed if the health of the
people was to be preserved, and the
future generations of Australians were
to be strong and happy. It was seen
that public parks and recreation grounds
were an absolute necessity ; and it was
also seen that, if had at all, they must
be had at once, before the few remain-
ing estates were cut up and sold. Pro-
minent and earnest men exerted them-
selves to obtain this great boon ; and
it is satisfactory to know that their
efforts have been in a large measure
successful, for several of the metro-
politan suburbs now possess parks
which, when improved and beautified,
will prove favorite places of resort, and
furnish the means of health and enjoy-
ment to thousands.
Camperdown is one of the places
which may be congratulated in this
respect. It has a finely situated park,
embracing about twelve acres. It is
bounded by Australia-street on one side,
running to a line near the Parramatta
Road, up to a new street, named Fow-
ler-street, on the Newtown side, and to
a line parallel with Church-street on
the other. The new street will run right
through from Australia-street to Church-
street, and is sixty-six feet wide. We
understand that the land cost the
Government about £lB,OOO. A piece
of land, however, is not, a park any
more than a stack of bricks is a house.
Camperdown is by no means the
“ Sleepy Hollow ” sometimes repre-
sented, as is evidenced by the interest
Mr. R. Fowler, and other leading re-
sidents have shown in the matter of
the public park. They have set to
work, earnest work, to convert a dreary
looking spot into a “ thing of beauty,”
which, as poor Keats says, “is a joy for
ever.” The following gentlemen were
constituted into a Park Committee ;
R. Fowler, Esq., Aldermen Thomson
(Mayor), Burcher, Cahill, McGrath,
Jentsch, Sparkes, Cruickshank, Jas.
Bennett, senr., and Messrs. Yeomans,
Larkins, and Pidcock. The first duty
of the Committee was to fence in the
park. This has been done in a very
neat and substantial manner. The posts
are all tarred at the bottom, and have
an iron cap on the top. This cap,
which is somewhat novel, will protect
the wood from the action of the
rain, and so help greatly to preserve
the fence. It has, of course, ad ded to
the expense, for no less than three tons
of iron were used ; but the Committee
wisely resolved to do their work well,
and erect a fence that would not need
repairing for a long time. We believe
they have already spent about £350 ;
and the local Council have expended
between two and three hundred pounds
in street formation, improvement, &c.
The work of drainage has been begun,
a double row of 21 inch pipes being
laid from Fowler-street, through the
park and under Australia-street. This
will enable the Council to gid rid of
the bridge in this street, which has for
some time been an inconvenience and
a danger. The irregularities in the
park are to be filled up at once, the
Camperdown and Newtown Councils
contributing street sweepings for the
purpose. The park is bounded on the
Parramatta-road side by the public
school and private properties. It would
add much to the appearance of the
place if these owners would put up a
uniform fence. The independent and
reliant action of the Committee de-
serves special notice, because it should
serve as a good example to other sub-
urban municipalities. It is too much
the fashion in affairs of this kind to go
cap in hand to anybody. The Committee
took a manly course, and determined
to ask no one but residents and pro-
perty owners of Camperdown to con-
tribute towards the cost of fencing and
improving the park. Their appeal was
liberally and willingly responded to;
and it is a fact that deserves to be
placed on record that the whole of the
funds were raised in the way stated.
This indicates a healthy public spirit
which deserves every commendation.
A number of seats, of very comfortable
pattern, have already been placed in the
park, and trees are shortly to be planted.
Even in its present state, the park is a
very popular resort. Last Saturday
afternoon several cricket matches were
being played. Many of the seats were
occupied by onlookers, enjoying the
pure air and pleasant view. We may
add that the park, from its central
situation, will also be convenient for
residents of parts of Newtown (and
Leichhardt.
PRESTON & FORD, Printers, Suburban Independent Office, Newtown.
