





CAN THE DESIGN ARGUMENT BE
VINDICATED ?
By W. W. COLLINS.
“The world is weary of idolatries :
Pan and Apollo and great Zeus are dead,
And Jesus Christ hangs cold upon the Cross.
Nay, more, the light of Science newly born
Hath slain the night of the Divine Idea.
* * *
Henceforth a grievous shadow quits the Earth,
While man, the fruit and flower of things,
Walks fetterless and free. ...”
—Robert Buchanan
Yes, “the world is weary of idolatry,” and well it may be, for all
too long have systems of belief and creeds of all kinds oppressed
the human mind, and enslaved the intellect in galling bonds, com-
pared with which the chattel bondage of the body is freedom
indeed. The morn of liberty is dawning, and on every hand signs
are not wanting to show that at last the fiat has gone forth.
Soon men will cease to be terrified by phantoms which their own
ignorance has reared. This age may not witness the emancipa-
tion, but as surely as the human mind advances, so surely will
that emancipation come. It may come more quickly than anyone
expects, for we are stepping on far and fast. The signs of the
times are all around, and they who list may read. The hand-
writing is on the wall; the ancient empire shall be subverted j
the dominion of superstition already decaying shall break away
and crumble into dust. And when at last the prison walls of


superstition and dogma have fallen; when the self-forged fetters
with which humanity has bound itself for ages past have for ever
been struck off from the tortured limbs, and man, free man,
breathes the pure air of nature untainted by any infectious blasts
of supernaturalism ; when he basks in the sunlight of perfect
liberty, then will he learn that this earth is not a waste howling
wilderness, that he is not a stranger here, that what he is and
what he has is not due to the will of an impossible being ; but
recognising the fact that he is the arbiter of his own fortunes, the
maker of his own happiness, and the cause of his own misery, he
will be provided with a greater incentive to morality of conduct
and to nobility of life, than can be found in any or in all the
creeds with which mankind has in the past been afflicted.
That the Church is well aware of the fact that it is fast losing
its hold upon the people is plainly evident, and everything is
being done that ingenuity and craft can suggest to give at least
an appearance of vitality; but it is appearance only. Too long
have they basked in a fool’s paradise of assumed security, and
now they are waking up, and on every hand are lamenting the
great‘and rapidly increasing departure from religious faith. That
their effort to revive will be futile needs no demonstration.
Salvation armies might excite our mirth were not their exhibi-
tions so pitiable. Christian evangelists may frighten the
weak and ignorant ones with their blasphemous hell fire business.
Church congresses may devise schemes for checking the onward
roll of modern thought. But all these will be to no purpose. As
successful would be an attempt to tunnel the rocky mountains
with a tooth-pick, or to pierce an iron-clad with a pop-gun, as to
undermine the empires of modern thought, based as they are on
the firm foundation of scientific research.
One of the most recent attempts to bolster up the tottering
edifice is a pamphlet* by Mr. Geo. St. Clair, F.G.S., published by
an English Christian Evidence Society. This is no attempt
to reconcile Genesis and Geology; oh no, Mr. St. Clair is
too much of a scientist himself to attempt that. It is not an en-
deavour to uphold the Adamite theory of the origin of the human
race, for Mr. St. Clair is an evolutionist. He refuses, and wisely
we think, to appeal to “Revelations made thousands of years ago
to Hebrew seers.” He contends
“That the main truths of theology may be arrived at by the
use of reason, just as astronomers arrive at the truths of the solar
* “The Design Argument Vindicated.”


system, geographers at a knowledge of the physical features of
the globe, and historians at the facts and truths of history. In
all sciences and branches of knowledge there is a basis of
observed fact, and a superstructure of logical inferences. If I
can show that indisputable facts and legitimate inferences lead to
the conclusion that there is a God, I may convince some who
have wanted a ground of belief outside the Bible. I may
persuade that not only is the Atheist mistaken in denying God’s
existence, but the Agnostic ill-advised in concluding we must
remain ignorant of his character.”
The above contention is by no means a new one, but it is bold,
and at once evinces the earnest decisiveness of the author, and
the character of the pamphlet. The spiritedness, however, ap-
pears to us to be considerably marred by a want of logical acumen
and of philosophical grasp ; and the illustrations and arguments
advanced assuredly do not warrant the boldness of the intro-
duction, and yet another proof is given that “The mountain in
labour may bring forth a mouse.”
The enthusiastic determination of Mr. St. Clair to have design,
and to prove a designer, may well be compared to the intelligent
“go” of the justly celebrated teetotal orator who declared with
vehemence—“ Believe me, friends, there is more than mere co-
incidence in the fact that red rum spelt backwards is murder or
to the far-seeing capacity and acme of inferential reasoning of the
not-teetotal parson who saw proof of divine intelligence, and
evidence of an overruling providence in the fact that cork trees
grew principally in wine-producing countries.
Mr. St. Clair, before proceeding with his main argument treats
us with a hackneyed quotation from Lord Bacon’s essay on
Atheism, in which it is asserted “that a miracle was never yet
performed to convert Atheists, because they may always arrive at
a knowledge of Deity by the light of nature.” We venture to
doubt that had Bacon lived in this 19th century whether he
would ever have penned the above sentence; and despite its
authorship, despite the approval with which it is quoted by Mr.
St. Clair, there is no doubt that as an argument [it lacks the im-
portant and essential element of truth. Were it true, most
assuredly there would be no necessity for any “vindication of the
design argument” against such keen observers and clear thinkers
as Herbert Spencer, Louis Buchner, and “Physicus.” Super-
naturalism has ever been the handmaid of ignorance ; Naturalism
of calm enquiry and persevering investigation.


The extremely “happy knack” of drawing inferences from
indisputable evidence is another peculiarity of the vindicator ; as
is also the answering of arguments purposely coined and called
Atheistic. Here is an instance—
“ ‘Use your eyes to learn God’s existence. Can we expect to
see God 1 It is not because no man hath seen Him we hold His
existence to be an unfounded supposition.’ Taking this to be one
of the Atheistic arguments, we are asked, Do you mean to deny
the existence of every thing you have not seen and all beings
whom you cannot gaze at 1 I will not talk about the air we
breathe which none of us can see as air. Nor will I talk of such
a country as Iceland, which few people visit, but which yet we
believe to exist on satisfactory testimony.”
It is well, we are inclined to think, for the erstwhile judicious
author that he “will not talk of these,” though if not, why they
are introduced must ever remain a mystery, for surely it cannot
be conceived that Mr. St. Clair could possibly entertain the
notion that there is the slightest analogy between the evidence
for the existence of these and the so-called “evidences” for the
existence of an intelligent creator of man.
We are somewhat repaid for the perusal of the foregoing on
reading the commencement of the next paragraph, for here we
learn that the author is painfully aware of the weakness of his
own argument and convinced of the necessity of attempting “a
line of illustration more to the point.” A more pointed illustra-
tion certainly could not have been advanced in order to enable us
to show the utter inconclusiveness of the argument from design,
as advanced by Paley, endorsed by Lord Brougham and Sir
Charles Bell, and vindicated by Mr. G. St. Glair, F.G.S. Here
is the illustration :
“In the British Museum is an Ancient Egyptian Brick made
of mud and straw, with the royal stamp upon it, impressed while
the brick was soft, and by the side of the royal stamp the foot-
mark of a cat. This brick was most likely placed on the top of
other bricks to dry, and puss walked over the stack and left the
impression of her feet. Prank Buckland remarks that this brick
has handed down to us the fact that there were cats in those days
in the land of Egypt. We have in fact then mummies ; but had
there been no mummies, and no evidence except this brick, it
would have been sufficient. The cat walked that way and wrote
her signature—Egyptian puss, her mark ! But more, by the side
of the cat’s footmark is the royal stamp : would not that have


been sufficient to prove that there were Egyptian Kings in those
days 1 The stamp, however, the impression of the royal seal is
not all that we find. There are tombs and mummies, there are
ruined temples and other structures which must have had
builders. These monuments of the past are covered with
hieroglyphics which can be deciphered. The hieroglyphics are
the language of the Egyptians, and they tell us of their customs,
their laws, their religious beliefs; they tell us of the Kings of
Egypt and their great deeds in peace and war. Kow it will be
admitted that the name of a king occurring in this way, together
with the record of his deeds, and the ruins of temples which the
writer says he built, are evidences that the King once lived. We
were not there to see him, we may 'not have his mummy even,
but from what we have, we infer his existence with at least as
much certainty as we inferred the existence of the cat from the
footprint. It is quite clear, then, that we may know of the
former existence and activity of a real person and king without
having seen him, by observations of his works, and by inference
from what we do see. The existence of living persons, our
contemporaries, may be arrived at the same way.”
This is the pointed illustration. Let us examine it and so find
out what is its real value, logically and as an analogy. We have,
Ist—The cat’s footmark impressed upon an ancient-Egypt brick,
from which we infer the existence of a cat in ancient Egypt; 2nd
—The Royal Seal, from which we infer the existence of an
Egyptian King; 3rd—Hieroglyphics which describe his mighty
deeds in peace and war; 4th—Ruined temples and other struc-
tures which must have had builders.
Ist.—Foot-marks. This then is the way in which we may
prove by inference the former existence of persons whom we have
never seen, and in the nature of things cannot see. But let us
here ask ourselves—What is it that enables us to draw these
inferences 1 Our knowledge of what causes produce what effects,
is wholly a matter of experience. From no effect can we infer
its cause, until by experience we have learned to connect that
effect, or some similar effect with that cause. We know that
cats exist; we know too what kind of impressions their feet leave
behind them (some of us who value our gardens know this all too
well). We can distinguish their footmarks from those of other
animals, and thus we can infer with certainty when we see the
footprint that it owes its origin to a cat. The inference, it is
true, is from the impression ; but the inference could never be


drawn did we not know what kind of marks cats make. Had
Frank Buckland been ignorant on this point he could not
possibly have inferred the existence of cats in ancient
Egypt.
2nd and 4th.—The Royal Seal and the Ruined Temples. This
line of argument applies with equal force to the inference of a
king from the royal seal, and of builders from the ruined
temples. We know kings use seals, we know men build temples;
and it is this certain knowledge which compels us to admit like
causes for like effects—though taking place thousands of years
ago.
3rd.—Hieroglyphics. The hieroglyphics tell us of great deeds
done by these kings in peace and war ; but here we must remem-
ber that credence would be given only as long as the deeds
enumerated accorded with reason. If, for instance, it were
enumerated as a peaceful pastime of the king that he was in the
habit of carrying himself about by his own waistband, we should,
despite the hieroglyphics, not believe it; or if it were asserted
that when decapitated in battle, the noble monarch fled from the
battle-field with his head under his arm, we should still disbelieve
it, even though the deed were recounted on every piece of stone
throughout the land of Egypt.
The inference from the cat’s footmark, the royal seal, the
ruined temples, and the hieroglyphics, is in each case based upon
and is the result of experience, and this is exactly what is lacking
in the argument for a maker of natural productions.
“What we have to do (says Mr. St. Clair) to prove the
existence of a divine Being, is to look about us and discover His
handiwork.”
But surely we must first know that “a divine Being” (whatever
that may mean) really exists, must know, too, what he can and
does make, before we presume to say what is his handiwork,
otherwise we shall be assuming the existence of a maker of what
we are merely assuming to be handiwork, which may do very well
for verbal jugglery, but is of very little use in assisting to solve a
most perplexing problem.
Again, we are told—
“If we can find artistic productions or pieces of mechanism we
must infer a maker ; and if they are things which man has not
made, which man could not make, then we must infer a maker
other than man. If one of these pieces of mechanism is the
human body itself, then the maker of the mechanism is the maker
of man—and the Creator of man we call God.”


This argument has at least the quality of novelty, and it is
really amusing to discover that we are manufactured articles ;
we should now like to know what has become of Professor
Huxley’s distinction between artificial and natural productions.
But unfortunately for Mr. St. Clair it is fallacious. “Petitio
principii takes place,” says Whateley, “when one of the prem-
isses, whether true or false, is either plainly equivalent to the
conclusion or depends on that for its own reception.”* That
this is so here will need no pointing out. Like all fallacies “it
appears to demand conviction and to be decisive on the question
in hand, when in fairness it is notand this it shall be our
business to show. First, then, we do not infer a maker because
certain articles exhibit mechanical contrivance, or because they
are artistic, but because of our knowledge of men as mechanicians
and as artists. There may be many things which do not exhibit
art, or mechanism, or anything approaching design, of the purpose
of which we may be profoundly ignorant; and yet provided they
show some signs of man’s manipulation (which signs we know by
experience), we at once conclude their human authorship. And
second—“We do not rise from marks of design in the works of
man to intelligence in their maker. We descend from a know-
ledge of intelligence in man to design and purpose in his work.”
This fact we cannot too frequently or too emphatically impress
upon our readers, for it is the misconception on this most im-
portant point which leads to so much confusion of thought, and
which has enabled Mr. St. Clair to build up a somewhat showy
defence of the argument from design—
“What I propose to do, therefore (continues Mr. St. Clair), and
all that I shall hare time to do, is to state the substance of
Paley’s argument from design and then to defend it against
more modern objections. Paley’s argument was endorsed by
Lord Brougham and Sir Charles Bell, and was considered good for
a long time ; but lately there has grown up an impression, and
there has been put forth an assumption that the argument is
undermined and destroyed by the doctrine of Evolution. I
purpose, therefore, stating the argument with enough fulness to
remind you of the conclusiveness it was once believed to have, and
then discuss the strongest objections now raised on the ground of
Evolution. I believe I can show the untenable character of those
objections, and I hope to convince some of you that the design
* “Logic,” p. 107, sec. 3.


argument has force and truth in it, and only needs a difference
of phraseology in stating it.”
By whom, we feel constrained to ask, was Paley’s argument con-
sidered good for a long time 1 Assuredly by those who would
have believed had Paley never written a line. But the insinua-
tion is not true that the argument has been held as good until
the comparatively recent promulgation of the doctrine of
Evolution.
Let us see what atleast one profoundly careful thinkerand writer
has had to say with reference to this argument. Buckle, in his
■celebrated “History of Civilization in England ” (vol. in. chap. 5
p. 283), in the chapter devoted to an examination of the Scotch
intellect during the eighteenth century, has the following criti-
cism on the endeavour by the theologians to prove theological
dogmas by the inductive method of reasoning :
“As a last resource they [the theologians] at the close of the 18th
century determined to use the weapons of their opponents, and
Paley and his successors enlarging the scheme which Ray and
Durham had feebly sketched out, endeavoured by a skilful em-
ployment of the inductive method, to compensate their party
for the failure of the deductive one. But their project, though
ably conceived, came to nought. It is now generally admitted
that nothing can be made of it, and that it is impossible to
establish the old theological premisses by a chain of inductive
reasoning. Respecting this, the most eminent philosophers agree
with the most eminent theologians, and since the time of Kant
in Germany, and of Coleridge in England, none of our ablest
men, even among divines themselves, have recurred to a plan
which Paley indeed pursued with vigour, but of which our Bridg-
water Treatises, our Prize Essays, and such schoolboy productions
are poor and barren imitations. No great thinkers now follow
this course in matters of religion; on the contrary, they prefer
the safer as well as the more philosophical method of dealing
with these subjects on transcendental grounds, frankly confessing
that they elude the grasp of that inductive philosophy which
in the department of science has achieved such signal triumphs.”
In a note (p. 285) referring to the Bridgwater Treatises, he adds;
“Some, such as Bell’s, Buckland’s, and Prout’s, had great scientific
merit, but the religious portion of them is pitiable and shows
either that their heart was not in their work or else that the
subject was too wide for them; at all events it is to be hoped
that we shall never again see men of equal eminence hiring


themselves out as paid advocates, and receiving fees to support
particular opinions. It is truly disgraceful that such great specula-
tive questions, instead of being subjected to fair and disinter-
ested argument with a view of eliciting truth, should be turned
into a pecuniary transaction, in which anyone with much money
and little wit can bribe as many persons as he likes to prejudice
the public ear in favour of his own theories.”
But is it not true, as Dryden said ?
When interest fortifies an argument,
Weak reason serves to gain the will’s assent,
For souls already warped receive an easy bent,
That the design argument needed no evolution theory to
impeach its validity is evident from the foregoing quotations.
Indeed, it is remarkable how, in spite of all that has been said
and written by those master minds who have made the natural
sciences their life’s study, the teleological views of nature have
been so long, and are still upheld, by theological influences.
To place natural and artificial pieces of mechanism in the
same category is surely an abuse of facts most evident; the
both in manner of production and in kind, when
produced is sufficient to stamp each as the result of agencies
equally dissimilar. That the evolution doctrine is altogether
incompatible with the argument from design is plainly evident, a
thorough understanding of the principle underlying or running
through the facts enumerated in Darwin’s “ Origin of Species,”
is enough to prove this. If species have been originated by
means of “Natural Selection”; if races have been preserved
(through being naturally favoured) in the struggle for life, where
is the necessity for a designer ? To multiply causes without neces-
sity is both unphilosophical and illogical. We admit that evolu-
tion is the process of creation: but to assert, as does Mr.
St. Clair later on in his argument (p. 19), that it does not,
and cannot, explain adaptation without a guiding intelligence, is
an assumption without proof, and a mere begging of the whole
question. What we do know is this : that nature can and does
produce simple as well as most complex organisms ; and while we
know that intelligent men produce simple as well as complicated
pieces of machinery, we do not know of any intelligent beings
capable of producing any one natural object.
Besides, what is meant by “a guiding intelligence 1 ?” We know
well and understand the term intelligent being, a being who has
intelligence; and this intelligence, we know, is the totality of


those attributes known as (1) Consciousness of agreement, (2)
Consciousness of differences, and (3) Retentiveness.* But it is
evident these can be attributes only of a finite being, and it is
impossible to conceive of any finite being, or indeed of any num-
ber of finite beings capable of producing the varied phenomena of
nature. Further, we must remember that when we speak of
being, we necessarily imply organisation; and using the argu-
ment from design, the organisation must have been designed, and
so we land ourselves in the self-created difficulty of an infinite
series of designs and designers which is in itself an absurdity.
But Mr. St. Clair has anticipated this argument and its diffi-
culties, only, however, to run away from it. He says :
“ But no one can show that the Deity exhibits in himself parts
put together for a purpose, and if I am not able to comprehend
the mystery of the divine self-existence my argument does not
oblige me to attempt it.”
This is all very well, but why, at the same time does he con-
tinue to use such words as “Him,” “His,” “Being,” “Personal God,”
etc., etc. 1 Is it possible Mr. St. Clair can conceive a Him, a Being,
or a Person, without parts 1 And if not, why does he not in
common fairness, refuse to use words necessarily implying such 1
It is really painful, to anyone making a study of these abstruse
problems, to find men, learned men, who in dealing with any
other questions are the very essence of straightforwardness, and
yet who in their dealings with this, which above all others requires
a fair, impartial, unbiassed intellect, will use an argument the
weakness of which becomes apparent just where necessity should
make it strongest, and then, unable to close their eyes to the
fact, run away shouting “ Mystery ! Mystery !”
We cannot conceive intelligence without at the same time
having forced upon us the idea of a highly complex series of
organisms. All experience compels us to associate the one with
the other; and to suggest that nature is controlled by any being,
however great, wise, or good, is to suggest that to which all infer-
ence and experience give a direct negation. Besides these, there
are other objections equal forceful. The argument would, if
legitimate, necessarily prove a multiplicity of deities. The phenom-
ena of theuniversearemultitudinous, and various as numerous, and
we can no more infer a single intelligence capable of producing
these than we can attribute all artificial contrivances to a single
intelligent human being.
# See Bain’s “Mental and Moral Science,” p. 83.


Again, we cannot conceive a being, no matter how much the
intelligence with which we invest him, capable of more than a single
thought at one and the same moment of time, and unless this is
possible the almighty designer is a myth, for the processes of adap-
tation, selection, and peservation, etc., are taking place in myriads
of creatures in every portion of the globe at one and the same
moment of time.
Professor Tyndall, some time ago, in an article written for the
Contemporary Review , referred to his boyhood when he used some-
times to lie awake at nights puzzling his young brain with the
question, “Who then made God ?” and the question is both the leg-
itimate and the logical sequence of inferential reasoning. If it is
difficult to conceive that a man capable of making a watch could
come to be without the aid of designing intelligence, how much
more must we require a sufficient cause for the personal, intelligent
being, capable of designing man. Surely if it is possible to manage
without a cause for the greater it should be much easier to do so for
the lesser. Are we to leave the gnat and swallow the camel 1 ? And
since we must accept one of the two propositions, should we not
as rational creatures accept the one presenting the fewer difficulties.
The assumption of a designing intelligence for natural productions
helps us not one jot in understanding natural phenomena. Nature
produces forms beautiful and ugly, simple and complex, mild and
terrific ; and if the powers by which it does so are its own inherent
property we could have no other possible proof of the fact.
The cause of nature is exhibited in its effects, and to suppose a
something or somebody acting with conscious determining intelli-
gence behind and besides the substance itself, is only making a
mystery of plain facts, and uttering transcendental nonsense.'
Leaving for a time the teleological argument, let us follow Mr.
St. Clair in his introduction of Paley’s famous watch incident :
“Paley argued, that if a man crossing a heath kicked his foot
against a stone, he might imagine that it had always lain there,
and that nothing was signified by it. But if he found a watch
upon the ground, he would infer that it must have had a maker,
because on examining it he would see that it was a piece of
mechanism, designed, contrived, and constructed for telling the
time. Having made that quite clear, he goes on to show that
every indication of contrivance, every manifestation of design
which exists in a watch, is seen in the works of nature ; tho
difference on the side of nature being greater and more, and that
in a degree which exceeds all computation.”


This is the specious illustration with which Paley introduces to
the reader his famous “Natural Theology.” Let us take it and
subject it to a little examination. Were the stone-kicker as
ignorant of mechanical science as he evidently was of geological
science, then we question if he would or could possibly have
reasoned in the manner indicated. And this suggests at once
the weak point of the analogy. The man would infer a designer,
because he would know that the watch was an artificial contri-
vance and not a natural product. Suppose he had found some
natural object—a flower, fruit, or some little animal—would he
not, in spite of the fact that these, as Paley puts it, exhibit
design in a degree greater, more, and exceeding all computation,
at once infer that the flower or the fruit grew, or that the animal
was naturally produced by other animals similar to itself 1 And
would the idea of design or of a designer ever even suggest itself
to him 1 We think not. If, then, the inference of a designer for
the watch sprang from the fact that it in itself bore evidence of
man’s manipulation, which evidences were known by experience,
then surely the analogy, if existing at all, is most incomplete and
unsatisfactory. Briefly stated, it amounts to this. We know
that men make watches ; ergo we must believe that God makes
men. We are “obliged to put the theory thus briefly, but have
no desire to make it look absurd.” This is argument with a
vengeance. And yet it is this one idea, amplified by numerous
and most interesting illustrations, that is the whole gist of
Paley’s “Natural Theology.” If it could be proved that there
were gods, and that they had made some plants or some animals,
then we might legitimately infer that the others were made by
gods too, but until this proof be forthcoming the inference cannot
possibly be correct.
A very slight knowledge of Geology, too, causes the remarks
anent the stone to appear particularly crude. A superficial
examination would be enough to show that it was composed of
particles, put together, its constituents being numerous and
varied ; that it had been consolidated by means of great pressure,
and afterwards broken, water-worn, and carried, many miles
probably from its original position. This at least would be the
history of most pebbles. A close survey of the pebble’s sur-
roundings, and an examination of the stone itself might enable
us to follow step by step its whole history, each step being the
necessary consequence of the step preceding, but nowhere should
we find any necessity for introducing intelligence as a factor.


The inferential argument from artificial contrivances to
natural products is not legitimate, and the only real analogy
would be either blind instinct or unconscious action, as when the
spider weaves its symmetrically-formed web, or the drosera and
the dionsea distil their viscid fluids which temptingly allure poor
insects to their deaths. To these we cannot ascribe intelligence,
and yet it is the unconscious activity of the physical forces of
the universe which in like manner have in the past, and are still
producing all the marvellous phenomena surrounding us. The
attempted analogy is in no sense justifiable, A brush in the
hands of a Turner may forcibly depict the grandeur of the land-
scape on the canvas, and reveal to us the artistic intelligence of
the author; but this is no proof that intelligence had anything to
do with the production of the landscape itself. The rugged peak,
the sloping hill, the deep ravine, the fertile valley, the rushing
torrent, and the musical brooklet, can all be accounted for by
natural agencies; and to these we cannot possibly ascribe intelli-
gence. Mr. St. Clair himself, admits (p. 14) “I will not assert
design for the Sahara.” But is it not true that the desolate
waste is just as much the result of the workings of natural forces
as the fruitful plain, and natural causes have to account for the
arid desert as much as for the orange grove. If Mr. St. Clair
can dispense with design for the one, Science can do so for the
other, and at least one important admission is made which gives
more than half we are contending for.
Several pages of the vindication are devoted entirely to a
scientific dissertation on the structure of the human eye, and
comparisons are drawn between it and the camera obscura and
the telescope. The facts given, though interesting in themselves,
there will be no necessity to recapitulate here, as they may be
found in any text-book on optics, or in any work on Natural
Philosophy. The object, however, of their introduction is plain.
The camera and the telescope are extremely ingenious contri-
vances, and manifest the ingenuity and intelligence of the
maker—
“The eye of a bird, the eye of a sheep, the human eye (let us
take that); is a much more complicated contrivance, and we are
asked, does this come without intelligence. The eye, however, is
only one organ in the organised system of the body. Instead of
the eye we might have examined the lungs, or the heart, and the
blood vessels. We might consider all these, observe the contri-
vance in each, and admire the concerted action of them all, each


filling its place and working for the good of all as though the body
were a well-regulated republic. The body is a great cluster of
contrivances, and for him who studies them it becomes true that
a man cannot lift his hand to his head without finding enough to
convince of the existence of God.
Then to reflect that so far we have not got beyond the indi-
vidual, and that there are millions of individuals of the human
species and many thousands of other species of creatures in many
of whom the contrivances are considerably different but equally
admirable, and fossil forms also, which show that the procession
of life has extended through eons of past time. Lastly, another
set of considerations may come in. He who made the lungs in-
tended man to breathe, and he is lord of the realms of the air.
Being lord of the air he adapted our voices to throw it into
vibrations, and our ears to hear the sounds of other voices, and
be gladdened by the strains of music. He who made the eye
intended man to see, and he is lord of light. He made the sun,
the stars therefore. He made the eyes of those fossil creatures
long since extinct, the Trilobites of the early Silurian rocks, and
adapted them to the light of their day. So he is lord of the ages
of time (I find myself talking about a Lord, a great Being, a
supreme intelligent Mind, a Personal God).”
The foregoing passages we could not resist quoting in full, as
showing how an otherwise evenly-balanced mind may become per-
turbed in a vain endeavour to travel into the regions of the un-
knowable. As a piece of rhetorical flourishing it is worthy of
some itinerant preacher rather than the pen of a philosophic
thinker. It is sadly out of harmony with the general tenor of the
pamphlet, and almost suggests that the author was for the
moment overcome by his own mental exertion. Mr. St. Glair
must surely have forgotten that he was defending the design
argument against Spencer, Buchner, and “Physicus.”
To assert, or approving quote the assertion, “That a man can
not lift his hand to his head without finding enough to convince
him of the existence of God,” is simply to approve that which, in
the face of evidence, is not true. It is the scientists and the
deep thinkers, not the superficial observers and the loose
thinkers, who have given the coup de grace to the arguments from
design. It is strange, and can be accounted for only on the
hypothesis that Mr. St. Clair had forgotten what he had written
previously, and what he intended afterwards to write, for we find
him immediately agreeing with Professor Huxley, who asserted


that “A death watch in a clock case reasoning about the design of
the clock, or pronouncing dogmatically without reasoning, would
be modest in comparison with a man dogmatizing about design in
the universe.” In order to screen himself from the accusation,
and at the same time to agree with Huxley, we are told, “I am
not drawing conclusions from the universe as a whole, nor even
from the solar system, but mainly from the human eye,” and this
after the dogmatic assertions about the Lord of Light, the
Creator of Sun and Stars, the Lord of Time, etc.
On page 15 there is an attempt to grapple with some of the
objections raised against the argument as advanced by Paley.
The incompleteness of the analogy (which we have previously
pointed out) is met by the assertion—
“lt seems to be strangely overlooked that we do not require to
see the artificers fingers at work, nor to have seen a particular
kind of manufactured article before, in order to draw a sure con-
clusion as to its being designed. We have seen Japanese mirrors
and inferred at once the human workmanship, yet we had not
seen them made, nor had we witnessed the manufacture of any-
thing like them, for they had the magical peculiarity of reflecting
from the polished side the pattern wrought upon the back.”
If there is anything strange at all about the matter it is that so
short-sighted an illustration should be thought a sufficient reply
to the objection raised. It has never yet been asserted that it is
necessary to see the artificers’ fingers at work, or that we should
be acquainted with the particular kind of manufactured article.
It is quite sufficient that any manufactured article could (no
matter that we had not seen one of the particular kind before)
readily be distinguished from a product of nature ; hence, we
should at once infer its source as that of all other artificial con-
trivances, which source we had previously learned by
experience.
“What we do see is the work of the artificers’ hands; and then
because it resembles the work of our own hands, and not any-
thing which grows on a tree or tumbles from a cliff, we infer in-
telligence and design. We infer them because we experience that
the work of our own hands is governed by our thoughts and con-
trivance, and we are persuaded that like effects can spring only
from like causes. That is our unconscious argument, and it leads
ps, when we see machines of iron and steel, to ascribe them to
man ; when we see telescopes and opera-glasses, to explain them
as his contrivances. We are obliged, therefore, when we find the


animal body to be a machine, and the eye an instrument com-
parable to the telescope, to infer contrivance on the part of some
intelligent being who is the maker of the eye, and therefore of
man.”
“Mr. J. S. Mill,” adds Mr. St. Clair, “confesses that the design
argument thus put is of a really scientific character, and has
some force.” While admitting great respect for everything
emanating from so profound a thinker as Mr. J. S. Mill, we must
differ from him at least on this one point. Science has nothing
whatever to do with final causes.
Natural Science, says Lord Brougham, * has to do with the
structure and relations of the universe, while the origin and
destiny of the universe forms the subject of Divine Science..
This we admit. Day by day natural science is everywhere ex-
panding the limits of the knowable. Divine Science, on the
contrary, based upon an assumption, has ever stood still; it has
given the world no facts, has overcome no difficulties, and has
retarded rather than helped the advancement of human know-
ledge. Where it has attempted to surmount a difficulty it has
done so only to present another—the difficulty of comprehending,
which has been greater in a degree exceeding all computation.
It may be legitimate for Mr. St. Clair to call the human body
a machine, and to compare the eye to the telescope. But the
difference between the animal mechanism and man-made
machines is so tremendously great, both as to manner of pro-
duction and as to kind when produced, that we can only logically
infer them to be the products of agencies equally dissimilar.
There can be no possible warranty for asserting, that things
totally different in themselves and in the method by which they
are produced, owe their origin to similar causes. No matter how
great the superiority in degree with which we invest the one over
the other, just as natural objects (the human eye) are different
from artificial ones (the telescope) both in degree and in kind, we
cannot do otherwise than infer that their causes have equally
differed in degree and in kind. Besides, we must remember that
though intelligence precedes artificial constructions, in nature
intelligence is the result of organisation, a result attributable
only to certain modes of existence; and unless Mr. St. Clair
means by intelligence that which is meant by the same word
when applied to man, he ought in justice to the question to use
some word better expressing his meaning. If, on the contrary,
* “Discourse of Natural Theology.”


he do mean the same, then seeing that in nature organisation
not only precedes intelligence, and that the degree of intelligence
■will in a great measure be decided by it, but also that Mr. St.
Clair expresses his idea of the maker of the human eye in words
which necessarily imply organisation, he should, unless he is
willing to apply his own argument to this being also, find and use
other words more fitly expressing what his ideas really are. The
whole argument, as we have previously pointed out, does (in spite
of Mr. St. Clair’s attempt to extricate himself from tho difficulty)
necessarily prove that this “intelligent being,” “lord of light and
time,” “personal God,” etc., etc., must himself have been
designed.
Mr. St. Clair strenuously endeavours to reconcile the doctrines
of evolution with the theory of design. He admits that we do
not deny the adaptation and contrivance as exhibited in the fins
of the fish, and in the wings of the bird. Why should we deny
these ? We do not even, as he suggests, say that they are decep-
tive in appearance. The deception is in the argument from
design, which properly speaking can belong only to artificial
objects, and not to the natural objects themselves. As Matthew
Arnold has observed.*
“Design, people say implies a designer. The fallacy lies in
the little termination er. We talk of a being an etre and we
imagine that the word gives us conscious intelligence, thinking
and loving without organisation, but it does not. Either it
gives us breathing and growing, or it gives us effect and opera-
tion. Design implies a designer. Human design does. It
implies the presence of a being who breathes and thinks, so does
that of the lower animals, who like man himself breathe and may
be said to think. A very numerous class of works, we know,
which man and the lower animals make for their own purpose.
When we see a watch or a honey-comb, we say : It works har-
moniously and well, and a man or bee made it, but a yet more
numerous class of works we know, which neither man nor the
lower animals have made for their own purpose. When we see
the ear, or see a bud do we say : It works harmoniously and
well, and a man, or one of the lower animals made it 1 No, but
we say : It works harmoniously and well, and an infinite eternal
all-thinking and all.powerful Being, the creator of all things made
it. Why ? because it works harmoniously and well. But its
* Contemporary Review , 1874.


working harmoniously and well does not prove all this ; it only
proves that it works harmoniously and well.”
The quotation from Dr. Prout explaining the fact that
animals in cold climates are furnished with warpa coats, by
means of natural selection, is both just and to the point, and the
introduction of any other factor than natural selection is both
uncalled for and unnecessary. As Darwin says— *
“It may metaphorically be said that natural selection is daily
and hourly scrutinizing, through the world, every variation even
the slightest; rejecting that which is bad, preserving and adding
up all that is good; silently and insensibly working whenever
and wherever opportunity offers, at the improvement of each
organic being in relation to its organic and inorganic conditions
of life. We see nothing of these slow changes in progress until
the hand of time has marked the long lapse of ages, and then so
imperfect is our view into long-past geological ages, that we only
see that the forms of life are now different from what they
formerly were.”
Besides, there are many things occurring in the structures of
animals and plants which, while inexplicable and meaningless if
viewed in the light of design, are on the contrary, full of
suggestion to the student of evolution minus design. To quote
again from Darwin—f
“The sutures in the skulls of young mammals have been
advanced as a beautiful adaption for aiding parturition, and no
doubt they facililate, or may be indispensable for this act, but as
sutures occur in the skulls of young birds and reptiles which have
only to escape from a broken egg, we may infer that this
structure has arisen from the laws of growth, and has been taken
advantage of in the parturition of higher animals. Besides this,
there are rudimentary organs which present insuperable difficul-
ties to our acceptance of the design theory. For instance|
rudimentary mammae are very general with small mammals ; I
presume that the “bastard wing” in birds may be safely con-
sidered as a digit in a rudimentary state : in very many snakes
one lobe of the lung is rudimentary, in the other snakes there
are rudiments of the pelvis and hind limbs. Some of the cases
of rudimentary organs are extremely curious: for instance, the
presence of teeth in foetal whales, which when grown up have not
a tooth in their head ; and the presence of teeth which never cut
* “Origin of Species,” chap. iv. f Ibid, Chap. VI. £ “Origin of Species’’
Chap. XIII.


through the gums in the upper jaws of our unborn calves. It
has even been stated that rudiments of teeth can be detected in
the beaks of certain embryonic birds. Nothing can be plainer
than that wings are formed for flight, yet in how many insects do
we see wings so reduced in size as to be utterly incapable of
flight, and not rarely lying under wing-cases firmly soldered
together.”
Again, there are cases of retrogression and loss of organs
through disuse, which have presented us with those strange ano-
malies (as Professor Owen termed them), birds that cannot fly ;
insects too, so deficient in wings that they cannot fly ; also the
eyes of moles, and some burrowing rodents reduced to rudimentary
size, and in some cases quite covered up by skin and fur.
“Several animals belonging to the most different classes which
inhabit the caves of Carriola and Kentucky are blind. In some
of the crabs the foot stalk for the eye remains, though the eye is
gone.” “As it is difficult (says Darwin) to imagine that eyes
though useless could be in any way injurious to animals living in
darkness, I attribute their loss entirely to disuse,” Some of these
animals we are told, such as the cave rat (Neotoma) which live
not in the deepest recesses of these caves, have eyes lustrous and
large, and if exposed for some time to a graduated light, begin
again to acquire a dim perception of objects. Now, that any
intelligent being should first create (using the word in the sense
in which it is used by Mr. St. Clair) animals, and endow them
with perfect eyes, and then lead them into situations where these
most complex organs would become useless and eventually dis-
appear, is altogether beyond comprehension.
The effect of environment upon organisation is everywhere
apparent. In nature, everything is unstable, and apparent
stability in animal and vegetable forms is maintained only as
long as there is some agreement between themselves and their
surroundings. Oscar Schmidt says :—f
“If the concatenation of the series by direct derivation and
heredity be disallowed, it is absolutely inconceivable why the
supreme creative power, Nature or the Personal God, should have
bound all higher animals together with the same common stages
of early development, and hereby expose them to such manifold
purposeless arrangements and great dangers. Of the millions of
young oysters which annually escape from the egg, the majority
perish under the disadvantage of external conditions, because the
t “Doctrine of Descent and Darwinism,” p. 202.


oyster has not yet divested itself of the ancient heirloom of the
roving navicula. It has been able to compete successfully in the
struggle for existence only because, like most of its congeners, it
is enormously prolific. This may be understood, but that a
personal creator, merely on principle, in order to keep the oyster
within the type of development, should have endowed it with the
phase of the navicula, in this case so extremely unpractical, can
be accepted like much other nonsense, only as matter of faith.”
Truth is stranger than fictien, and facts are always stubborn
things. The foregoing illustrations, while full of instruction on
the hypothesis of evolution, are incompatible a with creation, and
equally forbid the idea of a guiding intelligence. With Mr. St.
Olair we admit that “evolution is the process of creation,” but
the process is nature’s, and not that of any intelligent being, the
very suggestion of which is unwarranted both by facts and by
necessity.
Mr. St. Olair makes much of the use by Mr. Darwin of such
words as “contrivance,” “arrangements,” “ends answered,”
“purpose,” etc. All investigators, he says, find it a good clue to
discovery to ask the question, “What is the purpose of this
arrangement, and what is the design of that 1” Decidedly, and
for the simple reason that in discovering the purpose they are
often led to the discovery of the reason why. We might, for in-
stance, ask ourselves, What is the reason of those various
arrangements which we often find in flowers of the same order ?
Say the Ranunculacese, for example. Who is there that can fail
to be struck with the great divergence between the common
buttercup and the aconite, or monk’s hood, which, as Carpenter
says,* is the most irregular of all flowers. Yet the one is but a
modification of the other. Asking the question may lead to an
examination, and an examination will show us that the change
from a plant with single stems terminating with a radially sym-
metrical flower, to a tall spike with a cluster of flowers all
bilaterally symmetrical is due almost entirely, if not wholly, to
fertilisation by bees. “The whole shape and arrangement of the
monk’s hood bear distinct reference to the habits and tastes
of the fertilising bees.” The employment of such words as
“arrangement,” “adaptation,” “purpose,” etc., by the scientist is
useful and legitimate; these are nature’s processes, and it is only
when such terms are used as the outcome, with nature,
of a superintending mind, that they become mystifying and
illegitimate.
* “Vegetable Physiology” par. 329.


But Mr. St. Olair accepts the doctrine of evolution, and main-
tains that it does not supersede creation, but is the method by
which the creator works. Creation with him does not mean
calling into being out of nothing, but it means taking materials
and shaping them into an organism, or into something that shall
show the tool-mark of the creator upon it. The difference of
time, too, between instantaneous creation and creation by evolu-
tion is one of relativity only, the'one being quick and the other
being slow creation. In reply to Buchner, whom he says fancies
that to trace the process is to disprove design, because the result
was bound to be what you actually find it from the process, Mr.
St. Clair asserts :
“But we can show machinery for every button made in
Birmingham, and prove that stockings in Nottingham are
products of the loom. Every manufactured article must be what
it is considering what tools have fashioned it and what the pro-
cesses were. Yet it would not be what it is without man’s mind
directing the machinery, and, first of all, designing both the
machinery and the results. By what rule of logic are we author-
ised to infer that nature’s machinery needs no designing, and
nature’s processes need no directing.
Why, by what Priestly called a rigid canon of Newtonian
logic, viz. ; “not to multiply causes without necessity.” We
admit that evolution is the process of (nature’s) creation. We
admit, too, that difference in time makes no difference whatever
to the ultimate fact. But the eternity of matter necessarily
implies the eternity of force. As Buchner says: “No force
without matter and no matter without force.” If Mr. St. Clair
admits this, then he ought first to prove that the phenomena seen
on every hand are incompatible with the properties of matter;
that they are not and cannot be the product of the inherent
energy and plastic forces of matter itself. Matter is already in
the field as an acknowledged entity. A guiding intelligence is
not so unmistakeably in the field ; and as entities are not to be
multiplied without necessity, we are not entitled to postulate
another cause as long as it is possible to account for the
phenomena by a cause already in existence, which possibly has
never yet been disproved.
If it be argued that the order and arrangement seen on every
hand are inconceivable unless we admit a designing mind, then we
reply that inconceivability is no disproof. Many things may,
previous to the fact, appear inconceivable, but after the fact all
previous inconceivability counts for nothing.


That men and flowers, buttons and stockings, are exactly what
they are, owing to tho processes which have produced them is
true. But that is no proof that the processes are due to the same
or to similar agencies. The button machine produces a button,
and the loom a stocking. A fine summer gives an abundant
harvest, and a bad one fills the land with gloom and distress. In
each case there is an exact agreement between cause and effect.
But that is no proof that fine seasons and bad seasons are
designed for these respective purposes. Or again, we know that
men make artificial lakes in which are miniature islands, and
owing to the process the lakes and the islands must be exactly
what they are. But is this a proof that natural lakes and
natural islands have been produced by similar causes? We
cannot imagine that
The streams, which swift or slow
Tear down Aeolian hills and sow
The dust of continents to be,
require any guiding intelligence in order to enable them effectu-
ally to accomplish their work.
The whole attempt of Mr. St. Clair to prove by means of
numerous illustrations drawn from artificial arrangements and
contrivances the existence of a “mind above all human minds”
operating upon and using matter for the production of natural
objects, must, in face of the known fact that mind is the product
of organisation, necessarily fall to the ground. That there are
difficulties it is true, but these are removed with increasing know-
ledge, while we help ourselves not one whit in doing what
Darwin says is so easy, viz. : “to hide our ignorance under such
expressions as the ‘Plan of Creation,’ ‘the Unity of Design,’
etc.”
Mr. St. Clair asserts creation at every step of the step-by-step
variation and selection. It is, he says, in the birth of these vari-
ations that the creative force especially exhibits itself. “What
(he asks) is this creative force ?” In answer to this and at the
same time to give a reason for the occurrence of the variations,
which Mr. St. Clair says are not accounted for, we would point
out that changes in the inorganic world produce changes in the
organic, for after all the one is dependent on the other for its
existence. To cry back and state that the Atheist, does not
account for the origin of motion is sheer stupidity. If the
eternity of matter, which in itself involves the eternity of force,
be admitted, then matter must always have been in motion.
There cannot be force without motion. But Mr. St. Clair


“would not ask that all motion be accounted for.” He would,
however, “like an explanation of those special varieties which
give rise to flowers, and animal bodies, and the human eye.” This
may, owing to our limited knowledge, be impossible. But what
then ? The best thing to do will be to go on learning and not to
jump at some impossible conclusion. One thing, however, is
certain : in nature there are no such things as “accidental thrusts
and collisions,” but everywhere regularity, law, order. How
these laws would graduate from the simple to the complex may
be somewhat understood by an examination of Laplace’s nebular
hypothesis. The shape and position of this earth, for instance,
we know to be the necessary result of purely physical laws.
When this globe was part of the original cosmic incandescent
mass it could, under the circumstances of cooling and rotating in
space, assume no other possible shape than that of an oblate
spheroid (a round, slightly-flattened top and bottom), and this
shape, once assumed, new varieties of force and motion would
of necessity be produced. Those irregularities of surface, too,
which have since given us our principal mountain chains, our
continents, and our ocean beds, would be the necessary results of
the greater contraction of the liquid interior than of the solidified
exterior of the globe; and these would again give rise to still
further complications and varieties of motion. Again, when the
whole mass had become so cooled that the surrounding vapour
could condense, and as water begins to flow from the higher to
the lower portions of the earth’s surface, we should get the
commencement of those stratified rocks which, geologically
speaking, form so important a part of the earth’s crust. But
each of these changes would necessarily have, as its concomitants,
new complexities and varieties of motion. And so we might go
on, step by step, proving that the previous condition stands to
the succeeding, just in the relation of cause to effect. Every
cause engenders a process, which process is in itself the cause of
that which succeeds it. We might pursue this subject further,
but enough has, we think, been said to show that not only is a
governing intelligence incompatible and altogether unnecessary as
accounting for natural phenomena, but that these phenomena,
with all their variations and varieties, are the necessary
sequences of causes which have never had a beginning and can
never have an end.
To say, as does Mr. St. Clair, that everything, “the beauty of
children, the love of woman, the aspiration of the poet, the


courage of the patriot, the civilisation of Europe, and the
religion of Christianity,” must, on the theory of evolution, have
been potentially contained in the original cosmic gas, may be
comparatively true, but then, what becomes of the intelligence,
guiding and directing; for if these were so contained, so too
were ugly children, the hatred of woman, the idiot, the coward,
the religions of Mahomed and of Budda, Pantheism, Atheism,
and all the numerous and conflicting creeds that have hampered
the human mind, together with the bigotry, intolerance, and
persecution which have from time immemorial devastated the
fairest gardens of nature, made the sky lurid with the glare from
martyrs’ fires, and the earth to reek with the blood of its unfor-
tunate victims. No; the plea for a creative or directing
intelligent Being superintending these things will not do; and in
face of these facts we should be inclined to say—we are thankful
for it. Could we for one moment believe that these had been
designedly brought about we could not help but feel that the
author of them was a malevolent tyrant, whose systematic
cruelty stamped him as a being for hate and loathing, rather than
for reverence and love.
In conclusion, Mr. St. Clair asks if all the phenomena of the
world result from the clock running down, Who wound it up 1
And this is a very fitting question with which to close a vindica-
tion of the design argument. It can be best answered by asking
another question, more legitimate and more necessary : Who
wound “Who” up 1 Do not try to escape the anthropomorphism
by crying “Mystery !” Remember that any attempted solution
which lands us only in mystery can be of [no value as an hypo-
thesis or as affording an explanation.
We have been led to reply to Mr. St. Clair (for whom we en-
tertain profoundest respect, and no inconsiderable admiration),
not because we were afraid his pamphlet would make any havoc
in the ranks of Freethought, but because there are so many at
this time engrossed in the study of a question at once the most
interesting and the most important, and who, anxious to arrive
at the truth, know it can be done only by studying both sides of
the question.
The light of truth is ever fatal to the mists of error. Let
every one impartially examine these perplexing problems, with a
determination to follow only where truth leads. “Let Truth and
error grapple. Who ever knew truth put to the worse in a free
and open encounter V


iiiiaf ¥
PUBLISHING COMPANY,
34= HP-A-IRIKI STBBET,
SYDNEY,
FREETHOUGHT
BOOKSELLERS,
AND
MWi AGENTS.


-VJt
