

Can Australia Compare with
Canada and the United
States of America
as a Field for
Immigration ?
IF NOT! WHY NOT?
By Robert S. Walpole.
Bruce & Co., Printers, 434 Bourke Street, Melbourne,
Issued by the Victorian Employers’ Federation.
Offices and Club Rooms: 325 Collins St, Melbourne.


IMMIGRATION
AND
RAILWAY BUILDING.
B Y ROBERT S. WALPOLE.
An interesting lecture was, delivered by Mr. R. S. Walpole, on
April 2, to members of the Victorian Employers’ Federation on the
subject of “ Can Australia compare with the United States of
America and Canada as a field for immigration? If not, why not?”
The lecture was illustrated with maps and diagrams. As a pre-
liminary the speaker gave his experiences as a young man in the
Western States of America, and subsequently in the ■baddblocks of
Australia, and, after referring, to his recent visit to the United
States and Canada went on to say ;
In comparing the three countries, I propose to give particulars
as to population, land, railway communication, and the people, as
seen in the year 1907-08, and will therefore separate my address
into three parts, viz.—(x) What Canada has done for immigra-
tion, and the methods' used for attracting population. (2) What
the United States has done, and (3) What Australia has done, anil
should do. Though in comparing the three countries, some of the
remarks that will be made by me may not be in accord with the
views held by some present, or many of the Australian public, I
feel I should not be doing my duty unless I gave the benefit of
matured opinions arrived at during the visits made to those
countries. The Federation, of which I have the honour of being
secretary, is in no way bound by any suggestions or any criticisms
made by me. I have been merely asked by the Council of that
important body to place my views before them with the idea of
providing information which may be considered of value to what
I call my adopted country.
Commencing with Canada, you will note on the map a very-
large area of country, comprising some 3,744,000 square miles,
with a density of population equal to 1.72 to the square mile.
The population taken at the late census, 1901, gave 5,371,000,
and the estimated population in 1907, is 6,504,900, an increase
in six years of 1,133,900. Of this population 95 per cent, are
British. The larger portion of this country was, at the time of
my first visit (1871), an unknown land j and I may state that only


in recent years has the great North-Western provinces of Canada
been opened up and found to be one of the great wheat granaries
of the world. What has promoted the expansion of Canada has
been Federation, a progressive policy of railway building, and an
enlightened system of immigration.
ft has always been my opinion that the Government of a new
country should act as the United States and Canada have done,
merely as trustees for the Creator, and offer every facility possible
to those who are strong and willing, and who wish to make homes
for themselves. Or, to use the words of President Roosevelt,
“It is unwise to depart from the old American tradition and to
discriminate for or against any man who desires to come here
and become a, citizen, save on the ground of that man’s fitness for
citizenship. If the man who seeks to come here is from the
moral and social standpoint of such a character as to bid fair
to add value to the community, he should be heartily welcomed.
We cannot afford to pay heed to whether he is of one nation or
another. What we should desire to find out is the individual
quality of the individual man.” Or, to quote from the, Canadian
correspondent of the “Times”:—“Canada resents, and will
continue to resent, the importation of degenerates and criminals
as a simple measure of relieving the Old Country of waste and
dangerous material. The feeling is that while we, with our great
area of unsettled lands, have no right to close our doors against
respectable and industrious people from Great Britain or any other
country, we are under no obligation to receive and support the
paupers and criminals from the Old World communities.”
Canada’s population is 73 p.c. rural, and 26 p.c. urban
—the largest city, Montreal, having only 267,000 people. Wes-
tern Canada, 50 years ago, had a population of 8000. To-day she
lias over one million, and yet the climatic conditions of that country
are such as to virtually necessitate a large portion of the business
of the country being at a standstill for some five months in the
year, though an alteration has lately been made by using sleighs
to carry the crops to market in winter, instead of carting them
in summer. In climatic conditions Canada cannot compare with
Australia, where men may work, if they are so disposed, for 300
days in the year; but it is filled with a strong, hearty, progressive
pioneering population; and I remember reading in a great work
some years ago that the great Northern nations of the world were
those which took the premier position, due to the fact,, that the
obstacles and difficulties with which they had to contend in fighting
Nature made them of necessity the finest and pluckiest men when
it came to fighting man himself.


RAILWAYS.
The important matter of railways 'brings me to the great over-
land line to Quebec, known as the Canadian-Pacific Railway. Ihe
history of this railway supports the contention just given of the
force of character of men born in the Northern countries. A small
syndicate of men, rich, decided upon this enormous task of tra-
versing the great plains, scaling the huge Rocky Mountains, and
the Selkirks, and reaching the Pacific Slope, where, at the present
time, fruits and other products of the semi-tropical countries arc
to he found. I was informed by a relation of one of the gentle-
men who formed the syndicate, that after they had spent all the
money they had, they got into great difficulties. His uncle in-
formed him as he sat in his house one night, that every bit oh
the furniture in his magnificent place was virtually pawned to the
railways’ future, and that unless they were successful in negotiat-
ing finances to carry on the huge work, he would die a paupei -
However, eventually they succeeded, and when one looks from
the car during the railway journey at the stupendlous difficulties
they had to overcome, one is staggered to believe that any men
could have ventured their money on what must have appeared to
everybody else in those days as a wild-cat scheme.
After leaving Vancouver on this journey of 3000 odd miles,
one passes down the Fraser River Valley, a country sufficient in
itself to make one’s heart glad, with magnificent rivers and lakes,
and a country capable of growing anything that can he produced in
the temperate zone. And as one travels further, the mountains
gather in from each side, confining the area of the Valley till,
reaching Sleamour, one 'begins to feel from the atmosphere that
the rise of the Selkirk Mountains has begun. Further on one sees
lakes, large and small, the River Fraser still in sight, and the
mountains becoming more gigantic and rough, and capped with
snow.
At the time of the year that', I passed through, the snow was
just melting, and thousands of waterfalls were falling from heights
of five or six thousand feet. As the day proceeded, and the
Kicking Horse Canon was reached, there was scenery of a class
that I have never yet witnessed in ray travels in India, Europe
or the countries already mentioned-—huge precipices of rock from
which boulders of an enormous size were falling into the Kicking
Horse River, which travels alongside the track and pursues its
way first one side of the railway and then the other, roaring and
crushing along with it timber and material of every descrip-
tion. Mountains covered with snow met the eyes from


every point; but what strikes one even more than the great
works of nature, is the determined pluok shown by those who
dared to pioneer this railway through such intricate and diffi-
cult country. Looking from the carriage window, the obstacles
appear to be insurmountable, and the cost frightens one to think
of. What the surveyors must have faced in their efforts to find a
way to build a railway through such country only points to the
extraordinary engineering skill, and indomitable pluck in which
the Anglo-Saxon race seems to be pre-eminent.
One could scarcely believe that it would pay this great com-
pany to run trains fitted with luxurious cars over such enormous
distances, and under such difficulty, and to build palatial hotels in
the principal cities, and yet, in looking over their returns, I find
that they have 10,239 miles of railways, besides 2873 miles
other lines connected with them. The gross earnings of the com-
pany for the year 1907 was 72,207,527 dollars; working expenses,
46,914,218 dollars; net earnings, 25,303,309 dollars; and the
dividends, 9,037,000 dollars; thus showing that this great
■ work, which has so lifted Canada in the eyes of the world, is giv-
ing rich returns for the plucky pioneering work clone.
On the downward slopes on the'east side of the mountains to
Calgarv, one passes the great irrigation settlement carried out by
the Canadian-Pacific Railway Company, in which they have prac-
tically illustrated for the first time in Canada, on a large scale, the
system of irrigation. It consists at present of 361 miles of canals
and ditches.. When the scheme is completed, the company will
have 967 miles of main and secondary canals and distributing
ditches, and will irrigate some 1,500,000' acres, and make available,
another 1,500,000 for ranching, though at present, only the Wes-
tern section of 350,000 acres is being brought under irrigation.
This land, to a very large extent, was practically useless, and had
been acquired by the company as part of the payment given to it
by the Government for the construction of the railway.
Leaving Calgary, one travels over the Western plains for over
1000 miles to the greatest of modern cities, except, perhaps, Chi-
cago, for its age, viz., Winnipeg. It is built on a sure foundation,
being the entrepot for the wheat fields of Great Western Canada.
The plains travelled over are similar to those of Nebraska. Home-
steads are scattered about, which one can see are new, and lowly
enough, but meaning to the men who hold them their own pro-
perty ; and no one knows except those who have lived and worked
in the older countries in agricultural pursuits what the feeling is
to such people to have 160 acres of land all their own. It is that


innate desire of man to have some property in his possession, more
especially the .Anglo-Saxon man, that has made the British the
greatest pioneers that the world has ever known. Ihey will put
up with loneliness and hardships which no other race can surpass
in their desire to acquire such a privilege.
IMMIGRATION.
In looking over the immigration returns for Canada, I find that
some 1,219,943 immigrants have been received between the year
1897 and the year 1908, 10 years in all, at a cost to the country
of £1 per head, of which immigrants, 487,720 were British,
366,385 Continental, and 365,638 Americans from the United
States. The latter brought with them during the year 1907-8
more than sterling in cash and settlers’ effects.
Every bona fide immigrant is valued by the Canadian Govern-
ment as worth to the country. Bor ten years this would
represent Through the kindness of Mr. L. A.
Fortier, of the Immigration Department, I was introduced to Dr.
Lavoise,' the Immigration Agent in Quebec, and also to Dr. Lapage,
of the Immigrants’ Hospital, a few miles out of Quebec, all these
gentlemen showing me the greatest courtesy. I was invited to see
600 more immigrants land from the “’Empress of Great
Britain.” This great vessel was another part of the gigantic
Canadian-Pacific Railway scheme. The immigrants appeared
to be chiefly young, and Britisherssome belonged to that
splendid race of North Germans and Scandinavians, which make
some of the finest settlers in the American States. As they passed
down the gangway, the immigration officers and employees helped
the immigrants and their babies, and gave them all a kindly wel-
come. One of the things which struck me most was the kindly
manner in which they were treated from first to last by all the
officials, thus showing that they were welcome guests to the Cana-
dian Dominion.
The men who passed through, ranged mostly from 20 to 25
years of age, and had the brown, well-coloured skin of the agricul-
turists of the older countries. They were happy and excited at the
prospects of the future, and I remember saying to myself. What
would Australia give for 100,000 of such young men to populate
her country? but with the Immigration Restriction Act the door is
closed to a very large percentage of these men, who were under
contract to the farmers and others in the Western plains. Within
three hours of landing, they were despatched to their various des-
tinations. First of all they had of course to show that they were
possessed of and to be medically passed. This inspection is


very strict, yet in a period of xo years I found that, although
16,300 were held back for a close examination 1 , only 3294 were
finally rejected. In analysing the immigration returns, I noted that
out of the number of immigrants for the years 1903 to 1907,
totalling 613,000, there were 162,300 farmers and farm labourers,
163,000 general labourers, 156,000 mechanics, and 30,000 domes-
tic's ; the others were miscellaneous. The larger portion of general
labourers and mechanics were employed on the new railway works
and the buildings for new settlers.
The system adopted in respect to the handling of these immi-
grants is perfect, and when they reach Winnipeg, which is their
usual destination, they are taken to the Immigration Depot, a splen-
did building, in which they are comfortably lodged and boarded. In
the grand hall on the ground floor they find maps of the country
showing the land available, and, having made their choice, the
train takes them along to the district selected, where they are met
by a Government agent, and if they approve of the land, may take
possession at once. There are no free or assisted passages to
Canada, and the Government only encourages the immigration of the
agricultural class, domestics and navvies. The Government does
not make loans of money, stock, or implements to immigrants, but
occasionally provides food and fuel, and sometimes grain where
settlers are in destitute circumstances. The Immigrant Employment
Bureau at Winnipeg helps those who require employment to find it,
and there are hundreds of agents in the small towns and hamlets,
among the clergy, storekeepers and others who assist in an honorary
capacity. In each of the big towns there is an agent appointed by
the Government. There are also land guides. The usual rates of
pay to begin arelnexperienced men, a year and food; partly
experienced men, ; and experienced hands from the old country,
per year. Everything is done to meet the requirements of the
immigrant, but nothing is done to take away from him the main
point in a, pioneer’s life, that is, his independence, the Govern-
ment believing that if they give the land virtually for nothing,
160 acres free on payment of registration fee of £2, the
immigrants should be able to do the rest for themselves.
RAILWAY BUILDING.
The Canadian Government in its early, and what may be called
green-salad days, built 1483 miles of railway which it operates, and
for the year 1905 showed a deficit of 1,725,000 dollars. The
Government has spent altogether 162,000,000 odd dollars on rail-
way construction, and has sustained a net loss of 11,374,000 dol-
lars ; and it was looked upon as a considerable joke by the Cana


dians whom I met, that for the year 1907, for the first time, there
was an actual surplus of 180,440 dollars. The great railways that
have made Canada are not Government but private enterprises, such
as the Grand Trunk, the Canadian-Pacific, and the Canadian
Northern. The Grand Trunk system consists of 4645 miles, but
since the Canadian-Pacific competition it has joined with the
Grand Trunk Pacific, when the two combined will ultimately have
a mileage of 13,000. The Grand Trunk Pacific, has charters to
build 23 branch lines, and its main line, 3555 miles long, cost
some 125,000,000 dollars. The authorised mileage of the Grand
Trunk Pacific, mainland and branches, is 7900 miles. The Cana-
dian Northern, which, 12 years ago, had 125 miles, has now 4059
miles in operation. One hundred and fifty new towns haye sprung
up along this railway, which has been built at the rate of nearly
one .mile a day for the last ten years. Its gross earnings in 1907
were 10,000,000 dollars. Canada’s total railway mileage is 22,452
miles, besides 5159 miles of sidings. On the date of confederation,
1867, the mileage was only 2287. The mileage under construction
or contract to-day is 3000. Before leaving Canada I would like
to refer to one great pull that they have over Australia, and that
is in the enormous lakes and railway facilities. One has only to
. look at the map to see that the facilities offered in this direction
far exceed those perhaps of any other country-, except the United
States, and the arrangement now being made between -Canada and
America for a scheme connecting these lakes by canals, if suc-
cessfully carried out, will revolutionise the water traffic.
The latest scheme, is the Northern Pacific’s proposal to build
a. railway from Winnipeg to Hudson’s Bay, now consented to by
■ the Government on condition of its allowing running powers for
other railways over the line. It is looked upon as possibly the
greatest prospective revolution in the trade of Canada, as it is be-
lieved that if Hudson’s Bay can be kept open for some six
months in the year, it will allow of ships reaching Liverpool
in about one-half the time at present occupied. You will thus
see that private enterprise, coupled with grants of valuable land)
and also, in some cases, moneys advanced on easy terms to the
railway companies, have resulted in a keen competition between the
various railways, and a determination to spread themselves north,
south, east and west, with a view of getting prospective traffic in
the days to come out of what they believe to be the great immigra-
tion policy of the future, thus ensuring to Canada greater facilities
of communication for settling her lands —all these advantages, to
my mind, being greatly in favour of Canada as compared with
Australia.


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
On landing at New York, I found a great controversy going
on in America on the subject of immigration, and though that
country has absorbed, since I first visited it, some 15,000,000 of
immigrants, still with its urea of 3,567,000 square miles, it has
only a density of some 30 to the square mile, and has alien-
ated 808,000,000 acres, but has 718,000,000 acres still avail-
able for occupation. On leaving New York and passing through
the State of Nebraska, which I had not visited for 34 years, I was
struck with the fact that on looking from the windows of the rail-
way carriage, I saw nothing but farms on each side of the railway
of an average area of 160 acres; and on referring to.the statistics
of population, I found that the State, which was a territory when I
was ranching, had then but :i 00,000 people, but. now had over one
million; and that the great blizzards that roared over the 900 odd
miles of plain from the Rocky Mountains, piercing with their pene-
trating cold the thickest clothing, have been modified by copses
of timber planted round all the homesteads, and the country thus
rendered more habitable. Telephone and telegraph wires cover
the country, connecting the homes of the farmers with the markets
and with their neighbours. As one travelled one saw small com-
fortable, townships, hamlets and villages, all being the result of the
great venture by the Union Pacific Company, in building a line
which, in my time, had a greater traffic passing over it in the
shape of buffaloes than it had with cars; but to-day one sees trains
of 50 and 60 cars, carrying 20 and 25 tons of goods each, from
the Western States through to the East. Well do I remember the
first immigrants that I saw in Nebraska being dumped down some
2500 miles from the East, consisting of parties of Germans, Scan-
dinavians, English, Scotch and Irish in the dress and habits of their
country, each one having to work out his own salvation. I won-
dered how many of the homesteads that I now saw were those of
the men and women who were the first immigrants in that State?
The climatic conditions were no better there than in Canada, and
the country known as Western Canada to-day was then reckoned
to be a place only fit for trappers engaged in the collection of
furs. Hut time,’ pioneering railways, and immigration have
changed the whole outlook.
In this great country of America, progress is largely due to
the same cause as in Canada—viz., the building of railways. The
total American mileage of railways in 1870, when I first lived
there, was 52,922 miles. Now it is reckoned at over 215.000 miles,
(Continued, on page 11.)


RAILWAY MAP OF THE COMMONWEALTH.
This Map indicates the main railways by heavy black lines
and the branch railways by lighter lines. The suggested trans-
continental railways to the Northern Territory and to Western
Australia are denoted by dotted lines.
Area of Commonwealth 2,975,581 miles
Population (1908) 5,275,306
Railways—State Owned miles
„ Private Companies 915 f miles
Total Mileage available for Public
Traffic 15,575 miles
Mileage under Construction and
Authorised 30th June, 1908 ... 906 f miles
The railway gauge varies throughout Australia. It is sft.
•bn. in Victoria; 4ft. BJin. in New South Wales; Bft. Cm. in
Queensland; sft. Bin. and Bft. 6m. in South Australia and Sft.
Cin. in Western Australia. This break o t gauge causes great
inconvenience in the interstate traffic of the Eastern States.


RAILWAY MAP OF CANADA.
Area of Canada 3,744,695 sq. miles
Population (1907) 6,504,900
(Increase of 1,133,503 in Six Years.)
Railways 22,452 miles
(Including 1,483 miles owned by the Government)
Railways in Course of Construction 3000 miles
The Railway Companies have received from the Govern
ment about £70,000,000 in land and bonuses.
Canada has 198 Railway Companies under 98 controlling
Companies
Main Railways in Canada and also in the United States
are of the one gauge.


spreading north', east, south and west, 1 and increasing very rapidly
every day, all of which railways have been built by private en-
terprise on the land grant system ; and though a great..deal is said
against American railway monopolies and other matters of "that
kind, I found no more grumbling there than I have heard from
farmers in this country, and, as far as I could ascertain, the rates
charged on the main products, were not as great, for haulage as
here. It is certain that Uncle Sam knew what he was about
when he agreed that it was not has business to fill the country, nor
his business to build the railways or run them, but, it was his
business to offer to the world, as President Roosevelt has already
said, to those clean-living individuals, strong and desirous of mak-
ing new homes, an opportunity of doing so. To make the railways
pay, and to get the capital back necessitated the filling of the vacant
spaces of land belonging to the railway companies, and Uncle Sam
alternately, along the line of route, and consequently the former
had to advertise and send their agents throughout the Continental
portions of Europe, as well as Great Britain to look for immi-
grants. Just , here I will quote what that well-known writer,
Professor Mayo Smith, says on immigration;
“ The rapidity ,of the growth of America has been due not
only to the virgin soil and abundance of natural resources, but
also to the effectiveness of the labour force supplied by immigra-
tion. This labour force was composed largely of adult males in a
period of greater physical strength. It was the kind of labour
most needed for the development of a new country. It was under
the direction of skill and energy with capital supplied from
older communities. It is not surprising the country made enor-
mous strides in the accumulation of wealth.”
As I passed through the great country of Colorado—now a
State —on the Rio Grande railway, through the. deserts in the Utah,
from Utah through the great desert into Nevada, and over the
Nevada Mountains into beautiful California, and up the valleys
of California over the Shasta Range into the lovely State, of Oregon,
dropping over the mountains into the Territory of Washington, I
felt that when people talked about the world being too full, they
should think of the vast spaces still left on the great American Con-
tinent, with over 90,000,000 people, and yet only a density of 30
persons to the square mile, against England’s 558 to the square
mile, and the new prospects for opening up the great North-Wes-
tern portions of Canada, and the enormous wastes of Australia
and Africa, they would find there was still a little room left,
in spite of our Labour friends’ prognostications, for those who


desire to leave the close confines of the older lands, and to be able
in the morning to breathe their fill of the balmy breezes and' fresh
atmosphere of the plains and mountains, and to make themselves
comfortable homes without trespassing, on their neighbours’ pockets,
and here were lands where men could feel and know that
they were free and not dependent upon the relief of others, but
could build up a strong and virile race, capable of doing the great
work of filling the vacant places of the earth. When 1 left
Canadian and American soil at Vancouver on my return trip, I
felt in some respects a sadder and a wiser man, believing, it spared,
that there might be some little work yet left for me to do in pushing
forward the policy which from the earliest times when first I reached
Australia I felt was lacking, and that was in the direction of a
great and successful immigration movement.
AUSTRALIA.
In Australia we have a Continent comprising 2,973,066 square
miles, and so vast as to embrace the whole of Europe, with the
exception of Russia, and still leave n very large area over.
Queensland contains 668,000 square miles, South Australia
and the Northern Territory, 903,690 square miles, and Western
Australia 975,920 square miles. The people of Australia them-
selves have no idea what such a vast area means, both in climatic
conditions and in the products that can be produced from the soil
of such a large territory'. When I state that the Northern Terri-
tory alone represents 335,000,000 odd acres, of which all except
that in degrees is tropical, it can be easily understood that if
we take, in addition, the north portion of Western, Australia, ad-
joining on the one side Roebuck Bay, and on the other side, the
North of Queensland, as far as Normanton, we will find that we
have a big problem to solve in respect to the excellent suggestion.of
keeping Australia white if possible.
Mr. Searcey, who was Government Customs officer in the
Northern Territory for some 20 years, writing in his admirable book
on the Northern Territory, states that “ the great extent of country
on the coast and rivers will grow ever)' description of tropical pro-
ducts; immense areas are suitable for agriculture.” He further
states that “ the wet season commences about the end of October,
and lasts five months, the average rainfall being 65 degs. near the
coast. The temperature maximum during the wet season is 95
.degs,, and the minimum at night 65 degs. During the South-
East monsoons, the dry heat is very hot indeed.” As giving some
idea of the great heat of that country from one who is an experi-
enced, hardy man, accustomed to the tropics, when lie was laying


out a township on the Macarthur River, he says “We had an
awful time, for the heat was intense. We made an early start, and
after some four miles’ walk, commenced operations. As the day
advanced, the heat became unbearable. It made one’s eyebrows
crawl; so after an hour at peg-cutting;, I assured the surveyor I had
had enough.” Further, he goes on to state that two of the men
were so exhausted that they did not return until evening, and he
constantly describes Kis position in that country, sitting in his cane
chair, panting and wet through with perspiration.
I mention this as showing that the climatic conditions of Aus-
tralia are misunderstood by the vast majority of people through a
want of geographical knowledge as to its extent, and a man in
Victoria is very apt to consider that the heat he experiences for a
few days in the summer time is something very exceptional, whereas,
in the Gulf country, where I Jived for some time, the heat was equally
as great for the main part of the year, as that described by Mr.
Searcey, the only difference being that the highlands are very much
healthier and better to live in than the coastal zone, where the heat
is exactly the same as that in India or Fiji.
One thing is certain about vacant Australia—viz., that those
who have must hold and use; and if the waste lands held by Aus-
tralia are not to be dealt with, and populated by the Australian
nation, then they will be dealt with by other nations; and though,
as I formerly stated, we may all be one in the wish that the whole
of Australia should be worked by white settlers, we should be pre-
pared to leave out all political feeling in this matter, and endeavour,
as recently .stated by Professor Osborne, to treat the problem in its
physiological aspect, as well as its commercial, and when once a
satisfactory result is arrived at, work conjointly in harmony with a
view of doing the best possible under the conditions.
It is commonly stated that the only arable land of Australia
lies near the coast, and that the interior is arid. Now, as one
who has ventured into the back-blocks of Australia, and who re-
members in the early days similar statements made regarding the
aridity and the drought-stricken condition of what was at that
time known as the interior, I can safely say that there is no great-
er mistake made than to speak of Australia in such a manner. 1
remember going to a sheep station in the early seventies, situated
near Bourke, in New South Wales, where the land was held by
cattlemen. Sheep farmers were ridiculed by the cattle ranchers,
and called by the name of “ ground lice,” while it was also assert-
ed that all the wool would turn out to be hair, and the climatic
conditions would never suit sheep. Later on I heard similar state


merits made in respect to the D'iamantina, the Thomson and F len-
ders Rivers in Queensland, yet, to-day, from those parts the Rail"
ways are carrying hundreds and thousands of bales of combing
wool equal to the best grown in the more temperate portions. There
is also no doubt in my mind from what I hare seen grown by
Chinamen in small gardens at mining camps in the north part of
Queensland, that the soil is even more prolific, and more capable
of producing great crops of grain, Indian corn, tobacco, etc., than
in the more temperate parts. This is borne out by a statement
made by Mr. D’Arcy Uhr, in referring to the Florida Station on
the Goyfler River, and the luxurious growth of the mulberry,
orange, lemon, mango, cocoa-nut palms, banana, pineapples, and
numerous other fruits and vegetables there.
Captain Stokes, of the H.M.S. “ Beagle,” has also written most
sanguinely of tire Victoria River country. Lieutenant Rowe, of the
H.M.S. “Tamar,” of the Melville Island and old Fort Dundas
land, and Mr. Searcey of the Daly River.
As to the question of European labour in the tropics, Mr.
Searcey writes :
I heard the other day that a gentleman who had resided many
years in the northern possession, stated that that portion ot the
island continent was the healthiest country in the world, that
malarial fever was a bogie, and that any tropical products could bo
produced successfully with European labour. 1 am afraid that that
gentleman forgot that there are in the world a few other people who
have experience of tropical countries and tropical life and produc-
tion, and who, if they saw or heard such statements, would naturally
ask why such a tropical paradise had been neglected so long, and
had developed into what is known as the “white elephant t* Iney
would at any rata imagine that there must be a screw loose some-
where. Now it must be realised that we have a veritable tropical
■ Australia, and the sooner that fact is understood the better, ihe
conditions are just the same as obtain in other portions ot the
tropical world—-the same ills have to he borne, and similar means are
necessary for the development of the country. Why not recognise
all the country to the north of the twenty-second parallel of latitude
ns tropical country, and develop it tinder tropical conditions ? It
must he remembered that portions of the Northern Territory are
looked upon as supplying some of the hottest places 111 the world.
It seems to me, in the circumstances, rather absurd to say that
malarial fever is a bogie. As a matter of fact, it cloes_ exist, especi-
ally during the early portion of the dry season, I firmly behove,
however, that for a tropical country the Territory is one of the
most healthy in existence, and I know that Europeans, under certain
conditions, stand the climate perfectly.
In the interior of Australia, lands once held to be outside the
possibility of growing anything have now become stations, and
water, which it was believed impossible to obtain, has, by the means
of boring, been found to be plentiful. Hundreds of wells have
been struck in different portions of the supposed arid parts, more
especially near Hughenden, Winton, etc., and also in portions of


South Australia, from where one to three million gallons of water
from these natural streams are given off ever} - 24 hoursand at the
present time, after watering the sheep, it may be stated that 00
per cent, of such water is actually wasted. Professor Gregory, in
his hook “ The Dead Heart of Australia," speaks in the strongest
terms about this waste of water, and points out that by the geolo-
gical formation of enfolded rocks, there is a large quantity of
water in store right away from Lake Kyre to past the (Queensland
border. In the Government Handbook of South Australia there
is the following reference to the water question :
The intake bed of this storage area is the western slope of the
coast range from Cape York, into the north-eastern corner or m-w
South Wales. Oyer this range the rainfall averages 51 in. at
Geraklton. On the western slope there is a large sandstone forma-
tion so porous that the rain water, as it runs oft the hilltops, is
mostly absorbed by the sandstone rocks, and the volume along the
surface is considerably decreased by this loss. Thus yearly a very
large supply of water flows through the intake bods and passes
underground to replenish the water-bearing area of the artesian
basin. This annual contribution is so largo that the compara-
lively small quantity discharged by the bores, however numerous
they may be, will probably make no permanent difference to this
subterranean storage. The extent of the Australian Artesian Basin
is 590,000 square miles, of which South Australia has about 120,000.
The wells vary from 4580 feet deep to 229, and have a discharge of
1,250,000 gallons daily to as low as 20,000.
This all shows that it is impossible for anyone to say, with the
small and unreliable data to hand, how much of Australia is arid,
where it begins, or where it ends; but it may be safely said that
when we take into account the enormous area of country occupied
by mountains in Canada and America, and the desert land in the
latter State, and ice-bound land in a big portion of the former,
that Australia, with its 2,973,000 square miles, will not have
much more, if any, bad lands than either of those two countries.
But at the present time, it is absurd to trouble about the interior
portion of Australia, seeing the enormous area of rich country yet
available for settlement nearer the coast, if only the proper railway
facilities are. offered for reaching the same by intending immi-
grants.
RAILWAYS.
It will be seen on the maps that the railways of America and
Canada, more especially in Canada, which is a new country of
somewhat similar population to Australia, spread themselves out
in advance of population, acting as pioneers, the stream of popu-
lation following them. The Canadian Labour Department report
for February, 1909, states that railways are now being built of
over 4000 miles in length, and capital is to be expended equal to
over sterling to complete these undertakings. The


report also says:—“A feature of railway extension in Western
Canada is the efforts that are made to settle new regions as
soon as transportation facilities are given. (Note the words, “as
soon as”—not “ before,” but “as soon,”) It is expected that on
the Grand Trunk Pacific line, upwards Of 100 towns will be
located next year between Winnipeg and the Rocky Mountains,
each about eight miles apart, while 35 new towns will be plotted
on the, mountain division. On the Canadian Northern, 30 towns
will lie created, and on the Canadian Pacific 33, all providing
centres from which immigrants may proceed into the new territory,
as well as furnishing marketing points for their products.”
The system of railway-building in Australia in comparison with
this progression is best seen from the following figures Total
railways of Australia 15,574 miles, the larger portion being built
during the period of 1881-1891, viz., fiooo odd miles, whereas
from that date to 1907, 985 miles only were built, and 732 miles
authorised. And peculiar to say, during the period when Austra-
lia was building railways on a. somewhat large scale, the im-
migration for that period, 1881-91, amounted to 382,740, and
for the four years before that, 130,142, making a respectable total
of 51.2,882 persons in the fourteen years; but since that date, our
increase in population for the ensuing sixteen years amounted to
only 31,000 odd, and our railway building as shown, totals 985
miles'only. I would like to state that on the monetary value of
each adult male immigrant, reckoned 01V America and Canada stan-
dards, during those years, when Australia received 512,000 odd
immigrants, we improved our position in monetary value by
sterling; and I am not aware that during that par-
ticular period there were any more facilities for obtaining land than
there are at present. There,was certainly then no Labour l arh,
who, with a “dog-in-the-manger” policy, will not work the
land themselves, and will not allow others to do so. .there was
no Federal Government in those days who. locked the door and
stood outside with the key in their hands. There were none of the
disabilities in respect to the willing worker coming into this country,
whether he was engaged in the Old Land by those living in Aus-
tralia or not, and there was no restriction on his employment. He
was a welcome guest, and the country was desirous of having
him. Perhaps these are some of the disabilities which made me
put the query in the title of my address —“ If not, why not?
IMMIGRATION AND LAND.
In respect to the various cries of some people, that im-
migrants mean keener competition in the labour market, reduction


of wages, less spending power of the people, and the landing of
people in a country without available land, I reply that, as far as
the question of wages is concerned, the effect in Canada is shown
to be exactly the opposite. The average wages of farm help at the
present time are; per month for male help, or ,£42 P er y eiu ’-
Female help, £2 15s. per month, or £2 6 a year, and in respect
to labour generally, the wages of mechanics and labourers, and
carpenters, are much about the same as in Victoria, viz. : —lO/-,
7/- to 9/-, and 6/- to 7/- per day of 10 hours.
In respect to the second objection that there is a deficiency of
land, I see, on referring to the statistics (Knibbs, 1907)) that there
are 87,247,000 acres of alienated land in the Commonwealth, or
equal to 4.58 per cent, of the whole of the area of the Common-
wealth; and there is in process of alienation 35,000,000 acres more,
which would bring the total alienated to 6.4 per cent., leaving
93.96 per cent, of the country available. Under the conditions, it
appears monstrous that Australia is to be limited by the powers
that be in its available land for the settlement of immigrants to the
districts served at the present time by the few miles of railways
we have, and where land is generally of such a high value, even if
re-purchased by the Government, as to place it out of the reach of
the ordinary immigrant. I think if the .selections in Australia were
limited to 160 acres in area, as in Canada, there would be
millions of acres available even now, within reach of the railway
communication. If there is a complaint against a squatter as
being a monopolist, there is also a complaint equally good against
the large farmer; but in neither case, in my opinion, does there
seem to be any need to upset their right to the possession of
freehold land. Australia has enough land held under leasehold,
and Crown lands under no lease whatever —12,000,000 acres in
this small State of Victoria alone —to supply hundreds and thou-
sands of immigrants, conditional upon the one great want of this
country being supplied —viz., a strong progressive policy Of
railways. I have always held the belief that if Australia had been
run on Canadian principles as far as its railways are concerned, it
would have been equally as well-populated, and as well served
with railways to-day as either Canada or America; but seeing
that the policy of the country is that the railways shall be construct-
ed by the Government, the Government should build railways
reaching out to those available lands which I have personally seen
in this and other States, capable of keeping hundreds and thou-
sands of willing immigrants. If the money already spent in re-
purchasing at big values freehold originally sold by the Govern-
ment, had been spent in railways, we would all have been better
off to-day.


AUSTRALIA’S NATURAL ADVANTAGES AND POLITICAL
DISABILITIES.
Australia can offer special advantages over Canada and
America, in the fact that she has a better climate; she has 365
days in the year in which a man can live in the open; she has a
country more prolific in its variety of resources, mineral wealth,
etc.; she has climatic conditions which allow of both .stock and
people being housed at a very much smaller cost than in either
of the two countries already mentioned. It, therefore, appears
to me that she stands on equally as good a footing as either Canada
or America as a field for immigrants; but she cannot, in my opinion,
ever make a success, so long as these great domains for which the
various State Governments are trustees are neglected, and unless
they are prepared’to enforce upon the Federal Government to first
get rid of the iniquitous Immigration Restriction Act, and confine
themselves only to the mild restriction similar to the Canadian
Immigration Act. Secondly, to pursue a vigorous railway policy,
either on the land grant system, or by subsidies, or by both, or by
building the lines themselves; and, thirdly, instead of wasting
their time with all sorts of experiments in compulsory purchase of
Lands Acts, Closer Settlement Acts in congested areas, paying enor-
mous sums of money for lands already held by others, to deal with
their own lands under lease or otherwise, not confining themselves
to Victoria or the limits of New South Wales, but looking upon the
whole of Australia as one, the same as Canada does, forgetting all
provincial jealousies, with no limits except the circle of the great
blue water, knowing that every man who comes here, and every
woman and child who comes here, are a distinct monetary ad-
vantage to all Australia, and a benefit to the whole community.
Until that idea is grasped, there is but little hope of Australia
being a Commonwealth, as so-called.
In conclusion, the obstacles to such immigration as we should
have here are due to ourselves; not due to the climate, not due to
the country, but to the following causes
1. Immigration Restriction Act.
2. Want of a vigorous railway policy.
3. Want of confidence in our country and its resources.
4. Fighting capital with socialistic legislation.
5. Putting class against class.. ■
6. Buying back our lands originally sold for a mess of pot-
tage (instead of opening up our Crown lands), and by this
policy making people in the Old Country believe we have
no good lands.to offer to immigrants at a cheap price.


I hope I have given in this long address a fair exposition of
what I believe to be a fair comparison of the three countries re-
ferred to, and the great possibilities of Australia, if unhampered by
legislation, narrow-minded Government restrictions, and petty poli-
tical jealousies. It is time for us to show to other parts of the
world that as long as a man is clean, willing and honest, no matter
what be his occupation, he will be welcomed to Australia. We
want no newspapers following him into the so-called wilds of Aus-
tralia wherever he may go, reporting whether he has a minimum
wage, or how long he works; we want no walking delegates meeting
him on the wharves as he arrives, and filling his head with socialistic
nonsense; we want him to be taken to his future adopted home,
and left free to work out his own independent existence, unham-
pered by any of the political nostrums which seem to poison new
arrivals that come to this country. America and Canada have their
political problems; but the newcomer is left severely alone in respect
to those matters. The country gives him the land and the welcome, and
in doing so expects him to work out his own destiny. Of the three
countries I have lived in and visited, and of which I have
seen considerable portions, I have no hesitation in saying that if
Australia bad had the same energy and the same push put into her
as has been put into Canada and America, and had relied less upon
politics anil more upon hard work, industry, and private enter-
prise, she would be. equal to either of the great countries T have
described as a field for immigrants.
At the conclusion of his lecture, of which the above is
an abridged account, Mr. Walpole was highly complimented
on its able character and the new and common sense pro-
gressive ideas it contained, by the President (Mr. G. Fairhairn,
M.H.R.), Senator St. Ledger, and the Hon. E. ,E. Smith.
On the motion of Mr. McCntcheon, M.L.A., who said Aus-
tralia required an expenditure of between two and three
hundred millions sterling in developement work, a hearty
vote of thanks was passed to the lecturer,
(Reprinted from liberty and Progress, the Anti-Socialistic
organ of Australia.)
and Publishers, 434 Bonrktt Street* Melbourne,
