

Cannibals
won for
Christ.
Rev.
Oscar Michelsen


[?]


CANNIBALS
WON FOR CHRIST:
Jl of iinssioimnr perils anil STnumplja in
Ecmijoa, TUto fjcliriiiai.
BY
Rev. OSCAR MICHELSEN,
Missionary of the Presbyterian Church of Otago, N.Z.
WITH INTRODUCTION BY
Lieutenant G. C. FREDERICK, R.N.,
Hydrographic Department % Admiralty .
And may be Ordered oj any Bookseller ;
LONDON: MORGAN AND SCOTT,
Office of ®lje fflljristjtm,
12, PATERNOSTER BUILDINGS, E.C.


EVERY THURSDAY.
ONE PENNY.
The Christian:
A RECORD OF CHRISTIAN LIFE AND TESTIMONY, EVANGELISTIC EFFORT,
AND
MISSIONARY ENTERPRISE.
THE object of Christian, is to provide the Church of God with
accounts of work done for the extension of the Redeemer’s Kingdom
in various parts of the world. To earnest toilers at home and to lonely
missionaries abroad (Christian has proved a welcome visitor. The
Publishers frequently receive from readers in foreign lands hearty testi-
monies to the encouragement and blessing conveyed to them through its
pages ; the Portraits and Biographic Sketches given week by week, as
well as the numerous accounts of Christian effort at home, and the general
Evangelistic Intelligence from various parts of the globe, being heartily
appreciated.
London : MORGAN & SCOTT, 12, Paternoster Buildings, E.C.
And may be Ordered 0/ any Bookseller in the Kingdom.


PREFACE.
§T was in response to the repeated solicitations
of friends at the Antipodes and in Europe
that I decided, during a visit to England,
to give an outline of the Lord’s work as
* ' committed to my hands. Some difficulty
arose in the matter, in consequence of all my diaries
having been left at the mission station on Tongoa. So
this volume is but a statement from memory of some
of the many incidents leading up to the condition of
things which suggested the title —“ CANNIBALS WON
for Christ.”
It was not my intention, when this purpose took
shape in my mind, to remain more than a few
days in England. I was therefore compelled to com-
municate my story to a friend, whose writings have
long been read with acceptance by the Christian public.
Finding it possible, however, to return to Great
Britain after a brief stay, in Norway, I was enabled to
contribute several substantial sections, to the work, and
thoroughly to revise the whole.


At the end of the book will be found an Appendix,
which though by no means giving a history of Christian
work on the Islands, is intended to afford some idea
of the state of missionary effort in the New Hebrides.
This must not be looked upon as an exact account
of each mission station ; but, to the best of my ability,
with the information at my command, I have en-
deavoured to outline the work of my respected fellow-
labourers, past and present, on the Islands.
While these pages were passing through the press,
my faithful and devoted partner in the mission was
called to her rest. This event, so saddening to me,
will cause great mourning when it becomes known on
the island of Tongoa; whither I hope, in due course,
to return to resume my much-loved work.
It is my earnest prayer that the following chapters
may stimulate many in the Christian Church to put
more implicit faith in God’s promises with regard to
the spread of the Gospel; and to entertain higher
expectations as to the establishment of the Kingdom
of God in the dark places of the earth.
OSCAR MICHELSEN.


CONTENTS.
I’AGE
Introduction 9
I. Tongoa, Past and Present 13
11. The Missionary to Tongoa 18
111. The Field Surveyed 28
IV. Making Friends 40
V. Progress under Difficulties 50
VI. Joys and Sorrows 57
VII. A Flight for Life 66
VIII. New Mission Quarters 7 2
IX. Cannibals Rescued from Cannibals 79
X. Another Change of Locale 85
XI. Day by Day on Tongoa 90
XII. An Unexpected Cloud 104
XIII. Cannibalism and its Horrors 112
XIV. Three Tongoan Martyrs US
XV. Native Superstitions : A Religion of Dread 118
XVI. Two Wrecks: A Contrast 125
XVII. How Tongoan Christians Die 128
XVIII. Some Tongoan “ Institutions ” 133
XIX. A Question of Custom 14 2
XX. Present Condition of the Mission 146
XXL The Queensland Kanaka Traffic 153
XXII. Notes and Incidents iS7
APPENDIX—
The New Hebrides Mission 173
The Islands and the People 184


List of Illustrations.
I'AGK
Portrait of Rev. Oscar Michelsen. Frontispiece.
Portrait of Rev. Peter Milne 23
The Williams River, Erromanga 32
Heathen “ Drums” 36
The Missionary’s "Gun" 4 1
Tongoans (Pele Men) as Heathen 51
Manambalea Preaching Peace at P6l£ 60
The Would-be Murderers Lying in Wait 67
First Mission House at Selembanga 73
New Mission Station, Selembanga 74
Maripau, one of Manambalea’s Brothers 80
Maritarii.iu aiming at the Missionary 86
Original Mission Building at Panita 88
Road-making on Tongoa 94
Bush School House, Euta, Tongoa 99
Portrait of the Late Mrs. Michelsen, with third child ... 105
New Head Station at Lumbukuti 147
A Group of Christian Chiefs 149
Mission Church at Nguna 180


INTRODUCTION.
L-—V
7A \ ? N account of what is being done in a far-away corner
f/*V °*' eart h, and the story of one who has nobly
elected to go forth and preach the Gospel to
islanders steeped in savage heathenism, must neces-
‘‘f&A sarily be of deep interest to faithful followers of our
Lord Jesus Christ. At the same time, it must com-
mend itself to those who wonder why any one should take the
trouble to leave home to teach savages. Consequently, such
a narrative as that of my dear friend, Mr. Michelsen, needs
but little introduction; it speaks for itself in all its simplicity.
It relates the wonderful dealings of a loving Father, who can
keep a single servant of His unharmed, though surrounded by
savages thirsting for his blood; who would stop at nothing in
the accomplishment of their object, were it not that there is
One who can restrain the fierceness of man, and make it turn
to His praise.
In addition to the account of his missionary labours, Mr.
Michelsen gives an interesting description of the islands he
has visited, and their inhabitants. People living in the midst
of a nineteenth century civilization can hardly realize the con-
dition of these benighted heathen, sunk in superstition, and
practising the most horrible cruelties ; so that a narrative by


one who has met them in their own haunts must be very in-
structive. Many who live at home in comfort and ease know
little of the trials and privations, as well as dangers, which
those have to suffer who follow the promptings and callings
of an inner voice, and are ready to say, “Here am I, send
me.” Accounts of how brave missionaries live in constant
expectation that a cruel club, poisoned arrow, or bullet, may
end their earthly life while preaching “on earth peace, good-
will towards men,” seem to them but idle and exaggerated
tales.
Some who have met the missionaries in their distant homes,
in houses which their own hands have built, and gazed
upon the beautiful scenery, and enjoyed the fine climate, do
not realize the isolated life—years spent away from friends and
kindred, with only natives to converse with, except on rare
occasions—the disappointments encountered, the difficulties to
be overcome, and the hardships to be borne. Such may come
back and report that the missionaries have a splendid time of
it, and after all, do not accomplish much good among the
natives ! But others, who look into matters, see how wonder-
fully the Gospel is making its way, surely if slowly; how the
natives are learning to worship the Creator, and have faith in
His blessed Son; how gladly all trials and difficulties are
borne, if only they may be used in fulfilling the Master’s
command to go forth and “preach the Gospel to every
creature.”
Having spent many months among the New Hebrides, I
can speak from experience as to the change that has come
over the inhabitants of some of these islands, and how fully
this book deserves its title. Before leaving Australia for the
Group, many of my friends, who had some years previously
visited the New Hebrides, warned me to be careful in my
dealings with the natives, as they were warlike and treacherous
cannibals, amongst whom it would not be safe to land without


being well armed. But what a change did we find had taken
place in the vicinity of the missionaries—especially on Tongoa
and the neighbouring islands ! Cannibalism was quite a thing
of the past, and villages were living at peace with" one another;
they had disposed of all their weapons, so that it was difficult
to find any to purchase even as curios—perhaps, rather to our
disappointment, as we had quite looked forward to turning
our homes in distant England into small museums on our
return.
As we walked about from village to village, quite unarmed,
we were most hospitably received by the inhabitants, who
provided us with such food and refreshment as lay in their
power. We found everywhere peace, happiness, and merry
faces, where only a few years previously, cruelty, bloodshed,
and almost perpetual war, were the common practice. It is
well known that savages are proverbially thieves, showing a
great amount of cunning and cleverness in appropriating other
people’s property. By way of giving an example of the good
fruit which Christian teaching is producing, I will mention one
instance out of many that came under our observation.
During our surveying operations, a boat belonging to
H.M.S. Dart was swamped by a heavy surf on the south
coast of Epi, just opposite Mr. Michelsen’s station on
Tongoa; the officer and crew having to rejoin the ship some
miles further along the coast, where a break in the reef
allowed of communication with the shore. Until the weather
moderated, nothing could be done towards the recovery of the
boat, and all that was in it. About a week later the ship
returned to the scene of the accident; and there we found the
boat, which had been hauled up on the beach by the natives,
and most of the belongings, such as masts, sails, instru-
ments, etc., carefully collected, and piled up near it. As the
village was some distance off, the natives had written a
message, in their own language, on one of the planks. On


interpretation, this ran as follows“ We have picked up
all the things we could find. We have stolen nothing.”
This, we found, was quite true. The ropes and sails of the
boat, must have been a great temptation to the natives; but
they had learned better, and put into practice what they had
been taught.
Without wishing to take up too much space, I must just
mention one more incident that took place off Tongoa Island
some time after Mr. Michelsen had left for England, on
furlough, in 1891. A number of natives came on board
the Dart one day, some forty or fifty of them, and by way
of returning some of their hospitality, we provided refresh-
ment, in the shape of ship’s biscuit, with a thick layer of
jam (they dearly love anything sweet), and plenty of tea
well sweetened. All had been well provided for; but we
noticed that not one of them began to eat —they looked as
if they were waiting for something. After an awkward pause,
it was explained to me that they were waiting for some one
to say Grace. I accordingly requested the Chief Tinabua
to ask a blessing, which he did in the native language ; while
all present behaved most reverently, responding with a loud
“Amen.” Then they set to with a will, and astonished us
with their appetites. It was a sight and experience not easy
to forget—these dusky islanders, once heathen and cannibals,
thanking the Creator of all things for their daily food !
Let us hope that Mr. Michelsen may long be spared to
continue his labours among the heathen, and help to hasten
that time when “ the earth shall be filled with the knowledge
of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea.”
G. C. FREDERICK.
Kingsbury ,
Middlesex.


CANNIBALS WON FOR CHRIST.
CHAPTER I.
Tongoa, Past and Present.
Volcanic History of the Island—Warlike Propensities of Early
Settlers —Physical Features of Tongoa —A Moral and Spiritual
Revolution.
'SjTTftt BOUT 350 years ago,so says tradition, when all
seemed to be peace and safety, swift destruc-
MIpML tion came upon the inhabitants of a large
island in Western Polynesia. The natives of
"JCa. the various villages had gone forth to their
plantations, or were engaged in their ordinary occu-
pations. Hard labour was the woman’s share : she
carried in a basket on her back the yams which were
required for planting, and in her hand the indispensable
firebrand ; * while on her neck, or tied in a mat in front
9f her, was the helpless infant.
The men walked proudly on before with bows and
* Until the introduction of matches, the natives made fire by-
rubbing together two pieces of wood. This being a rather tedious
undertaking, they usually carried with them a firebrand to the
plantation for lighting the fire to consume brushwood, or at which
to roast a yam.


arrows—some of these plain arrows for shooting birds ;
others poisoned, to be directed upon their enemies.
Clubs and spears were also among their weapons, for
use, should occasion offer, in taking human prey;
and each man felt himself in a position to defy all
opponents.
Suddenly there was an alarming subterranean report,
accompanied by a violent earthquake. The shock was
prolonged into an irregular vibration, and the explosive
roar was continued day after day. No longer did the
proud savage reason, in the style of Lamech of old, and
think how manfully he would spear and club his foe
if he had but the opportunity. The cry of the fearless
warrior was the same as that of the affrighted mother
and child, and it was—“ Whither shall we flee for our
lives ? ”
In the case of multitudes of people all hopes were
disappointed and the worst fears realized. Slowly but
surely large tracts of land sank into the sea, and other
parts of the earth’s crust were raised several hundred
feet. At three different places fountains of fire were
opened up, and glowing lava sprang into the air to an
appalling height.
The principal remaining portion of the large island
which was thus sundered and destroyed is to-day called
Epi, or Api. At the time of which we write, many of
the natives whose lot it was to find themselves on the
hills which now formed new islands in the sea—one of
which is TONGOA —were killed by falling stones, stifled
with the prevailing smoke, or burned to death in their
hiding-places in the forests; which, in turn, were speedily
obliterated by the advancing flames. In some cases all


life, vegetable and animal, was destroyed; and luxuriance
and animation gave place to death and barrenness.
In these islands, even to the present day, there are
no snakes, although reptiles are very common in other
islands in the same region. This fact is corroborative
of the native story of the complete desolation wrought
by the catastrophe. Moreover, there are evidences, not
only of volcanic operations in the past, but of such
destructive processes being still at work. There are in
Tongoa hot places on which the natives cook their food;
and several spots where man cannot tread and vege-
tation will not flourish.
The several hilltops of the rent and sunken land are
now small islands, and are called Tongoa, Tongariki,
Buninga, Ewose, Laika, and Tevala. Collectively they
were named the “ Shepherd Group ” by the renowned
Captain Cook, and are situated about the middle of
the New Hebrides, of which they are a part. The
largest of these is designated after Tongo, who is said
to have been the first man to settle upon its inhospitable
soil, when the volcanic troubles just described had
passed by. He was a native of Makura, an island
about fourteen miles distant, and a venturesome and
enterprising man. Some time afterwards other settlers
arrived : first from Emae, a neighbouring island ; and
later on from Efate, about thirty miles away.
The authority of chiefs was claimed by the leaders of
the several expeditions, which resulted in the speedy
population of the island ; and these chiefs, who adopted
the names of the rulers in the villages from which they
severally came, have to-day successors who perpetuate
their name as well as authority. There was room


enough for all on Tongoa, and the land brought forth
abundantly to satisfy their needs ; but quarrelsome
propensities were not kept under control, and the sad
fact must be stated that, during ten generations now
past —or about 300 years—hardly a single chief on
Tongoa has left behind him a peaceful record. History
has been largely made up of friendly gatherings alter-
nating with fierce wars and cannibal feasts. Though
called natamate (peace), and supposed to remove all
discord, tribal feasts have been generally followed by
fights ; and not infrequently have “ peace feasts ” been
got up in order to furnish occasions for hostile attacks
upon too-confiding guests.
The Shepherd Group lies to the south-east of Epi,
nearly 17 degrees south latitude, and about 169 degrees
east longitude. Generally, the islands are exception-
ally fertile, especially Tongoa; the extent of which is
upwards of twenty square miles. The climate is
good, considering the tropical latitude; and, though
common throughout the group, malarial fever is rarely
experienced on Tongoa. The products include : roots—
yam of every description, mountain taro, sweet potatoes,
arrowroot, and manioca ; fruits—bananas and plantains
in great variety, and pine apples. Of indigenous fruit-
trees, the most important are the cocoanut palm,
bread-fruit, and horse-chestnut. There are also many
edible fruits of no commercial value. Of imported fruit-
trees, oranges, lemons, custard apples, and mango are
the most valuable. The exports are confined to copra
(dried cocoa-nut) and a small quantity of maize.
The people of Tongoa are amongst the healthiest and
best-looking natives in the New Hebrides. Although


principally Efatese, they are taller, stronger, and lighter
in colour than their ancestors. This, doubtless, is due
to the absence of fever, abundance of food, and a
considerable importation of Malay blood from the neigh-
bouring island of Emae. Calling themselves black,
they are in reality of a nut-brown shade, with frizzy
hair. They are distributed in some ten villages—two
in the interior, called “ the Bush,” and the others near
the coast. The houses are of grass, thatched upwards
to a ridge pole, surmounting arched pieces of wood,
securely settled in the ground. Nowhere in the entire
group are there larger or more comfortable residences.
The domestic animals are pigs, fowls, and dogs.
Tongoa has, during recent years, been the scene of a
moral and spiritual revolution, no less remarkable and
complete than that physical change which has just been
outlined. Succeeding pages will unfold the story in
detail, and relate how peace and goodwill have begun
to reign where hatred and warfare were once reckoned
among the rights and privileges of humanity. To say
that the Gospel of Christ has been instrumental of this
mighty change is a true anticipation of what remains to
be written.
B


CHAPTER II.
The Missionary to Tongoa.
Early Life in Norway—Emigration to New Zealand-From
Commercial Life to Colportage Work—Missionary Aspirations
Realized—Departure for the New Hebrides—A Year’s Residence
at Nguna—Visit to Tongoa, and Subsequent Settlement.
«SCAR MICHELSEN, the missionary who has
been privileged to evangelize the Tongoans,
is a native of Norway, having been born in
1844. His childhood was spent in the parish
•'y of Ski, where his father was sheriff. He was
educated for commercial life—a good drilling in foreign
languages doing much to stimulate his desire to see
lands beyond the Scandinavian Peninsula.
An intellectual father and a sympathetic mother
carefully nurtured a large family, but did little or no-
thing to develop the spiritual life. The general teaching
of the National Church at that time had much to do
with this neglect; for the religious duties of parents did
not go beyond seeing that their children were baptized
and confirmed. These things attended to, all was well,
if the communion wine and wafer were received before


death. “Ye must be born again” suggests to evan-
gelical Christians a body of teaching which was sadly
neglected in Norway at that time.
While still a lad, Oscar made the opening verses of
Psalm xxxii. the prayer of his heart; and he realized
in some measure the blessed consciousness of trans-
gression forgiven and sin covered. But until he was
twenty-two years old, he knew little of peace of soul;
black world-clouds, with occasional rays of heavenly
light, made up the story of his spiritual life. A teacher
under whom he studied English, advised him to read a
chapter of the English New Testament every evening—
an exercise which he found profitable in more ways than
one. But, engaged in a business house, and surrounded
by worldly influences, he gave little continuous thought
to his spiritual welfare.
Two friends of the family having resolved to go to
New Zealand, he proposed to accompany them ; and
his brother, Nicolai Christian, in whose wisdom he had
every confidence, not only consented to this course, but
generously made it possible. Writing of this period,
Mr. Michelsen says :
“ Before leaving my native country, I came in contact
with several living Christians who influenced me greatly ;
and I have no doubt their prayers went with me. My
limited means did not allow of travelling in the same
cabin as my worldly companions. This was my good
fortune rather than otherwise; for instead of their
society, I had that of two elderly Scotch ladies, the
Misses Edgar, who were going to join a brother in
Australia. I found in them true friends, of a calm,
solid faith, such as I had not known among my


acquaintances at home. I have no doubt that my con-
tact with them went far to develop my spiritual life.
“We arrived at Melbourne in June, 1867. I then
learned that one of my friends had decided to stay there
for a time, and that the other intended to proceed to
Queensland. I had no reason, however, to alter my
original purpose, so at Melbourne we parted—never
again to meet on earth. I arrived in New Zealand,
armed with a letter of introduction to a countryman of
mine, who ‘ regretted very much that he could do
nothing for me.’ I had only money sufficient to provide
for one week’s board. When my last shilling had been
spent, I secured work.”
This was in the business establishment of a man
having a good reputation for uprightness, although of no
religious convictions. His wife was a decided Christian,
and greatly grieved that, in common with other trades-
men in the town, her husband kept his shop open
on the Lord’s Day. Still influenced by Continental
ideas regarding the Day of Rest, young Mr. Michelsen
saw no objection to this practice; but soon his eyes
were opened to Christian obligations and privileges, and
he gave notice to terminate his engagement. His
services were however retained, with immunity from
Sunday duty; his wages also being increased by his
appreciative employer, who, a short time afterwards—
regardless of the ways of other shopkeepers—closed his
establishments on the Lord’s Day! The man after-
wards became a servant of Him who is Lord of the
Sabbath.
Through circumstances over which he had no control,
Mr. Michelsen found himself out of work at the end


of his first year’s residence in New Zealand. For
a considerable period he’ earned no more than would
supply bare necessities; but he was never allowed
to experience want. He had, from early days of his
settlement at the Antipodes, become connected with
the Presbyterians; and was glad when, after seven
years’ business life in the region of the gold mines, the
way opened for engagement in Gospel work under the
auspices of the New Zealand Bible, Tract, and Book
Society.
This agency was the beginning of colportage work in
connection with the institution. Going to the bush, he
advocated the claims of the society, and sold books and
distributed tracts. He visited distant settlements, and
was generally received with kindness by the people.
At the diggings his experiences were varied and in-
teresting—meeting with many intelligent and generous
men. If outwardly rough, some were hard readers, as
well as desperate toilers. This colportage work was
a fitting introduction to a missionary career.
After a year and a half, this form of service had to
be abandoned, because of its excessive strain upon a
somewhat slender constitution. The business of the
Society had so developed that there was room for an
additional worker at the depdt in Otago ; and thither
Mr. Michelsen went. While realizing that this was
a true Christian service, he set his heart upon some-
thing more aggressive. He thus describes the workings
of his mind :
“ Foreign mission work had been my muffled aspiration
ever since the time when I first took a decided stand
as a Christian. So long as I was travelling, I found


a kind of gratification of this desire; but I had not
been long at the depdt before all my old wishes came to
me as fresh as ever. I quietly sought to qualify for
mission work abroad. I made the acquaintance of a
Chinaman, who undertook to teach me Chinese, on
condition that I should instruct him in English. We
made very good progress.
“Just at this time, the National Bible Society of
Scotland advertised for a colporteur to work in China.
I wrote my application for the post, and sent it to
the post-office. The message boy arrived too late for
the outgoing mail, and it was a month before the next.
In the meantime, the New Hebrides Mission ship
Dayspring arrived at Dunedin with two missionaries
on board, who earnestly asked my Church to send
another worker. The reply was that there was no one
to send. A great Sunday-school gathering was held on
board, and there I met Rev. Lindsay Mackie, who had
long been my kind and wise counsellor.
“ I said, ‘ I begin to think of these islands.’ He
replied, ‘ That is exactly what I have been expecting.
It would suit you far better than that undertaking in
China: the prospect of our sending you to China is
uncertain ; but here is work for which I believe you are
fitted, and a man is urgently needed. Write out your
application, and I will support it.’
“ I wrote my application, and sent it to the then-
assembled Synod. My friend warmly supported it;
and, as I was well known to nearly all the ministers of
the Church through my colportage work, I was readily
accepted. After undergoing such training as was
thought necessary, I was sent down to the Islands in


1878, with the expressed wish that I should spend a
year at Nguna with Rev. Peter Milne, before assuming
the responsibility of an independent station.”
Rev. Peter Milne was the
first missionary of the Otago
Presbyterian Church. lie is
still in the field, and is now
gathering in a rich harvest
as the reward of faithful ser-
vice extending over nearly
a quarter of a century. At
Nguna, while learning a lan-
guage which was to prove
useful in future years, Mr.
Michel sen rendered such
help as was possible to Mr.
Milne. In the early part of
the year, the two mission-
aries visited Tongoa, the
REV. PETER MILNE.
younger man being much struck with its beach of black
iron-sand ; and the entire island, so far as could be seen,
covered with green forest.
It is not a flat coral island, as these specks of land are
often supposed to be, but an endless number of hills,
some only 400 or 500 feet ; others rising to a height of
1500 or 1600 feet. The sight was beautiful in the ex-
treme. The trees —varied in shade and form—included
the horse-chestnut, with its glossy foliage ; the bread-
fruit, with its light green jagged leaves ; crotons of every
imaginable colour ; and banyan-trees, like forest giants,
some of them covering an acre.
From the extending branches of these magnificent


trees,* roots are sent down to the ground, enlarging
as well as invigorating the tree. Again, from the
branches of the banyans were hanging convolvuli
and other creeping flowers; whilst ferns and orchids
of every description found shelter on branches as well
as the trunks. Thus, plants which could not live on the
earth, depended upon the monarch tree for existence.
All over the hills were seen cocoa-nut palms, with
their light-coloured foliage waving in the breeze.
At the very summit of what may be called mountain-
tops were tree-ferns, which looked like palms, with the
exception that they were of a much darker hue. In
Mr. Michelsen’s own words :
“The whole scene was delightful beyond description.
It wanted but one thing to complete the picture—that
was human life. This element was, however, soon sup-
plied ; one native after another walking or bounding
to the beach. After but slight preparation, they threw
themselves into the sea for a morning bath; and when
‘ dressed ’ again, seemed to think of nothing but play—
men, women, and children alike.
“As they thus laughed and frolicked, the thought
stole over my mind : ‘ What can I do to improve the
apparently happy condition of these children of nature ?
* The banyan tree begins its existence as a parasite on another
tree. Gradually it developes into a considerable growth, and in
many cases the original tree withers in its embraces. The banyan,
however, continues to flourish, and overshadows some of its largest
neighbours. The natives are often reminded that, as some proud
tree of the forest carries this seemingly insignificant parasite, and
is itself soon sacrificed, so the Word of God is conveyed to the
people in earthen vessels which must soon wither and disappear;
but “ the Word of the Lord abideth for ever.”


Am I really wanted here?’ The question was intelli-
gently answered when I subsequently took up residence
in the island, and saw the inhabitants at a shorter
distance.
“ Going ashorej we were very heartily received. Ah!
the chiefs expected presents, and so they were well
behaved. Under the grateful shade of trees, hymns
were sung, and the Gospel message briefly explained.
In the afternoon we rowed round the rock to the north
of the Lumbukuti landing, on the west coast of the
island. Some bush people were seen, and then lost
sight of; villagers were afterwards heard to cry out,
Man-ni-bus (bush-men). Others were seen with painted
faces, wearing black war-plumes in their hair, and with
long flowing calicoes hanging from their loins. They
looked more picturesque, but not less dangerous, than
the Lumbukuti people that had been seen in the fore-
noon.
“We were conducted to an open space, about half
a mile in the interior of the island, by Tarisaliu, a
dashing chief, fully six feet in height; he was dressed
in a white European suit, and quite ‘ got up ’ for the
occasion. All the time his heathenism showed itself in
a pair of pigs’ tusks, which dangled at the end of locks
of hair on each side of his face, which still had traces of
paint upon it. In savage fashion, his long frizzy hair
had been coiffured with lime, and tied up in a bunch on
the top of his head. Surmounting the whole was a
pretty yellow straw hat, which was often thrown off
when touched by branches of trees, and promptly
replaced by an attendant. Of these incidents the
chief was quite unconscious, for the hat was but a


roof on the heavy stack of hair which his noble head
sustained.”
An old heathen drum was standing on the place of
meeting, which had once been a dancing ground, but
was now almost covered with scrub. Tribes had been
at war, and the scene wore the complexion of desola-
tion. The story of life from the dead was told, and
some Christian songs were sung. On all hands were to
be seen the fruits of sin ; so it was with real appropriate-
ness that the only regenerating power for a lost world
was proclaimed. Passing through deep valleys, shaded
by high trees, and everywhere luxuriant with ferns,
the missionaries observed a beautiful knoll, which was
pointed out as the site from which a tribe known as the
P£ld people had been driven further inland by their
powerful neighbours of Lumbukuti.
Approaching the village of Pele, a war-fence, or pdH,
such as were once common in the island, was seen. The
chief of the village, named Marimaraki, a blunt, harsh-
looking man, with a tuft of hair from a pig’s tail in each
ear, was met. He was known to have been in New
Caledonia, so Mr. Michelsen addressed him in Trench.
The short answer of the distinguished traveller was in
the pigeon-English of the South Seas : “ Me no savez
that talk ; me talk all de same as you ! ”
In acknowledgment of presents to natives, the mis-
sionaries received yams and cocoa-nuts ; and left for
Nguna with definite impressions of the needs of Tongoa
and the prospects of work there.
All the chiefs on Tongoa seemed friendly to mis-
sionaries on the occasion of the visit of Messrs. Milne
and Michelsen. One went so far as to invite the latter


to settle at his village ; but there was afterwards reason
to believe that he only wanted to have a tapu (sacred)
power to stand between himself and stronger tribes.
As the time approached for Mr. Michelsen to leave
Nguna for Tongoa, he was down with “ island ” or inter-
mittent fever, and momentarily expected to die. It was
thought by his friends on Nguna that nothing but a sea
voyage in the Mission ship, soon to start for Sydney,
would save his life. In due course however, according
to arrangement, the Mission ship arrived, with Revs.
H. A. Robertson and D. Macdonald, two missionaries
labouring in other islands, who had come to assist in
the settlement of Mr. Michelsen on Tongoa. “ It’s only
fever,” they said ; “ and we have all had that.”
“ It is but a question of dying here or there,” reasoned
Mr. Michelsen ; and the point was not worth debating.
So the arrangements were duly carried out.
Arrived at Tongoa, the two missionaries, assisted by
sailors and natives, erected a frame-and-plaster house for
the new worker, who was so weak that he could not walk
alone up to his station.
After nine days the ship left, and Mr. Michelsen
found himself a solitary white man, a Christian, in a
population of about eleven hundred cannibal heathens!
Was he cast down ? No; he remembered his God!
What about dying ? He thought no more of it; but,
with a courage implanted and sustained by Divine
grace, he addressed himself to the work which he had
undertaken in the name of Christ.


CHAPTER III.
The Field Surveyed.
Dealings with Tongoan chiefs—“We are afraid of you!”—First
Impressions and Experiences—Matabuti’s Welcome—A Sabbath
Preaching Tour—Threatened by a “sacred” chief.
f-ysgj)
|W T HIS section, which involves a slight retrogression,
i I 'X * S ven * n missionar y’ s own words :
Our little party sailed north, a distance of 30
miles, from Nguna to Tongoa during the night,
and suddenly we found ourselves under lee of the
island. The natives, with their merry o-ahl o-ahl o-ah!
were bounding down on the dark strand, and natural
beauty made the landscape lovely beyond imagination.
■With these scenes before me, new hopes were a-
wakened. Thinking of these poor heathen, who for the
moment seemed so merry, but whose life I thoroughly
knew was a ceaseless slavery in the service of the
enemy of souls, I was gradually drawn out to pray that
the Lord would give me two years of active service
among them, so that I might preach the Gospel in every
village. Though I could hardly expect to live to see
the people changed from a heathen to a Christian


community, I felt sure that, if I were but allowed to
proclaim the message of salvation to them, God would
bless his own Word; and I would see the fruit in
eternity, if not in time.
The previous day, racked with fever, I thought of
little else but dying—an event which I believed to
be very near. The Lord had now inspired me with
faith and hope for future usefulness. I thought no more
of dying; but was fully determined to go forward in
the strength of the Lord to do his work.
Some native Christians from other islands accom-
panied Messrs. Robertson and Macdonald and myself.
We landed, as before, on the west side of the island,
on which there were but two villages, one large and the
other very small. No other part was so fit for a mission
station. Immediately on landing I asked for Mala-
kaleo, the chief of Lumbukuti, the larger village.
He soon presented himself, and did not favourably
impress me. A stout, gross-looking man, his eyes bore
testimony to his strong animal instincts. A load of
white beads, several pounds in weight, hung round his
neck ; a small whale’s tooth served as a nose jewel; a
fathom of Turkey twill secured a broad belt of bark to
his waist. With various other ornaments, these indi-
cated that the chief aspired to hold a place among the
dandies of the island.
Round one of Malakaleo’s eyes a black ring had been
painted, and round the other a yellow one; a plume of
cocks’ feathers stood in his lime-besmeared hair, and in
one hand he carried a short rifle. These were exhibited
as proofs that the chief was a mighty man of war.
Finally, a large number of pigs’ tusks, borne round the


wrist of his favourite wife, served to announce that he was
a social power; for all of these were taken from pigs pre-
sented to him by chiefs desirous of doing him honour.
This, then, was the man I had to deal with. He
smiled graciously when he came down to meet me, and
asked at once what I had in the carpet-bag in my hand.
“ Come up under the trees,” I said, “ and I will show
you.”' His eyes glistened as I took out a small hatchet
and gave him. Then I produced a clearing-knife, i.e., a
butcher’s knife with a fourteen-inch blade—a useful tool
with which to reduce the bush for plantation purposes.
I also presented him with a fathom of Turkey twill,
and other things highly esteemed by the natives of
these islands. He was getting quite demonstrative,
and seemed nigh to embracing me.
I then asked if there were any other chiefs present;
for I not only wanted to prepare the heart of this
all-important personage, but was desirous of doing my
best to remove all evil influence. Quite a number
of men presented themselves as chiefs. In my own
mind I felt—what later experience has proved to be
the fact—that these were nearly all “got up for the
occasion.” However, I had intended to give away all
I had in the bag; so if some real chiefs neglected
to defend their prerogative for the sake of helping
some of their friends, they did so at their own
expense. When the bag was empty, I thought the
time for action had come.
I turned to Malakaleo, and said, “ I would like to live
here altogether. Could you not sell me a place at your
village, where I could put up my station ? ” I thought
that he would surely like to have such a friend living


beside him. The man’s countenance fell. He said,
hesitatingly, “We are afraid of you.” Nothing that I
could say was of any avail to move this stern savage.
Underneath the rough exterior there was a conscience.
He was an ambitious man, who delighted to see his
people victorious over their enemies, even if he now
and then lost a few of his own men. He also loved
to be shown honour at heathen feasts, which he knew
I would discourage.
Malakaleo was a vicious cannibal, who, soon after
I settled on the island, made use of the expression,
“ I hunger for human flesh ! ” To prevent cannibalism,
I once sent him a tin of preserved meat. He was
a “ sacred ” chief, who pretended to have power to
do many wonderful things. It was perhaps a matter
of doubt with him if these powers would bear the
light of day. It need hardly be added that he was
a thorough sensualist. How would all this agree with
Christianity and its representative now standing before
him ? “ Axes, knives, calicoes, beads, etc., were all
very good ; but—l cannot have this man beside me,
and follow my old course.” These were his reasonings.
Hence his laconic reply, “ We are afraid of you.”
Should I draw back ? If I had the “I am with you ”
as my strength, surely it would not do to allow such
a miserable worldling to stop me ! The Lord often
bids His people to go forward, but at the same time
requires them to stoop. There was yet that other
chief of the small village Panita, on the same side
of the island. I therefore turned to him. Maritariliu’s
answer was, “ I require some time to think over it.”
After more than an hour he returned. Doubtless he


had consulted other chiefs. “ Yes, I can sell you a
piece of ground for a mission station.” We all pro-
ceeded up to his place. A native kindly allowed me
to lay my elbow on his shoulder, as, with a stick
in my right hand, I walked up to the village. When
THE WILLIAMS RIVER, ERROMANGA.
we arrived there, he demanded payment for his
services! I felt it would be making a very bad
beginning to give him anything; so I told him that
I had come there as their friend, and if he wanted
to be paid for a little kindness like that, it was quite
clear that he did not wish me to be there ; nor did
he mean all the words he had spoken to me by the way!
He did not press the matter further.


The chief of Panita pointed to a ridge as being
the spot he would sell. After examination, the land,
covering five or six acres, was bought, and well paid
for in various kinds of barter—value about £7 or £B.
Clearing was at once commenced. I noticed that
the Tongoans, who were quite willing to help, were
particularly careful not to touch the precise part where
I wished to build the house. They left that to the
Efate and Erromanga Christians, who had come with
us to help to build* The fact of the matter was,
it was a “ sacred place,” an old graveyard terribly
“infested with ghosts!” It would be a splendid thing
to have a missionary there—a man over whom they
believed the spirits had no power! His living there
would indeed drive away the ghosts, and make the
place like the neutral ground around. So the natives
reasoned.
My two missionary friends, assisted by sailors from
the Mission ship, and “ the foreign natives,” had the roof
on the house in nine days from the time we arrived
at the island. The walls were far from “ light proof,”
and there might be divided opinions as to whether
the house really was habitable. Being unable to do
anything myself, I had to be thankful that the house
was as it was.
The Mission ship left on a Saturday, after a stay of
nine days. Going ashore for good, I walked along the
beach—the only European on the island—to my new
* The Efatese helpers I paid for their work. The Erromangans
said they had done it for the Lord, and would have no payment
from me!
c


home, to commence work for the Lord. It was a
joyful day.
The next morning I went down to Panita, sang some
hymns, and spoke to the people. The language had
been acquired during my stay on Nguna. The recep-
tion accorded me was kindly. Immediately after the
service I was attacked by fever, and was unable to visit
neighbouring villages.
During the following week visitors came from all
parts of the island, and I spoke and sang to them.
All brought produce for sale, and there was a general
curiosity as to what I was disposed to give them! The
almost universal experience is for the missionary to
be well received at first; but when it is realized that
his purpose is not simply to bestow temporal advan-
tages, but to insist upon “ breaking with sin ”as a
condition of securing heavenly blessings, the natural
man protests. There is, in fact, an entire change of
attitude.
On the Tuesday I was down with fever—the second
and last attack I had on the island. While in great
pain, the native boy from Efate, who had come with
me as servant, informed me that a chief was outside
desiring to see me. When the worst of the attack was
over, I called in the visitor. It was Matabuti, from the
village of Meriu, in the south of the island ; a quiet-
looking man, who spoke deliberately, and seemed to
have his thoughts well ordered. He had suffered much.
He once had inflammation in one of his eyes, and for
want of proper treatment had lost the use of it. He
had also been much oppressed by a powerful chief,


Ti-Tongoa; and, like Israel of old, sighed after a
deliverer.
Briefly stated, the chief’s message of welcome was:
“I am very glad you have come. A long time ago I
had a wonderful dream. I thought I saw a ladder from
earth to heaven, and God sitting at the top. When you
came, I knew you were the man that belonged to that
ladder. I would like you to come over to our village as
often as you can, and tell us all about it.”
The man thought I could explain everything—l had
come to point them the way to God! And so it was
in truth. The incident cheered me very much; not
only was the Lord with me, but He had also gone
before me, preparing some at least to hear the Gospel.
The following Sunday, the ninth day after landing,
the Lord having abundantly heard my prayers for
restored health, I felt no more effects of the fever. In
the morning I held a small meeting at Panita, and some
of the village lads accompanied me to Bongabonga.
They led me to the open square of the village, on one
side of which was the farea —a kava, or cannibal, feast-
house.
On the other side of the square was a sacred place,
upon which the most conspicuous objects were the
skulls and jawbones of persons who had recently been
eaten by the villagers. There was also a sacred stone,
probably an altar for articles sacrificed to the spirits;
and a chest which no one would claim—perhaps it
belonged to some one who had died—at all events it
was shunned because regarded as ill-omened. The
dead man’s treasure was left with him—not an un-
common practice.


I got one of the natives to beat a drum—a tall,
hollow tree trunk erected in memory of the dead—and
we had a considerable congregation, who listened
attentively to the singing of Gospel hymns, and evinced
much interest in the words spoken to them. Neverthe-
less, in after-time this proved one of the hardest places
I had to deal with.
HEATHEN "DRUMS."
Proceeding to Menu, I was cordially welcomed by
Matabuti, the chief who had had the wonderful dream.
He at once brought me some green cocoanuts, that I
might refresh myself with the milk ; and ordered his
wives to kill fowls, get yams, and prepare a great feast.
* See also p. 151.


I promptly stayed his hand, and, to his great dis-
appointment, would only accept the cocoanuts and
some cold baked yams. I told him and his people
of the Gospel feast, and promised to go again the
following Sunday.
At Mangarisu, the village of the quiet but shrewd
chief, Ti-Tongoa, the majority of the people were away
at their plantations ; but we had a small meeting. Pro-
ceeding through the bush, we reached, in the afternoon,
Lumbukuti, the village of Malakaleo. We found a few
men and a number of boys in the open square, and I
went into the farea and began to sing and speak to an
ever-increasing audience.
After a time I heard some very loud talking out-
side ; and bringing my address to a close, I sang the
Hundredth Psalm, probably with more earnestness than
ever before, as I suspected the noise outside to be an
expression of hostility to my mission. In a few
minutes I that my suspicions were well-
founded.
Malakaleo and a number of his men were in the
square. The chief was busy pouring the milk of a
young cocoanut into a hole they had dug in the
ground. As already stated, he was a “ sacred ” chief,
recognised as competent to deal with powers unseen;
and his act at that moment was an invocation of
vengeance upon me, in order to cause my death!
Going up to Malakaleo, I addressed him in the
kindliest words ; but he maintained a stolid indifference
to most of what I said. One thing, however, struck him.
It was my remark: “Do not be afraid of Christianity.


God asks you to give up a yam,* and receive a pig! ’
In other words, I told him that the sacrifice which God
demands of His creatures is small in comparison with
His unspeakable Gift.
Hearing the word “ pig,” the chief exclaimed : “ Who
is willing to give me a pig?” I then explained my
illustration; but the benighted man turned a deaf ear
to my words, and shook his club at me.
A friendly native from Panita made a sign to me,
whereupon I realized the danger of my position, and
withdrew a few steps. After some further attempts, all
in vain, to get his ear, I left for Panita.
Need I say that on reaching the mission station I
thanked my Heavenly Father for having permitted
me to witness for the Lord Jesus before so many people
in one day. I had walked twelve miles, and delivered
five addresses, besides singing Gospel hymns.
In my preaching I told them that Jesus had come
into the world—and why. I said : “ God has made
us; He owns us ” —a significant expression among
the natives, for ownership should carry obedience.
“We have disobeyed the commands of God, and
brought upon ourselves His anger. God is angry with
us, black man and white man alike. When you are
afraid of the anger of the spirits, you make a sacrifice.
So a sacrifice has been made to avert the anger of
God, and that sacrifice is available for each and all
of us. About this I have come to tell you.”
* Yams are plentiful and of small value compared with pigs,
which are held in high esteem ; and never overlooked when one
chief wishes to compliment another by way of making him a
present.


When I came to reflect upon that memorable day’s
proceedings, I realized that I had made an unfortunate
mistake. I took upon myself to hold a meeting in
Lumbukuti without previously asking the permission
of the chief; hence the unpleasant occurrence which
I have described. I decided never to do this again.
Nor did I ever have occasion to force myself upon
the attention of any village, for I always had more
congregations willing to listen to the Word than I
was able to satisfy.


CHAPTER IV.
Making Friends.
A Curious Visitor and his Errand—Tongoan Land Customs—
“How many guns have you?”—Women hear the Gospel—A Chief
“learns to read”—Mendicant Logic on Tongoa—Divine Provi-
dence Illustrated —A Blind Man’s Joy.
<fVZls>
HE missionary shall continue the story:—
fNot long after settling on Tongoa a
stranger came into the house. He looked as
if he had a right there, but at the same time
was quite friendly. He was a man of about
fifty, and his whole appearance suggested that he was
a chief. After looking round in all directions, he
said, “You have come to live on my land,” I then
knew who he was, for I had learned a few days pre-
viously that the land I had purchased from Maritariliu
was the property of Malai, the real chief of Tongalapa,
the place where I lived. He had been driven away
from the island many years before.
Malai’s chieftainship was called Tonga-lapa-manu,
lapa is “ great,” and maun is “ thousand.” This would


THE MISSIONARY’S “GUN.”


imply that this great chieftainship was spoken of as
having a thousand of a population. They were in their
day feared by all around ; they used to make chase on
all and sundry, to kill and eat them. Seeing the power
of this common foe, several of the other villages forgot
their own petty jealousies, and joined together to crush
their dreaded enemy.
The villages of Panita, Malatolu, and Liseiriki, and
probably others, joined, and proved too great a power
for Malai and his tribe. The people were first driven
over the mountain, and settled right in the middle of the
island. For some time they were quiet; but at length
showed that they had not changed in disposition,
although they had been conquered. The united forces
already mentioned again drove Malai and his tribe
away. This time he fled to Meriu, where he found
shelter for awhile; but even there he did not feel
very safe. He went over to Emae, where he found
hospitality at Sasake, a warlike village on the north side
of the island. They were only too glad to receive such
an addition to their population.
Malai had been a great warrior in his day, and he
did not seem to be wanting in cunning. Feeling that
he could not safely return to take up his possession on
Tongoa, he judged it wise to be civil on his visit
to me.
It is the usage among these natives that even if a
tribe is driven away, they do not thereby forfeit the
ownership of their land. Also, a custom obtains in
native warfare that no peace can be made until the
victorious tribe has paid damages for excessive injury
done to the vanquished enemy ! I knew then that


Malai had a perfect right to order me off the land ;
and, at any rate, had friends enough in Tongoa to
make it very unpleasant for me. So I said I was
aware that the land was his, and that I was quite
willing to pay him for it. I gave him part payment
then, and promised to order from Sydney a grindstone
and some other things, which I had not with me then.
Thus I had paid for the land twice—not to mention
that Mr. Milne, on a visit to Tongoa years before, had
purchased from the great Malakaleo, who, at that time,
was a refugee at Panita, a small piece of ground for a
mission station, which I afterwards discovered was part
of Tongalapa ! One would think that the mission had
fully established its right to the land by that time!
As a further precaution, on the advice of Rev. Dr. J. G.
Paton, I had also put a clause in the deeds that all the
trees were included in the purchase. Satisfied that I had
acquired every right to the place, I sent a boy to gather
some cocoanuts, which I required for their milk, to be
used as yeast wherewith to make bread. He then
told me that he had had trouble with the Panita people
about the nuts, as they claimed them as theirs! So
I was compelled to climb the cocoanut tree myself.
Next morning I did not neglect to mention the
matter in the school. “Yes,” they said, "it is quite
right.” “No,” I replied, “it is quite wrong!” I asked
them what the barter had been for which Maritariliu
had divided between his people. He did not own
the land, so that it could only be for the trees ! I
silenced all for the time, but had afterwards to pay a
young man for a cluster of the cocoanut trees, for
which he assured me he had received no payment.


About this time a native entered the house flourishing
a war-axe. He declared that the mission house had
been erected on his land. It seemed that he had had
a plantation in the place some years previously. He
claimed compensation; but was told that he need not
expect it, as the land had already been paid for to
Malai—and compensation also given to the chief of
Panita. I gave him a piece of bread and butter, and
commenced a friendly chat. Nothing more was said
about compensation.
These circumstances impressed me with the fact that,
though fairly trustworthy in dealings among themselves,
the natives had been in the habit of regarding strangers
as proper persons to be “ taken in ” when possible.
“ How many guns have you ? ” was a curious inquiry
early addressed to me by a party of Lumbukuti warriors.
“ None,” was the reply. This was quite incredible to
men who would not dare to leave their village unarmed.
Continuing, I admitted the possession of just one gun,
and this I showed to my astonished interrogators.
Need it be said that it was the one weapon of Christian
warfare—the Word of God. “ This,” I explained, “is
the only gun I have; and in course of time it will silence
all the others on the island.”
It is excusable that at that time the Tongoans should
declare the Book without power. They neither knew
it as the sword of the Spirit nor the shield of the Lord.
To-day a different conviction prevails, for marvels have
been wrought in the name of the Prince of Peace.
Within the first month or so all the chiefs called upon
me, with the exception of two. Most likely the object


of the visitors was to receive presents.. One of the
two who did not come was Marimaraki, head of Pdle,
the bush village, which was engaged in war at the
time. The other was Manambalea, of Selembanga,
on the east side of the island. This chief, of which
much will be said hereafter, was an energetic and
courageous man, rather pleasant in appearance. He
had made himself no less distinguished as a warrior
than as an organizer of friendly gatherings of the
tribes.
Manambalea thought well to inquire concerning the
new religion before visiting its teacher, so he despatched
some of his people to see what they could learn. Now,
a week or two before, while working for me, several
men of Selembanga had seen a picture of Jesus at
the Well, talking to the woman of Samaria. Accom-
panied by some women, one of these men turned up
at the mission house, saying they wanted “to see
Jesus.” The picture was shown, whereupon the man
exclaimed, “ Yes, that is it! That is the Son of God
who came into the world to save us from our sins
and from hell, and to help us to get to heaven here-
after.”
The women evidently thought the man had not got
a correct version of the story; so they appealed to me,
and I explained the wonderful incident, telling of the
love and power of Jesus to save. They had heard
enough at home to impel them to walk six miles to
learn more ; and they went back with the feeling that
the half had not been told them.
At length the tardy chief made a personal call, and
asked for information. An acquaintance was then


formed, which has been fruitful of important results
throughout the history of the mission. Not knowing
the chiefs mind, I began by explaining that I had
taken up my abode on the island in order to tell the
people the way of salvation. Manambalea seemed
greatly astonished at the good news. He attended
evening worship in the mission house, and afterwards
made no sign of leaving. He ceased not to ask
questions concerning the Gospel; and when I set
forth the truth in song, the uniform request was “Sing
it again! ”
At a late hour that evening he was asked to retire to
rest, with the prospect of hearing more on the following
day. His answer was; “ I want to go home in the
morning, and tell my intentions to my people ; but
I will return hither in the afternoon.” This he did,
coming back to learn to read! At that time no
person of importance in the island had taken such a
decided stand, except Matabuti at Meriu. Meanwhile,
in Malakaleo’s quarter, strong words and feelings were
prevailing against the Gospel.
Not long afterwards a company of Malakaleo’s fighting
men appeared at the mission station, probably to inquire
about Manambalea’s object in staying with me. When
they met him, they asked if he intended to work
for the missionary. Of course, he would be working
there, and it would be the easiest thing in the world to
say so, and conceal his real object. “ No,” he said
decidedly, “ I have come to ‘ take the Book,’ ” i.e.,
submit to religious instruction.
The tone of his voice was such as to discourage
further interrogation. He remained a considerable time


at the mission house, and made rapid progress in
knowledge. It was his real determination from the
first to become a -Christian; I had to be faithful, and
the inquirer had to be honest, or it would not have been
possible now to report Manambalea’s conversion, and his
humble position at the feet of Jesus.
My deliberate judgment is that there is no man on
Tongoa who would make the same sacrifices for his
Master; nor has any one on the island exerted himself
so much for the Redeemer’s Kingdom as Manambalea.
At limes when all others have failed, I have found a
faithful friend in him. The story of this brother and
his work would almost require a separate volume to
do justice to it.
Among the many callers at the mission station were
not only those who had produce to sell, but such as
wished to honour me, a stranger, by receiving any
presents that I might be disposed to give. It was not
uncommon in the early days of the mission for a man
to present himself at the door with the enigmatical
remark, “ I love you.” What more natural than that,
conscious that my resources were distinctly limited, I
should say : “ When I love any one, I do what I can
to make him happy and comfortable. Now, if you
love me, why have you not brought me some yams, or
a fowl, or something that would prove of service ? ”
The native beggar, however, not impelled by want,
but actuated by the insatiable cry of the horseleech’s
daughters, said, “ Give, give,” in terms of the politest
compliment! He loved the missionary! Ought not
the missionary to make him a present in return ? That
was the form of mendicant logic on Tongoa! Others


again would bring me presents, not because they had
a grain of affection for me, but because they expected
a more valuable article in exchange.
There came a time, early in the work, when the
visitors grew few and far between. The explanation
was, that all the presents and barter goods had been
disposed of, and a considerable time must elapse before
the Dayspring would arrive with a fresh supply. In
such circumstances as these, God tried my faith. When
temporal prospects were very dark, I committed my
cares to the Lord. Not many days afterwards, and
before we were actually in want, a tribe of natives came
along, carrying taro, yams, bananas, and cocoanuts. I
was not a little surprised to see them at this time; as,
with others, they had lately ceased to come, because they
knew I had nothing to buy with. “ Well,” I said, “ you
have come ; but I have nothing to pay you with.”
They replied, “We know that; but these things were
sent down to us by Marimaraki, who requested us to
bring them over to you as a present.”
So our wants were supplied by the least likely man
on the island—a man who afterwards showed himself to
be of the meanest disposition. The God of Elijah can
feed his servants by gifts from a savage black man, as
well as by meat conveyed by voracious ravens.
Marimaraki’s life throws no light whatever upon his
strange act. Years later he asked the missionary how
much he would give him to “take the Book.” The
providential goodness of God fully explains the occur-
rence, for in His hands the heart of a bush chief is as
tractable as that of a highly-civilized ruler.


From quite early days on the island, Mr. Michelsen
visited Selembanga. The people always gave him a
warm welcome. They showed him what they con-
sidered the most interesting object in the village—a
remarkably fair-skinned boy, which the wife of the
young chief—Manambalea’s nephew—had borne to him
in Queensland.
They also took him to the house of an old blind
man, who was regarded with peculiar interest. The
missionary having been introduced as “ the man of
God,” the poor old pilgrim exclaimed, “ Oh, is that
the man of God ? Let me feel him.” Laying his
trembling hands upon the servant of Christ, he seemed
to experience unspeakable satisfaction. His words and
actions were in the spirit of the prayer of Simeon of
old ; “ Lord, now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in
peace ;...for mine eyes have seen Thy salvation.”
D


CHAPTER V.
Progress under Difficulties.
Work at the “Sunday House”—The Mission Station Robbed—
“A Sign"--Full Restitution, resulting in New Friendships—A
Ngunese Christian Chief’s Confession —Visit to Emae —Karisi,
the Little “Misi.”
nURING week-days Mr. Michelsen’s time was
) spent in manifold work for the good of the
people; teaching, visiting, etc. On Sundays
he would take a preaching tour, and late in
the afternoon and evening be “at home ”
for visitors. Numbers of men and boys, assembling to
sing and hear what the missionary had to tell them,
made the first day of the week very different from
others—not to them only, but to their companions also.
Probably on that account the boys of the village
called the mission premises the “ Sunday House.”
Among the elements of day-school instruction, Mr.
Michelsen included the names of the days of the week
in English; and the proceedings at the “Sunday House”
did much to impress the important lesson.


The missionary will speak for himself regarding in-
cidents of this time ;
“ Returning home from the Synod that met in the
Islands, during the first year of the work on Tongoa,
I observed a peculiar strangeness among the people
TONGOANS (PELE MEN) AS HEATHEN.
They seemed quite friendly, but it was plain that
there was something I had yet to learn.
“ Approaching the house, I thought I saw a change
in its appearance ; but I could not tell what was the
matter. Just then, one of the natives told me that a
band of Malakaleo’s men had broken into the place
during my absence. They were led by a man from
Panita, who, through frequent visits to the mission


station, knew how to effect an entrance. They turned
over everything; examined every nook and corner ; and
carried off just anything that struck their fancy.
“ I cannot say I took this very much to heart, as
I was quite prepared for such occurrences. Changing
the subject, however, I told the people I purposed
that evening showing them Navaevaeana —the ‘Sign’—
for thus the magic lantern is styled on Nguna. The
announcement did not cause nearly so much pleasure
as I anticipated. As a fact, my meaning was hardly
clear to the people. But, intending to surprise them, I
did not stop to explain.
“ The news spread rapidly; ‘in less than no time,’
so to say, it reached the ears of Malakaleo’s men, of
burglarious notoriety, in Lumbukuti. Then came a
message from Tinabua, the young chief, entreating me
to send no calamity upon the people ; and, furthermore,
assuring me that all the things that had been taken
away from the mission house should be returned on the
following day! I saw no reason, however, to defer my
inoffensive magic lantern display.
“ The next day Tinabua, accompanied by the senior
chief, Malakaleo, their fighting men, and many others,
came up to the mission house. They were all armed
and painted, as well as decorated with plumes of cocks’
feathers. They brought with them axes, knives, pieces
of print, and every item of my missing property upon
which they could lay their hands.
“ I took advantage of the occasion to make Tinabua
a present of several of the articles. Acknowledging
his honesty, I admonished him to remain a just and


upright ruler. I have reason to believe that this little
incident went far to make him a firm and constant
friend of the mission.
“ Another occurrence made a great impression upon
the natives. During my absence the Panita men had
joined the Lumbukuti warriors against the Peld people,
and the only man shot in the fight was the Panita man
who had acted as guide to the burglars !
“During the same year I paid a visit to Nguna,
in my boat. Conversing with some of the Christian
natives, I told them of the Lord’s blessing upon my
labours, and of the wonderful manner in which He had
opened the way for me to preach the Gospel to the
Tongoans. One of the company expressed his surprise,
and a second followed suit. After several had made
casual remarks, Matakoale, an elderly Christian chief,
said ; ‘ I am not at all surprised : further, we should not
be surprised. It is just what we have been praying for
all the time; and God has heard our prayers. Let us
praise Him! ’ ”
Mr. Michelsen had occasion to go to the island of
Emae, to make a settlement of the claim of Malai, the real
owner of the land at Panita on which the mission house
had been erected. He was received with much kind-
ness by the villagers of Sasake, who had heard of the
work on Tongoa from those who had visited the island.
In the evening, before retiring to rest, the missionary
assembled the Tongoans who had accompanied him,
and commenced the usual worship with a hymn. This
was not only a novelty, but a great enjoyment, to the
natives present; and before Mr. Michelsen could engage


in prayer, the heathen chief demanded a repetition
of the hymn. This was not all; for he continued
requesting encores far into the night, the hymns being
explained and the Gospel preached. There is reason to
believe that this and other meetings with the Sasake
people did much to open their hearts for the Gospel.
Since then teachers from Efate have been settled there.
An interesting visitor during the first year at the
mission station was a lad named Karisi. His upper Up
had been badly cut with a knife used for clearing the
bush, and he sought the missionary’s surgical aid. The
wound was carefully sewn up, and periodically dressed.
After some days, the lad proposed to stay at the station
and serve Mr. Michelsen in any way he could ; and the
proposal was gladly accepted.
Karisi at once impressed the missionary favourably,
being a tall, spare lad, with thoughtful eye. Though
fond of fun, he was all attention to religious instruction.
By dint of close application he speedily learned to read,
and his whole conduct showed him to be earnestly
seeking the truth. One evening, during worship, Mr.
Michelsen called upon him to engage in prayer. He
knew how anxiously he had taught the youth ; but he
did not know to what a degree the instruction had been
spiritually appropriated. To his joyful surprise, Karisi,
with little hesitation, stood up and offered the prayer
which the Lord taught His disciples. He afterwards
gave unmistakeable evidence of being a truly-converted
boy. “How can I keep from singing!” might well
be given as his motto. Until late in the evening one
would hear from Karisi’s hut the strains of one Gospel
hymn after another,


No sooner was the youth’s interest in the new religion
reported to Malakaleo, than that chief devised evil pur-
poses. Mr. Michelsen continues the narrative
“In the evening, after I had gone to bed, there was a
knock at my door. I asked, ‘ Who is there ? ’ The
answer was, ‘ Kinau!' (I!). It was Karisi’s voice, and I
let him in. In those days I was in the habit of bolting
my doors. I have given that up a good while now ;
things have changed.
“ When Karisi entered, I asked what was the matter ;
and he answered that he had just learned that Mala-
kaleo intended sending up some of his men to kill
him—probably that night.
“ I told him not to fear. We had trusted ourselves
into the hands of the Lord, and He would take care of
us. I directed him to sleep in the front room; and in
the event of any one coming to the door, not to answer
it personally, but to waken me. Then I would go to
the door, and he could get under my bed !
“ I went to lie down again, expecting Karisi to do
the same. I listened for intimations of the arrival of
the hostile party. After awhile I thought I heard
something like a human voice, and at once concluded
that the would-be murderers were approaching. I
strained my ears to distinguish the sounds, and then
heard more and more clearly the words of song. It was
Karisi; and the hymn was the native version of ‘ My
Jesus, I love Thee; I know Thou art mine.’ Subse-
quently the lad engaged in prayer, asking God to
preserve our lives, and to touch Malakaleo’s heart, and
lead him to a knowledge of Jesus. Further, he prayed


God to banish all heathen darkness, and establish His
Kingdom on Tongoa.
“ That prayer of the little ‘misi : (missionary) has been
abundantly answered. Karisi’s life was saved ; and in
the case of Malakaleo, the lion has been turned into the
lamb by the operation of Divine grace.”
Subsequent chapters will show in what remarkable
power the Kingdom of Heaven has come to the people
of the island.


CHAPTER VI.
Ioys and Sorrows.
A Lady Missionary—More about the Little “Misi"—A Native
Peace-maker—Christianity to be “Stamped out" —Murderous
Plots Frustrated.
a‘'" P T( 1T the close of the first year of his work on
Tongoa, Mr. Michelsen felt that it was not
good for a man to be alone.* Sometimes the
solitude had been almost painful to him : he
TO*. would look at his hands, and long to see white
kindred. He returned to New Zealand, seeking a wife
as well as a brief respite from the seclusion and anxieties
of Tongoa.
Having married Miss Jane Langmuir, of Otago, a lady
who for twelve years proved the sharer of his domestic
joys and sorrows, as well as a partner in his mission
work, he returned to the island in the early part
of 1881. The new arrival caused unbounded delight
among the native women. They showed their joy by
* Through the death in London, at the end of 1892, of his
devoted wife, he is again alone. But we must not anticipate this
sorrowful bereavement. Chapter XII. will give particulars.


jumping and screeching, as they crowded round the
lady missionary on the beach. No reception could
have been more warm and hearty.
Mrs. Michelsen little anticipated the trials and diffi-
culties which lay before her. The next thing was to
make home comfortable ; and in a very short time the
little building which then did duty for a manse was
rendered bright and cheerful. Since then, to the grow-
ing interest of the people, a little family has been added
to the home.
One of the first to call upon the missionary after his
return to Tongoa, was the loyal Manambalea, with
whom the boy Karisi had been left to do his best as
“teacher.” Mr. Michelsen asked the chief how they
had been getting on ; and he said, “ Very well.”
“ Have you learned to read ? ”
“ Yes.”
“ How have you spent your Sundays in my.absence?”
“ Preaching, of course ! ”
“ What have you been doing on week-days ? ”
“ We have had school daily, and quite a number of
villagers have attended.”
Manambalea added that the Sunday work began with
services held in his village, and afterwards extended
from village to village on his side of the island. The
chief himself beat the drum and called the people to-
gether; and then, after a few words, he .introduced
Karisi to sing and preach. The deep piety of this lad
has already been described. Doubtless his endeavours
during the absence of the missionary were an important
preparation for aggressive work such as was engaged in
afterwards.


Manambalea had, however, something to tell that was
not of so pleasing a character. During the missionary’s
absence fresh war had broken out; and the villages had
united in a proposal to exterminate the people of Pel£,
one of the two bush villages. Manambalea explained
that the P£ld people were “ a very bad lot,” and he was
sure there would be no peace on the island until they
had been “ wiped off.” Not only had all his men taken
part in the war, but the women also. Tying around
them their long aprons, they had painted their faces,
and decorated themselves with plumes; then, having
gathered all the spare muskets in the village, they had
been helping the men in what Manambalea regarded as
a holy war!
Was not this sad news for a missionary who had done
his utmost to impress upon the people the blessedness
of peace? Instruction proceeded among the Tongoans
“ line upon line, here a little, and there a little ”; so
Mr. Michelsen was not discouraged, though much dis-
tressed by this terrible intelligence. While a true and
faithful disciple of the missionary, Manambalea had yet
to learn that the Kingdom of God is not extended by
violence, but by “righteousness, peace, and joy in the
Holy Ghost.”
Mr. Michelsen explained that the island was not to be
conquered by war, but by Christianity—which is love,
and not hatred ; life, and not death. Manambalea was
soon led to see his error; and, hastening home, he
imparted to his people the clearer light which he had
himself received. He went further, telling his tribes-
men that he intended to go straight up to the bush
village, to stop the war. All begged of him to do no


MANAMBALEA PREACHING PEACE AT PELE.


such wild thing, saying that the people of Fdld would
certainly kill him. As he remained firm in his reso-
lution, the villagers proposed to follow him in a body,
well armed, so as to afford protection.
This, however, was not Manambalea’s wish. He
could see that this plan would assuredly mean more
war. So, settled in purpose, he went without escort,
only taking with him Karisi and another youth. He
was, however, followed by his wife and her sister,
who declared they would go “and die with him.”
The warriors of the bush village could not understand
the sight that met their view that day—Manambalea,
with whose people they had fought many a battle,
coming up to them with two defenceless lads ! There
must be some sinister purpose! The advance of the
chief is but part of a plot! Every fighting-man of P£l£
grasped his musket, expecting each moment to see their
armed enemy in force. But Manambalea held up his
hands, and called, “ Stop! lam not here to fight,”
he said; “ but to speak peace to you.”
At this the men threw their guns to the ground, and
stood up, in a respectful attitude, to hear what Manam-
balea had to say. In a few words he explained that he
had been at the mission house, and had related to the
missionary what had occurred. “The missionary,” he
said, “tells me it is not according to ‘the Light’* to
* This is an expressive designation for the Gospel. Conversely,
heathenism is, by native Christians, spoken of as “ darkness.”
Thus : Natatnoli malingo (“man dark”) is used for a heathen; sipe
ntalingo (“ship dark”) signifies a Queensland Kanaka cruiser!
Could native condemnation of a hateful traffic be more plainly
expressed ?


fight and kill people; but that we should love one
another and live at peace.”
The worthy chieftain further said that he intended
to stop fighting; and he hoped the people of Pele
would do the same, and become learners of the “ New
Doctrine ”! Thus what might have been a very disas-
trous war was brought to an end. Returning to the
mission house, Manambalea described what had hap-
pened, and suggested that the Gospel should be taken
to Pele on the following Lord’s Day—then two days
hence. The missionary was, of course, glad to agree
to this.
The news of these occurrences spread rapidly over
the island ; and it is needless to say that many
inquired concerning the New Doctrine which had put
a stop to war, and led enemies to terms of “ peace at
all costs.” The intention of the missionary to preach
at the bush village was also noised abroad, and soon
reached Lumbukuti. It greatly enraged Malakaleo:
the missionary was actually going to pay a friendly
visit to his mortal enemies! Therefore he would
“stamp out” the New Doctrine altogether on Tongoa,
by killing the missionary and burning down his
house!
In the course of the Saturday afternoon the chief of
Panita sent for Mr. Michelsen, and said : “ Misi, I
have heard that you are going to Pele to-morrow.”
“Yes,” was the reply.
“ I do not think,” said the chief, “ that you should
go; you cannot trust those bush people.”
The missionary replied : “ They are heathen as well
as you, and I have a message for all. I trust in God,


and consider myself as safe among the bush people as
among you.”
“Well,” rejoined the chief, “if you are determined to
go, you should not walk along the ordinary road.”
This remark let the missionary into a secret. It was
obvious that the chief did not so much fear the harm
which the bush tribe might do, as he reckoned upon
the intrigue of the Lumbukuti people.
Mr. Michelsen related the facts to his wife, who
suggested that perhaps he should not go. His prompt
answer was : “ Do not be afraid ; if there is any danger,
the Lord will let us know in due time.” Though pre-
pared to flee from village to village, the missionary and
his devoted wife determined, with God's help, to remain
on the island and continue their Gospel work. They
might be harassed, but they would not “ emigrate.”
Mr. Michelsen continues the story thus
“We retired to rest as usual that evening, after having
committed ourselves into the hands of God. About one
o’clock on Sunday morning, however, there was a knock
at the door, and voices were heard outside. I sprang
up, and asked what was the matter. Voices said:
‘ We have come from Selembanga, and want to speak
to you.’
“ Opening the door, I found some women who had
come round the coast on the south side of the island.
They informed me that some men from Kurumambe—a
village on the north side of the island—had come over
and told them that, while at Lumbukuti the previous
afternoon, they heard that Malakaleo had ordered nine
of his men to go up in the bush and wait on the road


where the missionary would pass in going to P6H, and
then kill both him and Manambalea. He had also
instructed another company to go over to the mission
station, and burn down the premises in the absence of
the missionary. What was to be done with Mrs.
Michelsen was not disclosed.
“This intelligence showed that Malakaleo had matured
his threatened plans to ‘ stamp out ’ Christianity; and
that the visit to PeH of myself and the peace-making
chief was to open the way. But lat once decided not
to take the course which would make the desired
occasion. I took the intimations I had received as
a message from God; and made up my mind not to
go to P£H as at first agreed.
“ After conducting service on Sunday morning at
Panita, instead of going on the proposed journey, I
returned to the mission house. Subsequently, the
band of men whom Malakaleo had instructed to burn
down the house, appeared. The leader seemed some-
what taken aback when he found me about the place ;
and his hand trembled as he held it out to press mine.
The band afterwards walked round to where my servant
boys were, and there they found Manambalea, a man
in whom I never found a trace of timidity or fear.
He knew all about the plot, but he spoke quite cheer-
fully to the men.
“ ‘ Oh, you have come ! ’ he remarked.
“ ‘Yes,’ they replied ; ‘we are passing on to the next
village to borrow a canoe ! ’
“ Manambalea continued : ‘ Do not tell us that. Just
do what you have come to do 1 ’
“ ‘ We have not come to do anything,’ said the leader,


hoping to get well and speedily out of his difficult
position.
“ Again Manambalea taunted them : ‘ Now just do
what you have come to do.’
“ ‘ What do you say we have come to do ? ’ asked the
Lumbukuti men.
“‘Why,’ replied Manambalea, glad that this point had
been reached, ‘to burn down the mission house, of
course. We know your designs ; now do your work!’
“ Having again assured the chief that they had no evil
purpose, the men passed on. Instead, however, of
going to the village they named, and there borrowing a
canoe, they made for the beach, and returned to their
own village.
“ Malakaleo’s evil devices were that day frustrated.
Far from ‘ stamping out ’ Christianity, his wrath led
tp measures which resulted in a speedy establishment
of the ‘New Doctrine’ in the hearts of many who
would otherwise have continued to thirst after truth
and light.”
As for “the little Misi”—Karisi —he served for a
short time as teacher at Kurumambe, with lasting results
attending his work. He had a great thirst for know-
ledge ; was endowed with a remarkable memory; and
acquired much facility in the use of the English tongue.
In course of time he went to Queensland ; and it has
recently been reported that he is devoting his energies
to mission work among the Kanakas there.
E


CHAPTER VII.
A Flight for Life.
Change of Mission Centre —A Weary March —Arrival on the
East Side of the Island—A Gracious Deliverance.
V r \*'Sv£>
HE time had undoubtedly come for another
spot to be selected on which to plant the
S headquarters of the mission. Not only
would the Lumbukuti people not suffer
the Gospel to be proclaimed in their own
village; they had determined to drive the missionary
out of Panita. Night after night the mission house
had been eyed by commissioners from Malakalco ready
to shoot at any one that might appear.
Nearly every village in the island was desirous of
hearing the missionary’s message, and it seemed a great
pity to do anything that might unsettle the work. Yet,
if Satan’s agents were to be foiled, the mission centre
must be changed—at least for a time. It was resolved
without delay to remove to Manambalea’s village, which
meant going from the west of the island to the east.
Nothing could have pleased Manambalea more than
this arrangement. His village was near several others,
and it was no rash calculation that, with God’s blessing,


THE WOULD-BE MURDERERS LYING IN WAIT.


the entire side of the island might be reached from
that centre.
Manambalea hastened home, and beat the war drum.
Having thus called his people together, he explained
the situation. His proposal that the missionary should
be received at Selembanga was heartily accepted, and
there was no delay in forwarding his kindly conceived
plans for the removal.
The eventful Sunday having passed without harm to
the mission, but to the utter defeat of Malakaleo’s
designs, a new era began in Christian work on Tongoa.
At one o’clock on Monday morning, the women and
children of Selembanga arrived at Panita and cleared
the mission premises, carrying everything to their own
village, which was, they rejoiced to realize, to have the
distinction of receiving the missionary and his wife.
The men of the tribe also turned out, and stood sentry
the while, cheerfully protecting the large body of
carriers. There are no conveyances on Tongoa, so
everything Had to be taken by hand—or by head.
Through devious passage-ways, along slippery precipices
which would inspire fear in uninitiated pedestrians, the
willing people made their way, some carrying unwieldy
articles of furniture on their heads, others with arms and
hands engaged with goodly loads.
Among the Panita boys who were at this time stay-
ing at the mission house, was a nephew of Malakaleo.*
* This youth is now chief of Lumbukuti. He stayed for some
time at the mission station, and when Mrs. Michelsen arrived on the
island, he joined with the native women in the rejoicings already
described. In honour of that event he took to himself the name
of “ Missis.” On one occasion he put on a pair of stockings which


With the others, he was shut up during the removal, lest
by any means the people of Lumbukuti should prema-
turely learn what was going on. Altogether, about
three hundred natives of Selembanga took part in the
removal operations. In the forenoon a band of fighting
men from Lumbukuti came up. They were led by their
chief, who desired a conversation with the missionary.
This was willingly granted.
“Is it true that you are going away ? ” asked
Malakaleo.
“Yes,” replied Mr. Michelsen.
“ Why ? ” asked the chief, blandly.
The missionary gave answer, “You have never under-
stood, Malakaleo, why we came to Tongoa. You seem
to think that we have come to distribute axes, knives,
calicoes, and other things that are desirable for this
world’s use. We have come here to preach the Gospel,
and for nothing else.”
Malakaleo: “Do you regard Selembanga as a better
place than this ? ” /
Mr. Michelsen: “ I do not seek the best place, but
people who are willing to hear the Gospel. You do
not wish to hear it; the villages on the east side do.
Therefore, I go to them. When you wish for the
Gospel, let me know; and I will come and give it to
you also.”
the lady missionary had discarded, and otherwise “got up” in his
attire, paraded the beach to the amusement of all beholders. The
seed of the Gospel was, however, sown in his heart; and later on,
while at Queensland, he developed into an active Christian worker
(see pp. 138 and 170). His proper name was Timataso, but he is
now known by the chieftain’s style of Tinabua.


Seeing he could effect nothing by this conversation,
the chief addressed Manambalea, showing himself
very angry that the latter should “take away the
missionary.” Manambalea insisted upon the mutual
character of the arrangement—the missionary wished
to go, and he wished to have him.
The Lumbukuti people having gone away in a rage,
the work of removal was proceeded with. Of necessity,
this was slow and tedious; and it was Tuesday after-
noon before the old quarters were left, to the regret
of the chief and people of Panita.
There was neither time nor inclination to travel round
the coast to Selembanga, in the footsteps of the carriers.
So the journey was made across the island. Manaura,*
senior chief of Mangarisu, the good Manambalea, and
a young man from his village, escorted Mr. and Mrs.
Michelsen, and two youths followed. It was a weary
walk through the bush, with all its risks and dangers.
Only God could protect them against the murderous
bands that infested the region; and into His hands
they committed themselves ere ascending the hills.
The young man from Selembanga walked cheerfully
in front, swinging his gun over his head. He said,
“ If you hear a shot fired, you will know they have
shot me. Then you can run back with all haste.”
The party walked on, the silence being broken only
by the guides, who talked about the points at which
the enemy might fall upon them. Happily, they spoke
the Selembanga language, which Mrs. Michelsen did
* Manaura was still a heathen ; but he was friendly, and open to
receive a present for his services. Besides, he was a “sacred”
chief, whom no one would dare to hurt.


not understand. In a state of health which quite
unfitted her for the fatigue of such a long and heavy
walk, her mind was fortunately spared the additional
agitation which this conversation would assuredly have
caused.
The last two miles of the journey of seven or eight,
were “ tramped ” in utter darkness. When passing
through questionable regions, the travellers maintained
complete silence. Just before dark, there was a shout
by one of those walking ahead. The missionary feared
that the enemy had appeared, and his mind was at
once occupied with various possibilities and courses of
action.
“ What is the matter, Manambalea?”
“ Oh, we are beyond all danger now.” The territory
of the Pdle people had been reached, and the Lum-
bukuti warriors would not venture that far.
Arrived in Selembanga, the missionary and his wife
made their temporary home in a grass hut which
Manambalea had put up, on land which, some time
previously, had been bought for an out-station mission
house. They felt much relief in the thought that,
humanly speaking, they were “out of danger,” in a sense
which they had not enjoyed for a long time past.
It afterwards transpired that a band of murderers
had been out, lying in wait under a large banyan tree,
beside the path! This was passed about twenty minutes
before the shout was heard. Why did the savage band
not carry out their purpose ? The God of Daniel
knows—and so do His servants who trust in Him.


CHAPTER VIII.
New Mission Quarters.
School Work Advanced—Native Expectations Realized—Sad Fate
of a Murderous Band.
ypi-T HAVING made Selembanga the headquarters of
C nri the mission, Mr. Michelsen sought to make his
home comfortable and establish evangelistic
eflQjjjj? agencies around him. Houses without floors
.“t are a frequent source of fever; so he lost
no time in building one more conducive to healthful
living. This was made of reed walls and a thatched
roof, and had a floor made of boards which were
brought from Panita.
In the meantime, material which Dr. J. G. Paton
had kindly purchased for Mr. Michelsen arrived from
Australia. It was a two-room frame, with an iron
roof. The much-needed addition was at once made
to the mission buildings. A kind providence timed
the despatch of these things, so that the Mission ship
did not deliver them at the old station; in which case
they might have been a burden during the flight which
has been already described.


School work was prosecuted with all possible vigour;
and Gospel meetings were held in two parts of Selem-
banga, and also at Euta, Pdle, and Kurumambe. Yes,
indeed, at Peld, as was promised by Manambalea, when
he told its chief that he wished to live at peace with him.
FIRST MISSION MOUSE AT SELEMBANGA.
Even Marimaraki, the chief of Pdld, afterwards showed
himself friendly to the mission and to Manambalea;
but it was clear that he cared little for the Gospel. He
would ring an old cow-bell (stolen in New Caledonia!),
to collect the people on Sundays ; but he afterwards
scolded such as responded to the call and listened to


the missionary! The truth seems to be that the old
rogue prized the friendship of Mr. Michelsen, in order
to keep on good terms with Manambalea, and to be
eligible for occasional presents !
After the new house had been built at Selembanga,
many of the natives recognised, in the sights that met
their eyes, a fulfilment of things that had been spoken
NEW MISSION STATION, SELEMLKMBANGA.
a century or two before, by “ a prophet of their own.”
A long time ago, said the people, before our grand-
fathers had heard of white men, there was a man
among us on Tongoa whose name was Marikitilangi—
freely translated : the Son of Heaven. He was not
like the rest of the people; even in his youth he never
went with the fighting men, but always lived at peace
with all.


That man used to walk about the island, visiting
alike the enemies and friends of his village, and
speaking kindly to all. Everybody knew him, and no
one interfered with him. When he was an old man,
and unable to go to the plantation like others, one day
he met those who were returning, and said :
“ I have been away to-day. I have seen what shall
come to pass many years hence. You shall bury me,
and after then these things shall happen: people shall
come here who are not like ourselves, but their skin
is white. This bark cloth that we use now shall be
thrown away, and nice soft cloth that they will give
us will be used instead. These stone adzes which we
are now using will also be thrown away, and a different
kind of tool will be employed. Almost everything shall
be changed. Upon the hill there [pointing to the site
on which the new mission house had been erected] shall
the man live who will show you the Light.”
Taking the people down with him to the beach,
Marikitilangi pointed out a cave formed by a large
flat stone lying against the rocks, and said:—
“ Look at this ! Our houses are all covered with
grass, but the roof of his house shall be like this ;
it shall be vatu ” —that is, iron or stone, for one word
indicates both in Tongoan.
When the natives who had heard this tradition saw
the mission house with an iron roof, standing on the
identical hill, they wonderingly said: “ This is exactly
what Marikitilangi said would be! ” When, later on,
the missionary made a road from one end of the
island to the other, the natives recalled another of


the old man’s predictions, to the effect that the teacher
who would come would “ cut the island in two! ”
So, as the Gospel was taken from village to village,
the .people said to the missionary: “ This is just what
Marikitilangi said you were going to do ! ” Thus, in a
remarkable manner, the natives of the island had been
prepared for God’s message ; and as of old, one had
“ made straight the way of the Lord.”
What appears to be a very important link in the
history of the mission was the sad end of Matokae
and six of his followers. This man, Malakaleo’s
“general,” was the leader of the band who, with mur-
derous intentions, lay under the banyan tree when the
mission party fled from Panita. One day he was
winding his way through the bush, past the deserted
mission station and the notorious cannibal village of
Bongabonga, when, on coming to Meriu, the village
of Matabuti, he met Maribatoko (freely translated ;
Father-leave-him-alone), engaged in building a house.
A quiet laconic man, who seemed to think a great
deal ahead of what he said, Maribatoko had stood
many a battle with the dreaded Ti-Tongoa, and had
shown a firm adherence to principle from the beginning
of his Christian life. Matokae asked Maribatoko what
he was doing. The reply was, that he was making a
lotu- house, i.e., a place of worship.
“ But you did not ask us about that! ”
“ No ; you are not interested in these things.”
“ Well, but you should not begin building a /oiu-house
without asking our leave to do so.”
“ You speak as if we were subject to you ; though of
you we are quite free, and do as we choose in these


matters. Besides, the house is for God, not for you.
We know God wishes us to build it, so we have asked
no one’s permission.”
These words were too strong for Matokae, who
summed up his indignation with a threat: “You build
it, then! We will come and take out one of the
sticks, and lash you to it Then we will carry you
home and eat you ! We will burn down the house, and
that will be an end of it.”
The Christian native replied, “You may do as you
like; in the meantime the building will go on.”
Matokae went to Mangarisu, where he was received
with every token of hospitality by Ti-Tongoa. He was
invited to remain till the next day; which implied that
the chief intended to kill a pig, and make a feast for
him. This was according to his gross disposition.
After eating and drinking, he lay down to sleep,
thinking all was peace and safety. The chief’s wife
went, during the night, to Marimaraki, her brother,
and informed him that his dreaded enemy, Malakaleo’s
“general,” was in their village, and would be going
through the bush next morning. Marimaraki’s eyes
flashed with delight. He speedily called together his
fighting-men, to whom he gave information and explicit
instructions.
Next morning Matokae made his way through the
bush. He carried a large piece of pork, a present from
Ti-Tongoa; and two guns, with which to avenge himself
on possible enemies. The main object of trust, how-
ever, was a “ sacred stone,” hidden in his belt. When
he came near to the banyan tree, where he had, some
months previously, awaited the mission party, he was


shot dead by the Pele men, carried off to the village,
and eaten. Marimaraki was ready to make any capital
he could out of this. So he afterwards remarked to
Mr. Michelsen, “Now we have killed Matokae for you.”
The ready answer was, “ I never asked you to do the
deed ; in fact, I do not at all approve of it.”
Further, in order to impress the entire island with a
sense of his disapproval of what the chief and his people
had done, the missionary, who had been in the habit of
visiting Pele every Sunday, paid no personal visit to the
village for a considerable time. Preachers were sent,
but the missionary’s face was not seen.
It is a remarkable fact that, although several months
had elapsed from the time of the flight to Selembanga,
and that to be shot in a fight was quite an ordinary
thing, no one had been killed on the island from the
day of Matokae’s murderous expedition until the morn-
ing when he himself was shot, and made the subject
of a cannibal feast. Not long afterwards three men of
the same desperate band were killed and eaten by the
bush people. Some time later another three of the
band were killed on board a Queensland ship, while
attempting to take possession. Only two men of the
nine are now alive: one of them is a Church member;
the other is, to say the least of it, very friendly to the
mission, and there is reason to hope that he will ere
long take a decided stand for Christ.
These facts made a profound impression on the
people of Lumbukuti; and doubtless had much to do
with the friendly attitude of the village at a subsequent
period, when the mission centre was again changed.


CHAPTER IX.
Cannibals Rescueb from Cannibals.
Villagers Rescued from the Jaws of Neighbours—Thrilling Inci-
dents, with Remarkable Sequel—A Grand Gospel Triumph.
the mission house was at Selem-
banga, a deeply interesting incident oc-
curred, which the missionary shall narrate
in his own words :
At the beginning of 1881 news reached
us from Epi that a small village there was being eaten
up by a stronger tribe. For generations there had been
war between these villages ; and at length one of them
became so reduced that it was no longer reckoned an
enemy, but treated as a prey. Every now and then
the stronger village would promote a raid upon the
weaker, and capture one or two of the people. These
were killed outright, and carried off for a cannibal feast.
Thus the smaller village was being gradually extermin-
ated. The circumstances invited prompt action.
I sent over some of our most energetic and enterprising


men, including Manambalea and two of his brothers,
telling them to ask the poor people to come and stay
with us at Selembanga. Two boat-loads were brought
MARIPU, ONE OF MANAMBALEA'S BROTHERS.
back, about two-thirds of the remnant, which numbered
forty all told.
It was impossible for the boats to touch the rocky
shore of Epi. The rescuers had therefore to swim
ashore through a rapid current. After inducing the
people to accompany them, they returned, being


followed through the foaming breakers by the refugees
escaping for dear life, some of them with infants on
their backs.
The people seemed very much inferior to those of
Tongoa, being very thin and haggard. The abdomen
was unduly developed, indicating that they had been
accustomed to unprofitable food. Fever, early marriage,
and consanguineous unions had also left unmistakeable
marks on the race.
For the comfort and, if possible, protection of those
still remaining, Maripau, one of Manambalea’s brothers,
was left behind on Epi. Bad weather set in; and for
some days the transportation could not be completed.
However, it was hoped that all would go well with
Maripau and his timid charge—for the most part old
women and children. In the meantime, on a Sunday
afternoon, Maripau appeared quite unexpectedly at the
mission station. The enemies of the people whom he
had remained on Epi to look after, had visited, in a
body, the partly-deserted village, and called upon him
to explain his action. The brave fellow faced them
boldly.
“ You do not know us,” he said ; “ we are the people
of God. Now God loves people, even those whom you
are destroying; therefore we have come to take them
away, and care for them.”
Taken aback somewhat, the leader of the cannibal
tribe did not at first manifest much severity. After
a few moments he showed by threats the bloodthirsty
temper of his party. Maripau’s situation was critical.
He was not afraid, however, “ Full assurance of faith”
was one of the graces which he enjoyed. Resuming,
F


he addressed the savage Epians: “ Remember, I am
God’s man. You may shoot me if you like; but if
you do, you fight against God.”
The spokesman of the tribe remarked : “You say you
are God’s man, and love men. Why, then, do you carry
that gun in your hand ? ”
This put Maripau somewhat in a difficulty. At
length he replied : “We are all accustomed to carrying
guns. But you need not suppose that I have any
intention of shooting you.” With that, he threw the
weapon to the ground.
Not much more was said at the time; but Maripau
learned from the people whom he was endeavouring to
rescue, that the enemy had determined to kill him.
Having surveyed the situation, he thought it would be
best to make for home, in the hope of hastening the
completion of the work of delivering the distressed
people. After threading his way through the bush, by
unknown paths, a distance of eight miles, he found him-
self on the south coast of the island. A small canoe lay
on the beach ; and, praising God for the means of flight
(for he could not thank the unknown owner), he. made
for Tongoa—paddling across a very treacherous current
in stormy weather.
Maripau’s thrilling story caused much excitement
in and around the mission house. The day after he
landed, the sea was calmer, and the remainder of the
poor people were fetched Maripau himself accom-
panying his brother and Manambalea on the expe-
dition.
> The refugees were miserably short of clothing; so the
first thing that had to be done by their benefactors was


to adapt “ calico ” —which is the common name for all
kinds of clothing fabrics—to their immediate needs.
The party included an old chief, who, on arriving in the
open square, looked around in all directions, and ex-
claimed : “Aw/, awe! ” —“ Dear me, dear me ! ”
He had been in Selembanga before ; and he called to
mind that the last visit was about thirty years pre-
viously, when he attended a cannibal feast as an invited
guest. He was one of those who helped to eat forty
Purau men whom the people of Selembanga* had
slaughtered. Now, having been rescued from cannibal
jaws, he was welcomed with tender compassion by
those who had learned a better way of life! Mrs.
Michelsen was the first white lady the old chief had
seen, and he was so alarmed at the sight that he did
not venture to shake hands with her when she cor-
dially greeted him.
. The sad experiences of this tribe were evidently over-
ruled by God for the furtherance of the Gospel on Epi.
A good while after they had been domiciled in Selem-
banga, messages were received from their old enemies,
asking them to return and live on friendly terms. I
refused to consent to any arrangement for a time ; but
replied that when the refugees were Christians, I would
let them go. After the small tribe had passed several
years with us at Selembanga, and all were nominally
Christian, I acceded to the proposal, on the under-
standing that a larger tribe should join the smaller
under one teacher.
What a grand Gospel triumph is this ! No human
wisdom was displayed, and no power according to this
* See page 120,


world. There was love for Christ and those whom He
came to save ; and it proved stronger than the strong
one, and those who, under him, were “ servants of sin.”
Need I add that these events made a profound im-
pression upon the people of several villages on Epi.
From these I received a number of requests for teachers.
They rightly thought that, if Christianity was able to
make those who had been enemies for generations to
live in peace together, it must be something good, and
something which they would also like to have.
Two or three villages on Epi speak the Tongoan
language ; the refugee village, however, was not one of
them. I had frequently been asked for teachers by the
Tongoan-speaking people ; but had none to send. Other
missionaries who had some to spare did send.
This part of Epi was for some time under the super-
vision of Rev. R. M. Fraser, whose station is on the
west coast of the island, about thirty miles distant.
It was finally arranged by the Mission Synod that it
should form part of my district. If I had been in a
position to supply teachers at the time I was first
asked, the work of God on Epi would doubtless have
been much in advance of what it actually is.


CHAPTER X.
Another Change of Locale.
The Missionary again Escapes Death—Hindrances Eventuate in
the Furtherance of the Gospel.
«FTER labouring for three years mainly on the
east side of the island, Mr. Michelsen decided
to return to the west. While absent he had
sent evangelists every week. It was clear that
to reach Lumbukuti and the islands beyond
Tongoa, residence on the west coast was necessary.
Such a step involved the serious undertaking of
cutting a road across the island, from Selembanga to
Panita, a distance of six miles, through virgin forest.
The chief of Panita, Maritariliu, whose attitude to
the mission was formerly quite friendly, was now an
opponent of the work. He had never been in real
sympathy with Christianity, but had expected his
village to grow in influence through the residence
of the missionary. When the mission station was
changed to Selembanga, he was disappointed. Hence
his present opposition. At this juncture, however, a


“HE RAISED HIS GUN TO FIRE, WHEN MRS. MICHELSEN
APPEARED.”
[Page 88.


kind Providence sent him to Queensland, in a trading
vessel, on board which he engaged as boatman. Thus
the only difficulty in the way of resumed work at
Panita was removed.
This change of locale took place with the warm
approval of Manambalea. That unselfish Christian
chief assembled his men to transport the necessary
mission furniture, and even went with the missionary
to reside at Panita until the work was re-established
in the west. The resumed operations were attended
with signally abundant blessing. Abandoning their
heathen customs, the people readily placed themselves
under Christian instruction, and a work of grace was
evident in the hearts of many. Everything was inspir-
ing gratitude and hope, when a sudden change came
over the scene. Maritariliu returned ; and, to his great
disappointment, found the people rallying to the mis-
sionary, and that his was the only heathen family in
the village !
This was too much for him ; so without delay he
sought to pick a quarrel with the missionary, and harass
the people back into heathenism. His wives, whom he
had strictly forbidden to have anything to do with
Christianity, had been unfaithful to him during his
absence ; and as he could say nothing else against the
“ New Doctrine,” he scolded the missionary for not
having kept his wives from improper behaviour! Of
course, the charge lay at the door of the heathenism
to which the chief had bound them.
All day long the chief raved and shouted ; and one
Sunday morning he sought Mr. Michelsen at a very early
hour at the mission station. He reiterated the blame


which he had already expressed. It was evidently his
purpose to shoot the missionary. He retired to a
suitable distance, and raised his gun to fire, when Mrs.
Michelsen, who had heard all he said, appeared. This
broke the evil spell; and the man, ashamed, lowered his
weapon, and went down into the village.
ORIGINAL MISSION BUILDING, WITH ADDITION, AT PANITA.
(Now removed to Lumbukuti.)
Following him, by request, Mr. Michelsen witnessed
other noisy scenes. The man was undoubtedly “ pos-
sessed with a devil.” He repeatedly said that the devil
had told him to kill some one, and that he would
assuredly do it. In the midst of the turmoil, people
fled from the village, until there were only a few left.
For the most part they went to Lumbukuti, the respon-
sible chief of which was now Tinabua, an intelligent


and righteous man. After awhile this chief sent Mr.
Michelsen a message requesting him not to leave the
west side of the island.
The reasonable answer to this was, that it was of no
use staying in a village where there were no people.
Mr. Michelsen added that, if Tinabua wished the mission
station to be on his side of the island, he would need to
find accommodation for it in Lumbukuti. This was
done, and the land was purchased on which the principal
station of the Mission was in due course erected. So,
at last, the most suitable place on the island became
the headquarters. Malakaleo, the retired chief, saw the
Gospel established in the village in which, five years
earlier, he refused to allow the missionary to preach ;
and in which several plots had been hatched against the
missionary’s life. God overruled all the opposition, and
brought to naught the devices of the wicked.
From Lumbukuti the Gospel has spread, not only
throughout Tongoa, but to heathen islands in the region.
The place is of such commanding importance, and its
chief so influential, that villagers far away on the south
side of Epi remarked, after Lumbukuti became a Chris-
tian village : “ When Tinabua puts his foot on our soil
we also will become Christian.”


CHAPTER XI.
Day by Day on Tongoa.
“It is day; let us sing”—First Duties and Breakfast—Morning
School —An Accident; the Patient “Baked” —Road-Making at
Selembanga—The Missionary’s Children and the Native Babies—
Sewing-Class Work—Dinner in Comfort and Tea with “Love
Apples”—Opening a Mission Box —“Tongoa Toddy”—Transla-
ting the Scriptures into Tasiko—Examination of Candidates
for Baptism—A Bush School House—How a Church was
Built—“Fire ! Fire !” —Visitors from Emae —Sabbath Rest and
Engagements.
«j<P
HE missionary thus describes the daily round
IHi rom t^ie m * ss i° n centre of Lumbukuti:—
Toa kokoreko —“The cock is crowing”; and
»the songsters of the forest announce the
approach of day. No hyenas, no lions, no
tigers are there to seek a cool place before the heat
of the sun makes life a burden to them. No giant
snakes are lying in wait for the early passer-by. Our
swarthy island brother has had a refreshing night’s rest,
and now he stretches himself on his somewhat hard bed
of reeds, peeps out of the door, and says to his friends
in the house, “ Epei aleati; tunga lega ”(“It is day; let
us sing.”) The well-known tune of “lam so glad that


our Father in heaven,” or another equally familiar, is
heard from every hut, though the sound is muffled
through the grass walls.
After praise and prayer, one and another finds his
way out. Among the first are the women, in order to
light the fires, whereat to bake a few small yams or
breadfruit, whichever may be nearest at hand. Whilst
the yam is being baked, the various members of the
family are quiet with their books, each studying to fix
the daily lesson in his mind, prior to going to school.
But even before any one was astir in the other houses,
morning devotions were past at the mission station, in
the house in which are lodged the young women who
stay with us for instruction in life and Godliness. All
these girls have had their morning bath, for without this
they are riot allowed to enter the mission premises.
The kitchen lamp having been lighted, a yam or two
is peeled and baked in the oven, a breadfruit being also
roasted on the open fire. Whilst their business is to
prepare our breakfast, these young folk likewise bake
something for themselves to take before school. Another
girl has skimmed the milk, and is shaking a bottle of
cream to make butter for the day ; all this- before the
sun is up.
With the dawn of day one or two more girls come
along. They are to sweep the dining-room and set the
breakfast-table. In the meantime the cow-herd and the
goat-herd appear, each with a billy-can of milk.* The
nurse-girl is in the children’s bedroom with a tub of
water, bathing the little ones. After performing my
* The missionary introduced cows, also goats ; and they have
fared very well on the island.


own ablutions, I take a hurried look at the passage of
Scripture which the natives are to say at morning
school, and from which lam to speak. Mrs. Michelsen
is soon out setting the cow’s milk, and giving the
finishing touch to breakfast preparations. The goat’s
milk has already been strained, and js being heated
to make it healthier, and so that it may keep. The
entire family is now ready for the morning meal; a
reeking plate of porridge, and a jug of cold goat’s
milk from last night, are ready for us. Also, an
abundant supply of yams, two breadfruit, a dish of
warmed-up native mushrooms, a native pudding, and
a small piece of bread and butter, with a cup of coffee ;
these make a good and wholesome breakfast, such as we
could not get at the best hotel in Europe.
But whilst the children are chatting, King Sol has
made his appearance, and the old bell out of the
Madeleine, which was wrecked on our shore, is jingling.
One is often provoked to wish for another and more
suitable bell for church and school use; but for all
that, there is power in the old bell yet. The second
half of the meal is gone through with less ease and
comfort than the first. From the impetuous manner
in which the boy is ringing, it is getting clear that the
school-house is nearly filled, and that he can see no
reason why the remaining scholars should not also come
along. I hasten down to the school, and so do all the
natives on the mission premises, leaving Mrs. Michelsen
and the children alone. School over, I go home to
attend our morning devotions before the various duties
of the day crowd upon us. This morning, however,
this quiet season is not to be enjoyed undisturbed.


A man named Pakoa meaning “ Shark,” a prse-
nomen as common as the English “John” —has come
from one of the bush villages, informing me that a man
has met with an accident. Having climbed a tree for
a breadfruit for breakfast, he had fallen and sustained
some internal injury. “ Have they done anything for
him?” “Yes; they are baking him.” This answer re-
quires some explanation. A long ditch is dug, large
enough for the patient to lie down in; a fire is then
made in the ditch, a quantity of wood being burnt.
Green leaves having been spread over the excavation,
the man is laid into it, and thoroughly covered up with
foliage and mats. The situation is steaming warm ;
hence the utility of the treatment. When I came to the
place I found the “ baking ” operation still in progress,
and was pleased to hear that the man was improving.
I did not disturb him, so long as he was comfortable
and doing well. After awhile, however, we took him
out. From a careful examination, I concluded that the
case was not a very serious one. I gave what further
attention I thought necessary, and left, promising to
call the next day.
I hurry on to Selembanga, where a large party of
men and women are busily working at a road, de-
signed to open up a thoroughfare through PeH. On
my arrival, Manambalea placed himself on a large
stone, feeling rather proud of the fact that this obstruc-
tion had been effectually rolled off the road. A
heathen chief from Tongariki, Samaki by name, stood
behind him, smoking his pipe. He was obviously
much interested in the road-making enterprise.


Returning home, I find everything going on very
much as usual. Our children had been down into
the village with some of the native women, to look
at the new babies. It had become a very common
tning for them to make such visits ; and the mothers
were pleased, as well as were our little girls. Dinner
ROAD-MAKING ON TONGOA.
(Heathen Chief from Tongariki looking on.)
was waiting my return. Our flock of about 100 goats
was coming in from the bush; the cows too were
in their stalls, looking quiet and satisfied. A number
of women were busy on one side of our verandahs
sewing their dresses ; another crowd of natives waited
on the other verandah. These latter had come from
§elembanga ; but Mrs. Michelsen had been too long
with her sewing-class to attend to them, They were


cooking a dish of rice, and enjoying the delay. Two
members of the sewing-class were also preparing rice.
So we sat down to our dinner with feelings of satis-
faction that all near and around us had been provided
for. One thing, however, was a burden on my mind—
the forenoon had passed without my getting any
translation work done. So I sent word down to my
Tasiko pundits to hold themselves in readiness—to
come and help me immediately after dinner. Between
the women who had come to sew their dresses, and
the Selembanga people desiring to sell their produce,
my wife, too, had her hands full. Indeed, she was kept
very busy until four o’clock, when the bell rang for her
writing-class.
When daylight failed me, I dismissed my pundits,-
and went out for half an hour’s work in our flower
garden. When called for tea, I brought with me a
handful of love-apples, vulgarly called tomatoes. A
dish of boiled pumpkin tops, slightly stewed with a
little cocoanut cream, and a beautiful mealy yam, were
placed on the table ; also home-made bread, home-made
butter, and home-made sponge-cake, and a home-made
cup of tea—all of them such as can only be got at
home , and are best enjoyed in the company of one’s
own dear wife and children. Everything seemed com-
plete ; but the love-apples had not been placed on
the table. They were soon brought, and then we
could wish for nothing more to make up domestic
happiness. Blessed is the man who has a happy home!
Whilst the table was being cleared, a few pleasant
minutes were spent with my two little girls—one on
each knee—looking at a- picture-book just arrived in


a “ mission-box ” from New Zealand. There being no
natives waiting to be attended to, we were able to
have worship with our children. Then they were put
to bed; and I sat down to refresh myself witn\a look
at The Christian —a friend in New Zealand having sent
me his copies for an entire year.
The table was cleared, the children were in bed, and
native servants were busy over their tea. Another
mission-box was opened, for our friends had been
very generous this time, and had sent us two. Now
is one of those happy hours which only a missionary
knows ! A flat parcel is taken from the box. It is
turned over, and we read, “ From Mr. S.’s children—
for the children.” We spontaneously remark, “ Poor
things ! won’t they be pleased to see another lot of
picture-books ! ” Then comes a heavy parcel of printed
fabrics. “ For the mission-box, with many prayers and
best wishes, from Mrs. J. L.” Another with similar ex-
planations. Here is a tin. It is pulled out and opened.
It contains a well-frosted cake; but on the top of
this is a small slip of paper, which is, indeed, to us
the most valuable part. On it is written, “To Mrs,
Michelsen, with kind love and best wishes, from
Mrs. T.” And so on. Then we lift something special—
a suit of clothes. The inscription is ; “ For Manam-
balea, with best wishes, and prayers that he may long
be spared to help in the good work.” Another parcel—
“ For Mrs. Michelsen and the children.” Tinware,
boxes of pocket knives, jews’ harps, two large axes,
and a few dresses for native women, make up the
multitude of gifts from Christian friends. Most of
the articles are valuable in themselves ; others are of


double value on account of the kind words sent with
them.
By the time everything is put away, we find it past
ten o’clock, and we feel a need for some refreshment.
A little water is heated on the kerosene stove, and
what has been called “Tongoa Toddy” is made. For
the benefit of those who are not abstainers, I may
explain how this most invigorating drink is compounded.
Take less than half a cup of good goat’s milk ; one
or two heaped teaspoonfuls of oatmeal—real Scotch
and fresh ; then a little sugar ; and—fill up with hot
water. Nothing more is required to make a palatable,
refreshing, and nourishing drink. Every drinker of this
“ toddy ” will have to find out for himself how much he
can take of it, without disturbing his sleep ; otherwise,
we guarantee—" no headache.” While enjoying our
“ toddy ” we go over the mission-box again in con-
versation, and come to the conclusion that our friends
have not forgotten us after all.
The next day begins very much as already described;
except that I am not called away, and can go on with
my translation work. This goes very well until I
come to the words “deliver up” (Matt. x. 21). I look
at the Ngunese version ; it does not seem to me to be
satisfactory. I ask the pundits to give me that in
Tasiko. They do so. The result sounds even worse
than the Ngunese. Several places where the same
word is used are looked up ; the idea required to be
expressed is carefully explained to the pundits; and
they suggest a word which is all that could be wished
for one place, but when used in another passage it is
found not to suit. A number of words are tried, and
G


one after another is rejected as failing to express the
sense adequately. No satisfactory solution of the
difficulty is arrived at, so the subject is left till
the following day. This is no isolated instance of the
difficulties encountered in the work of translating the
Scriptures for the islanders. Frequently much time
is spent in arriving at a correct rendering of the Inspired
Word.
Just at this time my wife informs me that we have
nothing for to-morrow’s dinner. I hasten to the goat-
herd to see if there is a kid suitable for our purpose.
The act of killing is performed by a native boy, and
Ido the more scientific part of the butcher’s work. By
the time I am ready, tea is waiting.
Arrangements having been made for the baptism of a
number of natives, some men and women have called
in order to have a private conversation with me during
the evening. Tea over, I examined them individually
on the fundamental doctrines of sin and salvation ; and
in most cases received very satisfactory answers. In
some instances I found that the replies to certain ques-
tions had been “got off” between the candidates. I
therefore put my questions in unexpected terms; but
as a rule, after the examination, I formed opinions very
similar to those of the native teachers, who had a more
particular knowledge of the individual character and
life. The whole evening is thus occupied; my wife
being engaged in putting the children to bed, setting
the bread, and writing letters to friends far away.
The next morning I have to make an unusually early
start—to be up at one of the bush villages in time
for school. I arrive shortly after the proceedings have


opened; and, some time before reaching the place, I hear
a shrill voice saying “ ba" and a deep bass voice repeat-
ing the word. Then I hear “ be” then “ bi,” then “bo,”
and so on. More or less throughout the school similar
spelling exercises are in progress ; and the attendants,
as usual, range from the oldest man to the youngest
BUSH SCHOOL HOUSE, EUTA, TONGOA.
child. School is opened and closed with singing and
prayer.
On looking round, I find that some of the “ pupils ”
are repeating portions of Scripture; there are among
them aged folk who can quote several long passages
of the Word of God, which they have learned by this
process, although unable themselves to read a single
word. To find things proceeding in this rough and


ready, somewhat scampish, way, did not surprise me;
for the natives have continually to be checked in their
teaching operations, which appeal excessively to the
ear, and too little to the eye. Gaining attention, I
give the school a short lecture on the art of teaching
and learning. Routine work being continued, there is
half an hour’s reading. After this I examine them in
a simple Scripture catechism. Here they do better ;
every one can answer the questions perfectly —by
whatever means they had learnt the subject. Subse-
quently I give an address of about a quarter of an hour,
specially dealing with the answers that have been given
during the catechizing. After school there is more or
less of a feeling for some additional reading, so several
of the scholars sit down outside the building for this
purpose.
Less than an hour’s walk brings me to Selembanga,
where four or five natives are waiting for me. The
erection of a new church is no small undertaking, and
for a long time preparations had been in hand. The
material—Australian hard wood—had been got from
Sydney, whilst the rafters were of Norwegian fir. The
native assistants had shown themselves quite expert
with saw, chisel, and hammer, and to-day the whole
village was called together for the crowning event.
The side walls—sixty feet long by twelve feet high—
were, to the great astonishment even of those who did
the deed, lifted bodily and placed in position; and
then, amid rejoicings, the ends were raised and fastened,
making the building thirty-three feet wide. Thus the
edifice was reared in one day. I returned in the evening,
about eight o’clock, perhaps feeling, no less than the


people of Selembanga, that a good day’s work had been
done.
I was hoping, after a late tea, to spend the remainder
of the evening quietly. About 9.30, however, we were
startled by calls from the distance. I went out on the
verandah to hear what it was, and distinguished voices
on the sea calling out “ Nakdpu ! nakdpu ! ” (Fire !
fire!) It was a boat from Emae, with a little com-
pany on board who had been rowing for hours against a
strong current, and were wanting to see the landing-
place ; hence their call for a light. The people of
the village, as well as some from the mission station,
have heard the, call, and fire brands are speedily seen
moving from all quarters down towards the beach.
The boat is soon ashore, and the Tongoans give the
visitors a hearty welcome, assisting them in every way
possible. The luggage includes baskets of shells,
brought to the mission station for sale, and baskets
of yam to serve as presents to friends. Ascertaining
the fact that visitors had come, we ordered that a pot
of rice should be cooked. In due course the strangers
reached the mission station, which is about three-
quarters of a mile from the shore. Men and women
came into the house to press our hands, and then we
learned the character of their principal business. A
couple wished to be married, and as Emae was under
my charge during the absence of Rev. Peter Milne in
New Zealand, it was desired that I should tie the knot.
After supper, a teacher and a few others from Emae
engaged us in conversation regarding the work of God.
It was near midnight when we retired to rest, happy


in the thought that the Emae party was hospitably
entertained.
The week’s work being ended, the much-needed Day
of Rest has come. Whilst firmly believing in all the
Ten Commandments as the unalterable law of God for
the life of man on earth, I have always endeavoured to
make the sweet memorial of our Lord’s Resurrection
to dawn upon the Tongoans as a holy privilege for the
people of God, rather than as a stern ordinance from
the Judge of all the earth. This latter aspect cannot,
of course, be entirely overlooked ; and it must be made
clear to the people that we are commanded to keep
the day holy. It has been our wont to observe the
day in the way that would be most glorifying to God,
and most for the spiritual benefit of the people. We do
not by any means lay down a strict rule about taking
nothing but cold food, nor how much is to be cooked ;
but we teach them to do as little work as is consistent
with health and a fair amount of comfort. The result,
I feel sure, is that the day is bright and happy, and
that the enjoyment of it is more in the sweetness of
holy exercises than in mere rest and exemption from
work.
There being no school on the Lord’s Day, the people
rest a little longer than usual. At sunrise a few small
yams or breadfruits are soon baked, which make the
principal part of the breakfast. Besides this, we always
give all who are staying on the station a cup of tea
and a piece of bread, so as to reduce their cooking to
a minimum. In every hut is heard the voice of song
and praise. Then one may see some reading, and
others getting themselves dressed for church. At


nine o’clock the churches are filled with worshippers.
The service lasts about an hour and a half, and after-
wards the people gather themselves into small groups
in various houses, and have a hymn and prayer. That
over, a good while is spent reading the Word of God.
While my wife returns to the station with the children,
to give them some instruction, a few of the natives—
perhaps some five or six—gather round me, and follow
me on my preaching tour round the island. This, of
course, is a most interesting, though very fatiguing,
work. I have no fixed plan for this tour. I consider
the weather, my own strength, and the need of the
villages.
As a rule, I return to my station some time after
dark, having walked and preached continuously from
nine o’clock in the morning. Whatever the day has
been to others on the island, it has been no day of
rest to me. Tea is waiting; but I cannot take it.
Two or three sips must suffice; and, after twenty
minutes’ rest and a warm bath, I am revived, and able
to join my family at the table.
Whilst the day has been thus with me, some of the
native teachers have been moving about on similar
errands, and other converts have been rendering such
assistance as lies within their power. At the mission
station, in the afternoon, there is Sabbath-school, and,
in the evening, a native teacher conducts public
worship in the church.


CHAPTER XII.
An Anexperted Cloud.
Jane Langmuir—Parentage and Training—Missionary’s Wife and
Helpmeet—Devotion to the Mission—“I am so Unworthy!”—
Departure “to be with Christ.”
fW ENTION has already been made in a note on
W P a S? e 5 7 °f the sad bereavement which has
ia. quite recently befallen Mr. Michelsen. The
P* deceased lady was a true helpmeet in the
” work on Tongoa, and this story of perils
and triumphs must of necessity include a sketch of her
life from the pen of her bereaved husband :
My beloved wife was the daughter of John Langmuir,
who was the son of a farmer near Paisley. Having learned
the business of a gardener and florist, and married an
Irish lady, he went to Australia about 1838. For many
years they lived near Melbourne, and had a large family,
whom they nurtured in the fear of God. After about
twenty years’ residence in Victoria, they removed to
New Zealand, in order that their youngest daughter,
Jane, might have the benefit of a more bracing climate.
They settled near Dunedin, and the change was bene-
ficial in the sense desired.


In Scotland John Langmuir had been connected with
the Established Church; in New Zealand he became
connected with Christians known as “ Brethren ” ; whilst
his children attended the Presbyterian Sabbath School,
and some of them became teachers there. In 1877 he
THE LATE MRS. MICHELSEN, WITH THIRD CHILD.
passed to his rest, aged about 66, leaving a widow
and six children—three sons and three daughters—
to lament their loss. Some of these had already
left home, and others were soon to do so. At length,
Jane alone remained to sweeten the home of the lonely
widow.
I had seen her often with her father at the Dep6t of


the New Zealand Bible, Tract, and Book Society, at
Dunedin. She was rather slender, and looked excep-
tionally thoughtful for her age—then a girl of seventeen.
I cannot say that I thought then that she would be-
come my wife. But no one could help noticing one of
her age , enjoying so much the company of Christians
of mature experience. A word I once heard from a
young lady friend and companion of hers, did much to
awaken my interest in Jane. I said, “Those Langmuirs
seem very nice Christian people.” “Yes,” she said,“and
particularly the youngest.”
In 1878 I left New Zealand for the mission-field.
After spending a year on Nguna, I went to Tongoa to
commence a mission by myself. A lonely European
among a thousand savages, I could not remain alone.
Indeed, a very unpoetic resolution was passed by the
Synod in Otago, that I should take a trip up to the
colonies to be married and ordained ! The second of
these could easily be done, and 1 felt confident that
the Lord would help me also regarding the other.
There was no lack of friends who were ready to give
me advice and help if needed. My mind was directed
to the sweet Christian girl I had seen every day on
her way to the High School in Dunedin, and who
had often visited the Book Society’s sale room. I laid
my proposal before her. She had two difficulties—
one was that she did not think she was fit for such
a work; and the other, that she thought of her
duties to her aged mother, who had no one else with
her. She said nothing about the cannibals; an objection
which I might well have expected, as she had a few
days previously been present at a meeting at which I


had given harrowing accounts of cannibalism. Indeed,
some candid friends had cautioned me : “ If you wish to
find a wife, you had better not say anything about the
cannibals.” My argument was, that I wanted a wife
who would be prepared to meet anything for Jesus.
When I saw her again, she said she was prepared to
go if her mother was agreeable ; but she felt it her duty
to submit to her mother in this matter, as it meant
leaving her alone. I shall never forget the moment
when her dear old mother gave me her reply. With
trembling voice she explained to me how that Jennie
had been her only comfort in widowhood—now about
thirteen years—and that, more than ever, she needed
some one with her. It was not a question with her
whether her daughter would make a good match or not.
The case stood before her mind thus;—The Lord had
asked for her, and although she had no one dearer on
earth, she could not keep her from Him. She knew
quite well that she would go away to live among the
South Sea cannibals, of which the people of the colonies
had heard so much; so that an account of her daughter
being devoured by them would be no surprise.
After the dear old lady had given her consent, I felt
exceedingly unhappy about taking her daughter from
her. The weeks soon passed away, however, and I
have no doubt they seemed too short altogether for the
poor mother. When she stood on the wharf to bid us
farewell, and felt that she could do no more for the
child for whom great sacrifices had been made, and
who, in turn, had been such a comfort to her, she
called after me between her sobs and tears; “Take
care of my daughter.” I tried to smile as kindly as I


could, and told her that her guarantee was that she
was now my wife. Ido not think she knew what I said,
but I heard her say: “Yes, you may smile .. .”
When others had left the wharf, she remained to lift
up her feeble arm, to wave her handkerchief to the
daughter whom she scarcely expected to see again.
My young wife landed on Tongoa amid the stormy
rejoicings of the native women. Natives came from all
parts of the island to see the lady missionary, and even
Malakaleo seemed quite moved when listening to her
playing on the organ. The chilly, unhomely house
was soon turned into a happy home. Cleanliness,
order, and brightness, became impressive elements in
the new order of things. When returning from a
fatiguing tour over the island there was a warm bath,
a tidy table, a well-cooked meal, and a loving recep-
tion—a very different state of things from that which
obtained a year before. I was often calling to mind
some words of Rev. Dr. Inglis before I left Dunedin ;
“ You need not think of working in the New Hebrides
without a wife. Many will remind you that you should
find a lady with a teacher’s certificate, and all that sort
of thing. My advice is: ‘Get a good wife.’ You will
have to do most of the teaching; but a good wife will
make your life easier, and thus enable you to do more
work. She will also save you from an endless variety of
trivial things which you otherwise would have to do.”
Months and years were made bright and happy, and
the wisdom of the worthy Doctor’s remarks abundantly
verified. Not that she was deficient in the art of
teaching, nor that she did not do it. She did much
in this direction, and also instructed the women in


sewing and housekeeping ; she was an excellent house-
keeper and cook. But her help to me lay mainly in
making home comfortable and happy, and in being a
true and wise companion and counsellor.
This beloved helpmeet has now been taken from me ;
therefore I can speak with freedom of her worth. In
all possible ways she shared my responsibilities and
anxieties. She carried on a Sabbath School, as it might
be called—a class for the young. To her disappointment,
at first, she found that several of the better instructed
young men of the village attended. Feeling that they
received useful instruction, they continued to come, and
in increasing numbers. She was almost invariably with
me on my voyages from island to island ; and if ever
she thought I might be in danger, she insisted on being
with me. When a savage lifted his gun at me to fire,
she appeared on the scene ; as she afterwards said, she
thought it was time for her to come out too. Her
presence saved my life.
As a doctor she was an important acquisition to the
mission. She had little faith in what generally passes
for orthodox physic; in difficult cases she generally
consulted all the books within reach, and then took
the course which commended itself to her own judg-
ment. Though I was supposed to be the doctor, I
always had a private consultation with her before
treating any case involving special care.
She loved singing, but had not a strong voice. Two
of her favourite hymns were those beginning :
“At the feet of Jesus, listening to His word;”
and
“ When peace like a river attendeth my way.”


It was in London, on December 30th, 1892, that she
was called home. She had given birth to a little boy,
and was hoping to recover her usual strength ; but
fever supervened, and in a few days her course on
earth was finished. She had almost a painful sense of
her own unworthiness. The day before she died, she
asked my pardon that she, who was so unworthy and
unfit, had had the presumption to go with me to the
mission-field. It was her earnest desire and prayer
that the Lord would give her another opportunity to
serve Him more faithfully than she had done. I re-
minded her of the perfect goodness and the love of God,
whereupon she exclaimed, “ Yes, He is so good—so
good ! ” but with a tone which implied what she so
often had said, “ and I am so unworthy.” She loved
the work with her whole soul, and while on furlough often
remarked : “ I wish we were home again on Tongoa.”
When I told her not to be troubled about her four
little ones, as I was sure the Lord would care for them,
she said, “ I am not the least troubled about them; I
know He will care for them.” Again, when I asked her
to forgive me any unkind word I might have said to her
at any time, she replied, “ Yes—everything” ; and added
in an energetic voice, “ God bless you I ”
Towards the end of her pilgrimage, she often sang,
with much feeling :
“ Master, the tempest is raging !
The billows are tossing high.”
When she felt the surging billows of Jordan around
her, I read the hymn to her. On coming to the chorus:
“The winds and the waves shall obey My will,
Peace / be still!”


her soul seemed as if it were on the other side already.
She exclaimed in a strange and distant voice, “Yes;
oh yes! ” Though naturally rather timid, it may be
testified of her that she lived out the counsel of the
lines :
“Where duty calls or danger,
Be never wanting there.”
Her mother had the joy of seeing Jennie just once
after first bidding her farewell. That was in 1884. She
was hoping soon to embrace her again ; but has survived
to hear of her daughter’s departure “ to be with Christ.”
For each and all of us there is the consolation ; “ Neither
death nor life...shall be able to separate us from the
love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.”


CHAPTER XIII.
Cannibalism and its Horrors.
The Motives of Cannibalism—Deeds of Horror, and Tales
of Woe.
ME horrors of cannibalism cannot be realized
by written descriptions. Mr. Michelsen’s
missionary career from the first has been in
the midst of people sunk to this depth of
degradation.
What is the motive of cannibalism? Unquestionably
the depraved appetite of fallen man, in his lowest
estate, is gratified by the taste of human flesh. The
chief of Pele, an island near Nguna, once remarked :
“ Pig’s flesh is bad, and human flesh is good.” This
is a declaration of the comparative excellence of the
latter as estimated by the cannibals themselves.
Another motive is a wish to show how entirely they
can vanquish their enemies; they make food of them!
Malakaleo, the chief, who was so bitterly opposed to
the Gospel at first, answered a message from his enemies
with the threat —“We will eat you!” In the old days


there were no feasts so high as those at which human
flesh was partaken of.*
One day, while Mr. Michelsen was helping Mr.
Milne on Nguna, news arrived of a fearful murder
having been committed on the island of Efate, the other
side of Nguna Bay. The two missionaries repaired to
the spot, and ascertained the facts. A number of
natives from the island of Makura had arrived in
Efate, just opposite Nguna, to dig some taumako , a
vegetable similar in appearance to the potato. The
chief who instigated and led in the murder, had been
among Europeans, in Queensland and elsewhere, for
thirteen years, and could speak English well! He
denied having killed any one; but while the words
were in his mouth, evidences of his guilt were forth-
coming. In the surf on the beach lay the trunk of a
human body; in a canoe alongside was the head ; and
the arms and legs were roasting on a fire in the
neighbouring village.
Confronted with proofs of his crime, the brutal fellow
readily excused himself. The things said by the mis-
sionaries were quite right and good for the white man,
but they do not suit the black man! Accompanying
the missionaries was Matakoale, a Christian chief from
Nguna. Stepping forward at this juncture, and laying
* Next in honour as food came the pig, which is to-day held in
high esteem on the island. Pigs and fowls (and no other animals)
multiply in every village. When a man bought a wife in the old
days, he would pay for her in so many pigs—ten or fifteen, accord-
ing to assessed value. It was customary to sacrifice both classes
of animals to the spirits. Pigs so devoted were killed by a knock
on the head, and not by being bled. When Christianity began to
make head-way, the question came into vogue—“ Is the pig bled or
not ? ” If bled, there was no heathenism about it.
H


his hand on his breast, this man said: “ I am a black
man, and I know that Christianity suits me.”
Seeing they could accomplish nothing, the mission-
aries left for the mission station in the boat which had
conveyed them across the bay. When a short distance
out from land, they saw a procession along the beach.
The body of a man, lashed to a stick, was being carried
by two persons. A shell* was blown, and some young
men went in front, swinging spears over their heads.
This was in bravado of the act of murder. Others
followed, filled with the same evil spirit. When the
true facts came to light, the worst fears were realized ;
for several persons had been killed, and the bodies were
sent as presents to friends !
The crime was excused by the statement that, some
time previously, a number of natives of Epi, working
for a planter on Efate, had stolen his boat, in order to
make their way home. While passing Makura, they
were induced by the natives to go ashore, and forth-
with were murdered and eaten. The chief of Makura,
on whose order this horrid deed was committed, was
the man whose mutilated body the missionaries found
in the surf at Efate, as just described. Thus the act
was one of revenge. It was also explained that the
Makura men on a previous visit had taken some earth
with them from Efate, and by means of it, i.e., by
incantation, had caused a drought from which the
islands were then suffering!
* A conch shell. Sometimes these are about a foot in length—
two shells being joined together. They are capable of producing
an alarming roar.


CHAPTER XIV.
Three Tongoan Martyrs.
Not “Moved Away”—Manoai’s Firmness—A Bush Tragedy—
The Last Cannibal Feast.
«HORTLY after the second break-up of the
Panita station, it became necessary for Mr.
and Mrs. Michelsen to take a trip to New
Zealand. No sooner had they left the island,
than the chief of Panita caused one of his
men, who would not be removed away from the faith
of the Gospel, to be shot. That man, though simple
and uninfluential, was the first martyr in the island.
The second witness unto blood was also shot during
the missionary’s absence. There was an elderly man at
Selembanga, named Manoai, a decided and earnest
Christian. He was too old to be sent out as a teacher;
when, however, he heard of the missionary’s intention
to leave the island for a time, he asked what he could
do to advance the work. He was glad to receive
instructions to visit the refugee Epians daily, to see
that they attended school, and otherwise to exercise


an influence for Christ among them. This charge he
kept faithfully so long as he lived.
He did not live long, however. One of the bitterest
enemies of the Gospel in the village was a man with
whom, as a heathen, Manoai was formerly on friendly
terms. This man, hating the light, conceived a hatred
for his former friend ; and meeting him one morning
in the road, inquired where he was going. Manoai’s
answer was, that he was about to visit the Epians. His
enemy knew the religious object of the visit, and at
once declared his intention to shoot his Christian
neighbour.
“ You may do as you like about that,” said Manoai.
“You can kill my body, but you cannot do any more ;
my soul shall go to heaven.” Manoai stood still, looking
his opponent in the face. The murderous threat was at
once put into execution !
The third martyr sealed his life-testimony about five
years ago, under singular circumstances. Many years
previously, when the village of Pele was at war with
another, one of the wives of the chief fled to Kurumambe,
her native place. She had her infant boy with her.
After the war, the chief insisted upon his wife’s return ;
and she went back, leaving her boy at Kurumambe.
As he grew up, he was in the habit of visiting Pele,
where he had free access, as the then ruling chief,
Marimaraki, was his half-brother.
The young man’s name was Bulilio, and in the course
of time he confessed Christ. Of an earnest disposition,
whenever he went to Pele, he preached the Gospel to
his kinsmen and others. This gave great annoyance to
the chief, who at length decided to put an end to it.


He instructed his men to shoot him ; and this was
done as he was passing through the bush from the
village. The young man ran some distance, and then
fell. It was thought that he had escaped; but some
days later the body was found in a state of decom-
position.
What followed shows the ferocity of Marimaraki.
When the corpse was conveyed into Pele, the people
said: “ Let us not eat this man ; he is one of our
own—brother of the chief.” The chief himself replied,
“ If you will not eat him, I shall.”
Not having the moral courage to insist upon burial,
the people assented to the proposal. Mr. and Mrs.
Michelsen, at Lumbukuti, saw the smoke of the enor-
mous fire which was kindled for the purpose of roasting
the corpse.
This was the last martyr on Tongoa for the faith of
Christ. And it was the last cannibal feast on the island !


O far as they are capable of being grouped
together, the superstitions of Tongoa make
up a system of fear. It was held to be
ifc-fiY necessary continually to appease the wrath
of the “spirits.”
Tongoan superstitions, for just twice in the year,
acknowledged an omnipotent Creator. In the times of
planting (about October-November) prayer was offered
for His blessing ; and at the gathering of the first-fruits
(about February) thanks were offered to Him for His
bounty. Doubtless the spirits were recognised here
also ; but yet the truth remains that, with all their
darkness and ignorance, the Tongoans admitted the
witness of God, that He “gave rain from heaven and
fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and glad-
ness ” (Acts xiv. 17).
CHAPTER XV.
Native Superstitions: A Religion of Dread.
Native Acknowledgment of the Creator—"Sacred” Men-
Kaimasi, or Witchcraft—Other Cruel Customs—Fear of
“Deceiving Spirits.”


Every village had its sacred man, who was sometimes
a chief. He undertook many functions: sacrificing to the
spirits, to avert their anger, on behalf of sick persons;
and practising Kaimasi (a kind of witchcraft), to com-
pass the evil, or bring about the death, of obnoxious
individuals. Sometimes these occupations were in very
skilful hands. Cases of sacred women are less common.
One at the village of Fila, on Efate, was so powerful
that she kept Christianity back several years by her
enchantments.
Samori, the chief of Voitasi, a small village on Tongoa,
was the representative of a once influential family,
which also held chieftainship on Emae. Amongst
sacred chiefs, his position was so high that he was called
“the Son of God.” Addressing him on the subject of
Christianity, Mr. Michelsen reminded him that, being
“ the Son of God,” he ought to be the foremost to accept
the Gospel! When the man showed a procrastinating
disposition, he was asked whether, in case he were living
away from home, a letter from his father would not
secure his utmost attention. He replied in the affirmative;
whereupon Mr. Michelsen told him that he was the
bearer of a message from God. Feeling the force of the
argument, the chief replied, with regard to his pre-
tensions : “ I am only joking.” If he had maintained
his claims, he would have felt compelled either to accept
or to reject the message brought by the missionary.
The practice of Kaimasi , which is similar to the
Nahak of Tanna, is essentially witchcraft, and is very
mischievous. It is believed that, by becoming possessed
of remnants of what a man has eaten, or of anything


that has come from him, his death may be caused
When the sacred man buries the remnant or morsel, the
unsuspecting man’s death-warrant is sealed ! Therefore,
if a native sucks sugar-cane, he is careful to retain the
fibre for destruction when he gets home. Again, if a
native is away from his own village, and eats bananas,
he takes home all he does not consume, so as not to
come under the power of actual or possible enemies.
Thus, in many circles, fear and revenge become the
warp and woof of social life.
Death from a natural cause was no part of the creed
of Tongoa before the missionary gave the people the
Gospel. If a man died, some one had caused his
death—that was at once fact and argument. Aged
believers to-day relate many illustrative occurrences.
Here is one :
About thirty years ago, the chief of Selembanga died,
probably of consumption. After consultation with
soothsayers, it was “ ascertained ” that the death had
been caused by the people of Purau, another village.
Of course the act must be avenged ! After the days
of mourning—probably a hundred days—the people
of Purau were invited to attend a feast at Selembanga.
Nothing suspecting, they went, and a carousal followed.
In the middle of the night, while engaged in a dance
of the vile character usual on such occasions, the
people of Purau were suddenly set upon by their
treacherous “ friends.” About forty men were slain.
Cannibal feasts were afterwards held, bodies being
sent in all directions to acquaintances and friends of
the murderers. Moreover, the people of a village on


the island of Epi, to the north, were invited over to
Selembanga to help to eat the victims of the mas-
sacre.*
The chief Malakaleo had an only daughter, whom he
loved dearly. She sickened and died. To show his
affection for her, he ordered that two of his wives should
be buried alive in her grave. Thus the departed one
would have, in the spirit-world, companions who would
attend to her requirements. The poor women appealed
in vain to the chief; he was deaf to all entreaties for
mercy, as also were other men of influence who were
visiting at the house of mourning. Malakaleo himself
struck them with clubs, and drove them into the grave ;
and thus his decision was carried into effect.
Though the savage heart was not touched by the
cries of his sacrificed wives, Malakaleo’s conscience was
not at ease after the terrible event. He always imagined
that their spirits were about the place, and that they
threw stones into the house at night. So, regularly, at
the close of the day, he hung a basket of food outside,
for them to partake of should they desire! Even then
the miserable man was haunted with the notion that
his,wives were avenging his cruelty. So he ordered
his other wives to fence off the house in which they
were buried ; for, as is often the case, the grave was
in one of the family houses. The incident shows that
in dark Torigoa, with all its brutality, there was a real
bondage arising from fear of death and dread of the
dead.
* To this very feast came the old Epian chief who was after-
wards, with his people, rescued from cannibals, as related ip
Chapter IX. (page 79).


The story has already been told of some families who
were rescued from cannibals on the island of Epi, and
cared for at the Selembanga station. The son of the
chief, the object of all the family hopes, died. Though
he owed his life to Christians on Tongoa, the old man
was not at the time so weaned from the cruelties of
native superstition as to have mercy upon his wife.
According to custom, he determined that she should be
buried with the boy.
Mr, Michelsen describes what followed :—-
“ I entered the house just as the old man was getting
hold of his gun. When I took that weapon from him,
he seized an axe, hoping to do his heartless work there-
with. I took the axe also out of his hands. He raved
with anger; and while I reasoned with him, he put his
fingers in his ears. As he would listen to no argument,
and was deaf to all appeal, I sent for some Christian
natives, and instructed them to take the wife under their
protection until the youth had been buried. This was
done, and the woman’s life was saved.”
Here is another tale of cruelty :
The chief Tarisaliu, of Purau, and his people, notor-
ious as thieves and ruffians, incurred the displeasure of
nearly every tribe on the island. Settling near Lum-
bukuti, and placing himself under the protection of the
chief, he sought to cement the subsisting friendship by
a horrid deed. One day, out walking, he saw in front
of him an old woman belonging to his own village.
He took his gun and shot her dead, sending her body
to the chief as an expression of his affection !


“ Laying the spirits ” was a serious matter. On a
report that spirits had been seen about, there was
nothing to be done but to discharge a goodly quantity
of gunpowder in the locality. Whether as an act of
defiance towards the spirits, or as a menace to more
substantial intruders, this measure had the reputation
of being eminently satisfactory. The trust of the
natives was, in a very emphatic sense, in the gun;
although they all grieved at times over its ravages in
their family circles.
In the following incident the missionary illustrates
the popular fear of “ spirits ” :
“ One evening, during the year spent on Nguna, I
had been over to Efate with three natives. Just as we
came out of the narrow boat passage at Havannah
Harbour on to Nguna Bay, we saw a squall coming
up from the west. We hoped to be across the Bay
before this would reach us; and as the sun was just
setting, we could not afford to wait. The squall over-
took us, however, much sooner than we anticipated ;
a heavy sea came in, and darkness enveloped us.
“ The boat was fast being filled—it was only a small
craft that two men could easily carry—and we com-
mitted ourselves to Him who holds the waters in
the hollow of His hand. The sea and wind grew in
strength, until one of the natives was so paralysed
with fear that I was compelled to take his oar, and
ask him to steer. This arrangement had not long
been made when the man who was steering saw a
light on Nguna. This would certainly have guided
us to the coast, although it might also have led us


into a strong and dangerous current which ran along
the shore. The man, however, directed the boat away
from the light, which he concluded was a manifestation
from ‘deceiving spirits.’ We rowed for hours, not
knowing where we were.
“ About twelve or one o’clock we heard breakers, and
I moderated the rowing, lest we should be swallowed
up. When able to see more clearly, I recognised the
outline of Efate near the point from which we had
started ! We followed the land, and before we knew
of it, we found ourselves in a great calm. We were
back in the boat passage from which we had started
some six hours previously!
“ Then I learned how it was we had toiled in vain ;
for the superstitious man took credit for not being
misled by the ‘ deceiving spirits.’ Moreover, I was
satisfied that his ignorance had been overruled to the
saving of our lives; for, if we had attempted to land
at Nguna in such a sea, we might have been drowned
by the swamping of the boat.”


CHAPTER XVI.
Two Wrecks: a Contrast.
The First: attended with Plunder and Cannibal Designs—The
Second : the Occasion of Kindly Hospitality.
,
tYEAR or so after the mission station was
established at Selembanga, the Queensland
labour trader Chance sailed round Tongoa, and
her boats called at the village. A young man
'fOv who was a servant at the mission house went
on board with the intention of going to Queensland.
The missionary despatched a note to the captain,
requesting him to send the lad back. He added the
words: “If the boy is not sent back, I will see to it
that he comes back.” The meaning was not obvious;
but Mr. Michelsen was mindful of the fact that it was
contrary to the provisions of the Queensland Labour
Act to remove a white man’s servant.
The message vexed the captain very much, and he
sent the young man ashore ; but at the same time
made strenuous efforts to carry off several scholars
of the Mission. In this he succeeded. Exceedingly
grieved, the missionary prayed the Lord yet to send
back the youths that were thus going beyond his reach.
In conversation with some of the natives, he told them


what he thought of the Queensland traffic ; and added :
“ If some should insist upon going, do not go in the
Chance ; because I know she is a dangerous vessel, and
will go down some day. It has, in fact, been reported
to me that her plates are as thin as a sixpence! ”
There the matter was left; and Mr. Michelsen hardly
expected to hear more_ of it. The next day, to his
surprise, he saw one of the scholars whose departure
he had begun to lament approaching the mission sta-
tion. Inquiring, “ Are you paid off already ?” he was
answered ; “ Yes ; and we paid ourselves ! ” The youth
then explained that the ship had gone on the rocks near
the heathen village of Mangarisu; but that the people
there had stopped them from proceeding earlier to the
station, as they were plundering the ship, and did not
wish the missionary to interfere.
Accompanied by Manambalea, Mr. Michelsen at once
walked over to Mangarisu. Before they got down to
the beach, they met a number of natives carrying
bundles of axes, cases of tobacco, rolls of calico, tins
of preserved meat, gin, gunpowder, and other com-
modities of “civilization.” Questioned respecting their
conduct, they paid little attention ; they had made
great hauls, and were excited and beyond control.
The captain and ship’s crew—some of them under the
influence of intoxicants—walked up to Meriu, where
there was a schoolhouse, in which they sought refuge.
Meanwhile, the Mangarisu men were engaged in a
consultation about slaying and eating the strangers.
As many of the white men as were sufficiently sober to
walk, accepted hospitality at the mission station, and the
others were given into the care of trustworthy men.


So the island was spared what might have proved a
cannibal feast of a specially tragic type. One of the
sailors explained that, as fast as the goods were con-
veyed ashore, the people carried them off.
The agent of the Queensland Government, an excep-
tionally refined man, sailing in the Chance , transferred
the fire-arms to a boat, and brought them to Selembanga.
Many of the villagers were little more than heathen at
the time, and they thought this a splendid opportunity
to help themselves. Mrs. Michelsen, having seen the
boat, appeared on the scene just in time; ordered the
restoration of every piece that had been handled ; and
organized a band of women who carried the fire-arms
up to the mission station.
Ultimately the shipwrecked company was taken away
by another vessel, and landed safely at Queensland.
Another wreck-scene on the island is altogether
different. About five years later, in 1888, while the
head-quarters were at Lumbukuti, the Queensland ship
Madeleine left her moorings, and was blown ashore in a
hurricane. The contents were safely lodged in Mr.
Michelsen’s boat-house, the natives rendering all the
help in their power. The captain proceeded in a boat
to the island of Malekula, and invited other ships to
attend an auction sale on the beach at Lumbukuti.
This was held, and everything was sold. That captain
has never tired of acknowledging the hospitality shown
by the natives on the occasion.
The contrast is remarkable, and nothing need be said
to emphasize it. The difference is as between brutalized
heathens and Christianized men.


CHAPTER XVII.
How Tongoan Christians Die.
Manamoana’s Vision—Manaura’s Testimony—Tiabua's Paec.
fNE of the first of the natives to show an interest
in the Gospel was a Panita man named Mana-
moana. He was a quiet pleasant-looking
individual, and one day after a Gospel service,
said to the missionary, “O misi! these are
good words you are telling us. There is life
in them. Most of our people let them go into one
ear, but they also let them go out of the other. These
are not words we should allow to go out again.”
Mr. Michelsen rejoiced to see that the Word of God
was reaching the poor man’s heart, and was disposed to
anticipate help in the work from one who had thus
early become an attentive listener. He was sorry, how-
ever, not many weeks afterwards, to hear that the man
was seriously ill. Going to his house, he ascertained
the facts. Rather than talk about his health, however,
the man, pointing heavenwards, desired Mr. Michelsen
“to speak to the Great One up there.” After prayer,
he remarked : “ Oh, that is good ! Speak to Him again
for me.” This was done, and at his request again
repeated.


Frequent and prolonged visits were paid by the
missionary to the dying man, and the way of sal-
vation explained to his delighted soul. On the last
occasion, though very weak and exhausted, he suddenly
sprang up on the bed, and excitedly pointing to the
door, said : “ Don’t you see them ? ”
Mr. Michelsen asked : “ What do you see ? ”
Again pointing, he said : “ Do you not see the angels
there ? They have come for me.”
Mr. Michelsen, desirous of calming the man, said :
“ Wait a little ; your time has not yet come.”
Induced to lie down, Manamoana continued peering
through the door.
After a hasty dinner, Mr. Michelsen proceeded again
to the poor man’s house; but was no sooner outside than
he heard the familiar death-wail. The rapturous vision
of angel-hosts was speedily followed by Manamoana’s
spirit being recalled by “ the Great One up there.” At
the house the hired women-mourners were sitting round
the corpse, continuing their lamentations.
Manama* senior chief of Mangarisu, one of the party
who escorted Mr. Michelsen through the bush on the
occasion of the flight to Selembanga, had been a
notoriously wicked man. He had probably caused
more people to be killed and eaten than any other
man on the island in his generation. He was said to
have had as many as fifty wives. Should any one
offend him and flee from his village, a message fol-
lowed the fugitive, instructing the chief under whose
*He was a thin, hunchbacked man, with sharp features. He
occupies second place in the procession of engraving on page 67.
1


protection he might be to “ kill him and eat him ” !
Rather than insult Manaura, fellow-chiefs would un-
hesitatingly obey such a command.
On one occasion, in early life, a brother of this chief
aroused his wrath. Manaura sent to Selembanga—
where the culprit was living—orders that he should be
buried alive. Manambalea, his half-brother, who was
then but a boy of seven or eight years, was made to
hold the torch for the grave-digger in the man’s house—
a dark hut. The man was compelled to go into the
grave, and two of his wives went with him. All three
were buried alive! Such was Manaura’s influence as
a “ sacred ” chief, that no one dared to interfere. This
man’s life was made up of deeds of cruelty and blood.
At last he became very ill. At the request of Mr.
Michelsen, Manambalea invited his kinsman over to
Selembanga, in order that he might receive medical
attention at the mission house. The invitation was
accepted, and Manambalea conveyed him on his back.
Whilst, however, efforts to benefit the body failed,
other influences were more successfully brought to
bear upon him. By the blessing of God, Manaura was
led to repentance for his sins of ignorance and wicked-
ness, and to find in Jesus the Great Saviour whom he
needed.
When the old man’s son and other heathen friends
saw that death was near, they entered the mission
house by night and removed him. Their object was
to bury him with heathen rites and ceremonies. While
Manaura continued to live, both Manambalea and Mr.
Michelsen frequently visited him in his own village,
and were much cheered by what they saw and heard.


His son, however, did not cease to maintain the advan-
tage of being buried as “ a great chief,” rather than to
be put in the ground at the mission station with nothing
attending the proceedings beyond a religious service.
What was this in comparison with a feast—an eating
of pigs and a drinking of kava * —extending over at
least a hundred days !
Dressed in a garment with which the missionary had
presented him, the lingering invalid would come out
of his hut, and listen to the Word of God as it was
preached in the village. He also used his influence to
get others to listen. Sad to say, however, he never had
the opportunities for good which allowed of such vig-
orous action as he formerly showed in the service of
sin and Satan. This was his grief.
At last he died. During the closing moments, hea-
then acquaintances surrounded him, and talked of the
grand feast they would make in his honour after death.
Six months previously this would have carried his
sympathies, and have satisfied all his ambition. Now,
however, his only remark was—“ Jesus!” They told
him how much they wished him to die as he had
lived in former years—a heathen; and to be buried
with the same pomp and display as his ancestors.
Moreover, in the course of a year or two, a memorial
feast—such as never had been held before on Tongoa
for magnificence—would be held, with dancing and other
accompaniments. These things had no longer any
charm for Manaura, who answered every argument with
the word—“ Jesus!” No other name had in it the
music which could “refresh the soul in death” of that
• See description, page 136.


weary, worn-out—but penitent—sinner ! His friends
afterwards told the missionary: “He said just one
word—that word you always talk about—‘Jesus!’”
Tinabua, nephew of Malakaleo, was a firm friend of
the Mission ; and it was mainly through his influence
that the mission house was put up at Lumbukuti.
Quiet and thoughtful, slow to act and speak, and of a
peaceful disposition, he did not say much about Gospel-
work ; but his heart seemed increasingly drawn to the
Word of God.
Early in 1890. he was taken ill; and although it was
difficult to say that anything serious was the matter
with him, he grew weaker and weaker. On a bad cough
being followed by a condition which was hopeless, he
was told that his end was drawing near. He sank
very rapidly. Asked whether he was prepared to face
Jesus —the Saviour and Judge—he articulated the simple
word —Tamate * (Peace).
“ Are you quite sure that you have laid all your sins
on Jesus, and that you are saved by Him ? ”
In the midst of great suffering he answered the same
word—“ Peace.”
Not many hours afterwards he slept in peace. Few
among the natives were better instructed than that
young chief, who never missed an opportunity to learn
of God and the plan of salvation.
* An interesting word, signifying that calmness which often
characterizes the Pacific Ocean.


CHAPTER XVIII.
Some Cangoan “Institutions."
Infanticide Circumcision—Polygamy—Kava-Drinking — Com-
memoration of the Dead—Sacred stones —Chieftainship—Installa-
tion of Timataso —The New Chief Commended to God—The
Queensland Labour Traffic—United Action —“Rocks Ahead !”
ti» was very common on the island
when Mr. Michelsen went. It cannot have
been practised for many generations, however,
or the people would not have been so numer-
ous. It is very likely that it dates from the
time when the Queensland traffic was commenced.
This parted husbands and wives for several years, and
infanticide (more often pre-natal) was an expedient to
put away the evidences of unfaithfulness on the part of
the women. Once introduced, the practice became
general.
In spite of constant wars, the population of the island
must have increased steadily from the time of original
settlement, in the sixteenth century, up to about fifty
years ago, when it was probably three times as large as
at present. During the past generation there has been
a continual decrease. For this, infanticide and the
Kanaka traffic are mainly responsible. The natural
resources are equal to a population ten times as large


as the present, which is a little over a thousand. Since
the introduction of Christianity, infanticide has ceased ;
and in some of the villages a large number of women
fondle babies on their arms.
Among the social practices—of no definite religious
significance on Tongoa —is circumcision. Though
very general on some of the islands, it is only
observed by a section of the population of our island ;
and then not in infancy, but when about twelve or
fourteen years of age. It is not a caste badge, but very
probably a survival of a tribal custom. There are, on
some of the islands, more indications of caste than
appear on Tongoa.
The polygamous practices of the people have been
a great drawback to Gospel work. Chiefs and others
of an ambitious turn of mind, have spared no effort
to increase the number of their wives; others have
added them to their households as “ women ” to do
their bidding.
Although making it a rule not to baptize polygamists,
Mr. Michelsen has ever distinguished between preaching
the Gospel and merely denouncing sinful customs.
Though speaking against polygamy, and not with-
holding clear statements regarding the moral law, he
has put his strength into making known the Gospel,
before which alone the evil ways of the people must
fall into ill-favour. In his own words : “ I did ntit per-
suade them to put away their wives—l left the truth
to do its own purifying work. I make it clear to them
that polygamy is not God’s holy way, but a practice
which sin has brought into the world.”


And the truth has done its purifying work. Once at
Epi Mr. Michelsen addressed a large and hearty meeting
of several villages. On that occasion he said nothing
about polygamy; but, after the gathering, he saw a
cluster of people, one of whom was speaking very loud,
almost excitedly. On inquiry, the missionary was told
that a man wished to put away his wives ! The simple
fact was, that the Gospel had reached the man’s heart ;
but the poor fellow could not look up to God, because
of the sinful manner of life that interposed between
himself and the Holy One.
In some countries the social customs are such that
the natives have to face many perplexing questions on
proposing to put away their wives. Not so in the island
of Tongoa, where, under the old order, a woman was
as well off without a husband as with one. Women
have their own plantations, so they need not starve. In
many cases they are thankful to be free—marriage is
bond-service ; and to be “ put away ” often amounts to
having their liberty given them !
The wives of a Tongoan chief were expected to serve
him as he might direct. Chiefs were held in honour
according to their capacity to buy “ women.” A chief
would have a number of houses—one for himself, and
one for each of his wives. In the event of a man dying,
the wife or wives passed over to his brother, somewhat
after an arrangement which God suffered to obtain
among the ancient Israelites.
Marriages were arranged by parents even while the
parties were infants. Thus, a boy who was to be a chief
had many wives bespoken for him. The girl was paid


for—so many pigs. As there was much ambition
among parents for their girls to be the wives of chiefs,
the proposal generally emanated from the feminine
side. Since the influence of Christianity has been felt
on the island, these hateful customs have fallen into dis-
repute. Marriages are now arranged by the young men
and maidens themselves ; and some interest attaches to
the fact that the right to open the question is not the
exclusive privilege of the stronger sex.
Kava is a stupefying drink, common in the islands.
There are various methods of preparing it; all of them
essentially objectionable, and in their outcome decidedly
hurtful. It is prepared from the root of piper methysticum,
and the process is attended by a peculiar ceremony.
Standing up in a circle, the men of Tongoa took a leaf,
and laid it upon the opening formed by the thumb and
first finger of the left hand, and then struck it with the
palm of the right. This was an act of “ sacrificing to the
spirits.” Exclaiming “ Natamate” (“spirits of the dead”),
the Kava devotees practically dedicated the drink to
the entire spirit-world. To the “spirits” they gave the
useless leaves ; their own sensual tastes were indulged
by the use of the root.
The root was cut into small pieces, which were, dis-
tributed among men, who masticated them in their
mouths. The pulp was spit out, squeezed in a cup, and
repeatedly chewed by one after another of the company;
then it was strained through fibre of the cocoa-nut
husk. Retiring to the corners of the square surrounding
the Kava-house —and every village had such an insti-
tution—so as not to be seen in the act, the men drank
the filthy liquid.


This drink induces a variety of stomach troubles, and
causes the death of many people. While unable to urge
upon uninstructed heathens the sinfulness of the prac-
tice because of its association with spirit-worship, the
missionary boldly declared the habit sinful, because it
interferes with the natural functions, and destroys the
human body.
There is no trace of a holy day having been observed
on Tongoa before the Gospel introduced the Sabbath of
the Lord. Feasts over the dead—such as are known as
“ wakes ” in some parts of the British Empire—were
frequent. The bodies of the dead were dressed up
and painted, and kept until decomposition had so far
advanced as to necessitate burial. The body symbol-
ized the spiritual presence of the departed one at the
feast in his honour. Every tenth day during the mourn-
ing, and in commemorations in after years, was invested
with a special character. There may in this be the
survival of a periodical festival.
Sacred stones, which were inserted in belts, were held
to protect their wearers from many evils. These charms
were handed down from one generation to another as
heirlooms and tokens for good. Some of the sacred
men had large numbers of them, which they “ worked ”
in connection with various “ arts.” Needless to say,
they expected reward for their divination. Moreover,
at the season of planting it was customary to put into
the ground stones, similar in shape to the expected fruit,
which were supposed to act as charms, and influence the
harvest.
Chieftainship is hereditary, designation also. If a chief


dies, and his son is an infant, the chief’s brother, with
the consent of the people, assumes authority until such
time as the young man may “ come of age.” It is the
rule for chiefs, when advancing in years, to introduce
their sons to the responsibilities of office. In such cases
the senior chief guides the junior in his work.
The great work of the chief in heathen days was the
ordering of feasts. Ruling was nothing to this—indeed,
this amounted to good ruling. When a man gets old,
he is glad to make these duties devolve upon younger
shoulders, to whom, as a rule, they are less irksome and
more agreeable.
The young man Timataso* was installed as Tinabua,
on the death of Malakaleo’s immediate successor. The
ceremony was of an essentially Christian character. A
shed w r as erected adjoining the church at Lumbukuti, to
hold the great crowd that assembled to witness the pro-
ceedings. In compliance with the desire of the chief-
elect, the people were in mourning for the late chief—
an arrangement never known before, but showing a fine
trait in the disposition of Timataso. In some measure
the ceremony was a working out of the old custom ;
but the whole was characterized by a becoming so-
lemnity.
Not only were all the villagers present, but all the
chiefs of the island, and a large number of other people
as well. The relation of the chief to the people, and
the responsibility of the chief as such to God, were
explained in detail by the missionary. As an inno-
vation, it was made clear that the chief does not own
the people, but is their head; and should be a ruler
* See note on p. 68.


of willing subjects. It was also shown that it is as
a servant of God that the chief is called upon to act
The presence of other chiefs was in honour of an old
custom, which, however, had in the past only been
partially carried out. Because of the constant wars
between the various villages, no such complete re-union
had before been possible. It is the rule on Tongoa for
the young chief to receive office from the retiring chief:
as the last chief of Lumbukuti had died, his predecessor
was again called in to act as “retiring chief.”
The installation ceremony began with all the villagers
coming up to the new chief and pressing his hand—the
imported form of greeting—and promising to be faithful
subjects of Tinabua, who, on his part, engaged to rule
them for their happiness. This was a new element
in the ceremony, as formerly the chief was regarded as
the rightful owner of the people ! This part of the
programme—somewhat tedious, it is true —was followed
by Malakaleo transferring the chieftainship by laying
his hand upon'the young man, and saying, “Be thou
Tinabua.” After that, Tinabua joined hands with all
the other chiefs, forming a circle round the missionary
and Malakaleo—implying that he was not only the
chief of Lumbukuti, but one of the federation of chiefs
on Tongoa, and accepted by them as a brother ruler.
“ There is no power but of God; and the powers
that be are ordained of God.” In recognition of this
important truth, the missionary engaged in prayer,
asking the King of kings and Lord of lords graciously
to accept the services of Tinabua, and to bless his efforts
to make the people of Lumbukuti happy through the
fear of God. The singing of a hymn concluded the


ceremony. A feast worthy of the chief’s influence, and
in harmony with the auspicious event, followed. The
installation thus described in detail is one of several
that have taken place on the island since Christianity
has asserted its power there.
The idea of oneness of interest and obligation on the
part of the- chiefs, suggested by their joining hands
during these installation proceedings, is more and more
taking a practical turn. On one occasion, the chiefs
conferred together regarding the Queensland Labour
Traffic, and decided to petition the Governor of the
Colony, protesting against the Kanaka “ recruiting,”
which is such a scourge to the Islands. They thought
he might respect their rights over their people ; and
they duly appointed a scribe, who prepared a memorial
which they all signed. This was then translated by
the missionary, and forwarded to the authorities in
Queensland. To the unspeakable delight of all, the
petition was respected ; and no “ recruiting ” has since
been done on Tongoa.
Another instance of united effort is furnished by a
more recent occurrence, during the absence of the
missionary from the island, while on furlough. One
day, while H.M.S. Dart —Captain Frederick in charge—
was at anchor at Tongoa, all the chiefs went on board.
Tinabua was the spokesman, and in quite creditable
English he explained to the Captain that the inhabi-
tants feared “ rocks ahead ” in regard to European
influence. Having seen the benefits of British pro-
tection in the Fiji Islands—and doubtless also having
their feelings stirred up through the Christian and
gentlemanly conduct of Captain Frederick and his


officers—they begged that Her Majesty might be
petitioned to take the people under her benign pro-
tection.* The Captain undertook to convey their views
to the Foreign Office. The chiefs of Emae, hearing
what had been done, speedily made for Tongoa, and
presented a similar request.
As another illustration of the native confidence in
British rule and care, mention may be made of a
childish expression on the part of the eldest son of
Marimaraki, the chief of Pcle. The missionary had
just received a beautiful picture of the Queen and the
Royal Family; and this was shown to the young man
and some other natives as—“our Chief and her Family.”
After admiring the numerous and interesting group, the
youth exclaimed : “ If they are so many as all that, why
does she not send one of them to Tongoa?” That is,
as Governor, of course ! Conscious of their individual
weakness, the chiefs of the island gladly combine for
strength ; but, even then, they feel the need of resting,
if possible, upon the powerful arm of Imperial Britain.
* Would that the inhabitants of the New Hebrides were as
happily situated as the Fijians ! At a Missionary Conference held
at Aneityum, in June, 1892, it was resolved : —“The Synod, having
heard with alarm of the threatened early annexation of these
islands by France, and feeling that such annexation would be
ruinous to our work, and to the best interests of the natives gen-
erally, urges upon the Presbyterian churches of Britain to use
their influence with Her Majesty’s Government to prevent such
annexation.” At the meeting in 1891, a similar resolution was
recorded.


CHAPTER XIX.
A Question of Custom.
Serious Dispute on Epi—Great Victory for Christian Honour—
Noble Determination of the Natives.
f"'* - UST about the time of the return of the refugees
to Epi, Manambalea again showed himself an
advocate of peace principles on the basis of
the Gospel. He heard that some of the other
villages of Epi speaking the Tasiko language
were, at war. Taking with him, as interpreter, a Tasiko
man, who happened to be on Tongoa, he went to the
troubled region, and made peace between the contending
parties. Shortly afterwards these people applied for
teachers! At the time, the villages were under the
charge of Rev. R ; M. Fraser; so Mr. Michelsen could
do nothing. One of the villages in Epi, by name
Tonomia, the strongest in that part, kept back until
1891, and then it seemed less likely than formerly to
admit Christian influence. In the meantime the villages
had come into Mr. Michelsen’s care. An event then
occurred, which proved the beginning of a new era. A
woman had left the village to become the wife of a
man belonging to another village—to which a teacher


had been sent. She was asked to go back, but refused ;
and the man likewise was not willing to part with her.
At the same time, he did not seem disposed to discharge
the alternative obligation—so many pigs !
Mr. Michelsen had gone over to Epi, just at that
time, determined, if possible, to see the last heathen
village in his district placed under Christian instruction
—so to give practical effect to the labours and prayers
of many years. Hearing of the trouble respecting the
woman, he made for the village which was determined
to compel its neighbour to observe a well-known custom
regarding payment for wives received from other
tribes. After a long walk through the bush, the village
was reached. Only a youth was to be seen, and he
explained that the men had gone into the forest. He
led the way ; and a mile or so distant, Mr. Michelsen
came upon the tribe in fighting order under the shade
of some enormous trees. All had guns, except the few
old men who were not so far advanced in “ civilization ”:
they were armed, some with bows and poisoned arrows,
others with spears.
The missionary was received in a friendly manner.
Explaining to him the reason of the hostilities that were
in progress, the leaders said that the “ Christian ” people
had been dealing unjustly with them. The injustice
complained of lay in the fact that pressure had not been
brought to bear upon the man who took a wife from
Tonomia without paying for her. Mr. Michelsen pro-
posed a visit to the offending village, in order to a
friendly conference. Armed men were not likely to
look kindly upon such a suggestion ; and, in fact, it
was at once ruled out of the question. To be sure, it


would involve a moral courage which is not necessarily
cultivated by the engagements of the field of battle.
Brave to fight, the forces of Tonomia hesitated to face
the foe on any other terms.
A little reason having been brought to bear, Mr.
Michelsen succeeded in persuading the men to go with
him. At the other village they found a divided feeling.
The chief, who was a decided Christian, would like
to have the matter settled peaceably. The man who had
taken the woman, as well as some of his friends, did
not put in an appearance. At last they were found,
and made to face the facts.
These facts were set forth by the missionary in an
address to this effect: Whatever you do, you should
live at peace with one another. No lasting peace can
exist where there is 'unfair dealing. The woman went
away from her village, and became the wife of a man
whom she wished to have, and who wished to have her.
So far, all right. According to heathen custom, if a
woman leaves one village to go to another, the former
village expects to receive some compensation from the
village which gains a new resident. When you all
become Christians—here and there also—payment will
not be made for any woman. But Tonomia, which is
yet heathen, expects payment for the woman. So I
say that you must pay the usual price, or the woman
must go back again ! The last clause was strongly
emphasized ; and the key-note, thus sounded, guided
the proceedings, and carried the day. The chief was
quite willing for the woman to go back; but the
husband wished to retain her. At the same time he
seemed unable to pay the price—ten or fifteen pigs!


Several speeches followed, all in favour of peace. A
heathen stood up, and, pointing to a boy, said : “ Where
is that boy’s father ? The gun ate him! ” He pro-
ceeded : “ Look at that young man. Where is his
brother ? The gun ate him ! ” And so on, naming a
large number whose relatives had been killed in war.
All agreed that the villages ought to live in peace.
Moreover, it was affirmed all round that this could not
be until all became Christian !
After two hours the warriors of Tonomia left, with
the understanding that the woman would be paid for.
Next morning the missionary heard that there had been
some difficulty in getting together a sufficient number
of pigs. Thereupon he sent a message in these terms;
“ Then the woman must go back.” This had the
desired effect, and the obligation was discharged the
next day. The pigs on such occasions are generally
served up at a village feast.
A teacher was then settled in Tonomia—the only
village in the district that remained entirely heathen.
Mr. Michelsen has several times heard of the progress of
his work there. It is joyous to relate that everything
goes to confirm the remarkable promise that was made
when the teacher was settled : “We are determined to
make up for lost time.” Education and evangelization
are being zealously promoted, with the earnest co-
operation of the people.
That was the last battle with open heathenism, fought
by Mr. Michelsen in the district allotted to him by
the Mission Synod.
K


CHAPTER XX.
Present Condition of the Mission.
Extent of the Work and its Needs—Singing—Communication
between the Islands and Australasia—Statement by
Mr. Michelsen.
HE work around which these incidents cluster
¥?■ has expanded to such an extent that there
were, in January, 1893, four stations in Mr.
Michelsen’s district—two on Tongoa, one on
Vi®z, Tongariki, and one on Epi. The missionary
stays at the stations alternately, spending most of his
time at the head station at Lumbukuti.
The villages of the entire district number 32, with
a population of 2070. There are no heathen; the
people have been Christianized. The church member-
ship in June, 1891, when Mr. Michelsen left for a period
of furlough, was 194. False professors are becoming
more and more unhappy, and true believers increasingly
earnest.
Weekly collections, in the direction of self-support,
have recently been commenced. As much as 165., in
pennies and half-pennies, has been taken at a single
meeting at Lumbukuti from 200 people. If the same


result were attained throughout the district, the mission
would be self-supporting. The realization of this may
be in the distant future; but there is reason to believe
that the hope is not utopian.
Not all at once did the educational work assume its
present advanced shape and importance. Some of the
first teachers that were sent out were young, and more
zealous than wise. When people would not attend
NEW HEAD STATION AT LUMBUKUTI.
school, these advocates of “ compulsory education ”
discussed means to force them! To-day the majority
of the people can read, and many can write. The
enlarged district, including part of Epi, has a population
of over two thousand.
While in many parts of the Group teachers are
urgently needed, so far as Mr. Michclscn’s own district
is concerned this is not the case, for every village has


its teacher. Of course, these humble workers have not
had a seminary training ; but there is a prospect of the
standard of efficiency being raised in the future, for
Rev. Robt. Lamb, M.D., is about to open an institution
for the higher education of islanders at Ambrim. It
is hoped that, after a course of suitable training, the
teachers of the future will be equipped for assuming
larger responsibilities. This, in the first place, would
do much towards reducing the force of European mis-
sionaries ; and, in the second place, it might be the
stepping-stone to the formation of a native ministry.
Not without much effort has the present condition
of things been attained. Mr. Michelsen had, generally
speaking, to educate his teachers before he could have
their services. If it had been possible, in the early days
of the mission, to procure from neighbouring missions
an adequate number of teachers, the present happy state
of things on Tongoa would, humanly speaking, have
been anticipated by a period of several years.
The Roman Catholic priests have already arrived in
the Group, and are doing their utmost to establish their
footing. The traffic in strong drink by unscrupulous
traders is also a crying evil. An urgent need is a Mis-
sionary reinforcement that shall work all the islands,
and by advancing the Gospel and true civilization,
enable the people to withstand Romish superstition
and other snares and temptations.
Singing has exercised a useful ministry on the island.
The first attendants at the school eagerly picked up
the hymns that were sung to them. To the great joy
of the missionary, the Gospel story went before him in


the songs which thus travelled from village to village.
Wherever he went he heard hymns; walking to their
plantations or at their work, the people were singing
Christian melodies instead of the old heathen songs,
which were, almost without exception, impure.
Through the operations of the Australian United
Steam Navigation Company, there is constant com-
I Eldest son of Marimaraki, 2 The late Tinabua. 3 Tarisaliu. 4 Matabuti
5 Maritariliu, 6 Samori. 7 Manambalea.
A GROUP OF CHRISTIAN CHIEFS.
munication between the Islands and Australasia. A
small steamer performs the inter-island service; and
once a month a large steamer leaves Sydney for the
Islands, advancing healthy trade among the popula-
tions. The Australian New Hebrides Company,
another medium of communication, is being worked
by Christian men in Australia, who are concerned


about the development of wholesome commerce with
the natives, with a view to helping the Missions *
The contrast between the past and present has thus
been stated by Mr. Michelsen himself:—
“ Cannibalism is now a thing of the past; the Prince
of Peace reigns over two thousand natives, who from
time immemorial had lived in almost uninterrupted
war. Souls enslaved with chains of superstition are set
free indeed, for the Son has made them free. Selfish-
ness and hatred are fast vanishing before the rising Sun
of Righteousness, which now on many an occasion
brings former enemies together in the name of Jesus, to
‘ show forth the Lord’s death till He come.’
“ Once a week, believers from every part of the island
meet to study the Word of God under the missionary’s
guidance. From almost every house in the whole
district, at the dawn of day, silence is broken by the
song of praise. From one dwelling is heard the well-
known words of ‘ All people that on earth do dwell,’
in the native language; from another, ‘ There is a
Name I love to hear ’; perhaps from another, the
23rd Psalm or the 121st; or ‘ Rock of Ages, cleft
for me.’
“ Then they have prayer. As this usually takes place
before there is sufficient light to see to read, there is
no reading of the Word until the meetings for morning
school and worship. Where the evenings were spent
in idle, and worse than idle, talk, the people are now
gathered in groups round the light of a modern lamp
* These established means of communication explain the im-
portance of all letters for the Islands being addressed “ via
Sydney.”


in every house, reading, singing, and uniting in prayer.
The aged are cared for,* and infant lives are spared.
In every village, where formerly men and women had
feasts—each sex in turn dancing round their heathen
drums,! singing songs that were the product of an im-
pure heart, and spending the whole night in the vilest
revelry—to-day is to be seen the entire population
going up to the house of the Lord, and each village
strives to excel the other in spiritual activity ; whilst
former enemies are never forgotten in their prayers.
“ Most of the people have learned to read ; and very
satisfactory progress is being made in the knowledge
of the Word of God. Not only have the natives
throughout the district shown themselves ready to
speak a word for Jesus; but in many instances have
wrought with their hands in the erection of schools
and churches, with no less zeal than that which they
formerly exhibited in preparation for their heathen and
carnal feasts. Some have gone forth to other islands,
taking their lives in their hands for the sake of making
known to the heathen the unsearchable riches of Christ;
and many more are waiting to be fully instructed for
the work.
* In former times, the aged, when unable to provide for them-
selves, were frequently left to die of hunger in desolate huts. To
bury them alive was suggested by feelings of comparative pity—as
less harsh than cold neglect.
f These were in clusters, or “ groves,” recalling the Canaanitish
abominations “ in every high hill, and under every green tree.”
They were often erected under large banyan trees. Interchange
of clothing by the sexes, and other details of obscenity such as
characterized the worship of Baal-Ashtoreth, were not unknown on
the island. See engraving on page 36.


Jr
Extract from letter toy “ Billy,” a Christian Teacher on Tongariki.
(Peculiarities in pronunciation : Vowels as in German \ g=ng\ c?*=nd; / = gbw ;
p also does duty for b.)
tf-TlsO, -tist, cfa -metf
p<o /m.
£-e s6L-ct£L& u,;tc*st. p*- Aal&xi. juLa-. . .
&io-ctcLnit*nu. / ykCLs£&&t*rx*eO diU*- -«<<*> djrpjs
ibi £*■ «*-*•
c/<7
TRANSLATION.
Misi, We two have gone to Tongariki. The people of Lakilia are being
affected by the Light; the men no longer become stinking [i.e.] intoxicated],
and the women no longer smoke. Maleisere is dead ; the many saw it, and
feared; and they are now coming out well to the meetings. .. . Our
hearts are drawn out to you, because you again press upon us the urgency
of the work of God, and we rejoice. Yes, that is all.
. I (am), Billy.
r
“ In former days their greatest desire in death was
that they might be buried with due heathen honours.
In recent times many have died fearing no evil—
for ‘Thou art with me.’ But whilst praising God
for what He has done, I earnestly invite the reader
to join in the prayer that past experiences may be
as nothing in the light of future blessings, but that
unparalleled numbers of such as are already nominal
and outward Christians may be called forth into the
eternal life in Jesus, and be led to exclaim : ‘ Behold,
what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon
us, that we should be called the children of God ;
and such we are!”


CHAPTER XXI.
The Queensland kanaka Traffic.
The word “Kanaka”—The “Third Plague”—Tongoa free from
the Scourge—Deplorable Facts—“Pinis” inevitable.
OJ
fX* jfr-
allusions have already been made
to the Kanaka Traffic, on which a brief state-
Iment must now suffice. The word Kanaka
means “ a man ” in the Hawaiian and other
"T'S islands; in the Samoa and Maori languages
it is Tanga-ta ; and in Tongoan, Na-ata , or, in desig-
nating the people of a village, Na-ka. So the Kanaka
traffic means a traffic in human beings !
After the whaling and sandal-wood trades, the Kanaka
traffic has come in as the third plague in the New
Hebrides. It began about 1863. There is no need to re-
hearse in these pages the horrors of the traffic; others
have made it their business to bring these before the free
citizens of the British Empire. Nor is it asserted that
the Kanaka traffic is the same to-day as when the
Carl and similar atrocities were perpetrated some
twenty-five years ago. Women as well as men are
by it deported to labour in the sugar plantations of
Queensland.


On representations from the missionaries and other
friends of the natives, the traffic has been regulated
more and more stringently during the past twenty
years ; and it may almost be said that nothing more
can be done for the protection of the natives, so long as
the traffic continues to be sanctioned. A Queensland
Government Agent is found on board every “recruiting”
vessel ; ships of war are cruising about the Islands
ready to enforce due observance of the regulations—
and splendid work has been done by this means by
Captain Davies and other faithful servants of the Queen.
The opinion prevails among friends of the natives that
the traffic cannot be further regulated.
I do not assert that all the regulations are carried
out ; indeed, if the “ recruits ” were not paid for, in
cash or kind, to the' chiefs of the villages, or others
who may be considered as owning them, the natives
would regard the traffic as man-stealing, and bloodshed
would inevitably attend its pursuit. Owing to the
united action of the chiefs of the island, as described
on p. 140, Tongoa has of late enjoyed complete immunity
from the scourge.
The deplorable fact is that the traffic takes the
greater part of the young, strong men of the Islands
away from their homes, leaving their wives unprotected.
They are engaged for periods of from three years to
nine or ten, but in the majority of cases do not return ;
instead of welcoming their husbands back, poor women
only receive the news of their death in a strange land.
These circumstances are productive of immorality, and
probably gave rise—as is mentioned elsewhere—to the
fearful destruction of infant life, now so common on all


the heathen islands. In a great many of the villages few
people are seen besides women and old men, and a very
small number of children. The able-bodied men, who
ought to be the strength of the Islands and the strength
of the mission, are in Queensland. Only about a third
of them return home; the other two-thirds die in the
colony. Moreover, the fact should not be overlooked that
natives suffering from consumption or other incurable
diseases, are frequently sent home simply to die.
It is often said that the native races “ die when they
come into contact with civilization.” This does not
adequately explain the high rate of Kanaka mortality
in Queensland. White men often pronounce the natives
“ lazy”; if inclined to dispute the correctness of the state-
ment, I should say that my observation is, that in their
plantations at home the natives work as much as they
are physically able—that is, probably eight hours a day.
In Queensland they are made to labour as no European
could under the same climatic conditions; and that is
much beyond their capacity. It is very doubtful if the
South Sea Islanders can, without injury to health, do
more work in the colony than a European.
Queensland planters object to coolies and Chinese,
who are able to work in the climate without serious
injury to themselves; doubtless the objection arises
from the fact that this class of labour would not pay
so well. If the Kanakas were only expected to work
according to their strength, it is probable that they
would be the less profitable class of labourers. It
seems clear that the margin of profit for the planters
lies between what the Kanakas are able to bear, and
what they are not able to bear, but yet are made to do.


In other words, the profit of the sugar planter is propor-
tionate to the number of Kanakas worked to death.
An incident will help us to realize what this traffic is
doing for the Islands. I was once sailing with some
Tanna men from Port Resolution (Dr. J. G. Paton’s
first station) to Futuna. Conversing with the men in
broken English, I inquired if there were many people
then living about Port Resolution. One of the party
laconically answered, “ Pinis ”(“ Finish ”). That was
to say, there were none ! Many a Government agent,
when asked if the traffic would soon be stopped, has
remarked : “ Really, it does not much matter ; for if
it is not stopped, it will soon stop itself.” This, I
believe, is true. If the traffic is not discontinued, a
period of twenty or thirty years may suffice to end it;
and to witness the return of a Kanaka ship to the
colonies with the sad report
"Pinis ”!


CHAPTER XXII.
Notes and Incidents.
Tongoans as Warriors—Waiting for the Gospel—A Curious
Caution—Pulling down the Hurricane—Dawn of Christian
Reform—The Currency of Tongoa—Merciful Deliverances
Native Cunning and Simplicity—“The Pharisee and the Publi-
can”—The “Wine” of Tongoa—The Languages of Mr.
Michelsen’s District —Tongoans and “The Blessed Hope”—
Saved to Save —“ That’s what ‘the Light ’ does for us ! ”
courage and enterprise which led to the first
I IKfe settlement of Tongoa, some 300 years ago,
after the great volcanic disaster, seems to
>1 have been maintained to the present time;
although old men complain that those of
the younger generation are not equal to their fathers.
There is not a village on the island without a long story
of bloody battles fought.
It often happened that when walking through the
forests, places were pointed out to Mr. Michelsen as
former sites of various villages. The Pele people have
been driven from their place once since Mr. Michelsen
went to the island; the Lumbukuti tribe were just
building their new villages when he arrived, after living
several years at Panita. Even the Selembanga men were


driven off their land; and so with Mangarisu and
Kurumambe. Tarisaliu, that cruel cannibal of Purau,
was driven from his place three times during Mr.
Michelsen’s residence.
This, of course, is only the negative side of the
matter. But it implies the other. Nor has their war-
fare always been confined to their own island. Thus,
several years ago, a wife of Ti-Tongoa (afterwards
called Manaura), on leaving Queensland, where she had
been engaged in sugar plantation work, did not return
to her own island. During her stay in Queensland,
she had consorted with a man from Siviri, on Efate.
It is a very common thing for women, during their
three years’ stay in the colony, to be wives of other
men. Knowing what a cruel master her rightful owner
was, the woman preferred to go ashore with her pro tem.
Efatese husband. This fact was soon reported to
Ti-Tongoa, who called together all his friends on
Tongoa, and even some from other islands, and, after
a feast, laid the matter before them. They agreed to go
and bring the woman back.
Fifty canoes were fitted up. They set out on their
voyage of over thirty miles one afternoon, came up to
Efate in the night, and had the village surrounded by
fighting-men when the people emerged from their huts
in the morning. Though savages, they did not lose
sight of their real object, i.e ., to get the woman back.
Before attacking the people, they made known the
purpose of their visit. The Siviri people thought pru-
dence the better part of valour, and gladly delivered
up the woman, with a reasonable number of pigs as
war indemnity. The invading Islanders returned


the next day, satisfied with the result. They had
also left a lasting impression on the minds of the
people of Efate, who never again ventured to offend
the Tongoans.
Years before Mr. Michelsen went to Tongoa, news
reached the island of the settlement of missionaries
on Efate. This did not affect the general population;
but there was one upon whose mind it made a deep
impression—a woman named Leinasu. She made all
possible inquiries, and earnestly longed to hear the good
news from the mouths of the missionaries.
This woman had a kind of presentiment that she
should live to see the day when “ the Light ” would be
known in the island. She passed through much suffer-
ing and many trials. Her husband was shot in one of
the wars, and she herself carried home his body to save
it from being eaten by the enemy. Fleeing from the
savage bush village to which she belonged, she took
refuge in Selembanga.
No sooner did Leinasu learn that a missionary had
arrived, than she sought the knowledge for which she
had so long been thirsting. She was one of the first
on that side of the island to embrace the Gospel, and
was for some years the faithful servant of Mr. and Mrs.
Michelsen. Her quiet Christian conduct and kindly
bearing were influential in a high degree.
Telling her own story, she has often said that before
finding peace through believing in Christ, she trembled
at the thought of her sins. This statement is the more
remarkable because a sense of sin is not readily admitted
by the natives. But this woman’s conviction was such


as to impress her with the exceeding sinfulness of sin.
She afterwards became the wife of an earnest Christian
teacher on the island.
During the first year Mr. Michelsen was on Tongoa
he proposed a visit to the village of Sakau, on the
island of Epi. Some native boys asked to accompany
him, and were allowed to do so. One questioned the
missionary as to what he was going to do. The answer
was : Lotu —“ Worship.” “ Well,” said the youth, “ let
us pray when we get there, but do not let us shut our
eyes ; for the Epians are not to be trusted! ” This is
not altogether a new version of “ Watch and pray.”
Mr. Michelsen rejoiced to find, however, that the
story of Jesus, the Way to Eternal Life, made a
profound impression upon the minds of the people.
When they heard of the glory, in store for those who
trust in Jesus, several interrupted and exclaimed, “ Let’s
all go there! ”
There is a grim interest in the story of Ti-Tongoa
and the hurricane which he claimed to command.
While yet a heathen, this “ sacred ” chief invited the
chief of Euta to a feast. The invitation was not
accepted, on the ground that the proceedings would
be simply heathen. Thereupon Ti-Tongoa conceived
coercive measures.
“ If you will not come,” he said, “ I will pull down
the hurricane upon you.”
A terrible threat, unquestionably; but still the chief
of Euta declined. Not many days afterwards the hurri-
cane came, and did fearful damage. Curiously enough,


however, its strength was spent upon Ti-Tongoa’s land.
The grounds of neighbouring chiefs, being sheltered,
suffered very little.
Meeting Ti-Tongoa about that time, the missionary
charged him with having brought on a hurricane. The
impeachment was stoutly denied. Carrying his banter
a step further, Mr. Michelsen added: “You said your-
self you would pull down a hurricane; and it would
seem that you pulled the wrong string.” To this
Ti-Tongoa made no reply. He is now of a different
temper. Being thoughtful, he exercises a good influence
on the island.
The Sabbatarian zeal of the good chief, Manambalea,
led him once to a curious expedient. Tongoans have an
appetite for fowls ; and Manambalea, preparing for a
Sunday dinner, had to face the question of dressing
and cooking the fowl. He saw no objection to the
dinner being provided on Sunday, and then the fowl
could be killed. In the meantime, however, it could be
plucked ! At this operation, Mr. Michelsen was horrified
to find one of the chief’s servants engaged on the pre-
vious Saturday !
The fowl was screeching wildly ; and on the mis-
sionary looking out, the lad ceased his work, and the
fowl stalked about in a nakedness which was painful
to witness. The lad explained that Manambalea did
not want to make too much work on Sunday! The
incident showed a savage thoughtlessness rather than
a savage intention. The missionary thus had to
inculcate lessons of mercy, as well as rules for pious
living.
L


In the early days of the Mission, all dealings with the
natives were conducted by means of barter; and as Mr.
Michelsen has had sometimes as many as fifty natives to
support—catechumens and intending teachers—there
was much “ dealing ” to do. In fact, nearly half the
missionary’s time was spent in procuring things needful
for the large household.
To simplify such transactions, he made some signed
tickets, which were received by the people as money ;
and afterwards “ honoured ” on presentation some
being of the nominal value of a halfpenny, and others
of one penny. Shrewd half-heathens soon hit upon
the idea of “ making money ” by splitting these cards—
overlooking the fact that the missionary’s initials were
on one side only. Moreover, this perishable “ coin ” was
found unserviceable. The next step was to introduce
English money; and this civilized form of exchange
speedily became an established institution on Tongoa.
Much disappointment is prevented, and time is econo-
mized in a very satisfactory manner.
“ Some trust in princes,” but Mr. Michelsen has not
had any such uncertain protection. British and French
vessels cruise about the islands, to guard European in-
terests ; but it is a remarkable fact, that only once, from
the day when he first landed on Tongoa, until all the
villages had been placed under Christian instruction,
did he receive a visit from a man-of-war ship.
He was driven from his mission station, and had to
live in a native hut, under the protection of a heathen
tribe; but there was neither inquiry by, nor support
from, representatives of great military powers. It


mattered not* His confidence was expressed in the
words, “ The Lord is our refuge and strength: there-
fore will we not fear ! ”
The exception referred to is hardly worth naming;
for it was a French vessel that called—not to ask what
it could do for the missionary, but to inquire what the
missionary could do in the way of giving information
about a boat, with crew belonging to a French vessel,
that had gone to sea, and been heard of no more.
During the first year of the work, when his life was
in danger, and help from man could not be expected,
and, therefore, was not sought, a chief came on his own
initiative, and walked about the house night after night,
carrying a loaded gun, and every now and then blowing
his pans-pipe, to break the monotony of the still hours.
That same man proved, at a later period, his personal
opposition to the Gospel by threatening to shoot the
missionary!! His act of rendering protection to Mr.
Michelsen was in obedience to an impulse which no
one could account for, except by concluding that, for the
moment, he was doing God service without knowing it.
* Specially gratifying were the visits, in 1890 and 1891, of
H.M.S. Dart, with Captain Frederick and his noble officers.
Whilst cruising about in the Group, to render any necessary
assistance if called upon, the object of the visits to Tongoa was of
the most pacific character —namely, adjusting the charts. Captain
Frederick is no less a faithful servant of the Lord Jesus, than of
her Imperial Majesty ; and it was to him a profoundly greater joy
to witness God’s victory over sin and ungodliness, than it would
have been to see the Queen’s cause triumph over enemies
vanquished in martial conflict. The Christian conduct of the
Captain and his officers did more to impress the natives with
an idea of the greatness of the British Empire, than could have
been effected by the thundering of cannon or any other warlike
demonstration. t See p. 87.


The natives are not such artless children as some
would imagine. A story will show them to be by no
means wanting in cunning when they can exercise it
to personal advantage. In 1886, during the Tarawera
eruption in New Zealand, there was a heavy fall of
volcanic dust on Tongoa.
It fell on the mission house at Selembanga during
the night with the gentleness of snow, and covered the
ground like a thick black carpet. As much as a
hundredweight was swept from the iron roof of the
mission house. The fact that the dust closely re-
sembled gunpowder suggested a wicked trick to the
minds of some of the non-Christian natives.
Some time previously the supply of firearms and
ammunition had been stopped at Queensland. Many
heathen, having gone to the colony in the hope of
laying in a stock of these, returned to their islands
much disappointed. Why not pass off upon them as
gunpowder some of the volcanic dust ? The thought
developed into a settled design. Old flasks were filled,
and the occasion awaited. By-and-by a ship anchored
at Tongoa, having on board some heathen natives of
the Solomon Islands and other groups to the north.
Tongoans boarded her, and offered the dust for sale as
gunpowder.
The “ returns ”•—men who had served in connection
with the labour traffic—were ready to pay any price for
that which would give stilts to their pride on rejoining
their people. They gave axes, knives, calicoes, tobacco,
pipes, and anything else the Tongoans asked for; and
for a time were satisfied with their bargains. If in the
end there was dissatisfaction, there is the consolation


that the “ ammunition ” did nothing worse than pro-
claim the folly of those who bought it, and the knavery
of those who sold it.
Kanaka “ returns ” have not always been well paid.
The temptation has been to load the men with trinkets
instead of giving them substantial recompense A
native of Tongoa, on one of the Fiji islands, received
with much gratification a roll of bright-coloured wall-
paper, which he thought was “ calico.” Going to a
great feast, he cut off a piece and “ clothed ” himself—
according as the fashion is for such to attire themselves.
When the time to dance arrived, and the festive round
caused profuse perspiration, the man’s finery ill became
his noble figure. First it hung to him ; and at length it
left him.
It need hardly be said that the man’s want of shrewd-
ness afforded the best part of the evening’s entertain-
ment, and taught all the lesson of not depending too
implicitly on European honesty. Indeed, the natives
have to-day a not very complimentary term in their
vocabulary ; “ white heathen ” with them designates all
Europeans who are not “ missionaries,” i.e ., God-fearing
persons. Yes ; such is the truth. God-fearing visitors
to Tongoa, whether traders or naval officers, are by the
people called “ missionaries.”
Before leaving the island on furlough in 1891, Mr.
Michelsen intimated his willingness to baptize a few
believing natives. Among the candidates were two
old men who answered to the description of the two
who, in the parable, went up into the temple to pray—
“ the one a pharisee, and th§ other a publican.”


One of the two, of quiet demeanour, said he desired
baptism. He was asked : “ What about your sins ? ”
“ Oh,” he replied, “ I have no sins.”
“ But,” inquired the missionary, “ how was it with you
before I came ? ” The benighted man said: “ I have
always been as I am now—just as you see me.”
“ But have you not sinned ? ”
. “No.”
“ Well then, I am sorry to say that Christ is not for
you : Christ only came to save sinners.”
All that Mr. Michelsen could say failed to convince
this man that he was a sinner. He endeavoured, how-
ever, to make it plain to him that baptism was only for
such as had gone to Jesus for salvation from their sins.
The other candidate had been a “ sacred man,” whose
former life was well-known to the missionary, and had
been anything but sinless.
“ What about you ? ”
“ Ah ! I have killed men ; I have eaten men ; I have
stolen ; I have been guilty of witchcraft; and, indeed,
I do not know what wicked thing I have not done.”
After a brief pause, the penitent continued: “My son
is a Christian, and so is my daughter. I am an old
man, and perhaps may not live until you come back
again. My heart cleaves to the Lord; and I want to
confess Him as my only Saviour.”
This man had not attended the course of regular
instruction required of candidates ; but the missionary
had no doubt as to his duty to baptize one who could
make such a confession. “ This man went down to his
house justified rather than the other.” He belonged to
Panita, the first station of the mission, He long did


business as a “ sacred man ” throughout the island.
The people soon learned, however, that the missionary
could deal more effectually with their sicknesses.
Losing his trade, the man went to a neighbouring
island to “ practise.” When Christianity was introduced
there, he returned to Tongoa. His business having
entirely gone, he realized his need of Divine consola-
tion, and threw in his lot with the Christians. His son,
a very fin'e young fellow, is one of the worthiest believers
on the island.
That young man, Taviroto, spent some time in
Queensland ; and, amongst other occupations, he served
a milk-dealer. On returning to the island, he stayed
at the Mission House. On one occasion he saw Mrs.
Michelsen setting the milk-dishes. He wanted to know
why she had not put the water in! In the simplicity
of his heart he thought the milk-dealer’s practice in
Queensland was the correct thing, rather than an ex-
pedient to increase his profits.
There has been considerable discussion among
Christian workers in the South Seas regarding the
way in which believers should “ show the Lord’s
death till He come.” With the natives wine is a
drink passing under the general name of “ grog,” against
which the missionaries utter loud and constant warn-
ings. What wine was in the East, the milk of the
cocoanut is in the South Seas.
The question has, therefore, been asked, May not the
cup of remembrance be filled with the grateful drink for
which the Christians cannot but be thankful to God, in
preference to the beverage which, as imported from


abroad, is a noxious mixture of chemicals, coloured and
strengthened to suit an acquired taste ? The “ cup of
blessing” may, in the opinion of some workers in the
islands, very appropriately contain that drink which is
practically the native substitute for “ the fruit of the
vine.” The Communion rite would, it is maintained,
lose nothing of its significance by the oriental wine
being replaced by its New Hebrides counterpart —the
milk of the young cocoanut.
The question remains an open one. Mr. Michelsen
tells of a native boy who, relating to some acquaintances
what he knew of Christianity said, “ They have a ‘ holy
eating,’ at which they eat bread and drink grog.” The
heathen thought this a grand feast; and it must be
capital to be a Christian, so as to have the special
privilege of drinking the grog against which the
missionaries warn them. Rev. Dr. Inglis held that
cocoanut-milk is the wine of the islands, and should
have the preference.
There are three distinct languages spoken in Mr.
Michelsen’s district—the Tongoan, which is the same
as that spoken on Nguna; the Makura, which is not
so widely used; and the Tasiko, which is one of a
family of languages, and is spoken on Epi, Malekula,
and Ambrim. All have been reduced to writing with
the Roman character.
In the Nguna-Tongoa tongue nearly the entire New
Testament has been translated. In this Rev. Peter
Milne has been a devoted and laborious worker. Two
small books have been written by Mr. Michelsen in the
Makura language, also some hymns. Since then, he


has decided to encourage the use of Tongoan among
the Makura-speaking people. In Tasiko the Gospel
according to Matthew, as translated by Mr. Michelsen,
has been published by the British and Foreign Bible
Society.
When the Otago Synod granted the missionary
leave to visit Europe, in 1891, the Mission Committee
was authorized to collect money to facilitate the
journey. The mission funds were, however, already so
strained, that nothing could be advanced. Except for
money from some other quarter, the workers could
not have left their sphere. The natives, out of love
to Mr. Michelsen and his wife, speedily solved the
difficulty by making arrowroot of the value of £IOO
to pay the passage. This is no isolated act of gen-
erosity on the part of the Christianized natives of
Tongoa.
Asked with what interest, or otherwise, the Tongoans
have listened to the Gospel message regarding the re-
turn of the Lord Jesus, Mr. Michelsen said : “ To the
natives the prospect of Christ’s coming again, and
the hope of the Resurrection life, is most charming.
When they report the death of believers, it is in the
words that he or she has ‘ fallen asleep.’ Everything is
very material with them—very real; and they expect
the higher existence to be substantial, because they
cannot so well realize any other. They hope for the
life of the world to come; and look forward to Christ’s
coming as ‘ the blessed hope.’ ”


It. is cheering to witness the tenacity with which some
of the native converts “ hold on to their Book ” —that
is, stand by the Word of God and pursue the Christian
life. There are many stories of native steadfastness,
even on the part of such as have, for a time, left the
Islands. Moreover, worldly sailors, who have ridiculed
and jeered at the natives while on the voyage to
Queensland, have afterwards confessed to the failure
of all endeavours to put some of them to shame. It
is the joy, if not the boast, of such converts to say,
“ I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ.”
The young man Timataso, who at one time called
himself “ Missis,” and ultimately became the leading
chief on Tongoa, should have a place among converts
who have regarded themselves as “ saved to save.”
As a youth of sixteen, he went to Queensland, about
the year 1884; that is, before “recruiting” from Tongoa
had been prohibited. The missionary was then residing
at Selembanga, and was not so well informed as he
could have wished to be of how the young man was
faring among his heathen friends at Lumbukuti. As a
fact, the teaching he had received in the early days of
the work at Panita, had taken a deep and ineradicable
hold of his soul. In Queensland he fell in with some
natives of the bush village of P£le, which was at that
time at war with Lumbukuti. Not affected by this,
Timataso availed himself of the opportunities that
were afforded him of preaching the Gospel to these
heathen from his own island. At least, in one instance,
the blessing of God attended his efforts. A Pele
young man returned from Queensland a decided
Christian; and when, in course of time, a teacher


was settled in the village, he proved a great help in
the work.
After some years, this young man disappointed the
missionary by accompanying a number of his people to
Port Mackay in Queensland. The reason of their action
was afterwards made clear—they were dissatisfied
with the conduct of the young chief of Pele, who did
not give to Christianity the support which he had
promised his people to do. The missionary was, how-
ever, agreeably surprised to receive, some months later,
a letter from a young man, a European, engaged as a
clerk in a sugar plantation office at Port Mackay. After
referring to the Godlessness of the white men by whom
he was surrounded, he mentioned that on a recent
Sunday he noticed a number of Kanakas loitering
about a large shed on the plantation; some were
playing jews’ harps, others concertinas, and for the
most part all were amusing themselves in various ways.
He observed, however, that there was a steady current
flowing into the shed, and so he went to see what the
attraction was. He there found a company of newly-
arrived Tongoans, and a number of other islanders,
listening to the preaching of a young Pele man, who
proved to be none other than Timataso’s convert. The
people were listening eagerly to the message of salva-
tion. Comparing the conduct of these “ savages ” with
that of the Godless Europeans around him, the cor-
respondent was deeply impressed by the scene.
There is neither brook nor water-shed on Tongoa,
and the rain is quickly absorbed by its pumice-stone
subsoil. As a rule, the water required for domestic
purposes is obtained from a few insignificant springs,


which, however, are not to be depended on in dry-
weather. At times want of water has been a serious
trouble. Mr. Michelsen saw the need of sinking a well,
and advised the natives to undertake the work. As a
beginning, to make sure of finding water, they set to
digging near the sea-shore. They soon got what they
need not have dug for—salt water. It required some
encouragement to induce them to work further inland.
They were at length induced, and their enterprise was
richly rewarded. To their great joy and astonishment
they came upon beautiful water.
“That’s what ‘the Light’ does for us!” was the
spontaneous remark of several. “ Only think,” they
went on, “ that we have more than once so suffered
from want of water, that we have nearly died ; and yet
here it was all the while, a short distance under foot! ”
The Tongoans praised God—accepting the well as a
gift of his loving Providence. Mr. Michelsen was care-
ful to explain that the water was the free gift of God;
and now the people of Tongoa needed to “thirst” no
more, for though other springs should fail, here all
might drink of the life-sustaining supplies.
Not only does “the Light”—the Gospel of Christ —
give to the Tongoans a well of water like unto Jacob’s,
of which they may drink, to thirst again ; but it is des-
tined to give to the dwellers on continents, as well as
islands, access to “ the well of water which springeth up
into everlasting life.”


APPEND IX.
The New Hebrides Mission.
EADERS of these pages will be interested by some
general account of mission work in the New Heb-
„ rides. For many of the facts lam indebted to
Dr. Steel’s work, “The New Hebrides and Chris-
tian Missions.”*
Pedro Fernandez de Quiros, a Portuguese navigator, was the
first European to discover one of the New Hebrides Islands.
On April 10th, 1606, he sighted the north end of a land which
he supposed to be Australia, and called it Tierra Australis del
Espiritu Santo. He sailed into the large bay. The port was
called Vera Cruz ; the river flowing into the bay he called the
Jordan, on the banks of which he commenced to build the “ New
Jerusalem.”
Captain Cook, however, was the real discoverer of the' Group.
His surveys were so near the truth that a good deal of the present
chart of the Group is constructed on his drafts. It was in 1774
that this great English navigator sailed twice through the Group
and discovered and named them all.
Many accounts have already been given of Christian Missions
in our Group ; and yet with regard to the deeds of cruelty, stories
of danger and sorrow, as well as the power of Jesus to save,
even among these cannibal savages, it may well be said, “ the half
has never been told.” We propose to give a brief description of
the Mission from island to island.
* Nisbet & Co., 1880.


Aneityum is the most southerly island in the Group. In 1845
Samoan teachers were settled there. Rev. John Geddie and his
wife went in 1848. It is not easy to express opinions of the
qualifications of a man whom one has not seen at work ; but
my impression is, that a greater pioneer missionary never settled
in the New Hebrides. In 1852 he was joined by the scholarly
Dr. Inglis. Whilst we would by no means forget much valuable
work of translation done by Dr. Geddie, and also by Mrs. Geddie
and Mr. Copeland, Dr. Inglis, after twenty-five years’ careful
toil, was able to present to the people of Aneityum the complete
Bible. When Dr. Inglis arrived, the natives, then some 3000,
were open to receive teachers in every district of the island.
After many a hard battle with heathenism in the early days,
the question had now changed front “ who will have ” to “ who
can give the Word of God to the people ?”
Dr. Geddie died in 1872, esteemed and loved by his fellow-
missionaries, and lamented by the natives. Rev. J. D. Murray,
also a Canadian, became his successor. He was compelled, though
with much reluctance, to retire in 1876, owing to his wife’s ill-
health. Rev. Joseph Annand, M.A., was appointed to the station
in 1877 ; Mr. and Mrs. Annand had previously laboured some
four years among the heathen on Efate. On leaving the mission
field in 1877, Dr. Inglis was succeeded by Rev. J. W. Lawrie.
The worthy doctor was afterwards kept busy for a considerable
time with the printing of the Aneityumese Bible, and died in
1891. After a period of labour on Aneityum, Mr. Annand took
up a new station on Santo, and the entire charge of Aneityum
was left to Mr. Lawrie.
Futuna. —Whilst Aneityum presents high hills and deep
valleys, and is, generally speaking, clad with the richest growth
of trees and plants, Futuna seems to be one square coral rock,
lifted some 2000 feet up out of the sea. The natives are a
race very different from the Aneityumese, and probably came
to their island from the east, centuries after Aneityum was
peopled. Rev. John Williams, the martyr of Erromanga, visited
the island in 1839. In 1841 Rev. A. W. Murray settled the first
Christian teachers. In 1843 one °f these with his wife joined
the army of martyrs, being slain and feasted on ; and the others
were cast over the rocks into the sea. In 1853 teachers were


sent from Aneityum; and, thirteen years later, Rev. Joseph
Copeland, with his wife, arrived on the island. In 1876 Mrs.
Copeland died, and Mr. Copeland’s health failed. He has not
since been able to take up regular work on Futuna. After many
trials, sorrows, and much patient toil, he could not say that the
people had renounced heathenism ; yet they seemed “ not far from
the Kingdom.”
The island remained without a European missionary until
1883, when Dr. William Gunn and Mrs. Gunn were settled there.
Although teachers had been at work since Mr. Copeland left, the
mission evidently declined during the interval ; so that Dr. Gunn
found the situation almost as difficult as if the people had been
altogether heathen. Faithful labours are now beginning to bear
fruit. A church has been formed, and it seems as if the worst of
the battle with heathenism is past.
Tanna. —A magnificent island, fertile and beautiful. A volcano
of exceptional activity makes it peculiarly interesting to the traveller.
It is peopled by some 8000, the sturdiest natives in the New
Hebrides. It is difficult to say why, but it is a fact that Tanna
has cost more mission work, probably, than any other island in the
Group, with the least apparent results. The first native teachers
were placed on Tanna by John Williams on November 18th, 1839.
One of these died, and the other two were removed to Samoa.
Messrs. Turner and Nisbet were the first missionaries, but had
to escape for their lives in 1843. From then till 1858 no European
missionary was located on the island. In 1853 small-pox was
introduced from California, and did fearful work both among the
Tannese and native teachers. In 1858, Revs. J. G. Paton and
J. Copeland (afterwards on Futuna as already stated), also Revs.
J. W. Matheson and S. F. Johnston, were settled on the island.
In 1859 Mr. Copeland left to take charge of Dr. Inglis’ station,
on Aneityum, during his absence. In three years, Messrs.
Johnston and Matheson, Mrs. Paton and child, and Mrs. Matheson
and child, were dead. It has been said, however, that both
Mr. Johnston and Mr. Matheson were in ill-health before they
went to the island. Mr. Paton also had a good deal of fever;
and the scenes of death and sorrow around him, besides consider-
able difficulty with the natives, made up a very sad chapter in his
life. At length he considered it necessary to flee. Mr. Johnston


died suddenly in 1861. Seven years later, Rev. Thomas Neilson,
an able and prudent man, settled at Port Resolution, near Dr.
Paton’s old station, but in a much healthier locality. He held
the fort there under many difficulties ; but his cool courage fitted
him peculiarly for dealing with the bouncing Tannese. He
laboured on till 1882, when he retired; and has since been
labouring in Victoria. He suffered much from asthma, on
account of the damp climate ; and it is also probable that the
sulphur fumes from the volcano had to do with his illness.
In 1869 Rev. William Watt took up a station near the place
where Mr. Matheson had lived. Mr. and Mrs. Watt do not
rejoice in the same amount of success as some of the other
missionaries in the Group ; though, of late, their endeavours
have been attended with considerable encouragement. But they
have done what no one else has done in the New Hebrides ; and,
perhaps, a similar case is hard to find anywhere else in the world.
They have held out against the heathenism of Tanna, and their
lives have frequently been in danger now nearly a quarter of a
century! Mr. Neilson’s former station is now worked as an
out-station under Mr. Watt. On the north-east of Tanna, north of
the volcano, is the station occupied by Rev. William Gray. He
commenced work in 1882, and has been making slow, but sure,
progress from the beginning. In 1891 he reports an attendance
at school of 80. The missionaries who occupy Tanna do not
despair of success. Let us pray for them, and with them, that
they may soon rejoice in a great harvest; that we may see fair
Tanna, with the proud Tannese, at the feet of Jesus.
Aniwa is a low coral island which can only be seen a few miles
away. It is not more than some twelve or fourteen miles from
Port Resolution, on Tanna, Dr. J. G. Paton’s first station. The
population is now not above 160 souls. Rev. T. Heath, of Samoa,
settled teachers there in 1840. They were afterwards re-inforced
by teachers from Aneityum. One of these was killed. In 1866
Dr. Paton settled on the island. The work went forward steadily
from that time ; and in two years nearly the whole population
was nominally Christian. It was not long ere the island was
placed beside Aneityum as a Christian island.
As Dr. Paton’s fame as a mission lecturer has gone long before
these pages, and will go where this short account will never reach,


it is needless for me to add that it was judged that his time would
be better spent moving about interesting the Churches in the
New Hebrides Mission than to remain on Aniwa among a small
and decreasing population. Since 1881 he has been labouring with
indefatigable zeal, advocating the Mission cause. The Mission is
indebted to his efforts for very large sums of money collected
for Mission ships. Aniwa has since been taken care of by
Mr. Watt.
Erromanga.—After all, there is, perhaps, no island in the New
Hebrides so interesting to the Christian Church as this. We
shall pass over Captain Cook’s difficulty with the natives, and
the dread chapter of the sandal-wood traders, which preceded,
and was probably connected with the martyrdom of Williams
and Harris. Erromanga is one of the larger islands, though
by no means the most fertile in the group. Its bare table-lands
give it a beauty of its own ; and, indeed, it is quite a relief after
visiting the other islands, so luxuriantly clad with tropical vege-
tation, to see the large expanse of open grass-covered land, with
here and there a solitary tree. One almost feels impelled to ask :
Where are the cattle and the farmhouses?
The scene on page 32 shows the sand-bank on the other side of
what is now called the Williams River. It was there that John
Williams and Harris went ashore; and, not very much further up, that
they were slain. They were carried up a short distance, to nearly
opposite the tall cocoanut palm ; there their bodies were divided
between the various parties who had shared in the deed of blood
and ignorant revenge. This would lead some to second the state-
ment of Dr. Steel, that “the natives are the lowest of the tribes
inhabiting the New Hebrides.” But I certainly differ here.
Erromanga has produced some noble men, and almost every
missionary north of Erromanga has to acknowledge that the best
servants he had were Erromangans. Doubtless, they take more
polishing than any of the natives of our Group who were before
them brought under the influence of Christianity and civilization.
In May, 1840, Rev. T. Heath, of Samoa, settled teachers on the
island; but, after much suffering and danger, they had to be removed
the following yehr. Some years afterwards several young men were
got away to Samoa, and placed under Christian instruction. They
were sent back to their island, but the success of the experiment
M


is very doubtful. Native teachers must have the support of a
European missionary, if they are to succeed among the heathen.
Rev. G. N. and Mrs. Gordon (of Prince Edward Island) took up
residence on Erromanga in 1857. Four years later they were mur-
dered. Their graves are found on the other side of the river. It
is worthy of note that the first man to step forward to take the
fallen soldier’s place was his own brother.
Rev. J. D. Gordon reached Erromanga in 1864. He found some
who had not forgotten the instruction of his brother. But, on the
whole, the island was still heathen. Rev. James M‘Nair, from
Scotland, joined him three years subsequently. Though spiritually
and mentally well equipped for the work, he evidently was not
physically fitted for life in malarial regions. In July, 1870, he
slept in Jesus. His dust rests beside that of Mr. and Mrs. Gordon.
Plots were laid against him, and in all probability he would have
been killed. But he did not live long enough to be registered on
earth among the martyrs of Jesus Christ. Rev. J. D. Gordon,
burning with love for, the perishing, opened a station also on
Espiritu Santo, where his prospects of success were very good ;
also on Erromanga the Word made a decided impression among
some of the people. Mr. Gordon was even aspiring to leaving his
bones on New Guinea. This, however, was not granted him ;
for in March, 1872, he was also called upon to join the great
company of martyrs, being tomahawked. Having just finished
revising the 7th chapter of Acts, in like manner as did Stephen
he “fell asleep.”
The same year, Rev. H. A. Robertson and Mrs. Robertson (also
from Canada) arrived. They expressed a wish to be settled on
Erromanga. The story of a missionary with his young wife volun-
teering to set up their home as witnesses for Jesus on the isle
where lay the bones of their six predecessors, is too pathetic for
me to attempt to dwell upon it. Their lives have often been in
the greatest danger. The Lord has rewarded their courage and
faith; and nearly the whole population, some 2000, are pro-
fessedly Christian.
Efate is a large, beautiful, and in most parts fertile, island in
the middle of the Group. The first news of a Saviour was taken
to Efate by some Christian natives from Samoa, who had lost their
bearings in their canoes on the ocean. They first landed on Tongoa,


where several of them were slain; others escaped, and settled on
Efate, where they began to tell the story as best they could. In
1845 the first teachers were sent to the island, by the London
Missionary Society’s agents, from Samoa. They passed through
dangers and difficulties ; but, more or less regularly, the work was
kept up, and considerable progress was made. Rev. D. Morrison,
a Canadian, was settled at Erakor, on Efate, in 1864. Two years
afterwards, Rev. James Cosh, M.A. (now Dr. Cosh, Balmain,
Sydney), arrived at Epango. He had to retire, after a compara-
tively short period of work, on account of his wife’s health ; but
he is still affectionately remembered by the natives. Dr. Steel in-
forms us that both these cases of illness were due to residing in a
close grass house. I quite believe it, and sincerely trust the day
is not far distant when grass roofs in tropical countries with a
moist heat will cease to be used as residences for missionaries.
The natives use these roofs ; but as they often have fires in their
houses, it is by no means so unhealthy in their case.
In 1872 Rev. J. W. Mackenzie, Nova Scotia, a pattern mis-
sionary, whom no one can know without loving, settled at Erakor.
With zeal, love, and wisdom, he and his energetic wife have
continued the work with great success up to the present. Mr
Mackenzie’s health has not always been what he might desire,
and therefore his work has been more difficult than otherwise.
It is a wholesome thing for any missionary to pay a visit to this
station. In 1872 Rev. D. Macdonald, from Victoria, took up
work at Havannah Harbour. He found his field utterly heathen.
After some years of patient effort, however, an impression was
made, and now there are very few heathen in the district. Mr.
Macdonald, who is still in the field, is an untiring student of New
Hebrides languages, and has published several books about
them.
Nguna.—The story of the mission on this island, if well told,
would be second only in our Group to that of Erromanga. The
opposition of the heathen, the raging of the enemy, deeds of
cruelty and murder, personal danger to the missionary and his
wife, make up a chapter of almost unparalleled missionary ex-
perience. Indeed, if Rev. Peter Milne had had his own way, he
would have been settled on Erromanga ; and it is very likely
that his name would have been added to the long list of the
martyrs of Erromanga.


He arrived in the islands in 1869, and remained on Erromanga
with Mr. M'Nair until the next year, when he was settled on
Nguna among some of the most determined cannibals in the
New Hebrides. Mr. Milne seems to have a love for adventure,
but does not see much in it after it is over. In his open boat he
visited islands far and near; Pele, Kakula, Emau, Mataso,
Makura, Emae, were all visited by him. Indeed, all the islands
north of Nguna, including also those now in my district, where the
MISSION CHURCH AT NGUNA.
same ora similar dialect to the Ngunese is spoken, were considered
as his district pro tem. He therefore paid a visit in his boat
to Tongoa and other islands —a distance of upwards of thirty
miles. With all his nautical enterprise and hard work —for a
greater worker never joined our Mission —Mr. Milne was plodding
for many years without seeing much fruit in the way of heathen
turning to Christ. Translating was done, and thus a great work
of preparation got through, which inevitably would bear- fruit in
its season.
At last the ice broke, and after the first hundred souls were
gathered in, the work went forward steadily and surely. He


has now seven islands in his district, with nearly 2000
Christian natives and very few heathen. He has probably more
nominal Christians and more baptized natives than there are on
the four southern islands put together. One of the most magnifi-
cent sights I ever enjoyed was to see the Nguna church packed with
worshippers as close as they possibly could be ; even then many
had to sit outside. Mr. Milne is now about 58 years of age ; but
I do not think he has more thought of retiring from his post than
has the most youthful member of the Mission.
Of course, we pass over the story of the Tongoan Mission,
which has already been told at some length.
Epi is the next island in the order we follow. The southern
part was in some measure influenced from Tongoa from the very
commencement of my work there. The first attempt at regular
effort on this island was made by Mr. Holt and his wife, who were
settled at Mburumba, on the west side of the island in 1880. He
was a man bent on winning souls, and the mission was in a most
promising state even after a few months’ work. At the end of the
year his house was burned down, and resort was had to an open
reed structure, which brought on fever. That, along with other
circumstances, led to Mr. Holt retiring in 1881. The next year
Rev. R. M. Fraser took up the work near Mr. Holt’s station,
though in a less healthy locality. He has since been labouring
with great success.
On the north side of the island Rev. T. Smaill, 8.A., was settled
in 1890. There never was a mission station that gave better
promise of success in so short a time. There is reason to expect
that very soon the whole population on Epi will be Christian.
Humanly speaking, there seems to be nothing wanting to hasten
that happy day, beyond a good staff of teachers sent out over the
whole island.
Ambrim is to the north of Epi. We can only hope that the
bright chapter of this mission is to come. In 1883 Rev. W. B.
Murray, 8.A., was stationed there under the falling dust of an
active volcano. The people were friendly ; the missionary and his
wife were possessed of such qualities and attainments, mentally
and spiritually, as would lead one to anticipate a certain success
among a people apparently open for mission work. But our


hopes, and theirs, were sadly disappointed. On his way to the
island, Mr. Murray took a cold which settled upon his lungs.
At the end of the next year he was compelled to retire. He
died the year after in New South Wales, and his widow returned
to Scotland with double sorrow. She had to leave behind not
only the husband to whom she had bound her life, but also the
work she loved so well.
In 1885 Rev. Charles Murray, M.A., went out with his young
wife to take his brother’s place. They also entered on their work
most cheerfully and hopefully. The next year Mrs. Murray died
at Futuna (Dr. Gunn’s station). Mr. Murray returned to his
station and remained there a year ; but he suffered so severely
with fever that a removal to a cooler climate was deemed abso-
lutely necessary. On both occasions I led in prayer at the service
of settlement, and I still believe that a great blessing is in store
for Ambrim. A teacher has been in charge ever since ; but very
little progress has been made. In 1892 Rev. Robert Lamb,
8.D., M. 8., C.M., was settled on the island. We know not if
he is to be privileged to be the reaper. Let us unite in praying
that the thousands of heathen on Ambrim may soon be guided
into the safe harbour. There are rocks ahead. At least one
Roman Catholic teacher has found his way to the island, and
French traders are also there.
Malekula is to the west. I wish I had a more cheerful
account to give of this mission. Revs. A. Morton and T. W.
Leggatt arrived in the Group in 1886, with their young wives,
and were settled at their respective stations the next year. The
work of house-building, translation, and itinerancy has been
carried on by these zealous and able missionaries ; but the
reaping is only being done to a very limited extent. Death,
sickness, and plots, are sad chapters from the short history of
the mission on Malekula. Mr. Leggatt is now labouring there
a lonely widower, and it is a matter about which there are divided
opinions if Mr. Morton is right in remaining on the island with his
wife’s health seriously injured by the many exciting scenes they
passed through in their dealings with the heathen.
Rev. John Gillan was also settled on a small island off the coast
of Malekula in 1889. He is not without some encouragement; but
it is not easy to say, after so short a time, what his present efforts


may lead up to. Natives often lead a missionary to the brightest
expectation; but when he gets so near to them that it becomes
clear that they cannot have both sin and Christ, the difficulty
arises.
Malo. —Rev. J. D. and Mrs. Landels, who arrived in the Group
in 1886, were settled on this island of about 3000 inhabitants in
1887. The Word is evidently taking root, and everything looks
hopeful. Some have already been baptized, and a considerable
number are attending school and Gospel services.
SANTO. —In 1887, Rev. J. Annand, M.A., and Mrs. Annand
settled on the small islet of Tangoa, on the south side of Santo.
This is the third time they have begun mission work in the New
Hebrides. They are Canadians, and are worthy companions of
their countrymen who have distinguished themselves so much in
the New Hebrides Mission.
Mr. Annand’s reports are always on the safe side; but even he
says (The Christian , November 24th, 1892), “To all our visitors our
success here seems real. Certainly to outward appearance our
natives are doing fairly well. On Sabbath no persons visit their
places of labour. Neither fishing nor hunting is now thought of,
lout the house of God is frequented. A very fair percentage of the
people attend the services.” Rev. A. H. and Mrs. Macdonald
began work at a station a considerable distance up the west coast
of Santo, in 1890. The people seem hearty, and his report in 1891
was most encouraging. But what are two missionaries among
probably 30,000 cannibals ?
The missionaries engaged in work in these Islands meet once a
year in Synod, to deliberate upon the internal working of the
Mission. This is by virtue of powers vested in them by the
churches represented in the Mission. These are: the Presbyterian
Church of Canada; the Free Church of Scotland; and the
Presbyterian Churches of Victoria, New South Wales, New
Zealand (North), Otago (N.Z. South), South Australia, and
Tasmania.


Rev. Dr. Lamb, who has undertaken work on the island of
Ambrim, has lately made two tours of the Group, making the
acquaintance of nearly every white person, settlers and mis-
sionaries. In a descriptive letter from Nikaura, Epi,* dated
July 26th, 1892, he says :
“ Our first impressions were not wholly favourable. A warm
welcome met us at every door of house or hut; but most of the
white faces that first greeted us seemed those of men and women
who had just returned from the grave, so white and emaciated
were they. It was the end of the hot season —an unusually hot
one—and La Grippe , along with fever (malarial), had been preva-
lent. Still, there were a few who were looking well, and some
who, as yet, have not known what fever means. These were the
exception. The universal experience, so far, has been that the
roses of health, which bloom in other lands, are doomed to wither
in these islands. The deep black soil, with rank vegetation,
is for us a steaming hot-bed of fever and ague. But the fever is
mild, seldom causing more than weakness and emaciation, from
which, with the proper remedies, recovery is rapid. Settlement
and cultivation, letting in the air and sunshine, may ultimately
dispel the miasma ; but much muscle must waste, and many lives
be expended before that condition will be achieved.
“ The islands are truly beautiful; but their beauty has been just
sufficiently overpraised to deprive one of the delight of surprises.
There is variety and contrast; beaches, black and white, flat islets
and lofty mountains, still lagoons and foaming reefs, reeking
swamps, and glowing, rumbling craters. Nor is the vegetation
everywhere quite alike. Ambrim and Aoba are vast gardens of
cocoanut palm. Tongoa and Epi are specially the home of wild
creepers, which overtop the tallest trees, and bury all, except
the towering palm, beneath one green mantle. All the northern
islands are covered by dense tropical forest, in which the banyan
is king ; while the shade is beautified by a luxuriance of ferns and
many-hued crotons, The Group, as a whole, is volcanic ; the soil
in the south is somewhat barren, and the land more open. To-
wards the north Nature is more bountiful, and there is abundance
of deep black mould. Already a trade has sprung up in coffee of
the finest quality, in copra, and maize. Cotton, tobacco, and
* Extracted from The New Zealand Presbyterian , Dunedin, Oct, 1, 1892,
Islands anit tljf |3fopl£.


sugar-cane grow admirably. Bananas —some thirty species—arrow-
root, pineapples, oranges, lemons, chilies, the custard apple, peanuts,
and ginger, grow without cultivation. Yams, taro, sweet potatoes,
and the bread-fruit, are among the staple products of the native
gardens. Some of our common vegetables and grasses, when
introduced, flourish well. Cattle, goats, pigs, and possibly sheep,
thrive, as do all our domestic pets. Some kinds of Veche de liter
abound, and there are plenty of fish, though the natives are but
poor fishermen. Kauri, a hard wood like teak, and a light durable
wood that seems to resist the white ant, are among the timbers.
These islands are of great value, destined to be a garden of tropical
fruits and spices. . . .
“To judge from the action of the Queensland Legislature, which
has staked its reputation on the advantages to be reaped from
the labour traffic, one would suppose that the natives too were
a valuable race. It is the very poverty and abjectness of the
Kanakas that make them such valuable slaves to the sugar-
planter. Once removed from their own island, nay, their own
particular district, few of them, in their present condition, are
capable of exhibiting either stamina or independence. Of twelve
lads removed by a labour-ship from Erromanga last year, ten are
already reported dead.
“ The New Hebrides and sister Groups form a strange chapter
in the study of human history. Here life is at its lowest ebb, and
the people as the washed-up foam and debris at the margin of
sand and wave. The jet-black and the much-coveted nut-brown
complexion are found members of the same small village. A
single islet is the home of Malay and Papuan. In the New
Hebrides alone there are some thirty different dialects, needing
almost as many versions of Scripture. The Aobans are fair-
skinned and clean ; their neighbours, the Ambrimese, are black
and filthy. Here on Epi there are three main dialects, and those
who speak one are foreigners to the rest. Every village, though
comprising only five or six huts, is an independent unit; and,
according to its size, is strong or weak, the friend or foe of its
neighbours, fearing and being feared. There is no such thing as
a natural death ; if a man die, it must.be due to kunt* (a kind of
witchcraft), and the suspect is shot; war and devastation follow.
True, there are many specimens of the noble savage j but the
people as a whole are of a low type, and are falling a prey
* The Kaimasi of Tongoa. See page 119.


to the violence of their own superstitions, and to disease, con-
stitutional and parasitic. Besides the Contagious and epidemic
diseases introduced by whites, or brought back from the col-
onies—viz., ‘ specifictinea,’ scabies, whooping-cough, measles —
there are native elephantiasis, consumption, bronchitis, and a form
of struma almost universal, manifesting its nature in offensive
abscesses, glandular swellings, and ulcers of skin and bone.
Great is the multitude of Lazaruses, with no pitying dog to lick
their sores. The people need to be better housed, clothed, and
fed. Despite the loss of the picturesque in native dress, which
follows the introduction of European clothing, and which
ethnologists deplore, the people absolutely need some simple
garments to enable them to withstand the effect of the rapid
changes of their own climate. Let some lover of the picturesque
devise a garment that will combine simplicity and taste.
“ Here we have had a capital rest while planning and pre-
paring for another step in advance. The mission station is built
on a spur, which, beyond the reed enclosure and a cluster of
cocoanut palms, drops down 250 feet into the sea. The scenery
is equal to any in the Pacific. Right at our feet is an immense
fringing reef, on which the billows unceasingly break in milk-
white floods with deafening roar; which, re-echoed from the moun-
tain slopes, and blending with the rustle of the palms, suggest on
a pitchy night the presence of Alpine heights and rushing tor-
rents. To the right and left are wooded bays and headlands, also
fringed with reefs ; and right in front stands Lopevi, an almost
perfect cone, 5000 feet high, down whose slope the black lava
pours sheer into the ocean. From the centre of the crater a thin
column of smoke or steam curls upward, warning the few in-
habitants of a slumber that may any day give place to activity, as
happened ten years ago, when the refugees on this very shore were
clubbed and eaten by their professed friends. To the right of
Lopevi is the open sea, and to its left is Paama, with Ambrim in
the background. The face of Nature changes with every passing
hour. The colours of the sea, the gorgeous cloud sceneiy at sunrise
and sunset, the weird effect of black shadow and silver glow
chasing each other on the surface of the deep on a cloudy moon-
light night—all are ours just now. We are dwelling amid scenes
that dwarf the works of the greatest masters, surpassing them in
extent and magnificence as Nature can surpass Art.
“ Last Saturday, a small party, we went down to the shore to


picnic and to see the coral reef. The tide was low, and we could
go a long way out. With old shoes to protect the feet, and armed
with a hammer and cold chisel, we waded about peeping into the
pools and knocking off choice lumps of coral. The fish in the
pools are small but exquisitely beautiful—green and gold, peacock-
blue, pink and white, silver and black, red and green —all colours
in almost endless diversity. As for the coral, it is a very different
thing from what you see under glass cases. Our attention was
first caught by what looked like a rhododendron blossoming
in a shallow pool—it was a lovely growth of coral, a pale pink
or purple. And then we began to find almost as many colours
of coral as of fish —cream-white, emerald, lilac or lavender, dark
browns and purples, pale yellows and sky-blues.. Within a small
area we collected some eighteen different varieties, classifying
them according to form. After gathering till we were about
tired, we had a delightful time on the beach.
“ It has taken me a day and a half, while waiting for the
steamer, to boil and cleanse the coral, tubful after tubful being
put on the fire. The colours fade rapidly once the polyps are
out of the water, and the smell as they die is repulsive. So, to
whiten our specimens, we boil them for a few hours in a solution
of washing soda, then pour clean water on them from a height,
and lastly expose them to the sun and rain.
“ On Sunday, the day after the picnic, we had a service in the
native-built school-house about to a.m. There was a fairly large
audience, over eighty in all. It is not easy to speak to natives.
You have to do it in concrete terms and very figuratively, or
you will not be understood. There is scarcely an abstract term
in their languages ; they have little or no idea of what is meant
by a ‘ city,’ and none perhaps had ever seen a ‘ lamb,' both of
these words being in the text. In the afternoon I accompanied
the missionary to a village at some distance along the shore, in
the opposite direction to that we had gone on Saturday. We
held service on a slope in one of the irregular circles, in the
centre of which stood the wooden drums and symbols of idolatry.
There were about fifty present. The old chief sat at the feet of
the missionary; and his son, a handsome, strapping, intelligent
young fellow, recently returned from Queensland, sat on the rock
beside me and looked on my book. The Gospel has had a
powerful influence on the people, who are now beginning to under-
stand the missionary and look up to him as their friend, Peace is


established, and there is comparative safety in travelling. The
natives come to barter and to buy medicine and books from villages
at considerable distances. Several of these are asking for teachers,
and alas ! there are none to send. Although there are already
180 such teachers in the field, the one great need of the New
Hebrides is more native teachers. Hence the demand for an
Institute in which to develop and strengthen for this service the
physical, mental, and moral fibre, of the most promising of the
native young men and women.
“ On our return, we stepped aside to visit a few huts and see
some of the sick. At the entrance of three of these kennel-like
abodes we stopped and called to the inmates; when, in each case,
forth there crawled an old man black with dust and soot, shrivelled,
nude, and ashamed of his sores. The oldest case was perhaps the
most pitiable. Pardon the description, but the truth must be told.
From head to foot he was suffering from a loathsome, contagious
skin disease, while from every toe pus was oozing. This hardly
seemed the worst feature. He lived within a stone’s throw of the
sea and was yet so foul that the grey hair seemed rooted in earth
rather than in a human scalp. Some one has coarsely remarked
that medical and surgical work amongst these people is several
degrees below that of a veterinary surgeon ; but these savages
are, after all, members of the-human family—though its waifs—and
have the same hope. Capital cases these for the medical mis-
sionary to score by!—that is, to exemplify to the native mind in
the most telling way, the real nature of the Gospel of Christ.
Let no one infer that nothing has yet been done for them. The
Presbyterian Church throughout the world has sent into this field
men and women who for half a century have sorrowed and wept
with the heathen in their degradation, seeking to raise them to
better things, not without much success. Perhaps the most
striking though silent witness to this is the fact that nearly
every mission station has its own little graveyard. There are
churches and congregations here that put to shame many a
colonial settlement. Still, much remains to be done. Every
missionary is doing more or less medical work; but as Christianity
has founded its free hospitals in every civilized community, so
the necessary complement of the teaching here given is a similar
institution.”
LONDON : MORGAN AND SCOTT, 12, PATERNOSTER BUILDINGS.


TSforfa by Jftoryan ¥ hfcott
The evangelization
OF THE WORLD.
A Missionary Band. A Record of
Consecration, and an Appeal.
By B. BROOMHALL,
Secretary of the China Inland Mission.
Contains Three Maps and
numerous Illustrations and Portraits.
Cloth Bds., 2s. 6d.; Bev. Bds,, Gilt Edges, 3s. 6d.
“ This is a most remarkable book. ... It is one
of the most powerful appeals for Foreign Missions
issued in our time, and altogether perhaps the best
handbook that exists for preachers and speakers in
their behalf.”
The Church Missionary Intelligencer,
HAYS OF BLESSING
U IN INLAND CHINA.
An Account of Meetings held in
the Province of Shan-si.
Compiled by MONTAGUE BEAUCHAMP, B.A.
IVith an Introduction by
J. HUDSON TAYLOR, M.R.C.S., F.R.G.S.
With Illustrations and Maps. Cloth Boards, Is. 6d.
Volume I. Now Ready.
The story of the
CHINA INLAND MISSION.
By GERALDINE GUINNESS,
Author of “In the Far Fast."
With Introduction by
J. HUDSON TAYLOR, M.R.C.S., F.R.G.S.
In Two Volumes. Cloth Boards, 3s. 6d. each.
Illustrated with Coloured Maps, Portraits,
and Pictures.
P UNROOTY;
Or, the Gospel Winning its
Way among the Women of India.
By CLARA M. S. LOWE.
Cloth Boards, 2s. 6d.
“We have been charmed by this book. We could
not lay it aside till we had read it through. Exciting
as a novel, it stimulates a reader's faith, prayer,
consecration, and love of souls."— Star in the East.
DRINGING IN SHEAVES.
By Rev. A.
With Biographical Sketch of the Author.
CHINA’S SPIRITUAL NEEDS
AND CLAIMS.
By J. HUDSON TAYLOE, M.E.0.5., F.E.G.S.
With numerous Illustrations and Diagrams ;
Conspectus of Protestant Missions in China, &c.
Paper Covers, Is.; Cloth Bds., Gilt Edges, 2s. 6d.
“ The story of faith and work told in it should be
read by every earnest Christian. It is a mine of
wealth for the missionary speaker and deserves a
prominent place in missionary literature."
IVesleyan-Methodist Magazine.
WORKING AND WAITING
" FOR TIBET,
A Sketch of the Moravian Mission
to the Western Himalayas.
From the German of H. G. SCHNEIDER.
Translated and Revised by ARTHUR WARD.
With Illustrations.
Paper Covers, Is.; Cloth Limp, Is. 6d.
IN THE FAR EAST.
i Letters from Geraldine Guinness.
Edited by her Sister.
New and Enlarged Edition—Profusely Illustrated.
Bound in Ornamental Paper Boards, 35. ;
Cloth Boards, 4s.
Wiilt Introduction by
J. HUDSON TAYLOR, M.R.C.S., F.R.G.S.
THE WORK OF AN EVANGELIST.
B A Review of Fifty Years Labour.
By Rev. A. B. EARLE.
Tinted Covers, 6d.; Cloth Boards, Is.
“ A very interesting little work, by the author of
* Bringing in Sheaves.’ . . . We have here much in
little. The views of this aged worker are worthy of
serious consideration.” — King's Highway.
A Record of Evangelistic Labours.
B. EARLE.
Tinted Covers, Is.; Cloth Boards, ls.6d.
“There is much in this volume that could not fail to stimulate and encourage. It is prefaced by a
singularly interesting sketch of the author, who appears to be a man of remarkable devotedness, combined
with great earnestness.” — Preacher's Lantern.
“Local preachers will find this book just the thing to help them in their work, and to all such we
earnestly recommend it.”— Primitive Methodist.
London: MORGAN AND SCOTT, 12, Paternoster Buildings, E.C.
And may be Ordered oj any Bookseller.


PUBLISHED BY MORGAN AND SCOTT.
Morfcs. &
Fidelia fiske:
The Story of a Consecrated Life.
By REV. W. GUEST.
Tinted Covers, Is.; Cloth Boards, Is. 6d.;
Cloth Elegant, Gilt Edges, 3s. 6d.
“ Here is truth stranger and more thrilling than
fiction, the incidents of a missionary career which
are to the glory of God and of His truth.”
The Sword and Trowel.
ARY LYON:
Recollections of a Noble Woman.
By FIDELIA FISKE.
Tinted Covers, Is.; Cloth Boards, Is. 6d.
“Among American educators Mary Lyon occu-
pies a first place. The book is a study for teachers;
and still more for all who wish to exercise spiritual
influence over others, consecrating their work as
teachers to the noblest ends."— The Freeman.
Duncan matheson:
The Scottish Evangelist.
HIS LIFE AND LABOURS.
mui) HiUAike portrait.
Tinted Covers, Is. 6d.; Cloth Bds., 2s. 6d.
“The life of a real man, consecrated in life and
full of zeal for the Lord. This biography will not
only interest, but benefit a wide circle of readers."
. . . We are right glad to see so worthy a memorial
of so worthy a man.” —Sword and Trowel.
THE CHRISTIAN HERO:
Memoirs of Robert Annan of Dundee.
Wiiih STboa Illustrations.
Tinted Covers, Is.; Cloth Neat, Is. 6d. Cheap
Editions ; Tinted Covers, 6d.; Cloth Boards, Is.
SPECIAL CHEAP EDITION for Gratuitous Distri-
bution, 4to size ; Tinted Covers, Id.; 7s. per 100.
“ From first to last this volume is full of interest,
and valuable lessons are deduced from the life of
this humble but honoured servant of Christ."
l/'o-d and U'o’-k.
IOHN WESLEY:
W His Life and Times.
Wtf) portrait. By j. w. kirton, 11. d.,
Author of “ Buy your own Cherries."
Tinted Covers, 6d.; Cloth Limp, Is.;
Cloth Boards, Is. 6d.
“In some nineteen chapters Dr. Kirton tells in a
popular and fascinating style the Life of the great j
founder of Methodism. It is emphatically the bio- .
graphy of Wesley for the people.” |
Primitive Methodist. 1
(tEORCE WHITEFIELD:
W A Light Rising in Obscurity.
mitf) By J, E. Andrews,
Barnster-at-Law.
Tinted Covers, 6d.; Cloth Limp, is.; Cloth
Boards, Is. 6d. Presentation Edition : Cloth
Boards, Gilt Edges, ss.
“ The popular and powerful preacher, whose efforts
synchronised with those of the Wesleys, is here set
before us in a striking piece of portraiture ; and the
extracts from his diaries give many life-like touches
to the sketch.”— Publishers' Circular.
WORKS by D. L. MOODY.
The late Rev. C. 11. SPURGEON said;—
“There can be no need for us to commend the living, blazing speech of our brother Moody. Who
can equal him in natural simplicity, ail aglow with holy passion ' 1
POWER FROM ON HIGH.
Or, the Secret of Success in
Christian Life and Christian Service.
Tinted Covers, Is. ; Limp Cloth, Is. 6d. ;
Cloth Boards, 2s. 6d.
Full assurance of faith.
Some Thoughts on
Christian Confidence.
Limp Cloth, 6d. ; Cheap Edition, 2s. per doz.
A Complete Price List of all Mr.
on application
TO THE work: to the work:
A Series of Trumpet Calls
to Christian Service.
Tinted Covers, Is. ; Limp Cloth, Is, 6d.;
Cloth Boards, 2s. 6d.
PREVAILING PRAYER.
A Series of Addresses on Prayer.
Tinted Covers, Is.; Limp Cloth, is. 6d. ;
Cloth Boards, 2s. 6d.
Moody's Works may be had post free
to the Publishers.
LONDON: MORGAN AND SCOTT, 12, PATERNOSTER P>UILDINGS, E.C.
And may be Ordered of any Bookseller.


PUBLISHED BY MORGAN AND SCOTT.
Morftg for JBible Students. &
THE BIBLE REMEMBRANCER.
A Handbook to the
Old and New Testaments.
With Steel Frontispiece and 12 Maps, Containing
0 large amount of valuable Biblical information.
Tinted Covers, Is. ; Cloth, Is. 6d. ;
Cloth Boards, 2s.
“ We do not know a more useful Handbook for
Bible readers and Bible students. It seems to
embody nearly everything necessary in such a
book.” —Christian Commonwealth.
The tabernacle,
THE PRIESTHOOD,
AND THE OFFERINGS.
By HENKY W. SOLTAU.
With Four Beautiful Coloured Illustrations,
and numerous smaller Engravings.
Cloth, ss. ;
Cloth, Bevelled Boards, Gilt Edges, 6s.
“The work is full of teaching, spiritual, and far
reaching; and we have much enjoyed reading it.”
The Sword and Trowel.
CEARCHING THE SCRIPTURES.
ln Order to Abiding
Communion with God.
Also Suggestions for Bible Readings and Study;
and a than of Consecutive Daily Reading.
By Dr. J. ANDERSON, M.R.C.S.
Tinted Covers, Is. 6d.; Cloth Boards, 2s. 6d. ;
Cloth, Bevelled Boards, Gilt Edges, 3s. 6d.
“Preachers and teachers will find it a treasury of
thought, beautiful expositions, and fruitful sugges-
tions. The volume is nicely got up, and is suitable
for a prize or a present.” —Oldham Chronicle .
“THE CHRISTIAN”
■ BIBLE READINGS.
Notes and Readings on the Five
Books of Moses.
Genesis. Exodus. Leviticus.
Numbers. Deuteronomy.
Tinted Covers, Is.; Cloth Limp. Is. 6d.;
Cloth Bds., 25.; Cloth, Bev. Bds., Gilt Edges, 2s. 6d.
“A series of useful notes to accompany the
reading of the Pentateuch. If any of our Bible-
class Iriends should be thinking of studying this
part of God’s Word, they cannot do better than
accept theguidance proffered them in this volume,”
The Quiver.
QHRIST AND THE SCRIPTURES.
** The Living Word and
the Written Word.
By Rev. ADOLPH SAPHIR, D.D.
Tinted Covers, Is.; Cloth, Is. 6d.;
Cloth Bds., 35.; Cloth, Bev. Bds., Gilt Edges, 3s. 6d.
“The book is full of thought, and palpitates with
life. It is admirably adapted for the mature and
thoughtful; but it is peculiarly fitted to give a right
direction to the thoughts and lives of young, earnest,
and inquiring persons.”
Newcastle Daily Chronicle.
MOTES ON BIBLE READINGS.
A Collection of over
Six Hundred Subjects.
By S. R. BRIGGS and JOHN H. ELLIOTT.
Tinted Covers, 2s. 6d.;
Cloth, Bevelled Boards, Gilt Edges, 3s. 6d.
“A book which every Bible student should pos-
sess . . . And those who conduct Bible Readings
will find it most suggestive.” —Christian Pi ogress.
IN THE VOLUME OF THE BOOK.
* Or, The Pleasure and
Profit of Bible Study.
Being an Introduction to the Study of the
Holy Scriptures.
By Rev. 6. F. PENTECOST, D.D.
Tinted Covers, Is. 6d.; Cloth Limp, 25.;
Cloth Boards, 2s. 6<L
“No one can read this almost unique volume
without being stimulated to a more diligent study of
THE Book.' —Night and Day .
MANY INFALLIBLE PROOFS.
The Evidences of Christianity;
Or, The Written and the Living Word of God.
By Rev. A. T. PIERSON, D.D.
Tinted Covers, 25.; Cloth Boards, 2s. 6d.;
Cloth, Bevelled Boards, Gilt Edges, 3s. 6d.
“ For half-a-crown any one may obtain here all
that is best in the way of fact and argument on
prophecy and miracles ; on the scientific accuracy
and the ethical beauty and sublimity of the Bible;
and on the Person and teaching of Christ.”
Methodist Recorder.
LONDON: MORGAN AND SCOTT, 12, PATERNOSTER BUILDINGS, E.C.
And may be Ordered of any Bookseller.


EVERY THURSDAY.
PRICE ONE PENNY.
XEbe Christian.
A WEEKLY NEWSPAPER
Containing Accounts of Christian Work and Missionary Enterprise in
all Parts of the World.
ORIGINAL ARTICLES, NARRATIVES,
POETRY, NOTES ON PASSING EVENTS,
And GENERAL EVANGELISTIC INTELLIGENCE.
portraits and gtotjrapljical Sketches of (Eminent
Christian ani 'fiftlomcn.
Extract from a Lcttcr/rom a Missionary in China :
“ For some time past I have regularly received from an unknown friend a copy of
‘ (Ti)r Christian.’ I should like the kind sender to know how welcome the gift comes to
one living in the interior of tins land, far from European society and Christian intercourse/’
Extract from a Letter/rom a Missionary in India :
“ Your most interesting and valuable paper is really very edifying and strengthening to
believers of all standards, to the weak and strong alike.”
! On receipt of Postal Order for Is. Bd., CTljc tThnslum will be
j forwarded to any Address in Great Britain, direct from j
| the Publishers, post free, for 13 weeks. {
r
EIGHT PAGES MONTHLY. PRICE ONE HALFPENNY.
Zb e Ibevalb of flberc\>.
AN ILLUSTRATED MESSENGER FOR HUMBLE HOMES.
Each Number consists of Eight Quarto Pages, with Full-page Illus-
tration and several Smaller Engravings.
Containing
STIRRING APPEALS, NARRATIVES,
PAGES FOR THE YOUNG.
CHOICE EXTRACTS, &c. f &c.
“ Full of short, telling anecdotes ; rich in encouragement, comfort, and solemn warning.
They point to Christ and His unsearchable riches. The Illustrations are good and
suggestive.”— The Friend.
1 Eight copies of “The Herald of Mercy” will be sent post
free to any Address direct from the Publishers for 12
1 months on receipt of P.O, for 4s. |
LONDON: MORGAN AND SCOTT, 12, PATERNOSTER BUILDINGS, E.C.
And may Ic Ordered 0/any Bookseller or Xensagent.
