

CANOBOLAS
THE IDEAL SITH
FOR THE
FEDERAL CAPITAL


With the Compliments....
OF THE
ORANGE FEDERAL CAPITAL LEAGUE.
JAMES DALTON,
President.
E. H. STOBO, Hon Secretary.


CANOBOLA
THE BOEB4L
FOR THE
FeOEKM Cafbtae of Aostolba
ISSUED BY .. .
The Orange Federal Capital League
ORANGE,
New South Wales.


THE
ORANGE FEDERAL CAPITAL LEAGUE
Presents the following statement with regard to
the suitability of the CANOBOLAS district for the
location therein of the Federal Capital.
Much more might be written as to the qualifi-
cations of the district than is contained in these
pages, but the desire to condense as far as possible
(in order to endeavour to ensure perusal by those
with whom the decision in the matter of the se-
lection of the Site rests) has caused considerable
curtailment.
Orange, N. S.W., Australia,
ist May, 1902.
Geographical Position & Railway Communication
The proposed FEDERAL TERRITORY at
Canobolas is 192 miles west of Sydney, on the
main Western railway line of New South Wales.
It is connected by railway with Melbourne direct,
via the Blayney to Harden line (which connects
the Western and Southern lines of N. S.W.), dis-
tance 481 miles; and is also connected by rail
with Adelaide by that route, distance 963 miles;
and, by rail, with Brisbane, via Sydney, distance
915 miles.
The construction of the proposed railway line
from Werris Creek to Wellington, near Orange, to
connect the Northern line of N. S.W. with the
Western line (which is a certainty as an ordinary
State work in the near future) will bring Brisbane
by rail within about 615 miles of Orange.
The proposed extension of the Cobar branch
line to Broken Hill (which is also certain to be
carried out shortly as an ordinary State work )
will very greatly shorten the journey from Orange
to Adelaide, and (consequently) to Perth.
Connection with Hobart is, of course, via Sydney
or Melbourne.


Food Supplies
In regard to food supplies the district is fa-
voured by exceptional conditions, namely, a rich
volcanic soil, and an abundant rainfall, and its
ability to support a large population from its
own resources is unquestionable.
Almost every description of crop is now grown
with perfect success throughout the district; or-
chards and vineyards flourish ; failure of crops
from drought is unknown.
The following list of Exports of produce from
the district has been supplied from the official
records of the Railway Commissioners; —
Produce, forwarded from the Orange District (Mill-
thorpe, Spring Hill , and Orange, Stations) for
a period of two years ending 30th Jane , 1899.
Potatoes - - 197,194 bags
Turnips - - 1,741 ~
Pumpkins - - 3,029 ~
Wheat - - 30,273 ~
Oats - - 10,351 ~
Chaff
Hay
Straw
26,735 tons
Flour - - i 9.3 2 4 ~
Fruit - - 76,021 cases
A large increase of production is possible, as there
are large areas of land still uncleared within the
district which are suitable for cultivation.
Sheep, cattle, poultry, etc., of prime quality are
raised and fattened for market in large numbers,
and the town of Orange is now a central Depot
for sales of stock from a wide area of this State,
and also from Queensland.
Special Advantages
The proposed Federal TERRITORY of 100
square miles (or more if a larger area should be
determined upon) includes the town of Orange,
the Canobolas Mountains, and beautiful undulating
country, diversified and picturesque in character,
very fertile, and well-watered by perennial streams.


Magnificent views extending over a complete
radius of fully 60 miles are obtained from the
summit of the mountain range, which is easily
accessible by vehicles. The proposed CITY SITE
has an easterly and northerly aspect, its contour
and surroundings are all that can be desired, and
it is confidently asserted that no finer building
sites can be found anywhere than those in and
around it.
The advantage of having a town such as Orange
abutting on the City Site, with Municipal Gas-
works and Water Supply already existing, would
certainly be very great during the process of form-
ing the City, and erecting buildings.
In regard to this point, the fact that Orange
has already a perfect and over-abundant supply
of water by gravitation from the existing reservoir,
is of special importance, inasmuch as the workmen
and others employed can be supplied therefrom
with all water required for themselves and their
families, and for the works, there being a surplus
available over requirements (and generally a great
overflow) sufficient for double the present popula-
tion of Orange (now about 5,000).
Temporary buildings of all kinds can be erected,
and all necessaries of life, and luxuries, can be
immediately obtained.
No other proposed site can compare with CA-
NOBOLAS in regard to these special advan-
tages, and it is confidently believed by the Orange
Federal Capital Teague that the claims and qualifi-
cations of the district to be selected as the Site
for the Federal Capital are superior to those of
any other available site.


Mean
Hottest Mon. Coldest Mon.
Temperature.
. on Record.
on Record.
Jan.
i to Mar.
31 - 66‘3
- 75'2
58-3
April
i to June
30 - 48*6
- 64-6
37’5
July
i to Sept.
30 - 60’4
- 69-8
49-8
Oct.
i to Dec.
31 * 44’2
- 50-4
36-9
Climate and Rainfall
The climate of the district is thus referred to
by His Honor Mr. Alexander Oliver, M.A., Fede-
ral Capital Site Commissioner, in his report dated
26th October, 1900, to the Government of New
South Wales :
“The climate of Canobolas, from the superior
altitude of the site and its position on the
fall of the plateau toward the great West-
ern plains, is preferable to that of any
Western site, and I believe that the com-
paratively high rainfall of Canobolas is
climatically beneficial, and in no way in-
jurious to health.’’
Also under the heading “Summary of Conclu-
sions’’ the Commissioner says:—
“If the quality of the soil and the character
of the climate are accepted as the con-
trolling factors, Orange ( or Canobolas )
would be entitled to first place.”
That is, first place among all the proposed sites.
The following statistics with reference to the
climate and rainfall of Orange have been supplied
by the Government Astronomer of New South
Wales :
Range and Mean of Temperature during
each Quarter of the Year, beginning
with January.
These figures show the mean for 27 years.
Rainfall.
Ist Jan. to 31st March - - B*7B inches
Ist April to 30th June - - 10*83 ~
Ist July to 30th Sept. - - 10*32 ~
Ist Oct. to 31st Dec. - - 9'39 ~
Total, 39*32 per annum.
These figures show the average for 27 years.


Healthiness and Altitude
The healthiness of the district is proverbial,
and medical gentlemen highly recommend it as a
health resort.
The locally-born persons are famous for longevity.
Orange is frequently quoted as one of the health-
iest places in Australia all the year round.
It enjoys complete immunity from fogs, and the
air is always bracing and light.
The proposed CITY SITE adjoins the town of
Orange, and is about 2,800 feet above sea level.
The Canobolas Mountains, lying to the West,
eight miles distant, attain the height of 4,600 feet
above sea level.
Water Supply
The town of Orange has already an abundant
water supply, obtained by gravitation from a reser-
voir on Gosling Creek, one of the streams flowing
from the Canobolas Mountains. The reservoir has
a holding capacity of 145 million gallons, and is
almost always full.
For the purpose of affording an ample supply
for the proposed Federal Capital, the construction
of a reservoir is contemplated in the Meadow
Creek Valley, about five miles distant from the
proposed City Site. Perfect facilities exist there
for the storage of an enormous quantity of pure
water. It is also proposed, in the event of it
being necessary in the future to supplement the
supply from Meadow Creek, to construct a reser-
voir on Cadiangullong Creek, about 10 miles dis-
tant from the proposed City Site, where perfect
facilities also exist for water conservation.
At both Meadow and Cadiangullong Creeks
earthen dams can be constructed at small cost,
there being a very large quantity of suitable clay
at both places.
The streams in question flow from the Canobo-
las Mountains, and have separate, extensive and
almost wholly unoccupied watersheds, consisting
principally of Crown Lands (Reserves), every acre
of which is within the proposed Federal Territory
of 100 square miles. Their capabilities have re-
cently been strictly tested by the Engineer -in -


Chief for Water Supply and Sewerage for New
South Wales (Mr. L. A. B. Wade) and his officers,
and the detailed result will doubtless appear in
the supplementary report of• the Federal Capital
Site Commissioner at an early date.
Drainage
The proposed City Site is admirably situated
for a system of sewerage, as the country falls
gradually towards the north.
Building Materials
Evidence as to the building materials available
at Orange was given at the Supplementary Inquiry
held by the Commissioner on 30th September and
Ist October, 1901, by Mr. W. L. Vernon, the Go-
vernment Architect of New South Wales, and the
Rev. J. Milne Curran, Lecturer on Geology and
Chemistry to the Department of Public Instruc-
tion. Their evidence showed in the clearest and
most unmistakable manner that the Canobolas
district stands in a unique position in this respect.
BASALT, TRACHYTE, MARBLE, FREE-
STONE, GRANITE, LIMESTONE, BRICK-
CLAYS AND FLAG-STONES were shown to
exist in the district in practically inexhaustible
quantities, and in most convenient positions.
The Trachyte has been tested and proved to be
a true Trachyte, distinct from anything that has
heretofore been found in Australia. It is of im-
mense value for building purposes.
Hardwood and pine can be obtained in various
parts of the Western districts in the vicinity of
railway lines.
Foundations
An important feature of the proposed City
Site is that it affords perfect foundations for build-
ing purposes, resting as it does on basalt over
clays and diorite.
Fuel
The extensive and well-known coal mines at
Lithgow and Eskbank are distant, by rail, only
95 miles East of Canobolas.


TOWN OF ORANGE, AND SURROUNDINGS.
BURSLE, PHOTO., ORANGE.


OVERLOOKING PROPOSED CITY SITE.
BURSLE, PHOTO., ORANGE.


RESERVOIR, GOSLING CREEK, ORANGE.
BUHSLE, PHOTO., ORANGE,


PART OF PROPOSED CITY SITE.
BURSLE, PHOTO., ORANGE.


PART OF PROPOSED CITY SITE.
BURSLE, PHOTO., ORANGE.


BORSLE, PHOTO., ORANGE,
OPHIR FALLS, CANOBOLAS.


MEADOW CREEK VALLEY, CANOBOLAS.
(A PROPOSED RESERVOIR SITE.)
BURSLE PHOTO., ORANGE.


PART OF WATERSHED, CANOBOLAS; ELEVATION, 4,600 FEET.
BURSLE, PHOTO., ORANGE.


BURSLE, PHOTO., ORANGE.
HOPETOUN FALLS, CANOBOLAS.


PART OF COOK PARK, ORANGE.
BURSLE, PHOTO., ORANGE.


BURSLE, PHOTO., ORANGE
KANGAROOBIE FALLS, CANOBOLAS.


SUMMERHILL CREEK, OPHIR, NEAR ORANGE.
THE SITE OF THE FIRST DISCOVERY OF PAYABLE GOLD IN AUSTRALIA.






MAP
OF
AUSTRALIA
SHEWING EXISTING and PROPOSED
RAILWAYS


