

O'CONNELL CENTENARY
CELEBRATION.
1875.
Cantata by Dr. Badham
(SYDNEY UNIVERSITY).
Sydney:
J. G. O’Connor, Printer, &c., 18 Jamieson Street.
1875.
BXJBXjXSHEID by the committee.




O'CONNELL CENTENARY
CELEBRATION.
1875.
Cantata by Dr. Badham
(SYDNEY UNIVERSITY).
Sydney
J. G. O’Connor, Printer, &c., 19 Jamieson Street.
1875.
PUBLISHED B"3T THE! COMMITTEE.




CANTATA.
EXILE,
WITH CHORUS.
The stars that watch our slumbers never knew thee,
Erin, i\or cheered the cradle of our birth ;
And to long-fasting eyes, that fain would view thee,
Stands as a wall the solid globe of earth.
Still dream we out the dull relentless story ;
Zone after zone of the unchanging sea;
Across the sun’s diurnal path of glory—
On I on ! until we wake, but not on thee I
What we could save of thee, that bore we hither,
The Exile’s only wealth, the one dear thought,
The one dear name, that shall be last to wither, —
To wither when all memories are nought.
But now ’tis as the sea’s returning waters
Filling the shores and inlets of the soul;
For through the world shall Erin’s sons and daughters
This day their great Deliverer extol.
But come, lerne, minstrel of our choice I
We know thy father was our Champion’s friend;
Now let thy harp and voice
Each strive for mastery, each with the other blend 1
3


lERNE.
RECITATIVE.
It was an aged seer who sought to gain
A silent deathbed upon Tara’s sod;
And, ere he yielded up his soul to God,
Thus did he utter his prophetic strain :
AIR.
If, Erin, thy birthright were other than queenly,
If dull were thy mind, as ignoble thy woes,
No power had Fortune to rack thee so keenly
By mocking and marring what Nature bestows.
Thy brow was for mirth, but the rents of thy mourning
Reveal all the furrows thy shame would disguise,
And tears ever hang on the fringes adorning
Those orbs that should mirror the depths of the skies.
0 dowered with gifts as the darling of Heaven,
Made rich bnt to spoil, and made fair to betray!
But the hour is appointed, the Champion is given;
The dark spell that binds thee shall vanish away I
The sound of one voice all thy thousands shall rally ;
No threat shall they utter, no sword shall they draw:
March, march to your triumph! while Peace in her valley
Reposes serene in the shelter of Law.
CHORUS.
Hail, mighty Orator! hail, wise Defender!
Wiping the dishonor from our ancient creed !
Fierce in debate, and yet as woman tender,
Through the world dispensing balm to those who need!
4


Free as the bolt of Jove scathing the offender,
Slaving all thy life that others might be freed!
For thy immortal work what can we render,
Rearing its own monument, reaping its own meed ?
AN EXILE.
RECITATIVE.
Hear how, with temperate and dauntless word,
He scouted faction and denounced the sword:—
AIR.
His soul hath not fair Freedom’s hue
Who wears the stealthy dagger at his side.
Half-hearted patriots ! by you
The despot and his crew
Are made more strong and well-nigh justified.
Oh ! help not those who batten on your harms
By idle muttering and clandestine arms I
Seek not with curses to affray,
For Power affrighted is a beast of prey ;
And shame will pierce where menaces rebound,
Hardening the breast they cannot wound.
The calm keen eye fixed on the offender’s face
(Rather as offering than asking grace),
Surer than any dart
Can shoot remorse for unrequited wrong
So deep into the heart,
That startled Conscience weeps for having slept so long.
6


Out on the sword ! out on the sword !
It goads the injustice which it cannot smite.
Be Reason’s sovereign word
The only weapon of your countless throngs !
Swell loud the diapason of our right!
For justice pealing from ten thousand tongues
Is as a trumpet of the Lord of Hosts ;
The strongholds of the proud, without a thrust,
Fall flat before it, while the dust
Mounts from the crumbled towers like their departing ghosts.
CHORUS.
Hail, mighty Orator! hail, wise Defender ! &c., &c.
A PRIEST.
RECITATIVE.
He spake and conquered, and he speaketh still:—
AIR.
Out on the sword ! out on the sword I
0 Erin! hear thy Liberator’s word,
And let his warning through thy bosom thrill!
Yet keep the sword ! yet keep the sword I
It is a treasure to be stored
Against the day that comes upon the world.
When from the barbarous North is hurled
The thunderbolt of brutal conquerors ;
When that fell demon whom thy soul abhors,
Who stamps the heel of military rule
On Church and Senate, Guild and School,
And clanks defiance in the House of Prayer,
(Art thou not there, O Lord? art thou not there?)
6


Would level into one Imperial waste
Whatever Time has built or Virtue graced,—
Then, then, ye brethren all!
The guardians of Freedom’s chosen land !
For your united islands stand,
Locked in the fierce resolve to conquer or to fall!
CHORUS.
Ye brethren all! ye brethren all!
The guardians of Freedom’s chosen land !
For your united islands stand,
Locked in the fierce resolve to conquer or to fall!
7






