

When read please hand to a Friend.
CAPITAL
LABOUR AND TAXATION
SOME PLEAS FOR COMMON SENSE,
C. MCKAY SMITH
Author of “Trade Depression and Wasted Resources,-” “The
Taxation of Property:” State Socialism,” &c., &c.
SYDNEY:
TURNER AND HENDERSON,




j=rs'i c t'o
CAPITAL
LABOUR AND TAXATION
SOME PLEAS EOft COMMON SENSE,
C. MCKAY SMITH,
Author of “Trade Depression and Wasted Resources;” “The
Taxation of Property;” State Socialism,” &c., &c.
SYDNEY:
TURNER AND HENDERSON,


many changes, aptly join’d,
Is bodied forth the second whole;
Regard gradation, lest the soul
Of Discord race the rising wind.
A wind to puff your idol-fires,
And heap their ashes on the head ;
To shame the boast so often made,
That we are wiser than our sires.
— Tennyson.


Sojne Pleas for Common Sense.
CAPITAL,
LABOUR, AND TAXATION.
New South Wales is in the 107th year of her history as
a Colony, and has seen her 39th anniversary as a self-
governing State. Her people became the beneficiaries
of a rich territory, delivered to them in fee-simple,
free of let or incumbrance, within the memory of many
among us, even now not far beyond their prime. No enemy
threatens her borders. Our colony has her portion in the
inheritance pf a worthy national tradition. In the varied
spheres of political philosophy, literature, science, and art,
her mother tongue opens to her an untold wealth of know-
ledge, experience, and enjoyment. Can any reasonable
being venture to stake his reputation for sagacity upon the
assertion that in this 1894, in which these words are
written, there is anything in the ripened crop corresponding
to the conditions under which the soil was ploughed and
sown ? The exhibits which mostly force themselves upon
the attention of the dispassionate stock-taker are a ran-
corous class jealousy, and a deeply rooted sense of political
distrust, operating as a benumbing and sterilising influence
in the spheres of production and commerce.
In selecting the words " Capital, Labour, and Taxa-
tion ” as the title of this paper, it is unavoidable that I
should occupy myself more or less with the aspects of the
political situation which they cover and include. And I
select them under the belief that a useful service may be
rendered my fellow colonists in an endeavour to popularise
views bearing upon their functions and inter-relationship
which are obscured to us in the distracting haze of political
conflict.
rn 3355 /F(slio/x
m. r■


To begin with :
What sort of thing is this Capital?
Without aiming at scientific definitions, is it not simply
another name for accumulated substance, no matter
whether held in gold, wool, tea, sugar, or other tangible,
warehousable or exchangeable commodity ? Or it may exist
in the form of a beneficial interest or a right of usufruct in
a specific part of the soil. I should prefer to restrict the
first of these definitions to commodities not readily perish-
able, and capable of being stored for other than immediate
use. Capital I claim to be an alternative term for abundance.
And if the capitalist—that is to say, the instrument through
whom an appreciable part of this abundance is reserved for
other than the needs of the passing day—is in soberness
and truth the miscreant he is habitually represented to be
by leading trades’ unionists, by some varieties of poli-
ticians, and by a section of the Press appealing to the
baser instincts of our kind, we surely do well to keep our
souls untainted by association with him. But that for
which I am about to contend is that in an advanced society,
under an ordered Government, and in circumstances in which
a free personal initiative is allowed to productive energy,
Stored Wealth, Accumulation, Abundance-
call it any name you like—is not only the root and feeder of
everything which ministers to national prosperity; but that
even if he fails in becoming himself an accumulator, the
poor man has relatively a larger and more direct and vital
interest in the fact of accumulation than the rich one.
The late Lord Bramwell, on one occasion bringing
down his formidable pick upon the oracular pretensions
of Mr. Henry George, thus exposes the bed rock of
the whole argument (" Liberty and Property Defence
“ League ” Tracts\ :
“ Let us take one of his new communities where Anglo-Saxon vigour
is at work. An Anglo-Saxon goes to a settler for work. ‘ Yes, there are
three trees to be cut down, but I shall have nothing to give you for six
months, when the timber merchant buys of me.’ ‘ Well,’ says the workman,
‘ but I want food and clothing ; meanwhile, let us go to the timber merchant.’
He is willing to take the timber, but can’t give the price or value till the
house-builder buys, which will be in six months. Then they go to the
builder, who has store of meat and wheat and clothing. He agrees to
advance it to the timber merchant, who advances it to the farmer, who
advances it to the labourer, who labours. Does Mr. George say that in this
case capital has nothing to do with setting labour to work ? But this is
the case with all work in civilised societies. It is the case where the
capitalist finds the ship, the weapons, and the food of the whale-fisher ”


and so on. The effect of the words is to show that until
someone begins the practice of storing up things available
in exchange, material progress would be a mere impos-
sibility.
There is this difficulty facing one at the start. If there
were a reasoned case to meet, a tough resisting medium to
confront, there would be some satisfaction in undertaking
the defence of Capitalism. Socialism, avowed and con-
fessed, has, no doubt, its foolish literature and its foolish
formulas, in which the subject is duly mauled and mangled.
But in the sphere of what is happily still open opinion, we
look in vain for the controversialist ready to undertake in a
manner tempered with reason and intelligence, the task of
demonstrating to us that we are all wrong in estimating as
we do the benefaction conferred upon the social economy
by the fact of accumulation. It is true we have a redun-
dancy of triple-lunged loudness invested in the business of
denunciation; but if
Capitalism
be truthfully describable as the last possibility in the way
of badness, there is surely some form of words, apart from
the claptrap of a Domain Sunday denunciator, which will
fittingly bring that proposition home to our minds and
consciences. I had the curiosity to cut out and place in
my scrap book a letter addressed on on,e occasion to the
Sydney Morning Herald , which as neatly as may be
samples the kind of thing thought good enough to fling
against the unhappy capitalist. Said this correspondent,
who, peculiarly enough, would seem to be preaching from
the dock rather than from the body of the Court:—
“It happened last year that I did not purchase woolpacks until late
in the season; just before I wanted them stocks in Sydney were low.
Capital, ever on the look-out for an opportunity to benefit the people (?),
seized the opportunity, bought up the remaining packs, and for my benefit,
I suppose, charged me a little over cent, per cent, advance on the ordinary
price.”
Leaving aside this writer’s ominous candidature for the
guillotine as a confessed aristocrat (for otherwise what
could he want with woolpacks ?) his two quoted sentences
afford, perhaps, as good an illustration as any we are
likely to meet with, of the prejudices which, in an acerbated
controversial atmosphere, are apt to displace sober reason-
ing and better sense. To destroy, whether by legislative
enactment or by the exercise of wrongly directed opinion,
the speculative element in the operations of daily life,


would, if possible or practicable, be to destroy an influence
under the operation of which, in our complex society, we
are lodged, clothed, and. fed. The gentleman who paid
double price for his woolpacks in the area of free
tition, may lay his account to pay quadruple under any
system in which, folly being rampant, the uses to which
people may apply their accumulated substance—their
capital—are to be dictated to them by authority.
Speculation on a large and active scale,
of which capital is directly the basis, operates correctively to
the prosperity of the area within which it prevails. In a stag-
nant community it is passive. Among aboriginal savages it
is non-existent. In individual instances it may work occa-
sional hardship, but I appeal to common experience whether
it is a truth or anything near a truth, the allegation, that its
tendency is to scarcen the quantity or enhance the cost
either of the necessities or conveniences of existence. If
by any mechanical contrivance it could be suspended for
six months,, one of its immediate visible products w r ould be
almost universal starvation.
It may be asked, why do you take the trouble to write
a book to tell us things so trite, so palpable, so obvious?
It is because it stands charged against the more educated
and propertied section of the community that it presents
no united front to forces actively engaged in the cause of
social and political disintegration ; that to a great extent
it has been sitting still, while political ambitions—l write
with no special reference to the politics of the passing
hour-r-joining hands with ignorance, credulity, and a sickly
green type of semi-feminine transcendentalism, have been
rearing among us a set of nebulous socialistic ideals of
threatening import to all that is best in our national life.
It, is because of the necessity of arousing that section to
the folly of remaining placidly inert while the rising tide,
already at its waist, is making for its neck. In plain truth,
no subject more important than that which forms the staple
of my inquiry could come before you at the present time.
The thriftful storage of reserve wealth for future use, for
which capitalism is merely a convenient synonym, is not
alone among ourselves, but everywhere, threatened by a
combination of forces, active or negative, in which may be
included the gradual debasement of the literary and critical
instinct by your state educational machine methods, and
the growth and spread of socialistic teaching.


A Congested Labour Market
is of course so much material ready to the hand of those
who find an interest in widening the area of the anti-
capitalistic propaganda. I have referred in terms of
perhaps needless disparagement to the oratory of the
Sunday Domain politician. I owe him an apology.
Let us hark back to the efforts of a few of his more
highly-placed rivals, whose sweet councils of wisdom in
the not very remote past, have had no inconsiderable
share in forming the minds and framing the opinions of the
political section which is at the present hour throughout
these colonies, pulling at every rope which may chance: to
give it a preponderating influence in the parliamentary
sphere. This is the evidence given by the late Premier,
now CHIEF Justice, of Queensland, before the Royal Com-
mission on Labour, which sat in Sydney in the early months
of 1891: —“ He had never been able to distinguish the sale of
“ a man’s personal service from the doctrine of slavery . . .
“ The natural and proper measure of wages is such a sum
“as is a fair immediate recompense for the labour for which
“ they are paid, but it can never be taken at a less sum
“than such as is sufficient to maintain the labourer and his
“ family in health and reasonable comfort.” Asked how to
determine the standard of reasonable comfort: —•“ It might
“vary from day to day. It would be for the Courts to
“ determine when the matter came before them what was a
“fair rate.” Asked how to differentiate between the means
necessary to ensure the health and comfort of a large family
as compared to a small one, Sir Samuel Griffith “ would, not
f ‘ deal with separate cases in separate families. You must
“take the human family as a whole” The “ Courts” and
the lawyers would at all events, have a high time of it over
this rather considerable order. Mr. ATTORNEY GENERAL
KINGSTON, now Premier of South Australia, giving evidence
before the same Commission—evidence substantially re-
affirmed in a recent issue of a popular publication:—“ did not
“ think it would savour of slavery to compel a man to return to
“ work against his will after the case had been thoroughly
“argued,” and conversely was of opinion that “ the em-
“ ployer, in the event of an adverse decision, should pay
“ wages fixed by the tribunal, even if he saw an imminent
“ risk of losing his whole fortune by carrying on. - " The
spectacle of a batch of constables driving, in accord-
ance with a ruling of the Court, reluctant work-people


before them to forced labour in the mill or the foundry,
while in another part of the town the recalcitrant capitalist
is being haled to the lock-up for the felonious atrocity of
not allowing himself to be cheerfully ruined, could only be
presented as a serious possibility to people from whom all
sense of humour was rapidly drifting. A late CHIEF
JUSTICE of Victoria was an ostentatious monetary supporter
of an anti-capitalistic labour strike, disastrously aimed
against the most elementary principle of human freedom.
If every labourer is entitled to obtain in exchange for
his toil the reasonably comfortable subsistence which Sir
Samuel Griffith would assure to him, it must be de-
mandable if the words have any sense or meaning, from some
particular person or persons. Let us suppose, then,
that from causes entirely beyond individual control, there
ensues a certain
stagnation in the business of production,
and by unavoidable consequence, congestion in the
labour supply. If it be made a function of State to
dictate to those who employ their savings in active indus-
trial enterprise that their works must be kept going, and
their work-people kept together in “reasonable comfort”
at their expense, without regard to the circumstances of the
market, it is equivalent to saying that it is the business of
Governments to drive people into the Bankruptcy Court.
Under the free play of natural conditions men would
exercise their ingenuity in numberless ways in seeking
something to do wherever it might be found. Impelled by
their necessities they would be driven from the towns to
find useful employment, probably enough in the first
instance at very low wages, in the remoter districts of the
colony. Production would go on, and the recuperative
forces of the industrial system would gradually re-assert
themselves until by-and-byethe return swing of the pendulum
would, by an increased demand, re-establish a premium upon
labour. But in discrediting the automatic remedy, we are
left, so far as I can see, no alternative other than that which
directly lands us among the State Socialists, with the
necessary acceptance of the conclusion that the accumulated
substance which men have either inherited or created under
a system of free initiative and free opportunity, is to be
put into the common pot for manipulation under a set of
managers, to whom no one, unless bereft of his senses,


would voluntarily entrust the custody of half-a-crown. But
then have we not a
Council of Conciliation and Arbitration
charged with the function of introducing comfort and joy
into the relations between Capital and Labour? We have.
It belongs to a series of departmental luxuries —the In-
spectorship of Scaffoldings is another of them—which
Governments bursting with superfluous wealth can always
create. Whether or not the people composing the Council
laugh when among themselves, like the augurs of old, I
cannot tell. Of practical failure it is as complete an
exemplification as anything can be. But it has its
ambitions. “ Compulsory arbitration,” so called, is un-
doubtedly to be the next move in the game. The attempt
is in the air to reduce the crass absurdities of the profound
economists from whom I have quoted into concrete realities.
In the course of a sermon, delivered apparently to a congre-
gation consisting of a solitary stray member of the globe-
trotting persuasion possessed of some pretentious self-consti-
tuted mission—l do not, of course, count in the elders and
deacons supplied on the premises in Phillip Street —we
learn from Dr. Garran, the President of the Council
(Sydney Morning Herald ) 9th October), that :
“ The proposal to force a hearing of the merits of trade disputes is
not in any way a revolutionary proposal. It in no way tends to discourage
enterprise or hamper industrial energy; it in no way detracts from the
liberty of the employer. What person, what principle is injured by the
attempt ?”
To plough my way through the laboured case from
which these principles get themselves educed, I felt
to be not only a dreary but a painful task. If offence be
taken at my words I cannot help it. I do not set down
aught in malice. But if the subject is to be discussed at
all, one cannot possibly avoid remarking that the presump-
tion is against the moral validity of an advocacy in which the
advocate has a deep personal interest. For plainly enough
with the Council of Conciliation it is an alternative between
the erection of an autocratic industrial “Star Chamber”
and early extinction. But I take larger ground. To
“force a hearing” in the sense in which the words are
used, would be simply nonsensical without the natural
corollary of an enforced verdict; and although any such
ultima ratio is discreetly veiled in the address under
review, it is still perceptibly within the line of vision. I


dispute the whole discourse—the heads, the body, the con-
clusion. I decline even to argue upon it, for the reason
that if we have really touched the point at which ancient
Peruvian methods in the industrial sphere are to be re-
garded as an open question, the opportunities remaining
to us for the unmolested exercise of our faculties would
constitute so poor an asset as not to be worth defending.
There is nothing, even in the irresponsible despotisms of
Persia or Morocco, corresponding to the claims urged at
present so gingerly by this peculiar judicature. Well did
Dr. GARRAN observe on an occasion on which he did his
fine powers better justice :
“ Civilisation is not something that has been met with by humanity
in its march, still less is it anything invented or designed by Governments.
It is a result painfully achieved by enormous toil—of co-operation and
antagonism, of love and hate, of war and peace, of failure and success, of
progress and retardation, of reform and relapse. The work of society has
been the work of individuals in society, the influence of individuals on each
other, and the influence of social culture on individuals.”
Individuals, that is, with their individuality left to them a s
God gave it, and not as machined out of recognition by
“Boards” and kindred encroachments of grandmotherly
officialdom.
What is beyond comprehension is that propositions
rooted and grounded in a sort of emotional apology for
philanthrophy are put before us as universally and per-
manently applicable, without the smallest perception of the
fine balance on which the social fabric is poised, or of the
folly, the worse than folly, of attenuating the motives and
obliterating in men’s minds the instincts which prompt them
to provide for other than the wants of the passing day—
motives and instincts the healthy operation of which, under a
Government of ordered freedom, is the chief thing which
differentiates us from the savage whom we have super-
seded.
The Lot of the Capitalist
may be rendered intolerable in many convenient ways
We are not, I think, as yet near the point at which he may
be robbed with impunity in the face of day. But I have
offered evidence of the vein in which the section of
capitalism willing to incur the grave responsibility of em-
barking largely in pastoral pursuits, or in extensive plant,
machinery, or stock-in-trade, has to adapt its mind to a
place in the pillory as the banded oppressor of the working


class. And what I have to urge here is that by imposing
upon capital a preponderating and gradually overwhelming
share of annual taxation, you can as easily and
effectively compass its ultimate extinction, as if you con-
nived at the simpler process in which revolver and
“jimmy” play the principal part. Say, for example, that
this capital or stored wealth is embarked in a factory or
coal mine ; you can practically efface its owner by the double
method of taxing his principal and obstructing his industry
by puerile legislative restrictions aimed directly against
the principle of free contract —I might rather say of per-
sonal freedom.
If a Pastoralist or Landholder
on any considerable scale, you can at all times rear a
tempting political vision for yourself by your attitude towards
him. He has been regarded as simply of the classification
ferae naturae —a thing to be hunted. In no way can one
show a healthier attachment to the ideal of citizenship than
by acquiring a patch of the soil which he can call his very
own. In freehold ownership, or even in the latent am-
bition which points to landed proprietorship as the vision
in front of a successful business career, is to be found the
germ of the national sentiment in its worthiest sense. But
what is likely to be the effect of theories now openly main-
tained and promulgated upon those who, under normal
circumstances, would look forward to indulgence in this
form of investment ? The venerable Henry Georgian tags
come up again smiling and get thrust in their faces. Says
Sir Henry Parkes to them (electoral address to the
constituency of St. Leonards, Herald, 3rd July) :
“ A land tax is recognised as sound by the highest authorities, and
it possesses the twofold advantages of raising revenue, and at the same
time assisting to make land more productive for the general community.”*
Mr. G. H. Reid’s views (.Herald advertisement, July 2)
cannot be done justice to in a short extract.
“ The temporary but very serious loss of revenue caused by the
doing of that long-promised thing,” [the simplification of the tariff]
observes that gentleman, “ will raise another question of importance.
How is the large sum which will be left in the pockets of the people
after tariff reform to be made good to the Treasury ? After every
* According to our theorists a high state of prosperity must necessarily prevail in the
home county of Essex. On the authority of the London Spectator, the freehold of good
wheat-growing land within 40 miles of London, much of it mortgaged up to £25 an acre,
is purchasable in that county in any quantity at the prairie price, locality considered, of
£6 an acre ! This is, of course, partially owing to the unprecedented depression in bread-
stuffs, but chiefly to the cumulative operation of constantly growing taxation, both
Imperial and local, which makes it impossible to let or otherwise apply the soil to profitable
use. People will not take the farms rent free on condition of paying rates and taxes.
a 2


effort at economy, it is clear fresh revenue to make up for the duties
taken off must be found. Where is it to come from? Let uS sup-
pose that the new tariff will yield, with Other taxation left on, about
.£2,000,000 a year. The great bulk of the money derived from a tariff
like that proposed would come from the mass of the people, living on wages
or salary. Surely if bone and muscle find two millions a year towards the
cost of government, land and realised wealth can find one ! Especially as
in most cases the taxes taken off will equal or exceed those put on To
place an unfair share of the cost of government on the weaker shoulders is
wrong ; to place nearly the whole upon such shoulders is iniquitous. Yet
that is what our present fiscal system does.”
“ In every country indirect taxation breeds extravagance and corrup-
tion. Direct taxation, on the other hand, goes hand in hand with economy
and good government.”
Here I have to confront a difficulty. The first note
in which accumulated substance was threatened with the
penalisation of
Direct Taxation
was sounded, 1 think, in 1887, when a Cabinet Minister,
a guest at some Eight Hours Demonstration dinner,
captured the hearts of his entertainers by the declara-
tion that it was the intention of himself and his
colleagues so to dispense the burdens of taxation, as
to “ fall especially on those who had gained, great
“ wealth, and that capital 'would have to pay for its own
“ production.” Ever since then the threat has in various
forms been a continuous one. But while one section
has contended that land alone should bear the burden,
another, scarcely less active, using the more compre-
hensive phrase “property,” makes the demand that
capitalism, whatever form it may assume, should bear its
part in the operation. Mr. B. R. WISE, I believe, inclines
to the differentiation of land as a subject of direct taxation
from other media of thriftful provision. Mr. Reid, on the
other hand, could not imagine (in September, 1893) “why a
“ man with a warehouse worth £IOO,OOO full of goods
“should go free/’ The Parkes-Burns Administration of
1887, taking up their parable from their immediate pre-
decessors, were the first to formulate parliamentary and
extra-parliamentary threats into concrete propositions. A
tax of id. in the £ was to be imposed on “ unimproved land
“ values, as well as on the capital, reserves, and deposits of
“ all Banking, Mortgage, and Loan companies, Insurance
“ companies, and Financial institutions of whatsoever
« kind.” No clue whatever was given as to the reasons
why, for example, a private lender on mortgage should be


free to conduct his business unmolested, while incorporated
mortgagees should be levied upon ; or why certain classes
of investments were invidiously brought into the scheme,
while others were to go free. From the day of the
abandonment of these abortive proposals to the present
hour every platform in the country, every bench in the
Parliamentary area, every meeting place of amateur debate
has rung with the dull reiteration of Tax the Land ; Tax
the Capitalist; Let us so influence the public mind as that
legislation and administration shall be diverted into instru-
ments of oppression towards those who, in the scheme of
their personal and domestic economies, look beyond the
necessities of the passing day.
To Thoughtful Politicians
seven years would seem a sufficient interval for politicians
to agree upon, and formulate some plan among themselves
in virtue of which they could present a united front both to
political opponents and to those pestilent critics to whom
nothing is sacred. But even the resurgated activities of
the Free Trade and Land Reform Electoral Committee
have so far proved unequal to so manifest an obligation.
Soon, however, the promissory notes of the late electoral
campaign fall remorselessly due. May I risk the surmise
that the task of brushing and combing the logic of
the platform into propositions for serious parlia-
mentary use is one not especially calculated to bring
happiness into the lives of those who have, with perhaps
too cheerful a confidence, undertaken it.
The Problem of Taxation.
Let me now turn more in detail to some of the
interesting extracts submitted to you. Before doing so,
.1 should, however, like to observe that one of the
necessities of intelligent controversy is a common
starting point. Not very long ago it would have seemed
reasonable to have assumed universal assent to the simple
proposition that all taxation is of the nature of an obstruc-
tion and a nuisance, and is only tolerable in so far as it is
unavoidable for administrative needs. But we seem to
have changed all that. “It would take too long,” observed
Mr. WISE during the campaign of August, 1893, 1,1 to
u explain in detail all the social advantages of a land tax.”


Too long! For my own part, I should have considered an
evening well spent by any orator who should undertake to
thrust home so remarkable a theorem. Mr. Reid, on the
same occasion, cautiously absolved himself from the neces-
sity of “ going into the abstract question at all.” It
would therefore seem a peculiarity of this new economic
departure that no one connected with it can find time or
opportunity to afford us the most modest inventory of the
collateral advantages derivable from land taxation. If
there be reality and truth in our discovery of a form of
taxation which blesses both giver and receiver, we have
touched a point in national development which should make
old world peoples green with envy. Gladly would I ask
you to believe in it. But in this essentially secular conten-
tion people must take the liberty of probing the conclusions
submitted to them. Blind faith is completely out of place.
It is therefore all the more disappointing to find that in the
present instance there is nothing better to rely upon than
the mere dicta of the converted, the original canon being,
I suppose, stowed away in the private Vatican of the
Supreme Pontiff, Mr. Henry George. Supposing I invited
you together to tell you that if I empty a bucket of water it
will run downhill, but that if I empty a pail of milk on the
same spot it will do exactly the opposite, do you not think I
would act wisely in keeping as near as possible to the door
for a rush in case of need ? Should I have any rightful
cause of complaint if I got myself maltreated for fetching
you from your homes merely to be made fun of? And
yet I am unable to trace the distinction in point of congruity
between asking you to accept the unsupported assertion
that taxation will operate in one particular way as affecting
land and in precisely the opposite way as regards every
other human interest ? It is the more necessary to ask the
question, as the sentiments under criticism have been in-
variably reported as delivered amidst uproarious applause.
It would, by the way, be interesting to know from Sir
Henry Parkes who —apart, of course, from Mr. Henry
George—are the “highest authorities” to whom he refers,
also from any of our other friends where we may obtain
a list of the nationalities to which direct taxation has proved
as the dew of Hermon. The only thing known to me
which more than any other stamps Mr. George as the man
of his epoch, is his spirited plea for a free use of the wet
sponge in matters of public indebtedness.


I now invite attention to Mr. Reid’s repeatedly
urged allegations as to the inequitable adjustment of the
Incidence of Taxation
as affecting Labour.
“ Sir George Dibbs and his friends (observed Mr. Reid during the
late election campaign), will not tax land because the value of land has
fallen—they will not tax incomes because times are hard. But they are
quite indifferent, when labour is in a very bad way, about the cruel hardship
and injustice of taking £3, 000,000 a year from those who live, and whose
families also live, from hand to mouth ! These atrocious inequalities must
be speedily and fairly readjusted. The motto of our freetrade financial
policy is, ‘No heavier load of taxation, but a fairer arrangement of the
burden.’ ”
Mr. Reid I take to be a gentleman incapable of wilfully mis-
stating a case for personal or political ends. The alternative is
that he must necessarily have based his remarks upon imper-
fect and unassimilated information. With a laudable desire
for your enlightenment I will make an effort at analysis of his
figures on my own account. Out of a total revenue of about
£10,000,000 from various sources, the proportion contributed
by Customs and Excise amounted in 1893 to £2,400,810. I re-
mind you that in this latter division alone is to be found the
contributions towards the expenses of Government of the sec-
tion depending immediately upon its labour for a livelihood.
Even to leave the question at this point it would seem we
are confronted with the view—Ist, that the whole dutiable
imports of the country are consumed by labour; and 2nd,
that labour in some unaccountable way insists on paying—as
secret conscience money or otherwise—about £500,000
more than the whole recorded Custom House return. But
let us proceed to a closer investigation of the subject.
The sole contribution of labour towards the revenue
of the country —I of course exclude revenue for “ser-
vices rendered” such as travelling by trams and rail-
ways, or the like—is, I repeat, that paid by it under the
head of
Customs and Excise Duties.
Excluding £72,536 for “Miscellaneous Collections”
(pilotage fees and the like), we obtained from these
sources in 1893 a total revenue of £2,328,274
ouuivvw v / >
This is made up by collections on Narcotics and
Intoxicants to the extent of 1,036,456
Leaving as the contribution of the more self-
denying section of our population the sum
of
£1,291,818


I now turn to that excellent and all-informing w’ork,
“Wealth and Progress, 1893,” and find the following
classification of the constituents of the population corres-
ponding, I suppose, to the Census year. Later figures not
being available, I take it that the case will not be appreciably
vitiated one way or another by accepting them for present
purposes:—-
Wage earners.
309,495 (say) 309,500
Persons working on
their own account
(exclusive of profes-
sional persons)
58,071
Professional persons
and civil servants ... 31,491
Employes with earn-
ings of capital owned
in N. S. Wales ... 67,134—156,696 „ 156,500
466,191 or say 466,000
For the immediate purpose it will be necessary to re-
classify these data. Of wage earners 43,308 persons (of
whom 12,513 are males) are given as in domestic service.
The statistical returns for 1893 give us a total of 165,911
persons engaged as employes in rural and pastoral pursuits,
excluding, as I take it, persons temporarily employed as
shearers or the like. I am entitled to the .presumption
that the contribution of these 165,911 persons to the
above stated £1,291,818, other than as consumers of com-
modities coming within the ad valorem section, is
practically nil. But to moderate the case and to allow
for imperfections which must unavoidably creep into
the large generalisations with which the Statistician
has to deal, I take 100,000 as a fair irreducible mini-
mum of the number of wage earners who, so far as they are
concerned with things dutiable, succeed in transferring the
tax-paying obligation to the employer. It is a matter of
fair open bargain and is not in the least referred to in any
invidious sense.


We have then
Wage earners as before ... ... 309,500
But deduct non-revenue contributors 100,000
209,500
Other than wage earners, as before... 156,500
But add those who pay taxation for an
additional ... ... ... ... 100,000
256,500
The proportionate contribution of these 100,000 persons to
ad valorem Customs taxation for clothing and like neces-
saries, I estimate at an average of 12s. 6d. each, and I think
the allowance is a fair one.
The calculation would then work out thus:—
Customs taxation paid by 209,500
wage earners content to dispense
with non-necessaries ... ... £580,763
But add ad valorem contributions of
100,000 persons at 12s. 6d. each ... 62,500
£643,263
Customs taxation paid by 256,500 non-
wage earners under similar circum-
stances ... £711,055
But deduct ad valorem contributions
of 100,000 persons at 12s. 6d. each 62,500
£648,555
£1,291,818
Now, as I do not put myself forward in the attitude of
a political sentimentalist, I make no apology for reminding
you of some additional facts bearing very directly on the
part of my case more immediately under review
The nett cost to the State of Free Edu-
cation ; in other words of an expen-
diture mostly incurred in relieving
the wage earners of this country of
a primary responsibility of parent-
age, amounted in 1893 to ... ... £641,952
The nett cost of Prisons and Police to 456,174
The nett contribution of the State to-
wards Hospitals, Benovolent, Aged
and Lunatic Asylums and Children’s
Relief (non-inclusive of expenditure
on Aborigines) to rather over ... 300,000
— £1,398,126


Lamentably enough, candidature for the prison cell
is far from being restricted to any one rank of life, but the
classification of offenders under sentence, given by Mr.
COGHLAN, is unfavourable to the presumption that the per
centage contributed to it by people in the propertied
walks of life is a considerable one. And no one will, I think,
contend that Hospitals, Asylums for the Aged, and the
like are, as a rule, built for or occupied by the well to do.
It does not then seem to me an extreme proposition, that
of the £1,398,126 here set forth, you may debit at the least
£1,000,000 to the account of those whom it is the fashion
to represent to us, as the victims of taxation formed and
fashioned in the interests of social caste and capitalistic
privilege.
I have treated the question so far as between the sober
self-restraining wage earner, and other contributories to
the tax fund of the country, and have shewn by figures,
not I think open to serious dispute, that from this stand point,
the alleged inequality is a figment of the imagination" At
this point I am prepared for the withering scorn proper to
be hurled against any one who would propose to deprive the
poor man of his beer, his whisky, or his pipe. In truth and in
fact however, I make no objection to the enjoyment of those
luxuries, whether by rich or poor, on the plain supposition
that they can be afforded. But when we are appealed to
in the name of those who—living from hand to mouth—
suffer the hardship of being levied upon for a purely imagin-
ary £3,000,000 a year ; about the “ atrocious inequalities ”
of which they are the victims, and so on ; it is of the essence
of the argument to observe that if, like people on a differ-
ent social plane, these favoured proteges are unable to
reconcile themselves under altered conditions to frugalities
not demanded by the malice of capital, but by economic
forces operating as irresistibly as a law of nature, there can
be no impropriety in exposing the faultiness of the plea upon
which our moral sympathies are sought to be enlisted. But
let us take the alternative view and regard the Customs’
revenue as a whole. Take it, if you like, that three-fifths of
the portion of it derivable from intoxicants and narcotics is
contributed by labour. It would still remain that Mr. Reid’s
£3,000,000 would, on a fair debtor and creditor showing,
boil down to an inappreciable proportion of that amount.
The annual


Liquor Bill of New South Wales
is estimated by a worthy churchman, who has made the
subject his especial study, at about £4,750,000. “ Bloated ”
as by universal consent he is, I do not believe the capitalist
does all the drinking. Who then finds the money? Is
there any extravagance in the surmise that a very fair
share of it is supplied by those on whose behalf practical
exemption from public responsibilities is being demanded
without moral justification—without arithmetical scrutiny—
without that even-handed justice which should rank as the
Mint stamp of statesmanship.
Again I seem to imagine myself being asked the ques-
tion, are you not ungenerous in placing in the cold light of
day the relation of labour to the question of
State Education?
Well; generosity is a thing with a double edge to it. Its
correlative is gratitude. That as a sober fact State educa-
tion is, at all events as regards four-fifths of it, equal to a
free monetary gift to the labour section will not, I take it,
be seriously disputed. And were the boon accepted in the
spirit in which it was bestowed, there would be some sense
in the tacit appeal that its strictly eleemosynary character
should be conveniently overlooked. When, however, the
recipients evince their gratitude in permitting themselves to
be used as the raw soil in which political weeds of many
poisonous varieties are permitted to thrive and flourish, with
a view to ultimate transfer to the Parliamentary conserva-
tory, there seems to me no impropriety in taking stock of
the question on its merits.
The Labour Vote
has been the means of introducing into our political
system a body of politicians prompt to avow, and to act to
the measure of their opportunity, upon the theory that the
interests of the body politic as a whole are not to be re-
garded as in the running when in conflict, or supposed con-
flict, with interests which they are supposed to have in their
special keeping; who strive to compass such ends as that
the working hours of grown-up men should be dictated to
them under penalties by Act of Parliament; that it is the
business of Governments to find everybody in work and


wages; that the trades-unionist picket should be allowed a
free hand in the pursuit of his amiable pleasantries towards
the industrial heretic ;* that land long since alienated and
paid for is, in open contempt for the dictionary, still to be re r
garded as the “inalienable” property of some select persons,
self-dubbed as the “people.” The politics of the future, so
far as the labour politician can influence them, are no longer
to be worked by forces freely directed, operating under
watchful criticism, but are to be doctored by the caucus
and other mechanisms of the Brummagem-Schnadhorst
type. No intelligent man in this country, no person worth
listening to in any country, argues against
Men of the Artisan and Working Class,
as such, taking a place —an honoured place if they like
to make it so—in Parliament. But that a compact body
of particularists should find themselves there with no other
aim than to thwart the purpose for which our political system
has been created, unless as a matter of bargain on behalf
of objects strictly sectional and selfish, is a position which
should be regarded as intolerable. To say the least, if these
be the fruits of a rather expensive school course, the sooner
the money is diverted into other channels the better.
Even taking my figures as subject to a larger margin
for error than I have already allowed them, the assertion
that the existing Customs’ tariff presses with comparative
unfairness upon people in the humbler walks of life would
still remain unproved.
I dismiss our endless cacklings about
Freetrade and Protection,
as, under present conditions, outside the controversy. Ten
years ago, you could have afforded yourselves the high
privilege of debating the case between free and obstructed
international exchange, on its abstract merits. To-day the
weight rests upon you of a crushing annual obligation to
the holders of your loan instruments. You have to reap the
aftermath of a decade of sustained administrative extrava-
gance ; and the belief that you can afford to pare away
* “ The right of working is a Royal right which the Prince can sell and the subjects
must buy,” was the despotic doctrine which prevailed in France at the time when the
monarchical power culminated. We now see its resuscitation, differing only by the substi-
tution of Trades’ Unions for Kings. For now that Trades’ Unions are becoming
universal, and each artisan has to pay prescribed moneys to one or another of them, with
the alternative of being a non-unionist to whom work is denied by force, it has come to
this, that the right to labour is a Trade Union right, which the Trade Union can sell and
the individual worker must buy! ” —Herbert Spencer, “A Plea for Liberty.”


important sections of revenue, merely to satisfy some
imaginary demand on the part of the Constituencies —I say
imaginary because the uncomplicated issue as between Free
Trade and Protection was never before them—can only be
seriously entertained by logicians who have succeeded in
veiling from their minds the thin margin of reserve force
which divides us from a catastrophe which I scarcely care
to name. When the grandest figure in Roman history was
found slipping in his tenses, it was proudly intimated that
“ Caesar was greater than grammar,” but it was not even
given to Caesar, much less can it be allowed to Australian
politicians, to be greater than arithmetic.
The Argument from Authority.
While waiting for a list of the illustrious authorities
which Sir Henry Parkes tells us, have endorsed the views
of the property taxers, I will offer you those of some, not as
yet wholly discredited, on the other side. The late
J. R. McCulloch,
the well-known author of the “ Commercial Dictionary,”
in his “Principles and Practical Influence of Taxation,”
observed :
“ It is impossible to regard the taxes which really fall on capital as
permanent sources of public income. Capital consists of produce saved
from immediate consumption, and employed partly to maintain those who
are engaged in the great work of production, and partly to facilitate their
labour. Its amount determines the amount of productive industry. And
it is, therefore, plain that whatever has a tendency to diminish capital, or
convert it into revenue, must, by diminishing the means of Employing and
facilitating labour, and consequently the annual produce of the country, be
a fruitful source of pauperism. The misapplication and destruction of the
means of production occasioned by these taxes, would not only defeat every
attempt to render them permanent, but would, by impoverishing and
exhausting the country, render all other taxes comparatively unproductive.”
Professor Leoni Levi,
of King’s College, London (Lecture on “ The Economical
“Administration of the Resources of theßritishEmpire ”): —
“ Ventured to say to the colonies : —First determine what are the
true functions of the State ; reduce such functions to a minimum, and abide
by your decision. Be sure that you do not undertake what private indi-
viduals can best do for themselves. Take care to secure and maintain a
perfect equilibrium in your revenue and expenditure, and do not accumulate
debt. In the levying of taxes do not touch the instruments of labour and
wealth : do nothing to discourage accumulation.”


John Stuart Mill,
writing in the ripened wealth of his intellect, observed in
his “ Principles of Political Economy ” :
“ The objection to a graduated property tax applies in an
aggravated degree to the proposition of an exclusive tax on what is
called ‘ realised property,’ that is, property not forming a part of any capital
en g a g e d in business under the superintendence of the owner—as land, the
public funds, money lent on mortgage, and shares. Except the proposal of
applying a sponge to the National Debt, no such palpable violation of
common honesty has found sufficient support in this country during the
present generation to be regarded as within the domain of discussion.”
Again“ To tax the larger incomes at a higher per centage than the
smaller is to lay a tax on industry and economy, to impose a penalty on
people for having worked harder and saved more than their neighbours.”
Not as arguing in favour of a property tax, but merely
assuming for purposes of argument the legalisation of such
a tax on the principle of an invidious distinction between
one form of accumulation and another, Mr. Mill proceeds:—
“ I can hardly conceive a more shameless pretension than that the
major part of the property of the country, that of merchants, manufacturers,
farmers and shopkeepers, should be exempted from its share of taxation ;
that these classes should only begin to pay their proportion after retiring
from business, and if they never retire, should be excused from it altogether.”
A habit of disparagement towards the men who built
up the English school of Economics has recently set in. It
is one more characterised by superficiality and flippancy than
by any genuine quality of discernment. The most besotted
enthusiast cannot deny that they have been dull. Yet
none the less is there to be found in the record they have
bequeathed to us much fine gold for the patient miner.
It is consequently under no sense of apology that I ask
your attention to extracts which, did time and space admit,
might be indefinitely multiplied.
“Confidence” as an Economic Influence.
Since the first ignoble bid to the predatory instincts
of the lower variety of vote owner was made about seven
years ago, that taxation was to be directly applied to the
accumulations of the thrifty and the provident, the subtle
and impalpable essence which takes the name of confidence,
has been gradually but surely dissociating itself from the
ingredients of our public life which make for a hopeful and
prosperous forecast of the future. The fact that the inter-
val between 1886 and 1891 partly synchronised with a land
boom in no way confutes the general proposition. The


paramount and pervading element is easily traceable
through the secondary and accidental one. Business
transactions, it may be axiomatically laid down, operate,
when unmolested by exterior forces, with activities pro-
portioned to the wealth, the vital force, and the confidence
in the political outlook to be found in the area in which
they have their opportunity. In communities unfavourably
placed in these respects, they stagnate.
Measured by this formula, how do we
stand?
Ask land and estate agents, stock and station agents,
merchants, auctioneers, storekeepers, shopkeepers; ask
the numberless great corporations and firms associ-
ated with the larger interests of the soil. Do you
indeed require to ask them ? You have only to root
out old files of the newspapers of 10, 15, or 20 years
ago, and mark the numberless transactions reported from
week to week in figures ranging from tens to sometimes
hundreds of thousands of pounds. Where are we now to
look for anything of the kind ? One day you perhaps see
the offer of some considerable property announced at
auction —the next, you are told with unfailing regularity it
had to be “ bought in.” Bank after bank has been
“ re-constructed ” under the supposition that, given a
sufficient margin of time, their huge landed accumulations
might find an opportunity of realisation. Funds which
would otherwise be available to vitalise the languishing
forces of industry are helplessly imprisoned in them.
Were natural influences allowed their free play, the recu-
perative forces of a healthily constituted society would
render the gradual emancipation of these funds an easy
possibility. But you, the land and property taxers—for
one does not exactly know by which name to call you—
with your vague and unstudied theories of class proscription,
which you have neither the unanimity to agree upon, nor
so far as I can see, the aptitude to follow to their ultimate
economic conclusions, take your stand at the gate and say,
“ No, this must not be. Every amateur economist in the
“ place must first be allowed his say, and until we chance
“to find out what we really do want, the country must
“wait. It is true we know no more of our own minds now
“than we did in 1887, but what of that?” And thus an
agitation without cohesion, congruity, or moral force to its


name, is kept indefinitely afloat, as mischievously operative
in a minatory sense as if its proposed objects had the actual
force of law behind them.
I wish it were possible to obtain from some Professor
of the tenets of Anti-Capitalism, an authoritative ruling at
what point the
Criminality of Capitalisation
comes into play. I asked the question once before, and I
will now repeat it: “Is it contended that those who resist
“the temptation of spending day by day the whole income
“they earn, are all in the wrong, and that good citizenship
“ consists in taking as our pattern, those who with a fair
“ margin for saving, fling away in gratuitous extravagance
“ every farthing that comes to them ? If not, let me ask
“ those who make it their peculiarly foolish business to foam
“ and froth at the capitalist to fix the point to which, in their
“ scheme of economy, the process of accumulation may be
“ rightfully carried. Disregarding for the moment any
“ question of capital expressed in monetary equivalents, is it
“ right that I should lay up food or materials enough to last
“me a week ahead ? If right for a week, is it wrong that I
“ should store away as a provision for possible loss of
“ employment, accident, or old age, enough to keep me
“ clear of obligation to others for a month ? If right for a
“month, is it wrong to lay by enough for a year? And
“ finding it exceedingly inconvenient, as one not owning a
“ private warehouse, to lay up for future contingencies,
“ supplies of flour, tea, boots, candles, and other numberless
“ items which go to make life endurable, where does the
“ criminality come in of converting them into the more
“ convenient form of coined gold, which at my pleasure I
“ may reconvert into things which minister to my daily
“ necessities ? By doing so I become of course that hateful
“ thing, a capitalist open and avowed, one in a position
“henceforth either to open fresh springs of industry on my
“ own account, to the direct advantage of the labour market,
“ or in exchange for a fair recompense, commonly called
“ interest, to lend my accumulations to others for the same
“ purpose." Even if willing to humble ourselves as re-
pentant sinners, and to forswear both the principle and
practice of accumulation, the light of nature affords us not a
ray of guidance as to the proper commencing point. Do


we err for example, in making sure provision for to-morrow’s
breakfast ?
In our churches on special occasions we humbly thank
the Almighty for turning our “ dearth and scarcity into
“ cheapness and plenty.” Clearly the intention goes far
beyond thanking Him for supplying us with the mere
necessaries of the passing day. We are acknowledging
God’s mercy in blessing us with abundance which can be
stored or exchanged—in other words, with Capital. If the
new economists are in the right it is evident that the
rubrics call for revision.
“The Experiment of Labour without
Capital,”
says the Hon. GEORGE Brodrick, Warden of Merton, “ has
“ been tried for many ages, and is still being tried by many
“ races of mankind, but these races are called savages.”
“ Capital,”says Professor Goldwin Smith, “spelt with a big
“C, swells into a malignant giant, the personal enemy of
“ labour; spelt in the natural way, it is simply that with
“ which labour must start on any enterprise, and without
“which no labour can exist at all. unless it be that of a
“ savage grubbing roots w T ith his nails.”
The Greater Landholder,
There is something almost amusing in taking stock of
the variety of sentiment popularised in the political market
place apropos of the greater landholder. He is the dog in
the manger; he is grasping; he is mean; yet by some wholly
unexplained contradiction, the ordinary motive of enlightened
selfishness, which is admittedly the lever of the whole in-
dustrial system is apparently powerless in its influence on
him. The owner of an idle ship or an idle steam hammer
is allowed the benefit of the presumption that these materials
are idle merely because profitable employment for them is
for the time being unobtainable ; but the big landholder is
supposed to sit upon his unused acres in a joyful spirit of
pure “cussedness” —to use the only word which really fits the
case. lam not his spokesman, nor am lin his confidence,
but I take the precaution of believing that if he could be
induced to state his side of the question, it might correct
some prepossessions born rather of prejudice than intelli-
gence.


Contemned Political Economy
is not unaccustomed to its revenges. In the mother country
for example, the new system of Local Self-Government by
County Councils, of some such pattern as that for which we
are supposed to be hungering and thirsting in New South
Wales, has been distinguishing itself with a rush. The toy
is new. The more extreme socialists form a strong party
in these Councils, and are having a fine old holiday on their
own account. Let us take stock of some of the incidents
of the new method. The public works contractor is no
longer to be a free agent; he is bound under almost confis-
catory penalties to pay his men the “ highest current rate
of wages.” Even contractors have their soft points ; under
the older dispensation, the decent elderly navvy or artisan
whose best years had perhaps been spent in one service
would always confidently rely on a show being given him so
long as fairly competent to put through his day’s work. But
there is an end to all that. All work having to be paid for
at a common minimum, the workman past his prime has no
longer a chance ; the contractor has to live, and can only
afford to retain those whose ripened strength is as yet
unspent. The nett result—observes Mr. T. Mackay, a well-
known economic essayist—is that of driving into chance
jobs at the docks, and in many instances into the streets,
hundreds of decent self-respecting working men, many of
them family men, for no other crime than that of being no
longer young in years. Similarly, the door is closed to the
undeveloped junior, formerly content to work his way up
at a graduated rate of pay, but now left—as Mr. Mackay
expresses it—“ to deteriorate in the ranks of the unem-
ployable.” I ask you to note for your guidance as well as
for your warning, how the ill-judged intentions of amiable
theorists thus become, in their practical consequences,
an engine of awful cruelty* I take another concrete
instance. One of the conceits of the London County Coun-
cil, is to use the ratepayers’ money—morally, as in the case
of our own Governmental outlay upon “Village Settlements”
and the like, it is an indefensible breach of trust—in the
erection of homes for the labouring classes, without the
smallest reference to the justification of the outlay in an
investment sense. Miss OCTAVIA Hill, a lady who has
* Since these words were written, have we not had among ourselves, the celebrated
•‘Minute” from the Minister of Works, in reference to which,however,it is fair to observe
that the position taken is not marked by the extreme arbitrariness of the London example


devoted both life and fortune tc bettering the worldly
circumstances of the working section of the social scale,
by methods which leave the self-respecting sentiment un-
broken, declared in a letter to the London Standard ,
that the restriction of private building enterprise,; re-
sulting from the threatened innovation, bore with
unrelenting severity upon those whose lot is a perpetual
strife for daily bread. It may indeed be broadly laid down
that authoritative interferences with forces working auto-
matically and healthily on their own account are, whether
as threats or actualities, a pure Curse, not alone in their
disturbing incidence upon the general scheme of indus-
trialism, but very specially as affecting the interests of the
more immediate objects of a solicitude undirected by
wisdom. It would almost seem as if the privileged
Domination of Caste and Class,
which, under the reproachful phrase Toryism, we boast of
having almost within our own time levelled in the dust has
been obliterated for no better purpose than to provide a
convenient site for its re-erection in more than its original
maleficence. It is only a trifling matter of substituting one
class for another. The worst feature of the thing is that
those who, in vulgar language, boss the game, are at all
times able to make a plausible case for themselves in the
speculations of men from whom, by reasonable calculation,
better things might have been expected. It makes one
almost tolerant to the sentiments of our home-bred vision-
aries when contrasting them, for example, with the kind of
material submitted to the Parliament of Queensland not
many years ago by the—in many respects —conspicuously
able and estimable gentleman who is now the first magis-
trate of that colony. I claim to revert to a “Bill to Declare
“ the Natural Law Relating to the Acquisition and Owner-
ship of Property,” submitted by Sir Samuel Griffith,
then Premier, to the Legislative Assembly in Brisbane, 22nd
July, 1890, as of immediate interest to us for two sufficient
reasons. Firstly: The sentiments embodied in it have not,
that I know of, been at any time the subject of apologetic
reference ; and, secondly: It is reasonably presumable that
although neveremerging from the “Bill” stage, its influence,
not the less obnoxious on account of the surprising foolish-
ness of the propositions embodied in it, has been disastrously
operative in the desperately criminal character of the labour


strikes which not long since threatened—which even now
have not ceased to threaten—devastation to the chief pro-
ducing interest of the northern colony. The Bill as a whole
is a wonder to be seen, but in Section 22 it is affirmed
that:—
“ The nett products of labour belong to the persons who are concerned
in the production.”
“ If more persons than one are concerned in the production, the nett
products belong to them in proportion to the value of their respective con-
tributions to the production.”*
“The evil that men do” frequently “lives after” the close
of their parliamentary existence. Manifestly, if these
declarations were framed on a true grasp of the presump-
tions on which the industrial fabric rests, the temper which
prompts shed-burning and like pleasantries towards the
pastoralist, who asks no more than to be allowed to pursue
his calling in peace, is one which, although evidencing itself
in overt illegality, it would be impossible from a moral
standpoint seriously to condemn. If, in addition to the
receipt of the highest wages paid anywhere in the world,
The Wool itself belongs to the Shearer,
“ in proportion to the value of his contribution to the pro-
duction,” who shall presume to say that he is glaringly
wicked in adding a few touches of unhappiness to the life,
or in wrecking the property —so miscalled—of the man
who defiantly robs him of his due ? I revive this
“ Declaration of Natural Law ” for the reason that it
presents crudely and nakedly the monstrous absurdity
which underlies the w 7 hole contention of the anti-capitalistic
cult. I revive it for the additional reason that it
reproduces the sort of amiable platitudes which, fermenting
in fortuitous combination with circumstance and oppor-
tunity, had their resultant 100 years ago in the most brutish
exhibition of sustained human ferocity which the world has
ever seen. True, the history of this Queensland Bill is a
history of four years ago. An interval of thirty years,
however, separated the publication of the Contrat Social
from the “Terror”; but Rousseau’s shallow sophistry
adopted, expanded, and salons d into activity by the
feminine Roland, with the gushing fervour of her gifted
* The context leaves no possible doubt as to the sense in which these “Sections “
are to be interpreted.


individuality, is almost universally recognised as having
prominently influenced the order of events, which for several
consecutive years turned the chief cities of France into a
Dahomey kind of shambles.
And within our own New South Wales the latter day
platitudinarianism has not been wholly unhonoured. It
was, indeed, a pretty thing to be confronted from day to
day in our morning papers with the news of peaceable men
on their way to their work being seized as
Prisoners of War
and removed to the enemy’s camps; camps not formed by
an external foe, but by people ironically describable as our
fellow subjects.
Now, the criminal activities of shearers’ unionism in
1894 were, no doubt, as regards overt acts, the work of
shearers’ unionists alone. But war is a rapacious luxury.
Without money-power it promptly languishes. Who sup-
plied the cash ? Where did it come from ? Largely from
the systematic contributions of the machinists, the typo-
graphers, and generally the working unionist artisans of
Sydney, Newcastle, and the larger towns. That there are
many worthy men among them I am not concerned to
dispute. But I challenge contradiction to the assertion
that, with the daily evidence before them of the criminal
tactics of bush unionism, they, without articulate protest—
without protest of any kind so far as is known —accepted
the dishonouring role of accessories, both before and after
the facts. Unless the sentiment which lends itself to so
perverted a purpose can be replaced by something higher
and better ; industrialism, in any sense in which decent men
would claim a pride of place in it, is an impossibility. People
residing in Sydney, with its patrolled streets and social
safeguards, may think these references needlessly empha-
sized, but those who have studied the incidents of the cam-
paign in the back settlements of this colony, as evidenced
by reports supplied very fully to the South Australian Press
by Mr. Langdon PARSONS and others, will not share that
opinion.*
1 Ask you to take Stock
of the Steam companies doing business in our waters, of
the Coal companies supplying them with fuel, of numberles s
* See particularly, South Australian Register, 6th October.


other forms of enterprise in our midst, once fruitful, but in
the great majority of which the struggle has for several
years past become one not so much for dividends as for
bare existence. After a lengthened interval of plodding
perseverance, pursued under a depressing load of anxiety
on the part of proprietors, managers, and directors, there,
perhaps, comes a turn of the tide, bearing on its surface a
brightened ray of restored prosperity. Is it a tenable pro-
position ; is the contention possible in the judgment of
men possessed of the veriest rag of ordinary intelligence,
that those who have borne the burden and heat of the day.
whose features in many instances bear lines imprinted upon
them by an almost departed hope, are to be expected to
divide freely with wage-earners, who alone have had their
dividends with unfailing regularity, and many of whom
will, as likely as not, have come in at the eleventh hour? *
To take a passing glance at another side of my sub-
ject: One of the most portentous facts of current history is
The Wasteful Squandering of Stored
Wealth
on the great national scale. It is doubly an evil. It dissipates
the stored margin of force in which reproductive industry
finds its sustaining power at the same time that it tacitly
operates as an incentive to individual unthrift. A Russian
squadron pays a friendly visit to Marseilles, and, from
admiral to powder-boy, is gushed overby its impressionable
hosts. The usual British naval scare forthwith sets
in, and some six or seven millions of money are rushed into
new ironclads. In the desolating interests of political cor-
ruption the equivalent of over £30,000,000 of our money are
annually expended in the United States OF America over
a “deadhead” pension list. ITALY, through the money cost
pf her inflated militarism, is within measurable distance of
insolvency and repudiation. France, although so far able
to bear the burden, has, through her vast expenditure in
armaments, the subsidisation of trade into artificial
channels, and other extravagances, to face a huge annual
gap between income and expenditure, which must sooner
or later sap the sources even of her stupendous wealth.
Among ourselves, we see efforts of the State turned
M (.u* * it: °. n t ' le most unquestionable authority that at all events as regards the
Northern Mines in present working, the proportion of the cost of coal-getting which falls
to labour, exclusive of interest on capital outlay, is 83 per cent.


upon designs for the. laying of a new Ocean cable,
which, it is safe to say, outside some ring of promoters
with personal interests to serve, will not add to the
happiness or comfort of a single human creature among us.
I have heard it said, “ These things are not all bad. . They
“ create employment. They circulate money.” It is true,
and the same argument might be used in favour of employ-
ing half-a-dozen men to go up and down our streets, say,
once a fortnight, for the purpose of breaking your shop
windows. Glaziers, plumbers, putty merchants, and some
others would have a rare time of it, as long as the thing
lasted, but the silliest reasoner to be found would not, I
think, regard this kind of activity as a twin brother to
prosperity. Chapters innumerable have been written of
the unbridled extravagances of irresponsible sovereignty.
But he would be a daring controversialist who, with the
world experiences of the last thirty years before his eyes,
would care to dispute the thesis that democracies on horse-
back would, in this respect, give any KING or Kaiser who
ever lived thirty points in a hundred and beat him at that.
In the colony which marches with our Southern border
the triumphs of the political sophister have all but reached
their natural climax. He has had it pretty much his
own way since when long ago, the historic Don, M.L.A.
threatened to “ stockwhip the squatters over the Murray.”
The nett result to-day is that only by the exercise of quali-
ties which are not, I think, within his grasp, can VICTORIA
be restored to a position in which she can feel complacently
assured of unbroken public solvency. So far in our own
colony, there has been more of a method in our madness.
Moreover our
Reserves of Material Resource
are, I think, stronger than those of our neighbour. But
the day when the first tax upon the accumulations garnered
by frugality and thrift is imposed in New South Wales, is
the day which will mark our final departure on the down-
grade. We do not at present rest directly under that
threat in its more comprehensive aspect, but whether sooner
or later it will be seen that the separation of personal
from real estate for purposes of direct taxation, is logically
and morally untenable.


I have not entered into distinctions between direct
landed taxation locally imposed under some form of legis-
lation as yet uncreated, and similar taxation directly exacted
under the supreme authority. It is solely in this latter
form that the question is at present within public cogni-
sance. It is to be presumed that any scheme of delegated
local authority, which may be imposed upon the country,
will at all events so regulate the local franchise as to give
the control of expenditure to those who find the means of
providing for it. Even then taxation would be wisely
levied, not on the corpus of landed estate, but upon what
it yields, or is reasonably capable of yielding, as clear rental
or income. To levy a surface tax on land which can
neither be let at any price, nor profitably used or cultivated
by its owner, is, to put it simply and plainly, to set public
authority to the very task which in ordinary estimation it
has been mainly created to punish.
It becomes merely a Common Plunderer
inasmuch as the ultimate penalty of non-payment of
taxation on an immoveable reality is of course confiscation.
But I remind myself that all things must come to an
end. The critical faculty in my composition leads me to
fear that I have been less successful in presenting to you
a well-strung case, than in offering you some topics for
reflection which are undoubtedly worthy of the closest
attention you can give them. I must, however, ask you
to permit me what is perhaps more the clerical than
the layman’s privilege of submitting one or two concluding
reflections.
Most of you are probably familiar with that engrossing
legend, “ The Conversion of Col. Quagg.” The devout
brother who operated so effectively upon that eminent
warrior, presents to us the best conceivable model for our
instruction and guidance. Offered the choice between
taking his punishment fighting, or taking it in inert meek-
ness on the ground, that Christian man chose the former
alternative, with results from which we may profit. Castle
Funk is not a good coign of vantage for effective defence.
“ Arithmetic,” said Sydney Smith in his inimitable way, “ is
the best counteractive of fear.” If we can be induced coolly
to take stock of the position, ourterrors maybe reasoned with.
Let me ask what has been done, what is being done among


us to develop a healthy spirit of protest against the
processes of political disintegration and decay, which are
unfolding themselves to our view almost day by day. It is
not long since some of you were present at a concourse of
“Citizens” held in the Centenary Hall for the purpose of pro-
claiming its deathless enmity to
The Debasement of your Political Life
by the election of the least worthy to your places of
honour. “We will not have this, and that, and the other
“ stamp of candidate placed in the councils of our country/’
was the refrain of the day, in language of telling eloquence
to which it was a treat to listen. What steps were taken in
practice to ensure that result ? Had there been an equally
well-attended meeting of Shearer’s Unionists for the further-
ance of some purpose dear to those engineers of destruction,
its conveners would probably have known where to lay their
hands on a couple of thousands of pounds before the week
was out. Talk would have been followed by work. If any
serious exertions were made by the “Citizens” to avert the
open scandal of the returns made to the writs in certain
instances which any one can identify —instances which I
would not leave in the region of conjecture, could I feel
the assured certainty that any untoward consequences of
printing them in plain type would fall on myself alone—l
have not heard of them.
Probably I will be regarded by some of my readers as
The Rich Man’s Mouthpiece.
May I intimate to this variety of critic, that merely as such,
and viewed from an economic standpoint, your rich man counts
with me for nothing. As regards not a few of the wealthiest
section who live and move and have their being among us,
it would not, I think, readily occur to any intelligent human
creature, to regard them as constituting the sort of material
on which enthusiasms are built. In protesting against the
penalization of thriftful accumulation by an invidious scheme
of class taxation, I do so because I am unable to escape the
conclusion that the privates of the army of industry will
find it impossible to injure the holders of acquired wealth
without doubly and trebly injuring themselves; and that
the evil consequences which must surely follow any wide-
spread acquiescence in the desolating logic of the political
visionary, will find their earliest and most permanent domi-


cile among those who struggle for their daily bread. Their
true oppressors are not those who dwell upon necessary, if
unwelcome, truths; but those who, without trained intelli-
gence, or competent mental preparation, or grasp of conse-
quences not immediate and palpable, do their little best to
thrust before us a set of fallacies exploded in theory and
discredited in practice; fallacies on the strength of which,
space has been strewed with the wreck of misapplied
human resources these hundred years or more.
Only one thing more. At present, those who have
views to urge in the province of political speculation on its
more conservative side, are out of the running, save as
regards the hospitable charity conceded them in the corres-
pondence columns of the daily press. Sydney journalism,
as a rule, finds its metier in travelling with the current.
Why should not the disbelievers in parliamentary socialism
whether veiled or overt, possess some organ of their own,
say,
A Weekly Journal of the Higher Class,
in which to domicile, and through which to popularise a
healthier type of sentiment; a journal which, with every
emphasis at its command, should make its stand upon
the belief that macadamised roads are not now, any more
than at previous periods in history, to be found leading
towards the goal of a reasonable prosperity, or that the
older methods of industry, sobriety, thrift, and the free
play of individual initiative, are to be safely displaced
by schemes trotted before us by bogus society regenerators
and their like.
I, for one, have an abiding faith in the better instincts
of our kind ; but the hardiest plant may be choked by
weeds, which shut it out from the light and air essential to
its nourishment and growth. Unhappily for us, the weeds
which threaten that healthy growth are in many instances
not merely tolerated—they are cultivated. Cants and
insincerities
which threaten your existence as a free
people,
have merely to be dressed in sufficiently specious disguise
for their originators to be rewarded by you, not only with
tumultuous applause, but with the £3OO a year and free
Railway pass, which constitute the solace of the elect.


As colonists you are drifting from the old moorings; year
by year you are approaching nearer and nearer to the point
at which your margin of beneficial interest in the public
estate must —unless the break is promptly applied—become
annihilated. And yet, without anything in the way of
really serious protest, the annual gap between income
and expenditure has come to be recognised as in the
regular course of events. I am not writing of any
one administration more than another. I am dealing
with a huge admitted evil which, year by year, growing
with our growth and strengthening with our strength, has
been eating its way into the vitals of our old ship of State,
with the same steady persistence as that with which the
teredo of your harbour worms its destructive course into a
balk of submerged timber. We all know what happens
in the end to individuals who live habitually beyond their
means. Is there any known formula whereby the aggre-
gated individualism which constitutes a nation can
permanently escape the consequences of an aggravated
assault upon the elementary rules of arithmetic ?
Turner & Henderson Printers, Hunter Street, Sydney.


IfAFf?
f(5750
wz cfF




A record unparalleled by any other Company in the history of Life
Insurance.
The tabulated result of Mr. Congar’s investments is : —
Number.
Original
Insurance.
Dividend
Additions to
Policies.
Total of
Claims
Paid.
Net
Premiums.
Return over
Cost.
Additions
Surrendered
to pay
Premiums.
5,999
9,842
9,849
23,963
<£200
200
600
300
£312 8
305 0
831 4
216 4
£512 8
505 0
1,431 4
516 4
£194 8 0
195 0 0
557 17 0
276 16 4
£318 0 0
310 0 0
873 7 0
239 7 8
£40 7 3
41 10 6
177 16 7
129 15 3
Totals.
.£1,300
£1,664 16
£2,964 16
£1,224 1 4
£1,740 14 8
£389 9 7
THE MUTUAL LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY
OF NEW YORK
AN INSURANCE POLICY IN THIS OFFICE IS A PROFITABLE
INVESTMENT.
In proof thereof read the following exposition of four Policies
issued to a single individual.
TTTHE policies in question are recent death claims and were issued on
J r the life of the late Horace N. Congar, of Newark, N.J., for various
A* amounts at different times, commencing with a policy for £2OO in
1849, another for £2OO in 1850, the third for £6OO in 1851, and the
fourth for £3OO in 1860, making in all £1,300. This amount has been
increased by dividends to £2,965 165., which is the total amount of
death claim paid by the Mutual Life.
This large increase is due to the fact that the insured allowed nearly
all his dividends to accumulate, thereby gaining the advantage of the
dividend-earning power.
The total amount of premiums paid on all policies was £1,453 95.,
of which £229 7s. Bd. was paid out of the dividends, leaving the total
net premiums at £1,224 Is. 4d., which amount is largely exceeded by
the remaining dividend additions to the policies, £1,664 165., being an
excess of additions over all premiums of £440 14s. Bd.
Thus it will be seen that while The Mutual Life has afforded an
insurance protection for thirty-three to forty-five years the Company pays
the face of the policies ... ... ... ••• £1,300 0 0
returns all premiums paid ... ... ... ••• £1,453 9 0
with an additional sum of ... £440 14 8
Z. C. RENNIE, General Manager.
Principal Agency: Company’s Building, Martin Place and Pitt St., Sydney.
AUSTRALIAN DEPARTMENT
/New South Wales: (Temporary Offices), 131 Pitt St., Sydney.
BRANCH OFFICES', Victoria: 473 Collins Street, Melbourne.
(.Queensland: 115 Queen Street, Brisbane.
Turner and Henderson. Printers, Sydney.
