

TRAFFIC AND TRANSPORT
A detailed assessment has been carried out to predict the traffic and transport impacts of the project. During
construction of the first stage of Canberra's light rail network, there will be temporary changes to traffic conditions
in the areas surroundingthe rail alignment. Although this may cause short-term inconveniences duringthe
construction period, operational light rail will ease traffic congestion and save time for commuters.
TRAFFIC AND
TRANSPORT |p«o|
. It currently takes about
35 minutes to travel by car from
Gungahlin to the City in the morning peak - a
12 kilometre journey, However these journey times
can be unreliable, sometimes taking 45 minutes.
. Currently there are about 5,000 trips down
Northbourne Avenue from EPIC to the city, resulting
in significant delays due to congestion,
. There are approximately 13,400 workers who live and
work in the corridor, 70 percent of these workers are
travelling to the city,
OURCOMMITMENTTO THE
COMMUNITY
Some of the expected changes to traffic and transport
along the corridor include:
. closure or partial closure at intersections will be
staged where possible, key intersections will be
scheduled for construction during typically 'non busy'
weekends avoiding major events
. some bus services may require temporary diversion
fora portion of the route
. temporary short-term closures of traffic lanes during
construction works will be staged to avoid peak
periods where possible
. short-term closure of public car parks during
construction,
The ACT Government will keep you informed and
provide plenty of notice prior to any changes to traffic
conditions, some of the mitigation measures to reduce
the impact of these changes include:
. site workers may be required to park their vehicles
at construction compounds and be shuttled to work
sites to reduce the impact on public parking
. minimise lane closures and disruptions during
peak hours
. adopt appropriate road signage and temporary speed
restrictions to maintain safety
. scheduling construction work and traffic movements
outside peak hours to minimise impacts on traffic
where feasible and reasonable,
CONSTRUCTION
WORK HOURS
. Standard construction hours for the
project will be between 7:ooam and
6:oopm Monday to Saturday,
. Controlled construction activities will
occur at night, Sundays and public
holidays, however the impact of these will
be mitigated as much as possible.
LOOKING TO THE FUTURE
The ACT Government will coordinate light rail schedules
with ACTION bus timetables to develop an integrated
city-wide public transport network, supporting those
who require the use of different modes of transport,
The bus and light rail networks will operate in an
integrated way to deliver a better all round service
for commuters,
Introduction of the light rail system will also ease
traffic congestion, improving journey times for
commuters, and will increase transport accessibility to
those who do not own motor vehicles, or people with
mobility issues,
WORKING TOGETHER
Participation in community consultation activities is
strongly encouraged, For more information on our
upcoming consultation sessions, or to learn more
about the project, please visit our website:
www.capitalmetro.act.gov.au orconnect with us
on social media.
(§)££!, Capital Metro
® capitalmetro.act.gov.au
O ©CapitalMetroACT
O /CapitalMetroACT


Stage
Commencement
Completion
Site establishment
Early 2016
Mid 2016
Early works
Mid 2016
Late 2016
Main civil
construction works
Late 2016
Late 2018
Restoration
Early 2019
Mid 2019
Testing, training and
commissioning
Early 2018
Mid 2019
CONSTRUCTION AND UTILITIES
As with any project of this size and scale, there will be impacts and some disruption to the community.
To minimise these as much as possible, Capital Metro has met with businesses, residents and key
stakeholders along the route to understand what is important to the local area.
Capital Metro has also worked extensively with utility and
service providers, undertaking a significant number of
investigations to establish the exact location of utilities
along the corridor,
CONSTRUCTION
There are a number of factors which must W
be considered with anymajor infrastructure
project, These considerations include
construction activities, the impact on existing utilities and
services and the use of land, Potential hazards must also be
identified - this includes building and environmental hazards,
and occupational health and safety considerations.
CONSTRUCTION
WORKHOURS
. Standard construction hours for the
project will be between 7:ooam and
6:oopm Monday to Saturday.
. Controlled construction activities will
occur at night, Sundays and public
holidays, however the impact of these will
be mitigated as much as possible.
PLANNING
. The route has been divided into six zones, with work
staggered to minimise the impact of construction on those
who live, work or do business along the route.
. A timetable for construction for each zone will be released,
so residents and businesses can plan ahead,
. Outside those periods, work will continue on technical
fit-out and platform construction, which will be more
confined and less intrusive.
. Major construction includes excavation, rebuilding roads
and laying tracks.
PREPARATION
. Capital Metro has undertaken an unprecedented level of
investigations to establish the exact location of buried
utilities along the 12 kilometre route,
. Working with utility owners, Capital Metro has conducted
1,312 pothole investigations, 432 hydraulic investigations
and excavated 29 trenches along the alignment,
. Knowing the location of buried cables and pipes will reduce
the risk of finding unexpected infrastructure beneath
the surface during major construction, ensuring work is
completed efficiently.
UTILITIES AND SERVICES
The ACT Government has commissioned a number of recent
investigations to determine the location of existing utilities
and services, The ACT Government has also consulted with
utility and land owners to advise them of potential disruptions,
Utilities located along the light rail corridor include:
. underground and overhead electrical cables
. water supply mains
. sewers and drainage
. gas mains
. street lighting
. telecommunication cables
A Utility Management Plan will be developed,This will include
processes and procedures to address potential risks for
the design and approval process, list of all utility services
to be treated (which will be a combination of relocation
and protection), key personnel and stakeholders, detailed
construction methodologies and a methodology for the
discovery of unknown utility services,
Other considerations
There are three major factors which must be considered
during the construction phase:
. environmental hazards - including release of potentially
hazardous materials, noise and vibration into the environment
. construction hazards - including the uncovering of
contaminated materials, construction hazards to workers and
construction works that generate significant heat or sparks
. occupational health and safety considerations - including
any activity or outcome that may affect the health and
safety of site personnel and visitors due to the failure to
implement safe work procedures on site.
Operational hazards and risks will be addressed through
a construction emergency response plan, community
education programs and through mitigation measures such
as the use of hoardings during construction, hazardous
material procedures, all cables will be buried within ducts
that adhere to Australian standards following construction
and proper storage of chemicals associated with the
operation and maintenance of light rail vehicles.
Land use
Majority of the land along the light rail corridor including
Flemington Road, Federal Highway and Northbourne Avenue
is owned by the ACT Government, Therefore, the use of land
for construction of the light rail is expected to have minimal
impact on the community
LOOKING TO THE FUTURE
Although there may be temporary disruptions during the
relocation of existing utilities, old pipes and cables may be
replaced with new infrastructure during this process, as well
as other construction disruption,
The light rail project will also see the development of land
including additional pathways and pedestrian areas,
WORKING TOGETHER
Participation in community consultation activities is strongly
encouraged. For more information on our upcoming
consultation sessions, or to learn more about the project,
please visit our website: www.capitalmetro.act.gov.au
orconnect with us on social media.
@ | Capital Metro
® capitalmetro.act.gov.au
O ©CapitalMetroACT
O /CapitalMetroACT


ENVIRONMENT AND HERITAGE
Field studies have been carried out by specialists as part of the environmental assessment to determine
potential contamination and operational impacts on the environment, including, but not limited to ecology,
soil and heritage.
BIODIVERSITY W
The project is unlikely to cause a
significant change to the existing
conditions along the corridor and
the existing biodiversity values. |||||
The following potential impacts were
considered when assessing the corridor:
. loss and modification of vegetation and
associated habitat
. death or injury to fauna
. impacts to fauna from additional lighting
. noise and vibration impacts to fauna.
HERITAGE
A total of 26 heritage listed items were identified within
the vicinity of the project area. Heritage specialists will
be involved in the detailed design and documentation
phase of the project, ensuring impacts on heritage
items and sites is minimised. Photographic recording of
any heritage items/areas affected by the project will be
undertaken in accordance with the relevant ACT Heritage
Council guidelines,
. The proposed landscape design, particularly the
Northbourne Avenue trees, grass and urban meadows,
will be implemented to reinstate the avenue's significant
processional landscape character,
. If archaeological relics or remains are found during
construction work, all work in the immediate area of
the find would cease and the item will be assessed
by an archaeologist.
. The project will be carefully and sensitively designed
to ensure the landscape character of Northbourne
Avenue would be reinstated as part of the project
and the potential National Heritage values of Canberra
are conserved.
. When fully implemented and mature, the proposed
landscaping works will be an improvement on the
current landscape of the corridor and would enhance the
heritage values of Northbourne Avenue.
OUR COMMITMENT TO
THE COMMUNITY
. Checking for the presence of flora and fauna species
and habitats on site before clearing begins and where
possible relocating.
. Ensuring exclusion zones are established to protect
vegetation and fauna habitat outside of the assessed
and approved clearing limits.
. Minimising any adverse impacts on natural temperate
grassland, Blakely's Red Gum Grassy Woodland, or
tablelands dry shrubby box woodland.
WORKINGTOGETHER
The light rail project team will continue to work with the
ACT Government to minimise any potential impact on
the community and environment, The team will keep you
informed as the project progresses and warmly welcomes
your feedback,
Participation in community consultation activities is strongly
encouraged, For more information on our upcoming
consultation sessions, or to learn more about the project,
please visit our website: www.capitalmetro.act.gov.au
orconnect with us on social media,
(g) capitalmetro.act.gov.au
O ©CapitalMetroACT
O /CapitalMetroACT
Capital Metro


NOISE AND VIBRATION
As with any major construction works, there will be noise and vibration associated with the construction of the
ACT Government's light rail project. To minimise the impact on the community, the ACT Government will work with
the successful bidder to develop mitigation strategies through a comprehensive noise management plan.
OPERATIONAL
VIBRATION LEVELS
Throughout March and April 2015, noise level monitoring was
conducted to establish a current noise base level, The findings
from this assessment will allow us to identify and address noise
and vibration levels, should they exceed the expected limit.
The noise emitted by the light rail will change at different
points along the route, depending on the location, track
finish and speed of the vehicle. However, on average the
light rail system won't be louder than general traffic noise.
Modern light rail and its construction methodology has many
features to help minimise noise and vibration. Light rail is
quieter than heavy rail because the vehicles are shorter in
length and lighter.
WHAT’S NEXT?
. Works are expected to begin in mid-2016.
. The construction stage will involve road excavation
activities along the alignment and near stop locations,
. The works will generate noise and vibration emissions,
however, they will be intermittent in nature and controlled,
. There will be regular compliance checks of all machinery, to
ensure noise levels are compliant with industry standards.
CONSTRUCTION
WORK HOURS
. Standard construction hours for the
project will be between 7:ooam and
6:oopm Monday to Saturday,
. Controlled construction activities will
occur at night, Sundays and public
holidays, however the impact of these
will be mitigated as much as possible.
LOOKING TO THE FUTURE
. Once operational, the noise of a light rail vehicle will be
barely noticeable - quieter than a bus. In fact, the noise of
general traffic will mask that of light rail vehicles.
. The highest noise levels would be at the depot within the
industrial area of Mitchell,
. The successful bidder for the project will be required to
mitigate operational noise of the light rail as much as
possible, This could include optimising schedules to avoid
idling time, optimising track design, thorough maintenance
practices, minimising wheel and rail roughness,
WORKING TOGETHER
The light rail project team will continue to work with the
ACT Government to minimise any potential impact on the
community, The team will keep you informed as the project
progresses and warmly welcomes your feedback.
Participation in community consultation activities is strongly
encouraged, For more information on our upcoming
consultation sessions, or to learn more about the project,
please visit our website: www.capitalmetro.act.gov.au
orconnect with us on social media,
OURCOMMITMENTTO
THE COMMUNITY
We are committed to ensuring the comfort of the community
and have measures in place to address any potential impacts
during the construction and operation of the light rail, Some
of these measures include:
. any construction works proposed to take place outside
'normal' construction hours will be subject to an approval
process on a case by case basis
. if working near schools, noisy activities may be scheduled
outside normal school hours
. consecutive works in the same location will be minimised,
including night-works
. noise and vibration generated by wheel and track
interaction during the operation of the light rail will be
minimised by regular wheel and rail maintenance,
(Q) capitalmetro.act.gov.au
O ©CapitalMetroACT
O /CapitalMetroACT
(§)* C I I Capital Metro


SUSTAINABILITY
Transport emissions represent about 14 percent of Australia's total greenhouse gas production, with private
commuters accounting for about 57 percent of Australia's transport emissions.
Transport fuels currently account for 25 percent of the
ACT'stotal annual emissions - close to 1 million tonnes of
harmful gases.
AIR QUALITY & ~f%~
GREENHOUSE GASES ' \
Analysis of the air quality in Civic found the concentration
of harmful gases, such as nitrogen and carbon dioxide, were
produced by the combustion of fuels from motor vehicles,
The light rail project is an important contribution in
Canberra's response to the environmental challenges of air
quality, traffic volumes and congestion, noise, greenhouse
gas emissions and urban growth,
An assessment of Canberra's air quality was undertaken to
identify any risks associated with construction activities.
These findings indicated:
. the generation of greenhouse gas emissions during
construction of the light rail will be just six percent of
total annual emissions in the ACT (based on 2013/14
figures), The successful bidder is required to have
measures in place to reduce the impacts of greenhouse
gas emissions resulting from construction activity
. dust will be generated during construction and operation
of the light rail, Dust control methods may include the
use of water trucks and sprays to minimise dust, and the
installation of barriers around work sites, A construction
dust and air quality management plan will be developed.
In a single lane of traffic, light rail can carry up to 20,000
passengers an hour. In contrast, a dedicated bus transit
lane can only carry up to 8,000 people in the same
amount of time; and a single lane of cars can carry just
1,000 people per hour,
The light rail project is likely
to improve air quality in
Canberra by reducingthe
number of people travelling
in emission-producing
cars; instead travelling via
'clean-powered' light rail.
. a carbon and energy management plan will also
be produced. The plan will include procedures for
monitoringenergy production, a strategy to identify
opportunities for reducing carbon emissions and a model
to measure the project's carbon footprint,
OURCOMMITMENTTO
THECOMMUNITY
The light rail project aims to meet the ACT Government's
renewable energy target and will encourage increased
physical activity - by reducing the amount of time people
spend in cars,
LOOKING TO
THE FUTURE
To ensure the best environmental F\\' I If\
outcomes are achieved as part of
the project, the successful bidder will be required to source,
as a minimum, 10 percent of the light rail system's electricity
usage from renewable energy sources such as solar or wind,
Combined with the ACT Government achieving its target of
90 percent renewable energy by 2020 - the time in which
stage one of the light rail will be up and running - this will
enable the Capital Metro project to be 100 percent green
energy powered, This provides a significant opportunity for
Canberra to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from transport,
WORKING TOGETHER
Participation in community consultation activities is strongly
encouraged, For more information on our upcoming
consultation sessions, or to learn more about the project,
please visit our website: www.capitaimetro.act.gov.au
orconnect with us on social media.
Figure I.Emissions by transport mode (Australia)
Source: DoE 2014 a: Treasury and DIICCSRTE 2013
(ipMI Capital Metro
® capitalmetro.act.gov.au
O ©CapitalMetroACT
O /CapitalMetroACT


URBAN DESIGN, LANDSCAPE
CHARACTER AND VISUAL IDENTITY
The project has been assessed against the design features of the project including landscape treatments and
opportunities to integrate infrastructure with the surrounding environment.
URBAN DESIGN A
Entry and exit points, intersections, stop bBR
designs etc have been designed with * y
consideration of the visual impact on the
surrounding landscape.
Recent assessments of the existing trees on Northbourne
Avenue and the Federal Highway have found that a significant
number of trees are in poor health and would need to be
removed regardless of the light rail project. Many have already
been removed due to poor health and storm damage.
The development of the Canberra light rail provides
an opportunity to refresh the Northbourne and
Flemington corridors, adorning theaiignment with both
native and exotic trees, The trees will provide visually
pleasing surroundings, and will offer commuters protection
from the elements,
The light rail project will also introduce additional pathways
and seating, enhancing the look and feel of the corridor and
surrounding areas.
LANDSCAPING-THE
NORTHBOURNE CORRIDOR
In early 2015, community feedback was invited on the
landscaping vision for the Northbourne Corridor as part of Capital
Metro's urban design consultation program, ACTCapital Metro
presented Eucalyptus rossii as the possible species for the
median on Northbourne Avenue.
Following community consultation and further technical
analysis (i.e. soil sampling), a new preferred species -
Eucalyptus monnifera has been selected and included in the
final design for the Northbourne Avenue precinct.
The attractive and stately appearance of the established
Eucalyptus monnifera, combined with its suitability to the
existing soil conditions of Northbourne Avenue, makes the
species a suitable replacement tree for the Northbourne
corridor. The Eucalyptus monnifera is also relatively easy
to establish and has the ability to withstand moderate
drought conditions,
LANDSCAPING-THE
FLEMINGTON CORRIDOR
A number of native and exotic tree species are proposed to
be planted along Flemington Road and the Federal Highway,
The ACT Government will work with the successful bidder to
identify a suitable tree species, as part of the final design, to
be planted along this corridor.
VISUAL IDENTITY
As well as the introduction of new trees, the light rail project
presents an opportunity to enhance the design of the
corridor, This will be achieved by increasing pedestrian zones,
including the introduction of additional seating zones and
foot paths,
The Civic Terminus will become an accessible, high quality
public space which will uphold the urban character of
the CBD, while the Gungahlin and Dickson Stations will be
reflective of their surroundings,
OURCOMMITMENTTO
THE COMMUNITY
Prior to construction of the light rail, a number of existing
trees are required to be removed - predominantly from the
Northbourne Corridor. This will allow the relocation of utilities
currently located under the proposed light rail alignment,
and construction of the light rail track bed, The Capital Metro
Agency will work with the successful bidder to minimise any
impact on the surrounding community,
During construction, access to existing retail outlets will
be maintained and alternate routes for pedestrians will be
established, where required. Works will also be timed to avoid
special events, minimising any impact on the community.
The Eucalyptus monnifera is
successful as an urban tree, as
it requires minimal pruningand
maintenance. The species occurs
naturally on Black Mountain,
currently exists on the verges of
Northbourne Avenue and is widely
planted throughout Canberra -
with more 100,000 trees planted
in streets and parks.
The ACT Government is committed to renewing Northbourne
Avenue as a tree-lined avenue that is safe for motorists
and pedestrians,
LOOKING TO THE FUTURE
The proposed landscaping and elements of the project
design will transform the beauty of the Northbourne Avenue
and Flemington Road precincts - greatly enhancing the
entrance to the nation's capital.
WORKING TOGETHER
Participation in community consultation activities is strongly
encouraged. For more information on our upcoming
consultation sessions, or to learn more about the project,
please visit our website: www.capitalmetro.act.gov.au
orconnect with us on social media.
Q> capitalmetro.act.gov.au
O ©CapitalMetroACT
O /CapitalMetroACT
(g)i2 ' Capital Metro
