

Pern pmw ..
fcga oott o oooo^ooo'-'
| CAPITAL PUNISHMENT. §
I 0
g j-vEASONS WHY THE JJ EATH SHOULD
i BE J (j|)
S WITH H
| SUGGESTIONS FOR AN EFFICIENT SUBSTITUTE. |
8 ALFRED J. TAYLOR |
(Librarian Tasmanian Public Library.J
0 CONTENTS:
Part I.— Reasons why it should be Abolished. w
w ll. —'Answers to Objections. . 0
H||) lll. —Suggestions for Efficient Substitute.
§ ONE SHILLING. ||
©
Hobart 3Tobm: Q
PRINTERS “ MERCURY’ 7 STEAM PRESS OFFICE.
o 1877 - • . Jl
6 DAVIES BKOS.j
#• #




CAPITAL PUNISHMENT.
WHY THE JDeATH SHOULD
BE J
WITH
SUGGESTIONS FOR AN EFFICIENT SUBSTITUTE.
BY
ALFRED J. TAYLOR
(Librarian Tasmanian Public Library.)
CONTENTS :
Part I. —Reasons why it should be Abolished.
ll. —Answers to Objections.
lll. —Suggestions for Efficient Substitute.
ONE SHILLING.
3§ubart
DAVIES BROS., PRINTERS “ MERCURY ” STEAM PRESS OFFICE.
1877. .


ON. pfENRY jBIJTLER,
of the of
PERMISSION,
JReSPECTFULLY JDeDICATED
JHE y^UTHOR.


PREFACE.
It is generally held that those who advocate the abolition
of the death penalty are either “ frothy declaimers ”
about the sacredness of human life, or men who are
influenced by a morbid sentimentalism. I submit that I
have shown that I belong to neither of these classes; and
in advocating the abolition of Capital Punishment I do
so in what I consider to be the best interests of
society. I hold with Lord Lytton that we 11 shall do
right if we blame the causes which make a demon * *
but wrong if we regard the demon itself only as the
suffering angel.’! f I admit at once that if the safety
of society cannot be otherwise attained the life of the
offender must be sacrificed. I do not deny that there
was a time when the infliction of a death penalty was a
stern necessity; when the law of “an eye for an eye, a
tooth for a tooth, a life for a life” was justified by the
then existing state and condition of society ; a time when
man, obliged to defend by force of arms and personal
prowess his possessions, his family, his life, was com-
pelled in sheer self-defence to employ and use such only
means as were then available and effective for the pro-
tection of himself and the weaker members of society.
But as civilization advanced—and still advances—with
giant strides, so have our opportunities increased for
providing other and more effectual means for the pro-
tection of society—means more efficient because more
certain and attended with better results to mankind because
less brutal and so less demoralising and debasing in their
influence upon society (which we should educate while
we protect). And I hold that it can be shown that th 6
death penalty is no longer adapted to the present condition
of society, and that it is no longer expedient to enforce it.
This position I have endeavoured to sustain in the
following pages, and until the facts which I have adduced,
and the arguments which I have advanced are refuted
and shown to have no weight, I submit that I have
established a position that deserves the attention of all
who express an opinion or record a vote on the subject.
ALFRED J. TAYLOR.
Tasmanian Public Library, April 28th, 1877.
f Quarterly Essays, p. 10.


Tasmania
32
6
26
Victoria
96
38
68
Queensland ...
21
18
3
New South Wales ...
141
35
106
South Australia
13
4
9
New Zealand
150 (many natives)
22
128
CAPITAL PUNISHMENT.
In offering a plea for the abolition of the death penalty,
I will first of all direct attention to the discordance between
the letter and practice of the law in capital cases, and point
out some of the evils necessarily arising therefrom.
That the death penalty cannot now be enforced in-
variably is admitted on all hands, and consequently the
administration of the law in capital cases is rendered very
uncertain. The following statistics prepared from official
returns courteously supplied to me by the Registrar-
Generals of the various colonies referred to show how
seldom the law, in capital cases, is carried into effect after
sentence has been passed upon the criminal. The returns
cover a period Of II years, from 1864 to 1874, inclusive.
Colony Sentenced to death, or death recorded Executed Reprieved
Total 453 123 330
In England in the year 1868, out of 21 persons con-
demned only 12 were hanged. In 1871, out of 13,
only 4 were hanged. In 1872, out of 30, only 15.
Let us enquire how this uncertainty is likely to affect
the criminal classes and society at large. The only
inference to be drawn from the above figures is that death
does not not necessarily always attend the commission of
the crime for which the law awards the capital penalty.
'Encouragement is thus offered to the law-breaker to com-
mit such crimes, for the punishment of one criminal by
hanging does not necessarily imply that all who commit
the same crime shall alike suffer upon conviction, whereas
in all other offences conviction implies the usual punish-
ment. Now, if the law is to prove a terror to evil-doers and
to exert a favourable influence with those upon whom a
deterrent influence can be brought to bear, they must be
made to realise by example that certain offences will
surely (in case of detection) involve a certain punishment;
in the words of Lord Brougham, there onust be u a fixed
and known rule of conduct, the same by whomsoever
administered, and applicable to all cases; so that those
whom it is intended to regulate may be distinctly aware


of what is required of them, and what penalty they incur
for disobedience.” That this cannot be the case under the
administration of the death penalty is sufficiently evident.
There should exist in all cases a general impression
that the infliction of a certain penalty is just. The
criminal would then be made to realise that his punish-
ment is recognised as a stern necessity, and when con-
victed he should “step into the grade of his punishment
as he does into the number of his cell.” But when dis-
tinctions are made in capital cases, and the public are
unacquainted with the reasons which may influence the
Executive in making such distinctions, an impres-
sion gets abroad that penalties are unfairly dealt
out and that there is partiality in the administration
of the law. In consequence of this idea, sympathy for
the criminal often amounts to forgetfulness of his crime,
public feeling revolts against the sentence under which
he suffers, and the blood-dyed villain gets to believe that
he is regarded as a martyr rather than as a justly pun-
ished offender. This is not the way to deter men from
committing crime.
Added to all this, the weighty fact remains that very
few of those who are tried on a capital charge are ulti-
mately convicted. And that something more than a desire
to give a prisoner “ the benefit of a doubt ” actuate juries
in giving their verdicts in capital cases, is only fairly
to be inferred from statistics presented to the British
Parliament, prepared from judicial returns, and covering
a period of 10 years, which show that, while the chances
of escaping the punishment awarded by the law for all
offences were as one to four, the chances of escaping it for
the capital case of murder were as five to one ( Hansard ,
Yol. 174), and these statistics are confirmed on taking a
larger survey. In England and Wales during the 70
years —1805 to 1874 —only one in six of the persons
charged with the crime of murder suffered the extreme
penalty of the law ('Statistical Journal, 1876).
The following may be mentioned as some of the causes
which account for the uncertain results likely to follow
upon a capital charge:—
There is always an anxiety on the part of all engaged
in the administration of the law in capital cases to find
some flaw upon which to hang the desire to save human


life,* and although it is true in theory that juries should
return verdicts conscientiously and regardless of conse-
quences, the fact remains that in practice they are con-
siderably influenced by a consideration of the results
likely to follow a verdict of “ guilty.” The following
are cases in proof of this assertion: —
In April, 1864, at the Criminal Court, Maitland, Victoria,
one John Sievers, was indicted for wounding with
intent to murder John Tuck. There were two counts in
the indictment, the first capital, the second not capital.
The jury asked the presiding Judge Wise, “If they
found the prisoner guilty on the first count (viz., the
capital count) with a strong recommendation to mercy,
would His Honor exert his influence to see the recom-
mendation carried out.” The Judge, of course, replied
that “whatever might be the result of their verdict,
it was their duty to return a verdict according to their
conscience.” The foreman immediately, without any
further consideration, returned a verdict on the second
count, and the prisoner was sentenced to 15 years’ hard
labour on the roads. About 12 years ago a woman was
executed at Chelsmford for poisoning her husband. The
year before she was tried for a similar offence, and the
judges expressed an opinion that if the punishment had
not been death, she would have been convicted on
the first occasion. On April 19th, 1875, Alfred Heap was
executed within the precincts of Kirkdale gaol. The jury
at his trial, while finding him guilty of murder, strongly
recommended him to mercy. A memorial for a reprieve
was afterwards got up, and petitions were sent in to the
Home Secretary. A representation was also made through
the foreman of the jury somewhat to the effect, that had
they anticipated their recommendation of mercy would
not have been acted upon, the jury would have reduced
the crime to manslaughter. A recent case in Victoria
will be fresh in the minds of many of my readers:—■
Ah Kat had been sentenced to death for murder. Before
his execution six of the jury that tried him signed a
petition, which concluded as follows : —“ Had we thought
* “ From 1840, Mr. Ewart, supported by many followers, pressed upon the Commons
again and again the total abolition of capital punishment. This last movement failed
indeed, and the law still remains life for life. But such has been the sensitive,—not to
say morbid,—tenderness of society, that many heinous crimes have since escaped the
extreme penalty; while uncertainty has been suffered to impair the moral influence of
justice.’’—May’s Const. His. of Eng., 4th ed., vol. 2, p, 400.


that the sentence of death would be carried into effect
several of our number would never have found the
prisoner guilty of wilful murder; on the contrary,
that we only did so in the belief that even without our
recommendation to mercy an execution would not be
permitted to take place for what was clearly an
unpremeditated murder.” r
There are instances on record showing that the very
same persons who are acquitted when tried for an act for
which the law assigns capital punishment have been found
guilty when tried for the same act on a charge which
does not involve capital punishment. Three men, Barker,
Brecken, and Raine, were tried at York in 1846 for
murder. They were acquitted. The same men were
tried for the same offence as a robbery only, which of
course did not involve capital punishment. They were 1
all found guilty. Joseph Travis was tried in 1848, at
Lincoln, for murder. He was acquitted. He was tried
again for the same offence as a robbery. He was found
guilty. At the Maidstone Assizes, in 1855, Elizabeth
Laws was tried for murder and acquitted. She was
again tried for the same act on a charge of stealing only.
She was found guilty. (Hansard , vol. 174.) °
The difficulty in obtaining convictions on capital
charges has been acknowledged by many Judges. And
in 1864 Mr. Humphreys, the coroner for the eastern
division of Middlesex, said that the failure of justice in
cases of infanticide is “ attributable to the law. The legal
punishment is death. The consequence is that all sorts
of excuses are made rather than find the prisoner guilty.”
Hr. Lancaster, another coroner, acknowledges that the
punishment of death makes juries “ less willing to con-
vict.”* f Hansard, vol. 174.^
If we ask why juries are so unwilling to convict in
capital cases the answer is obvious:—Because the innocent
are ofttimes involved in the penalty attached to the
violation of a law intended to punish the guilty only,
and which penalty once inflicted removes it out of human
power to make reparation for mistakes made and
wrongs committed. And can anyone blame the man
who would hesitate before returning a verdict, the
penalty attached to which, if enforced, is unalterable ?
* This was acknowledged by the Royal Commission that reported in 1866.


That innocent persons have suffered under the adminis-
tration of the capital penalty no one will attempt to deny.
The Kev. Julian T. Woods (who kindly authorised me
to use his name) told me last year that within the pre-
vious 10 years —in the course of his ministration as a
missionary in Australia —two persons on their death-
beds confessed themselves guilty of crimes for which
others, who were innocent, had been executed; and the
following recent cases clearly show that verdicts of
“ guilty ” may, even in the present day, be returned
against persons quite innocent of the crime with which
they may be charged. About the year 1872 a man
named Halligan was incarcerated at Pentridge Stockade,
having been convicted of highway robbery. In 1875
events transpired which left no doubt as to Halligan’s
innocence, and the Government ordered his immediate
release ’from prison.* About two years ago a mining
manager at Sandhurst, named Costen, was sentenced to
seven years’ hard labour for some defalcation in the
accounts of the company of which he was manager. At
his trial a link was wanting in the chain of evidence
given in his defence. A few weeks ago the missing link
was found, and Costen was discharged after having served
two years of his sentence, f
And that this hesitation on the part of juries is not
confined to cases in which a doubt of guilt may exist is
proved not only by statistics as quoted on page 5, but also
by reference to cases on record, in which juries have
returned verdicts in the very teeth of law and evidence. On
July 3,1863, Wm. Robinson was tried before Sir Valentine
Fleming, at Launceston, Tasmania, for wilful murder. The
evidence was conclusive, but the jury returned a verdict of
manslaughter only. His Honor expressed his surprise at
the verdict, and said that he thought in his charges to the
jury he made it clear that only one of two courses was
open to them, viz., either to find the prisoner guilty of
wilful murder, or else to acquit him. The evidence in this
case was too conclusive to admit of a doubt. His Honor
went on to mention an instance of a similar nature in
which a judge refused to take a verdict of manslaughter.
The jury failing to agree to any other verdict, His Honor
very properly sentenced the prisoner to penal servitude
* Australasian , October 16th, 1875. + Australasian , March 25th, 1876.


for life. A similar case, in which the judge also expressed
surprise at the verdict, is reported in the Melbourne
Australasian for March 27, 1875.
To say that society is mainly educated by ideas, is to
give expression to a truism. Let us apply this doctrine
to the above facts, and surely we must admit that the only
way in which the criminal classes are likely to be affected
by the present mode of administering the law in capital
cases is the very way calculated to impress their weak
intellects with the idea that they may commit the greater
crime with much more impunity than the lesser crime, so
many are the chances favourable to their escape when
tried for the former. The efficacy of punishment as a
deterrent influence must always depend more upon its
certainty than its severity, and experience and knowledge
of the criminal classes prove that they are more afraid of
short and certain punishment than they are of incurring
punishment much more severe but less certain.
Let us now refer to the evil effects upon society at large
attending the present glaring discordance between the
letter and the practice of the law in capital cases.
The public mind is unsettled. In altering the sentence
solemnly passed upon the criminal the Executive appear
to disagree with and overrule the decision of the judge;
and if a commutation be granted in answer to popular
clamour, then a dangerous precedent is given to the
public. On the other hand, if the criminal is executed
contrary to the expressed feelings and wishes of the
people, then respect for the la w is destroyed, and it is
represented as unnecessarily harsh and severe.* Much
more so is this the case when the extreme penalty is
carried out in some cases only out of a number of criminals
condemned during the same session; and more particu-
larly so if the public be unable to decide why such dis-
tinctions are made. But if the capital penalty were
inflicted in every case, the public mind would not
fail to condemn as unjust a law which admits of no
gradation—punishing the different shades of guilt uni-
formly. We see, then, that a discordance between the
letter and the practice must ever be the inevitable atten-
* 15,000 persons in Sydney signed a petition praying for a reprieve in the case of Mauns,
the escort robber, and when this was refused the excitement was intense. A similar
ease occurred lately in London.


dant upon a law which metes out the punishment of
death. If strictly enforced in every case the penalty
falls unequally and unjustly. If distinctions are made
the administration of the law is rendered uncertain. In
either case confidence in the law and its administration is
rudely shaken.
Experience has proved that it is not deterrent in its influence.
And the capital penalty has no deterring influence because it
does not remove the causes which induce men to commit capital
crimes.
There are few, if any, among thoughtful men, who
will now deny that man is very much under the tyranny
of his organisation, and that any imperfection of
organisation will greatly bias and influence his will
and power ofi action. Observation convinces us that
criminals, and especially those of the lower classes, have
deficient constitutions or organisations, and that con-
sequently they have peculiar tendencies and impulses
which find expression in deeds of violence and crime.
Thus, some men placed in certain circumstances, are as
irresistibly led to commit crimes as others are to do kindly
actions. They are really and truly slaves to controlling
passions, and placed in circumstances which will stimulate
the most active impulses of their nature, will commit
crimes of the deepest dye having no thought at the
time of the consequences to themselves of such actions.
Hanging fifty such would not deter others governed
by the same impulses from committing like crimes if
placed under similar circumstances. Speaking of the
criminal classes Mr. Bruce Thompson —who, in his official
capacity as surgeon to the general prison of Scotland, had
observed thousands of prisoners, says: —“ Habitual
criminals are without moral sense —are true moral
imbeciles; their moral insensibility is such that in the
presence of temptation they have no self-control against
crime; and among all the murderers he had known,
amounting to nearly five hundred, only three could be
ascertained to have expressed any remorse.” He also
quotes a medical man who had a long experience among
prisoners who declared himself mainly impressed with
their extreme deficiency or perversion of moral feeling and
the strength of their evil propensities. “ In all my experi-
ence,” he says, “ I have never seen such an accumulation


of morbid appearances as I witness in the post mortem
examinations of the prisoners who die here. Scarcely
one of them can be said to die of one disease, for almost
every organ of the body is more or less diseased; and
the wonder to me is that life could have been supported
in such a diseased frame.” If it be a fact that crime
depends so much upon organisation then Christian mercy
demands that we should study the antecedents of criminals.
The very fact that such a large percentage of offenders,
after the completion of a sentence, are returned to prison
again and almost invariably for the same crime for which
they were previously punished is a sufficient proof that
there is a class having natural tendencies to commit par-
ticular crimes. Mr. Shepherd, once Governor of Wakefield
House of Correction, stated before the National Association
for the Promotion of Social Science that he had traced the
career of at least 10,000 prisoners, and of the old offenders,
above 50 per cent., or more than half, were returned to
gaol again. How can it be denied that such tendencies
do exist when we see even children addicted to vice before
they can possibly know what vice or crime means. It
should be remembered also that some persons are so con-
stituted that the same considerations do not weigh with
them at all times. That which a man would not do
in his moments of tranquillity, he might be guilty of if
placed in circumstances likely to rouse into violent activity
faculties which otherwise might have remained compara-
tively dormant; and such susceptibility, I argue, would
be the result of his organisation, and altogether beyond
his immediate control. With such men the impulse of the
moment is stronger than the sense of after consequences.
Others, again, possessed by an uncontrollable destructive
impulse, have set fire to barns and other property without
having any ill-feeling against the persons whom they
injured, or any purpose of their own to serve in so doing.
In 1869, in the home country, a sergeant of the sth
Fusiliers, was seen to come out of a compartment of his
barrack-room with a rifle in his hands. On the verandah
outside was a corporal of the same regiment, at whom the
sergeant deliberately pointed his rifle and fired. The
corporal appears to have moved his head and thus escaped
death, for the bullet whizzed past close to his ear. In a
few moments the sergeant was a prisoner, and is stated to


have said, when asked why he shot at the corporal, “that
he did not know; he had been prompted to it by sudden
impulse, and was very glad the corporal was not hurt,
for they were the best of friends.” When taken before his
commanding officer on the following morning, he admitted
having loaded the rifle and fired, but was quite unable to
give any satisfactory reason for this. act. No quarrel had
taken place between him and the man who so nearly
became his victim, and no motive could, by any of their
comrades, be assigned for the murderous attempt. Now,
had the corporal been killed, any jury would most likely
have found the sergeant guilty of wilful murder, believing
that the cause which led to the commission of the crime
was a secret between himself and the dead. Cases such
as these show how closely what we call crime borders
upon disease and insanity, and it is impossible for any
jury, in estimating the cause of particular conduct, to say
how far and in what measure such conduct has been
induced by partial insanity, manifested in an irresistible
propensity to commit crime. The very fact that 60 per
cent., or more than half of those who are guilty of homicide,
attempt afterwards to commit suicide, leads to the con-
clusion that there must be the elements of insanity in their
natures. Let us not forget, also, the startling but stubborn
fact that crime is hereditary. Do we think it unnatural
that a bad tree should bear bad fruit ? Did not Israel have
a proverb that when the fathers ate sour grapes the chil-
dren’s teeth were set on edge? And was it thought strange
that the children of those who stoned the prophets should
afterwards stone Him who sent them ? Let us not lightly
sneer at a truth, neglecting which, we may act unjustly
towards a fellow creature, even though that creature be
the vilest of his race. Writing on the subject of the
“Production of Criminals,” Dr. Maudsley says: —“The
few and imperfect investigations of the personal and family
histories of criminals which have yet been made are
sufficient to excite some serious reflections. _ One fact
which is brought strongly out by these inquiries is that
crime is often hereditary; that just as a man may
inherit the stamp of the bodily features and character
of his parents, so he may also inherit the impress
of their evil passions and propensities. Of the true
thief, as of the true poet, it may be indeed said that


<£ he is born, not made.” This is what observation
of the phenomena of hereditary action would lead us to
-expect; and although certain theologians, who are prone
to square the order of nature to their notions of what it
should be, may repel such a doctrine as the heritage of an
immoral in place of a moral sense, they will in the end
find it impossible in this matter, as they have done in other
matters, to contend against facts. To add to their misfor-
tunes many criminals are not only begotten and bred in
crime, but they are instructed in it from their youth
upwards, so that their original criminal instincts acquire
a power which no subsequent efforts to produce reformation
will ever counteract. All persons who have made crim-
inals their study, recognise a distinct criminal class of
beings, who herd together in our large cities in a thieves’
quarter, giving themselves up to intemperance, rioting in
debauchery, without regard to marriage ties or the bars
of consanguinity, and propagating a criminal population
of degenerate beings. For it is, furthermore, a matter of
observation that this criminal class constitutes a
degenerate or morbid variety of mankind, marked by
peculiar low physical and mental characteristics. They
are, it has been said, as distinctly marked off from the
honest and well-bred operatives as black-faced sheep are
from other breeds, so that an experienced detective officer
or prison official could pick them out from any pro-
miscuous assembly at church or market.” f Responsibility
in Mental Disease , pp. 29-30 . J That a large class of our
fellow-creatures is steeped in ignorance we must, alas, all
admit, and that ignorance is a fruitful source of crime
none of us will attempt to deny: for let it be remembered
that there are certain blind animal instincts or impulses
in man, which from their very nature, are in a constant
state of activity, and that unless those faculties and powers
are properly developed which will enable him rightly to
direct and control such instincts, he will be governed
solely by animal impulse, and animal impulse will become
his will. Legislators enacting laws lose sight of these
considerations, and forgetting that all men are not con-
stituted alike, men of moral and intellectual capacity
erroneously imagine that a punishment which would deter
themselves from committing a crime would deter others,
forgetting that many of those who commit crime have no


controlling powers sufficient to enable them successfully
to resist temptations presented by their passions, and by
the influence of external circumstances. At a discussion
between the members of the National Association, Mr.
Elliott, who is an advocate for the law as it now stands,
said that he felt compelled to admit that “ the commission,
of so many murders per annum, in face of the dreadful
penalty of the gallows, shows that there are some people
who lay their schemes so deliberately, and with such
exquisite care, that they calculate they will escape the
gallows, so that the calculation of the chance of escape is
stronger than the fear punishment.” On the other hand,
we know that crimes are often committed under circum-
stances which make the criminal blind to all considerations
except the gratification of the controlling passion of the
moment. Mr. C: E. Rawlinson, who took part in the
discussion which I have referred to, said that he had
opportunities of knowing the criminal classes, and, with
regard to the deterrent power of the gallows, his firm
opinion was that, with the class on which the example
ought to be most profound, it was absolutely powerless.
He had gone into the greatest dens of iniquity; he had
traversed great cities and rural villages ; he had seen the
criminal population in their haunts of vice, and he had
come to the conclusion that no example they could place
before them would have any deterrent effect Mr. Nissen,
Sheriff of London, in a paper read before the same associa-
tion, expressed an opinion based upon his experience of
capital punishments that they exercised little terror over
the minds of the criminals and no deterrent effect upon
those who witnessed them. And this assertion is confirmed
by the statement of the Rev. Mr. Pyne, of Surrey, on the
authority of the Rev. Mr. Roberts, that in one instance
it was proved that out of 167 criminals, 164 had been
spectators of executions. The Rev. Mr. Thompson,
chaplain of York Castle, stated that from his own
observation of the characters brought out for execution
he felt assured that none of them had been able to realise
the awfulness of their position. He felt perfectly per-
suaded from the cases which came under his observation
that the fear of the punishment of death never came into
their minds at all, and he was convinced that if capital
punishment were abolished they would not find an increase


of murder. At the execution of Taylor and Ward, at
Kirkdale some years since, a young man named Thomas
Edwards was present. In six days afterwards he was
committed to gaol for taking the life of a young woman,
and was the very next to suffer upon the scaffold. The
Eev. Mr. Hutton—an advocate for capital punishment —
instances a case where a woman was so anxious to witness
an execution in Northampton that she took lodgings in
the town in order not to miss the sight. At the very
next assizes, the same woman was tried for the murder of
her own children.
The Rev. H. R. Haweis has well pointed to the
following as a fine practical comment of the dread which
the possible scaffold strikes into the breasts of wrong-
doers. “ Last January ” (1875), he writes, u in Liver-
pool, on one day three men were hanged for murder, and
The Times expressed a hope that their terrible example
might prove a turning-point in the character of the town
and county, and administer a decisive check to crimes
of violence. A few days later The Standard writes : ( On
the very day that the Liverpool murderers were hanged,
two men were charged with robbery and violence, com-
mitted in a street close to the scene of the murder, and
the same night a ship’s cook was stabbed at a street
corner. 5 At the following summer assizes the calendar
was pronounced to be ‘ the blackest on record ,’ there being
six cases of murder from Liverpool alone, and more than
twenty local commitments for manslaughter or other
violent crimes! ”*
Because statistics prove that in those countries where capital
punishment has been abolished there has been no increase in the
number of capital crimes.
The following facts, prepared as a brief summary of
the most authentic information on the subject up to the
year 1860, will serve to show the practical results of the
total or partial abolition of capital punishment in various
countries. A Royal Commission having been appointed
to inquire into the whole subject, the committee of the
society for the abolition of capital punishment in England
deemed it advisable to collect evidence from different
countries in order that they might be prepared, if
* Current Coin, p. 115.


invited, to offer it to the commission. Information was
obtained from France, Russia, Austria, Prussia, Portugal,
Belgium, Italy, Bavaria, Wurtemburg, Baden, Olden-
burgh, Brunswick, Nassau, Switzerland, the Danubian
Principalities, and certain of the United States of America,
as Michigan, Wisconsin, Rhode Island, Maine, Massa-
chusetts, New York, and Pennsylvania, and from a
paper prepared by the secretary to the society, and laid
before the National Association for the Promotion of
Social Science, I cull the following details bearing on the
subject:—
France . —Under the old French legislation, 115 crimes
were capital; subsequent alterations reduced the number
to 15. In 1832 King Louis Philippe secured the power
of juries to return verdicts of “ guilty with extenuating
circumstances ” on murder trials; such a verdict render-
ing it compulsory on the Court to lower the penalty at
least one degree. The power conferred was largely
exercised. But notwithstanding this, and the greatly
reduced number of executions, we have the official testi-
mony of the Keeper of the Seals, that the marked diminu-
tion of capital punishment during 30 years had not
caused crime to increase, but that, on the contrary, there
had been a decrease. And this notwithstanding the great
increase of population.
Russia. —Since the reign of the Empress Elizabeth
capital punishment had been discontinued for the crime
of murder—although inflicted for political crimes, at least
during revolutionary periods—and with decided advan-
tages. fsic) “ This applies both to crime in general, and
to the particular class of homicidal crime which alone is
deemed in many other countries to demand infliction.”
Austria. —ln 1852-3 only 8 per cent, of the criminals
sentenced to death were executed, the sentences of 92 per
cent, being commuted. In the 10 years ending 1804, only
5 per cent, of the condemned were executed. But capital
crimes do not appear to have increased. In 1831 the
condemnations were 42; in 1843 they were 30. At the
Hungarian revolutionary period from 1845 to 1848, they
rose nearly to an average of 90. In 1862, notwithstanding
the vast exercise of mercy, etc., in recent years, the capital
condemnations were only 87.


Prussia. —The number of executions for murder in
Prussia for the five years ending 1857 was 102; fora
similar period ending 1862 only 13. Although the execu-
tions for murder in the latter five years were 89 fewer
than in the former, yet the number of murderers convicted
did not increase, but on the contrary, decreased by 31.
Belgium. —For a period of five years, namely from 1830
to 1834, the Government virtually suspended the capital
penalty, and no execution took place during that term.
In those five years 22 persons were condemned for homi-
cidal crimes—a considerably smaller number than for any
preceding five years of the present century. In the
previous five years there were 22 executions in Belgium.
But in the next five years with no executions at all, there
were fewer murders committed than previously. Owing
to certain influential persons, capital punishment was
resumed in 1835. Four persons were executed during
the ensuing five years ending 1839, but the committals
for homicidal crimes which for thirty-five years past had
been steadily decreasing, now rose nearly 50 per cent,
as compared with the preceding non-capital punishment
period. Latterly, with more than 75 per cent, reduction
in the number of executions, there has been a decrease of
capital crime in spite of an increase of population. One
of the cases which claimed King Leopold’s clemency is
very suggestive. In 1842 three hawkers were condemned
to death for crimes of the most aggravated description;
but a commutation to imprisonment for life was granted.
Eventually another man confessed the crime and charged
two others as accomplices. The latter were subsequently
found guilty, and the first three liberated.*
Tuscany. —Tuscany was the first European state to
make the experiment of the total abolition of capital
punishment. It was virtually abolished by the Grand
Duke Leopold in the year 1774, and further repealed by
statute in 1786. Nevertheless, murders in Tuscany
decreased. In consequence of political agitation the
death penalty was re-enacted, but still not actually
enforced, in 1790; no execution occurred from 1774 to
* From the English news published in The Mercury January 2nd, 1877, we learn that
in Belgium a parliamentary committee has recommended the abolition of the death
penalty.


1799, a period of 25 years ; very rarely during the first
30 years of the present century. In 1830 two executions
took place, one at Pisa and one at Florence. On this
occasion the inhabitants of the latter city testified their
horror of the punishment by deserting the streets and
closing their windows and shops. The Grand Duke said
u that the people had taught him such a lesson that in
future no executions should take place in his dominions,
especially as the reports of the authorities were unani-
mously in favour of the abolition of capital punishment.”
No executions had taken place in Tuscany since 1830, a
period of 35 years ; and no evil consequences followed ;
no increase of capital crime.
Switzerland. —Several of the cantons of Switzerland
had almost discontinued capital punishment; and two —
viz.,Freiburg and Neufchatel —had abolished it altogether,
after 15 years’ experience of the discontinuance. In
consequence of some demand for a re-enactment of
capital punishment, an official inquiry was instituted to
investigate the practical result of the abolition. The
minister writes : —“ The report resulting from this inquiry
stated that neither crime in general nor special crimes
against life have been in any way relatively more
numerous than in the 15 years which immediately
preceded its repeal.”
Portugal. —For 19 years’ capital punishment had been
virtually abolished with excellent practical The
Portuguese statistics of homicidal crime exhibited a
continued and steady decrease. The number of such
crimes committed in 1851 was 278; in 1855, 173 ; and
only 142 in 1860.
Sweden.— A decrease of 90 per cent, in the number of
executions for a period of six years, was attended with
a decrease rather than any increase in the number of
capital crimes.
The same results attended a like policy in Bavaria,
Wurtemburg, Baden, and the total abolition of capital
punishment in the States of Oldenburgh, Nassau, and
Anhault; and like favourable results attended the
abolition of capital punishment in some of the States of
America.
John Bright, in his place in the House of Commons,


on May 3rd, 1864, said, “ The House ought to bear in
mind, that to us who have examined this question for
many years, no fact is more clearly demonstrated than
this —that there is no country in the world, be it a great
empire or be it a small state—where the law has been
made milder, and capital punishment has been abolished,
in which there is any proof that murders have been more
frequent, and the security of life in the slightest degree
endangered.”
Society would he safer without a law the 'penalty attached to
the violation of which is death.
I have before pointed out that when capital punishment
is likely to follow on conviction, there is a difficulty in
getting juries to convict and that consequently many
criminals are set free to prey upon society again, and
repeat like crimes, who, had the punishment been less
than death, would have been convicted, held in durance
vile,and society protected from their impulses andpassions.
And this is not the only reason why society would be
safer without the infliction of capital punishment. To
my mind a most important one is this, that experience
and observation would lead to the conclusion, that so far
from such brutal punishments having any deterring in-
fluence, they are likely to have the very opposite effect—
that they actually act as a stimulus to those whose ten-
dencies are towards crime. “ There can be no doubt,”
says Dr. Maudsley, u that the act of violence, whatever it
be, is sometimes suggested by the sensational reports of
similar deeds in the newspapers The idea
fastens upon the weak or depressed mind, and becomes a
sort of fate against which it is unable to contend.”
The following recent case in point strikingly illustrates
this truth, I clip it from the English news published in The
Mercury , January 9th, 1877: —“ M. Leon Sive, a cousin
of M. Eugene Sue, cashier of the Messageries Company,
has committed suicide. He had read so much lately of
dishonest cashiers that his mind became affected, and it
led him to doubt his own integrity. He shot himself in
the churchyard at Possy.”
The notoriety attending the trial and execution of
Bishop and Williams for a new species of murder, styled
“ burking,” placed a suggestion before the criminal
mind; and it is well-known that such murders became


iso frequent that the English Legislature had to introduce
an act, styled the u Anatomy Act,” to legalise giving dead
bodies to surgeons.
Readers of Macaulay’s History of England will have
suggested to their minds the case of William Fuller.
u This man himself has told us,” says Macaulay, “that,
when he was very young, he fell in with a pamphlet which
contained an account of the flagitious life and horrible
death of Dangerfield. The boy’s imagination was set on
fire; he devoured the book; he almost got it by heart;
and he was soon seized, and ever afterwards haunted
b y a strange presentiment that his fate would resemble
that of the wretched adventurer whose history he had so
eagerly read. It might have been supposed that the
prospect of dying in Newgate with a back flayed and an
eye knocked out,Would not have seemed very attractive,
but experience proves that there are some distempered
minds for which notoriety, even when accompanied by
pain and shame, has an irresistible fascination. Animated
by this loathsome ambition, Fuller equalled, and even
surpassed his model.”*
It cannot be denied that to the criminal mass the
murderer who dies what is called “ game” is as much a
hero as the man who dies with the flag of victory waving
over his head is to his fellow soldiers, or the martyr who
burns at the stake for his religion is to his disciples.
PART 11.
I will now proceed to a consideration of the arguments
usually advanced by those who support the present
system of administering the law in capital cases.
That the number of acquittals of persons charged with capital
offences is owing not to an unwillingness on the part of Juries
to convict in such cases , hut to the grand princivle of English
law that when there is a doubt of the prisoner’s guilt he is
entitled to the benefit of it.
The facts and statistics which I have adduced on
pp. 5-8 are a sufficient refutation of such an argument,
but I might again refer to the fact that time after time a
prisoner has been convicted on a second count which
* Macaulay's History of England, VoL 111., p. 590.


carried with it only imprisonment for life, when the
evidence clearly proved his guilt upon the capital count
of the indictment. Such cases clearly show that a desire
to acquit the prisoner is not the origin of all the acquittals
referred to.
That to argue that capital punishment is not deterrent is
to offer an objection which applies equally to all punishments.
If so, then why punish criminals at all ? But the
position taken up by those who advocate the abolition of
capital punishment is this :—That the death penalty has
no deterring influence with those whom the fear of death
is supposed to deter from capital crimes, and that those
upon whom a deterrent influence can be brought to bear
would be equally influenced —and with greater advantage
to society—by fear of more certain and less brutal
penalties. And I submit that experience and facts on
record sustain this position.
That if the law does not remove the cause of crime it at
least presents urgent reasons why capital crimes should not be
committed by appealing to the fear and love of life which is
supposed to influence all men.
But I answer that to give substance to such an argu-
ment in favour of capital punishment it must be proved,
not only that fear is present with the criminal when he
meditates or commits a crime, but that the preservation
of life is a feeling that predominates in the classes most
prone to crime. Experience teaches us that the very
reverse is the case. Nay, do we not ourselves look upon
death as something that is ever distant, and looking at it
thus, do we not daily engage in dangerous occupations
which may bring death in their train at any moment ?
But the fear of death is not before us, because it is
uncertain ; and we are content to run our chance. And
if the fear of death has so little effect upon us, what
effect can it be expected to have upon the minds of those
who are taught to look danger and death in the face from
their very youth ? Does not the miner, in the coal mine,
often refuse or neglect the use of his safety lamp, although
he is fully aware of the probable fatal consequences of
his rashness and folly ? Many of the accidents in the
eollieries are attributable entirely to the want of due
precaution on the part of the miners. Even in the
Sheffield manufactories, where the particles of steel are


so fatal to human life, the grinders often refuse to use the
simple contrivances provided, using which the minute
and deadly particles become innocuous; and it is only
giving expression to a truism to say that “ the lower we
descend in the scale of civilisation and virtue, the more
feebly does the value of life operate upon mankind.”
Swinburne has truly said—in his own beautiful
language—that “it is possible to meet death with a kind
of fearlessness * * which is not of the light but of
the darkness; not with divine defiance as a hero, but
with desperate indifference as a slave.”*
That if it he argued that the penalty of death is irretrievable
the objection applies with equal force to all punishment of any
severity , and that we can no more restore the past years of an
imprisonment than we can recall the dead to life.
This is to assert that we might as well hang a man
unjustly as keep him unjustly in prison for a while, and
the argument includes an estimate of human life which
few I trust would care to accept. I need only instance
a case like the following to prove the fallacy of such an
argument:—Some years since, and in one of the
neighbouring colonies, a medical man treated a patient
with a medicine then unknown among his medical
brethren in its new application. He was charged with
attempting to murder; the jury returned a verdict of
guilty (the most suspicious circumstance being that his
patient had insured her life in his favour); and he was
sentenced to a long term of imprisonment. Before the
expiration of the sentence he obtained his liberty, and at
once set about establishing his innocence. He obtained
certificates from Sir Benjamin Brodie and other eminent
European practitioners, and proved that his treatment
was strictly scientific and correct. He is now restored to
the confidence of his friends, has regained his social
position and practice, and his name is again to be found
on the roll of medical practitioners. Had he been hanged
would all this have been possible ? Compensation to the
unjustly imprisoned can always be rendered by society ;
but should an innocent person suffer under the penalty
intended to fall only upon the guilty, and the truth be
* Essays and Reviews, p. 32. Note.— And we must hold with him when he adds :
“Nor is any society sound, or any State secure which has found no way to cure this
dismal readiness to be killed off, this grim facility in dying.”


discovered only too late to prevent the sacrifice of life,
not all the riches which society commands can compensate
the victim or his relations for the wrong committed. And
when such cases do occur how painful and how undesirable
is the impression made upon the public mind. Must not
every humane mind, at such times, ponder the propriety
of retaining on the Statue book a law the penalty attached
to which once carried out is irretrievable ?
That he who Jails by a mistaken sentence , may be considered
as falling for his country , whilst he suffers under the operation
of those rules by the general effect and tendency of which the
welfare of the community is maintained and upheld.
This is Paley’s argument, and in answer I feel that I
cannot do better than quote what Lord Brougham has
well described as a “ convincing refutation.” I allude to
the reply given to this argument by Sir Samuel Romilly,
“ Nothing is more easy” he writes u thus to philosophise
and act the patriot for others, and to arm ourselves with
topics of consolation, and reasons for enduring with
fortitude the evils to which, not ourselves, but others
are exposed. * * * Instead of endeavouring thus
to extenuate and to reconcile to the minds of those who
sit in judgment upon their fellow-creatures so terrible a
calamity as a mistake in judicature to the injury of the
innocent, it would surely be a wiser part to set before
their eyes all the consequences of so fatal an error in their
strong but real colours ; to represent to them that of all
the evils which can befall a virtuous man, the very greatest
is to be condemned, and to suffer a public punishment,
as if he were guilty ; to see all his hopes and expectations
frustrated; all the prospects in which he is indulging,
and the pursuits which he is following, for the benefit
perhaps, of those who are dearer to him than himself,
brought to a close; to be torn from the midst of his
family; to witness the affliction, and to anticipate the
still deeper affliction that awaits them ; not even to have
the sad consolation of being pitied ; to see himself
branded with public ignominy; to leave a name which
will only excite horror or disgust; to think that the
children he leaves behind him, must, when they recall
their father’s memory, hang down their heads with
shame; to know that even if, at some distant time, it
should chance that the truth should be made evident, and


Total
cost.
Earnings.
Excess per
head.
Pentridge
£24,480
15s.
9d. ...
... £26,175 2s. lid. .
.. £2 18s.
2d.
Williamstown...
£1,133
9s.
2d. ...
... £1,328 5s. Id. .
.. £7 15s.
lOd.
Castlemaine ...
£3,673
15s.
4d. ...
... £4,882 14s. lOd. .
... £12 14s.
6d.
Sandhurst
£3,214
6s.
7d. ...
... £4,810 13s. 6d. .
.. £17 18s.
8d.
that justice should be done to his name, still that his
blood will have been shed uselessly for mankind—that
his melancholy story will serve, wherever it is told, only
to excite alarm in the bosoms of the best members of
society, and to encourage the speculations for evading
the law, in which wicked men may indulge. When we
are weighing the evil of the punishment of one inno-
cent man against that of the impunity of ten who are
guilty, we ought to reflect that the suffering of the
innocent is generally attended, in the particular instance
with the escape of the guilty.” “ When the guilty escape
the law has merely failed in its intended effect; it has
done no good, indeed, but it has done no harm. But
when the innocent become the victims of the law, the
law is not merely inefficient; it does not merely fail of
accomplishing its'intended object, it injures the persons
it means to protect, it creates the very evil it was to cure,
and destroys the security it was made to preserve.”
That society should not he burdened with the expense and
trouble of confining for life all those who have proved themselves
unfit to mingle with their fellows.
In the first place I would say that there is no law which
allows us to hang a man because it would be an expense
to keep him alive; and, in the second place, that the
criminal may be made to lift the burden off the shoulders
of the tax-payer, and supply the cost of his own main-
tenance by productive labour.
The six state prisons in New England are not only
self-supporting, but yielded together in 1871 a surplus
of £7,000. The annual report of the Inspector of Penal
Establishments in Victoria for 1875 shows that out of
twelve gaols, four exhibit a surplus over cost: —
During the 70 years referred to on page 5 the aver-
age number of persons executed in England and Wales
barely exceeded 16 in the 20,000,000, or less than 1 per
million of inhabitants. Let us balance the cost to each
individual for the maintenance of the 16 criminals who
perished upon the scaffold per year against the evils
which have attended the administration of the capital


penalty during the period referred to, and then say on
which side the weight of argument rests —with those
who advocate the abolition of the death penalty, or with
those who support it on such grounds. In Tasmania we
have put to death one individual during the last 9 years.
That criminals under confinement have opportunities of
repeating their crimes in prison.
I would reply, that, kept from the source which
tempted them to commit a first crime many would not
be likely to attempt a repetition ; that if criminals are to
be destroyed on the ground that they are dangerous to
other members of society the same argument must hold
good in reference to dangerous lunatics; that the same
means which are used to restrain dangerous lunatics
might also be used to restrain dangerous criminals.
Captain Knight, formerly Governor of Portland and
Portsmouth convict prisons, writes:— 11 1 am firmly con-
vinced from my own personal experience that almost all
serious and successful assaults on prison officers arise from
negligence or carelessness on their own part, or from
want of what has been termed ‘ individualisation ’or
study of the individual character of the prisoners; so
that many of them are placed in situations and at work
from which they should have been carefully excluded.
The danger of successful assaults on officers will be
absolutely nothing under a judicious management.”
That after the sentence of death has been altered to one of
imprisonment for life ) the latter sentence has never been carried
into effect.
All the arguments used to sustain this position go to
prove not that the criminal should be hanged, but that
the sentence of imprisonment should be carried out in its
entirety..
That it is practically impossible to carry out a sentence of
imprisonment for life.
Then why go through the farce of passing such a
sentence ? But is it true that it is practically impossible ?
Do we not imprison dangerous lunatics for the natural
term of their life, and why not criminals ?
That a long imprisonment would render the criminal insane.
This is one of the arguments advanced to sustain the
former position, but I submit that practical experience
proves the contrary. In 1866 there were 68 prisoners


under life sentence in Spike Island prison, Ireland, some
of these had been under restraints, varying from 13 to
18 years, and the reports speak of their health as good.
In Baden two of the prisoners had been in solitary con-
finement, one for 15 years, the other for 9 years, yet
their mental and bodily health had not suffered, the
effects of the long imprisonment having been neutralised
by changes of diet and employment, thus the prisoner
confined for 15 years was at first a cabinet-maker, then a
shoemaker, then an upholsterer, and afterwards a wood-
carver. In France many undergoing life sentences had
been under detention for 20 years and upwards.
Captain Knight writes from Brussels, September 28th,
1866 :—“ At Ghent I found about 497 prisoners who had
been sentenced a perpetuity or who have had sentences
of death commuted to this punishment. Many have been
in confinement for very considerable periods. Thus :
6 had been 25 years and over (I for 33 years); 28 had
been 20 years and under 25 years; 78 had been 15
years and under 20 years; 12 had been 10 and under 15
years. The men appeared in good health, mental and
physical, and by no means depressed.”
That to make the criminal so comfortable would only he to
encourage crime , and to give him better treatment than many
honest persons receive.
Some time ago this cry was raised in Scotland. Then
Mr. F. Hill, a prison governor in Scotland, threw his
prison open to the honest folk. “ The honest folk
immediately failed to see the comfort of prison life.
Those who could work preferred working outside, and
those who would not, shrank from prison discipline * * *
only about one in fifty was voluntarily admitted, and
out of that small number almost all were people who had
been in prison compulsorily, and submitted to prison life
only until they could see their way to get work outside
the prison doors.”*
That it is better for the criminal that he should be put to
death than that he should be made to endure confinement for life .
I submit that we have something besides the effect
upon the criminal to consider, the effect of such punish-
ment upon society. The associations always connected
with the infliction of the death penalty are so fraught
* H«Rißawds’ “Current Coin.”


with evil influences to society that I feel convinced that
this consideration alone if taken on its merits would be
fatal to the retention of such a penalty on our Statute
book in the present condition of society. Many of these
evils I have already referred to, others will be mentioned
before I conclude.
While the demoralising effects of public executions are freely
admitted by the supporters of capital punishment , yet they
argue that since executions have been made private these effects
have no longer any existence.
Although executions are now conducted with a certain
amount of privacy, the accomplishment of the sentence
with accounts of the brutal details and awful scenes
which too often accompany the administration of the
death penalty, find a prominent place in many of the
daily newspapers, and are read with avidity by the very
persons upon whom such details are likely to have the
most brutalising effects. Two years ago I received a
number of the Essex Weekly News , containing a report of the
reception of Sir Charles Du Cane and his Lady, at
Braxted, which occupied two columns. The same paper
contained ten closely printed columns, recording the last
days and execution of Coates, the murderer, including
his sayings asleep and awake, the thoughts he expressed,
the character of the hangman, how the neck was dis-
located, the effects produced by “ Calcraft’s short rope,”
“Marwood’s long rope,” a full account of the inquest,
etc., and other disgusting details. I clip the following
advertisement from the Glasgow Herald , May, 1876 :
“ The execution of Thomas Barr.” A special edition of
the Glasgow Herald will be published on Wednesday
morning next, with a full report of the execution,
immediately after it takes place. News agents should
send in their orders not later than Tuesday afternoon.”*
The Melbourne Evening Herald for December 11th,
1876, contains nearly two columns recording the execution,
etc., of Bondietto for the “ Sandy Creek murder.” The
* A copy of an almanac recently published in Liverpool contains the following notices
of days which it would appear the Liverpool public would fain keep green in its
memory. Glancing down the columns we read for January 3rd, “Triple execution at
Kirkdale, 1875 January sth, “Corrigan executed, 1874 January 21st, “Louis XVI.
executed, 1793; May 12th, “Strafford executed, 1641 September 6th, “Baker and
Cooper executed, 1875 November 14th, “Muller executed.” Murderers are thus
classed with Louis XVI. and Strafford without distinction, and criminals receive that
notoriety for which weak and unprincipled vanity craves. (Pall Mall Budget, Dec.
31st, 1875, p. 15.)


details of the execution itself are entered into with a
sickening minuteness which makes one shudder to read.*
The following are four out of many cases which might
be mentioned to show what awful scenes at times occur
at executions: —Manns, the Syney escort robber,
after being half strangled was again carried to the fatal
tree, his sufferings having been prolonged for more than
a quarter of an hour. A somewhat similar scene occurred
at Chester upon the execution of Alice Heritt, for
matricide,her sufferings being prolonged by the incomplete
adjustment of the rope and the drop not falling until
after two or three attempts to loosen it. At the execution
of three notorious murderers in New Zealand some years
since the executioner had to hang on to the legs of one
man to hasten hisMeath. In the year 1856 a man named
Bowsfield was executed in England for the murder of
his wife. Scarcely had the drop fallen when the horror-
stricken crowd shrieked out, “ He’s up again.” By a
tremendous effort he had flung his feet on to the edge of
the scaffold and was making strong efforts to reach his
neck. Pushed off again, he for the third time did the
same thing, and at last the executioner had to hold him
till he ceased to live. “ This dreadful scene produced a
profound sensation throughout the country.”f
That the above evils might be averted by suppressing the
details of executions.
To enforce this proposition would only be to make way
for other evils, and the introduction of a system of secret
executions contrary to the whole spirit and practice of
British law.
That if a man has the right to take life in self-defence
society enjoys the right to do the same.
Granted; but if it were possible, and better, for the
man so attacked to defend himself without taking the life
of his assailant, what then ? Would he still be justified
or wise in doing so. I think not. And I submit that if
it can be shown that society can be better protected by
* This case caused some excitement in Melbourne. The prisoner was condemned- on
purely circumstantial evidence ; strenuous efforts were made to save him, and a strong
feeling existed at the time of his execution as to the justice of the sentence under
which he suffered. The jury in returning a verdict of guilty recommended him to
mercy, but as in many other instances (see pp. 6,7) the recommendation to mercy did
not weigh with the Executive.
f Molesworth’s History of Eng. Vol. iii., p. 76. I regret having to record these details, but
I feel called upon to substantiate my arguments by appeal to well authenticated cases
in point.—A. J. T.


means more effectual and less objectionable than the
infliction of the death penalty, that society is no longer
justified or wise in inflicting such penalty.
That capital punishments should he continued on the
ground of u example .”
Irrespective of the fact that the death penalty has
been proved to be a failure —as far as any deterrent
influence which it may be supposed to exercise on the
class of criminals who commit capital crimes is con-
cerned —I would submit that this ground has been
practically given up since the time when private execu-
tions became the rule, and I would ask if executions are
supposed to be so effective as an example, why are not
all prisoners mustered to witness the death of all who
perish on the scaffold ? And why are not all who are
known to have criminal tendencies—from the street arab
to the discharged burglar—gathered from far and near to
witness, that he may profit by so fearful an example.
That the decrease in capital crimes in those countries where
capital punishment has been abolished is Giving not to such
abolition , but to the improved morals and education of the
masses.
This may account for a portion of the decrease, but
not all, for it must be remembered that this decrease takes
place in spite of a vast increase of population, and
increased certainty in obtaining convictions in capital
cases. This last cause alone should for the first year or
two after the change lead to an apparent increase in the
number of such offences. But the actual increase would
be not in the number of crimes, but in the number of
convictions. Conviction being more certain, a larger
number of persons found guilty would necessarily be
shown in the statistics, so that in reality if no increase is
shown the decrease is greater than it appears to be.
It must also be remembered that as we advance in
prosperity we need the importation of foreign labour to
facilitate the construction of extensive public works, the
introduction of which element alone is often the cause of
a large increase in the number of capital crimes. But
such increase cannot fairly be charged to the normal
state of any country.
That there is a decree that he who sheddeih man's blood by
man's hand shall his blood be shed.


I have placed this argument last, because I am glad to
say that it is very seldom advanced now by those who
advocate the retention of capital punishment, but as
what may be called the religious argument is advanced
at times, I deem it worth while to notice this, and one
or two other passages of Scripture, which are supposed to
bear on the subject.
In the original the word (yeshophek) signifies “ shall
be shed ” or “ will be shed.” And the verse simply seems
to convey an intimation of what would be the usual
consequences of the crime ; referring to that retaliatory
law of revenge which too often governs human nature
and which is so well illustrated in the Corsican Vendetta.
And this view is strengthened by reference to the fact
that it became necessary that cities of refuge should be
provided for those, who, having shed blood unwittingly,
might run the risk of being unjustly dealt with under
the influence of passion and revenge. If it is argued
that as a part of the law of Moses the death penalty
should be incorporated in the criminal code of nations
then on the same argument the crimes of idolatry,
blasphemy, Sabbath-profanation, slave-dealing, father-
cursing, etc., should come under a death penalty also. It
has never occurred to anyone that the declaration of our
Lord “ All they that take the sword shall perish by the
sword ” was anything more than a general intimation that
those who use offensive weapons shall have them used
against them. Nor has it ever been thought proper to
subject the soldier to the same interpretation of this text
that is adopted of the other as to the murder. How the
text “He beareth not the sword in vain,” is made
to imply and justify the infliction of capital punish-
ment I confess I am at a loss to The onus
prohandi must lie on those who maintain that it does so ;
Nor can I understand on what grounds the declaration
of St. Paul “If I be an offender or have done anything
worthy of death, I refuse not to die,” is taken to sanction
the death penalty. I can only regard it as merely the
earnest language of conscious innocence. Just as a man
in the present day may be charged with a crime, and his
life demanded by an excited rabble, and he conscious of
his innocence may exclaim u If you can prove me guilty,
I refuse not to die.” But this declaration would not


justify the rabble in taking his life, even if after trial they
still believed him guilty.
PART 111.
I will now proceed to suggest an efficient secondary
punishment which might be inflicted for capital crimes in
place of the death penalty.
I would suggest that a sentence of imprisonment for life
without hope of commutation of sentence should be strictly
enforced in every case where conviction follows upon a
capital charge. Those who support the present mode of
administering the law in such cases denounce this pro-
position on several grounds : —lst. Because such sentences
are never carried out. 2nd. Because it would be better
for the prisoner to die than have to endure such a
sentence. 3rd. Because the criminal would have oppor-
tunities for repeating his crimes in prison.
In addition to the answers which I have already given
to the above reasons,* I would say that the Ist and 3rd
arguments come with very bad taste from those who, while
they denounce a suggestion for imprisonment for life in
lieu of the death penalty, virtually carry out (only in a
less effectual manner) the very course which they declare
to be prejudicial to the best interests of society. From
the statistics quoted on page 4 it will be seen that out of
453 persons sentenced to death in the six colonies, there
referred to, during the 11 years, 1864 to 1874 inclusive,
only 123 were executed. What became of the remaining
330 ? If we were to trace out the answer we should
doubtless find that a large majority, if not all of this
number, had the sentence of death commuted to one
of imprisonment for life. But I am told that the
sentence is never carried out. Who alters it then I
ask—Who prevents its being carried out to the letter ?
Not those who offer a plea for the abolition of capital
punishment, for they advocate that the sentence of
imprisonment for life for capital crimes shall be carried
out in its entirety. No, but the men who denounce the
very same course of action when they stand up to defend
the law as it now stands. Surely inconsistency can go
no farther than this. Turning to a return of sentences
remitted during three years only, ending December 31st,
* pp. 25, 26,


1876, and laid upon the table of the Tasmanian House
of Assembly, January 26th, 1877, I find among others
that one man under sentence of imprisonment for life for
murder had been released after 14 years’ confinement.
Another for wounding with intent after 12 years.
Another for stabbing after 14 years. Who granted these
remissions ? I can safely say that had the power rested
with those who advocate the abolition of capital punish-
ment these men would have had little chance of regaining
their freedom. I hold that when a man commits a
capital crime he at once shows his unfitness to be at
large ; and it is a deep wrong to society that such men
should ever be let loose again. But how can the present
system of releasing prisoners be prevented ? Easily
enough. Let the law relating to such cases be so altered
as to remove it Jut of the power of any Executive to
grant such remissions of sentences, and let it always
remain with the representatives of the people in Parlia-
ment assembled to say whether doubly-dyed villains
shall be allowed their freedom, or whether they shall
not rather be kept out of the way of temptation, and
society insured from danger at their hands.
Printed at the “Mercury” Steam Press Office, Hobart Town




