

CAPTAIN JORGENSEN'S
Life Boat
THE
STORM KING
REGISTERED.
An Account of the Boat,
AND OF HER
Voyage from England to Australia.
By JOHN WARDER.
( With the Sanction of Capt. Jorgensen).
WITH ILLUSTRATIONS AND A CHART.
WM. MARSHALL & Co., Printers, Melbourne.




CAPT S.J.E. JORGENSEN.
MR. JOHN NILSEN, MATE.
Captain S. J. Engelhardt Jor-
gensen was born at Lauget near
Risoer in Norway, in 1856. The
son of a shipbuilder and shipowner
in his native town, whose name is
well-known throughout Norway, at
the age of 14 and half years of age
he went to sea in a full-rigged
ship, trading to the Baltic. Sub-
sequently he traded across the
Atlantic and all over the world.
At the age of 21 he became master
of a ship. He is a Certificated
Norwegian Master Mariner, as
well as holding an English Board
of Trade Certificate. Captain
Jorgensen married Miss Schrei-
ber at Melbourne, four years ago,
and has numerous friends in Mel-
bourne.
Mr. John Nilsen was born in
1860, at Arendal, a seaport town
in Norway, and went to sea when
14 years of age. He served first
in the Baltic trade, and subse-
quently the American grain trade.
Mr. Nilsen first met Captain
J-orgensen in 1880, on board the
ship “Ragna,” on which vessel
Mr. Nilsen rose from a position
before the mast to be chief officer.
A warm friendship grew up be-
tween the two men and they are
now firmly attaohed to eaeii
other.




THE INVENTION.
The inventor of any efficient means whereby can be prevented those
wholesale sacrifices of human life through shipwreck, which every now
and then cause a thrill of horror to move the civilised world, is assuredly
a benefactor of mankind. Attempts without number have been made to
solve the problem involved ; and in not a few cases a considerable advance
towards the desideratum has been achieved. The methods by which
communication may be gained between a stranded vessel and the shore,
now-a-days, may be said, indeed, to be nearly perfect; and hence, on the
stormy coasts of England, America, and other countries, thousands of
lives are saved annually that in the absence of the life-saving appliances
now in use would certainly be lost. The Life Boats stationed along the
shores of most civilised maritime countries are also a vast improvement
on what was in use a few decades ago ; and the same may be said of the
Life Boats with which most large passenger steamships are now provided.
Yet, it has remained for Captain Jorgensen to supply the idea of a boat
that may be conveniently carried on shipboard ; that may be utilised for
the storage of water when not otherwise required; that practically
launches itself in case of need ; and that can be easily put in shape even
by unskilful hands, so as to form what has been demonstrated to be an
unsinkable ark of safety. The scheme of the invention is to have a boat
that will, in the first place, yield perfect shelter to shipwrecked people,
and furthermore, to not alone allow of every ship carrying a sufficiency of
boats, but also of having no more boats than can be manned by her crew.
The history of Captain Jorgensen’s invention is full of interest.
The conception of it, as in the case of nearly all great inventions, flashed
upon him in a fortuitous and apparently preternatural manner. Whilst
in command of a ship sailing in very high latitudes in the Southern Ocean,
bound to Australia, with formidable icebergs in dangerous proximity, he
one day “ just happened to think,” as he puts it, what would be the best
thing to do if he lost his ship through her being brought in violent
collision with one of those islands of frozen water which bestrewed her
course. If the ship were wrecked upon an iceberg the chances of any of
the crew surviving to tell the tale would be exceedingly remote. For,
although she was provided with the ordinary allowance of boats, the


prospect of the crew being able to outlive the long weeks of exposure to
that frigid clime and those tempestuous waves in open boat, that must be
endured before they could gain a succouring port, was too dark to be
contemplated without an overwhelming sentiment of awe.
Thinking thus, Captain Jorgensen’s attention was directed, by mere
accident, to an empty 400-gallon water-tank which lay on the deck, and
the idea occurred to him that water-tight vessels of this sort could be so
constructed as not alone to serve the purpose of water-tanks, but also to
be readily convertable into a buoyant, manageable, safe and comfortable
Life Boat in the event of the ship itself going down. Water-tanks
must be carried on board ship. Then why not have them so designed
that they should form transverse sections of a boat, which, in the
nature of things, would be alike staunch and capable of withstanding
the assaults of puffed up billows, and a retreat in which ship-wrecked
mariners would be protected from the cold and wet ? For large passenger
steamers and sailing ships different kinds of boats, on the same principle,
would be employed. It is mentioned before that the boat, as a whole or
in sections, could be used for the storage of water ; but, as a whole or in
sections, she could be used for numerous other purposes : for the holding
of provisions or livestock, such as swine or chickens.
Upon this idea Captain Jorgensen did no't sleep. He made designs,
and on arrival in Australia he patented the invention. He worked out
all the details during the voyage, and constructed a complete model.
Mr. Seitz, the well-known consulting engineer, of Melbourne, having
grasped the idea as suggested by Captain Jorgensen, made the first
working drawings, and Captain Jorgensen feels very grateful to Mr.
-Seitz for the services he rendered. And it should be mentioned that the
idea would have been nipped in the bud had not several influential
members of the mercantile community, and marine board of Melbourne,
and other gentlemen come forward and encouraged the inventor, and
given him letters of introduction to gentlemen in England, so as to
-enable him to bring the thing before the authorities. Then followed
a prolonged delay in getting the boat constructed, and it was not
until September Ist, 1889, that she was completed. The construction
was carried out in London. The idea consists in a modification
of the water tanks used on board ship which shall enable them to
be used as independent life-saving appliances or connected together
;so as to form a boat. In the former case it is only necessary that
each tank, no matter what its shape, should be fitted with a false
bottom for carrying ballast below, so that in the event of its being
tumbled over in the sea it will always right itself. The space between
the false bottom and the top of the tank forms a chamber for carrying
persons and provisions. In the latter case the water tanks, in addition to


having a false bottom, are so constructed as to be readily converted into
a Life Boat at sea. They are furnished with suitable devices for ex-
peditiously securing them together, and each has its length of keel formed
at its bottom, while the tank which constitutes the stern of the boat is
provided with a rudder. The false bottom forms a deck plate, and the
space below retains sufficient water to act as ballast when the tanks are
being used as a boat, and also to keep a supply of fresh water for its
occupants. Each tank or section of the boat is loosely mounted upon
wheels for the purpose of convenience in putting them together and for
supporting them when on board ship.
The Storm King at Sea.
And this pinnace, which has proved so clever and stable in a sea-way,
is thus described by her inventor : —“ The Storm King is 6 tons measure-
ment, and she is 30 feet in length. She is 8 feet 6 inches wide, 4 feet 6 inches
deep. She is built of the best galvanised steel plates, one-eighth of an inch
in thickness, and she consists of three sections, each of which, entirely
separate from the others, can be put to life-saving purposes. When the
sections are put together the whole forms a very substantial, buoyant, and
last, but not least, essentially comfortable Life Boat. As you are no doubt
aware, up to the present time it has never been attempted to afford any


further protection, in case of people taking to the boats after a shipwreck,
than bare saving of life. You will recollect many heartrending narratives
of shipwrecked crews and passengers who, after having gone through
what would be thought the worst part of the mishap, the shipwreck, have
in many cases died owing to the exposure to the extreme heat or cold, or
other causes. I claim that my boat provides against this exposure.”
The principle of the invention is plain and simple ; yet the efficiency
of it is wonderful to the minds of those who are conversant with the con-
struction of ocean-going vessels, and the strains that are cast upon them
in a seaway. It seems almost incredible that a number of mere steel
tanks can be quickly united so as to form a boat capable of withstanding
the thousand and one shocks, jerks, strains, and tensions incidental to
sailing on the stormy and troublous main ; and if the Storm King had not
accomplished the voyage from England to Australia, and thus demonstrated
the practicability of the invention, no doubt the inventor would have been
written down a wild enthusiast. For evidently the safety of the boat
must depend upon the stability of the couplings which join together her
sections ; and to secure stability it is essentially necessary that these
couplings should be so designed and made as to prevent any working
involving friction. If the joints once began to work, they would soon saw
themselves asunder, and the various parts of the boat—absolutely manage-
able and seaworthy whilst intact—would become not much superior for
life-saving purposes to rafts. They would drift about at the mercy of
the waves, and, although they would not sink, the only chance their occu-
pants would have of being saved would depend upon their being picked up
by a passing ship or washed upon a hospitable shore. We have said these
sections in a separate condition would be not much superior to rafts or
open boats. That is hardly correct. They would be immensely better
than rafts, inasmuch as they would afford protection against the weather
and the sea to those on board.
The chief value of the invention, however, lies in the efficiency of the
connections between the sections, and the facility with which they may be
made either on a ship’s deck or even in the water.
To thoroughly comprehend the simplicity and effectiveness of the
attaching principle it is necessary to see the boat herself. The principle,
however, may be thus described. Upon one section is firmly rivetted a
solid steel flange, extending from the deck right round the external cir-
cumference of what must be termed the abutting surface. Into this flange
a corresponding flange on the next section fits, the grasp being exceedingly
firm and strong. For the rest a few bolts easily worked on deck effectually
lock the sections together.
The importance of the invention can be better understood when we
consider the case of one of the large passenger steamers that now-a-days


throng the chief ocean highways. It is by no means unusual for one of
these floating cities to sail out of port with over a thousand people on
board ; and it is obvious, that in the event of such a vessel foundering at
sea, her boats would be wholly inadequate to save such a numerous con-
gregation. In nearly every instance where a casuality of the sort has
occurred a frightful sacrifice of human life has followed, and often the
sufferings of those who were saved have been heartrending. With the
ordinary boats in use, there is the further difficulty of lowering them
and getting the panic-stricken passengers clear from the sinking ship.
And then, even under the most favorable circumstances, the condition
Interior of Cabin Aft.
of the unfortunate castaways is deplorable; while in high latitudes and
rough weather their privations are unspeakably awful, and deaths from
exposure nearly always ensue. Now, in the first place, there is no reason
why a ship should not carry as many sections on the Jorgenson principle
as would suffice to rescue as many persons as the ship herself could carry;
for not only could the sections be conveniently stowed away on the decks,
but they could be utilised for the storage of water and provisions. And,
in the event of the ship suddenly going down, each one of these sections
would be at once available for life-saving purposes, and would afford ample
protection to those in them against the inclemency of the weather.




Nautical men, who are very much disposed to reject proposals for change,
have raised objections to the Tank idea. Yet they have in numerous
noteworthy instances come forward and approved of the conception, and
it may be said that the sailor hails the invention as something in the
nature of a deliverance.
This is how Captain Jorgensen meets their arguments : —“ That tank
Life Boat is all very well, ” they said, * ‘ but look at the space it will occupy. ”
In large passenger steamers, the inventor represented, the life’boaton deck
could fulfil a dozen different requirements. ‘ ‘ Make a smoking room of
it—a deck cabin, anything—it will not hurt you ; and a few moments can
make it ready to save a hundred lifes. ” “Ah, well, perhaps a big ship
could carry one, but a small one could not.” “Then I’ll build her in
sections. It must be a very small ship that cannot carry a 30ft. boat in
three sections,” said Jorgensen. But the idea did not take, and Jorgen-
sen, failing steamer companies and capitalists to back him, devoted all
his own money to building her. He built her in three sections. “ She’s
not seaworthy,” said the nautical experts, “ those joints you have designed
to fasten and connect the sections are pretty good, clever, but they never
will stand rough sea work. ” The most eminent naval architects assured
him that he was throwing his life away, and an insurance company wanted
75 per cent, if he went to sea in her. “I suppose you will say she is sea-
worthy if I take her round the Cape to Australia,” was Jorgensen’s short
reply. They looked upon Jorgensen as mad, but declared that they
would be satisfied if he reached Australia. The reason the boat was
built in three sections was to put the principle to the utmost test. If
she had been in only one or two the test would have been imperfect. For
in three sections the greatest possible strain is put upon the joints,
and hence the principle is thoroughly established. That, as we know, he
has accomplished after a voyage of 11 months. That completely quashes the
unseaworthy cry—and the most determined objector cannot deny being
effectually quashed. To make its advantages clear let the reader imagine
himself to be one of the passengers by the unfortunate “ Quetta.” When
she sank, spars, wreckage, hencoops, a boat or two alone remained on the
surface. There was a struggle for anything that would support a human
head above water, and the survival only of the strong and the fortunate.
How different would the tale of disaster have been if, floating freely on the
surface, an ark of refuge to the struggling, drowning unfortunates, there
had remained a Jorgensen Life Boat where the steamer sank. As a
modest estimate probably three-fourths of those drowned would have been
saved. Given that it is merely Jorgensen’s first crude idea, a large
buoyant tank with no power of movement, it would have been something,
but when this tank is one, like the Storm King, capable of navigation
and locomotion, and fit, on an emergency, to make a voyage and reach a


haven, what an immense gain it is where one is carried. It is a double
ship, an extra life for every one on board. It is not necessary, except in
small ships, that the Jorgensen Boat should be in sections, the sample
experimental boat, in which he made the voyage, was so built to prove
that even in sections it is capable and seaworthy. Large ships, as the P.
and 0., Orient, Messageries, and German liners could carry half-a-dozen.
They may be, at the time of disaster, from various causes, unable to launch
them. “ Then, let the ship go down,” says Jorgensen, “remain in my
boat, and you are safe.” The old objection to apparatus for saving life of
the raft order, which were depended upon to float off a ship’s deck if the
vessel sank beneath them used to be the danger of being caught by the
ship’s spars, yards and cordage ; but that is an objection that has almost
disappeared in the later ships. All the large mail steamers to-day are
comparatively sparless. For this, the Experimental Boat, Jorgensen
makes very modest claims. Prejudice was so strong that I had to design
her, her joints, her fittings, everything myself. I am no engineer, and I
am quite certain that any engineer of ability would in 24 hours suggest so
many improvements that she would be ten times the boat. I only claim
the raw idea, and that I have proved to be correct.” And short of an
actual test with a foundering steamer proof of its soundness could not
further go. The idea and design are of vital public interest, and the
patent should commend itself to all who go to sea as a splendid safeguard.
The Storm King will save no fewer than 120 people. Sixty can be
housed below and the same number carried on deck, and those below and
on deck can change places at intervals. To some persons the idea of being
imprisoned, as it were, below deck is repulsive ; just as many passengers
object to riding inside of an omnibus. Yet, in wet weather, the most
stalwart of men prefer an inside passage, and often ungallantly decline to
give up their seats to the fair applicants who, on wet days, besiege the
’bus doors. The Jorgensen Life Boat is veritably an omnibus for the
gcod of all.


THE VOYAGE
OF THE
“STORM KING”
Having perfected his design, and had a boat constructed in accordance
therewith, Captain Jorgensen might reasonably have been content with a
trial involving no considerable danger to those on board of her. He
might, for instance, have sailed about the British Channel, remembering
the adage that “ little boats should keep near the shore.” If anything
went wrong during such a test, then he could count upon being picked up
by one of numerous ships navigating that crowded highway. But he
boldly determined upon putting his invention to the severest of proofs—to
verify its claims by the experimentum crucis —to launch out upon the
desolate wastes of storm-tossed waters which separate the Antipodes, and
sail from England down the Atlantics to the Cape of Good Hope, and
thence across the most tempestuous and treacherous of Oceans to Australia.
We remember the exclamation of the French General who witnessed the
Charge of the Light Brigade at Balaclava : —“lt is heroism, but not war-
fare ! ” One is inclined to pass a similar judgment on the exploit attempted
and achieved by Captain Jorgensen and his mate, Mr. Nilsen. It is
heroism, but from the time the Storm King left the Thames until she
reached Port Adelaide her crew passed through a series of risks which are
happily beyond those which fall to the lot of the ordinary navigator.
But the voyage has had its uses. It has proved beyond all doubt or
question, firstly, that the means by which Captain Jorgensen unites the
sections of his boat are worthy of the fullest trust; and, secondly, that
the vessel, when formed, is able to successfully combat all the perils of the
deep.
Before giving particulars of the voyage, it may be as well to say why it
was undertaken at all. The story is told by Captain Jorgensen with
characteristic modesty. When the Storm King was finished she was
inspected by numerous engineers and nautical authorities. “Some of
them said she would be safe,” said Captain Jorgensen, “and some of
them said she would not. So I determined to try her for myself.”
It may here be said that the experiences of the Storm King have
shown that every boat may be conveniently equipped with means enabling


her to ride safely through the roughest weather. Captain Jorgensen
says, all that is required is something such as a sack, a coat, or a pair of
sea-boots, attached to the end of a rope about 150 ft. long, extending from
the bow of the boat. The boat naturally drifts faster than such a body,
and it suffices to keep her head to the wind and sea. Hence, he suggests
that every ship’s boat should be provided with a painter 25 fathoms long,
so that in case of need, a rude, yet efficient sea anchor may be cast out in
a minute. But the anchor, of whatever composed, should not offer too
great resistance to the water. It should no more than keep the boat’s
bow to the sea. The quicker she drifts the better, so long as she does not
get broadside on to the waves. Every seaman knows this; but strange
to say, when the emergency arises, the appliances for putting out the
required sheet anchor are uot at hand. If every boat had a 25-fathom
painter, the rest would be easily compassable.
THE CAPTAIN’S REPORT.
At 3 a.m., September 12th, 1889, left the West India Docks, London.
Wind light from N.W. Waterman Saunders on board. 8 p.m., on the
13th, anchored at Dover to put on shore the Pilot. 9 o’clock, the saifie
evening, hove up the anchor and continued the voyage, the wind then
being squally from the North. Had, however, fine weather through the
English Channel, the wind varying from N.E. to E. with light breezes
and fine clear weather. At 3 p.m., on September 15th, passed Portland,
and signalled to the shore to be reported “all well.” At 12 o’clock
midnight, on the 17th, lost sight of the Lizard light, bearing N.E. by E.,
wind fresh from the S. E.
Some of the entries in the log are of special interest. For instance:
‘At 9 o’clock on the evening of September 18th, 1889, we had rather
a nasty surprise. Looking over the stern we saw two huge sharks
following the boat. There was a good deal of phosphorus in the water,
and the fish looked much larger, no donbt, than they really were.
Anyhow, they had a monstrous and threatening appearance, and we were
greatly relieved when after the elapse of many hours they left us.
On the afternoon of September 23rd, in latitude 43° 28" N., longitude
12° W., the wind commenced freshening from the westward with rain and
a falling barometer. At 8 p.m. took four reefs in the mainsail, furled the
mizen, and hove to. The wind increased to such force that we had
afterwords to shorten the mainsail to a goosewing. It was then blowing
with hurricane force, with a deluge .-of rain, and a high sea. The
barometer had fallen from 30.30 at 12 o’clock on the 23rd to 29.90 at
midnight, and again to 29.80 at 8 a.m. on the 24th. The boat laid
splendidly to the wind. No trouble whatsoever. Rudder fast about
amidships, main sheet hauled tight after, and the boat’s head about three
points from the wind. She never failed to take each sea comfortably,
and only occasionally a spray would come on board.


Being perfectly satisfied with the behaviour of the boat whilst hove to
in this gale, we determined to put her to the even severer test of running
before the wind. So at 11 o’clock, on September 24th, we increased sail
to a four-reefed mainsail, and bore away. It was then blowing a very
hard gale from N.N.W. with frequent squalls of immeasurable violence,
and a high and breaking sea. The barometer stood at 29.85. The sailing
was grand: up hill and down dale. Between the seas we were nearly
becalmed, the sail flapping ; and then the boat would be hurled up by a
mountain of water, and the wind would howl through the gear, blowing
the sail out with a report like the firing of a cannon, and she would be
swept down into another trough of that troubled sea. It was very
imposing to watch the huge billows chasing after us, coming up with a
threatening roar, their white crests curling over like breakers on a rocky
coast. We steered the boat with our face to the stern, so as to enable us
to take each sea stern on. The boat never lost steerage way even in the
troughs of the biggest waves, and only shipped three heavy seas, and
neither of these did any harm, only giving the helmsman a ducking. We
remember how differently the Ragna used to behave in such weather. It
used to take her, at least, five minutes to shake the mass of water off her
decks after shipping a sea ; and during this painful interval she lay like
a log in the water. Iu the case of the Storm King, the water was off
nearly as quick as it was on, there being no bulwarks or anything else to
detain it. Another ship I commanded, Captain Jorgensen states, was
nearly capsized running under similar conditions. It was on the banks of
Newfoundland. The ship was laden with grain from New York. Three-
fourths of the grain was loose and the rest in bags. She was struck by a
heavy sea, and heeled over with such a jerk that the cargo shifted, and
she took three feet of a list. Bearing these experiences in mind, and
seeing how admirable the Storm King conducted herself, Captain
Jorgensen felt very satisfied.
One thing is clear, namely : no open Life Boat could have gone
through that test without foundering. For whenever a heavy sea broke
on board an open boat she would inevitably be swamped and become
unmanagable. On the evening of the 24th we again hove the boat to
under the goosewing, as the sea was too high to run before at night.
The storm lasted the 26 th. We ran before it in the day time, and lay
to at night. On the first day of the gale we lost our patent log, so we
afterwards had to calculate the boat’s headway by guesswork. From the
25th September, until arrival at Madeira, we had fine weather with light
N.E. winds, but with a heavy swell from the westward. Having no log,
and the deviation of the compass being difficult to ascertain, the boat was
navigated simply by observations, my watch acting as a chronometer.
This watch, which was rated by Messrs. Hughes & Son, of Fenchurch
Street, London, proved to be very correct, and I have to thank that firm
for having supplied me with such a good timekeeper.
On October 2nd we anchored at Madeira, after a passage of a little
over 18 days. As we sailed into the roadstead we were met by numerous


boats, and when the people on them learned that we had come from
London they took off their hats and cried “Viva !” The vice-consul for
Norway and Sweden and his son, the Consul for Rusland, were both very
kind to us. Mr. Welsh junior told us that a proposal had been made, at
the exchange, to present us with a patent log and line to replace the one
we had lost. But, instead of this, a subscription list had been opened and
presented to us. The British Consul was exceedingly courteous and kind,
and invited me to dinner. The captain, officers and passengers of the
different steamers in port called on board, and on several occasions these
visitors gave us three cheers. These marks of approbation pleased us
very much.
On October 9th, at 5 p.m., we hove up the anchor with the help of
the Consul’s boat’s crew, who afterwards towed us further out in the
roadstead, there being no wind to fill our sails. We made fast to the
stern of the steamship Fifeshire, Captain C. Olsen, from Glasgow. Mr.
Welsh, junior, was still on board, and at the invitation of Captain Olsen
we repaired on board the Fifeshire to supper. At 7.30 p.m. returned to
the boat, since a light breeze had risen from the shore. Hoisted the sails,
and steered out to sea; the officers and crew of the Fifeshire giving us
three cheers and wishing us a pleasant voyage.
On the 21st October at 12 o’clock had the island of St. Nicholas in the
S.S.W., distant 18 miles. Passing close under the island we experienced
a very heavy squall with quite a clear and unthreatening sky. St.
Nicholas is one of the Cape Verde group of islands, and between these we
had light and baffling winds.
On the 25th October, in latitude 11° 22" N. and longtitude 24° 58" W.
the north-east trades left us with heavy rain squalls. On November 7th,
in latitude 2° 28" N. and longitude 26° 2" W., the south-east trades
commenced, but only came up in gentle airs; but there was a heavy
southerly swell. On November 21st, at 8 a.nr., we anchored at
Pernambuco, No Pilot. During this part of the voyage, up to October
25th, we had very agreeable weather, but from the date last named, until
we anchored in Pernambuco, the weather was the averse of agreeable. In
the calm belt in particular it was exceedingly unpleasant. W e encountered
heavy rain squalls accompanied with thunder and lightning, but with
hardly any wind beyond fitful gusts. In the south-east trades, although
the weather was fine, it was quite disheartening to see the slowness of the
boat’s progress, which was owing to the lightness of the breeze, the heavy
southerly swell and the current being against us. The current was so
strong that it put us back, at least, 18 miles in 24 hours. The boat had
not enough sail for such light winds, and to make it worse, the heavy
quality of what little surface we could spread caused them to flap
considerably with the rolling of the boat, and thus lost a deal of their
propulsive effect. We made all sorts of attempts to improve matters,
setting an extra mizen-sail on the yard of the main-sail. This acted
very well, and we could use it close to the wind. We also rigged up
an extra mast, which we managed by lashing three oars together.


Another oar was employed as a yard, and on this we set an extra main-
sail ; but this did not answer well, and after three days’ trial, we rigged
it down again. We hoped for the time when we would be in heavier
weather —more suitable for the Storm King.
The boat kept nice and cool as the water splashed against her side.
It was a relief in this tropical zone to get below deck, away from the
constantly varying conditions of heavy rains and piercing sun rays. In
such circumstances an open Life Boat would give no protection to its
occupants, who would be alternately soaked with rain and scorched with
the solar heat.
Take another example : where an open boat would be in the North Sea
in January, the persons on board would be perished with cold and wet.
I am sure that many ships reported te be lost, and never heard of again,
would have been reported in due time had her crew, driven to the boats,
not suffered death through exposure and lack of provisions. And the
Storm King has proved by her long and varied voyage through different
climes that she provides against such adversities.
The following ships passed and spoke the Storm King, asking
mutually to be reported “all well:”—October 12th, latitude 20° 23" N.,
longtitude 22° 25" W., steamship, Gulf of Suez ; October 20th, 18° 37" N.,
22° 54" W., French steamer; October 28th, 7° 48" N. and 24°10"W.,
Norwegian barque, Henry Turner, bound for Capetown ; November 7th,
2° 28" N. and 26° 2" W., an English ship ; November 12th, 1° S. and 28°
40" W., the English ship, Roger Andaman ; November 17th, in 5" 13° S.
and 22° 33", a Portugese barque, bound north.
All in Pernambuco took a great interest in the Life Boat, and
subscribed most liberally to pay the expenses of the voyage. Every ship
master in the port, the consuls, brokers, insurance agents, and many
others contributed ; all considering that the principle of the boat was of
great interest to the shipping. The Captain of the port, the English
Consul, and numerous influential residents took ocassion to personally
congratulate me as the inventor of the boat.
We left Pernambuco at 2 p.m. on December 2nd, a small steamer tow-
ing the boat out to sea free of all charge. All the ships in the harbour,
including two men-of-war, saluted us with their flags. The people of
Pernambuco were all very kind and generous to us, and they lost no
opportunity of expressing their belief that where the inventor of a life boat
made a trial trip himself across the sea in his machine there was a guar-
antee that the thing itself was all that was claimed for it. About this
part of the voyage there is not much to say, since we had not much to
complain of in the shape of storms, as we had in the Bay of Biscay. True,
we had for the most part contrary winds, and the boat’s bottom got very
foul, so much* so that at length we could hardly get her to move at all. If
we had not used the oars at last I fear we should never have reached Cape
Town, for the current was also setting strongly against us. On February
23rd she made the N. W. point of Robin Island, about 10 miles from Cape


Town, and the anchor was dropped. But a heavy S.E. gale set in, and
the boat drifted out to sea again. It was not until March Ist, nor until
she had passed through some terrible times, that she was got back to the
island again. The boat had become so dirty that it would hardly move in
the water, and myself and the Mate both began to think we should
never get in. What made the time more trying was that the supply of
tobacco had been exhausted. Having got back to Robin Island, however,
we were soon out of further trouble. A small pleasure steamer, called the
Morning Star, came out laden with passengers, who lustily cheered the
Storm King. She was taken in tow, and was soon safely anchored in
Table Bay.
The 25th of February we tried how the boat would lie to with a sea
anchor out. There was a tremendous sea running, and it did not take us
long to understand that with a big sea anchor out she would make bad
weather of it. For with such a preventative against drifting the boat lies
nearly stationary, and hence is liable to be constantly washed over with
big waves. After getting some rollers over us, so heavy in one or two
instances that I really thought the boat would go down, we gave up the
big sea anchor as a bad job, and laid the boat to under a goosewing. After
that scarcely any water came on board.
At 1 o’clock the Storm King was made fast to the quay, and at the
invitation of Mr. Burmeester we went to his house and had dinner, which
we enjoyed as only those can who have not had a good dinner for three
months. Everybody in Capetown showed great kindness and courtsey to
us. The Governor, Sir Henry Loch, honored us with a visit, as did also
all the persons of note in the city. The Engineers from Sir Donald
Curry & Co. inspected the boat, and repaired free of cost what little
damage had been done; and the leading firms of the city subscribed
handsomely for our expenses which were heavy. The press of the Cape
spoke in high terms of the invention, and so did all.
To show what an experienced sailor thinks of the boat: One day, I
was in Sir Donald Curry & Co’s. Office, when Mr. McLean, the manager,
introduced me to one of the Captains of the employ, Captain Hay, ef the
Grantilly Castle. I gave the Captain one of my circulars, and invited
him to see the boat, and say whether he could contradict one single point
of advantage that I claimed. He looked over the circular and said : “Be
sure, Captain, I shall see something to pick holes in.” Next day he came
down, accompanied by Captain Stephens, the deputy harbour-master;
and after carefully looking over the boat, he said —“ Captain, you know I
did not come with the intention of flattering you, but to criticise. But,
to tell the honest truth, I do not see a single point in your claims that I
can contradict.” Captain Stephens expressed the same opinion.
At 2 p.m. on April sth, 1890, we left Capetown in tow of the Morning
Star, with the good wishes from our friends at the Cape. ' The wind was
light from the S.E. which increases to a heavy gale with a great breaking
sea, so that at 12, midnight, we had the boat hove to, under a reefed
mizzen, and with 25 fathoms of rope out forward and a canvas bucket


attached. This acted as an excellent sea anchor, and the boat rode most
beautifully. The rope broke the crest of the sea, and the anchor was so
little that it did not prevent the tendency of the boat to drift, yet it
sufficed to keep her head three or four points from the wind’s eye. We
had, up to April 26th, solne heavy S.E. gales, which drove us back to 15
degrees east.
The Storm King Hove to in a Cyclone.
But heavy gales were experienced from time to time all the way to
Albany. Three of these gales are worthy of special mention. The first
was between the 7th and Bth of May in latitude 41.30 S. and longitude 34
E. The barometer went down to 29.23. The storm commenced from
N.N.E., and then changed in sudtlen squalls to N.W., and finally to S.W.
The boat when the last change took place got on the other tack of her own
accord, being hove to with a sea anchor ahead. The wind, says the log,
“ blew something awful, and the sea to match.” Yet the Storm King
came safely through it.
On May 25th, in latitude 39.45 S., the boat met with the second
tempest. This time Captain Jorgensen determined upon running before
the wind during the day, and although the sea was mountains high, and
the wind of hurricane force, the boat gallantly scudded along without
damage, except to the extent of having her canvas bulwarks torn in places.
Some of the squalls were fearfully heavy, and were accompanied with,
blinding showers of hail.


The third gale, and perhaps the most trying, because it was of the
longest duration, extending from June 15th to June 17th inclusive, was
met with in latitude 37 deg. 30 min. and about longitude 97 E. All these
hurricanes were revolving storms, and in this last one the boat passed
through the centre of the meteor.
These storms were all of the dreaded revolving kind :—as hurricanes,
cyclones, typhoons or meteoric disturbances of the most awful character.
Long before the wind itself came down with its unspeakable force and its
burden of water, in as many forms as are described by Tyndall, the sea
rose into mountains, the low atmospheric pressure allowing the huge
masses of water to leap far above the plane of the ocean. Captain
Jorgensen describes these storms as among the worst he has ever
experienced. It was wonderful to see the boat ride safely through them.
Yet the forbodings were really worse than the reality, since the Captain
could scarcely help fearing the worst.
To finish up with, the boat encountered a severe gale off Cape Leu win.
There was a heafy and confused sea, It was in this tempest that the
first damage was done to the Storm King on the voyage. A huge wave
came floundering along with immeasurable force and with what seemed
demoniacal intent. It curled over like a breaker, and came upon the
Storm King like a terrible avalanche.
The little craft raised her breast proudly to the hideous upheaval, and
buoyantly surmounted its crest. Yet some portion of the gigantic wave
swept over her, and bent several of the staunchious which supported the
deck railings. Further than this, however, the boat was unhurt, though
not many large ships would have come so bravely through that ordeal.
An exceedingly painful incident should here be mentioned. In the
gale experienced immediately after leaving the Cape, a heavy sea drove
Mr. Nilsen with great violence against the mizzenmast. The shock was
very severe, and for a long while it was feared that the poor fellow had
sustained dangerons injuries. That several of his ribs were fractured
seemed at first certain. But happily after a rest the welcome fact became
patent that beyond the shock and some nasty bruises he had suffered no
harm.
On June Ist the voyagers sighted Amsterdam Island. On the 9th of
the same month a rather serious misfortune befel them. On that day the
chronometer watch stopped ; and as all the other watches on board had
previously come to grief, they had henceforth no means of telling the time
except by guesswork, and no more than a rude idea of the longitude of the
boat. The dead reckoning alone had to be depended upon, and that was
hardly trustworthy since the patent log with which the boat was provided
on leaving London was lost in the Bay of Biscay.
On June 26th, about midnight, a curious and startling episode of this
■voyage occurred. The boat was gliding through the water in a comfort-
able kind of way. The Capain was at the helm, half asleep and half
awake. The moon shone brightly, to the extinguishment almost of the


stars. Somnolency seemed to pervade the whole situation. The captain
found it hard to keep off the sweet restorative influence of slumber. The
mate slept soundly below, the gentle sound of his breathing, coming-
through the open hatchway, being the only preventative against the
Captain throwing himself into the arms of “Nature’s soft nurse.” The
very waves of the ocean seemed drowsy, as if resting for some furious
morrow. The stars of the Southern Cross winked and blinked as though
they were tired to death. Even the bright moon had a dreamy expression
■on her face. And it would seem that the monsters of the deep were not
more wakeful. For with frightful suddenness the Storm King struck
against a whale that lay dreaming the happy hours away on that desolate
waste. After that the deluge, as depicted below.
At Close Quarters with a Whale.
On June 29th we find the following entry in the log“ Sighted
Australia at Cliff Head in the morning. At 10 p.m. saw Breaksea Island.
Then nearly a calm with only a light air off the shore. Hoisted our
Norwegian flag, which was made out by the lighthouse people, and the
.Storm King recognised and reported to Albany.” A small tug boat was
.sent out, and the boat was towed into port, where the toilers of the sea
were received by the harbor master and other officials an enthusiastic
gathering of citizens, who cheered the brave fellows most heartily. Capt.
Jorgensen reports that he met with nothing but the extremest kindness


at the hands of the people of Albany. He and Mr. Nilsen were made
the guests of the proprietor of the Freemasons’ Hotel, ana JoiJL luO hoca.jiv/
personages of the town, including Sir Malcolm Fraser, inspected the boat
and expressed approval of the principle on which she was constructed.
Then after a round of festivities at Albany the Storm King sailed
away on July 10th for Adelaide. The voyage across the Great Australian
Bight was of an ordinary character, save in one particular. On the night
of July 18th, whilst the boat was hove to with the sea anchor out, and
both Captain Jorgensen and Mr. Nilsen below, the boat suddenly turned
keel upwards. Mr. Nilsen was on watch, and the Captain fast asleep.
The boat being laid to, both Captain Jorgensen and the Mate were
below, the latter reading near the hatchway. Of course both of them
were thrown with great force on to the inside of the deck. Then
followed a few moments of terrible anxiety, relieved, however, by a
firm sentiment of faith in the righting powers of the boat and in
her buoyancy. The boat, although turned completely over, righted her-
self in less than a minute, thus proving the soundness of the principle on
which she had been constructed. Captain Jorgensen sustained a rather
severe injury to his left side, his shoulder, and his head in the tumble he
got out of his berth; but he refused to take much notice of these, and
professes that he was in no way injured.
The Storm King Capsized.


Captain J orgenson is at a loss to account for the capsize, for the boat
had passed through much severer weather before without difficulty. He
is a little disposed to think that some ship must have run into the boat,
or else that a tidal wave swept like an avalanche over the surface of the
sea and caused the mishap. However, the accident proved that even in
the worst conceivable circumstances the boat is safe. And it proved
something more. Between Captain Jorgensen and Mr. Nilsen a friend-
ship had long been established. During the short time the boat was
turned over the mate showed that the feeling on his part was such as to
prompt him to the most heroic deeds. The compartment in which the
two men were was nearly filled with water. The lights were extinguished.
The captain, who had been asleep, was hurled violently from his bunk.
Nilsen clambered to'the hatch, but before seeking to free himself from
the compartment, at the risk of his life, he turned to ascertain to what
extent tne captain required help.
The compass was lost, and a great many other useful articles were
either damaged or washed overboard. The loss of the compass made the
navigation thenceforth exceedingly difficult. But Adelaide was not so very
far off, and the daring seamen bore their troubles well. The arrival in the
South Australian capital was treated as an event of public importance.
In fact at every place at which the Storm King touched the people
showed the captain and mate the greatest attention and kindness, and in
this respect the people of Melbourne have certainly not been behindhand.


CAPTAIN JORGENSEN CLAIMS FOR HIS BOAT AS
FOLLOWS:
The essential features of this invention are that the Life-Boat is a decked
boat, and can be lengthened or shortened as required, according to the
number of persons to be saved, and, although it can be made a very large
boat, capable of taking five times, or upwards, the number of passengers
that the best ship’s Life-Boat in use can accommodate, it can be easily
placed anywhere on board, as each section can be made large or small, so
as to utilize room as required.
As each section is loosely mounted upon wheels, and is of light weight,
the sections can be connected together and launched with less risk in a
rough sea, and in the same time as would be needed to launch sufficient
ordinary Life-Boats to accommodate the same number of people.
The following are some of the advantages claimed for this Boat:
1. That any passenger ship can carry sufficient Jorgensen’s
Patent Life Boats for saving the whole of the passengers and crew,
without taking up more deck room than is occupied by ordinary boats,
whilst at the same time the ship’s crew can efficiently man them.
2. No matter how crowded the Life Boats, the sailors can work
them without hindrance.
3. Sufficient water and provisions can be carried by each boat to
last those on board at least fourteen days, and same can be so stowed
as not to be damaged by sea-water.
4. The shipwrecked persons are not exposed to the weather,
thereby overcoming the greatest danger.
Boats as used now, are in reality nothing else than good sea-
boats, enabling passengers and crew to be in them for a short time
only, except in trade winds and during summer weather, but it is
quite out of the question to remain in them for days in wintry
weather —the time when they are most required.
5. The boat being divided into several water-tight compart-
ments is unsinkable, whilst the different sexes can occupy different
compartments, a great convenience when the voyage extends over
several days ; other conveniences for cooking, etc., are also secured.
6. There is no need of tackle for launching the boats, thereby
enabling them to be so placed and secured that in accidents where
the ship suddenly sinks and leaves no time for launching, the ship
will force them to float clear of it as she founders, there being no
fastenings to cut loose.
In launching boats as usual by davits, many accidents happen by
tackles getting foul, or by the boats being - smashed or swamped
alongside, which are grave objections to the ordinary method of
launching boats in heavy weather.


Captain Jorgensen’s method of launching is something like the
launching of a ship from the stocks ; the rolling of the ship, together
with a hearty push from the sailors, giving the boat such headway
that it will have no chance of being smashed alongside ; and being a
decked boat it cannot fill with water as an open boat often does.
7. Each section of the boat is by itself a life-saving apparatus
in case of accident, and to be preferred to any boat now in use, as it
gives a shelter from the weather to its occupants.
8. Passengers can save themselves without assistance from the
sailors.
9. All ordinary Life Boats are liable to capsize in a heavy
breaking sea, and although a good boat will right itself again, it will
undoubtedly leave many of its occupants in the water.
Jorgensen’s Patent Life Boat, if capsized, will not throw out
its occupants, and it is impossible for it not to right itself, owing to
the water ballast in the bottom.
10. The compartments of the Boat can be used as water-tanks,
store-rooms for provisions, or cargo, whilst they can also be used as
lighters for bringing cargo or provisions to the ship in an 'open
roadstead.
11. When the ship is in danger of foundering, the Boat can be
put together in a safe place on deck, and the sailors thereby assured
of their safety, enabling the abandonment of the vessel to be deferred
until the last moment. Many a good vessel is abandoned, which the
crew would safely bring to port, if they were assured of their safety
in case of the vessel suddenly foundering.
12. Jorgensen’s patent can be advantageously adapted for use
at Life Boat Stations, as a boat made in sections can be more easily
transported and launched opposite a wreck.


WM. MARSHALL axd CO., PRINTERS, MELBOURNE.




KRUSE’S
FLUID MAGNESIA
Jjiß great fainliy (paidae.
RECOMMENDED /\ND PRESCRIBED BY THE MEDICAL PROFESSION IN
CJ\SES OF
Indigestion , Dyspepsia ,
Biliousness f Nervous Headache,
Constipation, &c.
AWARDED NUMEROUS GOLD MEDALS.
TiiTTiirriTlll rm ri 1111111111111111111 n 11111111111111in111111111111111111111111rirrr
SURE PREVENTATIVE OF GOUT & GRAVEL.
Hr Invaluable corrective alter any Irregularities ol Ealing & Drinking-
Full Directions for Use accompany each Bottle.
Of all Chemists, in Half-pint, Pint and Quart Bottles, at
18. 3d., 2s. 6d. and 3s. Cd. respectively.
