

GAPT. ARMSTRONG, R.N.,
LATE OF
LORI H@Wl IS HAND,
AND
SIR JOHN ROBERTSON, K.C.M.G.
Sgtmeg:
FEINTED AT THE “ EXPEESS ” OFFICE, 84 CLAEENCE STEEET,




“THORN BANK,”
Ocean Street, Woollahea,
September 18th, 1885.
Sir,
I beg to request that you will kindly give; your consideration to the Petition presented i for me last
evening by /???? /£:fin the Legislative Assembly. Knowing how the man with a grievance “may
become a perfect bore,” I almost fear to address you on the subject of my own case ; but smarting, as I do, under
the meretricious and mendacious statements of the few men whom 1 find banded together to misrepresent facts,
and who, seizing every opportunity to snatch a vote in a thin House, have hitherto smothered the publicity and
shame which must have fallen upon them, had the vote of a full House been taken. I ask you, as conscientious
gentlemen, whose only object can be to do justice, to mete out to mo the same fair play you would ask for your-
selves, if by any misfortune you might be placed under circumstances to those which so cruelly effect me.
Understand me, I do not, in thus writing you, make an appeal “ ad misarecordium ,” for your vote. I ask vou
merely to be good enough to acquaint yourself with the facts pertaining to my case, and which you will find in the
accompanying pamphlet and Parliamentary papers. If you will do this, I have no fear of the result. In some
way, I appear to have incurred the bitter hatred of Sir John Robertson, and this makes the task of vindicating
myself a very uphill one. Our positions are in such extreme opposition. I am, comparatively speaking, unknown.
He carries with him the reputation and credit of a life devoted to public affairs. His name, fame, and services
have become historical, and will be remembered for all time. What chance then have I against a political giant
such as this, surrounded as he is with men who follow him blindly ? Why, the very fact that he opposes me will
carry conviction as to some imaginary wrong-doing of mine to thousands who will never take the trouble to read
my defence. Yet I will ask all such to remember “that right and wrong were never so evenly balanced that all
the right lay on one side, and all the wrong on the other.” This aphorism is of course a two-edged sword, but I.
do not shrink from its application to my own case. I may have committed some error of judgment, though I am
not conscious of it ; but I have been cruelly ill-treated for it. My view of the case is that my opponents having
jumped to a false conclusion, acted upon it with extreme and unnecessary severity. If I committed faults they
magnified them into crimes, and was treated with a bitterness of hostility, displayed with a harshness so exaggerated
and so incomprehensible, as left me with no other .possible conviction then that the intention to crush me was
combined with a determination to frighten me from seeking redress.
My spirit rebelled againit such oppression and degradation. I imagine it , was thought that against the
number, power, and influence arrayed against me, 1 should be afraid to challenge my accusers and demand repara-
tion. But I was trained in a school which knows no such word as surrender, while it has a hand to hold a pistol
or arm to use a sword.
My opponents have availed themselves of every political trick they can bring, and have brought oratory,
declamation, clamour, inuendoes, falsehood, and wilful misrepresentation to their aid. They can, as they have
done before, watch for thin Houses in which, by outnumbering the other side, have prevented justice from being-
done to me. 1 have no such arts to assist me. 1 would not use them if I had. In addressing you and appealing-
to your common sense and desire to do right, I can make no display of eloquence, nor by chattering verbosity
make the worse appear the better cause. I can only address you in voiceless print, and approach you in those
calmer moments when (undisturbed by noisy debate in the House) you may be sitting at your own fireside, per-
haps, and in a position to give your cool judgment to my case. This is what 1 ask of you. as man to man.
Before God all 1 ask is Justice and Redress.
RICHARD R. ARMSTRONG.
I
r




CAPTAIN ARMSTRONG, R.N.,
LATE OP
LORD HOWE ISLAND,
SIR JOHN ROBERTSON, K.C.M.G.
Sir, — I must apologise for bringing the subject of my case before the
public again, but it is impossible I can allow the matter to rest at its pre-
sent stage. Quite recently, too, I have been put in possession of facts
which throw a peculiar light upon a certain document, “copies ” of which
were inserted by Sir John Robertson in the Herald and Daily Telegraph,
and the authenticity of which document was challenged by me immediately
after its publication.
It will be remembered that a day or two before the Select Committee
were to move the adoption of their Report by the House—this letter, pur-
porting to have been written by Mr, J. Bowie Wilson when on his death-
bed, to Sir John Robertson, was sent to the papers by that gentleman, with
evidently the distinct object of damaging the Committee’s Report, and
securing its postponement, or rejection, by the House. Sir John stated in a
foot-note that he had altered the original or had toned it down, leading
the public to believe that in its original state it was much more severe in
its condemnation of the Select Committee’s action and myself.
Those who have seen the letter, and the malignant hostility which this
member of the House has displayed towards myself, all through, will be
able to judge the nature of the toning down Mr. Wilson’s letter was likely
to receive at the hands of Sir John, and while deprecating any alteration
or interlineation whatever in the dead man’s letter, and the scandalous
use made of it, my attention was called by a friend, of Mr. Wilson’s, to
some extraordinary features in the letter which aroused grave suspicion as
to whether it was the emanation from Mr. Wilson’s pen, or had even been
written under his dictation. As straws show the direction of a current,
so trifling matters are frequently of great import in judging of the
authenticity or genuineness of a document, and there are internal evidences
in this document which induce me and my friends to strongly suspect its
validity. The curious circumstance of the letter being written on the Sun-
day—and dated the day after (the day of Mr, Wilson’s death) —he died
before noon—Sir John Robertson explains as being due to Mr. Wilson
being a religious man, and thus unwilling to date his letter on a Sunday ;


as if all the colony did not know that Mr. Wilson frequently took the
chair at Mr. Bright’s Freethought Lectures on a Sunday, and was a man
who, in such matters, had the courage of his convictions, and was, of all
men, the least likely to be guilty of the pious fraud attributed to him to
cover the blunder of fabrication or manipulations of the document. Other
evidence of a singular nature, as throwing side lights on to this historic
document, is forthcoming—and I have no hesitation in saying that to all
intents and purposes the letter, as published, is a fabrication.
At the investigation by the House Sir John was asked for the original
but he persistently refused to produce it when demanded by Parliament, and
declared positively that the document was signed by Mr. J, Bowie Wilson.
This I positively assert was not signed by Mr. Wilson. Sir John knew
that the publication in the Press had tended to my damage, and it was
made the pretext of postponing the adoption of the Report.
I would point out to the public that at every stage of the enquiry Sir
John Robertson has endeavoured to shelve or postpone the matter, and this
on most frivolous grounds ; and I have proof that while making certain
statements in the House to my damage, he was in possession of reliable in-
formation as to the inaccuracy of those statements. In a letter kindly
given to me by Mr. A. M'Donald, of Sydney, after referring to the con-
versation he had had with Sir John as to the genuineness of the document
referred to, he says :
[True Copy.]
“ 29 Hunter-street, Sydney, 20th April, 1886.
“ Captain Armstrong, E. N.
“ Dear Sir,— ln answer to your desire to obtain from me certain par-
ticulars that had come under my notice in reference to the letter said to
have been written by the late Mr. J. Bowie Wilson on the day of his death,
and published by Sir John Robertson on the 11th of May, 1883, in the
Sydney Morning Herald and Daily Telegraph— seeing that you have now
placed before the public particulars of the preparation of this extraordinary
document, I now feel at liberty to furnish the information asked for, which
is as follows On the day Sir John Robertson met you in my office (when
he shook hands with you) after asking you to withdraw—l said
to Sir John it was too bad to publish Mr. J. Bowie Wilson’s letter after
Captain Armstrong had withdrawn his case from before the House to save
the feelings of Wilson’s family. Besides, I said, the letter was not
genuine. He replied, ‘ Indeed ! It is curious ; I have the letter in my pocket ’
—and he handed it to me, which I have examined. It was clean, written
in a lady’s hand (evidently a copy of the published letter), and signed. I
gave it back, remarking that the person who wrote the letter signed it. He
then handed another letter, saying ‘You might as well say that is’not
genuine.' I looked at it; it was the last letter, I think, written by Mr,
Wilson to Sir John, asking him to protect his character in the House. I
said there was no doubt as to that document. I then pointed out to him
that he was in error in stating that 9 hhds. of Colonial wine had been taken


down to Lord Howe Island, and that the actual quantity was only 1 hhd *
and 2 qr, casks that I had presented to you to turn into vinegar for pre-
serving onions. There was also 1 qr. cask of Colonial wine purchased from
Adams, Surveyor-General, for private use, and the spirits consisted of 4
one-dozen cases of brandy (one ullage), on which 12s. per gallon duty had
been paid. After this I was much surprised to find, some two or three
days afterwards, Sir John reading the letter in the House, but he refused
to show it, saying he would place it in the hands of the Premier. In re-
viewing your position in this matter from the commencement, I have no
hesitation in affirming it to be one of the most heartless cases of persecution
and injustice ever enacted by any Government,
“ Yours faithfully,
(Signed) “ A. M'Honald.”
It will scarcely be believed that for more than three years I have been
seeking justice for the gross wrongs done to me in the matter of my re-
moval from duty, and degradation before the world.
Committees of the House, after the most patient and thorough investiga-
tion, have reported altogether strongly in my favour ; and though the
Government so far recognised the justice of my claim as to put a sum of
money on the Estimates to meet the case, the vote was submitted unfor-
tunately in a very thin House, at three o’clock in the morning, and by the
adroit management of Sir John Robertson was lost (15 votes to 18). Of
course I do not despair of justice yet being done, but it is right the public
should know through what influence this has been denied me, and have
some insight into the subtle action which occasionally operates to the cruel
wrong of men like myself, and which all must feel is a disgrace to public
men.
lam reminded that some seven years ago another document, which was
flourished by Sir John in the faces of the Mudgee people, excited consider-
able comment on the part of Mr. Buchanan, who utterly repudiated its
authenticity. I have peculiar documents in my possession confirming my
statements in connection with my case, which I am willing to show to any-
one. There was, I hear, another case which occurred some five years ago
very similar to the above, in connection with one of the papers of this city
and the before-mentioned Member of Parliament.
I called on Mrs. Wilson on the 15th of last month. In conversation she
acknowledged that Sir John Robertson had called on her some days after
her husband’s death, and submitted a letter which she was induced to at-
tach her husband's name to. Mrs, Wilson also stated to me that when Mr.
Wilson was sent down to the Island by Sir John Robertson that he was
too ill to undertake any duties, and had been very ill for two years pre-
viously ; that she would not have let him go if their friend Mr. Eanken
had not gone to take care of him. Mr. Eanken also confirms this. She
also stated that Sir J. had told her that this affair of mine had been made
a political question, and that was why he was anxious to secure this letter


to have it published. This thoroughly contradicts Sir John’s double state-
ment, when he declared in the House of Parliament (1) that Mr. Wilson
did sign the document, and (2) that he was in thorough good health when
he went to the Island. The S, M. Herald was also led into the same error)
May 2nd, 1883. It is a perfect disgrace, and most injurious to the country (
that men should abuse the privileges of the House by making (know,
ingly) false statements, as I can prove against Sir John on several occa-
sions. For instance, to give force to his argument against my receiving
compensation for wrongful dismissal, in Hansard of the 20th December)
1883, it is recorded (No. 7 pp. 521-526 ; No. 11 pp. 1195-1222) that
Sir John stated in the House of Parliament that Captain Armstrong had
been in the Queen’s service in the Navy, and it would have been better had
the fact not been mentioned, he knew I could not produce certificates that
I had left the service honorably. Sir John knew at the time that I still be-
longed to the service, and held testimonials of the highest character, and
that I had left active service through wounds and exposures in the trenches
of the Crimea. I am in possession of medical certificates stating that it
was perfectly impossible for me to continue active service any longer. I
have submitted all the originals to the Lieutenant-Governor of New South
Wales, who gave me the following :
“April 27 th, 1881.
“My Dear Sir, — I have read every one of the documents left by you at
my house yesterday, and I am happy to say that they are eminently satis-
factory, and everything that your warmest supporters could desire.
“ I am, very truly yours,
(Signed) “ Alfred Stbphex.”
On the three last occasions when my case was brought before the House
for adoption of Committee’s Report that I should be reimbursed, See., Sir
John persistently had it postponed until the arrival of a vessel from Lord
Howe Island, which he knew had a petition on board, which some ofjhe most
troublesome of the inhabitants were induced to sign. What was the result f
Two noted characters (women) are brought up in the hold of this vessel,
a schooner of 25 tons, with others. This occurs fifteen months after
Mr. Wilson’s enquiry and report. I have a photograph of this testimonial,
which is inserted in the public papers by Sir John. In the original petition
from the inhabitants complaining of the unjust treatment I received, are
the very names signed in my favour 12 months previous whose names in
this now appear on the other petition produced by Sir John, This document
is made up in Sydney and sent down, and all the names are filled up by a
notorious character named Nichols, and witnessed by Campbell Stevens.
These two men gave me great trouble on the Island, and were accused of
having run away with a vessel belonging to a Mr. Bell, of Sydney,
which cost him £6OOO, which they wrecked in the South Seas in a calm }
selling the wreckage, and never accounting to the owner for the money.
The two women referred to, whom Sir John represents in Parliament as
most respectable, are the wives of the two men above mentioned ; and the
one, Mary Nichols, had often threatened to kill her son, and used such dis-


gusting language to her children that the eldest was induced to run away :
he made a declaration to that effect before Mr. Farnell, J.P., of Sydney.
The other woman, Stevens, wife of the above, was so notorious that she
was reported by Messrs. Cloete and Hill (police magistrate) as having been
the cause of her paramour’s murder, and Sir John knew all this, as it was
reported to him officially by them.
All Sir John’s documents and statements have been published at the
expense of the public : all mine I have to pay for—at least £l6O for
printing alone, and my losses are over £3OOO.
One more interesting document and I have done for the present:—
[True Copy.]
“ Paramattta, December 9th, 1884.
“ My Hear Capt. Armstrong,—You ask me to detail the circumstances
under which I believe the letter published by Sir John Robertson as from
the late Mr. Erowie Wilson is not a genuine document, or one written by
or at the instigation of Mr. Wilson. When the letter appeared in the
Herald I carefully read it over and came to the conclusion that the state-
ments were so contrary to fact, and so inconsistent with my personal know-
ledge of Mr. Wilson and with his general character, that I at once deter-
mined to challenge the authenticity of the document at the earliest oppor-
tunity. Waiting a few weeks until the poignancy of Mrs. Wilson’s grief
at the loss of her husband had somewhat assuaged, I called upon that lady
to ask whether the published letter was authentic—whether in fact such
letter had been written or dictated by her husband 7 She at once stated
her regret that the letter referred to had been published, as it in no way
represented that dictated by her dying husband. She then explained that
a day or two before Mr. Wilson’s death he dictated a letter to Sir John
Robertson, which letter was partly written down by herself and partly, I
think, by her husband. This letter was duly sent to Sir John Robertson,
who, a few days after, called and submitted certain alterations and inter-
lineations, asking that they might be incorporated in the letter. To this
Mrs. Wilson thought there could be no objection, and in her then state of
mind readily gave permission for the changes, which were represented by
Sir John as very trivial in their scope. She stated that she was quite sur-
prised, not to say grieved, at the liberty taken by Sir John, for the letter
as published did not at all represent the views as expressed by the letter at
written. She seemed to expect that trouble would arise from it, and was
not at all surprised to have a visit from me, an old friend of Mr. Wil-
son’s, and for whom she knew he entertained a profound regard.
“ Yours faithfully,
(Signed) “ Wm. Clarson.”
Sir John also stated in the House that I had secured the “ Vernon " boys,
whom I took to the Island “by false representations.” This is again un-
true, for I have the letter “ initialled by him,” approving of the boys


being apprenticed to me. I have challenged Sir John Robertson in the
Press on every false statement he has made against me in the House, yet
he dare not answer any one of them publicly, but takes advantage of the
privilege he is allowed as a member.
I have also photographs of the original letter purporting to be written by
Mr, Wilson, and wish to Inform the public of its true nature. The first
sheets are in ladies’ handwriting, the 3rd and 4th sheets, which form three-
fourths of the composition (closely written), are apparently in the writing
of Sir John’s son, and finished off by Sir John himself on some of his Club
paper bearing the impression of the Club stamp, and inserted in the public
papers a fortnight after Mr. Wilson’s death, and a day or two before my
case, or rather the report of the Select,Committee, was again coming before
the House for adoption.
For the first twelve months after Mr. Wilson’s report, and during Sir
John Robertson’s term of Government, I was continually applying, peti-
tioning, and begging to have an Enquiry Committee appointed, I was even
threatened that if I visited the buildings so frequently the messengers
would probably have instructions to turn me out. This, however, did not
intimidate me, as I became more persistent in my demand for justice, and Sir
Henry Parkes was the only gentleman who had the courtesy to answer my
letters, I did not obtain a Committee until the next Government took
office.
My house has been demolished and property totally destroyed, and when
Mr. Wilson visited the Island my store and kitchen were burnt to the
ground at 2 o’clock in the morning, and when I demanded a full inquiry
into the matter I was told by Mr, Wilson that he would not trouble about
it, but leave the case until arrival in Sydney. Yet he tried to stop my
passage to Sydney.
I am, sir, yours truly,
RICHARD R. ARMSTRONG,
Late Administrator Lord Howe Island.
Tkornbank, Ocean-street,
Woollahra, May 5, 1885,
P. S. —I have sent five copies of this statement before I distributed them
publicly, to Sir John, to his private residence and his Club—nearly four
months ago —yet he has not answered one of them.


THE HONORABLE
JOHN BOWIE WILSON,
LATE COMMISSIONER
Howe island*




THE HOIORABLI! JOHI BOWIE WILSON,
liate Commissioner Lord Howe Island.
Comments on Letter purported to have been written by Mm on his deathbed,
April 30,1883, to Sir John Kobertson.
One part of this extraordinary letter was written by Mrs. Wilson, and
another part by her Daughter, on Sunday, April 29, 1888—Dr, Wilson
dying at noon on the following day. Several days afterwards Sir John
Kobertson obtained the portions from Mrs. Wilson and took them to the
Keform Club : a third part is written by Sir John’s son, and the letter is
finally finished off by Sir John himself (on the Club paper). Thus concocted,
it was sent to the S, M. Herald and Daily Telegraph and published on the
11th of May, 1883.
Sir John gets Mrs, Wilson to copy the letter, as printed, and attach her
late Husband’s name thereto, and this production was handed as the
original document to the Premier, who was to vouch for the authenticity
of Dr. Wilson’s signature.
And so, after all, the passages commenting on the Committee and Arm-
strong, “ too strong for publication ,” and “ toned down ” by Sir John,
never Existed —except in his own imagination ! !!
What says Sir John in reference to the above letter?—(See Hansard ’
Dec. 20, 1883.)
“ Sere is the letter Mr, Wilson wrote (with the few alterations of which
I have spokenj. The poor fellow is dead now, and was dead when the
letter reached me, so that it is like a voice from the grave. It is dated
30th April, 1883. Mr. Wilson on the day of his death wrote me this
letter, which letter, it has been alleged , he never signed, but I intend to
hand it to the Colonial Secretary, who is perfectly familiar with Mr.
Wilson’s signature, in order that he may see whether the signature is or is
not genuine.
“ Resolving to publish the letter, I waited on Mrs, Wilson and ob-
tained her permission to soften certain expressions about the Select Com-
mittee, which I am sure Mr. Wilson would not have written had he
known the gentlemen who composed that Committee as well as I do.
“ However, the Colonial Secretary now has the original, which any mem-
ber of the Committee may see, although Ido not think it ought to be pub-
lished.


I will read the letter as I altered it, and as it appeared in the public
Press. ”
(SP“Note impress of Reform Club stamp on right hand lower corner of
this extraordinary letter.
RICHD. R. ARMSTRONG,
Late Administrator,
Lord Howe Island.
■P - I may add that the statements made in this letter have been
proved to be false by the enquiry of two Select Committees, who honour*
ably acquitted me and recommended my case to the most favourable con-
sideration of the Government, and severely condemned the action of
Messrs. Wilson, Moore and Robertson.—R.R,A.
Sir J, in the House states that if the other gentlemen who went down
with Mr. Wilson were examined, they would give valuable evidence. After
this I insisted upon thoir being examined, and their evidence was
strong in my favour, except Mr. Wilkinson 5 he was summoned on the
Thursday to attend on the following Tuesday, but cleared out for Lord
Howe Island on the Saturday, and Mr. Robertson, (another of Sir John’s
sons who is clerk of this committee room, and was always present during
the investigations, admitted that he sent the summons to Mr. Wilkinson’s
brother by mistake.
In page 13S Hansard, 26th November 1884, Sir John is so excited on the
case that he on several occasions accuses the Government and Parliament
of attempting to swindle in trying to pass the item of £lOOO to compen*
sate me . . yet that same night millions of pounds had been passed with-
out a question.
Again he asks, why was not Mr. Ranken (who he had himself appointed
as 2nd magistrate) examined ? As he says in a matter of this sort where
there was no land swindle on (134 Hansard), no doubt he would give fair
evidence. Mr. Ranken was called and gave his evidence in a straight-
forward and honourable manner. He was, however, so shocked at the
proceedings of the enquiry at the Island that he did not attend as
magistrate. Sir John was also called upon by the Chairman and Com-
mittee to give evidence—yet did not attend.


Answer to Letter Purporting to be erom Mr. Wilson.
In the first place it was not written or dictated by Mr, Wilson.
2nd. Mr. Grimshaw was not a trespasser, but simply an 'agent for
Guano Company, of which the Government was aware.
3rd, Mr. Clarson, Senr. was not brought up under warrant.
4th. Mr. Clarson, Junr., was appointed schoolmaster by the then
Government (Mr, Suttor, Minister of Education), and not by me.
sth, The lad Nichols was not examined by Mr. Wilson, but simply gave
him papers from his mother.
6th. Mr. Eose’a evidence was of great value, as he was my manager and
acted as medical man—for the people of the Island—having studied medi-
cines, and he kept the accounts.
7th. The petition that came up 15 months after Mr. Wilson’s enquiry was
written by the schoolmaster who had been re-appointed by Government after
having been removed before, and it was not signed by all the inhabitants
of the Island, but by the very same who had complained previously of
the cruel manner I had been treated —vide letter to Mr. M‘Elhone, M.P.
and others. And lastly the letter is a fabrication and a tissue of gross misre-
presentations which have been proved by two Select Committees. When
this petition came back to Sir John, Mr. Wilkinson, the visiting magis-
trate, called upon me and was very anxious to convince me that he
especially kept away when the people were having their meeting on this
occasion.
Sir John makes remark in foot note that a gentleman told him he was
present at the meeting on the Island. This man did go down in the
schooner on that occasion, and was the person, who on a previous occasion,
wanted me to pass a voucher for him for £2O for work done. This I positively
refused as being too exorbitant, He then tried to bribe me with £5, and
stated that the Treasurer, Mr, Watson was a connection of his and could
easily get it passed—after.this I refused to pass anything for him. The
amount of wines and spirits received by the inhabitants from me was £lO
in 3£ years supplied medicinally and at same price as it cost me in Sydney.
Even these accounts have not been paid.
The petition referred to in this letter was especially kept back and never
presented to the Committee, but on Sir John referring to it in the House
he was called upon by the Chairman of Committees and others to produce
that petition. (Hansard, Dec. 20th, 1883, page 1205.) His answer is that
he will not produce it, and says (as a blind) that the petition was printed
in the Herald, where anyone can see it. Again, in this petition the people
aro made to say that their receipts could prove that they had received more
wine than I said I supplied them. How readily these supposed receipts
would have been brought forward if they had them. The fact is very few
of their accounts have been paid.


APPENDIX.
The following information relative to Captain Armstrong’s naval career
is extracted from the Royal Navy List, 1881 : —“ Retired Commanders
158—Armstrong, R.N., Midshipman, of H.M.S. Howe when she took
Queen Adelaide to Lisbon and Maderia in 1848, and was appointed aide-
de-camp to her Majesty ; saw much service in suppression of slavery on
the west coast of Africa ; was in the Vesuvius during the Crimean War -
present during the Crimean War at Sulina, mouth of the Danube, and
captured many vessels; engaged at the wreck of the Tiger, off Odessa
and on several occasions on the Danubian and Circassian coasts; signal
midshipman of the Vesuvius when engaged at the battle of Alma ; present
at the combined attacks on Sabastopol; was in command of a steamer at
Balaclava ; served with the Naval Brigade in the trenches before Sebas-
topol ; was one of the storming party on the Redan on the 18th June, and
present at the fall of Sabastopol ; engaged in the Sea of Azoff expedition,
and had charge of boats in many skirmishes at Mariapol and other ports ;
specially promoted by Lord Lyons for conspicuous zeal and gallantry;
wounded on three occasions ; Crimean and Turkish medals and clasps ;
pension for wounds Knight of the Legion of Honour ; Order of
the Medjidie ; has held the appointments of Chief Immigration officer;
commissioner and inspector of ships for years in Canterbury, New Zealand ;
was appointed Government resident at Lord Howe’s Island, South Pacific,
1878 ; has been successful in saving several lives from drowning during
his career.”
Exteact from Sydney Bulletin, Feb. 16th, 1884.
Towards the end of 1878 a small steamer “ Eva,” put into Lord Howe
Island, and a gale of wind at night drove her ashore. At daylight it was
found she was bumping heavily within a few yards of a jagged reef.
Anchors had given way, engines could not get her off, and the only boat
was not fit to launch to lay out a kedge. The islanders tried to launch a
boat from the beach, but the sea was too much for them. Then a man was
seen stripping ; he tied a thin line round his waist and plunged into the
surf. He had a hard struggle, but at last, nearly exhausted, he was
dragged on board the “ Eva.’’ A heavy line was quickly stretched from
the shore, the boat was brought out, and by its aid the little steamer event-
ually got afloat. Without the line from the shore she must have gone to
pieces. The plucky swimmer was Captain Armstrong, R.N.


On another occasion when sailing in the Government boat a sadden squall
upset her. Among the passengers were two who could not swim. Captain
Armstrong saved these two, though the boat was rolling over and over and
fast approaching a dangerous reef, and through his presence of mind saved
all the others. A number of sharks were around the boat at the time. He
was afterwards, for nearly an hour, on the bottom of the boat by himself
whilst the others were being taken ashore. On the trip of the “ Thetis ”
to the Island, in November 1882, Captain Armstrong was a passenger, and
was only allowed three days to take away his goods, consequently was
obliged to sacrifice a large quantity. On the evening of the steamers
departure, she caught fire in the main cabin, when some distance off the
Island, and had it not been for the exertions of Captain Armstrong and the
master of the vessel, (who were severly burnt), she would have been totally
destroyed—with all on board.
Printed at the Express General Printing Office, 84 Clarence Street, Sydney.


3 AP
£> \ 6 u v o
Li n Q
01370078
1508
