

JRSTI4 pPpn
Captain John IVelbe's
PROPOSALS
FOR
Establishing a Company by the name of the London
Adventurers for carrying on a Trade to (and settling
Colonies in) TP err a Australis , and Working and Improving
the Gold and Silver Mines which there abound.
HEREAS ’tis well known that there is no nation that do Trade from the South
WSeas to the East Indies but the Spaniards, whose India trade is from Aca-pulco
(on the Coast of Mexico, in the South Seas ) to the Philippine Islands in the
East Indies, which ships, in going, keep always in the North East Trade Wind ;
and in coming back they run to 40 or 45 Degrees North, to meet with a Westerly Wind, to
run them to the Eastward, for which Reason those Southern parts are not yet fully discover’d,
nor any part of them settled by any European whatsoever, they lying out of the way of all
Trading Ships.
If we look back and trace the Course of those European Ships Voyages that have
sailed round the Globe, it may be easily seen how far they were from making any Discoveries
in those Southern Parts, the Course of their Voyages not giving them any Opportunity for
so doing.
Magellanus, the Discoverer of the Sereights, called after his Name, the first that sail’d
West from the South Seas to the East Indies, sailed along the Coasts of Peru and Mexico,
till he came to California, and thence took his Departure for India, keeping in the North
East Trade Wind.
Sir Francis Drake said to be the first Commander that sail’d round the Globe ( MagelUmus
being kill’d by the Indians at Mindano Island) kept the Coast of Peru and Mexico on board,
and sail’d West for India, in the North East Trade Wind.
Sir Thomas Cavendish the same.
Captain Swann, one of the Buccaneers of America , with whom Captain Dampier sail’d
the first time round the Globe, kept in the North-East Trade Wind from California to India,
and was kill’d at Mindano, as Magella?ius was.
Captain Rogers in the Duke and Dutchess, with the Aca-pulco Ship, kept likewise in the
North-East Trade Wind.
It is here to be observ’d that from the Coast of Pent West, to the East Indies, is upwards
of 2,500 Leagues, which to the Southward of the Line is undiscover’d to any European,
(Captain Welbe excepted) who, in the course of his Voyage round the World with Captain
Dampier, in the Year 1703, 1704, 1705, and 1706, having many extraordinary Opportunities
of satisfying and informing himself what Discoveries had been made, by Order of the
Viceroys of Peru, for 150 Years past: Was thereby well assured, that the islands, named (by
the said Captain Welbe) St. George’s Islands and New Wales, and some other Islands there-
abouts, which abound with Mines of Gold and Silver, belong to no European Prince or State,
and are therefore free for the first Discoverer to take Possession of, which Mines the Under-
taker doubts not to prove, will enrich the British Nation upwards of 50,000,000 Sterling, if
taken Possession of, and Colonies settled, which is not half what the Kingdom of Peru has
produc’d to the Spaniards since their first Settlement there, under Francisco Pizaro, the
first Viceroy.
It is therefore propos’d that a Joint Stock, not exceeding 2,500,000 be raised to fit out
Ships, and settle Colonies forthwith, that the Improvement and Advantages of such Valuable
Discoveries may not be lost. And in order thereto, the said Captain Welbe is now ready to
grant Permits to such Persons who are willing to be Proprietors and Adventurers in this said
Undertaking. On Grant of which Permits, the Proprietors are to pay in is. on every Share,
viz., ioj-. for 1,000/. to enable the Undertaker to apply for, and obtain a Patent, and defray
other charges; and no more is to be paid in until at a General Meeting of, and by the
Proprietors, Directors, and Treasurers be chosen; and then no more on each Share than
what the Directors, at such Meeting, shall agree on, and find necessary for carrying on
effectually so valuable and advantagious a Trade.
N. B.— The proposer has no sinister Ends, nor Self Interest, In View, and expects no Pay,
nor any Reward, but such Part of the neat Produce of Profits, as the Directors
themselves shall think fit, and agree, to allow him.
Among the Sloan MSS. (British Museum) is an earlier proposal by Capt. Welbe to the British Govern-
ment for a full discovery of the Terra Australis. But none of his proposals or his petitions appear to have had
any result. His long-waiting, however, brought him to distress and a debtors’ prison.
[R. P. by E. A. P. 1888.]
