

3TVF p
£) o r
KD. /
Captain Matthew Flinders,
R.N.
Reprinted from the Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society
of Australasia, South Australian Branch (Vol. XIV.)




CAPTAIN MATTHEW FLINDERS, R.N.
Through the courtesy of Count Alphonse de Fleurieu,
who recently visited Adelaide, this Society has been supplied
with a copy of the reports made to the French Government
by General De Caen, who was Governor of Mauritius during
the time Captain Matthew Flinders was detained as a pri-
soner on that island.
The reports from which the information now supplied
was obtained, were translated into French from the original
papers of Captain Flinders, which Avere seized by General
De Caen, when Flinders arrived at Port Louis, Mauritius.
The French translation, now in the Municipal Library of
Caen, in France, has been copied by Madame H. L. Helonis,
and has been retranslated into English by Miss De Mole, in
Adelaide.
The greater portion of the retranslation has not pre-
viously appeared in English publications, and is of historical
interest, as it furnishes particulars of the voyage of the
schooner “Cumberland,” which does not appear in “Flin-
ders’ Voyage to Terra Australis.”
Where any portion of the within retranslation is re-
printed a reference to the fact is made in a footnote, in
order to enable the reader to refer to the original statement
published in “Flinders’ Voyage to Terra Australis,” or in
the “Historical Records of New South Wales.”
Extracts from the Journal of Captain Flinders, Commander
of the schooner the “Cumberland,” which arrived in
the north-west port of the Isle of France (Mauritius),
the 28th Frimaire, in the year XII. (1803).
June 11, 1803.—1 n the Bay of Sydney, Port Jackson*
The brig “Lady Nelson” has sailed for the River
Derwent, on the coast of Van Diemen, with the intention of
founding a settlement in Risdon Bay (near Hobart).


Captain Flinders writes to the Governor, P. G. King,
in which he gives an account of the bad state of the “In-
vestigator” after her voyage in the Gulf of Carpentaria,
and asks that for the continuation of the service on which
he is engaged the said ship should be tested by experts.
In reply to this letter, an order from the Governor, P.
G. King, to Messrs. William Scott, Commander of the ship
“The Porpoise;” E. H. Palmer, Commander of the Com-
pany’s ship “Bridge wafer; ” and Tho. Moore, shipbuilder,
to go on board the “Investigator” to make the required
inspection.
June 14.—Report of the experts’ inspection*, by which
it was decided that on the port side out of 98 planks only
11 were found to be sound, the others being completely
rotten; on the starboard, out of 89, only 9 were in good
condition. It was stated that the few sound planks were
right at the stem; those at the bow, and which must bear
most strain, are completely beyond service.
The stern, particularly the outside, is in a very bad
condition, and the sheathing on both sides so rotten that a
new lining is indispensable.
The experts, after this examination, decided unani-
mously that in no country in the world would it be worth
while repairing the “Investigator” so as to make her
thoroughly seaworthy, and that, in any case, Port Jackson
could not offer the necessary means for theso repair, t
June 15. —Captain Flinders writes again to the Gover-
nor, in which he explains to the latter that his snip being
condemned he is obliged to ask officially for another vessel
in order to continue the voyage on which he has been sent
by the Lords of the Admiralty, for the purpose of examining
the coasts of New Holland, which has been barely half sur-
veyed. He regards the “Porpoise” as the most suitable
ship to complete this voyage, in case the “Holla,” which is in
port, should not be available. He observes that for many
reasons the latter vessel would be more suitable by reason
of its size.
June 16.—The Governor, P. G. King, replied, in which
he announced that the expense which would be occasioned by
the purchase and the equipment of the “Holla” is an
obstacle to his granting him that ship, but that, having
# See Flinders' Voyage to Terra Australis—Vol. 11.. p.p. 274-5.
I The “Investigator" was subsequently cut down, refitted, and dispatched to England.
It left Sydney on 24th May. 1805, and arrived at Liverpool on 14th October the sam
year. See Historical Records N.S.W., Vol. V., p.p. 712 and 729-30.


already formed the project of sending the “Porpoise” back
to Europe, because she was getting into a bad state of repair,
he had given orders to the commander of this ship to return
to Port Jackson as soon as he has deposited on the coast of
Van Diemen the colonists that he is conveying there; then
the necessary arrangements will be made to facilitate the
continuation of the voyage of the “Investigator.”
The “Porpoise” left the same day for the River Der-
went, with the intention of forming a new settlement there.
July 6—Letter from Captain Flinders to Governor
P. G. King, in which he accepts the proposal made to him
of the “Porpoise, ’ and of a small colonial boat to serve as
tender.
The “Porpoise,” having returned, he asked that an in-
spection should be made aboard to ascertain whether in a
short time she could be put in seaworthy condition to extend
over two and a half years, which are practically necessary to
complete the voyage begun by the “Investigator” and to
return to England.
Same Day. —Order from the Governor, P. G. King,
to three experts to go aboard the “Porpoise” to make the
inspection according to Captain Flinders’ request.
July 9.—The said experts, having inspected the
“Rolla” (sic), declare that this ship, being badly in need of
repairs, cannot be made seaworthy in less than six months.
July 10. —Letter from Governor King*, in which he
informed Captain Flinders of the result of the survey of the
“Porpoise,” and proposed different means to make it pos-
sible for him to continue his voyage, such as:—
1. To wait until the “Porpoise” be repaired and re-
fitted.
2. To purchase and equip the “Rolla.”
3. To take the “Lady Nelson” and the colonial
schooner ‘ ‘ Francis. ’
4. To wait until January for the return of the
“Buffalo” from India.
5. To return to England to solicit another vessel to
complete what he has so successfully begun.
He leaves these suggestions to the consideration of Captain
Flinders, and congratulates him warmly on his zeal for
continuing the service which he has so beneficially com-
*See Flinders’ Voyage to Terra Australis—Vol. 11., p. 277.


menced, and hopes for the benefit of science and navigation
there will only be a temporary delay.
July 11. —Letter from Captain Flinders to the Gover-
nor, P. G. King :
To His Excellency P. G. King, Esq.—
I have received from your Excellency the report of the
inspection of the “Porpoise” and a resume of the different
plans to facilitate the continuation of the voyage of the
“Investigator.” I cannot sufficiently testify my gratitude
for the enthusiasm thus shown for the service on which 1 am
engaged.
May I, however, be permitted to make several observa-
tions on the different articles, contained in your Excellency’s
letter.
Whether it be a question of repairing or putting in a
condition to start the “Porpoise” or the “Holla,” or of
awaiting the return of the “Buffalo,” both suggestions
have the same drawback —that is, loss of time. As to the
first, she would later on be unfit to continue the service ac-
cording to he original plan of the voyage, owing to several
difficulties and obstacles it presents, and particularly on ac-
count of her size. The “Holla,” if she were put in sail-
ing order, would be suitable for the plan of my voyage, but
will not do. owing to the expense and tne time which would
be required to prepare her; and it is also possible that she
might be defective, and that her purchase might not be
approved of. The “Buffalo,” apart from the uncertainty
of her arrival, would require almost certainly six months
to be put in sailing order, and thus appears unsuitable for
the service of the colony; and then the inconvenience which
would necessarily result from the changing of her com-
mander into second, and of the company attached to the
ship, would in itself suffice to prevent me from thinking of
this ship.
The colony’s ships would be very suitable for the con-
tinuation of the voyage in the neighborhood of the colony,
as far as the geographical portion is concerned, but the re-
searches of the scientists who are with me would, in a
great measure, be impeded, and if we should be obliged to
procure these ships on the north coast, a great deal of
time would be spent in going to fetch provisions on the
islands opposite, so that the voyage would be dragged out to
an unreasonable duration; even then the geographical part


would be ill executed, and in the end we should lack vessels
to transport us to England.
The last article is accompanied by the same drawback—
the loss of time, but as your Excellency has kindly offered the
* ‘ Porpoise ’ ’ to transport us, there seems to be no other objec-
tion. I have taken into consideration, too, the result which
would follow if I should stay behind to explore several small
portions of the coast as far as circumstances would permit,
and if I sent home an officer charged to equip and bring
out a ship such as the Commissioners of the Admiralty
should think tit to send us; but when I consider that nm
presence may be useful, either for choosing and preparing
the ship, or with regard to the expedition, I think that more
may be lost than gained by my staying. This is why,
notwithstanding the repugnance I feel in returning to Eng-
land before fully accomplishing the object for which the
“ Investigator ’ ’ was sent out, I see the necessity of concur-
ring with the opinion of your Excellency and of preferring
the last plan.
I think it unnecessary to ask that the “Porpoise”
should be made ready with all possible speed, and that your
Excellency would be good enough to give orders to the com-
mander to effect his passage through Torres Strait, where,
if you think fit, I shall do my utmost to guide him in com-
plete safety. I think this passage is the smoothest and the
most expeditious at this season. It would furnish me with
a second opportunity to assure myself if this strait can be-
come or not a safe and general passage for ships coming
from the Pacific into the Indian Ocean.—
I have the honor to be
your Excellency’s most obedient servant,
MATTHEW FLINDERS.
July 13. — Letter from the Naturalist, Robert Brown,
and from the Artist, Ferdinand Bauer, in which these
scientists represent that their return to England would in no
wise second the purpose of the expedition, while by re-
maining in New Holland until the return of Captain Flin-
ders they would be able to continue their observations.
They proposed waiting eighteen'months, after which time
they purposed returning to England if they had received no
news.
July 17.— Reply of Captain Flinders to the preceding
letter, by which he consents to grant the request made, and


to leave these two scientists supplies for eighteen months,
while urging upon them to return by the first ship which
should offer, for England, if between now and then they
should receive no instructions on the subject.
July 19.— Letter from the Governor, P. G. King, to
Captain Flinders, in which he informs him that, in conse-
quence of the condemnation of the “Investigator,” the
“Porpoise” will be at his disposal to make his return
journey to England. He advises him at the same time
to devote himself forthwith to the dismantling of the “In-
vestigator” and to the work of fitting out the “Porpoise.”
July.— Mr. Scott resigns the command of the “Por-
poise,” and Lieutenant Fowler (formerly of the “Investiga-
tor”) is appointed to command her.
July 22.— The commander of the “Investigator,” as
well as the remainder of the officers and crew, are received
as passengers aboard this vessel. They devote themselves,
to dismantling the “Investigator” so as to fit out the “Por-
poise. ’ ’
August I.— Order of the Governor to the commander of
the “Porpoise,” requesting him to receive on board Captain
Flinders with the officers and sailors which he would desig-
nate, and enjoining him to pass through Torres Straits,
where Captain Flinders must continue his observations and
define various geographical positions. He orders him,
moreover, to take the route which the latter shall indicate
for the most prompt execution of the orders of the Loris
of the Admiralty, and to ascertain whether in passing
through Torres Strait the route to England is shortened.
Captain Flinders observes that since his last voyage
to Port Jackson the settlement has made great progress with
regard to provisions and refreshments. The first time he
had been unable to procure either oxen or sheep to refresh
his crews, and this time he finds meat as well as vegetables
at very moderate prices. He attributes these happy
changes to good administration.
August 7. — The Company’s ship “Bridgewater” and
the “Cato” having accompanied the “Porpoise” into Torres
Strait, drop anchor beside her.
August 10. — The three vessels set sail at half-past ten
in the morning.
August 18.— At half-past nine reefs were sighted. The
vessel was square-rigged; they let her go in order to tack,
but the ship, missing stays, struck on a reef, and the mizzen


came down immediately. The confusion and the waves
prevented the firing of a gun or making any other signal to
warn the other two vessels. They took different directions.
They were on the point of wearing, and the “Cato,” meet-
ing the wind, was unable to tack, consequently she grounded
a little to the north-west of the “Porpoise.” ' The “Bridge-
water” avoided the reefs by bearing to south-south-west.
After the first moments of disorder were over the large
boat and the cutter were lowered, and all looked to the
“Bridgewater” for rescue. Captain Flinders then said to
Lieutenant Fowler that he was going to take his charts and
his journals and try to get aboard the “Bridgewater” in
order to take the necessary measures to save the shipwrecked
crew as soon as possible. He soon perceived that it was
impossible to reach this vessel. He determined, in conse-
quence, to return to the place where the “Porpoise” was
lost, leaving in the boat his maps, &c. But the bar was too
strong, he could not approach it. During the night they
lit several fires, to which, according to some, the “Bridge-
water” replied, whilst others thought that it was only the
ship s lantern, which was seen till 2 o’clock in the morning.
At daybreak the boat was rowed towards the lost ship, but
the tide having receded, they could not reach her, the vessel
having been carried further on to the reef. They then
perceived that what had been mistaken for rocks was only a
bank of dry. white sand, and sufficient to hold all those who
could leave the ship, as well as the provisions which would
be taken out of her-, what added to the general delight was
that soon after the “Bridgewater” was observed approach-
ing the bank. The “Cato,” by the force of the wind, was
soon submerged and her deck broken up.
A raft had been constructed during the night to save
the crew in case the ship should break up. Everyone set to
work to take out provisions and water, which were sent on
to the sandbank, where Captain Flinders got into the boat
in order to go out to the “Bridgewater” as soon as she
should get near enough to induce the captain to drop anchor
to leeward of the reef in order to take on board all the
castaways and whatever they had managed to save, but
this vessel, being unable to approach the reef, took another
tack, and was not seen again that day.
At midday one barrel of flour, another of beef, pork,
and rice, some spirits, and a cask of water were brought
ashore at low water. The crew of the “Cato” arrived on


the sandbank in the open boat. Towards 2 o ’clock the shoal
was high and dry; everyone was employed in sending ashore
provisions, water, and various other articles, such as linen
and private belongings.
August 19. —Constructed a flagstaff on the sandbank
and hoisted a Union Jack.
"The Porpoise” being completely wrecked, Captain
Flinders renounces his condition as a passenger and takes
command of all which had escaped shipwreck. By the
evening they had brought ashore several casks of peas,
spirits, wine, and beef, besides some sheep, pigs, and poultry,
&c., as well as some sails and oars, which were used for
making tents.
On this day there was no sign of the ‘ ‘ Bridgewater. ’ ’
August 20 and 21.—Still continue to bring provisions
and water from the wreck.
On the 21st, after verifying the number of people ship-
wrecked, it is found that there are on the sandbank 94 souls,
of which three are children, and seven or eight persons so
badly injured on the rocks that they are incapable of doing
anything.
Not having sighted the “Bridgewater” for the last two
days, all hope of seeing her again is abandoned.
August 22. —The principal officers of the two ship-
wrecked vessels hold a sort of council to consider the means
of extricating everyone from the vexatious position in which
they find themselves. It is decided that they will set to
work at once to make a kind of flying bridge to one of the
largest boats, and that Captain Flinders and the commander
of the “Cato” will embark on this boat for Port Jackson,
where they will go to make arrangements with the Governor
either to procure colonial ships to bring them all back to
Port Jackson, or to freight a vessel capable of transporting
them to India, from where they will be able to take their
passage for Europe.
It is decided at the same time to construct a small
cutter, on which it is possible to embark for Port Jackson, in
ease of any accident happening to Captain Flinders, or if no
colonial ship should come to rescue the castaways.
August 23.—0 n the 23rd there are sufficient provisions
of all kinds to last three months, even supposing that full
rations are given out.


August 24.— Working with much activity on the flying
bridge of the cutter. Captain Flinders appoints Lieutenant
Fowler commander of all those shipwrecked on the sand-
bank, and gives orders that the crew of the ‘ ‘ Cato, ’ ’ having
been unable to save anything from the said vessel, shall
share with the crew of the “Porpoise” the provisions
which have been saved from the said ship.
August 26.—The cutter, named the “Hope,”* being
ready and having about three weeks’ provisions of all kinds,
Captain Flinders, with the commander of the “Cato” as
second, also an officer of the “Investigator, and 10 sailors
of the “Porpoise,” making in all fourteen men, set sail for
Port Jackson. They leave the reef at half-past eight in
the morning, and at noon they find themselves, according to
their observations, in latitude 22 deg. 11 min. 22 sec. S., and
longitude 155 deg. 3 min. E.
August 29. —Saw land to the westward five or six
leagues.
August 30. —Noon. Saw Cape Moreton.
September 9.—Sighted the Cape of Port Jackson, and
anchored in the Bay of Sydney at half-past 3 in the after-
noon.
Captain Flinders officially asks the Governor if he will
furnish one or two ships to take off the rocks the ship-
wrecked officers, sailors, and passengers of the “Porpoise.”
September 10. —They choose the “Rolla” to go and
fetch the castaways; the colonial schooner the “Francis” is
to accompany her, and it is decided that Captain Flinders
shall set out beforehand on the “Cumberland” to bring
word to the castaways that preparations are being made to
bring them assistance.
September 16. — The “Cumberland,” which was in the
River Hawkesbury, not having arrived, Captain Flinders
is to meet her in his cutter, the ‘ ‘ Hope; ” it was at the same
time decided that, after Captain Flinders had ascertained
that no one was left on the reef, he should continue his
journey to England on the “Cumberland.” They begin
putting on board this schooner full provisions for five
months.
The papers concerning the shipwreck and the measures
taken, consist of two letters, the first of which, dated the
9th of September, from Captain Flinders to the Governor,
*3ee Flinders’ Voyag-e to Terra Australis—Vol. 11., Chap. 11., p. 315.


P. Gr. King, in which he gives an account of his shipwreck
and of his return on the launch the * ‘ Hope, ’ ’ and makes the
official request for a vessel to go and fetch the others, who
w 7 ere shipwrecked.
The second, of September 17, is the reply of the Gover-
nor to Captain Flinders*.
Sydney, New South Wales,
17th September, 1803.
Sir-
in acknowledging your letter, with its enclosure, dated
the 9th inst., if I testify my regret for the misfortune which
has befallen the vessels, the “Porpoise” and the “Cato,” on
the other hand, I am thankful there are only three men lost,
of whom you make mention.
I have every reason to be assured that you and Lieute-
nant Fowler have neglected no precaution to avert this
accident, and I am equally satisfied, from your report con-
cerning the efforts made by the officers and crew after the
loss of the ships, both in saving the provisions and in main-
taining order in their present situation; and I cannot do
enough for you and those who have come with you for,
having undertaken a voyage of 700 miles in an open boat in
order to procure help for our friends who are still on the
reef; and I hope, for the honor of humanity, that, in case
the “Bridgewater” is safe, that her commander will be able
to assign some possible reason for his negligence in not ascer-
taining whether any were saved from the wreck or not,
all the more, as there is good reason to believe that he was
convinced that all had perished, f
No time has been lost in prevailing upon the master
of the “Holla,” bound to China, to take on board the
officers and sailors of the “Porpoise” and the “Investiga-
tor,” and carrying them to Canton, whither he is bound,
under conditions expressed in the agreement which
I have made with him and which you have wit-
nessed. For that purpose I have had put on
board a proportionate quantity of provisions as the com-
plete subsistence for 70 men for a period of ten weeks from
the time of leaving the reef. I shall also give Lieutenant
Fowler instructions to take command, which I have commu-
*See Historical Records of N. S. Wales, Vol. V.. p.p 222-3, and FUnder’s Voyages,
Vol. IT., p.p. 323-5.
t The “ Bridgewater” reached India safely. After leaving Bombay no tidings of the
vessel has since been heard of. See Flinders' Voyage, Vol. 11.. p.p. 307-9.


ni cated to you, and will direct him to consult with you on
the measures to be adopted for executing those instructions
as far as the situation and events may render them practic-
able.
And as you agree with me that the ‘ ‘ Cumberland, ’ ’ colo-
nial schooner, of 29 tons, built here, is tit to make the voyage
to England by way of Torres Straits, and it being essential
that you should reach England as promptly as possible with
your charts and journals, I have directed the Commissary
to hand over to you that vessel, with all its rigging, sails,
&c., &c., and to furnish her with the munitions of the “In-
vestigator,” with other articles which you may require, be-
sides a quantity of provisions sufficient for six months for
ten officers and sailors. And on your arrival at the wreck
reef, you will select such officers and sailors as you may
judge necessary. Lieutenant Fowler has my orders con-
-cerning this.
After having given every assistance to get the people and
as many provisions as possible on board the “Holla,” and
having given orders to the commander of the schooner
Francis,” according to circumstances and to bring back
those whom he has picked out as being incapable of service,
and to take as many provisions as he can. You will then
proceed to England by the route which you consider the
most suitable and advantageous for forwarding his
Majesty’s service.
On your arrival in London you will deliver my letters
to the Admiralty, and to the Principal Secretary of State for
the Colonies.
In ease any unforeseen circumstances should prevent
the accomplishment of your voyage in the “Cumberland,”
you will take such measures as may appear most conducive
to the interest and service of his Majesty, either by selling
the vessel or letting her for freight at the Gape or elsewhere,
if any merchants should undertake to send officers and
sailors capable of bringing her here. And in the event of
your being obliged to dispose of her, you will account with
his Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for the Colonies
for the proceeds.
I am, Sir, &c.,
(Signed) PHILIP GIDLEY KING.
Captain Matthew Flinders,
Commander of His Majesty’s armed ship “Cumber-
land.”


September 20.—The ‘ ‘ Cumberland, ’ ’ the ‘' Rolla, ’ ’ and
the “Francis” set sail and take their course towards the
sandbank.
September 23. — Entered Port St. Etienne (Port
Stephens).
September 24, and the Following.—Strong gales and
variable winds. The sky dark and cloudy.
October 8. —The “Rolla” perceived a sandbank to the
south-west and a sailing ship to the W.S.W., going full sail.
Sighted two boats, and soon after the flagstaff on a more
distant reef. At half-past two, passed the first sandbank
surrounded by reefs, but separated from the other bank by
a channel three miles wide. At 4 o’clock spoke one of the
boats, and soon after anchored in 15 fathoms. Replied to
the hurrahs of the shipwrecked people on the sandbank;
Captain Flinders while going ashore was saluted by the
little battery which had been established there; during his
absence of six weeks, a little cutter of about 20 tons had
been constructed and the keel of a second had been laid.
Everyone enjoyed good health; they doubted the return
of the “Hope.” All the men who were to go on the
‘ ‘ Rolla ’ ’ were taken on board, as well as a share of the pro-
visions which had been carried on to the sandbank.
October 10.—Finished loading all the provisions on
the “Rolla.” Captain Flinders leaves Mr. Denis Lacy,
formerly officer of the “Investigator,” with orders to man
the little schooner, the ‘ ‘ Resource, ’ ’ and to take her to Port
Jackson with the “Francis,” and to take as much as he
was able of what remained of the wrecks.
Captain Flinders then chose his crew for the “Cum-
berland,” which comprised eleven persons, himself in-
cluded.
Names of the persons selected: —
Matthew Flinders, Captain.
John Allen, Ist Lieutenant.
Edward Charrington, Boatswain.
John Elder, Master-at-arms.
George Elder, Master Carpenter of the “'Por-
poise.”
John Woods, Mate.
Henry Lewis.
Francis Smith.
N. Smith.
James Carter.
Jacob Gibbet. j


October 11. — The “Rolla” set sail for China.
October 12. —The “Cumberland” lost sight of the
sandbank and the reefs in lat. 15 deg. 29 min. 16 sec. south,
and long. 151 deg. 48 min. 28 sec. east. Saw a large num-
ber of gannets and other birds, which proved clearly that
there must be some fishing shoal or some inhabited island
in the neighborhood. The shoal seen by Bougainville at
eleven o ’clock in the evening, and which is marked on Eng-
lish maps by the name of Diana’s Bank, is very nearly in
the position indicated above, and about half a degree by
west, according to the Garde Teme (sic ). Captain Flin-
ders thinks it possible that all the birds belong to this shoal,
and if that is so, Mr. Bougainville’s longitude is correct.
With regard to the reefs between New South Wales
and New Caledonia, Captain Flinders advances, as a state-
ment of pure conjecture, that the much-regretted La
Perouse and his companions in misfortune may have been
lost on one of them. It was reported to him that a por-
tion of the stern of a vessel had been found on the bank
where the “Porpoise” and the “Cato” were wrecked, the
very day that all the castaways went ashore, and that this
piece of wreckage was burnt the same evening; Captain
Flinders has no reason to doubt the authenticity of the re-
port which came to him through a boatswain.
NAUTICAL OBSERVATIONS.
During the voyage of the “Porpoise,” which sailed
from Port Jackson on the 11th of August, as far as the reef
on which she was lost, the winds have often varied from
S.W. to S.S.W., to S.S.E., to S.E., and to N.E.S.E. Weather
often variable, rainy, sometimes calm, and a strong swell
coming from the south.
Generally, the strongest breezes came from the S.S.W.,
followed by squalls and rain. When the “Porpoise” was
wrecked the wind was E.S.E.
During the return of the cutter “Hope ” from the
sandbank to Port Jackson the winds changed from S.E.
to N.E. to E. S., E.N.E., and N.N.E. The weather
varied frequently on nearing Port Jackson; the winds were
W.S.W. and S. The sky often cloudy.
Since the departure of the “Cumberland” the trade
winds appear to have prevailed constantly with this varia-
tion : from S.S.E. to S.E. y 4 S., S.E., E.S.E., and E. The


weather nearly always squally, with strong* winds. The
sea rough, with a big swell.
Since the “Cumberland” has begun to sail from the
sandbank towards Timor through Torres Strait, winds from
the 5.8., E.S.E., and S.E. 14 E., have continued to prevail.
The weather squally and a heavy swell on.
October 10.—The wind was S.S.E. and S.E. 14 E.,
lat. 22 deg. S., and long. 145 deg. 59 min. 56 sec. E. Sighted
several banks of detached reefs on both sides of the ship.
Captain Flinders recognised these reefs as being the
same that had been sighted by the “Investigator” in Octo-
ber, 1802. So far as their longitude and latitude are con-
cerned, their extent southwards and westwards has not been
yet properly determined. The “Cumberland” tacked to
south to define them, but as they extended too far to the
south-east she was obliged either to take the channel or to
tack about. The channel by which the “Cumberland”
passed, is not less than half a mile wide, and it is fairly
safe, although, however, it would not be prudent to try to
pass through it with a vessel. The rollers seem rather to
break on a sandbank than on rocks. According to the
bearings made by Captain Flinders, it seemed to him that
the reefs extended at least three leagues.
October’ 22. —Entrance Into Torres Strait. —Entered
Torres Strait in Lat. 10 deg., Long. 144 deg. 2 min. east.
Sighted Pandora’s Shoal. Sounded seven fathoms
at a mile’s distance out. Seeing no shoal above water at.
2 o’clock, tacked to get a view of Murray Island before
night. Sighted the reef which runs N.E." Ci E. to E.S.E.
Sighted other reefs to the south at 4 o’clock. Sighted
Murray Island lying to W. y 2 N., tacked. Left Murray
Island distant 3 or 4 leagues.
Sighted other breakers which extend further to S.S.E.
Beefs extend on each side. The shape of these reefs is
rather curious, resembling somewhat a Wellington boot.
The inside appears to be navigable, but have not perceived
any passage for entering it.
October 23. —Foggy weather. The “Cumberland” hav-
ing passed south of the former reefs, another bank was seen
running W. to S.W. f/f S. Sighted during the day dif-
ferent little islands or sandbanks, Lat. 10 deg. 18 min. 15
sec. south, Long. 143 deg. 27 min. 3 sec. east. The “Cum-
berland” neared these reefs until sometimes the soundings


were only from to 3 fathoms. The bottom is not of
-coral, but it is very dangerous everywhere. Captain
Flinders sent ashore to obtain a few large shells or other
curiosities. From a few traces we found it appears that
these shoals are sometimes visited by the natives of the
; surrounding islands. The line of reefs much resemble
an island.
October 24. —At 2 o’clock in the afternoon, sighted
two low islands to W.N.W. At 4 o’clock sighted York
Island, high and flat, running S.W. At 7 o’clock another
small island sighted from the masthead to S. %E. An-
chored below this island.
Captain Flinders’ purpose, in taking the afternoon’s
route, was to verify different points in the charts of Cap-
tain Cook. He recognised them fairly well, but generally
•speaking the distances are too great.
October 25. —At 4 o’clock saw Gannet Island, and
hauled close to the wind because of the coral near it.
Dropped anchor at 20 minutes past 3. Sent two men
ashore to take some tortoises.
Observations taken off York Island confirm Captain
Flinders in his idea that some error has been made in the
charts of Captain Cook. According to him, York Island
is quite a long way from Gannet Island, while by Captain
Flinders’ observation, there is only 40 minutes’ difference
in longitude.
Left Torres Strait, October 26th, 5 o’clock in the
Morning.—At 5.30 in the morning weighed anchor and
sailed for Timor. It appears that this Gah net Island is
.at the end of Torres Strait.
At Noon
Lat. observed, 10 deg. 38 min.
Long., corrected, 141 deg. 38 min. E.
October 26.—At noon, fine weather, moderate breeze,
no land or reefs in sight; winds, E. *4 N., 8.N.E.,
N.E. y 4 E.
October 28. —At 2 in the morning saw land to the
W. S.; at 5 o’clock discovered two little islets. A con-
siderable archipelago in sight.
Latitude, 11 deg. 3 min.
Long., 137 deg. 3 min.


Captain Flinders wished to take observations at Cape
Arnheim to ascertain how far these islands are scattered
to the north, and to define clearly what course a ship should
take on leaving Torres Strait for Timor.
October 29. —At 1 o’clock kept close to the wind to>
define the north of an island which was seen, but unable
to reach it before night, Captain Flinders continued his
way, in order to find a passage to'the south.
At half-past five saw the two Crocodile Islands and
some reefs, rather low, which were barely covered at high
tide. Captain Flinders anchored at quarter to 7in four
and a half fathoms; bottom, sand and small stones; the
rocks of the northern island were of the same kind as those
of Cape Vanderline and of Cape Arnheim. The sound-
ing in this passage is extremely irregular, so that Captain
Flinders would not like to recommend it to any vessel un-
less she was pressed for time; the anchorage is very good
when the winds bear from the north.
Turning the south-west point a fairly large bay was.
discovered, which affords ships a good shelter from south
easterly winds, but it does not appear that, in this season,
the wind is favorable for sailing north.
October 30. —-No land or reefs sighted, winds gene-
rally from east-north-east, weather fair and breeze mode-
rate.
November 6.—Sighted high land, which we suppose
to be the Island of Moo, lying to N. y 2 W. No bottom at
82 fathoms.
November 7.— The weather fine, saw very high land..
Captain Flinders considers that this land was Timor itself,
although by the estimated distance this island was still 60 ;
miles off.
Captain Flinders judges the mountains in the centre-
of the island and to the north of the Island of Timor to>
be equal in height to the Peak of Teneriffe. They are easily
distinguished at a distance of twenty leagues.
November 11.—At half-past 4 in the evening the-
“ Cumberland” dropped anchor in the Bay of Timor in
9y 2 fathoms.
According to different observations taken by Captain
Flinders, he fixes the real longitude of the southern
point of Timor at 124 deg. 37 min.


During the four days that the “Cumberland” re-
mained in the Bay of Coupang, at Timor, Captain Flinders
took several general observations on the trade and resources,
of this island, which appears at present to be in a widely
scattered state.
November 15. —Got ready at 5 in the evening to con-
tinue the route to the Cape of Good Hope. Nothing re-
markable since sailing.
December 4. — The reflections of Captain Flinders on
the length of the passage from Timor to the Cape of
Good Hope without calling anywhere, which decided him
to put in at the Isle de France (Mauritius). Owing to
the length of the journey between Timor and the Cape of
Good Hope, and the size of the “Cumberland,” it was de-
cided at Port Jackson that he would call at Mauritius in
the course of the journey as much to take in fresh food
as for water, and that if it was recognised that the schooner
was unfit to continue her journey to England, it was pro-
bable that Mauritius would offer opportunity of freighting
the vessel for Port Jackson or of selling it to advantage.
It had been reported that ships usually avoid calling there
in the months of November and December on account of
the hurricanes. Thinking that the French who had brought
this report might be guided by interested motives, so as
to keep the inhabitants of Port Jackson from learning what
branches of trade might be established between the two
settlements, and seeing that this port meant a deviation
of not more than 200 miles out of our course to the Cape
of Good Hope, I decided to call there for the following
reasons: —
The store rooms of the schooner are in very bad con-
dition, and the schooner having become leaky it required
five hands working at the pumps from 5 to 10 minutes
an hour to keep down the water, and as the gear of the
pumps is out of order, it is to be feared that meeting heavy
gales and rough seas in the vicinity of the Cape we might
be forced to keep to sea without being able to double the
Cape.
Imperative reasons for calling at Mauritius are, first,
to repair the ship. Secondly, to procure firewood, water,
and liquors, seeing that we are on short rations since leav-
ing Timor. The third reason, and the principal one, is
the possibility of finding in Mauritius a vessel bound for
England, on board of which I might procure a faster pas-


sage than on a boat such as this, for its greatest speed is
only seven knots, and in a rough sea we are often obliged
to heave to, however favorable the wind might be. Added
to which it is impossible for me to work on board to com-
plete my maps of discovery, since it is only in the finest
weather that I can write my diary of the route; it is per-
haps likely that I may arrange for the return of this
schooner to Port Jackson, or I may be able to sell her to
advantage.
Independently of all these reasons there exist others,
not less important, such as delivering the letter from Gover-
nor King to General Magallon,* for otherwise I might be
obliged to send it back to him from the Cape.
To get information concerning the Geographe and the
Naturaliste.
To acquire knowledge of the periodical winds and
Aveather of the port, and the actual condition of the French
colony, and of the utility she and her dependencies in
Madagascar may be to Port Jackson, and to find out if
this island may not offer me resources in my future voy-
ages.
With the possibility of war breaking out shortly I
could get information on this point from this colony, espe-
cially as I have a French passport and I could avoid touch-
ing at the Cape, for which I have no passport, by taking
sufficient provisions to carry me to Saint Helena.
December 13.-—Being in sight of Rodriguez therq
were, besides Captain Flinders, two men sick with bilious
fever, which he attributed to the bad air it was impossible tq
avoid aboard in so small a ship having so many people on
board.
This is an accessory reason which makes him anxious
to reach a port. ~ ~!
December 14.—Sighted the He de France (Mauri-
tius. • <V'T : .:>3
December 15. —Moderate breeze, cloudy ; at daybreak
I saw land, the southern end of the island lying from the
south-west towards the northern part is not visible. I
kept close to windward to the north-west. I saw breakers
far off in front of us, and so worked to windward to define
* General Magallon was transferred to Bourbon prior to the arrival of Captain
Flinders, having- been superseded by General De Caen. See “Flinders Voyage to
Terra Australis.” Vol. 11, page 356.


their position; then I gradually sheered off, making straight
for the south-east and in the direction of the southern
part of the island. I saw a flag on the hill near the bay
S.W., and I hoisted ours at 11.30. A small schooner came
from the little cove and for some time headed towards us,
then she went along following the coast.
December 16.—Wind cool, weather fine. I steered
towards the schooner, supposing that it would put in at the
N.W. Port. But observing that it was going to the shore,
and that it was dropping behind us, I went as near as pos-
sible and discovered a French yacht. Seeing that she
sheered off and turned back into a small harbor in which
several small ships were riding at anchor I followed as
closely as possible after her and cast anchor in three
fathoms, where I was sheltered except from the S.W. I
sent a boat ashore, and after having seen my passport,
which I happened to have sent, an officer came on board
with a pilot.
Squalls outside the Goulet, the point of this small har-
bor : heavy clouds passing over at intervals.
At daybreak, calm; presently the pilot received some
order sent from the land.
After 10 o’clock the wind came in gusts from seaward;
for this reason it is not easy to leave this harbor.
Fresh breezes and line, but heavy clouds over the land.
On reaching this little port on the S.W. side of the
island we noticed that the crew left the schooner which
was in front of us and climbed the rugged hills in great
haste, each of them carrying something, and others were
mounting towards the summit, carrying muskets. They
refused to come to us, for otherwise I should not have
lowered a boat, wishing to set sail as soon as I could pro-
cure someone to show me the north-west port of this island.
Finally, we heard that war had been declared between
England and France, which accounted for this strange
behaviour.
I now began to consider that my passport did not ex-
tend further than aboard the “Investigator,” and I was-
dubious as to what degree the French would be indulgent
in considering its intention, rather than the literal sense
of the passport. I applied to the officer who came aboard
about procuring several casks of water, having in my own
mind the intention of weighing anchor, in fact, during the


morning in company with the other schooner, but instead
of going to the N.W. port with her, I was disposed to go
to the Cape as speedily as possible. But after some con-
versation I learnt that the Dutch were in possession of
the Cape, and as we could not go as far as St. Helena to
get provisions, or, at any rate, wood and water, I was
obliged to put a good face on the matter.
The French officer commanding this district came on
board, in company with other officers, and examined my
passport and particularly my commission, and demanded
it, in order to send it to North-West Port,* to submit it
to the Governor, but I objected to letting it leave my hands,
upon which they offered me horses to go by land and a pilot
to guide the schooner. Having found it advisable to ac-
cept one of the two alternatives, I adhered to the latter
and went ashore with the officers.
The officer second in command, and who was the first
to come on board, treated me with much politeness, but
after lunch in the afternoon I learnt that we could not
leave without permission from the commandant, whom they
were expecting; I therefore preferred to go on board, de-
claring that I would depart the next day if the matter was
not settled before then. I found the pilot on board, who
was awaiting orders to go out with us.
M. D’Unienville, major of this district of La Savanne,
spared nothing to show his hospitality, for, besides a quan-
tity of tamarinds arid bananas which he gave us, he pressed
me to dine with him, having invited several of his neigh-
bors. And then the commandant consented to my depar-
ture on the schooner as I had first desired. Our party of
friends, of ladies, and everyone generally, accompanied me
to the shore, and sent a basket of mangoes with other re-
freshments. M. D’Unienville and his wife seem indeed to
be very kind people.
December 17. —Fresh breeze and fine weather, with
gusts of rain off the land at intervals. At 4 o’clock the
commandant came on board, and as there were squalls of
wind coming from the Goulet, we weighed anchor, and at 5
o ’clock we passed the channel between the reefs and steered
past the high and rugged mountain situated on the south-
west point of the island, at 8 o’clock. We left the moun-
tain S.E. to the east, being nearly 2 miles from land, and
* Port Louis was then named North West Port.


steered closer to the wind towards the land. An American
ship steered to windward of our vessel.
Light winds, variable during the night; at daybreak
I saw the ship in North-West Port, 3 or 4 miles to wind-
ward. At 7 o’clock, we tacked, the vessels in the port re-
maining at E. 14 S.; at 9 o’clock the ship was S. 60 E., at 5
or 6 miles distance. Winds variable, the weather heavy
and cloudy. Tacked in order to get into port, keeping
near the shore towards the last because of the fresh water.
CAPTAIN FLINDERS UNDER EXAMINATION AT MAURITIUS.
Questions put to the commanding officer of an Eng-
lish schooner anchored in/ Savanna Bay, at the Isle of
Prance, on the 24th Frimaire, 12th year (the 17th Decem-
ber, 1803), who was chasing a coaster which in consequence
of the declaration of war between the French Republic and
Great Britain, wished to avoid being pursued by the said
schooner. The said English schooner arrived the next
day in the harbor of Port North-West, where she anchored
under Cartel colors. The commanding officer made a de-
claration to the officer of the health boat that his name was
Matthew Flinders, and his schooner the “Cumberland.”
Q. —What is the captain’s name?
A.—Matthew Flinders.
Q.—-From what place did the “Cumberland” sail?
A. —Prom Port Jackson.
Q. —At what time?
A.—Does not recollect, but thinks it was 20th Septem-
ber.
Q. —What is the purpose of your expedition?
A.—My only motive was to proceed to England as
soon as possible to make a report of my voyages
and to request another ship in which to continue
them.
Q —What is the reason which determined Captain
Flinders to undertake a voyage in so small a
vessel ?
A. —To avoid losing two months in proceeding by way
of China. Ships sailing from Port Jackson all
call at China.
Q. —Does not Port Jackson offer frequent opportuni-
ties for reaching Europe?


A.—There are big ships, as already stated, which call
at China, and for that reason he determined not
to proceed that way.
Q. —-At what place has the “Cumberland” put in?
A.—At Timor.
Q. —What could be the reason for her putting in at
Timor ?
A.—To take in fresh provisions and water. Left
Timor 34 days ago.
Q. —What passports or certificates were required at
that place?
A.—None.
Q. —What is your motive in coming to the Isle of
France ?
A—The want of water. The pumps are bad and the
vessel is very leaky.
Q. —To what place does Captain Flinders intend to
go from this island?
A.—Having no passport for the Dutch Government,
cannot put in at the Cape, and will therefore be
obliged to stop at St. Helena.
Q. —What is the reason for your not having your
officers, the Naturalists, and other persons em-
ployed on the Expedition?
A. —Two of the gentlemen have remained at Port Jack-
son, and will join the ship he expects to obtain in
England. The others have proceeded on to
China.
Q. —What reason induced Captain Flinders to chase
a boat when in sight of the island?
A. —Never having been at this island, he was not
acquainted with the harbor, and seeing a French
vessel chased her for the only purpose of obtaining
a pilot, and followed the vessel into the bay.
Q. —What reason had you to make the land to leeward,
the different directories pointing out the contrary
route to anchor in the harbor?
A. He says he came to windward, but the wind shift-
ing to contrary he took to leeward, and perceiving
the French vessel followed her, and anchored in
the same bay. He has no chart of the island.


Q.—Why have you hoisted cartel colors?
A.—lt is the custom since Captain Baudin came to
Port Jackson. He hoisted the colors of both
nations.
Q. —Were you informed of the war?
A.—No.
Q. —Did you meet with any ship, either at sea or in
any port you put in at?
A.—Met one ship only 6 degrees or 7 degrees to the
east of the Isle of France. Did not speak her,
though desirous of so doing, being prevented by
nightfall; met no ship at Timor.
Captain Flinders then made a general statement re-
specting the “Investigator.” He declared that after put-
ting in at Port Jackson he was obliged to abandon the
vessel owing to it being entirely decayed. The Governor
then furnished him with a ship to take him to Europe, but
he had the misfortune to get wrecked on the ease coast of
New Holland in lat. 22 deg. 11 sec. on a rock, about 700
miles from Port Jackson, and 200 miles from the coast. He
then embarked in the ship’s boat, taking with him fourteen
men, and left the remainder of his crew on a sand bank.
On this occasion he took three charts of his voyage, particu-
larly of the Gulf of Carpentaria. After 14 days’ passage
he arrived at Port Jackson, and remained there eight or
nine days. The Governor then furnished him with the
small vessel he is now in, and a ship to take the remainder
of the crew left on the sandbank. The ship not being a
Government vessel and bound for China, proceeded on her
intended voyage with officers and people which had been
left on the bank. Captain Flinders declares that of the
two boxes brought by him, one contains dispatches directed
to the Secretary of State, and the other was entrusted to
him by the commanding officer of the troops at Port Jack-
son, and that he is ignorant as to what they contain.
Captain Flinders, to demonstrate the legality of his
expedition and the veracity of what he has stated, opened
in our presence a trunk sealed by him containing the
papers having reference to his expedition, and gave us a
copy certified by him of the passport, which was delivered
to him by the First Consul and His Majesty the King of
Great Britain, also a copy of his journal since the condem-
nation of his ship, the “Investigator.”


Port North-West, Isle of France, the 26th Frimaire,
12th year of the French Republic (19th December, 1803). ’
Papers taken out of trunks and delivered to Captain
JTinders on the 17th Messidor, 12th year:—
One roll of finished charts.
One portfolio, containing miscellaneous papers, refer-
ring to the “Investigator’s” voyage, and giving particulars
for finishing the charts.
Two old log-books and two charts of preceding
voyages.
Two bundles of papers and two old manuscripts of
the “Investigator’s” expenses.
Two books of letters and opened letters relative to
the “Investigator’s” voyages.
One journal and part narrative of the “Investigator’s”
woyage.
Received the above books and papers,
(Signed) MATTW. FLINDERS.
Memorandum of papers, journals, and charts taken out
of one of Captain Matthew Flinders’ trunks:—
Four journals of the “Investigator.”
Three finished charts.
Six unfinished ditto.
Seventeen bundles of private letters.
Three books of private letters.
One journal of Captain Cook’s voyages.
Five journals of private narration.
Two rolls of printed charts, with several manuscript
charts, having no connection with the present voyage, but
having a connection with preceding voyages of English and
French navigators.
Several blank books and blank paper.
Received the above,
(Signed) MATTW. FLINDERS.
Copies of two other documents relating to papers, &c.
taken from Captain Flinders’ boxes have been received with
the foregoing statements, but as both appear in Flinders’
Voyages, Yol. 11., pp. 462-3, it is not considered necessary
to reprint them with these papers.


CAPTAIN MATTHEW FLINDERS, R.N., AT MAURITIUS
Mr. C. A. Beare (a son of the late Mr. W. L.
one of the founders of South Australia), who now resides-
at Curepipe, Mauritius, has forwarded to Mr. F. W. Giles
(hon. secretary of the South Australian branch of the
Royal Geographical Society), the following interesting
statement made by M. d’Epinay and his brother concern-
ing the detention of Captain Matthew Flinders in the Isle
of France (now Mauritius). The brothers d’Epinay were
both born in Mauritius —one in 1780 and the other in 1794
They were barristers and politicians. Both died in Paris,
the elder at the age of 46, and the younger at the age of
45. Captain Flinders, who had finished the charting and
sounding of the whole coast of Australia just previously
(including that of South Australia and Kangaroo Island),
was on his way from Sydney to England, when he put into
Port Louis, Mauritius. It has always been supposed that
he was arrested and kept a close prisoner there, and that
his plans and charts were taken from him, dispatched to
France, and there appropriated by the French geographers,
who had sailed along the southern shores of this State at
about the same time as he did. The version of the brothers
d’Epinay, which, of course, is tinged with French senti-
ment, is as follows:
STATEMENT BY MM. D’EPINAY.
Matthew Flinders arrived at Mauritius on board the
schooner Cumberland, and anchored at the bay of the Cape
at Savanneh, December 15, 1803. He had hoped to return
to Europe on board the Geographe, Commander Baudin,
whom he had met in Australia, but the Geographe had
sailed and Baudin had died a short time previously. War
had been again declared between France and England.
The Governor (General de Caen) saw a spy in Flin-
ders and kept him prisoner on parole; on the island he en-
joyed full liberty, and was there when England took it in
1810. Flinders had amongst his papers a free pass for
the Investigator, but not for the Cumberland. He had
•abandoned the Investigator, but had omitted to transfer the
pass to the Cumberland. A free pass must always bear the
name of the vessel it is intended to protect.
Flinders entered the bay of the Cape, pursuing a small
■coaster, which took refuge there. De Caen then sent the
Diligent, Captain Ruault, to bring the Cumberland to


Port N.O. (Port Louis). On examining his log-book they*
found that part of his mission was “to find out the pre-
vailing winds and tides of the port of He de France, the-
actual state of the colony, and of what use it and the de-
pendencies of Madagascar would be to Port Jackson.” De
Caen considered that the disclosing of this part of Flin-
ders’ mission was sufficient to justify him in detaining pro-
visionally Flinders as a prisoner, especially at the outset
of new hostilities.
Flinders gets angry and writes an impertinent letter
to General De Caen, the Governor. De Caen replies that
he considered himself justified in detaining him: —
1. Because England has broken through all treaties.
2. That in India the English Government has refused
to surrender the French possessions, which were
to be restored according to the clauses of the
Treaty of Amiens.
3. That the English Government has put an embargo
on the French ship, the Naturaliste, notwithstand-
ing the English free pass which she possessed.
4. Because part of Flinders ’ mission was to acquire the-
information above-mentioned.
Moreover, De Caen had referred to his Government,
who had ordered him to detain Flinders at the He de-
France. Amongst the papers found in Flinders’ posses-
sion was one mentioning that the Governor of New Holland
had decided to exclude all Frenchmen from his territory
in view of probable hostilities.
Flinders, on being asked why he entered the bay of
the cape instead of openly arriving at Port NAY. (Port
Louis), had the coolness to answer that he did not know
its position. Considering Flinders’ reputation as a navi-
gator, De Caen refused to be duped by this excuse. When
General De Caen, the Governor, received Flinders at Go-
vernment House he is in full uniform and hat in hand.
Flinders arrives with hat on and an aide-de-camp requested
him to uncover. Flinders’ letters to the Governor of the-
He de France are always written in an arrogant tone and
dated from “my prison.” Flinders is housed at the best
inn of the town, Government pays his expenses, and he has
an allowance of 15 francs (12/; French money per day.
which for those days was fully sufficient. Having cooled
down, Flinders politely claimed his books and possessions;


They are returned to him. He then expressed a desire to
live with the other English officers who are prisoners of
war. It is granted. Later on he asks to live in the
country. This favor is also granted, but only on giving
his word of honor that he will not attempt to leave the
island or change his abode without warning the authori-
ties.
No observations are made to him about his neglect of
his most sacred promises, as he travels all over the island
without permission. He is, however, kept under watch
and it is found out that at night he takes soundings off the
coast and has forwarded his notes to India. He Caen re-
mains passive. During all this time the English papers
see a victim in Flinders, and are abusing De Caen, while he
is only an agent. On the taking of the island in 1810
Flinders is freed and returns to England, where he dies
in 1814.
The year before his death he wrote a book, entitled “A
Voyage to Terra Australis During Years 1801, 1802, and
1803.” He also wrote an account of his sojourn in the He
de France and his quarrels with De Caen. There exists at
Mauritius a portrait of Flinders.
29


