

CAPTAIN FRANCIS DAY
OF BLAKISTON
19/5/43
The following record, compiled by Geo. C. Morphett after perscrutation
of the diaries of Captain and Mrs. Davison, and letters and records now
in the South Australain Archives, also the family Bible, is an amplification
of Rodney Cockburn's account, reprinted from the "Adelaide Stock and
Station Journal," in Vol. 1 of the "Pastoral Pioneers of South Australia.'
For historical purposes many names of early settlers mentioned are recorded,
also letters and dates.
Capiam i-ranas uavison, me son or John Uavi-on umas.er n.aimer)
and his wife, Jane Bentley, we glean from the family Bible, now in the
possession of his grand-daughter, Mrs. L. W. Ferres, of 37 Dutton 1 errace,
Medindie, was born on 29th November, 1799, at Scarborough, in ihe
County of York, in England. His mother died at Scarborough on 10th
December, 1803, at the age of 25 years. His father, who, from the
indenture of apprenticeship in the Archives, subsequently moved to Stockton
upon Tees, in Durham, was a son of the Davison family resident in Blakiston
Hall, in the County of Durham, for generations.
It is recorded that on 31st January, 1631, Sir William Seger, King
at Arms, granted the following arms to Sir Alexander Davison, of Blakiston:
"or a fesse wavy between six cinque foils, gules. Crest out of an Earl's
coronet or, a Dove rising argent holding in its beak a wheat stalk bladed
and eared all proper."
At an early age Francis Davison entered the Navy, and served at
the siege of St. Sebastian as a midshipman on H.M.S. "Queen Charlotte,"
being awarded 6s. Bd. prize money at the age of IZ years tor the capture
of the French ship "Suzanne." He then secured some knowledge of
mercantile law, oemg indentured to ms uncle, James bentley, Scrivener,
of London, on Ist January, 1814, for a period of seven years, Mr.
Bentley undertaking to find his apprentice sufficient "meat, drink,
apparel, lodging, and all other necessaries according to the custom of the
City of London during the said term."
On reaching his majority he was given command of one of his uncle's
ships, the "Sir William Congreve," which was wrecked in a hurricane on
the coast of Jamaica.
He then took command of the "Ceylon," in which voyages took him
extensively around the world, visiting Australia in 1833.
On 29th June, 1835, Captain Davison was married in Staindrop
Church, in the County of Durham, to Elizabeth, the third daughter of
John and Elizabeth Hawdon, who was born at Walkerfield, near Staindrop,
on 21st March, 1807, and their first son was born on 15th April, 1836,
but died three days later. Another son was born at 7 a.m. on 7th July,
1837, and baptised "James Bentley" in Staindrop Church on 7th August,
1837, by the Rev. P. Barlow. At 6 a.m. on 11th April, 1839, a third
son was born, and baptised "Francis" at the Staindrop Church by the
Vicar, the Rev. J. W. D. Merest, on 9th May, 1839.
Mrs. Davison was a sister of John and Joseph Hawdon, whose settle-
ment in Australia influenced Captain Davison to follow their example.
Joseph Hawdon arrived in New South Wales in 1834 (his brother
having preceded him by some six years), and was destined to become
notable in South Australian history as the first to overland stock to
Adelaide, where he arrived on 3rd April, 1838, with a mob of 335
cattle from their station at Howlong, on the Hume (sic Murray).


Joseph Hawdon's arrival was the occasion of great public rejoicing.
He was entertained at Government House by Governor Hindmarsh, and
tendered a public dinner on 9th June, 1838, at Shepherd's Hotel, at
which 90 gentlemen sat down,'James Hurtle Fisher occupying the chair
and John Morphett toasting "Our Sister Colonies of Australia."
We gather from a letter dated 2nd January, 1849, frqm John Hawdon
fd his sister, Mrs. Davison, that they eventually sold their Murray property.
He writes: "I have written to Gilbert to-day, and have told him that I
am desirous to part with the sheep and stations on the Murray. I have
empowered Mr. Graham, of Melbourne, to sell them, but 1 am rather
inclined to think he will not be able to get a purchaser in Melbourne. Do
you think there is a purchaser in Adelaide? I should like to get about
seven shillings each for the sheep and to give the stations, etc., in. . . .
I have not got my cattle and horses started yet for Adelaide, but hope
to get them off in a few weeks."
The success of his brothers-in-law evidently decided Captain Davison,
with his young family, to relinquish the sea in favour of pastoral adven-
ture in the new Province of South Australia, and, with some misgivings,
he. embarked with his family and retainers in the ship "Cleveland" on
24th July, 1839, under command of Captain Marley.
To aid Mrs. Davison in tending her two young sons, Tamar Barker
accompanied them as nurse, also their man-servant, John Guy, as well
as a cow, a dog, and a cat.
The "Cleveland" carried 180 emigrants and eight cabin passengers,
including Thomas Burr, afterwards to become Deputy Surveyor-General in
South Australia, after whom Mount Burr and Burr Forest, in the South-
East, are named.
After an uneventful voyage they sighted Kangaroo Island on 17th
December, and on 24th December, 1839, they all landed at Port Adelaide,
and took up their abode at Miss Bathgate's, in Rundle Street, as Mrs.
Davison notes, "the best house in Adelaide" (afterwards the York Hotel,
where Foy Gr Gibson's now stands).
Mrs. Davison was apparently not much impressed with Adelaide in
mid-summer, as she writes: "We were much disappointed in Adelaide and
the country around it appears nothing but a sand-hill. The weather was
so hot that it was almost insupportable, and not a blade of grass or anything
green except the gum trees to be seen. Provisions of all kinds very
dear, house rent enormous. We paid Miss Bathgate nine guineas per
week for our board till we could get into a four-roomed box that we
had taken at the rate of £lOO per year. . . . During the twelve weeks
we spent in Adelaide we were occupied in packing, unpacking, washing,
and sweeping the dust off ourselves, for we were either burnt with heat
or choked with dust. The children were very ill with dysentery. It is
one of the most disagreeable places I ever saw, and it was with sincere
pleasure that we all left it."
Captain Davison, after careful search during this period, had selected
land in the Mount Barker district, being Sections 4435, 4438, and 4445,
to which he later added Sections 4471 and 4430.
Cockburn quotes: "From about the first of February to the fifteenth
of March we were employed with three drays and 22 bullocks getting
our luggage on to our land, which we named "Blakiston," after the ancient
seat of our family. Mr. Joseph Hawdon had come from Port Phillip
about the first of March. I bought a heifer of Mr. John Hawdon's breed
from Mr. Reed for £l6, also 15 heifers and cows from Mr. Howe for
£189."


Two of the above drays were drawn by 12 bullocks belonging \6
Joseph Hawdon, and the other Captain Davison had bought with 10
bullocks at a cost of £l2O.
The Manning cottages, brought from England, were erected at Blakis-
ton by a carpenter at a wage of 10/- per day, plus meat, and on 16th
March, 1840, Mrs. Davison left Adelaide for her new home. She writes:
"Started at eight o'clock in the morning with a young Scotch girl, Jane
Wright, in addition to the family that came from England. We were
in a dray drawn by six bullocks, and another drawn by four to take what
remained of our goods. It was a lovely morning, and after we left the
plains the road was very romantic. The view from the first hill was
most extensive and beautiful. We went on at the rate of two miles an
hour over dreadful roads, till we reached a beautiful little valley near
the Onkaparinga, where we stayed to dine and let the bullocks rest (where
Stanley Bridge now is?). The drivers wished to remain there all night,
but although the moon had risen, we determined to push on and reach
home that night, which we did at half-past 1 1 o'clock. We had scarcely
reached home, which we call Blakiston, when the rain poured down. The
children bore this journey very well. We were all glad to get to bed. On
rising next morning I was delighted with the place. The house is
pleasantly situated on the brow of a hill looking down upon a pretty,
narrow valley and a well-wooded hill opposite. Higher up the valley
the landscape was enlivened by three tents belonging to some settlers
whose land joins ours, and near to our own house is the house we brought
out for our man. The cattle were grazing in the valley, and the air
felt so pure and invigorating that I could not think I was in the same
country with Adelaide. J. walked with Mr. D. round the section on which
our house stands, and was busy during the day in putitng the house
in order."
Surrounded by our present-day amenities, it seems wonderful how
this young English woman settled down immediately and happily to the
tasks of a pioneer woman's life and as a helpmate to her hospitable
husband in the entertainment of an almost constant stream of visitors
to meals and more often than not staying overnight. Her diary is uncom-
plainingly full of notes about her household chores, buttermaking (for
which she received up to 3/- per pound in Adelaide), candle-making,
ironing, doctoring settlers' children, dressmaking, gardening, servant
troubles, straying stock, the weather, her children, and her guests. She
even made a carpet for their sitting-room.
v Tamar Barker left Mrs. Davison when she married John Guy, and
incidentally their daughter married the late Colonel Findlater, of Naracoorre.
However, other help was available, and Mrs. Davison was often able to
secure the services of German girls from Hahndorf to do the washing.
With reference to wages. Captain Davison states that on 12th
February, 1842, "John Collins came and took his son James (a boy of
15 years) away because his wages (5/- per week and rations) were not
sufficient for him." He adds: "The emigrants are complaining they
cannot get work and are starving!"
On 21st April, 1842, he engaged two Germans to thrash his wheat
and clean it at lOd. per bushel, to be paid in wheat at 10/- per bushel,
while in July, 1845, the diary records paying four German girls sixpence
per day with rations for digging potatoes, and on 15th September, 1846,
he notes, "Engaged a little nurse girl at 2/6 per week to go to Mount
Barker by next week's mail."
The Davisons established a garden, in which are mentioned green
peas, asparagus, strawberries, turnips, potatoes, fruit trees purchased from


Mr Hack, 10 vines, 21 almond trees presented by Mr. Robert Davenport,
and the planting of "peach, plum, apple, and orange seeds." Cockburn
states that the Blakiston potatoes were "allowed to be the finest ever
seen in the Colony," and realised 22/- per cwt., while one turnip produced
weighed 31 lb. 15 oz., measuring 4 ft. in circumference. As to the
value of fruit, Captain Davison mentions paying on 3rd April, 1844 (the
day that he consigned 211 bushels of wheat to the Cape of Good Hope
per the "Symmetry") 6d. per lb. for grapes and 6/- per dozen for apples.
On Mrs. Davison's birthday, 21st March, 1840, her brother, Joseph
Hawdon, paid her a visit, and Captain Davison presented her with a
volume of "Morrison's Family Prayers."
The Blakiston house did not prove altogether weather-proof, as
on 12th April, 1840, Mrs. Davison notes: "A heavy rain during the
night. Our roof had split in several places with the heat, so that we
now had the rain pouring upon us in every direction. Had prayers after
dinner. As it got fine, went out with Mr. D. to fix where the waterhole
was to be dug, as our well is getting rather low." It is recorded that
"waterholes" (meaning dams) were dug—one 15 ft. wide, 8 ft. deep,
and 22 ft. long, for £4/10/-, and another, 23 x 9 x 17 ft., for £5.
There was delay in fencing the stockyards (the first post of which
was not put in until Bth May, 1840) because, after delivering 1,356 ft.
at 14/- per 100, the sawyers refused to complete the contract. Mrs.
Davison records on 25th March, 1840: "Mr. D., the carpenter and three
men went to bring the timber away. They took their guns with them,
and brought all that was ready." Posts and rails cost 25/- per 100,
but the splitters engaged to erect the yards at 10/- per rod complete
had a dispute with the Captain because he was able to break three rails
with his hand and foot.
In the interim there was constant trouble and loss of time from
straying stock. Mrs. Davisorr (among frequent references to straying
cattle) notes on 14th April, 1840: "Very wet and uncomfortable both
inside and out. . . . The cattle are away again; indeed, every day
they keep a man riding after them. Our English cow is the worst —she
leads them off. We have now no milk for the children. A man that
Mr. D. engaged yesterday left because it was too hard work to serve
the mason. Masters are the only people who are expected to work
nard in this Colony." (What a prophetic statement!)
This was apparently a very wet and stormy season, because on
9th June, 1840, we read: "Very wet with a dreadful wind; obliged to
fill the kitchen and parlour with the sheep that had been washed—quite
a hurricane during the night." (This must have been a very different
experience to her young life at Walkerfield!)
By the way, Captain Davison's recipe for sheepwash, according to
Cockburn, was lb. of powdered white arsenic and 4-J- lb. of soft
soap, boiled for -4- hour, or until arsenic is dissolved, in 5 gals, of water;
add this to water sufficient to dip 50 sheep. The mixture used for
scab in sheep consisted of 3 lb. of tobacco boiled in 30 quarts of old
wash, with the addition of one quart of spirits of tar, this being sufficient
for 20 sheep. Incidentally, the Captain's diary records the death of
20 sheep from dressing.
Captain Davison had purchased 570 lambs from Mr. Bonney in
March, 1840, which were shepherded by a man named Galloway, through
lack of fencing and as a protection against wild dogs. Cockburn states
that Davison's first clip of wool was sold to Mr. Waterhouse for lid.
per lb. in the grease. The next clip brought 1 Old. washed and 6d.
unwashed, while the 1842 clip only realized Bd. The diarist notes:


"Mr. Scott, who has a station near Mr. Smillie's, tried to depreciate it.
He is a Scotchman!" It is noted that the wild dogs killed 25 sheep in
one night early in December, 1840, and 40 on 28th January, 1845.
On 26th June, 1840, Captain Davison was appointed a magistrate,
and soon became busy, for on Bth July Mr. Briton came to inform him
that his tent had been cut open and a box containing all his money
and papers stolen. Captain Davison issued a warrant (his first official
act), and John Guy, who acted as constable, went with them to the
suspected person. They did not, however, consider they had sufficient
evidence for his apprehension. The box contained £4O.
On 9th August, 1840, Mr. J. W. Bull brought a person that had
stolen a goose from him. The man was committed, but made his
escape at 10 that night.
At noon on 23rd March, 1841, a fourth son was born, and baptised
"John Hawdon" at Blakiston on 6th Apr* l , 1841, by the Rev. Charles B.
Howard, Colonial Chaplain.
On Ist January, 1842, Captain Davison went to Mr. Henry Seymour's
(the founder of the Killanoola family) to meet Mr. Allan McFarlane on
an arbitration business between Mr. Seymour and Mr. J. W. Bull. The
case was adjourned and was settled on sth January, 1843, Mr. Seymour
giving Mr. Bull 12 cows and 11 calves, valued at £IOO, and £9O in
cash. Mr. Bull was to have the crop of wheat off 8i- acres, paying all
expenses thereon. Captain Davison notes: "Am glad this is settled.
Mr. Bull's claim was £963."
On 31st January, 1842, a neighbour, Mr. Monro, impounded some
cattle of Captain Davison's for trespass, and refused to release them
until damages were paid. Captain Davison placed the case before the
Magistrate's Court in Adelaide, but on 6th February, 1842, a fire
swept through the hills, threatening Mr. Monro's stock. Captain Davison
sent three of his men to help, and Mr. Monro turned the cattle out of
his stockyard, and thanked the Captain for his assistance —a satisfactory
settlement!
On 17th February, 1842, Captain Davison bought a plough from
Mr. Emmett for £B/10/-. On 26th March, 1842, Captain Davison sold
some oats for 7/- per bushel.
On 29th March, 1842, F. R. Hunt reported that he had seen the
remains of one of the Captain's calves partly burnt. Sgt. Thos. Naughton
went with Captain Davison to the place, en route searching some natives,
but they had nothing suspicious about them. At the foot of Mount
Barker they found the remains of a calf with part of the skin on the
off rump bearing the brand F. D. quite plainly. Footmarks were found,
the larger with two rows of nails nearly all round the heel. The sergeant
proceeded to search the tent of some splitters named Edward Sadler,
and John Cullen. The men were at work about one-quarter of a mile
away, but Sadler's wife said her husband bought the calf the day
before yesterday. Naughton brought the men, whose trousers and
shirts were bloody, as also an axe they were using. The sergeant also
found a sack marked XII containing the remainder of the calf. On
comparing a shoe belonging to each man with the footmarks they were
found to correspond. Sadler and Cullen were remanded on 31st March
by the Magistrate's Court in Adelaide, and found guilty by the grand
jury on 6th July, 1842, being sentenced to 10 years' transportation.
Cullen's sentence, it was thought, would be mitigated.
On Monday, 23rd January, 1843, Captain Davison's diary states:
"Hot weather, splitting slabs for an outbuilding. Whilst sitting looking
at the men a heavy branch of a gum tree fell upon me. I was taken
home on a stretcher by the men who took the branch off me, Mr, Rhodes


went immediately for Mr. Godwin. My clothes were cut off me, and I
was put to bed. The lower part of my body was quite paralysed from
the severity of the crush. I felt as if my back was broken. Inflammation
of the bowels took place. I was bled.
"Tuesday, 24th January, 1843, at 4 a.m. Mr. Rhodes started into
Adelaide for Dr. Knott, who arrived about 5 p.m. On examining me
they found three links of my back out and some of my ribs broken. I
was in dreadful pain, the inflammation was on the decrease. I was
cupped and bled.
"Wednesday, 25th, in dreadful pain. Several people called.
"Thursday, 26th, Dr. Knott came. I was put into a warm bath,
then cupped. Mr. and Mrs. Bartley and Mr. Burr called. Mrs. Bartley
staid for a fortnight. I attempted to get up at the end of a few weeks,
but was obliged to remain until the eighth week, when I got on crutches."
The fifth son, "Burton," was born at Blakiston at 6 p.m. on Sunday,
12th March, 1 843, and baptised by the Rev. C. B. Howard on 3rd May, 1843.
"Wednesday, 24th May, 1843," Captain Davison records, "I once
more begin my journal. I am gradually improving."
On 17th June, 1843, Mr. Alfred Mundy, the Governor's Private
Secretary, wrote to Captain Davison: "In writing the accompanying letter
the Governor has requested me to convey to you the pleasure he felt
at hearing that you had so far recovered from your late serious accident
as to be able to ride about your neighbourhood, and His Excellency hopes
that you may not have received any lasting injury from it. I wish to
assure you that I unite in these expressions, and was very sorry indeed
to hear of the misfortune which had befallen you. With my kind regards
to Mrs. Davison."
On 13th August, 1843, Captain Davison records that "Miss McFar-
lane came to take leave, as she is going to marry Mr. David Begg."
Captain Davison makes several references to agricultural machinery.
On 17th January, 1844, he went to Mr. D. McFarlane's to see Ridley's
reaping machine, and states that it did not seem to answer. In the
following month he accompanied Messrs. Seymour and Waterhouse to
Paterson & Lambert's to see a thrashing machine, and on 10th March,
1 845, he went with Mr. Seymour to see a thrashing machine he had pur-
chased for £3O. He records that on 14th May, 1845, Winter's thrashing
machine began to work with four horses, and thrashed about 100 bushels.
While on 11th March, 1847, he states that "Reaping machine at work
completed about 30 acres."
On 24th July, 1844, Captain Davison dined at Government House,
when there were present His Excellency and Mrs. Grey, Mr. Thomas
(the Governor's half-brother), Mr. Eyre, and the Misses Angas.
On 22nd September, 1844, Mr. F. Dutton reported that the bridge
over the Onkaparinga (near Hahndorf) had been washed away.
Captain Davison was evidently a man of many parts, for not only
had he knowledge of the Navy and the Mercantile Marine, but he was
also a sincere Christian, who almost unfailingly read prayers to his family
and guests on Sunday evenings. His diary notes on Sunday, Ist June,
1845, "I do not like travelling on a Sunday, but am obliged, the roads
being very bad." Fortunately for his consicence, he reached Blakiston
in time to conduct prayers.
His versatility is shown by the diary, where, on 17th November, 1844,
Captain Davison notes that he "vaccinated several children from Burton's
arm." It is understood that he made the original lymph from his own
calves. Moreover, Captain Davison and his good wife, as pioneer settlers,
evidently met with the esteem of successive Governors of their adopted


land, as evidenced by the invitations and correspondence quoted in this
resume. In particular, Mrs. Davison and Lady Augusta Sophia Young (an
aunt of our Miss Mabel Marryat) were on intimate terms, for in one
letter Lady Young thanked her "for the cow you have so kindly sent
me, and which I assure you is particularly valuable just now, as I have
found it impossible to procure one in the neighbourhood of Adelaide, and
dairy produce of every kind is scarce and bad in town. We have just
sent to fetch her from the Turf Hotel, and she behaved herself very
quietly." In another. Lady Young notes, "My baby is getting on as well
as I could wish, and is as good as it is possible for an infant to be."
While the following extract will interest housewives of the present day:
"I wrote to Captain Brewer on Saturday about a damsel for you, but
have not had any answer yet. I see by the papers that there are 70 still
left, and we constantly hear a very good report of them. I mentioned
that you kindly offered to take a second if there were many on hand
till she found a situation." Lady Young evidently proved a thoughtful
friend, for she later wrote: "I heard yesterday, I can hardly say with
regret, that your good friend Mrs. Bartley had been released from her
sufferings, and I write to you to say that if Mrs. Hughes can be prevailed
on to leave home for a few days for a little change, after her long and
harassing attendance in the sick room, it would give us very great pleasure
to have her here. She should be as private as she liked, and if you
would come with her, she would feel the change less. Whatever day
would suit you will be quite convenient to us, and under the circum-
stances I should think the sooner the better. Captain Davison and Mr.
Hughes are, of course, included in this arrangement if you and they
think it conducive to Mrs. Hughes' health and convenience. As I con-
clude Mr. Bartley's business will oblige him to be in town, Mrs. Hughes
would be nearer him than if she remained at Delamere, and assure her
that she need stand on no ceremony, but she shall be as exclusivly here
as at home."
On 29th March, 1844, Governor Grey and his lady, with Messrs.
O'Halloran, Henderson, and Burr, dined at Blakiston. Captain Davison
again dined at Government House on 2nd September, 1845, with the
Governor and Mrs. Grey, Mr. Thomas, Captain, Mrs., and Miss Bagot,
and Mr. Maturin.
On Thursday, 9th January, 1845, Captain and Mrs. Davison had
a daughter born to them at 30 minutes before 1 a.m. at Blakiston, who
was baptised "Jane" by the Rev. James Farrell, Colonial Chaplain, on
23rd April, 1845.
On 24th May, 1845, Captain Davison attended a dinner at Lam-
bert's Hotel of the Bench of Magistrates, at which Judge Cooper, in
the chair, presided over 27 diners, which included Hon. W. Smillie
(Advocate-General) and Mr. Torrens.
On 22nd October, 1845, the Captain went to say farewell to Governor
Grey and his lady, who were departing for New Zealand on 25th October.
On 20th February, 1846, he attended the dinner given by the colonists
to Captain Sturt.
On 16th May, 1846, the Rev. James Farrell (Colonial Chaplain)
brought Rev. J. Pollitt to Mount Barker to be introduced.
Captain Davison had previously received the followina letter from
England;
"Friar Gate, Derby,
December 1 1 th, 1 845.
"Dear Sir,"
"Allow me to introduce to you the Revd. James Pollitt, a clergy-
man just apopinted by the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel to


the Mount Barker district. I have heard a high character of him as a
private Christian and as a Minister of the Gospel, and sincerely hope
that he may be a blessing to your lovely district, in which I am persuaded
he will meet with a warm and kind reception.
"I understand he takes with him Mrs. Pollitt and four children.
"Believe me,
"Very truly yours,
"GEORGE GAWLER."
On 3rd June, 1846, Captain Davison walked with Governor Robe
over the land intended for a glebe, and on 16th June, 1846, Rev.
Pollitt conducted the first wedding in the district, marrying, in Captain
Davison's parlour, Mr. Mott to Miss Gratwick.
On 29th June, 1846, Captain Davison was busy measuring the land
given by Mr. Georgge Morphett and Mr. Stocks for a church.
On 10th July, 1846, a meeting was held at Nairne in reference
to the proposed church at Blakiston, when there were present: Rev. J.
Pollitt, Messrs. A. McFarlane, John Peter, Benjamin Gray, J. W. Bull,
Shepherdson, Goldfinch, O. Lackey (tutor to the Davison children), and
Captain Davison. This was followed on the 7th September, 1846, by a
meeting in Captain Davison's house, attended by Lieut. Dashwood, R.N.,
A. McFarlane, Rev. J. Pollitt, Thos. Seymour, John Peter, Henry Chambers,
B. Gray, Ide, Wilson, and others. The trustees appointed were Lieut.
Dashwood, A. McFarlane, Hy. Chambers, Thos. Seymour (for his father,
Henry Seymour), and Captain Davison, who agreed to be responsible
for £245 for the church, £l6O for the parsonage, and £3O for the well,
the church to be 44 ft. long by 23 ft. wide.
On 14th September, 1846, Captain Davison attended the Magistrate's
Court, when there were present Capt. Sturt, Messrs. Wigley, T. Gilbert,
Bonney, Wyatt, Hallett, D. McFarlane, and Edward Giles.
On 3rd October, 1846, the foundation stone of the Blakiston church
was laid by Mrs. Davison, saying: "In the name of the Blessed Trinity,
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, I, Elizabeth Davison, of Blakiston,
lay this first stone of St. James' Church, which shall be dedicated forever
to the honour of His Holy Name and service, this third day of October
in the year of Our Lord one thousand eight hundred and forty-six. Amen."
Each of her children put a coin, ranging from 1/- to a fourpenny piece,
underneath the stone.
On 9th November, 1846, Captain Davison dined at Government
House with Captain Webster, Ensign Roe, Messrs. Bartley and Finniss.
On 6th January, 1847, Captain Davison records being present at
the wedding of Mr. J. B. Hughes and Miss Bartley. Among the guests
he mentions Mr. Bartley, Mrs. Hutchinson, the Misses Lipson, Miss Lydia
Giles, Messrs. Herbert Hughes (brother of the bridegroom), Fred Dutton,
and Charles Haw' er. The Rev. James Farrell officiated, and afterwards
about 30 persons, including Governor Robe and Judge Cooper, sat down
to the wedding breakfast.
At 10 p.m. on Sunday, 30th January, 1847, a second daughter was
born at Blakiston, and baptised "Elizabeth Anne" on 28th April, 1847,
by the Rev. James Pollitt in the Blakiston church on the day it was
first opened.
On sth January, 1848, Governor Fredk. H. Robe wrote to Captain
Davison:
"I have succeeded in persuading the Lord Bishop to pay his first
visit to your church and to make next Sunday the occasion of that visit,
lest I should be called away from office before another Sabbath.


"Will you therefore permit me to ask your kind hospitality for him
on Saturday and Sunday nights? I know Mrs. Davison to be so staunch a
supporter of the church that she will gladly extend her usual kindness
and amiability to His Lordship. I will accompany him, and will send
up my tent and cot.
"Will you kindly make known the Bishop's intention to Mr. Pollitt
and to your neighbours generally, as many of them would no doubt wish
to be apprised of such an occasion."
On Thursday, 26th October, 1 848, Governor Young wrote to Captain
Davison:
"Availing ourselves of the obliging invitation which you were so
good as to give us. Lady Young and myself purpose being at Blakiston
on Saturday evening, and leave town for that purpose on that day
in the early part of the morning. The weather is at present very close
and sultry, and should it come on to rain our visit will be postponed to
the end of some other week, as we do not wish to lose the pleasure of
attending Blakiston church on a Sunday.
"Mrs. Short accompanies Lady Young, and I trust it will not be
inconvenient to Mrs. Davison and yourself to stand such a siege of your
house."
On Saturday, 2nd December, 1848, Governor Young wrote to Captain
Davison: "I propose being at Blakiston on Monday, and going on the
next day to the Murray. If convenient to you I shall be glad of your
company on the journey, but I beg that if from any cause it would be
inconvenient, you will not scruple to say so, in which case I shall proceed
alone."
At 9.30 p.m. on 14th October, 1849, a sixth son was born at
Blakiston, and baptised "Frederick William" by the Rev. George G. Newen-
ham in the Blakiston church on 18th November, 1849.
On 28th November, 1849, the following letter, marked "Private,"
was received by Captain Davison from Sir Henry Fox Young: "The bearer,
Mr. Thornhill, has brought me a letter of introduction and visits the Mvoun.
Barker district for the purpose of viewing a farm on which he has been
advised to purchase the existing mortgage; I shall feel obliged by any
attention or advice which it may be in your power to afford him.
"Lady Young desires her kindest regards to Mrs. Davison and your-
self, and in answer to my enquiry whether her congratulations and mine
on the birth of the sixth son should not be offered, she observes that it
is doubtful whether Mrs. Davison will think it a subject of congratulation;
which appears to me so unnatural that I must send mine to you, singly,
which I beg to do very cordially.
"Yours very truly.
"H. E. F. YOUNG.
"Stirling and S. Davenport have yesterday again written to me to
confirm the appt. of McFarlane as Chairman of the Mt. Barker Justices; to
which as yet no answer has been sent.
"H. E. F. Y."
On 7th May, 1850, His Excellency wrote to Captain Davison:
"The Yatala, en route to Kangaroo Island with Mr. Trewartha, takes
me on board on Thursday for Encounter Bay. If you are still inclined to
join me in this excursion I shall be happy of the pleasure of your company.
The Yatala (after leaving Trewartha and his miners at Kangaroo
Island) returns to Encounter Bay and brings me back to Adelaide.


"Let me know your determination by return of this messenger, yOu
had better take a bed at Government House on Wednesday, and with
Lady Young's kind regards to Mrs. Davison,
"I am,
"Yours very truly.
"H. E. F. YOUNG."
Captain Davison's third daughter was born at Blakiston at 6 a.m. on
14th March, 1852, and was baptised "Fanny Mary" in the Blakiston
church on 4th May, 1 852, by the Rev. John Fulford.
On 11th January, 1853, Captain Davison was appointed a Special
Magistrate, Commissioner of Police, and Police Magistrate, by His Excel-
lency Sir Henry Edward Fox Young, and presided over the courts at
Gumeracha, Woodside, Mount Barker, Strathalbyn, and sometimes Port
Elliot. He was Chairman of the Board of Road Commissioners for his
district, his colleagues being Robert Davenport, Edward Stirling, Lachlan
MacFarlane, and Thomas Lambert.
We learn from the following letter that the Blakiston church was
also honoured by the visit of aonther Governor;
"Govt. House,
"12th Jany. / 56.
"My dear Sir,
"It is possible that Lady Mac Donnell and myself may go to Hahndorf
to-night and visit Blakiston Church to-morrow, in the event of the weather
not proving too hot. I am therefore anxious to bespeak sitting room
either in your pew or that of the clergyman.
"As I am sending an orderly to engage rooms at the hotel I shall
desire him to take this on to Blakiston. Believe me to be most truly yours,
"RICHARD GRAVES MacDONNELL."
On account of the infirmity caused by his accident. Captain Davison
in 1851 refused to seek Parliamentary honours when the new Constitution
was granted to South Australia (vide letter 27/2/1851, Archives). He
was altogether a grand citizen and pioneer, and died deeply mourned on
the 23rd October, 1861, in his sixty-second year, his wife having pre-
deceased him on 30th October, 1856.
Among callers' names mentioned and not previously enumerated in
this resume are the following. Unfortunately in very few instances are
initials given: Rev. Austin, Messrs. Angas, Armstrong, Fred Aston, Jno.
August, J. Austin, Captain Blaxland, Messrs. C. Bagot, Bakewell, Bernard,
Borrow, Bo'wen (Tasmania), Burton, Dr. Chambers, Captain Coombs, Messrs.
Calder (surveyor), Chas. Campbell, Carter, Chaloner, Chisholm (N.S.W.),
Robt. Cock, Messrs. Disher, Donns, Downes, D. Duncan, Pelham Dutton,
Captains Elder and Evans, Messrs. Edwards, Emmett, Captain Field, Lieut.
Field, Messrs. H. Field, Chas. Flaxman, Edward Formby, A. Foster, Gill,
Gemmell, Gunn, Gwynne, E. Hack, Hagen, G. Hamilton, Jas. Hawker,
Henry Henty, Hervey, Frank Hunt, F. R. Hunt, John Hunt, James, Jick-
ling, Johnson, Pastor Kavel, Dr. Kent, Messrs. Kingston, Kirkland, Leigh,
Lillecrapp, Dr. McDougal, McArthur, McDonald, Donald McFarlane, Jno.
McLaren, Captain Martin, Messrs. Fred May, Maze (schoolmaster), Met-
calf, Mildred, T. N. Mitchell, Montefiore, Newland, F. Nixon (surveyor),
Paterson, Pearse, Penny, Peppered, Edward Peter, H. Philcox, Pinkerton'
Poole, Powlett, Prentice, Dr. Rankine, Messrs. Rhodes and Wm. Row-
lands, Captain Smythe, Messrs. Salby, Scott, Chas. Seymour, Smith, Stead,
Stein, Edward Stephens, C. Sterling, Thorpe, Fred Tuckett, Rev. Wood-
cock, Dr. Wark, Messrs. Chas. Warner, Warriner, Williams.


Following are some of Captain Davison's descendants:
Grand- Great-grand- Great-great-
Children children children grandchildren
James Bentley Davison, m. E. Denford—issue, two daughters:
Elizabeth, m. Frank Ayliffe—issue:
James —killed in last war.
William—killed in last war.
Keith, married, returned from last war—issue;
One son.
Elizabeth, m. J. Brennan—issue:
One son.
One daughter.
Ruth, m. W. Brennan—issue:
One daughter.
One son.
Alice, m. Ivan Stewart —several children, some married in N.S.W,
Francis Davison, m. (Ist) Elizabeth Hawdon, d. of John Hawdon—issue
Annie Hawdon Davison, member Pioneers' Association (S.A.).
Francis Bentley Davison, m. Mary Pol I itt —no issue.
John Hubert Hawdon Davison, m. Adelaide Buttrose—issue;
Alexander Davison, m. Mabel Bosisto—issue:
Hawdon Davison.
Vivian Davison.
Jeannette Davison.
Frank Davison, married, and lives in W.A.
Daisy Davison, m. John Fry, of Wirrega—issue:
Two daughters.
(Second wife) Emily Glen —issue:
Cuthbert Davison, killed 1914-18 War.
Roslyn Davison, m. S. Genders—issue:
David Genders.
Phoebe Genders.
Mary Patricia Genders.
Robin Genders.
John Hawdon Davison, m. Margaret Oliver (g.d. Hawdon)—issue:
Margaret, m. Col. Edward Lascelles (Eng.)—issue:
John, m. Enlisted this war—issue:
One son.
Frank, m. Killed in last war —issue;
Two sons (enlisted this war).
Edward. Returned, 1914-18 war.
Lionel. Returned, 1914-18 war.
Pansy.
Violet. > All married,
Eleanor, J


Burton Davison. Died unmarried.
Jane Davison, m. Frederick Packard (solicitor)—issue:
Marion Packard, m. L. F. Hayward—Three sons:
Theodore Franklin Hayward, A.1.F., m. Kathleen
Murray—One daughter:
Barbara Hayward.
Roland Franklin Hayward, A.1.F., m. Floris Daniel—
no issue.
Antony Franklin Hayward, m. Verna O'Dea —issue:
Joan Hayward.
Margaret Hayward.
Evelyn Packard, m. Norman Stuckey—one daughter:
Barbara Stuckey.
Cyril Packard, m. South African War, returned—issue:
Three sons.
One daughter.
Charles Packaro, m. South African War, returned—issue:
Two sons.
Two daughters.
Elizabeth Anne Davison, m. Rev. John Gower—seven children; four died
young:
Frederick Davison Gower (South African War, returned), m.
Constance Wilson (g.d. John Hawdon)—issue:
John Hawdon Gower.
Frances Gower.
Millicent Lilian Gower, m. L. W. Ferres—three children:
John Ferres (A.1.F.).
Margaret Ferfes, m. Lieut.-Col. Gordon Bleby (A.1.F.)
—one child:
Margaret Anne Bleby.
Helen Ferres—unmarried (1943).
John Lewes Davison Gower. Killed at Gallipoli.
Frederick William Davison, solicitor, m. Jane Agar—issue: Nine children.
Two sons, married in New Zealand.
One daughter, married in England to Bartlett—jssue:
One daughter. . .. *
One child. ' j
Fanny Mary Davison, m. Edwin Harris—no" issue. ; r - fV’
O.J.D. Printery, 174 Angas Street. ’Phone: C. SlOB.
Published by the Pioneers’ Association of S.A.
Verco Building, Adelaide
