

lll iwe
FIRST GOVERNOR OF
SPEECH
'S'
-SubttfD:
CAPT, ARTHUR PHILLIP, R.N,
NEW SOUTH WALES.
Mr. R, BURDETT SMITH, M.P.
One of the Commissioners appointed hi)
His Excellency the Governor in Council, to
carry out the Centennial celebrations in
.Yen' South Wales, 7888.; and Executive
Commissioner for Neiv South Wales at the (
Centennial Inter national Exhibition,
Melbourne, 1888.
H. Solomon. Caxton Printing Office. 247 George Street.




CAPT, ARTHUR PHILLIP, R.N.
FIRST GOVERNOR OF
NEW SOUTH WALES.
SPEECH
MR, R, BURDETT SMITH, M.P.
One of the Commissioners appointed by
His Excellency the Governor in Council, to
carry out the Centennial celebrations in
Mew South Wales, 1888; and Executive
Commissioner for Mew South Wales at the
Centennial International Exhibition,
Melbourne, 1888.
<SBines:
H. Solomon, C-axton Pkinting Office, 247 George Street.
p(^64L




AT the meeting of the Centennial Celebration Commission
held on Friday, 20th January 1888, Mr. R. Burdett
Smith, M.P., proposed a resolution as follows:—“That in the
opinion of the commission some special celebration should
be effected in honor of its first Governor, Captain Arthur
Phillip, R.N. That the foregoing resolution be communi-
cated by the president of this commission to the Hon. the
Colonial Secretary.”
Mr. R. Burdett Smith said : “Of the two most notable
historic characters in our annals, Cook and Phillip, we have
done something to honor the one —the Columbus of Austra-
lasia and Oceanica. Shall we ignominiously neglect the
other ? What time could be more appropriate than
during the celebration of our first centenary to do meet
justice to the memory of the other (Captain Arthur Phillip
Royal Navy), the illustrious man who, a hundred years
ago on January 26 next, unfurled the British standard on
our shores, and mainly laid the foundation of social life
under circumstances of great difficulty and perplexity,
requiring much prudence, forethought, self denial and
courage. Like Captain Cook, Governor Phillip all through
his honorable career exhibited those admirable traits of
character—intrepidity, devotedness, energy, and loyalty—
without which a great imperial undertaking might have
utterly failed, and a great statesmanlike policy be foiled,
an opening for industrial and commercial activity be closed
for years, or perhaps become a series of attenuated settle-
ments under some European or Asiatic despot! It would
be as unbecoming as it is superfluous to attempt, on an occa-
H33SS PIS
3DfeT7


sion like the present a biographical sketch of thegreatand good
man whose memory I askyou to perpetuate by some monument
worthy of hisfame and the honor of thiscountry. You are well
acquainted withthemainfactsof his career,and knowtheordeal
through which he passed before he gained the recognition and
confidence of his Sovereign and his fellow countrymen. It is a
remarkable fact that, when it was determined by the
Imperial Government, in consequence of the independence
of the North American colonies, a new settlement should be
founded in some unappropriated part of the world, and when
Captain Cook’s discoveries showed a most favorable territory
for that purpose, Arthur Phillip was chosen to command
the expedition without rivalry or dissentient public opinion.
His previous career had proved he was the man, the very
man, most likely to succeed in an undertaking in which
more brilliant but rash men would assuredly fail. The
wisdom of the national choice was confirmed within a period
of a few years ; and before he retired from the colony, which
his tact, prudence and courage had founded, he was a man
of historical distinction, not only the admiration of Great
Britain, but of the whole civilised world. How impressive
is his own narrative of the assembling of the first fleet of
eleven sail at the Mother Bank, within the Isle of Wight,
till it cast anchor in Botany Bay, and a few days later (by
his wise forethought) its sails were furled in Port Jackson.
It is the story of great hardships and vicissitudes ; but all
through it we recognise the spirit of the directing mind—
the perseverance that never lacked energy—the courage that
never quailed-—in the face of difficulties. But if we must
pause to admire the eminent qualities of head and heart
which so successfully brought the first fleet over the ocean,
wlxat shall we say of the forecast and prudence* by which
the settlement on Sydney Cove was established, and the
wisdom with which it was governed for several years 1 All


these considerations should be studied before we can realise
the lineaments—moral, intellectual and physical —of the
illustrious man whose name and fame I ask you to com-
memorate in the centenary of Australasia, for he belongs
not to this colony only, but to every member of the group.
The plan of penal government he laid down was capable
of expansion and modification, and it led by degrees
to the establishment of free institutions throughout all
Australasia. I- am well aware that the members of this
commission have formed a just estimate of the character,
career, and services of Governor Phillip. Still I cannot re-
sist the opportunity of quoting the admirable summary of
his character given by the late lamented Samuel Bennett
in his “Australian Discovery and Colonisation”: —“Arthur
Phillip was undoubtedly one of the most remarkable men
of his day, and was admirably adapted both by nature and
education for the important duties with which he was
entrusted. Kind and confiding under ordinary circum-
stances almost to a fault, where firmness and decision were
required, where a warning was needed, when duty was
neglected, deceit practised, or the public interest jeopardised,
he regarded leniency as a most culpable weakness. His
punishments were not frequent, but prompt and terrible.
With a man of his less self-reliance, less decision of charac-
ter, or less humanity, the shores of Sydney Cove would
probably have witnessed, in the first year of the existence
of the colony, more terrible scenes of vice and crime than
any which history has recorded. Under his rule public
order was never for a moment endangered, and considering
all the circumstances with which the people under his
charge were surrounded, the offences committed were few
and insignificant. He left the colony loaded with the
blessings of those over whom he had ruled, and followed by
earnest wishes for his safe return to England and speedy resto-


ration to health. The first Australian Governor in point of
time, he must also he regarded as first in point of character
and ability. The limited and remote sphere in which he
exercised his talents, his death in a short time after his re-
turn to England, and the absorbing interest which attached
at that period to the great events transpiring on the
European continent, prevented that recognition of his ser-
vices and that appreciation of his character which he cer-
tainly merited from the British Government and people,
and which, in more peaceable times and under other
circumstances, he most assuredly would have received.' 5
And, now, as to the site on which I ask you to request the
Government to authorise the erection of a monument in
every respect worthy of this distinguished man. We have
already done something to exhibit the nation's sense of
duty and gratitude in reference to Uaptain Cook. The
colony, 'pro'prio motu, in days of comparative poverty sfet up
a statue in honour of the farseeing, impartial and en-
lightened Governor Bourke. Subsequently a bronze monu-
ment of Albert the Good was erected at the principal
entrance to Hyde Park ; and now we are about to do
honour in a similar way to her Most Gracious Majesty the
Queen. Surely no niggardly spirit of political economy
will prevent us from raising some suitable memorial in
honour of our first Governor, Arthur Phillip, in the terms
of the resolution I have the honor to submit ? Let it be
placed as near as may be to that historic spot where he
first unfurled the British flag, and to which many historic
associations attach. It was this spot that inspired the
prophetic genius of Dr. Erasmus Darwin, who after read-
ing the account of the new settlement at Port Jackson,
wrote his “Visit of Hope, 55 of which I will remind you by
quoting the opening lines :


Where Sydney Cove her lucid bosoms swells,
Courts her young navies, and the storm repels,
High on the rock amid the troubled air
Hope stood sublime, and wav’d her golden hair ;
Calm’d with her rosy smile the tossing deep,
And with sweet accents charm’d the wind to sleep.
To each wild plain she stretched her snowy hand,
High-waving wood and sea-encircled strand.
“ Hear me,” she cried, “ ye rising realms ! record
Time’s opening scenes, and Truth’s unerring word.
There shall broad streets their stately walls extend,
The circus widen and the crescent bend.
There tay’d from cities o’er the cultured land
Shall bright canals and solid roads expand—
There the proud arch, colossus-like bestride,
Yon glittering streams, and bound the chafing tide ;
Embellish’d villas crown the landscape scene,
Farms wave with gold, and orchards blush between ;
There shall tall spires and dome-cap’d towers ascend,
And piers and quays their many structures blend ;
While with each breeze approaching vessels glide,
And northern treasures dance on every tide. ”
There ceas'd the nymph —tumultuous echoes roar,
And Joy's loud voice was heard from shore to shore ;
Her graceful steps descending press’d the plain ;
And Peace and Art, and Labor, joined her train.”
It would be a pleasing task, were the occasion opportune, to
point out the salient features of Governor Phillip’s admin-
istration. He was undoubtedly a strict, disciplinarian ;
but he had large human sympathies, and wished for nothing
more than the moral and material amelioration of the
miscellaneous population under his rule. With what zeal
he laboured to raise the tone of the infant society ! How
he encouraged marriage amongst the male and female exiles !
How earnestly he appealed to the Home Government to
send out, under favorable conditions, free settlers, acting
under the conviction that such a boon of Providence as this
glorious Australian territory was too great an inheritance


as possible.
to be divided “ amongst discharged soldiers, shipwrecked
seamen, and quondam exiles,” as Colonel Collins, judge
advocate, puts it. These recommendations were ultimately
acted on by the Home authorities, and in the year 1796,
eight years after the foundation of the colony, several families
of free emigrants were conveyed hither at the public expense,,
and the free emigrant settlement of Portland-Head, on the
Hawkesbury, was formed in 1802. This act of public policy
Dr. Lang deservedly lauds as one of the brightest facts re-
corded in our early history. I could add much more in
. support of my motion, but I think I have said sufficient to
inducfe members of this commission to agree unanimously to
its adoption. The memory of a man so distinguished—so
versatile in his intellectual and political attainments—so
loyal to his king and country—so true to a mighty trust—
should not be left unrecognised by Australia in celebrating
the centenary of the day and year in which he began the
great work of his life. It is needless to say that devotion
to duty seriously affected his health, and that he had to
retire from the scene of his arduous labours before he had
completed the fifth year of his firm but judicious adminis-
tration. He embarked for England on December 11, 1792,
having proved himself one of the most worthy servants that
ever held high office under the British Crown.
The motion was carried unanimously, and the Government
of Hew South Wales are taking steps to give it due effect.
Mr. R. Burdett Smith moved a similar resolution in
Parliament, which was withdrawn, as the Premier of the
Government, Sir Henry Parkes, G.C.M.G., stated that a
Statue or Memorial would be erected with as little delay




