

Captain Armstrong, R.N.,
LORD HOWE ISLAND.
» '
m bmp




To The Honourable The Legislative Council and The
Honourable The Legislative Assembly of New
South Wales, in Parliament.
The humble petition of the undersigned inhabitants, and those having located at
Lord Howe Island during Captain Armstrong’s administration, sheweth —-
That your Petitioners are the majority in number.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that on hearing of the severe
treatment which Captain Armstrong received at the hands of the Government,
we desire to press upon the attention of your Honourable House that a gross injustice
has been done that gentleman, and that the case should be reconsidered by a
competent tribunal.
In his capacity as Administrator of the affairs of this island (for nearly four
years he held the position) and as Magistrate, we bear full testimony that he
earnestly strove to check abuses, and foster neighbourly goodwill, and by example
to encourage habits of industry and sobriety. We know that he spent large sums
of his private means in introducing many plants, &c., likely to improve the island
products, and endeavoured in every way to develop its resources, and to thus set an
example to the inhabitants.
Captain Armstrong has been dismissed from his position as Magistrate for
selling wines and spirits to us without a license; the charges are most frivolous and
absurd . During the nearly four years of his stay amongst us we did not have more
than ten pounds (£lO/ worth in all given to us in exchange for produce and labour,
and then only when we required it medicinally, or of necessity, and we consider the
charge of sly grog selling made by Mr. J. Bowie Wilson as most cruel.
Before Captain Armstrong ever came to the island there were two instruments
among the inhabitants used for distilling spirits, and which Captain Armstrong
suppressed. Since he has left us (now seven months) there have been more
disturbances, complaints, and unfriendly feeling among the people than ever occurred
during the whole of his reign here.
We beg respectfully to protest against the action of the Honourable J. Bowie
Wilson, who was sent down to the island in the month of April last, to investigate
certain statements which had been made against Captain Armstrong by a few of the
islanders. Mr. Wilson not only refused to allow Captain Armstrong to cross-
examine those (nine or ten in number only) making their statements against him,
but would not permit evidence from the rest of the inhabitants to be proffered.
Neither did he take the ordinary course of having the-oath administered.
In fact, the islanders generally regard the so-called investigation as a one sided
affair, and a burlesque of justice, and that Mr. Wilson must have come down grossly
prejudiced against Captain Armstrong, or with foregone conclusion as to his verdict.
We humbly pray that your Honourable House will cause the whole case to
be reconsidered, and full justice done to a much injured gentleman, who has done
good service not only to this island but, as a Naval Officer, to the British Nation.
And your Petitioners will ever pray, &c.
(Signed, and follows signatures of nearly three-fourths of the most respectable
inhabitants, &c.)
November, 1882.


The Removal of Captain Armstrong from the Government Service.
GENERAL STATEMENT.
As bearing upon tbe recent action of the Executive Council in removing me from
the office of Resident Magistrate and Administrator of the Affairs of Lord Howe
Island, I beg to submit, for general information of the Parliament and the public,
the following statement, feeling confident that full justice will eventually be done
to me. I have resolved on taking this course as I have been quite unable to obtain
from the late Government any answer to my letters on the subject. I feel sure that
the grievous wrong done to me cannot be allowed to go unredressed, and all I ask is
a rehearing of the case. —R. R. A.
In the year 1878 I was requested by the Government to proceed to Lord Howe Island, and make
inquiries into the alleged disturbances existing there amongst the islanders and others.
On my returning to Sydney, and reporting the result of my inquiries to the Government, I was
appointed to the position of Government Representative on the island—the duties to include those of
Magistrate, Postmaster, Forest Ranger, Coroner, Registrar of Births, Deaths, and Marriages, &c., the salary
for all these offices being £3OO per annum. These duties I have endeavoured faithfully to administer; but
the difficulties of the position were greatly increased by my having no assistance whatever—no clerk, police,
lock-up, or other arrangements necessary for the enforcement of obedience to law or to salutary counsel;
and, though supplied with boats, I had at my own expense to find boats’ crews, &c., in cases of boarding
vessels, as 1 could but seldom muster the islanders together, three or four of whom only were even fit for
such work.
On my arrival at the island in 1878 I found many of the inhabitants without flour, tea, sugar-, and
other necessaries of life. I also found that some of them were in the habit of distilling a fiery spirit from
bananas and wild figs.
My first anxiety was to supply those needing them with the absolute essentials of existence, and my
subsequent action was to discourage the practice of distilling, and to promote in every way the pursuit of
those industries for which the island appeared to me to be so eminently adapted.
For several years this action resulted in increased cultivation, the improvement of the harbour, the
making of a good road from one end of the island to the other, and the general restoration of peace and
harmony among the islanders. In fact, I came to take a keen interest in the advancement of the island,
and endeavoured to show by example how its capabilities might be developed. I introduced many plants
of commercial value, cultivating them myself, and giving cuttings, seeds, and plants to such of the islanders
as I thought would do justice to them by fairly testing them. With the kind assistance rendered by my late
friend Captain Onslow, and by the Curator of the Botanic Gardens, Brisbane, I was supplied with cuttings
and plants of many varieties of vines, figs, oranges, bananas, and plants of special value, which are now in
course of trial, and some also were obtained for this purpose from the Sydney Botanic Gardens.
In all this the islanders were inclined to support me, and, though I had on occasions to assert the
authority of the law, no serious misunderstanding occurred, the general duties of my magisterial position
never being exercised in any more serious case than that of healing the ruptures occasionally occurring
amongst neighbours.
In the year 1881 a person arrived on the island to take charge of the interests and to manage the
affairs of a company which had procured, or had applied for, a license to work the deposits of phosphatic
guano abounding on Lord Howe and the adjacent islets known as the Admiralty Group. Seeing a prospect
of x-emunerative labour to the islanders, and the opportunity this was likely to afford for constant communi-
cation, giving them the means of conveying their produce to market, I encouraged in every way the action
of this company. I very soon found that the agent of the company was entering upon quite another
business, and was clearing away large patches of ground, destroying the Palms and indigenous flora quite
contrary to the rules laid down for its preservation. I had to restrain him from doing so, and on his
persisting again in clandestinely clearing land and defying my authority, I had to prevent him by threatening
him with the course of the Law, and reported him to the Government. In the meantime I had received
communication from Noumea inquiring as to this very man, who was an absconding debtor from that place,
and warning me of his general character. On his knowing that I had become possessed of this knowledge
he appears to have set zealously to work to destroy my influence, and by every form of annoyance to me
eudeavour to irritate me and bring my office into contempt. His influence was soon evidenced in the
conduct of one or two islanders whose antecedents were not very dissimilar to those of this person. It took
the form of a general objection to any representative of law and order being resident on the island, and in this
several others who had no personal objection to me supported the agitation which culminated in a petition,
actually drawn up by this man, being forwarded to the Government for my removal.
In this petition no reason whatever is given for the request, and it may be mentioned here that the
prime mover and his chief abettor in the matter have since left the island—the one being dismissed from
the service of the company he had represented, and the other on being called to account for the proceeds of
the wreck and gear of a ship he had under his command, and which were sold by him on owner’s account.
On the receipt of this petition the Government forwarded it to me for my remarks ; but, as no reason
or cause d’etre was assigned, I could offer none further than by stating briefly the character of the chief
movers in the matter.
So far this is a brief narrative of affairs up to the date of the arrival of the steamer Thetis at Lord
Howe Island, bearing Mx*. Jno. Bowie Wilson, who had been appoixxted a Comixiissioner to ixxquire into and
report to the Government as to certain charges made against me, and the following copies of documents will
show the after-course of events :


Ist, Copy of letter from the Clerk of Executive Council to myself-
Executive Council Office, Sydney, 28th March, 1882.
Sib, —I am directed to inform you that His Excellency the Governor, under the advice of the Executive Council, has
approved of your suspension from all your appointments under the Government, pending the result of an enquiry to be held
by the Honourable J. Bowie Wilson, into certain charges made against you, and generally into your official conduct, &c., &c.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
ALEX. C. BUDGE,
Clerk of the Council.
P, S. —This letter will be handed to you by the Honourable J. B. Wilson, or his secretary.
Captain Eichard E. Armstrong, E. N,,
Lord Howe Island.
To this letter I replied by intimating to the Commissioner my readiness to afford every facility
to the inquiry, in the following terms, which letter he requested me to withdraw :
Lord Howe Island, April 5, 1882.
To the Honourable J. Bowie Wilson and Gentlemen forming a Committee of Inquiry, on behalf of the Government of New
South Wales, as to the management of affairs on this Island, &c.
Sies, —I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your communication from the Government of New South Wales, and,
though the time is short on account of your arrival only yesterday, yet I am quite prepared to answer any questions, which
I believe will be satisfactory to you.
I was appointed by your Government in 1878 to make inquiry into the cause of disturbance between a Mr. Amora and
others and the inhabitants of the Island, and on my return, the Government, evidently being satisfied with the result of my
duties, appointed me as Government Eesideut, and since that period I have carried out the duties of Eesident and Police
Magistrate, Forest Banger, Postmaster, Eegistrar for Births, Deaths, and Marriages, &c., &c., which duties I believe I have
conscientiously and faithfully fulfilled. My duties have been most varied and complicated, and with a number of inhabi-
tants who have been, up to the time of my taking of duties here, quite unaccustomed to any authority. It has, therefore,
required great tact and judgment to study the characters of these people, and I am happy to state that till lately I succeeded
in establishing law, order, and sociability amongst them.
Unfortunately, last year a Mr. Ponder arrived here amongst us as agent for the Guano Company, and who I tried to
assist as much as possible, as I thought I saw a good future for the welfare of the people ; he had not, however, been long
on the island before he caused disturbances and dissension amongst the people, unhappily leading one or two of the most
turbulent spirits with him. I had to report Mr. Ponder officially for breaches of his employers’ agreement with the New
South Wales Government. All this aroused his vindictiveness, and he declared that he would do his utmost to have me
removed from the island.
On my arrival here in 1879 and undertaking the duties appointed to me, I found a number of the inhabitants without
the ordinary sufficient supply of food and clothing. I supplied them with these articles, but as they had no money where-
withal to pay I allowed them to either work it out in labour or take produce from their gardens at their own prices. In
some cases I have had to wait for over two years in getting any returns, and even now several are in my debt; and I consider
that through my assistance they are considerably improved in their respective positions. I have introduced a large quantity
of seeds and plants, at my own expense, which I consider will eventually be a profitable resource to the islanders, and
otherwise given them information and encouragement which is now tending to their benefit.
I have always held the interest of the island in my consideration, and have secured them many conveniences which
they would otherwise have been without. I have also laid out a good deal of money in developing the resources of the
island, and which they have of course indirectly derived a benefit from.
I beg to attach a brief statement of my former services, which I am satisfied will prove my abilities for holding the
present positions.
I have the honour to be, Sirs,
Your obedient servant,
EIGHD. E. AEMSTEONG.
On landing and pitching the camp, Mr. Wilson convened a general meeting of the whole of the
islanders, and explained to them that he would on a day fixed take evidence from them as to the charges
made against Captain Armstrong, but he did not wish to call upon them at their houses, from a desire that
nothing in the shape of gossip might interfere with the inquiry, which he wished to be free from all
personalities, &c., &c. Notwithstanding this, Mr. Wilson did not confine himself to this statement, as he
visited several of the houses and took down their statements and gave ear to their gossip. He also appointed
two of the islanders as special constables.
On this I was written to by the Commissioner, the constables being the bearers of the letter,
requesting me to give up possession of all the Government property lately in my possession. —R. R, A.
Lord Howe Island, 6th April, 1882.
Sir, —Messrs. John Bobbins and Campbell Stevens having this day been sworn in as Special Constables—acting under
instructions from the Government, I have to request that you will hand over to them the Government boats and other
property lately under your charge.
have the honour to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
Capt, Armstrong, &c., &c., J. BOWIE WILSON,
Lord Howe Island. Commissioner.
I replied to this in the following terms: —
Lord Howe Island, April 7, 1882.
To the Hon. J. Bowie Wilson, M.P.,
Commissioner, &c.
Dear Sir, —I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your communication of yesterday, and to state my
readiness to comply with your request. I shall this morning hand over the boats and gear to the persons authorized to
receive them ; but the other property of the Government in my charge is of so miscellaneous a nature—medicines, stationery,
and office requisites, &c,, &c,, —that I would suggest the necessity of having a suitable store-room, with adequate shelving,
&c,, got ready to receive them, if you deem it necessary to remove them.
The office table and drawers I shall be glad to retain for a time, as it is necessary for my use, while the drawers
contain all my office papers, &c.
I shall be glad therefore to get your views on these matters. May I add (and Ido so with the greatest deference to
your judgment and sense of fairness) that it seems to me unusual to manifest any want of confidence in an officer in the
absence of any definite charge, and before giving that officer an opportunity of explaining or defending any course of action
which may be deemed as unfitting him for public confidence.
I am, dear Sir, with all respect,
Yours obediently,
EICHD. E. AEMSTEONG,
Retired Commander E.N.
This letter Mr. Wilson, after perusal, requested me to withdraw, and I did so, without at all seeing
any reason for the request.


I then wrote a letter to him generally, as to the position I had held on the island, my duties, and
other details I thought necessary to bring under his notice, to which I had no reply.
On the day fixed for the inquiry, I requested permission to have the proceedings properly reported,
hut he declined to accede to the request. I then requested permission to ask the witnesses any questions
bearing on the evidence they were giving, but Mr. Wilson refused to allow me to ask a single question.
None of the witnesses were sworn, nor even cautioned as to speaking the truth. Further, I had to complain
that while every man and woman known to be personally averse to me were called to state their complaints,
not a single witness was examined who was known to be favourable to my administration, and these com-
prised the most respectable of the islanders. A complaint from some of these people has been sent in as to
the injustice of Mr. Wilson’s behaviour to them. I represented this to Mr. Wilson in a letter, to which I
had no reply.
Having obtained permission to go to Sydney in the Thetis, I awaited the issue of the Commissioner’s
Report, and was duly notified that it had been received, and could be seen at the office of the Executive
Council, and also calling on me to show cause why I should not be removed from office.
R. R. A.
Executive Council Office, Sydney, 4th May, 1882.
Sir,— Referring to the letter from this office of the 28th March, respecting your suspension from official duty pending
the result of an inquiry to be made by the Honourable J. B. Wilson into certain charges made against you and generally as
to your official conduct, I am directed to inform you that Mr. Wilson’s report having been received and considered, His
Excellency the Governor, under the advice of the Executive Council, now directs that your suspension be confirmed, and
that you be called upon to show cause why you should not be removed from the Public Service—your position as a Magis-
trate of the Colony being herein included—for selling without a license wines and spirits to the inhabitants of Lord Howe
Island.
2. I am therefore to require you to show cause accordingly within seven days from this date.
3. The report referred to will, I am to add, be open to your inspection at this office.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
EDWD. W. McKENNEY,
Richard R. Armstrong, Esq., R.N. Actg. Clerk of the Council.
The following is the Report, and my Replies thereto
Report on Charges made against Captain Armstrong, Resident Magistrate at Lord Howe Island.
Sib,— ln accordance with the instructions contained in your letter of 31st March, 1882, directing me “to proceed to
Lord Howe Island and hold a full investigation into all the complaints against Captain Armstrong, the Resident Magistrate
at that island,” I left Sydney on the forenoon of the Ist April, in the Government steamer Thetis, and anchored at the
island on the morning of Tuesday, the 4th. Shortly after anchoring the Thetis was boarded by Captain Armstrong, to whom
lat once handed your letter suspending him from all the Government Offices which he held. We landed and formed a
camp on the Island on that day, and it was fortunate that we did so, as on Wednesday a severe south-westerly gale came on,
accompanied by torrents of rain, compelling the captain of the steamer to put to sea, where he was kept for several days.
2. On Wednesday, the sth, I assembled nearly all the inhabitants, and having read to them my letter of instructions,
I explained to them the object the Government had in directing this inquiry, and also the manner in which I proposed to
conduct it; and with the view of giving them time for reflection, I appointed the following day to take evidence as to the
reasons they had for petitioning the Government to remove Captain Armstrong from his office of Resident Magistrate, but
owing to the bad weather the inquiry had to be postponed until Saturday, the Bth. On that day I examined the following
witnesses:—Harry Wilson, A. P. Mosely, Mrs. Mosely, J. Robbins, Edward King, Percy Johnston, Mrs. Johnston, Campbell
Stevens, and Charles Williams, who had all signed the petition for Captain Armstrong’s removal; but T. G. C. Nichols being
absent from the Island, and his wife having been confined the previous day, of course could not be examined, but Mrs.
Nichols sent to me by her son some documentary evidence, particularly an account of Captain Armstrong’s against her
husband, hereto attached, and marked “A”; also a letter from Captain Armstrong, addressed to herself, attached hereto,
and marked “ B.” William Nichols was confined to his bed from sickness, and Mrs. Andrews, William Brown, and Mrs.
Field, being advanced in years, I did not think it necessary to examine. The evidence of the above witnesses is hereto
attached. Captain Armstrong was present, and took notes of the evidence given,
3. The charges made against Captain Armstroug may be summarized as follows :
1. Allowing his Kanaka boys to wantonly destroy the pigs on the island, on which the inhabitants depend at times
for their subsistence.
2. The neglecting to prosecute the charge made against one of his Kanakas, named Tommy, for a criminal assault
on a girl of tender years, of which evidence is hereto attached, marked “ T.”
3. Giving undue preference in the distribution of Government work.
4. Attempting to monopolize the trade of the island.
5. The selling of intoxicating drink to the inhabitants, or in other words, illegal grog selling.
4. I may state that, in regard to these charges, I have not been guided entirely by the evidence taken, but also by
observation and general inquiries, and that at times when the evidence given would not be taken down in writing, and have
arrived at the following conclusions with regard to each charge :
1. There is strong presumptive proof of4he truth of this—although the evidence is not conclusive.
2. This charge appears to be well substantiated, for although the father of the girl has given Captain Armstroug
a letter to the effect that he was drunk at the time and did not now believe the charge, it must be borne in
mind that the writer was in Captain Armstrong’s employment and an inmate of his house, and it conveys to
me a strong impression that it is an attempt to hush the matter up. The statement of the two women who
were called in to see the girl is hereto attached.
3. I have not been able to obtain satisfactory evidence as to this charge.
4. The evidence I have been able to collect bears out this charge—namely, the attempt of Captain Armstrong to
monopolize the trade of the island; but even if this charge is too strongly put, the very fact of his opening
a store and exporting on his own account the natural products of the island, shews that he has placed
himself in direct antagonism with the inhabitants instead of having stimulated their exertions, and also
underrates his want of appreciation of the dignity and responsibility of his office as paid Resident
Magistrate.
5. This is the most serious charge—sly grog selling—and the evidence of the truth of the charge is overwhelming.
Three of Captain Armstrong’s accounts are attached hereto—namely, to Captain Nichols, John Robbins, and
H. Wilson —wherein they are severally charged for intoxicating drinks. Exhibits marked A., F., and G.
5, Having disposed of the charges made by the Petitioners, there is one matter that I cannot possibly overlook,
which is as follows :—On the petition being sent to Captain Armstrong “ for his remarks,” he returns the petition, with a
letter, in which he states “that there is no charge preferred against him,” but he also “encloses a Memo, of the characters
of said Petitioners,” and in this Memo. (82/209) he slanders and blackens the character of every individual signing the
petition. Captain’Armstrong headed this memo, “ Official, private, and confidential,” forgetting that he was not the servant
of an arbitrary despot but the paid representative of a free and enlightened Government. I have taken great pains to inves-
tigate the truth of the various statements in said “ Memo.,” and have come to the conclusion that the whole of the statements
are either gross exaggerations or absolutely untrue. Captain Armstroug, in the presence of Mr. Taylor, admitted to me that
the most serious charge in the Memo, was made on the statement of a man who he said he knew to be an unprincipled
scoundrel. He states, with regard to Captain Nicholls, that he drinks heavily when he has the opportunity, and yet Captain
Armstrong sells to this very man* 60 bottles of wine and 12 bottles of brandy, as shewn in account marked “A.” A more
unmanly attempt to stab a man in the dark, and ruin the characters of the inhabitants cannot be conceived.
♦ This man and family are nine in number, besides brother and family, and an old man of the name of Brown, who was being supplied with
wine by this man, and he required continual stimulants, being 70 years of age, and continually ailing. These supplies lasted over a long period,
and have not yet been settled for.


6. With regard to the 2nd charge against Captain Armstrong—viz., his not having taken steps to prosecute the
Kanaka for the criminal assault—see evidence herewith, and marked , I would have initiated proceedings had I not
learned that not only the father of the child but also the principal witnesses were both absent from the island, and as 12
months have elapsed, I thought it better not to do so ; but as several of the women on the island have stated they can no
longer go about the Island with the same freedom as formerly, being afraid of the Kanakas, I would recommend that one of
H. M. Ships of War be requested to call at the island, and demand Captain Armstrong’s license to hold them, and, as I am
informed he has no such license, to take the necessary steps to have them removed.*
7. After careful consideration of the whole case, I am decidedly of opinion that a Resident Magistrate is not required
at Lord Howe Island, and that the inhabitants generally do not require one ; and considering the serious nature of the
charge against Captain Armstrong, I recommend that his suspension be confirmed,
I have, &c.,
J. BOWIE WILSON, J.P.,
Commissioner.
To Clerk Executive Council.
Sib, —As I understand the Executive Council will duly consider my case this day, I shall deem it my duty to be
available should it be thought necessary to ask me for any further details as to my answers to charges made.
I have the honour to remain, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
E. E. AEMSTEONG.
In the last clause of the Report of the Commissioner upon my administration of affairs at Lord Howe Island a refer-
ence is made to some Kanakas in my service there. He suggests that a man-of-war should be commissioned to demand from
me my license for holding these men, and to remove them if necessary; but does not mention anything about a Kanaka in
the family of the complainant against my boys, although obtained under very different circumstances.
To prevent any unnecessary trouble and expense in carrying out any such suggestion, I wish, for the information of
the Government, to report that these men were duly hired by me from the French authorities in Noumea, for a term, which
expires next August.
Had the Commissioner wished for any information he could of course have obtained it on reference to myself. These
men are perfectly inoffensive, very industrious, and well behaved, and are general favourites with the islanders. During the
nearly three years they have been with me, I have never had to reprimand one of them for any offence.
Hunter Street, Sydney,
To E. W. M‘Kenny, Esq., (Care of Messrs. McDonald, Smith, and Co.),
Clerk of Executive Council. May 9, 1882.
Sir,
I have the honour to acknowledge receipt of your letter of May 4, informing me of the action taken
by the Executive Council relative to myself, and calling upon me to show cause why I should not be
removed from the Public Service.
I observe, that while in the Report submitted by the Honourable J. Bowie Wilson to the Govern-
ment, several other matters of grave importance to myself are dwelt upon (and, as I think, greatly to my
detriment), your letter mentions only the charge of “ selling wines and spirits without a license,”
I propose, therefore, to confine myself in this letter solely to answering that charge; but, as the
other matters referred to in the Commissioner’s Report must have had considerable weight with the
Government in calling upon me to show cause against my removal, I think it well in another letter for the
information of the Government, and in my own defence, to enclose my few answers to those charges, inviting
the attention of the Government to them.
SELLING WINES AND SPIRITS WITHOUT A LICENSE.
Answer. —As a matter of fact I have supplied wines and spirits on various occasions to the islanders
under the following circumstances, which I think will have due weight with the Government. The probable
total value of such during the three years would not exceed twenty pounds, of which amount about five
pounds have been paid, partly in produce and partly in labour.
Finding on my arrival at the island, more than three years ago, that several of the islanders were
distilling a rough, fiery spirit from the banana and wild figs, I remonstrated with them, and was instrumental
in checking the evil. On occasions, too, when vessels touched at the island a large portion of the
produce was bartered by some of the islanders for spirits, and but little work was done until the stock thus
procured was exhausted.
Seeing these evils, I let the inhabitants know that in cases of sickness or necessity I would be
prepared to give a little from my own private stock. This I did to remove what I thought the chief
incentive to their laying in a stock ; to cement a friendly feeling towards myself, and to gradually bring
about a better tone of feeling among the people. At first this took the form of my giving the islanders a
glass of colonial wine on their calling at my house, or a bottle of wine in case of reported necessity in their
families. This was sometimes reciprocated by a present of a bunch of bananas, or a little present of some
other produce of the island.
Anxious as I was to serve the needs of the people, I soon found that I could not afford to supply
them gratuitously, and wishing to keep in check the practice of applying for wine, and desirous of not
encouraging the spirit of pauperism, I let it be known that any supplied must be represented by such
produce as they might have for disposal, or by labour I might require at their hands. It was this which
led to the keeping an exact account of all that was supplied. The very three accounts referred to in your
Commissioner’s Report represent supplies furnished to three families suffering from illness as I judged at the
time, and as was represented to me, mainly caused by low, poor diet.
In the case of H. Wilson, he represented that himself and the family he lived with, viz., Mosely and
wife, were suffering from poorness of blood, which I thought would be removed or mitigated by a gentle
stimulant in the shape of wine ; the account of this man for wine amounts, I believe, to about One Pound
during three years, which is not yet settled.
* Several chances have occurred for the Government to get these natives off the island, but have not been taken advantage of, though I have
requested a passage for them to Sydney by the Government steamer on three different occasions. On last application to Mr. Wilkinson, he promised
to bring them up after the work of transit was finished, but however when the time came he did not bring them, and told me that he thought he
might be charged by the Noumea Government of kidnapping the men ; also that they had agreed to stop behind, and h witnessed their agreement.
This appear s to me very strange, as Mr. Bowie Wilson made great capital and fuss about the boys being on the island at all, and actually proposed
sending down a man-of-war to take them away. Before I last left the island the natives were anxious to return with me, but they have evidently
been worked upon since from Mr. W.’s statement.


In the case of Robbins, I may state that his wife had been nearly three months thoroughly prostrated
with rheumatic fever, followed by a very difficult and dangerous confinement. I enquired into the case and
at the earnest solicitations of her husband, allowed him to have the brandy, having from time to time given
him from my own stock (without charge) several bottles of wine.*
In the case of Nichols, for a long time the wife had also suffered from rheumatic fever, general
prostration, and debility, the children too (a numerous family) were weak and ill, and Nichols represented
to me that a light stimulant was absolutely necessary in their case, and informed me that he added a little
wine to their porridge, finding it very beneficial. On no occasion did I let this man get wine or spirits from
me without his representing that it was required for medical purposes. The declaration of Nichols’s son (a
young man of known integrity on the island), a copy of which is attached marked A, will fully establish
this fact. I had purposed not making use of this statement, but as the charges appeared to be so serious
without one hearing both sides, I have been advised to do so. I submit that being on the island without
medical aid or advice, and so remote from Sydney, I felt that the health of the community was practically
in my keeping. It has often been my duty to decline altogether to supply either wine or spirits, and this
in cases where I thought they would be abused.
I may here solemnly state that I have never known a solitary instance where any excess has followed
from wine or spirits supplied from my stock; neither have I been called upon or seen the necessity during
my administration to take any public action to check the use of stimulants, except in the case of the man
Nichols, whom I declined to allow to have any more nearly six months ago.
Finally, and in view of the foregoing, I may be allowed, I think, to take exception to the term “ sly
grog selling ,” as expressed in your Commissioner’s Report. Every transaction was represented in my books,
and an account sent to the parties. It would have been a simple matter, had I desired to traffic in drinks
for my own profit, to have got a license for my manager to sell; but as I had the strongest objection to the
liquor traffic being legalised on the island, did not do so. By myself supplying these matters, I was able to
exercise my discretion as to whether they were necessary, and to comply or decline as my judgment directed.
I may state that some such system is in operation on Norfolk Island, where the Magistrate has to give
special permission to the storekeeper to supply the islanders.
If on consideration of the foregoing statement the Government should still think it is a case of a
breach of the law, I submit that the extenuating circumstances are such as to suggest that it would be
wrong to brand me with disgrace of dismissal from my duties. And if the Government deem that a Resident
Magistrate is no longer required on the island, that I be reinstated, and allowed to resign at a fixed period;
and thus be saved from humiliation for having acted as I believed in the best interests of the Government
and the inhabitants, whose government was practically entrusted to me.
I have the honour to remain, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
RICHD. R. ARMSTRONG.
Hunter Street, Sydney,
(Care of Messrs. McDonald, Smith, and Co.),
May 8, 1882.
The Clerk of the Executive Council,
E. W. McKenny, Esq.
Sir,
In another letter I have dealt with the distinct charge of “ selling wines and spirits without license
to the inhabitants of Lord Howe Island.”
With your permission I beg to lay before the Executive Council my answer to the various charges
referred to in the Report of the Commissioner to the Government.
I have the honour to remain, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
RICHD. R. ARMSTRONG,
Late Lord Howe Island.
Note. —For convenience of reference I have taken the clauses as numbered and summarised in the
Commissioner’s Report, a copy of which has been furnished to me.
R. R. A.
Charge I. —“ Allowing his Kanaka boys to wantonly destroy the pigs on the island, on which the
inhabitants depended at times for their subsistence.”
Answer. —These wild pigs I was specially instructed to reduce in number, their ravages, according to
the Government Botanist’s Report, being most destructive to the indigenous flora of the island. On one
occasion a pig was found dead in the bush and it was charged on one of the black boys, who denied that he
had left it. On investigation I decided that the animal had probably been worried by some of the islanders’
dogs which for days were left lost in the mountains. These wild pigs and goats abound in thousands on the
mountains, and at certain seasons make raids on the cultivated lands, and if not kept in check will so
increase as to lay the island desolate, or at least denuded of verdure. The complainant in this case has no
cultivated lands, and therefore has no concern as to the increase of pigs and goats in the wild state.!
Charge 2. —“ The neglecting to prosecute the charge made against one of his Kanaka boys, named
Tommy, for a criminal assault on a girl of tender years, of which evidence is hereto attached, marked J.”
Answer. —This charge is utterly groundless, as on my arrival on the island, May 11, 1881 (the
alleged offence having taken place on April 11th), on hearing of the circumstance I had the evidence taken
upon the subject, and after the fullest enquiry came to the conclusion that there was no justification of the
charge, and that the whole excitement about the matter was the result of drink obtained from a steamer
during my absence. By the next outgoing opportunity I duly sent on a report to the Government on the
* The inconsistency of the Government in this respect is most absurd. J. Bowie Wilson and party took down a quantity of wines, spirits, and
ales, supplied by Government, which has been repeated on every trip to the island by the Government, and now the site of the camping ground is
strewn with empty bottles.
t Mr. Moore in his report published in 1869 calls attention to the destruction of the Flora of the island by goats and pigs, and fears that many
interesting genera have been altogether lost from this cause.


subject. As showing how unnecessary any further action was in the matter, I was strengthened in this
opinion by the evidence and written statements on the case by Mr. N. G. Thompson, one of the oldest and
most respectable residents, by Mr. T. B. Wilson, the late schoolmaster, and by that of the father of the child.
Other evidence of those present on the occasion of the alleged offence fully confirmed me in the views I had
taken of the matter.
To have held any public investigation would only have been pandering to a morbid and depraved
taste, and would have done incalculable injury to the little community.
Charge 3. —“ Giving undue preference in the distribution of Government work.”
Answer. —The complainant in this case not having the training or skill of a carpenter or shipwright,
nor the necessary tools, could not have executed the work referred to. On my speaking to him of this, he
replied that I ought at least to have “paid him the compliment” of asking him (vide evidence of C.
Stevens).
Charge J. —“ Attempting to monopolise the trade of the Island.”
Answer. —Finding that at times the islanders were in great straits as to the supply of flour, sugar,
tea, and other necessaries of life, I, at their earnest solicitations, got down a small supply ; there being no
other store on the island or opportunity of getting supplies, other than by a chance vessel. I have
frequently given some of these stores, &c., to islanders unable to pay for them, and such as I sold I have
not been paid for, or had to take out the amount in such produce as they have liked to spare. So far from
selling produce to ships, I have always sent what little produce I had from my ground in a regular way to
the Sydney or other markets.
The land which I hold on this island was leased to me by the Government for the purpose of
working fibre, growing coffee, &c., and I consider that through my energy and outlay of capital I have
given a great impetus to the rest of the islanders, and shown them that if their cultivations are kept up
with spirit that there is a great future for them in disposing of their produce, &c. Further, on clearing
the land for culture I had a perfect right to dispose of the natural products of the same, which otherwise
would have been wasted.
Charge s. —“ Making a damaging statement to the Government as to the character of some of the
islanders.”
Answer. —A copy of the petition for my removal having been sent to me by the Government for my
remarks thereon, and there being no charges whatever set out in the petition, I thought the most pertinent
remarks I could offer was to show the characters of some of the islanders I had to deal with, but deemed it
advisable to head the communication “ Private, official, and confidential; ” the real object of those who
were leading the movement against myself was to get rid altogether of magisterial adjudication or control—
this is manifest from their conduct all through the agitation.
I have endeavoured to keep as closely as possible to the text of charges referred to in the Commis-
sioner’s Report, and have not dealt with other clauses of the evidence taken by him at the islands, none
of which was sworn to by the various parties giving it, nor was I allowed to ask a single question of any
of the witnesses, or even to call evidence on my own behalf.
In conclusion,
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
RICHD. R. ARMSTRONG.
Executive Council Office,
Sydney, 31st May, 1882.
Sir, — Referring to former correspondence on the subject of charges made against you, which formed the subject of
Inquiry and Report by a Special Commission ; and to a communication from this office, dated the 4th inst., calling upon
you to show cause why you should not be removed from the public service, for selling without license, wines and spirits to
certain of the inhabitants of Lord Howe Island. I am now directed to inform you, that after careful consideration of the
said charge of selling wines and spirits without a license, and of the explanation you have offered, His Excellency the
Governor, under the advice of the Executive Council, has approved of your removal from the Public Service, as you have
failed to disprove the charges alluded to.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
ALEX. C. BUDGE,
Clerk of the Council.
Richard R. Armstrong, Esq., R.N.,
Sydney.
It but remains for me to add my conviction that all through this inquiry the Commissioner has
shown himself utterly unable to exercise judicial functions. His not permitting me to have a reporter
present to take notes of evidence; his neglecting to take such evidence on oath or with the customary
admonition to witnesses as to their speaking the truth; his not permitting me to ask a single question of
the witnesses; his not calling on the well-known and most respected settlers who were present to give
evidence as to their experience of my administration, and his general bearing towards me display an animus
and foregone conclusion in his mind against myself, which I consider unfit him to act in any other capacity
than an advocate in the interest of the few disaffected spirits who have caused the whole disturbance. His
report displays a bias throughout which is most damaging to me, and only explainable on the ground of his
inexperience of magisterial inquiries, he having admitted that, though a Justice of the Peace for many
years, this is the first case he has sat upon.
His reference in his report to the Kanakas employed by me, and his suggestion that the Govern-
ment should send a man-of-war to the island to demand my license to hold such labour, fully bears out my
view as to animus. At the very time he penned his report he knew I was in Sydney, and prepared on
request, to answer any question the Government might make, without their being put to the expense of
“ sending down a man-of-war to Lord Howe.” But his mention of the subject in his report enabled me to
furnish the Government with all information as regards the Kanaka men engaged by m« from the French
authorities at Noumea,
Finally, I am convinced that the whole action of the Commissioner will tend to the great injury of
the true interests of the inhabitants of the island. The very two men he appointed as special constables


were within three days of their appointment guilty of breaking open the school-house and had to be reported
for the offence, and since my absence from the island I have reliable reports that a general raid has been
made on the indigenous plants and seeds, which have been extensively collected and sent away by two
vessels visiting the island since my departure.
In view of the decision of the Government to dispense altogether with the services of a Resident
Magistrate, I have no hesitation in saying that in the absence of any representative of law and order, great
trouble is in store for the little community. The proposal to send down a Stipendiary Magistrate occa-
sionally will, if carried out, cost fully two thousand pounds per annum, as a special steamer will be requisite
to convey him to and from the island.
While acting there I have frequently had to use great tact and friendly counsel in healing breaches
between neighbours, which, if left unhealed, would have developed into very ugly and dangerous
complications.
The Government have from time to time had my reports on cases of any serious nature, such as
inquests, &c. ; but the numberless cases in which my intervention was solicited were frequently too trivial
to report officially.
I cannot but complain that the one-sided judgment of the Commissioner should be allowed to damage
and blight my prospects in a country which I had adopted as my home, and that my past services to the
nation —of which I attach a brief account—should be reckoned as nought in such an inquiry.
R. R. ARMSTRONG, R.N.
P.S.—The Commissioner has omitted, or FORGOTTEN to state that of the
whole community of nearly Sixty, only NINE PERSONS were called
upon for evidence as having signed the Petition, Of these, FOUR
DISTINCTLY REPUDIATED having any knowledge of the nature of
the Document to which they ATTACHED THEIR NAMES OR MARKS,
none of which were attested, and the other names were filled up and
signed by the man Nichols, who has always given much trouble on
the island.—R. R. A.
LIST OF SEEDS AND PLANTS IMPORTED BY CAPTAIN ARMSTRONG.
Ivory nut tree, candle nut tree, tapioca, arrowroot, Fiji; three different kinds coffee, pea nuts and calavancies, tea, sorghum,
pine apples, vanilla, taro, hops, different kinds of maize, date tree, sugar cane, wheat, oats, wine palm, and plants for
making beer hitter, four different kinds of bananas, prairie grass, two different kinds of plantains, Peruvian and Turkey
maize, different kinds of pigeons, key apple, Punjaub and silkworm mulberry, indigo, Eve trees, herbs of all kinds ;
tomatoes, breadfruit, W. I. arrowroot, sweet maize, different kinds sweet potatoes, white and black pepper, willows, bamboos,
ten different kinds of other plants, blue, red, peppermint, and other gums; navel, and bitter orange; peas, beans, &c.;
limes, granadilla, strawberry, melons, cherimoyer—Norfolk Island pine, mango, ginger, Chinese cucumbers, numerous
flower seeds ; apples, pears, currants, plums, and peaches, apricot, nectarine, prune, vines ; different kinds of onions, four
different pumpkins, and vegetables of all kinds ; tobacco three kinds, red and white cedar, rami, eight different kinds of
potatoes, yams, beet, castor oil; angora goat, sheep, well-bred cow, land rail ; oysters two kinds, grasses and clover, vegetables
of all kinds ; different kinds of plants from India, China, Brisbane, and New Hebrides. Sent fish, seeds, shells, birds,
&0., to Museum ; plants, palms, shells, fish, &c., &0., to Colonial Secretary, Treasurer, Under-Secretary, Governor, and
other high officials.
Secured islanders boats and moorings, surveyed harbour, inside and outside reefs, cleared away hundred tons of
rocks in passage, &c., at my own expense. No credit or allowance was made by Government for my outlay, <fec. Cleared
a road from north to south.
Re LORD HOWE ISLAND.
Although the actual charge made by the Government against me was the sale of wines and spirits to the
inhabitants, there were many other matters incidentally alluded to, but in such an intangible way that I
could offer no effective x’eply. Among these is a charge made by Mr. C. Moore, of the Sydney Botanical
Gardens, that I had failed to send him seeds and plants to the value of £3o—the sum he had paid to me
on behalf of himself and Mr. Shepherd. This charge I now learn has had much influence with the
Government in taking the coui’se it has, and I have decided on publishing the accompanying statement.
I need scai’cely say that I have a copy of original accounts sent in. Unfortunately, the originals
are reported in the Government papers as missing. Further, there is a great discrepancy between the
statement of Mr. Moore and that of the official of the Gai’dens whose duty it is to accept delivexy of such
things. I also wish to bring to notice a statement, drawn up by Mr. Moore, to which Ed. King (his
collector) attached his mark, and which King afterwards acknowledged before a notary public in Sydney to
be false.
My attention has also been called as to the statements I made respecting the characters of the persons
who were supposed to have signed the petition for my removal. It must be noticed that I made this
statement under the heading of “Private, official, and confidential,” with the express purpose of shewing
the kind of characters I had to deal with, and at the same time avoiding unnecessary publicity. I
considered, and still consider, it was my duty to do this, as one magistrate of a district should do with a
magistrate of any other district to which he finds that a troublesome character has migrated.
Objections have also been made in respect to my letter to a Mrs Nichols, in advising her to get
someone to write and dictate for her, &c., in order that her correspondence (with advice) would be more
moderate. My explanation is that I was continually receiving most insulting and defiant letter's from her,
which were unfit for publication, but which I had to notice as correspondence with my department.
A statement sworn to by her eldest son before a magistrate, here in Sydney, will, on perusal, satisfy
anyone the awkward position I was in, and the characters I had to deal with.
As to the prices quoted in the accompanying accounts, they are quotations I have in my possession,
or are those ruling in Sydney.
RICHARD R. ARMSTRONG.


ATE VALUE OF »E
From Lord
eds and Plant
Howe Island.
S IN
Charges made by
Captain Armstrong.
Sydney Value
per Bushel.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
1 bushel ..
1
10
0
@
£3 ..
3
0
0
24 plants ..
0
12
6
@
2s. ..
2
8
0
4 bushels ..
6
0
0
12
0
0
6 P. Cones..
1
10
0
@
10s. ..
3
0
0
15 plants
0
7
6
@
2s. 6d.
1
17
6
60 plants ..
1
10
0
4 bushels ..
6
0
0
@
60s. ..
12
0
0
. 2 bushels ..
4
0
0
@
80s. ..
8
0
0
36 plants ..
0
18
0
@
2s, 6d.
4
10
0
14 bushel ..
2
5
0
4
10
0
70 plants
1
15
0
&
2s. 6d.
8
15
0
Say 1 bushel
1
10
0
3
0
0
1
0
0
3
0
0
I
0
0
I
0
0
380 plants ..
9
10
0
47
10
0
5
5
0
10
10
0
• • • •
1
2
0
, ,
3
0
0
..
6
0
0
30
0
0
£52
Or. by Contra
from Messrs.
Moore, Shep-
herd, Co. £30
4
0
6
0
£155
0
6
Table showing Estimate Value of Seeds and Plants in Sydney and England,
Nov. —1 bushel Palm Seeds
~ 2 doz. Fern Plants, at 6d. ..
Deo. 28.—3 bags Palm Seeds, at 305...
~ 6 Pandanus Cones, at ss. ..
~ 2 Hermatelia Morel..
~ 15 Pandanus Plants, at 6d. ~
„ 5 doz. Fern Plants, at 6d...
1881.
Mar. 11. —4 bush. Palm Seeds, at 30s.
~ 2 bsh. Pandanus Seeds, at 40s
~ 3 doz. Plants, at 6d.
Mar. 26.—1 bag Palm Seeds ..
Aug. 24.—2 cases and sack Ferns, say
70 plants ~
~ 1 sack Pandanus Seeds, over
a bushel ..
~ 1 case Specimens
~ 1 package Palm Tree Speci-
mens
Sep. 27.—380 Plants, at 6d.
1882.
Jan. 4.—Palm Seeds ..
~ Pandanus Seeds
~ Plants
£ s. d.
15 0 0
60 0 0
@ 20s. 6 0 0
60 0 0
30 0 0
22 10 0
15 0 0
. 126 0 0
20 0 0
£854 10 0
My original ac-
counts, bills of lad-
ing, and carriers’
receipts, <fec., were
sent into Govern-
ment, but I find on
report being printed
that they are noted
as missing.
The value of the
seeds and plants
which I sent up to
Mr. Moore, includ-
ing freight, expenses
shipping, delivery,
&c., 1 estimate at
£7B.
R. E. A.
Quantity of Seeds and Plants acknowledged to
have been received by Mr. C. Moore’s
Gardener from Captain Armstrong.
Value per Bushel
in England.
Remarks.
Captain Armstrong and Lord Howe Island.
MR. McELHONE’S QUESTIONS, MR. MOORE’S ANSWERS, AND
COMMENTS BY CAPTAIN ARMSTRONG.
Question. Answer.
1. What quantity of palm seeds and plants 1. Mr. Moore has for some years past received palm
has Mr. C. Moore, of the Botanical Gardens, seeds and plants from Lord Howe Island, but no particu-
received from Lord Howe Island 1 lar records have been made either of the quantities of the
former or of the numbers of the latter.
Comment.
1. Mr. Moore acknowledges that he has been in the habit of receiving plants and seeds, which are
of great value, for many years from Lord Howe Island. He has had the monopoly of the trade all these
years up to the time of Captain Armstrong’s appointment. He also acknowledges that he has not kept a
record of his transactions, although several hundreds of pounds’ worth have passed through his hands. A
short time after Captain Armstrong’s arrival at the island, Mr. Moore arranged with him to collect
seeds and plants, and complained of his former collector, Edward King, and dismissed him. Messrs.
Shepherd & Co, found out, through King, the value and particulars of these plants, &c., and immediately
demanded from Mr. Moore to be allowed to join in the enterprise, and after some trouble were admitted.
Shortly after this the man King—finding his occupation gone—took the first opportunity of returning to
Sydney, and between Mr. Moore and himself a statement of complaint against Captain Armstrong was made,
he (Captain A.) having allowed other seedsmen besides Moore and Shepherd to share in the business. This
statement was drawn out by Mr. Moore, and to this Edward King {his again appointed agent, who is no
botanist, and can neither read nor write), attached his mark as correct. This was done during Captain
Armstrong’s absence on the island, and is made use of to his detriment. Some months after, on Captain
Armstrong coming up to Sydney, Mr. Moore wrote him a threatening letter, in which he informed him that
he was in possession of this statement from King, who had been employed all this time in the Botanical
Gardens at the expense of the Government. Two days after Captain Armstrong’s arrival in Sydney this
statement was declared by King before a Notary Public in Sydney to be false.
Question.
Answer.
2, How were they disposed of?
2. The palm seeds not wanted for the Botanic Gardens
were distributed in exchange for other seeds and plants
among certain nurserymen and Directors of Botanic
Gardens. The plants were either distributed for public
purposes or are now in the Botanic Gardens here.
9


Comment.
2. The answer to this question is very vague,
Question. Answer.
3. What are the market values in Sydney and 3. The market values in Sydney and in England are
in England of the same 1 unknown to Mr. Moore.
Comment.
3 Mr. Moore states he does not know the value of these plants in Sydney or in England, although
every seedsman in town knows their value. There are catalogues issued by all seedsmen in Sydney, and in
every one most of the plants of this island are quoted, and the prices of these seeds are well known in
England, Sydney, and on the Continent of Europe. The quotations of plants in Sydney are from 2s. 6d. to
10s. a plant, and considerably higher prices for more rare plants. The prices of palm seeds and others in
Sydney range from £3 to £5 per bushel. And the same seeds in England are from £l2 to <£ls per bushel.
Question. Answer.
4. What expense has the Curator or Colony 4. No collector, other than Mr. John Duff, overseer,
been put to in paying a Collector, and his has been sent, on account of the Botanic Gardens, to
passage to and from Lord Howe’s Island?
collect seeds and plants on Lord Howe Island. Mr.
Duff’s passages were made in the Government steamers;
therefore there were no special charges or expenses.
Comment.
4. Mr. Moore says no collector has been sent for the Botanical Gardens other than Mr. Duff, yet he
appointed and sent down Edward King also to collect for Government.
Question. Answer.
5. Will he cause Mr. Moore to produce the 5. In compliance with the request of two nurserymen,
accounts in connection with the above for seeds Messrs. Yeitch & Sons, of London, and Messrs. Shepherd
and plants sent by Captain Armstrong during & Co., of Sydney, to obtain palm seeds for them from
the period named, on account of himself and Lord Howe Island, Mr. Moore placed the sum of £3O
Messrs. Shepherd & Co., and have the accounts (contributed equally by these gentlemen) in the hands of
printed and distributed amongst Members 1
Captain Armstrong, to cover the expense of collecting
and forwarding such seeds to Sydney. The quantities
received from him on this account were altogether about
bushels. The cost of collecting these seeds on the
island was Bs. per bushel. In consequence of its having
been found impossible to obtain an adequate quantity of
seeds for the money paid to Captain Armstrong, Mr.
Moore felt himself called upon to send a special collector
to the island to collect sufficient seeds to meet the require-
ments of Messrs. Yeitch and Shepherd. This trip cost
an additional £25, and it was paid by those gentlemen.
Comment.
5. Mr. Moore gives a long, rambling statement, but evades the question to give the accounts asked
for which were sent in by Captain Armstrong, and to which the bills of lading, original receipts of carriers
and gardener, &c., were attached, and which are now reported in the Government papers as missing. On
undertaking to collect these seeds and plants it was with the understanding that they were for the Botanical
Gardens and Messrs. Shepherd & Co. Yet now Mr. Moore states that they were for private individuals,
only I have got official documents from him to pro e the contrary.
Question.
Answer.
6. Is it not a fact that Mr. Moore’s statement
of receipts of seeds and plants received from
Captain Armstrong differs materially from that
of his gardener ?
Comment.
6. Mr. Moore answers “No !” Mr. Moore in his statement in the Government Reports says he has
only received about ten and a half bushels of palm seeds. Captain Armstrong’s original accounts show
considerably more than this. Mr. Moore also fails to mention anything about the quantity of plants and
other seeds which he received, and which he positively gave Captain Armstrong directions to get. Mr.
Moore’s gardener acknowledges to have received plants as well as seeds, and, when valued at a very low
rate, amounts to over £52, viz., £22 over the money advanced by Mr. Moore. Therefore his statement
differs most materially to that of his gardener.
Mr. Moore’s correspondents in these matters are three most troublesome characters. The first, a man
who sold a wreck of a vessel belonging to his employer, and has not accounted for the proceeds, and was
generally troublesome on the island; another who was an absconder from Noumea, and was eventually
dismissed ignominiously by his employers ; and the third who acknowledges to have made false statements,
and to which he swore and attached his mark.
Mr. Moore’s statements and reports seem to have had great weight with the Government in their
final decision respecting Captain Armstrong’s present position.
The whole of the so-called replies by Mr. Moore in no way accord with the questions asked by Mr.
McElhone.


Re LORD HOWE ISLAND
ANSWERS BY COLONIAL SECRETARY TO QUESTIONS RUT BY
W. EORSTER, ESQ., M.L.A.
QUESTIONS.
1. Was Captain Armstrong
furnished with full particulars
of the charges for a reasonable
time before the inquiry ?
2. Was the inquiry made by
Mr. Wilson in his magisterial
capacity, or in what capacity 1
3. Was it made publicly,
and. with open doors?
4. Were complainants and
witnesses examined on oath ?
5. Was Captain Armstrong
invited or permitted to cross-
examine witnesses against
him ?
6. Was Captain Armstrong
invited or permitted to pro-
duce evidence, or summon
witnesses in his own behalf,
and were the usual facilities
afforded him for the purpose ?
7. Was Captain Armstrong
invited or permitted to make
any statement orally or in
writing in his defence ?
8. Was any such statement
taken into consideration and
examined in connection with
the evidence by Mr. Wilson
before coming to a decision ?
ANSWERS.
In his capacity as
Commissioner, and not
in his magisterial
capacity.
Answer to 6 and 7.
Captain Armstrong
was present and afforded
facilities for taking down
all the statements made,
and allowed several days
to prepare his defence,
which he made in
writing.
See answer above
and 7).
COMMENTS BY CAPTAIN ARMSTRONG.
1. Particulars of charges wei’e handed to me by
Mr. Wilson, on day of arrival; but I had very
little time to answer them, as on the following day
Mr. Wilson appointed two of the inhabitants to
take charge of all Government stores lately placed
under my charge, and it took all my time—viz.,
three days—to look up and turn over the property,
2. Mr. Wilson stated to a gentleman on the
island that, although he had been a magistrate for
a great number of years, yet this was the first case
he had ever sat upon. His obvious duty was to
have taken all evidence on oath.'
3. Most emphatically, No ! No one was allowed
in the tent with the exception of Mr, Wilson, his
Secretary, myself, and the person giving evidence.
Nine witnesses were examined, these being the only
parties who were supposed to have signed the
petition for my removal. Of this I have evidence
here.
6. The first part of this question is not answered
at all. As a matter of fact I was neither permitted
to produce evidence nor to summon witnesses \ I
was also refused to be allowed a reporter to take
notes for me, though I had one in waiting. The
only facilities I had were pen, ink, and paper. The
date of Mr. Wilson’s report is 17th April, and my
defence, 11th April; the evidence was given on the
Bth April. Before the evidence at the enquiry was
taken, I submitted two statements to Mr. Wilson,
which I requested him to duly consider. After
perusal, he wished me to withdraw them, without
assigning any reason, and which I did under pro-
test (vide Pamphlet, pages 2 and 3).
7. I was not allowed to make any statement at
the time, and 1 made an objection to the manner
in which Mr. Wilson took the evidence when the
first evidence was tendered; and when I attempted
to cross-question the witnesses I was stopped by
Mr. Wilson, who positively refused me such
privilege. One person’s evidence I particularly
objected to, viz., a Hottentot woman, who was
living with a black man. Mr. Wilson would not
accept my objection, and said he considered as
they were living together they were virtually
married.
8. I stated that I had evidence to tender from
several other of the islanders, but Mr. Wilson de-
clined to allow me to produce it.
LORD HOWE ISLAND.
TO THE EDITOR OP THE SYDNEY DAILY TELEGRAPH.
Sir, —In your issue of to-day’s date I notice an article respecting my removal from Lord Howe Island, on which
you will perhaps permit me to make the following remarks. 1 am glad to see that you do “ not in the slightest degree
endorse the finding of the Special Commissionerfor when the matter comes before Parliament I shall be able to prove
that the so-called inquiry was no inquiry at all, but simply calling together of the few disaffected inhabitants and asking
them to corroborate the complaints which they had previously sent to the Government, no evidence being taken from the
11


more respectable and industrious inhabitants, although such evidence was offered and positively refused. In taking the
statements which were given, no oath was administered, nor caution as to speaking the truth, and had the Commissioner
chosen to inquire as to the character of those people who supplied him with the testimony, I have no hesitation in saying
that he (being a disinterested man) would either have received it with very great caution, or refused it as being unworthy of
credence.
With regard to my acting as “ general merchant,” allow me to state that had I not frequently supplied some of the
islanders with stores from my own private stock they would have been in a fair way of starvation. Many a time have they
had to substitute coffee leaves for tea, sorghum for sugar, and geranium leaves for tobacco, <fec., &c., and in dividing my lot
with them I have been subject to the same.
In respect to the wines and spirits business, I only supplied these articles in cases of illness, or what I considered
necessity, in very limited quantities. In the early days of this colony it was part of the duty of the Governor to supply
stimulants in similar cases, using his own discretion. At Norfolk Island at the present time it is also part of the duty of
the magistrate to act in the same manner. And I apprehend that in the peculiar and isolated position in which I was
placed, that I not only had power to act in a similar manner, but I consider it was my duty to do so.
Importation of Kanaka Boys.—l have four whom I engaged from the authorities at Noumea for a certain period. It
was necessary to have a boat’s crew in cases of emergency, and which the Government had failed to supply me with. As to
general dealing in island produce, I may here remark that on my first appointment to the island the Government granted
me a lease of 100 acres for the purpose of developing the resources of the island, such as growing coffee, fibre, &0,, &c., to
which I have given every attention, and I consider that, through my former experiences in Fiji and other places, and energy
on behalf of the place, that I have considerably advanced the islanders in their relative positions, and put them in a fair
way of disposing of their produce regularly, which opportunity they never had before. We have been sometimes from six
to eight months at a stretch without any means of communication with the outside world. The island is situated 420 miles
to the north-east of Sydney, in mid-ocean, and was scarcely known before I went down. I estimate that the island will be
of great importance to New South Wales ere long.
The “ honest informers ” in my case were those individuals who had been most urgent in their appeals to me for
assistance, and are still in my debt for stores supplied from my own private stock to meet their pressing wants; and let it
be clearly understood, I have made no profits by the disposal of these articles, but simply kept them for their benefit.
I shall make no comments on the action of the Commissioner with regard to the future of the island, but simply leave you
and the public to form their own opinion as to the prudence of the course he has chosen in leaving two of the most
disaffected men in the place as constables in charge of the island —men, whose obvious interest it was to get rid of anything
like lawful control, and of whose character and antecedents the Commissioner knows positively nothing, nor did he take the
trouble to find out.
Trusting to your spirit of fair play to insert the above.—Yours, &c.,
EICHD. E. AEMSTEONG, E.N., late Lord Howe Island.
June 17, 1882.
CAPTAIN AEMSTEONG’S CASE.
A little sheet has just been published which gives in full the questions put by Mr. Forster, M.P., to the Colonial
Secretary, respecting the inquiry held into the case of Captain Armstrong, formerly Governor of Lord Howe Island, together
with Sir Henry Parkes’s replies and Captain Armstrong’s comments. In several important particulars Captain Armstrong
affirms these replies were incorrect. For example, it was said reasonable time was allowed to answer the charges, whereas
Captain Armstrong asserts that he received a copy of the complaint three days before the inquiry, and all that time he was
busy handing over stores to the men placed in charge. Sir Henry Parkes says the inquiry was made publicly with open
doors. Captain Armstrong emphatically denies this, and says no one was allowed in the room except Mr. Wilson, the
Commissioner judging the case, his secretary, Captain Armstrong, and the person giving evidence. Sir Henry Parkes
admitted that the witnesses were not examined on oath, and that the defendant was not permitted to cross-examine any of
them. The question as to Captain Armstrong being allowed to call witnesses in defence is passed over, but it is said he was
allowed facilities for taking down the statements made. Captain Armstrong states that he asked to be allowed to call
witnesses, but Mr. Wilson refused permission, while the “ facilities ” afforded were pen, ink, and paper only. He had a
reporter with him, but he was not allowed to enter the room. Such direct contradiction argues misstatements somewhere,
and no lover of justice will be satisfied without this being cleared up. —Evening News, October 28, 1882.
CAPTAIN AEMSTEONG IN EXPLANATION.
(To the Editor of the Evening News.)
Sik, —I would not trouble you on this subject had not several old friends informed me that a number of the public of
Sydney are under the impression that supplies of wines and spirits had been sent down to me to Lord Howe Island by the
Government of New South Wales for distribution amongst the islanders as medical comforts, &c.
I wish through your valuable paper to disabuse the public mind of such an impression. The Government have not
supplied me with a single bottle of either wanes, spirits, or provisions during the whole of my career at the Island. The
supplies I took down (a three years’ private stock) was six cases of brandy and a few casks of colonial wine (most of the
latter I had to use as vinegar). On my first arrival on the Island I found several of the inhabitants without stores and
necessary clothing, and some distilling a white ruinous spirit from the banana and banyan fig. In order to stop this illegal
proceeding, I at first gave a few bottles away ; but as I could not afford any longer to give, and anxious to discourage pauper
disposition, I fixed a nominal figure, at low price, and agreed to take labour or produce for whatever stores, &0., they
required. The whole amount of wines and spirits disposed of amongst the islanders did not exceed £2O worth in three years
amongst the whole of the community. A similar system as this is established at Norfolk Island. It must be remembered
that at times the islanders are several months without means of communication with the outside world. Trusting you will
find space for this explanation, I remain, Sir, yours, &c.,
EICHAED E. AEMSTEONG,
Nov. 1, 1882. Late E.M, Lord Howe Island.
TEIP OF THE “THETIS.”
The New South Wales Government steamer Thetis arrived yesterday from Lord Howe’s Island, after a somewhat
eventful passage. Captain Armstrong, late resident there, informs us she left Sydney at 5 p.m. on November 20, and soon
after getting outside the Heads the weather set in thick and threatening, with thunder and lightning. At 10 p.m. a heavy
blow set in from the north-west, and the vessel had to heave to for 40 hours, and occasionally shipping heavy seas. Arrived
at Lord Howe’s Island on November 24, and succeeded in landing everything belonging to the scientific men who went over
in her to observe the transit of Yenus from the island. Got under weigh at 8 p.m. on Monday evening for the return voyage,
and on rounding the Heads a cry of fire was heard from the captain in the cabin. All the passengers were on deck at the
time, but they immediately rushed to the rescue. The cabin was found to be in flames, and the air thick with smoke. In
putting it out, Captain Hutton had his hands slightly burnt, and Captain Armstrong had his arm severely burnt through his
shirt catching fire. They were fortunate in quelling the fire, but if it had been allowed to have its sway for a few minutes
longer, it was almost a certainty that the vessel would have been totally destroyed. The fire having been extinguished, the
vessel resumed the course for Elizabeth Eeef, in hopes of picking the reef up by daylight, but by some mishap it could not
then be found, but managed to reach it by 1 p.m. on Tuesday. Some of the passengers landed to gather shells and coral,
but the life-boat there was missing. At 6 p.m. started for Sydney, but unfortunately by midnight the vessel was again
caught in a S.E. gale, and had to heave-to for 14 hours. On the morning of Friday were considerably to the south of the
proper position, being five points out of the course, which was attributed to the strong southerly current. Obtained a sight
at 1 p.m., and then steered direct for Sydney, arriving yesterday afternoon. —Evening News, Dec. 2, 1882.


LORD HOWE ISLAND.
No. 1.
Petition of Inhabitants of Lord Howe Island to The Government of New South Wales.
Lord Howe Island, 20 December, 1881.
We, the undersigned settlers, representing the majority of this island, do most humbly petition that you will
take into consideration the many causes for complaint we have to make against Captain R. R. Armstrong,
the resident Magistrate, and do solicit that if it so please you he be removed in favour of any person you
may judge fit to appoint. And we, your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray —
T, G, C. NICHOLS, Wife, and six children.
HARRY WILSON.
A. J. MOSELY and Wife.
J. ROBBINS, Wife, and three children.
EDWARD + KING.
mark.
PERRY + JOHNSON and Wife.
mark.
CAMPBELL STEVENS,
WILLIAM + NICHOLS,
mark.
MARGARET ANDREWS, Widow.
CHARLES + WILLIAMS.
mark.
WILLIAM BROWN.
Remarks by Captain Armstrong.
T. G. C. Nichols, character attached, children cannot
write.
H. Wilson, character attached,
Mosel y, character attached.
Character attached ; one child can just write,
Edward King, character attached; T. G. C. Nichols’
writing, and not witnessed.
Perry Johnson and wife, character attached; this name
is in T. G. C. Nichols’ writing, and not witnessed.
C. Stevens, character attached.
Wm. Nichols, character attached, cannot write; the
name in T. G. C. Nichols’ writing and not
witnessed.
Margaret Andrews; the writing is T, G, C. Nichols’,
and not hers.
Charles Williams, character attached; the writing is
T, G. C. Nichols’; not witnessed.
William Brown; not his signature; written by T. G.
0. Nichols.
65, Botany Street, Moore Park.
Owing to the circumstances under which I left Lord Howe Island by the steamer Suva for Melbourne, on Monday, 7th
August, I desire to make the following declaration :
On the 7th day of July last I was working on the garden of Mrs. Field, at Lord Howe Island, when my mother, Mrs.
Thomas Nichols, came up to me and, without any cause or provocation whatever, dragged my spade from me, and threw it
with such force that, on its striking my back, I became very faint and sick, and remained so for some sime, quite unable to
return to my work. I then went home, when my mother followed me, swearing she would shoot me, exhibiting signs of
quite maniacal violence. This she had often done before towards myself and my brothers and sisters, using language only
fitly to be described as brutal, obscene, and disgusting.
I duly gave information of the occurrence above stated to Mr. Campbell Stevens, one of the two special constables
recently appointed by Mr. Bowie Wilson, and pointed out to him that my life was in danger. He, however, took no notice
whatever of my complaint, when I considered it necessary, in my interest and that of my brothers and sisters, to lay the
matter before the more respectable inhabitants of the island.
My father being away, and not likely to return, I resolved to leave the island by the very first opportunity, and seek
employment in Sydney.
I am personally known to Mr. J. Bowie Wilson and to the other members of the Government Commission, who recently
visited the island, and Captain Armstrong, R.N., has known me for the last three years, and will cheerfully bear testimony to
my industry, integrity, and other qualities.
ALBERT W. S. NICHOLS.
Declared before me, one of Her Majesty’s Justices of the Peace for the ) g FARNELL J P
Colony of New South Wales, this Eighteenth day of August, 1882, \ ’ ’
Captain Armstrong to The Principal Under-Secretary.
Sir, 16 January, 1882.
I beg to request that you will be pleased to attach the enclosed letter from Mr. John Bell to
my report, in a charge made by Thos. Nichols, and party, of Lord Howe Island.
I am, &c.,
RICHD. R. ARMSTRONG.
Since writing the report I have received news that Mr. C. E. Ponder has been removed from the
island by his employers, and Thos. Nichols has left the island for New Zealand,
[. Enclosures .]
Mr. John Bell to Captain Armstrong.
Dear Sib, 18 Park Road, Sydney, 14 January, 1880.
Mr. Thomas Nichols was employed by me in the year 1878 as master of the barque Australasian Packet , for the
purpose of procuring beche-de-mer, vessel and outfit cost me over £6,000. I eventually heard of the loss of the vessel,
which was wrecked at the S. S. Islands, and as I was afterwards informed solely through Nichols’ continued intemperance after
leaving Sydney. The wreck was sold by him to some traders, excepting the boats belonging to the vessel, he had them taken
to Noumea and their sold, receiving the whole proceeds of sale of vessel, boats, &c., although I appointed an agent at
Noumea to act on my behalf, whom Nichols would not acknowledge. He has neither written to me or accounted in any way
for the loss of the vessel or the sale of the wreck, and everything connected with the affair has been most mysterious and
unsatisfactory. I had purposed at the time taking out a warrant against him, but in consequence of the great difficulties in
the way of getting at him (he having gone to his home at Lord Howe Island) and the extra and great expense I would have
been put to, I was advised to withold my prosecution.
13


Mr. Campbell Stevens who was mate of the same vessel at the time of her loss, returned to Sydney and he could, but
would not, give me a satisfactory report of her loss or sale of the wreck ; he, I understand, is also at Lord Howe Island.
The crew of the vessel, on their return to Sydney, reported to me that Nichols took the vessel (after leaving Sydney) to
Lord Howe Island, and stayed there for several weeks, and also sent a large quantity (by boat-loads) of the ships stores to
his house, and to which he had no right whatever ; his instructions were on leaving Sydney to take the vessel to her des-
tination which he did not comply with.
In conclusion I may state that the vessel and trade was uninsured, and I lost over £6,000 by the transaction.
I remain, &c.,
JOHN BELL.
Mr. John Mason to Captain Armstrong.
Dear Sir, Sydney, 17 January, 1882.
Having just arrived per s.s. “ Hero,” from Auckland, Mr. Thos. Henderson, junr., has instructed me to acquaint
you that Mr. Ponder, who acted as his agent in Lord Howe Island, has been dismissed with ignominy. I may state that I
anticipated meeting with you here, and therefore I prepared myself for the event. You are as well aware as I am that Mr.
Ponder is the bete noir of my communication. It has taken some time to find out and defeat his machinations, but it appears
to me that whilst he was trying to undermine your position as a Magistrate on the island, he at the same time was playing
double with Mr. Henderson. It is now in your power to recall any asperity you may have shown towards Mr. Henderson’s
application for certain leases of land in Lord Howe Island supposed to contain guano, and to use your influence to secure
them to him, for better or for worse. This you had better attend to during your residence in Sydney, as in all probability
Mr. T. Henderson’s present substitute will remain on the island till your return.
I remain, &0.,
JOHN MASON.
S.S. India, Sydney, June 21, 1882.
Captain Armstrong, E.N.
Dear Sir, —In reference to your communication as to whether the mails had been detained on board the steamer
India, when off Lord Howe Island, in October last, as reported by one Ponder to the Postmaster-General of New South
Wales, I beg to say that this statement of Mr. Charles Ponder is quite in keeping with his general character when stayiug at
Noumea, and who afterwards absconded from the place.
As a matter of fact, the India was only a couple of hours off the Island, and the mails were sent on shore immediately
on our arrival by the first boat which came alongside.
I am, Sir,
Yours obediently,
E. M. PHILLIPS,
Commander s.s. India.
Captain Armstrong to The Colonial Secretary.
Sir, 21 April, 1882, c/o Messrs, McDonald, Smith, & Co,, Hunter Street, Sydney.
I beg to draw your attention to the unfair manner in which I was treated at the late Court of
Inquiry held at Lord Howe Island, inasmuch as I was not allowed to cross-examine the witnesses, nor
given an opportunity to produce witnesses on my behalf.
See statement herewith, marked A B,
Hon. J. B. Wilson.—B.C., 21/4/82, C. W. I have, &c.,
EICHD. B. ARMSTRONG.
[ Enclosures .]
A.
We, the undersigned, inhabitants of Lord Howe Island, beg hereby to declare our disapproval of the unfair manner
in which we consider the inquiry relative to the Eesident Magistrate, Captain Armstrong, has been proceeded with. After
complying with the request of the Commissioner, we walked 3 miles on two days to the Court, and waited the whole of the
time from morning till night without being called upon. We consider that, as being among the oldest residents, we had a
right to testify as to the general conduct of Captain Armstrong, who has, we believe, been uniformly kind and considerate
for the welfare of the islanders on all occasions.
We feel it only due to that gentleman that other evidence of a favourable nature should have been heard.
N. 0. THOMPSON, and for
Wife and Family,
her
Witness— Wm. Claeson. MAEY + FIELD.
mark.
MAEY WILSON.
WILLIAM THOMPSON.
To Capt. E. E. Armstrong, E.N., Eesident Magistrate.
Sib, Lord Howe Island.
We, the undersigned community of Lord Howe Island, deeply regret to hear of some false reports in Sydney of
the unjust and harsh manner you have treated us in your capacity as Eesident Magistrate on this island, and we now take
this opportunity of most flatly contradicting such foul statements; for, on the contrary, we beg to thank you for the
exertions you have undertaken for our interests, and for the fair and upright manner in which you have distributed justice
and settled any dissensions between us. We are also grateful to you for the stores and clothing you have brought down to
us on several occasions, whereas we otherwise would have been hard pressed for want of proper covering and provisions.
We have, &c.,
N. Thompson. Perry Johnson.
her T. B. Wilson,
Mary + Field. Mary Thompson.
mark. William Thompson.
Campbell Stevens. Emmaline Thompson.
his Eose Thompson.
Edward + King. John Thompson,
mark. his
A. J. Mosely. William + Nichols.
Henry Wilson, mark.
To Captain E. E. Armstrong, E.N.
Lord Howe Island, 30th July, 1882.
Dear Sir, —I have lately heard that Edward King, of this island, made a charge against your Kanaka boys (before
Mr. J. Bowie Wilson) that they had destroyed palm trees in the bush. My brothers and myself are continually in the bush
and we do not know of a single instance of their doing so. I have, however, often been in the bush with King gathering
nuts for Mr. Moore, and he has on several occasions cut down many trees for the sake of the nuts, when unable to reach
them with the hook, and I have remonstrated with him ; he, however, stated that he had authority, and that he would do
as he liked. I think it hard that the charge be put on the wrong party.
I remain, Sir, yours truly,
ALBEET W. S. NICHOLS.


[Enclosure .]
A. W. S. Nichols to Captain Armstrong.
Dear Sir, Lord Howe Island, 12 April, 1882.
I, Albert William Stanley Nichols, aged eighteen years, and eldest son of Thomas Nichols, of this island, hereby
conscientiously and solemnly swear that I make the following statements, with all knowledge of the seriousness of the
position I hold in making such statements against my parents ; neither have I had any quarrel or disagreement with them.
Hearing of certain accusations made by them, I consider you have been most grossly maligned, and I now wish, out
of justice to you, to make this statement, that on every occasion I have been sent by my parents to you for wine or spirits
that they have told me to ask for it medicinally, on account of illness in the family—more especially by my father. I also
know that on occasions you have lent them money, especially when they wanted to send me to Sydney, and they promised,
in my presence, to return the loan in a few days, which I am convinced they did not do, as you had to take out the value
in produce from our homestead at our own prices, though such produce was almost valueless to us.
I may state that I have never known you to act in any way but most gentlemanly and honourably towards all of us
on the island ; and you have at all times given us the very best of advice and counsel, especially to the young people, while
your manner has always been kind and considerate to all,
I regret to say that I am perfectly ashamed of the conduct of my parents of late towards you.
There are several other statements I have lately heard against you which are also false, and I am prepared to swear
at any moment, before any Court of law, to the truth of my statements.
In my presence they have on many occasions stated that they will do their utmost to have you removed off the island,
as they did not consider a Government official is required here. I know also that, since your decision in Court, in the case
of Mr. Ponder and my father, that my parents are both dissatisfied, and have had great ill-feeling towards you ever since.
I feel sure, indeed I know, that they have influenced the feeling of others against you in every way to your detriment.
P.S.—I have frequently known my father to distil spirits from bananas in large quantities.
Witnessed— A. E, Rose.
ALBERT W. S. NICHOLS,
C. Stuart Miller (constable, steamer Thetis.)
True copy.—Wm, Olarson.
[. Enclosure .]
Mr. William Olarson to Captain Armstrong.
My dear Captain Armstrong, 70 Pitt Street, Sydney, 26 May, 1882.
As I hear you have been taken to task for your treatment of the five Vernon boys apprenticed to you at
Lord Howe Island, I think it but my duty to forward you my simple testimony as to my experience of these boys.
You will remember that during your six weeks’ absence in Sydney they were under my direction, and I have known
them and their doings intimately during the last seven months.
I consider they were well fed, their meals actually consisting of the same materials used for your own table, cooked
by the same cook, and frequently taken from the very same vessels. Boiled or fried fish, fresh or cured potatoes, sweet
potatoes, vegetable marrows, sweet corn, salt or fresh pork, pumpkins, or other vegetables in season, biscuits, &c.; and
these in such abundance that I have often had to notice waste and wanton destruction of good food by these boys.
Their duties were light and easily executed, they not being called upon to do any work at all beyond their strength or
capacity; weeding, hoeing, and general farm and garden work and occasional boating, were the general duties they had to
perform. Altogether I consider their life might have been a very pleasant one, and their training would I think have fitted
them for a useful career in any country or under any circumstances, and certainly I should not object to any one belonging
to me leading the life, as I knew it on the island, led by these boys.
I know it was at your special request that the schoolmaster held a night class three times a week for these boys’
benefit, and I believe they would have been fairly good boys but for their being made the means of annoyance to you by
one or two leading agitators on the island. Having made up their minds to get rid, if possible, of anything like a
representative of law and authority on the island, these agitators sought by every device and subtle scheme to annoy and
harass you, and lost no opportunity of demoralising the Vernon boys by encouraging them in resisting the salutary
discipline and regulations you had enjoined.
I think it a great misfortune for these boys that the useful career open to them should have been frustrated by the
indirect interference of any one.
I refrain from referring to the antecedents and conduct of these boys at your place, but I believe all the trouble has
arisen from the subtle plotting of one or two men anxious to be rid of you as representing law and order.
I am led to this belief by a knowledge of the scandalously false accusations levelled by those people against you,
but which I believe, if there is any justice in the land, will only tend to your credit on proper investigation.
Very sincerely yours,
WILLIAM OLARSON.
P.S.—Pray call on me at any time to state my knowledge of these matters.
Lord Howe Island, 21st July, 1882.
Captain R. R. Armstrong, R.N,
Sir, —We, the undersigned, are quite satisfied that had not your Kanaka boys cleared away and commenced the
foundation for the school-house we would never have had that building erected by the inhabitants, in consequence of the
jealousy and ill-feeling existing among them. The material for the school building was laying in the bush for about twelve
months. At about the latter part of that time N. 0. Thompson, 0. Stevens, and T. B. Wilson, offered to erect the building
without the assistance of the other people of the place, who positively refused to assist in the work, notwithstanding many
promises made to do so. With respect to calling for tenders for erection of jetty and other Government buildings, we may
state that a notice calling for tenders for the above was posted outside your then residence of the Magistrate, for several
weeks, without any response from the inhabitants. We may also state that Mr, Thomas Nichols and his wife have always
been most strongly opposed to you as Magistrate, and on the most frivolous excuses kept their children back from attendance
at school. The late school-teacher, Mr. T, B. Wilson, resigned his position here in consequence of the jealousy and bad
feeling before referred to.
We are, Sir,
Your obedient servants,
THOS. B. WILSON.
N. 0. THOMPSON.
P.S,—The Government boats were always at the service of the inhabitants, on condition of their being returned
safely to the R.M. T. B. W. N. 0. T.
August 22nd, 1882,
c/o McDonald, Smith, & Co.,
Hunter Street, Sydney.
To the Honourable Sir Henry Parkes, K.C.M.G., Chief Secretary, &c.
Sir, —I have the honour to submit to your notice the enclosed Paper and Memoranda relative to my removal by the
Government from my position as Administrating Officer at Lord Howe Island, and from the public service.
I have waited patiently your return, on the advice of many influential friends, who feel, with myself, that you will
deal satisfactorily with a case which, in my own estimation, and that of, I believe, the public generally, is deemed a great
miscarriage of justice.
I commend the matter to your thoughtful consideration, with every confidence that you will take such steps as are
necessary, with the additional evidence now available, towards a reconsideration of the case.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
RICHD. R. ARMSTRONG.
No answer.


70 Pitt Street, Sydney, Aug. 26, 1882.
Sir John Robertson, K.O.M.G. . , , ~
My Dear Sir —lt has often occurred to me that I ought to write you privately on the subject of Captain Armstrong
and his administration of affairs at Lord Howe Island. But not till now have I sat down to do so, for personal worry
and other matters have absorbed my attention and energies. ,
I am satisfied that you would not willingly do a wrong to any man, or be a party to such wrong being done ; yet I feel
that in the case of Captain Armstrong there has been a very serious miscarriage of justice I visited Lord Howe island
about twelve months ago, and owing to the want of opportunity to leave the island remained there seven months. _ During
the whole of that time I had ample opportunity of observing the peculiar character of the islanders, and the administration
of affairs by Captain Armstrong, and I conscientiously declare that nothing could have been more salutary or more conducive
to the maintenance of order than the conduct of affairs there. As a whole, the community is orderly and industrious, but
the presence of two or three turbulent spirits who are averse to any even semblance of authority is quite sufficient to keep
up a ferment in the public mind destructive to order and good government. Captain Armstrong is simply a victim of this
ferment I bear testimony to his zeal and anxiety on behalf of the island, and as to the hearty support accorded to him by
the more reputable and industrious portion of the people. The scandalous untruths invented by one or two conspirators
with a view to damage him and secure his removal from the island excite my indignation in view of their success. No one
could have been more unsuited to the duty of investigation than Mr. Bowie Wilson, he seems to have gone down with his
mind fully made up to condemn Captain Armstrong, and his enquiry was simply a ludicrous mimicry of justice. No sworn
evidence was taken, and only those people adverse to Captain Armstrong were called upon, though the weight of testimony
from the old settlers was all in favour of Captain Armstrong. I really feel that the whole matter should be reviewed, and
am quite certain that on such review you would fully exonerate Captain Armstrong from any charge of wrong doing As to
the future of the island I am sure it will be found that unless some representative of order be firmly established there the
people will drift into a condition of barbarism. I have thought it my duty to write you as no one can know better than
myself the grievous wrong done to the late magistrate, and further that I have a strong belief in your unwillingness to do a
wrong to any man. .
-r 1 il _ 1 tvi Aof Armrlionr onri/Q VI T
I have the honour to remain your most obedient servant,
(Signed) WM. CLAESON.
P.S.—I shall be glad at any time to have a personal interview with you should you desire it.—W. 0.
Sydney, October 31, 1882.
c/o. Messrs. McDonald, Smith, & Co., Hunter Street.
To the Honourable Sir Henry Parkes, K.C.M.G., Colonial Secretary, Ac., Ac.
Sir —I have the honour to express my regret that my representations to yourself have failed to secure to me a prompt
reconsideration as to the circumstances under which I am removed from my position as Resident Magistrate of Lord
Howe Island, and degraded by being dismissed from the service. ... ,
I have now to state that, anticipating such a measure, if justice would be granted to me I am prepared with the
evidence here in Sydney, of persons resident on the island during my administration, who, I submit, should be heard while
availab|e. oannot feut congider it tlie des i re 0 f the Government that simple justice should be done in my case, and I have
humbly to entreat that you will take into consideration the cruel injustice to which I feel I have been subjected in conse-
quence of the blundering and partiality shown by the Commissioner appointed to investigate the matter. _
I pray that you will see it right to grant a Committee or Commission to examine and fully enquire into thecase,
feeling perfectly confident that such Committee would entirely reverse the decision of the Honourable John Bowie Wilson.
8 I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
RIOHD. R. ARMSTRONG,
Retired Commander, R.N.
To His Excellency The Eight Honourable Lord Augustus William Frederick Spencer Loftus, Knight Grand Cross of the
Most Honourable Order of the Bath, a Member of Her Majesty’s Most Honourable Privy Council, Governor and
Commander-in-Chief of the Colony of New South Wales and its Dependencies.
May it please your Excellency, „
I have the honour to lay before you the following statement, and to present my humble petition tha,t your Excellency
will be pleased to order a Special Commission to enquire generally into my administration of the affairs of Lord Howe
Island and into the circumstances of my removal from the service on the report of the Honourable John Bowie Wilson.
In craving this Commission I have thought it well to submit to your Excellency the papers bearing on the case as
presented to Parliament, with my answers attached, and especially as to my not being allowed to examine witnesses or call
any of my own ; and to notify briefly a few details which I think of importance as contributing to the information of your
Excellency on the general subject, and especially as to my career. _ , ,
Having been invalided towards the close of the Crimean War I emigrated to New Zealand, where for years I held the
post of Immigration Officer, Inspector of Ships, Commissioner, Administrator to the Charitable Aid, Ac., with credit, as
shown by enclosed testimonials. When, on the reduction of salaries, I resigned to try my fortune elsewhere I eventually
came over to New South Wales. Here I invested largely in developing several promising mines, but with results most
disastrous to myself. I had consequently to commute my half-pay and pension. After some time I took the appointment
of Resident Magistrate of Lord Howe Island, where I entered very heartily into the developement of its natural resources.
Getting a lease of one hundred acres, and spending my salary and other monies in promoting the true interest of the Island.
It being so isolated I could not take my wife and family with me, and I had to submit to other great personal
privations in many ways. My sons at the time doing good work at their studies ; one as tutor in the Grammar School
(Sydney), having passed very creditable examinations at the University; the other, now at the University, having taken two
Scholarships, besides several high class prizes, including Sir Charles Nicholson’s Gold Medal.
The salary attached to the duties of my position was £BOO per annum, for which I had to act as Magistrate, Coroner,
Forest Ranger, Ac., &c., without clerical aid, and without even the assistance of Police, or any provision for enabling me to
enforce obedience to law. _ n , , •
Under these circumstances my only safe-guard to secure order was to act with all the discretion and tact 1 could bring
to bear in the government of the people who ’till this period had had no official control or guidance whatever.
I submit to your Excellency that the papers herewith will bear out the fact that this discretion was wisely exercised,
and that the ex parte report and imperfect examination of the Honourable J. Bowie Wilson, have done me a grievous wrong,
which I am confident a fuller investigation by a Commission of two or more gentlemen nominated by your Excellency, with
power to call for papers and examine others as well as those having already given their statement, and if necessary to
proceed to the island, will at once rectify and restore me to the position I have ever held in the service of Her Majesty.
I have the honour to remain,
Your Excellency’s obedient servant,
EICHD. R. ARMSTRONG,
c/o. Messrs. McDonald, Smith, A Co., Retired Commander Royal Navy.
Hunter Street, October 24.
no/7Sfio\ Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Sydney, Bth November, 1882.
g IH —ln reply to your letter of the 31st ultimo, requesting an examination and full inquiry into the circumstances
under which you were removed from the position of Resident Magistrate of Lord Howe Island, I am directed to inform you
that as your case was dealt with during the Colonial Secretary’s absence from the Colony, he cannot undertake to go into
any examination of it, and that the Government cannot see any reason for reopening the case.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
irmotmno R. N . CRITCHBTT WALKER.
Captain E. R. Armstrong, R.N.,
Care of Messrs. McDonald, Smith, A Go., Hunter Street, Sydney.


(COPT.)
Lord Howe Island, June, 1882.
To J. McELHONE, Esq., M L.A., &c.
Sib, —We, the undersigned residents of Lord Howe Island (although unknown to you), beg to make known to
at least one member of the House of Assembly of New South Wales our sentiments as to the result of the Commissioner’s
(The Honourable John Bowie Wilson) mission to this island, in April last, respecting our late Magistrate ; and that that
gentleman should so arbitrarily decide the case simply on the evidence of a few persons who have always been hostile to
Captain Armstrong, and were more so on observing the great want of courtesy with which the Commissioner treated him on
his arrival at this island. From the hour of the landing of Mr. Wilson it was known to the inhabitants that he came
prepared to listen to any one inimical to Captain Armstrong, and it was evident to all that the sentiment of the Commissioner
was a foregone conclusion. This idea was seized upon by all those who were determined to give damaging evidence, and
on being called upon (nine or ten in number), not even put on oath as to the truth of what they were saying, &c., made most
exaggerated statements.
We ask, was such conduct to be expected from a gentleman occupying the position of the Honourable J. B. Wilson
on this occasion ? We notice some most frivolous charges, and decline to have anything to say of them.
With respect to the Kanakas employed by Captain Armstrong, we fearlessly assert that they are as well conducted,
honest, and obliging as any person in the place. We simply wish to express our opinion of Captain Armstrong’s proceeding
whilst amongst us, which has been that of a gentleman, and that he has rendered every assistance on all occasions. He has
at various times procured supplies of stores and clothing for the inhabitants at his own expense, and in return allowed us to
repay him in labour or produce as would best suit our conveniences.
During Captain Armstrong’s stay among us as a Magistrate, he has always fairly and conscientiously considered our
complaints and grievances, and, by his tact, settled many little disputes which otherwise would most probably have
culminated seriously.
As to Captain Armstrong letting us have wines and spirits from his own private stock, we are greatly indebted to him
for his kindness in so doing ; for we believe it has often been the means of saving much sickness amongst us, especially in
cases of getting wet through, or poorness of blood—brought on at times by want of proper food ; and we do not know of its
use being the cause of any drunkenness or disturbances amongst us.
The chief movers in this affair were 0. E. Ponder and Thos. Nichols, who, through misrepresentation, influenced
others of the residents to Captain Armstrong’s detriment. The former (C. E. Ponder) had on several occasions to be
severely reprimanded by the Magistrate for destroying forest trees, &c., on Government reserves, and he, in consequence
has several times threatened to do all he could to have him removed from the island. Secondly, T. Nichols combined with
the before-mentioned Ponder in inciting the people of the island against him. Now, sir, we would ask you as a man and a
gentlemen, is it justice that, on the unsworn evidence of a few illiterate men and women, a gentleman of Captain
Armstrong’s attainments, and a faithful servant of the nation, should have his character so thoroughly blighted.
We have the honour to be, Sir,
Your obedient servants,
(Signed) N. 0. Thompson,
(Also for wife and family) 26 years resident.
Thos. B. Wilson,
Late Schoolmaster, 4 years resident.
Maey Wilson,
17 years resident,
her
Maby + Field,
mark
26 years resident.
Emily Thompson.
William Thompson,
15 years resident,
his
Chaeles + Williams,
mark
11 years resident.
A. J. Mosely,
40 years resident
N. Rose,
24 years resident.
Albeet Wm. S. Nichols,
19 years resident.
TRUE COPIES]
TESTIMONIALS.
1, These are to certify the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty that Mr. Richard R. Armstrong served as Naval
Cadet on board Her Majesty’s ship Howe under my command, from the 18th May, 1847, to the 17th May, 1849, and
as Midshipman from the 18th May, 1849, to the date hereof, during which time he conducted himself with diligence, sobriety,
and attention, and was always obedient to command.
Given under my hand on board H.M. ship Howe at Sheerness, this 12th July, 1850.
JS. STERLING, Captain.
Extea.
I have had every reason to approve of Mr, Armstrong’s conduct, and of his rapidity of acquiring a knowledge of his
JS. STERLING.
Extea.
2. 1850 to 1853.—Mr. Armstrong was with me for nearly three years when employed on the West Coast of Africa in
suppressing slavery, and I always found him ready for any emergency. He is a quick, intelligent, and smart young officer.
He showed great pluck in saving the life of a boy named Colpoys when off Ambrizette, by jumping overboard, and keeping
up the youngster who had fallen overboard. There were a number of sharks alongside the ship at the time.
( Signed ) R. DUNNING WHITE,
Commander R.N.
3. This is to certify the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty that Mr. R. R. Armstrong served as Midshipman on
board her Majesty’s Steam Sloop, under my command, from the sth day of July, 1853 (O.E. 12th May, 1853), to this date,
during which period he conducted himself with diligence, sobriety, and attention, and was always obedient to command.
Given under my hand on board H.M.S. Vesuvius, at Spithead, the sth day of August, 1853,
(Signed) THOMAS WILSON.
Commander.
Extea.
Mr. Armstrong was Cadet and Midshipman of the Howe when I served in her as Commander, and his conduct was
always that of an attentive, correct, and promising young officer.
[Sgd] T. W.


4. This is to certify the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty that Mr. E. E. Armstrong, acting mate, served on
board Her Majesty’s Steam Sloop under my command, from the 9th December, 1854, to the date hereof, during which period
he conducted himself in accordance with the printed instructions, and kept a journal.
Given under my hand on board H.M.S. Vesuvius, at Balaklava, Bth February, 1855.
(Signed) EICHAED A. POWELL,
Captain.
Extra.
This officer has given me great satisfaction in the execution of his duty, and from my knowledge of him I consider
that he is quite competent to take charge of a ship as officer of the watch.
He has shewn great humanity and enterprise in saving the life of a boy when off the mouth of the Danube.
[Signed) E. A. POWELL,
H.M.S. Vesuvius, at Balaklava, 9th Dec., 1854. Commander,
5. This is to certify that Mr. E, E. Armstrong, of H.M. ship Vesuvius, served in the Eoyal Naval Brigade, under my
command, from 24th March, 1855, to the date hereof, during which time he complied with the general printed instructions.
Given under my hand at the camp of the Eoyal Naval Brigade, before Sebastopol, this 20th July, 1855.
(Signed) STEPHEN LUSHINGTON,
Captain Commanding E. Naval Brigade.
6. These are to certify the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty that Mr. E. E. Armstrong, acting mate of H.M.
Steam Sloop Vesuvius, served in the Eoyal Naval Brigade, under my command, from the 21st July, 1855, to the date hereof,
during which time he complied with the printed regulations.
Dated at the Camp Naval Brigade before Sebastopol, the 15th September, 1855.
(Signed) HENEY KEPPEL, _
Captain Commanding Eoyal Naval Brigade.
Extra.
7. This is to certify the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty that Mr. E. E. Armstrong, acting mate, served in
Her Majesty’s Steam Sloop, under my command, from the 9th day of February, 1855, to the date hereof, during which time
he has complied with the printed instructions, and in consequence of his conspicuous zeal and gallantry was recommended
by me to Lord Lyons for promotion.
Given under my hand on board Her Majesty’s Ship Vesuvius, at Sebastopol, this 25th day of November, 1855.
(Signed) SHEEAED OSBOENB,
Captain.
I hereby certify that Lieut. Armstrong was received into the Naval Hospital, Therapia, in May, 1856, suffering from a
gunshot wound in the right leg, with lodgment of the bullet, for the extraction of which he submitted to two operations,
when two pieces of a bullet were removed from the bone. There is now considerable thickening of the bone, and he suffers
at times much pain. (Signed) WM. BENNETT DALBY, M.D.,
Sheerness, December 22nd, 1859. Surgeon, E.N.
Lieutenant E. Armstrong has been under my care and observation since I joined this ship, suffering from the effects
of a gunshot wound in the leg. Several small pieces of bone have come away, and more will ultimately have to come, and
I consider him quite unfit for active service, if he ever will. His general health is not good.
(Signed) L. J. CUNNINGHAM,
H.M.S. Formidable, “ staff Surgeon.
Sheerness, Ist March, 1860.
These are to certify that Lieut, Eichard E. Armstrong, E.N., was admitted into the Naval Hospital, at Therapia, in
the end of May, 1856, with a musket ball wound of the leg, situated about its middle and external aspect, which he received
on the 12th of April, in the Crimea,
The bullet was subsequently extracted in two separate pieces by two operations, when the bone was found to be some-
what injured and denuded of Pereosteum. .
He was discharged for passage to England in the end of June or beginning of July, 1856, and at that time the wound
was nearly closed, but the limb very weak.
(Signed) J. DAVIDSON,
Dep. Insp. General,
E.N. Hospital, Haslar, Late of Therapia Hospital.
March Ist, 1860.
Off Aden, s.s. Poonah, 11th December, 1873.
Having learned from you that a report, totally unfounded, has been circulated to the effect that you were
dismissed from the employment of the Provincial Government of Canterbury, in consequence of misconduct while in office,
I gladly take the opportunity of most positively denying that any such misconduct occurred during my term of office, nor
did I at any time hear any rumour of such things during my continued residence in Canterbury.
It is quite possible that the misconduct of another official in the same department, who was imprisoned for his crimes,
and who was your immediate successor in Office, has been erroneously attributed to you. I am myself aware that you
voluntarily resigned your appointment at the time when reductions of salaries were made by Mr. Eolleston, the then
Superintendent of the Province.
Believe me, my dear Sir,
Tours very faithfully,
Commander E, Armstrong. ( Signed ) SAMUEL BEALEY.
Lieutenant Eichard Armstrong, E.N., held the offices of Immigration Officer, Commissioner to Inspect Immigrant
Vessels, and Administrator of Charitable Aid in the Province of Canterbury, New Zealand, from the fifth day of January,
1864, to the month of March, 1867, at which time I left the office of Superintendent of the Province, during which period
he satisfactorily and efficiently performed the duties of those offices, and I consider the Province was greatly indebted to
him for his diligence and activity in collecting large sums of money due from immigrants, which without such care would
have been entirely lost to the Treasury, . _ __
(Signed) SAMUEL BEALEY,
Late Superintendent of Canterbury.
(copy. )
Immigration Office, Christchurch,
g IE February 4, 1868.
My personal attention is immediately required on urgent private matters in the North Island, which will require
absence from my duties for at least one month from to-morrow. I have therefore the honour to request you will be good
enough to grant me leave of absence for that time.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
(Signed) EICHD, E. AEMSTEONG,
To His Honor the Surperintendent, Canterbury. Immigration Officer.
I certify that the above is a true copy. T
J. E. MAEOH, Immigration Officer,


Province of Canterbury.
Extract from the Provincial Government Gazette.
Provincial Secretary’s office,
Christchurch, 23rd April, 1868.
His Honor the Superintendent directs it to be notified that he has been pleased to appoint
DAVID MITCHELL MACKAY
to be an Immigration Commissioner, vice Richard Ramsay Armstrong, resigned.
{Signed) EDWARD JOLLIE,
Provincial Secretary.
I certify that the above is a true extract.
J. E. MARCH,
Immigration Officer, July 13th, 1882.
By his Excellency Sir Alfred Stephen, Knight Commander of the Most Distinguished Order of Saint Michael and
Saint George, and a Companion of the Most Honourable Order of the Bath, Lieutenant-Governor of New
South Wales.
TO RICHARD RAMSAY ARMSTRONG, Esquire, retired Commander R.N.,
One of Her Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the Colony of New South Wales ;
KNOW YOU, That I, Sib Alfred Stephen, the Lieutenant-Governor aforesaid, Do, by virtue of the authority and power
in me vested, and with the advice of the Executive Council, hereby appoint and assign you to be and to perform the duties of
Resident Magistrate at Lord Howe Island within the said Colony together with such other duties as are, or shall be, from
time to time directed to be performed by you in the exercise of such office or under the authority of any Act or Ordinance in
force within this Colony ; and to suppress all tumults, riots, affrays, or breaches of the Peace, all Public nuisances, vagrancies,
and offences against the Law in the said Island; and with all diligence and care to watch over the moral well-being of the
inhabitants of the said Island, and to the utmost of your ability to maintain obedience to the laws and due Administration of
Justice ; and to keep, and cause to be kept, all Acts, Ordinances, and Regulations for the good of the Peace and the preserva-
tion of the same, and for the quiet rule and government of the Liege Subjects of Our Sovereign Lady the Queen, in all and
singular their articles, in the said Island according to the force, form, and effect of the same ; and therefore I command you,
that in keeping the Peace, Acts, and Ordinances, and all and singular other the premises, you diligently apply yourself, and
perform and fulfil them in the aforesaid form, doing therein what to justice appertains, according to the law and form of the
said Acts, Ordinances, and Regulations as aforesaid.
GIVEN under my Hand and the Seal of the Colony, at Government House, Sydney, in New South Wales aforesaid, this
first day of August, in the year of Our Lord One thousand eight hundred and seventy-nine, and in the forty-third year
of Her Majesty’s Reign.
ALFRED STEPHEN.
By His Excellency’s command,
HENRY PARKES.
Entered on record by me, in Register of Patents, Number eleven, Page 102-3, this fifth day of August, one thousand
eight hundred and teventy-nine.
CRITCHETT WALKER.
For the Colonial Secretary and Registrar of Records,
These documents are represented by Captain R. R Armstrong to be true copies of the original certificates issued to
him, and he states his willingness to produce the originals when required.
ALFD. HILDER, J.P.
Sydney, 9th October, 1882.
The following information relative to Captain Armstrong’s naval career is extracted from the Royal Navy List, 1881 :
“ Retired Commanders —158. —Armstrong, R.N. Midshipman of H M.S. Howe when she took Queen Adelaide to Lisbon
and Madeira in 1848, and was appointed aide-de-camp to Her Majesty ; saw much service in suppression of slavery on the
west coast of Africa ; was in the Vesuvius during the Crimean War ; present during the Crimean War at the Sulina mouth
of the Danube, and captured many vessels ; engaged at the wreck of the Tiger, off Odessa, and on several occasions on the
Danubian and Circassian coasts ; signal-midshipman of the Vesuvius when engaged at the battle of Alma ; present at the
combined attacks on Sebastopol; was in command of a small steamer at Balaclava ; served with the Naval Brigade in the
trenches before Sebastopol; was one of the storming party on the Redan on the 18th June, and present at the fall of
Sebastopol; engaged in the Sea of Azoff expedition, and had charge of boats at many skirmishes at Mariapol and other
ports ; specially promoted by Lord Lyons for conspicuous zeal and gallantry ; wounded on three occasions ; Crimean and
Turkish medals and clasps ; pension for wounds ; Knight of the Legion of Honour ; Order of the Medjidig ; has held the
appointment of Chief Immigration Officer ; Commissioner and Inspector of Ships for years in Canterbury, New Zealand ;
was appointed Government Resident at Lord Howe’s Island, South Pacific, 1878 ; has been successful in saving several lives
from drowning during his career.”
Greyoliffe, Vaucluse, July 25th, 1878.
Dear Captain Armstrong,— At the time when the Government, of which I was a member, entrusted you with the
commission to Lord Howe’s Island, it was, I know, the intention of my colleagues to make some arrangement for the securing
to the inhabitants of Lord Howe’s Island the advantages of wise supervision and the administration of justice. From your
distinguished services, and the very high recommendations which you received, the offer of any such appointment would
have doubtless been made to you. If you think this assurance would be of any service to you with the existing administra-
tion, I feel sure that Sir John Robertson, if you apply to him, will confirm this ; or you may shew this letter to Mr.
Fitzpatrick or Mr. Farnell, with both of whom I have the pleasure of being on terms of friendship.
Very sincerely yours,
Captain Armstrong, &0., &0., R.N, ' (Signed) WILLIAM B. DALLEY.
College Street, 10 Nov., 1882.
Copy—From Sir Alfred Stephen, K.0.M.G., 0.8., &0., Lieutenant-Governor, N.S.W.
To Captain R. R. Armstrong, R.N.
Dear Sir, —I have read your papers, and the late Mr. Forster’s note upon them, and I agree in the main in what he
says—but not in his impression that, however excusably under the circumstances, you committed a breach of the law in
accepting goods or labour in return for liquors supplied by you. Ido not at present understand how a man can be truly
said to have broken a municipal enactment with which no means existed for enabling him to comply; but, setting this
point aside, it certainly does appear to me that the circumstances which (relying of course on your statement) led you to
supply those liquors, deprive the act of all criminality ; and if you were really not allowed to cross-examine the witnesses
against you, or to call witnesses in your defence, I should certainly think that the Government would, on your petition,
feel called on to have the matter reconsidered. The nature of the charges generally—or the character of the persons
supporting them—can only be fairly discussed after an opportunity afforded to you openly to impeach their character, and
to the people impeached to reply. I should be glad to hear of a more happy termination to your career of public service,
but I can obviously take no part in any discussion on the case—in any stage of it.
I am, faithfully yours,
(Signed) ALFRED STEPHEN.
Gibbs, Siiallard, & Co., Printers, 70 Pitt Street, Sydney.


>
I ' ■ K \- -i
1
'
.
■
-
.
