

*>
No. VII.
NEW SOUTH WALES
•i H'. I
MAGAZ I \ E.
FEBRUARY 1, 1834.
Vol. rr.
CAPTAIN STURT’S EXPEDITIONS.
(From the Literary Gazette.)
Two Expeditions into the interior of Southern Australia, during
the years 1828, 1829, 1830, and 1831; with observations on
the soil, climate, and general resources of the Colony of New
South Wales. By Captain Charles Sturt, 39th Regiment,
F.L.S. and F.R.G.S. 2 vols. Bvo. London, 1833. Smith,
Elder, and Co.
Journals of several Expeditions made in Western Australia,
during the years 1829, 1830, 1831, and 1832, under the sanc -
tion of the Governor, Sir James Stirling; containing the
latest authentic information relative to that Country : accom-
panied by a Map. 12mo. p.p, 263, London, 1833. Cross.
Van Diemen’s Land Almanack for 1833. Hobart Town, H.
Melville ; London, Smith, Elder, and Co.
These publications supply a mass of intelligence concerning
the fifth quarter of the earth, about whose infancy we are now
so frequently called upon to take a world of interest. It is,
however, too young, as yet, to inspire us with precisely that
sort of interest which most of the writers wish to awaken. Its
political views, its commercial means, its free and its convict
relations, as they regard the old people of the old universe,
resemble the strength, the emotions, and the gambols of chili-
hood, which are likely to be evolved in a mature future of in-
fluence and effect in the great sphere of being ; but which at
the time serve only to amuse the seniors who have played the
game of life, and know what it is worth —or rather, how worth-
less it is. When we hear the bold child talking of prodigious
D 3


things, of being willing to catch a bee in spite of bis sting, or
climb all the way to the pretty moon to see whether it is really
lire or really cheese, we laugh at the blissful ignorance, blind
to what that child may hereafter be—a hero, a legislator, a
philosopher, upon whose deeds so much of human affairs may
depend. So is it amusing to listen to the prattle of baby colo-
nies, anticipating extraordinary development, power, empires,
when when ?—when they shall have grown older—over-
come every natural difficulty—civilised or extirpated the
hapless ignorant and savage race whose lands they are to re-
people —peopled those vast continents—gone through all the
dangers and changes of political generation, and become the
mighty nations of three centuries hence. The aspirings of
man are fine and cheering (though somewhat laughable) in
this way. No sooner are a few hundreds of these human ants
thrown together, where millions might vegetate in quiet, but
they become imbued with the energy of patriarchs, and the
foresight of prophets. This river settlement is at once the
nucleus of a splendid country—this factory the egg of a com-
mercial kingdom. Well, the oak began in an acorn, and the
mightiest ot dominions in a handful of adventurers or outcasts.
In the meantime, we must take Australia and its adjacent
lands as they are ; struggling into existence, contesting with
other regions, such as Canada, the Cape, &c. &c. for the ad-
vantage of luring settlers, and hardily striving to make the best
of the circumstances in which they stand. Always remem-
bering that, to a literary journal, like ours, the products of
natural history, and elucidations of science to be obtained from
new and extended means, possess a charm very likely to
detach us from dwelling on present statistics or anticipated
glories. * r
With this confession we turn to our authors. Captain Sturt
dedicates his volume to that honest and able friend of all hu-
mane improvement, Lord Ripon; and then proceeds to lay
before us the fruits of his expeditions into the interior of Aus-
tralia in 1828, 9, 30, and 31. His descriptions of the river
navigation are extremely curious and interesting, and, as they
promise to lead to important geographical results, deserve as
much of our attention as the details of intercourse with the
natives, though the latter foreshew all the political conse-
quences of attempts to settle on the banks of these difficult and
now almost unnavigable streams.
The first expedition was down the Macquarie river, into the
western region, in 1828, 9. The party went overland from
Sydney, and, striking on a depot on the river about lat. 32* ° ,
long. 148° 30’, furnished themselves with stores, and em-
bark* d on (he Macquarie. They soon arrived-at extensive
marshes, and encamped on a forest of reeds, where they eh-


countered many obstacles ; but at length they were enabled
to penetrate yet farther, (ill they reached Darling Diver, and
to their great disappointment discovered it to be salt. On
their return by the Castlereagh River, they crossed the Dar-
ling ninety miles higher up. Ihe absolute intormalion ac-
quired, beyond what was previously known, seems to be small,
for Captain Sturt s. ys, —
“ It would be presumptuous to hazard any opinion as to the
nature of the interior to the westward ot that remarkable
river. Its course is involved in equal mystery, and it is a
matter of equal doubt whether it makes its way to the south
coast, or ultimately exhausts itself in feeding a succession ot
swamps, or falls into a large reservoir in the centre of the
island.” _ - ■
So much for the uncertainty of the Darling. Indeed, such
is the state of the country, that between the summer droughts
and winter rains, it is not easy to determine what is dry land,
swamp, river, lake, or inland sea. We are inclined to think
that they change places and characters with the season. In
geology, the following is curious :
“ It is a most remarkable fact, that not a pebble or a stone
was picked up during the progress of the expedition, on any
one of the plains ; and that after it again left Mount Harris
for the Castlereagh, the only rock-formation discovered, was a
small freestone tract near the Darling river, ihere was not
a pebble of any kind cither in tbc bed of the Castlereagh, or
in the creeks falling into it.”
The annexed also relates to a singular natural pheno-
menon :
“ About 3 p. m. on the 7lh, Mr. Hume and I were occupied
in tracing the chart upon the ground. Ihe day had been
remarkably fine, not a cloud was there in the heavens, nor a
breath of air to bo felt. On a sudden we heard what seemed
to be the report of a gun fired at the distance of between five
and six miles. It was not the hollow sound of an earthly
explosion, or the sharp cracking noise of falling timber, but
in every way resembled a discharge of a heavy piece of ord-
nance. On this all were agreed, but no one was certain
whence the sound proceeded. Roth Mr. Hume and myself
had been too attentive to our occupation to form a satisfactory
opinion ; but we both thought it came from the N.A\ r . 1 sent
one of the men immediately up a tree, but he could observe
nothing unusual. The country around him appeared to be
equally flat on all sides, and to be thickly wooded; whatever
occasioned the report, it made a strong impression on all ot us ;
and to this day, the singularity of such a sound, in such a
situation, is a matter of mystery to me.”
This journey extended over sonic thirteen hundred miles..


The second expedition set out in November 1829, and was'accom-
pamed by Mr. George M'Leay, the naturalist. It descended
the rivers Murrmnhidgee and Murray, to the south of the
preceding course, crossed a lake named Alexandrina, and
debouched on the western coast, at Encounter Bay. The
Murray is a river which joins the Murrumbidgee between
142 and 1t.3 ° , and latitude and'was seventy yards wide
at the junction. Lake Alcxandrina is fifty miles long, and
forty broad. It is shallow in many places, but has some fine
bays. Ihe water is brackish, and the outlet of Encounter Bay
impracticable. Captain S. supposes that the Darling may
fall into the Murray. The summing up of the travel is almost
astounding.
Our journey homeward (the author says) was only re-
maikable tor its labour: in conclusion, therefore, it remains
tor me to add that we reached the depot on the 23d of March.
ur sugar failed us on the 18th of February, and our salt pro-
visions, in consequence of the accident which happened to the
skiff, on the Bth ot March ; so that from the above period we
were living on a reduced ration of flour; and as we took few
ish, and were generally unsuccessful with our guns, the men
had seldom more than their bread to eat. I regretted to ob-
serve that they were daily falling off, and that although unre-
mitting in their exertions, they were well nigh exhausted ere
we leached the Morumbidgee. We were from sunrise to five
o clock on the water, and from the day that we left the depot
to that of our return, we never rested upon our oars. We
were thirty-nine days gaining the depot from the coast, against
a strong current in both rivers, being seven more than it took
«s to go down. From the depot to this station we had seven-
teen days hard pulling, making a total of eighty-eight, during
which time we could not have travelled over less than 200
miles. I was under the necessity of stopping short on the
10th instant, and of detaching two men for the drays, which
happily arrived on the 17tli, on which day our stock of flour
failed us. Had I not adopted this plan, the men would have
become too weak to have pulled up to Pondebadgery, and we
should no doubt have suffered some privations.”
A few quotations respecting the natives will suffice to gratify
the curiosity of our readers, and induce them to extend their
researches to these interesting volumes. That cannibalism
prevails in a certain degree is pretty certain. Captain Sturt
says:—
“ One of the stockmen pointed out two blacks to me at a
little distance from us The one was standing, the other sil-
img. ‘ That fellow, sir,’ said he, ‘ who is sitting down, killed
ui3 infant child last night by knocking its head against a stone,
alter which he threw it on the fire, and (hen devoured it.’ 1


was horror-struck, and could scarcely believe such a story. 1
therefore went up to the man and questioned him as to the
tact, as well as I could. He did not attempt to deny it, but
slunk away in evident consciousness, 1 then questioned the
other that remained, whose excuse for his friend was, that the
child was sick, and would never have growui up, adding, ho
himself did not patter (eat) any of it. Many of my readers
may probably doubt this horrid occurrence having taken place,
as t have not mentioned any corroborating circumstances. I
am myself, however, as firmly persuaded of the truth of what
1 have stated, as if I had seen the savage commit the act; for
I talked to his companion who did see him, and who described
to me the manner in which he killed the child. Be it as it
may, the very mention of such a thing among these people goes
to prove that they are capable of such an enormity.”
The following is a fair specimen of their general conduct:—•
“ Some natives were observed running by the river-side
behind us, but on turning the boat’s head towards the shore,
they ran away, it was evident they had no idea what w r e
were, and, from their timidity, feeling assured that it would
be impossible to bring them to a parley, we continued onwards
till our usual hour of stopping, when we pitched our tents on
the left bank for the night, it being the one opposite to that on
which the natives had appeared. We conjectured that their
curiosity would lead them to follow us, which they very shortly
did ; for we had scarcely made ourselves comfortable, when we
heard their wild notes through the woods as they advanced to-
wards the river ; and their breaking into view with their
speares and shields, and painted and prepared as they were
for battle, was extremely fine. They stood threatening us,
and making a great noise, for a considerable time, but finding
that we took no notice of them, they at length became quiet.
1 then walked to some little distance from the party, and
taking a branch in my hand, as a sign of peace, beckoned them
to swim to our side of the river, which, .after some time, two
or three of them did. But they approached me with great
caution, hesitating at every step. They soon, however, gained
confidence, and were ultimately joined by all the males of their
tribe. I gave the first who swam the river a tomahawk (making
this a rule in order to encourage them), with which he was
highly delighted. I shortly afterwards placed them all in a
row, and fired a gun before them : they were quite unprepared
for such an explosion, and after standing stupified and motion-
less for a moment or two, they simultaneously took to their
heels, to our great amusement. I succeeded, however, in
calling them back, and they regained their confidence so much,
that sixteen of them remained with us all night, but the greater
number retired at sunset. On the following morning they ac-


companied us down the river, where we fell in with their
tribe, who were stationed on an elevated bank, a short distance
below, to the number of eighty-three, men, women, and chil-
dren. Their appearance was extremely picturesque and sin-
gular. They wanted us to land, but time was too precious for
such delays. Some of the boldest of the natives swam round
and round the boat, so as to impede the use of the oars, and
the women on the bank evinced their astonishment by mingled
yells and cries. They entreated us, by signs, to remain with
them ; but, as I foresaw a compliance on this occasion would
hereafter be attended with inconvenience, I thought it better
to proceed on our journey ; and the natives soon ceased their
importunities, and, indeed, did not follow or molest us.
* * * * *
“ On the 19th, as we were about to conclude our journey
for the day, we saw a large body of natives before us. On
approaching them, they shewed every disposition for combat,
and ran along the bank with spears in rests, as if only waiting
for an opportunity to throw them at us. They were upon the
right, and as the river was broad enough to enable me to steer
wide of them, I did not care much for their threats ; but,
upon another party appearing upon the left bank, I thought
it high time to disperse one or the other of them, as the
channel was not wide enough to enable me to keep clear of
danger, if assailed by both, as I might be while keeping amid
the channel. I found, however, that they did not know how
to use the advantage they possessed, as the two divisions
formed a junction ; those on the left swimming over to the
stronger body upon the right bank. This, fortunately, pre-
vented the necessity of any hostile measure on my part, and
we were suffered to proceed unmolested for the present. The
whole then followed us, without any symptom of fear, but
making a dreadful shouting, and beating their spears and
shields together, by way of intimidation. It is but justice to
my men to say, that in this critical situation they evinced the
greatest coolness, though it was impossible for any one (o
witness such a ,scene with indifference. As 1 did not intend
to fatigue the men by continuing to pull farther than we were
in the habit of doing, we landed at our usual time on (he left
bank, and while the people were pitching the tents, 1 walked
down the bank with M‘Leay, to treat with these desperadoes
in the best way we could across the water—a measure to which
my men shewed great reluctance, declaring that if during our
absence the natives approached them, they would undoubtedly
fire upon them. 1 assured them it was not my intention to go
out of their sight. We took our guns with us, but determined
not to use them until the last extremity, both from a reluctance
to shed blood, and with a view' to our future security. 1 held


a long pantomimical dialogue with them, across the water, and
held out the olive branch in token of amity. They at length
laid aside their spears, and a long consultation took place
among them, which ended in two or three wading into the
river, contrary, as it appeared, to the earnest remonstrances
61 the majority, who, finding that their entreaties had no
effect, wept aloud, and followed them, with a determination, 1
am sure-, -of sharing their fate, whatever it might have been.
As soon as they landed, M'Leay and I retired to a little
distance from the bank and sat down ; that being the usual
way among the natives of the interior, to invite to an interview.
When they saw us act thus, fliey approached and sat down
by us, but without looking up, from a kind of diffidence pecu-
liar to them, and which exists even among the nearest
relatives, as I have already had occasion to observe. As they
gained confidence, however, they shewed an excessive curio-
sity, and stared at us in the most earnest manner. We now
led them to the camp, and 1 gave, as was my custom, the first
who approached, a tomahawk; and to the others some pieces
of iron hoop. Those who had crossed the river amounted to
about thirty.five in number. At sunset the majority of them
left us; but three old men remained at the fire-side all night.
I observed that few of them had either lost their front teeth,
or lacerated their bodies, as the more westerly tribes do. The
most loathsome diseases prevailed among them. Several were
disabled by leprosy, or some similar disorder, and two or three
had entirely lost their sight. They are, undoubtedly, a brave
and confiding people, and are by no means wanting in natural
affection. In person they resemble the mountain tribes.
They had the thick lip, the sunken eye, the extended nostril,
and long beards ; and both smooth and curly hair are common
among them. Their lower extremities appear to bear no pro-
portion to their bust in point of muscular strength; but the
facility with which they ascend trees of the largest growth,
and the activity with which they move upon all occasions,
together with their singular erect stature, argue that such
appearance is entirely deceptive. The old men slept very
soundly by the fire, and were the last to get up in the morning.
M'Leay’s extreme good humour had made a most favourable
impression upon them, and I can picture him even now, joining
in their wild song. Whether it was from his entering so
readily into their mirth, or from any thing peculiar that struck
them, the impression upon the whole of us was, that they took
him to have been originally a black, in consequence of which
they gave him the name of Rundi. Certain it is, they pressed
him to shew his side, and asked if he had not received a wound
there—evidently as if the original Rundi had met with a
violent death from a spear-wound in that place. The whole


tribe, amounting in number to upwards of 150, assembled f<>
see us take our departure. Four of them accompanied us.
among whom there was one remarkable for personal strength
and stature. The 21st passed with opt our falling in with any
new tribe ; and the night of the 22d saw us still wandering
in that lonely desart together. There was something unusual
in our going through such an extent of country without meeting
another tribe; but our companions appeared to be perfectly
aware of the absence of inhabitants, as they never left our
side.’.
After this the expedition was providentially saved in the
very crisis of their fate, from a conflict with six hundred hos-
tile natives; but we must again refer to the work itself; and
only add, that it is illustrated with a map, and embellished
with some fine objects of natural history.
The small volume, the second on our list, contains journals
of various expeditions in Western Australia up to the year
1832; which have extended our acquaintance with that quar-
ter of the new est new world. The most novel parts relate to
the range of Darling mountains; and to excursions from and
about the Swan River. The general gist appears to be to
encourage emigration to that quarter; where, indeed, capital
and labour are much wanted. As we have no desire to con-
ciliate the conflicting opinions on this subject, many of them
the offspring of interested motives, the authors being concerned
in the prosperity of Canada, or Cape, or Australian settle-
ments, w'e shall merely select a few illustrations of curious
facts relating to (he natives and country.
“ We beard (says the writer of one of the narratives) the
natives, whose traces we had been following this morning, hail-
ing each other at a great distance : vve were fortunate enough
this night in finding shelter from the rain, which was pouring
down in torrents, under a shelving rock ; it was of consider-
able size, having the shape and appearance of a thatched roof
of a cottage. In the neighbourhood of our bivouac, and for
some distance around, were large masses of granite ; in one of
these we discovered a cavern, the interior being arched, and
resembling somewhat in appearance an ancient ruin. On one
side was rudely carved what was evidently intended to repre-
sent an image of the sun, it being a circular figure about
eighteen inches in diameter, emitting rays from its left side,
and having without the circle, lines meeting each other nearly
at right angles : close to this representation of the sun, were
the impression of an arm and several hands. This spot appeared
to us to be used by the natives as a place of worship.”
At another place we are told
“ We encountered a valley, the most difficult passage of any
thing I ever yet met with in the shape of bush ; its vegetation


1834.] Western Australia. 61
consisted solely of shrubs, advanced to a larger standard than
usual in this country ; the ground (I suppose inconsequence
of perpetual shade and circulation) was csvered with moss, and
on this wc were obliged to crawl under the thicket, while
sliding down and climbing up the numerous and steep descents
and acclivities in which the place abounded ; half a mile front
this brought upon us that remarkable feature, the White
Patch ; and as I believe an opinion obtains, that it is a sand-
stone, and formed of hardened drift from the beach, I shall
insert my own observations. The first peculiarity that strikes
the eye is a large surface of limestone, upon which, in the
hollows and lower parts, is deposited a considerable portion
of sand, accumulated both from the sea-shore (which the pre-
sence of broken shells attests) and from the gradual decompo -
sition of the rock itself; and that this process is going rapidly
on, I conclude from the following evidence :—Above the sur-
face on every side may be seen strong excrescences, resembling
the stems of shrubs, sometimes very slender, sometimes as
large as the timber of a large tree ; one might imagine, with
the poet, that nature had first given birth to a thicket,
Then framed a shell when the work was done,
.And changed the hazel wands (o stone.
They do not however, on close examination, appear to have in
them any thing analogous to incrustation, but to be the harder
parts of the rock, that have resisted the action of the atmos-
phere, probably zoophytes embedded in a more triable matrix,
which has disappeared from around them, and blown away iu
the form of sand ; there are nodules of a closer-grained lime-
stone to bo seen protruding above the surface, sometimes yel-
low, much resembling grallo anticho, and sometimes black or
slate-coloured.” Again :
“ After walking about three miles in a north by west direc-
tion along the banks, we began to observe evident tokens of
the proximity of the sea, such as hottentot figs, rock spinach ;
of the latter we prepared a mess when we arrived on the edge
of a large flat, into which the river falls. It was then twelve
o’clock ; before, however, we began our repast, we were hailed
by three natives, who were wading over from the opposite side,
fearful probably that we were likely to interfere with some
snares of fish which they had constructed near the spot where
we were; they carried spears, but approached wilhal with
such friendly guise and courtly seeming, that-I did not hesitate
to advance to meet them alone and unarmed. They were, on
the whole, smaller of stature than the men I had been accus-
tomed to see, and wore no skins. The countenances of two
were certainly ugly and brutal enough, but the third had a
sprightly air and good-humoured expression, accompanied with
that revolting laugh which, is so general with these savages :
E 8


his hair, matted with peculiar taste into strings resembling
spun-yarn, and bound up close, displayed a head of true
Caucasian proportion, with a facial angle less acute than is
often observable in the European. They expressed consider-
able surprise at the facility with which we procured a spark
from the firelock ; and upon our making signs to that effect,
soon blew it into a blaze. I afterwards shot them two small
birds, and gave them some of our kangaroo meat, which they
ate, refusing biscuit and vegetables,”
All the intelligence a Swan River settler may require is to
be found in this volume ; and we have only to add, from
sources of information on which we can rely, that the best foot
is put foremost, and no disappointment can possibly arise from
finding the colony more eligible than it is here represented.*
Of the Van Diemen's Land Almanack for 1833, we need only
observe that it is quite equal to its precursors, of which we
spoke favourably, and supplies the latest, most ample, and ap-
parently very impartial and accurate accounts of that country
and its European inhabitants.
* The hollowing note from a recent Hobart Town Journal, conoborutes this
view:—
“ The descriptive writers speak favourably of the present state of affairs
there, but those who deal in details of facts throw a shade on the picture.
Kangaroo flesh, for example, sells at Is. 6d. per pound, when it can be got. A
descriptive tourist speaks of excellent dinners and beef-steaks—but a cow and
calf cost We observe also, among sales, &c chiefly such articles as
rum, brandy, geneva, London porter, ale, wines of the choicest description.
Bilks, lace caps, silk shoes, fine India mats, and many other things not exactly
suited to a new settlement, however necessary they may be to the com.ort of
settlers just emerged from the refined circles of a highly luxurious society.
We throw no blame on the gentlemen who have founded the settlement, nor
question the morals of any part of the population. But if they wish to thrive,
they must forget fashions for a season. The whole expenditure, both of money,
labour, and thought, should be upon the laud in the first instance. Cattle and
sheep, agricultural implements, seed corn, and articles of food and clothing
(not dress) absolutely indispensable, should be their only imports, till they
Lave something else to trim the balance of trade with than hard cash. Their
newspaper protests loudly against all taxation ; but it calls as loudly for public
works, particularly roads and bridges, or floats. This we do not very clearly
understand. If people can be got to rear public buildings, repair roads, &c,
to administer justice, and so forth, for nothing, taxation would certainly be a
gratuitous evil. But we doubt whether this state of things is likely to con-
tinue verv long. The natives are beginning to get troublesome to the more
advanced locations. One settler has recently been cruelly murdered by them.
No provocation whatever was given, according to the account of a boy who
escaped when the deed was perpetrated—except that the settlers had taken
their country from them, and were killing their cattle—that is, the few wild
animals which furnish these hunters with their chief means of subsistence.
Every civilised man sees that the savages are in the wrong, when they thus
attack, instead of joining in friendship with the new-comers; but it requires
«ome pains and dexterity in argument to bring this undeniable truth home to a
savage understanding. In Van Diemen’s Land, we are happy to observe, this
difficult task has been accomplished with the remainder of the natives there ;
the missionary has succeeded where the soldier failed, end the exterminating
war is at an end,”—South African Advertiser, Oct, 20’
