

CARAVAN
BUILDING
Details of
A Home-Built' Trailer:
A Light Car Caravanette
and USEFUL HINTS on
CARAVAN TOURING
A Home Beautiful Production
Caravan designed by
F. R. Oulton for the
Home Beautiful was
adapted by Mr. H.
Pruser to meet his own
requirements. which
included accommoda-
tion for a small rowing


Page Two
Caravan (Building


Caravan (Building
Page Three
The Design, Use and Care of
Home-built Trailers
By M.
C. TINDALL
One reason for issuing this book just now is to satisfy the constant demands of applicants for copies of
the Home Beautiful in which its contents appeared serially and which are now unobtainable. How-
ever it is certain that in a country so suited to caravan travel there will be considerable development of
people caravanning after the war, and although it may not be possible to obtain all the material at present,
many will be glad to have the plans to study. They may even, in some cases, be able to build the body
and use it for some other purpose until happy holidays come round agajn. We regret that Mr M. C.
Tindall, who collaborated in the preparation of the book and wrote a good deal of it did not live to
see it published.—Ed. H.B.
CARAVANNING became popular about the be-
ginning of this century, although in England
horse r drawn caravans were built as far back
as 1880. These were usually very cumbersome and
heavy, and mostly drawn by two horses.
The Home-built Job
There are many designs of caravans on the
road today, and many home-built jobs are as good
as the factory models, and, in some respects, better.
Recently I visited a camping ground not 100 miles
from Melbourne, and within sight of my own
caravan there were three caravans built from the
directions that were published in the Home Beau-
tiful. In each case the owner had made alterations
or adaptations to suit his own purposes. In one,
accommodation for four was needed, so he made
an extra bed above the single bed; also extending
the over-all length by a few inches. After inspect-
ing this caravan, my summing up was—“a fine job.”
Another was built narrower, as the owner had a
narrow “right-of-way” to pass through at his home.
This gave the impression of being too high, but
otherwise it was very good. A third was built with
the furniture differently placed, which meant that
the windows had to be so reduced as to seem too
small. This one also had a bed added above the
single bed.
About 1910, a few caravans appeared, built
on motor bus chassis, but there also proved too
big and heavy, and too high to pass under many
of the English bridges. •It was not until 1925
that the trailer caravan—i.e., the caravan built as
a separate unit and trailed behind the car—came
into being, the weight thus being distributed over
two vehicles. It might be said that until the trailer
idea developed, a caravan was an impossibility to
all but a few. It meant that a motor was standing
idle for long periods, taking up space, and could
not be used except for one purpose. In those days
also, a caravan was much more costly, and too
much money was lying idle. A person owning
a caravan of this type needed a car as well. There
are still caravans built on heavy motor chassis, but
they are usually employed for official or business
trips, such as tours round Australia. They are,
as a rule, good jobs, specially built. For the or-
dinary man who wants a holiday caravan, however,
the trailer type undoubtedly is the best proposition.
With the trailer caravan you have the car to go
for provisions, or to make a day’s run to some
other place, but with a “one unit” caravan you
are anchored, so to speak, as you would have to
take everything with you. This might be all right
in some cases, but generally it would be a handicap.
Prospect and Protection
Whilst on the subject of windows, one or two
points are worth watching. First, while sitting
at the table one should be able to look out and
see what is worth seeing outside. I have been
in some caravans from which there was no view
at all, and the “closed-in” effect is surprising.
Therefore, all windows, if possible, should be placed
no higher than 3ft. 9in. from the floor.


Page Four
Secondly, the windows should be of a reason-
able size; if the windows are small the caravan
during a hot spell becomes uncomfortably, if not
unbearably, warm. Thirdly, all windows should
be made so that they will open, and it follows
that they should all be provided with wire screens—
with, if possible, a full-sized wire screen door. The
best type of window is hinged at the top, which
means that they can be left open when it is rain-
ing. Large windows of this kind on the four
sides give a view all round, and can be opened or
closed, according to the direction of the wind.
My own caravan is fitted with a wire door which
has lift-off hinges, and the door can be carried
inside, flat on one of the beds, or left in position,
hooked back. For appearance sake carry it inside.
Dust proofing is important. All windows and
door should have a strip of felt or soft rubber to
close against as dust finds its way into the smallest
crevice. Felt would be easiest to procure and Is
best stuck on with rubber solution. All joints
around the floor should also be made absolutely
tight, using a stopping which does not get very
hard, otherwise it will crack and fall out.
A Job for Home Craftsmen
Anyone desiring to build a caravan need not be
afraid to do so if a good plan is followed for the
main structure. But one word of advice: If you
are building a caravan from a plan, and desire
to alter the interior layout, take the trouble to
draw out a new plan and make sure everything fits.
The pioneering has been done, and there is
no need to deviate from the usual practice for un-
der-carriage, tow-bar, coupling, etc. But for in-
side arrangements, no harm can be done by fol-
lowing one’s own fancy. Always remember that
the main parts underneath must be strong. The
coupling should be of the ball and socket type,
which has proved better than the old bar and pin
type, which rattles on the road. There should be
no sound from the ball and socket coupling.
Coming to the fitting on the car, I would like
to warn the intending builder or hirer that this is
the most important part of the whole outfit. It
is really astounding to see the flimsy arrangements
on some cars. A typical example met with was a
car that was towing a 16 cwt. caravan which
had been hired for the holiday. A good shaped
bar had been made by a man who, one would think,
knew his job. It was fitted behind the bumper bar
and bolted to it, but the bumper bar was held
to the car by one bolt on each side, and this bolt
was screwed into the car frame itself, having no
nut on the inside; therefore the whole weight was
being hauled on
aj the thread of
two 3-Bin. bolts.
Most caravaneers
have started like
this, and gradually
continued on
through the car and
tent stage, arriving
eventually in pos-
session of a com-
fortable caravan.
Remember that this particular part has to
take sudden strain upwards and downwards, as well
as end stresses. It is no use having a good strong
tow bar if it is held in a flimsy way. The iron-
work used to hold bumper bars in position is usually
not good enough to tow a trailer caravan, which
may be anything from 10 cwt. to 30 cwt., or even
more. Angle iron is a good material to use, but
it is always best to have an extra strip running out
from the centre of the car frame, so that the direct
pull does not come from the side members.
Caravan (Building
For a heavy caravan, I would suggest dispensing
with the bumper bar altogether, and using 2in. to
2y 2 in. angle iron, bolted to the frame members, well
under the body. If possible, have the job done
by a firm that has had experience in building
caravans.
The building of
this light - car
caravanette is
fully described in
this book.
An Eye For The Future
When building a caravan, it is as well to look
ahead. A young couple will most likely need a
three-berth later on; so it would be best to start
off with a three-berth, or a two-berth that could
be added to later on. Again, if the family has
grown up, a two-berth is all that is needed, and
it is not advisable to use a van which is unnecessar-
ily large. It is always better to have the van as
light as possible, as travelling is then much more
comfortable.
The general rule is 1 cwt. to 1 horse power—that
is, it is reckoned that a 26 h.p. car can haul a 26
cwt. caravan. I do not like this, and much prefer,
say, 15 cwt. caravan to a 26 h.p. car. I have known
a 10 h.p. car pull a 12 cwt. caravan without trouble;
but it makes much harder work of the driving, as
more care must be taken, more gear changing, and,
if the weather happens to be very hot, there is a
chance of over-heating on hills. Therefore, I would
advise a man with a small car to consider the
caravanette, which is very comfortable and light, as
it is under six cwt. With this outfit, a tent is
used for meals, and if more than two are in the
party, stretchers will make up the extra beds. The
caravanette does not give all the conveniences
of the full-size van, but it is a very near approach
to it, and is far better than the small trailer and
tent outfit.
A two-berth caravan, fully furnished, weighs
about 10 to 12 cwt., and is about 10ft. long by 6ft.
6in. wide; and a three to four-berth van, 14ft
long, runs to 16 cwt. Some, of course, may be
heavier, according to the material used.
Driving And Travelling Hints
It must be remembered that when a caravan
is ready to move off its weight will be increased
by the provisions and clothing it is desired to
carry. This will be regulated by the nature of
the tour. If you are going to travel to the usual
holiday resorts, it is unnecessary to stock up with
a lot of tinned and bottled foods, as they can
all be bought at your destination, or near it. Water
is very heavy, and there is no need to fill up at
home, as for your first 100 or 200 miles you will
need only enough for meals; then you can take
on more. Some caravans have water tanks holding
as much as 20 gallons, i.e.: 200 lbs. Such a tank
should not be filled unless a very dry area is to
be crossed; three or four gallons should be ample.
Clothing and blankets are heavy, but in this
country warm clothes cannot be left at home. If
an extra table and deck chairs are to be carried,
the very lightest should be chosen. It is a good
plan to put as much gear in the car as possible,
especially the heavy things. If this can be done,
you will not have to unload the caravan when
stopping by the roadside for lunch.




Page Six
If the party consists of only two, you can take
out the back seat of the car, and this will make
room for all extra gear, such as deck chairs, suit-
cases, fishing gear, and so on; in fact, anything
that is not needed in the caravan should be carried
on the car, if possible, but do not make the mistake
of having things in the car that are needed in the
caravan. Make a point of having all things handy,
and keep them in their right places.
Do Not Skimp On Material
When building a caravan, remember that some
day you may want to sell it, so use the best material,
especially on the outside; don’t use old-fashioned
car wheels, etc. You will not save much, and will
lose in the long run. Don’t use 3-ply on the out-
side walls, as there is far better material in larger
sheets, up to 12ft. x 4ft. For inside lining use 3-ply.
The layout of the van will depend on the number
of people using it for sleeping. As mentioned
earlier, you can have others in the party sleeping
in a tent, but dining in the caravan. A two-berth,
10ft. van can be used by four people in this way.
My two-berth van has a folding table 3ft. 9in. x
20in. in the middle, with a bed on each side, used
for seats, and there is ample room for four to dine.
There is also ample room for cooking, stove, sink,
cupboards, ice chest, etc. This is similar to the
layout of a factory-made caravan, and its com-
pleteness has been admitted by many.
Painting Must Be Thorough
Painting a caravan is a job which must not be
rushed or slummed over, as the life of the van
depends very largely on all wet being kept out of
the woodwork and panels. All roughness must
first be smoothed off and finished with a very fine
sand paper. Dust should then be brushed or blown
out of the crevices. It is a good plan to give a
coat of rather thin paint before using a filler. If
the paint is forced into all joins and crevices, the
filling will hold better, and if it should loosen at
all the paint is still there to prolong the safety
period. Ordinary putty is not good enough as it
is inclined to shrink and fall out. It is better to
use a more flexible stopping which is not so affected
by the heat of the sun. A smooth finish is the
best, as dust is easily washed off, and is also more
lasting. Only the very best paint should be used
on the outside of the van, and a watch should be
kept for any cuts or cracks which might develop,
and fill them if only temporarily. If water gets
into the panels of a van which is lined throughout
it is a very difficult job to get it thoroughly dried,
and no paint or filling will hold if used while the
wood is still damp. Light colors are far the best
for a caravan as they keep the van cooler and do
not show the dust. Aluminium paint is excellent
for the roof if a very good quality is used. There
are some cheap lines which are coarse and rough
looking, therefore they should be avoided.
When making the furniture, 3-ply should be
used. All tables and doors should be made in
frame work, using 1% x % timber, then gluing
and tacking on the 3-ply. This method saves a
great deal of weight. If good quality plywood is
used, it can be stained and polished, which gives a
far better appearance than paint for the furni-
ture. Ceiling and upper part of walls, light cream
washable paint is best.
Next to consider are the essentials for day ser-
vice, i.e., cooking, washing, etc., and night comfort,
i.e., beds and bedding.
Cooking And Washing
A good stove is an asset in a caravan. There are
two types, the petrol or kerosene forced gas stove,
and the kerosene blue flame. They are both good
and dependable, but the blue flame is by far the
safer, as there is no pumping, and no jets to get
Caravan (Building
blocked. They take a few minutes to get up to
full heat, compared with the other type, but time
means little when holidaying. Almost anything
can be cooked on one of these stoves; an oven
can be placed on it for baking; but for grills, an
open fire must be used, for obvious reasons. A flue
vent must be provided above the stove.
A wash-up sink or basin, with running water,
is necessary, and, if possible, the water tank should
be just high enough to do without a pump. This
can be done easily in a small van, but in a large
van, where a lot of water would be required, a
large tank would have to be put under the floor,
and a pump used to raise the water. Filling the
tank from the outside is an advantage. A two-
gallon watering-can, with a foot of hose on the
spout, makes a good filler.
Sleeping And Resting
Caravan beds are usually flat. There is no
spring frame to sag in the middle, as the mat-
tress is placed on top of lockers. This being so,
it is as well to have a good deep mattress of coil
springs or sponge rubber, and as the beds are used
for seats as well, they must not be too soft, there-
fore, I think the coil spring is the best.
Loose covers should be made for both mat-
tresses and pillows. Use a good, heavy quality, as
they will have to stand up to hard wear during the
day as a lounge or seat. Curtains can be made
of the same material, which will be heavy enough
to keep out the sun, when necessary.
In hot weather, a lean-to tent is a necessity,
especially if there are no shade trees about. This
type of tent is fastened along the top of the caravan
with turn buttons, and two poles hold it out in
the ordinary way. It can be made completely
covered in, or front and one end; this, I think,
is the better, as it gives privacy round the door.
The roof of the caravan should be insulated and
lined. Some caravans are insulated all round, but
unless the caravan is to be used in the very hot
parts, I think it unnecessary; lining with 3-ply
seems to be all that is required.
A skylight ventilator which can be opened is
handy, but if the caravan has large windows it is
not a necessity. If one is included, it must be
carefully made and fitted, otherwise it is liable to
develop leaks. Also there is a danger of the sky-
light being left open, and unexpected rain may do
a lot of damage.
Adjustable supports are necessary under the four
corners for two reasons. They steady the floor,
and they take some of the weight off the tyres.
(They should not take too much weight, however).
Some supports work with a brace, and others just
drop down and are held by a thumb screw.
A jockey wheel near the coupling is essential to
facilitate the movement of the van when off the
car; also when coupling and uncoupling. For large
caravans, it is a good idea to have a connection ball
on the front bumper bar, and by this means the
van can be coupled to the front of the car and
pushed into a corner, or under a tree, where it would
be difficult to put it by manhandling. This is an
advantage if there is only one man in the party,
and I have often found the need for it. The ball
need not be fixed to the centre of the bumper
where it might foul the starting handle. It could
be held on a bracket bolted to left hand bumper
support. This would give a good view along the
side of the van.
The Trailer At Home
A caravan need not be kept in a garage when
not in holiday use. If possible, construct a roof
for it, and perhaps lattice work, to keep some of
the hottest sun off it; and if this is done, the
van can be used as a spare room, or a quiet resting
place during the daytime. A caravan makes a fine


Caravan (Building
Page Seven
% M/f&f?* D Sketch showing method of
Rubber / beading well
sr%Jp-r Puttied in.
This is a simple window arrangement which has proved very
satisfactory. As will be seen in sketch, a strip of heavy
duck or leather cloth (waterproof) held under drip gutter
keeps water from running inside. The top edge of drip
gutter should be well puttied. The window closes down on
a strip of sponge rubber or heavy felt stuck on with rubber
Ball bolted to front
Bumper bar.
solution and is held shut with two small bolts. The wire
gauze frame is made two inches wider than the window so
that it covers well over the opening. It is kept cl
two small spring catches. To open window it is necessary
to mt up tie wire screen, which is hinged at top.
In the building instructions
given on pages 9-16, this is
the first drawing to be con-
sidered. Springs and axle
(p. 11), are easier to assemble
in the upside down position,
as shown here.
C&ntre of Spring
An easily constructed protection tor
fibro cement sheets, and lattices above movine of the caravan in and out. Blocks are then placed under
bra th e e a^le C and TheJtepis a hold-all g for odd things, and has a door mat screwed to the l,d.


Page Eight
Caravan (Building
sewing or reading place, and so long as the roof
is under cover, no ill effects will occur. Some cara-
vans are left out in the open all the year round,
but this entails painting every year.
If the van is to be out of use for any length
of time, it should be put on blocks, and the tyres
taken off and kept in the garage.
Lighting the caravan is best done by carrying
an extra battery. A 6-volt radio battery is the best;
fully charged, it will last for three to four weeks,
using two lights and radio. If current is drawn
from the car battery, it might be found too flat
to start the car.
Having procured or built a caravan, there is
only one thing to trouble us, and that is the time
to use it. Most of us have to be satisfied with
annual leave and Easter, and a few week-ends
may be put in at some handy place. But in any
case, a caravan holiday starts when you leave
your front gate. You should feel more or less
as the birds feel. You can stop at any place
desired for a meal. A good idea is to leave home
about 5 o’clock in the evening, and drive till
about 10 o’clock. This gives you a good start if
going a long distance.
The traveller is well catered for along our
main roads. The camping grounds in the most
popular resorts are well equipped with shelters,
fireplaces, water laid on, and even showers, with
arrangements for a hot shower, too.
Hints On Driving
Starting On a Hill.—lf a stop has to be made on
a steep hill the starting away again will be greatly
eased if the van is allowed to roll backwards to the
right across the road. If this is done the clutch
will be fully engaged by the time the full weight is
felt by the engine. Other traffic must be watched
during this process as you may be blocking the road.
Braking.—An important point to be watched
when braking with a caravan in tow is:—On ap-
proaching a sharp curve in the road do not leave
the braking until you are rounding the bend; al-
ways brake before you have to turn the steering
wheel. It is always better driving round a bend
with the engine pulling rather than with the brakes
on—caravan or no caravan. The tendency of a
van on a curve is to push the car round and this
could cause an accident; but if the car is pulling
this danger disappears.
Rear Mirror.—A rear mirror must be fitted to all
cars towing a trailer of any kind, if the usual rear
view is blocked by the trailer. This is a police regula-
tion, and is also very necessary. The mirror should
be fitted in such a way that it gives a good view
along the side of the van and the road behind. If
the van is wide the mirror should protrude further
out. Always be very careful when making a turn
while towing a caravan.
E«sS2wSM?ith 522


Caravan (Building
Page Nine
Car, with trailer built by Mr M. C. Tindall, in camp on the Cumberland River, near Lome.
How to Build a Trailer Caravan
By F. R. OULTON
I. CONSTRUCTION DETAILS OF THE BODY
AS far back as 1937 Mr F. R. Oulton designed
/\ and constructed a model trailer caravan and
1 V contributed to the Home Beautiful a series
of articles giving detailed instructions for its con-
struction by home craftsmen. Dozens of trailers
have been built to this design, both by amateurs
and skilled tradesmen. In general the design has
been adhered to pretty closely. In some cases
workers with experience in building and in prac-
tical use of caravans have adapted the design to
suit their requirements and varied the details ac-
cordingly. Certain improvements suggested by
fellow-caravanners and others discovered by the
writer in his own tours have been made and are
included in the revised edition given in the pages
that follow.
THIS ONE TAKES A BOAT, TOO.
It should encourage intending builders—especi-
ally those who are rather afraid to tackle so im-
posing a job—to know that the caravan shown
above, and those on page 5 as well as the fine
caravan (with boat accommodation) reproduced on
the cover, were all built by men who were not car-
penters or builders, but merely handy men who
used common sense and care.
In offering the directions and plans which have
resulted in the building of so many of these cara-
vans, the difficulties of obtaining materials at the
present time have not been overlooked. That con-
dition, however, cannot last indefinitely; in fact a
good deal of secondhand materials that would be
quite useful is already being freed owing to the
lifting of the light restrictions. Moreover, building
a caravan is a task that generally extends over
some months and the confirmed handyman is never
happier than when hunting round for things that
are difficult to obtain or discovering substitutes
that will take their place.
The caravan shown on the cover was built by Mr H. Pruser
for a friend who, with his wife, has used it on many enjoyable
holidays, particularly in the Murray River district, hence the
boat. This “flattie” slides in on small rollers let into the
floor just inside the trap-door. The ’van is 13ft. long. Its main
structure is the same as the Home Beautiful job. with many
variations. A double-bed wire mattress is fitted across the
rear end, just above the boat; a little higher than the usual
bed, but it is not so high as to be awkward. Meals are taken at
the other end, which can also be made into another bed.


Page Ten
Caravan (Building
Fig. la. Special caravan axle compared with car axle
fill Drop Axle (fil f |fH| Car Axle fl
ifew*'*' —jiHU- JA
wii' "f CUoronce pl | f > 9,2 j ; /
y-4 s'B” L Y-/- — 4' 8" • T
Spring .Soaks close to wheels. \~/ Distance of spring .Seat
Perhaps the most important suggestion relates
to the body-material of the van.
The sides and roof of the original model were
made of 3-ply covered with canvas and painted.
This proved quite satisfactory up to a point, but
such covering requires a good deal of maintenance.
Since then masonite has come on to the market
and it provides a more durable cover and one that
can be handled just as easily and with less trouble
in finishing. It is made in sheets 12ft. x 4ft. which
simplifies the job considerably because there is no
need to use the canvas covering. The fact should
not be overlooked either that considerable advance
has been made during the war period in the manu-
facture of plywood and that such materials as
resin-bonded plywood and plastic plywood will also,
in time become available.—Editor H.B.
The sprung weight of the caravan, excluding the
interior furnishings, is approximately 6cwt. There-
fore a vital point in design is the ability of the
caravan to track behind the towing car. This “road-
ability” is obtained by correct distribution of weight,
also by setting the wheels behind the centre of the
caravan. One must also set the wheels (or rather
the axle) accurately at right angles to the line of
the caravan and be sure that the tow-bar is central.
Next comes the problem of wheels, axle, springs
and fittings. As the strength and safety of a cara-
van depend on these, care must be exercised in their
selection.
New v. Secondhand
One variation of the original scheme is sug-
gested here. It is to employ new material instead
of buying a secondhand car and using some
of the parts. The latter offers the inducement of
economy but it has certain grave disadvantages. A
car axle does not necessarily make a good caravan
axle for, as will be seen from the drawings, it is
not wide enough and if lengthened may give trouble
later. New spring seats would have to be provided
and king Dins secured. Secondhand wheels are all
right if not old-fashioned. But it is felt that most
builders who use old stuff regret it when the job is
finished and it is not possible to alter it.
Fig. la shows the difference between the drop or
crank axle and the standard car axle. The drop
axle has the great advantage of keeping the centre
of gravity as low as possible, and at the same time
providing spring seats close to the wheels. The
drop axle can be purchased to suit the sft. Bin.
track, and it is the one the reader would be wise
to use, and fit up wheels and springs to this new
job. Long, flexible springs have a tendency to
cause wobble. A short, stiff spring is better.
Importance of Weight Distribution
IN designing a caravan comfort, strength and light-
ness are three factors that must be considered.
Strength, of course, is paramount, for although
wear on tyres is negligible when compared with
that of the car tyres, the van must be able to
withstand the inevitable bumps, turns and twists
it will be called upon to endure without “opening
up.” Assurance lies in good workmanship and care
in details. Lightness is very important, for no
matter how beautiful and imposing your caravan
it will be only a drag on your car and your purse
if it’s too weighty. Comfort and convenience are
matters that vary according to the ingenuity and
resourcefulness of the caravanner.
Trailer couplings, tow-bars and fittings, both for
car and caravan, can be purchased complete. I have
not detailed the construction of these metal parts
other than a suggestion of a type that can be
used (Fig. 1). Keep the tow-bar short and coupled
close to your towing car.
The overall measurements of the caravan, ex-
cluding the 3-ply covering, are: Length, 11 ft.;
width, 6ft. 3in.; height from bottom of chassis
cross members, 6 ft. 5V 2 in.
The design makes provision for three beds, cup-
boards for kitchen supplies, sink, water supply,
table, wardrobe, cooking stove and electric light.
Construction Details
After you have studied the several drawings and
list of parts required, a start can be made with
the actual construction. The sketch of the chassis
lay-out explains the positions of the various parts
(Fig. 5).
Selected kiln-seasoned Tasmanian Mountain
Ash forms the main material used. The timber
must be thoroughly seasoned and specially selected
for its straight grain.
The two sills marked B in the plan of the
chassis, Fig. 3, are of selected hardwood, 4 in. x


Caravan (Building
Page Eleven
Side Elevation
Left Sid©
End Elevation offers no difficulty, but carefully prepared joints,
FWk niilo with good fit, mean a strong, rigid frame,
both ends al.ke. when marking the depths of the lap-joints it
on these. Place the two sills together when mark-
ing the positions of the cross-members, to ensure cut out will be iy 2 in. wide and
accuracy. The cross-members are not evenly rail The P are lued and bolted to
spaced, as the studs are secured to these. Notice /s in - de ®P- T r these rails the full length
before you start thecorrect position of these cross- Carry these rmls the
members, Fig. 3. The construction of the chassis of the caravai^ te a gee 4> 6> a nd 6A . T he fenders
Framework ready for covering.
are cut from heavy gauge galvanised
iron, but not to a full semi-circle, as
they are only 14 in. deep and 10 in.
wide (see sketch). The springs are
mounted on the sills in their correct
positions (see sketch P. 7). The bolts
holding the shackle brackets must fit
tightly in the holes bored in the wood.
Use lock washers on all bolts used in
the underframe.
Having progressed to this stage,
you are now ready to start on the
axle. Fit your springs and make cer-
tain that your wheels and axle are at
right angles to the line of the cara-
van. Folding jacks are fitted at rear
corners (see sketch Fig. 10). Pro-
vide a reliable catch so that the jacks
will not fall down when not required.
Before proceeding further, check
over the frame for any slight in-
equalities which might cause trouble
when laying the floor. Scrape away
any excess glue where the lower rails
C join the cross-members A, so that
the studs or uprights will make a
good fit. Make a trial fitting of the


Page Twelve
tow-bars and then remove, as they would interfere
when putting in the 3-ply sheathing.
You can now proceed with the upper frame-
work. Tasmanian kiln-seasoned Mountain Ash is
used both for the sides, ends and top. The sides
are identical, except provision is not made at the
right side for a door. A window replaces this
opening. All joints in the entire frame are glued,
and wherever vertical and horizontal pieces cross,
they are halved to make a flush joint, and secured
with a 1y 4 in. screw (see 6, with detail of joint).
It will be found easier if all the studs and hori-
zontal pieces are carried slightly longer than is
required (Fig. 6). Ends can be cut later.
Lay out the uprights for the sides and mark
them all together with a try-square. The widths Cross members to -Silts
are set out from the spacing of the cross-members.
(See plan of chassis, 3), Do not forget to allow
for the y 4 in. cut-out to fit against cross-members
A. (See Fig. 4 and 6A).
A piece of 3 in. x x / 2 in. pine is let in flush with
the sides of the frame at the top. (See side eleva-
tion 7 and 13). The curved ends and the top pieces
can be steamed at home, but the average reader
would be wise to have the bending carried out at
a timber-bending works. The cost of bending a
set of 12 pieces (8 ends and 4 roof pieces) was £3.
A plain curve at each end is cheaper, but the two
curves as shown in the design make a more at-
tractive job. (Figs. 8 and 9 give the detail of
these curved pieces). The shapes should be set
out on ply-wood by drawing the squares and
plotting the curves. A thin lath of wood can be
bent to give a good sweeping curve.
Note that the actual radius of the curve is
the same at both ends, with the lower bend closed
more and the top bend opened. This is important,
as it is difficult to have two different bends on the
same piece of timber.
Both end uprights and roof pieces are iy 2 in.
viiu upiigiu/o aim iuui cue ±72 ill.
x % in. The bend is across the thin way. After .vsBP
drawing out, the shapes should be fretted out for ~ ~ ' 4-- —
use as templates. Remember to make the extra
allowance in length. This is partly because it is
an advantage to have the extra in which to cut
joints, and partly because steaming is liable to
cause the ends to split somewhat, and these parts
can be cut away when allowance is made. The
curved pieces are joined to the lower rail as in
Fig. 11. The two inner ones at each end go
under the cross-members, and are halved to the
end cross-members. These are all glued and bolted
together. Cross bars are carried across the roof
and halved to the curved pieces.
It is at this stage that the short pieces “D” (Fig.
4) are fitted in between the floor and the lower rail
C. If care is taken in fitting these filler pieces,
it will add to the strength and rigidity of the frame.
When the upper structure is completed, the
floor can be laid. This is 6 in. x % in., pine,
tongued and grooved. The wiring for the electric
lighting can now be carried out. The tail light can
be connected to the towing car by the standard
Lower rail.C. is joined
to cross member ,A.
Method of fitting the folding Jacks
Chain ffl
Detail of Cross Members
w and Uprights showing the
pieces of wood 'D' between them
Caravan (Building Sketch of Chassis showing lay-out of Sills. Fenders
arid Cross Members Curved End Pieces
Curved End Pieces
plug and insulated cable. The ceiling light can come
from the same source, or a battery installed in the
caravan. Select a battery which is interchangeable
with jtour car battery, so that the charging will
cause no trouble. Carry the wiring up one of the
studs and along the cross-members. Standard car
lights can be used, or a simple parchment shade
made to suit. The latter method is much cheaper.
The door and windows are next made. Figs. B
and C give details of these. The door is framed
up from % in. hoop pine or Oregon, joined by
mortise and tenon joints. The lower part of the
door has a panel of Vi in. 3-ply, nailed on the
outside, the full width of the door, whilst the
upper part has flywire tacked on the back, and
a neat half-round moulding round the edges of
the wire. The panel A is hinged so as to cover
the flywire opening when the door is required to
become a solid door, as for privacy or in wet
weather. A simple bolt will hold this flap in place.
Hinge the door so as to open back toward the
front of the caravan, and provide it with a lock.
The windows open outward and are hinged on the
top edge. A rubber weather strip can be fixed
to cover the top edges of the windows, or a metal
trough, as used on cars can be screwed in place.
Fix door and window stops % in. from front
edges. A plain metal hook and eye will keep the
windows open. A small bolt will lock them.
Your framework is now ready for the outside
covering, and as masonite is easily cut and used
there is no need to give directions except that all
edges should be well puttied up and the top edges
should be covered with angle aluminium beading.


Caravan (Building
Page Thirteen
11. THE FITTING AND FURNISHING OF THE INTERIOR
WITH the general construction and exterior
work practically completed we are now
ready to do the interior fitting and furnish-
ing. Alluring pictures of the comfort and con-
venience of modern caravans have been published,
and the reader will doubtless have many ideas he
would like to incorporate; but pleasure and com-
fort must always be balanced by weight.
Indeed, in the long run, economy of weight
means increase of pleasure. Therefore, only the
essentials are detailed. The plan and the eleva-
tion of the off-side (Fig. 1) give the general layout,
and the photographs show how the work is finished.
Sleeping accommodation is provided for three
people in a double and a single bed; but another
bunk could be installed above the latter, either
as a fixture or a makeshift. It could be hinged
to a rail fitted just below the front window, falling
down when not required as a bed, and serving
as a back to the existing single bed. To fix this
additional bed would be very simple.
The first job, however, is to screw a piece of
6 in. x % in. pine across the floor at each end.
These will prevent the ends from warping and
will seal any space between the floor and the outer
wall.
The beds are detailed in Figs. 2,3, and 4. The
single bed at the front is 24in. wide, whilst the
double bed at the back consists of two frames each
22 in. wide.
The single bed at the front is supported by two
pieces of 2 in. x 1 in. pine, screwed to the uprights
of the caravan and is fixed in place by screwing it
to these supports. The beds are made of 1y 2 in. x
% in. pine, as shown in Fig. 2, with details of
joints used. A piece of 3/16 in. ply is nailed on
the top as shown. To prevent the mattress from
slipping forward a piece of 3y 2 in. x % in. pine is
screwed to the front for the whole length of the
bed. Fig. 4 shows this piece of pine in place.
HoW wheel ■fenders are built
The two frames of the double bed are hinged as
shown in Fig. 3. Like the other, it is supported by
two pieces of 2 in. x 1 in. pine, screwed to the up-
rights, and one bed is made to slide along these
supports to become a double bed.
Sheaves, similar to those used on sliding doors,
are fitted underneath the comers of these two
beds, and run on steel tracks screwed to the side
supports as shown in Fig. 3A. These ball-bearing
sheaves, with steel track to match, can be pur-
chased at hardware stores.
Bolts at each end of the bed keep it in position
when used as a double bed. Provide two bolts to
keep the back in position when used as a settee.
Under the bed is storage space for the table, blan-
kets, etc. Provide a door hinged to the floor, and
opening outwards. Fig. 6 shows the construction of
the doors. The bed slides over this door, so that
it should be slightly narrower than the space from
the floor to the bottom of the bed. Bolts at each
end keep the door closed.


Page Fourteen
Table
The table top is y 2 in. ply. (Fig. 5); 3ft. 6in. x
17 in. is a convenient size, but it could be larger if
required. A piece of l l / 2 in. xy 8 in. pine is fitted
between the uprights of the caravan, 2 ft. 6 in. from
the floor, and the table is fitted round the upright,
as shown. A bolt keeps the table secure at this end,
whilst the other end is supported by a leg hinged to
fold under. A hole is bored in the end of this leg
and a piece of *4 in. dowel rod is glued so that about
y 2 in. projects and fits in a hole bored in the floor
to receive it.
Wardrobe, Sink and Cupboard
The position of this unit can be seen in Fig. 1.
Fig. 7 gives the measurements. The upright next
to the window is used to fix the side of the ward-
robe as shown in Fig. 8. (The aim is to obtain
necessary strength with minimum of weight). The
_ rut oW Ui© ends of the Stiles after
the cioof ha> been g!u*d.
bn
and soldered.
/Mr,
./2b Jt .'
CoJN-STFVtfCTIOK of Btß
Caravan (Building
fixing of the furniture also acts as a brace to the
sides of Jbhe caravan.
From a sheet of 6 ft. x 3 ft. x y 2 in. hoop pine
plywood, saw out the two sides of the wardrobe, and
dress them square to 17 y 2 in. wide. These sides
are fitted as shown in Figs. 8 and 9, to make a tight
fit with the framework of the caravan. The base
is secured to the cleats screwed to the floor. For
additional strength, these sides are glued, as well as
screwed, to the framework, and glue blocks are used
also. Glue blocks are fitted to the four top corners
of the wardrobe, as shown in Figs. 9 and 10. The
top of the wardrobe is secured by brackets (Fig. 9),
screwed to pieces of 2 in. x 1 in. pine, itself screwed
to the cross-members of the roof. As the top of the
wardrobe does not quite reach the roof, a moulding
is necessary to keep out the dust. Off-cuts will
serve for the cover to the fender on the right of the
wardrobe.
Fig. 11 shows the construction of the framework
of the sink. The pieces A, B, and C are joined as
shown in the detail sketch of these joints, but the
two cross bars can be fitted and skew-nailed to
B and C. To fit the sink flush with the rails, a piece
about y 8 in. deep, and 1 in. wide is cut out as shown.
The two compartments next to the wardrobe
have sides of y 2 in. plywood. The top board is of
% in. solid hoop pine, not plywood. Fig. 9 gives the
shape of this board, cut out to fit the sink and
round the uprights of the caravan. Pieces of 2 in.
x % in. pine are glued and screwed to the top edges
of these side pieces. The sink is cut from a piece of
24-gauge galvanised iron measuring 24 in. x 22 in.
Fig. 12 shows the development of the sink and
how to mark out in preparation for bending. First
turn down the 1 in. flange, then turn up the longer
sides, then the 10 in. sides. The corner is shown in
detail (Fig. 13). The bands strengthening the
corners are bent round. These should be riveted


Caravan (Building
A piece of 3 in. x 2 in. hardwood held inside
the sink will enable the corners to be squared up.
The hole for the plug and washer should be cut
slightly smaller than required, then tapped from
Page Fifteen
the inside of the sink with a plumber’s mallet
or bull-nosed hammer to make the washer a tight
fit. The washer is soldered in position. Fit a
galvanised waste pipe to carry the water away.


Page Sixteen
The waste pipe is led down through the fender as
shown in Figs. 7 and 9, the end being bent so that
the water will not strike the wheel. The sink is
hidden by a piece of plywood nailed in front (Figs.
9 and 11).
The cross rails between the drawers are of 2 in.
x % in. pine. They can be dowelled, stub tenoned,
or simply screwed to the sides. The drawer run-
ners are 1 in x % in. pine, glued and screwed to
the sides. Fig. 16 shows the construction of the
drawers. They are simply nailed boxes, but care
should be taken to see that they are made square.
Glue as well as nail them. A piece of *4 in. ply-
wood is glued to the front of the drawers, as
shown. This overhanging drawer front does away
with drawer stops. The edges of these front pieces
are rounded over slightly.
Fig. 6 gives details of door construction. Like
the drawer, they have *4 in. ply, glued and
screwed to the front, and overhang) the edges,
except on the edge which carries the hinges.
Caravan (Building:
The water tank is simply a gal-
vanised iron container with tap fitted,
screw cap for filling, and a strong
handle. A spring clip on the upright
of the caravan will hold this tank in
place behind the sink. Around the
sink, as shown in Fig. 9, screw a strip-
of cement sheeting (plain, colored, or
mock tiling), and finish the edges with
a neat beading.
Safe, Bread Bin and Cupboard for
the stove are fitted on the near side of
the caravan, and are directly opposite
the wardrobe and sink. Figs. 15 and 17
give all the details of construction, and,,
like the other furniture, they are made
to fit in with the framework of the
caravan. For that reason a slight
alteration in overall length may be
necessary, so as to fit in with any slight
variation in the spacing of the studs,,
if any such variation has occurred. The
front of this unit is framed up from
2 in. x % in. pine, as shown. The ends
are of y 2 in. plywood, and are secured
to cleats screwed to the floor, and the
backs are secured to the framework of
the caravan, as in the wardrobe. Detail
sketches (Fig. 17) explain the way these
ends, and the division, are constructed.
Drawer runners of IXA1 X A in. x % in. pine
are glued and screwed to the sides, and
the centre drawer runner dowelled to-
the front rail, and skew-nailed to a iy 2
in. x % in. rail fitted between the
caravan framework at the back.
Drawer guides, and the centre drawer
guide G, are fitted in position when
the drawers are run in. These can be
glued to the runner and tacked in
position. To prevent the drawer from,
dropping when pulled out, glue a piece
of % in. pine under the top of this
cabinet, so as to keep the drawer
straight. The wings hinged to the
uprights are for the protection of the
cooking stove. When not required,,
they fold back towards the middle of
the cabinet, and this unit then becomes
a sideboard or buffet.
A piece of asbestos cement sheet is screwed in
position between these folding wings to protect the
wall from the stove. Line the bread bin with tin.
The bottom of the cupboard under the drawers is
3-16 in. ply. The long space at the bottom has a door
hinged to the bottom rail.
Fit all windows with flv-wire frames. These
frames could be iy 2 in. x % in. pine, hinged on
the top edge. A small bolt will keep them closed.
Finally, cover the parts of the fenders projecting,,
and your interior construction is completed. Clean
down all your woodwork with glass paper, and
fill all screw and nail holes, and give the whole
a priming coat of paint. The furniture should
have a final coat of enamel.
The interior framework, roof and sides could
be of the same toning, but not a high gloss
finish. Fit all drawers and cupboard doors with
handles and catches, and make sure that these
catches will not fly open when the caravan is on
the move. Fit a piece of % in. angle aluminium
to the edge of the floorboard at the door entrance
to protect it.


Caravan (Building
Page Seventeen
We now come to the Caravanette, which was
designed for the Home Beautiful to give
owners of light cars as many of the comforts
of the big van as possible without the weight.
The wheels and tyres can be lighter, to match
those of the car, and the Caravanette can be
towed by the smallest car if a suitable coupling
can be fixed. — Editor .]
meals are prepared while standing on the ground;
this tent is’ also the dining room.
The writer’s own view of a caravan is that it
should give the greatest comfort at the lowest ex-
penditure of labor, time and money. Having become
interested in trailer caravans in 1929 before much
pioneering had been done, I started by building
one of the collapsible type. There was a good deal
of work in packing and unpacking in this type of
van, so I then tried a large tent carried in a very
light trailer, but this involved too much time in
preparing for the night and packing up in the
morning. I looked into the question of the “home-
on wheels” caravan, also the commodious trailer
caravan, and weighed their advantages and draw-
backs —and especially their cost. Finally, I decided
that if a highway holiday is to embrace
many places and entail a good deal of
travelling, the ideal caravan for the average
man is a light, strong, compact, inexpensive vehicle
that will go anywhere that a car will go. (I know
of some fine spots which can only be approached
A CARAVANETTE, as the name implies, is a little
caravan, and this one has a lot to recommend
it. It is a trailer having a body 9ft. long, 4ft.
wide and lower than a car; it has a door at each
side. It is fitted with two rubber mattresses, and
rear compartment that contains stove, wash basin
and cupboards for crockery, food containers and so
on. A rear door forms a cover when lifted up. Lug-
gage cases are carried on shelves over the foot
of the bed. A small shelter tent can be erected
partly over the rear end when necessary, where
Fig. I.—The first unit of the Caravanette to be assembled. The
wheels are standard 16 inch and a %Yz inch drop axle has been
adopted with underslung springs to give more than usual clear-
ance. The unit as it stands cost £l7/10/ pre-war.


Page Eighteen
Caravan (Building
through trees too low for a full-sized caravan.)
Hence the Caravanette, which I am about to de-
scribe. The only advantage that the large vehicle
has over it is that in wet weather everything is
under one roof. However, caravanning is essentially
a summertime pleasure.
In practice this particular vehicle has proved
very satisfactory. The size is just right. If it
were any smaller it would be cramped; if any
larger it might defeat its purpose. It appears to
be ideal for service with small cars—down to say
14 h.p. No evidence of its use with cars below
that is forthcoming. It has this advantage,
too, that it is strong enough to travel behind
large cars at any speed without the fear that the
caravan “can’t take it” over the rough. That is one
thing to keep in mind when deciding on a caravan,
the job must be sturdy enough to travel over in-
ferior roads without having to drop down in speed
too much.
When the caravanette is described as “inex-
pensive,” that is a comparative term, and does not
mean it is “a cheap” job. The total cost, however,
of this particular job was not more than £3o—
remember!
I desired a good-looking vehicle, so I used the
latest wheels (16 in..), such as are used in most
standard caravans. To use old-fashioned wheels
puts the “junk brand” on any trailer. I used a 2y 2 in.
drop axle underslung, instead of the usual 4in. drop
with springs on top. This allows a better clearance.
Axle and wheels with hubs were supplied for £l3.
The springs complete with all fittings came to
£4/10/-, so that Fig. 1 cost £l7/10/- as it stands.
It is always safest for the amateur to assemble
these parts first, and then build the body on them.
First lay the two side members, 9 ft. long, on the
springs, using 3x2 kiln-dried mountain ash. Cut
two 4ft. pieces for the ends and join as shown in
drawings. It will be found best to hold the springs
in place with thumb screws until a later stage. Be
sure to get the joints well squared up and tightly
bolted before proceeding.
We must next fix the bent curves, which form
the ends and top in one sweep. These, of course,
will be got from a wood-bending firm. It is not
worth while for the amateur to attempt this, as it
cost me only 37/6, including the wood. In this
price there are also three bent pieces for the rear
door, which we can attend to later. Blackwood,
2xl, was used for the curves. The plan followed.
The side piece with opening for door cut out.
was to brace the two curves temporarily. See that
they are upright, fix in position, and then space out
the uprights. The photograph will give a good idea
of the arrangement. Cut out enough of the 3x2
to just get the correct angle to fit curves at the
bends (see drawing A).
Angle iron iy 4 x iy 4 was used for corners of
lower bearers, as shown in drawing B. There is a
cross member just behind the wheels, 6ft. from the
front; this is the division between the sleeping and
cooking compartments. It is also the strengthening
portion. All other framework members are of 2in.
x lin. kiln dried mountain ash. Uprights are fixed
as shown in Figs. C and D, the top is not checked
in, as I considered that this might weaken it.
The position of the springs can now be deter-
mined. The front end of the springs should be at
least 3ft. Bin. from the front end of the caravan,
which means that the axle is Bin. behind the
centre line. If desired, of course, it can be put
farther back, but I do not like to throw too much
weight on the car, and as there is little weight
in the tail of this job I think Bin. back is enough.
It must be remembered that most of the luggage
will be carried forward of the axle, the weight of
which will be partly carried by the car. This being
so, it would be wrong to have the axle further back
as the car would be taking too much of the weight.
To true up the wheels and axle lift the wheels off
Fig. 2. —Framework in course of construction. It is fastened temporarily to the springs with G cramps
while measurements are being checked.


Caravan (Building
the ground, place block under the axle. Now cut
two pieces of 2 x 1 and tie temporarily to the out-
side of side members, spin wheels and see that at
least 2 in. clearance is left; also see that the
axle is at right angles to the side members. A
large set square will be required for this.
Now that we have got the wheels in place, we
have also got the position for the doors. They must
clear the mudguards. One side of the door should
be 3ft. 6in. from the front of the job. The door
is 28 1 wide by 3ft. deep. Cut a piece of 2x 1
to fit on top of side member. To raise door level,
fit on edge, not flat. Also cut piece for tops of
door; slant cut at one end to get it as high as pos-
sible. Fix on the flat. This can be seen in photo-
graph. The other uprights will come, one over
centre of wheels to take the strain of the mud-
guards, the other at the division between cooking
and sleeping compartments.
The top of the dividing frame must be on the
slope to match the bend of side. To get this, I have
used two pieces the lower one is planed to the
angle, and the top piece screwed on (see drawing
E). The lower piece is then bolted to uprights.
We are now far enough forward to think of the
covering material. The choice at the moment lies
between plywood and masonite prestwood, and
for several reasons the latter is to be preferred.
For one thing, it is made in a handy size (12ft. x
4ft.). Next it is very “bendable” if steamed or
placed in hot water, but in this job a sheet placed
on top of the framework simply falls into place
and can be screwed on without any strain or
trouble. (By the way, it will be found necessary
to screw a strip of wood at the front end to line
up with the ends of the bent members of the
frame; this will give an even surface for the cover-
ing sheets to be screwed on.)
The piece of timber fitted
between the ends of the
frame at the front end to
provide a flush surface for
the covering sheets, Fig. F.
The simple method of
applying the covering to
the framework is here in-
dicated. A single sheet of
12ft. by 4ft. is fastened at
the front end, bent back,
and held temporarily with
cords. About two feet of
this will be cut off later
to accommodate the rear
Page Nineteen
If painting the masonite inside do so before
fixing on and use size. On no account use size
on the outside, use a good undercoat paint.
Another benefit of masonite is that in addition
to being easily worked with saw and plane (for
the edges, of course) it has a fine, smooth finish.
This is quite good in itself but it will take paint
readily. The underside is a rough texture. It
should be sized, given a good undercoat and painted
before being fixed; that is if the interior is to be
painted. When painting the smooth (outside) side
do not use size.
Plywood was used in the first caravanette and
was quite satisfactory so far as finish and weather
were concerned. One of the new resin-bound ply-
woods, when available, may have advantages over
even masonite. It is worth looking into.
To mark out the side sheets, first cut off 2ft. Bin.
(as the body is 9ft. 3y 2 in. long), then place sheet
against frame just to the top edge; leave as much
as possible under side member, which will later be
cut to curve up at each end. Hold sheet with small
thumb screws, then run round with pencil. For the
bottom edge curve, use a thin lath to get the curve,
and while a helper holds it, mark out also. If you
have followed directions the roof sheet will only
need trimming with a wood file. Hold this sheet in
the same way, keeping it down to bottom of sill at
the front. Now mark for cutting off at cross piece
E. To cut masonite, place it across planks and
use a saw which is not too coarse; file and sand-
paper the edges. Small screws are preferable to
hold it down, and all edges are best covered with
beading, which also prevents any tendency for
screws to pull through.
The inside head room will be 3ft. 7in. at highest
point, excluding mattress.
Having finished off the outside sheetings and
smoothed off all edges, give it a coat of good under-
coat paint. After this putty up all the joins, and


Page Twenty
give a second coat of paint. Then cover edges with
angle aluminium lypn. x 1 / 2 in. (the goes on
the top). Start at the front, and put in one %in.
screw and gently bend the metal, following the
curve until reaching the rear door, where the metal
will be cut off. An aluminium drip-gutter must be
fixed across the roof as near as possible to the rear
door hinges to prevent water running in. This is
one point at which we must take extra pains. I
have used a strip of canvas across here to cover
the jsin at the hinges, one edge goes under the drip
gutter and the other is covered with half round
aluminium. This will prevent water running in off
the door when it is lifted, also water off the roof.
The cross gutter should project just enough to allow
the water to drip away from the side, say %in.; then
below this gutter, continue with angle metal right
down to the tip at rear. Now to make the door
tight from rain and dust while it is closed: Use half-
round aluminium iy 2 in. wide, and screw on to the
edge of rear door (see drawing G), so that when the
door is shut the metal will close down on a strip
of sponge rubber, about y 2 in. wide and Vim. thick.
As there is no masonite on the wood at the
side of this door, it is %in. lower than the door;
this will be taken up with the rubber as shown in
drawing G. This will be done, of course, on both
sides.
CUTOFF
met ano
DRILL FOR
SPLIT PUT
Door Lock—inside
Dust and Rain Precautions
A strip of sponge-rubber should be fixed along
the bottom of this door also. It is a good idea to
get inside the compartment, close the door down
and ask someone to go round the edge with a light
so that any crevices that would admit dust can be
detected. This, of course, must be done at night.
This photograph shows one of the side doors, each of
which has a small curtained window. It is just as well to
pack the glass with sponge rubber, as well as the doors,
as precaution against dust and rattling. This sponge
rubber can be bought in handy strips, and is useful for
many purposes.
Caravan (Building
The partition between compartments was removed to
take this photograph, which shows the rubber bed in
position. It is made in two sections, one 6ft. x 2ft., and
the other, 6ft. x Ift. lOin.; it is sin. deep, and covered
with a heavy tapestry; it lies, of course, flat on the floor.
Now to make sure of keeping our “tucker” dry.
Construct an interior gutter under the hinge, as
some water is bound to get in. Bend a strip of
galvanised iron as shown in sketch 1., and carry
this right across and down both sides to a small
opening in the floor. This will take away any
water that might get in when opening the door
after rain. (This practice is followed in the boot
of some cars.)
The Floor
The floor is laid down in */ 2 in. T. & G. lining
boards, placed crossways. Two supports are used
underneath at the rear, and in the front the centre
draw-bar acts as a support with a strip of wood,
to make up the height, the draw-bar being lower
than the floor. It will be necessary to cut many
of the floor boards at the ends to fit in to the
frame-work. Make sure that the floor is a tight
fit, as this is the place where dust will work up from
underneath. A good idea is to use rubber solution.
It is wise to paint the floor boards before laying,
especially in the grooves, as water is splashed up
here from the wheels. So make sure of a water-
tight and dust-proof floor.
The Rear Compartment
To continue with the rear compartment: I have
fitted a “Demon'* stove, double burner, as used in
many caravans. This type is safest, as there is
no compressed gas, therefore, no likelihood of
catching fire, and it is best to have metal round
it so that it can be kept clean. At the side of the
stove a wash-up bench is fixed, with a cupboard
underneath.
Both the stove and the wash-up basin must be
held firmly in position to prevent them bouncing
about during travel. For the stove I have used
a strip of aluminium across the lower part, held
by a wing nut on each side.
The basin is fixed at the back by two hooks
about eight inches apart, under which the edge
is slipped with another hook attached to a coil
spring at the front. To empty the basin it is


Caravan Building
only necessary to lift the spring hook and take
the basin out. I have used this arrangement
on other trailers and always found it very satis-
factory.
Behind the stove and wash-up basin there is a
large space, which is to be used for food con-
tainers, a bread box, crockery, etc. It is best to
have doors on these cupboards hinged at the
bottom, and held as a shelf while open this
gives more room while cooking or preparing meals.
A table and chairs will be carried and meals taken
in a small tent. On the floor will be carried water
tanks (two at least) about 2 gallons each.
Rear compartment with the door raised and held in
position with supports made as shown in the diagram.
These are important. The equipment shown here is by
no means complete but the picture indicates the amount
of space available for camping impedimenta. When packed
for travelling, everything is held firmly in position.
Page Twenty-one
This picture shows a little girl resting in the caravanette.
When taken the window section had not been cut out.
This compartment can be arranged in many
ways, so it may be left to the prospective builder
to please himself—or should I say, his wife? To
support this rear door I have had to make two
supports after the style of those used on gramo-
phone cabinets. They are 26 in. long and made
from 1 in. x 3/16 in. steel (see drawing J).
When making supports for this door remember
that they must hold the door down as well as up,
as a gust of wind will lift it and your support
might fall away if not fixed in such a way as to
keep the door from being lifted.
We now pass on to the “bedroom.” It is well
worth while spending a little extra on a really
comfortable bed. There was on the market a very
suitable sponge rubber which with a couple of
inches of padding on top made a wonderfully easy
resting place. Rubber is now out of the question,
but a reversible inner sorun? mattress can be
obtained for about £4/10/-. Either of these is
well worth the expense. Mattress covers of a good
tapestry such as used in cars is another profit-
able outlay.
At the foot of the bed there will be room for
two suit cases (on edee), and near the roof there
is room for a shelf, which will carry suit cases and
sundries, after the stvle of those used in railway
carriages. Small collapsible shelves can be ar-
ranged in corners at front end for books and so on.
so that nothin? need be thrown on the bed. A
place for everything is my motto, and I try to
carry it out.
The mudguards had to be made, as car mud-
guards proved to be unsuitable. They are 9V 2 in.
wide and made of a 2in. flat inside; see sketch
of section L. Bolt mudguards to lower bearers
and one bolt through side of body to upright.
A strip of material called “piping,” used on cars,
should be placed between the mudguards and the
body to prevent small stones and dirt from drop-
ping into places from which they cannot be re-
moved easily. To protect the body from mud and
stones thrown up use a sheet of galvanised iron,
or, better still, aluminium, fastened under the mud-
guards. Cut a semi-circle the shape of the mud-
guards and fix it by means of the same bolts that
hold the mudguards.


Page Twenty-two
Door Locks and Handles
For the door locks there are many kinds to
choose from. After experimenting I found the most
satisfactory plan was to use car door handles in
conjunction with ordinary mortice latches of small
size, such as are used in houses. The car door
latches themselves are too large for use in doors
that are only one inch thick. For the same reason
I did not cut away the wood to let the latches into
the doors, but shaped a piece of wood about 7
inches long, and having checked the latch neatly
into it, screwed it on to the door as shown in sketch
H. The bar of the car handle was then pushed
through the plate, screwed to the door on the
outside, and the bar cut off at the necessary length
and drilled to take a split pin that holds it firmly
in position.
A car door handle is also best for the rear
door, fixed in the same way.
The two doors at the sides are made in the
usual way, and the windows are fitted as shown
in sketch M outside view. Both doors and
windows must close against a strip of sponge rub-
ber, so fix a strip of wood all round, leaving room
for’ the rubber; this is essential if dust is to be
kept out.
The centre draw-bar is of 3% x 2 in. k.d.
Mountain Ash, and it is best not to use bolts
through the wood except at the rear end of the
pole. I have used U bolts as shown in Fig. N.
Cut a bare V 4 in. out of the pole on the ton side
to prevent slip, and to prevent side slip screw on a
small stop niece of wood at each side of the pole
and keep U bolts tteht. A strengthening stav can
be made for the pole, using, sav,. 1 in. x % in-
iron, and bolt on to the side bearer underneath,
and carrv them out, to near the end of the pole. I
will leave the coupling to the builder’s own Choice:
all I will sav is, get a good one, for this is a vital
point on which users of caravan trailers are apt
to meet with trouble.
Tyres which have almost finished their life on
the car are auite aood enoueh for a trailer oro-
vided they are sound. I should sav tvres which
are ready for re-treadine are sufficient. Tn past
experiences I have found that wear on a trailer
tyre is almost nil.
It is necessary with this outfit to carry a small
tent. One of the Auto Tent type would do as it
has a cover which would go over the kitchen end
of the caravan. I intend to have a special one made
to run as far as the side door on one side. A
tent is only needed in wet weather, but we cannot
get good weather all the time, that is certain.
As the rear end of the caravanette must take a
few knocks at times, it should have iron bumpers
underneath so that if dragged over gutters the
body will not be damaged. These can be fixed
at the rear comers, as shown in the sketch. When
the car lifts the front end of the caravanette
as, for instance, passing over a deep gutter
these corner bumpers will take the shock and pre-
vent damage.
It will be necessary to provide a support of
some kind for the front when the car is discon-
nected. A wooden leg hinged to the front end of
the pole might serve the purpose, but some builders
may prefer to make a thorough job of it by fitting
a jockey wheel.
Always chock the wheels when the caravanette
is disconnected from the car.
Caravan (Building
Lighting
For illumination, the caravanette can be wired
for roof and tail light, a light should be fitted
inside the rear door so that when this door is
raised the kitchen is ready for night cooking if
necessary.
In summing up, let me say that if the directions
are followed fairly closely, there should be no diffi-
culty in the construction. I must, however, im-
press on the prospective builder the necessity of be-
ginning at the right point. Get the axle, wheels
and springs first. I have seen amateur builders in
great trouble through building the body first and
then discovering that the axle does not fit, through
too much or too little space for tyres, etc. Build
a caravanette as you would a house from the
foundations upwards, and you will find that nothing
will go wrong. The weight of the caravanette, in-
cluding rubber mattress but excluding other fit-
tings, is 5 cwt. 7 lbs.
Since describing its construction in The Home
Beautiful some little time ago, I have taken the
caravanette as far as Tuggerah Lakes, north of
Sydney, and back through the Kangaroo Valley
(which is very hilly) and along the Prince’s High-
way, without striking any trouble or finding any
fault in it.
It is as handy and easily towed as a caravan
could be. My only trouble was with the tent, which
was too small for the very wet weather we en-
countered. The size of it was 6ft. x. 7ft., with an
extension coming over the caravan.
The reason for this added- height is that when
covering the caravan for protection from sup or
rain the cover must be high enough to walk under,
otherwise we would be bending down to enter or
leave the doors.
My arrangement for this support (which was
one at each side) proved to be “not so good.” A
better plan would be one rail along the centre.
Question of Cost
The reader will probably be wondering whether
all this can be done for the sum of £3O, as pro-
mised. My own experience has proved that it
could be done in pre-war days. But probably no
two caravanettes will cost exactly the same amount
when built by amateurs. ..Some ingenious workers
will do it even more cheaply, others will spend
quite a lot more money in extra fittings and equip-
ment—those little things that add to the comfort
and enjoyment of a holiday tour. But all the
essentials are covered by the sum mentioned, as
will be seen in the list of items and prices appended.
The builder can add to it anything he desires;
everyone has a different idea, and there is a large
field for selection. '* . -
Pre-War Cost List
List price of new material required for the
essential parts is as follows: —
£ s. d.
Axle, wheels *' 13 0 0
Springs, including all fittings 4 10 0
Masonite, at 6d. per sq. foot 3 12 0
Mudguards
2
0
0
Timber, including bending
2
16
0
Aluminium beading
1
0
0
26 18 0
Rubber Mattress at 5/ per sq. foot 6 0 0
Locks, paint, screws and bolts will ac-
count for about another 2 0 0


Caravan
Page Twenty-three
**
l_ —
i
i
3 Dent
To MATCi
P/eces
V D/DE
—
or epak
l 1
vf
;.;[
r E
s' //
1
Y
l—
Slac/ti*
ONE P/2
Z"x/ V
Li
ri
OOP,
’CE
//
7
\V\\
-
\
\
||
P/ECE
<HEQ
T
I -
j
!
;.{
f/vz?
4 * ///<
•//
\i
L
-7.B—^
ink
—- j.
J \ ,
-rt-jA/v
3/DE
E
T
j
fO
5S==U®»1
TO
BE
—
\
\
P/EC
1
f}
LOWER i
Mason it
;
EOCE OF
E 3HEAT INC
POLE
bolted NEj
7Z>
/ PT 5QUAP
S3 ,
' '
SCALE PLAN
OF CHAS
SIS AND FI
RAME OF
CARavant
rTE
If You are a Handyman you should certainly ...
Buy
THE AUSTRALIAN HOME BEAUT
Every Month. Price, One Shilling
I F 1
LJE


Page Twenty-four
3HJ'HOB 50)
Printed and published by EDGAR H. BAILLIE, of 185 Balaclava Road, Caulfield, for United Press, Herald and Weekly
Times Limited, at Its Registered Office, 44-74 Flinders Street, Melbourne.
Caravan (Building
