

CARDINAL MORAN
AXD THE
FEDERAL CONVENTION,




CARDINAL MORAN
THE FEDERAL CONVENTION.
DEPUTATION TO THE CARDINAL.
His Eminence’s Consent.
A deputation of representatives and influential
citizens waited on his Eminence the Cardinal at
noon, on Friday, sth February, to request that he
would allow himself to be nominated for a seat in
the Federal Convention. The following were those
who were present : —Mr. F. Wentworth (of Yau-
cluse), son of the late William Charles Wentworth,
founder of the Constitution, ex-Judge M‘Farland,
The Hon. E. Greville, M.L.C., Colonel Waddell,
Captain Oldershaw, Mr. John Woods, J.P. (of
Manly), Alderman F. Penny, J.P. (Licensing
Magistrate), Messrs. William Jarrett, J.P. George
Flannery, B.A, (assistant secretary of the Bathurst
Convention), Harrie Wood, J.P. (ex-Under-
Secretary for Mines and Agriculture), T. M.
Slattery, Dr. C. W. MacCarthy, C. Lewison, I.
Kino, H. A. Rose, H. Oxenham, E. O’Farrell,
George Pile, Charles I. Harris, 0. C. Beale, and
M. Meagher (Bathurst).


The meeting took place in the library of St.
Mary’s Presbytery. His Eminence, who was
-attended by his private secretary, the Very Rev.
Dr. O’Haran, on entering the room, was received
with loud applause.
Mr. Wentworth acted as spokesman. He said
he had the honour of introducing a deputation of
citizens who were anxious that his Eminence should
see his way to allow himself to be nominated for a
seat in the approaching Federal Convention. The
gentlemen present represented every class and sect,
and they all felt with him (the speaker) that at this
great crisis in the history of the country it was of
the utmost necessity that they should obtain the
very best men possible to represent them. (Ap-
plause.) They all felt that, considering his Eminence’s
great ability, and learning, and the very great
interest he took in this matter, if he could see his
way to come forward he would render one of the
greatest services that any man could possibly render
to the country. (Loud applause.)
Mr. T. M. Slattery announced the receipt of
apologies from Dr. Warren, Mr. G. J. Barry (Mayor,
North Sydney), Messrs. Laidley Mort, J.P., James
Finch, B. F. Marks, J.P., John Pope, J.P, (Farmer
and Co.), N. Melville, B. M. Pitt, John Williamson,
and W. C. Wentworth. Mr. T. M. Slattery also
read the following letter, which he had received from
Rabbi Davis, which was loudly applauded by the
members of the deputation :—-
Sydney, February 4, 1897.
T. M. Slattery, Esq.
My Dear Sir, —Fearing that I shall be unable to
be present with you to-morrow, permit me to say by
these means that I am among the many who consider


that so eminent a citizen as Cardinal Moran is in
every respect qualified to bear a part in the approach-
ing Convention.
His distinguished position, his acknowledged
ability in taking a comprehensive view T of questions
.of general policy, and, above all, the peace and
harmony that have rested upon the many hundreds
of Churches throughout the colony under his sway,
as well as upon the educational and benevolent
institutions he has established and governed with so
much tact and discrimination, give evidence of a rare
; power as an organiser that mark him out as one who
would be of invaluable service in assisting to arrange
the lines and frame a Constitution on which the
future federation of the colonies should be based.
I am, &c.,
Alexander B. Davis.
His Eminence, who appeared very sensible of the
honour that was paid to him, and thoroughly to feel
the responsible nature of his position, said in reply
that he felt much gratified by the presence of so
many distinguished citizens. Considering the impor-
tance of the matter, he had taken the liberty of
putting his thoughts on paper, and with their per-
mission he would read them to the deputation.
(Applause.)
THE CARDINAL’S REPLY.
“Gentlemen,— ! beg to assure you that I am
most grateful for the, singular confidence of which
you give proof whilst you extend to me this very
flattering invitation to be one of your candidates at
the approaching Federal election. Many friends,
Catholic and non-Catholic, from various districts of


the colony, have been pleased to be associated with
you in this invitation, and I deem it a duty which 1
owe to Australian patriotism to accept it. (Ap-
plause.) It will probably be your wish that I
should avail of this occasion to briefly set forth the
principles by which I shall be guided should it be
my privilege to be elected one of your representa-
tives at the Federal Convention. (Renewed
applause). The outline of the Constitution framed
for the Australian Commonwealth in 1891 has
merited the applause and admiration of many
thoughtful men, and with the practical amendments
introduced at Bathurst last year will, 1 have no
doubt, commend itself for the acceptance of the
approaching Convention. 1 would wish to see
inserted in the preamble to the Constitution some
such clauses as the following :
“Religion is the basis of our Australian Common-
wealth and of its laws' In accordance with the
spirit of religion, a genuine liberty of conscience is
the birthright of every Australian citizen, and the
full and free exercise of divine worship, so far as
may be consistent with public order and public
morality, shall be accorded to all.” (Hear, hear.)
In the ideal of an Australian Commonwealth, as it
commends itself to my mind, each State should
enjoy the most perfect freedom consistent w r ith the
well-being of the commonwealth, while at the same
time the Federal Government should be invested
with full authority to weld the various States into
a strong united Australia, and to avail of their com-
bined resources, in so far as may be necessary, to
promote the common interests of all. Whilst, how-
ever, we endeavour to attain this grand ideal, it may
not be expedient to proceed with precipitancy or
with hasty legislation. The slow and gradual
growth of such an ideal will insure its greater


strength and greater permanence. Hence, for
instance, it may be considered opportune for each
State in the Australian Commonwealth to continue
for a fixed period, say 12 to 18 years, to be the
arbiter of the administration of its own railway
system, and, perhaps, for a period also, of its own
fiscal policy. (Hear, hear).
“ c I regard it as one of the main duties that
devolve on the Federal Government to organise the
military and naval defence of the Australian Com-
monwealth. An Australian fleet, subject to the
control of the Federal Government, appears to be a
matter of paramount importance —I would even
venture to say of absolute necessity, considering the
strained relations of many of the European Govern-
ments at the present day. As regards the capital
of the Australian Commonwealth, I heartily concur
in the opinion, which is very generally entertained,
that Sydney or some neighbouring district of New
South Wales should be the seat and centre of the
Federal Government. Endowed and enriched as
'Sydney is, with so many choicest gifts the
terminus of the great shipping trade of Europe, as
well as of the great Republics of America and of the
vast Empires of Asia, and holding, as she does, the
key of the Pacific, this city appears to be marked
out by Nature itself for this queenly privilege.
Other colonies expect that some concessions shall be
made by New South Wales. The concession on
their part of the Federal capital to the mother
colony will, I am confident, be approved and highly
appreciated, by all who have at heart the best
interests of the Australian Commonwealth.
It is difficult to conceive a matter of more vital
importance for the future welfare of Australia
than the selection at the present time of repre-
sentatives of ability and experience and high


personal character, irrespective of their religious
or fiscal or other opinions. Wild theorists and
mere experimentalists should not be chosen to
frame a Constitution for the Australian Common-
wealth. The scales of justice should be held
with even balance. If the rights of labour have
to be promoted and protected, the rights of property
have no less to be guarded and defended. So, too,
where the interests of all the colonies are involved,
too great care cannot be taken that no injustice be
done to any. Should 1 be honoured by my fellow-
colonists with a seat in the Convention, whilst
guarding the best interests of the other colonies, 1
shall take care that no injustice be done my own,
(Applause.)
Queensland and West Australia at present
stand aloof from the other colonies, I am confident
that before many months they, too, will be repre-
sented at the Federal Convention. The example of
the Canadian Dominion is one which cannot fail to
convey a lesson of practical wisdom to us. More
than one of its vast provinces took no part in the
original scheme of union. But with the solitary
exception of Newfoundland, all have long since learnt
by experience the advantages of Federation, and have
cast in their lot with the grand Dominion of Canada,
(A_pplause.) I have only to add, in conclusion, that
it is not my intention on the present occasion, or at
any future time, to enter the arena of politics. I
have hitherto kept aloof from all political strife, and
it is my unalterable resolve to continue to pursue
the same course. My sole claim to the compliment
which you, gentlemen, and my other fellow-citizens
have been pleased to pay me on the present occasion,
is that in a spirit of devotedness to this land of my
adoption, I have never failed to avow myself an
sincere, and consistent advocate of an
Australian Commonwealth. (Loud applause.)


Mr. Wentworth, in the name of the deputation,
thanked the Cardinal for the consent he had given,
.and briefly stated that those who were present saw
they had made no mistake in the step they had
taken. (Hear, hear.)
A little time was afterwards spent in conversation,
in which his Eminence took part. The deputation
then withdrew.


THE CARDINAL’S MANIFESTO
TO THE ELECTORS OF NEW SOUTH
WALES.
Gentlemen, —
At the request of very many of my fellow-colonists,
of every denomination, and of all shades of political
opinion, I come to ask your suffrages for election as
one of your Representatives at the approaching
Federal Convention.
I advocate a Federation of our Australian Colonies,
in that I am convinced such a F ederation must con-
tribute not a little to promote the grand destiny
which awaits Australia, to give a fresh impulse to
the development of her resources, and to ensure for
her an enduring prosperity and peace.
The Italian Republics and the Hanse Towns of
Germany in mediaeval times attained by Federation
the highest degree of contentment and prosperity.
The Dominion of Canada in our own day affords a
like example. It had been only a few years federated
when in 1874 the Governor-General, Earl Dufferin,
made an extensive tour of the Dominion Provinces,
and as the result of his observations he was able to
write, “ Everywhere I have learnt that the people
are satisfied—satisfied with their own individual
prospects, and with the prospects of their country ;
satisfied with their Government and the institutions
under which they prosper. With spontaneous
unconcerted unanimity of language, the entire
Dominion has declared its faith in itself, in its
destiny, in its connection with the mother country,
and in the well ordered freedom of a constitutional
monarchy. Words cannot express what pride I feel


in the loyalty of Canada to England. Nevertheless
I should be the first to deplore this feeling if it
rendered Canada disloyal to herself; if it either
dwarfed or smothered Canadian patriotism, or
generated a sickly spirit of dependence.” And he
adds that “ the daily growing disposition to extin-
guish sectional jealousies, and to ignore an obsolete
provincialism proves how strongly the young heart
of the confederated commonwealth has begun to
throb with the consciousness of its national exist-
ence.” Such are the cheering results achieved by
federation in the Dominion of Canada, and such, too,
1 am confident, shall be attained in the Australian
Commonwealth.
The ideal of an Australian Commonwealth, as it
commends itself to me, is that each State shall con-
tinue to enjoy the most perfect freedom of action
consistent with the wellbeing of the Commonwealth,
whilst at the same time the Federal Government
shall be invested with full authority to weld all the
States into a strong united Australia, and to avail
of their combined resources in so far as may be
necessary to promote the common interests of all.
I need not further repeat what was set forth when
I replied to a deputation of my fellow-colonists a
few days ago. Suffice it to say that I adhere to all
the statements which I then made.
Great things have been achieved by the separate
colonies during the past fifty years. Capital cities
have sprung up, worthy rivals of the chief centres
of civilisation in the home countries. The commerce
of Australia has attained vast proportions, her re-
sources have been multiplied, and an energy has
been displayed by her devoted sons, combined with
a spirit of enterprise and industry, which has no-
where been surpassed. With such results already
attained, may we not rest assured that a glorious


destiny awaits our united Australia, and that, with
her ever-increasing gifted population, she cannot
fail to exercise a vast influence for good, not only
on the neighbouring empires of the East, but
throughout the whole civilised world !
Some senseless writers in the public press have
accused me of disloyalty and of a secret aim to
separate the Australian Commonwealth from the
Empire. Nothing could be farther from my
thoughts. I know of no allegiance in civil matters
save what I owe to Her Most Gracious Majesty the
Queen and to the Government of New South Wales.
I am loyal to the Crown for conscience sake, and I
am loyal to it because the interests of Australia for
many a long day must render imperative such a
union with the Empire. The man who at the present
time would seriously advocate a separation of Aus-
tralia from the Crown should be consigned, not to
Darlinohurst, but to Gladesville. No nation can
O 7
desire greater freedom than that which we here
enjoy. The purpose of Federation is to enhance
that freedom, to guard and protect it, to extend its
benign influence, and to hand on unimpaired its
priceless blessings as an inalienable heritage to Aus-
tralia’s sons.
I need not dwell on the many advantages that
shall accrue to our Australian citizens from the pro-
posed Federation. Suffice it to mention a Supreme
Court of Appeal, a uniform Judicature, a common
postal and telegraph system, a national currency and
coinage, and banking legislation, and due arrange-
ments for naturalisation, copyrights, patents and
quarantine.
One of the most important duties that shall devolve
upon the Federal Government will be to attend to
all matters connected with the military and naval
defence of Australia. Uniformity of discipline and


unity of command are essential conditions of success-
in warfare, and without them it might easily come
to pass, in the case of a hostile invasion, that the
heroism of our citizens and their devotedness and
self-sacrifice would be of little avail. The fleet that
guards our coasts should be subject to the control
of the Federal Government. When the resources
of a United Australia are available, it may well be
expedient to organise our own Australian fleet, and
to commence the building of our vessels in Aus-
tralian waters.
As regards the organisation of the Federal
O O #
Government, the general outline of the Constitution
approved in 1891, and amended at the Bathurst
Convention last year, appears to have merited the
public approval. The Governor-General should be
appointed by the Crown, and through him all com-
munications of the Federated States should be made
with the Home Government. The Governors of
the particular States should be chosen by their
respective Governments with the approval of the
Governor-General,
There should be two elective Chambers of Parlia-
ment —that is, the House of and
the Senate. It might be expedient that a certain
proportion of the Senate— say, one-sixth—would be
nominated by the Federal Executive Government
during each Parliament. Men may be found of
singular ability and long political experience whose
presence and counsel in the Senate would be invalu-
able, but whose connection with any one of the
Federal States might not be such as to lead to their
being selected as representatives.
The Federal Government, either by direct or by
indirect taxation, must be equipped with the neces-
sary funds for carrying on the work of administration.
It will be the duty, however, of the Executive


to take care that such taxation may not add to the
existing burdens of the Federated States.
The mother colony of New South Wales justly
claims as a portion of her inheritance the capital and
seat of Government of the Australian Common-
wealth. The City of Sydney, by its history and
position, and by the many gifts and varied resources
which Nature has lavished upon it, appears to be
marked out as pre-eminently qualified for this
queenly privilege.
In matters of religion our citizens throughout
Australia form a mixed community. But we are
not atheists. We all believe in a Supreme Being,
the Creator and Sovereign Lord of all, the Divine
Arbiter of our destinies, the source whence comes
the authority for making Jaws, and the duty and
sanction of their oloservance. Furthermore, we all
profess to be guided by conscience, and what is con-
science but the eye of God in the human soul ? I
consider the words of Washington to be as true
to-day as they were a hundred years ago : “ Let it
simply be asked, where is the security for property,
for reputation, for life, if the sense of religious
obligation desert the oaths which are the instruments
of investigation in courts of justice ? And let us with
caution indulge the supposition that morality can be
maintained without religion. Beason and experience
both forbid us to expect that national morality can
prevail in exclusion of religious principle.” 1 would
wish, therefore, to see inserted in the preamble to
our Constitution that “ b'eligion is the basis of our
Commonwealth and of its laws.” And I would
add that “ in accordance with the spirit of religion,
a genuine liberty of conscience is the birthright of
every Australian citizen, and the free exercise of
Divine worship, in so far as may be consistent with


public order and public morality, shall be accorded to
all.”
I would request all the electors of New South
Wales to register their vote on the present occasion.
The law requires the elector to vote for 10 represen-
tatives. Unless the vote be given for 10 candidates,
neither more nor less, the vote will be of no avail.
When selecting those 10 candidates it will be well to
bear in mind at the present momentous crisis, that
there is no question of the religious denomination to
which they belong, or of the nationality which they
represent, or of the political party with which they
are associated. You should choose for your vote
the ten candidates who by their energy and ability,
by their disinterestedness and experience, and withal
by thier earnestness and zeal in promoting the cause
of Federation, have proved themselves to be the
best qualified to frame a Constitution for a U nited
Australia. As for myself, I stand alone, and have
no association whatsoever with any other aspirant
to your suffrages. It is an arduous task that is
assigned to your representatives, for there can be no
question that on the Constitution which shall now
be framed must in a great measure depend the
future destiny of Australia, and the permanence of
her prosperity and peace. If an Australian Com-
monwealth be now devised in a spirit of generous
patriotism, we will have in a little while throughout
the whole Australian Continent one Country, one
People, one Flag ; and freedom and progress, with
the many blessings which follow in their train, shall
be perpetuated amongst us.
Should it be my privilege to be elected one of
your representatives I will use every endeavour that
the Federal Constitution shall be worthy of Aus-
tralia’s glorious destiny. I would regard it as a


matter of duty to deal with all the colonies in a
spirit of equity and justice, and it would be my
special care to guard from all injustice my own
colony, and to defend its best interests.
I am, Gentlemen,
Your faithful Servant,
tPATRICK FRANCIS CARDINAL MORAN,
Archbishop of Sydney.
15th February.


APPENDIX
THE BATHURST CONVENTION
November, 1896.
Address of the Cardinal-Archbishop.
(From the local Newspapers.)
The People’s Federal Convention came to a close
on Saturday, the number of motions that remained
to be dealt with preventing the termination of pro-
ceedings that had been intended for Friday. The
Convention had opened on Monday, when 105
delegates and invited guests responded to their
names —prominent among whom was the Right Rev.
Ur. Byrne, Bishop of Bathurst, who further showed
the interest he took in the proceedings by consenting
to act on one of the committees, that, namely, of
procedure and standing orders. On the closing day
His Lordship moved a resolution, which was agreed
to, to the effect that the Convention should urge upon
the Queensland Government the re-introduction, as
early as possible, of the Enabling Bill in the Queens-
land Parliament. Dr. Machattie, president of the
local Federation League, was elected president, and
seven vice-presidents were elected as follows ; —Mr.
E. Barton, Mr. F. B. Suttor, Dr. Bassett (Mayor of
Bathurst). Mr. B. B. Nicoll, Colonel J. G. Davies
(Tasmania), Hon. R. E. O’Connor, M.L.C., and
Professor Gosman (of Victoria). On the second day
the president delivered his inaugural address, and in
the evening, the Hon. John Gavan Duffy, Post-


master-General of Victoria, was among the speakers.
On the third da} 7, the principal subject of discussion
was the financial aspect of Federation. The day was
made especially remarkable by the arrival of His
Eminence Cardinal Moran, who, with the Very Kev.
Dr. o’Haran,had travelled from Sydney in a special
railway carriage in company of the Premier and Sir
Patrick Jennings. His Eminence was received at
the terminus by the Bishop of Bathurst, the Very
Bev. Father Byrne, President of St. Stanislaus’
College, the Bev. Father Dowling, Vice-president,
and other members of the clergy. There were also
present to receive the distinguished visitors Dr.
Machattie, Messrs. John Meagher, Michael Meagher,
G. E. Machattie, Dr. Bassett (Mayor), and many
other prominent members of the Convention. The
surroundings of the platform were crowded and
hearty cheers were given, in which the Cardinal had
a chief part. His Eminence was driven to St.
Stanislaus’ College, where he was the guest of His
Lordship the Bishop. On Friday the Cardinal
delivered to the Convention an address, which was
received with enthusiasm, and for which, on the
motion of Dean Marriott, seconded by the Hon.
Sydney Smith, and carried by acclamation, the
members rising and giving three hearty cheers, His
Eminence received the best thanks of the Convention.
The address, said the Dean, breathed the spirit of a
wide Catholicity and a true patriotism, and was very
helpful to them on that occasion. Other speakers
were the Premier, Mr. Lyne, Mr. Edmund Barton,
the Hon. B. E. O’Connor, Sir Patrick Jennings, and
the Hon. D. O’Connor. In the evening a banquet
was given to the Cardinal at his residence by Mr.
John Meagher, at which were also present the Bight
Bev. Dr. Byrne, the Very Bev. Dr. O’Haran, the
Very Bev. Dean Marriott, Mr. Sydney Smith, Mr.


W. J. Lyne, Mr, E. Barton, Mr. R. E O’Connor,
Mr. D. O’Connor, Mr. Jago Smith, Mr. Webb, Mr.
Geo Lee, Mr. John See, Mr. F. B. Suttor, Dr.
Machattie, Dr. Hurst, Dr. Bassett (Mayor of
Bathurst), Mr. Millen (Bourke), Mr. F. B. Freebill,
and several others. The Cardinal, the Premier, Sir
Patrick Jennings, and Mr. W. J. Lyne responded to
the toast of “ The Visitors,” proposed by Mr.
Meagher. Dr. Machattie proposed the toast of
“ Federation,” to which Mr. Barton and Mr. R. E.
O’Connor responded. The Cardinal proposed the
health of “ The Host.”
The following is His Eminence’s address at the
Convention :
His Eminence said : I would have wished to be
allowed to remain an unobserved spectator in this
grand assembly, and to listen in silence to the lessons
of enlightened patriotism which shall be given us by
the distinguished political leaders and other states-
men —men of intelligence, integrity and patriotism
—whom I see around me ; but the request of the
worthy president of the People’s Convention that I
would deliver a brief address is for me a command
which I cannot fail to obey. Permit me first of all
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the success
which has attended the discussions and the delibera-
tions of your Convention. It must be a source of
since rest "pleasure to you and to the truly energetic
committee that have so faithfully co-operated with
you to know that in every detail, in the meetings
which have been held, in the enthusiasm which has
been evoked, in the eloquent discourses which have
been delivered, your Convention has proved to be a
complete success.
The Patriotism of Australia’s Sons.
I would wish, furthermore, to bear witness in some
humble way to the fact that the popular sentiment


throughout the Australian colonies, and the genuine-
patriotism of Australia’s sons, are with you in this
great Federation movement. There have been some,
indeed, who have thought well to cast their sneers at
your Convention, and who have endeavoured to
throw ridicule on your invitation to so many repre-
sentatives of AusLalian interests to assemble in your
beautiful City of the Plains. But may I not ask,
what great national movement has ever been in-
augurated without being subject to similar attacks ?
I can assure you, however, that you have, through-
out the country, an invincible moral power to sustain
you, a moral power not confined to one or other of
our colonies, but which, springing from the
enlightened patriotism and generous hearts of
thousands of devoted citizens of all our colonies, must
prove irresistible in its strength, and which, guided
by our political leaders, cannot fail to overcome every
obstacle that would bar the path of Australian
Federation. I trust that you shall not relax your
efforts until the banner which you have so auspi-
ciously unfurled at this People’s Convention shall be
crowned with glorious victory. (Loud cheers.)
The Common Sense of Federation.
It may be said that hitherto the separate colonies
have given proof of singular vitality and energy, and
their efforts have been crowned with at least partial
success. Why not leave well enough alone ? The
answer is obvious. The separate condition of our
colonies may have been best adapted to the begin-
ings of colonial life, giving ample field to individual
enterprise and energy. But at the present stage of
colonial development our Australian patriots feel
assured that by the united resources and united
strength of all these colonies, and by the stimulus
thus given to the energies of our citizens and the


wider experience that is available, a Commonwealth,
of bright name and peerless fame may be built up i n
this southern world, in grander proportions and with
vaster influence and greater power than any separate
colony could ever aspire to. (Enthusiastic applause.)
Some of the Advantages,
I may be permitted to dwell for a moment on
some of the advantages that must accrue from such
a federation of Australian strength. In the
influence which Australia may justly claim to exer-
cise on neighbouring and other States, assuredly one
strong central Government cannot fail to achieve
results which the separate colonies would hopelessly
seek to attain. (Cheers.) In our present scattered
condition it would be patent to everyone that other
States trouble themselves very little about us, and
even the Home Government, no matter how politely
it may deal with us, yet makes no secret that our
divided and occasionally discordant voices do not
command all the attention and respect which would
necessarily be extended to the voice of United Aus-
tralia. We may take an example from the grand
Republic of the United States, which with queenly
dignity rules the opposite coasts of the Pacific.
What influence would the separate States exercise
were they not organised and united in one strong
Commonwealth ? So, too, it is with Canada. Her
separate provinces were little more than an unknown
cypher, without weight and without influence,
throughout the nations of Europe, and even in
Great Britain. How different is the position of the
Canadian Dominion of to-day. It has become a
powerful factor in the cause of social progress
throughout the world. In like manner the flag of
United Australia, the symbol of freedom and of
peace, shall one day be saluted with respect by


other nations, and an enlightened people marshalled
under that banner cannot fail to exercise an abiding
influence, imparting to surrounding and even to
distant lands some part of the abundance of bless-
ings of Christian civilisation which they themselves
enjoy. (Enthusiastic applause.)
United Australia and the Flag of Freedom.
No less weighty are the manifold advantages
which must accrue to United Australia in repelling
from her tranquil shores any assault or invasion
which ambitious neighbours or greedy adventurers
may attempt. The curse of a vast standing army
shall never, I trust, befall this fair land. (Cheers)
It is difficult to conceive a more sad condition of
things than that which some of the great nations
of Europe present at the present hour. Millions of
their sons under arms spend their lives in idle pre-
paration for war, and fruitlessly waste away the
energies and resources which would otherwise spread
the blessings of abundance through their native land.
For my part, I would wish every one of our
Australian citizens to be trained to the use of arms.
(Cheers.) Such a nation’s discipline would be the
surest guarantee ot our liberties and of peace.
Should any emergency arise, or should the dangers
of invasion threaten Australia’s shores, her well-
trained sons would be an invincible barrier against
all such assailants, and would prove a resistless
phalanx, assured of victory against every foe.
(Applause.)
Above Party Politics
It has been very freely whispered, and at times even
broadly asserted, that this People’s Convention is
an attempt to cast a slight on our political leaders,
and to withdraw from their guidance the important
movement which is the subject of your discussions.


Gentlemen, Ido not consider it is so. Did I think
that your Convention had any such political aim, I,
for one, would have no part in it. (Cheers.) As I
understand it, the special purpose of the Convention
is to strengthen the hands of our political leaders, to
cheer them on in their efforts to overcome the many
difficulties that must necessarily be encountered in so
momentous a measure, and to stimulate their energy,
that they may faithfully persevere until the great
work be accomplished. Cheers,
The Question of Separation.
A few days ago a telegram from London appeared
in the daily Press to the effect that within a few
years Australia would assert her independence and
demand separation from the mother country.
(Laughter.) lam confident that such a statement
is altogether misleading, and that, in so far as it
relates to the aims and efforts of our patriotic citi-
zens, it is absolutely untrue. (Cheers.) I have met
from time to time in New South Wales and the
other colonies not a few representatives of popular
opinion, and I unhesitatingly declare that no
such aims underlie the present patriotic movement.
(Cheers.) On the contrary, lam convinced that no-
where will you find a more earnest and loyal body of
citizens than are our own Australian people. There
can be no doubt that there is a Republican spirit
abroad amongst us, but this is far from implying a
tendency to separation from the Imperial Crown.
N othing is more ambiguous than the word Republic
as used in modern times. It is generally supposed to
be a synonym of Liberty, and yet nowhere will you
find Liberty so crushed, and such vexatious tyranny
exercised as in some of the so-called Republics.
The constitutional government which we enjoy in
these colonies is in the truest sense a Republic.


(Great applause). There is no country in the world
where greater liberty is enjoyed by the citizens.
All are on the same footing of perfect civil equality,
and every advantage which the State presents is
alike accessible to all. When the Canadian Domi-
nion was proposed a quarter of a century ago the
same parrot-cry was raised, that it was only a covert
attempt to separate from the home country. What
has the result proved ? So far from the Canadian
colonies being detached by Federation from the
British Crown, at no period were the bonds of
friendly union so firmly cemented with the home
countries as at the present hour. (Cheers.)
Our Connection with the British Empire.
It is true that nowadays the claims of loyalty are
made to depend in a great measure on the material
interests of the parties concerned. What the
interests of the Empire may be in the present case
I will not stop to inquire. But I have no hesitation
in expressing my opinion that for many a long year
the interests of our A ustralian continent will make it
imperative on our statesmen to maintain unimpaired
the connection of these colonies with the home
country. (Applause.) No doubt the day will come
when the vast growth of population and the varied
developments of our resources may demand an inde-
pendent government, but, assuredly, it will not be in
the lifetime of anyone of us that such a contingency
can arise. It has been often said that if Canada were
to demand on to-morrow a separation from the home
countries, Great Britain would not fire a shot to
maintain the present order of things. Should the
day arise when the interests of United Australia
may require an independent government, I am con-
fident that it is with the approval of the home
countries such a result would be achieved, and that


the mutual friendship of our colonies with the Empire
would remain undisturbed. (Renewed cheers.)
The Building-up of our Commonwealth.
But it will be asked is the A ustralian people equal
to the destiny of building up a great Commonwealth,
which shall be a beacon of enlightenment, a home of
prosperity, a citadel of peace, a centre and source of
blessings to other lands ? I say most emphatically
that the results already achieved prove our citizens to
be fully equal to such a task. (Cheers.) See the
cities with their noble structures which have arisen
in our various colonies. Sydney, Melbourne, Ade-
laide, Brisbane, Hobart are so stately in their pro-
portions, so rich in their surroundings, that any one
of them might well be the capital of a great empire.
I need not dwell on the persevering and successful
efforts of our citizens to explore the hidden resources
and develop the mineral wealth of all our colonies,
how universities have been founded and education
placed within the reach of all, how communication
with the home countries has been improved, and our
railways pushed forward on every side. All this
tells of great things already accomplished, and speaks
of an energy and spirit of enterprise on the part of
our gifted people equal to any destiny, no matter
how grand or glorious, that may await the Southern
Continent. (Enthusiastic cheers.)
More than Wealth and Commerce Needed.
It may be well, how T ever, to bear in mind the
important truth that vast wealth and commercial
activity and material progress are not to be reckoned
as the sole tests of an enlightened State, or the sole
factors in building up a great centre of Christian
civilization. The Loid Chief Justice of England a
few weeks ago, addressing the assembled Bar of the


United States, took occasion to declare that the true
signs of civilisation are : “ Thought for the poor and
suffering, chivalrous regard and respect for woman,
the frank recognition of human brotherhood irre-
spective of race or colour or nation or religion, the
narrowing of the domain of mere force as a govern-
ing factor in the world, the love of ordered freedom,
abhorrence of what is mean and cruel and vile,
ceaseless devotion to the claims of justice.” (Ap-
plause.) One with whose writings many of you are
familiar, Sir William Jones, has in part embodied
the same ideas in verse
“ Not high-raised battlement or laboured mound,
Thick walls and moated gate ;
Not cities proud, with spires and turrets crowned ;
Not bays and broad-armed ports,
Where, laughing at the storm, rich navies ride ;
Not starred and spangled courts.
No ! Men—high-minded men;
Men who their duties know,
And know their rights, and, knowing, dare maintain ;
Prevent the long-aimed blow,
And crush the tyrant while they rend the chain —
These constitute a State ;
And sovereign Law, that State’s collected will,
O’er thrones and globes elate,
Sits empress, crowning good, repressing ill.”
Give me a people enjoying the blessings of liberty,
•and rich in material resources, who are quickened by
patriotism and guided in their daily dealings with
their fellow-men by the genuine Christian altruism
that is cornpendiated in the golden maxim, “JDo unto
others as you would wish others to do unto you,”
and at once unhesitatingly I say such a people must
become a great centre of civilisation and an
important factor in the world’s progress. Such, I
mi convinced, are our Australian citizens. (Great
eheering.)
Genuine Liberty.
I trust that an unquenchable love of liberty as it
is the birthright so shall it ever be the prized heritage
of Australia’s sons. And when I speak of Liberty


I mean that genuine liberty which wages relentless
war against discord and selfishness and cant, and
which, whilst guarding and asserting our own
inalienable rights, is careful to show due respect and
reverence for the rights of others. Our citizens,
animated by such a love of liberty, shall build up a
glorious and enduring Commonwealth, and Australia
OO # 7
cannot fail to attain the bright destiny that awaits
her. (Renewed cheering.)
The Safeguards op Religion.
I have not spoken of religion. If I now refer to
it, it is to deprecate the attempts that are made from
time to time to stir up foolish dissensions among our
citizens on the plea of difference in matters of
religion. (Applause.) Religion has its own
safeguards and moves in its own higher sphere.
The better instructed a Catholic is in the
teachings of the Church, and the more firmly he
adheres to the principles of his Divine Faith,
the more sincerely will he respect the conscientious
convictions of others. (Cheers.) I have no fears
for the future of religion in Australia. If there be
anyone who in the ardour of political strife would
be disposed to set at nought the influence of religion
in building up an enlightened Commonwealth. I
would wish to remind him of the words of Washing-
ton, “ Let it simply be asked where is the security
for property, for reputation, for life, if the sense of
religious obligation desert the oaths which are the
o o ... r . ,
instruments of investigation in courts of justice ?
And let us with caution indulge the supposition that
morality can be maintained without religion. What-
ever may be conceded to the influence of refined
education on minds of peculiar structure, reason and
experience both forbid us to expect that national
morality can prevail in exclusion of religious
principle.” (Cheers.)


Catholics and Protestants Hand-in-Hand.
To our Catholic people I would say : Go hand-in-
hand with your Protestant fellow-citizens in every
measure that may have for its purpose to advance
the interests, to develop the resources, or promote
the welfare of Australia. (Cheers.) This fair land
justly claims the united energies of all her sons ; she
stands in need of the conservative strength of all
her citizens to achieve her glorious destiny. He
who sets himself to sow dissensions should be
regarded as an enemy no less of religion than of his
country. (Applause.) Discord being banished from
amongst us, how happy will be the result. Our
citizens all united in harmony and concord, emula-
ting each other with friendly rivalry in eagerness to
promote the common good, who can doubt that a
grand future must await such a land ? (Renewed
cheers.)
The Parliament of Federated Australia.
Our gifted Premier has promised us a grand
exhibition to mark the close of the present century,
which has been truly marvellous in our colonial
growth no less than in the manifold triumphs which
commerce, science, and industry have achieved. Far
be it from me to attempt to depreciate in any way
the advantages that must accrue from such an
exhibition, or from the attractions which it cannot
fail to present to our own Australians, and to visitors
from many lands. But I venture to predict that
yet another far more brilliant exhibition shall mark
the close of this nineteenth century. I mean the
Parliament of United Australia,a Parliament clothed
with splendour and power and majesty, arrayed in
stateliness and beauty like one of our cathedrals of
old, the guarantee of freedom to Australia’s sons,


strong as a fortress and sacred as a shrine. ”
{Great cheering.)
Patriotism, Prosperity, and Peace.
One word more, and I have done. I love the
little shamrock of my native land. (Applause )
It typifies the undying fidelity of the Irish heart,
and the indomitable patriotism of Ireland’s sons.
It is the symbol of the Faith and Hope and Charity,
which through weal or woe have never ceased to shed
their blessings on the green hills and smiling valleys
of Erin. (Cheers.) That shamrock transplanted to
Australia retains all its vigour and freshness, but,
-emulating the land to which it has been transferred,
expands its triple leaf in giant growth May we not
trust that in like manner the virtues and blessings
which it symbolises may be enhanced and multiplied
throughout this fair land ? (Cheers). As a motto
for our United Australia, I would inscribe upon its
Iriple leaf Patriotism, Prosperity, and Peace, (Great
.applause.) With such a motto the flag of Australia,
unfurled over a free people, cannot but be the
herald of blessings to the whole Southern and
Eastern world, and generations yet unborn in many
lands will joyfully salute it as marking the centre
and source whence came to them Christian enlighten-
ment and the manifold blessings that follow in its
train. Gentlemen, from my heart I pray that such
Patriotism, Prosperity, and Peace may be the
inalienable inheritance of our United Australia.
(Loud and continued cheering.)


(From Sydney Daily Telegraph, Feb. 22, 1897 b
ANTI-CATHOLIC BIGOTRY.
STATEMENT BY CARDINAL MORAN.
TO THE EDITOR.
Sir, — I have learned with surprise that not a few of our citizens
have misinterpreted some words of mine as reported in your issue
of Thursday last. lam reported to have said that “ I was deter
mined to crush out once and forever the anti-Catholic bigotry,”
which once more has been drawn from its lurking places by my
candidature; and this has been interpreted to mean that I would
use my endeavour to introduce a Catholic ascendency amongst us.
Permit me to say that no such foolish thought ever entered my
mind. The anti-Catholic bigotry to which I referred has been for
years a source of disunion and discord among our citizens, and I
am confident that every respectable colonist, whatever his denomi-
nation may be, must desire to see it banished from amongst us
for ever. On the present occasion it has assailed me personally in
the most violent manner, and even clergymen have been found
who, in coarse and offensive language, have avowed their deter-
mination to have recourse to the weapons of Satan, that is, to
lying and misrepresentation and calumny, in order to defeat
my candidature. If such sentiments of bigotry were to be found
among the aboriginals it would be called “ cannibal bigotry.” But
when I invited my fellow-colonists of every denomination, and of
every shade of politics, to unite with me in stamping out such
cannibalism, it would assuredly be a matter of folly for me to
dream of setting up any other form of bigotry in its stead. On
the contrary, I would wish every intelligent and respectable
citizen, whatever his religion or politics may be, to assist in
crushing out once and for ever in this fair land every kind and
description of bigotry. It would be sad, indeed, if whilst the
flag of United Australia was being unfurled it should be found
sullied by the stain of bigotry or by intolerance of any kind.
The British Constitution has been described by a leader of
thought in our days “as admirable in its own line, and perhaps
the greatest of human works.” One of its distinguishing features
in this fair land is that it asserts religious equality among all our
citizens. My sole desire is to give effect to such a principle, so
that religious equality may hold good in all the relations of civil
life amongst us. Hence it is that I have offered myself as a
candidate on the present occasion, and I rely on all classes and


all creeds to give their aid in preventing any religious cry being
ever again raised against any candidate, whether he be a Roman
Catholic, a Jew, or a Protestant. Every man is entitled to be
judged by his ability, his high personal character, and his fitness
for taking part in public life. His claim to the suffrages of his
fellow-citizens must rest not on the faith which he professes, nor
on the church or chapel at which he attends, but on the-aTulity by
which he is distinguished, and on his disinterested Australian
patriotism.
This is no mere afterthought of mine. In my discourse at the
Bathurst Convention last November, I used the following words:
“ I trust that an unquenchable love of liberty, as it is the birth-
right, so shall it ever be the prized heritage of Australia’s sons.
And when I speak of liberty, I mean that genuine liberty which
wages relentless war against discord and selfishness and canf, and
which, whilst guarding our own inalienable rights, is careful to
show due respect and reverence for the rights of others. Our
citizens animated by such a love of liberty shall build up a
glorious and enduring Commonwealth, and Australia cannot fail
to attain the bright destiny that awaits her. I have not spoken
of religion. If I now refer to it, it is to deprecate the attempts
that are made from time to time to stir up foolish dissensions
among our citizens on the plea of difference in matters of
religion. To our Catholic people I would say : Go hand in
hand with your Protestant fellow-citizens in every measure that
may have for its purpose to advance the interests, to develop the
resources, or promote the welfare of Australia. This fair land
justly claims the united energies of all her sons ; she stands in
need of the conservative strength of all her citizens to achieve
her glorious destiny. He who sets himself to sow dissensions
should be regarded as an enemy no less of religion than of his
country. Discord being banished from amongst us, how happy
will be the result ? Our citizens, all united in harmony and con-
cord, emulating each other with friendly rivalry in eagerness to
promote the common good, who can doubt that a grand future
must await such a land?” These words fully express my senti-
ments, and it is my earnest desire that a genuine religious equality,
with peace, harmony, and concord may reign undisturbed among
our citizens.
PATRICK F. CARDINAL MORAN,
Archbishop of Sydney.


SYDNEY : 7
AME AND CO., PRINTERS.
PITT STREET.
