

FIFTY YEARS OF
AUSTRALIAN HISTORY.
Sketches of the Lives of
Leading Statesmen, Politicians & Public Men
Career of a Cornstalk.
Personal Reminiscences of
Pioneer Settlers and Old Families.
By J. H. L. ZiLLMANN, Ph.D.
Price: One Shilling.
, SYDNEY, 1914:
DUNCAN i MACINDOE LTD., PRINTERS, 84 BATHURST ST,




DEDICATION.
I dedicate this small book of my life to my
esteemed friend, Mr. S. A Rosa, Author and
Journalist, in recognition of a great kindness
done to me on an important occasion.


AN AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL HYMN,
which did not win the prize.
(Suited for devotional use at the opening of the Federal Parlia-
ment at Canberra, specially, or generally on .National
occasions).
DEUS NOSTER REFUCIUM.”
Great God of Nations, Thee we trace,
Through vanish'd ages vast,
We trust the future of our race
May crown its triumphs past ;
In glorious hope of this, we sing
With one triumphal tone,
And though to ancient forms we cling.
Ideals new we throne;
0 Bethel’s God, Whose gracious Hand,
Our tribes with manna fed,
Who o’er strange seas to this South Land
Hast a brave vanguard led;
Thou’st giv’n to us this Austral Home,
Wherein the South’ren sky,
O’ercanopied by Heaven’s blue dome,
Shines forth Thy cross on high;
Our Nation’s Forum we would raise
On this wild crescent shore,
And build great temples to Thy praise.
And glory, evermore •
May we in Council learn to be
Strong, Pure, and Truly Wise,
And while we stand a people free,
May Ave by justice rise ;
And with our cross-shaped banner starr’d,
O’er Altar, or on Spire,
We’ll wave the flag we ne’er have scarr’d
By persecution’s fire ;
We would display a loftier scope
Than vague or vapid creeds,
And hymn a song, of “larger hope,”
More ample than our needs.


Career of a Cornstalk
Including
Fifty Years of Australian History
With Sketches of
Leading Statesmen, Politicians & Public Men.
Also Personal Reminiscences of
Pioneer Settlers and Old Families
Interspersed with some
EXTRACTS FROM ORIGINAL POETRY
J. H, L. ZILLMANN, P H .D.
Preacher, Lecturer, Author.
Life is mostly froth and bubble,
Two things stand out like stone
Kindness and another’s trouble,
Courage in your own.”
—Lindsay Gordon.
Sydney: DUNCAN & MACINDOE, LIMITED, General Printers
81 Bathurst Street,




PREFACE.
Those born in the southern parts of Queensland and the northern
parts of New South Wales, which border on southern Queensland, are
commonly called il Cornstalks,” because of the Indian corn or maize crops
which thrive in these regions, and, presumably, because like the stalks of
this kind of corn they generally grow to a great height. This part of the
life of a cornstalk applies to me, like to most Australian born in those
parts. I will not say whether the couplet of an old English poet is true,
Tall men are like houses tall,
The.upper rooms are furnished least of all.
My patriotic instincts would rather incline me to say,
Cornstalks are like our brethren tall,
The top-most parts are fruitful most of all,
In some respects, no doubt, 1 fulfil the conditions represented by this
synonym, and my life is “ the Career of a Cornstalk.” A leading jour-
nalist, and man of letters in our city, suggested this as a proper title for
the book, as I have written it in these pages, and indeed it was at his insti-
gation that I set to work to put together some reminiscenses of my career
which has extended into that stage, when the stalk turns-“ sere and
yellow,” and the golden tinge of the ripened cob reminds us “ the time of
harvest draweth nigh.” Harvests should not go to waste but should be
gathered in, and unless I soon begin the gathering “ the harvest will be
past,” and it will become “ too late ” to “ reap what I have sown and
gather what I have strawn ” —that is as a literary effort, which is of chief
present concern to me, though I have the profound conviction that we
must all do our “ Karma ” and reap as we have sown, but whether in the
body or out of the body I cannot tell, God knoweth. All I wish to say
further in this short preface is that I write this brief history of my life
(rather incidents from my life), because I think there is something worth
preserving for our common larger Australian History, and because I wish
my friends to have some record of one in whom they have been interested
and in whom they have believed after he has passed and gone. To my
many friends, whether in Australia, England, or America, I dedicate these
reminiscences of the past, and send to them all greeting* of fraternal good


will. And as the gladiators of ancient Rome, who were about to die,
saluted “Great Cassar,” so I send my “ Morituri Salutamus ” to friends
both far and near, and as I do this I hail them in the words of America’s
sweetest poet—
“ I will not sit idly down and say—
The night has come it is no longer day,
We are cut off from labor by the failing light.
No, I would rather say—
“ For age is opportunity, no less,
Than youth, though in another dress,
And as the evening twilight fades away,
The sky is filled with stars invisible by day.”
N.B. It was my privilege recently to have some correspondence
with Mrs. Campbell-Praed, that celebrated authoress, who urged me to
1 chronicle some of my experiences.” This of itself would justify me in
publishing this small work. Mrs. Campbell-Praed, like myself, is a
native of Brisbane, Queensland, of days far back when the population
was sparse and everybody knew everybody else.
In a subsequent letter Mrs. Praed wrote, “ I wish you every success
for your memories. lam sure it is a fine thing to preserve the old
traditions. They will pass too soon, and future generations will owe a
debt of gratitude to those of the pioneers who, like yourself, helped ,to
keep them alive.”
T
—J. H. L. Z.


NOTE.
Owing to Dr. Zillmann’s very severe illness,
and his medical adviser having forbidden
his mental condition being disturbed, his
friends have corrected his final proofs for
him.




Methinks I see the isolated village on the hill;
With deep lagoon close by, where neighbours came their pails to
The while exchanging greetings in the language of good will.
Had I the pen of him who wrote of sweet Evangeline,
I might portray Arcadia in this true Australian scene,
The homes which brave men built in forests of eternal green.
—(From Some of My Old Rhymes).
CHAP. I.—PRELIMINARY AND GENERAL REMARKS.
A few miles inland from the shallow, but expansive, waters of
Moreton Bay, “there is a green hill” not “far away” from the
site of Brisbane, the beautiful capital of Queensland, the Queen
of the Australian States. On this spot, “evergreen” in my
memory, I first saw the light, and there grew up from babyhood
to boyhood, and from boyhood to young manhood. If height can
prove manhood such was certainly the case, but the fact was that
when I left to start my career for life I was scarcely more than
ah overgrown boy of 6 ft. The “green hill” ran parallel with the
course of a wide lagoon, and its summit was marked by a sort of
elongated plateau, on which were built ten or a dozen slabbed,
barked, and thatched cottages, in one of which I gasped the
first breath of that individual existence which I have since main-
tained “amidst many changes and changes of this mortal life.”
In these abodes of simple minded, but by no means unlettered,
pioneer settlers from the fatherland, the genii may not always
have been classical, or the groves academical, but they were by no
means destitute of poetic inspiration, and the cult of philosophic
thought, though there may have been something of a pietistic
strain. And as gradually the Teutonic merged into the British,
the social and religious conditions became at least interesting.
As the place where varied waters meet has a natural and scenic
charm, so in countries where people from different nationalities
mingle and mix their lives and blood under one great social
and political system, characteristics which please and charm arc
sure to be created. This small Teuton stream of humanity
flowed on merrily, running its Waters of life into courses marked
by Hibernian, Caledonian, Anglican, and even Cambrian chan-
nels; and soon formed part of that larger current of State and
Federal existence, which now flows with a national and imperial
swell. I have sat down in my infant school days and cried
because my school fellows called me “Dutchman,” and because


I was not born “the happy English child” of which they sing,
and which appeared to my fancy as something sublime, because
it was coupled with a devout phrase of thanksgiving to “the
goodness and grace which “smiled” on the birth of the British
child. To this day in our Cosmopolitan Australia in some sec-
tions it still seems to be a handicap to bear a German patronym,
as it is to wear what is made in Germany, though in America'
where I travelled for some years, I found this to be rather an
advantage, and do confess that I often felt shocked and annoyed
at being described as “only an (adjective) Britisher,” for my
speech betrayed me, though my name suggested to the Yankee
in the far west the pity that it should be so, and that I did
not speak with an American accent. I hope that when we shall
have attained to America’s age we shall have reached to an
elevation far above all kinds of paltriness in our patriotism.
There is very little of it now in America : in the more cosmopoli-
tan cities and in the centres of cultured population such little-
nesses are completely and absolutely despised. But lam writing
of the far back in my Australian career. lam gratified in think-
mg that such limitations are passing away in social and national
life, but I have some fear that what I am now proceeding to tell
may excite prejudice. However, let me give the whole story. I
may have gained light, but I have not gained love from others
by my course of religious history. In the village where I '&as
born I developed the dream, the practice, and ultimately the ‘sk>-
fession of a preacher. I had heard preachers of all denomfHg-
tions. My earliest recollections were of a white robed gentleman
with a most benevolent countenance, suave in manner and
speech, and gentle in deportment and address. This cultured and*
refined person (he was the parson) remains a vivid picture in my
memory to-day. I mourned his death with an intense emotion,
when he. in taking his morning dip in the weedy lagoon at the
hill on which my home was situated—where he was then the
honoured guest—became entangled among the weeds where
he was an hour later discovered dead. Not so long before his
brother, one of the pioneer squatters of Moreton Bay, was killed
by the blacks at Caboolture, where he had only recently formed
a cattle ranch. Gregor, the name of the first Church of England
parson of Brisbane, was to me a sort of superman and the old
prayers and creeds of the church are indelibly associated in my
memory with his amicable personality. But soon a much more
lagged, self-assertive and aggressive class of itinerant preachers
came across my path. They opened their mission at the little
Moravian settlement by teaching these simple German pietists
that they “had not yet been converted,” and were therefore not
true Christians. The excitement and noise of revivalistic religion
soon carried me away from my older and quieter moorings.
About this period “a book of sermons,” intended to convey the


more dogmatic teachings of this particular form of religion was
placed in my hands. I was a boy not far in my ’teens, but I had
ambitions. I committed most, if not all, of these sermons to
memory. At first, I either preached them to the trees or to my
boy companions, when following herds of cows or horses. Soon
I was put forward to repeat some of these discourses before
congregations of bush people and cockatoo settlers. And then,
after a short time, I was “planned” to take preaching appoint-
ments in regular places of worship. Having a loud and clear
voice, with a memory that hardly ever failed, I created something
of a sensation as a “boy preacher.” The sermons I had com-
mitted to memory served the purpose well. The English was
good if not elegant. They at least gave me a good vocabulary.
The effect was that I hardly ever halted for the want of a word,
and though German was the language of my childhood, and its
idiom seems ever to have controlled my speech (conveying just
a slight smack of my ancestral tongue), I have always found
help from the sermons I committed to memory. What might
have been if I had committed Shakespeare to memory in the
same way, I can only surmise.
Among the various preachers whom I came in contact with,
one a grave and revd. seigneur, impressed me more than any
otljier; he was the founder of the German settlement
I was born, and but for him my parents would
ijgver have met or come to Australia. Old Dr. Lang, who brought
so many immigrants to Australia in the early days, often visited
this brotherhood of Moravian Missionaries, which he had brought
to Moreton Bay. In childish play I imitated his preaching, and
called myself “Doctor.” Ever after I was called “Doctor,” and
hardly knew that I had another name. On a visit to Queensland
some three or'four years ago I called on an aged patriach in his
95th year—a mature man in my childhood —who in the same old
familiar and home like fashion addressed me as “Doctor.” A
great many years after, while visiting America, a degree of
Doctor of Philosophy was offered to me by a properly organized
and State Chartered University. I was then in New York. Sir
Arthur Hodgson, M.A., had just arrived there—his advent being
heralded by such a head line as “Arrival of the Squatter King of
Queensland.” I called on him, was invited to dine with him,
was informed by him that he had over 40 years ago seen me “a
thumping big baby” in my cradle at the old Mission Station and
gave me much interesting information of his first arrival at the
Moreton Bay Penal Station, where he had been arrested “as a
Jackeroo,” taken before the Superintendent Officer, to whom he
handed a letter of introduction from the Governor at Sydney,
which was the “open sesame,” gave him his liberty, and made
him the officer’s guest. I had received the offer of the “Doctor of
Philosophy” degree a day or two before, and consulted him as to


the “disability of accepting. He advised me, “by all means ae-
-1 15 well . to have a handle to your name.” The State
uhich has given its legal status to this University has a popula-
ton larger than our whole Commonwealth, twice told and the
cynical sneers of a few Sydney pressmen do not trouble me. I
Doc J°J' by title and long practice—for a Doctor is a
inwT V ha i n °t reC T Ur t 0 this sub J ect again, and I beg to
f ” ends I intend to wear this title for what it
k ’ aS l ° ng ‘ 35 I l last ’ But after this digression I proceed
thit ° n makmg thls general remark here that
hat ffrancl old Trojan Dr. Lang was largely responsible for my
. a 01 course k has taken. In my youthful vears
[ a ™ 7 ritm / ° f fr ° m 14 to 1 had the & ood fortune to receive
instruction from some very capable and efficient teachers. I
make a pause here and ask myself “was it good fortune to be-
come a preacher at all?” When I reflect how men of deep
earnestness are so bigoted and narrow, and then how men- of
broad and philosophic thought become so often the victims of
heresy hunters, and in their discourses are perpetually apologis-
mg for the rationality of their dogmas and creeds, and the
utility of their professional services, I am half disposed to think
it may have been bad fortune” to have become a preacher or
clergyman Ido not say what might be under a broad philo-
sophic and modern church,, freed from harassing mental a*
stnctmns, such as the broad school” in the Church of Englknd
stands for. Well, after all is said, though I am “too broad” for
Australian Bishops (rather English Bishops in Australia) at pre-
sent yet comd 1 rebuild my body and return in fifty years from
nm U might not be too broad. A clergyman recently said to
me, 1 wenty-five years ago they were all complaining you were
( (Oo broad and Robertsonian, now we are all preaching the ad-
vanced ideas which you then enunciated. And in twenty-five
“nnw S ” t o p C °T e m Ve T Shall (m T ° f US at least) be where y° u arc
now. Probably I got my broad church bent from the variety
of my instructors. The first (or nearly so) Superior School in
Brisbane had an old Methodist ex-minister for its head and I
was one of his pupils, I studied French and Elementary Science
SOl iL of a celebrated Congregational divine. The Rev
V\. Ridley, M.A., Presbyterian Minister, while making investiga-
tions among the aboriginals of Moreton Bay, as my father’s
guest, gave me my first lessons in Euclid, and conducted me
safely oyer lons Asmorum or “the Bridge of Asses.” The Rev.
Joseph Horner Fletcher, in after years, the second Principal of
Newington College, taught me my first courses in Systematic
Divinity. Is it any wonder that, with all this variety of agencv
and influence, I should have been much of an ecclectic in matters
theological? I have been sneered at and vilified for my changes.
I have changed in the course of growth, not chopped about from


whim - or caprice. I will not soil these pages by repeating what
the “dearly beloved brethren” of the cloth have said. Paul, a
man of great changes, said as a child, he thought and acted as a
child, “but when he became a man he put away childish things.”
I have only changed as I have evolved. “He is a fool who cannot
change, a bigot who will not, and a slave and coward who dare
not.” I am willing to be judged by this dictum. At one time 1
thought that in any one of half a dozen Protestant denominations
I might have found a spiritual home. I am now convinced that,
even if I could take them all in, not one of them would take me in.
I have carefully and conscientiously investigated the claims of
Rome, and though Newman has lured me bv his Apologia and
his doctrine of development the initial difficulty has always been
there, and I could not profess faith in the supernatural. With
me at any rate the doctrine of evolution has knocked the bottom
out of all theories which imply miraculous interference. The
tendencies which seem to dominate my mind at the present time
are a settled bias towards the teachings of Anglican broad theo-
logians. The Church of Maurice, Phillips—Brook's, Stanley,
Heber —Newton, Cheyne, Stayce, not to mention many others,
might be broad enough, but when Plymouth Brethrenism, or
Evangelicalism are in the ascendant, it becomes a stagnant
sects! and will keep men like Douglas Price, the Revd. Heathcote
(yes, and let me say, “even me”) out in the cold or idle in the
market place all day long. There should be no need for seeking
rest for the soles of our feet in Unitarianism. Why should the
bigot or the hypocrite be left in sole possession? At present
we cannot help ourselves, but the time will come when we shall
coerce them as they now coerce us. And our coercion will be a
demand that men shall speak what they honestly believe, and that
not only in revisions of Prayer Books and Bibles, but that all theo-
logical and devotional formulas and manuals shall be radically
altered so that we may do what is “the noblest work of man,”
and make an honest God —a God who is at least worthy of our
adoration. It is not alone the conditions of units “crying in the
wilderness,” but there are millions of earnest souls crying for
“more light;” we, as an age, are “like children crying for the
light.” The theologians of orthodoxy have no message for this
age—“ The oracles are dumb.”
‘No nightly trance or breathed spell
Inspires the pale-eyed priest
From his prophetic cell.”
“The night is dark and we are far from home.” The sure
guidance, however, is always at hand. “If any man will do His
will he shall know the doctrine.” He never can know much, but
he shall know enough. Not, perhaps, enough for posing and
genuflecting, and for all purposes of church membership, but


enough for the development of spiritual humanity—or as they say
for ‘the saving of the soul”—if it is worth saving. When the
church becomes a magnet to attract the true and the good, in-
stead of a fold to enclose the- blind and the halt, then
will she arise in her imperial glory and splendour. How devout
and sincere the honest agnostic may be, is illustrated in words
written by Huxley and inscribed on his tomb:
And is there no meeting place beyond the grave
Is all but silence, darkness?—yet ’tis rest,
Fear not ye waiting ones who watch and weep,
P or God still giveth His beloved sleep.
■ soul who could thus achieve the highest goodness
without any “aids” from faith ! Huxley’s scepticism was of the
kind described by Tennyson.
There lives more faith in honest doubt.
Believe me, than in half their creeds.


II. —MY FIRST ADVENTURES AS A PREACHER.
It is about 52 years ago since I first came to Sydney a youth,
not out of my ’teens, for the purpose of qualifying myself to be a
preacher. Sydney was then a comparatively insignificant city
with a population extending over an immense area of not more
than 60,000. Over the same extent of ground it now contains
above 600,000 people. Everything to me was very wonderful, and
the harbour appeared, on first sailing over its waters, at night,
a perfect scene of enchantment. Though I have often traversed
the harbour since, and it has become as familiar as my own home
playground, it has lost nothing of its ancient charms.
Age has not wither’d it,
Nor custom stal’d
Its infinite variety.
But what contrasts between Sydney then and now! Circular Quay
was a bog of unredeemed shallow waters. The old markets, the
old Post Office, the ancient cathedrals and churches, the ram-
shackle, tumble-down buildings and humpy looking structures used
as places of business in George Street, with the whole un-
interesting tout ensemble of empty space and old fashion, cannot
even be thought of in comparison with what one sees now in the
presence of grandeur and magnificence that even a modern New
York, as I have witnessed it, cannot outrival. Cut still every-
thing seemed glorious to me. The people certainly appeared more
fraternal if more homely than they do at the present day. In
circles where I visited, the glass of wine on even the glass of
porter were much more the media of good fellowship than is the
case now among the same (or corresponding) classes of people. 1
must not, however, go into the larger aspect of things, but pro-
ceed with my personal history, and in this I shall not be too
careful about order and sequence. I shall diverge or anticipate or
moralize and philosophize as the fancy seizes me or as the mood
inclines me.
Shortly after my arrival in Sydney (just about 52 years ago)
I made it a point to pay my respects to Dr. Lang, who was then
in the prime of his vigorous manhood. This was not first in the
order of my experience, but in importance. I here place it first.
This grand old pioneer, as I have previously remarked, was the
cause of my parents’ first meeting, and shortly after they started
for this then almost a terra incognita—for so' far back as 1838
Australia was a hardly known country to the civilized nations of
Europe. There were then no steamers to bring people to these


distant shores, and it took six months of slow sailing to come
from Hull to Sydney. The Duff was, I believe, the name of the
ship in which the brotherhood of Moravian missionaries came to
Australia under the auspices of Dr. Lang. It is no wonder, there-
fore, that on my visit to Sydney I should have sought the oppor-
tunity soon after to call on Dr. Lang. It was months later
when spending an evening at the Manse with the Doctor’s family
as we were finishing tea that he was called away to celebrate a
marriage in his study, and, shortly after, another wedding party
appeared on the scene, and were attended to, though I never
heard of the Doctor’s house being called “a marriage shop,” noD
withstanding that it was a great resort for persons wishing to
take upon themselves ‘‘the holy estate of matrimony.” The
beautiful simplicity and order of home life, and the quiet dignity
and true womanly deportment of Mrs. Lang, the deference
which, in every word and act, she seemed to pay to her distin-
guished consort, linger in my mind as most pleasant memories of
the past. An incident may be mentioned as showing that Dr.
Lang was not the anti-Romanist which his public utterances
might sometimes, have seemed to indicate. In glancing over his
library, I noticed a book on the life of a celebrated Bavarian
priest named Martin Boos. I became interested in turning over
its pages, and the Doctor spoke glowingly and approvingly of the
Catholic theologian, with whose writings he was quite familiar,
and finished his really liberal comments by making me a preihnt
of the book. Dr. Lang’s conduct in his own home was gentle’M’d&s
itself, and, later on, when I heard him thunder away against Hie
Government, when he was on a political mission to Goulburn,
and shortly after, when I heard him deliver a most advanced
address at Kiama on the land question and politics generally,
with Herculean force and vigor, I could hardly recognise him
as ‘‘the mild-mannered” and polite host at whose house I had
been entertained so agreeably. Though I had no association with
newspapers, I can call to mind how I reproduced from memory
a two-column report of the Doctor’s address, which was published
in the “Kiama Independent.”
In the year 1862, when only a little over 18 years of age, I
came down to Sydney by the old A.S.N. Company’s steamer “The
telegraph. Captain O Reilly, so well known and so popular
in the coastal steamship travelling, was the skipper of this boat.
A year or two later, when I was a nervous, despondent young
preacher in Sydney, Dr. O’Reilly, a brother of the captain, was a
member of my congregation, and became my special friend and
medical adviser.
Years after, when I was incumbent of a parish in Queensland,
the Doctor was my guest for a short interval, but, alas! he was
then stricken with the complaint which had carried his brother


off, and which resulted in his death a few months after. As illus-
trating - what a highly intelligent man, of this particular time,
thought of North Queensland, where he had been on a visit, he
said that Cooktown was the finest site for a city in Australia,
and would one day become the great commercial entrepot between
Australia and the ancient Eastern countries. Dr. O’Reilly and
his brother, Captain O’Reilly, were among the brainiest of men,
but perhaps (though Irishmen) among the most modest and re-
tiring. The son of the Doctor is now well known in Sydney,
if only as a familiar figure, of most venerable appearance, among
the doctors of Sydney. A big fat lump of a boy in church and
school, with a stock of fair, curly hair, he was when I first knew
his father. Strange to relate, I had written thus far in my nar-
rative, when I opened my “Morning Herald” (Nov. 29, 1910),
and saw there that “the widow of the late Captain O’Reilly died
yesterday in Brisbane, at the advanced age of 85.” ’
I came to Sydney for the purpose of undergoing certain exam-
inations, and passing through some prescribed disciplinary pro-
cesses, prior to being received as “a probationer for the minis-
try.” I stood in great awe before a large conclave of ministers,
was put through a course of examination on matters theological
and ecclesiastical, and, I believe, produced a favourable impres-
sion, for I was “accepted,” as the expression went. I remember
tl^u -names of two young men who stood side by side with me in
oral examination. One was John Osbourne, who afterwards
pitched on the Primacy of St. Peter, pleased the Roman Catho-
lics and their Archbishop, but, instead of going over to Rome,
as was expected, he broke away from orthodoxy of every descrip-
tion. Pie afterwards filled important 1 positions in this city,
amongst which was the editorship of the now defunct “Evening
Star.” Another of my fellow-examinees was a fair and very in-
tense young man, named Pincombe, who died a short time ago,
after many years of showing how miserable real religion can make
you. I only met him once since, a few years ago, and addressed
him fraternally, but it was responded to with a growl. For two
or three years following, several young Englishmen were asso-
ciated with me in my annual examinations. Two of them became
known later in life as prominent clergymen. The Rev. Dr. Man-
ning became connected with the Church of England ; the Rev. Dr.
Sellers, though many thought inclined that way, remained true
to his old love. But to go back. Part of the preliminary pro-
cess which I had to undergo consisted in what they "called
“preaching a trial sermon.” There was at that time a small
church in what is still known as Prmces-street, and Here I was
directed to go one Sunday morning and preach before two of the
ministers of that body. One was the Rev. J. A. Manton, as
kindly hearted a soul as ever lived, a man of vast knowledge, with
educational abilities far above the average. He became the first


Principal of Newington College, where, some years after, he died.
I had a great affection for him, and visited him when on his last
bed of sickness. He asked me to kneel and pray by his bedside,
which I remember I did most fervently. I never saw him again.
It was always a comfort to me to know that this good, scholarly
old gentleman had, as I heard, spoken in terms of high apprecia-
tion of the sermon I had preached in old Princes-street Church.
While in Sydney I was the guest of an aged widow lady of the
name of Coates, who lived somewhere out near Rand wick, where
perhaps a dozen houses then made up the entire suburb. A daugh-
ther of this lady was married to a gentleman of the name of
Vickery, the identical Ebenezer Vickery, I believe, who afterwards
became so famed as one of our Sydney money kings. He died
recently, not so far from being, if not actually, an octogenarian.
He was a robust young man, in his thirties, when I first came
to Sydney. There was an old gentleman of the name of Hebble-
white, in whose house I was asked to officiate.
A capacious basement room was fitted up as a chapel. I con-
ducted a service and preached in this room one Sunday evening,
and here I delivered a discourse that I had often preached to the
trees in the wild bush of the Moreton Bay district, Queensland.
Here, with the greatest confidence in myself, and before a densely
packed roomful of. people, I held forth for more than three-quar-
ters of an hour, without note or scrip, from the text; “While we
look not at the things w r hich are seen, but at the things which
are not seen, for the things which are seen are temporal, but the
things which are not seen are eternal.” I forget now what I said,
or what I may have repeated, but I do remember that my memory
never served me better, and that, without omitting a word or syl-
lable, I gave ray discourse, and received plaudits after the service
which might have spoiled an older man. My previous trial ser-
mon on “Naaman, the leper of Syria,” was the only other occa-
sion on which I preached in Sydney until about a year after,
when I was appointed second preacher to one of the principal
churches in Sydney. When I first came to Sydney I can remem-
ber the walls of St. Andrew’s Cathedral a feAv feet high, and
they had been in that state for years, weather-worn, and neglect-
ed in appearance. I frequently went to see the sights in old St.
Mary’s Cathedral, but, to show how strong early bigotries were,
at first I had a strong feeling against entering the church. The
story of the massacre of the Huguenots on St. Bartholomew’s
Day, and D’Aubigne’s account of the sale of indulgences and per-
secution of reformers occurred to me.* I believe that I never
*lt occurs to me how a little over four years later (a day or
two after I had entered as a student at Moore College), I was
greatly impressed by a service, and High Mass, which I attended
in a large wooden structure on the spot where Old St. Mary’s
had, about two years before? been burnt to the ground, with all
the treasures which had excited my curiosity; and as showing even
then an inkling of broad ideas which came to me later, I had in
my hand Renan’s just published Vie de Jfcsu (Life of Jesus), which
I had purchased in Maddocks’ Book Stall. His fine description
of the death of Jesus lat once committed to memory. I have
often since quoted it in preaching.


thought then there was another side to the question until some
years later I read the works on the other side. It took me some
time to discover the truth, as described by Leckey in his great
work, Rationalism in Europe,” ‘‘that the spirit of intolerance
uas at first equally strong in the Church of Rome and in the
Reformed Churches, and that its extinction both in Catholic and
Protestant countries was due to the spirit of rationalism” ; it took
me a still greater time to learn that Christianity compares most
unfavourably in this respect with most Oriental systems, espe-
cially with Buddhism, which never persecuted and never had a
religious war, while Christianity has drenched Europe with blood.
. his
rio
-fv


CHAPTER IN.—FIRST EXPERIENCES AND FURTHER
ADVENTURES.
(1) Adelong, via Coulburn, Gunning, and Yass.
After a short visit to Brisbane, I returned to Sydney, and,
before proceeding to my appointed sphere of duty at the Adelong
goldfields, I called on old Father Watkin, as he was familiarly
called. He had to give tne official directions and authority before
I left for Adelong. Whether there were kinder people in those
days, or whether I was more susceptible, may be a question. There
may have been a little of both. However, fatherly manifesta-
tions of affection such as I have received in my early manhood
from several aged ministers to linger in my memory, quite different
to the severities and cruelties to which I have been subjected by
those in authority in later years. This kindly old gentleman gave
me much encouragement, but his drolleries often made me laugh
boisterously. An incident may be mentioned. I once asked him,
having given a speech by his direction, “Had I been too long?”
“Yes, you are a little too long.” Perhaps I thought he was a
little too short when he answered me so. Indeed, Father Watkin
was rather short of stature. Both Mr. Watkin and Mr. Manton
were great smokers. I have always found that clergymen who
smoked were what we might call “good fellows.” Spurgeon once
told his congregation that he would go home and smoke a good
cigar to the glory of God. The man who could speak about the
sufferings of the damned in hell as he did, had no right to smoke
or joke in any way whatever. Father Watkin gave me my com-
mission, and I went on in my travels. I was escorted to the
railway station from the house of friends where I had been stay-
ing at Newtown. The gentleman who escorted me was, in later
years, distinguished as a journalist, and has only recently joined
the great majority. Air. Burton was then a young man, visiting
among mutual friends, to see the lady to whom lie was afterwards
married. His career in connection with the editorial and business
management of the “Sydney Mail” is well known. He saw me
safely on to the first train I had ever boarded. It took me as
far as Campbelltown, the terminus for several years, where I was
met by some Camden friends, with whom I stayed a week, and
from there I took coach for Goulburn. Here again I stayed a
few days, and was prevailed upon to stay over Sunday and
preach. It has never been my lot to mix up with a more com-
fortable lot of business people than I met with among the Met ho-


lists of Goulburn over 50 years ago. Whatever Methodism may
lave done for them in saving their souls, it had made them all
airly rich. What Methodism was, and what it was going to do
n the world, was their daily talk; Perplexities about modern
religious thought and problems about the supernatural never
doubled these simple-minded, snugly-provided, and smugly self-
issured people. These are the impressions which my memory calls
back from the past, of people who, whatever I may now think of
them, treated me like a prince. The same discourse with which
t had engaged the attention at the gathering in old Mr. Hebble-
white’s private chapel did duty again, but, if anything, I gave
them an improved elocutionary performance.
A young fellow in about the same stage of probationary dis-
cipline as myself held forth in the morning; I did duty in> the
evening. The young man I refer to was John Corbett, so long
known afterwards as Methodist Book Depot steward in Sydney.
Religion, like rheumatism, attacked him badly, and left him hors
de combat after a very brief experience. He took things alto-
gether too seriously, and was compelled to abandon the clerical
calling, owing to ill-health. When I left Goulburn I borrowed a
horse, and proceeded on my way, thinking this was, the easier
and more economical mode of travelling, as the business firm,
Davids, Alexander and Co., which owned the horse, had a branch
storlfihat Adelong, and I was asked to deliver him there. The
wretched creature, however, turned sulky after I had ridden him
a Mw miles, but, with the assistance of some teamsters and other
travellers, I almost literally dragged him on to Gunning. From
this then very small township I was enabled to make a fresh and
effectual start. When I reached here the Methodists were hold-
ing their quarterly meeting. In those days such a meeting had an
interest similar to that of a Diocesan Synod. It was presided over
by the chief minister of the district (superintendent of the cir-
cuit, he was then called), and generally beside him sat a couple of
assistant preachers, exhorters, local preachers, class readers, with
quite a large number of lay members.
The chief minister at this meeting was the Rev. Henry Honey
Gaud. He was an exceedingly popular and jovial kind of man,
so much so that often a pun was got off at his expense (parodying
the dying words of the Rev. John Wesley), “the best of all is
Gaud is with us.” The plight in which I was when I came here
and presented myself at the door of the meeting-house—dreadfully
fatigued, and with a knocked-up horse—gave me a most sympa-
thetic welcome, and there and then an old circuit horse was sold
to me, on the vote of the meeting, for a nominal figure compared
to his real worth
There was an old man (he must have been in his seventies),*
*lt has occurred to me some months after writing the above
that Tom Brown was the name of this celebrity.


who took a prominent part in the proceedings of the meeting
He was a natural-born humorist, and was as much a developmeni
of bush life conditions in Australia as Pteter Cartwright was o
* n mer i ca - He was blind in one eye, and thil
added to the comicality of his apppearance. Among the sample,
of Iris humor which I heard were these. On the occasion of layim
the foundation-stone of a small church in his district, he devout],
exclaimed, “I thank God for what my eyes see.” Instantly ht
corrected himself, and said, “What my eye sees,” and, he added,
I can see more with my one eye than any of you can see with you,
two, you can only see my one eye, but I can see your twt
eyes.’ On another occasion he was expounding “the simplicity
oi the plan of salvation,” as the old phrase had it, and then h<,
began an eainest expostulation, and demand, “What more couh
you expect God to have done for you? Did you expect that Hi 1
would come down from heaven and pull you' up by the hair o:!
youi head, and, suiting the action to his word, he pretendec
to grasp at thei hair which once grew there (he was very bald) 1
If it depended upon that, some of us bald-headed men woulc'l
never get to Heaven.” 1
Ihe Rev. H. H. Gaud, the chief Methodist minister of the
district, asked me to take a seat in his buggy, as late in,' the
afternoon we started for Yass, his headquarters, I leading my
newly-purchased horse alongside of the buggy. An incident oc-
curs to my memory which shows that those ancient Methodist
rainistei s were not at all like the “cranks” and “fighting per-
sons” who have been trying to howl, down the liquor trade. As
in the increasing darkness of advancing night we drew near to
ass, a man stepped out from the wayside hotel, and opened
the sliprails through which it became necessary for us to pass.
Mr. Gaud, having driven the horse through, took out a sixpence
from his waistcoat pocket, and, in giving it to the man, said:
‘Here, my friend, take this, and drink my health in a glass of
beer.” The thing was done so good-naturedly and simply, that I
felt inclined to draw a little nearer to a man who did this simple
act of kindness. Neither Mr. Gaud nor his family would hear of
my leaving for Adelong for at least su week, and my stay was
further prolonged as much because I felt disinclined to leave a
home which was adorned by female grace and beauty (the daugh-
ters of mine host), and made melodious by musical accomplish-
ments equal to anything I had hitherto experienced.
®ut, where I might have met my fate (on© of the fairest of
Eve’s daughters), I had been anticipated by some “other fellow ”
and a feeling of “honor bright” prevented what might have been
With a heavy heart, and feeling that the Fates were against
me, and, with an idea of somebody else understanding my feel-
ings, I left for my destination, after holding forth at each service


in the Sunday during the time that I was the guest of a man
[ loved ever after, and whose memory I have always revered.
Lt was during the time that I was the Rev. H. H. Gaud’s guest,
md immediately after the Sunday evening service, that a young
nan walked by my side from church to the parsonage, and re-
called having heard me preach at Goulburn a Sunday or two be-
fore. He was quite a young man, and, so far as I know, had
not even then begun his studies to prepare himself for the very
popular and gifted minister that he afterwards became in the
methodist body. Something drew ns together, as young men, and
we occasionally met after our first conversation at Yass.
In the last year of his life, nearly two-score years after, I
Tequently met him, and every meeting was just as friendly as
ffie first. The Rev. George* Lane, whose sudden death in the
nidst of duty two or three years ago, after a distinguished
career, will be remembered as one of the most genial of men,
uid one whose genius for finance might have made him successful
n another department of life. My memory goes over the whole
period which spans his ministerial career. I began before him,
md have continued after him. It was precisely at the same time
that I met another gentleman at Yass, with whom I became inti-
ate many years after.
One day, when visiting the old post-office of that town, a tall,
fair jtfentleman, with most correct, classical features, and in fash-
ionable clerical costume, passed before me, and so impressed was
1 With his appearance that, even to this day—nearly a half-cen-
tury after—-I can remember him as if it were only a week ago.
The Rev. Canon Kemrnis, whose brilliant career, as a Church of
England clergyman, will be remembered by many, was the person
whom I met, and who so impressed me.
I cannot refrain from mentioning an incident which happened
while on my way to Adelong, on the very day that I left Yass.
I was riding along a ridge, as the road was winding round the
slope-of a hill, when suddenly I was accosted front the summit
of the hill, just above me, by a rider on horseback, where he had
halted, and was looking down at me. He was mounted on a
beautiful black-looking animal, himself a very “Dick Turpin,”
as I had often pictured that beau ideal of a boy’s fancied high-
wayman, and the steed was the veritable typical ’’Black Bess.”
As he slowly descended the hill, and came up to me, I noticed
the pistols strapped to his valise, and the revolver fastened to
his belt. In his blue blouse, wideawake felt hat, corduroy
breeches, and long Wellington boots, he looked all that my fancy
had ever painted a bushranger to be like. There was something
about his appearance, and especially about his voice, which gave
me entire confidence. He wanted to know where 1 had come
from, and where I rvas going; whether I had seen any troopers


aiong the road or waggons and drays. My replies seemed t(
satisfy him, and particularly as I had not seen any troopers H<
dismounted from Ins horse, tightened the girths of his saddle, cn
up a pipeful of tobacco and, having filled his pipe and lightei
up, he remounted, and then, in the pleasantest manner possible
having wished me good-day, he rode away through the trackless
bush in the direction from which he had come.
When I reached Gundagai that evening, I was told that Gar-
diner, the celebrated bushranger, had slept the night before at an
hotel just outside the town, and, from the description I gave of
the horseman I had met, it was concluded that I had undoubtedly
seen Gardiner, that great king of Australian bushrangers His
many escapades and exploits in the western districts of New South
VV ales are well known many of which took place after my meeting
with him. I always had a sort of sympathy ever after for Gar-
diner, and when, with his paramour, Mrs. Brown, he so com-
pletely disappeared 1 am afraid that I cherished a secret wish
that he might not be caught, and that he might get out of the
country, and lead a better life somewhere else. As is known he
was afterwards arrested, and, having spent 12 years in gaol
where he became most popular with the prison officials, and be-
came a kind of lion to be interviewed on rare and special occa-
sums by some of our leading- public men and distinguished visi-
tors he was given his liberty, on condition that he left the
country.
Gardiner went to San Francisco, as is known, kept a drinking-
saloon or, as we should say here, “a pub,” became quite a hero,
and after some years died, regretted by all who had mad© his
acquaintance. While staying in ’Frisco,' many years after, anil
waiting for the opportunity to come back to'Australia, I came
across several who had known him, and who spoke in the highest
terms about him.
My mission at Adelong for a year was mostly among a lot
of Cornish miners, with whom I can say I became quite popular
They took me down their gold mines, 300 ft. and more rrom the
surface. I saw where the Mundic reefs were dug, which had onlv
quite recently been turned to account by some new invention for
extracting the gold. One of my first duties after taking charge
of this district was to marry a couple. Since then, more than 52
years ago, I have married couples in all parts of the world. But
quite recently, in my advanced years, an official called the Regis-
trar-General has had it in his power to hinder me from exercising
the proper duties of my sacred calling, and Courts and Cover re
ments have refused to remedy the injustice. It does not pay to
bo too broad. 1 shall have more to say on this subject. But to
proceed with my narrative. The day after my arrival at Adelong
I can recall how, in passing along what was n apology for a street
(over Camp Hill), a company of gold miners were standing just
outside a hotel at the corner, and I overheard a rather contemp-
tuous expression as regards my youthful appearance, “Why, he
only looks like a boy.” I at once sank in my own estimation,
and did not get over it until I came across somebody who had a*


Second-hand long-tailed black cloth coat to sell, which I purchased
and wore, and was soon encouraged by many remarks of approval
as to “how much more like a minister” I looked, and “how much
[older an appearance” it gave me. I often visited Tumut in those
days, and had much kindness shown to me by the Church of
clergyman, the Rev. Samuel Fox, afterwards so well
known in a suburb of Sydney. He was a typical Evangelical or
Low Churchman. I remember with pleasure how I often spent
happy days at the little vicarage at Tumut, and the many occa-
sions in which this clergyman led over an extra horse to Adelong,
so that I might accompany him in some of his visits to several
of the famed stations of squatters in the district round. The
Yyners of Tumut I became very friendly with, and so with others
;— people generally of a very superior class, using the expression
in the best sense of the term. Tumut was actually voted for as
a site for the Federal Capital, and it is quite possible, as far as
beauty of situation and salubrity of climate go, they have chosen
a worse site. I can well understand Sir William Lyne’s disap-
pointment at Tumut being ultimately rejected. One of my most
ardent friends in the upper reaches of the Adelong was a Mr.
Gale, who is so well known in the Queanbeyan and Goulburn dis-
tricts, where in his nineties he is still living. His son, the well-
known proprietor of a Queanbeyan newspaper, is one of the most
useful of the public-spirited men in the district, was but then a
bit of a boy.
(2) South Sydney.
The. long and expensive journey to Adelong, a rude, rough
place, too, for so inexperienced a young man, excited a good deal
of anger and indignation among my friends. Old Benjamin Car-
vosso, my former tutor, particulaxTy resented it, ana described
my appointment as “the height of ministerial folly.” Someone
had been at work, and influence had reached the ruling powers,
for I had only spent a year at Adelong when I was transferred
to Chippendale Church (since called second Sydney circuit), and at
that time the second position of importance in Sydney. I became
second preacher under the Rev. Stephen Rabone. From him I
imbibed anti-teetotal opinions. I never imbibed anything- stronger
(T lived at his house), and though I have in later years, while
living among anti-liquor people, and from motives of expediency
or desire to help others, identified myself with the extremists
or teetotallers, I have always felt that compulsory total abstin-
ence is not a panacea for curing the evils of drunkenness. As
against the argument, “You should abstain for the sake of ex-
ample,” I can remember how Mr. Rabone said: “Example, to be
effective, must be apparent. Now, drinking is a personal mat-
ter, and, as a rule, it is done in private, so how can anyone be
influenced by my example?” He himself was a most abstemious
man, though I remember being present at the christening of his
grandson (I think it was C. W. Oakes, late Hon. Minister in the
Wade Government), when I remember he partook of a glass or
two of claret wine, At a tea meeting held to give me a welcome


as assistant to Mr, Rabone, I remember for the first time meel
mg: with a Rev. Mr. Vanderkiste, who was somewhat celebrated a
!!/<r r ;\ nd Preacher He had written “The Dens of London’
and Lost but hot for Ever.” The occasion of this last worl
was his having been lost in the bush for some week
somewhere near Dungog. His mission work in Londo
and Australia is given in those books. He gave m
u- greetings and welcome in some doggerel rhymes
Wr ° te ' vh i le , sitting on the platform and preface:
w ith them a speech which kept the audience in a titter of laughter
Here are some of the lines (first referring to Mr. Rabone) :
how?, Raboni means Master, and is very much like Rabone; 1
For you have only slightly to alter the tone.”
“And Zillmann is no Stillman,
As you very soon will find,
When he trumpets forth his notions
As they well up from his mind.
One of his stories concerned an old lady who could never pro
° dd P UtC M n T ? me ; She would insist upon calling hin,
Mr Kisterwankey ” He also told of a horse he had purchased
for Mission work from a man who was not a total abstainer;
Whenever Mr. Vanderkiste passed a public house the horse
tr ul te i-ffi P Thickly to the hitching post and would only move away
with difficulty. This was awkward for the minister, who was ar
ardent abstainer.
W Idle 1 resided here, I became acquainted with the i( A.llei
family, of ioxteth Park, Glebe-road, where it was my haßfti tf
stay overnight once a month, having preached in the little family
chuich on the estate. There were then ample grounds surround-
ing the residence, so like an English country gentleman’s resi-
dence. Old Mr. George Allen ivas the beau ideal of an EnglisE
country gentleman of the good old sort, and extended unbounded
hospitality. Mrs. Allen was as benevolent in disposition as she
was prepossessing in appearance. She was truly “a being breath-
ing thoughtful breath. To have known her was to be a
better person for all the rest of one’s life. The Hon. George Wig-
ram Allen, the son, for some years Speaker of the House—a!
very honourable position—was a dignified and courteous gentle-
man Mrs. George Wigram Allen, a daughter of the late Rev,
U R. Boyce, at one time president of the British Methodist
Conference, was amiability itself. Mr McAfee, a relative of the'
Macarthur of London Mayoralty fame in after years, and the son
of old Daniel McAfee, a celebrated Irish Protestant minister
was married to one of the Misses Allen. I often stayed a night,
at his house, and had the great privilege of listening to some of
his elocutionary performances. There was something in his Irish'
accent and terse, witty remarks that attracted me greatly. The'
first time I ever heard Poe’s “Raven” recited was by Mr. McAfee ■
1 was the only hearer. On several occasions I met Dr. Woolley
the Principal of Sydney University, at Toxteth Park. Beyond‘a 1
polite bow or shake hands, I don’t think I ever had the moral'


urage to converse with him. He seemed so learned and thought-
1, and yet he could be most condescending to the humblest. I
hi call to mind how, on the eve of his departure for England, a
vv months before he went down in the steamship London, which
in the Bay of Biscay, I attended a picnic got up for the
nldren of the Sunday school by Mrs. Allen in Toxteth Park.
h . Woolley was present, and he went round among the children
kh the cake and bun basket, making himself, like the great
%ster, “as one that serveth.” That appealed to me, a young
hn in the days of my hero worship, as few things have ever done.
Many distinguished visitors to Australia I have met here,
te Rev. Ebenezer Jenkins, M.A., from India, had been lecturing
the old Masonic Hall on “India,’ ’ Sir John Young, the
ivernor, in the chair. When, afterwards, I met him at Toxteth,
felt I had come in contact with one of the most brainy men iof
r time. But how can I describe my feelings when, on the fol-
ving Sunday evening, just before I gave out the text for my
rmon, I jsaw Air. Jenkins walk up the aisle of the church, and
ke his seat in the Allens’ pew. The shock that that gave to my
Yves may be imagined, and I can hardly realise to this day how
pulled through, but somehow or other I got through. I held up,
listing entirely to my memory, and repeated very tremulously a
scourse which I had well prepared and well committed. “The
hst I have ever heard from so young a man,” was the comment
ade by this illustrious and scholarly visitor, on the testimony
old Mrs. Allen, and bow thankful I was when those words of
mfort were whispered into my ear, for I had surely thought the
.eat, pian must have despised me, in spite of the apostolical in-
nctipp, “Let no man despise thy youth.”
p While I was the assistant preacher at Chippendale (South
-■dney), I remember an incident connected with the life of a man
-io has since become famed in several departments of public
ie. The high, haughty, unbending attitude of men who once
kr© glad to seek my patronage, but in laxer years have stood
oof, or looked askance, has often amused me.
However, here is what I remember about Sir Arthur Rut-
dge. One evening I was passing down Princes-street by the
die old church in which, scarcely two years before, I had
©ached my trial sermon. I saw it was lighted up, and the door
is open. I yielded to the promptings of a passing curiosity,
id, having entered the porch, I looked in and listened. I saw
.at the meeting was entirely composed of the gentler sex. It
oked like a mothers’ meeting, presided over by a j T oung, fair,
eek, curly-headed young man even then younger than myself,
he oracular and authoritative style of the young exhorter I have
?ver forgotten. I had already met the young man at his father’s
sidenc© (a schoolmaster of a Protestant denominational school),
id a true pedagogue he was, for the self-assertive and emphatic
yle in which h© spoke, to me, seemed to com© upon my nerves
ith the impact of a succession of unpleasant shocks. Here
as the eldest son, already anticipating his judicial func-
ons in laying down the law before an assemblage


of elderly matrons. 1£ e seemed to be quit© couversi
with the Devil and his devices, for he informed the d
creatures before him that “if the Devil could not gain
vantage over them by direct assault, lie would bv stratagem.”
later years I came in contact with this gentleman in the J
England district, and afterwards in Queensland, and have rei
nised in him a man with a good modicum of natural ability, 1
had he depended on himself he might never have been a Judge
Sir Arthur. Queensland Methodists have turned several of ti
half educated and average preachers into important public figu
and functionaries. And yet Rome is continually inveighed agai
precisely for the reason that she seeks to gain so much tempc
power. lam not aware that the Methodists in N.S.W. or any
the other States have been similarly aggressive, though I
not like Ministers of sects becoming Chief Judges.
(3) Ulladulla.
When I had completed one year of service in the South S,
ney circuit, i was .sent off for two years to a little place col
Ulladulla, on the South Coast. I lived at Miltoh, which is not
considerable town, but then it was so small that it only stood
the name of a few residences. Here at any rate I spent a g
deal of energetic work in attracting a large congregation
building a parsonage, of which I was the only trustee right up
a recent date, which brought me into some business, intercourse v|
•my old friend, Rev. Geo. Lane, just before he died. This was'
eventful period in my life, if only that by coming to Ulladulljr
became acquainted with the writings of Shakespeare. I b
preaching almost my first ’sermon there on “Saul, the first. K
of Israel,” and in the course of my remarks I had quoted M
Portia's speech before the Duke of Venice, and in'.describing
noble qualities of Saul in his early manhood, I used the wo:
“he was, above all, possessed of that attribute ‘which
throned monarch better than his crown.’ ” Where I had go!
from I could not have said, but a gentleman present in my c
gregation (Mr. John Miller, a highly-respected and well-knc
farmer of that district, arid a lover and student of Shakespeai
made my acquaintance in consequence, loaned me his magnific
copy of Shakespeare, and so opened to my mind those marvel!
writings which appealed to me more than anything I had liithe
read. I have often in later years introduced Shakesperian s]
jecfs into the pulpit, much to the pleasure, and I believe pro
of many of my hearers, but to the horror of others, who
presented a phase of Pharisaism which is fast dying out.
While residing in that district I had many opportunities
gratifying my old love and habit of horse-riding. I kept a cor
of horses, both of which could run, and were first-rate travel!
When I had purchased one of these animals, I felt like propos
to go back on my bargain, for, as I said at the time, “he look
regular scrubber.” I, however, kept him, fed him up well, i
soon found that he required no training to make him run, tho


even then I did not discover his real value. I was ambitious to
become possessed of a horse and buggy, and so “swapped” my
horse with one of the Garrads, of South Coast fame, and it turned
out soon that twenty (aye, three times twenty) of such brutes as
that for winch I had given my horse and money to boot were not
north the one I had parted with. I had already named him
“Doctor.” Horsey men of years gone by will remember the name.
He soon after won a thousand pounds on Randwick course, clear
gain to the owner. For several years continuously he won every-
thing before him, and proved to be a real gold mine to the man
who obtained him from me, while the horse that I got for him
was 11 hdgety old brute, made splinters of my buggy on two or
three occasions, and more than once imperilled the lives of myself
and those belonging to me. It was during my residence at Mil-
don, Ulladulla, that I first heard the Bishop of Sydney ■. Dr.
Darker) in administering confirmation and preaching. I was very
much impressed at this, my first seeing a Church of England
bishop in his robes, but more still with the appearance of the
Bishop as he stood up in the little country church, a grand-looking
man of 6ft. 7in. in stature, and with a most commanding appear-
ance, literally a very high Churchman, though theologically the
lowest Churchman we have had for a bishop. But he was a grand
man notwithstanding. Even then, the purity of his English, the
simplicity and logical incisiveness of his utterances, and the whole
tout ensemble of dignity and scholarship produced a profound im-
pression in my mind,and I might say that was the beginning of
a bias in favour of the old Church of which he was such a splendid
figure.
my residence at Milton, Dlladalla, the widow of the
laith Samuel Hordern, a mere child then, was living there with
bei grandmother, her father and mother having preceded her to
Sydney, where later the whole family was reunited. John Booth,
it may be said, became one of Sydney’s most famous business men.
In later years he became associated with the Horderns, and con-
nected with them through ties of family relationship. I infer
from all accounts that he had a good deal to do with helping do
build up one of the largest (if not positively the largest) commer-
cial establishments of Australia. Old Mr. Booth is still living,
hearty and well, at over 80. He does not look more than 60. He
has never smoked or used alcohol. Lately he and I have been
“swapping yarns,” or as we should more politely say r , “exchanging
experiences,” about Milton and Ulladulla in the early sixties.
From him I have received some most interesting information
concerning the history of Milton, one of the prettiest and most
considerable towns on the Southern Coast. It was originally part
of a farm owned by a man of the name of Watman, whom I knew
well as a regular member of my congregation. He sold it to Mr.
John Booth, who, with characteristic shrewdness, foresaw the
possibilities of the situation, for he refus'ed offers from others to
join with him In plans to form there the site of a town. The
necessity arose of giving the place a name. In anticipation of this
project, and while he was discussing the matter with someone,
he listlessly looked over some books on a shelf and his eye caught


the word of “Milton.” It was a copy of Milton’s “Paradise
Lost.” “Eureka! I have got it ;the name of th© town is Milton.”
Every suggestion to reconsider the matter was brushed aside.
And so very appropriately the situation of the town (a para-
dise of beauty) was called Milton. Mr. Booth is not one “of the
founders,” as it has been put by a recent writer in a daily Sydney
paper—he i s the sole and original founder of Milton. The Booths
used frequently to attend my services. Mrs. Booth afterwards
joined her son in Sydney, accompanied by the little girl who, in
after years, became the mother of the present head of the Hordern
firm, and shortly after Mr. John Felix Booth, the present chief
manager, was born, a man who, for good business ability and
natural kindness of heart, cannot be excelled. Mr. Edward Booth,
th© late representative of the Hordern firm in London, whose
sudden death occurred on th© eve of his return to Australia to
spend a holiday with his friends in Sydney, was a son of whom
any father might justly have been proud. In paying the father a
visit of condolence on the occasion of the son’s death, he spoke
to me in tearful and tremulous accents of th© good personal and
business qualities of his deceased son, whose sudden collapse from
heat apoplexy during the memorable, heat waves in London will be
remembered. But the old gentleman’s account of his son, Charles
Booth, was pathetic, so capable a son cut off so early! Owing to a
genius for mathematics he had a brilliant career as on© of the
earliest Fort Street schoolboys. Later as a Grammar School and
University student (though he did not take his degree), and then
as on© of the greatest promoters of life assurance in connection
with the A.M.P. Society. (j.
The young ( English preacher who succeeded me t9 dit
Chippendale, the Rev. R. Sellers, now a veteran (so well
known as the Rev. Dr. Sellers), and one who has been a
commanding figure in Methodist circles for many years past,
cam© down to Ulladulla about this time to assist me in some special
services. At a public meeting, at which members of different
Churches attended, I listened to one of the most instructive
addresses it has ever been my privilege to hear, on ancient New
Testament MSS. The difference between the uncial and cursive
styles, and the inferences and arguments derivable therefrom,
were clearly and interestingly portrayed. I know little about
young modern Methodist ministers, but at that time, taking Mr.
Sellers as an example, they were for the most part well equipped.
W© were great chums at this time. W© ate together, we slep>
together, w© smoked together (I smoked, at least), we rod© out
every day together, and we went out shooting wallabies and
pigeons together in scrubs which have long since disappeared.
Th© racing capabilities of Doctor were first brought out by
Mr. Sellers. It was while we were out riding together that I first
discovered the horse’s aptitudes for fast galloping. So thoroughly
were we engrossed in indulging our sporting proclivities, that Mr.
actually missed his steamer for Sydney, but we rode all
night 70 or 80 miles to Kiama, and he just caught his steamer for
Sydney next day, in time to get up for his Sunday work. I have


on several occasions since living (nearly 18 years) in Sydney,
made advances to renew some of those happy friendly associations,
but Dr. Sellers, stern, reticent, and uninclined to friendships be-
yond his Church bounds, is quite a different man to Richard
Sellers of yore. So at least it seemed to me. In 1865 he called
me (jokingly) “Mr. President of 1885.” Perhaps it might have
been so, but I am just as well pleased with my freedom.
More true joy Marcellus excited feels
Than Caesar with a Senate at his heels.
Mr. David and Mr. James Warden, the former the Senior
Magistrate of the district, and the latter, years after. Member
of Parliament for Shoalhaven, and father of the present General
Manager of the N.S.W. Government Savings’ Banks, I knew
well, and being very wealthy men, and members of my congre-
gation, I greatly deferred to them in most things. They repre-
sented a high type of Scotchman,, physically and otherwise. The
gentleman just referred to (son of Mr. James Warden) is much
like what his father was, and his mother’s brother was the per-
son who bought my fine racehorse. Doctor. The Kendalls were
a very large tribe in the Ulladulla district. Mr. John and Ed-
ward Kendall Were living here during my time. Thomas, the
eldest of the brothers (later on my fat'her-in-law), with his
mother in her eighties, was living at Kiama, while several of his
sons were still living in Ulladulla district. The Rev. Thomas
Kendall, one of the first Church Missionary Clergymen of New
Zealand, the head of the family and founder of Ulladulla (or about
that) had some years left for Sydney in a sailing craft and was
never heard of again.
I lived for about a year with Mr. Frederick Hall, the first
storekeeper in Milton. He was the smartest, if not the largest,
storekeeper of the district. He made a large fortune out of his
business, and years after he had retired in affluence, and while
living at Randwick he was induced to enter in some speculations
and lost everything. But to show the pluck of the man, though
in his seventies, he started again in business in a distant and
wild part of the far west, where, though bidding well soon to be
an octogenarian, he is now pushing ahead. Mr. Hall was an
earnest Congregational in religious profession, and I was greatly
influenced by some religious works that he put in my way.
“Dr. Kilto’s Philosophic Readings” engaged our attention every
morning after breakfast, and the writings of men like Dr. Leif-
child (the Loudon Parker of his day),- Lynch, Binney, and other
preachers and authors became a regular process of mental
dietary and discipline. Here, for the first time, I came across
Dr. Binney’s book on “Is It Possible to Make the Best of Both
Worlds?” This was a great book in its time among evangelical
people, but I confess I was never attracted by that style of re-
ligion, which, while it secures titles to real estate on earth, is for
ever expounding how we may “read our title clear to mansions
in the skies,"


(4) Armidale.—From Methodism to Anglicanism through Colleg
At the end of my two years’ term at Ulladulla, I wafe sen
to Armidale as a married Minister*. This appointmen
gave great dissatisfaction to my friends, and to myseJ
keen disappointment. The disappointment consisted tl
gome extent in the inadequate financial arrangement unclh
which I was sent there. My predecessor, “an uumarriei!
minister,” had been assisted by a subvention almouj
equal to what the people had collected, but I was left withouj
any outside assistance whatever—it wa,s as the Americans say
“root hog or die.” I could not do the rooting and, therefore
died, figuratively speaking. But I was too inexperienced for s
promising and important a position, and distance from friend
made both myself and the gentle lady to whom I had recently beoJ
united very home sick. Still it was an eventful appointment tha
to Armidale. Only a few weeks after I arrived there Judge Hard
graves opened the first Assize Court ever held there. I went ti
witness the occasion, was asked to take a seat by his 'side
on the Bench, and the evening after, at a representative gathering
a banquet, I acted as chaplain to the Judge, and pronounced
the grace. Mr. John Moore, the first Mayor and founder virtu
ally of Armidale wafe then in his prime and was very friendly t
me, so was Mr. Weaver, the famed Police Magistrate, and I coub
add a long list of others. I think of a Mr. Skinner, Bank Manager
who though not an Anglican, favoured my inclinations to job
that fold. The Rev. S. Hungerford, then a comparatively younj
man, now a patriarch of 80 years of age, was the incumbent o
the parish. This gentleman and myself had few ideas in common
and in quite recent years I must have shocked him at my enun-
ciation of certain broad Church or Modernist theories. He always
seemed to me a fairly good scholar and very much of the gentle
man. While at Armidale I made the acquaintance of a Mr. Seely
an English University man, and brother to the writer of “Ecc<
Homo”—a great book, even then which I had already read
and a few months later Renan’s “Vie de Jesu,” completed' the in
fluence which Mr. Seely’s book had begun. It was thought tin
brother of this Armidale notability was also the writer of the famei
book on “Supernatural Religion,’"’ which for so long was as great ;
riddle as Junius’s Letters. This Mr. Seely of Armidale miglr
have been a great light in England, but at Armidale he nevei
burned with a brightness more than was necessary for a success-
ful financier. For various causes, as I have said, I felt aggrievec
with my appointment to Armidale. I would have borne
my isolation and chagrin had it not been for a procesi
that had been for_ some time going on in my mind
I had been reading the newly-published work edited by Stopford
Brooke, “Life and Letters of the Rev. Frederick Robertson, ol
Brighton.” I had also been completely charmed by reading Rob-
ertson’s sermons. Henceforth Robertson became my hero, and
influenced my mind in the direction of the teachings of the broad
school party in the Church of England. More than j
quarter of a century after my Armidale experiences !


iad the great privilege and pleasure of hearing Mr.
Brooke preach in the Netting Hill Unitarian Church, West End,
London. I met him with his two bright intellectual-looking daugh-
ters in the vestry of the Church after the service, and received an
invitation to dine with him during the week—which, unfortunately,
owing to unforeseen circumstances did not transpire. 1 hough a
complete stranger to him I felt that when I met him I had stood
before the man who had had the greatest influence on my thoughts
n life. The biographer of Robertson, the friend and student
of Tennyson, the associate of broad Church divines like Maurice
and Stanley, the chaplain of Queen Victoria, the preacher before
Oxford and Cambridge Universities, must have had strong con-
victions when he abandoned Anglicanism for Unitarianism.
Whatever other influences may have contributed to break-
ing up my old affiliations, the influence of Robertson,
his character, and teachings, 1 am convinced were the
3hief causes of bringing me over to the English Church,
[t had nothing to do with the clergy of the Church
with whom I had come in contact, who were for the most
part “namby pamby,” with little bonhomie, and very ordinary
intellectual abilities, a starched up set, who (some of them)
turned their backs on me, when, years before, I was introduced
to them as “Reverend.” There were very few even among the
laity to welcome me to the fold. I remember one who had set
himself up as a great church leader (who had shown anything
but a brave spirit when the bushrangers stuck up his bank at
Gloti Innes), writing to the papers and castigating Bishop Barker
fpf Tl receiving men into the ministry who had been brought up to
“inveigh against” the Church) s teaching. But I had an ideal
of a broad, comprehensive church, even then, and the good Bishop,
Dr. Barker, touched my sympathetic nature with his kindness and
friendship, which helped me through the crisis. Soon I found my-
self among the divinity ,students of Moore’s College, preparing
for holy orders. I had “small Latin and less Greek,” but I de-
voted myself to study, and in a few weeks could read my Greek
Testament in the clasjs with the rest. I took first place in Gieek
after my second term, and second place in the college, as well
as having won the prize for the best essay on a given subject.
In 1867 Christmas time, I proceeded with others to Bishops-
court, the seat of the Right Rev. Dr. Barker, where, with seven
or eight candidates, I was examined for deacon’s orders, and,
having been duly accredited by the examining chaplain, the late
Rev. Dr. Zachary Barry, I was ordained in the old wooden St.
Andrew’s (among the very last to take deacons’ orders in that
structure), and then appointed to my first cure in the Church of
England, at Forbes, on the Lachlan.
The Right Rev. Dr. Sawyer, the first Bishop of Grafton and
Armidale, officiated at my ordination to the diaconate, and
preached the ordination sermon, from a text in the Gospel for
the day, on “The voice of one crying in the wilderness.” He
was a man of a fine spirit, a most enthusiastic disposition, and


calculated to inspire others with something - of the influence of
hi)s own temperamental inclinations. His death by the capsizing
of a boat in the Clarence River, when returning from his duties
one Sunday a few months later, was indeed a great calamity to
the Church of England in N.S.W.


IV. —Anglicanism: Clerical Experiences.
(1) Forbes My First Parish.
In taking over the parish of Forbes, I was taking over the
better half of the district in which the Key. Joseph Barnier (so
long and well known as the incumbent of St. Barnabas’ Church
in this dity) had laboured for some years. I laboured here for
one year, or and then, at the close of 1868 (Christmas),
I was ordained to the work and office of a priest in the Church,
with the late Canon Tress, of Richmond, Melbourne. 1 was one
of the first to receive ordination in the new cathedral.
During my term at Forbes 1 had some stirring experiences,
living in that part of the State where the bushrangers roamed
who infested that part of the country. Heie Gardiner used to
visit his paramour, not many miles away from Forbes. Her© a
notorious bushranger was shot, that .is, a few miles from Forbes,
at the Goimbla Station. Here a well-known squatter’s place (Mr.
Charles Cropper’s) was stuck up while he was on the run after
cattle, and the bushrangers commandeerod his wife to play and
sing for them, as well as to prepare ample lunch. Hex-© the mail
coach was stuck up near Goimbla. Here Ben Hall, trusting to
his mate to go to town for some provisions, was given away by
his fellow-bushranger, trapped and shot by the police, and car-
ried into Forbes and buried. All these events were either of
recent occurrence, or happened in my time. From all I had heard
of the bushrangers in their western haunts they were not com-
pletely bad—and would not have been bad at all if it had not
been for being harassed so much by the police. The settlers
generally regarded their escapades as the result of their feud
with the police, and sympathised mostly with the bushrangers.
I confess that when I heard first how Ben Hall took to the bush
. blamed the police in my own mind. He was a man with no
riminal instincts, an only missed being a rich squatter.
Shortly after taking charge of the Foi’bes parochial district
I baptised the posthumous child of Ben Hall, and at the same
time joined in matrimony his widow to a respectable settler. I
was never afraid of being meddled with by the bushrangers.
It seemed to me a point of honour with them never to interfere
with a parson or priest. I may have passed them in my travels
in the distinct, but should not have known them from the ox*-
dinary stockman or boundary rider. I often visited the Icelys
at Goimbla. There was then a young man on their station, a
Mr. Rothery, who is now the aged and much esteemed secretary
of the Society for Preventing Cruelty to Animals. He recently
informed me of the death, some years ago, of Mr. Charles Icely,


and of the fact that his widow is still living. I remember h(
as a most winsome little woman, a lady to the very core of hi
being, who often extended hospitality to me and mine. Goimb
was to me a real oasis in a social desert. There the presidii
geniup of the house seemed to me to waste her fragrance in tl
desert air. There in the house whose Avails and picture fram
ivere perforated Avith bullets by the bushrangers, she sang ai
performed the sweetest melodies, and often charmed the ha
hazard gatherings composed of chance travellers, or visitors fro
the neighbouring stations.
As the AA'hole of the Lachlan and Forbes district had nc
come under my ministerial charge, I had a parish vastly larg<
than any English diocese under my ministerial charge. Far i
near the sources of the Lachlan there were Canowindra ai
v’oAvra, and the different stations of the Brothers West. Binda, M
John West’s station, Avas one of my regular preaching places. Mr
John West is one of the pleasant memories of my visits ther
“A creature not too bright or good for human nature’s dai
food,” and yet Avith “something of the angels’ light.” I tun
been charmed by fair ones of the true British aristocracy, I Jiai
met with some of the brightest and most intelligent Avomen i
the drawing rooms of New York, but I am bold to say I hai
met in my early days, in the far AA r e<st, as genuine specimens (
the true lady as in any of my rambles in any part of the globi
So far down in the loiver levels of the Lachlan, beloAV where Coi
dobolih is noAV, I have recollections of the Streets. ,I‘hill
Street, a well-known squatter, Avafc proprietor of the Condoboli
Station, and here I visited and preached in the course of m
regular duties. A fine manly character of the good old sort, avj
this gentleman, and he, ‘Avith his Avif© (formerly a Mil
Lawson, and sister to Mrs. Icely), always entertained n
when visiting at Condobolin. Judge Street, their soi
is now Avorthily occupying a position on the Supren
Court bench. Not many miles aAvay, a place of regular call, live
the late Mr. W. H. Suttor, a member of Parliamenl
and brother of the President of the- Legislative Council. Hi
vast literary attainments are Avell knoivn to all readers of th
annals of early colonial hhistory. His splendid library was a
Avays at my disposal, and here it Avas I first acquired my tast
for Tennyson. His annotated copies of Tennyson Avere of ur,
speakable value to me, and helped me to understand and appr<
date the beauties and philosophy of “In Memoriam,” Tennyson’
greatest poem.
(2) Sutton Forest and Bong Bong.
When the diocepe of. Bathurst Avas constituted, I elected t
remain Avith my old Bishop, and Avas sent by him to take charg
of the Sutton Forest and Bong Bong parochial district. Lon
Belmore, the then Governor of N.S.W., had recently establish©
his country residence on the Throsby Estate, near Bong Bong, s
that this appointment virtually carried with it that of Chaplai


to the Governor. His Excellency may not have been amongst
the brightest of our State Governors, but lam sure that he was
among the most conscientious and painstaking. Any request for
help that I ever made to him was always liberally responded to,
and when i appealed to him on one occasion on behalf of a one-
time influential member of my old congregation at Eorbes, who
had got into trouble, and was in durance vile at Berrimk, tlfe
appeal was at once brought before the Cabinet, and the ridicu-
lously exorbitant sentence passed by the late Judge Carey was
abbreviated by some years. The gentleman on whose behalf I
appealed to the Governor is still living, and is (or was, not so
long ago) in a highly responsible position, but, alas! “the grati-
tude of man ha/s often left me mourning.” in passing, I may say 1
often met Judge Carey at social functions at this same gentleman’s
house. The Judge was an ex-clergyman of the Church of England,
though I believe only in deacon’s orders. He had some fame as
a scholar, being translator of “Dante’s Inferno.” It was re-
ported that Judge Carey was received into the Roman Catholic
Church before his death. But probably his friendship with Arch-
bishop Folding, and a visit from this Prelate at the time of his
last sickness was sufficient to account for the rumour. From
what 1 had seen of this Judge I thought his tendencies were
rather in the direction of Eroude than Newman. I was Lord
BelmoreA private chaplain at Sutton Forest, and I believe it was
’•jtist an accident that I did not christen his first son and heir,
AVho was born in my parish, on the Throsby Park Estate. The
lixtJovernor wi(b called down to Sydney a little earlier than had
odjjeen expected—at least, that was what was reported in the
papers.
As showing how small the world is, I came across Lord Bel-
more’s tracks many years after, when travelling in Northampton-
shire, England, when visiting an old and curiou.s church at War-
mington, in Northamptonshire, where he had only preceded me
by a few hours. And, later on, at New York, when engaged in
the city mission work with my confrere, the Rev. Jocelyn John-
stone, who one day showed me a cablegram from Lord Corry
(the son born in my parish, and the heir of the Earl of Belmore),
to/say, “I have this day passed my examination at Cambridge
for 8.A., thanks to your good coaching.” I ascertained that my
friend had been private tutor to the young gentleman. While
I lived at Sutton Forest I became acquainted with the Throsby
family. The Osbornes, who were connected with them ; Charles
Nicholson, the son of a distinguished officer; the Badgerys ; John
Morrice, M.P. for the district, and many others. These are all
historical names, and are associated in my memory with interest-
ing recollections.
And, while I am thinking about it, there lived in my parish,
about half way between Sutton Forest and Berrima, a Mr. Cal-
vert, a former member of one of Leichhardt’s exploring ex-
peditions. He, with his amiable and highly-cultured wife, were
regular attendants at my church. Mrs. Calvert’s most interest-
ing articles on local botany, and kindred subjects, regularly ap-


Reared in the pages of the “Sydney Morning Herald.” I have!
often heard account* of Leichhardt from Mr. Calvert. Though,
xlr. Calvert had shared with Leichhardt the hardships and pri-
vations or crossing Australia from east to west, I never heard
one word of brag from him. He never seemed to indulge ill
hose sanguine expectations, so long rife among many, of Leich-
hardt ever turning up again in the resorts of civilisation.
1 shall never forget how, when the usual monthly English
mail had brought the news of the breaking out of the Franco-Ger-
man war when out driving along the Moss Vale Hoad, i met
| i. and Mrs. Calvert in their buggy, and ways greatly pleased
by my triend s enthusiasm in favour of Germany.
u IV—Chi Sunday, June Bth, 1913, I attended Church al
Richmond, N.S.W., where (after the sermon) 1 read the following
inscription on a mural tablet in the Church (the Mrs. Calvert just
referred to is the same as here described, and must have died soon
after the period of my meeting her and her husband), “Sacred to
the memory of Louisa, wife of J. S. Calvert, J.P., and daughter
of the late James Atkinson, J .P. She died April 28th, 1872, aged
38 years. this tablet is erected by her friends to mark their re-
spect for her pious labour and scientific researches during a
lesidence of several years in the Kurragong district. She hath
done what she could.’ Her residence at Kurragong, a few miles 1
from Richmond, must have been before her period of life between
.jntton 1 orest and Eerrima. Mrs. Calvert struck me at the tlhie
as being considerably younger than her husband.
While at Sutton Forest I once exchanged duty for a irejd
weeks with the Rev. F D. Bode, who was assistant minister of
St. James Church, Sydney. So that I may say that 1 was at
one time myself the acting assistant minister at this very ancient
church-ancient as Australian history goes. The last Sunday on
which 1 preached there the church was so crowded that people
were (Standing in the aisles and the several doorway entrances,
i was here brought into most friendly contact with the late Canon
Allwood, at that time incumbent of St. James’, and vice-chan-
cellor of the University. I was greatly impressed with the Canon’s
piotound scholarship, and his vast research and knowledge, which
would have overawed me had it not been for his gentle and loving
spirit. 1 have met men of his type in England. Great scho-
lars and great men of the Jo.wett and Newman order,
wno might well have been suggested in connection with
men like Canon Alhvood. I received more real commendation
from inm than from many who never failed to let me know they
were men of high degree, and my intellectual superiors.
A truly great man and ripe scholar, as well as a strong man, as
a pohtmian, I met while living at Sutton Forest, in the person of
the late Hon. Wi ham Munnings Arnold, a nephew of the renowned
iii. Arnold, of Rugby, whose life by Dean Stanley had made him
one ot my literary heroes. To meet with a nephew of this great
man was m itself an event. He was at this time Speaker of our
State 1 arhament. His (sad fate a few months after by drowning


in a flood on the Paterson may be remembered, if only for the
gallant and characteristic Arnoldian spirit which he displayed in
that he lost Iris life while trying to save a poor old woman’s
pumpkins from being carried away by the flood. He came to
hear me preach one Sunday and lecture during the week. I spoke
in my sermon on Sunday on the subject of having “a form of
godliness without the power.” I had dipped into some scientific-
works, and talked pretty freely about “life in form and organism.”
At a social evening during the week at the residence of Mr. John
Mortice Mr. Arnold gave me his opinions, and though he dis-
sented from some of my statements, there was in him a kindly
and appreciative spirit which gave me great encouragement. So
far as I have been able since to judge, Mr. Arnold had advanced
beyond the ordinary orthodoxy, and was in perfect harmony with
his famed cousin, Matthew Arnold, the great apostle of modern
culture. His other cousin, Edwin Arnold, not less famed after-
wards as a literary genius, and the author of the “Light of
Asia,” was then hardly known to the great world. 1 remember
the Rev. W. Wyatt, a son-in-law of Mr. Morrice, was present.
He was an M.A. of Oxford. He was only in deacon’s orders,
and gave as his reason for not taking priest’s orders that he had
been ordained a deacon by Samuel Wilberforce, then Bishop of
Oxford, and would not allow a colonial Bishop to lay hands on
him, out of his great respect for, perhaps, one of the greatest of
modern English Bishops. Mr. Wyatt placed his schoolroom at
my disposal for conducting service occasionally on Sunday evenings.
I was the first clergyman who ever conducted Church of Eng-
land services at Moss Yale. There were then not a half a dozen
houses in the entire place. It has since become a populous town,
and, from a church point of view, it is now a well-endowed and
well-organised Parish.
C 3) Kiama.
After my short incumbency of Sutton Forest I spent
about five years in the Illawarra district as the incumbent
of Christ Church, Kiama. During my charge of this
district one of the several churches in which I had to officiate
at stated intervals had the misfortune to be burned down—
rather, I would say, the good fortune, for it was an old ram-
shackle sort of a structure, and a new and handsome structure
was soon erected in its place. Indeed, the whole village of Ger-
ringong was quite burnt down, and my little church there liter-
ally flew away in a great conflagration. That was one of the
fiercest gales that ever took place on the South Coast. A good
deal of public attention was called to the event by sensational
reports in the newspapers, and, being anxious to strike the iron
while it was hot, I came to Sydney and collected money for a
new church. I called on Sir Hercules Robinson, the then Gov-
ernor of the State, and he readily gave me his cheque for £25.
Men like Messrs. Smart, Knox, Mort, and several others gave
me like amounts, and Mr. Frederick M, Darley, barrister, gave


me liis cheque for £l2 12s. Many years after, much to the
gladness of bitter sectarians, he gave me another kind of checll
in his capacity as Chief Justice of the State. Of this I shall have
something to say later on. When I lirst went to Kiama “Parkes
and the Ghost” were very much a subject for banter and ridi-
cule. Some mischievous Ribbonman had frightened a superstitious
Orangeman by covering himself with a large white sheet, and
obstructing the road in which the Orangeman returned from his
lodge, where such pleasant toasts had been drunk as “To h
with the Pope.” I don’t think Parkes came out of this too well,
not that he was in the slightest degree superstitious, but he
had a lot of anti-Popish superstitious people to deal with. In-
stead of treating it as a grim joke, as it was intended to be,
Parkes took it up in a serious (or assumed serious) manner, and
only excited ridicule. However, “the Kiama Ghost” became his-
torical, and was for many a day the subject of laughter and a
sore point with men of the Orange brotherhood. During the
period of my residence at Kiama,.. one Sunday morning, in the
midst of pouring rain, I went across the small glebe to church,
thinking that I should only be required to officiate in the most
formal manner. The rain was so heavy that 1 thought surely
\ ery few would venture out. Suddenly, however, the rain
abated, and I robed and appeared as usual at the desk in church.
Ihe Hirst glance round revealed to me the well-known figure of
Sir Henry Parkes, at that time Premier of the colony. lat once
magnified the importance of my congregation, and thought if iit
does not count many, it weighs heavily this morning. I had
thought of giving a short address, but seeing him I determinedlto
go on with the sermon I had prepared. After all these yearjj I
can remember the subject, text, and what I said. Mr. S. Bent,
who is known as one of the greatest of our public school teachers
and inspector/s, and was at this time a member of my congrega-
tion, told me afterwards that Sir Henry had spoken to him in
the highest terms of my preaching, and that the point he had
been particularly pleased with was when I spoke of Abraham’s
self-control and hi(s power to keep a great secret. That, no
doubt, appealed to Sir Henry. Later on in life, while in New
York (I had sent a newspaper to Sir Henry with a review of his
book on “Fifty Years’ Experience of Australian Life,” and wrote
a short note to him), I received a letter from him with a present
of one of his books. Some months after preaching before the
author of the public school system I arranged for a series of
meetings to oppose the abolition of the denominational system,
and may say I was the means principally of defeating ' John
Stewart (who for some years had been member for Kiama), and
securing the election of Captain Charles, lately deceased at a
very advanced age, having nearly reached the century of exist-
Messrs. John James and Samuel Marks, nephews of the
captain, were quite opposed to him politically.
I remember Mr. William Marks, too, who lived at Ulladulla,
where I resided then, but afterwards became a settler near Lis-
more, on the Richmond River. Some eight or ten years ago
he died at over 80 years of age. Another of the Marks bro-


thers, Robert (my brother-in-law) died about the same time over
70. It seems strange when I reflect that the father of the
Markses died at Kiama during my time there. He must
have been nearly 90. Though he was a North of Ireland Pres-
byterian he desired a visit from me on his last bed of sick-
!ness, and I paid him the visit, and prayed with him a few days
before he expired. Another old gentleman named Armstrong
lived at Kiama, and married again at 97. He died about eight
or ten years after his 100th birthday. Who did not know old
Daddy Armstrong? “Old Bedad,” he was called, from his habit
of using the word.
I have a distinct recollection of an old resident, a farmer
near Kiama, a patriarchal looking gentleman, long bearded, with
the form and features of an Eastern Sultan, but whose North of
Ireland brogue was unmistakable. The father of our. present
Chief Justice, Sir William Cullen, was a familiar figure about
Kiama in my time, and I have recollections of his son as a young
man of bright and intellectual appearance, the man who is now
sometimes known by his more honourable title of “His Excellency
the Lieutenant Governor.”
During my incumbency of Kiama I first became acquainted
with the Hon. Geoffrey Eagar when he was Colonial Treasurer in
the Martin Government, as one Sunday morning I noticed him,
a stranger, sitting in the pew belonging to an influential mem-
ber of the congregation. He had a most thoughtful and distin-
guished appearance. A few days later I was invited to meet
Mr. Eagar and found him most agreeable and a very ready and
interesting conversationalist. He told me of his admiration for the
Riv. John Graham as a preacher, who was then Pastor of the
Pitt Street Congregational Church. I was not prepared for
what followed when referring to my discourse of the Sunday he
asked; “Is that your usual style of preaching?” I said something
to the effect that “I had not felt quite up to the mark,” and he
added at once with great emphasis, “well if you were in Syd-
ney I should prefer to listen to you instead of Mr. Graham.” I
thought at the time that that was great praise, but I have lived
long enough, and have been able so to see into men of real mark
that I would not now regard that pompous platitudinarian, with
all of his school, the Thus. Binneys and Parkers of London, and
Jefferies of Australia, as men avlio deserved to be ranked (or
spoken of in the same breath) with the Campbells of the New
Theology, or Fred. Robertson’s of advanced religious thought. No
doubt it was my strain of Advanced Thought, considerably de-
veloped even then, which attracted the philosophic minds of men
like Eagar, Arnold, and many others.
Twice or thrice each year I met regularly a gentleman of
good presence and deportment, one of the well-known District
Court Judge's of -New South Wales. Judge McFarland was a real
gentleman so far as manners and address could make one that;
though not by any means very popular. He was an author of
some renown, and had wide literary knowledge and tastes. His
book on the Pitcairn Islanders is still an authority on that part


ofAustrahan history which refers to Bligh’s Governorship. Yea:
after 1 often met him on the Monaro performing the same Di,
ti ict Com fc functions, but after that I lost sight of him for man
years until I met him old and seeming as'though “wearied wit
the march of hfe,” living in retirement on his civil pension. B
died shortly after. Sir Joseph Hector Carruthers, who droppe
out of political existence some time ago, was a boy, and that nc
ot great boyish age, when I resided at Kiama. The gentleman juf
mentioned, the present Chief Justice of New South Wales, wa
v ll j ver gi n g to the end of his teens, while the man tl
nead ot whose Government made him Chief Justice was quit
a young boy. No worthier parents ever lived than the fathe
and mother ot the two brothers, Rev. J. E. and Sir Joseph Cai
lutheis. 1 have some faint recollection that one of these ger
tlemen, perhaps both of them, passed the University Junior Civ
Service,- which I regularly conducted for several years at Kiama i
that far back period. How Sir Joseph, as Premier, could eve
have allowed his Attorney-General (Wade) to treat me as he die
and as the Sydney public know, I have often wondered. I di
not quite approve of his political party, but the influence of “Aul
-Lang Syne caused me always to strain my political conscienc
on Ins behalf, for I could not vote against the son of parents
so revered.
I may also mention that in the early days of my Kiam;
career I once had the opportunity of seeing that good old Eng
hshman who was at the head of the great organisation which ,i
composed chiefly of our Irish fellow citizens. Archbishop Foldinj
nad come down to this small town, at it was then in the corns!
ot a confirmation tour down the coast, I had finished my sery.ic l
and was starting for an afternoon at the little village o
Gernngong, and in passing the Roman Catholic Church a grea
crowd of people blocked my way. Evidently they had not al
been able to get into the church for the usual devotions anc
j and the venera ble old gentleman came to the front step:
oi the door, from where he addressed the large audience. Thai
was m itself impressive if it had only been for the largeness o
the audience and the grave and reverend appearance of the apos
tofical looking man who, fatherlike, was speaking to them. Bui
when (suddenly the aged Archbishop, with outstretched hands gav<
his blessing to the kneeling throng, I'do not hesitate to say thal
a deep feeling of solemnity came over me, and Protestant that 1
was, the poetry, beauty and impressiveness of the scene appealec
to me as few things have ever done. I have always thought weli
good old Dr. Folding, for it is a matter of history that
tue Moravian brotherhood missionaries (one of whom was my owr
tathei) in the simplicity of their piety called on the venerable
pi elate when they arrived in Australia and asked and received
his benediction.
I do not suppose that any of Dr. Folding’s successors woulc
have tolerated Freemasonry any more than blessing Moravians
nit Dr. Folding did both. A Roman Catholic assisted ir
making me a Freemason not so ,long after the Archbishop’s


'visit to .Kiama, and several other gentlemen in good
standing with their Church were Roman Catholics and
imemhers of the lodge of which shortly after the time
just referred to I became Worshipful Master. Dr. Kelly,
'the present Archbishop of Sydney, is quite astray in his_ sweep-
ing condemnation of this Order. Though I have not visited a
I lodge for some years and do decidedly object to much in the bad
’ masonic spirit which I have encountered (but that is merely
local and incidental), I regard Freemasonry from the standpoint
|of human brotherhood as an admirable institution for bringing
| men of all creeds and classes together, and whatever it may be
politically on the continent of Europe, so far as Australia and
America are concerned—which are the limits of ray experience
—I have found in it genial companion ship and true fraternity. In
America I w.fs brought by means of it into a much larger ex-
perience of my fellow men, and after my return from travelling
in the United States I was invited at Melbourne to deliver a
lecture on “Some Aspects of American Freemasonry.” Sir Wil-
liam Clarke was then the Grand Master, and wrote most kindly
about me, and expressed regret that on account of illness he
would not be able to attend. The Deputy Grand Master, how-
ever, with all the officers of the Grand Lodge, Avere present. There
happened also to be present one of the members of the Lecture
Cbmmittee (or who had been that) of the Grand Lodge of Eng-
land, who supported the motion for a vote of thanks to me in
the most commendatory remarks I had ever heard _ used to
describe ray public deliverances. He called it “the most interesting
M.Wsonic lecture he had ever listened to,” and informed the breth-
AM that he had often in his official capacity, had to invite dis-
tinguished brethren to lecture in England from the countries of
Europe and the States of America. But this is a digression, for
I shall have occasion to refer to incidents of my Masonic ex-
periences in America. In vieAV, however, of the attacks which
have been made Tipon the Order, and some of my oavu grievances,
Avhich it may have been an act of unwisdom to ventilate. I wish
to emphasize my OAvn general approval of an order of Avhich I am a
Past Master.
Old Thomas Chapman, a great figure in the early mercantile
annals of Tasmania and N.S.W. history, had his beautiful villa
home at Kiama on an exquisite site overlooking the ocean. He
Avas a man of great Avealth, and his extensive properties in bank
shares, as Avell as houses and lands in this and other States,
made him a very desirable resident, and I need not add a valuable
member of my* congregation, though he a man of very ad-
vanced ideas religiously. He was one of the best informed men
I have ever met, and a great reader of the best of books in both
current and standard literature. I had access at all times to his
valuable library. Many spare hours I have spent in reading
aloud to him from his choicest books. Buckle’s great history, which
he originallv intended as an “introduction to the study of civi-
lization,” I first read in this manner, and appreciated far more
than some of Mr. Chapman’s other favourite authors, such as


Carlyle, Fronde. His step daughter (Miss Cooper), a. most dig-
nified and, indeed, aristocratic style of lady, was more fitted for
the West End drawing-rooms of London, whither she ultimately
tended, and though undei; the plebeian name of Brown, she lived
amongst most patrician surroundings ; and Australia has never
seen her again. She was the niece to old Mrs. Thomas Kendall,
who was sister to Mrs. Cooper, who, having lost her first husband,
afterwards became Mrs. Chapman. As I wa,s thus in a way con-
nected with Mr. Chapman, it may be understood that I had many
advantages, and being somewhat of a favourite guest at his mag-
nificent residence, I enjoyed many opportunities socially and
otherwise. While on the subject of Kiaina, and having men-
tioned two noted sisters, Mrs. Chapman and Mrs. Kendall, I may
also mention old Mrs. Hindmarsh as another sister, whose maiden
name all were Rutter. There is quite a history connected with
these sisters. They were left in Sydney by their father, Mr.
Rutter, a widower, long, long- ago. He went to England, married
again, and as his daughters' were being brought up so well out
here, and he had married the second time, he did not send for
them. Many years after, when they had all grown up, had large
families of their own, had almost forgotten everything about
their father (long dead) and knew nothing about the family he had
left behind, they made a remarkable discovery. It was very
early in N.S.W. history when telegraphy wap in its infancy,
that Rev. Ralph Mansfield was sent to England by the Govern-
ment of N.S.W. to make himself acquainted with all the details
or telegraphic operating, when he met a Mr. Rutter, through
whose ingenuity much in the way of making electricity serviodfr
able to mankind by telegraphy, as we now have it, had beeani
accomplished. I do not know exactly in what manner, but I dfch
kmnv that this was the case. From Mr. Rutter’s enquiries it
was ascertained that the three ladies mentioned were his sisters,
about whose existence he for the first time heard from Air. Mans-
field. During the earlier years of my Kiama experience I had
the privilege of reading lengthy letters from Mr. Rntter to his
sister, my mother-in-law, and a more interesting correspondent,
or better writer, of pure English, I could not have nerused. Mr.
John J. Rutter, ivho I believe still lives at Ulladulla, is a
son of Mr. Rutter, of telegraphic fame, and was married to a
Miss Cooper, a sister of the lady I have just mentioned (hhs
half cousin) ; and another Miss Cooper became Airs. William Ken-
dall, also cousins.
While at Kiaina I became acquainted with Mr. Henry
Connell, junr., the author of “The N.S.W. Magisterial
Digest,” for magistrates of this State. He became grey at an
early age, and his father, -who had not a grey hair in his head
at 80, looked younger than the son at 50. The young articled
clerk who assisted Mr. Connell in. the compilation of the book,
Air. David Walker, entered very much into my life. His father
was a highly respectable doctor at Kiama, who, when he became
a widowmr, married a very high Church Anglican lady, -who was
very fond of her little stepson, David, and the effect on him of


er high Cliurchism was marked. David, who was articled to a
iwyer, Mr. Owen (afterwards a Judge in thin; State), had a
hequered career. He fell foul of Chief Justice Dailey, and
roken in heart and reputation he left for America, where I met
dm much to my astonishment many years after. I had just
rossed the continent from New 7 York and reached Portland, Ore-
;on, where my attention was called to the account of the execution
>f a young medical student who had been convicted of murder
vhile I was chaplain of the prisons. I never believed him guilty
ind consider he was judicially murdered. The account in the papei
seemed to me altogether improper and wrong, and I at once
vrote to defend the young man I had attended, and for whom i
tad in vain pleaded with Governor Flower. My letter in the
Oregonian” newspaper brought David and myself together the
next day after years of separation. It w r as while at Kiama that
[ was enabled, through my friend, to get hold of Newman s
“Apologia”—a book which influenced me more than anything m
a change from early anti-Romish prejudices. At that time I was
in less danger of'sympathies in that direction than later on after
vears of absence in America, I returned to Australia, and found
myself deserted by Bishops and clergy. The “parting words of
Newman about keeping those walling to serve the Church, idle
in the market place all day long,” often occurred to me. And
yet such men call themselves Christian and Catholic. That.l had
no tendency Homewards, is proved from certain lectures which at
this time I was fond of delivering. “William, the Silent Hero of the
Dutch Republic” (a much greater man than William 111 King
of England, ever was) I delivered in the first place, for my
friend, Rev. John D. Langley (I am happy to say our friendship
has never altered) in his School Hall, and at Brisbane, Ipswich, and
other places. Also a lecture on “Dollinger and the Old Catholic
Movement,” in connection with the Vatican Council, I rung the
changes up and down the Southern Coast. I delivered His to
crowded audiences wherever I went, especially in St. Barnabas
Schoolroom, the Protestant Hall, Pitt Street, the Mayor of Syd-
ney (Gould), father of Senator Gould, in the chair. I never spoke
on a stormier night as regards weather and certainly I never
spoke to a more excited or enthusiastic crowd. The lecture lasted
over two hours, and no doubt I thought myself a clever fellow,
but it was purely a natural gift of memory, and I have often since
thought what tons of money I could have made had I committed
Shakespeare. But then—well read into that whatever you like.
This lecture brought me on a visit to Brisbane, and that vipit
brought me afterwards to Queensland, my' native State. So I will
finish my Kiama period here, by adding that that little town
was always good to me, though in late years they don t seem to
know that I ever lived. They made me a, present of nearly £lOO
(when it was all paid it topped that score) with a most flattering-
address. The Rev. Dr. Kinross, the Hon. John Marks were
among those who took part in the farewell to me.


Vll.—Some Queensland and Victorian Experiences.
Ipswich, and Melbourne, Vic. t
I have made such frequent references to the various place'
Twe ±r h 7w T d , e ®l >eciall .y to the cities mentioned in th{
above heading that 1 shall not need to do more than give som
geneial descriptions. I have just referred to my visit to Bris-
bane, while still incumbent of Kiama. That was an eventful oc
“m my hlst ° ry > for took me out of this State and brought
"n u Ch large s P ublic - When in Brisbane I gave m
S’t ° n u I)( i hnß Ti a /l d tbe °. ld Catholic Movement.” At tha?
i le I really thought the Anglican position was justified bv tin
secession of the Old Catholics (as they were called) but in \atei
Rev CW S T f R an anC l ient l a " d "ltra T Protestant writer as tin
Vxi ‘ L Bas 111 lns history of Henry VIII convinced me
and a<L e ntinl a tb ° anal ° gy bet T e + e T n ejecting the. Pope’s 'supremacy
£ , adopting the supremacy of the secular and temporal king and
only the of the Pope which the Old Catholics
i t T V‘ , • S u a ni loa< i Churchman that did not concern me but
had I been high Church I should have gone over to Rome But
?nf« e irvr+ r bean h'gh Church. I now think that the doctrine of the
infallibility of the Pope is the natural and logical outcome of
Rome s claims, or as some might call them “pretensions ” This
has come about m a way I may explain further on. However here
I vdl say my esprit de corps—for I wished to be considered a loyal
Anglican led me to take up the position which Anglican Bishops
that ‘‘N™ Clergy then ~ naiataV V;d- So man - v of them thought
wni i n wa ® c<anin - hack” that I took up the note and
a J°? c dead of da 9 ci d rhetoric on that point. I have
iad 7° des( i end /rom that height as from other summits that I
can hardly imagine myself the same individual whom Bishops have
since compe led to eat so much dirt, and with whom eeclesmisS
flooS rtS WTb Tv 1 t be + Very , canaille of clericalism have wiped theii
r°7 s ; With this lecture, however, I seemed to please the more
thoughtful of the ecclesiastical minded, but had got together suffi-
tbTennf a ?h andum ?jF ases ’ cla P trap it may be called, to tickle
the ears of the groundlings. I was well reported in the papers and
Ld en Alf Q )lm + C > ed . to P reacb in . St - John’s Cathedral in the morning
and All Saint s in the evening I had crowded attendances. At
offices of H"m ” the ?°r rnor Lord Normanby, and
ornceis of H.M.S. Challenger, which was then exploring the
Southern Seas in connection with the historical deep sea foiind-
A 1 told these learned men, some of the leading Scientists of
„ tb j d ;y-. tkat without the grace of God” all their scholarships
and attainments in science were worth nothing (my text was the
words of Paul, By the grace of God lam what I am”) and I
spoke with an assurance that as an effect of mere nerve control and
maturitv OU .!nd haye f ?6en T rth a «°° d deal had I had more mental
maturity, and a fair modicum of the learning of these men. At


111 Saints in the evening I had for my auditors Judges and
Members of Parliament, but my most distinguished hearer who
. consider weighed as much as a very large number of the big
mdience, Sir Charles Talley, was one of the most intellectually
powerful men that ever crossed the horizon of our Australian
bistory. He was present on that occasion, and his commenda-
tory remarks on the character and style of my oratory I regard
is among the best encomiums I have ever received. Out of six
years of my time spent in Queensland at this stage of my career,
five years were spent as Rector of St. Paul’s, Ipswich. This church,
during my time, was the largest in revenue of any in the Bris-
bane diocese, for during one year my stipend, with exes., totalled
£IOOO. While I was stationed here for a year I was member of
diocesan council. I can remember having something to do
with voting a subvention for augmenting the salary of a young
man only then in minor orders of Cathechist, but who subsequently
became the Rector of Townisville, and afterwards the first Bishop
of that diocese. Years after he was elected Bishop of Goulburn,
N.S.W., and had it in his power to refuse my application for a
license in his diocese. My course, or life, at Ipswich was varied
by occasional holiday trips down South (“vacations” as Americans
say, much more sensibly) on one of which I visited Melbourne for
the’ first time, but did' not officiate in any church. I, however,
made the acquaintance of the Very Rev. Dean Macartney, at whose
house (the Deanery) I was invited to dine and meet the Right
Rev. Dr. Morehouse, the recently appointed Bishop of Melbourne.
I met other distinguished men, among them a Mr. Wilkinson—
whose designation, if I remember rightfully, was Chancellor in
Exility— Chief Justice Stawell, and Mr. Morris, Registrar of the
difibese. These great men were specially invited to meet me, for
li°this time the world went well with me, and I had the ball
dt ! my feet. It seemed like the result of this visit some time
later on, when at Ipswich, a telegram of ususual size was one
day handed to me in which the Dean of Melbourne offered me
charge of St. John’s Church in that city. The telegram recom-
mended my acceptance of the offer in a length of four or five
telegram forms (it must have taken poundjs sterling to pay for
it), but, after consideration, I declined. The next day or two
after the telegram was repeated, at even greater length, and
feeling flattered, I accepted the offer. The indignation of my people
was so great one would have thought I had committed a great
sin or that a public calamity had overtaken the town. The
Queensland which had always been specially favourable,
now said “I had conie in with a pean and was going out with a
groan.” It was ascertained that I could not have been of great ac-
count, because, after all, they had done for me, common
gratitude (should have kept me among such a devoted and loyal
people. The Premier of Queensland, who was a member of my
congregation, said reproachfully to me, “Ah, you should have
stayed with us and we would have made you the next Bishop of
Brisbane.” I had married him to a Miss Uniacke, a Melbourne
lady, during the period of my incumbency. The Hon. George
Thorn was not one of the greatest Queensland Premiers, but the


State progressed well during Iris Premiership. However, this
may be, 1 think at that time he had the greatest influence of
any layman in the State, and, though I say it, worse men than
myself have been appointed Bishops in this my native Australia.
From first to last, English Bishops have disappointed us, with
very few exceptions.
My Melbourne experiences had a speedy culmination after a
period of only twelve months at St. John’s, in the appointmerit
to the Archdeaconship of Hamilton, in the Ballarat diocese. But
then the Melbourne position w T as only taken by me for that time.
That it was successful may at leajst he surmised from the fact
that the congregation of St. John’s presented me with a testi-
monial of £l5O, and with a most flattering address. While in
Melbourne I often officiated on special occasions in old
St. Paul’s Cathedral. I was invited to preach at the
Raikes Sunday School Centenary, in which all the Pro-
testant Churches of Melbourne had combined, but my
Bishop (Dr. Morehouse) objected to his clergy preaching in dis-
senting churches (as he called them) and so i was prevented. On
one occasion I was invited to speak in the Melbourne Town Hall
at a great meeting at which Peter Lalor, of Eureka fame, took
the chair, then Speaker of the House. I gave a speech under the
auspices of the A.N.A. Society, which brought me prominently
before the public. The meeting was to protest against Earl
Derby’s act in annulling Sir Thomas Mcllwraith’s action in an-
nexing New Guinea—one of the greatest blunders of the British
Government in its Australian Colonial Policy. On another ocKJa-
sion I gave a lecture in the Atheneum Hall, Thos. Bent in Jibe
chair, on “Australian Federation,” long before it became a prac-
tical question in politics. The “Evening Herald” described ihy
elocution as the best ever heard in Melbourne, excepting Herr
Bandmann. Later on I gave a lecture on Benjamin D’lsraeli at
Ballarat, and the chairman, the Mayor, described it as equal to
anything he had ever heard from Charles Clarke. I mention these
matters not from vain glory, but in rebuttal of slander and de-
tractions and the attempt of reverend gentlemen to belittle me.
I took charge of Hamilton in the Ballarat diocese in a state of
impaired health and shortly after took a trip to New Zealand.
At St. Peter’s, Wellington, I preached, and the “Evening Post”
was unbounded in its praise. At the consecration of the old Bal-
larat Cathedral, I was the appointed preacher. I had
not been in Hamilton more than a year when the Bishop,
Dr. Thornton, gave me to understand (notwithstanding
his positive agreement and promise) that he had other
views as regards the Archdeaconship. This led to friction,
to open war, and at length to active alienation from
church work. I wasted some two or three years in taking
an impossible position on the Monaro under the Right Rev. Dr.
Mesac Thomas, Bishop of Goulburn, but had not been under him
long before I began to use the words of the Psalter, “Woe is
me that I am constrained to dwell with Mesac.” The change to
the mountain air and beautiful scenery had a beneficial effect


on my health, so in that respect my time there, over two years,
was not wasted.
After this period, for one year I accepted the position
of Editor of the “Darling Downs Gazette,” Toowoomba,
Queensland. I should have liked to give a detailed account
of my life and work in this part of my Australian career, hut
I must reserve some space for my travels abroad. I may just
add a few reminiscent remarks concerning some who had more
than a local fame. The late Hon. W. H. Gx’oom, among the
first members of the House of Representatives, who had been for
many years Speaker of the Queensland Parliament, was one of
our soundest and safest of men, and had to do with the develop-
ment and progress of Queensland more than any man I know.
He has left behind several sons who are in their way carrying on
their father’s good work as proprietors and conductors of the
“Toowoomba Chronicle,” one of the best of Australia’s provin-
cial newspapers. The present Minister of Customs, as is well
known, is tne youngest and best known of his sons. While at
Toowoomba, I became acquainted with one of the most remark-
able men of recent times, considering his age. Francis Adams,
of London, a young man of 28, was spending his summer at Too-
woomba. He had only recently come out from England. Though
so young he haH written several books, and had already become
a regular contributor to the leading English magazines. He was
well known for the bitterness and severity of his attacks on public
men, especially Henry Parkes, in the “British Fortnightly.” He
had, while here, written some of the most savage articles in the
Sydney “Bulletin.” One I remember of a particularly pungent
styfth on a well known nonconformist divine whose defective
scholarship was pointed out in a style which few could command.
I Tofund great pleasure in his conversation, and gave him a free
hand in the paper I edited, a result being great help to our poli-
tical party (Sir Thos. Mcllwraith being the leader) coming into
power, and the defeat of Sir Samuel Griffith and his following.
His gruesome death in London later on w r as the great
sensation of the time, and stirred up the horror of West End.
Another literary celebrity who came across my path at this time
was Mr. A. G. Stephens. He could hardly then be said to have
passed into literary birth. I gave him his first literary task on
my paper, and he so improved that before a coxxple of moons had
marked their course he was instructing me on the best methods
of writing leaders. I remember well Mr. Stephens’ first literary
endeavour, a report of a concert, which was perhaps a little stilted,
but was a finished composition and had in it the promise and potency
of the art critic’s and bookfellow’s style. He has changed great-
ly from the willowy youth of 16 to the large man of massive pro-
portions, and intellectually he has become a Samson, though that
expression hardly fits, for he is as a journalist, smart and agile, and
needs no patronage from me or anybody else. He is a product
of Toowoomba. I have no further space or time to tell of my
Australian experiences, for at the close of the year for which
I engaged as editor I removed to Exeter, England, where I had
my head-quarters for the few months I travelled, preached, and
lectured in the old country.


V.—AN AUSTRALIAN ABROAD.
The full story of my travels abroad can hardly be given here.
I shall leave it on record for the time of my canonization, when
scraps of informations may be sought after. I do not make
this remark in any vainglorious spirit, but if it is true that “those
who are cannonaded in life will be canonized after death,” then
I may safely predict such an era will arrive for me.
In 1889 I went to England, visited places of note, and met or
saw persons distinguished for intellectual and social standing.
London, with all that charmed or interested me there, in its famed
Westminster Abbey, and not the less famed St. Paul’s Lathedral,
its preachers of world-wide repute, its old historical buildings, the
Tower, with castles and ancient churches, its magnificent hotels
and picture galleries—in one word, London lingers in my mind
as the greatest centre of the world’s interest wherever my pilgrim
feet have trodden. Only a short time ago I read an American
visitor’s impressions of London, and may adapt them as my own:
“Pictorially, London,” he says, “means to me twilight films, a
minaretted sky of incomparable suggestiveness, and wavering
beauty, a grey monotone that rolls back the curtains of to-day, and
brings to the eye a majestic mediaeval vision. Long ago some-
one aptly described Boston not as a city but as a ‘state of mind.’
In a sense more specialized London is a state of mind.” How
this was proved in my case is shmvn by the impressions Which
Niagara produced on my mind when visiting there some time after.
I wrote some lines, which I think show that London seemed: to
me a state of mind rather than a city : ' t to
Here is a parable. I see
The dread which once came over me
In modern Babylon.
When first on© night I paced the street,
A voice of doom my ears did greet ;
It was the tramp of million feet—
Niagara rushing on.
And thus I went on to show, in several following stanzas, how
Niagara brought back that state of mind which found expression
in what London had been to me:
I saw tremendous force portrayed,
I saw and felt as one dismay’d,
When such great force cannot be stay’d,
And what might then appear.
Many other parts of England I have visited, and met with men
whom it has been one of the privileges of my life to have seen
and conversed with. For two weeks I was the guest of Lord
Nelson at Trafalgar. I was entertained by a clergyman in North-


hamptonshire (Canon Alderson), who was the brother-in-law of the
Marquis of Salisbury, then Prime Minister of England. This same
clergyman is now Bishop of Norwich if lam not mistaken. At
least, he was up to a recent date. I met Dr. Magee, whom Dean
Stanley described as “the greatest orator on the bench of Bishops.”
His sister had been a regular member and zealous worker of my
Melbourne St. John’s congregation, and I called to enquire about
her chiefly, for she had left Melbourne to return to her native
Ireland. Dr. Magee, who had been Dean of Cork, and fought
Gladstone’s Disestablishment Bill in a magnificent discourse when
he appealed to the English Church for help, in a sermon that is
a classic in our language. The text was taken from the Gospel
story, of where the fishermen on the Gallilean Lake signalled to
their fellow toilers to “Come over and help them.” Though cer-
tainly I would have been more in sympathy with the Grand Old
Man, I could not the less feel admiration for the brilliant and
scholarly churchman, Dr. Magee, then Bishop of Peterborough,
afterwards Archbishop of York. I can only say that I saw Glad-
stone. 'ies, I may say more. I heard him. It was the time
that “the traitor Piggott” had been run to earth, chiefly through
the powerful and successful advocacy of Parnell, by Lord Russell,
who soon after was Chief Justice of England. I saw what was
probably the first meeting of these two great men after the Piggott
denouement. They met in the House of Commons. From the
visitors’ gallery where I sat I could hear both their voices, though
I could not distinguish what they said. I sat in a prominent
placp, in the visitors’ gallery, and Gladstone’s eyes Avere fixed on
me jsjuccessively at intervals. I was dressed in my regular clerical
and probably he thought I was some clerical acquaint-
and appeared to me several times on the point of nodding
to me. The Secretary of State for the Colonies (Lord Knuts-
ford),_ through whose grace I was escorted to the place for “dis-
tinguished visitors,” I did not see, but a letter of introduction
from the Hon. Thos. Archer, then Agent-General for Queensland,
was “the open sesame” which gave me access to a seat among
“the Lords” and titled gentry, who, as a rule, only find their
way there. I sat close beside Earl Spencer, though I did not
know it till I met him a few days after in his country house, Al-
thorp, in Northamptonshire.
Exerter was my headquarters for some time, and here
for a couple of months I officiated for a most aristo-
cratic congregation at St. Leonard’s Church as locum tenens
for the Vicar, a Mr. Shelldon. I had been travelling in various
parts of England as deputation for the did Church" of England
Mission Society, and had still appointments for the Isle of Wight
and other parts, but if struck from “a bolt from the
bine.” I was confronted with the Colonial Church Act, which had
jiist been passed in the English Parliament, and I could not go on
till other formalities might have been got over. I found out when
it was too late that the difficulty could have been got over by going
into the province of the Archbishop of York. Indeed/ I had
already written to Archbishop Thompson of York, but being im-
petuous in my desire to get over to America and see that great


country, I did not receive his reply till I had reached Quebec, in
Canada. However, I was fully compensated for whatever depri-
vation that may have implied by my experiences of American and
Canadian life. Five or six years of travel and residence, north,
south, east, and west, gave me some wonderful experiences of the
good and the bad in American life. I hare stayed periods in
villages and small townships, and in cities of great size and mag-
nificence. I have been Chaplain for the Prisons of New York,
and have been an honoured guest in the drawing rooms and salons
of Uptown New York, among the exclusive circles of the Four
Hundred; and out west among the Mormons and cowboys and
Indians; I have been the guest of the rich chief Saltese, a lender
of money to white settlers, who a couple of years before had been
received with great honour by, as he put it, “the great white
father,” and who ever after dressed like President Cleveland,
and kept a carriage the exact replica of the President’s State
Carriage. I have seen him drive in the carriage as he went to
the Mission Station, where he kept a sort of town house—drove
to it every Friday evening; on Saturday attended to all his busi-
ness, for he was a great landlord; Saturday evening went to con-
fession ; Sunday morning to Mass, and in the afternoon back to
his home on the reservation. I have travelled in the States of
Washington, Idaho, Montana and Utah. I have visited the great
Salt Lake and City, where I saw the Beehive (a more capacious
residence than the White House), fitted up for the abode of Brig-
ham Young and his indefinite number of wives, while the beauti-
ful palace of Amelia, Brigham’s favorite wife, was close by on
the other side of the road. )fl , ( •
I was conducted by a Mormon Elder through the Tabern&cle,
to the Temple, through the large Mormon co-operative business
concerns. I dined by special invitation with the Chief
Federal Officer of the Excise, a leader of the Unitarian Society,
who was married to a daughter of Brigham Young (and she was
proud to own it) ;he had no sympathy for Mormonism. I also
dined with an ex-Bishop of the Mormon Church, an old Stafford-
shire peasant from Fingland, who had renounced Mormonism, and
became a Unitarian because he would not fulfil his polygamous
duties. I have mixed rip with the proud and highly-cultured so-
ciety of the garrison towns out west; for three months I officiated
at a garrison town. Here Uncle Sam’s soldiers are stationed to
keep recalcitrant Indians in awe, or to guard the gentiles against
outbursts of fanatical Mormons. I have attended at some Me-
thodist Conferences out west and seen for myself how closely
allied is the hallelujah of a camp meeting to the wild whoop of the
red man on the warpath. Over the Rockies and over the Cas-
cades across the wheat belts of the Palouse, the flats which
skirt the Columbia River, and the dense forests of Puget Sound,
and within view of the unexplored timber forests of Oregon have
I wended my way generally, preaching and lecturing and telling
the people about my own native Australia. But chiefly have I
travelled about the great civilised centres, not as a bird of pass-
age, but have sojourned for months and years in great cities. I


have preached in some of the largest Episcopal churches of New
York, before audiences which I may justly call immense. I have
spoken before some of the grandest men in the magnificent
Masonic Temple of 27th Street, New York, where I told
them what a great country Australia was, and how much Free-
masonry was doing to cement the bonds of brotherhood among
English-speaking- peoples. On another great occasion, when a
conference of Freemasons was held in Portland, Oregon, I spoke
’midst tumultuous applause at the free-and-easy gathering, where
I responded to a fraternal welcome. I stood once before a great
congregation in Philadelphia (the Quaker City), in the Church of
the Nativity, to preach on a special occasion. I was then one of
the Chaplains of the city prisons. I was to preach at the Vale-
dictory service, when the Incumbent, who had accepted
the position of Bishop out west, was to start on his long train
journey across the continent. 1 received directions to catch the
express train which would leave New York at 3. Shall I ever
forget that Sunday? I had already conducted three services, and
preached three times in New York City. At the House of Deten-
tion, Mulbery Street (where witnesses who cannot find bail are
detained), the New Tombs, to all “the bums” and “drunks” (often
about 200) of New York, arrested on Sunday; the Old Tombs—to
the common inmates —where frequently scholars and philosophers
who had come within the coils of the law, were my hearers. Then,
at 3 p.m.. I caught the express for Philadelphia, which never
halted till I reached Philadelphia, after 7 ; and at 7.30 I had robed
in the vestry, had just time to sit for a few minutes in the Chan-
cel and then, while “the hymn before sermon” was being sung 1
bad seconds for preparing and- calming my mind in a brief
devefjonal exercise in the pulpit, from where (I remember it so
without note or M.S., but with my small open pocket Bible,
I gave out my text, and looking to the little company who were
the next day to start on their long journey across the continent,
I repeated the w'ords from the concluding verses of the Ist lesson
of the evening’s service (Isaiah, 55 ch., 12 and 13 v., Revised Ver-
sion) : “Y"e shall go out with joy and be led forth with peace; the
mountains and the hills shall break before you into singing, and
all the trees of the field shall clap their hands. Instead of the
thorn shall come up the fir tree, and instead of the brier shall
come up the myrtle tree, and ,it shall be to the Lord for a name
for an everlasting sign that shall not be cut off.” With such a
text, in such a church, and before such a congregation, who could
not have been eloquent ? I can only describe the effect on the
congregation as electrical. I never realised how strong could be
the self-restraint of a multitude when they did not themselves
“break forth” into cheering, especially when I spoke of the beauti-
fying and unifying influences of those religious ideals and institu-
tions which bound England and America together in a common
language and in a common Christian brotherhood. This was dur-
ing the time when the Venezuelan trouble was brooding between
the Government of the United States and that of Great Britain,
and as I exclaimed in words somewhat like the following: “Cursed
be the tongue that is lifted up in council to promote strife be-


tween the two nations! Paralysed and withered be the hand
that through a servile press would sow the seeds of international
strife!”—the feeling of the great crowd before which I spoke be-
came sensibly intense, and I felt that in a well-ordered Church
I was never so near an outburst of enthusiastic applause. At
the close of the service an impromptu levee was forced on me as
I stood in my surplice at the foot of the pulpit steps. I con-
sider that I did more in addresses of this kind—never known of or
noticed in Australia—than legions of peripatetic lecturers on
whom tens of thousands of the taxpayers’ money have been squan-
dered in wasteful extravagance. For my work never a cent of
Government money was spent, and it lasted over five or six years.
I am confident it did much good for England and Australia, for in
Masonic Lodges, as well as churches and public halls my voice w r as
continually heard in advocacy of all those great interests which
bind together the English-speaking peoples.
My work for over three years—mostly all the time on the City
Mission in connection with the prisons—I have described through
the press or platform. I never spared myself, but in season and
out of season was ready to help my erring and suffering fellow
mortals. The Committee of the Society which I served had some
distinguished names, among them was Vanderbilt and Pierpont
Morgan, and its President (Rev. Dr. Brockholst Morgan) was a
man of distinction, holding a position similar to that of a Bishop.
At the annual meeting of the Society he singled me out specially
for praise for the work I had done in the prisons, and the annual
report made special reference to my ‘‘good work.” This was re-
cognised when I started to return to Australia, when a cheque of
over 200 dollars was presented to me by the Society, towards
which Bishop Potter (the Bishop of New York) 5O
dollars. Some time before the “New York World” (the popular
daily of the city), wrote thus about me and mv work: “He is a
'•lendid specimen of muscular Christianity, and much beloved by
the prisoners. Possessed of a remarkably fine voice, his sermons
reach to the furthest cell, and are listened to with an attention
which is tin expected.”
During my time in New York I formed the acquaintance of
one of the greatest men that America has ever produced—Phillips
Brooks, the great Boston preacher, the friend, and on his visits
to England, the guest of Queen Victoria, was the greatest man 1
ever met or heard. He had been brought up a Unitarian, hut he
and his four or five brothers, all conspicuous men physically and
intellectually, b°came Epicopah’an clergymen, but were grand
men. Arthur Brooks I had already formed an acouaintance with,
and he, at Whitaker’s rooms, where we met, introduced me to his
brother, the Bishop. I had already heard the Bishop. Such an
orator! Never man spake like this' man—at least in modern
times. He fulfilled Henry Ward Beecher’s idea of a public
speaker, as a. man who stands on a platform and thinks aloud on
his feet. Tne love, reverence, and admiration which naturally
grow up in one’s mind for such a man can only be understood in
becoming acquainted with him. He was a bachelor, and


a prince among the knights of purity. A man of a magnifi-
cent physique, whose gift of chastity was such that never a word
of suspicion was uttered, and he might have said with Tennyson’s
Knight of the Round Table, “My strength is as the strength of
ten because my heart is pure.” And yet this man was a Socialist
of the true Christ-like pattern. A great mystic; a transcendental
philosopher and idealist. How sordid the materialistic philoso-
phies and mere secularities appeared, and how childish and stupid
mere miraculous beliefs or supernatural theories seemed as you
listened to this man’s great thoughts. “He showed the goodness
of real greatness and the greatness of real goodness.” These, his
own words when delivering the funeral oration over the dead body
of Abraham Lincoln, apply to himself. He had only been a
Bishop for one year, when he was cut off by that fatal scourge
of diphtheria. The old nurse of over 90 who had nursed him as
an infant, was with him to the last. To her he said in the last
words he uttered, “Mary, I am going home.” At the funeral
service, attended by perhaps the largest throng ever assembled
in Boston, were people of all ranks, Christians and non-Christians,
who united in singing—
“G God, our help in ages past,
Our hope for years to come.
Our shelter from the stormy blast,
And our Eternal Home.”
Two other men of world fame as public speakers I also met
and heard—Robert Collier and Robert G. Ingersoll. The loving
sweetness of Robert Collier’s utterances, as I heard him, from the
pulpit of an Uptown Church, were to me most refresh-
ing and inspiriting. Ingersoll, as he stood on the platform of
the hall of Cooper Union Institute, gave one of his wittiest and
most brilliant speeches. The occasion was a large gathering of
coloured people assembled to hear Frederick Douglas giving an
address on his mission to Hayti, where the had been Ambassador
for the United States. Chauncey Depew was in the chair, who
has been called tlie Gladstone of American orators.* He and
Ingersoll got into a little dispute on the Church’s work in relation
to slavery. Chauncey Depew defended the Church, but it took
him all his time to hold his own against the great agnostic. A
great hit was made by Depew when he mentioned the work of
Henry Ward Beecher. What thunders of applause when that
great man’s name was mentioned! And still more when his
famed sister, Mrs. Beecher Stowe, was referred to as the authoress
of “Uncle Tom’s Cabin”! It was a great occasion in my career
when on the same evening I heard Depew, Ingersoll, and Douglas,
the last-named, who had been born in slavery, became free and a
noted abolitionist, and lived to celebrate many anniversaries of
Abraham Lincoln’s great work in emancipating his coloured breth-
ren.
After my New York period I came out west, where I spent a
good deal of time in lecturing, first on Australia and Australian
subjects, and then generally on political questions connected with


Bryan’s candidature for the Presidency, on© of the most stirring
periods since the war of the rebellion in the United States. By
this time my churchmanship was of a very negligible quantity,
but I think I was more of a Christian than ever, for I took up
Socialistic principles and advocated the cause of the Populist
Party. My experiences as a prison chaplain had hardened my
heart against C'hurchism and Conservatism of every kind, and
had developed my humanitarian instincts. I had while in New
York received a bias against orthodoxy in connection with the
controversy that arose out of Ingersoll’s famed Christmas sey
mon. Not from anything that great man ever said or wrote,
but because of the spirit in which bigots attacked this lover of
humanity, I took a thorough dislike to Protestant orthodoxies
However, whatever the particular cause or causes may have been,
my tendencies had set in too strongly for too long a time in the
direction of honesty as against intellectual subserviency and cant.
I still held the position of one of the Bishop’s Examining Chap-
lains with a sort of roving commission throughout the eastern
part of the State of Washington, but a few months brought my
church career to a close. When 1 began writing verses attack-
ing the orthodox, it was a sign of what was coming. I had already
seen into the hollowness of the Parkhurst Crusade against certain
evils in our social system, and that insight was illuminating as to
the extent to which churches were responsible for those evils. In
the light of the Crucified One of ages back, I saw who were the
crucified now, and I saw who the crucifiers were. I saw them
robed in the Church’s vestments wearing the cross of gold, singing
anthems before high altars as of old, and making long prayers at
street corners, as did “the generation of vipers” whom Jesus cas-
tigated and flagellated, “Ye scribes and Pharisees hypocrites'” I
saw how those who crucified the Saviour long ago were still cruci-
fying the saviours of to-day, and I wrote;
Not on a cross of wood with nails,
Nor by the rabble’s madden’d cry;
But on a cross which never fails
To make its victims surely die.
That cross is now a cross of gold,
And not of wood as was of old.
That was fully six months before Bryan, of the Democratic
Convocation won his candidature for the Presidency by declaring
to the crucifiers of our day—
“You shall not crucify humanity on a Cross of Cold.’’
He may never have read my verses, though I know they were
published not so far away from his home at Lincoln, Nebraska,
but the warning has gone out. “A solemn voice is sounding,” not
only “startling all who come to pray,” but reminding us all that
“Tim© is flying ; time is flying ;
Every creed grows old at last.”


With myself converted to real Christianity and Socialism, 1
came back to Australia, where Pharisaism and Churchism are
more strongly entrenched than even in England, and naturally i
came to my crucifixion. I never had a desire for martyrdom, and
never prayed, “0 my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass
from me,” and I am afraid I have not had the grace to say,
“Nevertheless, not my will but Thine be done.” I did not even
desire to be a saint, but I made one great mistake. I thought I
ccidd be a Christian and remain in the Church. These wretched
modern Pharisees who have been asking “ Can actors be Chris-
tians P” “Can publicans be saved?” “Can Priests go to Hea-
ven?” are now hearing another language from the reformers of
to-day: “Is it consistent to remain in the Church at all?” “Will
you not damn your honest soul by professing creeds in which
yon do not believe?” “Must not those who wish to save their
souls come out of the Church?” These questions are being asked.
I have tried to think that advanced ideas and modernist profes-
sions are compatible with the old systems, but the impossibility
(for me at least) has been forced upon me by Right Rev. Fathers
in God who, off duty, wear the richest of broadcloth, and when
officiating are “clothed in purple” (and other gaudy colours), as
well as the finest of “fine linen.” Certainly they “fare sump-
tuously every day” if appearances indicate anything. Some of
ns are, impatient to see pur ideals realized, but “the wheels of the
gods though they move slowly, move surely, and “they grind to
powder.” Jnstice must triumph.
Though crush’d to earth shall rise again,
The eternal years of God are hers ;
Put error wounded writhes in chains,
And dies amidst her worshippers.
By the constitution of our country and the laws of our States
I should as a clergyman, though unattached, have been allowed to
earn an honest livelihood. This has not been allowed me, not even
by the young boastful Premier, who promised me justice. lam
a living example of one who has been “crucified on a cross of gold.”
T was anxious to tell the story of ray life, and had gone on fairly
with a few chapters, but was abruptly cut short, and thus driven
to do what the press would not do for me. I conclude by quot-
ing from some “Rambling Rhymes,” printed by me some time
ago, which may sum up sufficient for the purpose of bringing “the
career of a cornstalk” to a closei I have done the best with the
material at my disposal, though I have given but about one-third
of what X have written...


Easier were death than the woe and the shame,
Which Judges decreed to fair honest name,
The sage, Socrates, when the poison he drank,
Saw cause for his prejudiced judges to thank,
For had they been content to then ostracize
Ling’ring were worse than rapid demise.
Bad enough is the cross of wood with the nails,
When blood issues forth and vitality fails,
The pain is acute, and the time is but brief,
The end’s soon there, and the endless relief,
Biit when crucified fast to the cross of rich gold,
It’s far away worse than the hard wood of old.
These pimdits of law did scholars amuse,
When claiming “Psychometry” was the abuse
Of words, or yet of some new fangl’d thing.
Which threaten’d the English of our Lord the King,
And e’en most doubtfully scann’d they the page
Of Webster, the rule and guide of this age.
They scann’d, and they search’d these judges so high
’Neath S. o’er pages, they had a good try, lfaH
They fuss’d, and they fum’d, until it was shown,
We spell Psychic with P, thus the Greek word was known.
Some putrid old chestnuts in rust and in mould,
They accounted as treasures worth far more than gold.
Pilate and Herod made friends on the day,
When prompted by Jews a Jesus to slay,
The Roman and Jew in this were combin’d,
The Good Man to kill, and then they were blind
To their petty quarrels, and so they agreed
In that “blackest of jobs” to be in the lead.
And here was a work of a lesser dark hue,
The Christians for once were one with the Jew,
Like nagging fish fags they join’d in a scold,
The old man of grey was scathingly told,
He was sentenc’d to worse than if doomed to be shot
From volley by squad, more furiously hot.
Than fire at the stake, for nothing can match
Slow torture, —in short the more rapid despatch
Is pleasanter far compar’d to the mode,
Which burdens life’s way, or roughens its road
Which (hear me, O Jew!) old Shylock complain’d
Takes life, when “the means” of the life are retain'd.


Before closing this story I wish to add an Appendix or two.
Appendix A. Australian Nationalism. —I may say that 1
have always been a great advocate for Australian Nationalism.
My lecture on “Federation,” 34 years ago in the Melbourne
Athenaeum (Thos. Bent, afterwards Speaker, and later Premier
of Victoria, in the chair) proved that. My address in the Mel-
bourne Town Hall on the annulling by Earl Derby of Sir Thos.
Mcllraith’s action in annexing New Guinea, proved how my
patriotic instinct# against British interference with Australia’s
concerns had been stirred up. 1 was (and haVe always been) in
favour of Australian Home Buie as against British jingoism and
Imperialism. We should, I think, elect our own Governors, even
our own Governor-General, instead of accepting England’s ap-
pointees, who have been infinitely the inferiors of our own
leading Statesmen. Close alliance with the Mother Land, not
impossib.e incorporation, is our true attitude. We have been too
long the exploiting ground in Church and State for adventurous
and aristocratic Britishers. I confess lam in many respects dis-
appointed with federation. We have no need to fear invasion by
Asiatic races. Let us develop our resources, and extend our
commercial relations with races of our own kin. —Germany and
America included—and we need never fear the effete races of the
East. We do not require a large army or navy while we are an
industrial and commercial people. But if we are to be made
the prey of the exploiter, at home or from abroad—-the creatures
of combines and monopolies—we shall not even then be
dragooned into national defence by the lords of Capitalism.
The defensive forces that are merely “compulsory” and “hire-
ling” will never effectually defend the nation no matter how well
trained. I confess that during the long years that I have been
kept in poverty and destitution I should have been found wanting
in patriotism sufficient to defend my country against a foreign
foe. How could any man fight or die for a country that -does
not give him the means of livelihood? The compulsory system
might be logical if conditions were just, but considering the un-
just and unequal state of affairs in our whole social system, the
only rational deduction is a volunteer defence. Let those who
are so very much in love with aristocracy and monopoly fight
for the defence of those most interested. If the man on starvation
wages who cannot maintain a home or family is willing to shoulder
a gun for a boarding house, which capitalism grudging allows him,
no one should hinder him, but others similarly situated should
not b© forced to fight. “England expects every man to do his
duty.” She does not force him. I am here reminded of an ex-
perience of travel in England. I was the guest of the late Lord
Nelson at Trafalgar in Wiltshire. He was the grand nephew of
the great Admiral. In passing, let me say I was taken by him
into the room where the relics of the celebrated Admiral were
kept. Among them was an arrangement in semi-circular shape


of the flags by which Nelson’s last message was despatched.
Originally it read; “England confides.” But there was no flag
for confides. He then ordered “But it expects;” and when told
there was no “flag for expects/’ he commanded, “well then
“spell it.” This I had from the late Lord Nelson himself. But
among many other of his reminiscences was this: He sat in the
House of Lords as a young man, on the seat next to the Duke
of Wellington, when the aged hero rose to deliver his last speech
in the House of Lords. A discussion had arisen on the military
estimates for the year, and something had been said about
Waterloo. Instantly the old Duke rose to his feet and in his
deeply sonorous voice exclaimed—-“ Waterloo! Waterloo! A battle
of giants! but if I had had my veterans who were out fighting
the rebels in the American colonies, I would have made much
shorter work of , them.” This gave me great food for thought.
If Wellington’s veterans could be defeated by the patriotic farmers
of the American Revolution, might rve not, if patriotic, defend
our country against any possible invading foes? Imagine what
could be the patriotism of any country where its chief rulers
would be imported, and its own sons have to stand by. In a
very degenerate age of ancient Greece, Lord Byron recounts
this to the credit of the Greeks: ‘ ‘Their tyrants were their
countrymen.” Our Governors, Bishops, and Archbishops have
not even been our countrymen.
Shortly after my stay with Lord Nelson, at Trafalgar, I visited Cam-
bridgeshire, and for a couple of weeks had my head quarters at oSL John’s
College, Cambridge University, the guest of one of the Proctors. ! q In many
different parts round I preached and addressed large congregations of
people on Australian subjects. Often during the mornings in the short
interval after breakfast that professors, tutors etc., spent in the large
breakfast room, I interested, and think astonished them by narrations of
my Australian experiences. At one of my meetings I commenced my ad-
dress by quoting the old German proverb, “ Hinter dem berge sind duch
leute ” (Behind the hills are also people). This was at a place called
Faversham. In giving the meaning I said “No doubt you will understand
the proverb when I render it in English, as the Irishman said when asked
if he understood Italian —‘Faith I do, if it’s spoken in Irish.’" There
was not a smile from one in the audience, excepting the gentlemanly
chairman (a Rev and learned Professor of St. John, who was also Incum-
bent of the Parish), who gave me a polite nod. Some months after I
repeated the joke in beginning a lecture at a town called "Warwick, in the
Orange Co , New York State. There was an ‘immediate outburst of
laughter. I remarked after the lecture to the chairman (T. P. Fowler,
President of the New York and Western Ontario Rail Road Co.) on the
difference between the English and American audience, and, in reply to
my remark, “ the English audience never saw the joke,” he at once re-
plied, “Oh, yes they did, and if you had gone there a week later you
would have found them all laughing.”
Appendix B,—Some Personal Incidents and Anecdotes Worthy of
Being Recorded.
Some events in my career I have purposely omitted because
they might involve recollections of those dead and gone, and


especially by those near and dear to me. But some incidents
which I have inadvertently omitted I will briefly summarise here
(1) When I was the Minister in charge of St. John’s Church
Melbourne, I was often invited by the Rev. Dr. Bromby, who
was the preacher there to take his place and that meant generally
an exchange of pulpits with him. That in itself was complimen-
tary, but later on the Doctor and his vestry unanimously elected
me the evening preacher for St. Patti’s. I was on my way to visit
friends in Queensland when I received intelligence of this by wire
at the boundary town, Albury. I accepted, and in due course re-
turned to Melbourne, but when I called at the Deanery, I was in-
formed by the Doctor that Bishop Moorehouse had vetoed the ap-
pointment. (2) There is also a point I wish to be clear upon, as
showing to my friends the wrong that had been done to me in a
critical period of my life. When I was requested to accept an in-
cumbency in the Ballarat diocese which was then attached to a
vacant Archdeaconry, I distinctly and clearly accepted it on
condition that I should be the Archdeacon. I was appointed, took
up Archdeacon’s work, was paid the emoluments of the office, and
after two years politely informed that the Bishop (Dr. Thornton,
now Assistant Bishop of London) had others view r s. This was the
beginning of my alienation from Church work, and will serve as
an illustration of the worth of a Bishop’s word. (3) During the
period of my acting Archdeaconship the great honor was con-
ferred on me of being appointed to preach the sermon at the Conse-
cration of old All Saints’ Cathedral. This will show' how I stood. I
did preach the sermon to a very large congregation, and in spite of
being harassed by officious interruptions by the Bishop while
in the pulpit, I preached a sermon which won the approbation of
men of^ great intelligence, and the unbounded praise of the press.
After Breaking with the Bishop I accepted a leading position in
a nonconformist body in Melbourne, which from a variety of
opposing circumstances I could not maintain ; then having spent
a year in journalistic work already mentioned, I found my way
to England, when I did lecturing and preaching work in several
countries in different parts of England, for the o d Church of
England Missionary Society. This was in financial and other
■ways so successful that on good authority (if an old Rev. friend
now a Professor of Hebrew at Oxford is a good authority) I was
informed that I was likely to be called upon to preach the Anni-
versary Sermon of the Society at Westminster Abbey. He in a
kind w r ay warned me to “be prepared” for that, as the Society’s
Secretary had informed him it was so intended. (5) After reach-
ing New York I took a few week’s work at the Church of the
Ascension, Brooklyn, and upon leaving, a purse of dollars w r as
presented to me in connection with which a very extravagant
eulogy was pronounced in which I was compared to Henry Ward
Beecher. But then I knew I was never in the same street with
that great man (only then recently deceased) who was perhaps
the greatest preacher America has ever produced; though cer-
tainly later on in an inland part of New York State an Editor
of a newspaper in characteristic Americanism said: “I really do
like your style of oratory better than Beecher’s, of whose Church
for five years I was a member.” But as we say in Australia he


toay have been pulling my leg. (6) When on my way to take
temporary duty at Quebec I had to change trains at Montreal.
1 knew that the sister of one dear to me (dead and gone) had been
living here. I enquired of the licensee of the hotel where I put
up, who at once informed me all about this lady, and gave me
the information that she was now the wife of Professor Donald,
of the famed McGill University. I found her without any trouble,
and of my most pleasant experiences in America were the few
days I spent in her house. But with a sad heart she informed
me of her brother in Queensland of whom she had not heard
for years, and thought he must have been,killed by the blacks.
Tire next few days found me the guest of Bishop Williams, the
Anglican Bishop of Quebec, who had been in the midst of reading
the missionary work of the Jesuit Fathers among the Indians
in the days of early settlement. The Bishop spoke in terms of
admiration of their work, and gave me a sketch of the books
he had been reading. Next Sunday I began a ministry of nearly
one year at Portneuf, not far from Quebec, in a little Church on
the banks of the mighty St. Lawrence River. I took for my
subject the introduction of Christianity into Europe, as recorded
in Acts XVI., where we read of Paul going down to the river
side near Phillippi and preaching “to the women who resorted
thither.” I referred to myself preaching by “the river side,”
the mighty stream flowing by the spot in which we were as-
sembled, and compared the progress of Christianity on the
Western Continent to that which had been the result of Paul’s
first sermon. I did not confine myself to any particular form of
Christianity, but I spoke of the mighty organisation of Roman
Catholicism, and the self-denying labours of the Jesuit Mission-
aries on that Continent, as I had heard from Bishop Williams.
There were several English-speaking French Catholics in my
Church, and they were greatly pleased. They informed their
Priest of my liberality, and all round the district spread the fame
of that discourse. Next day I received an invitation to visit a
Mr. Walsh (one of the few men there who spoke English) who
had heard of me and my preaching. I entered his house, and
saw him sitting on a chair with his foot bandaged resting on
another chair. “You seem to be an invalid, or have you met
with an accident?” I queried. And he then informed m© that he
had just returned from Australia, had gone down to the timber
yard where he had been formerly employed, and that in walking
over some flooring he saw a heap of saw-dust, and kicked it with
his foot to scatter it, when immediately after he saw his foot
flying in the air. Beneath the heap of sawdust there a
treacherous circular saw r wdiich severed his foot with a lightning’s
rapidity. He then w-ent on; “I think I have only met one man
of your name, and that was out in Queensland, Australia. He
was my last boss.” I was enabled to inform him that the man
he had met w r as my brother. Then he handed me a book on the
“Industries of Queensland,” and pointed me to a picture of a
saw mill on the Logan River, with a laige number of men and
bullock teams and drays loaded with timber. And indicating the
central figure he informed me “that was my boss before I went
to work for your brother.” And sure enough there was the


brother of my lady friend whom I had met at Montreal. He
kindly gave me the picture, and that very day I posted a letter
to the sister, which she received with much surprise and joy.
I never felt more the force of the aphorism, “Truth is stronger
that fiction.” (7) I have not mentioned my visit to the Taber-
nacle and Temple of Mormonism at Salt Lake City. The first
I entered and heard the proverbial pin drop across the great
space of the building—the cause being some peculiarity in the
acoustic properties of the building. The Temple I could only
gaze at from outside—a building larger than St. Paul’s—sur-
mounted by the Angel Moroni, gilded (the Angel who led Joe
Smith to the discovery of gold plates) and with a large trumpet
held in his right hand in the attitude of blowing it. My un-
sanctified gentile feet were not permitted to enter the courts
of this Holy Temple (?) but from what I heard, rites and cere-
monies, councils and conferences, baptisms and sacramental feasts,
and plural marriages in defiance of federal laws, were held .or
celebrated in that magnificent structure. (8) On the eve of my
final return to Australia I delivered a lecture in verse and rhyme
on Australia at Spokane, which had been my home for some time.
My lectures and talks pn advocacy of Bryan’s candidature had
produced a favourable impression, and when I came out of the
lecture hall, a tall gentleman of strong personality (apparently)
accosted me. He enquired, “are you quite decided about return-
ing to Australia?” He had just informed me that he was the
President of the Populist Party. I to’d him that “nothing could
keep me now.” He regretted it, as he had a commission especially
to interview me. and to say that if I would stay the party
would nominate me for the vacancy, soon to be, of Senator to the
Congress. When travelling in New Zealand some months later,
I received intelligence that the man nominated by the party had
been elected. I made my own inferences, but I did not regret
coming back to Australia, for then I did not anticipate the brutal
treatment I have from first to last received in my native land.
(9) When I left to return finally, the Bishops of Spokane and
New York (1 had asked the latter for a line up to date) gave me
splendid letters, hut when I landed at Perth, W.A., a man who
was Bishop there—l should say who was vastly my inferior in
many ways—refused to have anything to say to me concerning
Church work. Shortly after I took a lecturing tour through New
Zealand, and was invited by Bishop Neville to preach in his
Cathedral at Dunedin. I held forth on “the Vision of the In-
visible.” This was the last occasion on which I preached in a
Church of England. I was anxious to remain in the Church, but
the antagonism of the Bishops prevented that, and as I always
have had (in my career as a public person) an ambition to be a
preacher, I went wherever I could find a pulpit or platform. 1
took an engagement in Sydney at the Hyde Park Unitarian Church
and having completed this, I started for New York, where one of
two vacant positions had been offered me. I was on my way
and reached London, when I was overtaken with the same sick-
ness to which (after 12 or 15 years) I have again been subject,
while ivriting these reminiscences. Whether my career is closing
or not, or whether it is only a passing effect of intense emotion


(for even in writing this book the bitter past has been recalled)
I do not know, and seriously do not much care. As regards xny
mental attitude in relation to the future, I will use the words of
the poet Whittier—
I know not where His islands lift
Their fronded palms in air;
I only know I cannot drift
Beyond His love and care
And so beside the silent sea
I wait the muffled oar;
No harm can come from Him to me.
On ocean or on shore
Is there such a thing as continuity of existence after death r
It must be “a change for the better,” and if not it is eternal
sleep; it is rest; and so it is still true “He giveth His beloved
sleep.” I hope in “the night of my death” to see “a star,” for
“listening love” has long enabled me to hear “the rustling of a
wing.”
I


CANBERRA,
Our National Capital.
Named by Her Excellency Lady Denham, wife of the
Governor-General.
“The stone which the builders rejected is become the head
of the corner/’—Hebrew Psalter.
Proclaim the name from off the scroll,
Let the wild burr of sound be heard.
With flag, and band, and big drum’s roll,
And “cooee,” let all hearts be stirr’d •
Let woods and hills with echoing sound,
.Reverberate ’ mid rocks on high,
O’er dales, and downs, the country round.
Let there be heard the thund’ring cry
“Canberra;’’ wake ye sumb’ring dead,
Rise from your beds of loam and clay,
In war-like march the plain o’erspread,
Come forth to hail th’ auspicious day ;
O shades, of ail the ancient tribes,
Ye phantom armies rise and greet
The fair white goddess, who ascribes,
Your primal name the word most meet;
Most meet the name, which pioneer
First heard from black man long ago,
On this same spot, the camp ground near.
As yonder homestead still may show;
Canberra, ta’en from black man’s vogue,
Is chang’d to-day to classic name,
As the great Burns who rais’d a brogue
From rugged Scotch, to rythmic fame;
This “stone” from ’mong the way-side rocks
“Rejected by the builders” proud,
We place on high, the chief of blocks,
Exultant with “rejoicings loud.”
J. H. L. Z.
12th, 1913.
March


BRITISH ANTARCTIC EXPEDITION, T§lo.
Victoria Street,
London, S.W.,
July 4th, 1913.
Dear Sir,
Commander Evans wishes me to thank you very much for
kindly forwarding your poem on our lost comrades in the South,
and also to thank you for the kind sentiments expressed in yotir
note.
Believe me,
Yours faithfully,
J. H. MATHER,
Secretary to Commander Evans.
The Rev. J. H, L. Zillmann,
56 Eveleigh Street,
Redfern, Sydney, N.S.W.
Besides the foregoing, I have received many encouraging
commendations of this endeavour to record something of the past;
among these were a pleasant letter from His Honour Judge
Docker, and, not the least, a most friendly letter from my esteemed
friend, Mr. W. M. Hughes, late Federal Attorney-General, in
which he writes—(l take the liberty of giving his letter in fud) :
THE PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH.
House of Representatives,
January 24, 1914.
My Dear Dr. Zillmann,
I owe you many apologies for not sooner writing you. I hope
your hook will soon be out—if it is not already published—and
that it will be a great success.
I am sure you must have a great story to tell. Your life
has been a full one; you have laboured hard and long. Your mind
is richly stored with the gleanings of the years and reflections
thereon. I wish you well now and always, and enclose my mite
towards your venture.
I remain.
Yours very truly,
W. M. HUGHES.




