

CARE OF MOTHER
AND CHILD
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HOME AFFAIRS, MATERNAL
AND CHILD WELFARE, QUEENSLAND.


Registered at the General Post Office, Brisbane,
for transmission by post as a book.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by
Queensland Government Printer.


A Country Clinic.
A Railway Clinic.
A Metropolitan Clinic.
II


Foreword
This book has been prepared for the mothers of Queensland by
officers of the Department of Health and Home Affairs.
My officers tell me that most of the troubles of babies and small
children come from want of knowledge.
For twenty-seven years the Government of the State has been
extending its activities for the assistance of mothers and the safety of
babies—the future men and zvomen of Queensland —through a network
of Baby Clinics and Maternal and Child Welfare centres established all
over the State, and by means of pamphlets, articles in the newspapers,
the railway car, or “Baby Train,” and a Correspondence Service.
The first “Queensland Mothers’ Book” was prepared by Dr. A.
Jefferis Turner, zvhose long and devoted services were much appreciated
by the Government.
The book has been revised and the methods of feeding have been
carefully considered and approved by the State Nutritional Advisory
Board, and are recommended accordingly as standard methods for
Queensland.
It is my earnest hope that the book will be of the greatest value to
babies and toddlers and to their mothers, and will serve as a further step
in our programme of health and social reform throughout the State.
[?]
August, 1947.
III


Preface
By A. FRYBERG, M.B., B.S., D.P.H., D.T.M.,
Director-General of
Health and Medical Services.
This book is written mainly for mothers. Only those methods have
been described which are considered safe in the hands of a mother who is
caring for her own child in the city or perhaps in the far outback. These
are all methods that are founded upon experience in the feeding and care
of infants, and children up to school age, gained during the last twenty-
six years in the Government Clinics throughout Queensland.
Any mother who desires further information or special advice can
get it if she will call on the nurse in charge of the nearest Baby Clinic, or
Maternal and Child Welfare Centre, or if she zvill write to her, or to —
The Director of Maternal and Child Welfare,
C/- Training Centre, 184 St. Paul's Terrace, Brisbane.
MOST OF THE TROUBLES OF BABIES AND SMALL CHILDREN
COME FROM WANT OF KNOWLEDGE. IT IS FAR BETTER
TO BE WISE BEFOREHAND THAN TO BE SORRY AFTER-
WARDS.
Give the book a fair chance. Sit down and read it now. Then put
it away carefully where you can find it when you want it.
It may save your baby from suffering; it may even save his life.
Remember, too, that from the Director of Maternal and Child
Welfare {Dr. H. C. Murphy'), down to the most junior nurse
on the staff, all officers of this Service are willing to give you the benefit
of the accumulated knowledge of the Department to the best of their
ability.




Contents.
Page.
Objects of Baby Clinics and Child Welfare Centres xi.
Essentials for Baby’s Health .. .. 1-5
Environment. Cleanly Surroundings. The House.
Refuse. Yards, Sinks, &c. Food. What Every Baby
Needs. Fresh Air, Water. Food. Clothing. Bathing.
Muscular Exercise and Sensory Stimulation. Warmth.
Regularity of all Habits. Cleanliness. Mothering.
Management. Rest and Sleep.
Feeding During First Two Years .. .. .. .. 6-47
Breast Feeding. Advantages of Breast Feeding. The
Feeding of the Newborn Baby. The Needs of the
Nursing Mother. Vegetables and Fruit. Your Daily
Bread. Alcohol. Smoking. Rest. Bowels. Worry and
Excitement. Difficulties of Breast Feeding. Difficul-
ties Which May Lead to Early Weaning— (a) In the
Mother. (6) In the Child, (c) Faulty Management.
Why Breast Feeding Seems to Disagree. The Baby is
Overfed or Fed too Often. The Baby is not Satisfied.
To increase the Supply of Breast Milk. Complementary
Feeding. Feeding Table for Complementary Feeding.
Signs and Symptoms of Underfeeding as Compared
with Overfeeding. The Baby has an Over-excitable
Stomach. The Feeding of Twins. The Premature Baby.
Prevention of Chilling. Feeding is Very Important.
Prevention of Infection. Avoidance of Handling.
Artificial or Unnatural Feeding. Introduction.
Measurements. Method of Using Artificial Food.
Artificial Feeding Mixtures. Whey. Whey-Milk
Mixtures. Milk and Water Mixtures. Amount of
Food Required by the Average Baby Fed Artificially
Emulsion. Fruit and Vegetable Juices. Care of Cow’s 1
Milk. Method for Preparing Modified Milk. Dried
Milks. Goat’s Milk. Prescription for Goat’s Milk.
Lactic Acid Milk. Peptonised Milk. Condensed Milk
Proprietary or Patent Poods. Practical Points in
Bottle Feeding. Some Types of Feeding Bottle in
Use. Utensils Required for Artificial Feeding. Baby’s
Food While Travelling. Methods of Introducing ,a
More Varied Diet Into the Feeding of Breast Fed an#
Bottle or Unnaturally Fed Infants. Weaning. Weaning
Table. 10 p.m. Feeding. Guide to the Artificial
Feeding of Babies After the Normal Weaning Period.
Summary of Infant Feeding During the First Year.
Feeding during the Second Year.
Baby’s Bath, Bed, and Bowels .. .. 48-54
Baby’s Bath. Baby’s Bed. Pillows and Mattresses.
Sleep. Why Babies and Young Children Do Not Sleep.
Why Do Babies Cry? The Bowels. Constipation in
Babies.
VII


Page.
Yodr Child’s Teeth .. .. .. .. .. .. 55-60
Foundations. Teething. Formation of Good Teeth.
How Decay Spreads in a Tooth. How to Clean the
Teeth. Preservation of Good Teeth.
Some Common Errors in Baby Management .. .. 61-65
How and Why They Are Harmful. Feeding Baby
During the First Two Days of Life. Giving Baby a
Dummy. Omitting to Put Baby to the Breast Eegularly
in the First Two Days. Night Feeding. Giving Castor
Oil. Keeping the Breast for the Night. Thinking
that if Baby is Not Thriving it is Because the Mother’s
Milk Does Not Agree. Thinking that if Baby Vomits
After the Breast he Should be Weaned. Regarding
Leakage of Milk Prom the Breasts as a Proof of Ample
or Over-Supply. Thinking that Mother’s Milk and
Artificial Food Cannot be Given Together. Regarding
One Cow’s Milk as Best for an Artificially Fed Infant.
Thinking that if Pregnancy Recurs the Mother’s Milk
Will Poison Baby. Regarding the Return of Menstrua-
tion as a Reason for Weaning. The Patting or Jogging
of Baby. The Cleaning of Baby’s Mouth.
Baby’s Progress .. .. .. .. 66-70
Milestones. Weight. Table of Average Weights and
Heights. Weight Chart. Record of My Child’s
Progress During the First Two Years. Notes.
The Training of the Child .. .. .. . . .. 71-77
Birth and New Environment. Origin of Character.
Formation. Ridicule. Fear. Overstimulation. Imita-
tion. Obedience. Truthfulness and Honesty. Jealousy.
Temper Tantrums. Regular Habits. Bad Habits.
Thumb-sucking. Thigh-rubbing. Dirt-eating. Nail-
biting. Bed-wetting. Play and Work. Sex Instruc
tion. The Child Who is Backward in Learning.
The Prevention op Disease 78-80
Infection Spread by Coughing, Sneezing, Smearing,
Infection Spread by Contamination of Food. Careful
Handling. Closets. Flies. Infection Spread by Insect
Hosts. Infection by Worms.
Sick Babies 81-100
What to do for Sick Babies if Skilled Advice is Not
Available. Care of the Head. Nits and Lice. Care
of Eyes. Care of the Mouth. Swollen Breasts.
Respiratory System. Adenoids. “Colds.” Sore
Throat. Croup. Diphtheria. Bronchitis. Digestive
System. Thrush. Ulceration of the Mouth. Colic.
Diarrhoea and Dysentery. Prolapse of the Lower End
of the Bowel. Rupture or Hernia. Rupture of the
Navel or Umbilical Hernia. Rupture of the Groin
or Inguinal Hernia. Strangulated Hernia. Worms.
Threadworms. Causes and Treatment of Threadworms.
Hookworms. Causes and Treatment of Hookworms.
General Diseases. Rickets. Scurvy. Pink Disease.
Lead Poisoning. Anaemia. The “Blue Baby.”


Sick Babies— continued. Page.
Bashes. Non-contagious Bashes. Erj'thema or Red-
ness of the Skin. Prickly-heat. ‘ ‘ Cradle Cap. ’ ’ Insect
Bites. Hives or Nettle-rash. Chafing. Napkin Bash.
Eczema. Contagious Rashes. Impetigo or School Sores.
Scabies or Itch. Ringworm. Rashes Associated With
Infectious Diseases. Measles. German Measles. Scarlet
Fever. Chicken Pox. Infectious Diseases Without a
Rash. Diphtheria. Whooping Cough. Mumps. Table
of Infectious Diseases.
Some Emergencies .. ~ .. .. .. .. 101-104
Burns or Scalds. Choking. Convulsions. Cuts. Things
in the Ear. Things in the Eye. Things in the Nose.
Hard Things Swallowed. Poisons. Treatment of
Poisons. Bleeding from Ears or Nose.
Preparation or Food 105-112
Helpful Hints for the Nursery Cook. Choice of Food.
Cooking of Food. Simple Recipes.
The Child From Two to Five Years —General Manage-
ment 113-116
The Importance of Care and Management. Periodic
Examination. Co-operation. Achieving Independence.
Toys. Playmates. Gaining Confidence. Training for
Citizenship. Character Formation.
The Child From Two to Five Years —Feeding .. .. 117-123
Three Meals a Day. Not Forcing Children to Eat.
Sweets. Fresh Foods. Milk. Fruit. Vegetables.
Tinned Foods. Vitamins. Wholemeal Bread and Wheat-
germ-meal Bread. Wheatgerm and Bran. Biscuits.
Menus —Breakfast, Dinner, Tea.
The Food op School Children .. .. .. 124
Sandwiches and their Fillings.
Western Difficulties .. .. .. .. .. .. 125,126
Canned Fruits and Fruit Juices. Goat’s Milk. Sprouted
Cereals. Native Plants Used for Food.
Economical Housekeeping , .. 127,128
Advice Regarding the Buying and Cooking of Food.
Record op My Child’s Progress From Two to Five Years 129-134
Notes.
Index 135-144


Objects of the Baby Clinics and Welfare
Centres.
1. To advise expectant mothers in matters regarding their own
health and that of their babies before and after birth.
2. To visit all newborn infants within their districts so far as
possible; to distribute leaflets and invite the mothers to visit the
Clinics.
3. To advise by letter mothers living at a distance from the clinic
centre.
4. To encourage the natural feeding of infants as the best method
of reducing sickness and mortality during the first year of life.
5. To help all mothers in the management and proper feeding of
babies and children before school age.
6. To spread sound knowledge on which the rearing of healthy
children depends, and to discourage all practices which are doing them
barm.
7. To advise medical or hospital treatment for such cases as may
need it.
8. To educate the women of Queensland in mothercraft, so that the
next veneration will be stronger, wiser, and happier than the present.
X


Essentials for Baby's Health.
Most babies are born healthy and, with knowledge and reasonable
eare, can be maintained in perfect health throughout babyhood and
childhood. Nevertheless many babies die every year and many more
suffer in health from want of knowledge. Only by knowledge as to the
right way to treat our babies can we hope to obtain the best results.
ENVIRONMENT.
Cleanly Surroundings.
The health of the nursing mother and the baby is greatly
influenced by cleanly surroundings. There is much less danger of
baby getting diarrhoea if the house and yard are kept clean, if the closet
seats are securely closed against flies, and if food is kept covered from
flies and dust.
The House.
All parts of the house must be freely ventilated and kept quite
clean.
Refuse.
Bum all refuse behind the kitchen fire. What cannot be burned
should be put at once into a metal garbage tin, and the tin kept care-
fully covered. The garbage tin must be scoured out with hot suds or
hosed out. A dirty garbage tin is a danger both to adults and to babies.
Yards, Sinks, &c.
Keep the yard clean. Dirty surroundings attract flies, and these
contaminate and infect food. Drains, sinks, and water-closets must
be kept clean by frequent flushing with water. The free use of clean
water for this purpose is better than any disinfectant. Report
immediately any block or other defect of the drains at the nearest
Town Hall. Earth closets must be kept scrupulously clean, the seat
carefully covered and kept flyproof, and the pan freely supplied with
ashes or sawdust, or other deodorising material. The best deodorant for
this purpose is a tablespoonful of kerosene every day.
Food.
Keep all food, and especially milk, in a clean, cool, well-ventilated
place, away from any position where bad air, flies, or dust can get
to it. Unless you have an ice-chest or refrigerator, stand the milk-jug
in a bowl of clean water and cover with a piece of butter muslin or


cheese-cloth sufficiently large to dip down into the water as shown in
illustration. Keep it in the shade and exposed to the wind. This will
keep the milk cool, and also protect it from flies. Use a clean piece of
muslin every day, and scald the bowl out every morning.
WHAT EVERY BABY NEEDS.
If a child is to grow in both body and mind as it should do in
the first year of its life, there are twelve things which it is essential
that it should have. These have been called “The Twelve Essentials,”
and too much stress cannot be laid on their importance. They are—
Fresh Air.
1. Baby must have abundance of pure fresh air night and
day. Remember that the body is built from the blood and that the
blood is purified by the air we breathe. Blood cannot be purified
by impure air. Therefore, see that the room in which baby lies, both
day and night, is well ventilated. Ventilation means a constant current
of air across a room, and this cannot always be secured by one open
wi,ndow. On warm, still nights, windows on both sides of room, or door
and window, should be open. Fresh air is necessary at night as well
as in the day. It is foolish to be afraid of ‘ ‘ night air. ’ ’ Keep baby out
of direct draughts, but do not be afraid of the air being cool. Pure,
cool air is invigorating and prevents “catching cold.” Warm, stuffy
air is poisonous and devitalising, and makes him catch cold easily.
Keep him in the open air as much as possible. His eyes are at first
very sensitive to bright light and must be protected. Never cover a
young baby’s face with a handkerchief or other covering, no matter
how light and fine. The breath of the infant cannot escape freely
from under it, and he breathes this impure air over and over again.
2


If the other essentials for his health are attended to, pure, cool,
outside air will make baby bright, keen for his food, contented, and a
sound sleeper.
Water.
2. As an essential to life, water ranks next in importance to the
oxygen contained in the air. It forms about two-thirds of the weight of
the body and enters into the composition of every fluid and of the solid
tissues. Baby gets most of the necessary water in his food, but some
of it should be given in the form of plain, cool, boiled water, which he
should be trained early in life to take. In hot climates this is very
necessary, on account of the increased action of the skin.
If of doubtful purity, the water for bathing baby should also be
boiled.
Food.
3. The best food for every baby is its mother’s milk, and every
healthy mother can and should nurse her own child for the first nine
months of its life. It is the only perfect infant food, because it contains,
in the right proportions, all the ingredients necessary for the complete
growth and development of the child.
The best substitute for mother’s milk is cow’s milk, properly
modified so that its constituents are, as nearly as possible, like those
of human milk.
If good, clean, fresh cow’s milk cannot be obtained, a good brand
of dried milk is the best substitute. Even with great care it is much
more difficult to give it in the right proportions, and many failures
occur because of the varied amounts that are measured in the spoons.
In addition to the best food available, there must be regularity in
times of feeding.
Clothing.
4. Must be light, porous, loose, non-irritating, and suited to climatic
conditions. In cold climates the aim must be to keep the child comfort-
ably warm in hot climates to so clothe him that he suffers as little as
possible from the heat. (See also chapter on clothing.)
Bathing.
5. The daily bath is necessary for the health of the child. In
addition to cleansing, it helps to keep the pores of the skin in a healthy
state.
Muscular Exercise and Sensory Stimulation.
6. If you want a baby to thrive, and to be active and strong, you
must let him exercise both muscles and senses. From the earliest days
baby should work for his living. Crying and vigorous sucking are
forms of exercise for the very young infant. Later, the baby by its
activity in kicking, grasping, &c., gets the additional exercise it needs.
3


His senses also need stimulation. The daily bath is not only for cleanli-
ness, but is a form of exercise, in that it educates his sense of feeling.
Sight can be exercised by placing baby where he can watch the waving
branches of a tree, and so on. Sensory stimulation is also provided by
such things as fresh air and sunshine and the daily outing.
In illness an attempt must be made to sustain the tone and activity
of the muscles, by such things as change of position, judicious handling,
and good nursing. Even when ill, baby can have the sensory stimulus
of fresh air and sunshine, and as he improves, bathing, outing, &c.,
must be added as soon as the doctor permits.
Warmth.
7. The bodily warmth needs to be evenly maintained. In cold
climates, clothe so that all parts of the body except the face are pro-
tected from chill. If the body is warm, pure cold night air will do no
harm. In hot climates, the aim has to be to keep the child cool, but
remember that young children chill quickly. Cold feet or hands may
cause colic.
Warmth is a vital necessity for premature infants.
Regularity of all Habits.
8. Regularity in baby’s life should begin when he is born. In
particular there must be clocklike regularity of feeding, regularity of
sleeping and exercise, and regularity of action of the bowels. If the
baby’s bowels are not regular or are sluggish, refer to advice given on
pages 52 to 54.
Cleanliness.
9. There must be cleanliness in everything. If baby is artificially
fed, the food and feeding utensils must be scrupulously clean.
Never leave dirty linen in baby’s room. Remove soiled napkins
immediately and place them in water. Wash the hands well after
handling napkins.
Mothering.
10. Proper handling and mothering of a baby are necessary for the
best growth and development. Babies who are allowed to lie all day
passively in cots and who have no mothering tend to be pale, flabby,
languid, and wasted.
An artificially-fed baby should never be allowed to lie in a cot
while taking his bottle. He should, when being fed, be held in a
position as nearly as possible like that of a child being fed at its
mother’s breast. Every baby should be taken daily for a walk in the
fresh air.
He should not be nursed all the time he is awake—baby grows
and thrives better if left to kick and amuse himself, but he should not
be left too long unnoticed or in the same position. Turn him from side
to side, or prop him up with pillows. A change of position is a relief


and rest for baby, just as it is for older people, and it also gives the
attention which, with other things, means the “mothering” of the
child.
On the other hand, too much attention can do much harm. Baby
should not be patted, shaken, or jogged after feeding. How would
the average grown-up person feel if treated in such a way after a
meal? Do not constantly play with and talk to him; it is tiring to
his brain, and a strain on his nervous system. He should be left to
amuse himself, and his own fingers and toes are. at first, his best
playthings.
Management.
11. This consists in faithfully carrying out all the essentials for
the child. If baby is asleep do not be afraid to wake him when his
feeding time comes round. After being wakened a few times he soon
learns to wake himself at the right time. Do not feed him or give him
a dummy because he cries. Teach him to understand that he cannot get
his own way simply by crying for it. By your own example teach the
child to have faith in you. Never make him a promise that you do
not intend to keep.
Best and Sleep.
12. These depend mainly on the carrying out of the above
essentials. If baby is fed, clothed, cared for, and managed properly, he
will sleep well. Therefore, if he does not sleep, look for the cause, and
try to remove it.
Sufficient restful sleep is as important to the baby and growing
child as food and water.


Feeding during First Two Years.
BREAST FEEDING.
Every mother should realise how important it is that her baby
should receive his natural food; that is, his mother’s milk. That milk
has been supplied for him by Nature, and is adapted to his special
needs. Doctor Sir Truby King says: “A woman’s milk is not her own.
It is created for her baby, and the first duty of a mother is to ensure,
by foresight, a proper supply of the only perfect food—the baby’s
birthright. ’ ’
Almost all mothers can feed their babies if they desire to do so.
If they have not quite a sufficient supply of milk for the baby’s
full needs he must not be weaned on that account. Give him what
there is, and finish his feeding with a little artificial food. At the same
time, try to increase the breast milk supply. This can and should be
done. Any Baby Clinic nurse will show you how to do it. Even a little
mother’s milk is very valuable for the baby, and helps him to digest
any artificial food which may be necessary.
Advantages of Breast Feeding.
Here are some of the reasons why breast milk is best for baby.
It contains in the right proportions all the food ingredients necessary
for the growth and development of the child.
The death rate among breast-fed babies is much lower than among
those artificially fed. Statistics tell us that, of the babies who di,e in
their first year, a very large percentage are bottle babies. A breast-
fed baby is much less likely to contract disease than one who is
artificially fed, and further, if disease is contracted, the baby fed on
his mother’s milk makes a quicker and better recovery than does the
bottle-fed baby.
The child who is breast-fed during his first year is stronger and
healthier during his second year than the one who has been artificially
fed.
Mother’s milk is always ready; there is no troublesome prepara-
tion of bottles, and mixing of foods. Thus it is a great saving of time
for the mother.
Mother’s milk is always the right temperature, and is germ-free.
6


By feeding baby in the right way, much money is saved that would,
for the bottle-fed baby, have to be spent on infants’ foods, bottles,
teats, bottle brushes, &c. So give haby what Nature meant him to
have—his mother’s milk.
In addition to all of these reasons, the baby who is dependent on
his mother for the food he receives is more devoted to her than the
child who is satisfied to be fed out of a bottle, by anyone; and the
mother more dearly loves the baby whom she has fed with her own
milk.
The Feeding of the Newborn Baby,
On the treatment and training which an infant receives in the first
weeks of life depends greatly his progress during the ensuing twelve
months. The opinion is frequently expressed that the newborn baby
is too young to be trained; this is a mistake. Even very young babies
quickly acquire habits, and it is important that they should be of the
right kind.
To delay training until he is a few months old may, and probably
will, result in giving mother or nurse a great deal more trouble, and
the baby much unnecessary distress. So begin as you mean to go on.
The feeding of the new baby is a most important matter, and
probably more mistakes are made on this than any other point in the
management of infants.
Most babies, when born, know how to suck. It is seldom we find
one who cannot do so. This is because, for long ages past, babies have
been fed at their mothers’ breasts, and at birth the sucking instinct
is present. This instinct must be developed, but care taken that it is
done on the right lines. It must not be either under-developed or over
developed. If baby, who very often in these first days of life is very
sleepy indeed, is allowed to sleep undisturbed, he may, at the end oi
a day or two, be very unwilling to work for his living. For that is
what sucking is to a baby, and there is no more difficult child to
manage than the one who has not been trained to suck properly.
Feeding him from a feeding-bottle, with a hole in the teat so large
that the fluid pours down his throat without effort on his part, will
also result in disinclination to suck.
The instinct can be over-stimulated by putting baby too frequently
to the breast, by leaving him on the breast too long, and also by giving
him a dummy to suck.
Vigorous sucking is necessary for his health, but it should be done
regularly, and at proper feeding time only. In the early months of
life it forms a very important part of baby’s daily exercise, for not
only does it develop jaws and mouth, but it improves the circulation
of the whole body.


There is another reason why baby should be trained to correct
feeding habits early. We all know that the mother’s full milk supply
does not come in until the end of the second or the beginning of the
third day after baby’s birth. But before the milk comes in there is a
little creamy-looking fluid in the breasts. This the baby should have,
for although there is very little it has high food value, and at this time
no other food can take its place. In addition, the mother’s health also
is benefited, and she makes a quicker recovery if baby is put regularly
to the breast at this time.
Put baby to the breast within about six hours of birth, as soon as
the mother has rested, leaving him only about two minutes at each
breast. See that he is actually sucking and not dozing. It will be
sufficient to do this once every six hours for the first day. On the
second day, leave him three or four minutes at each breast, and feed
him every four hours. On the third day, when the milk supply is
usually established, put him to the breast every three hours, or if a
strong baby every four hours, and leave him about fifteen minutes. The
average baby takes from fifteen to twenty minutes to feed. A strong
baby may get all he wants in ten minutes. No baby should be left at
the breast for longer than thirty minutes, and it is only delicate
babies, or those who suck feebly, who should require so long.
Alternate the commencing breast; if you begin by giving the baby
the right breast for his first feed, commence with the left for the second,
the right again for the third, and so on. Completely empty one breast
at each feeding.
Big, strong babies generally do well if fed every four hours—that
is, five feeds daily (6 and TO a.m., and 2,6, and 10 p.m.), from the
third day. Others are better on three-hourly feeding, six feeds daily
(6, 9 a.m., 12 midday, and 3,6, and 10 p.m)., until they are about
three months old. After that time, four-hourly feeding suits most
infants, but do not jump suddenly from three to four hourly feeding.
Increase the intervals by a quarter of an hour every second or third
day, until a four-hourly interval is reached. This can be done without
baby being aware that any change is being made.
To all healthy babies give no night feeds from birth. This is most
important. If this is done from the start of life, baby learns to take
all that he needs in the daytime. This allows him and his mother to get
the regular, uninterrupted night’s sleep which both require. A baby
trained from birth to have no night feeds takes, during the day, all he
requires to satisfy his hunger, and for his growth and development. If
fed in the day only, he obtains just as much as if he were being fed
both day and night. For example, careful weighing of children before
and after feeding has shown that a child having, say, 30 oz. of food in
the twenty-four hours, and given six feeds a day, takes 5 oz. at each
feed; while if he is fed ten times a day he takes 3 oz. at each feed; thus


obtaining exactly the same quantity of food in the twenty-four hours
If a baby is screaming from hunger, you may give him a feed at night
After this give him more food in the daytime and stop feeding at night.
But this training must start at birth. A baby accustomed to being
fed night and day will protest vigorously if his mother suddenly
lengthens his feeding intervals. He has been trained to frequent feed-
ing, so takes only sufficient to satisfy his hunger for that period.
But when started from birth on regular three or four hourly feeds,
with no night feeds, he never expects anything else. So keep to regular
feeding times. To make a concession one day means almost certainly
making a concession another day. Never hesitate to wake baby during
the day when feeding time comes round. Very soon he will learn to
wake himself at the right time. If he is allowed to sleep over his feeding
time during the day, he cannot be expected to sleep all night. He will
not have had his full supply of food, so will be hungry and restless.
There is still another very important point. Mention has already
been made of the fact that the mother’s milk does not come in until
the second or third day. As a result, many people think it their duty
to give baby artificial food during this time. This is a great mistake,
which can lead to much trouble, and in many cases has been responsible
for the unnecessary weaning of the baby.
If baby required milk during the first two days of his life, Nature
would provide it. As already mentioned, there is present in the breasts
during this time a creamy-looking fluid which has high nutritive value.
Baby should be put to the breasts regularly in order to obtain this.
Beyond this, nothing but plain boiled water should be given. Never
give water sweetened with sugar, particularly cane sugar. Babies
who, during the first week, are fed on sweetened water or any form
of artificial food, whether made of fresh, dried, or condensed milk,
not infrequently refuse to take their natural food later. In the
comparatively few cases in which with proper management the supply
of breast milk is not established by the third day, the shortage should
be supplied by giving what fluid can be expressed from the mother’s
breasts. In any case, do not give any artificial milk mixture before
the child is seven days old, and before giving this, consult a Clinic
trained nurse, if possible.
THE NEEDS OF THE NURSING MOTHER.
The commonest mistake of the first few days after childbirth is
overfeeding the mother with sloppy foods which tend to upset her
digestion and cause constipation and headache. While the mother is
in bed she should be on a light diet, including milk and milk puddings,
toast, bread and butter, eggs, fish, fruit, and vegetables. By the fifth
day a grilled chop may be added if she is well. A glass of water should
be taken before each suckling.


When the mother begins to go about, she should have a good
nourishing diet, including milk, butter, cheese, meat, fish, poultry, fruit,
and vegetables. She should continue to take a glass of water each time
she puts the child to the breast. The milk in the diet is a very important
factor. In "Western districts goat’s milk is as good as or better than
cow’s milk. It is very seldom that whole dried milk (not dried separated
milk) must be substituted. Those who do not like the taste of milk
may flavour it with cocoa or in some way w r hieh they prefer, or they
may take it as junket, and part may be taken as custard or in a milky
pudding. These may be mixed with sliced or shredded fresh fruit or
stewed fruit or failing these with canned fruits. The quantity of milk
should be one pint and a half or more daily. Butter and eggs are good
foods, but will not supply the place of milk. Cheese is a wholesome
food. Meat should not be taken more than once a day.
Vegetables and Fruit.
Of vegetable foods what are called “greens” are the most
valuable. The best is well-washed lettuce, especially if home grown.
When this is not available, finely-cut leaves of uncooked silver beet,
shredded cabbage heart, and grated carrot are good substitutes.
French beans and cabbage take a second place, but should not be
omitted. They are often so badly cooked that the best part of them is
poured down the kitchen sink. The nurse will explain to you the
right way to cook them.
Of the root vegetables, the best is the potato —both English and
sweet potato—which should replace bread at the principal meal of the
day. Carrots, turnips, parsnips, pumpkin, and swede turnips are also
valuable, if properly cooked. The sweet potato has a special value to
which reference will be made in the cookery notes.
Fruit should always be taken and is best uncooked. Tomatoes
are the most valuable, after them oranges, papaws, and pineapples, but
all fruits are good in reasonable quantity. Should neither fruit j*fr
vegetables be procurable in drought-stricken areas, eat eannld
tomatoes, and peas and beans that have sprouted one-half or one inch
long. A special section regarding the diet in Western Queenslahd is
included at page 125.
Your Daily Bread.
You should eat only wholemeal bread or wheatgerm bread, and
avoid white bread and scones made of white flour. If the only bread
you can get is white bread, take one or two tablespoonfuls of wheatgerm,
which you can get from any chemist, or if you cannot afford this, three
or four tablespoonfuls of cooking bran daily. Take also wholemeal
porridge every morning. Marmite, or vegemite, which may be taken
mixed with milk or water as a drink or spread on bread and butter,
is also good.


The mother cannot increase her milk by eating more food unless
the want of milk is due to partial starvation or to unsuitable food. She
cannot increase it by patent medicines. A reasonable amount of
wholesome food she should take, but not more.
Alcohol.
No alcohol should be taken by the nursing mother. Beer and stout
have not the advantages popularly ascribed to them. They are not
necessary.
Smoking.
A stronger comment needs to be made with regard to smoking in
excess. Too much smoking on the part of the mother has a harmful
effect on the baby.
Rest.
The nursing mother benefits by feeding her baby lying down.
Bowels.
Regular action of the bowels should be brought about by taking the
food recommended. Suitable exercise will also assist.
Worry and Excitement.
Many mothers know from actual experience that their supply of
milk is affected by worry. The emotions play a big part in determining
the composition and quantity of the milk.
DIFFICULTIES OF BREAST FEEDING.
Every healthy woman can suckle her baby. The exceptions are
extremely rare. If the mother is not healthy, medical advice should
be sought.
The coming of the milk depends more on the baby’s sucking than
on anything else. If the nipples are flat and ill-formed, the baby cannot
suck properly. He soon gets tired, and the milk does not come. If
the baby is pacified with dummies and spoon-feeding he will not suck
and the milk does not come. A good nurse will help the mother through
her difficulties, but the nurse should be given a chance to correct flat
nipples before the baby is born. A bad nurse will put the baby on the
bottle.
Difficulties which may Lead to Early Weaning.
Refusal to suck the breast. —This is one of the commonest causes of
weaning. The cause may be—
{a) In the mother;
(5) In the child;
(c) Due to faulty management, especially faulty management in
the first days of life.


(a) In the Mother.
1. Small, flat, or depressed nipples. —For such conditions, much
can and should be done before the birth of the child. During the last
two or three months of pregnancy, such nipples should be drawn out
and rolled between an oiled finger and thumb, twice daily. If this
is impossible, the breast pump may be used to draw the nipples out.
The strong sucking of a healthy infant is sometimes successful when
other means have failed. Such cases can be very difficult to manage,
but with patience and perseverance much can be achieved. When, after
the birth of the child, the nipples are definitely inverted, the infant
should be trained from birth to take not only the nipple, but a portion
of the surrounding areola, in his mouth while feeding. Babies soon
learn to do this and can be satisfactorily fed in this way.
2. Late establishment of lactation. —This is sometimes due to
faulty management, but in some cases, and especially with first babies,
lactation may not be established at the usual time. It may be delayed
two or three weeks, or even longer. In such cases, put the baby to both
breasts with absolute regularity. The strong suction is the best stimulus
to induce the flow. In the meantime the baby must be artificially fed.
(See pages 9, 18, 24.) Never omit to put him to the breast before he is
fed. At the same time give the mother routine treatment for increasing
the milk supply. (See page 17.)
3. Cracked nipples and breast abscess. —With proper preparation
for nursing and absolute cleanliness, these should not occur. When
cracks are present it may be necessary to use a nipple-shield and the
baby not infrequently refuses to suck this. Friar’s balsam should be
applied when the nipples have been cleansed and dried after each
nursing. If the condition does not improve, the mother should get
medical advice.
(b) In the Child.
1. Feeble powers of suction. —This may be due to prematurity or
congenital weakness. Treat as for prematurity or weakling. (See
page 21.) Some infants, though otherwise normal, have more feeble
powers of suction than the average baby. These children tire quickly
at the breast and will not suck for the usual time. In such cases
leave the child a shorter time at the breast —e.g., only ten minutes—
and give both breasts at each feed (five minutes at each). This is done
because the milk flows more quickly and easily at the commencement
of the feed and the baby will get more in the time. Express the
remainder by hand, and if necessary feed it to the child. It may be
necessary to feed two-hourly. After this treatment the baby soon
becomes sufficiently strong to obtain his full requirement at the breast.
2. The nipple slips under the child’s tongue, and although he
appears to be sucking satisfactorily, he is not getting the milk. Once


the difficulty is recognised, the nipple is placed over the tongue and
the child’s head pressed against the mother’s breast.
3. Blocked nose. —This can effectually prevent a baby sucking, but
very few children are born with definite nasal obstruction.
4. Sore or ulcerated mouth. —This is a temporary condition some-
times caused by injury to the delicate mucous membrane by unnecessary
cleansing of the baby’s mouth. It may cause the child to refuse to
suck on account of the pain caused. Artificial food should not be given
but the breast milk should be expressed regularly and given to the child
from a spoon. The condition usually clears up in a few days with the
application of a solution consisting of one part of peroxide of hydrogen
and four parts of cool boiled water.
5. Hare lip or cleft palate. —Such a child will be unable to nurse
at the breast, but should on no account be weaned because of the
disability from which he is suffering. Because of the fact that he will
in all probability require an operation in the near future, the breast
milk is especially needed to build up the child’s strength so that he
may be physically fitted to stand the operation well. The mother’s
milk must be regularly expressed and fed to the infant either from a
bottle with a large-holed teat or from a spoon, and the child must be
kept in a sitting position while being fed. Such cases must always be
referred to a doctor.
6. Teething. —lt sometimes happens during the teething period
that a child’s gums may be swollen and painful for occasional short
periods before the teeth erupt, causing a temporary refusal to suck the
breast altogether, or to suck only for the few minutes during which the
milk flows easily. The milk should be expressed and fed with a spoon,
the child being put to the breast again as soon as the discomfort appears
to have passed.
(c) Faulty Management.
This is the commonest cause of refusal to suck. Causes are—
1. Failure to put the child to the breast in the first days of life. —
This is one of the commonest causes of refusal to suck. Babies are born
with the sucking instinct, but if this is not developed early it may be
forgotten. Infants not infrequently sleep almost constantly during the
first few days of life. This is specially likely to occur if they suffer from
shock after instrumental delivery. In some cases no effort is made during
this time to train them to suck. Instead of being put to the breast
regularly, they are permitted to sleep as long as they will. Later, such
babies may refuse to nurse at the breast, and this may lead to complete
weaning. Such cases are among the most difficult met with by the
Welfare nurse. Success in making the child suck is generally only
obtained after much trying work. If, in addition to this (failure to put
the child to breast), he is given a dummy dipped in some sweet stuff, the
difficulty is greatly increased.


2. Giving baby a dummy. —This is frequently done in very early
days with the idea that it prevents the child from crying, but a baby
who has never had a dummy never cries for one. There is grave danger
that the child will become accustomed to, and like, the feel, shape, and
size of the dummy, and that when put to the mother’s breast he may
refuse to suck. The ill effects of giving a child a dummy are aggravated
when it is dipped in some sweet substance —e.g., condensed milk, honey,
or glycerine and borax. Then the infant enjoys the sweet taste and
refuses to suck the breast to obtain the milk which is less sweet, and
which it must work hard to obtain. In addition to all this, there is
the serious risk of infection from the dummy.
3. Giving artificial food from a bottle with a large-holed teat. —This
is often done in the first two days of life by people who think that a
baby requires feeding before the mother’s milk is established. The food
given is usually well-sweetened, and the child fed from a bottle with a
large-holed teat. A baby fed in this way for two or three days will
refuse to suck the breast to obtain food which (being less sweet) it does
not like. And also, having obtained the sweet food without effort, it
wishes to continue obtaining its food easily.
4. Over-supply. —This is probably the commonest cause of upset
which may lead to weaning. The child takes too much, is upset, vomits,
and has frequent motions. He is very cross, screaming day and night.
For these reasons, the mother or nurse thinks the food disagrees and
weans him. To correct, consult the Clinic nurse who will test the feed
and adjust the length of time at the breast and the feeding intervals.
(See page 16.)
5. Insufficient milk in the breasts. —In such cases, the hungry infant
may fight the breast and refuse to suck. The treatment is to give a test
feed, provide a complement of modified milk, if necessary, and give the
mother treatment for the restoration of breast milk. (See page 17.) Do
not give any milk complement, except expressed breast milk, before the
child is seven days old.
6. Milk flowing too quickly from the breasts. —This condition is
usually met with soon after the establishment of lactation, but may
persist later. The child gets the milk too quickly, coughs, is frightened,
and refuses to suck. In such cases express some of the milk from each
breast —an ounce will probably be sufficient —before the child commences
to feed. After a little has been expressed, the milk flows less quickly.
Position can also help. In these cases the mother should hold the baby
in such a way that the breast is not dependent. Elevate baby by
placing him on a pillow, in the mother’s lap, so that in sucking he must
draw upwards. This will prevent baby getting the milk so easily.
Sometimes the mother manages this best by lying down while she feeds
baby.


7. Nervous, excited, over-stimulated babies. —These children need
absolute quiet during nursing. Talking frequently prevents the child
from sucking and may lead to weaning.
8. Breasts very tense when full. —This may cause difficulty especi-
ally with a nervous, impatient baby. In such cases, express a little
of the milk before feeding. This softens the breast and the baby will
then take it readily.
9. Women who have very large or pendulous breasts need to take
special care that the breast is kept clear of the baby’s nostrils while
feeding, otherwise breathing is interfered with, and sucking prevented.
The commonest reasons given by mothers for weaning their
children are: —
(a) That their milk “did not agree with baby” ; he vomited, had
wind, and frequent motions. Teach the mother that the
quality of her milk is rarely at fault, but the quantity is
frequently wrong. Over-feeding, irregular or too frequent
feeding are the commonest causes of trouble which is often
attributed to the quality of the milk. In the first weeks of
life, discomfort and green stools generally point to over-
feeding. The mother should consult the Clinic nurse.
(b) Supposed poor milk. —Mothers not infrequently state that
their milk was too thin and watery and did not satisfy the
child. In such cases it is almost invariably faulty manage-
ment, or the quantity of the milk, which is at fault. Analyses
of mother’s milk have proved that the thin and watery -
looking specimens are just as rich as the creamy-looking
variety.
(c) Decrease in the milk supply after the mother gets up. —The
mothers say: “My milk left me when I got up.” Decrease
in supply may result when the mother too early, perhaps in
the third week, resumes the duties and responsibilities of
her household, as well as the full care and responsibility of
her child, and is over-anxious and worried. In such cases
regular sucking should be persevered with and the infant
complemented if necessary. At the same time means should
be taken to reassure the mother and increase the supply.
{d) Failure to gain weight satisfactorily. —The mother says:
“Baby was not gaining as he should have done.” Remember
that birth weight is not always regained in the first two
weeks; it may take three or four weeks. But in most eases
it is found that it is faulty management.


(e) Return of menstruation, during lactation, is fairly common
and is not a cause for weaning, though on account of slight
upset in some mothers, with temporarily diminished milk
supply, it may be necessary to complement the baby for a
day or two.
if) Illness or absence of mother— Even if the baby has to be
temporarily taken otf the breast, the supply can be kept up
by expression. This can be done by the mother or a nurse.
The breast is grasped placing the thumb above the nipple
and the fingers below. Gentle but firm pressure is applied
as the hand is passed towards the nipple. With brief illness
such as influenza, this should always be done. In cases
where the mother is acutely ill, or suffering from an infection,
the supply frequently very quickly comes back to normal,
even after an interval of some weeks, when the baby is put
back to the breast.
The only adequate reasons for which it may become necessary to
wean baby before the ninth month are given under the section
on artificial feeding on page 24. They are; —
1. Because the mother is suffering from a serious form of
chronic illness, such as tuberculosis.
2. Because the mother has commenced a new pregnancy.
3. Because the mother is compelled to work and she and her
baby require to be separated.
Under all other circumstances, regardless of what your friends
and relations may advise, it is your privilege and duty to
breast feed your baby.
WHY BREAST FEEDING SEEMS TO DISAGREE.
1. The Baby is Overfed or Fed too often.
Perhaps he is a fine, fat baby, but he is not a happy baby. He
seems to be troubled with “wind.’'’ He has stomach-ache often, and
he roars. At night he keeps the whole family awake, and even disturbs
the neighbours. He passes large motions with undigested milk in them
and his motions may be green. Baby begins to get flabby and to
lose weight. His mother thinks he is not getting enough, feeds him
oftener and makes him worse. Some foolish friend is sure to say that
the mother’s milk does not agree with the baby and he should be
weaned. This is very bad advice. Baby is suffering from too much of
a good thing. Feed him less often. He will do better on four-hourly
feeding. Keep him fewer minutes on the breast, and do not let him
get so much of the “strippings”—perhaps ten minutes may be enough.
Sometimes a tablespoonful or two of warm water given before suckling
prevents his taking too much. A little water may always be given
between feeds if it pacifies' him.


There are milder cases of overfeeding, in which the baby is only
fretful and sleeps badly. You can easily know what is wrong with
him by looking at his motions and observing that they contain
undigested milk. If a baby is gaining weight too quickly he is being
overfed, and if you persist in giving him all that he will take, he will
have a severe attack of indigestion and begin to lose weight.
2. The Baby is not Satisfied.
He is not getting enough. He does not gain weight as he should,
and he seems to be always hungry. Perhaps breast feeding has never
been properly started, because the nipples were malformd, or the nurse
was careless. Perhaps the mother is not very strong, and had plenty
of milk while resting, but not enough while doing hard work. Very
likely she is not taking the right food, which we have recommended.
She is discouraged and gives the baby a bottle once or twice a day.
This is a mistake. Her breast milk begins at once to lessen; perhaps
the baby refuses to take the breast, then the milk disappears altogether.
In cases where it is difficult to get baby back on to the breast, it is a
good plan to discontinue feeding from a bottle and feed him from a
spoon. In a day or two he may take the breast readily, and continue
to take it.
The baby must be put to the breast at regular intervals for the
mother to retain what milk she has. Let him suck while he is hungry
and empty one breast thoroughly before he is given the other.
Commence with the right or left breast at alternate feeds. This will
encourage the breasts to Secrete more milk.
If he is unsatisfied, give him a little artificial food such as whey,
diluted cow’s milk, or dried milk if fresh milk cannot be obtained.
(See page 18, complementary feeding.) It is best to give artificial food
unsweetened at first, or sweetened with dextrimalose or milk sugar,
if necessary. If cane sugar is used, the mixture may be too sweet and
he may refuse the breast. Begin by feeding with a spoon or by using
either a natural form feeder or a bottle fitted with a very firm teat. A
skilled nurse can often by massage and hot and cold douching increase
the flow of milk to the breast, as long as there is milk in the breast.
Always give him what breast milk there is at each feeding and finish
with the artificial food. If at last you are driven to wean him you
may have got him past the most dangerous early months, and you will
have weaned him gradually.
(For signs and symptoms of underfeeding and overfeeding, see
table on page 19.)
To Increase the Supply of Breast Milk.
1. Peed baby regularly, emptying one breast completely before he
is given the other.


2. After feeding, express the remainder of the milk from both
breasts into a scalded cup and give to baby along with the artificial
food already advised.
3. Bathe the breasts. Each breast is bathed for one minute alter-
nately in hot and cold water. This is repeated three times. Dry each
breast briskly. Carry this out twice a day.
4. Massage the breasts—
(a) The first movement is begun with the palm of the hand
placed over one shoulder and continued by stroking firmly
and slowly downwards to the nipple.
(b) The second movement is commenced near the shoulder blade
at the back and continued forward to the nipple.
(c) The third movement is commenced below the breast and
continued upwards to the nipple.
5. Drink a glass of water before each feeding.
6. Lie down and relax for half an hour twice during the day, if
possible.
7. Do what you can to bring about the feeling of quiet, calm
confidence within yourself and an atmosphere of calmness, contentment,
and happiness in the home.
Complementary Feeding.
If the supply of breast milk begins to fail before the ninth month,
as is shown by the fact that baby is not gaining weight normally (see
page 67) and seems hungry, every effort should be made to restore it
as advised in the preceding section. If he is being fed four-hourly, it
may be advisable to try him on three-hourly feeds for a short period.
If he still fails to gain weight, it will be necessary to give him a comple-
ment —that is, a feeding of artificial food immediately after he has
emptied the breasts. (See page 17.)
The mother usually has sufficient breast milk for the 6 a.m. feed.
She may require to give a larger complement in the afternoon than in
the morning. In order to determine the amount of complement
required, the mother should consult her Clinic nurse, who will arrange
to carry out several test feeds. Where this is impossible, the mother
should begin with a small complement—say, 1-2 tablespoonfuls,
according to the age of the baby—and gradually increase the amount,
being guided by his gain in weight and his general behaviour. (See
“Feeding Mixtures,” pages 27, 28.) It sometimes happens that, with
the improvement in the baby’s condition, he begins to gain weight
normally and the supply of breast milk improves.
18


Feeding Table for Complementary Feeding.
Babies under 2 Months.
6 a.m
Breast
9 a.m.
Breast
Whey or whey milk mixture (see Feeding Tables, pages
27, 28
Breast
Whey or whey milk mixture
12 noon
3 p.m.
Breast
Whey or whey milk mixture
6 p.m.
Breast
Whey or whey milk mixture
10 p.m.
Breast
Whey or whey milk mixture
Babies ovee 2 Months.
6 a.m.
Breast
10 a.m.
Breast
Whey milk or milk mixture (see Feeding Tables, pages
27, 28)
2 p.m.
Breast
Milk mixture
6 p.m.
Breast
Milk mixture
10 p.m.
Breast
Milk mixture
UNDERFEEDING.
OVERFEEDING.
1. History of continuous failure to
1. History of big gain in weight
gain weight.
followed by digestive upset and
fall in weight.
2. Baby appears unsatisfied at the
2. Frequent crying with drawing up
end of his feeding and after
of legs. This may be relieved
settling down for a time cries
temporarily by feeding but soon
before his next feeding is due.
becomes worse.
In some cases, particularly if the
child is much underweight, he
may seem contented and sleep
most of the time.
3. The stool is often small and may
3. Stools are large and contain a
be green and contain mucus. It
good deal of curd. If over-
may be passed infrequently,
feeding continues, frequent stools
perhaps every second day, or
containing mucus may occur.
frequently, several small stools
being passed in the twenty-four
boms (“ starvation diarrhoea ”).
4. Urine is small in amount.
4. Urine is not diminished, but may
be increased at first.
Consult your Clinic nurse regarding amount of complement.
Consult your Clinic nurse regarding amount of complement.
For feeding of babies who require to be weaned, see your Clinic
nurse. (Weaning Table on page 41.)
If possible, never wean your baby before the ninth month.
Signs and symptoms of underfeeding as compared with over-
feeding—


3. The Baby has an Over-excitable Stomach
Many babies have the habit of bringing up a teaspoonful or two
of curdled milk after feeding. This is not vomiting; it is what the old
nurses used to call “posseting.” It is messy, but of no further con-
sequence if the baby continues to thrive. But some babies bring up
large quantities—perhaps soon after feeding, perhaps some time after.
They appear uncomfortable until relieved by vomiting, and although
their motions may be perfectly digested they are poorly nourished.
If the baby loses weight rapidly it is a serious matter, and medical
advice is necessary. Unfortunately too often the mother thinks the
breast milk disagrees, and puts the baby on artificial food, on which
he becomes worse.
These babies are often intelligent and precocious. They need very
quiet treatment and no excitement. They sometimes do better with
small feeds at short intervals—viz., two-hourly. Though at first very
slow to gain weight, they usually do well in the end. As they improve,
lengthen the intervals between the feeds.
THE FEEDING OF TWINS.
A young, strong, and healthy mother should have plenty of breast
milk to satisfy two babies. Some wet-nurses have had no difficulty in
feeding three or four. Two small babies, and twins are usually small
at the start, do not need much more than one big strong baby. What
the mother really needs is self-confidence, which makes her task easy.
If she lacks this, let her consult the nurse at one of our Clinics.
A hard-worked mother who has ha;d several children, and is
perhaps not in her best health, may not be able to supply all the milk
needed. The twins should then be given what breast milk there is,
and some whey-milk or modified milk at the end of each feeding. It
may be necessary to give a larger share of breast milk to the smaller
and weaker one. The feeding in these cases may not be an easy
problem for the unassisted mother, but with the help of the Clinic
nurse it becomes easier.
The mother will save time if she feeds both at once. Let her make
herself comfortable on a bed, resting her back against one or two
pillows placed upright, or on a couch with her feet on a stool. While
young and small one twin may be supported on each arm. When they
grow heavier and more active, it will be found more convenient to place
them on a pillow on the mother’s lap, with their heads near together
and their legs diverging. For artificial feeding they may be placed
in two cots facing the mother, while the mother rests her arms holding
the bottles on the edge of each cot; or she may sit on a couch with a
babe on a low pillow facing her on each side and rest her arms on a
pillow across her lap, as she holds the bottles.
In these days, when triplets, quadruplets, and quintuplets are
successfully reared, no mother need be afraid of twins.


THE PREMATURE BABY,
While most people know that when a baby is premature he needs
special care and treatment, many have little knowledge of the special
points which require immediate attention if the child is to have a
reasonable chance of survival. Such babies, when born in a locality
where there is a Baby Clinic, should be at once brought under the
notice of the Clinic nurse, who is always willing to advise the mother,
or to help her in carrying out the doctor’s directions in the care of
these cases. For the mother in the country, where Clinics and Welfare
nursed are not available, the following directions may he useful:—
If a baby is under 5 lb. in weight, when born, it is better to treat
him as premature to get satisfactory results. But even those who weigh
so little as only 2 or 3 lb. can often live and develop into strong, healthy
children if the necessary care be taken.
In appearance, the premature differs from the normal baby in more
than size. The little body is very soft and limp, the skin wrinkled,
downy, and redder than usual. The infant is very weak and often too
feeble to suck. The cry is feeble, and suggestive of the mewing of a
young kitten. Often the baby cannot cry at all.
There are four points which must receive immediate attention.
They are—
(а) Prevention of chilling. (This is most important, and must
be the first consideration.)
(б) Careful feeding with mother’s milk.
(c) Careful avoidance of infection.
id) Avoidance of unnecessary handling.
Prevention of Chilling.
Because the baby has come too soon into the world, he chills very
quickly. A premature baby who is allowed to become thoroughly chilled
soon after birth rarely lives; therefore, when we know that an infant
is to be born prematurely, special care should be taken to prevent this
chilling. A small cot should be prepared, and by means of hot bottles,
thoroughly warmed. Baby must not be bathed nor even oiled at first.
As soon as he is bom, wrap him in warmed cotton wool, or soft flannel,
and place him in the warm cot. Six or eight hours later, if the child
is then thoroughly warm, oil him with warm olive oil, using cotton
wool swabs. Do this as quickly as possible, uncovering only a portion
(say, one arm or leg) at a time, and also taking care to move or handle
the baby as little as you can. Very small babies should be oiled without
being lifted from their cots, which should be screened from draughts
while it is being done. In hospitals, cots are specially prepared for
such babies, but special cots are not essential, and a very satisfactory
and comfortable bed for the “prem” can be quickly improvised. Half
of an old-fashioned “dress-basket” does splendidly, and failing this,
the family clothes basket or a box can be used. To prepare the
M. & c.—B.


improvised cot, first line it with either brown paper or newspaper; this
is' to prevent the escape of heat. After this, and for the same reason,
line the inside with blanket. A strip of old blanket or a wide woollen
scarf can be used. To fix this, place it first outside the basket, so that
it reaches from top edge to bottom, and fasten it securely, either with
a string tied all the way round or by sewing through the blanket and
basket at intervals. Having done this, turn the blanket over inside the
basket so that it is completely lined, and also has a tidy top edge. Now
throw a single blanket over the cot; it should not reach quite to the
head of the basket. Place a thin firm pillow in the bottom, and a soft
one over it, to form a mattress. A flannelette napkin will serve as a
sheet, and a small folded fine towel as a pillow. At first a mackintosh
may not be necessary, but later must be provided. Into this warmed
cot baby is placed, wrapped in his cotton wool jacket, and covered with
a soft shawl. Place a small light blanket over, letting it lie loosely on
the child, and then draw the sides of the enveloping blanket across the
cot, and tuck them in. But this is not enough. Premature babies chill
so easily that more warmth is required, and this is supplied by hot
water bags or bottles. Eubber bags are best, but if they are not
available, stone ginger beer or ink bottled will serve. In cold weather
three are required—one at the foot and one at each side. One bag is
placed between the two pillows at the foot of the bed. The others lie,
not against baby’s body, but tucked down at the side, between the
enveloping blanket and the mattress. For the bottle at the foot of the
bed, use two-parts boiling water and one-part cold water; for the side
bottles, use equal parts cold and boiling water. These require to be
refilled (one every hour in rotation) in winter. In summer, two bags
are usually sufficient once baby is thoroughly warm, and they do not
need changing so often.
To make a cottonwool jacket for the premature baby take a piece
of cottonwool about 15 inches’ wide and the length of the baby from
the neck to below the ankles. Fold it in half making it about inches
wide. This is cut magyar shape and lined with butter muslin and tapes
sewn on down the front for fastening. A cottonwool bonnet may also
be made lined with butter muslin.
Give baby plenty of fresh air. Keep him in a well-ventilated room.
In our Queensland climate, the air, even in winter, is not cold enough to
hurt the premature baby, provided his bed is kept properly warm.
Guard against overheating. It is wise to have a dairy thermometer in
the bed, and this should register between 85 and 95 deg. Fahr.
Gradually decrease the artificial heat as baby’s strength improves. Oil
him every second day, taking the same precautions as' for the first
oiling. Do not put him in the bath until he weighs 5 lb. As he
improves, commence with sponging—at first only face and hands, and
gradually increase until he is being fully sponged, and later bathed.


Feeding is Very Important.
The healthy, normal baby thrives best if fed on his mother’s milk.
For the premature baby, natural feeding is even more necessary; in
fact, few survive without it. Though the baby may live and thrive on
an artificial food, he is much more likely to do so if he is fed on his
mother’s milk; and failing this, the milk of another healthy mother is
the best thing. Sometimes a relative can be found who has a healthy
baby of her own, and so is able to act as foster-mother. It does not
matter if the foster-mother’s baby is some months old; the milk will not
hurt the premature baby on that account, though it may be necessary
to dilute it, perhaps’ to half strength, at first. If there is any doubt
as to the health of the foster-mother until a test can be made or the
opinion of a doctor obtained, do not put the child to the breast, but
feed from a spoon, and boil the milk before it is given to the baby. If
only a small amount of breast milk is available from either mother or
foster-mother, give that first to the baby, and then make up to the full
requirement with the artificial food. It will not do any harm to give
the two foods in this way. In fact, the small quantity of mother’s milk
will help baby to digest the artificial food.
If every effort to obtain sufficient breast milk fails, you may
give first whey, then whey to which increasing amounts of whey-milk
are added, and finally the whey-milk mixture alone, or with the
addition of lactic acid as advised on page 31. Or you may try one
teaspoonful of condensed milk in 3 oz. (6 tablespoonfuls) of boiled water.
If this agrees, the strength should be gradually increased to one
teaspoonful in 2 oz. (4 tablespoonfuls). The condensed milk should be
poured from the container into the measuring spoon and carefully
levelled.
Nothing but boiled water should be given to the premature baby for
the first twelve hours; but after that he must have food. It is impossible
to say how much the child should have at a feed. Some of these infants
are able to suck the breast, and obtain all they need with three-hourly
feeding. Others are quite unable to suck, and at first almost unable to
swallow. Such cases must be fed with a pipette or eye-dropper, and if
able to take only very little (perhaps only one or two teaspoonfuls) must
be fed, at first, perhaps every hour, with one interval, at night, of three
hours. With a feeble baby it may take as long as half an hour to give
it this small quantity. AS soon as the baby can take a large amount,
gradually increase the interval between the feeds (by a quarter of an
hour at a time) to three hours, with one five-hour interval at night. Also
substitute a small feeding bottle for the eye-dropper as soon as the child
shows signs of sucking. While baby is too feeble to stick the breast, the
mother’s milk must be expressed, either by hand or the breast pump,
every three hours' during the day, so that the supply may be kept up. As
the child’s strength increases, it may be put to the breast, at first for five
minutes twice daily, and the feeding finished from the bottle. A rough


estimate of the amount of fluid that a premature baby should take it
three ounces for each pound of body weight. Thus, if a baby weighs
3 lb., try to give him 9 oz. of food daily. So if he is fed nine times
daily, endeavour to give him an ounce each time. He may take much
less at first.
Prevention of Infection.
As a result of being undeveloped and weak, baby is very susceptible
to infection. Because he is so tiny he is generally an object of interest
and curiosity to neighbours and friends who come to visit him. In his
interest this should not be allowed. Even a common cold in an attendant
or visitor can easily lead to a fatal pneumonia in a premature baby. For
this reason, isolate him as far as possible; have no unnecessary visitors
and as few attendants as can be. If mother or nurse develops a cold, she
should tie a pad of four or five layers of gauze over her nose and mouth
while attending to the child.
Avoidance of Handling.
Handling is very harmful to the feeble premature baby. Until he
shows signs of increasing strength, do not remove him from his cot
while feeding or oiling him. Handle as little and as gently as possible
while changing him. But change of position is necessary—turn him
from one side to the other every four hours.
The management of a frail premature baby requires not only much
care and trouble, but a high degree of skill. The successful rearing of
such an infant is justly a source of pride to mother or nurse.
Premature babies often develop signs of anaemia during the early
months, and it is advisable to consult your doctor or Clinic nurse in
regard to this.
ARTIFICIAL OR UNNATURAL FEEDING.
Introduction.
The only good reasons for weaning a young baby are (1) because
the mother is' suffering from a serious form of chronic illness, such as
tuberculosis, (2) because the mother has commenced a new pregnancy,
(8) because the mother is absolutely compelled to go out to work and
she has to be separated from her baby. Never believe that your milk
disagrees with your baby, unless you are overfeeding him. To give
artificial food to a young baby is to undertake a very serious respon-
sibility. You want to be quite sure (1) that artificial food is really
necessary, and (2) that you are giving the best obtainable substitute for
the natural food, and are giving it in the best way. This is especially
true in the case of a very young or weakly baby. If it is not really
necessary, you may be making a fatal mistake. If the food is unsuitable,
or given wrongly, the baby may be starved or made very ill. After the
first six months the risks are less, but even then serious injury may result.
24


Babies vary very much in their powers of digestion. The food on
which one baby thrives, is often a food on which other babies waste.
Never, therefore, fail to obtain the best advice possible. Visit
or write to the nearest Baby Clinic, and the nurse will be
only too pleased to give you all the help she can, all
the more pleased that you have consulted her beforehand.
Many mothers try various foods on the advice of friends or are
influenced by reading advertisements, and upset their babies before
taking the best advice. If you have done this, delay no longer, consult
your doctor or the Clinic before your baby gets worse. The Clinic
nurse will make a special study of your baby, and find out by care-
ful trial what agrees with him best, for no two babies are quite alike.
The perfect artificial food, which never disagrees, is found only in
advertisements, not in real life. You may do more harm by making
mistakes in the feeding in two or three weeks than the nurse may
be able to correct in two or three months.
Milk is the only food for babies. When good fresh cow’s milk
is available, this is better than dried or preserved milk. Fresh goat’s
milk is equally good, and may be given in just the same way. We
advise Western mothers to give goat’s milk instead of cow’s milk.
Measurements.
Great mistakes are made in measuring with teaspoons and table-
spoons. For instance, a tablespoon should hold half a fluid ounce,
but most tablespoons hold nearly a whole fluid ounce. It is therefore
necessary either to use a medicine glass, or to use the feeding bottle, the
marks on which are usually fairly accurate, or a standard glass or
enamel pint measure marked in fluid ounces.
Be careful in measuring sugar or dried milk. For measuring these
use the mothercraft spoon or other standardised measure. Household
spoons vary in size and can never be used unless tested by your Clinic
nurse or by your chemist. For measuring dried milk use the measure
supplied. With cane sugar it is only necessary to take up a heaped
spoonful and scrape it off level with the back of a knife. Milk sugar
must be pressed down as tightly as you can with the flat side of a
knife before levelling, and to do this you must hold the spoon firmly
between the thumb and finger placed close to the bowl. Do not rest
the spoon on the table while pressing down but hold it over the
tin. Dried milk must be firmly pressed down into the measure in the
same way. The Clinic nurse will be pleased to show you how to make
these measurements.


Method of Using Artificial Food.
When a baby is first put on artificial food he should never be
given the full strength suitable to his age and weight all at once.
You should begin with a mixture about half strength, and gradually
increase it to full strength. This is to make it easy for the babe to
learn to digest this unaccustomed food without being upset. You
must not expect him to gain much weight, if any, during this beginning
period; but this is much better than seeing him lose weight from failing
to digest this new food at the start, and perhaps have a serious setback.
The time taken to arrive at full strength will depend on the infant’s
progress, but prolonged underfeeding must be avoided.
As the baby grows bigger he needs more food. This you can
give him by gradually increasing the quantity. Never increase the
amount of milk and emulsion at the same time. Never increase the
proportion of sugar at any time. Do not increase either the quantity
or strength of the mixture unless the baby is digesting well what he
is taking.
It is impossible to give a scale that will suit every baby. The
mother should ask herself, “Is the baby digesting his food, or is he
passing undigested milk in his motions ? ” “Is he satisfied and happy ?’ ’
If he cries, “Does he cry because he is hungry, or because he is
uncomfortable and troubled with colic and wind?” And finally, “Is
he gaining weight?” If he is troubled with pains and passes
undigested food in his motions, he is getting too much food, or food he
cannot digest. If he cries with hunger and does not gain weight, he
needs more food, and, provided his motions are healthy, the quantity
or strength of the mixture may be increased gradually. In cases of
indigestion the milk must be greatly reduced, or even stopped
altogether for a day or two (giving whey instead), and then gradually
worked up again. Overfeeding is a very common mistake. If baby is
h a PPy and gaining weight, he is getting enough; to give him more will
overtax his digestion and may result in a digestive upset. Feel your
way carefully when you increase his diet. (For signs and symptoms
of underfeeding and overfeeding, see table on page 19.)
Whatever mixture is being given, the baby must have sufficient
fluid. The quantity of water needed is greater in warm weather, when
the amount of nourishment needed is rather less than in cold weather.
Every baby should be given water to drink between feeds. A thirsty
baby is not the same thing as a hungry baby, and babies should never
suffer from thirst. The baby should not be left to suck at a bottle of
water, because he may use it as a dummy.


MIXTURE No. 1.
Constituents.
5 oz.
10 oz.
15 oz.
20 oz.
Cow’s Milk
Whey
Sugar of Milk..
Boiled Water ..
li oz. j
3J oz. !
2 teaspoonfuls 1
5 oz. j
3 oz.
7 oz.
] tablespoonful
10 oz.
MIXTURE No. 2.
Constituents.
6 oz.
10 oz.
15 oz.
20 oz.
Cow’s Milk
Whey . .
Sugar of Milk..
Boiled Water ..
1J oz.
2 oz.
1J teaspoonfuls
li oz.
3J oz.
4 oz.
3J teaspoonfuls
2J oz.
5J oz.
6 oz.
1 tablespoonful
li teaspoonful
3J oz.
7 oz.
8 oz.
1 tablespoonful
3J teaspoonfula
6 oz.
When sugar of milk is not available, cane sugar may be used.
ARTIFICIAL FEEDING MIXTURES.
Whey.
Whey is not a complete food, and should not be given alone for
any length of time, but it is sometimes very useful as a temporary food.
It may be given for a few days to babies who have been badly upset
by overfeeding or wrong feeding, and also for a short time to others
who are recovering from attacks of diarrhoea, for in these cases even
diluted milk may cause a relapse. It may be given to babies who have
been weaned suddenly, and to young or delicate babies who have
temporary need of a complement. Finally, it may be used during the
transition stage when passing to whey-milk and milk and water mixture.
Whey-Milk Mixtures.
(For use in the feeding of weakly babies and young babies who have
been suddenly weaned and babies under the age of one to two months
requiring a complement, see pages 6, 9,19.)
One fluid ounce = 2 tablespoonfuls.
The spoons referred to in these tables are mothereraft spoons or
other standardised spoons.
As baby becomes stronger, the following mixtures may be given in
rotation. Do not increase the strength of the mixture while he is happy
and gaining weight normally. Be guided by his gain in weight (see
weight chart, facing page 68), the state of his nutrition, and the
character of his motions. (See page 52.) The amount of his food may
be increased according to the table on page 29. Where possible, consult
your doctor or Clinic nurse before making a change.
27


MIXTURE No. 3.
Constituents.
5 oz.
10 oz.
15 oz.
30 oz.
Cow’s Milk
Sugar
Boiled Water ..
2 oz.
2} teaspoonfuls
3 oz.
4J oz.
1 tablespoonful
1£ teaspoonful
5J oz.
6J oz.
2 tablespoonfuls
8J oz.
12J oz.
4 tablespoonfuls
17J oz.
Emulsion to be
given gradually
(see page 29)
If teaspoonfuls
3J teaspoonfuls
1 tablespoonful
IJ teaspoonfuls
2 tablespoonfuls
3 teaspoonfuls
MIXTURE No. 4.
Constituents.
5 oz.
10 oz.
15 oz.
30 oz.
Cow’s Milk
Sugar
Boiled Water ..
2J oz.
2J teaspoonfuls
2J oz.
5 oz.
1 tablespoonful
1 teaspoonful
5 oz.
7J oz.
1 tablespoonful
3} teaspoonfuls
7j oz.
15 oz.
3 tablespoonfuls
3 teaspoonfuls
15 oz.
Emulsion to be
given gradually
(see page 29)
1J teaspoonfuls
3 teaspoonfuls
4| teaspoonfuls
9 teaspoonfuls
MIXTURE No. 5.
Constituents.
5 oz.
10 oz.
15 oz.
30 oz.
Cow’s Milk
Sugar ..
Boiled Water ..
3J oz.
2 teaspoonfuls
IJ oz.
6J oz.
1 tablespoonful
J teaspoonful
3J oz.
10 oz.
1 tablespoonful
2 teaspoonfuls
5 oz.
20 oz.
3 tablespoonfuls
10 oz.
Emulsion to be
given gradually
(see page 29)
1 teaspoonful
2 teaspoonfuls
3 teaspoonfuls
6 teaspoonfuls
MIXTURE No. 6.
Constituents.
6 oz.
10 oz.
15 oz.
30 oz.
Cow’s Milk
Sugar
Boiled Water ..
3J oz.
l| teaspoonfuls
IJ oz.
7J oz.
3J teaspoonfuls
2J oz.
11 oz.
5J teaspoonfuls
4 oz.
22J oz.
2 tablespoonfuls
3 teaspoonfuls
7J oz.
Emulsion to be
given gradually
(see page 29)
i teaspoonful
1J teaspoonfuls
2£ teaspoonfuls
5 teaspoonfuls
Milk and Water Mixtures.
(For use in the feeding of normal babies and babies over the age of
one or two months requiring a complement, see page 19.)


Age.
Number of Feedings and
Intervals In 24 Hours.
Oz. at each Feed.
Total in 24 Hours.
Oz,
Oz.
Third Week
Five
4-hourly
4
20
or Six
3-hourly ..
3
18
Fourth Week
Five
4-hourly
4i
21
or Six
3-hourly
H
21
Fifth Week
Five
4-hourly
22J
or Six
3-hourly
3J
22
Fifth to Eighth Week ..
Five
4-hourly
5
25
or Six
3-hourly
4
24
Third month
Five
4-hourly
5i
27J
or Six
3-hourly
H
27
Fourth month
Five
4-hourly
6
30
Fifth month
Five
4-hourly
6i
32i
Sixth month
Five
4-hourly
7
35
Seventh month ..
Five
4-hourly
7i
37J
Eighth month
Five
4-hourly
8
40
Ninth month
Five
4-hourly
8
40
Amount of Food Required by the Average Baby Fed Artificially.
(For advice regarding the number of, and intervals between,
feedings, see page 8.)
For amount required by premature infants, see page 23.
For table of average weights at different ages, see page 68.
Emulsion.
These mixtures do not include extra fat because some babies show
an intolerance for fat, particularly during the hot weather. The first
signs of intolerance will be shown by the passing of pale, curdy motions
and a tendency to vomit. Fat is usually added in the form of a cod liver
oil emulsion. This is added gradually. Do not add emulsion until baby
is 6 weeks old unless ordered by your doctor.
Begin by adding one drop twice a day. The simplest method of
doing this is by placing the emulsion in a scalded spoon and dipping
the teat of the feeding bottle into it before commencing the feed. Every
week double the amount of emulsion given until 16 drops are given
during the day. This is equivalent to half the amount contained in a
mothercraft teaspoon. The following week give f teaspoonful during
the day divided into three portions and the week after 1 teaspoonful.
After this, the amount of emulsion may be increased each week by \
a teaspoonful in the day until 5 teaspoonfuls are given daily. When
the proportion of cow’s milk in the mixture is increased, the amount
of emulsion is reduced.


In the hot districts of the State when your child does not seem able
to tolerate much fat, give concentrated vitamin extract, such as Halivol,
Radiostoleum, &c. Ask your doctor or Clinic nurse for advice regarding
this.
Fruit and Vegetable Juices.
After the first month or two a bottle-fed infant must have fruit
juice daily, and a breast-fed infant after the third month. Orange juice
or sweetened lemon juice is best, but tomato or pineapple juice may be
used. Commence with half a teaspoonful, in twice that quantity of
water, once daily, and increase gradually to a dessertspoonful twice
daily. If fruits cannot be obtained, twice the amount of the juice of swede
turnips or carrots may be used. To obtain the juice, do not peel the
vegetables, but wash well, and dip into boiling water for a few seconds.
Then grate, and squeeze the juice out through muslin. Give this to baby
twice daily between meals.
Care of Cow’s Milk.
The milk should be received in a scalded vessel, covered with a
dustproof cover, and placed in a milk cooler, ice chest, or refrigerator
till the mother is ready to prepare the milk mixture.
Method for Preparing Modified Milk.
1. Boil all utensils used.
2. Measure and mix together the cow’s milk, boiled water, and sugar
of milk.
3. Put into a scalded saucepan, bring quickly to the boil, stir well,
and strain through boiled butter muslin into a scalded jug.
4. Stand the jug in a large soup plate or basin of cold boiled water
covered with a large square of boiled butter muslin.
5. Keep in a cool, airy place, milk cooler, ice chest, or refrigerator.
Dried Milks.
When good, fresh milk cannot be obtained, we may have to use
dried cow’s milk, which is sold under the names of “Glaxo,” “Prescrip-
tion Glaxo,” “Lactogen,” and “Vi-laetogen.” These are excellent
foods, but are more expensive and much less easily managed than fresh
milk. In consequence, very young or delicate babies often fail to digest
dried milk. It is a common mistake to give a baby more dried milk
than he can digest. It may seem easier to use dried milk, but in actual
practice it is more difficult to use it successfully than it is to use good,
fresh boiled or pasteurised milk.
Sometimes a teaspoon of maltogen instead of an equal quantity
of sugar may be added to each feed with advantage, especially if the
baby is constipated. The nurse at the nearest Clinic will help you with
your feeding table.


Goat’s Milk.
The goat has been called the poor man’s cow, because its initial
cost is small. She takes up little room, produces twice as much milk per
body weight as the cow, and has a wide range of food that is relatively
cheaper than that of the cow. Goat’s milk has been tried extensively
in infant hospitals and elsewhere, as a substitute for cow’s milk. It is
modified just as cow’s milk is modified. As far as is known, the
composition and behaviour of the two milks is practically identical.
The fat globules are smaller than those of cow’s milk, and of more
uniform size. On standing, practically no cream layer is formed, and
the cream cannot be separated by the centrifuge. Its freshness in
localities where cow’s milk cannot be procured is an advantage.
Goats are said to be relatively immune to tuberculosis. The milk
has a peculiar odour and taste which might be objectionable to the older
child, but would not be so to the baby.
Prescription for Goat’s Milk.
(10-oz. Mixture.)
Goat’s Milk .. .. oz.
Sugar of Milk .. .. 1 tablespoonful and 1£ teaspoonfuls
Boiled Water .. .. 5f oz.
The following special mixtures' are to be used on the advice of your
doctor: —
Lactic Acid Milk.
Cow’s milk requires for its digestion considerably more acid
than does human milk. Strong healthy babies can usually produce
all the acid needed, but babies with weak digestive power cannot
always do so. For them, and especially for newborn babies, when
these have unfortunately to be fed on cow’s milk, and for babies
whose digestion has' been impaired by many weeks of unsuccessful
attempts at artificially feeding, the addition of acid to the milk is
extremely useful.
The best acid for this purpose is lactic acid, which can be obtained
from any chemist. Having prepared one pint (20 ounces) of the
baby’s food, add to it, drop by drop, half a teaspoonful (30 drops)
of lactic acid, stirring briskly all the time. The milk mixture must be
cold when the acid is being added. Measure the acid in a small glass
measure obtained from the chemist. Some mothers find it easier first to
add the half teaspoonful to an ounce of the water and then mix it
gradually to the other 19 ounces. If you are making half a pint (10
ounces) you will of course add only 15 drops of the acid.


For the mother’s use in the home, the lactic acid may be dilated as
follows:
Lactic Acid (75%) .. .. .. 1 oz.
Boiled Water 7 oz.
1. To twenty ounces of the milk mixture, add one tablespoonful
of this mixture.
2. To ten ounces of the milk mixture, add two teaspoonfuls.
3. To five ounces', add one teaspoonful of this mixture.
Another method is to buy a bottle of lactone syrup, which is a
mixture of lactic acid and com syrup, and to add 1 ounce of this to
plain or diluted milk without sugar. This method has given good
results; but we prefer plain lactic acid, as' we can add this to any
mixture of milk, water, and sugar that we want to use. It is also
cheaper.
When the baby has gained two pounds or more in weight, he will
probably be able to digest cow’s milk without lactic acid. Try him on
half the quantity of lactic acid. If he does' well on this for one week,
put him on to the same proportions of milk and water without any
acid.
Peptonised Milk.
This is milk that has been partly digested. It is troublesome to
prepare and should be given only when other methods of feeding have
failed. It is' not suitable for babies who are suffering from “gastro-
enteritis.” Its chief use is with very delicate babies during the early
weeks or months.
The mixture of two parts of milk with one part of water should be
raised to blood heat, the peptonising powder added, and the mixture
kept at this heat by standing the jug in moderately hot water for half
an hour or longer until it gets a slightly bitter flavour. It is then
poured into a saucepan and brought quickly to the boil, then cooled,
after which it can be kept cold for twelve hours, but must be prepared
fresh twice daily. To 3 oz. of the peptonised milk mixture add 1 oz. of
boiled water and two flat teaspoonfuls of sugar. When the baby has
gained a pound or two in weight, the time during which the milk
is peptonised should be gradually reduced, so that the baby is gradually
accustomed to digest the milk without peptonisation.
Condensed Milk.
This is a concentrated milk containing a large proportion of added
sugar. It is sometimes useful as a temporary food for very young
or weakly babies. One flat teaspoonful in 3 oz. of boiled water may
be given at first—that is, one part of condensed milk in twenty-four of
water—and this should be gradually increased until the baby is taking


linB, or one teaspoonful in each ounce, giving 3,4, or 5 oz. Some use
stronger mixtures than this, but it is better to gradually substitute
cow’s milk or dried milk, a little at a time, until the condensed milk
is completely replaced. Babies may flourish for a time on condensed
milk, but it contains too much sugar and too little milk to build up
strong babies.
Proprietary or Patent Foods.
There are a great many of these, but they can be divided into two
classes.
Firstly, foods to be given with milk. These consist of cereals in
which the starch has been acted on by malt. They are occasionally
useful. Mellin’s Food and maltogen, which contain no unmalted starch,
are the most suitable for very young infants.
Secondly, foods which contain malted flour mixed with dried milk.
We do not recommend the use of any of these. Though some babies
have done fairly well on them, many have done very badly.
Practical Points in Bottle Feeding.
Let us consider some of the practical difficulties associated with
artificial feeding.
Bottle.—There are two types of bottles in general use; one is the
upright, the other is the boat-shaped. There are advantages in using
the upright one. It can be easily stood in a jug of hot or cold water to
bring the food to the right temperature, the rounded inside surface is
easily cleaned, and valves which are an added source of infection are
unnecessary.
Teat.—A straight, firm teat is the best. The difficulty is to find a
teat which will allow the milk to come through at the right rate. When
the bottle containing the milk mixture is inverted, a moderate-sized
drop should hang from the tip of the teat. If the hole allows the
mixture to run through, discard it; if no drop appears, enlarge the hole
with a sewing needle which has been sterilised by dipping it in boiling
water. Baby should finish his bottle in 15 to 20 minutes.
The utensils needed for bottle-feeding baby should be kept on a
separate table or tray and covered with a large square of boiled butter
muslin weighted at the comers. The following are used when preparing
the food: —
A large aluminium saucepan to sterilise the utensils.
A small aluminium saucepan for boiling the milk mixture.
A glass measure to measure the quantities of milk and water.
A mothercraft or lactogen measuring spoon,
A large enamel plate to stand measures and jug on when mixing
the food.


Medicine Bottle. (2
ounces.) Used for giving
boiled water to young
infants.
USE.
Upright Feeder.
(4 ounces.)
SOME TYPES OF FEEDING BOTTLE IN
Pyrex Upright Feeder.
(8 ounces.)
“Natural” Feeder.
(8 ounces.)
34


Two household spoons to stir milk mixture.
One knife for levelling off the sugar in the measuring spoon.
Two jugs or mugs for milk mixture and boiled water.
One large soup plate or basin in which to stand milk mixture.
Squares of butter muslin for covering baby’s milk mixture and
boiled water.
One standard glass or enamel pint measure, marked in fluid
ounces.
Two scalded pie dishes —one in which to place the bottles, the
other to be used as a cover.
One scalded saucer in which to stand the teats, covered by a
clean cup.
Two bottles and teats. A jar of soft soap with bottle brush to
use when washing bottles. A covered jar of salt for cleaning teat, after
feeding.
Sugar of milk or cane sugar.
Cod Liver Oil Emulsion such as Hypol or Clinic Emulsion.
To Clean Bottles. —Have ready always a soap jelly made by
boiling \ lb. of shredded soap in 1 pint of water. Keep this in a
preserving jar with a cover.
After baby’s bottle is used, rinse immediately under cold running
water, and then with warm water. Leave a little warm water in the
bottle, dip a stiff bottle-brush into the soap jelly, then brush inside
of bottle until perfectly clean. Einse with clean water, and protect
from dust and flies, by keeping in a covered pie dish.
Once a day, or preferably twice a day, before use wrap bottle in a
small towel or piece of flannel, put in a saucepan, cover completely with
cold water, which must be brought to the boil and kept boiling for two
or three minutes'.
To Clean Teats. —Einse first in cold water (preferably under a
tap), then in warm water. Place a teaspoonful of salt in your hand,
and rub the teat briskly and firmly between your palms. This cleanses
the outside of the teat. Eepeat the process with the salt put inside the
teat, and this should remove all the scum of milk from the rubber. If
the inside of the teat is not perfectly clean, turn it inside out, and
repeat the cleaning with salt. Einse in boiled water, put on a clean
saucer, invert a cup over it, and leave in a cool place until needed.
Before use place in boiling water for one minute, then into cold
boiled water to cool it rapidly. This last helps to preserve the rubber.
Heat, exposure to strong light, prolonged boiling, and soaking in water
nil cause rubber to perish.
Two teats and two bottles should always be kept.
35


UNTENSILS REQUIRED FOR ARTIFICIAL FEEDING.


Baby’s Pood while Travelling.
With breast-fed babies the mother should have no difficulty.
Babies fed on cow’s milk are frequently upset while travelling by rail
or steamer. Railway carriages are very unsafe places for keeping milk,
especially in hot weather. Unless very carefully packed in ice the
milk goes bad very quickly. Thermos flasks are dangerous holders
of milk and should not be used for the baby’s milk. It is dangerous
also to procure milk from refreshment rooms, &c., as such milk can
never be quite trustworthy.
In any journey lasting more than three or four hours it will be
safer to carry some good dried milk, or for very young babies con-
densed milk, and to use this for preparing baby’s food for the short
time the journey lasts. Boiled water can always be obtained at the
stopping places. As the baby is not used to this food, give it rather
less than full strength. At the journey’s end return to the baby’s
former food.
Methods of Introducing a More Varied Diet into the Feeding of
Breast-fed and Bottle or Unnaturally Fed Infants.
A careful study of the following pages will show how new foods
may be introduced gradually into the baby’s diet as he is able to deal
with them.
The Key-word for the period is gradual. There must he no sudden
change from one food to another.
Before malting any change, consult your doctor or Clinic nurse
either personally or by letter.
Fruit juice or vegetable juice is introduced from the second to third
month, as already advised on page 30. Give baby boiled water to drink
between feeds, especially during the hot weather. It may be given
alone or flavoured with a little fruit juice.
5 to 6 Months—
-6 a.m., 10 a.m., 2 p.m., 6 p.m., 10 p.m.—Breast (or bottle in the
artificially-fed).
A smooth scraped bone once during the day will teach baby to bite.
Orange juice or vegetable juice (see recipes), 1 teaspoonful twice
a day.
6 to 7 Months —
6 a.m., 10 a.m., 2 p.m., 6 p.m., 10 p.m.—Breast (or bottle in the
artificially-fed).
Before 10 a.m. and 6 p.m. feeds: A rusk made of twice-baked bread
may be given to baby to bite on.
Bo not give arrowroot biscuit or any similar sweet, sop biscuit.
Orange juice or vegetable juice, 2 teaspoonfuls twice a day.
37


7 to 8 Months—
-6 a.m., 10 a.m., 2 p.m., 6 p.m., 10 p.m.—Breast (or bottle in the
artificially-fed).
Before 10 a.m. feed: A buttered rusk and a little marmite or vege-
mite spread on it. Unless otherwise indicated, cereal jelly may be given
with a spoon. At first, the jelly is given only to teach baby the feel of
solid food.
Commence with 1-2 teaspoonfuls of strained barley jelly with 1-2
teaspoonfuls of scalded or pasteurised milk and water mixture. The
quantity is gradually increased so that by the end of the seventh month
baby is taking one tablespoonful of the jelly with 2 to 3 teaspoonfuls of
the milk mixture over it.
Before 6 p.m. feed: A buttered rusk with marmite or vegemite.
After baby has been on the cereal jelly at 10 a.m. for one week, he
is given the same amount at this feed.
Orange juice or vegetable juice, 3 teaspoonfuls twice a day.
8 to 9 Months—
-6 a.m., 10 a.m., 2 p.m., 6 p.m., 10 p.m.—Breast (or bottle). (See
note on 10 p.m. feeding, page 41.)
Before 10 a.m. feed: Buttered rusk and marmite or vegemite.
Strained cereal jelly increasing gradually to 2 tablespoonfuls with 4-5
teaspoonfuls scalded or pasteurised whole milk over it.
Before 2 p.m. feed: Unless otherwise indicated, give strained vege-
table broth made with spinach, silver beet, or other green vegetable,
carrot, potato, choko, marrow, pumpkin (see recipe), beginning with
1 teaspoonful and gradually increasing to 2 tablespoonfuls by the end
of the eighth month. A few breadcrumbs may be added.
Before 6 p.m. feed: Buttered rusk and marmite. Cereal jelly as at
10 a.m.
Orange juice or vegetable juice, 3-4 teaspoonfuls twice a day.
9 to 10 Months—
This menu is to be used in conjunction with the weaning table on
page 41.
6 a.m., 10 a.m., 2 p.m., 6 p.m., 10 p.m.—Breast or milk mixture
(scalded or pasteurised whole milk). See note on 10 p.m. feeding on
page 41.)
38


Before 10.0 a.m. feed; Buttered rusk and marmite or yegemite.
Strained cereal jelly made from barley, unpolished rice, oatmeal, wheat-
meal or wheatgerm meal, increased gradually to 3 tablespoonfuls with
1-2 tablespoonfuls of scalded or pasteurised whole milk.
Before 2 p.m. feed: Strained vegetable broth, made to include a
small piece of liver once a week, is increased gradually to 3 tablespoon-
fuls. Breadcrumbs may be added and the broth thickened by rubbing
2 teaspoonfuls of vegetables, such as potato, pumpkin, vegetable marrow,
choko, through a sieve. J tablespoonful raw egg yolk may be added to
the broth once a week.*
Before 6 p.m. feed: Buttered rusk and marmite. Cereal as at
10 a.m.
Orange juice or vegetable juice, to 1 tablespoonful twice a day.
Emulsion as ordered.
10 to 11 Months —
Normal weaning is completed during this period. After weaning,
the allowance of milk for the day is pints. When there is difficulty
in getting the child to take his milk allowance, some may be used in
making the cereal or added to the soup, vegetables, and fruit pulp
Allowance of emulsion for the day, 3 teaspoonfuls, or as ordered.
6 a.m.: Milk mixture (milk, 6 ounces; water, 1 ounce).
10 a.m.: Strained cereal jelly, 3-4 tablespoonfuls with 2-3 table-
spoonfuls scalded or pasteurised whole milk. Buttered rusk and
marmite or vegemite. Milk mixture as at 6 a.m. Finely-grated apple
or prune pulp.
8 p.m.: Four tablespoonfuls strained vegetable broth, made to
include liver once a week, mutton broth (see recipes), and breadcrumbs,
The bt'6th may be thickened by rubbing about 1 tablespoonful of vege-
tables, such as potato, choko, squash, marrow, or pumpkin, through b
sieve. |-teaspoonful raw egg yolk may be added once a week. A puree
may he made by whipping up these vegetables with a little milk and
given instead of the broth. Fruit pulp such as apple, papaw, prune
Milk mixture as at 6 a.m.
6 p.m.: Cereal as at 10 a.m. Buttered rusk or crisp toast and
marmite. Milk mixture as at 6 a.m.
See note on 10 p.m. feeding, page 41. Orange juice or vegetable
juice, 1 tablespoonful twice a day. Emulsion as ordered.
* Begin with 2 or 3 drops of egg yolk. Some children do not tolerate egg-white
well.
39


11 to 12 Months—
-6-7 a.m.: Milk mixture (milk, 6 ounces; water, 1 ounce). Buttered
rusk.
10 a.m.; Strained cereal jelly. Four tablespoonfuls with 3-4
tablespoonfuls scalded or pasteurised whole milk. Buttered rusk or
crisp toast and marmite or vegemite, or one teaspoonful of warmed raw
egg yolk with wheatgerm breadcrumbs and butter. Milk mixture. Kaw
apple grated or papaw.
2 p.m.; 5-6 tablespoonfuls vegetable or mutton broth or bone and
vegetable broth (skim off fat; see recipes) with sieved vegetables or 1-2
tablespoonfuls vegetable puree with red meat gravy. Fruit pulp, raw
or cooked, and 1-2 tablespoonfuls milk. Boiled custard or pudding made
from sago or ground rice and containing egg. Milk mixture.
6 p.m.: Cereal as at 10 a.m. Buttered rusk or crisp toast and
marmite. Milk mixture. Orange or vegetable juice, one tablespoonful.
Emulsion as ordered.
Before making any change in baby’s diet, consult your Clinic nurse
either personally or by letter.
WEANING.
Weaning is the change-over from natural feeding to nothing but
artificial feeding. Except for very urgent reasons, the change-over
should not be made in less than fourteen days, and in the best interests
of mother and child should occupy a period of 5-6 weeks. The best
time to begin weaning is about the ninth month, and only in exceptional
and unavoidable circumstances should weaning begin before this age.
The younger the infant, the greater the risks attending the weaning.
Do not wean a baby merely because the supply of breast milk has
become small, but give complementary feedings as advised on page 18.
Even a tablespoonful of breast milk at each feeding is better than none
at all. Consult your Clinic nurse in regard to increasing your supply.
Do not wean baby during a spell of very hot weather, for he is
more likely to be upset if weaned at this time. Diarrhoea is most
prevalent immediately after the commencement of the hot weather;
November and December are the dangerous months.
In the following table a practical plan is given for weaning at the
ninth month, and it is to be used in conjunction with the menus recom-
mended for this age on page 39. If it becomes necessary to wean
baby at an earlier age, consult your Clinic nurse personally or by letter
in regard to this emergency.
40


Time.
First Week.
Second Week.
Third Week,
Fourth Week.
Fifth Week.
(ajn. ..
Breast feed
Breast feed
Breast feed
Breast feed
Milk mixture as
at 10 a.m.
10 a.m. ..
Scalded or
pasteurised
milk, 7 table-
spoonfuls ;
boiled water, 9
tablespoonfuls;
sugar, 3 level
teaspoonfuls.
Scalded or
pasteurised
milk, 8 table-
spoonfuls (=4
ounces); boiled
water, 8 table-
spoonfuls (—4
ounces); sugar,
2i level tea-
spoonfuls.
Scalded or
pasteurised
milk, 10 table-
spoonfuls ;
boiled water, 6
tablespoonfuls;
sugar, 2 level
teaspoonfuls.
Scalded or
pasteurised
milk, 11 table-
spoonflils ;
boiled water, 5
tablespoonfnls;
sugar, li level
teaspoonfuls.
Scalded or
pasteurised
milk, 12 table-
spoonfuls (=6
ounces); boiled
water, 4 table-
spoonfuls (=2
ounces); sugar
1 level tea*
spoonful.
2 p.m. ..
Breast feed
Breast feed
Milk mixture as
at 10 a.m.
Milk mixture as
at 10 a.m.
Milk mixture as
at 10 a.m.
«p.m. ..
Breast feed
Milk mixture as
at 10 a.m.
Milk mixture as
at 10 a.m.
Milk mixture as
at 10 a.m.
Milk mixture as
at 10 a.m.
10 p.m. ..
Breast feed
Breast feed
Breast feed
Milk mixture as
at 10 a.m.
Milk mixture as
at 10 a.m. (See
note on 10 p.m.
feedlng.below.)
Weaning Table.
For use in the 9th mouth in conjunction with menus recommended for this age.
(See page 39.)
The mothercraft measure or similar standardised measure is used for measuring sugar.
If you have followed this plan, baby is now entirely weaned, and
it is probable that weaning has been completed without his realising
that any change was being made. If you have followed the menus set
out on pages' 39 and 40 baby is becoming accustomed to a varied diet. He
should certainly not be allowed to share the family meals and eat scraps
of everything. For further advice, consult your Clinic nurse personally
or by letter.
At eleven or twelve months, after the baby is weaned, he may be
gradually accustomed to full strength cow’s milk, and his emulsion
may be given separately as a teaspoonful twice or thrice a day.
This general guide will not succeed with every baby and will
often need modification. If you are in any difficulty, consult the
nearest Baby Clinic personally or by letter.
The 10 p.m. Feeding.
With regard to the 10 p.m. feeding, some well-developed, strong
babies a few months old take sufficient food in four feeds to last them
for the twenty-four hours. These are the exception. Most require to be
fed five times until about nine months old. At any time after this the
child may be fed four times, providing he will take the required amount
of nourishment in these feeds. His development—firmness and state of
nutrition —his state of well-being and contentment checked by his
weekly gain in weight will be your guide. Make a habit of referring
to the weight chart facing page 68. The shaded area represents
variations which may occur in normal children. If the weight of your
baby falls below this, consult your doctor or Clinic nurse.


GUIDE TO THE ARTIFICIAL FEEDING OF BABIES AFTER
THE NORMAL WEANING PERIOD.
Important Points to Remember. —Remember that at this stage food
tastes and habits are formed which may last a lifetime.
1. Teach baby to drink out of a cup. Give the drinks from a cup,
first at one feed (say, the 10 a.m.), then at two feeds in the day, and so
on, thus discontinuing bottle feeding gradually.
2. Keep absolutely to regular meal times. Give nothing whatever
but water and fruit juice between meals.
3. Up to two years of age the child may be given 1| pints of milk
daily. Solid food is introduced gradually in small quantities to train
the baby’s digestion. After he is two years old, he should continue to
take not less than one pint of milk daily.
4. Teach baby to eat each new food that is good for him. Do not
let him start the bad habit of refusing food because he does not like it.
If persevered with, babies like almost anything that is good for them.
They will not want the things which are bad for them, if they have
never tasted them. Do not let them get the taste for cake or sweets.
5. Active exercise for teeth, jaws, and salivary glands is absolutely
necessary. Baby must be taught to chew, not to bolt his food, and, as
time goes on, to take more and more of his food in hard form.
Remember that hard, crisp baked wholemeal bread, with butter or drip-
ping and a drink of milk, is just as nourishing and better for teeth and
digestion than a basin of bread and milk, and crisp hard oatcake is just
as good as soft porridge. Do not give arrowroot biscuits or any similar
sweet, soft biscuit.
6. Do not add too much sugar to baby’s food. It is bad for the
teeth and the digestion,
7. Cook all foods thoroughly and serve appetisingly. Add a little
salt in cooking, but no soda. (See hints on cooking, page 106.)
8. Children should not be continually urged to eat if they are
disinclined to do so. Under no ordinary circumstances should a child
be forced to eat.
9. If there is any important article of a simple diet, such as milk,
meat, cereals, or vegetables, which a child habitually refuses, this should
be gradually worked in with the food he takes readily. When he refuses
to drink milk from a cup or a glass allow him to use a straw.
10. Always give the most substantial meal in the middle of the
day. Never give a young child a meal of meat and vegetables before
he goes to bed at night.
11. Although he is learning to eat other things milk is still his
principal food until he is two years old.


SUMMARY OF INFANT FEEDING DURING THE FIRST YEAR.
Breast Feeding.
Breast feeding is the ideal method until the child reaches nine
months. A new born baby should receive nothing but cool boiled water
until lactation becomes established on the third day. (See page 9.) If
the supply begins to fail or any other difficulty arises, consult your Clinic
nurse. If the mother fails to respond to the measures used to increase
the supply of breast milk, complementary feeding may be used, but
no milk, other than expressed breast milk, is to be given before the child
is seven days old. (See page 9.)
Artificial Feeding.
The only good reasons for weaning a baby before nine months are
three in number, and are mentioned on page 16. Before giving any
artificial food, whether as a complement to breast feeding or as a com-
plete feeding, visit or write to the nearest Baby Clinic to find out if
baby requires artificial food, and, if so, the best food to give him.
(See page 24.)
Additions other than Milk to Baby’s Diet.
(See pages 37 and 40 for details.)
All changes and additions to baby’s diet must be made very
gradually. Orange juice is introduced in the second-third month.
5 to 6 Months—
A smooth-scraped bone teaches baby to bite. Orange juice or
vegetable juice.
6 to 7 Months—
A rusk to bite on. Orange or vegetable juice.
7 to 8 Months—
A buttered rusk with a little marmite or vegemite. Cereal jelly.
Orange or vegetable juice.
8 to 9 Months—
Buttered rusk and marmite or vegemite. Cereal jelly. Strained
vegetable broth and breadcrumbs. Orange or vegetable juice.
9 to 10 Months —
Buttered rusk and marmite or vegemite. Cereal jelly. Strained
vegetable broth thickened with vegetables and made to include liver
once a week. Breadcrumbs. Raw egg yolk (|-teaspoonful) is added to
broth once a week. Orange or vegetable juice. Emulsion as ordered.


10 to 11 Months—
Buttered rusk with marinite or vegemite. Cereal jelly. Strained
vegetable broth thickened with vegetables, or mutton or bone and
vegetable broth or vegetable puree. Raw egg yolk (-J-teaspoonful) is
added to broth. Fruit pulp. Orange or vegetable juice. Emulsion
as ordered.
11 to 12 Months—
Buttered rusk, marmite or vegemite, or warmed egg yolk spread on
it. Breadcrumbs buttered and one teaspoonful raw egg yolk. Broth
or vegetable puree with red meat gravy. Fruit. Milk and whipped-up
ripe banana. Boiled custard or milk pudding, containing egg yolk.
Orange or vegetable juice. Emulsion as ordered.
FEEDING DURING SECOND YEAR.
MENUS.
12 to 15 Months—
On Waking (6 or 7 a.m.).
Crust or rusk with butter.
Milk or milk mixture .. .. .. .. 6 to 8 ounces
Breakfast (10 a.m.).
Rusk or baked crust with butter, dripping, or
bacon fat.
Cereal jelly (oat, wheatmeal, &c., with whole
milk) .. .. .. .. .. .. 4to 5 tablespoonfuls
Milk or milk mixture .. .. . . .. 6 to 8 ounces
or—
Crisp toast with butter, marmite, honey, or acid
jam without seeds or skin.
Granose biscuit or weetbix wuth whole milk over i to 1 biscuit
Milk or milk mixture .. .. .. 6 to 8 ounces
Dinner (2 p.m.).
Baked crust.
Mutton or vegetable broth with sieved vegetables 3 to 4 ounces
Baked apple cooked with dates or honey .. Ito 2 tablespoonfuls
Creamy milk or junket 1 tablespoonful
Milk or milk mixture .. .. .. .. 4 to 6 ounces
Raw apple .. .. ■. .. .. .. Small piece, grated
if necessary
or—
Scraped bone.
Floury baked potato (English and sweet) .. Ito 2 tablespoonfuls
Sieved vegetables (pumpkin, marrow, spinach,
white of cauliflower) .. .. .. .. Ito 2 tablespoonfnln
Red meat gravy 1 tablespoonful
44


Milky sago pudding .. .. .. .. Ito 2 tablespoonfuls
Milk or milk mixture .. .. .. .. 4 to 6 ounces
•Eaw apple Small piece
or—
Coddled egg .. .. .. • • i yolk, increasing
gradually to whole
egg 2 or 3 times a
week
Spinach puree .. . . .. .. .. Ito 2 tablespoonfuls
Floury baked potato mashed with butter .. Ito 2 tablespoonfuls
Fruit pulp (tinned peach or apricot) .. . . 2to 4 teaspoonfuls
Milky rice pudding .. .. .. .. Ito 2 tablespoonfuls
Milk or milk mixture .. .. .. .. 4 to 6 ounces
•Raw apple Small piece
It is a good idea to give raw ripe fruit in season occasionally
instead of cooked fruit with junket or milk pudding. Pulped peaches,
papaw, or grated apple are usually well digested.
Orange, tomato, or other fresh fruit juice should be given with
water once or twice daily between meals.
Towards the end of this period, when the child is about fourteen
months old, 1 teaspoonful brains, stewed, and given with milk sauce, or
1 teaspoonful light fish, such as whiting, steamed or baked, may be
included in this meal twice a week.
Tea.—
Crisp toast, rusks, or baked crusts .. .. 2or 3 fingers
Butter or dripping and/or jam or honey.
Cereal jelly with whole milk .. .. .. 4or 5 tablespoonfuls
Milk or milk mixture .. .. .. .. 8 ounces
Between 15 and 18 Months—
Baby should now be graded on to three meals daily, although if
sufficient milk is not taken the milk drink in the early morning should
be continued. Otherwise, orange or other fruit juice should be given, or
a piece of ripe, raw fruit, such as apple, if baby chews it well. Baby
should continue to have 1 to 1| pints of milk a day to drink with a little
added water if the weather is very hot.
Arrange the meals on the same lines as for the previous period,
increasing the quantities gradually, according to the child’s age, appe-
tite, and ability to deal with the food. A little unstrained porridge
should now be added to the cereal jellies, increasing until baby is having
completely unstrained porridge. Give more solid, dry and hard foods,
such as toast, rusks, and wheatmeal bread, which will train the baby
• Make sure that your baby can chew the apple well.


to chew, rather than much soft, mushy food. A dry evening meal with
a drink of milk after it should be given as soon as baby will take it welL
Good chewing is necessary for digestion and the proper development of
jaws and teeth. At this age you may add to the menus previously
given—
Light fish, such as whiting (steamed or baked).. 1 to 2 teaspoonfuls
Chicken (steamed or boiled and minced) . . Ito 2 teaspoonfuls
Brains (stewed and with milk sauce) .. .. Ito 2 teaspoonfuls
Egg (coddled or lightly boiled) .. .. .. 1 (2 or 3 times
weekly)
Between 18 Months and 2 years—
Early morning drink Fruit juice and water.
Breakfast (7.30 to 8 a.m.).
Rusk or crust of wholemeal or wheatgerm meal
bread with butter .. .. .. .. lor 2 fingers
Whole wheatmeal or oatmeal porridge .. .. 6to 8 tablespoonfuls
(with milk 2 to 3 ounces)
Milk or milk and water .. .. .. .. 6to 8 ounces
Piece of raw apple.
or—
Toast made of wholemeal bread, with butter.
Baked or stewed apple .. .. .. .. 1 apple
Milk or milk and water .. .. .. .. 6to 8 ounces
Piece of raw apple.
or—
Orange or grapefruit .. .. .. .. \to 1
Dry cereal (such as granose biscuit) wdth butter 1 biscuit
Milk or milk and water .. .. .. .. 6to 8 ounces
Piece of raw, ripe apple.
Dinner (12 to 1 p.m.).
Fish, brains, chicken, or rabbit (steamed or
stewed) .. .. .. .. .. .. 2to 3 teaspoonfuls
Potato (English or sweet, baked or boiled in
jacket, and mashed) .. .. .. .. 1 (small)
White of cauliflower or baked pumpkin (well
mashed with butter) 1 to 2 tablespoonfuls
Baked or boiled custard with stewed fruit .. Ito 2 tablespoonfuls
Milk .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4to 6 ounces
Piece of raw apple.
or—
Wholemeal rusks .. .. .. .. .. lor 2 fingers
Mutton or vegetable broth with sieved vegetables 3 to 4 ounces
Baked rice or sago pudding (milky) .. .. 2to 4 tablespoonfuls
Milk .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4to 6 ounces
Orange .. .. .. .. .. .. 1
46


or—
Coddled egg •. • • • • • • .. 1 egg
Spinach,lettuce, or other leafy vegetable (sieved) Ito 2 tahlespoonfuls
Potato (baked or boiled in jacket and mashed) 1 (small)
Milk jelly or blanc-mange, with fruit juice.
Milk .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4to 6 ounces
Piece of raw apple.
or—
Wholemeal rusks 1 or 2 fingers
Potato (baked in jacket) or tomato (without
skin or seeds) .. .. .. . • 1 (small)
Vegetables (young green peas or French beans,
carrot, marrow, or young corn on cob) .. Jto 1 tablespoonful
of at least two
vegetables
Meat gravy .. .. .. • .. .. 1 tablespoonful
Junket with ripe mashed papaw or prune pulp,
or other ripe fruit in season, such as peaches
and grapes (remove pips and skins) and
whipped bananas.*
Milk .. .. .. .. .. .. 4 to 6 ounces
Piece of raw apple.
Tea (4.30 to 5.30 p.m.).
Wholemeal bread sandwiches filled with grated
cheese, tomato pulp, marmite, dates, or pea-
nut butter.
Drink of milk or milk and water .. .. .. 6 to 8 ounces
or—
Oatcake or wholemeal bread with butter .. lor 2 pieces
Dates or prune or apple pulp.
Drink of weak cocoa made with milk .. .. 6 to 8 ounces
•Be specially careful in the use of tomatoes and bananas. Remove skins and
seeds of tomatoes. Bananas must be ripe but not over-ripe; they must be mashed and
whipped up with a fork. Begin by giving one teaspoonful and gradually increase.
47


Baby’s Bath, Bed, and Bowels
Baby’s Bath.
A baby must have a daily bath, which should be given at the
same time each day. Always arrange to give it just before a feed is
due; never immediately after a feed. At least an hour should elapse
after a meal, before a bath is given.
A proper baby bath is required; a bedroom basin is not sufficiently
large except for the first few days.
See that everything is in readiness before undressing baby.
Choose a place sheltered from draughts; in winter a warm room is
needed. Get ready a complete outfit of clean clothes so placed that the
articles lie one on top of the other, in the order in which they will
be required when dressing baby. Get ready also two washers, a cake
of good baby soap, two Turkish towels', a flannel apron for the mother
to wear, and the baby bath. Powder is not a necessity if baby is very
carefully dried, but it can be used if liked.
While bathing baby the mother either sits on a low chair, with
the bath standing on another low chair in front of her, or else she places
the bath on a table by which she stands.
Put the cold water into the bath first. Never put the hot in first,
as a serious accident may happen if a mistake is made. Then add to
the cold water sufficient hot to make the bath blood heat. If no ther-
mometer is available, this is judged by placing the bare elbow in the
water, and when it feels comfortably warm to the elbow, it is the
right heat.
Hold baby out; then undress him quickly, and wrap him in a
towel. Wash his face carefully and gently, and dry it carefully. Keep
one washer specially for his face. Next soap, wash, and dry his head.
With ordinary care, there is no risk of damaging the soft spot on
the top of the head. If the mother is sitting down to give the bath,
baby is lying on her lap while his head and face are being washed;
if she is standing, he is lying on a folded blanket on the table. Now
loosen the towel from around baby, and leave him lying on it while,
with the second washer, you quickly soap and wash him all over. Then
lift him into the bath. The mother’s left arm and hand should be
behind him to support his head and back, while with the right hand


the front of his body is well rinsed with the washer. Next turn him
face downwards, still supporting him with the left arm, and again
rinse thoroughly. Lift him out, wrap him into a towel and dry quickly,
paying special attention to the creases and the backs of the ears. If left
damp they are apt to become sore. Dress him quickly; do not loiter
over the bath. Do not clean out his' mouth; it does not require it.
The very young baby usually cries violently while being bathed,
but after a few weeks he learns to enjoy it. Long after he enjoys his
bath he dislikes being dressed, and cries vigorously during the process.
In the evening, undress and sponge him, and put on his nightdress.
In summer weather a bath can be given instead of the sponging.
A feeble baby should not be bathed, but should be sponged daily.
Uncover only a small portion at a time (for example, one leg, or one
arm), wash dry, and cover again quickly. Even if baby is delicate,
the whole of his body requires washing daily.
Baby’s Bed.
Baby must be trained from birth to sleep by himself, for the follow-
ing reasons:—
By sleeping with his mother he runs the risk of being overlain
and suffocated.
Lying close to the mother, he is probably breathing his mother’s
used-up breath, instead of the pure air which he needs.
From lying close to the mother, baby becomes overheated, and
frequently develops an irritating rash.
The child is disturbed by the mother’s movements, and so sleeps
less soundly. And when wakened he develops the bad habit
of demanding to be fed during the night.
If accustomed to sleep with his mother at night he sleeps less
soundly in the daytime, because he then misses his mother.
Therefore, see that baby has his own cot, which should be placed,
not close against the mother’s bed, where he will breathe impure air,
but on the opposite side of the room, with a free current of pure air
passing between mother’s bed and baby’s cot.
The type of cot is important. Swinging cots are not good for
babies. A cot with wire gauze sides which will let down, or a wooden
cot with the bars not too wide apart, may be used.
Pillows and Mattresses for Baby’s Bed.
During a great part of his first year, baby’s head lies on a pillow,
or should do so. The use of a pillow is to support the head in a comfort-
able position. The misuse of a pillow may be actually dangerous.
Every now and again a baby is suffocated by burying its face in a big
pillow. If mothers realised the fact they would never expose the baby
to that danger. Large Soft pillows are unhealthy, because they keep


the fresh air away from the child’s air passages and make him liable
to colds and other ills. Actually baby does not need a pillow at all,
but a thin small one does no harm and is' a help in making him comfort-
able. The ideal material for a pillow is soft winnowings from barley
or oaten chaff enclosed in a case of thick soft cotton material. The
outer slip may be as pretty as you like, but avoid having any lace or
embroidery in the middle where the baby’s head lies.
Chaff is also the ideal material from which to make a shakedown
to cover the mattress. The foundation mattress should be firm, well
studded, and fairly thick. The purpose of having a shakedown on top
of this is to provide a soft, yet cool nest for baby, which can be renewed
or destroyed if accidentally wet or soiled, and safely distributes heat
if a hot water bottle is used, the bottle being placed between the two
mattresses. About 5 lb. of barley or oaten chaff enclosed in a cover
of unbleached sheeting makes a satisfactory shakedown.
During the summer in Queensland very little bed clothing is
required, but in the cold months baby’s bed may be made warm and
comfortable by placing across the cot a blanket large enough when the
mattress is placed on it for its edges to come wnll over both sides and
one end. On this place a firm mattress, and then the chaff shakedown.
Over the mattress lay a piece of blanket, and then the bottom sheet,
well tucked in all round. Put a piece of waterproof sheeting across the
centre of the bed and cover this with a draw sheet, preferably made of
flannelette. Baby comes next, and is covered loosely with a large soft
shawl or “cuddling blanket.” The sides of the large blanket are then
brought over and tucked in on the opposite side, and finally the end is
brought up and safely pinned, and baby is in a cosy sleeping bag.
Let us think again how much time baby spends in bed and spare
no pains to make that bed just right.
Sleep.
A newborn baby should sleep nine-tenths of its time—that is, almost
all the time that is not spent in feeding, bathing, &c. From birth he
must be wakened regularly during the day for his food, and permitted
to sleep all night. If he wakes during the night, change wet or soiled
napkins, and change his position. If the weather is hot, give him
some boiled water, but never feed him between 10 p.m. and his 5 or
6 a.m. feed.
As the child gets older he sleeps less; but up to the time he is
twelve months old he should have at least two hours’ sleep in the
morning and also a sleep in the afternoon. Absolute regularity is
necessary. The want of sufficient sleep may cause nervous disease in
later life.


Why Babies and Young Children do not Sleep.
All babies and young children need much sleep, but some sleep
more than others. Some allowance must be made for inborn differences.
But so long as they are healthy and properly managed, children will
take all the sleep they need. Bad management may lead to a baby
sleeping too long in the daytime, so missing some of his feeds, and
becoming wakeful and hungry in the night. If a baby is really unable
to sleep from hunger, it is better to give him a small feed in the night
than to let him cry until exhausted. But in this case the food taken
during the day has been insufficient, and the quantities must be revised.
Night-feeding easily becomes a bad habit.
If your child is sleeping badly, there is some reason for it. Con-
sider carefully whether he is not suffering from one of the common
causes of bad sleeping.
1. By far the most common cause of bad nights is overfeeding,
or feeding with food the child cannot digest, more especially if this
food is given in the afternoon or evening. It may be necessary to
lessen the whole quantity of food taken, or with older children to change
the hour of the child’s principal meal from afternoon to midday,
and to give only a very light meal at the end of the day. Feeding
between meals with bread and butter, biscuits, &e., should always be
avoided. Give less food if hot weather comes on suddenly. Some
children wake in the night screaming and frightened. These attacks
are called “night-terrors” and are almost always caused by
improper feeding. When they occur in older people they are called
nightmares.
2. Pain may cause want of sleep. This includes stomach-aches
caused by bad or overfeeding. Another common pain is qarache.
You may suspect this if the child has “a cold’ with running from the
nose or a cough. Some warm glycerine dropped into the ear and a
hot flannel to the side of the head may give relief. If the pain is
severe or persistent you must seek medical advice.
3. Some children cannot sleep on account of obstruction to their
breathing. They sleep with their mouths open, breathe heavily, some-
times snore, often toss' and roll about the bed. This is a common condi-
tion caused by adenoids. Do not delay in taking these children to
the doctor, for unless relieved they will grow steadily worse.
4. Another cause of want of sleep is over-excitement. It is very
effectual in children of nervous temperament. You may often see
these children start and twitch even when they are asleep. Late parties,
picture shows, or other exciting entertainments in the evening are bad
for all children and especially for these children. Most babies are
“jumpy” and easily startled. The father who comes 1 home late, and
enjoys a game with the little one before it goes to bed, may spoil its
night’s rest.
5. Occasionally restlessness at night is caused by thread-worms. You
may learn about this on another page.


Why do Babies Cry?
The first thing a baby does is to cry. This is how he expands his
lungs for breathing. A very young baby cries to strengthen his ehest.
Let him. In moderation, of course, a good healthy cry will do him no
harm.
A baby cries because he is hungry. This also is healthy. If he cries
after he is fed, it may be because he is not getting enough. The Clinic
nurse will probably be able to increase the quantity of your breast milk.
If not, she will advise you what to give him after each feed. Never put
a breast-fed child on full bottle feeds. If you do this, you will soon lose
what breast milk you have.
Very often a baby cries because he has colicky pains after feeding.
Sit him up after the feed, or put him over your shoulder, so that he may
easily get rid of the wind he has swallowed. If that does not soothe him,
you may be giving him the wrong food, or too much of the right food.
Overfeeding with breast milk is a common way of making crying babies.
Perhaps giving the breast soothes him for a short time but makes him
worse afterwards.
He may cry because he feels cross and irritable. This is usually due
to overfeeding or giving the wrong food. Perhaps he is thirsty in hot
weather and wants a drink of water, not milk.
He may cry because he is uncomfortable. Perhaps he has a wet
napkin, or a tight binder, or too many clothes on a hot day.
He may cry because he wants his own way. You may have taught
him to expect to be rocked to sleep, or to suck a dummy, and he cries
because he knows that will bring him what he wants'. It is very easy to
teach a young baby bad habits; not so easy to break them.
If you want to be a good mother, try to find out why your baby
cries. Do not treat him as if he were a bottle, and a dummy were the
cork.
The Bowels.
It is very important that a baby’s bowels should act regularly.
Prom the time he is one month old he should be “held out” at the same
time each day—preferably just before his bath—and in a very short
time he learns what the position means. It is a good rule also to “hold
baby out” after every drink, so training the child to clean habits and
saving the daily washing.
After birth the bowels may act several times daily, but as the
child gets older, the number of motions' usually decreases. Generally
young infants have from one to three motions each twenty-four hours.
At first the motion is dark and tarry, but after a few days it becomes
smooth and yellow, with a faint odour; it should remain like this. If
bottle-fed, the motions will be rather darker in colour and more offensive
than those of a breast-fed infant.


Constipation in Babies.
Breast-fed babies have soft motions, which are easily passed. Yet
their mothers often complain that they will not pass a motion for
several days, unless something is done to help them. Babies who pass
soft motions easily cannot be said to he constipated.
It should never be necessary to give opening medicines to a
breast-fed baby. If true constipation does occur, all that is necessary
is to improve the mother’s diet, so that her milk should contain enough
of the vitamin that helps the baby’s bowels. To do this she should
eat no white bread, but always wholemeal or wheatgerm bread, and
whole wheatmeal or wheatgerm meal porridge. If she is unable to do
this she should take one or two tablespoonfuls of wheatgerm every day.
This will cure the baby’s' constipation, and keep her own bowels
regular, too.
Do not give castor oil; its first effect is to empty the bowels, but
its second effect is to prevent them from acting. The harmful and
unnecessary practice of giving castor oil to a newborn baby starts an
irregularity which is kept up and increased by repeated doses of castor
oil. There results a condition artificially manufactured by the mother
or nurse, which she calls' “constipation.”
Do not neglect to give baby cool, boiled water between his feeds,
particularly during the hot weather, as advised on page 3.
Once or twice a day the baby should be allowed to lie without
his clothes, or with only a singlet, and exercise his legs and abdominal
muscles' by freely kicking, for fifteen or twenty minutes in. warm
weather. This will often induce a motion. If necessary he must be
held out over a pan, just touching its rim. It is a good plan to hold
out a baby after each feed. He will pass water, thus keeping his
napkin dry, and will often pass a motion. If the baby’s training has
been long neglected, these methods may not suffice. It may then he
necessary to insert the nozzle of a syringe dipped in vaseline or inject
a few teaspoonfuls of warm, plain boiled water into the bowel. A warm
cloth applied to the perineum is useful, unless the child has been
recently circumcised. Gently kneading the abdomen, beginning low on
the right side, upwards to the ribs, across, and down on the left side,
should help. Medicines should not be necessary. While these measures
are being used, correct the mother’s diet. In any case she need not be
anxious about the delayed opening of baby’s bowels while he is well
and the motions are soft and of a natural colour when they are psased.
Bottle-fed babies suffer from the same mismanagement and need
the same treatment. With them the condition is' more troublesome,
for cow’s milk is often constipating and causes firmer motions, often
in solid masses, and sometimes in small round lumps like pebbles. The
food may need adjusting, and it would be wise to consult a Clinic
M. & C.—C.


nurse. See that the baby drinks enough water. He may be
taking more milk, especially if this is dried milk, than he should. The
substitution of malt-sugar in the form of Mellin’s Food, maltogen, or
extract of malt, for some or all of the sugar in his food, or of brown
sugar instead of white, is often helpful. The addition of small quantities
of marmite will assist.
The best remedy is to add one teaspoonful of wheatgerm
to two tablespoonfuls of water, let it soak for two hours, strain through
muslin, and then give the baby one or two teaspoonfuls daily. It is
seldom necessary to give more. In most cases this is better than giving
prune juice or magnesia. Standardised paraffin oil may be used. No
other medicine should be given except on medical advice.
Some babies become constipated when being weaned. They should
be given strained wholemeal jelly instead of barley jelly.
Older children should be given whole wheatmeal or wheatgerm
meal porridge and wholemeal or wheatgerm bread.
This is very important. —Whatever medicines are given for con-
stipation, much depends on the way the medicine is given. If too large
a dose is given, or if it is given every second or third day, or once or
twice a week, the irregularity of the bowels is increased, and the
constipation may become permanent. The medicine should be given
every day at the same time, in just sufficient doses to produce its effect
and no more. The dose must be determined by trial. Once a daily
regular action has' been established, the dose should be slowly made
less, and after a time may be left off. Used rightly the medicine will
help to cure constipation; used wrongly the same medicine will make
it worse.
With proper management and proper diet, a correct amount of
vegetables and fruit, constipation should be very uncommon.


Your Child’s Teeth.
Foundations.
The foundations of both the first or temporary teeth and the
permanent teeth are laid long before birth. Every baby is born with
a mouth full of teeth, though they are under the gums and cannot be
seen. Somewhere about the seventh month—the exact age varies' much
even in healthy babies—the first tooth appears, usually a lower middle
incisor (or front tooth). Within the next two months all the incisor
teeth may be cut. About the beginning of the second year the first
milk molars (or back teeth) appear. At about eighteen months the
canine or eye teeth emerge between these and the incisors; about the end
of the second year the second milk molars. This completes the first set
of teeth, twenty in all.
Teething is not a Disease. —It is a perfectly natural process which
usually gives rise to no trouble at all. At the worst there may be a little
fretfulness and dribbling, when the gums are swollen, and occasionally
the baby is restless at night and wakes with a sharp cry. When a
baby is sick from any cause the uncut teeth appear to ache, and the
mother is apt to mistake this aching for the cause of the illness. As
all babies are “teething” from six months to two years of age, this is
a very convenient excuse for all the troubles caused by want of know-
ledge and care. Teething bands are useless; teething powders bought
at a shop are both useless and dangerous.
At birth the crowns of the first permanent molars are already
beginning to form; those of all the other permanent teeth, except the
wisdom teeth, are formed inside the gums during the first three years
of life, though they do not appear until much later. The first per-
manent molars' appear at about six years behind the milk molars.
They are often mistaken for temporary teeth, and allowed to decay
, ear ly— a very serious error, for they are intended to last a lifetime.
Within the next two years the roots of the temporary incisors are
absorbed, and they fall out, to be replaced by permanent teeth. Within
another two years the same happens to the milk molars, later still
to the canine or eye teeth, and the second permanent molars appear.
The last or wisdom teeth, which complete the permanent set of
thirty-two, come much later.
55


The Formation of Good Teeth,
No care after birth will affect the formation of the first set of
teeth. To have good teeth the baby must be bom of a healthy mother,
one who has' taken plenty of fresh air and exercise, who has chosen her
food wisely (including fresh milk, eggs, uncooked fruit, and vegetables),
but has not eaten overmuch, who has taken no alcohol, who has not been
troubled by indigestion (perhaps caused by her own bad teeth), con-
stipation, or kidney disease, and who has thus been able to supply the
good blood out of which good teeth are made.
How Decay Spreads in a Tooth.
The decay begins in a little pit or crack in the hard outer covering,
where food and germs have collected. The decay reaches the softer
inner substance of the tooth and begins to undermine the outer shell.
The outer shell breaks away, the decay spreads towards the pulp of the
tooth, poison is coming into the mouth through the open sore. The
decay has reached the pulp or “nerve” and has spread downwards;
an abscess is forming at the root of the tooth and poison is being
absorbed into the blood.
Get the little holes in your teeth stopped before they go too far!
They will never stop of their own accord!
Don’t wait till the tooth hurts! Take care of your teeth and your
teeth will take care of you.
How to Clean the Teeth.
Clean out the spaces between the teeth, first outside, then inside.
Brush along the tops of the teeth, clean the outsides of the teeth, clean
the insides, do the same to the other jaw.
Wash your mouth out well and your teeth will be clean.
As the permanent teeth are formed in the first three years of
life their good development depends on the care that is taken in those
years as well as on the mother’s diet during pregnancy. For their
perfection and durability the baby should be suckled with human milk,
the only substance which contains all the materials for forming good
teeth in best proportions. If the baby has unfortunately to be bottle-
fed in should have good cow’s milk by preference, and a small quantity
of cod liver oil emulsion.
He should have no “dummy,” which tends to deform the jaws
and crowd the teeth so that they cannot develop properly. After
weaning he should be carefully fed with right foods, including one
pint of milk daily.
When the baby is six months old he should have a bare bone to
bite. When he is seven months old he should have a tiny crust or
finger of bread baked hard and crisp in the oven. Thereafter he


HOW TO CLEAN THE TEETH.
CLEAN OUT THE SPACES BETWEEN THE TEETH
First outside.
Then inside.
Brush along the tops.
Clean the outsides.
Clean the insides.
DO THE SAME TO THE OTHER JAW.
THEN WASH YOUR MOUTH OUT WELL AND YOUR
TEETH WILL BE CLEAN.
HOW DECAY
SPREADS IN
A TOOTH.
Get the little holes in
your teeth stopped before
they go too far!
They will never stop of
their own accord!
Don't wait till the tooth
hurts!
TAKE CARE OF YOUR
TEETH AND YOUR
TEETH WILL TAKE
CARE OF YOU.
The decay begins in a
little pit or crack in the
hard outer covering, where
food and germs have
collected.
The outer shell breaks
away, the decay spreads
towards the pulp of the
tooth, poison is coming
into the mouth through
the open sore.
The decay reaches the
softer inner substance of
the tooth and begins to
undermine the outer
shell.
The decay has reached
the pulp or "nerve" and
has spread downwards; an
abscess is forming at the
root of the tooth and
poison is being absorbed
into the blood.


should be given baked bread instead of soft bread, and butter. His
crusts should be hard and crisp but not tough. Before he is two years
of age baby should have learnt to bite other hard foods, including a
piece of raw apple, which is a good tooth cleanser; but be careful that
he does not swallow any pieces that have not been broken very small.
Jaws that do no work and have no exercise will not grow strong teeth.
Mothers are destroying teeth by feeding babies entirely on pap and
mush. Crisp oatcake should sometimes be given instead of soft porridge,
or wholemeal porridge may be given after three years of age.
Any serious illness or prolonged failure of nutrition during the
first three years, although it may be completely recovered from in every
other respect, may leave the permanent teeth imperfect.
The Preservation of Good Teeth.
Children’s teeth are more precious than pearls; we wish as much
care were taken of them. School age in this State commences at six
years, and soon after entering school the children’s teeth are inspected
by the school dentists. Not more than one in ten have a clean
mouth. Of their fair white infant teeth many are discoloured and
broken, some are septic and offensive, some have caused abscesses.
Many of these children have suffered from toothache, many of them
have been unable to masticate properly and have acquired the habit of
bolting soft food, some have been partly poisoned by swallowing foul
secretions. Worse than all, owing to the loss of temporary teeth the
jaws have not grown properly, the permanent teeth are crowded and
ill-developed. Often the six-year-old molars begin to decay soon after
they have erupted. It is a dismal picture. No wonder that many
children grow up undersized, ill-developed, and weakly, poorly equipped
to meet the strains and stresses of after life.
Let us try to understand the reasons for this. Some children,
as we have already explained, have weakly constructed teeth to begin
with, but much of the trouble is due to sheer destruction, caused by
want of knowledge and proper care. Nature has capped every tooth
with one of the hardest known, called enamel. It is formed
by living cells beneath the gums, but once destroyed can never be
replaced. Nature has therefore made it very hard and resistant,
capable of crushing and grinding and lasting. It has one weakness;
being formed of lime salts it is dissolved slowly but surely by
acids. To guard it from this danger Nature keeps it constantly
bathed by an alkaline fluid, the saliva. So cunningly has
Nature contrived the mechanism of the salivary glands', that they
are stimulated to action by all pleasant acid flavours, such as those
of fruit juices, which flood the mouth with alkaline saliva. But taste-
less, insipid, and alkaline foods do not stimulate the salivary glands
but discourage them. Nature’s safeguards were almost perfect, until


mankind commenced to feed on large quantities of starchy foods and
sugar, against which her defensive mechanism was insufficient. These
destroy the enamel by forming a paste lodging in the small cavities
of the teeth, and the paces between the teeth, or a glutinous deposit
on the teeth. These pastes and sticky substances cannot be penetrated
by the saliva, and slowly ferment as they adhere, forming acids. Each
atom of acid, as it is formed, unites with an atom of lime from the
enamel. As this goes on day after day, month after month, year after
year, the enamel becomes pentrated at its weakest spots. Once it is
penetrated, the living pulp becomes inflamed, the interior of the tooth
begins to decay, and the tooth is lost. In the early stages the dentist
can save the tooth by skilful treatment. In the later stages the tooth
should be extracted, because it is a source of weakness and poison.
Prevention is better than cure. Preserve your children’s teeth by
feeding them in such a way as to assist Nature’s' defensive mechanism
and not frustrate it. Nature has some difficulty in dealing with bread
and butter; a little acid jam will assist her. Bread and butter between
meals will in time destroy the teeth; sweet cake will do so more quickly;
biscuits made of finely ground flour (so much advertised and so much
used) are even worse. It is a good plan to give potato with the midday
meal and no bread. Every meal should contain some acid sub-
stance such as fruit, even canned fruit will do, but without too much
sugar. A little fresh fruit may be given at the end of the meal,
and this is best of all. Apples and oranges are the safest and best,
but any acid fruit may be given with care. Understand that we do
not say that children should be given too much fruit, but a little
ripe raw fruit at the end of the meal. Sugar-cane contains a sweet
acid juice which is good for the teeth, and the exercise which it gives
to the jaws is beneficial. It may be given instead of fruit.
You may not always be able to give fruit. Then give acid drinks.
Children like them, and they are inexpensive. Lemonade made with
weak lemon juice and water with not too much sugar, or orange or
pineapple juice or bottled limejuiee, or a syrup you can make yourself
with tartaric acid are all good. Lemon-trees are very hardy, and
there are few backyards in the coastal districts in which they will
not grow. In some districts such as Townsville where lemons may
be expensive, the Indian tamarind grows freely, and from this a
delicious and wholesome acid drink is easily made. (See page 107.)
Tea lessens the secretion of saliva, and for this and other reasons should
not be given to children.
We give our children too much sugar. In excess, sugar combines
with the mucus of the mouth to form a sticky coating on the teeth
impenetrable to the saliva. Sweetmeats and lollies are harmful. None
of them are good, but the old-fashioned acid drops were not so bad
as are chocolates and soft sweets. Children like sweets, but they like


fruit better, and fruit in moderation is good for them. Above all
be careful what you give the child in the evenings. The surest way
to destroy his teeth quickly is to give him a chocolate or a biscuit
when he goes to bed; all night it will be corroding his teeth
undisturbed.
When your child is two years old let him learn to clean his
teeth. The teeth should, whenever possible, be cleaned twice every day
before going to bed and after breakfast. It is most important that the
teeth be quite clean before the child goes to sleep. Cleaning the teeth
before breakfast is of very little use. Let him use a small toothbrush
like that in the picture. The mouth should be wide open, not shut, and
the teeth should be brushed gently—inside, outside, and on the top—
brushed as you would brush a dress, not scrubbed as you would scrub
a floor. Do not use any tooth-paste or tooth powder. Dip the brush
Full size photograph of toothbrushes. The bristles are of unequal length and
form serrated edges.
The smaller brush is recommended.
in the fruit-acid tooth-wash described on page 107, and teach him to
rinse out his mouth with this afterwards. He should not swallow it,
but if he swallows a little it will not harm him. The toothbrush should
be carefully rinsed and Uept dry.
Watch your children’s teeth carefully, and if there is anything
wrong take them to a dentist. Indeed, it would be a good thing if all
children had their teeth examined by a dentist twice a year, whether
they appear sound or not. All teeth showing the first signs of decay
should be stopped at once before they get worse. This will save much
trouble and expense afterwards, for if the temporary teeth are neglected
the permanent teeth may be ruined and the jaws may be deformed.
The most important of all the teeth to save are the six-year molars,
which come through behind the temporary teeth, sometimes without
the mothers noticing them. They are mistaken for temporary teeth,
allowed to decay, and the whole permanent set is spoilt. Dentists
consider them “the key of the arch.” The dentist should be one of
the child’s best friends. He should be given the chance to save teeth.
A child, who is brought to the dentist only when he has toothache, to
have hopelessly bad teeth extracted, is not likely to look on him as a
friend.


Some Common Errors in Baby Management.
How and why they are Harmful.
Though fewer mistakes are made nowadays than was the case
before child welfare was recognised, not infrequently examples are
still seen of mothers, or even nurses, who generally, through lack of
knowledge, cling to, and persist in, habits or treatment which are
productive of trouble and anxiety for themselves, and often impaired
health for the babies concerned.
Sometimes these errors are begun in the earliest days of the infant’s
life, and habits so begun are very difficult to cure. Babies soon learn
to expect, and then demand, those things which they have been taught
to expect.
Among these common early errors are:—
1. Feeding Baby during the First Two Days of Life —lf
food were required at this time, Nature would supply it. Baby should
have nothing but the colostrum and some boiled water. Though the
amount of colostrum in the breasts is very small, it is very important
that baby should have it. Deprived of it, the child does not thrive as
well as the one who has it. The practice of giving condensed milk,
much sweetened cow’s milk or other food at this time, is one of the
surest and quickest ways of weaning an infant. For, not only does
baby prefer the sweeter artificial food, but as he usually finds that he
can get it without effort, he refuses the breast. This can quickly and
easily lead to the complete weaning of the child.
2. Giving Baby a Dummy. —Unfortunately, this is still a common
practice. A very large number of babies are given a dummy
soon after birth; sometimes even during their first day. It is given with
the idea that it will prevent him from crying. A baby who has never
had a dummy never cries for one, while a child who is accustomed to
it is apt to cry each time it falls out of his mouth. This dummy is a
grave risk of infection, for flies are attracted by the warm, moist teat,
which has just dropped from baby’s mouth. They alight on and infect
it, sometimes with the germs of dysentery—summer diarrhoea as it is
called —from which a number of babies die every year. Or the dummy
drops on the floor, from where it is rescued and casually wiped, before
61


being replaced in baby’s mouth. In addition, there is' the risk that a
baby constantly sucking a dummy may have tired jaws when put to the
breast, and consequently will not suck well.
Also, the child gets used to and likes the shape, size, and “feel” of
the dummy in his mouth, and for this reason may refuse to suck the
mother’ nipples.
Some doctors think that the pressure of the dummy against the soft
bones of the roof of the mouth causes the formation of a high, narrow
palate.
Finally, there is the effect on the child’s character. The infant
who has been trained, whenever not sleeping or feeding, to demand a
dummy to suck constantly, will dvelop later into the spoilt little
tyrant who demands his own way always, and constant entertainment.
The ill-effects of dummy-sucking are aggravated when the dummy
is dipped in some sweet substance. Cane sugar, condensed milk, golden
syrup, honey, malt extract, and glycerine and borax are those most
commonly used. All are very sweet, much sweeter than mother’s milk.
As babies enjoy sweet things, they prefer the dummy with its sweet
coating which they can obtain without effort (or simply by crying for
it) to the faintly-sweet mother’s milk, to obtain which they must suck
vigorously. As a result, many refuse to take the breast, and artificial
feeding, with its many risks and disadvantages, results.
While these sweet things do not, in all eases, wean baby off the
breast, they can, if continued, cause severe upset. Condensed milk is
a concentrated food containing a lot of sugar. This, and dipping the
teat in cane sugar, honey, &c., results in supplying baby with an excess
of this substance, and causes digestive upset, which will probably be
accompanied by frequent, frothy motions, and scalded buttocks.
3. Omitting to put Baby to the Breast Regularly in the First
Two Days. —This is a grave error, which can lead to untold work,
worry, and anxiety for the mother or nurse, and can easily result in the
rapid weaning of baby. The sucking instinct is well developed in the
healthy newly-bom infant, but if the child is not put to the hreast it
can be quickly forgotten.
First attempts to make the child suck when it is several days: old
often fail completely, with resultant stress and strain for all concerned.
4. Night Feeding. —This should never be started. From the
beginning of life train baby to satisfy his hunger during the day. If
he is never fed at night he will never expect it. Give no feeds between
10 p.m. and 5.30 or 6 a.m. In this way, both mother and child get the
uninterrupted night’s sleep so necessary for their health.


5. Giving Castor Oil.—This practice is still common. It is
given with the idea that it is required to clear the meconium out of
baby’s bowel. Its effect is to cause rapid and violent action which
leave the bowel tired and sluggish. Repeated doses are a common
cause of constipation.
Later mistakes commonly made by mothers include;—
1. Keeping the Breast for the Night. —This is frequently done
because the mother thinks she has not sufficient milk for baby’s full
needs. The child does not require feeding at night if he is properly
fed during the day. Further the best means of augmenting the
mother’s milk supply is by the regular, vigorous sucking of a healthy
infant To omit this stimulation three or four times daily means that
an already insufficient supply will rapidly diminish, and the child soon
be fully weaned. It is to be remembered that mothers frequently think
their milk supply insufficient, but test feeding proves that baby’s needs
are well supplied.
2. Thinking that if Baby is not Thriving it is because the Mother’s
Milk does not Agree. —This is a mistake. Mother’s milk does agree,
but many other things may affect baby’s progress. Vomiting, induced
by jogging and patting after meals, colic, due to such things as irregular
feeding, overfeeding, sweet things on dummy, &c. —these are some of
the things which may prevent baby thriving. Look for the cause, and
try to remove it. Remember that a baby who does not thrive when fed
by his mother will probably do very much worse if given artificial food.
(See page 6.)
3. Thinking that if Baby Vomits after the Breast he should be
Weaned. —This is a grave mistake. Remember that if a baby vomits
if properly and intelligently fed on his mother’s milk, he is likely
to vomit very much more if given an artificial food. The cause for the
condition should be sought and removed.
4. Regarding Leakage of Milk from the Breasts as a Proof of
Ample or Over-Supply. —Test feeding in these eases prove that, while
in some eases the supply is ample or overabundant, in others it is
definitely insufficient for the child’s needs. The leaking may be due to
lack of tone in the parts, and then special treatment is indicated.
Hot and cold bathing of the breasts, twice daily, and dabbing the
nipples with spirit may help. Do not keep the breasts overheated. Pay
attention to general hygiene.
5. Thinking that Mother’s Milk and Artificial Pood cannot be
given together.— Again a great mistake. Breast milk can be given
with any artificial food. The latter food is more easily digested if even
a little of baby’s natural food can be given with it. Until baby is old
enough to be weaned, give him what breast milk there is, and then make
up to the required amount with artificial food.
63


6. Regarding one Cow’s Milk as best for an Artificially-fed
Infant. —As a rule milk from a herd is better, for with the herd, if the
percentage composition of one cow’s milk is below normal, another may
be above, and so the average is maintained. If milk from one cow were
used, it would be wise to ensure that the percentage was normal and the
cow free from disease.
7. Thinking that if Pregnancy Recurs the Mother’s Milk will
Poison the Baby —This is incorrect; the mother’s milk does not poison
baby. At the same time, it is never desirable that a mother should
continue to suckle an infant at this time. If pregnancy recurs, the child
should be weaned in the usual way. Sudden weaning could, and
probably would, be harmful to all concerned. So the mother should
commence to wean her baby as soon as she is sure that she is again
pregnant. Until then give baby the benefit of the doubt. When
satisfied that weaning is indicated, take the usual two or three weeks
necessary to accomplish this. The breast milk taken by the child at
this time will not harm him. Weaning is advised, not because the milk
would injure the child, but to avoid throwing too much strain on the
mother.
8. Regarding the Return of Menstruation as a Reason for
Weaning is another Common Error. —Very many mothers menstruate
while breast feeding their babies, and usually the milk is not in any
way affected. Occasionally there is a little temporary upset. There
may be a little decrease in the milk supply, or, on the part of the child,
a little vomiting or inclination to loose motions. Even if this occurs it
very quickly passes off, and should not be regarded as an indication for
weaning.
9. The Patting or Jogging of Baby —This habit is practically
universal. Try to imagine what your own sensations would be if you
were repeatedly or consistently jogged, swung, or patted on the back,
especially after a meal. It is a frequent cause of vomiting in infancy.
But the child becomes accustomed to the movement and then demands
it both day and night. But the mother who automatically jogs her
baby during the day does not desire to stay awake at night to do it.
Thus it can be a source of digestive upset to the child and broken
nights for both mother and baby.
10. The Cleaning of Baby’s Mouth —This should be done at birth,
but not after, except for special reasons. Nature keeps baby’s mouth
clean. Mother’s milk is sterile. The introduction of fingers or swabs
into the mouth may be a source of either injury or infection. Feed
baby properly and his mouth will not require cleaning.
64


There are many other errors or superstitions which fortunately are
not now so commonly met.
Included in the list are :■ —
That it is unlucky to cut the fingernails of a young baby;
That if a baby holds his breath there is danger that he will
suffocate;
That dribbling is a sign that teeth will be erupted shortly;
That “teething bands” assist in the cutting of teeth;
That if teeth are cut “on the cross” they cause more trouble;
That a weekly aperient should be given;
That a binder should be worn for several months “to strengthen
baby’s back”;
That a child should be kept awake after a fall;
That if a baby boy is allowed to cry there is a danger that he
will develop rupture;
That birthmarks are due to unpleasant ante-natal shock;
That if a baby cries he must be hungry;
That mother’s milk is “windy,” and so unfit for baby;
That mother’s milk is “too thin and watery” to be suitable for
baby feeding;
That lime water should be given to babies for its bone-making
properties;
That even a small degree of tongue-tie calls for surgical treat-
ment.
An error not frequently met with, but which can be very difficult
to overcome, is a mother’s conviction that because her own mother did
not breast-feed her babies, it follows that she herself will be unable to
do so.


Baby’s Progress.
Milestones.
A healthy infant should make definite progress; this shows normal
growth and development of mind and body. If babies are properly
treated from the start of life, there are few who do not show steady
progress.
At two months —Baby knows his mother; will follow moving objects
with his eyes.
At four months—He can, with effort, hold up his head.
At five months—Crows and laughs aloud; handles toys.
At sixth month —Weight at birth doubled; begins to sit up.
Eighth to ninth month —Able to sit up alone.
Ninth to tenth month—Crawls and pulls himself up on his feet.
Eleventh month —Stands with assistance.
Twelfth month—Weight at birth trebled; six teeth cut; says single
words.
Twelfth to fifteenth month —Walks alone.
Eighteen months—Soft spot in head closes.
Two years—Puts words into sentences; has sixteen teeth.
Normal children may reach these various stages of development
earlier or later than the ages stated. If there is excessive delay in reach-
ing any stage—for instance, if a child is unable to sit up by the tenth
month —medical advice should be sought.
Weight.
In the first week after birth a baby loses weight. In the second week
he usually gains, so that when a fortnight old he has generally regained
his birth weight; but sometimes even a healthy baby does not regain his
birth weight until he is three or four weeks old. After that, if baby is not
gaining, a doctor’s advice must be sought or a Baby Clinic visited, unless
that has been already done.
Prom the second week to the fourth month an infant will gain
from 5 to 8 oz. per week. Prom the fourth to the sixth month he will
66


gain 1 i lb. per month, and from the sixth to the twelfth month about
1 lb. per month. Variations occur within normal limits. (See weight
chart facing page 68.)
A steady weekly gain is best; if baby makes regular steady gain it
does not matter if he is somewhat under average weight. Babies
frequently cease to gain weight while teething, if slightly out of health
from any cause (a cold, for example), or when the food is being changed.
A rapid gain of weight lasting more than one week is sometimes
dangerous and a sign of overfeeding. It may lead to a serious
digestive breakdown and loss of weight.
Never give baby food beyond what he needs for his age and weight,
with the idea of further increasing his weight. There are no advantages
and many disadvantages in doing this. The child may gain weight
rapidly to begin with, but later he will suffer from indigestion, and many
ills may follow that. Also, this undue weight makes him a burden for
his mother to carry, and in consequence he is taken out less than usual;
so again his health suffers. His bones are not sufficiently strong to
support his weight, so that he is backward in learning to crawl and walk;
or, if he does walk, he becomes “knock-kneed” or “bandy.” And, what
is more serious still, if he should become very ill, the baby who is over-
weight from overfeeding has a poorer chance of recovery them the child
of normal weight.
At six months the child should have double his birth weight.
At twelve months the child should be about three times his weight
at birth.
The following table gives the average weights of children up to
the age of twelve months;—
Age. Weight.
At birth 7J lb.
1 month . . . . .. . . . . . , gj
2 months . . . . . . . in
. . J.V „
3 ” HI „
4 » 131 „
5 ” 144 „
6 ” 154 ~
7 >’ 164 „
8 » 174 „
9 » 184 „
10 » 194 „
11 » 201 „
12 21 „
The weight of a healthy baby varies according to his build; a
big-boned baby weighs more than a small-boned baby. Boys usually
weigh a little more than girls.


Table of Average Weights and Heights.
Age.
Sex.
Weight.
Height.
Birth
Male
7-5 lb. ..
20-6 inches
Female
71 „ ..
205 „
6 months
Male
16 „ ..
2o-4 »>
Female
15-5 „ ..
25
12 months ..
Male
20 5 „ • .
29
Female
19'8 „ . .
28-5 „
18 months ..
Male
22-5 „ ..
30
Female
22 „ ..
29-5 „
2 years
Male
26-5 „ ..
32-5 „
Female
25-5 „ ..
32-5 „
3 years
Male
31 „ •.
35
Female
30 „
35
4 years
Male
35 „
38
Female
34 „ ..
38
5 years
Male
41 „ ..
42
Female
40 „ ..
41-5 „
6 years
Male
45 „ . .
44
Female
44 „ ..
43-5 „
7 years
Male
49-5 „ . .
46-5 „
Female
48 „ ..
46
8 years
Male
54 5 „ ..
48-4 „
Female
53 „ . .
48
9 years
Male
60 „
50
Female
57-5 „
49-5 „
10 years
Male
66-5 „ ..
52
Female
64 „
51-5 „
11 years
Male
72-5 „ ..
64
Female
70 „ . .
53-5 „
68


RECORD OF MY CHILD’S PROGRESS.
First Two Years.
Name Address
Date of birth. Place of birth
Name of doctor Name of nurse
Date of first attendance at Clinic Where
Weight at birth Weight at 6 months
Weight at 12 months 18 months 2 years
Until what age fed naturally (breast fed)
If weaned before 9 months, when Why
First tooth appeared
Number of teeth at 12 months At 24 months
Toothbrush first used
Date of crawling Date of standing
First word spoken Date
Date of walking alone
Date of immunisation Doctor’s name
Date of first visit to dentist
Amount of milk taken each day—at 18 mths 24 mths
Sleep at night During day
Dates of examinations by doctor
Illnesses or operations—dates, &c
Remarks regarding mental and physical development —interest in to;
and games, &e
69


NOTES,


The Training of the Child.
Birth and the New Environment.
Before baby’s birth everything is done for him by his mother,
who supplies ail his requirements through her own blood. After birth
he becomes an independent being for the first time. He requires to
breathe and to take nourishment for himself. From the moment of
his birth he begins to make adjustments to his new environment and
to learn more and more about the world into which he has been born.
Origin of Character Formation.
Gradually he begins to react to changes in his environment in
certain definite ways. He expresses his feelings. These are the begin-
nings of character formation. It is during these early days that parents
and others about him influence the devlopment of his behaviour. A
sense of dependence upon the parents develops, and with it a feeling
of security. Anything which upsets this feeling, such as a harsh word
spoken by the mother, finds expression in the pout of the lip or the
cry. Intelligent handling and mothering are necessary for healthy
growth. Mothering comprises an attitude of unobtrusive friendship,
goodwill, and understanding towards the child. In response to this
he loses the fear of his surroundings, gains confidence, and feels that
all is well. A smile or a kindly, softly spoken word when a mother is
passing the child’s cot, as he lies awake, makes all the difference to him.
Almost every mother intuitively understands her baby’s behaviour, the
little actions by means of which he makes his desires and feelings
known.
Ridicule.
Avoid ridicule. Even a baby is sensitive to ridicule, which may
cause a sense of inferiority and of shyness from which he may never
recover. Encourage him to express himself naturally and freely.
Fear.
A child is born with few, if any, fears. Fear may be implanted
as the result of example, such as fear of thunder, lightning, or the dark.
Avoid frightening a child by the use of threats —threats of policemen,
of doctors, or of bogeymen. Avoid telling stories of a harrowing
nature or of talking about sickness and of suffering in his presence.


Many children are afraid of meeting strangers who take too much
notice of them and force themselves upon them. If such people waited
for the children to become accustomed to their presence and behaved
in a natural manner, children would behave naturally in return.
Over-stimulation.
A baby may be over-stimulated in various ways. There is a
temptation to handle him too much, particularly when he is the first
baby. He may be taken for long runs in the motor car. His attention
may be attracted by the making of loud noises or by the waving of
bright objects. Children who are treated in these ways tend to become
restless, irritable and discontented. Attention has already been drawn
to the harmful effects of jogging and patting baby.
Imitation.
A child is a good imitator, therefore the parent must be careful
to set a good example.
Obedience.
From the earliest days train the child to know what you want
him to do and what not to do. Exercise patience and reassurance in
training him. If he has learnt to trust you it will not be difficult to
get him to conform to your wishes. By using harsh measures in trying
to force him to do something he does not wish to do, either because he
is afraid or because he thinks you are unreasonable, you can easily
cultivate an attitude of defiance which may not be easily changed.
Once you are satisfied that your request is reasonable, show him quietly,
kindly, but firmly, that obedience is expected of him. Be sure that
your child understands what you want him to do. A nagging parent
cannot expect to have an obedient child, because the child ceases to
attend to his continual correction. Never frighten, tease, shame, or
bribe a child into obeying.
Truthfulness and Honesty.
Be truthful, fair, and just to your child. A child may be driven
to lie because he is afraid of the consequences of misconduct. Be
consistent in your correction, so that the child will understand what
you want and that you may understand his motive. Do not be too
severe in your method of punishment and administer it calmly, so that
the child will feel that he has been fairly treated. A child may
develop a craving for certain things, such as sweets. A regular ration
of candy or other wholesome sweet may be allowed. Do not hide these
things from him by so doing you are merely tempting him to find them
and training him to be deceitful.
Many children have vivid imaginations and indulge in fabricating
stories. This is a natural part of their development and should be
correctly interpreted.


Jealousy.
A jealous child is merely a self-centred child. He is self-centred
because of the over-attention he has received from the parents. When
another baby arrives he feels that he has been displaced, and it is only
natural that he should feel jealous. Make him feel that you still love
him and care for him, and train him to help in attending to baby’s
needs.
Avoid showing special favour to the child who is better equipped
mentally.
Temper tantrums.
Endeavour to discover the cause of the child’s outburst. Some-
times it is due to fatigue or to his not feeling well. It may result from
a state of boredom into which he has fallen through lack of play or of
suitable interest. It is natural that a child should want to be busy
every minute he is awake. If the energy of a healthy child does not
find an outlet in suitable occupation it will find a vent in crying or
in making a noise of some kind or in throwing things about. A child
may fly into a tantrum in order to attract attention or to get his own
way. Let the parent remain calm or walk away. Make it clear to
the child that he gains nothing by such an outburst. Sometimes the
outburst may be due to harsh, unfair, or bad handling on the part of
the parent, and it is wise that the parent should have a clear under-
standing of the cause and in the future correct faults in himself. Let
the parent see to it that his own temper is under control.
Regular Habits.
While encouraging regular habits in regard to feeding and toilet,
do not make a fetish of routine. Avoid scolding him or making him
feel that he is in disgrace because he has failed to comply with what
you expected of him. Do not be distressed if your child does not
respond readily to your efforts to cultivate regular and clean habits.
Continue your efforts patiently and calmly.
Bad Habits.
Regard a bad habit as a symptom rather than a disease. It may
indicate a sense of boredom in the child, and treatment should be
directed to the cause of this. The best time to correct a bad habit is
when it is first noticed. Avoid showing anxiety regarding the habit,
and direct the child’s attention to some healthy interest. Above all,
avoid continual correction by the frequent repetition of the word
“don’t.”
A bad habit may originate in some local irritation or itching. For
instance, a boy baby may be born with a tight foreskin, for which
circumcision may be required. An operation may be unnecessary if the
foreskin can be easily stretched and drawn back by the doctor. This


drawing back has to be repeated by the mother daily for a week or two.
These measures should be taken early, and as soon as the desired result
is obtained this part of the body should not be fingered at all.
Threadworms may cause local irritation, but this cause is easily
discovered and easily prevented from doing any harm.
Any local discharge in a little girl should receive medical treatment
without delay.
Thumb-sucking. —All babies put their thumbs and fingers into
their mouths during the first two or three months. After that there are
several simple ways of preventing a habit which may prove troublesome
later. For instance, a pair of gloves or socks may be put on the hands,
or a piece of sticking plaster on the thumb. If necessary the sleeves
may be pinned to the nightdress, or simple cardboard splints may be
applied to the arms, so as to prevent bending of the elbows (Consult
your Clinic nurse.)
After the first year, and still more after the second and third years,
a difficult habit may have arisen, and these simple measures may be
useless and harmful. Much of this trouble comes from the child not
having anything to divert his mind from his only solace from boredom.
Perhaps he is an only child and has no playmates, and his devoted
but ill-advised mother insists on doing everything for him. He may
not even be allowed to button his clothes or brush his hair. Certainly,
he will do these things very slowly at first, but he is learning all the
time, and this keeps him happy and interested. He should be encouraged
to “help mother” by sweeping a corner of the room or dusting a chair,
not for any good it may do the chair, but for the great good it is doing
to himself. There is nothing better for such a child than attendance at
a well-conducted kindergarten or a nursery school.
Persistent thumb-sucking may deform the front teeth, making them
project and look very ugly when the child grows older.
Thigh-rubbing. —Occasionally a young child, particularly a little
girl, is noticed to have the habit of rubbing her thighs together in the
interval between sleeping and waking as she lies in her cot. Without
making any fuss the child should be watched, and after her sleep
she should not be allowed to lie half awake, but should be roused to
complete wakefulness by encouraging her to play with her toys, or
her attention should be attracted in some other pleasant way. If
the habit shows itself on going to sleep, train the child to go to sleep
lying on her side with one or both hands between cheek and pillow.
Dirt-eating. —This is a dangerous habit which is found in young
children from eighteen months to three years of age. It is common in
children suffering from hookworms, or sickly in other ways, but it
occurs also in healthy children. The causes of this habit are not
thoroughly understood, but one of them is probably the custom of
74


feeding young children entirely on soft foods and not giving them
anything hard, such as baked bread, to bite. Foods containing lime
and iron are useful. These are milk, cauliflower, cheese, eggs, carrots,
green vegetables, oranges, liver, meat, whole grains, spinach, silver beet,
green peas, prunes, root vegetables, and dried fruit.
It is dangerous because it leads to children swallowing indigestible
substances, or, what is worse, substances containing dangerous germs
In this way they may at any time become very ill from bowel disturb
ances. Some of them get repeated attacks of this sort.
Nail-biting. —Children who bite their nails are often highly-
strung, restless, and irritable. Correct any physical defect, such as
anaemia, malnutrition, eyestrain, nasal obstruction, &c., which may be
present. Avoid operations which are not urgent. An operation may
be an ordeal for a child of this type. Foods containing iron and
calcium are beneficial. (See “Dirt-eating.”) Treat the habit as a sign
of emotional stress due to anxiety or fear, and if necessary ask the
advice of a person qualified to assist in removing this. Avoid over-
correction and restraint.
Bed-wetting. —This may be an obstinate trouble and may sorely
try a mother’s patience. Yet there is no condition in which patience
and understanding are more necessary.
Early training of the baby is important. He should be held out
frequently, perhaps after every feed, and his napkin kept as dry as
possible. This not only saves washing, but teaches him to like the feel
of a dry napkin. Whenever wet it should be changed as soon as
possible.
In quite normal children bed-wetting is not uncommon during the
second year. Sometimes it may occur occasionally during the third
year. If it persists after this, it may become obstinate and last many
years, and this is a serious matter; for it may prevent the child from
staying with friends or living in a boarding school. Worst of all, it
may create a sense of inferiority and a feeling of unhappiness.
It may be due to bad health, faulty nutrition, or some local trouble,
and for these medical advice is needed. But more often it is not due
to any physical cause. It occurs during sleep, when the child is uncon-
scious and not morally responsible. That is to say, that it is a disorder
of the unconscious mind, and the treatment must be mental or as we
say nowadays, psychological.
Such simple measures as restricting the amount of fluid drunk with
the last meal, giving no fluid after this, and rousing the child to pass
water, when the parents go to bed, may help, but they usually fail,
because they tend only to emphasise his weakness and to create a
feeling of anxiety and fear of failure.
75


Punishment nearly always fails and is harmful. The child feels,
the injustice of being punished for what happens while he is uncon-
scious. Scolding or the exhibition of worry or anxiety by the mother
always makes things worse. It is far better to take no notice at all,
than to impress on the child’s mind his inferiority.
The unconscious mind can be influenced by suggestion. The child
should be encouraged in the belief that his trouble can, and will, be
overcome, not rebuked and discouraged every time there is a failure.
Encourage his successes and take no notice of his failures. If over-
excitement, fatigue, or failure of health, cause a relapse, do not be
discouraged yourself nor allow him to be so. Just make a fresh start,,
and it will be easier next time.
As this treatment is difficult, you would do well to consult a
doctor, or perhaps the Clinic nurse may be able to help you.
PLAY AND WORK.
Play forms an important part in the development of the child.
A.t first all the movements of his limbs are slow and purposeless, but
very soon they become trained to serve definite purposes. All of these
activities correspond with the rapid growth and development of his
nervous and muscular systems. He learns to play with his fingers and
his toes, and gradually he distinguishes between what is part of his
own body and what is not. He begins to grasp objects. Soon he
delights in imparting movement to them; he pushes them, throws them
on the floor. He find great joy in splashing water and in playing
with mud.
What he lacks in reality, the child supplies by his imagination. An
only child will imagine he has a playmate and will give him a name.
A doll becomes a live baby, a broom handle becomes a real horse. As
his mind develops he becomes more independent. He wants to do things
for himself—to wash himself, to dress himself, to brush his hair.
Encourage him in the performance of these activities. The child takes
a delight in being allowed to help mummy and daddy. Play merges
into work. He gains confidence as he succeeds in carrying out these
simple tasks and as he is allowed to give expression to his ideas.
A child needs companionship, and will be benefited by attending a
nursery school or kindergarten, where supervised play with other
children about his own age will cultivate social habits. The parent
is not absolved from the responsibility of guiding the mental develop-
ment of the child after he is sent to such a school. The mother and
school director should co-operate as far as possible.


SEX INSTRUCTION.
Curiosity is a valuable and constructive force in the development
of the child’s mind. A child appears to possess at quite an early age
a very lively interest in everything connected with the reproductive
function, and he sees more and understands more than his parent
realises. This interest spreads until it embraces a curiosity about
everything in the child’s environment. Treat your child’s questions
seriously and answer him frankly and honestly. It will be easier to
-do this if a state of friendship and companionship has developed between
tlie parent and the child. The child should be made to feel that the
parent is not attempting to evade the question. The parent should
answer the question as fully as he is able and in a manner best suited
to the child’s intelligence. If he is unable to answer the question, let
him get help from a doctor or anyone else who is qualified to help him.
THE CHILD WHO IS BACKWARD IN LEARNING.
Backwardness, while often the result of mental retardation or mental
maladjustment, may have its origin in physical defects. Seek medical
advice regarding the cause and treatment.
If a child is mentally retarded, early recognition of the fact is
important in order that he may receive special training. Much can be
done to make the child happier and his life more useful.
Mental maladjustment may result in various forms of behaviour
which become problems for parents and doctors alike. An important
need in the emotional development of the child is a sense of security,
and when this is absent, owing in many eases to faulty handling, such
as severe and unjust punishment, over-attention of the child himself
•or of another child in the family, a lack of understanding of some kind
between parent and child, the child’s behaviour becomes difficult. Most
of these children can be helped by making careful and tactful enquiry
into the conditions under which they are living and by making readjust-
ments. Removal to new surroundings in charge of a person tempera-
mentally and intellectually suitable may be the only solution.
77


The Prevention of Disease.
There will always be some sick babies, but there would be
fewer sick babies if mothers would exercise a little more care in
the prevention of disease. The two common causes of disease among
babies and young children, which are responsible for a great number
of deaths, are (1) respiratory infections in which the disease germs exist
in the secretions of the mouth, nose, throat, and air-passages and are
conveyed directly from person to person; (2) bowel infections, in which
the disease germs exist in dirt and are conveyed to the food by flies or in
other ways.
INFECTION SPREAD BY COUGHING, SNEEZING, SMEARING.
The “common cold” is an infectious disease. Like influenza, measles,
and whooping-cough, it is spread by coughing. Every time a person
coughs or sneezes a fine spray containing disease germs is spread through
the air all around him, and is breathed in by any person near him.
In this way they catch his disease, and this happens most easily in
crowded ill-ventilated rooms.
There is another way in which these diseases can be spread. Very
small children are constantly putting their fingers into their mouths
or up to their noses. Imagine what would happen if their saliva
and mucus contained a dark-blue dye. Their hands, faces, toys, and
everything that they touched would be stained dark-blue. You can
easily understand how any disease germs which they are carrying in
their noses and throats are similarly smeared on everything they touch,
and conveyed to other children. Have we not all seen little children
poke the fingers they have been sucking into baby’s face or mouth,
while the mother sits by and makes no effort to prevent infection?
The infection can be spread by handling the baby’s face, hands, or
clothes, or even the mother’s clothes. Those dangerous diseases—
diphtheria, scarlet fever, meningitis, and infantile paralysis—are
spread mostly in this way. The worst spreaders of infection are not
those who are very sick but those who are not too sick to go about
and mix with other people. Many carriers of disease are not sick at
all.
Mothers should teach young children clean habits, for it would save
many lives.


INFECTION SPREAD BY CONTAMINATION OP FOOD.
Careful Handling.
Diseases due to careless disposal of excrement are very dangerous
to little babies, and often cause their death. People who handle milk
or milk dishes with unwashed hands, or leave milk exposed to flies
which have been where there is excrement, may unknowingly be respon-
sible for giving the germs of these diseases to babies and children.
Unless these germs get to people’s mouths with food or in some other
way they can do no harm.
To avoid these diseases one must be very careful that food, parti-
cularly milk, is clean and does not touch any dish or human hand
that is not clean. A person’s hands should always be washed before
he handles food. The kitchen and all places where food is stored
should be kept free from flies by screening the windows, doors, and
food safes with wire gauze. A covered bucket should be provided for
soiled napkins. A swatter should be kept ready for any fly that gets in
when a careless person holds the screen door open.
Closets.
But above all, excrement itself must be disposed of only in a
proper closet where it will not get scattered or be exposed to flies. The
best system for cities is to have sewers. Where there is no sewer or
septic tank it is necessary to have the pan system or the pit system.
In either case the closet must be built so that no excrement can be
scattered and no flies can get into the pan or pit. The seat must
have a lid that is kept closed, and there must be no holes through
which flies, rats, or chickens can get in. The regulations of the Depart-
ment of Health and Home Affairs require this, and show how an
inexpensive sanitary closet can be built in the country.
Flies.
The common house-fly is a danger on account of his habit of going
to excrement and afterwards walking with dirty feet on our food. It
is not necessary to have flies in the house, for they can be kept out by
screens. It is also possible to keep down the number of house-flies in
the town or on the station by keeping them from breeding in horse
manure, garbage, or other decomposing matter that can furnish the fly-
maggots with food. It takes about ten days for a fly’s egg to hatch,
grow into a full-sized maggot (larva), pass through the chrysalis (pupa)
stage, and come out as a full-grown fly. To prevent flies from breed-
ing it is only necessary to make sure that no manure, garbage, or
decaying matter is allowed to stay in town or near people’s houses
for more than a week. Manure cannot breed house-flies if spread
thinly on a field for fertiliser. If there are many house-flies about, it.
is a good plan to find out where they are coming from by hunting for
79


the maggots, and to get rid of their breeding-places. In towns the
local authorities should see that fly-breeding places are not permitted.
There is another kind of fly, the common “bush fly,” that is not
so easily got rid of. It is very persistent, and has an unpleasant way
of getting at a person’s eyes and nose. It then may go to another
person’s eye. In this way it can carry the germs of eye diseases. This
fly should at least be kept out of schools and houses by screening so
that it will have the least possible chance to spread eye diseases.
INFECTION SPREAD BY INSECT HOSTS.
The part which may be played by the common house-fly in the
spread of disease has been already mentioned. There are some diseases
which are spread by insect hosts —that is to say, the germ causing the
disease lives in the insect before it infects the human being.
Filaria is spread from one person to another by a night-biting
mosquito which sucks up some larvae of the Filaria worm when it bites
an infected individual. The mosquito which carries Filaria, breeds in
dirty, stagnant water, such as that found in open drains, choked roof
gutters, or liquid manure.
Dengue Fever is spread by a day-biting mosquito which is small,
active, and difficult to kill. When it bites anyone infected with Dengue
Fever, it sucks up the germ which is very minute and which develops
in the body of the mosquito. This mosquito breeds in clean water, such
as tank water.
Malaria is spread by another species of mosquito, which is in-
conspicuous and makes no noise. It bites after sunset. Malaria is caused
by a parasite, the spores of which develop in the mosquito. The disease
is rare in Southern Queensland, where there are few persons suffering
from chronic Malaria. It is not so rare in the North.
If everyone were to take the necessary precautions to prevent water
remaining stagnant, the mosquito would have nowhere to lay her eggs,
and we would be free of domestic mosquitoes and the diseases which they
carry.
There are other diseases which are carried by fleas.
INFECTION BY WORMS.
Hookworm disease, which is carried by the minute larvae of the
Hookworm piercing the skin of a human being, is described on page 91.
Threadworm infection is described on page 90.


Sick Babies.
WHAT TO DO FOR SICK BABIES IF SKILLED ADVICE IS NOT
AVAILABLE.
If you cannot get advice from a doctor or from a Baby Clinic,
the directions given here should be followed:—
General Treatment.—Sick babies need more fresh air than healthy
babies. Never let the sick room get stuffy. Put baby in a corner out
of the draught, and keep the window open, night and day.
The baby is sick when he vomits or has diarrhcsa, and is seriously
sick if he should any day have several loose green motions containing
mucus and curds. When this happens stop all food, and give cold
boiled water or thin barley water, and a teaspoonful of castor oil.
Consult your doctor, or go to the nearest Baby Clinic at once. In
summer it is dangerous to wait.
In hot weather, two or three loose movements a day, even though
the baby seems to be well, may indicate the beginning of serious
illness. It is far easier to keep him well than to cure him when sick.
If you are doubtful, take him to the Baby Clinic, if there is one in
the district, or consult your doctor.
If baby is feverish, sponge him frequently in warm water, taking
care not to chill him. Uncover and sponge only one part at a time—
for example, one arm or the front of the body, leaving all the rest
covered until that one part is sponged and dried. Then cover that
portion before beginning on the next.
Give him as much boiled water as he likes to drink, but do not
give him his usual amount of food for a day or two. A baby needs
less food when he is ill.
CARE OF THE HEAD.
Nits and Lice.
Nits are the eggs of the head-louse firmly attached to the hair,
most often on the back of the head and behind the ears. The louse
spreads from child to child. It causes much irritation and scratching
which may lead to impetigo, followed by inflammation and swelling of
the glands at the back of the neck. The impetigo may be cured with
ammoniated mercury ointment, which also kills lice.
81


Lice are easily got rid of. Where only a few are present the daily
use of a very fine comb is sufficient. When more numerous they may
be killed with kerosene (the oil used in lamps) mixed with equal parts of
vaseline applied to the hair at bedtime and left on all night. No lamp,
candle, or raised flame must be within three yards of the child while
the kerosene mixture is being rubbed in, or the child may be frightfully
burnt. For the same reason never use petrol (or benzine or motor
spirit) under any circumstances. Before applying the kerosene mixture
protect the skin of the back of the neck and behind the ears with a
little vaseline or lard. Wash well next morning with soap and water.
Care of Eyes.
Newborn babies are liable to grave inflammation of the eyes, which
may cause blindness. This is due to infection at the time of birth.
Therefore cleanse the eyelids and surroundings with special care as
soon as the child is born.
Do not attempt to separate the lids, for fear of abrading the eye-
balls and carrying in impurities. With the aid of a piece of “surgical
gauze ’ ’ or cotton-wool, or perfectly clean boiled rag, and plenty of warm
boiled water, cleanse the lids thoroughly.
If preferred, boracic lotion may be used, or a doctor may order
a stronger antiseptic —but perfect cleansing is the first essential.
On the slightest sign of redness or swelling about the eyelids—
especially in the first week —or on any sign whatever of mattery dis-
charge, call in a doctor at once, as immediate active treatment may be
needed.
The discharge from an inflamed eye can infect other eyes, so the
utmost care must be taken not to risk carrying, by fingers, towels, &e.,
any impurity from a bad eye to the sound eye of the baby, or to the
eyes of any other person.
If a child squints, blinks, screws up its eyes, frowns, makes grimaces,
has discharge from the eyes, or complains of continual headaches, take
him to an eye surgeon or to a hospital, not to a spectacle maker.
Care of the Mouth.
In healthy babies the mouth is kept clean by giving drinks of cool
boiled water between the feeds. More harm than good is done by
wiping the inside of a baby’s mouth. If the delicate mucous membrane
lining the mouth is damaged, thrush may follow. Cleanliness in regard
to the mother’s nipple or the teat is all that is required to guard against
infection of the mouth. The mother’s nipple should be washed with
warm boiled water before each suckling. The use of a dummy is
prohibited. (For treatment of thrush see page 85.)


Swollen Breasts.
Newly born infants of both sexes may get swelling of the breasts,
which secrete a kind of milk.
The treatment for this condition is absolute rest for the part. Bathe
the breasts once daily and apply over them a soft pad of cotton-wool,
which must be held in place by a bandage. When handling or feeding
the child carefully refrain from touching the part. Avoid all inter-
ference. Any attempt to squeeze the milk out may result in baby having
an abscess of the breast, which may need to be opened. If left alone
the condition should soon improve. If it does not, or if any inflamma-
tion should appear, a doctor must be consulted at once.
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM.
Adenoids.
Adenoids are something like enlarged tonsils, but enlarged tonsils
can be seen, and adenoids are hidden at the back of the nose, between
the nose and the back of the throat. A child with enlarged tonsils
almost always suffers from adenoids also, but many have adenoids
whose tonsils are not enlarged. They are unfortunately very common.
Although adenoids cannot be seen, the effects they produce are
very visible. They block the air passages and make it difficult to breathe
through the nose. Usually the child becomes a mouth-breather. He
sleeps with his mouth open, breathes heavily while asleep, and often
noisily, or snores. Often his sleep is restless and disturbed; sometimes
he tosses and turns all through the night. If he gets a “cold” all these
symptoms become worse.
A child with adenoids may persist in breathing through his nose
and does not then become a mouth-breather. He suffers worse for this;
owing to the effort to breathe through the obstructed nose his chest
falls in at the sides, and he becomes “pigeon-breasted.” To see this you
have only to undress him.
Adenoids obstruct the air-passage between the ear and the back
of the throat. Consequently these children have often some loss of
hearing, which often passes unnoticed. Inflammation of the ear causing
earache and discharges from the ear in children are usually caused
by adenoids. Nearly all eases of deafness in early life are due to
neglected adenoids. Many of these children are thought to be inattentive
and stupid, and do badly at school, but improve remarkably after their
adenoids are removed.
If you have any suspicion that your child suffers from any of
these troubles, do not fail to obtain medical advice.
83


“ Colds.”
“Colds” are infectious diseases spread from person to person.
Those who are suffering or have recently suffered from “colds,” or
who frequently suffer from them, should not handle other people’s
babies. Babies should be protected from infection, which they are sure
to acquire, if their mothers allow them to be fondled and kissed by all
their relatives and friends and even by strangers. Especially should
they be kept away from crowded rooms and evening entertainments,
where in close air contaminated by many persons infection is almost
sure to be encountered. To take babies to picture shows is very
dangerous. No sensible, well-instructed mother would do such a
thing. Handkerchiefs and spoons that have been used for others must
not be used for babies. Do not blow on a baby’s food to cool it.
Do not kiss a baby on the mouth. Do not kiss him at all if you have
a “cold.” If any of your children have “colds,” keep them away
from the baby. A “cold” in a baby may lead to serious bronchitis
or pneumonia, which are frequent causes of death in the very young.
If baby has a “cold,” protect him from draughts and chills, but
give him plenty of fresh air. Sponge him if he is feverish. If he is not
feverish, take him out daily in the fresh air. Rub his chest night and
morning with camphorated oil. Give him plenty of boiled water to
drink. Do not overfeed him. Avoid overclothing, and muffling up
round the neck, which not only makes him uncomfortable, but renders
him more liable to catch “colds.” If his nose is blocked with mucus
you may clean its entrance with a little swab of cotton wool on a
match stick.
If a child has adenoids or large tonsils, he is very susceptible to
“colds,” and should be taken to a doctor for advice.
Sore Throat.
This may be quite a slight ailment, but it may mean that he is
suffering from that most serious disease, diphtheria.
If a child who is complaining of sore throat seems otherwise well,
plays about during the day, and sleeps well at night he may be suffering
from simple sore throat, but it is better to take no chances. If he
continues fretful and out of sorts, refusing food, and obviously ill,
a doctor’s advice must be obtained immediately. With diphtheria there
may or may not be hoarseness and feverishness. Some of the worst cases
are not at all feverish. If the child’s throat is examined greyish
white patches may be seen on the tonsils or back of the throat, but
sometimes the patches are too far down to be visible. If this membrane
spreads into the windpipe, the child suffers from diphtheric croup, and
unless it receives immediate treatment will almost certainly die. The
only safe place for these children is a hospital, where a doctor is always
close by, for death from suffocation may occur very quickly.


When a child reaches the age of one year he should be immunised
against diphtheria. Prevention is better than cure.
Diphtheria, if treated by antitoxin in the early stages, is almost
always curable, but if allowed to go untreated, for even a few days, is
frequently fatal. Only a doctor is able to give antitoxin. Every day’s
delay much increases the risk of death.
For mild sore throat give the treatment usual for any feverish
condition.
Croup.
If baby gets croup, give him immediately a hot bath and a dose of
castor oil. Be careful that he does not get a chill after the hot bath.
(The water must not be too hot —test it with your elbow before putting
baby into it.) Flannels wrung out of hot water and put round his
throat will give relief; but care must be taken not to burn the skin.
Get advice from a doctor as soon as possible. What you think is
simple croup may be diphtheria, and prompt treatment may be necessary
to save the child’s life.
Diphtheria.
See “Sore Throat,’’ page 84.
Bronchitis.
If baby has a bad cold on the chest, and is feverish, put him to bed.
If he has wheezy and quick breathing, he may have bronchitis.
To rub his back, chest, and sides with warm olive oil or camphor-
ated oil may do baby good and cannot harm him. Take a little oil in the
palm of the hand and rub gently and quickly for several minutes.
Place baby in a properly ventilated room, but protect him from draughts
and keep him warm. Do not put too much covering over him if he feels
hot and feverish.
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM.
Care of mouth. (See page 82.)
Thrush is caused by a fungus introduced into the mouth by dirty
teats, dummies, &c. This disease should not occur where cleanliness
is observed. The fungus produces small white patches on the tongue,
roof of the mouth, and on the inside of the cheeks. An attempt to
remove them causes bleeding of the lining of the mouth. In order to
cure the condition strict cleanliness must be observed. The mouth is
cleaned out with a piece of soft rag dipped in a solution of bicarbonate
of soda and cool boiled water (1 drachm to 1 pint), followed by a weak
solution (pale pink) of permanganate of potash or peroxide of hydrogen
(1 part to 4 parts cool, boiled water) after each feeding. Babies in
whom Thrush occurs are often debilitated, and medical advice regarding
this must be sought.
M. & C.—D.


Ulceration of the Mouth or Stomatitis.
In this condition there occurs small ulcers scattered over tongue
and mouth. The tongue is furred, the gums are dark red and swollen.
The child is usually feverish and fretful, and refuses his food. In those
eases in which the condition is not secondary to scurvy, pink disease,
or to the taking of certain medicines or poisons, it usually subsides
within seven days. A mixture of iron and chlorate of potash hastens
recovery. During the course of the disease the diet should consist of
cereal jellies, fruit juice, and strained vegetable broth.
Colic.
This is generally due to overfeeding or to feeding with unsuitable
food, to taking food too quickly, too hot or too cold, or to dirty bottles
or teats. It may also be caused by swallowing powdery lead paint from
veranda rails, &e. (See “Lead Poisoning,’’ page 93.)
A child with colic cries, his legs are drawn up, and feet and
hands are cold. Stop all food for the time being. To continue feeding
the child makes him worse. Sitting the child up, with its abdomen
and chest supported against his nurse’s chest and left shoulder, and
at the same time rubbing his back firmly, may give some relief. Apply
warmth to abdomen, hands, and feet. If the colic is severe, give an
enema of warm water; this generally gives relief by removing wind
and irritating material. Severe colic may be caused by obstruction
of the bowels, so if it does not stop quickly, you must get medical
advice.
Diarrhoea and Dysentery.
Diarrhoea is the passage of frequent, loose, watery, unhealthy
motions. They may be merely soft and ‘ ‘ mushy, ’’ or may consist mostly
of water. They may contain much mucus or slime, or particles of
undigested food. Their colour may be brown, yellow, or green. When
medicine is being taken, they may be blackish. They may have an
offensive smell, or they may be acid, scalding the buttocks.
The stools of a breast-fed baby are always soft, and sometimes two
or three motions may be passed every day. If the motions are healthy
there is no diarrhoea, but if they contain large white particles of
undigested milk the baby is being overfed. The stools of a bottle-fed
baby are firmer, and if he is passing two or three soft motions daily
he is suffering from diarrhoea.
Putty-coloured motions, whether loose or constipated, are due to
absence of bile. The baby must then be given no butter, oil, or fat, and
the cream must be taken off his milk. It may be necessary to put him
on a special fat-free diet for a time.
Diarrhoea may be caused (1) by too much food, or by food that
the baby is unable to digest; (2) by infection from germs which the
baby has swallowed. At the beginning of a mild attack of diarrhoea the


baby may appear quite well, but after a time, and in all bad attacks,
he is restless, irritable, often feverish, often vomiting, and loses weight
rapidly.
Diarrhoea is more common in summer, partly because the baby is
more thirsty, and is given more milk when he really needs more water;
partly because germs grow very quickly in his milk in hot weather;
partly because disease germs are carried by flies to his food, teats, and
dummies during the season.
Dysentery is a very dangerous epidemic disease which occurs
every summer among babies in Queensland. It also occurs during the
winter, but generally not in epidemics. In Brisbane it is at its worst
during the months of November and December, but the months in
which the yearly epidemic occurs are not the same in all our towns. At
first it may be very like an ordinary diarrhoea, but it is easily recognised
when the baby passes very frequent small motions containing blood
and slime, often with much straining. In a bad case there is high fever,
much weakness, and grave danger of a fatal result. The germ which
causes it is the dysentery bacillus, which is carried about by flies, and
so spreads from house to house.
Prevention of Diarrhoea and Dysentery.
Do not overfeed babies in hot weather. Give them as much water
to drink as they want. Be sure that the milk they are getting is clean
and fresh. Keep it cool after you have boiled it. If you cannot get
clean milk, substitute dried milk. Above all, keep the food, bottles,
and teats most carefully covered from flies after they have been boiled.
There is no way of keeping a baby’s dummy free from flies. If you
wish to keep your baby safe from infection, burn the dummy.
Treatment of Diarrhoea and Dysentery.
Give the baby a full teaspoonful of castor oil to clear out all
undigested food. Stop his food. Give him no milk of any sort,
but as much water or thin barley water, which may be slightly
sweetened, as he likes to drink. If the baby has been breast fed,
relieve the breasts by gently expressing the milk. If he is not well
in twenty-four hours, get medical advice or take him to the nearest
Baby Clinic.
For the benefit of those who may be very distant from medical
or skilled nursing advice we give some further directions.
If the baby is breast fed he may be kept on thin barley water for
another day or two. Usually it is safe to give two short breast feeds
of five minutes each on the second or third day. Continue to give
thin sweetened barley water freely, but resume breast feeding very
gradually as the motions improve.


If the baby is bottle fed cow’s milk must not be given for several
days, perhaps not for a week or two or even longer. Keep him on
the barley water for a few days until he begins to improve. When the
motions begin to be fewer and less watery, and he is no longer feverish,
it will be safe to give him whey. If the baby is more than eight or
nine months old the whey may not satisfy him, and he may have some
sweetened arrowroot, cornflour, or sago made with water only. If still
hungry a small finger of baked bread may be given occasionally after
the whey. Continue these foods until the motions are becoming normal,
whe,n a tablespoonful of boiled milk may be given in the food or whey.
If this passes through undigested, give no more milk for a day or two,
then give it again. As soon as the milk is found to agree, it may be
gradually increased each day, until the baby is taking his proper food.
In mild cases of diarrhoea no medicine is necessary after the first dose
of castor oil, but all cases are not mild. A few loose motions may
be the beginning of a serious illness. In dysentery early medical
treatment is most necessary.
Raw apple, finely grated, has been found of value in the treatment
of dysentery. As much of the apple as he will take is fed to the child
every two hours during the first twenty-four hours, or as long as he
will continue to take it. The apple will be recognised in the motions.
In children under the age of six months, as well as in older children,
dried apple powder may be used, beginning with one teaspoon of the
powder, mixed with eight tablespoons of boiled water, cooled. This
may be given at two-hourly intervals. As the motions improve the
powder is mixed with whey, and gradually milk is added in increasing
quantities.
All soiled napkins should be covered with disinfectant at once, and
flies prevented from getting to them. After changing the napkin wash
your hands carefully, or you may convey the disease to your other
children.
Prolapse of the Lower End of the Bowel.
Sometimes, as the result of straining, the lower bowel is forced
down outside the natural opening. If it does not go back of itself,
anoint it with vaseline or oil, then press gently but firmly a clean
napkin on the protrusion. It will nearly always go back as soon as
the child stops crying to take a deep breath. A cold water pad applied
to the part after the bowel has been returned will help to tone up the
muscles. Then strap the buttocks together with a long broad strip of
zinc oxide plaster. This may be replaced when necessary for several
days, and should not prevent the bowels from acting. If you moisten
the plaster with a little methylated spirit, when removing it, it comes
off more easily. If you have not this plaster, make the child lie down
on his side, and pass his motion into a napkin, while you pull the upper
buttock to one side.


The bowels must be made to act regularly and the motions must
not be allowed to become hard and lumpy. The most useful aperient
is a teaspoonful or dessertspoonful (according to age) of paraffin
oil or emulsion given twice a day. As these cases are sometimes
troublesome, it is well to get medical advice.
Rupture or Hernia.
A rupture is a small hole in the abdominal wall under the skin,
through which is squeezed a bit of the bowel. The small hole is caused
by a slight defect in development. The squeezing-out happens when
the baby cries or strains and so contracts the abdominal muscles. Usually
the rupture goes back when the crying and straining ceases, but some-
times it remains down. It is a delusion that crying alone will cause a
rupture, and this is a poor excuse for spoiling boy babies. The hole
must be there before the rupture can get through. Two kinds of rupture
occur in babies and small children.
Rupture of the Navel or Umbilical Hernia.
This can nearly always be cured before the baby is a year old by
applying a broad strip of zinc oxide plaster. Other kinds of plaster
may irritate the skin. When applying the plaster the skin should be
drawn together and you should ask your doctor or a Clinic nurse to
show you how to do this properly. When the plaster begins to wear
loose, it should be replaced by a fresh strip. The plaster does not
interfere with the baby’s daily bath. Never let the rupture come down
while you are replacing the plaster.
Rupture of the Groin or Inguinal Hernia.
This occurs in both sexes but is more common in boys. It can
usually be controlled by a knotted skein of knitting wool. As the appli-
cation of this can only be learnt by practice, you must be shown how
to put it on by doctor or nurse. When this fails a small truss made
by an instrument maker may succeed. This is more expensive, and as
the baby grows a fresh truss will be needed. If the treatment is com-
menced early, and the rupture is never allowed to come down, many
eases can be cured by the time the baby is a year old, because Nature
is inclined to close the opening within the first year. The only alterna-
tive is an operation. After the first year, a cure by any other method
is most unlikely, and an operation is advised.
Strangulated Hernia.
Sometimes the bowel is pushed so far that it becomes nipped or
strangulated in the small hole and cannot be put back. This is a
very serious accident, for it means a stoppage in the bowel, and unless
this is speedily relieved, which probably means an operation, the child
will surely die. In such a case every hour’s delay increases the danger.


WORMS.
Threadworms.
Children with threadworms generally suffer from an itchiness at
the seat, especially at bedtime. This may make them restless and
prevent their going to sleep. The itchiness is caused by the worms
coming out of the anus and crawling about. More serious symptoms
from threadworms are extremely rare in Queensland. “Picking at the
nose’’ is not a sign of worms.
The only way to be sure that a child has threadworms is to see
them in the motions or outside the back passage. This is not difficult.
Look for them at night time with the aid of a torch. They are about
the size of cotton thread, about half an inch long, and are probably
alive and wriggle. All sorts of things in the motions, for instance the
stringy parts of bananas, are sometimes mistaken by mothers for worms.
If you are in doubt, put the things into a small bottle with methylated
spirit and show them to your doctor. Children should not be given
medicines for worms that they have not got.
Causes of Threadworms.
Every threadworm grows from an egg which has been swallowed.
These eggs are very small and can be seen only with a microscope.
The young child wallows some of these eggs accidentally, perhaps
from the fingers of another child. When the worms crawl out to lay
their eggs and so cause itching, he crushes them with his fingers, which
become covered with these invisible eggs. Even though the hands are
washed clean, there remain many eggs under the finger-nails. All
young children put their fingers into their mouths at times, and so
they are continually reinfecting themselves, and increasing the number
of their worms. Older children who suffer from worms will be found
nearly always to have the habit of biting their nails.
Treatment of Threadworms.
If the worms are numerous, medical treatment will give relief.
Strong medicines are necessary, and, as these may be dangerous, they
should be given only under medical direction. Injections of salt and
water given very gently after the bowel has been emptied, will often
bring away many worms, and these injections are harmless, if care-
fully given. Add two household teaspoonfuls of salt to one pint of
warm water. Use a Higginson’s syringe after covering the point with
a short piece of rubber tubing. Smear this with a little vaseline and
introduce it very gently. If the child struggles, you may injure the
bowel with the nozzle of the syringe and cause bleeding and you should
stop trying any more. Though many worms may be brought away by
medical treatment, there are nearly always a few left behind. Prom
these the child will probably reinfect himself, and in a few months
may have as many as before.


The real cure of threadworms depends on the mother. Make the
child sleep in good thick “combinations,” so that his fingers cannot get
at the worms to crush them. Smear some vaseline around the anus
before he goes to bed to prevent the worms crawling and causing
itching; or ask your doctor for some ointment which will kill the
worms when they come out. If reinfection is prevented, the few worms
left will die out.
Hookworms.
Hookworms are small white worms about half an inch long. They
cling to the lining of the bowels of many people and gradually make
them weak and pale by sucking blood and injecting a poison. If people
have hookworms they are more likely to be dangerously sick when they
get infectious diseases, such as pneumonia, measles, or typhoid fever.
Children with many hookworms do not grow up the way they should,
and are undersized and backward in school. But there is no need for
anyone in Queensland to have hookworm disease.
How People get Hookworm Disease.
The hookworm —like those other enemies of man, the mosquito and
the fly—cannot spend its whole life in one kind of place. The female
hookworm lays over a thousand eggs a day in the human bowel, but
none of them hatch there, and they could not hatch in the body if
people swallowed them. When the bowel motions of people who have
hookworms get on the ground through carelessness, ignorance, or bad
training, the eggs hatch. In about a week the little baby hookworms
(larvae), so small that we cannot see them without a microscope, stop
growing and eating, and lie waiting for a chance to get into some
human body. This chance will come when some person’s skin touches
the moist earth that they are in. Most of them die because this does
not happen, but some get on the bare feet of children or grown-ups
and quickly wriggle through the skin and float away in the blood. They
finally find their way with the blood to the lungs and are coughed up
and swallowed. When they reach the intestines they grow up and cause
sickness, and lay thousands of eggs to keep the race of hookworms going
as long as human bowel motions get on the ground.
Hookworm Disease and Rainfall.
Because the little hookworm larva; can develop only in moist earth,
hookworm disease is found only in people who live or have lived where
there is an abundant rainfall. There is very little hookworm disease
where less than 40 inches of rain falls in a year, and the disease is most
common in farming areas where there is over 50 inches of rain each
year, and wherever sugar-cane can be grown.
91


The Prevention of Hookworm Disease.
It is easy to prevent hookworm disease because the eggs can only
hatch in earth, and they cannot do that unless people pollute the ground
with bowel motions—a very dangerous thing to do. The secret of
getting rid of the most serious of our tropical diseases lies in three
words, “Stop soil pollution. ” To do this every house, school, or place
of work should have a clean, fly-tight, rat-proof closet built in agree-
ment with the regulations of the Department of Health and Home Affairs,
and children should be taught never to pollute the ground. Children
who live where there is hookworm disease can be protected if their
premises are free from pollution and boots are worn whenever they go
elsewhere. Hookworm lame are not able to go through boots in good
repair. Going barefoot on the sea beach is safe, because hookworm
larvae cannot stand the salt water, but the sand above high-water mark
is badly infected in some places.
How to be Examined and Cured.
It is easy to find out whether one has hookworm disease, for the
hookworm eggs can be seen in the bowel motion if it is examined with
a microscope, and a small specimen can be sent for examination to the
nearest Commonwealth or State public health laboratory. Parents can
get a container in which a specimen can legally be sent through the
mails by writing to the laboratory. If people have hookworm disease
they can be cured by taking a medicine that kills the worms. This can
be obtained from the family doctor or hospital.
GENERAL DISEASES.
Rickets.
This is a disease in which the bones become soft and easily bent;
the ends of the bones are enlarged; the head grows large and bossy
and sweats profusely; the chest becomes deformed; convulsions are
common, &c. It is due to the deficiency of a viatmin which is present
in the cream of fresh milk, and very abundantly present in cod liver
oil. It is a remarkable fact that sunlight enables the baby to keep well
on a supply of this vitamin which would be quite insufficient for it
if kept indoors in a dull climate. For this reason severe rickets is
rare in Queensland; but mild cases, including some which lead to bow-
legs or knock-knees, are not uncommon. The diet should contain
plenty of milk, not too much mush, and several teaspoonfuls of cod
liver oil or emulsion daily.
Scurvy.
This is the disease caused by want of a vitamin which is present
in fresh fruit and vegetables. It is present also in milk, but boiling,
scalding, pasteurising, or diluting tends to diminish the amount of this


vitamin present. This is the reason we give orange juice to hottle-fed
babies. The first sign of scurvy in a baby is nearly always tenderness
in the legs. He cries when these are handled, or when he is bathed.
They may become so tender that he is afraid to move them at all, and
he may be thought to be paralysed, or to have fallen and broken some
bone. The next sign is usually bleeding into the gums, which look as
though they were bruised. More rarely blood is passed in the urine.
A teaspoonful of fresh orange juice or sweetened lemon juice given
every few hours cures this dreadful disease. A cream made by mixing
the floury part found immediately under the skin of a cooked potato
with some milk is also of value.
Pink Disease.
This is not an uncommon disease of infancy. It occurs usually in
children between nine and eighteen months, sometimes in younger
children, occasionally in older. One of the first signs is that the child
becomes very fretful, irritable, and restless, and sleeps badly. He
refuses his food and loses weight rapidly. He becomes very flabby and
wasted, and looks miserable. The condition may be attributed by the
mother or her friends to teething. As the condition develops it is
noticed that the child sweats freely and an itchy, rough rash very like
prickly heat appears. The hands arid feet become pink and later
swollen, and feel cold and clammy. The tip of the nose also becomes
pink. The gums become red and swollen, and may ulcerate. The child
frowns or shuts his eyes and hangs his head or turns it from the light.
He tends to lie with his face buried in the pillow. Seek medical advice
as soon as you begin to suspect the condition.
Lead Poisoning.
Among Queensland children lead poisoning is caused by paint on
veranda railings, gates, fences, and other surfaces exposed to the weather.
The paint becomes powdery and comes off when handled. Young
children put their fingers into their mouths very often; older children
do so when they bite their nails; and so the poison is swallowed. Lead
poisoning is never caused by drinking tank water. If you have any
suspicion as to your veranda-rails or other outside painted surfaces,
rub your hands over them, and see whether the paint comes off. There
is now a regulation forbidding the use of lead paint on outside surfaces
within the reach of children’s fingers. Any chemist will tell you
whether the paint outside your house is lead paint.
The most common symptoms of lead poisoning in children are—
1. Colicky pains worse at bedtime, usually refusal of food, often
vomiting. Sometimes persistent vomiting occurs without
pains. The attack may last several days or a week. After
it is over, the child takes his usual food until the next attack.


2. Weakness of the legs, sudden giving way of the legs during
walking, dropping of the toes owing to paralysis of the
muscles of the front of the legs. In consequence the child
trips easily, and has to lift his feet high as he walks.
3. Convulsions. These may be serious or fatal.
4. A squint may develop in a child who has not squinted before;
he may also have headache or vomiting. If not taken to a
doctor early he may lose his sight and be blind for the rest
of his life as a result of inflammation and atrophy of his
optic nerves.
The treatment of lead poisoning is removal of the child from the
poison. Find out where your child got it; if in doubt, have the paint
examined by a chemist. Having proved the source of the poison, there
are only three things you can do—
1. Have it repainted with non-poisonous paint; or
2. Board off the painted surface so that the child cannot get
to it; or
3. Leave the house.
Of course you will get medical treatment from your doctor or the
hospital. But this will do no permanent good unless you prevent the
child from getting more of the poison. Very often the child gets better
in bed or in hospital, but gets a relapse after he gets up or comes home,
and each attack is usually more severe than the one before.
Foods rich in calcium (lime) should be given to the child after he
has been removed from the poison. These are milk, cheese, eggs, green
vegetables, carrot, pumpkin, potato, lettuce, orange, pawpaw, pineapple.
Anaemia.
Some babies, especially those underweight at birth, are apt to
become anaemic towards the end of the second month. Consult your
doctor or Clinic nurse in regard to this condition.
The “ Blue Baby.”
Occasionally babies are born blue, and the blueness remains. Theso
babies become breathless on the slightest exertion. They may appear
exhausted after sucking or crying for a short time. These babies do
not thrive well, and medical advice should be sought in regard to their
management.


BASHES.
Bashes may be divided into three groups —
1. Non-contagious rashes;
2. Contagious rashes ;
3. Bashes of infectious diseases.
So many different kinds of rashes occur in children that it is wise
to consult your doctor or Clinic nurse when they appear. The following
is written for the guidance of those who are not able to secure medical
advice immediately:—
1. Non-Contagious Rashes.
Erythema or Redness of the Skin. —This may arise suddenly. It
is usually patchy and frequently fades within twenty-four hours. It
may look serious, but usually it is not. The skin of an infant is very
delicate and reddens easily. Soaps which may have no effect on the
skin of an adult may redden the skin of an infant. Very hard water
or friction produced by vigorous rubbing may cause redness of the skin.
The condition may result from overfeeding or from eating unsuitable
food or food to which a child is sensitive. It may result from the
taking of certain medicines or the giving of an enema.
A sweat rash may be caused in the first few days of life owing to
the over-action and blocking of the sweat glands. Pearly white spots
about the size of millet seeds appear, particularly on the faoe. This
rash is of a temporary nature providing the child is not kept overheated.
If he is kept too hot this may be followed by a red spotty rash.
Prickly-heat.—ln hot weather the sweat glands act very freely
and keep the skin moist. Unless this moisture dries quickly it is apt
to cause an itchy rash, which is known as “prickly-heat.” It is most
often noticed on the body, especially on the back. To prevent this see
that the child is not too heavily clothed. Light clothing, with silk or
aertex next the skin, never wool, and plenty of fresh air are the best
preventives. Do not let him lie too long on his back, but turn him first
on one side and then on the other. A light chaff mattress is best for
coolness.
If the rash is troublesome, sponge the part with tepid water, using
no soap. Dry carefully. Then dust with a powder of oxide of zinc
and starch, or dab on some calomine lotion and let it dry on the skin.
“ Cradle Cap,” or Scurfy Patches on Babies’ Heads. —This is a
condition which appears as bran-like patches on the scalp, and may
spread to the forehead and eyebrows. It should be carefully watched
for, because it may be difficult to remove if not treated at once. To
guard against cradle cap, before baby’s bath each day apply a little
warm olive oil or castor oil to his scalp before using superfatted soap


The scalp should be gently rubbed with the mother’s soapy hand, and
the soap should be washed off carefully before drying with a soft towel.
Mothers are usually afraid to touch the “soft spot” on baby’s head,
but they can do no harm if they wash and dry the head gently.
As soon as a scurfy patch is observed remove it by rubbing it
gently with the tips of the fingers smeared with a little vaseline. The
removal may be aided by gently scraping the smeared surface with a
visiting card. The vaseline may be left on the scalp over-night and
washed off the following morning. If the scales are more firmly attached
they may be loosened by rubbing them with the tips of the fingers
dipped in a mixture of vaseline and kerosene, followed at once by very
gentle combing with a small tooth comb and washing with warm water
and baking soda (1 teaspoon to 1 pint of water), or with baby soap.
Great care must be taken to avoid the risk of fire by not applying
the kerosene near an open flame and of irritation by not allowing the
kerosene to remain on the scalp for more than a few minutes. If any
redness or irritation occurs, smear the scalp with lanoline.
Rash associated with Pink Disease. (See page 93.)
Insect Bites. —Bites of mosquitoes, sandflies, fleas, and lice may
cause a rash, which may be recognised by the presence of a darker
puncture in the centre of each spot. When irritated by scratching a
good deal of redness accompanied by discharge may occur. Where
bird lice are responsible, the nests of the birds must be destroyed and
the houses screened to prevent their rebuilding. For the irritation
apply a paste made of bicarbonate of soda and water.
Hives or Nettle Rash. —This rash occurs commonly in children.
The areas vary in size and are raised. They may have pale centres
surrounded by pink haloes, and are itchy. They appear, fade, and
reappear suddenly. In some cases a swelling of certain parts, such as
the lip, may be the first or only sign. The condition may be due to
some digestive upset brought about by overfeeding or by some con-
stituent in the food to which the child is sensitive. At certain times
the eating of crab, fish, or certain kinds of fruit may cause it. An
external irritant may also cause the condition.
Chafing. —This condition occurs in the creases where two skin
surfaces come into contact. The skin becomes red and moist, and a
discharge may occur. The parts generally affected are the creases behind
the ears, the creases of the neck, the armpits, the elbows, thighs, and
knees. It may also occur in the crease between the buttocks. To
prevent the condition baby should be gently soaped all over, particularly
in the creases, using a superfatted soap. After washing off the soap
dry the skin very carefully. If powder is used it should never be
applied until the skin is perfectly dry. It is better to use no powder
than skimp the drying.


Napkin Bash.—The area of skin covered by the napkin may be
reddened owing to irritation caused by a wet napkin. If baby does not
have sufficient cool boiled water between his feeds, the urine becomes
concentrated and irritates the skin. Wet and soiled napkins should
be removed as soon as possible. Irritation may be caused by a napkin
which has not been soaked sufficiently or which has been washed in a
strong soda and soap solution and improperly rinsed and aired.
Eczema.—Eczema is a skin disease which sometimes affects babies.
Some of the causes are improper feeding, chronic constipation, undue
exposure to strong wind or bright sunshine on unusually delicate skins,
or hereditary tendency.
Eczema may occur on any part of the skin, but breaks out chiefly
in its folds, or on the head—especially on the cheeks, forehead, and
scalp, and behind the ears. The skin is at first red and rough, then
becomes broken and watery, then scabs form, but the raw surface
beneath the scabs continues to weep—this weeping and crusting are
the special characteristics of eczema.
A doctor’s advice must be obtained for the treatment of eczema.
All obstacles in the way of obtaining advice must be overcome. Where
a doctor cannot come to the baby, one of the parents can usually manage
to make a journey to consult him.
2. Contagious Bashes.
Impetigo (School Sores). —This is a very common skin trouble.
It consists of mattery blisters which dry into scabs, which may be as
large as a threepenny bit. Sometimes the scabs fuse into large masses;
more commonly they form separate spots, which are most abundant on
the legs, arms, and face, though they may occur anywhere. The
matter from one spot infects other places, and fresh spots appear
wherever the child scratches. It is a purely external disease, and
although the skin looks horrid the child may be very well.
Impetigo is easily cured. Ask your chemist for some ammoniated
mercury ointment, and keep this constantly applied to the sores after
removing the scabs by softening with olive oil or applying a starch
poultice. The ointment must be kept on the arms and legs by bandages ;
for the face it may be applied on a linen mask, or it may be sufficient
to apply it at bedtime.
Sometimes impetigo is secondary to some other skin trouble, and
is not then so easily cured. If, therefore, the condition does not quickly
improve, you must consult a doctor.
Scabies or the Itch.—This is a disease which is caused by a minute
parasite resembling a cheese mite, and produces a rash as the result of
irritation. The parasite burrows under the skin and forms minute
channels, in which she lays her eggs. This gives rise to intense itching
and as the result of scratching the skin may become excoriated and
inflamed. The parts usually affected are the webs of the fingers, fronts


of wrists and elbows, armpits, and groin. The face usually escapes,
but may become involved in a baby who is being nursed by a mother
who has the disease. Usually several members of a family are affected
at the same time. Seek medical advice regarding treatment.
Ringworm.—This is a skin disease caused by a parasite, and it
may affect either the scalp or the body.
Ringworm of the scalp is most difficult to cure, consequently a
doctor must be consulted at once. It should be suspected when a patch
of short, broken hairs is seen.
Ringworm of the body in the early stages, can be cured by the
daily application of tincture of iodine for two or three days only or the
application of weak white precipitate ointment. If the condition does
not quickly improve a doctor’s advice must be sought.
3. Rashes Associated with Infectious Diseases.
Measles.—Measles is one of the infectious fevers. A child who
has contracted measles seems, at first to be suffering from a feverish
cold. There is running from the eyes and nose, coughing and Sneezing.
The temperature may be high, and the child may seem very sick. The
rash appears three or four days later. It consists of blotchy red Spots
which show first behind the ears and then spread to the face and body.
When the rash begins' to fade the temperature generally falls.
The child should be put to bed in an airy, well-ventilated room;
if possible, he should have a room to himself. Give liquid diet while the
temperature is high, and later on light diet. Protect the eyes from
glare, see that bowels are well moved daily, and most carefully avoid
chill.
The mouth and nostrils should be cleaned daily. Uncomplicated
measles is not a serious' disease, but if complications set in it may become
very serious indeed. Broncho-pneumonia is one serious complication,
and discharging ears another.
The rash fades quickly, but the child must be kept in bed until he
has lost his cough; he is infectious' for fourteen days after the rash has
faded and he has left off coughing.
Gorman Measles.—This is a mild form of measles. Soreness and
enlargement of the glands at the back of the neck occur.
Scarlet Fever.—Scarlet fever is one of the infectious fevers. It
usually begins with fever, headache, vomiting, and sore throat, followed’
quickly by the scarlet rash, which appears first on the chest.
Very serious complications, such as inflammation of the kidneys or
of the ear, may arise in the course of this disease; so if it is suspected
a doctor must be consulted at once. Until he arrives keep the patient
in bed, give liquid diet while feverish, then milk diet, attend to bowels,
and avoid chills'.
The disease is very infectious, so the patient must be isolated for at
least six weeks from the commencement of the disease.


Chicken-pox. —This is an infectious disease. It sometimes begins
with slight fever, but frequently the rash appears without any other
symptoms of illness. The spots are usually scattered, and are at first
like small pimples; these later become tiny blisters, which quickly dry
up into small scabs. If feverish the child must be kept in bed. Protect
him from chills and draughts; give him light diet for a few days, and
prevent him from scratching the sores.
The child is infectious for three weeks.
INFECTIOUS DISEASES WITHOUT A RASH.
Diphtheria. (See Sore Throat, page 84.)
Whooping Cough. —This is an infectious disease which is some-
times fatal to young children, and the younger the child the greater the
risk. Therefore, if whooping cough is about, every effort should be
made to guard baby from the risk of infection. If one of your children
gets the disease, ask your doctor to inoculate your baby against whooping
cough.
It usually starts like an ordinary cold, but, instead of the cough
lessening at the end of a few days, it increases and the ‘ ‘ whoop ’ ’ develops.
This consists of a series of short coughs succeeding one another so rapidly
that there is no time for an intake of breath. This is followed by a deep
inspiration, which causes the characteristic ‘ ‘ whoop. ’ ’ But although the
child may be suffering from whooping cough, the whoop may be entirely
absent. Babies don’t get the whoop. Therefore, if whooping cough is
about, any child with a bad cough which comes on in fits, is worse at
night, and ends in vomiting, is almost sure to be suffering from this
illness.
Broncho-pneumonia and convulsions are complications of whooping
cough. If the attack is severe, get a doctor’s advice. If mild, the child
need not be kept in bed, but must be carefully guarded from chills.
Keep the child in bed while feverish. Fresh air is very necessary.
If the child vomits with the attacks of coughing, it naturally follows
that he loses a good deal of his nourishment. So it is wise to give him
some light, easily digested food after the attacks, in the hope that
digestion may be completed before the next fit of coughing.
Mumps. —Mumps is an infectious disease. It usually begins with
some feverishness, the glands below the ear become tender and swollen,
and the swelling increases and extends over the side of the face. One or
both sides may be affected.
If there is any fever, keep the patient in bed, give light diet, attend
to bowels, and avoid chills. If the pain is severe, foments may be applied,
or gentle rubbing with warm oil may relieve. When the child is up it
is well to avoid chilling, by tying a flannel round the swollen face.
The child is infectious for twenty-one days from the appear-
ance of the swelling; longer, if the swelling has not all disappeared.
99


Table of Infectious Diseases.
Disease.
Incuba-
tion
Period.
Day of
Illness
when Bash
first
appears.
Type of Bash.
Symptoms.
Period of
Infectlvlty.
Period of
Exclusion
{torn School
from last
date of
Contact
with the
Disease.
Scarlet
fever
Days.
1-8
2nd day
Bright red spots
size of pin’s head,
general blush of
skin
Sore throat, fever,
vomiting
5 weeks ..
10 days
Measles ..
German
Measles
7 14
14-21
4th day
2nd-4th
days
Dull red blotches
Variable between
scarlet fever and
measles
Fever, blood-shot
eyes, discharging
eyes and nose,
irritable cough
Slight fever, enlarged
and tender glands
at back of neck
14 days ..
7 days
21 days
21 days
Chicken-
pox
10-21
1st day
Small pearly blis-
ters which rup-
ture and form
sores and scabs
Slight fever or none
at all
21 days or
until scabs
have dis-
appeared
21 days
Diphtheria
2-10
Nil
Nil
Sore throat or croupy
cough or dis-
charging nose
4 weeks or
longer if
discharge
from
throat
nose, ear,
or eyes,
or pus-
tules on
skin
12 days
Mumps ..
10-21
Nil
Nii
Fain on opening
mouth, diffuse
and painful
swelling in front
of ears
21 days ..
30 days
Whooping
cough
5-14
Nil
Nil
Sneezing discharge
from noseand eyes;
cough, getting
worse after 7 days
6 weeks ..
21 days


Some Emergencies.
Burns or Scalds.
The consequences of extensive burning or scalding, particularly
of the chest, may he serious. In the case of all such accidents, com-
municate with a doctor immediately. When you are unable to do this,
avoid unnecessary excitement. Gently remove the clothes from the
burnt area, cutting them away if necessary. Cover the part loosely
with a piece of light, clean, cotton cloth, and get someone to stay with
the child while you make the necessary preparations for treatment.
In anticipation of such an emergency it is recommended that a tube
of tannic acid jelly, which can be obtained from any chemist, be kept
in the house. The jelly is squeezed from the tube on to the burnt area
or is spread on pieces of clean cotton cloth, butter muslin, or lint,
which are placed on the part. The jelly is preferred to a solution of
tannic acid and water which does not beep for more than about two
weeks. As tannic acid is dirty and destroys bedclothes and other
material, it will be advisable to protect them by using paper or water-
proof sheeting. If the jelly is not available, an infusion of tea, which
has been allowed to cool, or wet tea leaves enclosed in a clean cloth,
may be applied.
In the case of superficial burns in which the skin is not broken,
a solution of baking soda and cool or warm water, one level table-
spoonful to one pint of water, may be applied. The affected part is
covered with pieces of clean, soft, light cotton cloth soaked in the
solution. This application will relieve the pain temporarily.
When you have made the child comfortable, keep him warm and
as quiet as possible. Allow him to drink water to which baking soda
has been added in the proporton of one level teaspoonful to 1 pint of
water, either plain or flavoured with orange or lemon juice and sugar.
If he is irritable, restless, and has an anxious expression, or if, on
the other hand, he is listless and inactive, do not give him anything
else for twenty-four or forty-eight hours or until the doctor sees him.
When the bum is extensive, it will be necessary to provide a wire
cage or other suitable support made out of a cardboard box or pieces
of string fixed to a chair on each side of the bed in order to keep the
bedclothes off the part. To keep the child warm, hot water bags should
be placed under the cage, but not too near the child’s body.
101


N.B.—Never leave a young child in a room where there is a fire
without a good fixed fireguard. Do not use flannelette for babies.
Never leave a kettle or vessel containing hot water where a young
child can pull it over. Never put hot water into an empty bath or tub,
but put in cold water first. Many awful deaths would have been
prevented by these simple precautions.
Choking.
Something has gone down the child’s throat and stopped his breath-
ing. Try to hook out the stuff which is blocking the breathing with the
forefinger thrust far back over the tongue. It is usually within reach of
the finger. If it has gone further, and the child is suffocating, hold him
by the feet with the head down, and pat him on the back or let someone
give his chest a few firm squeezes, or put him across your knees with the
head hanging down and squeeze his chest several times.
To restore breathing, if the child is blue and senseless after dis-
lodging the obstruction, lay him on his stomach, with his head hanging
over a small, thin pillow, or folded towel placed under the chest, turn his
face to one side, and practise artificial respiration. If no one at hand
knows how to do this, it will suffice to squeeze the back and sides of the
chest firmly with the open hands about fifteen times a minute—
alternately squeezing and relaxing until the child begins to breathe.
There should be distinct intervals between the squeezing, so as to afford
time for expansion and the inrush of air. If a second person is) at
hand, the lower jaw and tongue should be drawn forward at the same
time, while the head hangs over the low pillow or folded towel. If
artificial rspiration does' not restore breathing in a few minutes, put
the child into a very warm bath (say, 110 deg. F., or as hot as can be
just borne by the elbow) for half a minute, and dash some cold water
on the head and chest. Throw a dry towel over him and quickly
resume artificial respiration.
Convulsions.
Convulsions may result from a digestive upset, due to overeating or
to the eating of unsuitable food such as unripe fruit. Convulsions may
also occur at the onset of any illness, especially one accompanied by
high fever, such as pneumonia, meningitis, or any of the infectious
diseases, as well as in lead poisoning.
Send for the doctor immediately. Get ready a warm bath: test
it with your elbow to make sure that is is not too warm. Put into this
a small bag (made like a blue-bag) containing mustard. The amount
required is a tablespoonful of mustard to a bucketful of water.
Squeeze this mustard bag well into the bath. Place the child in the
bath, and apply a cold wet cloth to the head. Prevent chilling of the
body by placing a towel over it in the water.
Give plenty of fresh air. If the convulsions continue, the child
may remain in the bath for as long as ten minutes. Then take him


out, dry quickly, wrap him in a blanket, and put him in bed. Give
an enema to get the bowels moved, and, as soon as the child can swallow,
give a dose of castor oil.
Cuts.
Bathe in hot water to arrest the bleeding. Then bring the edges
of the cut as near together as possible. Apply a pad of clean soft
gauze or clean linen, and bandage firmly. The cut may first be covered
with a small piece of gauze or linen soaked in “Friar’s Balsam” (Tinc-
ture of Benzoin), if you have it handy. If the cut is very long or very
deep it will probably need stitches; less scar will be left if it is
sewn together.
If the part becomes inflamed, foments must be applied, and
renewed about every four hours.
In the case of a punctured wound, such as might be produced by
the prong of a garden fork, a nail, or a large splinter of wood, consult
a doctor immediately.
Things in the Ear.
Children sometimes push things into their ears. As it is very easy
to injure the ear and cause permanent deafness, no attempt must be
made to remove the foreign body. Take the child immediately to a
doctor. If you cannot do this, you may syringe the ear with warm
water.
If an insect gets into the ear pour in a little sweet oil.
Things in the Eye.
Only slight accidents should be dealt with at home, as it is very
easy to injure the eye. If there is a difficulty a doctor must be consulted.
Should such things as a piece of dirt or a minute cinder get into
the eye, make the child look down, press gently with a match-stick
on the base of the upper lid, and turn the lid back over this. The
lower lid should simply be pulled down. Then, if the object is visible,
it can be removed with the corner of a handkerchief or a wisp of
cotton-wool.
Things in the Nose.
Children sometimes push things up their nostrils. If old enough,
the child must be told to blow his nose vigorously. No instrument
must be used. If vigorous blowing is not successful, the child must be
taken to a doctor.
Hard Things Swallowed.
Children sometimes swallow such things as buttons, coins, pins,
fruit-stones, &e. If this happens, do not give castor oil or opening
medicine, but at once give some stodgy dry food, such as dry bread,
suet pudding, bun, or potatoes. This is given to cover the object, and
so prevent its sharp edges from doing harm. The motions must be
carefully watched until the object is found, or the child may be sent
to a hospital to be examined by X-rays.


Poisons.
Dangerous, perhaps fatal, accidents occur usually from want of
care. Small children are likely to taste and swallow any liquid they
see lying about in cups or even in tins. Therefore keep all dangerous
fluids carefully out of their reach.
The substances most likely to be swallowed are carbolic acid, lysol,
caustic soda, white ant poison, and strong acids, all of which
are deadly poisons. Kerosene should also be kept out of children’s
way. Should any of these things be swallowed, for caustic soda
give vinegar or limejuice in water; for strong acids, give bicarbonate
of soda stirred up in water, or some washing soda dissolved in warm
water; for all other poisons, an emetic of common salt and mustard,
a large teaspoonful of each stirred up in a large cupful of water.
You will of course send for a doctor or take the child to a hospital,
but you should give the emetic first, and repeat it if necessary.
TREATMENT OF POISONS.
Send for the doctor, name the drug suspected,
Keep any cup where poison is suspected.
In every case, what ’er the poison be,
You may give water, milk, and eggs, and tea.
Oils may be used, but two exceptions lie,
In phosphorus poisoning and in Spanish fly.
In every case where staining* is not found
To give emetics is both safe and sound.
So mix at once —be quick, but don’t be flustered —
Two tablespoons of salt, or one of mustard.
If stains are present, then proceed with care,
And of emetics most of all beware.
The poison known, to make the patient placid,
For alkali corrosives, give an acid.
An acid swallowed, then reverse the matter,
And give an alkali to kill the latter.
The acid antidotes in household use
Are table vinegar, and lemon juice.
What alkalies to use, need no revealing —
Take whitewash, chalk, or plaster from the ceiling,
Carbolic acid poisoning, to make the patient easier,
Give tablespoons two of sulphate of magnesia.!
In opium poisoning he snores like some old Druid,
Give him a teaspoon of Condy’s Fluid (well diluted with water).
In strychnine—opium; when there’s long stagnation
Besort to artificial respiration.
F.T., in the Kensington Infirmary N.L. Magazine.
Bleeding from Ears or Nose.
If after a heavy fall, or accident, there should be bleeding from
the ears or nose call in a doctor at once, as this may be a most serious
matter.
If a child bleeds from the nose habitually, keep him from picking
his nose, and insert a small plug of cotton wool, covered with vaseline,
into the nostril that bleeds.
* Of the lips and mouth by strong acids or alkalies. t Epsom salts.


Preparation of Food.
HELPFUL HINTS FOR THE NURSERY COOK.
Choice of Food.
Food must be absolutely fresh. The following points should be
noted in buying foodstuffs: —
1. Meat. —Should have no disagreeable smell, and should remain
firm when pressed. Flabby meat is not fresh.
Beef. —Is deep red in colour, with lean and fat intermixed. The
fat should be pale yellow. Very lean beef is not to be recommended, as
it is usually of poor quality.
Mutton and Lamb. —The flesh should be fine grained, paler than
beef in colour and with a white fat. If lean and very pale in colour,
the quality is poor.
Veal. —Good veal is fat, the lean part finely grained and of a clear
white colour. The kidney is small and covered with firm white fat.
Liver, Heart, Tripe, Kidney, &c. —Great care must be exercised
in seeing that these are absolutely fresh.
Poultry. —ln a young bird the end of the breastbone bends easily,
as it is still gristle—in the older bird it is quite firm. Young fowls have
smooth legs and combs, and the feet are pliable. For roasting choose
fowls with black legs, for boiling the legs should be white.
2. Fish. —The smell of fish is the best guide to its freshness, but
it should also have stiff body, firm flesh, red gills, and bright prominent
eyes. Whiting is probably the most easily digested fish obtainable in
Queensland owing to the small amount of oil it contains, and it is
therefore very suitable for young children.
3. Eggs. —When held up to the light fresh eggs will have a bright
yellow colour and no spots on the shells. A bad egg will rattle when
shaken.
4. Vegetables. —Should look fresh and be crisp to the touch. A
leaf, pod, or stalk should break with a sharp crack when bent. Much
of the value of vegetables, especially the green leaves, is lost if the vege-
tables are kept any length of time after picking. Roots carry and keep
better than the leafy vegetables, and are therefore very useful as a
105


source of vitamins and minerals in the hotter parts of the State. Sweet
potatoes are very wholesome and a good source of iron and should be
made use of more than they are.
Cooking of Food.
In cooking foods always remember—
1. Steaming, stewing, grilling, and boiling axe the best means of
cooking children’s food. Fried foods are less easily digested and are
therefore not suitable for small children.
Meat. —The most economical method of cooking meat is by
stewing, as coarser parts of meat can be made appetising in this way
and all the nourishment of the materials is retained. A very small
amount of heat is needed for cooking, as a stew should never boil—the
secret of success in stewing lies in slow cooking.
Baking or Roasting.—A large amount of heat should be used to
commence with. A joint put into a cold oven loses its flavour and juices.
After fifteen to twenty minutes, the heat should be lessened and the
cooking more gradual. Always baste well.
Boiling.—Do not boil fast. Fresh meat should be put into boiling
water and allowed to boil for five minutes; after that it should be drawn
to one side and should simmer gently till cooked.
2. In Cooking Green Vegetables, Baking Soda should not be
Used. — lt destroys the vitamin C. If the vegetables are young, as
they should be, and cooked quickly, they will not need soda to keep them
green. Too much water should not be used, as the valuable mineral
salts are likely to be thrown away in the water. Therefore, greens
should be steamed or boiled in very little water. Do not throw away
the water in which they are boiled. If any is left, use it as a stock for
soups and gravies.
Potatoes and other roots should be well scrubbed and baked or
boiled in their jackets, as the valuable mineral salts are just under the
skin, and are likely to be lost in peeling.
Butter added to vegetables greatly improves the flavour and
makes them more nourishing.
Salads.—Green leaves and other vegetables used uncooked should
be well washed in salt and water, and then under running water.
Economy can be effected in preparing meals for children by using
a steamer which will take several vegetables at once, or by boiling two
or three small amounts of vegetables in the same saucepan. Fish, eggs,
brains, or other quickly cooked foods may be steamed in a saucer or deep
plate on top of the saucepan in which the vegetables are cooking. Do not
waste your fuel. The pudding for baby’s midday meal may be cooked
when you have the stove hot for breakfast, and then placed in your
cool safe or ice box.


Do not forget that milk and eggs, and other dairy products, may be
a little dearer to buy, but they require little or no cooking, and, therefore,
you economise in wood or gas.
Remember the value of fresh uncooked fruits and vegetables in the
children’s diet.
By spoonfuls are meant flat spoonfuls. If you do not measure
correctly, you must not expect good results.
SIMPLE RECIPES.
Fruit-acid Tooth-wash.
Dissolve one flat teaspoonful of acid tartrate of potash and two or
three small saccharin tablets (obtained from a chemist) in one pint of
hot water. This is inexpensive and suitable for schools and institu-
tions, but it will not keep more than a few days. For household use
obtain some fruit-acid tooth-wash tablets from a chemist. Dissolve
one tablet in two tablespoonfuls (or T oz.) of water.
Home-made Lemonade.
Dissolve three teaspoonfuls of sugar in one pint of cold boiled
water. Add three teaspoonfuls of lemon juice, and stir.
Tamarind Fruit Drink.
Pour one pint of boiling water over the contents of five or six
large tamarind pods. Stand till cool. Strain through muslin or cheese-
cloth. Then add one or two flat clinic tablespoonfuls of sugar. This
should be prepared fresh every day.
Fruit Cup.
One-half cupful orange juice, \ cupful lemon juice, 1 cupful
shredded pineapple, and \ cupful thoroughly mashed papaw, 1
of Syrup made with sugar and water. Strain and add 1 cupful barley
water and 1 cupful water. Serve as cold as possible.
Lemon Syrup.
Four cupfuls sugar, 4 cupfuls water, 2 oranges, 2 lemons, \ oz. citric
or tartaric acid, 1 dessertspoonful essence of lemon or lime.
Put sugar and water into saucepan, rub rind of lemon with 2 oz.
loaf sugar, add juice of lemons and oranges to syrup. Boil fifteen
minutes, remove from fire, add citric or tartaric acid. Strain and allow
to cool, then add lemon flavouring and bottle.
Tartaric Acid Syrup.
Two pounds sugar, oz. tartaric acid, two and a-half teaspoon-
fuls essence of lemon, one pint boiling water. Place sugar and tartaric
acid in jug, and pour on boiling water. When dissolved and quite cool,
add essence of lemon, and bottle for use. To one tumbler of water add
three teaspoonfuls of the syrup.
107


Fruit Juice for Artificially-fed Babies.
Squeeze juice of a clean, sweet orange and strain through perfectly
clean muslin. Dilute at first by giving equal parts of juice and boiled
water.
Lemon juice is equally good, but requires further dilution and the
addition of sugar to sweeten.
Pineapples or tomatoes may be cut up small and squeezed through
muslin.
Carrot or Swede Turnip Juice.
Wash a carrot or a swede turnip, dip in boiling water for half a
minute, grate, just cover with cold boiled water. Stand for two hours,
strain, give the amount ordered undiluted or diluted.
Barley Water.
One and a-half tablespoonfuls of pearl barley, wash well, and
put in a saucepan with one pint of cold water. Add a pinch of salt.
Simmer gently for one hour; strain through perfectly clean muslin.
Make up to one pint with boiled water. Sweeten slightly. Barley
water will not keep. It must be freshly made twice a day, and kept
in a cool place.
Vegetable Broth.
Take three level teaspoonfuls of pearl barley or rice, one small
carrot sliced, one small potato, piece of pumpkin, four leaves spinach
or silver beet, pinch of salt; cover with water and boil all together for
two hours, or until thoroughly cooked. Strain through sieve. Amount
of broth should be 3 oz. when cooked. For use, add equal quantity of
milk, and heat.
Bone and Vegetable Soup.
Take a pound of shin of veal or mutton, or bones of some young
animal—lamb, chicken, kid, rabbit, &e.; chop up so as to expose
marrow; place in a saucepan and cover with one and a-half pints of
cold water and half to one tablespoon of malt vinegar, but no salt.
Simmer gently for some hours—the longer the better —add a handful
of mixed vegetables and simmer again for one hour; strain and make
up to one pint, and allow to set into a jelly.
Practically any vegetables may be used, according to the season,
and should include, from time to time, cabbage, spinach, lettuce leaves,
turnip tops, beans or bean strings, carrots, parsnips, turnips, onions,
cauliflower, fresh or dried peas, celery, potato, pumpkin, &c. Prom
time to time add other odds and ends—such as a piece of liver or brains,
or a teaspoon of marmite, sweet bread, and so on. By varying the
constituents of the soup, a variety of necessary elements is ensured in
the child’s food.
Do not skim all the fat off the soup, as it is mostly marrow fat and
very nutritious. This soup can be used on two consecutive days if it is
brought to the boil at night and kept in a cool place.


Mutton Broth.
Two pounds neck mutton; three pints of water; a little salt. Cut
meat small, break bones. Cover with water, add salt, allow to stand
for half an hour, bring slowly to the boil, and allow to simmer gently
for three to four hours; strain, allow to get cold, remove fat, and reheat
with a teaspoonful of rice or barley to each cup of broth. Simmer
gently for half an hour for rice, and longer if barley is used, then
strain before giving.
Prune Juice.
Wash prunes well; soak overnight. Boil one hour, and strain.
Prune Pulp.
Same as above. ' Then remove stones, and press pulp through a
sieve. Eighteen prunes make about seven teaspbonfuls of pulp.
Apple Pulp.
Bake an apple well until quite soft. Remove skin and core. Pass
through sieve; add a little sugar.
Baked Flour or Flour Ball.
Tie a cupful of flour tightly in a cloth, and boil slowly for six
hours. Take the flour out of the cloth, removing the outer crust. The
inner part should then he broken up into small pieces, and spread out
on a large dish. Place in oven and bake slowly, until it is crisp right
through, and a pale biscuit colour. While hot, crush to a powder with
a rolling-pin. Store in airtight jar.
To prepare the food, mix one tablespoon of the powder to a smooth
paste with a little cold water. Add 8 oz. of boiling milk mixture,
stirring all the time. Put mixture back into saucepan, and boil for
five minutes.
Preparation of Bean Sprouts or Other Germinated Cereals.
Soak some beans, dried peas, barley, or wheat in cold boiled water
in a flat dish over night. Spread them out so as not to cover each
other. In the morning drain off the water and cover with a double
thickness of gauze. Keep damp by adding a little boiled water as
needed.
The sprouts will appear in about forty-eight hours. They are
ready to eat when they are one or two inches long. Bean sprouts are
palatable and very nutritious.
Cooking. —Boil or steam the sprouted seeds like any other green
vegetable for twenty-five minutes, adding the salt when
nearly cooked. For small children rub them through a
sieve. For older children this is not necessary. Serve with
white sauce or with a little butter.
N.B. —If the peas, beans, or cereals are dead, they will not sprout.


Steamed Fish.
Place i lb. of fish between two plates, with two tablespoonfuls of
milk and a pinch of salt. Steam oyer a saucepan of boiling water for
from ten to fifteen minutes. Serve with a little white sauce.
Mutton Stew.
A scrag end of mutton with most of the fat removed is chopped
into short lengths and put into a saucepan with two or three cups of
cold water. To this is added a good-sized carrot, a parsnip, a turnip,
an onion, and two tablespoonfuls of barley. Simmer for two or three
houra, stirring occasionally, as the barley is apt to stick to the sauce-
pan. A little salt is added just at the last.
Minced Tripe.
Cleanse the tripe, and pass it and a peeled onion through a
mincing machine. Sprinkle with salt, and put in a saucepan with a
little water. Simmer for three hours. Blend tablespoonfuls of flour
smoothly with a cup of milk; add this to the tripe, and stir till it boils.
Simmer ten minutes longer and serve.
Minced Liver.
Prepare and cook same as minced tripe, but simmer for two hours
instead of three.
Cod Liver Oil and Emulsions of Cod Liver Oil.
These must be kept in a cool, dark place. If they are left exposed
to the light, the vitamin value is affected.
Junket.
This is very easily made by adding sufficient rennet essence or
tablets to warm fresh milk, and keeping it warm till it goes solid.
Only perfectly fresh sweet milk should be used. The junket may be
sweetened and flavoured.
Whey.
To make 12 oz. of whey, put 18 oz. of milk in a jug and stand the
jug in a saucepan of hot water until the milk is blood heat (100 deg.
P.). Take the jug from the saucepan, and stir into a teaspoonful of
best rennet, or a junket tablet dissolved in a little water, or one-third
of a teaspoon of Quick Set Junket Essence. Allow to stand for a few
minutes' until firmly set, then break the curds up with a fork, pour
into a saucepan and bring to the boil, then strain through a piece of
clean boiled cotton fabric —for instance a handkerchief. Do not squeeze
the curds. Keep in clean jug in cool place.


Boiled Custard.
Milk—6 oz. or 12 tablespoonfuls, 1 egg, 1 teaspoonful sugar.
Method. —Beat the egg. Heat milk to nearly boiling point, then
pour over the well-beaten egg and sugar, stirring all the time. Pour
into a jug, stand jug in a saucepan of boiling water, stirring the custard
one way till it thickens. Be very careful not to allow the custard to
boil, as it will curdle and be spoilt.
Baked Custard.
Beat up one egg with 1 teaspoon of sugar and 8 oz. of milk.
Pour the mixture into a small piedish and bake in a slow oven until
just set. This must not be allowed to boil.
Cheese Custard.
Beat up two eggs in one pint of milk. Stir in one teacupful of
bread crumbs, three heaped tablespoonfuls of grated cheese, add salt to
taste. Put in a well buttered baking dish and bake in a moderate
oven till custard is set.
Tomato Cheese Custard.
This is prepared in the same way, putting first into the dish a
good layer of sliced, skinned tomatoes.
Cottage Cheese.
Put some sour pasteurised milk in a clean basin, cover with butter
muslin, and keep in a warm place till a solid curd forms. Tie up
loosely in double butter muslin and allow to drain for twenty-four
hours. Add a pinch of salt and a little fresh milk to make a creamy
paste. With the addition of a few chopped raisins and a pinch of sugar,
this makes a good sandwich filling.
Bice Baked in Milk.
Three teaspoonfuls of rice, 1 teaspoonful of sugar, \ pint of milk,
add i teaspoonful of salt. Wash rice well. Put into piedish with sugar
and milk and bake gently in a slow oven for two hours, stirring occa-
sionally during the first half-hour. A little nutmeg may be grated
over when rice is nearly cooked. One teaspoon of butter or suet
broken in small pieces and sprinkled over before cooking improves
the dish.
Ground Bice.
Ground rice, 2 tablespoonfuls; milk, \ pint. Mix the rice to a
smooth paste with a little of the milk, add the remainder and one
teaspoonful of sugar. Boil in a double saucepan for thirty minutes.
Flaked Bice.
Flaked rice, 4 tablespoonfuls; milk, \ pint. Mix the rice with a
little of the milk, stand aside for five minutes, then add the remainder
and 1 teaspoon of sugar. Boil in a double saucepan for thirty minutes.
111


Barley Jelly.
Eub two and a-half level household tablespoonfuls of patent barley
into a paste with cold water, and make up to half-pint by stirring in
boiling water. Add a pinch of salt. Boil in double saucepan, with lid
on, for one hour. While hot strain through perfectly clean gauze or
a very fine wire gauze gravy strainer into a scalded jug. Cover with
gauze. Make fresh supply daily.
Rice Jelly.
Make the same as barley jelly, substituting two level household
tablespoonfuls of ground rice for patent barley.
Oat Jelly.
Soak three level household teaspoonfuls of oatmeal in half-pint
of warm water for one hour. Add a pinch of salt. Boil for one hour
in double saucepan, with lid on. While hot strain through perfectly
clean gauze or a very fine wire gauze gravy strainer into a scalded jug.
Cover with gauze. Make fresh supply daily.
Wheatgerm Meal Jelly.
Soak three level household tablespoonfuls of wheatgerm meal in
half-pint of warm water for one hour. Add a pinch of salt. Boil for
one hour in double saucepan with lid on. While hot stir through
perfectly clean gauze or a very fine wire gauze gravy strainer into a
scalded jug. Cover with gauze. Make fresh supply daily.
Baked Bread.
Cut a slice of bread, remove crusts, and cut bread into fingers.
Place in a moderate oven; bake until faintly browned, and the bread is
quite crisp and will break like a fresh biscuit. Crusts may be baked
until hard and crisp. For older children bake the whole slice, cruat
and all.
Oatcake.
Mix together two small cups of fine oatmeal, half a teaspoonful of
salt, and half a teaspoonful of sugar. Make a hole in the centre of
this, and add to it a quarter of a cup of boiling water. Mix quickly
into a dough, turn on to a board well sprinkled with meal. Work very
little, roll out as thin as possible, cut into pieces, and bake on a griddle
or hot plate until crisp.
Oatcakes if not freshly made, should always be toasted a little
before the fire so that they are quite crisp.
Coddled Egg (for Children).
Place egg in boiling water, cover, and remove saucepan immedi-
ately from the fire, leaving egg in the water for five minutes.


The Child from Two to Five Years.
THE IMPORTANCE OF CARE AND MANAGEMENT.
Periodic Examinations.
Many mothers who are prepared to he advised by their Clinic nurse
and to exercise great care in regard to feeding, handling, and general
management and care in avoiding infections during the first year of
baby’s life, relax their efforts during the second and succeeding years.
Although the first year is very important because the foundations of
baby’s future progress are being laid, it is important that every
mother should attend the Clinic with her child until he has reached
school age. While the earliest and most urgent work of our Baby
Clinics and Child Welfare Centres is naturally concerned with the
first year, a very important part of our work is that associated with
the care and welfare of the pre-school child or toddler. There occur
many cases of badly fed and poorly nourished children whose mothers
have not realised that knowledge, care, and skill are required in the
management of toddlers.
Every toddler should be brought to the Clinic for examination at
least once, but preferably twice, a year and should be taken to his
dentist once every six months. By doing this and not waiting until
something is wrong, the child comes to regard his doctor and his
dentist as his friends and he is not afraid of them when something is
required to be done. The Clinic nurse with whom both mother and
child will have become familiar will be able to give advice regarding
the planning of a balanced diet and to suggest methods of management
whereby health can be preserved. Behaviour which may be the prelude
to the formation of bad habits, physical defects which may limit
chest expansion, diminish the intake of fresh air and lead to faulty
posture and poor resistance to disease, may be recognised at a time
when correction is relatively simple.
Co-operation.
If the parents, by intelligent handling and sympathetic under-
standing in the early years, have gained the confidence of their child,
co-operation between him and those concerned with keeping him fit
will be readily established and problems associated with his upbringing
later will be more easily solved.


Achieving Independence.
As the child develops, the more primitive activities of sucking and
grasping become replaced by the more complex and co-ordinated
movements associated with mastication, sitting, crawling, standing,
walking, running, and talking, and later by other activities requiring
greater skill. The exercise of these activities is important in enabling
the child to adjust himself to his surroundings in his efforts to achieve
greater independence. After the parents have provided a suitable
playroom or playground and material, they should allow the child
free scope for his activities. While they may be interested onlookers,
they should not interfere with his play. At the same time, they should
be ready to respond when an appeal from the child indicates that he is
in need of help or guidance.
Toys.
Simple toys such as blocks of wood often provide more pleasure
to children than the most elaborate mechanical ones. Generally
speaking, the younger the child the larger should be the toy. Among
other considerations the fact must not he overlooked that a child of
two years and older puts into his mouth things which may he acci-
dentally swallowed or find their way into his air passages. Toys with
rough or sharp edges and balloons attached to pointed sticks should
be avoided. Provide toys which can be washed. Apart from their
value in providing means of teaching the child cleanliness, washable
toys are more hygienic than those which are not. Once having decided
upon a suitable toy and handed it over, the parent should regard
it as the child’s property, to he treated as he chooses. He should he
allowed to learn by experience what treatment the toy requires. In
any case, a broken toy may he just as precious to him as one which
is whole. The child must value and be interested in his toy, if it is to
have the desired effect of amusing him.
At an earlier age when sight, hearing, and feeling played so
important a part in the child’s development, coloured toys, or toys
capable of making a noise, or those from which he could derive pleasure
from handling were suitable.
Playmates.
By the time he has reached the age of two years he is beginning
to show an interest in other children and to join in games with them.
He will harness up his playmate and play horses; he will throw a ball
to another child. He likes toys to which he can impart motion, such as
wooden trains or engines, wheelbarrows or carts. He tries to hit a
ball with a racket or bat. The small girl loves her doll, which she
dresses and undresses.


Gaining Confidence.
Soon after the child begins to walk, he shows an interest in going
up and down stairs. How often a mother is alarmed to find her small
child engaging in activities which to her seem most hazardous! In
reality it is seldom that he comes to serious harm. It is in this way
that he gains experience and confidence. If he has been allowed to
develop without unnecessary thwarting of his activities, the child, by
the time he is two years old, has learnt to do many things which require
more or less skill. Encourage him in his attempts to undertake new
tasks. Do not allow him to be discouraged by failure, but be ready to
give him unobtrusively just that little extra assistance which he may
require in order to reach his objective, allowing him to experience the
joy of achievement whenever it is possible.
Training for Citizenship.
Reference to the value of the nursery school and kindergarten in
the development of the child of pre-school age has been made in another
part of this book.
There are two important facts which parents should keep in mind.
One is that character is formed before the age of six years; the other
is that every individual is a unit in a social group.
Companionship with children of his own age is an important part
of a child’s life. Without it he has little opportunity of learning
to make adjustments and he is apt to become a “spoilt child.” By
“making adjustment” is meant the process of fitting harmoniously into
a group of children. It consists in learning how to give and take for
the good of the group, the process of acquiring judgment, balance
and control.
In the light of future citizenship it means the young child is
learning to co-operate, to work for the good of the community. It
means that he is learning to put into practice the universal law of
interdependence—interdependence of one individual upon another, of
one part of the community upon another, of one nation upon another.
In the cities the parents of the child of pre-school age may have
the assistance and co-operation of the directors of nursery schools and
kindergartens who are specially trained and qualified to supervise the
development of the child at this early age. The child leading the life
of the only child, the difficult, sensitive, “highly strung” child, and
the restless, irritable child are particularly helped by attendance at
these schools.
Character Formation.
The child becomes more content as the result of his new interests;
his emotional life is able to develop along healthy channels in his
new environment, and his intellectual growth can take place normally.


To the onlooker it may seem that all the activity that goes on at the
nursery school and kindergarten is just play. Behind it all, growth and
development are proceeding; characters are being formed. The
process is slow but sure. Attention is paid to the physical as well as
the mental development of the child.
Parents living in a town or district where no nursery school or
kindergarten exists may find it possible to invite some children in
to play and to organise a nursery school or something like it in their
own homes.
For the parents of a solitary child living in the “outback” there
may be only one solution to the problem—the parents must give up
much time at the cost of some other duties in order to give the child
companionship.
The companionship must aim at strengthening, not weakening, the
child’s confidence. In all his play and work the child must be allowed
full scope for the exercise of his initiative. His mistakes must not be
ridiculed. He must be encouraged and reassured in all his efforts.
Handwork, be it connected with small household duties, carpentry,
gardening, drawing, or other activities, is useful in helping the child
to be practical. He must be encouraged in creative work of every
description. A sense of responsibility may be developed by allowing
him to keep pets and have control of their welfare.
Suitable toys, good books with clear pictures, story-telling, all
play their part in the child’s education.
“A sound mind in a sound body” should be the motto of every
parent and every teacher.
You may obtain information on all matters concerning child
welfare by visiting the nearest Clinic, or by writing to the Sister in
Charge, or by communicating direct with the Baby Clinic and Child
Welfare Training Centre, Alfred Street, Valley, N. 1., Brisbane.


Feeding from Two to Five Years of Age.
At these ages it is not usually necessary to measure the quantities
of food taken. So long as the food is plain and wholesome, the quantity
may be left to the appetite, which varies much in different children,
and at different times. But if the child is fond of any particular food
—for instance, fruit, or butter, or jam, or potato, or meat—it may be
necessary to limit the quantity of that. The foods that we do not like
overmuch will not do us any harm.
Three Meals a Day.
Some rules should be observed. The meals should be limited to
three. No solid food should be given between meals. Giving children
bread and butter, cake, and biscuits between their meals spoils their
meals; it often causes loss of weight, and it is sure to cause decay of the
teeth. Sometimes it is advisable to give a drink of milk and fruit
between meals, but usually milk is given with meals.
Do Not Force Children to Eat.
Children should never be forced, bullied, begged, or bribed to take
their food. This is a sure road to trouble. If your child refuses a meal,
which is not distasteful, do not make a fuss. He may be ‘ ‘ bilious ’’ or
not hungry for good reasons. If in good health, he will have a good
appetite for the next meal. The child who is implored to eat by an
over-anxious mother becomes more and more difficult to feed. He gets
thin and his health suffers. In extreme cases it is necessary to separate
him from his mother, when he rapidly recovers.
Sweets.
If children have pennies to spend, let them buy wholesome fruit
or peanuts instead of tooth-destroying sweetmeats. A pennyworth of
factory-made ice cream is wholesome food, but water ices are just
sweet rubbish. If the child, when he is young, does not get a taste
for sweets and has been fed on a properly balanced diet, he will not
have the same craving for them as other children who have been
brought up on them. He may be given a piece of barley sugar, pre-
ferably acid flavoured, after his midday meal. Do not allow the child
to have a bag of sweets to himself; provide suitable sweets and let him
select one or two. Train him to eat a piece of apple afterwards. Avoid
giving him a sweet at bedtime
M. & C.—E.


Fresh Foods.
Give fresh fo.ods as much as possible. Dried and canned foods
and all the things you buy in tins should be given only as occasional
substitutes. Without a plentiful supply of vitamins no children can
thrive. Stews, soups, macaroni, &c., given to children must not contain
pepper and spices.
Milk.
Of all foods milk is the most important. F.or the amount of
nourishment it contains milk is the cheapest of foods. All children
under six years should have, if possible, one pint every day. This
may be given partly with porridge, partly as a drink, partly in milk
puddings or custards. Some children prefer to drink the milk. Those
who do not like it thus may have it flavoured with cocoa or postum,
or take it as junket. The best and easiest way to persuade your
children to take milk and milk foods is to take some yourself. In
some western districts where fresh milk may be unprocurable, dried
skimmed or ereamless milk may be given in milk puddings. The
absence of cream may be corrected by the addition of some butter.
Milk puddings should be milky, not stiff and stodgy ; usually children
like them best made without eggs. Custard made of milk and eggs
is a valuable food.
Fruit.
Fruit is a necessary food, not a luxury, and should be taken with
meals. When other fruits are dear, tomatoes may be cheap, and are
just as good. Each meal should end with fresh fruit, or with stewed
fruit and milk pudding, junket, or custard. Or an acid drink made
with lemon or orange juice or with tamarinds, or other fresh fruit
juices, or failing these with tartaric acid, is a pleasant change, and
helps to preserve the teeth. Be very careful not to give unripe or over-
ripe fruit; do not give too much, and if you give raw apples, be very
sure that they are thoroughly chewed. All fruit eaten raw should be
carefully washed, especially if it is not peeled. Bananas for young
children should be carefully mashed. Many of our children are fruit-
starved ; consequently when they get a chance they gorge themselves
with fruit and get sick.
Vegetables.
Vegetables are a most important part of children’s diet. Root
vegetables are particularly rich in mineral salts. Green vegetables
contain vitamins and valuable amounts of lime and iron. We fre-
quently meet children who do not like vegetables. This is often
because their mothers do not know how best to cook them. Directions
regarding the buying and cooking of food will he found in the section
on “Helpful Hints for the Nursery Cook,” page 105.
In western districts, where fresh fruit and vegetables may be
unprocurable for long periods, sprouted peas and beans are a most
valuable source of vitamin C. Keep them covered with a wet cheese


cloth in a shallow dish till they are an inch long. Then cook very
gently and n,ot long. (See page 109.) Onions either raw or lighly
cooked are also recommended.
Young children should have their dinner or principal meal in the
middle of the day. If given in the evening it spoils their night’s rest,
and may cause night terrors.
Children need less food in summer than in winter.
Tinned Foods.
There is no doubt that, owing to the constant reading of advertise-
ments, many mothers have become unconsciously biassed in favour of
tinned foods. They waste their money in buying some advertised branc
of dried milk, when good fresh milk, which is a better food and
cheaper, is easily obtainable. They will buy tins of expensive rusks,
when those they can bake in their ovens are at least as good.
They are attracted by prettily-named foods containing dried eggs
instead of giving their children good fresh eggs. They do not realise
that for children who are no longer babies fresh butter, perhaps with
the assistance of a simple emulsion of cod liver oil, is better than some
expensively advertised substance with a fine name. This is a weakness
to be avoided. Tinned or canned foods have their uses, but fresh foods,
when obtainable, are always better.
Vitamins.
Vitamins are substances that are present in foods in very small
quantities, but are absolutely necessary for the preservation of health.
They are present in varying quantities in most fresh and unprocessed
foods, but are wholly absent from white bread, white flour, and all
foods made from this, and from sugar and golden syrup, and from
many dried and preserved foods'. Children whose food is deficient in
vitamins are often undersized and undernourished; they easily fall
sick, suffer very badly in epidemics, have very poor, decaying teeth,
often develop chronic ill-health, and die easily from any acute disease.
Expectant mothers often suffer in health, and may become seriously
ill when their food is deficient in vitamins.
There are six necessary vitamins, but only four are likely to be
deficient in Australian diets. It is very important that all expectant
mothers, babies, and children should have sufficient of all these vitamins
in their food.
Vitamin A is chiefly obtained from milk, butter, and yolk of
eggs. Margarine, which does not contain the important accessory
food factors, should not be substituted for butter, especially as so
many Australian children do not take enough milk. Liver is rich in
this vitamin and a useful amount is present in cheese, suet, and
dripping, but not in lard or bacon, nor in vegetable oils and fats.
It is also obtained from some vegetables and fruits, particularly from
all greens, carrots, and tomatoes.


There is some vitamin B in milk. It is most abundant in the
germs and skins of cereals, but has been removed from white flour,
and is therefore absent in white bread. It is frequently deficient in
Australian diets, and this deficiency causes poor health and chronic
constipation. Whole wheatmeal, wheatgerm (Vita B, or Bemax, or
Cerevitamin) wholemeal bread, wheatgerm-meal bread, and extract of
yeast (marmite, vegemite) are the best available sources of this
vitamin. It is present also in peas and beans. It is not destroyed by
drying nor by cooking unless soda has been added.
Vitamin C is abundantly present in most uncooked fruits,
especially in oranges, lemons, tomatoes, and pineapples, and in salads.
It is diminished in cooking, and is therefore present in smaller quan-
ties in cooked vegetables and fruits. There are some in potatoes and
in cabbage if properly cooked. Canned tomatoes contain a fair propor-
tion, and some may be present in other canned fruits. It is destroyed
altogether by long cooking, cooking with soda, and by drying. Conse-
quently, it is absent in jams, marmalade, and dried fruits. Raw milk
contains a small quantity, but this is diminished by scalding or
pasteurising. This is why we give orange juice to babies.
Vitamin D is not present in many foods. There is a good deal in
milk, butter, egg yolk, and liver; there is also some in cheese, suet,
and dripping. Unlike all other vitamins it is formed in the human
skin, when this is exposed to sunlight. Our babies might obtain
more vitamin D from the sun, if they were not so heavily clothed.
To avoid sunburn, exposure to the direct rays of the sun must at
first be only that of a small area and for a short time, preferably in
the early morning. The Clinic nurse will give instructions for this.
Cod liver oil contains large amounts of the two vitamins A and D,
this is why we add it to the food of artificially fed babies and give
it to delicate children.
Any deficiency of vitamin D interferes with the growth ,of the
bones and makes them soft, so that they bend easily. This is how
some children get knock-knees or bow-legs. Good strong teeth cannot
be grown without a good supply of the vitamin; and its absence makes
children get convulsions easily.
Wholemeal Bread and Wheatgerm Meal Bread.
Wholemeal bread was the bread of our great grandmothers and
was a much better bread than the white bread which most people eat
to-day. Be sure that it is really wholemeal and not just brown bread
or bread that has been made dark by adding extract of malt or
molasses. Wheatgerm-meal bread is just as good, and for young
children, and for some older people, it is better.
One consequence of eating white bread is the enormous present
consumption of pills, salts, and other aperients. These should be taken
only for occasional emergencies. Their constant use is a most harmful
habit.


Wheatgerm and Bran.
The germ is the part of the wheat grain from which the young
plant grows. Bran is the fine skin of the wheat grain. Both of these,
which contain valuable vitamins, have been removed from white flour
and are, therefore, absent from white bread. Both are present in
wholemeal flour and wholemeal bread. Wheatgerm is sold under
various names—including Cerevitamin, Bemax, and Vita B —and can
be secured from the chemist.
Bran contains a smaller quantity of vitamin than wheatgerm does,
but is much cheaper. Clean cooking bran suitable for human
consumption can be bought for two or three pence a pound.
Biscuits.
Biscuits are one cause of decay of the teeth, and should not be
given to children. Those made of finely ground flour, such as arrow-
root biscuits, are especially harmful.
Neither do we recommend biscuits for mothers, but they are some-
times useful when travelling. Only those made from whole wheat or
wheatgerm meal should be eaten.
Granose biscuits, which are quite different from ordinary biscuits,
may be used with milk instead of porridge.
MENUS.
Breakfast.
Milk is more important than porridge, and therefore porridge
should never be taken without milk. The best porridge is made of
whole wheatmeal or wheatgerm meal. To vary the taste one-quarter
of oatmeal or cornflour, not more, may be added to it. Avoid fancy
breakfast foods, which are less’ valuable and more expensive. There is
no truth in the notion that porridge is too “heating” in hot weather.
Add only a little sugar or golden syrup and plenty of milk.
After this an egg may be given boiled, coddled, poached, or
scrambled, or some fresh fish, when procurable, with baked bread or
crisp toast and butter.
Or baked wholemeal bread or crisp toast and butter with marmite
or jam or honey. Sometimes as a change you may give dripping.
Milk to drink or cocoa or postum and milk (not too sweet).
A quarter or half an apple or orange.
Dinner.
This should be varied; we give suggestions for one week. Acid
drinks may be given if the meal contains no fruit. If potatoes an
provided, bread is unnecessary. Children under three should be given
meat and liver cautiously and in small quantity.


1. Roast beef (underdone) or mutton or grilled steak or chops
or egg and cheese cut up finely. Potatoes (sweet potatoes
are just as wholesome, and many children like them better).
Vegetables such as marrows, squashes, pumpkins (cooked in
skin), stringed beans, cauliflower, well-boiled carrots and
turnips or parsnips, boiled onions, &c. Peas and beans
should be well cooked and given in small quantities. Water
cress, pumpkin, and sweet potatoes are valuable sources of
iron. Milk pudding with baked apples or stewed fruit, or
raw thinly-sliced pineapple.
2. Fresh fish boiled, steamed, or fried. Potatoes and vegetables.
Stewed fruit or canned peaches or apricots or fresh fruit,
such as pineapple, mashed banana, orange, papaw, &e., when
you can get them, with custard.
3. Liver (the most valuable of all meat foods, sometimes called
lamb’s fry). For young children the liver should be minced.
Potatoes and vegetables. Junket and sliced pineapple or
mashed banana or orange or other fresh uncooked fruit.
4. Vegetable soup or broth made with carrots, onions, &c.
Macaroni or rice or cauliflower with grated cheese. Lettuce
with tomato or beetroot salad. Fresh fruit.
5. Tripe stewed in milk. Potatoes and vegetables. A plain
steamed pudding with stewed fruit or a small helping of
jam. Lemon or tamarind or other fruit drink.
6. Stewed mutton or chicken or rabbit. Potatoes and vegetables.
Bread and butter pudding, with stewed fruit or acid drink,
or some thin slices of raw pineapple.
7. Cheese custard or omelette, or boiled, poached, or scrambled
eggs. Lettuce with tomato or beetroot salad. Wholemeal
bread and butter. Junket with fresh fruit.
This would be a good dietary for one week, but mothers should
vary it, keeping to the main principles. Meat should not be given every
time, but children should be allowed to develop a taste for other
wholesome and important foods, such as cheese, liver, tripe, and fish.
A salad consisting of lettuce, grated carrot, tomato (well washed),
shredded raw cabbage heart, and similar raw vegetables should be
allowed each day.
Tea.
A large cupful (7 to 10 oz.) of milk, or hot cocoa or postum made
with nearly all milk.
Baked wholemeal or wheatgerm meal bread with butter and acid
jam or marmite, sponge cake, rock cake, or oatcake, rusks, or granose
biscuit.


Some stewed fruit with junket or milk pudding, or half to one
orange or other fresh fruit in moderation.
Sometimes tomatoes cooked with rice or macaroni, canned tomatoes
may be used if you cannot get fresh ones.
Tea should include sandwiches of wholemeal ,or wheatgerm-meal
bread, with butter, qr acid jam, marmite, tomato, celery, cheese, peanut
paste, &c.
In winter, soup is given with advantage—such as tomato puree,
potato puree, marmite, spinach puree, or pea soup.
Children under five years of age should not be allowed to have
soft, new bread, currants, raisins, plum pudding, raw cucumber, celery,
radishes, curry, sauces, pickles, or other condiments, tea or coffee, and
children under three years should not have nuts, cheese (unless grated
or cooked), bananas (unless mashed).


The Food of School Children.
After five years of age the child begins to take the same food as
the grown-up members of the gamily. This should not be very different
from the diet we have recommended for the child under five. If the
mother does not know the difference between wholesome and unwhole-
some food, as sometimes happens, so much the worse for the child. He
probably has his dinner about six o’clock. It must be remembered
that the growing child needs a liberal allowance of protein (body-
building food); especially he needs milk. If he drinks tea, it should
be half milk; cocoa and milk would be better; he should also have
plenty of milk puddings, custard, milk with his porridge, and so on.
Probably he takes his lunch with him to school. This may consist
of a few sandwiches, perhaps some oatcake, shortbread, or rock cake,
and should always contain some fruit, but should not be mostly fruit.
The sandwiches give an opportunity for some pleasing and wholesome
variety. The bread should be stale, cut thin, and lightly buttered;
wheatgerm-meal bread is best. Meat or ham sandwiches are not recom-
mended, though they may be given occasionally. The following are
better:—
1. Cheese sandwiches, either thin slices of cheese or some soft
cheese that can be spread on the butter, with lettuce* if
possible, or finely cut uncooked leaves of silver beet.
2. Marmite or vegemite sandwiches with or without lettuce
leaves.
3. Thin slices of hardboiled eggs with or without lettuce.
4. Fruit sandwiches made with sliced tomatoes, bananas, or
pineapples. If fruit sandwiches are not given, add an
orange, apple, pear, or banana to the lunch, or a short stick
of sugar-cane. If possible he should have Jor | pint of milk.
Other fillings for sandwiches made of wholemeal or wheatgerm-
meal bread and butter are:—Grated carrot, peanuts, peanut paste,
minced meat, brains, liver, fish, poultry, sardines, salmon, herring,
minced currants, raisins, prunes, celery, and cheese.
On returning from school he should have a glass of milk or a cup
of warm milk in winter, and in summer some fruit or a fruit drink.
• The leaves of the water cress or endive, a variety of lettuce, are very suitable
for sandwiches.


Western Difficulties.
In remote western districts fruit and vegetables may be unprocur-
able for many months. Onions will keep a long time and are very
wholesome raw or boiled. Canned tomatoes contain some vitamin,
though not so much as fresh, and so do some other canned fruits.
Canned pineapple juice is good. Perhaps the best substitute for fresh
vegetables are sprouted peas and beans prepared according to our
directions. Those who are grown-up and children over twelve may eat
these uncooked as a salad, or very lightly cooked. For younger
children they should be prepared according to the directions given on
page 109. If the peas and beans are dead they will not sprout, but
dried peas and beans remain alive for one or two years. Seedlings of
mustard, cress, cabbage, turnips, and radish grown on a piece of wet
flannel on a plate make a good substitute for fresh vegetables. When
the tiny plants are an inch or two high you cut them off with scissors
and eat them with bread and butter.
In these districts goat’s milk is better than cow’s milk. The
mother, who milks her own goats, knows that the milk is clean, that
it is fresh, and that it contains no added water. If a few nannies
are properly fed, they will give good milk right through the summer.
They will do well on mulga. Every effort should be made to keep the
goat in milk, if it is at all possible.
Swedes, carrots, sweet potatoes, oranges, lemons, and other citrus
fruits keep well. Carrots keep well in the ground, lemons and oranges
keep well if wrapped in tissue paper in airtight tins. Pumpkins should
be spaced.
Native Plants Used for Food.
New Zealand spinach, known also as Warrigal cabbage, thrives
not only in the western country but all over the State. The succulent
green leaves are more appetising than silver beet.
Pig-weed, known also as purslane and portulaea, grows plentifully
throughout the State. Besides the stems and leaves which are used,
it possesses a root which is not unlike radish. It is often cooked as
a vegetable.
The young leaves of the native hibiscus may be used in a salad.
The leaves of the “fat hen” or wild amaranth make a useful
vegetable.


Old-man saltbush thrives in the dry inland districts. The whitish-
green leaves are a valuable food. They may be eaten instead of lettuce
between bread and butter. When cooked, the leaves and tender young
stems make a useful vegetable.
When these native plants are eaten for the first time, take very
small quantities.


Economical Housekeeping.
Economy in housekeeping can he practised by a woman who is a
good manager and has some knowledge of the values of foods. Every-
thing depends on the housewife, and the care and skill with which she
spends the slender stream of shillings and pence, which form the
family income. It will help her very much if she makes use of the
following hints:—
1. Do not live from hand to mouth. Think out carefully the
week’s rations of your family, what you will need, and what
you will pay for it.
2. Buy the food supplies yourself. Local cash shopping centres
are cheap, and tram fares are more than saved by lessened
cost and better quality. Watch the market prices, and buy
what is cheap and in season. Pay cash and you can buy
where, how, and when you like.
3. Buy wisely. It is not the costly foods that are most valuable.
The cheaper cuts of meat, if properly cooked, are just as
nourishing as the more expensive. Liver, kidneys, brains,
and tripe are much more valuable foods than chops, steaks,
and joints, and they are much cheaper.
4. Choose the fruit and vegetables that are plentiful and cheap.
The best vegetables are those that you grow yourself.
Even a few lettuces and tomatoes grown in tubs or tins
are a great help. On a very small piece of ground you
can grow enough vegetables to support a family, and save
two or three shillings every week. Lettuces, silver beet,
carrots, and tomatoes are the most valuable and easy to
grow. If besides these you can grow cabbages, beans, peas,
marrows, turnips, parsnips, and onions you are well off
indeed. Every backyard in most districts should grow a
lemon tree and a few papaws, together with a choko vine.
5. Do not waste your money on cooked or tinned foods, biscuits,
rusks, or fancy breakfast foods. Wheatmeal is the best
breakfast food, oatmeal comes next, and both are inexpen-
sive. Wheatmeal should be used for scones, cakes, and
puddings; if flour alone is used add some large spoonfuls
of cooking bran.


6. The one thing of which you should always buy enough is
milk. Every child under six should have at least one pint
of milk daily; from six to sixteen, half a pint is the least
that can be advised, owing to the big demand necessary for
the growth of bones and the development of the teeth;
over sixteen, half a pint should be still the minimum.
Though dried skimmed milk is no substitute for milk,
it is a good food and may be used with butter or dripping
in puddings, soups, cakes, and scones. Condensed milk is
half sugar and is never economical. Mixed, as it usually
is, with much water, it is very poor nourishment.
Instead of puddings, give the children sometimes junket
mixed with sliced or shredded uncooked fruit —apples,
oranges, pineapple, papaw, tomatoes, &c. It is better than
baked or stewed fruit and saves gas or firewood.
7. Butter is the most valuable fat. Next to it comes dripping,
which is much cheaper.
Margarine, which does not contain the important
accessory food factors, should not be substituted for butter.
8. Use sugar and golden syrup in moderation. Too much of
them may possibly satisfy your children’s hunger, but
leave them undernourished and unhealthy for want of
better food.
9. It is better to spend a penny or two on baking soda and cream
of tartar than to throw away money by buying self-raising
flour.
10. Prepare the right quantities for each day, and never throw
away food unless it is bad. “Leftovers” may be used in
many ways. Sour milk can be made into scones, and saves
using cream of tartar. Porridge may be made into milk
puddings. Stale cake may be made into trifle with junket or
custard and jam. So may stale bread and scones, or they
may be baked into rusks, or they may be fried. Crumbs are
always useful for cooking. Pineapple peelings make a nice
acid drink. Cold potatoes may be sliced for salads, made
into soup or into scones. Outside lettuce leaves, turnip tops,
and silver beet are as good as spinach. Bones and fish-
bones and trimmings of bones and fish are good for soup,
as is any water that drains away from cooked vegetables.
11. Save fuel by arranging your meals so that several dishes
may be cooked at the same time. Remember that raw
fruits are better than cooked fruits. Well washed lettuce
with sliced tomatoes or shredded young carrots should
sometimes replace cooked vegetables. Cold meat is better
than twice cooked meat, though that is good if it is fresh,
but it must not be kept over twenty-four hours in the
summer.


RECORD OF MY CHILD’S PROGRESS.
Two to Five Years.
Name Address
Date of birth Place of birth
Weight at 2 years Height
Third Year.
Weight at 3 years Height
Date of immunisation* Doctor’s name
Dates of examinations by doctor
Visits to dentist
Remarks on teeth
Amount of milk taken each day
Illnesses or operations, dates, &c.
Remarks regarding mental and physical development—toys, games,
playmates, &c
Attendance at nursery school or kindergarten
Fourth Year.
Weight at 4 years Height
Dates of examinations
Visits to dentist
Remarks on teeth
Amount of milk taken each day
Illnesses or operations, dates, &c
Remarks regarding development
Attendance at kindergarten
Fifth Year.
Weight at 5 years Height
Dates of examinations
Visits to dentist
Remarks on teeth
Amount of milk taken each day
Illnesses or operations, dates, &c
Remarks regarding development
Attendance at kindergarten
* Immunisation against diphtheria should be carried out when the child is
twelve months old.


NOTES


Index.
A Page.
Abscess of Breast .. .. .. .. .. 12
Acid Drinks .. .. .. .. .. .. 107
Acid Tooth-wash .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 107
Adenoids .. .. .. 83
Air, Fresh .. ~ .. 3
Alcohol 11
Amentia .. .. .. .. .. 94
Aperient, Weekly .. .. .. .. .. 65
Aperients .. .. .. .. .. .. 53
Apple .. 45
Apple Powder . . .. . . . . 88
Apple Pulp 109
Apple Treatment in Dysentery .. .. .. .. .. 88
Arrowroot Biscuits 109
Artificial or Unnatural Feeding .. .. 24
Guide to, After Nine Months .. .. .. 42
Measurements for 25
Utensils required for . . .. .. . . 36
Artificial Feeding Mixtures .. .. 27
Amount of Food 29
Emulsion 29
Milk and Water .. .. .. .. .. 28
Whey .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 27
Whey-milk .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 27
Average Weights and Heights, Table of .. . . .. 68
B
Babies, Sick, General Treatment of .. .. .. 31
Babies, Nervous, Excitable .. .. .. .. .. 15
Baby Not Satisfied .. .. .. .. .. .. 18
Baby, The Blue .. .. 94
Baby with Over excitable Stomach .. .. .. .. 20
Baby’s Bath 48
Baby’s Bed 49
Baby’s Clothing 3
Baby’s First Two Days .. 61,62
Baby’s Food While Travelling ~ .. 37
Baby’s Pillow and Mattress .. .. 49
Baby’s Progress .. .. ~ .. 66
Backward Child, The . . .. .. ~ .. .. 77
Bad Habits ~ .. 73
Baked Bread 112
Baked Flour 109
Baking .. .. • • -. .. .. .. .. 106
Baking Soda, Avoidance of, in Cooking 106
Barley Jelly .. • • .. .. .. .. .. 112
Barley Water .. 108


Page.
Bath, Baby’s .. . . .. .. . . .. .. 48
Bathing .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3
Bean Sprouts .. .. .. .. .. .. 109,125
Bed, Baby’s .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 49
Bed-wetting . . .. .. .. .. . . .. 75
Beef .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 105
Binder .. .. .. .. .. . •. .. 65
Birth and the New Environment .. . .. ■■ -'7l
Birth-marks .. .. .. .. . . .. .. 65
Biscuits . . .. . . . . . . . . • . 37, 59,121
Bites, Insect .. .. .. .. .. rr .. • • 96
Bleeding from Ears or Nose .. .. •. .. 104
Blue Baby .. .. .. .. .. .. .. • ■ 94
Boiling .. .. .. .. . . . . • . . . 106
Bone and Vegetable Soup .. .. .. •. 108
Bottle Feeding, Practical Points in .. .. .. •. 33
Bottle with Large-holed Teat .. .. .. ■ ■ .. 14
Bottles, To Clean .. .. .. .. .. .. 35
Bottles, Types of .. .. .. . . .. •. ■ • 34
Bowel, Prolapse of .. .. . . .. .. .. 88
Bowels, Baby’s .. .. .. .. •. .. 52
Bowels, Mother’s .. .. .. . . .. 11
Bran .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 121
Bread, .. .. .. .. .. • • • • .. 10
Baked 112
Wheatgerm Meal .. .. . . .. .. • • 120
White, Avoidance of . . .. .. .. .. 10
Wholemeal .. .. .. .. .. .. ’ 120
Breast, Abscess of .. .. .. . . .. .. .. 12
Breast Feeding .. .. .. .. .. • . .. 6
Breast Feeding, Advantages of .. .. .. .. 6
Breast Feeding, Difficulties of .. .. .. .. .. 11
Faulty Management .. .. .. •. 13
In Child •• •• 12
In Mother .. .. .. .. .. • ■ ■. 12
Over-excitable Stomachs .. ■ • ■. • • 20
Over-feeding .. .. .. .. .. .. 16,19
Over Supply .. .. .. .. .. •. • • 14
Under Feeding .. .. .. .. .. 17,19
Under Supply .. .. 14
Breast Feeding in First Pew Days .. .. .. .. 13
Breast Feeding and Beturn of Menstruation .. .. 16
Breast Feeding and Illness or Absence of Mother .. .. 16
Breast Milk and Artificial Food given Together .. .. 63
Breast Milk Decreasing .. .. .. .. .. .. 15
Breast Milk Plowing Too Quickly .. .. • • • • 14
Breast Milk Seems to Disagree .. .. .. •. 15,16
Breast Milk, To Increase Supply of .. .. •. • • 17
Breasts, Baby’s, Swollen • • 83
Breasts, Leakage of Milk from .. .. .. .. • • 63
Breasts, Massage of .. .. .. • ■ • • ■ • 18
Breasts, Pendulous .. .. .. • • 15
Breasts, Tense .. .. ■ ■ ■ • • • 16
Bronchitis . . .. . . .. . . . • • ■ • • 85
Broth, Mutton • • • • .. .. .. ■. ..109
Broth, Vegetable .. • • • • ■. • • • • • • 16®
Brush, Tooth .. ■ • .. .. .. •. • • 60
Burns .. .. ■ • .. .. .. • • 101
Butter .. .. • • .. .. ■ • • • - • 106


C Page.
Canned Poods 122,125
Carrot Juice .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 108
Castor Oil .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 63
Chafing 96
Character Formation 71,115
Cheese, Cottage .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 11l
Cheese Custard 11l
C : cken Pox , .. .. .. .. .. .. # , 99
Child, 2to 5 yt. 3, Care and Management of .. .. .. 113
Choice of Food .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 105
Choking .. 102
Citizenship, Ti„ining for 115
Cleanliness .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4
Cleft Palate and Feeding .. .. .. .. .. 13
Closets 79
Clothing 3
Cod Liver Oil 28,29,39,40,43,44,110
Coddled Egg 112
Colds .. .. 84
Colic 86
Complementary Feeding .. .. .. .. .. .. 18
Complementary Feeding Table .. .. .. .. .. 19
Condensed Milk 32
Confidence, Gaining .. .. .. .. .. .. 115
Constipation in Babies 53,54
Constipation in Mother 11
Convulsions .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 102
Cooking of Food 106
Co-operation .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 113
Cottage Cheese .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 11l
Cradle-Cap .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 95
Croup 85
Cry, Why Babies .. 52
Custard .. .. m
Baked .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 11l
Boiled 11l
Cheese .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 11l
Tomato Cheese .. .. .. .. .. .. 11l
Cuts .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 103
D
Dengue 80
Diarrhoea .. .. .. . . .. .. .. . . 86-88
Diet during Weaning .. ~ . . .. . . . . 39
Diet from 5-12 Months .. .. .. .. .. . _ 37-40
Diet from 1-2 Years .. .. .. .. .. .. 43-47
Diet from 2-5 Years .. .. .. .. .. 117-123
Diet, Methods of Introducing a More Varied 37
Diet of the Nursing Mother .. .. .. .. . _ g
Difficulties which may lead to Early Weaning .. .. .. n
Diphtheria 84,85
Dirt and Disease .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 79
Dirt Bating .. .. .. .. . . .. .. .. 74
Disease Spread by Coughing, Sneezing, Smearing, Swallowing,
and Insect Hosts 78-80
Disease, Prevention of .. .. .. .. .. .. 78
Dribbling .. .. .. .. . . .. .. .. 65
Dried Milk 30
Dried Skimmed or Creamless Milk . . .. .. 118,128
Dummy .. .. .. . . .. .. .. 14, 61
Dysentery .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 86-88
M, & C.—F.


E
Page.
Ear, Things in .. .. .. .. 103
Ears, Bleeding from .. .. .. .. .. .. 104
Economical Housekeeping .. .. .. .. .. .. 127
Economy .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 106
Eczema .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 97
Egg 39,40,43-47, 112
Eggs .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 9,105
Eggs to Cook for Children .. .. .. .. .. 105
Emergencies, Some .. .. .. .. .. ■ • 101
Emulsion .. .. .. .. .. 28, 29,39, 40,43,44,110
Environment .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1
Erythema .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 95
Essentials for Baby’s Health .. .. .. .. .. 1
Examinations, Periodic .. .. .. .. .. .. 113
Excitable Baby 15
Exercise, Muscular and Sensory Stimulation .. .. . • 3
Excitement .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 11
Eye, Things in .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 103
Eyes, Care of .. .. .. .. .. • • • • 82
F
Pall, Keeping Awake after a .. .. .. .. .. 65
“Pat Hen” .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 125
Fear .. .. .. .. .. .. 71
Feeding .. 6
Artificial or Unnatural .. .. .. .. .. 24
At Night 62,63
Breast .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 6
Newborn .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 7
Of Children during First Two Tears 6
Of Children during First Year .. .. 6-9,11-20, 24-44
Of Children 1-2 Tears .. .. .. .. .. 44-47
Of Children 2-5 Years . . .. .. .. 117-123
Of School Children .. . . .. .. .. .. 124
Of Twins .. .. .. .. .. - - .. 20
While Travelling .. .. .. .. .. .. 37
Feeding Bottles, To Clean .. .. .. .. .. 35
Feverish, Baby .. .. .. .. 81
Filaria .. .. .. .. .. .. -. .. 80
Finger-nails, Cutting Baby’s 65
Pish 105
Fish, Steamed .. .. . - .. .. .. .. 110
Fleas .. .. .. .. .. .. 80
Flies .. .. .. .. .. .. 79
Flour-ball 109
Food .. .. .. 1, 3
Food, Artificial, Method of Using .. .. .. .. 26
Food, Canned .. .. .. 119,125
Food, Careful Handling of . . .. .. -.-. 79
Pood, Choice of .. .. . . .. .. .. .. 105
Food, Cooking of .. .. . . .. -. .. •. 106
Food, Fried .. . - . . .. .. • • • • 106
Food, Preparation of .. .. .. 105
Pood, Tinned .. .. . . - - - ■ • • T 19 ,125
Food, While Travelling .. .. .. .. .. • • 37
Poods, Proprietary or Patent . - .. .. - - • • 33
Forcing Children to Eat, Avoidance of .. -. • • H 7
Fresh Air .. .. • • .. • • 2
Fresh Poods .. .. . . .. • • ■ • • • H 8


Page.
Pried Pood 106
Fruit 10,118
Fruit Acid Tooth-wash .. .. .. .. .. .. 107
Fruit Cup 107
Fruit Drink .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. 107
Fruit Juice .. 30,108
G
German Measles .. .. • • .. • ■ .. • • 98
Germinated Peas, Beans, and Cereals .. .. . . 109,125
Grated Apple .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 88
Grilling .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 106
H
Habits, Bad .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 73
Habits, Regularity of 4
Habits, Regular .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 73
Hard Things Swallowed .. .. .. .. .. .. 103
Hare Lip and Feeding .. .. .. .. .. . . 13
Head, Care of .. .. .. • • .. • • • ■ 81
Heart .. .. .. .. .. .. .. • • 105
Heights, Average .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 68
Hernia .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 89
Hibiscus, Native .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 125
Hives .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 96
Holding Breath .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 65
Home-made Lemonade .. .. • • ■ • • • • • 107
Hookworm Disease .. .. .. .. .. 91,92
Hookworms .. . . .. .. .. .. • ■ • • 91
House .. .. .. .. .. .. .. • • 1
I
Imitation .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 72
Immunisation .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 85
Impetigo .. .. .. .. .. . • .. • ■ 97
Independence, Achieving .. .. .. .. ■. .. 114
Infections Spread by —
Coughing, Sneezing, Smearing .. .. .. .. 78
Contamination of Food .. .. . ■ • • • ■ 79
Insect Hosts .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 80
Infectious Diseases .. .. .. .. .. 98,99
Infectious Diseases, Table of .. .. .. .. .. 100
Information Regarding Child Welfare Work .. .. .. 116
Insect Bites .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 96
Insect Hosts .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 80
Iron, Food Containing .. .. .. .. .. .. 75
Itch 97
J
Jealousy 73
Jelly-
Barley 112
Oat 112
Bice .. • • . • • • .. .. .. •. 112
Wbeatgerm Meal .. .. .. .. .. .. 112
Jogging Baby .. .. .. .. .. • • •. 64
Junket .. 116
K
Kidney .. •• •• •• •• •• •• 166
135


L
Page.
Lactation, Late Establishment of 12
Lactic Acid Milk .. .. .. .. .. .. 31,32
Lactone Syrup Milk 32
Lamb .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 105
Lead Poisoning 93
Lemon Syrup .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 107
Lemonade, Home-made .. .. .. .. .. .. 107
Lice .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 81
Lime, Foods Containing .. .. .. .. .. 75,94
Lime Water 65
Liver 105,110,122
Loose Motions .. .. ~ .. .. .. • • 81
M
Malaria 80
Management of Children .. .. .. .. .. .. 5
Management, Some Common Errors in Baby .. .. 61-65
Margarine .. .. 119,128
Marmite .. .. .. •• .. .. ..38-40,43,44
Mattresses for Baby’s Bed 49
Measles .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 98
Measles, German 98
Measurements for Artificial Feeding .. .. .. .. 25
Meat .. .. 105,106
Menstruation, Return of, and Weaning .. .. .. 64
Menus .. .. .. .. .. .. 44-47,121-123
Milestones .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 66
Milk 118
Breast .. .. .. .. .. .. 6-9,19, 20, 23,43
Condensed .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 32
Cow’s 10,19, 25,27,28,30, 38,39, 40-47,118
Care of .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 30
Dried .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 30
Goat’s 31,125
Lactic Acid .. .. • • .. .. .. 31,32
Lactone Syrup .. .. ■. •. • ■ • • 32
Method of Preparing Milk Mixture .. .. .. 30
Milk and Water Mixtures .. .. .. . • .. 28
Modified .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 28
One Cow’s .. .. .. .. .. .. ■. 64
Peptonised .. .. .. . • .. . • ■ ■ 32
Whey-milk Mixtures .. .. • • .. . ■ • ■ 27
Milk, Breast, Not Agreeing 15,63
Milk Puddings .. .. .. .. • • . ■ • • HI
Milk, “Windy” 65
Mince .. .. .. .. .. ■ • • • • • HO
Mistakes Commonly Made by Mothers .. .. .. .. 63
Mosquitoes .. .. .. .. • • • ■ • • ■ • 4
Mothering .. .. .. .. .. .. .. • • 4
Motions, Loose . • .. .. .. .. . ■ • • 87
Mouth, Care of .. .. .. .. .. . • • • 82
Mouth, Cleaning of 64
Mouth, Ulceration of • . .. .. . . • ■ 13,86
Multiple Pregnancies .. .. .. .. .. .. 20
Mumps .. ■ • ■ • - • • • • ■ • • • • 00
Mustard and Cress .. .. • ■ . • • • ■ • • • 135
Mutton .. .. ■ • • • . • ■ • .. • • 105
Mutton Broth .. . • •. • • • • ■ • • • 100
Mutton Stew .. • • • • ■ • ■ • • • ■ • HO
My Child’s Progress during First Two Years . . -• • • 69
My Child’s Progress, 2-5 Tears .. .. -- •• 129
136


N Page.
Nail-biting .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 75
Napkin Bash .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 97
Native Plants 125
Needs of Every Baby .. .. .. .. .. .. 2
Needs of Nursing Mother .. .. .. .. .. 9
Nervous Baby .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 15
Nettle Rash .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 96
Newborn .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 61,62
New Zealand Spinach .. .. .. .. .. .. 125
Night Feeding .. .. .. .. .. .. 62,63
Nipple Slipping Under Tongue of Baby .. .. .. 12
Nipples, Cracked .. .. 12
Nipples, Flat, Depressed .. .. .. .. .. .. 12
Nits and Lice .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 81
Nose, Bleeding from .. .. .. .. .. .. 104
Nose of Baby Blocked, Interference with Sucking .. .. 13
Nose, Things in .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 103
Notes 70,130
Nursing Mother .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 9
o
Oat Cake .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 112
Oat Jelly .. .. .. 112
Obedience .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 72
Objects of Baby Clinics and Child Welfare Centres .. .. xi.
One Cow’s Milk .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 64
Orange Juice .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 30
Oranges 10,125
Over-stimulation .. 15,72
P
Papaw .. • • • • 10,94
Patent or Proprietary Foods 33
Patting Baby .. .. .. • • .. .. .. 64
Peas, Dried 109,125
Pendulous Breasts .. .. .. .. .. .. 15
Peptonised Milk . . .. . . . . .. .. .. 64
“Periods,” Return of, and Weaning .. .. .. 64
Pig-weed .. • • .. .. .. .. .. .. 125
Pillows .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 49
Pineapple .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 10, 94,125
Pineapple, Canned, Juice 125
Pink Disease 93
Play and Work 76
Playmates .. 114
Poisons .. .. • • .. .. .. .. .. 104
Poisoning, Treatment of 104
“Poor” Breast Milk 15
Portulaca .. .. •. .. .. .. .. .. 125
Potatoes 106
Potatoes, Sweet .. .. .. .. .. .. 10,106
Poultry . • .. • • • • • • • • • • • • 105
Pregnancy, Recurrence of, and Weaning 64
Premature Infants, Care of .. .. ~ .. .. 21
Preparation of Food .. • ■ .. - • •. .. 105
Prevention of Disease .. .. .. .. • • .. 78
Prickly Heat • • • ■ • • ■ • • • • • • • 05


Page.
Progress, Baby’s .. .. .. .. .. .. 66
Progress, Record of My Child’s .. .. .. 69,129
Prolapse of the Lower End of the Bowel .. .. .. 88
Proprietary or Patent Foods .. .. .. .. .. 33
Prune Juice .. .. .. .. . . .. •. 109
Prune Pulp .. .. .. .. .. .. • • • • 109
R
Rashes
Non-contagious .. .. .. .. .. .. 95
Contagious .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 97
Associated with Infectious Diseases .... .. .. 98
Recipes 107
Apple Pulp 109
Baked Bread .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 112
Baked Flour .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 109
Barley Jelly .. .. .. .. .. . . ~ 112
Barley Water 108
Carrot or Swede Turnip Juice .. .. .. .. 108
Cheese Custard .. .. .. .. .. .. 11l
Coddled Egg 112
Cottage Cheese 11l
Custard .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 11l
Eggs .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. 105
Fish, Steamed .. .. .. .. .. .. 110
Flour Ball .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 109
Fruit Juice for Babies .. .. .. .. 30,108
Fruit Acid Tooth-wash .. .. .. .. .. 107
Germinated Peas, Beans, and Cereals .. .. .. 109
Home-made Lemonade .. .. .. .. .. 107
Junket .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 110
Milk Puddings .. .. .. .. .. .. 11l
Mineed Liver .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 110
Minced Tripe .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 110
Mutton Broth .. .. 109
Mutton Stew .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 110
Oat Cake .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 112
Oat Jelly 112
Prune Juice .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 109
Prune Pulp .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 109
Rice Jelly .. .. .. .. .. .. •• 112
Sprouting Peas, Beans, and Cereals, To Prepare .. .. 109
Tamarind Fruit Drink 107
Tartaric Acid Syrup .. .. .. .. .. • • 107
Tomato Cheese Custard ~ .. .. .. .. 11l
Vegetable Broth .. .. .. .. .. .. 108
Wheatgerm Meal Jelly .. .. .. .. .. 112
Whey .. 110
Redness of Skin 95
Refuse 1
Refusal to Suck Breast .. .. .. .. .. • • H
Regularity of Habits .. .. .. .. .. .. 4
Rest .. .. 5 > n
Rice, Baked in Milk .. .. .. .. .. • • HI
Rice, Flaked .. • • .. .. • • • • • • HI
Rice, Ground .. 1H
Rice Jelly .. .. .. .. .. • • • • • • H 2
Rickets .. .. • • • • • • • • • • • •


Page.
Ridicule 71
Ringworm .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 98
Roasting .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 106
Rupture or Hernia .. .. .. .. .. .. 89
Of Navel or Umbilical Hernia .. .. .. .. 89
Of Groin or Inguinal Hernia .. .. .. .. 89
Strangulated 89
s
Salads .. .. .. 106
Saltbush, Old Man .. .. .. .. .. .. 126
Sandwiches, Fillings for .. .. .. .. .. .. 124
Satisfied, Baby not .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. 17
Scabies .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 97
Scald 101
Scarlet Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 98
School Children, Food of 124
School Sores .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 97
Scurvy .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 92
Sensory Stimulation .. .. .. .. .. .. 3
Sex Instruction .. .. . . .. .. .. .. 77
Sick Babies, What to do for .. 81
Sinks .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1
Sleep. 5,50
Sleep, Why Babies and Young Children do not .. .. 51
Smoking .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 11
Sore Throat .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 84
Sores, School .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 97
Soup, Bone and Vegetable .. .. .. .. .. 108
Sprouted Peas, Beans, and Cereals .. .. .. 109,125
Stew, Mutton .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 110
Stimulation .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3
Stomach, Baby with Over-excitable .. .. .. .. 20
Stomatitis .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. 86
Suction, Feeble Powers of . . .. .. .. .. 12
Summary of Feeding during the First Year .. .. 43,44
Summer Diarrhoea .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 87
Superstitions .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 65
Surroundings .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1
Swallowed, Hard Things .. .. .. .. .. .. 103
Sweat Rash .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 95
Sweet Potato .. .. .. .. ~ .. 10,106
Sweets .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 117
Syrup, Lemon 107
Syrup, Tartaric Acid .. 107
T
Tamarind Fruit Drink .. .. .. .. .. .. 107
Tartaric Acid Syrup .. .. .. .. .. .. 107
Teat 33
Teats, To Clean .. .. .. .. .. .. ■ • 35
Teeth, Care of .. .. .. .. .. .. 55-60
Teeth Cut ‘‘ on the Cross ” .. .. 65
Teeth, Formation of Good .. .. .. .. .. 56
Teeth, Decay in .. •. 56
Teething .. .. • • • • ■ ■ ■ • • • 13,55
Teething Bands .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 65
Temper Tantrums 76


' PAOH.
Thigh Rubbing .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 74
Threadworms .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 90
Throat, Sore .. .. 84
Thrush .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 85
Thumb Sucking .. .. .. . . .. .. .. 74
Tinned Poods 119,125
Tomato 10,123,125
Tongue-tie 65
Toothbrush 60
Tooth-wash 107
Toys 114
Training of the Child 71
Travelling, Feeding while 37
Tripe 105,122
Tripe, Mineed 110
Truthfulness and Honesty .. .. .. .. .. 72
Turnip, Swede, Juice 108
Twins .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 20
u
Ulceration of the Mouth .. .. .. .. .. .. 86
V
Varied Diet in Infant Feeding 37, 38
Veal 105
Vegemite .. .. 38-40,43,44
Vegetable Broth .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 108
Vegetable Juice .. .. .. .. .. .. 30,108
Vegetables .. .. .. .. .. .. 10, 105,106,118
Vitamins .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 119,120
w
Warmth .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4
Water .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3
Weaning .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 40
Weaning, Avoidance of, because Vomiting .. .. .. 63
Weaning, Reasons for Early .. .. .. .. .. 16
Weaning Table .. .. . • .. .. .. ■ • 41
Weight .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 66
Weight Chart .. .. .. .. .. • • .. 68
Weights, Average .. .. .. .. .. .. 67,68
Western Difficulties .. .. .. .. .. .. 125
Wheatgerm .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 121
Wheatgerm Meal Jelly .. .. .. .. .. .. 112
Whey as a Food .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 27
Whey-milk Mixture .. .. .. .. ■ ■ . . 27
Whey, To Make .. .. .. .. .. .. .. HO
White Bread, Avoidance of .. .. .. .. .. 10
Wholemeal Bread .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 120
Whooping Cough .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 99
Why Do Babies Cry? .. .. .. .. .. .. 52
Work 76
Worms .. .. .. .. .. .. .. • • 80
Threadworms .. .. .. .. .. .. • • 90
Hookworms . . . . . . .. .. • • ■ • 91
Worry .. .. .. .. .. .. • • • • H
Y
Yards .. .. .. .. .. •t- ■ 1
A. H. Tucker, Government Printer, Brisbane.


