

CARITAS ANGLICANA
OR,
An Historical Inquiry into those Religions
and Philanthropical Societies that
flourished in England between
the Years 1678 and 1740
GARNET V. PORTUS


Free thought and
radical collection
bequeathed to the
National Library of Australia
by
Harry Hastings Pearce


THIS ITEM BELONGS TO THE
FREE THOUGHT
AND
RADICAL COLLECTION
BEQUEATHED TO THE
NATIONAL LIBRARY
BY
HARRY HASTINGS PEARCE


CARITAS ANGLICANA
OR,
AN HISTORICAL INQUIRY INTO THOSE RELIGIOUS AND
PHILANTHROPICAL SOCIETIES THAT FLOURISHED IN
ENGLAND BETWEEN THE YEARS 1678 AND 1740
BY
GARNET V. PORTUS, B.A., B.LITT.
Late Tfhodes Scholar at New College, Oxford; and of the University
of Sydney , N.S.W.
WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY
The Yen. W. H. Hutton, B.D.
Archdeacon of Northampton, Canon of Peterborough , and
Fellow of S. John’s College , Oxford


First impression, 1912


FOREWORD
There has been a curious movement among
Church historians, of recent years, to “ whiten ”
the eighteenth century. Where a writer in iB6O
remarks that “ the genuine Anglican omits that
period from the history of the Church altogether,” 1
a more recent historian expresses the hope that
a “generally despised period ” may be given “ its
due.” 2 The most recent writer on this subject
prefers to regard the century as “ of that chess-
board character that can be called either black or
white according to the squares to which we direct
our attention.” 3 This is a more satisfactory point
of view, and the history of the religious and
philanthropic societies during the first half of this
century seems to confirm it. But it has its dif-
ficulties also. For some squares are grey, at least
to the impartial observer. To which colour, for
instance, shall we assign the period 1708-14,
1 Mark Pattison, “Tendencies of Religious Thought in
England, 1688-1750,” In Essays and Reviews. London,
J- W. Parker, iB6O, p. 255.
2 E. H. Pearce, The Sons of the C^ er Eh Introduction.
3 Plummer, The Qhurch of England in the Eighteenth Qentury,
P- 3-


or 1715-20, or 1725-30? The answer will
depend upon our individual points of view regard-
ing the correct relation of the Church to the State
and other such problems. The history of the
societies which we are about to consider will give
us little help in the direction of any dogmatic
assertion on this matter, for it will leave us almost
as much in perplexity as before concerning the
true character of the century. But it certainly
should help us to recognize that it was a transition
period, and transition periods should be judged
leniently.
It is somewhat of a misnomer to call this essay
the history of the religious and philanthropic
societies in England during the period 1678—1740.
For the history of only two types of societies is
studied in detail, and the most important founda-
tions of the period—the S.P.C.K. and the S.P.G.
—are barely noticed, except where they come into
contact with other organizations. Yet, on the
other hand, next to these greater foundations,
the Societies for Reformation of Manners and the
Religious Societies are much the most important
of the voluntary associations founded during this
period. And it seemed wiser to concentrate
attention upon them than upon much smaller,
if almost as interesting, bodies. For the chapter
on the other societies of the period does not
pretend to be much more than a catalogue.
It was inevitable that any attempt to chronicle
the history of the Religious Societies should
involve a consideration of the connexion between


them and Methodism in its early stages. Church-
men are inclined to over-emphasize this connexion
and Methodists to deprecate it unduly. The evi-
dence, again, is scarcely conclusive. On the whole,
while we may find some likeness between earlier
Anglican models and the first Methodist societies,
we must not push this too far as a basis of infer-
ence. Religious Societies existed before either
Anglicans or Methodists formed them in the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. And as
long as man remains a social animal it seems
legitimate to expect him to enter into associations
to effect more easily the satisfaction of his desires.
We shall be on safer ground if we assume what
the evidence seems to prove, and that is that the
connexion between the Religious and Methodist
societies at the beginning of the rise of Methodism
was, very largely, a personal connexion.
This thesis was presented for the degree ot
Bachelor of Letters at Oxford, and I have so
many people to thank for help in its preparation
that, if I were to include them all, I should exceed
the limits of a preface. But I should like to thank
especially Dr. Wickham Legg, who first directed
me to the study of this subject, and has since
given me valuable references and hints ; Professor
Watson, of Christ Church, who supervised my
researches ; Mr. L. G. Wickham Legg, Fellow
of New College, who undertook the ungrateful
task of seeing this work through the press, and
without whose aid I should not have been able to


publish at all ; Miss Ethel Ireland, for her ready
help in the preparation of the Index ; and, lastly,
my old tutor, Mr. H. A. L. Fisher, of New
College, who was not particularly connected with
the production of this thesis, but who first gave
me the inspiration which transformed my work,
in the History Schools and afterwards, from a
somewhat grudgingly-performed duty into a real
pleasure.
G. V. P.
Morpeth, New South Wales :
May, 19 11.


INTRODUCTION
The period from 1678 to 1740 would seem to
many people to be one of decay or stagnation in
English religion. The fervour with which the
Church had been welcomed back, after the
suppression of her worship and the exile of many
of her clergy, had worn off. The Dissenters had
little influence on national life. They were
distrusted because of their past connexion with
the politics of the Commonwealth ; the political
animosity of Parliament surrounded their lives
with restriction, and crippled their spiritual
efforts ; at extremes of the scale, men differing so
widely as Richard Baxter and John Bunyan were
forced to undergo the cruel penalty of imprison-
ment. The Church grew in stately prosperity :
Dissent languished in dark corners of the land.
That would be a rough description of what most
people think was the condition of English religion
during the later years of Charles IPs reign. But
it is impossible to look at all below the surface
without seeing evidence of a determined struggle
to restore the religion of England to practical
force. Of this struggle the thorough and


illuminating study of Mr. Garnet Portus has pro-
duced the record, as regards the most conspicuous
examples. The Religious Societies, 1678-90,
followed by the Societies for the Reformation of
Manners, founded in 1690-91, were the most
determined attempts of the laity to revive the
idea of corporate responsibility for public worship
and for public morals. The two movements have
been, not unnaturally, confused, and it has been
thought that the one was the direct issue of the
other after a period of abeyance had been passed
through. So some historians have thought of the
Reformation as a consequence of the work of
Wycliffe and the Lollards. But Mr. Portus, who
has investigated the sources of our knowledge of
both series of societies, shows that the Societies
for the Reformation of Manners had an indepen-
dent origin at a definite date. All we can say is
that they followed the Religious Societies, with a
different aim in practice, but that they both
expressed the concern which Churchmen were
beginning to feel about their responsibility in the
religious and secular life of the nation.
The moral condition of England during the
reign of Charles II has been painted again and
again in lurid colours by modern historians, but
nothing has ever surpassed in effectiveness the
simple severity of the diary of John Evelyn. Set
beside that such scandalous chronicles as the
memoirs of Grammont and the secret record of
his life by that eminent public servant Samuel
Pepys, and you know enough of what religion


had to contend against in the days of the most
profligate of our kings.
To find a remedy it is generally necessary to
investigate the cause of the evil. Acute observers
traced the general decay of morals to that period
when the country was disturbed from end to end
by Civil War, and religious education was at a
standstill. Thus, when the Lord Chief Justice
requested that very sharp speaker, Dr. South, to
preach at a gathering of Old Westminster Boys in
February, 1685, he could find no better subject
than “ The virtuous education of youth the surest
if not the sole way to a happy and honourable old
age ”; and he pointed the moral by a reference to
the times of Puritan supremacy, which he always
dated from 1640. The sermon was never preached,
for the death of Charles II stopped the festival;
but South printed it as the expression of his
mature opinion. In it he speaks thus :
“ Since nothing can happen without some cause
or other, I have been further considering with
myself what the cause of this terrible evil, which
still looks so grim upon the Government, should
be. And to me it seems to be this. That as the
forementioned Rebellion and Civil War brought
upon the nation a general dissolution of Order,
and a Corruption and Debauchment of men’s
manners, so, the greatest part of the Nation by
much now alive, has been born, or at least bred
since that Fatal Rebellion. For surely those who
are now about or under 50 years of age make a
much greater number in the Kingdom than those


who are above it ; especially so much above it, as
to have passed their youth before the time of the
Late Confusions ; which have since so perfectly
changed and new-modelled or rather extinguished
the Morality, nay, the very Natural Temper of the
English nation.
“ For this is certain, that wise and thinking men
observe with sorrow, that the change is so very
great and bad, that there is no relation in Society,
or in common life, but has suffered and been the
worse for it.
“ Look into families, and you will find the
parents complaining that their children pay them
not that duty and reverence, which they have heard
and read, that children used to show their parents
heretofore. Masters also complain that servants
are neither so obedient nor so trusty as in former
times. And lastly, for the Conjugal relation (a
thing of the greatest and most direct influence
upon the weal and woe of Societies, of any other
thing in the world besides) it is but too frequent
a complaint that neither are men so good husbands,
nor women so good wives, as they were, before
that accursed Rebellion had made that fatal lead-
ing breach in the conjugal tie between the best of
kings and the happiest of peoples.
“ But now, how comes all this to pass ? Why,
from the exorbitant licence of men’s education.
They were bred in lawless ungoverned times, and
Conventicle Fanatick Academies ... by which
liberties having once leaped over the severity and
strictness of former customs, they found it an easy


matter with debauched morals and defloured con-
sciences, to launch out into much greater.” 1
A violent if ingenious paradox many readers
may consider this ; but there is no doubt that
South calls attention to a consequence of political
disorder and religious unrest which is often for-
gotten. The stirrings of new life are, it seems,
inevitably accompanied by the sapping of old
foundations. After the Reformation, as after the
Commonwealth, unprejudiced observers bewailed
the laxity of morals, and believed that it was due
to what had happened ten and twenty years before.
However that may be, the leaders of the
Church in England at each period went the right
way to work to cure the evils. Andrewes held up
the Cross of Christ before a reckless and dis-
orderly court ; George Herbert illustrated by his
example the beauty of the Church’s strict rules for
a simple life ; Nicholas Ferrar and his family gave
a new model for the layman’s household ; and
then came Laud, moving the High Commission to
reform public morals, and not to spare the high
offenders. So, says Clarendon : “Persons of
honour and great quality were every day cited
into the High Commission Court, upon the fame
of their incontinence, or other scandal in their lives,
and were there prosecuted, to their shame and
punishment.” All this effort was ended by the
war. It came to life again in the Religious
Societies, and again in the Societies for the
Reformation of Manners.
1 South’s Sermons, vol v: Sermon i, pp. 3,4, and 5, ed. 1704.


The first chapter of Mr. Portus’s most careful
study shows that it was the want of education in
religion and morals which was seen to be at the
root of the evil when Charles II was king. It is
to this that persons of temper so different as
Gilbert Burnet and Robert Nelson call attention.
It was to supply what was lacking that men like
Horneck fostered if they did not originate the
formation of societies with a simple rule of life,
which should cultivate what men called u the
Practice of Piety.” The mass of religious litera-
ture which issued from the press at this period,
not merely in the arid form of sermons, which, as
well as extravagantly controversial, seem to us to-
day to be eminently soporific—it is difficult to say
which is the greater fault—but also in the more
attractive guise of books of devotion written with
an extraordinary richness and reality of feeling
which reminds one almost of the fervour of
S. Teresa, though it is strictly restrained within
the bounds of English orthodoxy, is another
evidence of the determined efforts which were
made to lead back English society into the way of
Jesus Christ. This is the tale which Mr. Portus
tells first.
And then he goes on to the time when the
awakening of religious life led to a sense of horror
at the public breach of every Christian law. If
the preacher should lead men to fast and pray, the
magistrate should coerce the openly wicked till a
strong barrier was presented against the flood of
luxury and vice. Vain are laws without moral


feeling to enforce them. The Church thought
she had instilled the moral feeling. The religious
laity demanded the enforcement of laws which
would protect the innocent, and save many a
sinner from a life and death of shame. This is
the story which Mr. Portus has told after most
careful and accurate research. It remains for the
historians of English religion to admit into their
survey the facts, obscure till now in their relation
to the general life of the nation, which he has so
industriously collected and so lucidly arranged.
W. H. HUTTON.
The Vineyard, Peterborough :
Vigil of the Purification ‘B.F.M., 1912.




TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER AGE
Foreword ------- m
Introduction ------ vn
I. The Beginning of the Religious Societies,
; 1678-90 ------ 1
11. The Foundation of the Societies for Refor-
mation of Manners, 1690-91 - - - 28
111. History of the Societies under William 111
and Anne ------ 50
IV. Contemporary Opinions about the Reforming
Societies - - - - - “83
V. The Spread of the Societies - - - 107
VI. Other Religious and Philanthropic Associa-
tions of the Period - - - - 156
VII. The Decline of the Societies for Reforma-
tion of Manners - - - - 1 73
VIII, The Later History of the Religious Socie-
ties and their Connexion with Methodism 193
appendix
I. Note on the Authorship of the Contempo-
rary Account of the Societies for the
Reformation of Manners - - - 223
11. Sermons Preached before the Societies for
Reformation of Manners - - - 229


APPENDIX PAGE
111. The System of Blank Warrants and Regis-
ters USED BY THE SOCIETY FOR THE REFORMA-
TION of Manners - - - - - 235
IV. Later attempts to form Societies for Re-
forming Manners ----- 243
V. The Annual Reports of the Reforming
Societies - - - - - - 251
VI. The Standing Orders of the First Religious
Societies - - - - - - 255
Bibliography - - - - - - - 259
Index - -- -- -- - 279


CARITAS ANGLICANA
CHAPTER I.
THE BEGINNING OF THE RELIGIOUS
SOCIETIES, 1678—90.
Perhaps the most characteristic feature of the
modern Englishman is his law-abidingness ; and
in his general claim to this quality it is frequently
forgotten that it hardly dates back, as a national
characteristic, beyond the eighteenth century. The
unchallenged reign of law did not begin in Eng-
land till the Revolution of 1688, and it came to
its own somewhat in the guise of a compromise
between the forces of tradition and anarchy, which
had swayed the nation alternately during the
seventeenth century. Accompanying this, in the
sphere of politics, came the claim of common
sense in the sphere of religion. And this too
was a compromise, just as significant and just as
characteristic of England. If the reign of law
represented a refuge from the traditional and
arbitrary power of the crown on the one hand,
B


and on the other the novel, but just as arbitrary,
government by force, which England experienced
during the Rebellion, then just so surely the
principle of common sense in religious matters
represented a working mean between the two
extremes of High Anglicanism and Puritan
laissez-faire. But if common sense was to be the
guiding principle in religious affairs, and if tolera-
tion was to be its ultimate end, still all this was as
yet undreamed of during the reign of Charles 11.
The result of the conflicts and reactions of the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries had been to
leave the Church in a grave position of spiritual
weakness. And to understand that position it is
necessary to go back to the Reformation.
The break-up of the old religious system in
England in the sixteenth century had brought
negative results. The older Catholicism was
gone, and it was necessary to put something in
its place. Anglicanism was the first substitute,
and Puritanism followed hard upon its heels.
But with the triumph of Puritanism came num-
berless sects, and with the sects came religious
anarchy. All this brought the question of the
basis of religious authority sharply before men’s
minds. Hobbes, the Cambridge Platonists, and
Locke are the forerunners of the Deistical in-
quirers of the eighteenth century. Authority after
authority had gone by the board. Henry VIII,
Edward VI, Mary, Elizabeth, the Stuarts, and
Cromwell had all set up to be arbiters of faith,
and all upon different principles. But when they


had fallen their systems had fallen with them.
People began to be more and more incredulous of
the authority of the Church. And besides this
the pendulum of the national taste, in religion
and life, was beginning to swing back from
Puritan “grandmotherliness” —a movement which
the return of the swashbuckling cavaliers tended
to accelerate—into the opposite extreme. In
fact, the agitation about religion from 1588 to
1689 was, in its sources, mainly political. Eliza-
beth had wanted the doctrinal via media , not for
its internal approximation to truth, but for its
external comprehensiveness and its promise of
political solidarity. The Roundheads, most of
them, hated bishops much more intensely than
the creed of a real presence. The Protectorate
had tolerated Jews and Roman Catholics just so
long as it could keep a watchful eye upon them.
And Anglican policy, caught up in a wave of
traditional sentiment at the Restoration, would
not endure the official presence of any sect which
denied its exceedingly full expression of the
claims of the restored Church.
Along with this political presentation of re-
ligion, and this tendency to diminish revered
tradition, went another factor peculiarly detri-
mental to the nation’s morality. And that was
the extreme ignorance of the mass of the people.
It is true that there are not wanting signs of the
presence of lower middle class people at the
universities as sizars and scholars, and this
indeed right through the period of the Rebellion.


But they were only the very elect of their classes.
No adequate provision could be made during the
shock of recent troubles for the education of the
majority of the nation. Since Edward Vi’s reign
religious opinion had suffered a succession of
startling shocks and changes. One form was no
sooner established than it was officially superseded
by another. And every change reacted upon
education. Persecutions, burnings, and at the
last civil war were invoked in religion’s name.
In all this chaos the nation had less and less time
to educate her sons. And the upshot of the
century which was ended by the civil war (1558-
1660), was that the generation of Englishmen
born from 1625 to 1660 grew up with all the
fierce religious passions which characterized their
fathers, but with little or no real appreciation of
religion and religious things and small knowledge
of aught else. Ken, the Bishop of Bath and
Wells, “ was wont to question beggars on their
knowledge of religion, and found them so hope-
lessly ignorant that he thought the only chance
of improvement was in raising up a new genera-
tion who should be better taught.” 1
That all this was helped by the Puritan usurpa-
tion of the pulpits it is not hard to believe.
Like the Montanists of the first century, the
Puritans were apt to take little account of learn-
ing, in comparison with the gift of the Spirit.
Robert South, the famous preacher of the
1 J. H. Overton, Life in the English Church (1660-1714),
London, 1885, p. 72.


Restoration, gives us some idea of this when
he says of “those of the late Reforming Age" :
“ Latin was with them a Mortal Crime,
and Greek , instead of being owned for the
Language of the Holy Ghost , (as in the New
Testament it is) was looked upon as the Sin
against it ; so that in a Word, they had all the
Confusions of Babel amongst them without the
Diversity of Tongues. . . . All Learning was utterly
cryed down. So that with them the best
Preachers were such as could not read, and the
ablest Divines such as could not write. In all
their Preachments they so highly pretended to
the Spirit , that they could hardly so much as
spell the Letter. . . . None were thought fit for
the Ministry but Tradesmen and Mechanicks ,
because none else were allowed to have the
Spirit. Those only were accounted like St.
Paul , who could work with their hands , and in
a litteral sence, drive the Nail home , and be able
to make a Pulpit before they preached in it.” 1
It is customary, indeed, to regard the lax
morals of the post-Restoration period as due to a
reaction against Puritanical severity combined
with the bad example of the Court. But these
tendencies of themselves could not have produced
1 Robert South, The Christian Pentecost ... set forth in a
Sermon preached at Westminster Abbey, 1692. [Twelve Sermons
upon several subjects ... by Robert South, D.D. London,
1698, vol. iii, pp. 544, 548.) It must be remembered that
South’s attack upon the clergy of the Commonwealth was
not unprejudiced.


the evils of the time had not the ground been
prepared by the lack of education in religious and
secular matters. Puritanism was, in the main, an
attitude of the spirit, converted, it is true, into
sectarianism by the accidents of political history,
but re-converted into a spiritual attitude by the
Restoration. There is little reason to believe that
the Puritan spirit would tolerate laxity of living
any the more readily because it was prevalent in
high places. And again, it may be doubted
whether too much had not been made of the
effect of the example of the Court of Charles 11.
London, it may be admitted, must have been
greatly affected, but the country at large would
hardly take its cue from a circle which was, even
in these later Stuart times, fairly remote from the
general access of the nation. Great as must have
been the effects of these two tendencies, there is
little reason to doubt that it was the moral
and spiritual unpreparedness of the nation at
large which was mainly responsible for the low
state of morals and religion which we find during
the Restoration period and afterwards. That
this correspondence of ignorance and vice was not
unnoticed may be gathered from the following
extracts. Bishop Burnet could remark that “with
the restoration of the king, a spirit of extravagant
joy spread over the nation, that brought on
with it the throwing off the very professions of
virtue and piety : all ended in entertainments and
drunkenness, which overrun the three kingdoms
to such a degree, that it very much corrupted


all their morals.” 1 But later he says also, “ the
commonalty of the nation are . . . ignorant . . .
in the matters of religion : . . . This is the more
to be wondered at, considering the many small
books concerning these, that have been published
of late years,” [he is writing after the foundation
of the S.P.C.K.], “ so that this ignorance seems
obstinate and incurable.” 2 The gentry “ are
for the most part the worst instructed, and the
least knowing of any of their rank I ever went
amongst ... a gentleman here is often both
ill-taught and ill-bred . . . and they grow soon
to find it a modish thing, that looks like wit and
spirit, to laugh at religion and virtue.” 3 Testi-
mony to this is even more directly borne by
Robert Nelson :
“That which fills the Gaols with Malefactors
and the Kingdom with idle Persons, who con-
sume the Stock of the Kingdom without
improving it, according to the Observation of a
late Great Man in the Law [Judge Hales], is
the Want of a due Provision for the Education
and Relief of the Poor, in a Way of Industry.
And this he compares to an Error in the first
Concoction; which is never afterwards to be
remedied, but by the rougher Methods in the
Courts of Judicature : Whereas, a sound
prudent Method for an industrious Education
1 Gilbert Burnet, History of my own Time, Oxford, 1823,
vol.i, p. 157. [i. 92.]
2 Ibid., vol. vi, p. 193. [ii. 647.]
3 Ibid., vol. vi, p. 193. [ii. 648.]


of the Poor, would doubtless afford a better
Remedy against these Corruptions, than all the
Gibbets and Whipping-Posts in the Kingdom.
For as Necessitous and Uneducated persons in-
crease . . . the Multitude of Malefactors will
increase , says he, notwithstanding the Examples
of Severity .” 1
It was certain that lax morals and irreligion,
themselves the product of widespread ignorance,
would, in turn, tend to perpetuate that state of
things which brought them into being. So that
the nation seemed to be caught in a vicious circle,
and release from it could only come in some
extraordinary and unlooked-for spiritual develop-
ment.
This development was to find its starting-point,
curiously enough, in the one feature of Puritanism
for which the nation retained an affection after
the Restoration—the hearing of sermons. Com-
plaints of the fondness of the laity for this exercise
are rife during the period from 1660 to 1680. 2
But it was due to the preaching of William
Beveridge and Mr. Smythies of St. Michael’s,
Cornhill, and still more to the pastoral work and
sermons of Anthony Horneck, that the beginnings
1 Robert Nelson, Ways and Methods of Doing Good, an
appendix to his Address to Persons of Quality, London, 1715,
p. 179.
2 The sermon “jostled out catechizing,” the people “ have
been very opinionative according to the impression which the
affectionate noise of the last sermon has made upon their
minds.” (Lancelot Addison, Primitive Institution, London,
1674. See also A True Notion of the Worship of God, 1673.)


of the great “ Society ” movements, which were to
have so important an effect upon the Church in
the next century, first took their rise. Horneck
is an interesting character. A German by birth,
he was educated at Queen’s College, Oxford, was
for some time Vicar of All Saints’ in that city,
and finally was appointed to the Savoy Chapel in
1671. Here he laboured for twenty-six years,
finally dying at his post in 1697. A High
Churchman, he did not scruple to take the oaths
at the Revolution, though, by doing so, he con-
siderably decreased his income. Nor would he
accept any pluralities. Later he found help in
appointments as prebendary of Westminster and
of Wells. “He was of primitive zeal and prac-
tice in his devotions ; His preaching most florid,
fervent, and pathetique, bot all upon the Mystique
way, which did take much with the common sort of
serious people, who are many tymes wrought upon
by zealous raptures of communion with God . . .
Indwelling in Christ, the joy of the Holy Ghost,
and other misterious notiones, which they fancie,
rather than feel or understand. Whowever he is
much lamented, and had upwards of one thousand
of godly sisters, daughters, and mothers in Israel,
to convoy his corps to the enterment.” 1
This opinion throws some light upon the
character of Horneck’s undertakings which we
shall have presently to observe. But it was not
c
1 Letter from Thos. Burnet to the Electress Sophia of
Hanover, July 29, 1697 (J. M. Kemble, State Papers, London,
1857, no. 64, p. 193).


only over the “ mothers in Israel ” that Horneck
exercised an attraction. In 1678 his sermons
and those of Smythies at St. Michael’s, Cornhill,
powerfully attracted several young men of Lon-
don and Westminster, and these young men fell
into the habit of going to consult with their
clergymen and vicars concerning their awakened
state. 1 It is not quite certain from what source
the idea of forming Religious Societies from such
material first emanated. Woodward says he
himself had met and conversed with several
of the young men, and he gives us the impression
that the initial movement was begun by Horneck.
But Kidder, in his Life of Horneck , does not
claim that the doctor actually originated the
societies. Woodward himself says that the
existence of some contemporary clubs of Atheists,
Deists, and Socinians suggested to the young
men the idea of banding themselves together as
societies. Be that as it may, it is certain that
Horneck, if not the originator, was the patron of
the movement. He is called their “ father ”by
Woodward, and Kidder gives a list of the rules
which he drew up for the earliest societies.
These rules exhibit great common sense, and
1 The account of the foundation of the Religious Societies
is mainly compiled from Richard Kidder, Bishop of Bath and
Wells, Life of Anthony Horneck, London, 1698, and Josiah
Woodward’s Account of the Rise and Progress of the Religious
Societies, 1701. Woodward may be treated as a first-hand
witness, since he tells us Horneck had seen and approved of
his account.


show no trace of the extravagant mysticism with
which Horneck was often charged. The societies
are to be strictly confined to lads or men of the
Church of England who have been confirmed and
are more than sixteen years of age. They are
to be, in all cases, under the control of an
Anglican clergyman, who is to direct their
spiritual instruction and manage their meetings.
Only parts of the Anglican liturgy are to be used
at such meetings, and no controversial points
concerning either the Church or the State are to
be discussed. If time permits, they “ may dis-
course each other about their spiritual concerns ;
but this shall not be a standing Exercise, which
any shall be obliged to attend unto.” 1 Then follow
some simple constitutional rules which, in a
slightly modified form, served as models for such
organizations for over seventy years. They are
to meet once a week, stewards are to be annually
elected to manage accounts, a weekly subscription
of Gd. and a fine of for each absence is fixed,
and the proceeds are charitably disbursed by the
stewards. One day in the year (Whitsun Tues-
day in this case) is appointed for an annual
“moderate dinner” before which the society hears
a sermon, and after which the funds are distributed
to the poor. The majority is “to conclude the
rest,” a resigning member pays ss. to the general
fund, and the society is to be cautiously co-optive.
The last direction of these earlier organizations is
a comprehensive rule of life which is worth
1 Kidder, op. cit. y p. 14.


quoting in full as giving a clear picture of their
real ends : “ To love one another : When reviled,
to revile not again : To speak evil of no man ; To
wrong no man : To pray, if possible, seven times
a day : To keep close to the Church of England :
To transact all things peaceably and gently : To be
helpfull to each other : To use holy Thoughts in
their coming in and going out: To examine them-
selves every night : To give every one their due :
To obey Superiors both Spiritual and Temporal.” 1
When we remember that this was no community
in orders nor in seclusion, but a society joined by
young men, voluntarily, for spiritual betterment,
we begin to see that, considering the ordinary
moral standpoint of the age, nothing but a real
piety could dictate either the framing or the
acceptance of such rules.
Such were the earliest of the Religious Societies
founded in London in 1678. They continued to
meet and gradually to increase the number of their
organizations throughout the next seven years.
But with the accession of the last Stuart King
their existence began to be threatened. So far
their stewards had been elected and their funds
disbursed, without a break since their foundation.
But 1685 brought rumours of Popery, and as the
rumours changed into certainties, suspicion began
to awake on all sides. One of the rules of the
societies had enjoined that strangers were only to
be admitted to meetings with extreme caution,
and membership was only accomplished after
1 Kidder, op. cit., pp. 14, 15.


private discussion of a candidate’s fitness. All
this savoured of secrecy, and secrecy just then
savoured of Romanism. And Horneck’s own
views were not regarded without suspicion,
u Efterall it is debated whether he heth done
more good or Evil, to the most of those well
intentioned people.” 1 The man who cried up
“ the austerity of the primitiue devotione, and the
frequencie of its exercises (and that at hours which
now wold be thought unseasonable),” 2 was not
likely to escape the taunt of Romanizing practice.
So the secrecy and the mysticism of the move-
ment brought it into disfavour, and a mild kind
of unofficial persecution of the societies began.
“ The time . . . was not over favourable to
any kind of Religious Meetings. And yet the
Doctor had the hard measure to be censured very
severely,” says Kidder. 3 Faced with this many of
the members began to fall away. But a cause is
only hindered by its cravens. Others grew more
vigorous than ever against Popery, and set up, in
opposition to the regular Roman Catholic Mass
at the Chapel Royal, daily prayers at 8 p.m. in
St. Clement Danes, which were well attended.
This really was the start of a new movement in
the activity of the societies. From being
1 Kemble, State Papers, no. 64, p. 194.
2 Ibid. Yet note Kidder’s remark, “ Far was he from the
Innovations of the Roman Church on the one hand, and from
Enthusiasm on the other” {ibid., p, 37), “He valued the
Flock more than the Fleece ” (ibid., p. 44).
3 Op. cit., p. 17.


organizations for purely personal help they
became philanthropic. Henceforward the rules
of every Religious Society make provision for an
endowment to provide preachers or services in
neighbouring churches. The daily prayers at
St. Clement Danes, where they “ never wanted a
full and affectionate congregation,” 1 were followed
by the establishment of a lecture in preparation
for the Holy Communion once a month. This
was to be delivered by eminent divines, and was
generally directed against Popery. But, despite
these clear indications of the loyalty of the
societies, suspicion of them was still entertained.
And finally, in order to continue their devotional
meetings without molestation, they resolved upon
a piece of harmless deception. They changed the
name of their organizations to that of “ Clubs,”
and by meeting at a public, instead of a private
house, and by spending an odd shilling in drink-
ing, they continued to remain unmolested. 2 “By
which honest Artifice they carried on their good
Design without interruption, even to the end of
that unhappy reign” Not the least interesting
feature of the whole of the “Society” movements
in this period is the way in which they furnish
parallels to other earlier and later events. It is
easy to be pharisaical about this “ dodge ” to
1 Woodward, Account , p. 27.
2 It is to be observed that both now and afterwards the
societies never made total abstinence any feature of their
organization.
3 Woodward, op. cit., p. 29.


continue without molestation, but we must bear
in mind that the early Church at Rome was well
content to masquerade as a burial club in the
second century. 1
Thus, after the Revolution, the societies were
in fairly good case, having proved their loyalty
and efficiency. A new policy was adopted which
is embodied in the rule “ that every one should
endeavour to bring in one other at least into their
society.” 2 The immediate effect of this was a
great increase in the numbers both of the mem-
bers and of the societies. But with fame came
renewed opposition. The movement engendered
spiritual pride, said its critics, and faction, and
schism. Hitherto the members had kept their
organizations secret, though their charity had been
manifest enough. But, thus challenged, they
came out of their retirement and laid an apology,
in the form of a statement of their aims and
methods, before Compton, the Bishop of London.
The prelate was fully satisfied, and dismissed them
with the remark : “ God forbid that 1 should be
against such excellent designs.” 3 Later on a
similar statement being laid before Tillotson, the
Primate remarked that, in his opinion, “ these
Societies were a Support to our Churchy 4
It is not surprising in that age of unrest to
find these objections levelled at any movement,
but a brief glance at the societies’ methods and
1 See H. M. Gwatkin, Early Church History, London, 1909,
vol. ii, p. 120.
2 Woodward, op. cit., p. 3 1. 3 Ibid., p. 33. 4 Ibid., p. 118.


constitution serves to clear them of the main
charges against them during their infancy. The
chief charge was the danger of schism arising
from too great a satisfaction with their own
methods, and a probable dissatisfaction with the
state of contemporary Church life. But to meet
this provision had been made. They could only
meet under the direction of an Anglican clergy-
man, only use the Anglican liturgy, and only
discuss non-controversial points. Their practical
work as missionaries tended to bring schismatics
back to the Church’s Communion, and indeed
they did convert many Anabaptists and Quakers. 1
Then, too, the services they paid for were all
Anglican, and the habit of a corporate monthly
Communion pointed away from schismatic
tendencies. The argument that they invaded
the parson’s office by their visitation of the sick
is surely captious, when we consider how greatly
the Church needed pastoral helpers at that time.
And the other two practical arguments which
their detractors levelled against the societies may
be similarly met. The fear that “ designing Men
may . . . pervert their Design ” to the Church’s
prejudice is constitutionally guarded against by
strict rules of admission and constant clerical
1 These societies “ bring several Quakers and Enthusiastic
People to Baptism, and to a sober Mind ” (Woodward, op. cit.,
p. 88). Perhaps the best argument of all for their thoroughly
Anglican character was the fact that they fixed their meetings
always at such times as would not clash with the services of the
Church.


supervision, while the fear of spiritual pride is
surely not enough to warrant all undertakings to
be set aside. That were cowardice, and if man-
kind shrank from such a risk the needful things
of life would never, as Carlyle says, “get them-
selves done.” Finally the argument that they
hindered parochial communion was hardly fair,
since the design of the members was to extend
the movement until each parish could boast of
its own society. 1
Meanwhile the movement began to spread.
Societies were established in the provinces, and
one in particular, established at Romney, in Kent,
in 1690, made encouraging progress. It even
published a hymn book of its own. 2 In order to
be ready for the Eucharist at any time the
societies provided that in at least one church in
London a “ preparation sermon ” should be
preached every Sunday. And thus “ many
attained that excellent Primitive Temper , of frequent
Communicating without growing formal.” 3 But
their good work was not all in this direction.
Orphans and widows were cared for (in one case
this saved a whole destitute family from accepting
Roman Catholic help at the price of joining the
D
1 Woodward, op. cit., pp. 119-27.
2 Woodward, op. cit., p. 41: The hymn book in question was
called The Christian Sacrifice of Praises . . . for the use of the
Religious Society of Romney. London :W. Pearson and John
Wyat, 1724, Quoted by Dr. Wickham Legg in his paper on
London Church Services in the reign of Queen Anne, p. 29, in
Transactions of the St. PauTs Ecclesiological Society, vol. vi.
3 Woodward, op. cit., p. 37.


Roman Communion). 1 Regular charitable help
was afforded, and we even hear of a sick sailor,
with no claim upon any of the members of one
society, being nursed for eight weeks. 2 And the
society always made provision for a funeral
sermon to be preached over a deceased member. 3
How much the Religious Societies had come to
be regarded in later years as an ordinary part of
London parish machinery may be gathered from
a survey of James Paterson’s Pietas Londinensis
(1714). There we find numerous references to
Religious Societies and their manifold activities.
A monthly lecture is still maintained at St.
Clement Danes as well as daily prayers (p. 67).
In the chapel at Poplar, the parish of Josiah
Woodward, there is a“ preparation Sermon ” once
a month. The chapel in Noble Street is “ erected
for the Ease of the Inhabitants . . . and main-
tained by their Subscriptions, Gifts and Contribu-
tions, who are far from the Mother-Church ; and
headed by a religious Society there.” 4 This
chapel was in the parish of St. Giles’, Cripplegate,
which had a flourishing society of its own lasting
well into the latter part of the eighteenth century. s
1 Woodward, op. cit., p. 92. 2 Ibid., p. 93.
3 “On Sunday Night one of the Young Men belonging to
one of the Religious Societies, was Buried at St. Giles’s, Cripple-
gate, the Rer. Mr. Smithies Preaching a Funeral Sermon.”
{Protestant Mercury, January 12-17, 1699-1700, p. 2, col. 1.
Nichol’s Newspapers in the Bodleian.)
4 Tietas Londinensis, p. 209.
5 For the rules of this society and a list of its members,
also for an account of their annual dinner, see Dr. Wickham


By an analysis of Paterson’s statistics we find that
out of the ninety-nine churches he mentions no
fewer than twenty-seven are dependent on Re-
ligious Societies for some of their services, while
three out of the fifteen public chapels he mentions
are in like case. Thus by 1714 nearly twenty-
seven per cent, of the London places of worship
were being helped by the Religious Societies.
But all this was a future development. For
the present, the societies were moving on slowly,
content to gain the approval and support of such
men as Tillotson, Compton, Beveridge, Fowler
(Bishop of Gloucester), 1 Horneck, Robert Nelson
and Thomas Bray. Queen Mary was interested
in them and “ took great satisfaction in ” these
Religious Societies. 2 In the near future they
were to be caught up into a movement quite
alien to their original intentions, which we shall
have occasion to discuss in the next chapters.
But before we leave the Religious Societies in
their early stages it will be well to glance at their
style of devotions and their personnel , from which
something of interest can be gathered.
Their meetings began with Scriptural sentences.
Then a short admonition was followed by the
Legg’s London Church Services in the reign of Queen Anne , p. 3 1 •
The details appear in the Appendix.
1 Edward Fowler (who afterwards wrote in defence of the
S.R.M.) lent the societies his church in London, St. Giles’,
Cripplegate. He held it in Commendam as Bishop of Gloucester.
2 Societies for the Reformation of Manners (1699), p. 11.
Burnet confirms this ( History of my own time , vol. v, p. 18
[ii. 318.]).


General Confession (from the Holy Communion
service), the Lord’s Prayer, the Ash Wednesday
collect, and other collects, a psalm, the Apostles’
Creed, the collect for Trinity Sunday, and a private
prayer for the society. A general intercession
(compiled from the Prayer Book), a thanksgiv-
ing prayer, an exhortation to humility, a psalm,
a proper preface, and the Grace, completed a
service in which every prayer, except the general
society prayer and the thanksgiving, is taken
from, or based upon, the Prayer Book. 1 This
of itself should have silenced the detractors of
the societies when they called them schismatic
in tendency.
As to the personnel , evidence may be gathered
from a manuscript list in the Bodleian 2 and
from the publication of the manuscript at St.
Giles’, Cripplegate, already referred t 0.3 Inci-
dentally in this manuscript we find a list of
fifteen societies meeting weekly, six of them
on Sunday nights and the rest on weekday
evenings. Only one of the rendezvous ap-
pears to have been a church, and that is the
vestry of St. Alban’s, Wood Street, where
a society met every Sunday evening. The
1 This form appears both in Woodward’s account and
again in the Orders belonging to a Religious Society, London, 1724.
(Bodleian 141, k. 515 (1 ).)
2 The Names, Places of Abode, Employmts., and Occupacions of the
several Societys in and about the Cities of London and Westminster
Belonging to the Church of England, 1694. Bodleian, MS.
Rawl. D. 1312.
3 i.e., Dr. Legg’s pamphlet.


remainder of the places of meetings are either
private chambers or taverns. Thus, there is one
which meets at “ The Duke’s Head,” another at
the u Eagle and Child,” another “ behind the
3 Flower de luces,” etc. All this accords with
Woodward’s account of their adoption of a new
title and new places of meeting during the
suspicion which fell upon them in the reign
of James 11.
Turning to the lists of members we find them
nearly always in three sections ; Masters,
Journeymen, and Apprentices; and in these
particular cases the societies seem composed
mostly of men following distinctly manual trades.
A list selected at random 1 gives the following
occupations of its members : Buttonseller, Mil-
liner, Tailor, Salesman, Perfumer, Goldsmith,
Confectioner, Perukemaker and Goldsmith. But
in many cases the regular artisan element is more
prominent. The same general character appears
in the names of the society at St. Giles’, Cripple-
gate (1718). Of the 254 names in the Bodleian
manuscript only seven are described as “gentle-
men.” Of these, five are clerks ; of the others,
the one is a steward to an estate, the other an
attorney. The numbers of the societies vary
from ten to forty-nine. From the evidence of
these lists it seems fair to conclude that the
members of the Religious Societies were for the
1 Cf. the “ Sunday Nights Society meeting att Mr. Brad-
shaws in Denmarke Court against Tom's Coffee house near Exeter
Change in the Strand." (Rawl. MS. D. 1312, fo. 2.)


most part of the lower to lower middle classes.
This same general idea may be gathered from
Robert Nelson’s remarks. He is speaking some
time afterwards of the foundation and usefulness
of the societies. “ For if a few Persons, on no
Account considerable, and whose Names are
hardly known, being of the Church of England ,
by their frequently meeting together to pray,
sing Psalms, and read the Holy Scriptures,
have . . . been enabled to do so much ... as
those that are particularly called the Religious
Societies have been able to do : If they have
been so Instrumental in promoting the daily Ser-
vice among Churches, with the regular Adminis-
tration of the Holy Sacrament of the Body and
Blood of Christ every Lord’s Day, and in some
Churches also every Holy-Day in the Year, . . .
How much more easy would it be for Persons
of Quality and Character, if they were heartily
disposed to unite in this end, to do abundantly
more.” 1
The societies have been by one author attri-
buted to an imitation of the French organiza-
tions of St. Vincent de Paul in Paris, some sixty
years previously. But there is hardly need to
go thus far afield in our search for origins.
St. Vincent de Paul’s societies were somewhat
similar, and were also composed of the laity.
“La grande innovation de Vincent, celle qui
explique ce prompt developpement, etait d’avoir
introduit I’element lai'que dans ces associations de
1 Nelson’s Ways and Methods of Doing Good, pp. 137, 138.


charit£.” 1 Also the organization was similar,
elected stewards and lay management being a
characteristic of these as of Horneck’s societies.
“ Le procureur, d’apres les statuts, devait £tre
indifferemment un ecclesiastique ou un bourgeois
de la ville, et chaque annee les comptes devaient
6tre rendus par le tr£sorier en presence du cur 6,
du procureur, du chapelain, de I’un des syndics
et du recteur de I’hdpital.” 2 But, on the other
hand, the English societies were entirely different
in aim from those of St. Vincent. Dr. Horneck’s
young men primarily met together for their own
benefit, and not from philanthropic motives.
Although these motives did later supervene upon
their organization, they were not the original,
and, while the English societies were inde-
pendent, never the main end of the societies, if
we are to judge by their constitutions. Christian
charity and Puritan zeal might send the members
of the Religious Societies abroad to the needy
and negligent, the sufferer and the sinner, the
prisoner and the prostitute, but these societies
first came into existence to save the souls and rest
the consciences of their own members. The
Societies of St. Vincent de Paul, on the other hand,
were not an effort to gather together the laity so
that they could reform themselves, but that they
might reform others. cc Ce qu’il pr£chait, ce
n’etait pas comme autrefois, la vie contemplative,
1 Nouvelle Biographic generale, vol. xlvi, col. 231, s.v.
Vincent Depaul.
2 Ibid., col. 232 n.


mais la vie active, sociale, un christianisme mis
au service de toutes les miseres humaines.” l
St. Vincent’s chief title to grateful remembrance
in France is his foundation of the “ Filles de la
Charite,” And this again emphasizes the differ-
ence between these societies and Horneck’s. Not
only were they charitable rather than devotional,
but they were mainly composed of women. “ A
I’origine Vincent avait eu la pensee d’associer les
hommes a son oeuvre . . . mais ces associations
d’hommes n’eurent pas le m£me succes que celles
de femmes, et furent bientdt abandonnees par leur
fondateur.” 2
In the English societies we get no trace of
women members at all until we meet with White-
field’s meetings of women in the middle of the
eighteenth century. 3
Samuel Wesley is nearer the truth when he
compares the societies to those founded in France
by M. de Renty.4 Really these societies were
started in Paris by Henri Michel Buch in 1648,
and were continued through his exertions and
1 Nouvelle Biographic generate , vol. xlvi, col. 232, s.v.
Vincent Depaul. 2 Ibid.
3 There appears to be only one exception to this. A
Religious Society for women was founded at Wolverhampton
in Anne’s reign, 1711-14. Vide S.P.C.K. Private Records,
MS. Abstract of Letters, 1711-14.
4 Letter concerning the Religious Societies by Samuel Wesley,
London, 1724, press mark in Bodleian : The
letter is a spirited defence of the societies. There was a
flourishing one at Epworth (Wesley’s parish) which we shall
have occasion to note later on.


those of M. de Renty. They were associations
of workmen of various trades who met together
and lived under communistic and religious rules.
“ Ces ouvriers associes mangeaient a la meme
table, disaient la priere en commun, se couchaient
a neuf heures du soir, se levaient a cinq heures
du matin, assistaient aux offices les dimanches et
les ffites et portaient le m£me costume . . .
Chacun contribuait dans une proportion egale aux
de loger, d’entretien et de nourriture.
Si un societaire venait a se retirer, soit pour se
marier, soit pour retourner dans son pays, le
directeur faisait son decompte en lui remettant ce
qui lui revenait, deduction faite de sa part dans
les frais. Tousles trois mois, le directeur rendait
compte de I’etat de la societe, et tousles ans il y
avait une reunion generale.” 1
Here we get the idea of religion as an element
in common life, the regular contribution towards
expenses, and revision of accounts, and even the
annual feasts which were afterwards characteristic
of the English societies. Yet, on the other hand,
the French clubs of de Renty were more economic
than religious in their object. They were self-
help societies, but the self-help was mainly on the
material side of life. “ L’association avait pris,
sans aucun doute, le caractere religieux du dix-
septieme siecle ”: 2 but “le caractere religieux ”
was not its raison d'etre. Societies of this kind
were established at Soissons, Metz, and Nancy,
E
1 Nouvelle Biographic generate, vol. ii, col. 685, s.v. H. M.
Buch. 2 thict.


in several of the Rhone towns, and almost all
through Languedoc, and lasted, with some
modifications, down to the Revolution of 1789.
We seem to find, therefore, in these French
societies, the charitable, religious, and self-helping
characteristics which distinguish our Religious
Societies, It would not be hard to push the
parallel even further by quoting similar rules
and regulations. But this is scarcely necessary.
The circumstances of their origin were not at all
similar. Horneck’s organizations were so per-
fectly natural under the circumstances, that we
need not strain after an evolutionary explanation
of them as based on foreign models. Horneck
was a travelled and a cultured man and may have
been acquainted with the French societies. But
there are precedents enough in the mediaeval
English craft-gilds, and in the Puritan associa-
tions of laymen, to justify the contention that the
English societies were the natural outcome of
contemporary London life. The social prompt-
ings of human nature in pastor and parishioners
are a sufficient explanation both of the English
Religious Societies and their earlier French
analogues.
This, then, was the state of the Religious
Societies of London during the first ten or fifteen
years of their existence. As yet the movement
was purely for personal and mutual self-help in
spiritual matters, together with the practice of
devotion and the extension of charity. The
societies tended to be quiet and unassuming, and


there was no trace of collective militancy or
proselytism in their attitude to the world. Also
they were distinctively Anglican. We have now
to follow the course of another movement, also
beginning within the Church, which was to catch
up these earlier societies into quite a different
sphere of work and set before them quite
different ideals.


CHAPTER II.
THE FOUNDATION OF THE SOCIETIES
FOR REFORMATION OF MANNERS,
1690—91.
The seventeenth century in England had been
a time of adjustment, and during that adjustment
both the minds and the morals of England had
suffered considerably. For the last half of the
century the tone of English society in all grades
was undoubtedly low. And this conclusion is
not based upon the evidence of those writers
who, like extreme Tories and High Anglicans and
Roman Catholics, had reason to inveigh against
what are commonly regarded as the gains of that
century in England. For, indeed, we shall find
reason enough to be careful in crediting all that
contemporary writers have to say about the
wickedness of their own age. There seems to
be a natural tendency in most chroniclers, when
they are depicting the faults of their own days, to
make them appear far worse than those of any
other day or any other age. But concerning the
general morality of the later Stuart period, the


chorus of anathema is unanimous enough to
justify us in regarding it as more than ordinarily
debased. Reasons for this have already been
suggested in the previous chapter, but we may
profitably glance at the official attempts during
the period to check this state of things.
The more glaring of the sins of the nation, by
its own acknowledgement, were shameless im-
morality in sexual relations, drunkenness, pro-
fanity, and excessive gaming, together with a
general slackness towards personal religious
matters which is well illustrated by the looseness
of Sunday observance during the period. There
were, indeed, severe laws in the Statute Book
against all of these offences, but these laws were
seldom enforced. The reason of this lay, for the
most part, in the fact that governments were
too busy in settling their own stability to govern
in respect of these particulars. But another
reason lay in the nature of the laws themselves.
Severe laws had been passed to enforce Sunday
observance and attendance at church. 1 Various
penalties were imposed for breaches of this law,
but the trouble was to get information of these
breaches. Conviction could only be obtained
from evidence by view, two witnesses, or
confession. The abuse of Sunday trading
indeed became so glaring that 29 Car. 11, c. 7,
permitted conviction on the evidence of one
witness. So too the statutes against drunken-
1 I Eliz., c. 2 ; 23 Eliz., c. I ; 35 Eliz., c. I ; 3 Jac. I,
c. 4 ; 1 Car. I, c. 1 ; 3 Car. I, c. 2 ; 29 Car. 11, c. 7.


ness 1 required evidence from witnesses (some-
times one and sometimes two) of the offence.
For this, and for the offences of cursing and
swearing 2 a varying scale of fines was fixed. For
the latter again, the information of either one or
two witnesses was required. Similar laws en-
forced penalties for blasphemy,3 and for gaming. 4
The laws against sexual immorality in the Statute
Book were for the most part earlier,s but they also
depended for their execution upon information
laid by witnesses. We must not forget that the
evidence of these witnesses was sufficient to con-
vict a man in his absence. In the majority of
cases these statutes made no provision for a trial
at all. A constable who caught a man red-
handed could arrest him without a warrant. But
a private person could obtain a warrant from a
Justice of the Peace or magistrate, sometimes on
his unsupported evidence, and this warrant of
conviction the constable of the parish was required
to execute. In some cases, however, the warrant
was only issued upon the information of two
1 I Jac. I, c. 9 ; 4 Jac. I, c. 5 ; 7 Jac. I, c. 10 ; 21 Jac.
I, c. 7 ; I Car. I, c. 4. 21 Jac. I, c. 5, § 2 makes only
one witness necessary for a conviction for drunkenness, and
6 and 7 Gul. 111, c. 11 does the same for a conviction for
swearing and cursing.
2 21 Jac. I, c. 20 ; 3 Car. I, c. 4 ; 6 and 7 Gul. 111, c. 11.
3 9 Gul. 111, c. 35.
4 3 3 Hen. VIII, c. 9 ; 2 and 3 P. and M., c. 9 ; 16 Car. 11,
c. 7.
3 I Hen. VII, c. 4 ; 4 Hen. VII, c. 12 ; 39 Eliz., c. 4 ;
43 Eliz,, c. 2 ; 1 Jac. I, c. 7 ; 7 Jac. I, c. 4.


witnesses. It is true the arrested person, after
the payment of his fine or punishment, could
bring an action against the magistrate for false
imprisonment or false charges, but if he was
nonsuited he was compelled to pay treble costs.
It is only when we read these provisions and
think of the possibilities of injustice and espion-
age and petty revenge for which they provide a
means, that we realize into what a pass the
governments of England must have come
throughout the seventeenth century to require
such aids. But the executive of the seventeenth
century was not the executive of to-day, and
until the question of liberty could be settled in
regard to royal prerogative, no advance could
be made in providing for order. For the interim
period of constitutional development the people
must help to look after themselves.
It is necessary to remember the methods of
enforcing the penal laws against these offences of
immorality and profaneness, for they are the very
basis of the organizations whose workings we
have to consider. The Societies for the Reforma-
tion of Manners developed along the lines which
the provisions of these statutes suggested. They
were based on the working principle of lay
information, and it was by reason of this that
they accomplished what they did, just as it was
by reason of this that they ultimately fell into
disrepute.
It is clear that such laws as these would do
little towards checking vice and immorality


without the presence either of a strong police-
executive or a high moral tone in the nation.
Unfortunately in the Restoration period neither of
these things was present. “ The Laws of God
were avowedly despised ; the Laws of the Land
which were a Reinforcement of the Laws of
God upon temporal Penalties, were a-sleep.” 1
The history of the official attempts to put these
laws into execution under Charles II and James 11,
is, as may be expected, melancholy and disappoint-
ing.
On May 20, 1660, Charles II issued a pro-
clamation against vicious, debauched, and profane
persons, and calling upon his magistrates to put
into force the laws against such offenders. 2 His
faithful Commons thanked him, and, together
with the Lords, asked him to re-issue it, which
he did in August, 1660, adding that it was to be
read in all chapels and churches in England and
Wales once a month for the next six months. 3
1 Reformation, or Mockery, ... a Sermon at Salters Hall,
June 30, 1729, p. 22, by Thos. Newman. (He is speaking
to the Societies for the Reform of Manners about the period
before their foundation.)
2 See Somers' Tracts, London, 1809-15, vol. vii, p. 424. It
runs, “We will not exercise just severity against any malefactors
sooner than against men of dissolute, debauched, and profane
lives, with what parts soever they may be otherwise qualified
and endowed.” Did the Merry Monarch smile as he signed
this ?
3 Royal Proclamation of August 13, 1660, “for Publishing
a former Proclamation of the Thirtieth of May last.” Also
Commons' Journals, VIII. 62, and Lords' Journals , XI, 58.


In January, 1661, the King issued a third
proclamation with a view to enforcing Sunday
observance and re-issuing the earlier proclama-
tion. 1 In February, 1663, the King’s Speech
recommended Parliament to reconsider the laws
against immorality and profaneness. In May
both Houses desired the King to issue another
proclamation. In June a new bill to check these
abuses failed to pass the Commons, and in
August, 1663, the King re-issued his former
proclamation. 2 Three years later the Commons
appointed a committee to examine the question of
the execution of these laws. This committee
drew up a bill which was passed by the
Commons, examined in committee by the Lords,
and quietly dropped. 3 There, for this reign, the
matter ends, so far as serious legislation is con-
cerned. The Lords awoke to the possibilities of
the law against blasphemy in 1678, when one of
their own members—the Earl of Pembroke —was
committed to the Tower on the evidence of one
witness. 4 They brought forward a Bill to alter
F
1 Royal Proclamation of January 17, 1661.
2 Vide Journals of the House of Commons, VIII, pp. 472, 525-S 2 5-
3 Ibid. VIII. 630. Lords’ Journals, XII. 98. “This com-
mittee was empowered to receive information touching such
books as tend to Atheism, Blasphemy, and Profaneness, and in
particular . . . the book of Mr, Hobbs, called the Leviathan."
Profaneness was more of a theological than a moral sin in the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. It embraces both the
authorship of unorthodox books and the breaking of the
Sabbath.
4 By 9 Gul. 111, c. 35, this was increased to two witnesses.


the law, but the Commons would not pass it. l
The incident is a curious commentary on the
situations which the Societies for the Reformation
of Manners afterwards had to face. The troubled
reign of the fourth Stuart King shows no trace of
this subject in its Parliamentary history. But in
1687 the Mayor and Aldermen of London issued
a proclamation, drawing attention to the frequent
transgression of the laws against immorality and
profaneness, and specially ordering an examina-
tion of all constables on this part of their duty. 2
This is interesting evidence which supports the
fact, already noted, that laws of this kind must be
dead letters unless there is a strong police, or
a steady force of public opinion behind them.
The City is here trying to strengthen its execu-
tive arm, but the time had now come when the
private efforts of London citizens were about to
be exerted as the expression of a section of public
opinion in regard to this very subject.
And the time seemed ripe for such an interfer-
ence. As men’s minds settled down from the
conflict of the Revolution to contemplate its
gains, the frightful immorality of the capital
forced itself upon their attention. “ The impu-
dence of both sexes was now become so greate and
universal, persons of all ranks keeping their
1 See Lords' Journals, XIII. 133, 136.
2 Cf. Ashm., H. 23, No. ccclxv. The proclamation is dated
Nov. 8, 1687, and has appended to it an abstract of the penal
laws for these offences quite in the style of the publications of
the later Societies for Reformation of Manners.


courtezans publicly, that the King had lately
directed a letter to the Bishops to order their
cleargy to preach against that sin, swearing, &c.
and to put the ecclesiastical laws in execution
without any indulgence.” 1 “It is very well
known, That in the late times Profane Swearing,
Drunkenness, Open-Lewdness, and Prophanation
of the Lord’s-Day were generally discouraged,
and in a manner wholly suppressed. And it is
as well known, to our Shame, that those Sins
have not only since revived among us, by reason
of the Impunity of Offenders, the Countenance
and Preferment they have met with, and the
Contagion of great and ill Examples, but have
been committed with the greatest Impudence and
without Controul; without either Shame, or the
Fear of the Laws ; so that they were seen and
heard at Noon-Day in our Open Streets ; and as if
we were resolved to out-do the Impieties of the
very Heathens , Prophaneness , and even Blasphemy ,
was too often the Wit and Entertainment of our
Scandalous Play-Houses , and Sincere Religion became
1 Evelyn’s Diary , Feb. 19, 1689-90. In 1689 a specimen
of a declaration against Debauchery had been presented to
the Prince of Orange to issue. This declaration bewails
the evil times, but blames the facility of absolution in the
Popish religion for them, and requests the new Parliament
to issue severer laws against swearing, luxury, etc. See A
Specimen of a Declaration against Debauchery , Tendered to the
consideration of His Highness the Prince of Orange and of
the Present Convention of the Nation. (Bodl. Pamph. 190.)
There is no evidence that William 111 ever issued this
declaration.


the Jest and Scorn of our Courts in the late
reigns.” 1
The initial movement towards reform in these
matters might almost be called adventitious. In
1690 the police officers and dwellers in Tower
Hamlets entered into a private agreement to
endeavour to suppress the open immorality of
their suburb. The movement apparently started
from the encouragement given to such action by
the issue of a Royal Proclamation for apprehend-
ing highway robbers. The locality abounded in
brothels, and the inhabitants had reason to believe
that such houses were in the habit of sheltering
these criminals. 2 How far the movement was
attended with success we cannot gather, for it
was purely local in its operation. But later, one
of the original promoters removed his dwelling
to the Strand, and thereupon suggested to several
other gentlemen that a similar organization should
be formed in his new locality. The idea of
making this a less parochial organization appears
to have occurred to these gentlemen at once. The
man who claimed to have been the founder of
1 An Account of the Societies, 1699, p. 3. The author is
writing of the age before the Revolution. Perhaps he is
not always impartial in his statements, but this picture,
at any rate, does not seem to be overdrawn. This Account
must not be confused with the latter official accounts of the
S.R.M. Its authorship appears to be a matter of dispute, and
is discussed in the Appendices [vide No. I).
2 This information is mainly gathered from a pamphlet,
The Beginning and Progress of a Needful and Hopeful Reformation
[by Edward Stephens], London, 1691.


the society was a Gloucestershire squire called
Edward Stephens. He had just left the Bar,
and shortly after this he took Anglican Orders,
having left the infant society presumably on
account of the entrance of Dissenters into it. 1
1 Stephens, originally a lawyer, afterwards took Anglican
Orders for the purpose of keeping up a daily celebration of the
Eucharist among the small society which he himself had formed
for religious purposes. He seems to have been a man who
was always running after fresh schemes with tremendous
enthusiasm. About 1700, in his pamphlet, A Seasonable and
Necessary Admonition to the Gentlemen of the First Society for the
Reformation of Manners, he claims to have been the originator
of the whole movement. “It was I (so Providence order’d it)
who, after I had my Quietus from another Service, began your
Society, and made Choice of the First Persons ; publickly . . .
defended their Actions . . . and, had they followed me, had
brought it ... to a farther Progress than yet hath been made.
But when I saw some, whom I had introduced, set up with
Formality, Affectation, and Vanity (tho’ for all these Infirmities
they might be useful, yet) in so serious a Work I could not bear
it. But the All-wise Providence made use of that to take me off
... for a better Service ” (p. 4). There seems to be no reason to
doubt the truth of this statement. The time at which he founded
the society would have occurred just between the times when
he left the Bar and took Orders (circ. 1693). We know from
Woodward’s account that he befriended the Religious Societies
just after they began to promote reformation of manners, and
we shall see that it was just about 1692 or 1693 that dissenters
began to appear in the societies for the reformation of manners,
a fact which would not have made Stephens anxious to remain
with them. Also we know that in 1691 he chronicles the
beginning of the movement (cf. note 2, p. 157), and there
exists in the Bodleian a MS. letter to him from Henry Dodwell,
in 1704, dealing with the same subject. We may, therefore,
assign the foundation of this society to his efforts. This will


But it was soon recognized that little could
be done unless some effort was made to see that
the Justices of the Peace of the City should fulfil
their part in the matter. Thereupon it was
resolved to get a letter from Queen Mary,
inciting the Justices of Middlesex to perform
this part of their duty, and, on the strength of
this, to obtain an order of Sessions from these
justices to the inferior officers to put these,laws
into execution. This letter from the Queen was
obtained through the good offices of Stillingfleet,
Bishop of Worcester, in July, 1691, and the
justices made the requisite order of Sessions. 1
be another fact to add to the Life of this remarkable man when
it is written. So far this has not been done at all fully. His
frequent changes of front, both religious and political, and his
various schemes through the years 1690-1706 would be not
a little illustrative of that period. He wrote against Rome,
though in practice he desired conciliation with her, just as he
supported the Revolution, but criticized the new Government
very strongly. In religious matters his views appear to have
been eclectic. In Dr. Legg’s pamphlet on London Church
Services some of the interesting facts of his very varied career
are collected (pp. 10, 11).
He could apparently speak very straightforwardly upon
subjects in which he was interested. In the Beginning and
Progress of a . . . Reformation his preface is addressed to
William 111, and he finds occasion to say ; —“ If you have not
Zeal enough, nor Charity enough, nor Courage enough, nor
true Wisdom enough, to do this generously and resolutely for
the Honour and Service of God, the Good of the People
committed to your Charge, and the Satisfaction of a good
Conscience, your Religion is vain, your Courage brutish, and
your Wisdom Foolishness with God ” (p. a),
1 The letter is referred to in the Account above men


The promoters were soon faced with the necessity
of obtaining information against the offences
which they wished to prosecute. It was just
now (1691) that the Society for the Reformation
of Manners came into existence. Friends of the
original promoters of the scheme were induced
to band themselves together to act as informers
against the more glaring offences. A constitution
was adopted, and simple prudential rules were
promulgated for the guidance of members. The
members of the society agreed “ to use all proper
means to prevail with Men of all Ranks to concur
with us in this Design, especially such as are
under the Obligation of Oaths to do so.” 1 The
movement grew rapidly. The patronage of the
Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London was
obtained. The original founders had included
some men of law, and, under their direction as
an executive, schemes of administration were
quickly developed. As informers came forward
increasingly it became necessary to make the task
tioned (p. 5). It asks the justices to be diligent in punishing
offenders, and ready to receive informations against them. It
is addressed to the Justices of the Peace for Middlesex at Hicks
Hall. How necessary it was that some further attempt should
be made to enforce these laws may be gathered from an extract
from the Athenian Mercury, of Aug. 4, 1691 —“ Last Lord’s Day
some Persons ... in contempt of the late Order for Reformation
. . . went to drink Wine ... in Drury lane. . . . They drank
themselves all so dead drunk, that one of them never awoke,
and the Master of the House will be prosecuted according to
Law ” (p. 1, col. 2).
1 A Help to a National Reformation, sheet D 4 v.


of laying information as easy as possible. Agents,
paid by the societies, were established in different
central quarters of the city, and supplied with
blank warrant forms for every kind of offence
which the society aimed at suppressing. l These
agents were also instructed in the legal procedure
necessary in such cases. Thus, an informer
would only have to go to the nearest agency,
give the details of his information to the society’s
clerk, and receive a filled-up warrant. This he
would take to a magistrate, and, after swearing
his information, the warrant would be signed.
1 For specimens of these see Appendix No. 3. This account
of the early procedure and constitution of the society is com-
piled from several pamphlet sources, i.e.—
(1) The Account of the S.R.M. in London and Westminster,
London, 1699.
(2) The official account of the progress of reformation of
manners —later published by the societies themselves, and
constantly re-edited and brought up to date.
(3) A Help to a National Reformation, London, 1700 (with
which No. 2 is sometimes Incorporated).
(4) A Vindication of an undertaking of Certain Gentlemen in
order to the suppressing of Debauchery and Trofaneness, London,
1692 [by Edward Fowler, Bishop of Gloucester].
(5) The Beginning and Progress of a Needful and Hopeful
Reformation in England, London, 1691.
(6) A Seasonable and Necessary Admonition to the Gentlemen
of the First Society for the Reformation of Manners, London [N.D.].
(Both 5 and 6 are by Edward Stephens.)
(7) Josiah Woodward’s Account of the Rise and Progress of the
Religious Societies in the City of London, etc., London, 1701.
The reference to these sources in the chapter would be mostly
passim, so I have not mentioned them in the notes except
where quotations are taken directly from them.


Then it was taken by the informer back to
the agency, and left there. Afterwards, another
employee of the society would call at each agency,
and, receiving all the signed warrants, would
deliver them to the constables in the respective
parishes where the offenders resided. It was the
constable’s business to serve the warrant, and
collect the fine or impose the penalty, either of
distraint or punishment, which the law demanded
in default of payment. In order to check the
constables, a register of the signed warrants was
kept at each agency, showing the particulars of
each case. With this the society’s agent attended
at each Quarter Sessions, when parish constables
were required to furnish their reports of arrests,
fines, warrants, etc. And as well as checking
any omission of duty or appropriation of fines
by the local police, this register also served as
a check upon the parochial vestrymen and church-
wardens, to whom the fine was to be delivered
by the constable for the use of the poor. It
was not unusual, therefore, for the society to
be represented at the Easter meetings of the
parishes in the more vicious districts of the
metropolis. 1
Meanwhile, arrangements were made to adver-
tise the movement and the societies. The legal
patrons compiled an abstract of all the laws which
were then in force against the various offences
G
1 For specimens of these abstracts of warrants see Appendix
No. 3. Fortunately, no less than nine of these MSS. volumes
are in the Bodleian, extending over a number of years.


for which the society wished to prosecute, and
a short account of the improved machinery for
executing these laws was prepared. These two
documents, together with the Queen’s letter and the
order of the Justices of the Peace, were distributed
all over the country. At first all the charges were
personally borne by the several original promoters,
but gradually regular contributions were levied
from members, and subscriptions were accepted
from well-wishers. Members were strictly en-
joined not to accept the one-third share of the
fines which the law allowed to the informers in
several cases. This was afterwards one of the
most frequent gibes at the society —that its
members were only giving information for the
sake of the fine ; but it is a gibe which never
appears to have been deserved, for, if we are to
judge from the later annual reports of the societies,
no one had ever succeeded in proving this against
any member of their body. Further than this,
the society, in 1694, made the following offer—
“ We agree, upon our own Costs and Charges,
to imploy and maintain a competent Number of
such fitting Persons, as we shall choose, to assist
the several Constable and other Officers in the
Wards of the said City of London , and in other
. . . Parishes, in putting in Execution those
good Laws aforesaid.” 1
But long before this date the numbers of
members had grown large enough to necessitate
1 Proposals for a 'National Reformation of Manners, London,
1694, P- 2 4-


the formation of several sub-societies. Some of
these appear to have been organized exactly upon
the parent model, and were almost independent
associations. But others were organizations of
some particular class, with a view to some
particular duties. Of these the most important,
always excepting the informers, who were drawn
from all ranks, were the Society of Gentlemen and
citizens and that of Constables. In the Rawlinson
MSS., in the Bodleian, there is a copy of the
agreement of each of these bodies, from which
we gather a good idea of the lines along which
the movement now progressed. 1 The magistrates
met every week to discuss, in private, difficult
cases relating to this subject. By a system of
co-optation only well-affected persons were allowed
to become members, and strict secrecy was enjoined
on all. They agreed upon certain principles in
dealing with the work, of which the most im-
portant ones were —tolerance and encouragement
of informers, the practice of a personal examination
of excuses offered by those who offended against
the Sunday observance statutes, and concealment
of the name of the informer. All of this may
appear to us to be somewhat in the nature of an
encouragement to espionage ; but, in justice to
these men, we must recollect that their oaths
obliged them to the upholding of the laws, and
1 The gentlemen’s agreement is dated June 8, 1693. The
agreement of the constables is not dated, but would appear to
be slightly later. Both are in the Bodleian, Rawl. MS.,
D. 129.


that “ informing ” was recognized by the State as
an ordinary method of accusation.
The constables’ agreement is a very workman-
like document which does not bind them to any
exaggerated constitution. They meet weekly
(“ every Tuesday at 5 of the clock in the
Afternoon precisely at Hamlin’s Coffeehouse ”),
under penalty of a penny fine for each default.
Each officer is to furnish an account of his
week’s efforts for the cause, and difficult situa-
tions are submitted to the deliberation of the
whole company. Care was taken in electing
new members, and all debates and resolutions
were kept secret. And “we agree at each
meeting how we shall divide ourselves in our
walkes to the most advantage And so as to take
in all parts of the City and that we change our
walks as oft as may be convenient.” 1 Evidently
these policemen were earnestly trying to solve
their problems, and further evidence of this may
be found in the queries they address to Sir
Francis Pemberton, the eminent lawyer, con-
cerning controversial legal points. They inquire
whether a constable may arrest outside of his
own constablewick, or without a warrant, and if
so can he receive the fine from the offender, etc. 2
But all the London police were not imbued with
this spirit. For the deputy and common council
men of the ward of Cripplegate had to proceed
against four constables of the ward for keeping
back fines from offenders against “ the late act of
1 Rawl. MS., D. 129, fo. 30. 2 Ibid., fo. 32.


Common Council relating to night walkers.” 1
A contemporary writer says of this organization,
“ And 1 must observe, that this is found a very
admirable and successful Method for all Constables
to take.” 2 There was also another society of
tradesmen and others who made it their particular
duty to suppress lewdness. The societies of
“ informers ” were apparently either subordinate
societies within the original body, or freshly formed
societies in other districts which were found neces-
sary from time to time as recruiting increased.
Finally there were associations of clergy who helped
in the reforming work. Whether these were
already existent clerical associations who tried
to support the new movement, or fresh organiza-
tions on the class principle like the other sub-
societies, cannot be discovered from the existing
references to them.
The general constitutional rules of these new
Societies for the Reformation of Manners, both in
the case of the parent body and its offshoots, do
not appear to differ essentially from the associa-
tions we have already examined. They met
weekly under a penalty for default of attendance.
They were under a constitutional obligation to
proselytize as much as possible, though new
members were only admitted with extreme
caution. After a new member had been twice
proposed, the society appointed two members to
inquire into his life and conversation. The
1 See Rawl. MS., D. 862, fo. 70 (Apr. 6, 1706).
2 Account of the S.R.M. ut supra, p. 8.


debates of the society were kept strictly secret,
no extraneous matter was allowed to be discussed,
and the majority were to determine the society’s
policy at any given time. .We cannot but notice
the likeness between the administrative parts of
the constitutions of these societies and the earlier
Religious Societies which Horneck organized.
But as yet there was no connexion between
them. Perhaps the English habit of consti-
tutionalism was c< in the air ” at this time, and
that would account for this likeness. And,
besides this, we must remember we are now
fairly within the society-making age in religion
and philanthropy.
But we must not imagine that the new societies
had progressed to this stage without encountering
considerable opposition. This came first from an
official quarter. One of the great difficulties had
been to ensure that the justices and magistrates
should not only sign warrants when they were
brought, but that they should not actively dis-
courage the laying of informations. Probably
some of them were corrupt, but most of them
were simply supine about the matter. Questions
were printed in the Athenian Mercury asking if
judges were not compelled to issue out a warrant
when an information was laid, and whether such
judges who refuse to do this should not be
reported to the Crown. Such publications only
turned the feeling of the magistrates more against
the movement. All sorts of rumours began to
be spread. A certain Mr. Hartley was the


magistrate most favourable to the new project,
and to him the informers flocked. Unfortunately,
in the midst of the opposition, two clerical errors
in Hartley’s warrants ggve the society’s detractors
a chance of accusing it and the magistrate of
unheard-of injustices. 1 A chance meeting between
a hostile justice and an informer who had gone
to Hartley’s chambers drew forth an order of
Sessions restraining informers, while the slanders
against the society increased. A lawyer at a
coffee-house declared that “ all this noise is Cheats
and a trick of the justices to get money, and that
he wou’d give 2,000/. for” their takings for a year.
This was a scandal, for at the time over one
hundred warrants had been issued from which
no justice nor his clerk had had a farthing. 2
But there were, however, some magistrates on
the side of reform, for in the first few months
several persons were bound to their good
behaviour for opprobriously calling persons
engaged in the work “ informers.” And a
constable was turned out of his office for refusing
to execute a warrant against a person for Sunday
trading. 3 All this opposition must have been
1 Cf. Ed. Fowler’s Vindication, pp. 11, 12. The bishop,
in commenting upon the outcry that was raised, remarks
that “ it is an easie thing to find a Staff to beat a Dog.”
2 See Athenian Mercury, vol. iii, August 4, 1691, p. 1, col. 2,
This Journal also states that matters are so well arranged by the
informers that 10,000 warrants would be granted in the first
twelve months ! As a matter of fact the societies’ published
“arrests” did not total 10,000 fora considerably longer time.
3 Ibid., p. 2, col. 1.


what the early societies expected. The signifi-
cance of the term “ informer ” had been ugly in
England since the Restoration, and indeed from
before then. There had been too much ecclesi-
astical supervision by the Government during the
last century for any espionage of whatever kind
to be received without keen opposition. But
that was not the fault of the Societies for the
Reformation of Manners. They did not invent
“ the informer ” as an instrument. They took
him straight out of the Statute Book. Judges
might object to have their work scrutinized by
their colleagues, and tradesmen might find private
informing a very great nuisance indeed ; but
that was the business of the Parliament which
allowed those laws to remain, which made use of
private information as an instrument, and which
even encouraged it. To-day we are as apt to
despise the informer as were the Englishmen of
the late seventeenth century. But before we
permit ourselves the pharisaic luxury of despising
him in this particular connexion it would be well
for us to recollect that the members and in-
formers of these societies were strictly bound
by the rules of their association to receive no
part of the one-third share which the laws
allowed to informers in certain cases, and we are
also bound to remind ourselves that these men
were acting from a purely philanthropic impulse ;
that they were facing certain opposition and cruel
misunderstanding ; that they were sacrificing
their time and forfeiting the good opinions of


their fellows; and finally that each several
member was not only at a considerable incon-
venience, but also at some personal expense in
prosecuting the advancement of this cause. And
expense was no small consideration to many
members of such organizations. And if we ask
“ for what reason,” we can find no other reply
than that it was for the good of their brethren’s
souls and not at all to the disadvantage of their
brethren’s bodies. The impulse to philanthropize
may have been religious, and therefore there will
be some who will call this impulse merely militant
puritanism in another guise. But that would
not be fair. The principles underlying the
movement may have been puritanic in the sense
that they were religious, but, as we shall see,
this religious basis was wide enough to be able
to neglect any sectarian aloofness. Also these
principles may have been militant—but this was
a problem that demanded attack, and the period
was not a “ kid-gloved ” age —and, granting that
this impulse to reform was puritanic and militant,
we shall be nearer the truth if we enlarge our
idea of it by remembering its undoubted civic
importance and describe the motive which
prompted the establishment of these societies as
a puritanic and militant philanthropy.
H


CHAPTER III.
HISTORY OF THE SOCIETIES UNDER
WILLIAM III AND ANNE.
At the outset the Societies for Reformation of
Manners had been composed of Anglicans.
They were not, however, on any religious basis,
and there seemed no reason at all why they
should be confined to representatives of one
communion. Within the first few years of
their existence they were to receive accretions
from two different sources, both of which were
distinctively sectarian. Before 1694 the societies
had not only swept into their work many of the
older Religious Societies in London and West-
minster, but they had also quite freely sought
the help of the Dissenters.
In the natural course of events it was not long
before the members of the Religious Societies
began to be marked out as helpers in the new
reform movement. To endeavour to put a stop
to the torrent of vice, immorality, and profane-
ness would seem to them a laudable and practical
way of putting their renewed religious ideas into


action. The most obvious branch of the reform
work for them was the task of informing. They
were soon split up into two bodies of informers
—one in London and one in Westminster —and
began their task with much vigour. Special
prayers at their devotional meetings were used
For steadfastness in their new work. An exercise
of Christian graces, used at this time, and quoted
in Dr. Woodward’s account, give one an idea of
their earnestness. They are to pray for Chris-
tian poverty of spirit, for a disinterested mind,
for the habit of prayer, for charity, and for quiet
resignation. But just as there is no one so
cruel as a sentimentalist, so there is no one so
short-sighted as an enthusiast, especially if his
enthusiasm be tinged with religious introspection.
Apparently the young men tended to run into
excesses of zeal For the cause. The Societies for
Reformation of Manners began to distribute short
rules for the use of their members, and the
title of them is significant: “Some Prudential
Methods that have been Recommended to those
that give Informations against Prophaneness and
Debauchery in and about the Cities of London
and Westminster, and particularly to the Mem-
bers of the several Religious Societies that
have acted in the business of Reformation.” 1
The informers are urged to give no informa-
tion where the matter of fact is at all doubt-
ful, and to remember, if possible, the exact
1 A Help to a National Reformation, London, 1700, sheet
D 3 v.


words of the oaths or profanity they report. 1
They are also urged to be careful in reporting
cases of what they consider to be drunkenness,
and a naive description of this state is added
to their information, 2 while they are also
requested to be lenient to this offence upon
weekdays. Sunday trading was apparently the
worst of the evils which it was desired to combat,
for informers are warned against the excuses,
probably well-worn even at this date, that the
windows and doors of shops are only opened for
the sake of light and air. And with regard to
Sunday hawking there is to be no compromise.
Information is urged in all cases of “ Bakers
appearing in the Streets with their Baskets , or
Barbers with their Pot , Bason , or Periwig-80x ,3
Shoe-makers , Taylors , Hatters , or other Tradesmen
carrying out their Work and Ware ” upon this
day.
But the members of the Religious Societies
1 Profanity was generally an offence of a theological nature,
such as denying the Trinity, etc. Nevertheless there was a
penal statute against this.
2 “ Tho’ a Man that cannot stand upon his Legs, or that
reels or staggers as he goes along the Streets, and is heard
to faulter remarkably in his Speech, unless in Case of some
known natural Infirmity or Defect, may ordinarily be pre-
sumed to be Drunk” (No. II of the “ Prudential Methods”
recommended.)
3 Ibid. Barbers would have been greatly in demand on the
Sundays of the period. The age of the wigs would create this
demand, and fashionable parties as well as churches would take
their toll of people of quality on the Sabbath.


were generally young men, and they needed the
corporate support of maturer members to escape
the “ slander of youth ” that was levelled at their
enthusiasm. The opportunity for this came
from a curious quarter. The original association
of the Tower Hamlet residents, to which refer-
ence has already been made 1 had fallen into
mismanagement by reason of not being properly
organized. The two societies of informers which
had been formed from the Religious Societies
thereupon approached the older body, and an
agreement was drawn up to embody the principles
of association. A constitution was settled which
provided for a monthly meeting, subscriptions
were fixed, prudential rules on the lines of the
directions of the parent organizations were
adopted, and the whole of London was divided
into districts of supervision. But the most
interesting part of the whole scheme was the
existence of two paid informers, whose business it
was to inform against the more common offences,
and to let the society know of all the more serious
breaches of the laws, to keep registers of the work
done, and never to take any part of the informer’s
share in the fines. Apparently the rest of the
members could help by giving information
privately, or by telling the society of offences
which they had seen. But the ordinary mem-
bers’ business was simply to pay and to elect.
It is not clear whether the two paid informers
were to be of the association or not. We cannot,
1 Vide chap, ii {supra).


however, but think that the practice was unusual.
If every society of informers had worked upon
such lines, the contemporary gibe would have
been against paid informers, and not, as it was,
against amateurs. We are clearly dealing with a
pathological case here. And the explanation is
to be found probably in the supposition that the
older Tower Hamlet body hit upon this idea of
paid informers, and that they were content to
protect their own districts this way, and for the
rest to do good by proxy. The younger and
more enthusiastic members would be left free to
follow their own ideas in this matter. But the
original association at Tower Hamlets was pri-
marily formed to protect its own district and
not from any motives of high abstract philan-
thropy. 1
1 Th is information is gathered from an interesting MS. in
the Bodleian (Rawl. MS., D. 129). It is composed of
copies of the rules of the magistrates’ and constables’ societies
before mentioned, and also of a copy of an agreement pre-
sented to the Dissenters probably before 1694. B contains
also the Agreement of the Tower Hamblett Society, with eight
rules, and ending with a pledge to continue the work in good
will. No mention is made of any of the administrative
machinery of warrants, etc., which would seem to point to the
fact that this part of the business was arranged by the
reformers with the parent organizations. The date of the
agreement would appear to be some time before 1694, for it is
certainly later than the Dissenters’ Agreement (which must be
dated before Mary’s death on internal evidence) ; since that
agreement mentions too small a number of the S.R.M.
helpers—e.g., forty or fifty—for us to suppose this association
had already been formed. No satisfactory evidence for the


Meanwhile the Society for Reformation of
Manners, faced by the problem of so few helpers
in the Anglican Communion, had extended the
hand of friendship to the Dissenters of London.
So far, what had been done had been done by
“ forty or fifty persons, all except one or two in
the Communion of the Church of England,”
and it was thereupon “ humbly offered to the
consideration of the reverend nonconformist
ministers whether it may not be a very great
means to further the reformation already begun,
if they could persuade any considerable number
of their congregations or others of known pru-
dence and integrity to follow the examples of the
persons already mentioned.” 1 The society was
date can be gathered from the confused information given in
Woodward’s account of the amalgamation. It may be noted
here that considerable confusion appears to exist not only
among contemporary writers, but also among nearly all those
few modern writers who have mentioned these movements.
There is a distinct tendency to treat the Religious Societies
and the S.R.M, as parts of one organization. Cf. Smollett’s
History of England, London, Virtue [lB4B], vol. ii, p. 82.
Archdeacon Sharp’s Life, and The Duty of Rebuking: a Sermon
. . . by George Stanhope (before the Lord Mayor and the
S.R.M. on December 28, 1702), also Life of Wilberforce, 1838,
vol. i, pp. 130-35. Abbey’s and Overton’s are perhaps the
most clear of the modern accounts, but they only gave four or
five pages to the whole treatment of the societies. The above-
mentioned MS. does not appear to have been considered at all.
1 A Copy of the Paper offered to the dissenting Ministers being
Instructions to the Informers and the rules and methods that are
observed by them (Rawl. MS., D. 129, fo. 6). For the date
and bearing see previous note on p. 54. It speaks of “the


at some pains to explain the necessity and nature
of the movement, and in this proposal it offers to
send the dissenting ministers blank warrants
with further information, and also to introduce
them or any of their followers to particular
societies, “which may prove a very effectuall
meanes of promoting kindness and charity among
men of different perswasions, as well as provoking
and incourrageing one another in Good works.” 1
This latter aspect of the Societies for Reforma-
tion of Manners as a factor in religious union in
England was destined to be important. In the
regular sermons afterwards preached to the
societies constant reference is made to the pos-
sibilities of the movement in this direction.
And, on the other hand, it was this very mixture
of Churchmen and Dissenters in the societies
which invoked censure from many of the Church-
men of the period. 2 Perhaps it was this very
thing which induced Edward Stephens to sever
his connexion with the societies, for we know he
held strong views about Dissent and authority.
Queen’s Majesty ” and not of the late Queen. The number
of members of the S.R.M. quoted in this paper prove it to
be a document from the first two or the three years of the
society.
1 A Copy of the Paper offered to the dissenting Ministers being
Instructions to the Informers and the rules and methods that are
observed by them (Rawl. MS., D. 129, fo. 15 b).
2 Bishop Nicolson, of Carlisle ; Sharp, the Archbishop of
York, and, more vehemently, the famous Sacheverell, protested
against this union of the Church and Dissent. ( Vide later
chapters.)


But, whatever the result may have been, there is
abundant evidence that the Dissenters joined the
movement in some force, and from henceforth
we can no longer regard the society as strictly
Anglican in any sense. 1
We have now traced the history of the
societies down to 1694. They enjoyed the
patronage of several persons of rank and ability,
Archbishop Tenison, Fowler, Compton, Trelaw-
ney, Patrick, and Stillingfleet among the bishops
being of the number. And now just as they
were settled in organization and policy, they
suffered a blow in the death of Queen Mary.
She had taken a keen interest in the movement
from the time when she had really started it by
her letter to the Justices of Middlesex. But her
position had rendered caution necessary.
“ The reforming of the manners of her people
was one of her chief cares. If a greater pro-
gress was not made in this, according to the
pious wishes of some who had good intentions
and much zeal, the true account of that slow-
ness was this ; she had often heard that the
hypocrisy of the former times, had brought on
the atheism and impiety of the present, and had
fortified libertines in their prejudices ; there-
fore she resolved to guard against everything
which might seem to revive that. . . . There-
I
1 Frequent sermons were preached to the S.R.M. and
many of these were preached in Salter’s Hall and other places
of dissenting worship, and by dissenting ministers. (See
Appendix II.)


fore, though this was no sooner moved to her
than she set it a-going, yet finding few instru-
ments to concur in it, and seeing a violent
opposition to those that did, she thought the
putting her whole strength to it, might be
reserved with great advantage to another
time. . . . She did hearken carefully after
every thing that seemed to give some hope
that the next generation should be better than
the present.” 1
During this year the society published the
result of its work for the past twelve months.
The report complains of the hindrances met with
from the inferior officers in the work of reform,
either on account of antagonism or mere laziness.
Also it complains of the encouragement of vice by
the generality of the people, of whom the Proposals
say, “instead of being Suppressers, are rather
Supporters and Encouragers of it, either by
neglect of Duty or by giving bad Example.” 2
The report also gives accounts of several murders
traced by the members of the society, and of the
discovery of houses of ill-fame. 3 One of these
gives us an excellent picture of the work and
methods of a reforming constable. “In the year
1692, Mr. Anthony Miles , one of the Society,
1 Burnet’s Memorial of Mary, Princess of Orange. Edin.,
i 842, pp. 51, 5 2 -
2 Proposals for a National Reformation of Manners, ... as also
the Black Roll [of Prosecutions during 1693-94]. London, 1694,
p. 29.
3 Ibid., p. 30 et seqq.


being then Constable, and walking his rounds
... in Rosemary-Lane . . . heard a great Revel
rout with many Oaths and Cursings and making
a stand to hearken and inform himself, he heard
several Persons in that House thrusting one
another down Stairs.” The account goes on to
relate how the constable thrust his staff in the door
to keep it open till he could enter in, “ with divers
Persons attending him.” Finally, the pamphlet
ends with a summary of the societies’ prosecu-
tions for the past year, which amount to no less
than 313, and all for offences against sexual
morality. 1 Of this number no less than 269
were women, 143 of them being prosecuted as
soliciting prostitutes (“ night-walkers ”).
How far the cares of State and the dictates of
conscience would move the widowed King to
support the societies was not at first clear. He
appears to have been genuinely grieved at the
death of his Queen, and even went to the length
of renouncing his mistress, Elizabeth Villiers. 2
But, at any rate, the Parliament was moved in
the next year to pass a fresh Act “ For the more
effectual suppressing of profane cursing and
1 This appears to have been the first statistical statement
of results published. The next one accessible is the Sixth
Black List published for the year 1700, and thereafter they
appear to have been annual. In 1708 the style of this report
was changed from a Black List into a Regular Account. (See
Appendix V.)
2 H. C. Foxcroft, Supplement to Burnefs History, Oxford,
1902, p. 406.


swearing.” 1 The preamble of this Act regrets
the ineffectiveness of 21 Jac. I, c. 5, and prac-
tically reissues it, reducing conviction from the
oath of two informers to conviction from the
oath of one. There was a sliding scale of fines
fixed according to the social status of the
offender, 2 and the Act was commanded to be
read in all churches and chapels four times a
year. 3
During the next few years we can trace the
history of the movement through the sermons
preached regularly to the societies. These were
delivered both in St. Mary-le-Bow quarterly to
the Anglican members, and in Salter’s Hall and
other places to the Dissenters. They are very
varied in everything but length, and a pre-
disposition is shown in favour of certain obvious
texts. 4 By 1697 we learn that there are twenty
1 6 and 7 Gul. 111, c. 11.
2 For each offence a servant, day labourer, common soldier,
or common seaman paid one shilling ; all other persons paid
two shillings. If the offender refused to pay, the fine was to
be levied by distress, and in default of this the offender
suffered one hour’s confinement in the stocks for each offence.
Offenders under sixteen years of age were to be thrashed.
3 In Bodleian Pamph. 256 there is a letter from Compton,
Bishop of London, to his diocesan clergy, just after the Act
had been passed, printing the King’s proclamation which
ordered the clergy to read it four times a year.
4 E.g. Leviticus xix. 17 : “Thou shalt in any wise rebuke
thy neighbour, and not suffer sin upon him” ; Psalm cvi. 30
(a.v.) ; “Then stood up Phinehas, and executed judgement :
and so the plague was stayed.”


of the societies in and about London, 1 and that
the four annual sermons are preached on the
Monday after quarter days. By this time the
King was freed from the cares of foreign war
for a time by the Treaty of Ryswick, and more
at liberty to turn his attention to internal govern-
ment. 2 The Commons appointed a committee
on the subject of reformation, and in February,
1698, this committee presented an address to
the King, praying him to issue out a proclamation
for the execution of the laws against immorality
and profaneness, and the suppression of pernicious
books and pamphlets. The King immediately
complied with this request, and even asked the
Commons to consider a new Bill on the subject
of profanity. 3 In 1699 the proclamation was
again issued, and in that year a new Act was
passed against profaneness. 4
But more important than these fitful Par-
liamentary efforts in the cause of reform was the
foundation, later in the year 1698 5, of the Society
for Promoting Christian Knowledge. The pre-
amble, which was to be signed by every member,
maintains that the “ growth of vice and immorality
1 A Sermon Preach'd at St. Mary-le-Borv, June 28, 1697, by
John Russell, London, 1697, p. 9.
2 Commons Journals, vol. xii, p. 118.
3 Ibid., xiii, pp. 8, 40. The proclamation is printed in the
pamphlet, Help to a National Reformation.
4 9 Gul. 111, c. 35. This was directed mostly against theolo-
gical profanity, denying the Trinity, preaching false doctrine, etc.
5 Cf. Summary Account of the S.P.C.K., March, 1813, in
Bodl. 133, c. 5.


is greatly owing to gross ignorance of the prin-
ciples of the Christian religion,” 1 and the aim of
the society was to correct this ignorance. This new
organization was destined to play an important
part in the life of the Societies for Reforma-
tion of Manners. At first its policy of dissemi-
nating Christian literature greatly helped the
reform movement. All the publications of the
Reforming Societies were sent through the length
and breadth of England by this means, and the
extra-metropolitan spread of the movement to
form Societies for Reformation of Manners
and Religious Societies was largely due to this
policy, as we shall see in a later chapter. But
the S.P.C.K. was never militant against vice in
the same way as the earlier societies. It attacked
the cause rather than the result of the evil which
was manifested in contemporary manners, and
therefore it gradually supplanted the Reforming
Societies at a later period by assuming what
was really their most important function : the
correction of the nation’s point of view in regard
to these matters. But all this was a future
development. For the present we have only
to notice that the establishment of the new
organization tended greatly towards a reformation
of manners, and that this was accomplished by
a vigorous policy of propagating literature and
establishing Charity Schools.
1 See A Chapter in English Church History : being the Minutes
of the S.P.C.K., 1698-1714, edited by Ed. McClure, Lond.,
1 888, p. 1.


Just now the societies received valuable assist-
ance in the shape of formal recognition and
approval by Tenison, Archbishop of Canterbury.
In a letter to the bishops of his province he
recommends the formation of societies to check
the immorality and profanity of the times, and
instances the “ noble zeal ” of the London bodies.
But the most significant thing in his letter is that
he puts his finger upon the weak spot in the
movement, and that is the refusal of the upper
classes to give it any hearty support. “ Gain
over the persons who have the greatest Esteem
and Authority in their Parishes,” he says, “ for
if once the better Sort can be brought to such
a Seriousness and Sobriety, the rest will more
easily follow.” 1 But this was easier said than
done. The ordinary policy of informing and
prosecuting could only bring the lower classes
of offenders to justice. Rank and title were
enough to overawe the generality of informers,
and, where these did not suffice to screen the
patrician offender, there was always the resort to
bribery and corruption of justice. As we shall
see, it was on this very account that the Reform-
ing Societies suffered their bitterest reproaches. It
was gradually becoming clear that private enforce-
ment of penal laws was accomplishing very little
towards the reformation of the upper classes.
And since the upper classes in England during
this period were not only among the most vicious
1 Circular Letter to the Bishops of the Province, April 4, 1699,
p. 5.


portion of the community in general, but were
also looked upon as examples to their inferiors,
the failure of the reformers to influence or
chastise them in any proportionate degree was
likely to bring the whole reforming movement
into disrepute.
However, for the present, things looked
hopeful. Archiepiscopal patronage was followed
by the appearance of an apologia on behalf of the
societies, which ran through several editions.
Only thirty out of one hundred and sixty pages
in this book are devoted to an account of the
societies. The rest is in the form of a rhetorical
sermon against wickedness in general, and urges
the duty of private effort to combat this. 1 The
next two or three years are perhaps the brightest
in the societies’ history. The Commissioners of
the Scottish Church and of the French Church
at the Savoy, as well as numbers of bishops and
peers, officially approved of the above book and
of the movement it defended. 2 Great numbers
of criminals were arrested, and a visible check
was given to the more scandalous offences, so
that “ our constables of late have found it difficult
1 The full title of the volume is An Account of the Societies for
Reformation of Manners in London and Westminster and other
parts of the Kingdom ; with a persuasive to persons of all ranks to
be Zealous and Diligent in Promoting the Execution of the Laws against
Profaneness and Debauchery, For the effecting of a N ational Reforma-
tion. London, 1699.
2 Cf the fifth edition of the above (Brit. Mus., 712, d. 24),
sheet a.


to take up a swearer . . . and the Tower-end of
the town has been much purged of the pestilent
generation of night-walkers.” 1 Also the official
record of the prosecutions of lewd and scandalous
persons alone, for the three years ending
December, 1702, gives a total of 2,645 men
and women. 2 These are both accounts from the
side of the society, but there is outside evidence
to confirm them. tc Lewd customs are so much
left off . . . that [our constables] . . . have not
been able to carry one person for these offences
before the Magistrate.” 3 The newspapers of
the period confirm this. The presentments of
the grand juries for London and for Middle-
sex, in June, 1701, heartily commend and
return thanks to the members of the societies. 4
This is certainly a change from the earlier
attitude of the Bench. And an impartial wit-
K
1 Cf. the fifth edition of the above (Brit. Mus.,7i2,d. 24),
sheet a, pp. 21, 22.
2 Black lists of the S.R.M. Vide Brit. Mus., 1881, c. 3,
3 The Post Man, July 16-18, 1700 ; also the copies of news-
papers during these years supply similar evidence. Cf. The
Protestant Mercury, August 2-7, 1700 ; The Dutch Prophet,
[November 26, 1700] ; also The Protestant Mercury, September
4-6, 1700 ; The Post Man, Jan. 30, 1699-Feb. I, 1700 ;
July 8-10, 1701. The newspapers may be seen in a series
of bound volumes called Nichol’s Newspapers, in the Bodleian.
4 The Post Man, June 3-5, 1701 ; and The Proceedings
of the King's Commission of the Peace ... on ... the 4 th and
sth days of June, 1701. London : Printed for Elizabeth
Mallett at the Hat and Hawk in Bride Lane, 1701, p. 5
(Nichol’s Newspapers). The charges to these juries had
commended the societies.


ness, Evelyn, writing about the same time, and
noticing the efforts of the reformers, remarks,
“ This began already to take some effect, as to
common swearing, and oathes in the mouths
of people of all ranks.” 1 Apparently about
this time also the Society for Reformation of
Manners produced an account (distinct from the
report of convictions, which were annual) of the
progress of the movement, and this was fre-
quently re-issued during the next ten years.
From it we see that, from 1691 to 1702, thirty-
four country benches had issued orders of Ses-
sions on the lines of the one originally issued
by the Justices to whom Queen Mary had
addressed her letter, and that the presentments
of the county grand juries frequently commended
the appearance of societies in their neighbourhood. 2
In 1701 an attempt was made to induce the
archbishop to introduce a further Bill against
debauchery into the House, but it came to
nothing. A certain Sir John Phillips appears to
have already tried to do this, but he was
unsuccessful, as was also the attempt to “ have
some prudent clergymen put into the Commission
of Peace in all the Counties.” 3 The nation was
1 Evelyn's Diary, March 24, 1699-1700.
2 The title of this was An Account of the Trogress of Reforma-
tion of Manners in England, Scotland, Ireland, and other parts of
Europe and America . Editions of it can be seen in Pamph. 241,
256, 258, etc., in the Bodleian, and also in the British
Museum.
3 S.P.C.K. private papers ; Wanley MSS. xlv.


in no mind to renew their acquaintance with
clerical judges.
Up to this time there had been no question
of the political views of the reforming societies.
But there can be little doubt that, since their
co-operation with the Dissenters had begun, the
clerical support they received was mainly that
of Low Churchmen. As this included, at this
period, the majority of the bishops, it was rather
in the nature of a help than otherwise for the
societies to take on this hue of Churchmanship.
Not a little was made by “Broad” Churchmen,
in their sermons to the reformers, of that aspect
of their work which seemed to promise a reunion
of religions in England. In the end this hope
was not fulfilled, but it tended to place the
societies definitely on the side of the Whig party
in their outlook. This being so, no difference
was made to the work by the death of William 111,
on March 8, 1702, and the accession of his
sister-in-law. She immediately issued out a
proclamation against vice and immorality, and
indeed, for the first few years of the reign, appears
to have taken an interest in the work. 1 Unfor-
tunately, this interest did not extend to any
1 The date of Anne’s first proclamation on this subject was
March 26, 1702. The Observator , March 3-6, 1703, remarks
“ This is the 20th Proclamation to my knowledge that Her
Majesty has published to this purpose in less than a Twelve
Months time.” This appears to be an overstatement. She
certainly issued a good many, including some to Scotland,
for this same purpose. See also S.P.C.K. private papers,
Wanley MSS. Ixiii,


serious attempt to strike at the heart of the evil,
which was the selfishness and bad example of the
upper classes in the capital. Magistrates still
winked at corruption, and constables, under such
encouragements, were not particular how they
treated offenders. 1
So long as Anne was in Whig leading-strings,
we hear of no official repudiation of the societies,
but with the High Church reaction in the middle
of her reign they suffered a good deal.
However, in the first year of Anne’s reign, the
cause received its baptism of blood, a reforming
1 Nos. 94 and 95 and 96 of the Observator (March, 1703)
contain a discussion on Reformation of Manners which speaks
of these evils : “ They [the prisoners in Bridewell] told us
how they have been Debauch’d by the very Constables who
have been charged to carry them to the House of Correction ,
and also by the Reformation Men , as they call’d them.” (No.
94, p. 2, col. I.) This is a serious charge, and it seems hardly
to be proven against the officers of the S.R.M. In February,
1700, a scheme for reforming Newgate and other prisons
notices the debauching of women prisoners by gaolers, but
there is no evidence of this charge against any of the informers.
The societies always made a point of rebutting such scandals in
their annual reports, and constantly announce themselves ready
to meet any definite charges. It may well have happened,
however, that their name was used by some persons to serve
their own ends, or that the Bridewell prostitutes were simply
malicious. We might know what to expect of these women
by the remark—also in the above journal—“ This they said
was a common thing when one Whore was to be brought
before a Justice, for another to borrow a Child . . . and so
make her pass for a Married Woman, whose Husband was at
Sea, or in the Army.” (No. 94, Observator , March 13-16,
1703, p. 1, col. 2.)


constable named John Cooper being murdered
on May 12, 1702, during a riot at Mayfair.
Such an event is not surprising. The class of
people who passed through the hands of these
officers must have been thoroughly brutal as well
as thoroughly licentious. The great fairs had
been a thorn in the side of the reformers ever
since their first organization. As early as 1665
we find proclamations forbidding the licentious-
ness that accompanied them. At the Bartholo-
mew fair there appear to have been three days
of legitimate trafficking in the sale of beasts,
and after that for eleven days the gathering
was “ a meer Carnival , a Season of the ut-
most Disorder and Debauchery ... an open
Scene of Lewdness ... in which Multitudes
of Cheats , Panders , and Ruffians ply their
utmost Craft.” 1 The murder of Cooper, who
was a parish constable of St. James’, and a
member of one of the societies of reformation,
renewed the outcry against these seminaries of
debauchery. And in August of the same year the
Lord Mayor and Council of London refused to
let any booths or stalls at Bartholomew fair for
stage plays, acting, or lotteries. Cooper, who was
helping the constables of Westminster to arrest
some lewd women, was attacked by “several rude
soldiers who endeavoured to prevent it.” More
1 Reasons for limiting Bartholomew Fair to the three days
specified in the grant thereof, London, 1711, p. 9. In 1709 the
reformers succeeded in closing it for a season. See also The
Post Man, July 10-13, l 7° 3> P* 2 > col. 2 -


than a year afterwards a Gloucestershire man,
Thomas Cook by name, having been arrested in
Dublin, confessed to the murder, and was executed
(August 11, 1703). 1 Later the society appears to
have been successful in controlling the licentious-
ness and immorality at Bartholomew and Smith-
field fairs and at Mayfair. 2
This opened the way for a fresh attack upon
another quarter of contemporary debauchery and
profanity—the London stage. The reformers
had already prosecuted several actors and authors,
and tracts had been written on behalf of their
policy. 3 The Queen’s proclamation of December,
1704, appointing Sir John Vanbrugh and William
Congreve to form a new company of comedians
“ under stricter Government and regulations than
have been formerly . . . for the better reforming
the abuses and Immoralities of the Stage,” seemed
to point the way to better things. But, when a
new theatre was built in the Haymarket, and it
was known that Vanbrugh was to be its manager,
the society approached Tenison on the subject.
They pointed out that Vanbrugh had been
already prosecuted for one of his plays, “ The
1 This account is gathered from contemporary newspapers,
the Post Man and the Observator ; and also from the S.R.M.
account of its progress. (9th Edition.)
2 Help to a National Reformation (sth Edition, Lond., 1720) ;
also For God, or for Satan, being a Sermon preached ... by
Thomas Bray. Dec. 27, 1708. “The taking the Outworks
of Satan’s fortified Place among us,” p. 23.
3 A Humble Application to the Queen ... to suppress Play-
houses, [etc.], by John Feild, London, 1703.


Provoked Wife,” and after an attack on him in
the Lords by Fowler, Bishop of Gloucester, had
only been saved by influential patronage. 1 And
they asked the Primate to warn the Queen
against the author. In support of this they quote
several passages in his plays which they consider
objectionable :
You can’t take the oaths ; you’re a Jacobite !
Thou may’st as well say I can’t take Orders because
I am an Atheist !
And again
Alas ! my Lord, I’m the worst company in the world
at church, for I’m apt to mind the sermon or the prayers
or
One is strangely apt at church to mind what one
should not.
These are frank gibes, but the writers do not
mention the one passage in the play which really
touches the heart of the matter. Lady Brute
and Belinda are talking of their embarrassment,
whenever an obscene jest is made on the stage.
Belinda : For my part, I always take occasion to blow
my nose !
Lady B. : You must blow your nose half off, then, at
some plays.
Belinda : Why don’t some reformer or other beat them
for it ?
Lady B. : Because he is not so sure of our private
approbation as of our public thanks.
The plain truth was, and is, that the stage
reflects national manners. If the reformers
1 Both this play and The Relapse were attacked by Jeremy
Collier in 1698 in his Short View of the Stage.


wanted to raise the tone of the stage they would
have to raise the tone of contemporary London
life. Short of this there was no way of restrain-
ing the writing and acting of plays like those of
Wycherley, Congreve, and Vanbrugh, without
returning to a period like that of the rule of the
saints in 1656. And the most effective method
of raising the tone of contemporary life was the
educative way of the S.P.C.K., and not the policy
of frontal attacks on the results of evil principles. 1
But, in the eyes of the society, what constituted
profanity was not blasphemy and cursings, nor
even satire on sacred things, so much as openly
expressed doubts and questionings which we
should call liberal thought to-day. It was such
passages as the following which the letter to
Tenison attacked so fiercely. A modern parson
would feel called upon to argue them !
How I have loved to Heaven I appeal ; but Heaven
does not now permit that love no more.
Why does it, then, permit us life and thought ? Are
we deceived in its Omnipotence ? Is it reduced to find
its pleasures in its creatures ?
1 This is borne out by the prologue of another of the plays
of Vanbrugh —The False Friend. Only those comedies which
held the mirror up to the nation of the period were likely to
be patronized.
“ You dread Reformers of an impious age,
You awful cat-o’-nine-tails to the stage,
This once be just and in our cause engage ;
To gain your favour, we your rule obey,
And treat you with a moral piece to-day,
So moral we’re afraid ’twill damn the play ! ”


The attack did no good, for in 1705 a new
Italian opera-house was opened, Vanbrugh being
one of the promoters. It may have consoled the
reformers to know that Vanbrugh found it a
white elephant. 1
From now until the High Church reaction the
societies progressed normally and steadily. There
are virulent outbreaks in sermons now from one
side and now from another, which seem to show
that men’s attitudes to the societies were begin-
ning to be determined by their party-politics. 2
There was constant trouble with the military in
L
1 Cf. A Letter from several Members of the Society for Reforma-
tion of Manners to .. . Thomas . . . Archbishop of Canterbury ,
December loth, 1704. (Brit. Mus. 816. m, 22 (8)).
Also for this part of the work see A Representation of the
Impiety and Immorality of the English Stage , London, 1704.
Also Serious Reflections on the Scandalous Abuse and Effects of the
Stage: in a Sermon Trcach'd ... on Sunday the yth day of
January, 1704, by Arthur Bedford: Bristol: 1705. (Bodl.
Godw. Pamph. 1034.) Bedford afterwards wrote a treatise
against Church music complaining it had become “an
introduction to the playhouse.” This volume the S.P.C.K.
helped him to print in 1710. ( Vide MS, Abstract of
S.P.C.K. letters, 1708-11.) He writes, “A person who only
views the score of their music . . . may observe that when
there are soft chromatic notes joined with a flat key, in order
to strike gently on the passions . . . they are designed to
usher in something that is immodest.”
2 Cf. Plain English. A Sermon Preached ... on Monday ,
March 27, 1704, by William Bisset; and also Plain English made
Plainer. Being Remarks on Mr. Bisset's Scurrilous Sermon
. . • by a True Churchman, London, 1704. The tone of this
controversy is disgraceful.


London, who seem to have been extraordinarily
debased. They had already been the means of
furnishing the societies with one martyr, and, in
the near future, they were to repeat their bar-
barity. One of the society who had informed
against a soldier received a missive threatening
vengeance from him, which ran u Thou Immortal
Informing Dog, thy Days are Number’d, I’ll
surely be the death of thee ! ” 1
All through the period we hear nothing of
the Religious Societies of the capital at all,
and must conclude, since they begin to reappear
later, that they were quietly fulfilling their
functions in London. From the records of
the S.P.C.K., we can gather that they were being
formed from time to time in various parts of
the country, sometimes in connexion with the
Societies for Reformation of Manners, and
sometimes separately.
Early in 1709 the reformers suffered another
loss by the murder of John Dent, their second and
last martyr. Dent was connected with the society
from its earliest years. He too appears to have
been a constable. He had attempted to rescue
Cooper seven years earlier, at Mayfair, when that
officer was killed. The register of warrants for
the years from 1707 to 1709 shows him to have
been active in the duty of informing, 2 but he
appears to have done this so openly and bravely
that “ even his worst of Enemies . . . have been
1 Plain English, p. 37.
2 Cf. Rawl. MS. D. 1401, in the Bodleian.


heard to say, that they Believed him to act
therein, merely from Conscience.” 1 He was
murdered by three private soldiers, while en-
deavouring to effect an arrest in the vicinity of
a playhouse.
But the nation, whose twenty years of internal
peace had turned their thoughts towards the
improvement of manners, was now being caught
up in a reaction. The High Church party,
whose voice had been more or less smothered
since the Revolution, was beginning to lift its
head again. The Queen appointed some High
Church Bishops in 1707. In the same year the
terms of the Act of Union with Scotland seemed
to involve the doctrine of absolutely Erastian
control by the State over religion. The cry of
u Church in danger ” began to be raised. 2 The
notorious Sacheverell, three months before his
sermon to the City on the <{ Perils of False
Brethren,” bitterly attacked the reformers. 3
Naturally disliking this hybrid combination of
Churchmen and Dissenters, Sacheverell con-
demned them on High Church principles. He
also took the line that it is not our business to
1 The good Fight of Faith . . . Exemplified in a Sermon
preached ... on March 24, 1709, by Dr. Thomas Bray, at the
funeral of Mr. John Dent, from which and from Strype’s edition
of Stow’s Survey, London, 1720, vol. ii, Bk. v, p. 32, col. 2,
this account is compiled.
2 Alfred Plummer, Church of England in the Eighteenth
Century , p. 56, gives an excellent sketch of the position at
this time.
3 Derby Assize Sermon, August 15, 1709.


meddle with our neighbour’s sins except when
they are subversive of social morality. <c We
are certainly oblig’d,” he says, “in Charity to
bear always an hearty and tender Concern for our
Neighbour’s Good and Safety . . . But on the
other hand, . . . the same express Injunctions . . .
oblige us ... to the no less necessary Duties of
Peace , and Quietness . . . not to thrust ourselves
Pragmatically into his Business, or . . . under the
Sanctify d Pretence of Reformation of Manners , to
turn Informer . . . and arrogantly intrench upon
Others’ Christian Liberty . . . under the Shew
of Zeal and Purity , (the most infallible token of
a Dextrous and Refin d Hypocrite and Knave).” 1
All this is fair enough, but is it to the point ? Is
not sin always socially subversive ? And must
not Christians always combat it, even in the
individual ? And, whatever Sacheverell may have
thought about the reformers’ methods, he should
have remembered that they were based on the legal
principles which the Government chose to accept
as the basis of the contemporary laws against
immorality and profaneness. Further than this,
it was not politic for a preacher who prided
himself on his adhesion to the doctrines of non-
resistance thus to attack in an Assize Sermon
the laws which his “ divine sovereign ” had several
times supported by proclamations. Woodward
made this point with telling emphasis against
Sacheverell two years later, after the Tory
champion had so dramatically proclaimed the
1 Derby Assize Sermon, August 15, 1709, pp. 14, 15,


doctrine of loyalty and non-resistance at his
trial. 1
There can be little doubt that the Tory
reaction told against the societies’ influence.
From a total of 3,299 prosecutions in 1708,
they had fallen in the beginning of the reign
of George I to 2,571, and in 1716 the numbers
were considerably less than two thousand. Not
that this opposition was in any way official,
but it must have been strongly expressed in
indirect ways. The Government, which passed
an Act against occasional conformity, was not
likely to encourage associations which relied
upon dissenting help. There is no doubt that
the nation was still keenly alive to the ques-
tion of reformation, but it was, for the period
of this reaction, at any rate, ready to assist the
societies. It would be unfair to suppose that
the Tories of 1710-14 were ready to abandon all
philanthropical projects in their pursuit of High
Anglicanism. Convocation submitted a repre-
sentation in 17 11, in which the Lower House
deplored the low state of morality and the growth
of irreligion, but it also remarks that the private
endeavours which had been hitherto “ used to
stop the growth of this evil ” have been unsuc-
cessful. Later, the same body complains that the
only success which has attended the efforts to
enforce Sunday observance has been <c among the
1 The Judgment of the Reverend Dr. Henry Sacheverell
concerning the Societies for Reformation of Manners, by Josiah
Woodward, London, 1711.


meaner sort.” 1 A reference of this kind points
to the true cause of much of the prevailing
immorality. It was impossible to accomplish any
serious reform without ensuring that it affected
the upper classes, and so took away the example
of well-bred licentiousness that had such dire
effects. As may be expected, the subjoined
representation of the Upper House of Convoca-
tion particularly mentions the good work done
by the societies in combating the evil. 2 Evidently
most of the bishops were still ready to encourage
the “ mongrel combinations ” which the Church-
men shunned.
So too the Queen in the same year complained
that her proclamations on this subject had been
ineffectual, and ordered a stricter crusade to be
made. The strength of evil example is no less
patent to the Queen than to her clergy, for
she requests the magistrates to remember their
strict obligations, both public and private, in this
matter. 3
Another influence, besides the turns of the
political wheel, which was lessening the active
importance of the societies, was the establishment
of many other charitable institutions in London.
By these, men’s minds were drawn away from
1 A Representation of the Present State of Religion ... by a
joint Committee of both Houses of Convocation, 1711, pp. 4, 5.
2 Ibid.
3 Queen Anne’s letter to the Lord Keeper of the Seal,
October 22, 1711 (quoted in Appendix to Nelson’s Fasts and
Festivals').


the militant attitude in philanthropy to a more
benevolent aspect of it. The S.P.C.K. was
increasing its sphere of work every year, the
Society for Propagating the Gospel had been
founded in 1701, Bray’s designs for parochial
libraries were afoot, and the charity school
movement was growing. l
But the continuation of the immorality and
profaneness of the capital was to be sufficient
warrant for the existence of institutions like the
Societies for Reformation of Manners for some
time yet. 2 For the present, however, party spirit
was in the ascendant, and the societies did not
escape the evils of it. Men “ are transported by
the Spirit of a Party, and can think nothing well
done . . . but what takes its first Rise from
themselves, or their Leaders . . . and this is one
Cause why the Number and Power of those who
are hearty Friends to Virtue seems less than it is,
because they are divided on other accounts, and
each Party would have every thing of this sort
done in their own way, and are ready unseen
to reject the Methods proposed by those, whom
they look on, as their Adversaries.” 3
1 Ut infra (chap. vl).
2 The advertisements in the newspapers towards the end ot
Anne’s reign furnish very striking indirect evidence of the
moral callousness of the nation. Many of the advertisements
for lost property conclude with the significant phrase that, on
the return of the property, “no questions will be asked.” See
Spectator, Nos. 115, 216, 391, 414, 603, etc.
3 Reasons why Vice ought to be Punish'd, but is not: in a Sermon
preach'd at Maidston in Kent, At the Assizes . . . March the


Such was the condition of the movement
during the four last years of Anne’s reign. With
the advent of the Hanoverians and the uninter-
rupted Whig supremacy which followed it, we
might expect that the Societies for Reformation
would greatly flourish. We shall see, however,
in a later chapter, that this was not destined to
bring them into such an important position as
their supporters anticipated.
On the other hand, we find that the Tory
reaction tended to bring the older Religious
Societies into favour again. They were, at all
events, distinctively Anglican. But though, by
this means, their connexion with the reformers
tended to be severed, and a more purely devotional
aspect was given to the London Societies, yet the
change was not an unmixed good to them. For
they began to imbibe Jacobite principles, and
were patronized by the Nonjurors. 1 This was
not likely to recommend them to the new
Government, and, after the accession of George I,
we hear little of them in London until the
rise of the Methodists. That they did not
disappear, however, may be shown from the fact
that in 1737-40, in Wesley’s and Whitefield’s
Journals, we find mention of them as existing in
17th, lyof ... by John Johnson, London, 1708, p. 22.
(Bodl., Mason, AA. 430).
1 James Hutton tells us that his father, a Nonjuror, had
established a Religious Society in his own house in London
(Memoirs of lames Hutton, by Daniel Benham, London, 1856,
p. 9).


London. 1 But they clearly tended to be obnoxious
to the dominant Whig feeling in the City, and
the Primate later had cause to take steps to
prevent their disloyal tendencies from corrupting
the charity schools under their control. An early
Georgian view of them, which is not from an
antagonistic source, gives us a fair idea of their
state after the Queen’s death :
“ There are about forty of these societies in
and about London which are called the Religious
Societies, whose first institution was very laud-
able . . . and from that time that any of the
members of these societies discovered a dis-
affection to the present happy establishment,
they have been put under such regulations by
the authority and wisdom of his Grace of
Canterbury as ’tis hoped has put it out of
their power to propagate their disaffection.
And a particular regard has been had to the
Charity Schools under their influence, to oblige
their respective masters and mistresses to take
the Oaths to the Government.” 2
M
1 C. F. Secretan, in his Memoirs of the Life and Times of the
pious Robert Nelson, London, iB6O, appears to think (p. 96 n)
the societies perished in the irreligion of the Georgian period.
But the evidence of the Methodists’ journals and Hutton con-
futes this. See Appendix to Dr. Legg’s London Church Services,
p. 34, where the Religious Society at St. Giles’, Cripplegate,
is shown to have flourished as late as 1762 ; also cf. note I,
p. 195.
2 Secretary of S.P.C.K. to Mr. Thomas Bennett, near
Marshfield, Gloucester (from MS. letters to correspondents,
1708-32, in possession of the S.P.C.K.).


Both the societies which we have been consider-
ing have now passed their zenith of influence and
importance. We are now to follow the history
of the reforming societies through a gradual
decline to extinction before the first half of the
century was completed. And later we shall see
how the Religious Societies come to be caught
up with the Wesleyan movement. But, for the
present, let us look at the contemporary opinion
of the nation about these reformers. They had
created no small stir, and called down upon them-
selves plenty of criticism. As we shall see, that
criticism was as varied as it was representative.


CHAPTER IV.
CONTEMPORARY OPINIONS ABOUT THE
REFORMING SOCIETIES.
It is not to be expected that an institution em-
bracing Dissenters and Churchmen should not
meet with criticism during this period. And not
only was its basis of membership criticized, but
also we find violent opposition to its dictatorial
methods. Let us, however, first glance at the
evidence of the support the societies received
from their contemporaries.
Already it has been noticed that, as a general
rule, the Low Church bishops of the period were
inclined to encourage the societies. Tenison,
Compton, Kidder, and Fowler have already
appeared in former chapters in defence of their
objects and methods. 1 Of the contemporary
1 Cf. Tenison’s Letter to the Bishops of his Province, quoted in
chap, iii, and also E. Fowler (Bishop of Gloucester), Vindication.
Kidder’s name appears with those of eight other bishops in
the third edition of the Account of the Societies, 1699. See
also Henry Compton, Bishop of London, Eleventh Conference
with his Clergy, 1699-1700. London, 1704. The Bishop
of Chester, Nicolas Stratford, appears also to have been a strong


clergy, Drs. Bray, Stanhope, and Willis, as well
as a host of minor clergy, supported the move-
ment, as did many of the faithful laity of the
time. 1 Evelyn notices it with approval, 2 and
Dr. Josiah Woodward of Poplar was very active
in promoting it. 3 Bull, Bishop of St. Davids, is
also a friend to the societies. 4 There was also, of
course, the fanatical Stephens to be numbered
among the list as well as Mr. John Disney, whose
classic defence we shall have occasion to discuss
later.
The opposition to the societies fell into three
divisions—those who disagreed with the results
obtained, those who objected to the methods
employed, and those who took offence at the
union of Churchmen with Dissenters.
The first class are headed, curiously enough,
by Defoe and Swift, both of whom wrote on this
subject, and the conclusions of both writers are
remarkably similar. Defoe, who is indeed the best
representative of the view that we have already
supporter of the S.R.M. (Vide McClure, A Chapter in
English Church History, passim.)
1 See the List of Sermons in Appendix, No. 11.
2 Diary, March 24th, 1699-1700.
3 Besides his mention of the S.R.M, in his account of the
Religious Societies, he wrote many tracts for distribution by
the S.R.M., and afterwards by the S.P.C.K., e.g., A Short
Answer to the Objections against Informers ; Disswasive from the sin
of Drunkenness ; A Kind Caution to Trofane Swearers; A Rebuke
to the Sin of Uncleanness , etc. Most of these tracts are in the
British Museum.
4 See Life of Bull, by Robert Nelson, p. 366.


seen, urged that the only reformation which
could last would be a reformation which should
start from the top and work downwards. In
his “ Poor man’s plea in relation to all the
Proclamations, Declarations, Acts of Parliament,
etc., which have been, or shall be made, or pub-
lish’d for a Reformation of Manners” (1698),
he traces the present immorality to the Stuart
accession, and finds that only under William 111
and Mary is any attempt made to stop it. But
he disagrees with such attempts because these
laws are practically, though not theoretically,
different for rich and poor, who themselves are
just as wicked as each other. “Wherefore,”
says he, “till the Nobility, Gentry, Justices of
the Peace, and Clergy, will be pleased either to
reform their own Manners, and suppress their
own Immoralities, or find out some Method and
Power impartially to punish themselves when
guilty, we humbly crave Leave to object against
setting any Poor Man in the Stocks, or sending
them to the House of Correction for Immorali-
ties, as the most unequal and unjust way of
proceeding in the World” (p. 8). He says that
the community at large has learnt its vice from
the nobility and gentry, and that reformation can
only be learnt from the same examples. “ These
are all Cobweb Laws,” he writes, “ in which the
small Flies are catch’d and the great ones break
through ; ... we do not find the Rich Drunkard
carried before my Lord Mayor, nor a Swear-
ing Lewd Merchant” (p. 10). No project of


reformation is feasible while magistrates “ punish
a man for Drunkenness with a ‘ God damn him ,
set him in the Stocks' ” (p. n). So too the poor
man’s faults hurt himself, those of the rich man
hurt everybody, for “if my own Watch goes
false, it deceives me and none else; but if the
Town-Clock goes false, it deceives the whole
Parish” (p. 17). He has no sympathy with
the rich offender, and in two satires written in
1702-03, he is very bitter against that attitude
of mind which is represented to-day by vague
talk of the necessity of “ sowing wild oats ” :
[Shame] talks of Honour, Scandal of the Times,
Blushes at Reformation, not at Crimes.
He that offends, may ha’ been Vice’s Tool,
But to acknowledge, makes a Man a Fool,
Puts him quite out of Fashion in the Town,
And he that Once reforms is Twice undone*
Nor does it matter to that scathing pen whether
the offender be of the Establishment or a Dis-
senter :
The Bottle Conquers all his Reformation,
And makes Religion stoop to Inclination.
Lectures and Sermons he frequents by Day,
But yet comes home at Night too Drunk to Pray ;
is the picture he gives of the pious Dissenter.
But the Churchman does not escape :
1 More Reformation; a Satyr upon himself, pp. 4, 5. London,
1703. The name of the earlier Satire was Reformation of
Manners ; a Satyr, V# Vobis Hypocrite : 1702.


The Church may the Dissenters then despise,
When they themselves are free from men of Vice.
The Villain in his Heart will still be so
Tho’ he to Church or Conventicles go. 1
If it be objected that this is over statement and
only due to the bitterness of the author’s satire, it
may be pointed out that any satirist is under the
necessity of satirizing facts if he expects to have a
contemporary audience. And we have no reason
to think Defoe was here writing for posterity.
Indeed the earlier satire created such a hubbub
that, in his second attempt when defending him-
self, he notices this :
For if thou but a Hypocrite Describe,
The Clergy search for him among their Tribe.
If to Describe a Blockhead we Intend,
The Beaus take Arms, and think they’re all designed. 1
The only remedy Defoe has to offer for this
kind of thing is the reformation of the upper
classes. How that is to be done he does not
clearly indicate. But when we turn to Swift, who
describes a condition of things very similar, and
advocates the same remedy, we do find a more
or less constructive programme of reform. Swift,
unlike Defoe, was a Tory and a High Church-
man, but he was a politician because he was a
Churchman, and not a Churchman because he
1 More Reformation ; a Satyr upon himself, pp. 16, 17. Lon-
don, 1703.
2 Ibid., p. 38.


was a politician. l In his Project for the advance-
ment of Religion , and the Reformation of Manners
(1709) Swift insists upon the evil state of the
times and the need of reformation. The Army,
the Navy, the Universities, the women of England,
all want reforming. The magistrates accept
bribes from offenders, and “maintain, or at least
enrich, themselves by encouraging the grossest
immoralities ; to whom all the bawds of the
wards pay contribution for shelter and protection
from the laws.” The remedy for all this, in
Swift’s judgement, is the remedy which Boling-
broke advocated later for the political evils of his
time—the personal interference of the sovereign.
Anne poses in this work as an earlier “Patriot
Queen.” The reform is all to be effected by
administration. The Army and the Navy and the
Bench and the Clergy are only to be augmented
by persons of tried morals. The Sovereign is to
appoint censors for the stage, and personally to
discourage immorality in the professions and at
the Universities. So far the author has been
dealing with upper class immorality, but the same
broom of administrative reform is to cleanse the
haunts of vice among the lower classes. On the
positive side, more churches were to be built, and
London parishes were to be divided. 2 This was
1 See Lecky, Biographical Introduction to Swift’s Works (Bohn’s
Edition), pp. xxvi-xxx.
2 Lecky says this suggested the Act for building fifty
new churches, 7 Annas (Biographical Introduction, ut sup.,
p. xxviii), c.


undoubtedly a serious evil, and many contem-
porary writers complain of the under-staffing of
the London parishes, and of the enormous areas
that one clergyman was supposed to supervise. l
The negative remedies, suggested by Swift, are :
stricter supervision of taverns, prevention of
pernicious publications, refusal to allow women
in alehouses, and severer laws against bankruptcy.
Thus Swift, agreeing with Defoe, as to the main
features of the problem, goes further in the
direction of supplying remedies than his pre-
decessor. There is little doubt that this picture
of contemporary morals is not overdrawn, even
allowing for the fact that the pamphleteer is apt
to depict his own times as being much more
depraved than any which have preceded them. 2
But, it may be asked, What do these writers say
of the societies which are expressly formed to
combat this state of things ? Defoe, indeed, con-
demns them by implication. They are the
outcome of the legislation against vice, and it is
this legislation which allows the “ big flies to
break through the web.” The societies have
N
1 See particularly Robert Nelson’s Ways and Methods of
Doing Good, in his Address to Ter sons of Quality, pp. 105 and
142 et seqq.
2 For evidence to support Swift’s and Defoe’s view see the
newspapers of Queen Anne’s reign. The “ benefit of
plutocracy ” abuse appears to have been fairly obvious. Cf.
Athenian Mercury, vol. iii, nos. 3, 7 ; Article in the Tost Man,
March 24-26, 1702 ; Queen Anne’s letter to the Lord Keeper,
October 22nd, 1711 ; S.P.C.K. Minutes and Correspondence,
passim.


only perpetuated the punishment of smaller
offenders. Swift, writing ten years later, boldly
says, “ Religious Societies, though begun with
excellent intentions, and by persons of true piety,
are said, I know not whether truly or not, to
have dwindled into factious clubs and grown
a trade to enrich little knavish informers of the
meanest rank, such as common constables and
broken shop-keepers.”
This is more debatable ground, and really
introduces the objections made against the society
by those who disagreed with their methods rather
than their results. These objections are mainly
levelled at the practice of giving information. As
we have seen, the working of the societies largely
depended upon informers, and these informers’
names were generally kept secret. The Society of
Magistrates agreed to do this, and the parent
body directed each separate organization to adopt
the principle of secrecy both in their information
and in their debates. It was not to be wondered
at that this principle evoked vehement opposition
on all sides. Complaints are frequent throughout
the literature of the period, to the effect that
secret informing is an unworthy and dishonour-
able weapon to use, even against vice. It must
be remembered that such complaints would be
even more natural in this age than they would be
nowadays. For the Toleration Act had only
just put an end to the informations against con-
venticlers, and, more than this, the name of Titus
Oates, and all that he stood for, still stank in the


nostrils of contemporary England. But a most
serious charge against the informers of the
society was that they informed for profit. This
came from official sources as well as from purely
vicious ones. Onslow, in his notes to Burnet’s
History of My Own Time , in speaking of the
societies, remarks, u The lord chief justice Holt,
I have heard, was no friend to them. He did
not, as it was thought, approve of voluntary
combinations for putting laws into execution,
which often ran into violences and personal re-
venges, and other irregularities ; some persons
were too severely prosecuted, while others were
connived at. He had met, it is said, with several
instances of this, in the prosecutions carried on by
this society, upon bad informations from their
agents, called reforming constables, who seldom
acted upon principle, and were often corrupted.
He was, however, thought to be too much sharp-
ened in this matter, and against some good men,
who meant very well in it.” 1 A chief magistrate
is not a person likely to be well disposed towards
private attempts to enforce law, and probably
much of the opposition from the Bench came
from this feeling. But, if we are to trust Defoe
and Swift, many of the magistrates themselves
were not above suspicion, and their attitude to the
1 Vol. v, p. 18 [ii. 318]. Notice the extremely cautious
account of the judge’s views. This may point to a mis-
understanding of his real opinions. At any rate we can
imagine the scorn of a professional for such amateurs as the
S.R.M.


reformers may well have been bitter. 1 But of
the vituperation which was poured on the heads
of the informers by the more vicious of the age,
what shall we say ? Nothing was too slanderous
or too scurrilous to be charged against them.
Doggerel verses, satires, offensive notices in the
newspapers, and straightforward attacks on them,
are freely scattered through the years from 1691
to 1720 and afterwards. Here is a specimen
from a tract entitled The Invisible Observator :
“ Rascally Fellows that Cloak their Villanies with
Religion and bubble the Publick under pretence
of being a Religious-Informer .”
For the Maxim says, and true it is, or I may be
accurst,
That Cheat which hath Religions Cloak most certain is
the worst. 2
1 “Wild, debauched, hectoring Blades, who Swear, and
Drink, and Game ; whom, when you, Gentlemen, have
hunted from Bowling-Green to Tavern, to give Information
against Offenders, they shall Curse you for precise Phanatical
Dogs.” —Bissett, Plain English , p. 56.
2 London, S. Malthus, 1705. References to this class of
literature would fill a chapter—cf. “ What Charity can be
expected from such a miserable Congregation ; that for half a
Crown a Night, will run a whore hunting from Limehouse to
Tuttle-Street ; which is about Four Pence per Mile to seek
Customers for New-Prison and Bridewell.” (Plain English made
Plainer , 1704, p. 5.) Also, “The Great duty of Reformation
going forward in Fleet-street and the Strand by Eight, Com-
mitments made by Nine, and Justice’s Clerks plentifully daub’d
in the fist by Ten.” {The Dutch Prophet [November 26th,
typo].) This kind of thing went on for a long time. In
1725 we get a pamphlet entitled, A Letter from the Man in


The informers were defended from nearly
every pulpit in which a reforming parson was to
be found. All the sermons preached before the
society deny the charges vehemently. Disney,
in his reply to Sacheverell, states that in all his
personal experience (and he was a magistrate of
some standing) he had never actually met a case
of an informer belonging to the societies who
took a bribe. The annual reports of the societies
always ask for proof of such charges, and there
is no evidence that any was forthcoming. The
only actions at law in connexion with the move-
ment were on charges of false imprisonment, and
none of these seem to have been proved.
In regard to the general charges of the dis-
honourableness of informing most of the de-
fenders argue from the utilitarian point of view.
One specimen of this is sufficiently characteristic
to enable us to pass over the voluminous material
which was produced on behalf of it. It is from
The Case of Witnessing against Offenders face to face ,
considered , and was published by sanction of the
societies in 1704. The argument runs somewhat
in the following style :
If the laws are for the public good, then their
the Moon, to Mr. Anodyne Necklace, containing an account of a
Robbery committed in Hell . . . with several copies of private Com-
missions . . . and Memorandums of Pensions, etc.,paid to 'Pretended
Reformers for Secret Services. (Bodl. Pamph. 377.) This illus-
trates the general feeling against the S.R.M. perhaps better
than any of the others. It is a readable pamphlet, and must
have done the society some harm.


execution and not the manner of it is the main
thing to be considered. Moreover, vice is now
considered not as a crime but as a fashionable
practice. This must be stopped. As to secret
informations, the accused is not unjustly treated
by them, since, if he is guilty he deserves punish-
ment, and if he is innocent he can bring a charge
for restitution against the magistrate who signed
his warrant, and the informer’s name then must
come out. If a magistrate accepts information
only from approved persons, like members of the
societies, no harm will be done. And practically,
would it be worth while to issue a warrant and
try a case with witnesses for a fine of two
shillings ? For such offences the way that puts
the laws into force most effectually is the best
way. When Parliament allows a law to remain
on the statute book every good citizen must try
to enforce that law by every legitimate means.
Such a summary gives us an idea of the
defence which was made on behalf of informers.
It is the defence of Bacon for the Star Chamber,
of Strafford for his system, of Robespierre for
the reign of terror. Id maxime tenendum , quod
effectum maxime ohtineat , is the text from which
this apology is preached. We may condemn
some of these arguments as mere casuistry, but
we must admit that, when an apologist takes his
stand on this ground, our ultimate judgement of
the validity of his case must depend upon an
examination of contemporary circumstances. Salus
populi may be suprema lex , but if we acknowledge


this we must carefully determine what is the
position of the populus. This brings us back to
an examination of the statements of Defoe. But
Defoe in later years found reason to modify his
judgement. Writing in 1723 he remarks “I
find our Reformers, or Societies for Reformation
. . . very well employed in pursuing Scandalous
People, and such as keep disorderly Houses.” 1
And two years later, in considering the question
of contemporary degeneracy, he acknowledges
that, while there is a great deal of immorality in
London, it is not so much tolerated as in former
times. There are, he says, “no Stews allowed at
the Bankside, as was formerly the Case ... we
have no Statutes made for Limiting the number of
Bawdy Houses” [legalizing them by implication],
“and setting up a Sign at their Doors to have
them known by, or for restraining them to who,
and to who not, when and when not, how long
and how long not, any they should receive and
entertain, as Lodgers in their Houses.” And he
finds that no longer is encouragement held out
to the quality to sin if they be so disposed.
There are no Rochesters nor Sedleys ; “ the
Times are bad enough, God mend ’em ! But
not quite so bad yet, as those that went before
us.” 2 The testimony from a writer who had
been antagonistic to the societies in former
years seems to point to the fact that their
efforts had not been altogether without success.
1 William Lee, Daniel Defoe , London, 1869, vol. iii, p. 104.
2 Ibid., vol. iii, pp. 443-44.


And such success would justify the arguments
which are used to defend the employment of
informers. But, while such arguments may
convince us that the general defence of this
practice may be justified de facto , there does
not appear to be much evidence which would
contradict the earlier accusations of Defoe and
Swift. The societies, on the whole, were only
putting the laws into force among the lower
classes. As Defoe maintained, u the big flies ”
were breaking through, and “ only the little ones
were catched.” A sermon preached to the society
in 1697 explicitly recommends only the prosecu-
tion of social inferiors, since the prosecution of
those who are above the informer in the social
scale “is likely to do more hurt than good.” 1
And therefore this de facto ground of defence
must be shifted to include only the practice of
informing against the middle and lower classes as
a general rule. As such it will still be a question
of circumstances, and we must still decide, by
an examination of contemporary circumstances,
whether the practice is defensible or not. On
the whole, we may say that, while some amount
of bad feeling was raised by these methods, yet
the numbers of prosecutions and the remarks of
contemporary authors and newspapers seem to
show that some headway was made against vice
and immorality even if that headway was confined
to the lower classes of the nation.
1 A Sermon preached to the Societies for Reformation of Manners,
Nov, 15, 1697, by John Shower. London, 1698, p. 45.


Up till 1714 the societies did a good work
which was being neglected, and which offered an
opportunity for philanthropy —albeit of a some-
what militant type. They declined, through the
Georgian era, into extinction, and the causes for
this we shall see later. Upon the whole, it was
better for England that they should decline. But
until some effort was made by the State for
greater administrative zeal in the execution of
these particular laws, it was not a regrettable
thing that private citizens should assume a large
enough share of political responsibility to enable
these laws to be put into force. The societies
were really what we might call a device of
u interim politics,” which should last until the
State machinery should be reinvigorated and the
upper classes should become sensible of their
responsibility in this regard. The general failure
of the age, and it has been the failure of many
ages, before and since, was the refusal of the
majority of the upper classes to recognize any
bond of social obligation. Religion had not a
strong enough hold upon the nation at large to
induce the aristocracy and the plutocracy (for
trade interests were beginning to produce an
English aristocracy of achievement) to adopt for
their rule of life the motto “ Noblesse oblige.”
The Church and Dissent were too busy with
controversy to teach that privilege was duty and
that power meant ministration. Robert Nelson
spoke very straightly and very truly to the
quality about this. Speaking of charity he says,
o


“ The Great Errour the Generality of Christians
run into, in relation to this Vertue, is, That they
look upon it as a pure Piece of liberality , per-
formed to those to whom they owe nothing, and
from whom they expect nothing.” 1 And his
denunciation of this attitude is perhaps the best
indirect testimony we can have of the need of
some method to check the vice of the period at
its source, and to supply some means which the
societies could not supply of bringing home to
the idle rich some punishment for their evil
example and their continuous neglect.
“ If You do not do Good with Your Riches
. . . You use them . . . contrary to the Right
of the Poor ... It is the hungry Man’s
Bread You lock up in Your own Chests ; it is
his Food You consume in Riot and Gluttony,
it is the naked Man’s Cloathing You wear in
the Extravagancies of Your Apparel; and it
is the Prisoner’s Liberty that You throw
away at Your excessive Gaming and deep Play 2
. . . And yet dare You affirm that You love
Your Neighbour as Yourself?” 3
There is yet another class of objectors to the
societies whose objections are not based on any
grounds of legal fitness or moral necessity, but
rather upon theological principle. They contended
that the societies should not be supported, because
1 AddresTdo Tersons of Quality, p. 219.
2 Ibid., pp. 228-30. 3 Ibid., p. 237.


they encouraged a union of Churchmen and
Dissenters. One or two examples of this class
will suffice to show the general ground of such
objections.
William Nicolson, who afterwards became
Bishop of Carlisle, while he was Archdeacon of
that diocese, was brought into collision with the
Society for the Reformation of Manners which
was established in his cathedral city. A Mr.
Gilpin, together with the Mayor, and the Chan-
cellor of Carlisle, had set up this society in 1700.
Nicolson wrote to the Archbishop of York as
Primate, informing him of the establishment of
this society, and of another one in Brampton,
in Cumberland. The Chancellor had apparently
been encouraged by seeing his bishop’s name in
the preface of the account of the societies pub-
lished in the previous year. The Archdeacon
asks his Primate whether the book is genuine,
whether the Churchmen of the city are not ultra
vires in consorting with Dissenters, and whether
the organization of the society is not in contra-
vention of the Twelfth Canon, which forbids the
exercise of temporal authority by a magistrate in
matters of religion. He further objects that in
the Brampton Society already arrangements have
been made for a dissenting minister to preach
a weekly lecture. The Archbishop replied stating
the societies cannot be considered as conventicles,
and that many bishops heartily approve of them. 1
1 “ And so eagerly, in many places, are the minds of the
people set upon these new methods, that it may justly be


He further states that his policy is neither to
help nor to hinder them, and that the Bishop of
Carlisle must act on his own initiative in this
matter. Referring to the rules of the society
at Carlisle, which Nicolson had sent him, he says,
“ I must confess to you that if a Society was
entered into at York upon these articles, I should
neither give the members of it any disturbance,
nor any discouragement.” 1
Meantime Gilpin had been in correspondence
with the Bishop of Chester, Nicholas Stratford,
who had supported and patronized the societies
in his diocese. 2 Gilpin had been framing the
Carlisle organization upon the rules of the
Religious and not of the Reformation Societies.
So the Bishop sends him a copy of the specimen
agreement and of the prudential rules, which both
the parent Reformation Society and the S.P.C.K.
were now busily distributing. But the Bishop
of Carlisle, backed by his Archdeacon, had by this
time told the Carlisle Societies that he would
allow only such organizations as were composed
of members of the Established Church. There
the matter dropped as far as the official authorities
of the Church of England in Carlisle were con-
doubted whether it be in the Bishop’s power to stifle or
suppress these Societies, though he should use his utmost
endeavour to do it.” Letters ... to and from William Nicol-
son, D.D., ed. John Nicols, London, 1809, vol. i, p. 156.
1 Ibid., vol. i, p. 162.
2 “In my own Diocese, where I have already caused several
of the said Societies to be erected.” Ibid., vol. i, p. 171.


cerned. From Nicolson’s Correspondence we
gather that some of his friends approved of, and
some discouraged, the movement. Nicolson
himself appears to think the societies were
founded on the associations of Presbyterian and
Independent Ministers which were started during
the Great Rebellion, at Worcester, 1 and that these
“mongrel combinations” are “directly contrary to
our established constitution.” 2
Archbishop Sharp, of York, had already had
some experience of the societies before Nicolson
had sought his advice. A society formed at
Nottingham in 1697-98 had asked his permission
to preach a quarterly lecture. But he refused to
license this, giving as his reason that their rules
differed from those of the London Societies,
which Horneck founded and of which Dr. Wood-
ward had written, in that they admitted Dissenters.
Clearly the Archbishop was here confusing the
Reforming Societies and the Religious Societies.
He protests, however, that he is no enemy to
reformation of manners, and afterwards allows the
Nottingham Society to have their lecture on the
same day as the weekly lecture, “ so that it might
pass for one of those courses,” says his biographer. 3
1 Letters ... to and from William Nicolson, D.D., ed. John
Nicols, London, 1809, vol. i, p. 166.
2 Ibid., vol. i, p. 177. This account is compiled from the
published letters of Nicolson and from McClure, A Chapter
in English Church History.
3 Life of John Sharp, Archbishop of York, by his son, i. 179.
It is not clear what the weekly lecture here referred to was —
probably some course of sermons upon another subject.


This liberty he allowed to Societies for Reform
of Manners both at Nottingham and Hull, but
a society founded at York languished because
it could never obtain his patronage. 1 He also
refused to put his name to the account of the
societies, in 1699, although he had been asked
to do so. 2 His private opinion was that the
societies were in danger of infringing the Twelfth
and Seventy-fifth Canons as conventicles, but this
did not prevent him from saying that he would
not think the worse of any man for engaging in
them. 3 His attitude on the whole subject is well
summed up by his biographer when he remarks
that he was “as unwilling to oppose any useful
or commendable designs as to give any encourage-
ment to any uncanonical proceedings.” 4 But this
attitude could not have been distinctly unfavour-
able to this design, for both Disney and Wood-
ward quote him as a supporter of the movement
in their replies to Sacheverell.
The case of Sacheverell himself has already
been discussed. Though much fiercer than
Nicolson, his theoretical objections to the societies
were similar. But the doctor was much more
transported by party spirit than the Archdeacon.
1 Letters ... of William Nicolson, vol. i. “ His Grace’s
scruples must cease,” complained the members of this body ;
“if once his query was but put into plain English, viz.,
whether it be lawful for private persons to assist the magis-
trates by informations, etc. to put the laws into execution for
the suppressing vice” (p. 180).
2 Ibid., vol. i, p. 157. 3 Ibid., vol. i, p. 157.
4 Life of John Sharp, vol. i, p. 189.


He could find no good word at all for the
societies, whereas Nicolson, when he could be
sure of the thoroughbred Anglican character of
his audience, could even preach to them. 1
That attitude to the societies which is really
represented by Sacheverell is the political attitude
of Tory hatred to an institution that savoured of
Whiggism, which we have already examined.
Thus we get evidence of a good deal of oppo-
sition to the societies on various grounds
political, practical, ecclesiastical, and legal. The
very fact of their existence and activity in the
face of this would seem to indicate that they
were really fulfilling a want in the national life.
They were certainly inquisitorial and dictatorial,
but they were just as certainly honest and dis-
interested, though perhaps a little Whiggish.
They lasted, as we shall see, just so long as
the conditions which brought them into being
lasted.
But any account of the societies’ apologetics
would not be complete without a reference to
“the incomparable essays of Mr. John Disney.” 2
1 Sermon preacKd at Bow Church , on December 30, 1706, by
William [Nicolson], Bishop of Carlisle. He even calls the
founders of the movement “ Generous and Religious Heroes ”
(p. 28) and “Lights in the midst of a Crooked and perverse
Generation” (p. 31). It may well have happened that the
responsibility of a territorial episcopate had modified Nicol-
son’s views since 1700.
2 Robert Nelson’s title for him. Almost every writer on
the subject quotes these essays as the locus classicus of S.R.M.
defence.


Disney had a curious career. The son of a
Dissenter, he became an Anglican on his majority.
He was an efficient and impartial magistrate, but
was removed from the Commission in 1710,
though he was restored the next year. He
supported the reformers both on the bench and
with his pen. In 1719, at forty-two years of
age, he took Anglican Orders, and was Rector
of St. Mary’s, Nottingham, from 1722 till his
death in 1730. 1 He casts his essays into the
form of dialogues. The first is between Theo-
timus and Eugenius (who had just been made
a justice of the peace), and the argument takes
the form of discussion about the duties of this
office. The second is also in this form, and
once more the names of the disputants are
significant; Philaretus, defending the societies,
and Eulabes and Choristus finding fault with
them. In the course of the two essays every
conceivable objection against the administration
and organization of the societies is discussed,
besides a good many that are not conceivable.
And all are answered with more or less skill.
Most of the important objections have already
been noticed. For the rest we may say they
comprise social and religious, as well as legal
points. The great moral objection to the
practice of punishment through secret informa-
tion, i.e. that it does not tend to reform the
1 For his Life see the ‘Dictionary of National Biography. The
titles of his essays were simply An Essay upon the Execution of
the Laws against Immorality and Trofaneness.


offender, is not very convincingly treated.
Disney argues that a man will search for
arguments to justify his forced abstention from
vice, and eventually come to abjure it. Human
nature, indeed, would be much more likely to
kick against the pricks, and we feel the author
would have strengthened his position far more
by a plea of social necessity. A curious point
of view is opened up by the objector who is
afraid to lessen the revenue by decreasing the
drink trade. The argument that Dissenters
should not be mixed with Churchmen is treated
very ably, and with much common sense. The
societies, Disney argues, are companies for the
suppression of immorality and profaneness, and
as such they do not require an Anglican or
a dissenting principle of membership any more
than a trading company does. His contempt
for the magistrate who opposes any fellow
magistrate for doing his duty in this regard
strikes a good note, though his answer to the
dilemma of the tradespeople who fear to ruin
their livelihood by helping to inform is scarcely
practical. He bids them be consoled with the
thought that it is their duty. We can imagine
with what benignity of brow the figure of Duty
would appear to the miserable tradesman who
finds his customers deserting him and his
business in ruins.
Such specimens are enough to show the range
of the book. It is an ingenious and laborious
piece of work, and one is not surprised at the
p


position it assumed among the literature of the
subject. Yet it would not, perhaps, be unjust
to say that it was more likely to be a valuable
weapon in the hands of an already convinced
reformer than a persuasive to an antagonist to
change his ways.
On the whole, we may say that the objections
we have examined are very typical of the age
that produced them. They give us some idea
of the interest that the whole movement must
have evoked, and also they furnish evidence
that it was not confined to London, but had
spread all over England. This extension we
must now examine in some detail.


CHAPTER V.
THE SPREAD OF THE SOCIETIES.
The nature of the Societies for the Reformation
of Manners made it inevitable that they should
become proselytizing bodies. We noted that
one of the first acts of the original society had
been to distribute information about their pro-
ceedings all over England. Up till 1698 this
continued to be an important part of the society’s
work, but after that year, by the establishment
of the S.P.C.K., this branch of work passed
almost entirely into the hands of the new
society.
From 1699 onwards there are frequent refer-
ences in the S.P.C.K. minutes to lists of books
which are being sent out to its country corre-
spondents. And in these lists there appear
most of Woodward’s reformation tracts, the
same writer’s account of the religious societies,
cautions against swearing, gaming, drinking, etc.,
and also the books which the Society for the
Reformation of Manners themselves issued, such
as the Help to a National Reformation , the Account
of Reformation of Manners , the Abstract of the Penal


Lavas against Vice and Immorality , and so forth.
Thus gradually the propaganda work of the
reforming movement came to be done by the
S.P.C.K. What the reforming societies did in
this way was chiefly confined to London. Thus
in 1701 we hear that they had dispersed “above
thirty thousand printed Papers throughout all
the publick Houses in and about London and
Westminster.” 1 But the efforts which were
made to interest the country in this work were
mainly made by the S.P.C.K. Indeed as early
as 1701 we find a member of a Society for
Reformation at Bristol writing to the S.P.C.K.
and complaining that the Society for Reforma-
tion in London did not “hold a Correspondence
with all others in England and Wales in Order
to carry on the Work the better.” 2
It must not be supposed that the S.P.C.K.
advocated any distinct formation of societies for
reformation on the London model. ’ For the
S.P.C.K. was never aggressively militant to the
same degree as the reforming societies. Its
method of procedure may be gathered from the
various circular letters sent to its correspondents.
Having urged that the only remedy for the
prevailing immorality and vice was better
education, they proceed to outline a plan by
which such an end can be achieved. “The
first step will be to engage the clergy to meet
frequently together,” in accordance with Teni-
1 McClure, A Chapter in English Church History, p. 137.
2 Ibid., p. 335.


son’s circular letter of April, 1699. When
a clergy society is thus formed, they are to
endeavour to procure lay assistance to set up
charity schools, and to promote reformation
of manners. As early as October, 1699,
a minute to the effect of the advisability of
instructing the clergy to meet in societies of
this kind appears in the S.P.C.K. records. A
clergy society in Lincolnshire, formed in April,
1700, states in its preamble that it has been
formed “ for the more successful discharge of
our ministry, the promoting Christian Know-
ledge and Piety, and the Reformation of Man-
ners.” 1 As a result of this policy, we get local
associations of clergymen and laymen, whose
business it is both to set up charity schools and
to suppress offenders against the laws against
immorality and profaneness. Such associations
are generally referred to in the minutes of the
S.P.C.K. as “ clergy societies,” though sometimes
they are called only “ societies.” Though it is
part of their business to put the laws into
execution, they are not distinctively societies
for the reformation of manners. Very fre-
quently, however, the establishment of a reform-
ing society was the result of the rise of such
local associations, and we find distinct societies
for reformation spread all over England.
So, again, the Religious Societies were quite
separate from these clergy associations, though
they often existed side by side ; and Religious
1 S.P.C.K. private papers (Wanley MSS. XLIX).


Societies sprang from the formation of the
clerical bodies. It is necessary to remember
these three distinct types of associations, lest we
become confused. The Religious Societies in
the country never appear to have been caught
up, in any official capacity, with the reforming
bodies, as they were in London. And apart
from each of them stands the County Clergy
Society which helps both of the other organiza-
tions, but which owes its rise primarily to the
efforts of the S.P.C.K. in London.
It is evident, therefore, how greatly the spread
of the reform movement was due to the S.P.C.K.
and its policy. As the scope of the London
reforming societies narrowed down to the metro-
politan area, that of the younger organization
increased. But the latter never took the militant
line which characterized the former. Its methods
were persuasive (through education), and not
compulsory by means of threats ; and therefore
it is not surprising to find in the later lists of
books which the S.P.C.K. propose to send to
their country correspondents that much of the
distinctively reforming literature is omitted.
“Kind Cautions” and “Persuasives” still appear,
but not the “ Black Rolls,” nor any inflammatory
sermons, nor passionate defences of informers.
All this was to have its effect upon the older
organization, more especially as the charity
school movement grew and attention was con-
centrated upon this more attractive aspect of
philanthropy. Also, the nature of the S.P.C.K.


enabled it to go much further afield in the
dispersion of literature than the Society for the
Reformation of Manners could go. The soldiers
of the English and Irish Armies had tracts sent
to them, and the Chaplains of the Fleet were
carefully supplied with material for distribution
among the seamen. Nor did the society limit
itself to England. The Prussian Army and the
French Navy benefited by its efforts, and frequent
translations of its pamphlets were made in the
Welsh language. 1
It was chiefly from these efforts that the
reformation literature spread on the Continent
and in America, in both of which places the
principle of association was adopted freely. It
is proposed to notice such continental and
colonial associations first, and then to indicate
the spread of the society movement in Great
Britain and Ireland. And in this latter account
it will be well to keep the three kinds of societies
which existed quite distinct and separate.
It is not surprising that Professor Franck, of
Halle, in Saxony, should have warmly fostered
the society movement. In 1700 he writes that
the Account of the societies has been translated
into German, and that societies are being formed
1 The information in this chapter is mainly gathered from
Mr. McClure’s Chapter in English Church History, as well as
from MS. material in the Society’s Office, and contemporary
notices in the S.R.M. annual reports. Reference will only
be made henceforth in this chapter to sources other than
Mr. McClure’s publication.


in that country by this means. 1 Such societies
were, doubtless, general organizations for pro-
moting piety and suppressing disorder. They
also appear in Brussels, where we learn “ they
have very much suppressed the disorderly Houses
in Brussels . . . as . . . the Musick-Houses, which
were generally Houses of ill Fame in Amsterdam
in Holland A 2 The Account of the Societies 3
was also translated into the French and “ High
Dutch ” languages, and in Switzerland at Neuf-
chatel, Ztirich, St. Gall, Jais in Grisons ; and in
Holland and Denmark we have evidence of the
existence of the society movement. 4 As well as
this, several of Woodward’s tracts, especially his
a Soldier s Monitor , were translated into the Ger-
man, Russian, Swiss, and Swedish languages.
In Jamaica there was a flourishing organiza-
tion of clergy and laity called “A Society for
Reformation of Manners and the Propagation
of Christian Knowledge ” in the island, which
had the approval and support of Sir William
Beeston, the Governor of Jamaica. It met at
Spanish Town on the “ first day of each Grand
1 Cf. Woodward’s Account of the Religious Societies, chap, i,
p. 7.
2 Account of the Progress of Reformation of Manners, p, 4.
3 This would appear to be the account of the societies
compiled and published by the S.P.C.K. It contained in-
formation concerning the Religious and Reforming Societies,
and wherein they differed from the S.P.C.K. (See Appendix,
No. 1.)
4 Cf. Account of the Progress of Reformation of Manners,
PP- 5"7-


Court,” and corresponded regularly with the
S.P.C.K. in London. 1
In the American Colonies the movement was
taken up, and societies were formed for sup-
pressing disorders and for the service of religion.
In 1705 we hear that in Boston “there are also
Religious Societies without Number in this
Country that meet at proper Times to Pray
together, and repeat Sermons, and forward one
another in the Fear of God.” 2 The society
“ for suppressing disorders ” was so active and
useful, in Boston during the year of its formation
(1704), that by 1705 two other societies of
similar nature were established, “and not only
in Boston are such good Things done, and doing,
but in many Places in the Province besides.” 3
Turning from foreign and colonial associations
to those within the kingdom we find the three
types of societies already noted, in existence in
England and Wales. Ireland does not seem to
have produced any of the clergy societies, and
the main interest of the Scottish association
movements lies in the adaptation of the reforming
societies to the different laws which prevailed in
the northern kingdom.
I. Clergy Societies
The clergy societies, which we shall consider
first, are really more fitly described as general
Q
1 Cf. S.P.C.K. Records (Wanley MS., No. L).
3 Help to a National Reformation, sth Edition, p. 14. (Bodl.
Pamph. 265.) 3 Ibid., p. 15.


societies, since though they were generally started
by parsons lay help was nearly always a feature
of their more developed stages. They naturally
depended, in their inception, upon the good will
of the bishop of the diocese in which they were
started, and we find evidence that some of the
bishops withheld their approval and so retarded
the movement. Thus in Haverford West, in
Pembrokeshire, “ some scrupled the design for
want of the mandate of their diocesan.” 1
In Derbyshire, the promoters, not being suc-
cessful in obtaining the co-operation of their
bishop, suppressed his answer to their letter.
Bishop Trelawney, of Exeter, “was averse” to the
society attempted at Plymouth. On the other
hand the next Bishop of St. Davids—George
Bull—was particularly active in this work, and
encouraged both the clergy societies and those
definitely formed for reformation of manners. 2
And the saintly Wilson of Sodor and Man wrote
to the S.P.C.K. his full approbation of the design
of erecting these societies for education and
reformation.
One or two particulars of various societies may
be interesting before we pass on to those of the
other types. The clergy society in Lincolnshire
appears to be a typical organization. Its rules
1 The Diocesan in question was Thomas Watson, Bishop of
St. Davids, 1687-1705. Later a correspondent of the
S.P.C.K. from Carmarthen finds “ no discouragements but the
want of a good bishop which he heartily prays for.”
2 Cf. Life of Dr. George Hull, by Robert Nelson, p. 366.


show it to be divided into two sections which
meet alternately through the summer months in
the evening; there is a small regular subscription
to defray expenses, and Evensong is said before
each meeting. Members are cautioned u not to
lay too much stress upon men’s being of their
Societies,” and to be careful “ not to make them-
selves a party in the Church.” 1 The society in
Bedfordshire, the organization of which appears
to have served as a model for other associations,
appears to have been of the same nature except
that it was more frankly religious, and aimed at
getting the clergy to start Religious Societies of
some kind in their respective parishes.
Other correspondents of the S.P.C.K., on being
urged to form clergy and other societies, object
for the same reasons as we have earlier found
Defoe and Swift using against the reforming
societies in London. “ The Education of poor
children will go but a little way towards a
Reformation,” writes Mr. James Smith, of
Cottenham, Cambridgeshire, “ since Deism, pro-
phaneness, and irreligion, reign chiefly among
those of estates and titles.”
But, on the whole, the movement was taken
up fairly extensively, as may be seen from the
following brief table of the places where clergy
societies are known to have existed, outside
London :
In the Midlands.
At Stanford* and Maidenhead, in Berkshire.
1 S.P.C.K. Records, Wanley MSS. No. XLIX.


Bedford, and in Bedfordshire (a county
society).
Hallaton, in Leicestershire.
Lapworth and Harborough, in Warwickshire.
St. Albans.
Brampton and Northampton, in Northants.
Kimbolton (Hunts.).
Lynn,* in Norfolk.
Eye, in Suffolk.
In the South and South-West.
In Kent, and throughout Surrey.
Selsey, in Sussex.
Wiltshire (particularly at Longbridge Deverill,
which was very active on associative lines).
Exeter.
Trusham* and Hidon Clyst, in Devon.
In the West and Wales.
Alcester, Evesham, and Worcester (Worcester-
shire).
Cirencester and Gloucester* (Gloucestershire).
Bristol.
Chester and Wigan, and in Cheshire and
Lancashire.
Wrexham and Gresford, in Denbighshire.
Flintshire and Montgomeryshire.
Bangor.
Pembrokeshire (a county society).
Isle of Man.
In the North.
Derbyshire (in the county generally).


Lincolnshire (particularly Burton and Epworth).
Nottingham.
Guisborough and Cleveland, in Yorkshire.
Newcastle and Morpeth, in Northumberland. 1
11. Societies for the Reformation
of Manners.
The movement towards establishing Societies
for Reformation of Manners shows many of the
characteristics of that which we have just con-
sidered. We find, in the correspondence of the
S.P.C.K., many complaints of the extent to which
the presence of justices and magistrates, who are
not conscientious in this respect, is hindering the
formation of associations to check vice and
immorality. Also there appears the old outcry
against the evil example of the nobility and upper
classes which makes the reformers’ efforts fruit-
less. Yet there appeared to be a fairly extensive
“ Society ” movement in this direction, over
similar parts of England.
Before we proceed to tabulate the results of
such a movement, there are some particulars of
various places concerned in the movement which
illustrate the attitude of the nation towards it,
and the difficulties with which it had to contend.
Thus the society for reformation at Derby is
1 The evidence for the towns marked * has been gathered
from S.P.C.K. MSS. If local records could be examined
doubtless evidence of a much more detailed character could be
collected.


composed wholly of Dissenters, for “ the Church-
men refused to join with them.” And “they
meet with great discouragements, the justices
refusing to accept the printed warrants and
neglecting to record those who are convicted.” 1
As in the case of the clergy societies, the reform-
ing bodies of the country depended much upon
the countenance of the Bishop of the diocese.
We have already noted Nicholas Stratford,
Bishop of Chester, as a warm supporter of them,
and his letters to the S.P.C.K. during 1698 to
1702 confirm this. Somewhat conflicting accounts
are given of the Chester society. A corre-
spondent of William Nicolson, then Archdeacon
of Carlisle, says that the Dissenters who joined
the movement, “ fearing lest the people should
be drawn from them,” seceded from it because
their Anglican brethren suggested they should
take out licences from the Bishop in order to
preach reformation sermons. 2 But this is hardly
an impartial view. Matthew Henry, a dissenting
minister in Chester, tells a different story. From
him we gather that the movement was started by
the Bishop of Chester and Dr. Fog, the Dean, in
1698. At first, indeed, it proved to be somewhat
of a bond of union between the orthodox and the
Dissenters. Henry says of the Dean’s second
“ lecture ” for the cause ; “ Such Preaching against
Sin, and such Endeavours to suppress it, will
1 S.P.C.K. Abstract of Correspondence, No. 288, April
28 th, 1701.
2 Letters ... to and from William Nicolson, vol. i, p. 165.


contribute as much as anything to heal Differences
among those that fear God.” 1 Later than this, in
1700, the Churchmen openly requested the Dis-
senters to form a society “ in concert with” theirs. 2
But apparently there were not lacking some rigid
Anglicans in Chester who determined to make
capital for orthodoxy out of the affair. The
following extract shows the kind of trouble that
fell upon reformers all over England, and
especially when they were composed of members
of different religious bodies. “My brother
Hulton , on Lord’s day was Seven-night, observing
the Church Wardens of St. Peter j, with a strange
Minister, and others, go into Mr. Holland's Ale-
House, and sit there three Hours, told the Recorder
of it ; the Bishop came to hear of it, and Mr.
Hulton desired his Lordship to admonish them ;
they set light by the Bishop, and challenged the
Magistrates to fine them : whereupon Mr. Hulton
was summon’d to inform against them, and did
so, and they were fined, but were very abusive
to him.” 3 In the face of such apathy and oppo-
sition in official circles, the combined movement
appeared to languish in Chester. In September,
1701, Henry’s biographer tells us: “Every
Body saw where the Rebukes and the Lash
of the Laws fell; heavy Complaints were made,
that by these Means, the Enemies of the Church
were encouraged to expose and ruin the Friends
I W. Tong, An Account of the Life and Death of. Matthew
Henry , London, 1716, p. 244.
2 Ibid., p. 247. 3 Uid., p. 248.


of the Church for humane Frailties, that this must
needs produce Consequences that would make
all true Churchmen repent of it when it was
too late. . . . Prosecutions were very much
discouraged, and the Lectures not well at-
tended.” 1
Perhaps the most interesting Society for
Reformation was that which existed at Bristol.
Fortunately, an account of their actual society
has been preserved in their own minute-book,
now in the Bristol City Central Library. In
contrast to the organization at Chester, the
Bristol society appears to have been managed
chiefly by laymen, and so to have escaped many
slanders from bigoted sectarians. The minutes
last from March, 1699, with various breaks until
April, 1705, and there is also preserved a rough
account-sheet, which throws some light upon the
actual workings of such organizations. The
following sketch is really of the nature of a
running commentary on the minutes. 2
The society originated from a meeting in Sir
John Duddlestone’s house, on March 8, 1699.
It agreed to meet weekly to suppress immorality
1 W. Tong, 'An Account of the Life and Death of . . . Matthew
Henry, London, 1716, pp. 249, 250.
2 This minute-book is a folio MS., and may be seen at the
Bristol City Central Library. The records contained therein
comprise, for the most part, monthly meetings, from March,
1699, to August, 1701, September, 1701, to December, 1702,
and odd minutes throughout the years 1703-05. The rough
Account Sheet is for the year 1700.


and profaneness in terms of the King’s pro-
clamation. 1 It met at the Mint Workhouse. 2
A list of fifty-five members was drawn up,
including prominent members of the Common
Council and of the Corporation of the Poor at
Bristol. 3 This influential lay support meant
much for the society in its work, especially in
its deputations to the Mayor and Aldermen of the
city. A constitution was evolved, much after the
style of the London bodies. Deliberations were
to be secret, a subscription of half-a-crown a
quarter was levied on all members, 4 the prayers
of all members were asked, and the rules for
admission of new members, and for determining
vexed questions, were like those adopted in
London.
R
1 Ui sup., chap. iii.
2 An old house, converted in 1696 into the Bristol Mint,
when the Government determined to supplement the coinage
at the Tower by branch mints in some of the leading pro-
vincial towns. It was used as a mint till 1698, and then
passed into the hands of the corporation of the poor at Bristol
(the first body of Guardians formed in England). Several
prominent members of this corporation are included in the
list of the Bristol Society, so perhaps they lent the workhouse
to the S.R.M. for its meetings. (Cf. pamphlet —Dec. 5, 1901
—published by the Guardians of the Poor at Bristol.)
3 E.g. Sir John Duddlestone, Richard Bayly, William Bagly,
John Bachelor, and John Day. All of these were members of
the common council, and several of them held the office of
sheriff.
4 This is frequently referred to in the minutes as “Quarter-
age.” Constables were afterwards admitted as members of the
society on payment of one shilling.


The society soon arranged a regular Reforma-
tion Sermon, at St. Nicolas’, in the city, and
frequent notices of gratuities for the clerks and
curates of this church appear in the minutes. An
early clerical supporter was the Rev. Arthur
Bedford, whom we have already met as a corre-
spondent of the S.P.C.K. He afterwards intro-
duced the charity school project to the society.
Unlike other provincial societies, however, this
was only a secondary part of its work. Originally
formed to suppress vice it kept its character as
a Reforming Society, though it did much good
work for education in Bristol.
The society soon instituted a vigorous crusade
against gaming. A deputation waited on the
Mayor to suppress this practice at the great fair
at Easter time, and later efforts were made, under
Bedford’s supervision, to suppress stage plays,
music halls, lotteries, and gaming-houses ( Minutes ,
June 18, 1700). Sunday trading was vigorously
opposed, the proprietor of the Hotwells’ House
being requested “to give no waters out on
Sundays after 8 a.m., in summer, and 9 a.m.,
in winter, and to sell no intoxicants ” ; and, in
August, 1701, the society resolved “that Goody
Patrick, of St. James’ parish, is to be brought
to book for exposing fruit on the Sabbath day.” 1
There was a crusade against “ tippling,” and also
against those vagrant night-birds of the slums
1 In Aug., 1700, there is a protest to the Mayor and
Alderman against hackney cabs and ferry-boats plying on
Sundays.


I
s.
d.
Salaries (Messenger and Clerk) ....
Gratuities at St. Nicolas’ Church
4
11
o
3
11
6
Candles at Lectures
o
8
9
who “ live at their own hands.” Constables were
ordered to bring lists of persons in the several
parishes who “ lead an idle and disorderly life,”
and the gate-keepers of the city were instructed
to stop several persons who, “at very unseason-
able times of night, go in and out through the
gates of this city, and most of them supposed
not to be able to give a good account of so
doing.” The society apparently protected its own
members carefully. Mr. Bedford being slandered
by a certain Robert Lane, junior, a committee is
appointed to wait upon Alderman Lane to inform
him “ that this society resents the slander ”
(April 30, 1700). Constable Chapman, who loses
a suit which is brought against him by Morrice
Pritchard for his zeal in the performance of his
duty, is reimbursed to some extent. Certain
men employed by members to discover cases
of Sabbath-breaking are paid £l. 10 s. 6d ., on
April 8, 1701. In August, 1702, the society
receives, through Mr. Bedford, several books
and papers from the Reforming Society in
London ; but this is evidently Bedford’s work,
for most of the literature distributed by the
Bristol Society appears to have been published
in Bristol itself. Finally, the rough account of
expenditure during 1701 shows the following
items :


s.
d.
For 100 Summons 1
.... 0
12
0
Half-Hour Glass
.... 0
0
6
Mr. Tyndall—for 2 books
.... 0
8
0
Such a glimpse into the society’s minutes gives
us some idea of the ordinary procedure of such
associations in the provincial towns. In some
places, however, there appears to have been
considerable zeal for a reformation of manners,
though no societies actually existed. This is
notably the case in Durham. In 1701—02,
Archdeacon Booth, of Durham, writes to the
S.P.C.K., asking for an address to be prepared
which may be presented to the Bench of Justice
at Durham. This request was passed on to the
Society for the Reformation of Manners, who
prepared it—an instance of the close correspon-
dence of the two London societies. The Arch-
deacon’s visitation charges are full of pleas for
reformation, and the effect of this is seen in the
list of presentations by the Dunelm Grand Jury
for January, 1701-02, which contains accusations
against several persons for offences against
morality and decorum. But apparently his dio-
cesan will not encourage him, for, in a letter to
the S.P.C.K., in June, 1701, he complains that
there are no Societies for Reformation nor
1 These are evidently printed forms. They ran (cf. minutes
of Oct. I, 1700) ; “You are desired to meet the Society for
Reformation of Manners at the Mint Workhouse on Tuesday,
etc. . .


Clergy Societies in Durham, and he wishes some
one would stir up his Bishop to this work. 1
Afterwards some one apparently does “ stir the
Bishop up,” for we read of his severe charges
to the mayor and magistrates in this matter.
For the rest, the societies for reformation were
fairly scattered over England, as the following
list shows. Some of them appear to have been
county organizations, but, for the most part, they
belonged to particular towns :
In the North.
Morpeth, and Newcastle, and Alnwick (North-
umberland).
Carlisle (already noticed in an earlier chapter).
York.
Leeds.
Nantwich and Chester (and in Cheshire gener-
%).
Wigan, Warrington, and Liverpool (Lanca-
shire).
1 Nathaniel Lord Crewe was Bishop of Durham (1674-
1722). In April, 1701, the Order of Justices of the Peace at
the Quarter Sessions in Durham contained exhortations to put
into effect the reforming laws. When Booth sent this to the
S.P.C.K. he enclosed with it a list of queries touching the
subject of reformation. He asks “whether it would be pos-
sible to get a new Bill through the House against immorality ?
whether Sir John Phillips’ services to the cause might not be
rewarded with an official promotion ? and whether some
prudent clergymen might not be put into the Commission of
Peace in England and Wales?” (Cf. S.P.C.K. Records,
Wanley MS. No. XLV.)


Penrith (Cumberland).
Kendal (Westmoreland).
Derby.
Nottingham.
Hull.
In the Midlands.
Tam worth.
Bedfordshire.
Lapworth (Warwickshire).
Wendover 1 (and in Buckinghamshire generally).
Northampton.
Newbury and Reading.
Coventry.
Shrewsbury.
Leicester.
Norwich.
South and South-West.
In Kent generally, especially at Canterbury (ut
Infra).
Kingston in Surrey.
Longbridge Deverill (Wilts.).
Isle of Wight.
Bristol.
Portsmouth.
Lyme Regis (Dorset).
Shepton Mallet (Somersetshire).
Wales and the W°.st of England.
Gloucester (and in Gloucestershire generally).
1 Cf. Sermon ofThos. Penn to S.R.M. in ‘Such., Oct. 7, 1708.


Staffordshire (a large organization at Newcastle-
under-Lyme).
Kidderminster (Worcestershire).
Carmarthen. 1
Pembrokeshire (a county society).
Monmouthshire (a county society).
Bangor. 2
111. Religious Societies.
The Religious Societies, as well as the other
organizations we have discussed, profited very
much from the assistance of the S.P.C.K. The
larger society stood more in a parental relation to
these religious associations than to any of the
others. We can trace this by an examination of
the S.P.C.K. minutes. In June-July, 1700, it
appointed a committee to inspect their proceed-
ings, and, in answer to their questions, advised
them to continue the help which they had been
affording to the reforming societies by informing
against offenders. Also the Religious Societies
were advised to put themselves severally under
the control of their parish clergymen. This
policy was indicated to the S.P.C.K. early in that
year by Dr. Frank, one of their members, in a
body of proposals made to them. As the
1 Founded by Bishop Bull’s efforts. This society wrote to
the S.R.M. at Bristol for advice (vide MS. minutes of the
Bristol Society already quoted).
2 This list is compiled from various sources and references,
but mainly from S.P.C.K. records, both published and MS.


Religious Societies began to found and support
charity schools, the connexion became stronger.
We find the S.P.C.K. inspecting their orders
and distributing Woodward’s Abstract of Orders
for a Religious Society among their correspondents
in town and country. In December, 1702, the
larger society officially thanked Robert Nelson
for his vindication of the religious organizations
which appeared in his Companion to the Fasts and
Festivals , etc., published that year. Later, a
copy of this work was sent to the stewards of
the various Religious Societies at their quarterly
meeting. 1
As we have seen, the Religious Societies had
been in their foundation and practice distinctively
Anglican, but the good results they had obtained
induced some of the dissenting bodies to set up
Religious Societies of Protestant Dissenters. But
these do not seem to have come into existence
until after Anne’s death, 2 and there is no evidence
to suggest that they existed outside London at
all. Of the country bodies formed on the Angli-
can model, the most interesting was that at
Epworth, which Samuel Wesley, the father of
1 The Religious Societies of London and Westminster met
every quarter to hear a “ Society” sermon at Bow Church.
2 Vide A Sermon preached to a congregation of Dissenters on
Jan. xxxth, 1713, London, 1714 (Bodl. Pamph. 306), A
Sermon preach'd the XXVI 11th of May, 1718 , . . to a Society
of Trotestant Dissenters ... by S. Wright, London, 1718
(Pamph. 344, Godw. Pamph. 1004 (7), 1002 (14). (See
next chapter.)


the founder of Methodism, set up in 1702.
He wrote a long account of this to the S.P.C.K.
and it was afterwards printed and distributed
by them. This is specially interesting in view
of the fact that John Wesley himself ap-
parently intended his societies to be modelled
on such a plan, although the sequel proved
his failure.
In his account, the elder Wesley complains of
the debased and ignorant and vicious state of his
people. He resolved that reformation of manners
could only be secured by a better religious and
secular education, and to this end he set up a
society like that established at Old Romney, in
Kent, and described by Woodward in his account.
The first members were his choristers, and at the
first meeting they numbered eight persons. But
the movement quickly grew, and rules, as
suggested by Woodward, were adopted. They
met and subscribed weekly, communicated every
month, and spent their income and their spare
time in works of charity. A marked increase of
piety in the parish followed, and it was resolved
to set up a charity school, in order, as the founder
remarks, “to go a great way towards securing the
two generations.” This is very significant. It
was a repetition, on a small scale, in the Isle of
Axholme of what had taken place in the national
life. To combat the spiritual ignorance of the
masses, the Religious Societies had spontaneously
evolved, and after them the S.P.C.K. had arisen
to supply the secular education which the nation
s


lacked, and which was responsible for so much of
the prevailing vice and immorality. In the
Epworth case there is also the interim attempt to
deal with morals from the outside, corresponding
with the enterprise undertaken by the reforma-
tion societies on a large scale for the national life.
For the original Religious Society at Epworth
developed reformatory functions and endeavoured
to put into execution the laws against vice. In
fact the Epworth Society 1 represents the threefold
development of spiritual instruction and reforma-
tion, of inquisitorial coercion, and of education
and the reform from within, which is represented
in the national life by the establishment, in that
order, of the Societies for Religion, Reformation,
and Christian Knowledge, during the period from
1660 to 1714. And Wesley’s hint of “ securing
two Generations” 2 touches the real cause of the
decline of the reforming societies, and the con-
tinuance even in the face of a good deal of
difficulty, of the educative work of the S.P.C.K.
The society at Epworth proved popular enough
to form several smaller Religious Societies in the
neighbourhood. A rule that no society should
contain more than a dozen members helped this,
and the later societies devoted themselves purely
to devotional activity, leaving all questions of a
reformation of manners to the original body.
This body also attempted to remedy the defect
1 S. Wesley’s account is printed as a footnote in Mr.
McClure’s Chapter in English Church History, pp. 178—82.
T Ibid., p. 180.


which the absence of a central London Religious
Society caused, by trying to set up a correspon-
dence with other Religious Societies both in
England and Germany. One curious feature
deserves notice. “ They do not take in any
Women into these Societies, in order to avoid
scandal and all other abuses the more easily,
to which promiscuous meetings cannot but be
liable. Women may hear their Husbands at
Home and Girls their parents.” 1
But that not all the women of England were
content with second-hand devotional instructions
from their menfolk is proved by the existence of
a Religious Society for Women at Wolverhamp-
ton, “ started at their own request, and now
numbering over eighty females.” 2
In estimating the importance of the following
list it may be remembered that organizations like
the Religious Societies were not public in their
functions, and so much less likely to come into
prominence than bodies like the clergy and the
reformation societies. The societies also are
always town or parish, and never, as in the case
of the more public associations, county organiza-
tions. The towns in which they appear to have
flourished are appended. It will be noticed
that Kent has the largest number of societies.
1 See S. Wesley’s account in the footnote in Mr. McClure’s
Chapter in English Church History, p. 181.
2 Vide S.P.C.K. Records; MS. Abstract of Correspondence,
1711-14, No. 3799. There had already been started
a Religious Society for men in Wolverhampton.


Possibly this may have been due to its nearness
to the London models 1 :
In the North.
Newcastle (there appear to have been several in
this town).
Y ork.
Chester. 2
Nottingham.
Epworth.
In the Midlands.
Swaffham (Norfolk).
Ipswich (Suffolk),
Luton (Bedford).
Dunstable (Bedford).
St. Neots (Huntingdonshire).
Stanford (Berks).
Warwick.
Wolverhampton (Staffordshire).
In the West and Wales.
Gloucester.
Stroud (Gloucestershire),
Worcester.
Bath (Somerset).
1 The list is compiled from practically the same sources as
the two preceding lists.
2 “ Religious Societies compos’d both of Churchmen and
Dissenters” at Chester. (McClure, p. 342.)


South and South-West .
Canterbury
Old Romney
New Romney
Ashford
Lymne
Acryse
Gravesend
Greenwich
(Kent).
Lewes (Sussex).
Longbridge Deverill (Wilts.).
Much has been said of the connexion between
the S.P.C.K. and the other societies, especially in
the country. A MS. report exists in the
S.P.C.K. records describing a journey of John
Skeat and Thos. Morrison (agents of the society)
in August, 1701, which gives such a vivid and
contemporary picture of the whole movement
that it is worth while to reproduce it here 1 :
“We set out Friday, Aug. 15th for Canter-
bury, and next morning we arrived there, and
the same day we reached Dover, where we
fixed up a chain book at the Ship Tavern (the
place where passengers going and coming
from France resort to), and left a Help 2 and
papers of all sorts there. The Master of
the house returned many thanks for the favour
1 Vide S.P.C.K. Records. Wanley MSS. No. LII. The
report, as far as I know, has never been published. Its date is
Aug. 15, 1701.
2 i.e., the book called A Help to a National Reformation.


we had done him, and promised to use the
books and papers to the best advantage, and
seemed to be a very sober man. At the Lion,
which is the first post house, we left a Help,
and papers of all sorts, the like at Mr. Young’s,
Vintner, the Fountain, and at Mr. Richard’s
Coffee House, and at the George Tavern, at all
which places we are returned thanks for what
we had done, and all promised to show them
to their guests and to make a good use of
them. We understood the Mayor of the place
was a sober man, and that Mr. Mac Queen, the
Church Minister, was a pious good man, who,
we were assured, would encourage anything for
the promoting reformation. We had not oppor-
tunity of waiting on him, or the Mayor, but
have since sent them a packet. The same night
we returned to Canterbury. The next day
(being the Lord’s day), in the evening we visited
the Religious Society, which consists of about
30, who are men of religion, and meet in very
good order, and we required of them what pro-
gress they had made in relation to the School,
and they told us that they had raised a lecture-
sermon in order to promote the same, and
endeavoured at the same time to have a collec-
tion at the Church-doors, 1 which as yet they
could not effect by reason Mr. Braddock 2 was
1 Whitefield’s Journals show the London Societies still
adopting this practice later in the century.
2 Mr. John Braddock was S.P.C.K. correspondent for
Canterbury.


of a contrary opinion, which had hitherto
hindered their progress in that matter. They
told us that at Ipswich there was lately raised
a School of 40 boys which they clothed. Mr.
Lewis 1 likewise acquainted us that he had
made what progress he could in that matter,
but hitherto had no success, by reason of
many great obstructions he met with ; but
acquainted us that he had got several sub-
scriptions towards propagating the Gospel in
foreign plantations, and was in hopes of pro-
curing many more [so desired he might have
sent down 12 of the printed charters]. After-
wards we took out 2 or 3 officers to the public-
houses, and found 12 with company in them,
whereof one was a constable, and the next day
convicted them before the Mayor, where were
Mr. Alderman Gibbs and Dr. Taylor, a Justice
of the Peace for the County, both Churchmen
who were very well pleased with what we had
done, and when we came away they told us we
had done them a signal piece of service, for
which they returned us hearty thanks, and
assured us that nothing should hinder them
from following so good an example as we have
set them. 2
“ We presented to each of them one account
1 Mr. Lewis, of Acryse, in Kent ; also a corresponding
member of the S.P.C.K.
2 Lewis, writing to the S.P.C.K. six months earlier,
remarks : “ There is but one Society for Reformation at
Canterbury, and but two Justices that encourage the Design.”


of the progress in 4to gift, and several other
papers. Several of the offenders paid the
same day, we having warrants levying the
money which amounted to \Blank~\ ourselves, 1
and went with them to the execution of them.
We gave to Mr. Alderman Gibbs and Dr.
Taylor an account of those warrants which
were not with the Constables’ names, to whom
they were delivered,who promised faithfully to
have them put into execution. The whole city
was alarmed at our proceedings, and the same
night we met several of the constables, who
were mightily encouraged by what we had
done, and returned us thanks for the same,
and promised to take some of the members
belonging to the society out every Lord’s
day, to divide themselves over the whole city,
and to do as we had done, which we under-
stood, since by letter that they perform (and
the two above-mentioned justices go with them).
As to swearing, fruit being exposed for sale,
and barbers shaving on the Lord’s day, ’tis
almost suppressed, we not hearing an oath all
the while we were there, though we were in
several public-houses ; and, asking a barber if
he could come and shave on the Lord’s day,
he told us he durst not do it, being strictly
forbid by the Mayor.
“Tuesday the 19th we went to Wingham,
a town within five miles of Canterbury, where
1 The English is difficult ; but I have not attempted to put
it in order.


we met with several well-disposed men who
were ready to form themselves into the society,
and to whom we gave several papers and books,
and procured the fixing up a chain-book at
Mr. Richard Loughton’s, at the Sign of the
Dog, a place where the Justices of the Peace
meet thereabouts once a week, and left there
our Help and other papers of all sorts. When
we parted they seemed mightily affected with
what we said to them, and returned us hearty
thanks, and promised to do all that lay in their
powers. Wednesday the 20th we visited the
Reformation Society at Canterbury ; which
consists of about 40, most of them men of
substance, and some of them the chief in
the town. 1 They were very well pleased to
see us and glad for what we had done, and
promised, for the time to come, to be not so
remiss as formerly, but follow the example
we had set them, for they said, by our coming,
we had put new life into them. 2 We were
informed by them that Mr. Horn, near Canter-
bury, was a very hearty man for the reforma-
tion and had punished people for swearing
himself. We sent one account, one Help, two
Reformations and papers of all sorts to him, 3
T
1 Notice the implied contrast in social status between the
“ men of religion ” in the Religious Society and the “ men
of substance ” in the Reformation Society.
2 Apparently all the S.R.M. were liable to bursts of
enthusiasm and periods of lifelessness.
3 Abbreviated titles for well-known S.R.M. literature.


and the same to Mr. Mills a Justice of the
Peace. There we left, with our friends at
Canterbury, 3 chain-books and other papers,
with 12 packets for Mayors, etc., to dispose of
as they found occasion, which they promised to
do to the best advantage. They further told
us that Mr. Alderman Gibbs and Mr. Justice
Taylor were extraordinarily zealous in the work
of reformation, and went out several times to
observe and punish disorders on the Lord’s
day, etc. Thursday the 21st we set out at
Canterbury. At the Red Lion, an Inn at the
Spring, about 6 miles from Canterbury, we left
papers of all sorts. The man of the house
swore, and when he was rebuked and the
papers offered to him, told us he would take
’em if we were no fanaticks. For he said
a Justice made him pay for swearing who at
the same time offered him the same, which he
refused, as supposing him to be such. There
were at his house 2 Dragons, 1 to whom we
gave papers, and when it was told ’em one was
against swearing, which we feared soldiers were
much guilty of, they told us that indeed for-
merly they were, but now it was much abated.
That night we came to Gravesend, to the Post
house, where we met several that belongs to
the Religious Society, who were very glad of
our coming, as being in want of stirring-up,
and they all seemed ready to join in the work
of Reformation. We left one account to be
1 Dragoons.


chained up at the Post house and papers of all
sorts, and a Barber, to whom we gave a Black
List, promised to fix the same in his shop.
They told us that the Mayor was well inclined
and that he had lately made a Sea Captain pay
for swearing.”
“ There was likewise fixed up at Rochester,
Sittingham, and Chatham, one account in each
place and one Help and papers of all sorts,
with which the people of the houses were very
well pleased, and received it very kindly.” 1
So far we have followed the spread of the
movement only in England and Wales, but in
Ireland the associative principle had made some
progress. Religious Societies . had been estab-
lished in Dublin since 1693,2 and were soon
followed by the foundation of reform societies.
Both of them owed much to the activity and
charity of James Bonnell, the Accountant-General
of Ireland, who helped and subscribed to the
Reforming Societies, and was a director of one
of the Religious Societies in the Irish capital,
as well as their apologist in public. 3 The Reli-
gious Societies spread quickly. Ten existed in
Dublin by 1699, and others had been formed in
Kilkenny, Drogheda, Maynooth, etc. 4 The
1 The report is spelt and paragraphed exactly as in the MS.,
but I have altered some of the punctuations.
2 Cf. Life and Character of James Bonnell, by Wm. Hamilton,
London, 1703, p. 147. 3 Ibid., p. 147.
4 Account of the Societies for the Reformation of Manners (1699),
p. 17.


reformation movement was, however, keenest in
Dublin. In 1697 we learn that “last Lord's Day
. . . there were eight or nine Pounds levied in
Ale-Houses." 1 These societies were encouraged
by Archbishop King, and well supported by the
magistrates and clergy in Dublin. The parish
ministers of Dublin formed a kind of Clergy
Society for Reformation of Manners, and their
membership roll contained several Episcopal
names. And there were also Reforming as well
as Religious Societies outside Dublin in the
above-mentioned towns. 2
How far these societies were effective in check-
ing vice and immorality is not very certain.
Woodward praises their efforts, and the author
of The Account compares the progress in England
very unfavourably with that made in Ireland. 3
On the other hand, in 1712, we find both Houses
of Convocation complaining of “ impieties and
scandalous immoralities ” in Ireland, “so that
a Sense of the heinous and damning Nature of
them seems to be much worn out of the Minds
of Men.” 4 Probably the movement suffered
much in the same way as did the English move-
1 Woodward’s Account of the Religious Societies , p. 81.
2 Account of S.R.M. (1699), PP- x 7•
3 “Yea Ireland, as if blushing at engaging so late . . .
exceed your fervour.” Daniel Williams, A Sermon Trenched
at Salteds Hall, to the Societies for Reformation of Manners. May
16, 1698. London, 1698, leaf A 4.
4 Representation of the present State of Religion ... by both
Houses of Convocation in Ireland , Dublin, 1712, p. 18.


ment, from attacks from all quarters and for all
reasons. But Ireland was, after all, so far as
laws and administration were concerned, practi-
cally in similar case to England. And the
societies for reform, at all events, would be as
much the logical outcome of the laws against
vice and immorality on one side of St. George’s
Channel as on the other. When, however, we
cross the northern border of England at this
period we are faced with quite a different state
of affairs, and it is to the movement across the
Tweed that we must finally turn our attention
before we leave this question of the extension
of the society movement.
Outside London, perhaps the most interesting
of all the developments of the society movement
towards a reformation is to be found in Scotland.
But the position of affairs in Scotland at the end
of the seventeenth century was far different from
the position in England. In the northern king-
dom, as in the southern, specific legislation against
vice and immorality had been on the statute book
for one hundred and fifty years. Acts had been
passed during the reign of Mary of Scotland
against adultery, during the reign of James VI
against swearing ; and later, after the Restoration,
there had been Acts of Charles IPs Scottish Par-
liaments against blasphemy and cursing, drinking
and fornication. But the machinery of the law
was more extensive in Scotland than in England.
Where the English Acts were dependent for


execution upon the private citizen, the Scottish
Acts called in, as well, the power of the National
Church. The Act of 1672 (cap. 58) ordered
justices to punish any person delated to them
by the Kirk Sessions and other church officers,
as well as by nominated private citizens. By
another Act, in 1693, presbyteries were to
appoint supervisors who were to report on
breaches of the laws against immorality and
profaneness in their own districts, and who
were to receive remuneration for so doing from
the fines. In 1695 judges were warned to put
all these Acts strictly in force upon pain of
a penalty of Scots, which were to be
given to the poor. Then, in 1696, a retro-
spective Act was passed, reviving and extending
all former laws “against drunkenness, Sabbath-
breaking, swearing, fornication, uncleanness,
mocking and reproaching religion and the exer-
cise thereof, and generally all the laws made
against profaneness.” Further, this Act ordered
every sheriff, bailie, and magistrate, and their
“ deputes ” to be diligent in administering such
laws ; and it provided for the appointment of
a parish judge in parishes where an ordinary
magistrate did not reside, for the same purpose.
This appointment must be made by the magis-
trate, at the request of the heritors (landed
gentry) and Kirk Session ; or, if he fails, by the
Lords of Session. The justice’s clerk of this
special parish court of immorality was to be
paid from the fines collected. The Act also


recommends that informers should be encouraged
“ out of the fines,” the remainder to go to the
parochial collections for the poor. 1
Thus we see that the legislation of Scotland
was far more likely of itself to provide a check
to vice than was the contemporary English
legislation. But this was not all. Besides the
efforts of the supreme legislative authority there
were official attempts from subordinate legislatures
to enforce the same laws. Every year, from 1699
to 1705, Acts for suppressing immorality and vice
were passed by the Provost and Town Council
of Edinburgh. 2 In those sections dealing with
Sunday trading we get curious echoes of the
English Societies’ informal instructions to their
agents. 3 The town magistrates of Edinburgh
set aside two courts a week —on Mondays and
1 This information is gathered from the Acts of the Par-
liament of Scotland. See also A Letter from a Magistrate in the
Country ... to his Freind, etc., by Francis Grant. (Advo-
cates’ Library, Edinburgh. 4 0 (1701)).
2 Cf. Acts of the Town Council of the City of Edinburgh for
suppressing of Vice and Immorality, Edinburgh, 1742. An
Act of 1704 forbids drinking in taverns after 10 p.m, (p. 140).
In fact, there were three Acts concerning this subject passed
in 1704 (pp. 140, 143, 145). The book concludes with an
abstract of crimes, punishments, and penalties, much in the
style of the abstracts published by the S.R.M. in England.
3 The Barber of Edinburgh was apparently as much in
demand on Sundays as his London contemporary ; cf. “If
any Barber, or his Servants, shall be found carrying about,
from Place to Place, any of their Utensils for Trimming on the
said Day, they shall be holden and repute as guilty, and liable
to the Fine as above mentioned” (p. 130).


Fridays—to deal with these cases, and “for the
encouragement of such as should delate l the
guilty they were to have the third part of the
fines as a reward.” 2
Also the National Church was awake to its
responsibilities in this matter. In 1697 and
1699 the General Assembly of the Kirk issued
a commission not only urging, but commanding,
all ministers and members of the Kirk Sessions
to inform diligently, on pain of censure and even
of suspension, not only against offenders against
these laws, but also against magistrates who were
unwilling to proceed against such offenders. 3
Besides such public bodies there also existed
in Edinburgh a semi-public institution called the
High Constables of Edinburgh. By the end of
the seventeenth century they were really a sepa-
rate society, with rules and orders of their own ;
and they seemed to have taken to themselves
a personal responsibility for the execution of
the laws, which practically made them a society
for reformation of manners. They administered
the legislation of the Town Council with great
zeal, and enforced the Act of 1696 very strictly. 4
Thus we find in Scotland, at the end of the
1 “ Delate : verb Scots =to accuse judicially before a
court —to inform against.” ( English Dialect Dictionary,
s.v. Delate.)
2 Cf. Sir F. Grant’s Letter, etc. ( ut supra).
3 Ibid.
4 Cf. History of the High Constables of Edinburgh, by J. D.
Marwick, printed for private circulation: 1865, pp, 152
el seqq.


seventeenth century, a much more effective
system of enforcing the laws against the vicious
and profane than existed in England. The Par-
liament made special provision for enforcement
of its Acts, and this was backed up by the efforts
of Town Councils, 1 of the General Assembly,
and of the Constables’ Society of the capital.
Yet, apparently, the morals of the northern
kingdom were still in evil plight. The preamble
to the Act of 1696 considers with alarm “how
much immorality and profanity do abound over
all the nation.” The Town Council speaks of
Edinburgh in much the same terms. A private
witness, David Hume, Lord Crossrig, speaking
in 1700, says, “ I had for several years observed
the growth of profanity . . ~ and that it was
come to a great hight.” 2 Officially, indeed,
Scotland’s face was uncompromisingly set against
immorality and profaneness to an extent which
was undreamed of, even amid the English
societies. Sabbath-breaking was particularly
anathematized. “ Sabbath was the special day
of the week when every act and moment of
existence were watched ; the doing of any work,
the indulgence of the slightest recreation, was
u
1 We find counterparts of the Edinburgh laws in the con-
temporary legislation of most of the larger burghs in Scotland.
Cf. MacGregor’s History of Glasgow, 1881, p. 273 ; Samuel
Corvan’s Ancient Capital of Scotland, 1904 ; William Chambers,
History of Peeblesshire, 1864, p. 216; William MacDowall’s
History of Dumfries, 1867.
2 Domestic Details, by Sir David Hume of Crossrig. Edin-
burgh, 1843, p. 66.


forbidden ; the vaguing or loitering on the
streets or on the Castle Hill, the mere gazing
idly out of windows, was a subject of condemna-
tion and occasion of threats of discipline by Kirk
Sessions, or fine by magistrates.” 1 An author,
writing early in the nineteenth century, is horrified
at the severity of Church discipline before 1700.
“ Searchers, . . . generally elders of the church,
escorted by a guard of soldiers, were appointed
by the session to go through the town during
divine service on Sunday, to . . . imprison all
. . . persons, under whatever circumstances, who
were found walking either on the streets, on the
pier, or on the Links.” 2
The first Society for the Reformation of
Manners appears to have had its genesis in a
kind of Religious Society, and it was a member
of this —David Hume, Lord Crossrig —who was
the parent of the movement in Scotland. He
tells the story thus :
“While I lived in Edinburgh I had been a
member of a societie that mett every Mundayes
1 H. Grey Graham, Social Life in Scotland in the Eighteenth
Century , p. 92.
2 History of Leith , by Alexander Campbell, 1827, p. 319.
Later this author instances the case of a man who was caught
by the searchers on Sunday morning, in the very act of eating
radishes out of his own garden. When asked what time he
thought it was, he artlessly replied, “ About the close of the
sermon,” a reply which was held to convict him out of his
own mouth. So he was haled before the Kirk Session, but
dismissed on his plea of a first offence and a promise never
to repeat It (p. 320).


afternoon for prayer and conference, I did
often regrate to some of that societie yet alive,
that there were not now such meetings.”
“It happened some years agoe, that I
understood, by the flying post, there were
societies set up in England for reformation
of manners, and that there was an account of
them coming out. This was very pleasant
news to me, and I was very desirous to see
such a book.
“In the month of Sept r . (as 1 remember)
1699, 1 was in Mrs. Ogston’s shop, where I fell
on a book with that title, recommended by
many Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Judges
of England. The book I bought, and read with
great satisfaction. 1
“ Some weeks thereafter, in Oct., 99, Mr.
G. Meldrum, minister, being at my house,
occasion having fairly offered it self, I told him
there were societies in England for reformation
of manners ; that I had a book that gave account
of them, and I wished there were such societies
in Scotland, and I would be satisfied to join in
them. He did heartily wish the same, and
having heard of the book, desired a loan of
it, which I did give him. I told him, if he
knew any willing to join, I wished he might
be active in exhorting them to it, and said
he had a nephew, Mr. Francis Grant, 2 who,
1 This is evidently the Account of the S.R.M. of 1699.
2 Afterwards Sir Francis Grant, advocate. He wrote the
above-mentioned Letter from a Magistrate and several other


I supposed, might join, and wished him to
acquaint him therewith, which Mr. Meldrum
undertook to do, and within a week or so sent
Mr. Grant to me with the book. We conferred
together on the proposal, to which he did aggrie,
and undertook both of us to speak with some
others, which resolved in a meeting at my
house, on Friday, Nov r . 3, 1699, where
were present, Mr. Francis Grant, Mr. Robert
Alexander, clerk, Mr. William Brodie, ad-
vocate, Mr. Matthew Sinclair, and Mr.
Alex r . Dundass, physitians, and I think
James Row of Chesters, and Baillie Hugh
Cunninghame. 1 We conferred some time, and
appointed next meeting the morrow forenoon,
at Mr. Meldrum’s lodging, where having con-
ferred again about qualifications of members,
and of acquainting other ministers of the town,
we appointed next meeting to be at my house,
on Saturday, Nov r . 11, at 4 a clock, afternoon,
pieces of S.R.M. literature for Scotland. He was always
a keen protagonist for the Scotch Societies,
1 Several of those names appear in the account of the
Praying Society (from which this society sprang) which appears
in Wodrow’s jlnalecta , vol. iv, p. 235 ; “He (Mr. John
Dundas) and Niccol Spence, . . . with Sir H. Cuningham, Sir
Francis Grant, afterward Lord Cullen, James Steuart, Clerk of
Edinburgh, Commissar Broady, Dr Dundas, Sir Francis
Pringle, Mr George Meldrum, and some others, wer members
of a Praying Society . . . about the 1698. . . . This privat
meeting laid the foundation of that noble designe of reforma-
tion of manners in King William’s time, and Queen Ann’s
time, that did so much good,”


and so on every Saturday, till we had our rules
put in a dress and approven of by the minis-
ters. 1 There was a book of 3or 4 quares of
paper, in which the rules and monitory was
insert, and which was signed by all of us on
the 3 of Feb., 1700, the same night in which
the fire happened. 2
“This is the thing I remark as notable,
which presently was a rebuke to some of us
for some fault in our solemn engadgement
there, and probably Satan blew that fire to
witness his indignation at a societie designedly
entered into in opposition to the Kingdom of
Darkness, and in hopes that such an occurrence
should dash our societie in its infancy, and
discourage us to proceed therein. However,
blessed be God, all who then mett have
continued stedfast ever since, and our number
hath encreased, except only that Dr. Sinclair,
several weeks before the fire, did forbear to
come to us, and we have had many meetings
since that time, even during the three months
that I lived at the Earl of Winton’s lodging
in the Canongate, and more frequently since
I came again to dwell in the city, except where
1 This practice of getting the supervision of local ministers
in the formation of parish S.R.M. was urged later by Grant in
his letter (cf. above).
2 A disastrous fire occurred at Edinburgh in the Parliament
Close and the Cowgate on February 3, 1700. The Lord
Provost and Baillies officially said it was a judgement on the
town’s wickedness.


the meetings of Parliament have fallen on the
days of our meeting. Likeas, there are several
other societies of the same nature set up in
this city ; and we have received the encourage-
ment of the General Assembly and commission
thereof, tho’ in general terms. Thus I may
say, has God carried on his own holy designs,
maugre the malice of Satan, as in the case
of Job.” i
Such was the foundation of the first Society in
Scotland for the Reformation of Manners. As
we have seen, the movement was much more
in line with the general trend of public opinion
than it was in England. The Kirk discipline
helped to enforce the civil laws there ; the statutes
of the realm provided efficient machinery in the
shape of parish judges ; the magistrates were liable,
not only, as in England, to censure, but to fines
for refusing to prosecute offenders ; and the
municipal corporations had appointed special
courts to try these offences. Yet while these
things constituted the strength of the movement,
they also constituted its weakness.
As far as organization went, the societies were
much simpler in detail than the English ones,
if we are to judge from the suggestions given
in Grant’s letter for their formation. He only
suggests that they should begin and end with
prayer, do nothing without the advice and super-
vision of the Kirk ministers, and be careful not
1 Domestic Details by Sir David Hume, pp. 67-71.


to serve private interests in their prosecutions.
There was, of course, no need for the elaborate
system of agencies and printed warrants in
a country where the machinery of the law pro-
vided for rapid conviction of offenders, and made
smooth the path of the informer. Also there was
not in the Scot of the period the same passion
for constitution-making which distinguished his
southern neighbour. The great question in
Scotland, as in England, was the question of the
informer receiving a share of the fine. If we
are to judge from the apologists for the northern
societies, this was the normal practice, for they
always defend it. 1 It is quite conceivable that
the weight of religious and municipal authority
behind the practice cleared it of much of the
odium which it excited in England.
There does not appear to be such an output
of distinctive reformation literature as there was
in England, though the ordinary proselytizing
works propagated by the societies and the
S.P.C.K., in England, appear to have found their
1 Cf. d Private Letter asserting the lawfulness of informing
against the Vicious and Profane , by Geo. Meldrum (Edinburgh,
1701) (Advocates’ Library Pamph. 411).
A Discourse concerning the Execution of the Laws made against
Profaneness, by Sir F. Grant (Edinburgh, Bvo, 1700) (Advocates’
Library).
Vindication of Informers, etc, [by Sir F. Grant], Edinburgh,
1701.
I have not found any attacks upon this practice in Scotland
at all except vague references in sermons to the opposition
against informers.


way across the border. l One of the Scottish
apologists hit upon a novel argument to stir his
countrymen towards reformation. He says,
“ Hereby we come behind our neighbour nations
of England and Ireland. . . . The Reformation
of the Church of Scotland in doctrine, worship,
discipline, and government hath been and is
much talked of in foreign nations. But is it
not a shame that . . . Reformation of Manners
should be neglected among us, and that in this
we should be outstript by those that come short
of us in reformation in other things.” 2
In 1701 the cause was helped by the passing
of further Acts by the Scottish Parliament, and
the Council of Edinburgh. The preamble to the
former contained an encouraging commendation
of the societies, though it was not passed without
trouble, several earls objecting to it on account
of the power it gave to the Kirk Sessions, and
finally succeeding in getting it revised. 3 The
commendation of the General Assembly, in 1700,
had brought the societies into notice among the
various country districts, the Synods of Lothian
and Tweeddale following the example of the
1 In a list at the end of Grant’s letter the ordinarily
circulated tracts of Woodward and Disney, black lists, and
presentations of grand juries are to be found.
2 d Discourse of Suppressing Vice , etc., by W. Wishart,
Minister of the Church at Leith, 64 pp. (Edinburgh, 1702)
(Advocates’ Library).
3 Cf. Jt Diary of the Proceedings of Parliament and of the
Privy Council of Scotland , 1700-07, by Sir David Hume, of
Crossrig, p. 42.


Edinburgh Presbytery in supporting them. In
1701-02 there were thirteen of the societies in
Edinburgh alone. 1 The societies seem to have
gone on doing their work with more or less
success. In 1708 appeared Queen Anne’s pro-
clamation for the encouragement of piety and
virtue, which cited all the laws and statutes
against vicious and profane persons, and com-
mended the enforcement of this legislation to
the nation. 2 In 1712 the Reformation Societies
asked the assistance of the Society of High
Constables in Edinburgh, and henceforward a
delegate from the latter body assisted them at
their monthly meetings. 3 But the chief work
which the societies accomplished was the intro-
duction of the S.P.C.K. into Scotland. The
prominent members of the societies drew up
proposals for voluntary subscriptions, and, with
the General Assembly’s permission, sent them
to all the presbyteries of Scotland. And then,
having drawn up a charter, they succeeded in
getting the Queen to grant it, and thus “ they
gave the first beginnings to the Society for
the Propagating of Christian Knowledge and
X
1 An Account of the Progress of Reformation of Manners in
England, etc. (London, 1702).
2 The text of the proclamation appears in an appendix to
a volume called Act of the Town Council of Edinburgh for suppress-
ing Vice and Trofaneness, Edinburgh, 1709 (in the Free Public
Library at Edinburgh).
3 J, D. Marwick, History of the High Constables of Edinburgh,
p. 159.


Reformation of the Highlands and Islands which
has come to so great a length.” 1
But, despite these successes, the societies in
Scotland appear to have languished. Contem-
porary accounts of the decade from 1720 to
1730 show an increasing state of immorality.
Atheistical and Deistical Clubs abound in Edin-
burgh and Glasgow ; the gentry failed, as they
did in England, to set a good example of restraint
and piety, and “ a flood of impurity ” prevailed. 2
It is not remarkable, however, that the societies
in Scotland should have come to a comparatively
early end. What was wanted in Scotland as well
as England was a thorough reformation in the
hearts and minds of the people, and that could
come, in the last resort, only by the attainment
of a new point of view about vice and immorality.
The future reformation lay in the north and
in the south, with the spread of education, and
in setting up the charity schools in the Highlands
and Islands the Reforming Societies did a greater
work than anything they may have accomplished
by executing the laws against vice. But even
this latter duty was never so urgent, even as
a matter of interim politics, in Scotland as it was
1 Wodrow’s Analecta, vol. iv, p. 235 ; also see Account of
the S.P.C.K. in Scotland (Pamph. 593, Advocates’ Library).
A sketch of the rise of the movement in Scotland is given in
History of the S.P.C.K., by Allen and McClure (1898), p. 123.
2 See Wodrow’s Correspondence, vol. iii, p. 324 ; and the
same writer’s Analecta, vol. iii, pp. 309, 432 ; and vol. iv,
p. 3 1 , etc.


in England. For the very machinery of parish
judges and municipal controls and Church censure,
which aided the movement, was ultimately the
means of its becoming moribund. It was not
such a pressing question in Edinburgh to find
means for the execution of laws, as it was in
London ; and a private society, though it may
have been regarded as less inquisitorial under
these circumstances, would have far less real
justification for existence. It is not surprising,
therefore, to find that references to the societies
gradually disappear from 1708. Later, indeed,
there was a renaissance of the movement in
Edinburgh. In 1742 a Reforming Society was
set up in the town, upon traditional lines, and
appears to have flourished for a few years. 1 But
the time for private interference with State laws
was past. The age was not suitable for such
a revival, and again the society passed out of
existence. Philanthropy had become suspect in
this militant guise, and was forced to assume
a more benevolent and less Puritanic dress.
1 Cf. Scots’ Magazine, December, 1742.


CHAPTER VI.
OTHER RELIGIOUS AND PHILANTHROPIC
ASSOCIATIONS OF THE PERIOD.
It may be stated at the outset that any con-
sideration of the various other religious and
philanthropic attempts made during this period
is necessarily incomplete, and must partake more
of the nature of a catalogue than a history.
Many of them were large and important under-
takings, and their history has been separately
written. Others are bound up with the life of
their promoters, and have been considered in this
relation. Some of them were public and were
promoted by Parliament, and therefore find their
place in larger histories of the period. And
others, again, were so small and of such incon-
siderable importance that references to them in
contemporary records do not supply enough
material to enable them to be accurately presented
here.
The associative principle had attracted various
people in the latter part of the seventeenth
century, and we find suggestions for societies of


various kinds in the writings of most diverse
characters. John Evelyn, as early as 1659, was
playing with the idea of a corporate foundation
for the better pursuit of science and religious
learning. His society was to consist of six
persons who were to eat and to take recreation
in common, but to work and sleep in separate
cells. There were to be daily prayers, a weekly
fast, and a fortnightly Holy Communion. One
month every year was to be spent away from the
society, generally at the universities, and the
funds were to be supplied by common subscrip-
tions. But the proposal does not seem to have
met with any success. 1
About 1687-88 Edward Stephens, whom we
have already had occasion to notice, founded his
private society for daily participation in the
Eucharist. This flourished for seven or eight
years until the multifarious interests of that
gentleman took his attention away to other
schemes. 2
In 1694 there appeared from the pen of Mrs.
Mary Astell a work entitled A Serious proposal to
the Ladies for the advancement of their true and
greatest interest. In it the authoress outlined a
scheme for a Protestant nunnery, “more academic
than monastic,” in order to develop those activi-
1 Cf. Evelyn’s Diary and Correspondence , iii. 261, Letter to
Boyle, September 3rd, 1659.
2 Cf. his letter to the Archbishop of Canterbury quoted by
Dr. Legg in his pamphlet on London Church Services, p. 10.
See also note on Stephens in chapter ii.


ties of women which “custom does not now
permit to be exercised.” There were to be no
vows, nor were all thoughts of marriage to be
renounced on entering the association, but special
attention was to be given to religious and devout
practices as well as to study, and thus it was
designed to escape “ foolish amours, impertinent
visits, and idle amusements.” The support of
the society was to be derived both from charity
and from the wages paid to the members as
governesses of young persons of quality. The
only danger which the promoter sees is that
wives so educated, though they will make homes
attractive for clever men, will be more knowing
than their husbands if the latter should be
tc blockheads.” In such cases, however, she
naively remarks, those husbands will need such
wives to govern them “ whose prudence will
conceal it from observation.” A second part,
containing more detailed proposals, was published
in 1697. A certain great lady 1 offered ,£IO,OOO
to the work. But the design never came to
anything, for Bishop Burnet persuaded the
patroness to withdraw her offer on the ground
that such practices would encourage Romanism.
Burnet need not have been so bitter against this
project, for in his History, talking of the ill-
education of women in England, he says, “ Some-
thing like monasteries without vows would be a
glorious design, and might be so set on foot, as to
1 Either Anne or the Lady Elizabeth Hastings (see article on
Mrs. Astell in the Dictionary of National Biography).


be the honour of a queen on the throne : but I
will pursue the matter no further.” To which
remark Cole added the significant note : “If
she had done so, who so likely to traduce her
as aiming to introduce popery by degrees ? ” 1
As a matter of fact, Mrs. Astell’s scheme,
though on a much smaller scale, had been pro-
pounded nearly twenty years earlier by Clement
Barksdale. This writer’s college is to consist of
an association of unmarried women in a founda-
tion, for the purposes of piety and education,
exactly on the same lines as the later scheme.
But it too was abortive. 2
It is not part of our purpose to discuss the
great foundations of the S.P.C.K. and the S.P.G.
except as they directly appear to influence the
other societies we are considering. The former,
founded in 1698, practically produced the latter
in 1701. The S.P.G., indeed, will hardly con-
cern us, for its activities are confined to a sphere
outside England. 3 The influence of the S.P.C.K.
upon our societies has already been noted and
will be referred to again. Its annual lists of
books for dispersion are largely filled, during its
1 Burnet’s History of his own Times, vol. vi, p. 204 [ii. 653].
2 Cf. A Letter Touching a Colledge of Maids, or, a Virgin Society,
written [by Clement Barksdale,] August 12th, 1675. (Bodl.
Wood, 130/3.)
3 The Religious Societies in London gave towards the
foundation of the S.P.G. Cf. A Letter from a member of the
Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge in London to his friend
in the country, London, 1709.


early years, by “ Reformation ” literature. So
too its erection of parochial libraries was a great
help to a forward reform movement in a country
where there were over 2,000 parishes where the
annual income of the minister did not exceed
£3O. And finally its steady support and en-
couragement of the charity school movement
did more than anything else to strike at the root
of vice and slackness and immorality. 1
The Corporation of the Sons of the Clergy
hardly falls within our period, for it was instituted
in 1655, although it was not incorporated by
Charles II till 1678. It was probably from this
society that the S.P.C.K. and the Religious
Societies borrowed the idea of a corporate annual
dinner. All through this period, however, the
Corporation of the Sons of the Clergy continued
to flourish. Originally formed to help the
widows and families of clergymen, it was in 1684
affording assistance to 92 widows, of whom 24
had been wives of sequestered clergy. In 1685
the proportion of sequestered ministers’ widows
1 Particulars of the enormous amount of educative work
done by the S.P.C.K., both through the Schools and by
distributing literature, can be gathered from The History of the
S.P.C.K., 1698-1898, by Allen and McClure. Pamphlets
and books of the period supply abundant evidence of the
regard in which it was held by writers of all classes. On
July 7th, 1713, nearly 4,000 children from Charity Schools
in London and Westminster viewed the procession to the
public thanksgiving. (Cf. the print reproduced by the
London Topographical Society.)


to other widows receiving help was 34 to 98, and
in 1686 it was 45 to 112. 1 This society did not
confine its operation to London, but spread all
over England. And in the eighteenth century
a society for extending the same kind of aid to
the widows of the ministers of dissenting bodies
was founded, which was supported by several
Church of England subscribers. 2 This society
was not on any sectarian basis among the dis-
senting bodies, but appears to have helped all
applicants of dissenting views irrespective of their
peculiarities of sect. 3
As we have already noted, this imitation of
Anglican models by Dissenters was not confined
to this particular endeavour. There were
founded in London, especially after the accession
of George I, several Religious Societies among
the dissenting bodies. There was one which
supported the “ Lord’s day evening lecture ” at
Founders Hall, in Lothbury, in 1719.4 Another
society of Presbyterian young men existed in Old
Y
1 Henry Dove, J. Sermon preached at the Meet-
ing of the Sons of Clergy-men ... on . . . Decemb. z, 1686, p.
38. Cf. other Sermons preached before the Sons of the Clergy in
Bodl. Pamph. 261. Godw. Pamph. 1767 (14).
2 Cf. Sermons preached to this Society by prominent dissenting
ministers, 1748, 1738, 1736, and 1757. Godw, Pamph,
993 (S)» lO °7 (*)•'
3 The Sons of the Clergy, by E. H. Pearce, London, 1904,
+ Cf. Jl Sermon preach'd at the Evening Lecture in founders
Hall, Oct. 11, 1719, by S. Rosewell, M.A., Upon Occasion oj
his leaving that Lecture. London, 1719.


Jewry in 1716, and others of the same persuasion
at Blackfriars, in Jewin Street, and in Silver
Street, in the years 1715— 21. The Silver Street
society, like their Anglican brethren, supported
an evening lecture, and the Society of Protestant
Dissenters at Little St. Helens in 1718 supported
the Lord’s day morning lecture. l For the most
part, these dissenting Religious Societies were
intensely loyal to the existing constitution, in
contrast to the wayward Jacobite tendencies which
the Anglican devotional associations were begin-
ning to assume. Some of these Dissenters even
appear to have had their annual sermon preached
upon Whig festivals, such as the birthday of
George I (May 28th), or the day of his corona-
tion (October 20th).
But perhaps the most interesting of these
minor organizations for religion was the Phila-
delphian Society. It was founded during the
last years of the seventeenth century, and its
endeavour was to transcend all Creeds in pursuit
of true piety and religion. Its promoters called
it “ A Religious Society for the Reformation of
Manners, for the Advancement of an Heroical
Christian Piety, and Universal Peace and Love
towards All : who ... do not . . . Dissent
from any . . . Church in which they have
before liv’d : . . . much less do they perswade
others to Dissent . . . ; ... they meet once
1 Cf. Sermons preached to these Societies which are in the
Bodleian Library. (Pamph. 344 and Godwin Pamphs. 1002,
1004.)


upon every Lord’s Day to implore the good
Spirit of God.” 1
The members of the society thus met every
Sunday. They are described as “ a little Hand-
ful ” 2 ; but the society mystically claims as
members all those in any land who are awaken-
ing to the need of a reformation in Christianity.
Such mysticism naturally keeps and reverences
greatly the Christian Sacraments, as an evidence
of the “inner light.” But there is no suggestion
how the Dissenters, whom they earnestly invite
to join them, are to be reconciled with the doctrine
of the real presence, or a belief in baptismal
regeneration. And in keeping with their mystical
outlook they were “ not without hopes of the
Extraordinary Appearance of God in an Affair of
so High an import,” 3 and they diligently worked
out a prophecy of the Second Advent, which fore-
cast it in seventy years’ time ; so that, they said,
it behoved them to make haste to start a reform.
Although there is much in this that recalls the
Montanists, or the Enthusiasts of the rebellion
period, there is no doubt that the sight of
orthodoxy and dissent in what seemed to be an
eternal quarrel was very disheartening to the
religious enthusiasts of the period. Yet these
1 Cf. The State of the Thiladelphian Society, or the Ground of
their proceedings considered, 1697, p. 7. Also Declaration of the
Philadelphian Society of England: Easter day, 1699. (Bodl.
Pamph. 231.)
2 The State of the Thiladelphian Society, p. 11.
3 Ibid., p. 12.


Philadelphians, despite their adherence to sacra-
mental views, were no Anglican bigots. “ I see
darkly as through a Glass,” says the apologist,
“ this Angel of the Love descending as from the
Holy City, and gently striking some of the
more eminent Pastors of the Establish’d Church
of this Nation, and saying as it were to them
‘Arise: here is no Abiding Place. There remains
yet a more Glorious Work to be done, than
your Predecessors could accomplish.’ ” 1
The society appears to have existed for a little
while into the next century. In 1701-02 one of
their Sunday afternoon meetings 2 was broken up
by a crowd at Hoxton. On the matter being
taken to law, the magistrate before whom they
appeared desired the society to clear itself of the
charge of schism. Thereupon in March, 1702,
they issued a Vindication of themselves. This
stated that the society was composed of English
and German enthusiasts, that their meetings were
only private conferences for mutual edification
and for the honour of God, that they obliged no
member to leave any Christian communion, but
freely embraced all Christians, except Roman
Catholics, that their rule of life was that of the
Sermon on the Mount, and that their rule of
faith was that of the Apostles’ Creed. They
invite inspection and challenge informers to show
1 The State of the ‘Philadelphian Society, p. 15,
2 They met on Sunday afternoons always, so that members
could attend the churches of their respective denominations in
the mornings.


that they have ever acted in any way contrary
to the dictates of faith and holiness, and finally
they enunciate their three great aims. These
are, first, “ the Promotion of Catholick Peace,
and of true Brotherly Love ”; secondly, “to
Revive the Spirit of Primitive Christianity ”;
thirdly, to witness “the Truth of the blessed
Kingdom of our Lord, according as is deliver’d
by the Holy Prophets and Apostles, and, as is
agreeable to the most Catholick Faith, of all
Christian antiquity.” 1
The main interest of the Philadelphian Society
henceforth was the attempt to revive its principles,
after it had fallen into decay, by the famous
William Whiston. In 1712, after he had been
expelled from his chair at Cambridge, and
prosecuted by Convocation on account of his
heretical books, he put forth “A Proposal for
erecting Societies for Promoting Primitive Chris-
tianity.” 2 The objects of these societies are
practically synonymous with the aims of the
organization just described. He proposes that
they should inquire into the faith of the Apostles
and deduce practical ethical rules from this
inquiry. To this end they are to meet and
discuss problems of religion and conduct, to
begin and end discussions with prayer, to invite
all Christians to join them, and to enter into a
correspondence with the Religious Societies.
1 Vindication and Justification of the Philadelphian Society ,
etc. Lond., 1702. (Bodl. Pamph, 246.)
2 [London ?, 1712.]


Whiston sums up his project in an epigram—
uto Find , and not to Make their Religion.” He
mentions the existence of an earlier society with
similar aims, which appears to have been the
Philadelphian Society.
By 1715 he had succeeded in establishing his
society, and it met weekly till 1717, at his house
in Cross Street, Hatton Gardens. It was com-
posed of about ten or twelve persons of all
shades of religious opinions. “ Sir Peter King,
Dr. Hare, Dr. Hoadly, and Dr. Clarke were
particularly invited : but none of them, he says
“ ever came.” 1 The society languished, how-
ever, when Whiston turned his attentions to
his perplexities over the Athanasian Creed, and
we hear no more of it. 2
Turning from religious to more frankly
charitable associations, we find them gradually
on the increase during the first half of the
eighteenth century. Corporations like that of
Queen Anne’s Bounty are too well known to
require notice here, but there were several
smaller charitable associations which are not
generally noticed in the histories of the period.
In 1698 a corporation for assisting the poor
of London was founded, in terms of an Act of
Parliament in the reign of Charles 11, by the
London Common Council. At an establishment
in Bishopsgate Street they supported and edu-
1 Nichols’ Literary Anecdotes, London, 1812, vol. i, p. 500.
2 Whiston joined the Baptists eventually. Bishop Butler
was a member of this society for a time.


cated poor children, and later founded the Grey
Coat School at St. Margaret’s, Westminster. The
movement was, of course, Anglican, since it was
official. From 1700 to 1713, twelve thousand
children were apprenticed to trades by this
corporation, and over fifteen thousand were
sheltered and given temporary work during the
same period. 1 Afterwards children’s workhouses
were set up on similar lines throughout England,
in Greenwich, Limehouse, Exeter, Plymouth,
Tiverton, Bristol, Lincoln, Worcester, and other
towns.
In 1719 this work was taken up by voluntary
workers, who formed themselves into the
“ Charitable Society.” But this turned its atten-
tion rather to the sick and needy than to the
education of children. They established an in-
firmary in the parish of St. Margaret’s, West-
minster, and treated any needy sick who presented
themselves or were sent by members. They
clothed their patients in uniforms, and made
a speciality of retaining incurable cases, nor did
they neglect the spiritual needs of their patients.
All subscribers were trustees, and they met every
week to administer the funds of the institution.
There were 4,467 patients treated the first sixteen
years, at an expenditure of £8,614. This society
met once a year to hear a sermon, but there is
no evidence of an annual feast. At first it was
designed to establish societies in other parts of
London to work in co-operation with the original
1 Cf. Robert Nelson’s Ways and Methods of Doing Good, p. 182.


body, but this part of the project seems to have
fallen through. 1
There were also other small private societies
doing philanthropic work at the beginning of the
century. “ The Society for Relieving Distressed
Housekeepers ” aimed at privately assisting those
who were very badly situated and were too
modest to apply to workhouses. Another private
society gave help to small “ decayed ” tradesmen
who had been unlucky in business, enabling
them to compound and start again. There was
also an association for relieving poor people
imprisoned for debt. 2 With these must be
mentioned the charities disbursed by the great
merchant companies in London, which were
really, on this view, organized charitable and
philanthropic societies. 3
Beside these associations there must be men-
tioned a few others whose charities were confined
within certain limits. One of these was the
Scots’ Corporation. Founded in 1664 for the
relief of poor Scots, this society had given valu-
able help to its dependents during the Great
Plague and after the Great Fire. In 1672
1 Cf. e// Charitable Proposal for Relieving the Sick and Needy.
Lond., 1719 (Bodl. Pamph. 354) ; also dn Account of the Pro-
ceedings of the Charitable Society, 1719—35, in Bodl. Godw.
Pamph. 1032 (17).
2 These details are gathered from Nelson’s Ways and Methods
of Doing Good (ut sup.).
3 There is a list of them in Strype’s Continuation of Stow’s
Survey, ut sup. Bk. v, vol. ii, p. seqq.


they built a hall and buildings in Blackfriars,
and in 1718 published a short history of the
corporation. 1 They also appear to have provided
Scottish natives who were stranded in London
with the means to return to Scotland. 2
The Herefordshire Society was another such
smaller association of particular interests. It was
formed from natives of the county in London,
and was, apparently, as much a social as a
charitable undertaking. Fines for absence from
meetings were imposed, and the proceeds were
devoted to the education and equipment of
county lads as apprentices. The members met
annually at St. Michael’s, Cornhill, to hear
a sermon. 3
There must have been many rather obscure
local societies of this kind in the early eighteenth
century, but records of them were not carefully
preserved, except, perhaps, in their own localities.
Two other societies are worthy of mention
during the period. Both are distinctively religious
and charitable, but both are on a distinctively
sectarian basis. They are the “ Commission for
Relieving Poor Proselytes that are converts
z
1 There is a list of them in Strype’s Continuation of Stow’s
Survey, ut sup. Bk. v, vol. ii, pp. 53-54.
2 Cf. Journey through England in Familiar Letters [by John
Macky], London, 1724, vol. i, p. 269.
3 i. Cf. Sermon preached to the society, February 2, 1725—26,
by Thos. Bullock, in Bodl., Godw. Pamph. 1031 (19).
ii. Cf. Sermon preached to the society, December 4, 1723,
by Thos. Watt (Hereford Public Library).


from Popery ” and the “ English Society for
promoting Protestant Schools in Ireland.”
The former was started by the Archbishop of
Canterbury and the Bishop of London in 1717
to distribute subscriptions to poor proselytes
from Rome. The Government gave £s°o per
annum, and appointed commissioners to manage
the fund. In the first year 100 were relieved
at a cost of £660. As the expenditure in 1721
was only it does not appear that the
commissioners received many subscriptions other
than the Government grant. But the organization
was in existence until 1755, for in that year it
published an account in which it stated that
“ without some additional supplies it will be
next to impossible to carry on this good work.”
Evidently it had been moribund for some
years. 1
The English Protestant Schools Society was
only a subscribing branch to the society founded
in Ireland by charter in October, 1733, for
erecting Protestant schools in that country. The
movement started with a rush, but soon the
promoters were compelled to call upon their
English sympathizers for money. Thereupon,
the “ Society corresponding with the incorporated
Society in Dublin for promoting English Pro-
testant Schools in Ireland” was formed. This
English branch had an annual meeting, for which
1 Cf. An Account of the Establishment for Relieving Poor Proselytes
London, 1722 (Bodl. Pamph. 370); also Strype’s Continua-
tion of Stow’s Survey , vol. li, bk. v, p. 39.


a special sermon was preached in the church of
St. Mary-le-Bow, Cheapside. The attempt was
attended with a fair measure of success. In the
first thirty years forty-nine schools were set up
in Ireland, which were attended by 2,475 children,
and over 3,000 scholars had already been
apprenticed. 1
Besides these societies in London and England
during this period from 1689 to 1 75°5 the s pi r *t
of charity had led to the establishment of many
hospitals and other similar institutions. 2 As the
eighteenth century advanced, philanthropy seemed
to attract the nation more and more. The general
national activity in this direction had been mainly
expended, during the seventeenth century, upon
attempts to change men’s nature from an evil
to a good state by compulsion. Unfortunately,
the connotation of the terms “ good state ” and
“ evil state ” had varied with every reign of the
century. It was not until after the Toleration
Act (1691) that any compromise on religious
opinions left the way open for an attempt to
change evil u states ” by bettering evil conditions.
But upon this attempt England was engaged
during the eighteenth century, and that century,
in this aspect, may rightly be regarded as a period
of transition. And the fact that this transition in
men’s spiritual attitude to their fellows was taking
1 Cf. Godw. Pamphlets 1757 (21), 1758 (19), 1767 (10),
for Sermons to this society.
2 Cf. Overton’s Life in the English Church , 1660— 1714,
pp. 221-30, for some of these foundations.


place has often been forgotten by historians of
the period. Therefore they see only spiritual
deadness in that which is really adjustment.
Perhaps this is why the eighteenth century has
received such scant justice at their hands.


CHAPTER VII.
THE DECLINE OF THE SOCIETIES FOR
REFORMATION OF MANNERS.
The Societies for the Reformation of Manners
had been, as we have already noted, somewhat
affected by the Tory reaction during the last
years of Queen Anne’s reign. With the acces-
sion of George I it was confidently hoped that
better times were in store for them. 1 But the
Tory opposition had left its effects on the societies.
Their constables were still apt to be “ maliciously
and falsely persecuted by vexatious suits,” 2 and
public opinion was still decidedly unfavourable.
Yet the new King’s proclamation against vice and
immorality, and the return of Whig popularity,
soon began to react upon the condition of the
societies. From 1715 to 1725 we find evidence
of a revival in interest in the work, and some
success began to crown their efforts. Thus the
1 S, Wright : A Sermon preach'd before the Societies for Reforma-
tion of Manners in London on June 27, 1715. B. Mus. 693,
e. 19 (n).
2 Robert Nelson, Address to Persons of Quality, p. 152.


present society, in its reports for 1715 and 1716,
is able to announce that there have been no
prosecutions within the City of London during
those years for keeping <c Bawdy and Disorderly
houses.” In 1717 an important case was decided
in their favour, which shows that they were
beginning to regain their hold on the constables
of London. In the previous year some of the
society’s constables were carrying some “ ill per-
sons ” to Bridewell. Ingram, a chief constable
for Fleet Street, demanded of the constables their
legal authority. They showed him their com-
mission, but apparently he was not satisfied, for
he had both them and their prisoners taken to
the compter for the night. Ingram could not
produce any sufficient reason for his action when
the society brought a suit against him for false
imprisonment. Probably he was disaffected to
the movement. At any rate, the judge took this
view and, on the jury returning a verdict of
“ Guilty,” “ the said Ingram was thereupon
cast in 20/. Damages.” The Lord Chief Justice,
who tried the case, warmly approved of the
society’s endeavours, and “ represented the ill
Consequence that might attend the discourage-
ment of so laudable a Society.” 1 The next year
(1718) the society received additional official
encouragement, for, in a charge to the grand
jury and other juries of Middlesex, Justice Bul-
strode highly commended “ the virtuous Men,
1 See Strype’s Continuation of Stow’s Survey, ut sup., vol. ii,
bk. v, p. 32.


and good Subjects, who have been very in-
strumental in presenting some of these naughty
Houses.” l In April, 1721, the King issued from
St. James’ an “order to the Justices of the Peace
for Middlesex and Westminster to suppress the
scandalous Clubs and Societies which tend in any
wise to the corruption of the principles of the
masses,” etc. This must have considerably
helped the society in their crusade against clubs
of the more immoral kind, which they had been
endeavouring to prosecute hitherto without much
success. 2 This appearance of the King on the
side of morality is hailed by an anonymous writer
as the dawning of a new age. He exhorts the
officials of the King to follow their master’s
example :
“Ye Magistrates, and Judges of the Realm,
Whilst this your pious Monarch sits at Helm,
Assert the Power which ye represent,
By giving Criminals due Punishment,” 3
Whether this order prompted them or not, at
all events the London justices instituted a vigorous
1 The Charge of Whitlocke Bulstrode, Esq., to the Grand Jury
... of .. . Middlesex .. . Hpril z\st, 1718. London,
1718, p. 36. Bulstrode was a member of the S.P.C.K. and
a zealous supporter of the Religious Societies.
2 [Edw. Ward] M Compleat and Humorous Account of all the
remarkable Clubs and Societies in the Cities of London and
Westminster (London, 1756). This account mentions several
clubs which were raided and broken up by the reforming con-
stables and the reforming societies.
3 The Hell-Fire-Club, kept by a Society of Blasphemers ; London,
1721, p. 22. (Bodl. Pamph. 366.)


crusade against gambling-houses. They met with
little success, but their efforts served to reveal
some of the reasons why such institutions
flourished. For they found the proprietors of
gaming-houses in league with the constables (and
even with the high constable) all over London,
and especially near Co vent Garden. Such con-
stables refused to serve warrants upon their allies,
and informed them of the measures being taken
against them. However, a successful police raid
was effected upon one of the largest establish-
ments—Vandernand’s gaming-house, in the Play-
house passage in Drury Lane. It must have been
a dramatic adventure, A file of soldiers had to
be requisitioned before the constables who were
serving the warrant could be brought off in
safety. One of the opponents was shot by a
soldier, and two of the constables were wounded,
before the affair was ended. 1 This kind of thing
1 Cf. dn of the Endeavours that have been used to
suppress Gaming-Houses, ... in -A Letter to a Noble Lord : Lon-
don, 1722, pp. 22-26. The author also complains “that, in
less than half an Hour, a hundred sworded Men can be got
together, that fear neither God nor Man ” (p. 30) ; and also
that one of the proprietors of a gaming-house had almost
succeeded in getting on to the Commission of the Peace
(p. 33). There is a picturesque “ List of Titles and Offices ”
at the end of the account which gives some idea of the
effective organization of these places, e.g. —
Two “ Tuffs, who have Money given them to decoy others
to play.”
“ A Flasher, to swear how often the Bank has been stript.”
“ A Captain, that is to fight any Gentleman that’s peevish
for losing his money.”


shows what the officials of the societies must have
had to face, and how impossible it was for a
private society, without a considerable executive
force, to deal with such desperadoes. It also
illustrates the fact, which we shall presently
notice, that the State was beginning to be alive to
its responsibilities in this matter. We may also
notice this general tendency in charges to the
grand juries of Middlesex in 1722, and, outside
London, in the charge to the grand jury of
Gloucester in the following year. Both of these
charges urge the necessity of presenting offences
of immorality and profaneness in terms of the
King’s proclamations to that effect. l Again, in
1723 and 1725, we have the impartial evidence of
Defoe, which has been before quoted, to the effect
that there was beginning to be a visible improve-
ment in the morals of the capital. 2 So too the
tone of the stage appears to have been raised
slightly during this decade. “ The plays are
writ with more modesty, and acted with more
2 A
“ A Runner, who is to get Intelligence of the justices
Meetings.”
“ Link Bop, Coachmen, Chairmen, Drawers, that bring the
first Intelligence of the Justices Meetings, or of the
Constables being out, at half a Guinea Reward.”
1 The Third Charge of Whitlocke Bulstrode, Esq., to the Grand-
Jury ... of Middlesex at the General Quarter Sessions . . .
held ... the Fourth Day of October, 1722 ; London, 1723.
d Charge given to the Grand-Jury of the County of Gloucester
at the Midsummer Sessions, 1723, by Sir Richard Cocks, Bart. ;
London, 1723.
2 W. Lee, Daniel Defoe, vol. iii, pp. 104, 441-44.


decency ; and the Balls are less frequented and
almost out of fashion with most persons of dis-
tinction.” 1
But perhaps the best evidence for a revival in
reforming work, during the reign of George I, is
to be found in a study of the annual reports of
the Society for the Reformation of Manners. In
1715 there were 2,571 prosecutions for specific
offences, as shown by the abstract which accom-
panied the report for that year. In 1716 this
number dropped to 1,820, but rose again to
nearly 3,000 in the following year. From 1718
to 1725 the average number of these specific
prosecutions is 2,280 each year. The average
number each year during the whole life of the
societies (including prosecutions for offences not
specified in the annual lists, of which there were
sometimes as many as a hundred a year) was only
2,118. We can see, therefore, that the societies
were comparatively very busy during these
years. 2
Yet there is some evidence during this period
that seems to show that this progress is more
apparent than real. The problem of brothels was
not effectually dealt with either by the societies
1 Sermon preached to the Societies for Reformation of Manners
... on .. . January the \th, 1724, by .. . Edward \Chandler\
Lord TJishop of Coventry and Lichfield. London ; 1724, p. 23.
The bishop, on this occasion, is scarcely an impartial witness.
It is to be doubted whether persons of quality had begun to
forsake going to balls during any period in the eighteenth
century.
2 Cf. Appendix No. V.


or by the State officials. In 1724 there appeared
a pamphlet, addressed to the gentlemen of the
societies, complaining of this, and suggesting as
a remedy that such places should be legalized in
order to save the nation’s manhood. 1 So too
another contemporary writer remarks on the
shamelessness of the London prostitutes, and
asserts that in this respect London is worse than
“any city in the world.” 2 Nor is the official
view of the city’s morals much brighter. “ Scarce
anything has been presented,” remarks Mr. Justice
Ryder to the grand jury of Westminster in 1725,
“ but what comes from particular Prosecutors.
The few, scandalously few, Presentments of the
Constables, whose . . . acquaintance with all the
parts of the Liberty, cannot fail of conveying to
their Knowledge that infinite number of Annoy-
ances, which every body takes notice of but them-
selves, adds but to the Necessity of this Remark.” 3
1 A Modest Defence of Tub lie Stetvs, or, an Essay upon Whor-
ing, as it is now practis'd in these Kingdoms. Written by a
Layman : London, 1724. This pamphlet takes the line that
the Societies have tried to abolish such resorts and failed, and
that this is only another historical instance of the impossibility
of stopping prostitution while human nature remains what it
is. If it is to be trusted, the pamphlet reveals a fearsome state
of things in London. Modern theorists would doubtless be
surprised to see their detailed arguments on this subject in
print nearly 200 years ago.
2 A Journey through England in Familiar Letters [by John
Macky], London, 1724, vol. i, p. 280.
3 The Charge to the Grand Jury of the City and Liberty of
Westminster at the General Quarter-Session, . . . Oct. 6, 1725, by
Samuel Ryder, Esq. London, 1726,p. 27. (Bodl. Pamph., 331.)


This mention of “ particular prosecutors seems to
indicate that informers of some kind were busy ;
but another charge, delivered the next day to the
grand jury of Middlesex by Sir Daniel Dolins,
urges the jury to present all “ Peace-Officers
and their Assistants ” who “unlawfully Apprehend
and Take up Persons no ways misbehaving
themselves . . . and afterwards Discharge them
for a Bribe, Fee, or Reward.” l This seems to
point to the existence of blackmailers who were
living on money extorted from minor criminals
by threats of information against them. It is
important to discover whether such men were
included in any of the reforming societies’ organi-
zations. A contemporary satire affirms that the
societies’ informers were of this kind. 2 But, on
the other hand, the societies, in their annual
reports, fearlessly ask for proof of such accusa-
tions, and deny that any of their members have
yet been proved to have taken a bribe. It is
difficult to reconcile such statements. It is not
unlikely, however, that idle vagabonds of the
period would use the societies’ name and reputa-
tion to help them in blackmailing, and the public
at large would not be in a position to distinguish
between such rogues and bona fide members of
1 P. 26. The charge is to be found in Bodl. Pamph.
3/8.
2 Cf. A Letter from the Man in the Moon (ut supra), London,
1725. (Bodl. Pamph. 377.) The satire describes the organi-
zation of the S.R.M. too accurately for there to be any doubt
for whom it was intended.


the societies. Be that as it may, the odium
attaching to the practice of informing grew
steadily, and this considerably affected the
societies’ reputations. 1
The enormous increase in gin-drinking which
took place during the second quarter of the
eighteenth century had a great effect upon this
very question of informing, and retarded the
reform movement considerably. In 1725 a com-
mittee, appointed by order of the Quarter Ses-
sions, to inquire into the number of gin-shops in
the out-parishes of London, reported that there
were no less than 6,187 places that sold geneva,
and that, besides this, there was much clandestine
traffic in the spirit. All kinds of tradesmen sold
gin as an extra commodity. This return showed
that in some parishes there was one gin-shop to
every ten houses ; in another, one to every seven
houses ; and in one of the largest parishes in the
suburbs, every fifth house was a gin-shop. The
committee further found that, on account of the
increase in this traffic, women were being de-
bauched, children prostituted, and men robbed in
increasing numbers. Even workhouses were being
corrupted by the clandestine sale of gin. Physi-
cians, magistrates, grand juries, bishops, and peers
all drew up representations of the evil of the
practice, and implored parliamentary interference.
In 1729 and 1736 Acts were passed against exces-
1 Cf. Gentleman's Magazine { Feb., 1731), p. 61 ; Dec., 1732,
p. 1105; and especially Dec., 1737, p. 748, where a diatribe
against informers is quoted from The Craftsman of Dec. 3.


sive drinking, but complaints continued long after
these dates. 1
The determination to evade the Act of 1736
was so general that it fostered the growth of
professional informers more than ever, and they
became increasingly odious to the nation. This
proved to be the death-blow of the reforming
societies. Their whole existence was based upon
the principle of lay information, and they had
been compelled to fight hard to justify this prin-
ciple ever since their foundation. They could no
longer do this in the face of the increased suspicion
which these events brought upon the practice of
informing. Their last report, the forty-fourth,
was published in 1738, and after that year we
hear no more of these particular organizations.
In truth they had been moribund for some time.
The bribery of constables, the hatred of informers,
the failure of the societies to reach the upper
classes, the need of reformation inside the families
of the nation, all contributed to their end. Party
spirit in connexion with the societies had again
been called forth, 2 and the executive of the separate
1 It would be out of place to attempt to give an exhaustive
account of the measures taken to combat this evil practice.
Its treatment finds a place in the larger histories of the period.
(Cf. Lccky’s History of England in the Eighteenth Century , etc.).
An appendix to Bishop Gibson’s (of London) Sermon on
Intemperance, in 1746, gives a list of twelve efforts made by
various bodies to abate this evil from 1725 to 1743.
2 Sermon Preached to the Societies for Reformation of Manners
... on .. . January the sth, 1730, by Francis [Hare], . . .


organizations was weakening. The published
numbers of prosecutions show a remarkable
falling-off for the period 1725-38. Instead of
an average of 2,280 annual prosecutions which
were made in the decade before 1725, we now
find an average of only 753 prosecutions each
year. The numbers for the last two years of
the societies’ existence are 488 for 1737, and
545 for i?3 8 -
It must not be supposed that the Gin Act
of 1736 was responsible for the decline and fall
of the societies. Nor yet was their extinction
due to the fact that there was no longer work
for such organizations to perform. For, with
the death of Queen Caroline in 1737, the nation
entered upon the very worst and lowest stage
which it experienced during the whole of the
century. Corruption was bad before, but now
it became worse ; the national taste and manners
grew more debased, and religion was scoffed
at on all sides. 1 Why, then, did the Societies
for Reformation of Manners perish, just when
the need for them became acute ? The answer
involves several considerations, which arise from
the nature of the societies, and these will best
be considered separately.
As we have already observed, the societies
Lord Bishop of St. Asaph: London, 1731, in which he
laments this rise of party spirit as a hindrance to the work
of the societies.
1 See Plummer’s Church of England in the Eighteenth Century,
pp. 11l et seqq ., for a good picture of the period.


came into existence because the laws of the land
made provision for private attempts to assist the
execution of the laws. So long, therefore, as
the State executive was unwilling or unready to
enforce these laws, there was a sound practical
justification for the existence and activity of the
societies. But as the eighteenth century advanced,
the State, in the persons of its metropolitan
justices, began to assume the responsibility of
executing these neglected laws. It is not quite
clear what prompted this gradual resumption of
State functions. It may have been that the
period of internal and external peace, which the
Whig supremacy brought it, gave the Govern-
ment a chance to set its house in order in this
respect. Perhaps it was the spectacle of increasing
vice and immorality in the capital, and the
realization of the fruitlessness of the endeavours,
public and private, that were being made to deal
with it, that stirred up the justices to a sense of
their responsibility. Whatever the cause may
have been, the result is fairly clear. From about
1718 onwards we find evidence of increasing State
interference in this problem. Some of these
attempts have already been noticed—e.g., the
crusade of the justices against gaming-houses,
in 1722, and various charges to grand juries, in
London and the country, to enforce the laws
against immorality and profaneness. Besides
these there is further evidence afforded by other
charges to grand juries 1 during the period from
1 Cf. Sir Daniel Dolins’ Second Charge and Third Charge to


1718 to 1738. If we compare these charges
to juries with the charges and presentments of
grand juries earlier in the century, we notice
that mention of the Reforming Societies is now
generally omitted. We no longer get, as in
the earlier charges, exhortations to support the
societies, or commendatory references to them,
but juries are urged to present offenders on their
own account. The State is no longer relying on
private efforts to enforce these laws. This does
not mean that there was any sharp antagonism
between the societies and the justices. For,
when the latter, in 1730, made an effort to
combat lewdness, by appointing a committee to
suppress “ night-walking and disorderly houses,”
we find the societies officially thanking them in
their annual report for that year, and repeating
their official thanks in the same way every year
till 174 t. 1 Nor were other public bodies slow
to follow the example of the justices. In February,
1738, a Court of Aldermen at the Guildhall
passed resolutions against Sabbath-breaking, etc. ;
and the Lord Mayor issued an order to all the
public officers in London in terms of these
resolutions, especially ordering them to be
2 B
the grand juries and other juries of Middlesex, April and
December, 1726, London, 1726.
The Three Charges of Sir John Gonson to the Grand Jury of
Westminster on April 24, July 11, October 9, 1728 (Bodl. Pamph.
384), etc.
1 The help afforded by the justices on this occasion is also
mentioned in Hare’s Sermon on January 5, 1730, ut sup.


diligent in apprehending prostitutes and night-
walkers. And the court recommended all citizens
to give information to magistrates not only about
such offenders, but also about any officers who
were guilty of negligence in this respect. 1 All
this official activity must necessarily have reacted
upon the Reforming Societies, for if the State
was putting its own laws into effect, or endeavour-
ing to do so, there was no real reason why private
bodies should exist for the same purpose.
But this was not the only activity of the
societies that was being superseded. One of
their earliest efforts against vice had been
a vigorous propagation of reforming literature.
But this function had, as we have already seen,
been usurped by the S.P.C.K. in its policy of
eradicating vice by educational methods. The
distribution of wholesome and monitory literature
went hand in hand with the erection of charity
schools, and, gradually, the lists of books which
the S.P.C.K. sent out to their country corre-
spondents begin to omit distinctively militant
literature of the reforming type. The younger
society may very justly have presumed that such
books painted contemporary immorality in such
vivid colours that it might attract rather than
repel the morbidly curious in such subjects.
The annual reports of the Societies for the
Reformation of Manners intermittently mention
the number of books and papers which have been
1 Cf. Gentleman's Magazine , 1738, p. no, for order of this
court.


distributed since its foundation. In 1721 this
number reached 400,000 —an average of over
13,000 books a year. In 1737 it had only in-
creased by 44,750, which makes the number of
books distributed each year for the last sixteen years
of the societies’ existence to average only 2,80 c. 1
Besides this assumption of their functions, the
societies suffered on account of their organization.
They had never been able to reach or control the
upper classes at all, and this reacted upon their
ideals and their personnel. They were under
considerable suspicion as harbourers of black-
mailing agents, and they must have grown weary
of the effort to prove their disinterestedness. And
subsequent recruits were not of the calibre of
the earlier members. “ While . . . the society
consisted of chosen members only, though neither
many, rich, nor powerful, they broke through
all opposition, and were eminently successful in
every branch of their undertaking; but when
a number of men, less carefully chosen, were
received into that society, they grew less and
less useful, till, by insensible degrees, they
dwindled into nothing . . . Most of the original
members being gone to their reward, those who
succeeded them grew faint in their mind and
departed from the work, so that, a few years
ago, the society perished.” 2 And the reason
1 Cf. Appendix, No. V.
2 Sermon by John Wesley before the [later] Society for
Reformation of Manners, January 30, 1763. Cf. Works of the
Rev. John Wesley, 3rd ed., London, 1829-31, vol. vi, p. 149.


for this falling off in the quality of members
may be found in the general attitude of
the nation towards religious problems at that
time.
We have already had occasion to note the
adoption of the principle of “ common sense ” as
the watchword of the eighteenth-century inquiries
about religion. 1 As the century advanced, the
Deistic controversy, which represented the ap-
plication of this principle of reason to religious
problems, grew more and more acute. The
thesis that opponents of Deism were trying to
prove was that the revelation of Christianity was
not contrary to reason. This inquiry had the
effect of bringing theological discussion more and
more into everyday life, so that it became the
talk of ordinary men in coffee-houses. c< Not
the speculative reason of the few, but the natural
conscience of the many,” raised the theological
difficulties of this epoch. 2 But if this broad
appeal to the ordinary man resulted in a gain of
u sweet reasonableness ” in religious matters, it
also tended to result in a loss of “ grace abound-
ing.” If men became more interested in theology,
they also became less interested in morals. And
this is evident both in clerical and lay circles.
One effect of it was to take away even the Broad
Church support which had been extended to the
1 Ut supra , chap. i.
2 Mark Pattison’s Tendencies of Religious Thought in England
in the Eighteenth Century , in Essays and Reviews, London, iB6O,
p. 285.


Reforming Societies. From George I’s accession
onwards, the bishops’ charges to their clergy and
people become less and less concerned with the
details of administration, and more and more
concerned with arguments against Deism and
infidelity. Hence we find in them fewer instruc-
tions about services, hardly any remarks upon
the duties of churchwardens to present vicious
offenders, and no approval, nor even any mention,
of the Societies for the Reformation of Manners.
The only time when references to these societies
are plentiful in bishops’ charges are the years
immediately succeeding Archbishop Tenison’s
circular letter of 1699. Later, indeed, prevalent
immorality forced the bishops to turn their atten-
tion once again to morals 1 ; but, for the present,
they were busy in combating men’s opinions
rather than their vices.
Such a state of things naturally meant that the
policy and ideals of the Reforming Societies no
longer appealed to men’s minds with the same
force as they had done formerly. And the
quietism of Walpole’s policy in political matters
perpetuated this state of things. To the man
who felt called upon to show some active interest
in his fellows there was ample scope offered by
the various philanthropic and charitable institu-
tions of the period, without going forth to dragoon
his neighbour into righteousness.
1 Bishop Gibson, of London, in a pastoral letter to his
diocese in 1739, cautions people against enthusiasm on the
one hand, but also against lukewarmness on the other.


We may thus briefly summarize these causes
that made for the decline of these societies.
The Societies for the Reformation of Manners
had come into existence to check the immorality
and vice of the age. They had endeavoured to
do this in three distinct ways. First, by moral
and social supervision through the medium of
the existing laws of the land ; secondly, by
propagating literature which would serve to raise
men’s minds above the contemporary view of
immorality and profanity ; and thirdly, by appeal-
ing to the religious feeling of England upon this
matter. But by the middle of the first half of the
eighteenth century it became impossible for them
to exercise any of these three functions to any
considerable extent. For the State, under a more
stable government, resumed control of the moral
and social supervision of its people, in regard to
the execution of these laws, through its justices
and its delegated authorities ; the educative work
of the societies was taken out of their hands by
the S.P.C.K., which was much fitter to assume
that work ; and, finally, the religious feeling of
the country was absorbed, for the most part, in
theological speculation. Add to these three con-
siderations the fact that the reforming organiza-
tions themselves fell into disorder, and we can
understand why it was that they came to an end
in 1738.
In truth, it was as well that they should have
come to an end when they did. Perhaps their
chief work was to awaken the nation to a sense of


its responsibility in this matter, and to embody
the philanthropic impulse. If so, their work was
really done when the State itself began to urge
private informations through its own official
bodies and not through any lay association. And
the philanthropic impulse was a better principle
upon which to base such attempts than the reli-
gious one. For the provinces of religion and
social service were too much separated in that age
to make it possible for an institution that endea-
voured to combine both of them to be regarded
without suspicion. Vice was very plainly doing
the nation much harm. It was sapping the
foundations of family life and individual purity.
Let a man adopt the line that this must be
checked—the line that the State adopted in
passing the penal laws against such vices—and
the means to check it become far more easily
justified on social than on religious considera-
tions, at least at that time. For if religious
considerations be adopted as the plea for such
institutions, religion, as then understood, would
begin to qualify the methods used, and quibblings
about orthodoxy and dissent would be raised at
once. Inasmuch as the societies forced men to
be good, we may regard them as a manifestation
of seventeenth-century Puritanism. But inas-
much as they were private associations upon
unsectarian principles, we may regard them as
the forerunners of later eighteenth-century bene-
volence, which was Puritan in the best sense.
And this indeed would seem to be the correct


view of them. They represent the half-way stage
between the militant Puritanism of the seven-
teenth and the benevolent Puritanism of the
eighteenth centuries.


CHAPTER VIII.
THE LATER HISTORY OF THE RELIGIOUS
SOCIETIES AND THEIR CONNEXION
WITH METHODISM.
In discussing the spread of the society movement
in Great Britain we have already had occasion
to notice that in London, after 1714, several
dissenting Religious Societies had been formed
more or less on the model of the Anglican
Religious Societies of the capital. These bodies
made somewhat of a parade of their loyalty to
the new dynasty, which rather implies that the
original societies were disaffected to the Govern-
ment. At this we need not be surprised, for
we have already seen that the Archbishop of
Canterbury had found it necessary to restrain
the London Religious Societies from corrupting
the charity schools under their control with
incipient Jacobitism. 1 Indirect confirmation of
this can be obtained from other quarters. In the
Bodleian Library there is a copy of the Orders
2 C
1 Cf. extract from MS. correspondence 1706—32 in the
society’s records (quoted in chapter iii).


belonging to a Religious Society , published in 1724, 1
which shows some points of contrast with the
orders printed by Wood in his Account in 1701.
Thus, the preamble introduces a clause to the
effect that every member tc shall sincerely promise,
that he will be faithful, and bear true Allegiance to
his Maiesty King GEORGE.” 2 This is evidently
one of the precautions taken by the authorities
to ensure the loyalty of these bodies. Again, the
rules of 1724 do not mention, as do those of
1701, that the members are at all obliged to
“ help to punish profaneness,” etc. Evidently
this society had no wish to join the reforming
bodies in any way. Was it because these latter
included Dissenters ? For another significant
difference between these rules in 1724 and 1701
is the omission in the latter constitution of the
resolve “to do what benefits them in their
stations in order to the cementing of our
divisions.”
There is yet another constitution of a Religious
Society extant which seems to confirm the opinion
that they had fallen into disrepute on account
1 These are bound up with several other publications in
a volume in the Bodleian (141, K. 515). Among the older
publications is a poem by Parnell, called Divine Entertainment,
or , The Hermit, which is printed separately, and contains on
the title-page the words “ Particularly recommended to the
Perusal of the Members of Religious Societies.” Except that
the moral of the poem is to be content with things as they
are, and not to question God’s purposes, it does not seem
particularly appropriate to Religious Societies.
2 Orders belonging to a Religious Society, London, 1724, p. 3.


of their Jacobite tendencies. It is found in the
rules of the Religious Society at St. Giles’,
Cripplegate. l These rules are dated 1718. At
the end of them there is a specific declaration
of loyalty to King George. That this was
inserted by authority and not because of the
spontaneous loyalty of the founders may be
judged from the fact that only thirteen members
signed it. And we know, from the list of names
that follows the rules, that this was in incon-
siderable proportion of the membership. This
society also only uses c< the Prayers Recommended
by the Twelve Stewards and approved of by the
Lord Bishop of London” (Rule 28).
For the rest, these later constitutions of
Religious Societies appear to be substantially the
same as those we have already seen in the earlier
stages of the “ Religious Society ” movement.
There are provisions made for regular subscrip-
tions, fines for absence from the weekly meeting,
election of stewards, and a monthly fast and
participation in the Holy Communion is enjoined.
The rules of the St. Giles’ Society make provision
for the support of a charity school, which is not
mentioned in the constitution of 1724 ; also this
society inserts the rule about helping in the
reformation of manners, which the society
omitted in 1724.
There is hardly any evidence to show what
1 These rules have been printed by Dr. Legg in his pamphlet
on London Church Services in the %eign of Queen Jlnne, pp. 31
et seq.


was the average membership of a Religious Society
at this period. Indeed, so far the only documents
that throw light on this question at all are the
MS, list in the Bodleian, by which we find
that the average membership of the fifteen
societies there mentioned is seventeen, 1 and the
report of John Skeat to the S.P.C.K. 2
Until the rise of the Methodist movement the
evidence which throws light on the state of
the Religious Societies in London after Queen
Anne’s death is very scanty. But there are
frequent references after 1737-38, which show
that the societies existed during that period. 3
But they appear to have fallen into a state of
formality and spiritual deadness, which is typical
of the period under consideration. They “ were
altogether slumbering or dead souls, who cared
for nothing but their comfort in this world, and
as they had once joined this connection they
were willing to continue in this respectable
1 MS. Rawl., D. 1312. The number of members in the
largest society in this list is forty-nine. It is “ the Thursday
Night’s Society meeting at Mr. Thomas Castle’s, in Cannon St.,
near Ab. Church Lane.” Skeat reports the Canterbury Society
as consisting of about thirty. In 1743 Wesley found a Religious
Society at St. Ives, in Cornwall, which had 100 members (see
Note 35). In 1710 there was a Religious Society of seventy
members at St. Neots (Cambridge) (cf. S.P.C.K. MS. Abstract
of Letters, No. 2,056).
2 Quoted in chap. v.
3 Cf. Memoirs of James Hutton , by Daniel Benham ; Bp.
Edmund Gibson’s Observations . . . upon ... the sect . . . 0j
e Methodists ; The Journals of Wesley and Whitefield [passim).


pastime on Sunday evenings, by which at small
expense they could enjoy the pleasure, and
fancy themselves better than the rest of the
world who did not do the like.” 1
But that they kept up their regular meetings
till 1737 is certain, and in that year they were
brought under the influence of the great revivalist
Whitefield. It is now our task to endeavour
to estimate what part the older organizations
played in the establishment of the new Wesleyan
Societies, and how much their ideals and con-
stitutions influenced the founder of Methodism.
It is sometimes forgotten that the Wesleyan
Societies are the product of several distinct
organizations which preceded them. The chief
of these organizations which influenced the later
bodies were the Moravian Societies in London,
the original associations started by John Wesley
at Oxford in 1729, and the older Religious
Societies with which we are dealing. And a
slight sketch of the foundation and early history
of the former organizations is necessary both to
elucidate this point and also to show that these
Moravian bodies themselves were not unconnected
with the Religious Societies in London. This
may perhaps be done best by showing the
1 From a letter of James Hutton quoted in his Memoirs,
p. 9. On the other hand, Gibson, Bishop of London,
praises their “ modesty and decency.” But a letter to the
Religious Societies in 1737, after Whitefield’s sermons to
them, seems to indicate that Hutton’s remarks are not
exaggerated.


connexion of James Hutton, the father of
Moravianism in England, with the different
societies.
James Hutton, the son of the Rev. John
Hutton, was born in 1715. He was educated
at Westminster, but was not sent to a university,
being apprenticed to a bookseller on leaving
school. His father, who was a Nonjuror, and
kept a school for his livelihood, held in his house
meetings of a Religious Society, which the boy
joined early in life. l The Rev. Samuel Wesley
(John’s elder brother) lived next door to the
Huttons, and, by this means, John and Charles
Wesley were introduced to the family when they
came from Oxford after 1729. Before the
Wesleys left for America they were on terms
of warm intimacy with the elder Hutton and
his family. A regular Sunday evening conference
was held at Hutton’s house, under the presidency
of the host, though whether this was in conjunc-
tion with the Religious Society or separate from
it we cannot say.
Young Hutton fell under the spell of John
Wesley, and desired to accompany the brothers
to America, but was prevented, since his period
of apprenticeship had not yet been served,
(t 73 5-36). He, however, had the opportunity
of meeting the Moravian bishop and some of
the brethren who travelled in the same ship with
1 It is significant to find a Religious Society meeting in the
house of a Nonjuror, when we know that the societies during
this period were generally suspected of Jacobite tendencies.


the Wesleys, and appears to have been much
impressed by them.
The receipt of regular letters from Charles,
and of a diary from John Wesley, and the
communication of them to other admirers of the
evangelists, gave James Hutton the chance to
set up another little society in his own home,
based on the ideals of the Wesleys. This society
was quite distinct from the contemporary
Religious Societies, such as Hutton’s father
patronized, and must not be confused with them.
But membership of both was not inconsistent,
and the meetings of Hutton’s gathering were
arranged so that members could attend their own
several Religious Societies. Weekly contributions,
at a Wednesday meeting, formed the basis of this
“ Poor Box Society ” (as Hutton calls it), and
the subscriptions went to a general charitable
fund. Other Methodists were introduced by
the Wesley connexion, and the society became
predominantly Methodist.
At this stage, George Whitefield, who was in
London preparing for his visit to Georgia, was
introduced to the society. 1 His preaching
immediately began to enlarge its numbers, and
the Methodist policy, begun at Oxford, of
visiting the sick, and of self-denial, was adopted
by the members. Whitefield’s eloquence, added
to the romance of his disinterested mission to
1 Whitefield appears to have lodged with the Huttons
( George Whitefield's Journals, Ed. Wm. Wale, London, n. d.
p. 78).


Georgia, attracted crowds to the churches in
which he was preaching. “ When they applied
to him personally for advice, he . . . recom-
mended them to the society raised by Hutton and
his friends, by which it was much increased, and so
extensively made known that even the wardens
of the original societies [the older religious
societies], entreated Whitefield to preach their
quarterly sermons before them. By this means
the elder and new societies came into a more
intimate connection.” 1 Whitefield preached the
last two quarterly sermons to the Religious
Societies in 1737. 2 From the one delivered in
September of that year we can gain some idea
of the activities of the Religious Societies during
the period. He praises them for keeping up
celebrations of the Holy Communion in poor
parishes, and for keeping up monthly lectures,
for maintaining charity schools, and for organizing
singing classes for Church services. 3 This last
is a new development in London. We have seen
the Religious Societies of Romney and Epworth
based upon choirs, but there is no hint, either in
Woodward’s account or afterwards, that this was
1 Memoirs of James Hutton , by Daniel Benham : London,
1856, p. 14. The information concerning Hutton is mainly
extracted from this volume.
2 Their titles were The Benefits of an Early Tiety and The
Nature and Necessity of Society in General and of Religious Society
in Tarticular. Both may be seen in his Works.
3 On the other hand, we find him writing in 1739, “ Most
of the old societies in London, I fear, are sunk into a dead
formality, and have only a name to live.”


done in London. However, it gave Whitefield
a chance to evangelize within the societies. He
joined one of the singing classes, and managed
to inspire its members with something of his own
fervour and zeal. 1 The societies were much
revived by Whitefield’s campaign. One of them
started an early Communion at 6 a.m., and paid
a celebrant for it, and another charity school was
founded by their renewed efforts. 2 But how
greatly they stood in need of some such renewal
is illustrated by a letter written to the Religious
Societies in and about London and Westminster,
which urges them to put into practice the
excellent precepts of Whitefield’s teaching, and
which hints at the “ vain and worldly practices ”
into which many members of the societies had
fallen. 3 But, on the other hand, the enemies of
2 D
1 “About the latter end of August (1737), finding there
were many young men belonging to the [Religious] Societies
that attended my administrations, I entered into one of their
singing societies, hoping to have greater opportunities of doing
them good. It answered my design. Our Lord gave me to
spiritualize their singing. And after they had taught me the
gamut, they would gladly hear me teach them some of the
mysteries of the new birth, and the necessity of living to God.”
(Whitefield’s Journals, ut sup., pp. 79-80.)
2 The Society at St. Giles’, Cripplegate, appear to have
continued their practice of a corporate Communion once
a month, at 6 a.m., throughout this time (cf. Dr. Legg’s
pamphlet on London Church Services in the Reign of Queen Anne).
3 Cf. A Letter to the Religious Societies, in and about the Cities
of London and Westminster; briefly exhorting them to sincerity in
their profession, by a member of one of them. Occasioned by an
excellent sermon preach'd before the said societies, on Wednesday,


enthusiasm were not long in raising the cry,
“ Church in danger,” and many publications were
issued attacking Whitefield’s tenets, and warning
the Religious Societies against him, and these
continued for two or three years. 1 Such attacks
would seem to indicate that a good many of the
members of the Religious Societies had resolved
to follow the Methodists and their teaching. But
all this was in the future. For the present,
Whitefield was in a flood-tide of popularity.
“ Henceforward, for near three months suc-
cessively, there was no end of the people
flocking to hear the Word of God. The
churchwardens and managers of charity schools,
were continually applying to me to preach for
the benefit of the children.” 2
It was probably in Hutton’s little society that
Whitefield began the habit of extempore prayer.
“ 1 had a sweet knot of religious friends,” he
says, “ with whom I at first attempted to pray
Sept. 28, 1737, at the quarterly meeting in the Parish Church op
St. Mary-le-Bovp, by the Reverend Mr. Whitefield, London, n.d.,
in Bodl., 14 1, k. 515 (4).
1 Cf. Remarks on the Rev. Mr. Whitefield's Journals, addressed
to Religious Societies (1738); also A Letter to the Religious
Societies prefixed to a letter to Mr. Whitefield : London, 1739, by
Tristram Land ; also a reply to the above letter, by a member
of one of the Religious Societies [Richard Finch] : London,
1739. It was probably just at this time that Bishop Gibson,
of London, wrote his Observations upon ... the Methodists, in
which he too warns the Religious Societies of London against
the movement
1 Whitefield’s Journals, ut sup., p. 81.


extempore. Some time, I think in October
[ l 73?]> we began to set apart an hour an even-
ing, to intercede.” 1 Whitefield collected about
£I,OOO for charity schools, and more than £3OO
for the poor in Georgia, during his London
campaign. He left for Georgia in December,
1737-
After his departure, Hutton fell under a
new influence—that of the Moravians. These
“ brethren,” who imagined they had reformed
themselves into primitive Christianity, had, after
several attempts, secured approbation for their
orders from the Church of England, in the shape
of a letter from Potter, the Archbishop of Canter-
bury. Their patron, Count Zinzendorf, satisfied
with this, returned to the Continent, and was
consecrated bishop of the Moravian Church in
May, 1737. In the following December he or-
dained Peter Bfihler for the Moravian missionary
enterprise in South Carolina. 2 But before he had
1 Whitefield’s Journals, pp. 83, 84. This is very interesting.
In the older Religious Societies special provision had been made
against extempore prayer. For it was regarded as a distinctly
Puritan and dissenting feature. But here is a society—founded
on the model of the older ones—which is beginning to use it.
2 The Moravians had several times sought English approval
of their orders. Archbishop Wake and Jablonski (formerly
Chaplain to the King of Prussia) had conducted a correspon-
dence about this in 1717, and Wake had expressed himself as
satisfied with the validity of Moravian orders. A deputation
to London, in 1728, from Hernhut, where the Moravians had
settled under the protection of Count Zinzendorf, had failed
to accomplish anything in this direction, owing to the hostility


left London, Zinzendorf had planted an outpost
of Moravianism in the English metropolis. Ten
Germans, resident in London, had been formed
into a small society, which engaged them to meet
every week to practise and profess Bible Chris-
tianity, and to accept the doctrine of sanctification
by faith. l
of Ziegenhagen (Chaplain to Queen Caroline). In 1734 a
certain Spandenburg came to London as advance leader to ten
Moravian missionaries for Georgia. The S.P.G. had taken
up the case of the persecuted Salzburgers, and sent, in 1733,
1734, 1 73 5? and 1741, four colonies of Germans to Georgia.
Ziegenhagen and the trustees for Georgia received the Mora-
vians coldly, and said that persecuted refugees were wanted for
America, and not illiterate proselytizers. But Governor Ogle-
thorpe, of Georgia, was in London, and took up the cause of
the brethren with some zeal. The arrival of the Moravian
Bishop Nitschman settled the matter, and in February Span-
denburg left with a party of colonists, and arrived at Georgia
in June, 1735. In February (1736) Nitschman, with another
party, followed, and it was with this party that the Wesleys
crossed the Atlantic, and from them John Wesley first experi-
enced the attraction of Moravianism. Early next year Count
Zinzendorf came to London to arrange about sending more
missionaries to South Carolina, and to settle the question of
orders. This question had become pressing now that the
Moravians were on missions in English colonies. It was
then that Potter of Canterbury expressed his approval of the
episcopate of the brethren, saying, in a letter to the Count,
that “ he had been led to the conviction that the Church of
the brethren is truly an Apostolic and Episcopal Church,
whose doctrines contain nothing militating against the Thirty-
nine Articles of the Church of England.” These details are
gathered from Benham’s Memoirs of Hutton and L. Tyerman’s
Life and Times of John Wesley , London, 1870, vol. i.
1 The rules of this society are given at length in the Memoirs


Matters were at this stage when John Wesley
returned from Georgia in February, 1738.
Through him Hutton became acquainted with
Bohler, who had arrived in London on his way
to Georgia, and, like Wesley, he soon fell under
the spell of the missionary. Bohler expounded
the Moravian doctrines both to Hutton’s little
society and to the company left behind by Zin-
zendorf. Soon he had a number of earnest
disciples, and these began to form themselves into
a third society to follow his teachings more closely.
These events are not surprising. It was an evil
time. The Reforming Societies were all but
extinct, and indeed perished in that year (173 8),
which had also seen fifty-two criminals hanged at
Tyburn. Within the last two years 12,000 per-
sons had been convicted for evasions of the Gin
Act. 1 The growth of rationalism was exalting
of Hutton, pp. 25, 26. While they recall the rules of the early
Religious Societies in their simple and unaffected piety, yet
they show signs of the stress which was laid by the Moravians
on the doctrine of absolute dependence on faith.
1 Tyerman’s Life of "John Wesley, vol. i, p. 173. He also
states that a House of Lords’ Committee had been appointed
to inquire into the causes of the present immorality and pro-
faneness. This is quite true, but it was a committee from the
Irish and not the English House of Lords. . . . This committee
found the causes in question to be neglect of religion, of divine
service, of Sabbath observance ; want of reverence for the laws
and the magistrates ; neglect of education of the young ; and
the increase of idleness, gaming, and drunkenness. The Lords
petitioned the Lord Lieutenant for a proclamation to enforce
the laws ; the bishops, etc,, were desired to exhort their people
to a reformation, and steps were taken to disperse an impious


morals above faith, and reason tended to judge
men by their works. It was this over-emphasis
on the reasonableness of Christianity which
brought home the doctrine of Bohler to his
hearers. The first companies of this new associa-
tion met, somewhat informally, at Hutton’s house,
but increasing numbers soon drove them to seek
a larger shelter, and on May i, 1738, we get the
foundation of the Fetter Lane Society, cc in obedi-
ence to the command of God by St. James, and
by the advice of Peter Bfthler.” 1
This is not the place to discuss the change in
Wesley’s religious views, which is commonly
called his conversion, nor the mental processes
which led him to acquiesce in the foundation of
the Fetter Lane Society. Indeed, it was not until
twenty-three days afterwards that he experienced
the flashing certainty of salvation. 2 What Peter
Bohler insisted upon was the realization by the
patient of the certitude of the change in his soul,
by a feeling of inward calm and peace. This
could come from no other source, he argued, but
that of an absolute dependence on faith and a
clear deprecation of all works. Works might
and licentious society who called themselves “Blasters” (cf.
Lords’ Journals, Ireland, vol. iii ; October 5, 1737 ; February
11, 1738 ; and March 10, 1738). Apparently the S.R.M. in
Ireland had become extinct before this. Otherwise we should
certainly have expected them to be mentioned in a report of
this kind.
1 Wesley’s Journals , May 1, 1738 ( Works , vol. i, p. 92).
The command of God by St. James is presumably James v. 16.
2 Wesley’s Journals , May 24, 1738 ( Worlds , vol. i, p. 98).


follow faith or precede it, but they were no neces-
sary part of the accident called “ conversion,”
which can only take place if the active and passive
faculties of the patient are exclusively directed to
the spiritual phenomena of belief. So much may
be noted of the doctrine upon which the re-
generated society movement based itself. It is
not at all clear how far Bohler’s disciples realized
the trend of the doctrine. Its almost sensuous
acceptance of God’s covenant, the amorous lan-
guage of the converts it made, and, more than all,
the quiescent certainty of their attitude, made it
inevitable that any organization working upon
such principles would sooner or later be challenged
by the Wesleyan call to be up and doing. It is
worth while to notice this tendency here, for it
was the rock upon which the Moravian organiza-
tion at Fetter Lane was to split in the near
future.
A comparison of the rules of the Fetter Lane
association with those of the older Religious
Societies shows that while there are many points
of resemblance, there are also many dissimilarities
which amount to differences in principle. Both
meet every week, both promote religious con-
versation, and both hedge membership round
with certain conditions. But the Fetter Lane
Society pays no subscription, it is not at all
Anglican, it enjoins no monthly fast, and sub-
stitutes a love-feast for the Holy Communion
service. Both require the approval of the majority
for new members, but, while the qualifications for


membership of the older bodies are evidences of
right living, the new society insists upon a spiritual
catechism which literally fulfilled the injunction
of St. James, u Confess your sins to one another.”
There are important differences in organization.
The abolition of subscriptions does away, in the
newer body, with the need for the administrative
officers, stewards, and treasurers ; and again,
inside the Fetter Lane Society the members are
subdivided into bands or classes of not less than
five or not more than ten persons. And these
little bands, each under its own leader, have
separate conferences on Wednesday evenings.
This last detail of organization is evidently
Moravian. Wesley was impressed with it, espe-
cially after his visit to Germany, and always
made it a feature of the later Wesleyan Societies.
How far, then, may we say that this organiza-
tion is based on that of the older societies ?
Their weekly meetings, their love-feasts, their
very scheme of association upon a religious basis,
may well have been borrowed from the Religious
Societies, and this especially since Wesley and
Hutton and some of the members of Hutton’s
Society were not ignorant of the working of these
older religious organizations. Indeed, both Wes-
ley and Hutton had passed their boyhood almost
in the shadow of Religious Societies, and both
their fathers were strong supporters of such
societies. There is no doubt that Moravianism
also contributed its share to the scheme of the
Fetter Lane associations, especially in the “ band ”


system which we have noticed. On the other
hand, it may be argued that the points of resem-
blance between the old and new societies are
simply the outcome of the associative promptings
of mankind, and that this is a case of post hoc and
not of propter hoc. And if this be argued, it is
hard to see on what evidence such arguments can
be refuted. Nevertheless it may be pointed out
that the Fetter Lane Society affected the Wesleyan
movement (as we shall see), and if we decide that
this organization of 1738 is a development from
the older Religious Societies, we can assign to
them to some extent the position of “ parents of
Methodism,” at least on the administrative side.
But there is another ground of connexion
between the Religious Societies and Methodism
which can only be understood by following the
history of the movement a little further, and that
in some detail.
Three days after the foundation of the Fetter
Lane Society Peter Bohler left for America, and
Wesley and Hutton took over the task of manag-
ing the new organization. In June Wesley set
out for Germany to see Moravianism at its head-
quarters. But the congregation at Marienborn
would not admit him to the Holy Communion
on the ground that he was “ homo perturbatus ,
and that his head had gained an ascendency over
his heart.” 1 For the remainder of his sojourn
he appears to have busied himself in collecting
information and listening to the varied religious
2 E
1 Memoirs of Hutton, p. 40.


experiences of divers individual Germans. 1 But
his reception perplexed him, and this seems to
have been the first sign of u a rift within the
lute.” On his return to England, though still
presiding over the Fetter Lane organization, he
began to criticize some of the German doctrines. 2
And he was not alone in his perplexity, for many
of the members of the old Religious Societies,
“to whose deliberate self-righteous minds this
Gospel was a stumbling-block,” were beginning
to feel puzzled. Their awakening from spiritual
lethargy by the Methodist crusade had been fol-
lowed by varying results. Some of them joined
the new society at Fetter Lane when the plea of
faith was vividly presented to them. But others,
caught up on the Pelagian side, perhaps by the
spectacle of so much depravity all around them,
became firm doctrinal opponents of the move-
ments Late in 1738 Whitefield returned from
1 Cf. his Journal for this period, passim.
2 Cf. his letters at this time to Zinzendorf, in Germany,
quoted by Tyerman in his Life and Times of John Wesley, vol. i,
pp. 206-07,
3 Cf. Jl Sermon preached to the Religious Societies at their
quarterly meeting, March 21, 1739, with a view to stop the growth
of some modern irregularities, by William Berriman, D.D. The
preacher warns them to practise piety, and not to dispute
about faith. Cf. p. 17, “ The Church of Christ . . . requires
many Hands to be employed in its Ministrations. And this
is sure to be done to most Advantage, when the People are
content to sit peaceably under their own Pastors, without
studying to gratify an itching Ear, by running after those to
whom they have no Relation, to the great Disturbance of the
public Peace and Order.” Bodl., Godw, Pamph, 991 (26).


America, and by the following February (1739)
he was in Bristol. His vigorous advocacy of
the doctrine of the “ new birth ” soon caused
him to be excluded from the pulpits of the
Bristol parish churches, and he began to use
the rooms of the societies in Bristol for his
preaching. 1 He frequently mentions these so-
cieties in his Journal, and it is important to
discover what kind of societies they were. Some
of them were recent establishments, 2 but others
are not so described. Now, there had been
in Bristol, in 1737, some of the societies on
the old religious model, and to these Whitefield
had preached in that year. 3 And he had had
some acquaintance during the same year with a
Religious Society at Stonehouse, in Gloucester. 4
Later, in May, 1737, he had returned to Bristol,
and he says, after describing the furore he had
created by his preaching, “a private Society or
two were erected.” 5 It is fair to assume that
these private societies in their origin owed some-
thing to the older Religious Societies in Bristol,
1 This information is collected from Whitefield’s Journals
{ut sup.). The reference in each case would be to the date
mentioned in the text.
2 “ Since I was in Bristol last,” says Whitefield (p. 208).
3 See his Journals, January and February, 1737. Indeed he
had first preached his sermon on “ Religious Society,” which
he afterwards delivered to a quarterly meeting of the Religious
Societies in London in 1737, in the parish church of St.
Nicholas, in Bristol, in this year (cf. Works).
* Whitefield’s ‘Journals [ut sup.), p. 75.
5 Ibid., p. 77.


as well as to the Praying Societies in Oxford, to
which Whitefield had belonged in 1729. There-
fore we may say that the societies Whitefield met,
and whose rooms he used in 1739 at Bristol,
were both societies of the older religious type,
and other societies partly based on the style of
them. From this material Whitefield, in 1739,
formed other new societies, both at Bristol and in
other parts of England. For we have a letter of
his, written from the ship that was carrying him
to Philadelphia late in 1739, which letter is
addressed to “ the Religious Societies lately set
on foot in several parts of England and Wales.”
In this letter he distinctly points out the difference
between the old and the new organizations. He
says it is not necessary for the new societies to
use a form of prayer, and he questions whether
“ Dr. Woodward’s form ” has any authority. In
doctrine he advises emphasis to be laid only upon
justification by faith. And finally he strongly
urges that mutual confession should be a cardinal
feature of the new organizations. “ For want of
this,” he says, “ most of the old societies in
London are sunk into a dead formality. They
meet on a Sabbath evening, read a chapter and
sing a psalm, but seldom, if ever, acquaint each
other with the operation of God’s Spirit upon
their souls, notwithstanding this was the great
end of those who first began these societies.”
Here is clear evidence of the influence of the
societies formed on the earlier model, upon the
societies set on foot by Whitefield in 1739.


There is also evidence to prove that Wesley was
no stranger to the Religious Societies in London.
In his Journal he mentions several societies he
visited both before and after his return from
Germany, and the style of devotional practice
which he finds in them, 1 as well as the mention
of them meeting to hear a sermon at Bow
Church, 2 make it certain that some of these
societies at least were formed on the “ Wood-
ward ” model.
The societies organized by Whitefield in Bristol
also fell under the influence of the elder Wesley.
“In April,” he says, “I went down to Bristol;
and soon after, a few persons agreed to meet
weekly, with the same intentions as those in
London. These were swiftly increased by the
occasion of several little societies, which were till
then [1739] accustomed to meet in divers parts
of the city, but now agreed to unite together in
one.” 3. This extract illustrates the policy of the
founder of Methodism. His plan was to make
old institutions serve his purpose by infusing into
them a new spirit. From what has been said it
is clear that some of these old institutions in
Bristol, which were afterwards banded together
on the model of Fetter Lane and the Foundry,
1 Wesley’s Journal, March 26, 1738 (Works, vol. i, pp. 89—
9°).
2 Ibid., September 26, 1738 (Works, vol. i, p. 159).
3 A Short History of the People called Methodists, by John
Wesley (Works, vol. xiii, pp. 273, 274). Cf. Journal, April 4,
1 739 (Works, vol. i, p. 185).


in London, were Religious Societies of the earlier
type. 1
But the Fetter Lane organization was not
destined thus to pass into the hands of the
Methodists. It was from the society at the
Foundry rather than that at Fetter Lane that
the real Wesleyan organizations developed. It
will therefore be necessary to notice the progress
of the movement for one step farther.
From the time John Wesley had returned
from Germany, in the latter part of 1738, until
he went to Bristol in April, 1739, he had taken
charge of the meetings at Fetter Lane. Some
months after his departure from the capital,
Molther, one of the brethren, arrived and visited
the meetings. His description of what he found
there is enough to show that Wesley was no
longer of the Moravian way of thinking. No
longer was quietness or calm resignation the
feature of the gatherings, for all the sighings and
groanings which accompanied conversion were to
1 Wesley’s policy in this respect is still more clearly shown
by the following extract :
“On August 26, 1743, ... I set out for Cornwall, but
made no considerable stop till I came to St. Ives, on Tuesday,
30. Some time since, Captain Turner, of Bristol, put in
here, and was agreeably surprised to find a little society formed
upon Dr. Woodward’s plan, who constantly met together. They
were much refreshed and strengthened by him, as he was by
them. This was the occasion of our first intercourse with
them. I now spoke severally with those of the society, who
were about a hundred and twenty, near a hundred of whom
had found peace with God.” {Works, vol. xiii, p. 279.)


be heard on every side. 1 Molther set himself
to remedy this, and succeeded in bringing back
the Moravian spirit into the meetings of the
society. When Wesley heard of this he came
back in haste from Bristol to re-convert his
people from Moravian heresy. 2 While he was
in hot debate at Fetter Lane, he was pressed by
some friends to begin another society upon his
own principles. He consented, and the society
at the Foundry was established. 3 All through
the early part of the year 1740 the quarrel
between Wesley and the Moravians was coming
to a head. In Wesley’s eyes the Moravians
were guilty of two heresies. For they asserted
that there were no degrees of faith, which meant
the denial of faith to the tortured Methodist
“ doubters ” and “ wrestlers.” And they also
held that to seek salvation by works, before the
gift of faith, was wrong. This is not the place
to deal with the lights and shades of this contro-
versy. 4 It is enough to note that while the
1 See Molther’s letter, about the end of 1739, printed in
Benham’s Memoirs of Hutton, p. 53. “I was alarmed and
almost terror-stricken at hearing . . . their whining and howl-
ing, which . . . they called the demonstration of the Spirit
and of power.”
2 Cf. Journal, Nov. 1, 1739 [Works, vol. I, p. 238).
3 Cf. JJn Earnest Jjppeal to Men of Reason and Religion
(Wesley’s Works, vol. viii, p. 37). There had previously been
preaching at this place. (Cf. Thomas Jackson, Life of the Rev.
Charles Wesley, London, 1841, vol. i, p. 219.)
4 The whole dispute is dealt with very ably from the
Methodist point of view by Tyerman in his Life and Times


Moravian doctrine of stillness meant waiting
passively in rapt earnestness for faith, Wesley
preached rather that men should trust in God’s
mercy alone, but do their best in life while
waiting for the assurance of it. In July the crisis
came. On the sixteenth a question was asked at
Fetter Lane, whether Wesley should be heard
preach there. The answer was that “ this place
is taken for the Germans.” 1 On the twentieth
Wesley appeared at a love-feast in Fetter Lane
and openly refuted the Moravian doctrines of
stillness and the impossibility of degrees of faith.
“ I believe these assertions to be flatly contrary
to the word of God,” he said ; u You that are
of the same judgment, follow me.” He then
withdrew and took eighteen or nineteen of the
society with him. 2 “The two societies of the
Brethren and the Methodists thenceforward
were separated and became independent upon
each other.” 3 From now onwards the Foundry,
to which Wesley’s followers had seceded, became
the headquarters of Methodism.
of John Wesley, the letters and journals on both sides of the dis-
pute being quoted (vol. i, chapters “ 1739” and “ 1740”).
Tyerman proves, by subsequent correspondence, that the
fundamental doctrines of the Moravian Church were sub-
stantially identical with those of Wesley, while the London
doctrines of Molther and Hutton were a heresy (vol. i,
pp. 308, 309).
1 Wesley’s Journal\ July 16, 1740 (Works, vol. i, p. 281).
2 Ibid., July 20, 1740 (Works, vol. i, p. 282).
3 Letter from James Hutton, quoted in Benham’s Memoirs,
p. 54.


We have now come to a point where we can
abandon our inquiry into the history of the
beginnings of Methodism. And we must here
sum up the evidence that bears upon the point
at issue. Shortly put, the question is, How far
did the Religious Societies contribute to the
growth of Methodism ?
Of the societies which formed the Fetter Lane
association, we may say that that of Hutton owed
something to the older bodies, inasmuch as its
founder was well acquainted with their organiza-
tion and was himself a member of one. The
original Moravian Society founded by Zinzendorf,
on the other hand, was quite a separate develop-
ment. The Fetter Lane Society we have already
examined. In doctrine and principle it differed
greatly from the older Religious Societies, but
there are some points of resemblance. These
may be ascribed to an imitation of the older
models by the founders, who were not un-
acquainted with such models, or may be explained
simply as the working of the associative principle
in human nature (which is sometimes called the
“ social aspect ”of religion). But when we come
to consider the question of the Bristol societies,
we may fairly say that the Methodist associations
of that city are founded in imitation of the older
societies, and composed largely of members of
the pre-Methodist associations. And this also
serves to remind us that in London the old
societies were no strangers to the Methodists.
Both Whitefield and Wesley visited them often,
2 F


and made converts of their members. And some
of those members joined the Fetter Lane organiza-
tion, which was the direct parent of the Foundry
Society. 1 Thus, on the whole, we may say that
1 It seems fair to treat the society at the Foundry as the
first real Methodist Society. The Oxford gatherings of 1729
and the society founded by John Wesley in Georgia were
formed before he had developed his ideas of conversion, which
were practically the mainspring of the Methodist movement.
“ The birthday of a Christian was already shifted from his
baptism to his conversion, and in that change the partition
line of two great systems is crossed.” (Julia Wedgwood, John
Wesley, London, 1870, p. 157.) The later quarrel between
Wesley and Whitefield does not affect this inquiry.
The history of the Moravian organization in London after
Wesley’s secession is interesting. In October, 1742, the
Fetter Lane Society, under ZinzendorFs advice, was formally
settled, not as a branch of the English Church, but a# “ a
Society of the English Church in union with the Brethren.”
It was called “ the Congregation of the Lamb,” and, at its
second inception, consisted of seventy-two members. (See
Memoirs of Hutton, p. 89.)
Meanwhile, in April, 1741, a Society for the Furtherance
of the Gospel was organized from among the Moravians in
London. It was not intended to oppose the S.P.C.K. or the
S.P.G., or to interfere with any established charitable endea-
vour. Its real object was to support the missions of the
brethren. Its constitution was not unlike those of the older
Gospel Societies, although it shows Moravian tendencies. For
ten years it paid the expenses of the missions of the brethren,
more especially in the English Colonies, when it was dissolved
on account of the pecuniary difficulties of the congregation.
But in 1765 it was renewed on the old basis, and did good
work both in helping missionary enterprise and in circulating
Moravian literature. (See Memoirs of Hutton for particulars,
pp. 40 seq., and 481, 482.)


Methodism in its beginnings owed something to
the Anglican Religious Societies which existed
in England during the decade 1734-44. And
perhaps it owed more to them as recruiting-
grounds for converts and members than as models
on which to base its organization. The most
distinctive feature of later Methodist societies
was the “ band ” system, 1 which was an importa-
tion from the Moravian organizations, and not
from the Anglican societies, while one of the most
distinctive characteristics of the older Religious
Societies was the system of regular subscriptions
for charitable purposes which does not appear in
the first attempts at Methodist organization.
But the members themselves of the older bodies
were directly brought into contact with the
Methodist leaders, and some of them were
strongly influenced towards the new movement.
These would doubtless have been the most
religious of the members, and this is not sur-
prising when we have learnt how low the societies
had sunk in spiritual sloth. If this conclusion
is correct, we shall have to acknowledge that
Methodism, while itself owing something in
organization and numbers to the older Religious
Societies, was the indirect cause of their extinc-
1 For particulars of the “band” system see The Nature,
Design, and General Rules of the United Societies in London,
Bristol, etc. (Wesley’s Works, vol. viii, pp. 269-71.) Wesley
regarded it as the “ sinews of his societies.” (John Stough-
ton, Religion in England under Queen jlnne and the Georges, vol. i,
P- 4°3-)


tion. For after the rise of Wesleyanism we hear
no more of Religious Societies in the older sense.
We must not, however, suppose that this extinc-
tion was entirely due to the rise of Methodism.
The stricter Churchmen among the members of
the societies would never have countenanced the
movement after it began to show signs of separa-
tion. But the spirit of “ sweet reasonableness ”
which characterized this period of the century
was not calculated to sustain such institutions
after they had lost their enthusiasts. And it was
this type of member that Methodism attracted.
Left to themselves, in undisturbed sway of their
Anglican institutions, the Churchmen of the
societies were unable to keep them alive in the
face of the spirit of the age. 1
1 It is quite possible that some Religious Societies in the
country lingered on into the second half of the eighteenth
century. In 1743 James Hervey (one of the original Oxford
Methodists), who became curate at Bideford, in Devon, estab-
lished a Religious Society upon the Woodward model, which
continued to meet for forty years after he left in 1743.
( Herveiana , p. 43.)


APPENDICES




APPENDIX I.
NOTE ON THE AUTHORSHIP OF THE
CONTEMPORARY ACCOUNT OF THE
SOCIETIES FOR THE REFORMATION
OF MANNERS.
This book, of which the full title is An Account of
the Societies for Reformation of Manners in London ,
and Westminster , and other parts of the Kingdom;
with a persuasive to persons of all ranks to he
zealous and diligent in promoting the Execution of the
Laws against Profaneness and Debauchery , for the
effecting of a National Reformation , appears to have
run through five editions from 1699 to 1701.
Of these editions four are accessible.
The first, dated 1699, is in the British
Museum, 1 and contains only the Account itself,
and a prefixed letter of approbation signed by
five bishops. The second edition, also dated
1699, is in the possession of the writer, and
contains several further introductions to the
Account. It first prints William Ill’s proclama-
tion of February 20th, 1697-98, then Queen
1 British Museum, 694, f. 18.


Mary’s original letter to the justices of Middle-
sex, July 9th, 1691, and then the Commons’
address to the King for suppressing profaneness
and vice, February 17th, 1697-98. Also the
signatories to the letter of approbation are
increased by the addition of four other spiritual
lords and twenty-nine lords temporal. There is
also added to this edition an Appendix, in the
shape of an Abstract of the Penal Laws against
Immorality , etc.
The third edition, dated 1700, is in the British
Museum, and is the same as the second except
for the addition of the names of some Irish lords,
bishops, and judges to the letter of approbation,
and of the text of the Act 6 and 7 Gul. 111.
against profane cursing and swearing. l
The fourth edition is not accessible in the
Bodleian Library, the British Museum, or the
Advocates’ Library in Edinburgh.
The fifth edition, dated 1701, is in the British
Museum, and contains all the information pub-
lished in the third edition. It adds to this
letters of approval from the lords temporal, and
from the commissioners of the General Assembly
in Scotland, also two documents of approval from
the French Christians at the Savoy and elsewhere
in London. As well as these, the fifth edition
contains the “ Prudential Rules ” drawn up by
the Reforming Society, for the benefit of in-
formers, a specimen agreement for the formation
of a Society for Reformation of Manners, and
1 British Museum, 853, d. 17.


copies of the blank warrants used by the
societies. l
There are a good many references to this work
in the contemporary literature of the subject.
Edward Stephens deprecated the book when it
first appeared. 2 Archbishop Sharp refused to
sign the letter of approval attached to the second
edition. 3 Nicholas Stratford revised the book
before publication, and in writing to a corre-
spondent tells him it is not by Dr. Bray nor
any other clergyman, but by a barrister-at-law. 4
And Nicolson, Archdeacon of Carlisle, distinctly
says the author was a certain “ Mr. Yates,
Barrister of the Temple.” 5 This remark appears
in a footnote to another account which is printed
in Nicolson’s Correspondence , and is called A
Short Account of the Several Kinds of Societies, set up
of late Tears , for the promoting of God's Worship ,
for the Reformation of Manners , and for the Pro-
pagation of Christian KnowledgeP
Now this latter account seems to have been
2 G
1 British Museum, 712, d. 24.
* “ Why, if the book is so good,” he asks, “ can you only
get five out of twenty-five bishops to approve of it ? ” (Cf.
Seasonable and Necessary Admonition to the Gentlemen of the First
Society for the Reformation of Manners. Brit. Mus. 4105,
d-
-3 Cf. his letter to William Nicolson, February 27 th,
1699-1700. (Nicolson’s Correspondence,vo\. i, no. 64, p. 155-)
4 Ibid., no. 71, p. 172.
5 Ibid., no. 82, p. 191 (note). This footnote is signed
W. N.
6 Cf. Bodl. ; R. I. 19. Jur.


confused with the book we are considering. Its
authorship is assigned to Yates both in the
Catalogue of the Bodleian Library and by Hal-
kett and Laing, 1 while the account of the Societies
for Reformation of Manners has been variously
ascribed to different persons. As we have seen
above, a contemporary guess made Bray its
author, but the Bishop of Chester contradicts
this. Then the old copy of the British Museum
catalogue in the Bodleian Library assigns the
book to Defoe. 2 The Bodleian catalogue at-
tributes it to Josiah Woodward, as do Halkett
and Laing.
There is some internal evidence to combat
these last two suggestions. The attitude of the
author of this book is not at all the attitude
which we should expect from Defoe in writing of
the Reforming Societies. As we have seen (cf.
chap, iv), Defoe’s view of these societies at this
time was decidedly hostile, whereas this book
praises them almost on every page. The internal
evidence against Woodward’s authorship consists
in a remark made in the book itself where his
account of the Religious Societies is spoken of in
1 Cf. Dictionary of Anonymous and Pseudonymous Literature
(Halkett and Laing).
3 It was from this source apparently that J. H. Overton
quotes the Account as Defoe’s in his Life in the English Church ,
1660-1714, pp. 214 and 215. The present B. M. Cata-
logue, however, has erased the reference, and the book is
not now catalogued as being written by Defoe. The press
mark of the book as attributed to Defoe is Brit. Mus. 861,
1. 2.


a way which allows us to presume that he is not
the author of both books.
But the most weighty evidence against the
authorship of Defoe or Woodward is, fortunately,
external. From the minutes of the S.P.C.K. 1 we
discover that Mr. Justice Hook was “ desired to
draw up an account of the nature of this Society,
and wherein it differr’s from other Societys”
(February 3rd, 1699-1700). This account was
read (February 15th) and examined (February
22nd) and amended and ordered to be printed
(March 7th). It was sent out to correspondents
(March 7th) and to the bishops (April 18th and
25th). A deputation waited on the Lord Keeper
with it (May 2nd), and it was reprinted (July
25th, 1700). This is clearly the Short Account of
the Societies mentioned in Nicolson’s Correspond-
ence and attributed by the Bodleian Catalogue and
by Halkett and Laing to Yates. It was compiled
by Mr. Justice Hook.
Who, then, wrote the account of the Reforming
Societies which we are considering ? The Bishop
of Chester suggests a barrister-at-law, whom
Nicolson calls Yates. This is first-hand evidence.
And it is also supported by no less than five
distinct references to Mr. Yates’ of the
Societies of Reformation in the minutes and corre-
spondence of the S.P.C.K. from 1698 to 1704. 2
The cumulation of this evidence is sufficient
ground for us to assume that the author of this
1 A Chapter in English Church History, by Edmund McClure.
2 Ibid., pp. 54, 90, 178, 340, and 342.


Account of the Societies for Reformation , etc., is
Yates, and that The Short Account of Societies , etc.,
was written by Mr. Justice Hook for the
S.P.C.K. If this be correct then the Bodleian
Catalogue is in error in attributing the former
book to Woodward and the latter to Yates.
And Halkett and Laing are in like case.


APPENDIX II.
SERMONS PREACHED BEFORE THE
SOCIETIES FOR REFORMATION
OF MANNERS.
The societies had a regular annual sermon preached
to them in the Church of St. Mary-le-Bow, Cheap-
side.l But very many of the quarterly sermons
for which the society made provision 2 were
apparently preached there as well. These ser-
mons generally bear the footnote, “ printed at
the request of the societies.” In some cases the
printing was undertaken by the societies, but
1 Cf. James Paterson’s Piet as Londinensis. After this sermon
the annual meeting would be held. The sermon was generally
printed by the societies, and the past year’s report was added
to it after 1709. The sermon was preached in December or
January.
2 There was “ one on the Monday next ensuing after the
four usual quarter-days, preached by some minister of the
Church of England ” (cf. Sermon to S.R.M., June 28, 1697, by
John Russell). Although the society was not based on any
sectarian principle, the lion’s share of its work appears to have
been done by Anglican members.


generally the preacher published his own sermon.
This practice would account, in some measure,
for the gaps in the following lists, for some of the
regular quarterly sermons were not printed at all.
It will be seen that the officials of the societies
endeavoured to secure episcopal approbation in
this direction as well as in others. In the follow-
ing list of Anglican sermons, only the two marked
“ ? ” do not bear the express notice that they
were preached at S. Mary-le-Bow Church.
Anglican Divines who Preached to the
Societies from 1696 to 1739, WITH THE Dates
of their Sermons.
1696. December 28th, Josiah Woodward.
1697. April sth, Lilly Butler, D.D.
June 28th, John Russell.
October 4th, Samuel Bradford.
1699. January 26th, Edward Fowler (Bishop of
Gloucester).
March 28th, William Whitfeld.
1700. January Ist, John Mapletoft (?).
March 25th, Gilbert Burnet (Bishop of
Sarum).
December 30th, Simon Patrick (Bishop
of Ely).
1701. March 31st, Nicolas Stratford (Bishop of
Chester).
December 12th, Dr. White Kennett.
1702. March 30th, William Talbot (Bishop of
Oxford).


1702. December 28 th, Geo. Stanhope (Dean
of Canterbury).
1703. March 30th, John Williams (Bishop of
Chichester).
December 30th, Dr. Willis (Dean of
Lincoln).
1704. March 27th, William Bisset.
1705. January 1st, John Hough (Bishop of
Lichfield and Coventry).
December, William Wake (Bishop of
Lincoln).
1706. December 30th, William Nicolson (Bishop
of Carlisle).
1708. December 27th, Dr. Thomas Bray.
1709. December 26th, Peter Newcombe,
M.A.
17 11. January 1 st, Dr. William Colnett.
December 31st, Charles Trimnell (Bishop
of Norwich).
1713. December 28th, Dr. Waugh.
1716. January 2nd, Dr. Boulter.
December 31st, St. George Ash (Bishop
of Derry).
1717. December 30th, Dr. Heyley.
1720. June 7th, Moses Lowman (?).
1722. January 1st, William Butler.
December 31st, Joseph Willcocks (Bishop
of Gloucester).
1724. June 6th, Edmund Gibson (Bishop of
London).
1725. January 4th, Edward Chandler (Bishop
of Lichfield and Coventry).


1726. January 3rd, John Wynne (Bishop of
St. Asaph).
1727. January 16th, Thomas Green (Bishop
of Ely).
1728. J anuary 1 oth, Richard Smallbrooke (Bishop
of St. Davids).
1729. January Bth, Dr. Heylin.
1 73°. January 9th, Archdeacon Denne.
1 73 1 . January sth, Francis Hare (Bishop of
St. Asaph).
1 733» January 15th, James Knight.
1734. January 10th, Arthur Bedford, M.A.
1 735- January 27th, Robert Drew, M.A.
1736. January 19th, Edward Cobden, D.D,
1738. March 20th, William Simpson.
1739. March sth, Samuel Smith, LL.B.
The last-mentioned sermon was apparently the
last official sermon preached to the societies. It
has appended to it the forty-fourth account of
the society, which was the last one published.
Dissenting Divines who Preached to the
Societies in London.
1697. February 15th, Samuel Burgess.
May 31st, John Woodhouse (at Salter’s
Hall).
August 16th, Matthew Sylvester (at
Salter’s Hall).
November 15th, John Shower.


1698. May 16th, Daniel Williams (at Salter’s
Hall).
August 15th, Vincent Alsop (at Salter’s
Hall).
November 14th, John Spademan.
(Circa)
1698. John How (no place nor date in title).
1699. Edward Calamy. 1
1702. December 29th, William Harris.
1715. June 27th, S. Wright (at Salter’s Hall).
1729. June 30th, Thomas Newman (at Salter’s
Hall).
1 73 6. June 28th, Samuel Day (at Salter’s Hall).
1738. August 25th, Samuel Chandler (at Salter’s
Hall). 2
Besides this there are existent sermons which
were preached to the branch societies in the
country, and there are the two famous sermons
preached by Dr. Woodward at the funeral of
Constable Cooper, in 1702, and by Dr. Bray,
at the funeral of Constable Dent, in 1709.
Anything of particular interest, or which bears
upon the history of the societies in the above
sermons has been noted in the text. Most of
them are wearisome reading. The ordinary
2 H
1 Cf. Own Life , vol. i, p. 410.
2 For the occasion of any large meeting, the London
Dissenters used the great trading company’s halls. It is not
clear whether the societies ever paid for the publications of
these sermons to their dissenting members. Certainly no
annual report was affixed to a sermon by a Dissenter.


preacher of the period generally proceeds
thus.
The text is first discussed in its context, and
the moral of it proved to be a sound and practical
one. It is then applied to the matter under
discussion. In “ reforming ” sermons this part
of the discourse generally fell under three heads.
First, the preacher triumphantly proves that
immorality is displeasing to God ; secondly, he
finds the nation is permitting the practice of
immorality, although there are means at hand
to stop it; thirdly, he discovers those means
to be the methods of the reforming societies.
These he holds up to approbation as fulfilling
Divine commands ; and finally, he commends the
societies to the blessing of God.


APPENDIX III.
THE SYSTEM OF BLANK WARRANTS AND
REGISTERS USED BY THE SOCIETY FOR
THE REFORMATION OF MANNERS.
A SPECIMEN BLANK WARRANT.
“ Whereas [A. 8., gentleman], being [above six-
teen years of age] is convicted before me of
profane swearing [five times], within the parish
of [ ], this being the [second] time of
his conviction, these . . . charge and command
you to demand of the said [A. B.], [2OJ.] for the
use of the poor of the parish. If he refuse or
neglect, you are to levy the same by distress, and
in default of this, set him in the stocks for [two
hours]. And this shall be your warrant, etc.”
Here the blank warrant has been filled in by
the insertion of the words in brackets. The case
has run somewhat thus : —A. B. has been heard
to swear five times by an informer, who goes to
an agency of the Reforming Societies. Here it is
found by the register ( q.v . below) that A. B. has
already been convicted of a similar offence. The
warrant is then made out as above, and the


informer takes it to a magistrate and swears his
information. When the magistrate has signed it,
the warrant is brought back by the informer to
the agency and left there. Later it is collected
by another agent, who delivers it to one of the
constables in the parish of , who serves
the warrant upon A. 8., distressing him, or setting
him in the stocks if he will not pay or has no
negotiable property. Had A. B. been “ a servant,
day labourer, common soldier, or common sea-
man,” he would have been asked to pay ioj. ;
being “a gentleman,” he pays twice that amount.
Had he sworn twice he would only have paid Bj.,
for he pays at the rate of 4 s. per oath. He would
only pay 2 s. per oath if this had been his first
offence, but it is his second. Finally, had he
been under sixteen years of age, and refused to
pay, he would not have been distrained upon, nor
set in the stocks, but would have been “ whipped
by the Constable by the Warrant of the Justice,
or by the Parent, Guardian, or Master, in the
presence of the Constable.” 1 It is to be noted
that no cumulation of offences warrants a longer
punishment in the stocks than two hours.
One other specimen will suffice :
“Whereas [A. B.] Innkeeper, is convicted before
me of having allowed tippling on Sunday [date],
1 This imaginary case is compiled from the Abstract of the
Tend Lam against Immorality and Trofaneness, which was one of
the pamphlets freely distributed by the S.R.M. The legal
authorities for the case are 21 Jac. I, cc. 7, 20; 3 Car. I, c, 1 ;
17 Car. 11, c, 7 ; 6 and 7 Gul. 111, c. 11.


Deliv-
ered
To
A
Warrant
Dated
Signed by
Against
!n the Parish
of
Oct. 13
[1710.]
Mr.
Constable,
C. W.
Do. [Oct.] 13
Sir Jno.
Houblon.
Edwd. Perry in
Bishopsgate
Street
St. Bottolphs,
Bishopsgate.
For
Levying
For the
Offence of
Convic-
tion.
Com-
mitted
upon
In the
Parish of
Convicted
by
£ s. d.
i 4 o
6 Oaths
aConviction
do. [Oct.] 4.
[Aforesaid.]
Mr
Mercer
these . . . charge and command you to demand
of the said [A. B.] to forfeit twenty shillings for
the use of the poor of the parish. If he refuse
or neglect, you are to levy the same by distress,
and in default of this to take him to gaol until
such time as he shall make payment. . . . And
of the due execution of this you are to give an
account when it shall be demanded of you. And
hereof fail not at your peril,” etc.
This warrant explains itself. It is for a distinct
offence for which there is a set penalty, and it
demands no mental arithmetic to elucidate it. It
might be noticed, however, that the constable is
required to give account of having executed the
warrant when such is demanded of him. This
would be at the examination of parish constables
at the quarter sessions, at which also an agent of
the societies would attend with his register, from
which the following is an extract :


This is an entry in one of the MS. registers in
the Bodleian, called “An Account of the Warrants
issued out to the Constables of the Parish of
Against Persons convicted of Profane
Cursing and Swearing, Profanation of the Lord’s
day, etc.” (MS. Rawl. D. 1396.) The entries
date from February 20 to November 14, 1710, and
all the warrants are issued in London parishes.
Here, evidently, Mercer has laid information
against Perry for swearing six times. A warrant
has been signed and issued and delivered to
Mr. Constable. 1 “ C.W.” indicates “Church
Warden,” in which case, perhaps, the warrant has
been given to the constable through the church-
warden of the parish, so that the latter may check
the former in case he does not deliver the amount
of the fine to the wardens for the use of the poor.
It is Perry’s second conviction, and so he pays
double, for six oaths. This is at the rate of 2 s.
an oath for first offences. So that Perry could
not have been a labourer, servant, soldier, or
sailor. With this information the agent of the
societies is prepared to check both the constable
at the Quarter Sessions and the wardens at their
vestry meetings.
The contents of these MS. registers reveal one
or two interesting facts. Most of the offences
are for E.T., which means “ Exercising Trade
unlawfully” (i.e., on Sundays). 2 In the register
1 “ Constable ” is the name although it has been erased.
2 A note in the Bodleian Catalogue of Rawlinson MSS.,
describing these registers, remarks that “ E.T.” signifies


for March, 1704, to April, 1707, the name of
John Dent (who was afterwards murdered in
1709) appears frequently in the column of in-
formers. Most of the E.T. convictions are
against bakers, fruiterers, and barbers. 1
The later registers are provided with another
column, headed “ Proceedings thereupon.” Many
of the cases for unlawfully exercising trade are
entered as “ excused,” or “ discussed,” or “ dis-
charged, promising amendment.” These entries
seem to evidence that the plan, promulgated by
the Gentlemen and citizens’ Society, 2 of calling up
offenders and examining their excuses, was really
being carried into effect. Finally, we may notice
that the same names recur again and again in the
informer’s column. This seems to point either
to the fact that the really hard work of the move-
ment fell mainly upon the shoulders of the
enthusiastic few, or to the practice of laying
informations in the names of the societies’ agents.
The latter supposition seems more probable. An
agent, who knew the details of the legal pro-
cedure, would be likely to take upon himself
frequently the business of informing, at the
“ excessive tippling.” This appears to be a highly unlikely
significance. Indeed it is safe to say that this note is incorrect.
For a note at the bottom of each page of MS. Rawl. D. 1396
gives the signification of various contractions, and E.T. is
explained as “Unlawfully Exercising of Trade on the Lords
day.”
1 Cf. p. 52, note 3.
2 Cf. p. 43.


request of some timid or busy member of the
societies.
This whole system of information, which was
based on statute law, is no longer possible in
England, because these specific statutes have been
repealed. The following information shows the
date of the repeal of each several statute. (Cf.
chap, ii, notes i-6.)
I. Sunday Trading.
i Eliz., c. 2, was repealed by 9 & 10 Viet., c. 59.
23 Eliz., c. 1, was repealed by 7 & 8 Viet., c. 102.
1 Jac. I, c. 22, § 28, was repealed by 48 Geo. 111,
c. 60 ; and 3 Geo. IV, c. 41.
3 Jac. I, c. 4, was repealed by 9 & 10 Viet., c. 59.
1 Car. I, c. 1, and 3 Car. I, c. 2, are still un-
repealed. An unsuccessful attempt was made to
enforce 1 Car. I, c. 1, in 1897. It must be
remembered that much of the present Sunday
trade in bars, etc., though illegal under these Acts,
is legalized by later statutes, e.g., Acts concerning
Licensing and Travelling, Bread Acts, etc., etc.
29 Car. 11, c. 7, is partly repealed by 7 & 8
Geo. IV, c. Ixxv, §l. Also at the present time
a prosecution may not be executed under this
Act (29 Car. 11, c. 7) except with the consent of
(1) the chief officer of police of the district, or
(2) two Justices of the Peace, or (3) a Stipendiary
Magistrate. This consent must be obtained in
writing before an information is laid. (Vide
Thorpe v. Priestnall, 1897.)


11. Drunkenness.
The statutes i Jac. I, c. 9 ; 4 Jac. I, c. 5 ;
7 Jac. I, c. 10 ; 21 Jac. I, c. 7 ; 1 Car. I, c. 4 ;
upon which the Reforming Societies mainly relied
for informations against this offence, were all
repealed by 9 Geo. IV, c. 61, § 35, which is part
of an Act in 1828 to regulate the licensing of
Inns, Alehouses, etc.
111. Swearing and Cursing.
21 Jac. I, c. 20, and 6 & 7 Gul. 111, c. 11,
were repealed by 19 Geo. 11, c. 21, which, though
itself since repealed in some of its sections, remains
in force in many of the other sections. The con-
viction by warrant in the absence of the accused
disappeared from this statute. Henceforth the
accused is always charged by the officer before the
magistrate. Thus, in regard to this offence, by
1746 the principle of lay information as a means
of conviction has disappeared. This Act (1746)
also made a further social distinction in the fine
levied —all persons over and above the degree
of “ gentleman ” paying five shillings per oath.
Previously such persons had been fined at the
rate of two shillings per oath.
The Act 3 Car. I, c. 4, which also dealt with
these offences, was repealed, with the statutes
against drunkenness, by 9 Geo. IV, c. 61,
§ 35-
2 I


IV. Blasphemy.
3 Jac. 1, c. 21, was repealed by 6 & 7 Viet.,
c. 68, §l. 9&10 Gul. 111, c. 32, was repealed,
in so far as it relates to persons denying the Holy
Trinity, by 53 Geo. 111, c. 160, §2. The present
law concerning blasphemy is largely case law.
V. Gaming.
33 Hen. VIII, c. 9, was repealed by 8 & 9
Viet., c. 109, § 1, and by 26 & 27 Viet., c. 125
(Statute Law Revision Act, 1863), as were also the
Statutes 2 & 3 P. & M., c. 9, and 16 Car. 11, c. 7.
VI. Lewd and Disorderly Practices.
1 Hen. VII, c. 4, was repealed by 3 & 4 Viet.,
c. 86, § 1.
4 Hen. VII, c. 12, was repealed by Statute Law
Revision Act, 1863.
39 Eliz., c. 4, was repealed by 12 Annae, c. 23.
43 Eliz., c. 2, was repealed at various times.
1 Jac. I, c. 7, was repealed by Statute Law
Revision Act, 1863.
7 Jac. I, c. 4, was repealed by Statute Law
Revision Act, 1863, and by 12 Annae, c. 23.


APPENDIX IV.
LATER ATTMEPTS TO FORM SOCIETIES
FOR REFORMING MANNERS.
In 1757 the Methodists, faced with the dreadful
immorality of the capital, which only seemed
enhanced by the partial success of their “ Revival
Movement” up to that time, determined to revive
the Societies for Reformation of Manners.
In August, 1757, a small Methodist company
in London, which had met for prayer, fell to dis-
cussing the contemporary profanity of the Sabbath.
Various remedies were suggested, and six of the
members afterwards waited on Sir John Feilding,
in the hope of finding some means to check this
profanity. He appears to have encouraged them,
for petitions were delivered to the Lord Mayor
and Aldermen, and to the justices at Hick’s Hall
and Westminster. From these, as well as from
divers clergymen who were approached, much
encouragement was received. At first only a
literary crusade against profanity was begun.
Thousands of pamphlets, instructions to con-
stables, dissuasives from crime, etc., were pub


lished. But by 1758 it became necessary for the
promoters to begin to inform against offenders in
order to check Sabbath-breaking, and gradually
the sphere of prosecutions extended until game-
sters and prostitutes as well as profane persons
were convicted. The society found a great deal
of opposition to their attempts to stop Sunday
trading in alehouses. They had “ not only the
tipplers and those who entertained them to con-
tend with, but rich and honourable men, partly
the landlords of these alehouse-keepers, partly
those who furnished them with drink, 1 and in
general all who gained by their sins. Some of
these were not only men of substance but men
of authority ; nay, in more instances than one,
they were the very persons before whom the
delinquents were brought.” 2
The new societies were unsectarian, although
they were accused of all being “ Whitefieldites.”
This was not true. In 1763, out of the 160
members, only 20 were followers of Whitefield,
while 50 were Wesleyans, 20 were Anglicans,
1 The brewers and landlords of the eighteenth century
would appear to have held similar views to those of the
twentieth.
2 Cf. John Wesley’s Sermon to the Society for Reformation of
Manners on Sunday, January 30, 1763 , at the Chapel in West
Street. {Works, vol. vi, No. 52, p. 149.) From this sermon
and from Wesley’s Journals this account is compiled. It is
curious to note how, at the very outset, these later societies
were faced by the same problem of “interested” magistrates
which had so greatly hampered the efforts of their pre-
decessors.


and the remaining 70 were members of the older
dissenting bodies. 1 From the date of its incep-
tion in August, 1757, until August, 1762, the
society seems to have been very active, for it had
made 9,596 arrests, 2 and the next five months
furnished 992 more. The latter number was
made up of 40 for “ unlawful gaming and pro-
fane swearing,” 400 for Sabbath-breaking, 550
for prostitution and whoremongering, and 2 for
“ offering to sell obscene prints. 3
John Wesley identified himself with the revived
society. In 1763 he preached before it, and
warns the members not to hasten to increase their
number, “and to add not thereto with any regard
of wealth or rank or outward circumstance.” He
also remarks that he regards the careless selection
of new members as the reason of the earlier
societies’ downfall. In 1764 we find him pro-
posing to the “ London Leaders ” meeting to
assist the new society to liquidate a heavy
debt. 4
In February, 1766, however, he dines with
a certain Mr. W. Welsh, whom he calls “ the
father of the late Society for Reformation of
1 John Wesley’s Works , vol, vi, p. 154.
2 Over 1,900 arrests per annum. The older societies in
the period 1715-25 only averaged 2,280, though they were
much larger.
3 This was an offence for which the older societies had not
prosecuted. It seems to have become worse as the century
advanced (p. 225).
4 John Wesley’s Journal, Nov. 4, 1764 {Works, vol. iii,
p. 200).


Manners,” and laments its decease. 1 The cause
of this would appear to have been an action
instituted against the society in King’s Bench,
which issued in a verdict for the plaintiff with
£3OO damages. “This verdict,” says Tyerman,
“ was obtained by the false swearing of a wretch
whom the society afterwards convicted of wilful
perjury.” 2 But the society, already under heavy
debts, could not face this additional burden, and
it appears to have come to an end in 1765.
“They could never recover the expense of that
suit. Lord, how long shall the ungodly
triumph ? ” 3
Towards the close of the eighteenth century
another attempt was made to found a Society for
Reformation of Manners. It is not surprising to
find that its author was William Wilberforce.
He conceived that “ there was needed some
reformer of the nation’s morals who should raise
his voice in the high places of the land ; and do
within the church and near the throne, what
Wesley had accomplished . . . amongst the
multitude.” 4 “ God,” he says, “ has set before
me as my object the reformation of [my country’s]
1 John Wesley’s Journal , Feb. 2, 1766 (Works, vol. iii,
p. 241).
2 Life and Times of Samuel Wesley, London, 1866, p. 223;
also see John Wesley’s footnote to the sermon quoted above
(p. 244, note 2).
3 John Wesley’s Journal Feb. 2, 1766 {Works, vol. iii,
p. 241).
4 Life of William Wllberforce , by his sons, London, 1838,
vol. i, p. 130.


manners.” 1 “ His first great effort,” says his
biographers, “ was suggested by Dr. Woodward’s
History of the Society for the Reformation of Manners
in the year 1692.2 His plan was to obtain a
Royal Proclamation against vice and immorality,
and then to suggest the formation of a society.
The Duke of Montague promised to act as
president, and the Archbishop of Canterbury
expressed himself warmly in favour of the move-
ment. He prevailed upon many of the bishops
to become members of the new association, which
was finally started in the autumn of 1787. The
society began its meetings at the house of its
first president, the Duke of Montague, and was
soon actively employed. The prospectus pub-
lished by the society states that- it was founded
“to check the rapid progress of impiety and
licentiousness, to promote a spirit of decency and
good order, and enforce a stricter execution of
the laws against vice and immorality.” Its policy
was “ to be vigilant ... in the prosecution . . .
of criminal practices . . . within the law,” and
1 Life of William Wilberforce , by his sons, London, 1838,
vol. 1, p. 130.
2 Plainly these biographers are in error. Woodward wrote
the Account of the Religious Societies. It was about 1692
that the Religious Societies began to do reforming work (cf.
chapter iii), and Woodward alludes to this. So possibly this is
the ground of the error. William Wilberforce himself appears
to have confused the Religious and Reforming Societies also,
imagining that reformation of manners was only the secondary
aim of the earlier Societies for Reforming Manners (cf. his
letter to Mr. Hey, May 29, 1787, printed in his Life, i. 132).


to assist “ the magistracy in the discharge of their
duty.” Clearly the society is based on the same
principles as the earlier one. This prospectus is
signed by seventeen peers, nineteen bishops, and
thirteen laymen (including Wilberforce). 1 Bishop
Beilby Porteus, who had been translated from
Chester to the See of London in 1787, made the
advancement of the society his special care. He
succeeded Lord Bathurst as the third president
of the society, and “ had the satisfaction of seeing
it productive of the best results.” 2 “ Many
persons were prosecuted and punished for dis-
seminating licentious books, and ... a check
was in some measure given to that most per-
nicious custom of exhibiting publicly indecent
prints.” 3 One of these “ licentious books ” was
Thomas Paine’s Age of Reason. Although it had
been already answered by the Bishop of Llandaff 4
in his Apology for the Bible , the society determined
in 1797 to prosecute. Great pains were taken
to secure a conviction, Erskine conducting the
prosecution, at the request of the Bishops of
London and Durham. s Lord Kenyon, in his
charge to the jury, commended the society’s
action. The publisher, Thomas Williams, was
1 The Prospectus is printed in Wilberforce’s Life, vol. i,
PP- 393, 394-
2 The Life of the late Right Reverend Beilby Tor tens, by Robert
Hodgson, London, 1811, p. ioi.
3 Ibid. ; cf. p. 245, note 3, for this offence in 1763.
4 Anecdotes of the Life oj Richard Watson , London, 1817,
p. 287.
5 Porteus, and the Hon. Shute Barrington.


convicted, and the publication was effectually-
stopped. 1
Later than this, Porteus induced the society
(which was officially known not as the Society for
Reformation of Manners, but as the “ Society
for enforcing His Majesty’s Proclamation ”), to
issue a declaration deploring the frequent pro-
fanation of Sunday. The bishop had always been
a keen Sabbatarian, and in 1781 had managed to
get an Act passed for restraining profanations on
the Lord’s Day. 2 When he came to London
he formed a Sabbatarian “Association,” which
met at his house. 3 Wilberforce was one of the
members of it, and afterwards endeavoured (1799)
to pilot a Bill through the House for suppressing
Sunday newspapers, but it failed. 4 • But the society
does not seem to have profited by taking up this
crusade.
2 K
1 Hodgson’s Life of Porteus , pp. 125-29. In the Life oj
Thomas Paine , by M. D. Conway, New York, 1892, p. 261, will
be found an interesting account of the trial. Williams, the
publisher, was a poor man, and his defence was undertaken by
subscription. Erskine had, five years previously, defended
Paine when he had been prosecuted for publishing his Rights
of Man.
2 Hodgson’s Life of Porteus , pp. 73-83. This had been
done by the bishop in the face of two proposals to open
a Sunday Evening Entertainment and a Sunday Evening
Debating Society.
3 Life of Wilberforce, vol. ii, p. 272.
4 Ibid., vol. ii, p. 338 and p. 424. Wilberforce says that
the Bill was lost because Pitt withdrew his support on account
of the fact that three out of the four Sunday newspapers
supported his ministry (p. 338).


It is to be observed that the Society for enforc-
ing the King’s Proclamation differed from the
older societies in that its influence was exerted
mainly through members of the upper classes.
The championship of causes seems to have been
its policy more than the detailed business of
arresting petty offenders. There is no evidence
of the existence of the society after the end of the
eighteenth century, and we may suppose that it
perished in the general turmoil into which the
metropolis was thrown by the alarm of a Napo-
leonic invasion. Wilberforce’s original plan had
been for these societies to be formed “ through-
out the country.” 1 Whether this particular
movement spread or not we cannot determine,
but in Dublin, in 1796, there existed “an associa-
tion formed for the express purpose of dis-
countenancing vice and promoting the knowledge
and practice of religion and virtue.” 2 A con-
temporary pamphlet, which was addressed to the
Reforming Society (among others), advocates, as
a first principle of reform, the reformation of the
laws. This is a curious echo of Defoe, nearly
a hundred years after he wrote. 3
1 Wilberforce’s Life, vol. i, p. 134.
2 Cf. Bishop Watson’s Anecdotes, p. 289. This association
wrote to the bishop to thank him for opposing the attacks of
“ infidel authors, and particularly those of Thomas Paine.”
{lbid., p. 290.)
3 Sketches of a Tlan for an Effectual and General Reformation
of Life and Manners, by John Donaldson, Esq., London, 1794.
Bodl.; B°, P. 239. Art. (3.)


APPENDIX V.
THE ANNULA REPORTS OF THE
REFORMING SOCIETIES.
The first Report issued by the Society for the
Reformation of Manners appears to be “ A Black
Roll containing the real or reputed names and
crimes of several hundred persons that have been
prosecuted by the Society this last year (1693-94)
and published for the satisfaction of many who
have been desirous to know what progress we
have made in this Reformation of Manners.” 1
This publication of a “ black list ” apparently
became more or less an annual undertaking, for
the next one available is the sixth, which is for
the year 1700. After that the “ black lists ” were
certainly issued annually, for we have the eighth,
tenth, and thirteenth preserved in the British
Museum. 2 From the numbers given in these
lists we can extract the numbers of the sixth and
1 This list was affixed to a pamphlet called Troposals for a
'National Reformation of Manners (Brit. Mus., 491, b. 24).
2 Cf. a folio volume in the Brit. Mus., 1881, c. 3.


ninth lists, as well as the total of the numbers in
the eleventh and twelfth lists.
In 1708 the style of this annual report was
changed from a “ black list ” into a regular
account called The . . . Account of the Progress made
in Suppressing Profaneness and Debauchery , etc. The
fourteenth and fifteenth of the accounts are acces-
sible. 1 Unlike the “ black lists,” which give only
the prosecutions or offences connected with pros-
titution, the Accounts give a summary of the total
prosecution upon all the chief offences against
which the societies had set their faces.
The numbers of prosecutions revealed by the
“ black lists ” for offences in connexion with
prostitution are as follows :
First (?) for 1693-4. 269 women and 40 men.
Sixth ~ 1700. 843 men and women.
Seventh* 2 „ 1701. 944 „ „
Eighth „ 1702. 858 „ „
Ninth* „ 1703. 628 „ „
Tenth „ 1704. 863 „ „
Eleventh* „ 1705.1 ,
Twelfth* ~ 1706. J 9 » »
Thirteenth,, 1707. 706 „ „
The fourteenth and fifteenth Accounts give only
the numbers of convictions, and not the names of
1 Cf. a folio volume in the Brit. Mus., 1881, c, 3. The
Fourteenth Account is also in Bodl.: Pamph. 281.
2 The lists marked * are not accessible, but their numbers
can be obtained by calculation.


14.TH Account,
15TH Account,
1708.
1709.
Lewd and Disorderly
Men and Women
I2 55 •
794
Keepers of Bawdy and
Disorderly Houses
5i •
32
Keepers of Common
Gaming-houses
30 •
10
Exercising Trade on
Sunday
1187
... 1523
Profane Cursing and
Swearing
626 .
575
Drunkenness
150
42
the convicted (as do the “black lists”). The
numbers are as follows :
Besides this information there also appears in
the Annual Accounts a brief report of the societies’
work during the year, and an appeal for help
from the public. As various special events hap-
pened in each year, mention was made of them in
the reports, but most of the contents varied very
little from year to year.
Unfortunately, the reports from 1709 to 1715
are not available, but after that year there is a
fairly continuous supply of them down to 1738,
which was the date of the societies’ dissolution.
These reports are either in the British Museum
or the Bodleian Library. A tabulated account of
them will reveal the information they contain in
such a way that the progress of the society from
year to year can be distinguished.


The numbers given in these accounts are some-
times internally inconsistent. Often the sum of
the detailed prosecutions for the year does not
amount to as much as the number obtained by
subtracting the total of all the prosecutions by the
society up to the previous year from the corre-
sponding total number of the next year. We
must therefore assume that there were many
other prosecutions by the society of which the
details do not appear in the report. And this
would seem to be confirmed by the notes given
with several of the reports.


No. of Account
Year (Dec. to Dec.)
21
1715
22
1716
23
1717
24
1718
25
1719
26
1720
27
1721
28
1722
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44§
1723
1622
1724
1951
Total 2506 for the year—particulars not given.
Ln
£. * “ “ << “ “ OpOl “
1727
1728
Same as No. 34. —Total for the Year (by cal- :
culation), 1226.
1730
*
251
30
i73i
1732
1733
1734
*
170
1735
318
1736
1737
1738
Lewd and Disorderly
Practices -
1152
1066
1927
1253
Account not available.
1189
1*97
1223
*
ro
VO
ro
No numbers given in this Report except sum
total of Prosecutions since inception.
H:
.2
3
*
230
89
Account not available. —Total No. (by calculation)
for the Year, 682.
*
95
*
52
Keeping Bawdy and
Disorderly Houses
t
36
t
9
33
3i
14
615
15
709
35
653
36
648
96
21
600
108
9
275
14
3
395
240
268
Sabbath breaking -
1066
621
524
492
424
o
393
493
Profanity and Swearing -
263
102
400
205
114
161
201
22
Account not available. — Total Nc
for the Year, 89:
Drunkenness
46
H
2'5
17
11
13
8
5
12
Keeping Common Gam-
ing Houses and Gaming
8
8
8
16
4
104
42
23
15
Total No. of Persons pro-
secuted by the S. R. M.
since its inception -
[
O
N
i-T)
ON
NO
f'x
O
M
rf
GO
■'3-
ON
VO
CO
ro
O
00
ON
On
00
ON
ON
LT>
ON
ri
ON
N
M
ro
On
O
O
LO
On
vO
rr>
vcT
On
0
VO
CD
rC
ON
ro
00
rf
ocT
On
O
f-N.
On
ZC
ON
O
CO
rO
<0
ON
0
On
<0
ON
00
fO
0
rn
CO
VO
0
0
O
0
0
0
O
O
0
0
O
0
0.
O
0
0
No. of Books, etc.,
0
0
O
O
O
O
0
0
0
0
O
O
O
O
O
O ‘
0
0
0
0
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
Tf
LT)
distributed
0’
d
0
0
o'
rT
L
00"
0"
ro
o’
cT
CO
-rt-
rt-
rf
tJ-
Annual Reports , 1715 —38
* Mentions arrests for Sodomy, not here shown. Nos. 36-41 bear a note thanking London J.P.s for assistance (cf. p. 173).
t “ Whereof none within the City of London.”
§ “ Which is the last account they set out.” (Strype’s “ Stow.”)


APPENDIX VI.
THE STANDING ORDERS OF THE FIRST
RELIGIOUS SOCIETIES.
The appended rules are those which were drawn
up by Dr. Horneck for the guidance of the
earliest Religious Societies. They were probably
adopted about 1680-90, soon after the foundation
of the societies and before their connection with
the reforming bodies in 1691, of which connection
they show no trace (vide chapter hi).
Other specimens of the orders of Religious
Societies are accessible, showing their constitu-
tions at various periods of their history ; and
the gradual evolution of these constitutions
form an interesting commentary upon that
history.
Such specimens may be found in (1) Josiah
Woodward’s Account of the Religious Societies,
date 1699, 1 ; (2) Rules of the Religious Society
1 This account is in the Bodleian Library and the British
Museum.


of S. Giles’, Cripplegate, date 1718 1 ; (3) Orders
of a Religious Society, date 1724.2
The following specimen rules are taken from
the Life of Anthony Horneck , by Richard Kidder,
Bishop of Bath and Wells :
I. That all that entered such a Society should
resolve upon an holy and serious Life.
11. That no person shall he admitted into this
Society till he arrive at the age of Sixteen , and hath
been first confirmed by the Bishops and solemnly taken
on himself his Baptismal Vow.
111. That they chuse a Minister of the Church of
England to direct them.
IV. That they shall not be allowed in their meetings
to discourse of any controverted point of Divinity.
V. Neither shall they discourse of the government
of Church or State.
VI. That in their meetings they use no Prayers but
those of the Church , such as the Litany and Collects
and other prescribed prayers ; but still they shall not
use any that particularly belongs to the Minister , as
the Absolution.
VII. That the Minister whom they chuse shall
direct what practical Divinity shall be read at these
meetings.
1 These rules are reprinted by Dr. Wickham Legg in his
paper on “ London Church Services in the Reign of Queen
Anne” (Transactions of St. Taut's Ecclesiologtcal Society, vol. vi).
2 These may be seen in the Bodleian Library—the shelf
mark is 141. k. 515.


VIII. That they may have liberty , after Prayer
and Reading , to sing a Psalm.
IX. That after all is done , if there he time left ,
they may discourse each other about their spiritual
concerns; but this shall not be a standing Exercise
which any shall be obliged to attend unto.
X. That one day in the Week be appointed for this
meeting , for such as cannot come on the Lord's Day;
and that he that absents himself without cause shall
pay three Pence to the Box.
XI. Every time they meet , every one shall give
six Pence to the Box.
XII. That on a certain day in the year , viz.
Whitsun-Tuesday, two Stewards shall be chosen ,
and a moderate Dinner provided , and a Sermon
preached and the Money distributed (necessary
Charges deducted) to the Poor.
XIII. A Book shall be bought , in which these
Orders shall be written.
XIV. None shall be admitted into this Society
without the consent of the Minister who presides over
it; and no Apprentice shall be capable of being
chosen.
XV. That if any Case of Conscience arise it shall
be brought before the Minister.
XVI. If any Member think fit to leave the Society ,
he shall pay five Shillings to the Stock.
XVII. The major part of the Society to conclude
the rest.
XVIII. The following Rules are more especially to
be commended to the Members of this Society , viz.
To love one another: When reviled , not to revile
2 L


again : To speak evil of no man : To wrong no man :
To pray , if possible , seven times a day : To keep close
to the Church of England : To transact all things
peaceably and gently : To he helpfull to each other:
To use themselves to holy Thoughts in their coming in
and going out: To examine themselves every night:
To give every one their due : To obey Superiors both
Spiritual and Temporal.


BIBLIOGRAPHY.
A. Manuscript Sources.
I. S.P.C.K. Library, London :
1. Letters and Abstracts of Letters to and from
Correspondents of the Society, 1708-32.
2. Abstract of the Books presented to the
Society, and of the Books sent to their
Correspondents, 1709-2 2.
3. Wanley MSS.
11. Bodleian Library, Oxford :
Rawlinson MSS.
D. 129. a. Agreement of Gentlemen and
citizens.
b. Agreement of Constables.
c. Agreement of the Tower
Hamlet Society.
d. Copy of the Questions sent by
the Constables to Sergeant
Pemberton.
e. A Copy of the Paper offered
to the dissenting ministers
by the Society for Reforma-
tion of Manners.


D. 1312. The names, places of abode,
etc., etc., of the Religious
Societies in London and
Westminster (1694).
D. 862. Prosecution of Constables of the
Ward of Cripplegate.
D. 1396-1404. Registers kept by the
Society for Reformation of
Manners from 1703 to 1716.
D. 673 (10, 11). Catalogue of the writ-
ings of Edward Stephens.
Cherry MSS.
23. Letter to Ed. Stephens from H. Dod-
well, Feb., 1704.
111. Bristol City Central Library.
Minute Book of the Society for Reforma-
tion of Manners in Bristol, from March,
1699 (with various gaps) to April, 1705.
Shewing a Rough Account Sheet for
1700.
B. Contemporary Works, Pamphlets,
Letters, Etc.
Not all of the pamphlets, etc., bearing on this
subject are included in the following list, but only
the most important ones, nor are all the charges
to the Grand Juries of London and Westminster,
which have been used as evidence. There are,
however, full references for them given in the
notes :


An Account of the Endeavours that have been used to
suppress Gaming-Houses ... in a Letter to a
Noble Lord. London, 1722.
An Account of the Establishment for Relieving Poor
Proselytes, London, 1722. (Bodl.: Pamph. 370.)
An Account of the Proceedings of the Charitable So-
ciety, 1719-35. London, 1735. (Bodl.; Godw.
Pamph. 1032.)
An Account of the Progress of the Reformation of
Manners, in England, Scotland and Ireland and
other parts of Europe and America : The Third
Edition. London, 1701.
An Account of the Societies for Reformation of Manners
in London and Westminster, And other Parts of the
Kingdom. With a Persuasive to Persons of all
Ranks, to be Zealous and Diligent in Promoting the
Execution of the Laws against Prophaneness and
Debauchery, For the Effecting a National Reforma-
tion. London, 1699.
An Account of the Society in Scotland for Propagating
Christian Knowledge: In which is included, the
present state of the Highlands and Islands of Scotland
with regard to religion , Edinburgh, 1774.
The Acts of the Parliaments of Scotland.
The Acts of the Town Council of Edinburgh, for sup-
pressing of Vice and Immorality, made since the
Happy Revolution ; especially since the year 1700.
Edinburgh, 1742.
Addison, Lancelot: The Primitive Institution, or,
A Seasonable Discourse of Catechizing; London,
1674.
Astell, Mary : See under Serious proposal.


The Athenian Mercury.
Barksdale, Clement: See A Letter touching.
Bedford, Arthur; Serious Reflections on the Scan-
dalous Abuse and Effects of the Stage: in a Sermon
Preach'd ... on Sunday the qth day of January,
1704. Bristol, 1705.
The Beginning and Progress of a Needful and Hope-
ful Reformation, with the First Encounter of the
Enemy against it. His Wiles Detected, and his
Design ('t may he hop'd) Defeated: [by Edward
Stephens]. London, 1691.
Berriman, William : A Sermon preached to the Re-
ligious Societies at their quarterly meeting, March
21, r 739> w *th a view to stop the growth of some
Modern Irregularities, London, 1739.
Bissett, William : Plain English: A Sermon Preached
... on Monday, March 27, 1704. London,
1 7°4-
Bray, Dr. Thomas: The good Fight of Faith . . .
Exemplified in a Sermon preached ... on March
24, 1709 ... at the funeral of Mr. John Dent:
London, 1709.
Bullock, Thomas : A Sermon on Acts 11. 4.6, preach'd
before the Herefordshire Society, February 2, 1726.
(Bodl.: Godw. Pamph. 1031.)
Bulstrode, Whitlocke : The Charge o/"[W. B.] Esq ;
to the Grand Jury . . . of Middlesex , . . April
2 1st, 1718. London, 1718.
The Third Charge of [W. B.] Esq; to the
Grand Jury ... of Middlesex at the General
Quarter-Sessions . . . held ... the Fourth
Day of October, 1722. London, 1723.


Burnet, Gilbert; History of my own time , ed.
M. J. R[outh]. Oxford, 1823, 7 vols. [The
references enclosed in square brackets, follow-
ing those of this edition, are to the first edition
of this work.]
A Memorial of Mary , Princess of Orange. Edin-
burgh, 1842.
Calamy, Edmund: An historical account of my own
life . . . 1671-1731, ed. J. T. Rutt, 2 vols.
London, 1829.
The Case of Witnessing against Offenders face to face ,
considered. 1704.
[Chandler,] Edward, Bishop of Coventry and
Lichfield : A Sermon preached to the Societies for
Reformation of Manners ... on .. . January
the \th, 1724; London, 1724. ■
A Charitable Proposal for relieving the Sick and
Needy. London, 1719. (Bodl.: Pamph. 354.)
The Christian Sacrifice of Praises . . . for the use of
the Religious Society of Romney, London, 1724.
Cocks, Sir Richard: A Charge given to the Grand-
Jury of the County of Gloucester at the Midsummer-
Sessions , 1723. London, 1723.
Collier, Jeremy : A Short View of the Immorality , and
Profaneness of the English Stage , London, 1698.
A Compleat and Humorous Account of all the Re-
markable Clubs and Societies in the Cities of London
and Westminster [by Edward Ward]. London,
r 756-5 6 -
[Compton, Henry] : The Bishop of London's
Eleventh Conference with his Clergy held in the
years 1699 l7°° u pon the King's proclama


tion for preventing immorality and prophaneness.
London, 1704.
A Declaration of the Philadelphian Society of Eng-
land: Easter day , 1699. (Bodl.: Pamph. 231.)
Defence of the Rev. Mr. Whitefield's Doctrine on
Regeneration , by a member of one of the Religious
Societies [Richard Finch]. London, 1739.
Defoe, Daniel: See More Reformation , Reformation
of Manners , The Poor Man's Plea.
Uncollected Works —See under Lee.
Disney, John; An Essay upon the Execution of the
Laws against Immorality and Profaneness , Lon-
don, 1710.
A Second Essay upon the Execution of the Laws
against Immorality and Profaneness : wherein the
case of giving Informations to the Magistrate is
Considered , and Objections against it Answered ,
London, 1710.
Remarks on a Sermon by Dr. Sacheverell. London,
171 1.
Dolins, Sir Daniel : Second Charge to the Grand
Luries . . . of Middlesex , April, 1726.
Third Charge to the Grand Juries of Middlesex ,
October , 1726.
Donaldson, John : Sketches of apian for an Effectual
and General Reformation of Life and Manners,
London, 1794.
Dove, Henry : A Sermon preached at the Anniver-
sary Meeting of the Sons of Clergymen ... on
. . . Decemb. 2, 1686. London, 1687.
The Dutch Prophet.
Edinburgh : See Acts of the Town Council.


Evelyn, John: Diary , ed. H. B. Wheatley, 4 vols.
London, 1906.
Feild, John: A Humble Application to the Queen
... to suppress Play-houses. London, 1703.
(Bodl.: Pamph. Mason, H. 83.)
Finch, Richard: See Defence of the Rev. Mr.
Whitefield's Doctrine.
[Fowler, Edward] : A Vindication of an Undertak-
ing—See A Vindication.
The Gentleman s 1732-38.
Gibson, Edmund ; An earnest dissuasive from In-
temperance in meats and drinks: in a Sermon :
Fourth edition , revised and enlarged , with a more
particular view to the point of Spirituous Liquors.
London, 1743.
See also Observations.
Gonson, Sir John : The Three Charges of Sir [ J.G.]
to the Grand Jury of Westminster on April 24,
July 11, October 9, 1728.
Grant, Francis: See A Letter from a Magistrate ,
and A Vindication of Informers.
Hamilton, William: The Life and Character of
James Bonnell , Esq., late Accomptant General of
Ireland. London, 1703.
[Hare, Francis] : A Sermon Preached to the Societies
for Reformation of Manners ... on .. . Jan-
uary the qth , 1730, by the .. . Lord Bishop of
St. Asaph , London, 1731.
The Hell-Fire-Club , kept by a Society of
London, 1721. (Bodl.: Pamph. 366.)
A help to a National Reformation . . . ; Published
by the Society for Reformation of Manners.
2 M


London, 1699. (There are several later edi-
tions.)
Henry, Matthew : See under Tong, W.
Hook, Mr. Justice : See A short Account.
Hume, Lord Crossrig, David: Domestic Details
. . . April 28, 1697 -January 29, 1707. Edin-
burgh, 1843.
A Diary of the proceedings in the Parliament and
Privy Council of Scotland, May 21,1700— March 7,
1707, ed. J. Hope, for the Bannatyne Club.
Edinburgh, 1828.
The Invisible Observator. London, S. Malthus,
1 7°5*
Johnson, John: Reasons why Vice ought to be Punish'd,
but is not: in a Sermon preacKd at Maidston in
Kent, At the Assizes . . . March the 17 th, 1
London, 1708. (Bodl.: Mason, AA. 430.)
Journals of the House of Commons.
Journals of the House of Lords.
Journals of the House of Lords of Ireland.
Kemble, John M.: State Papers and Correspon-
dence, London, 1857.
[Kidder,] Richard, Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells:
The Life of the Rev. Anthony Horneck, D.D., late
Preacher at the Savoy, London, 1698.
Land, Tristram : A Letter to the Rev. Mr. White-
field. Designed to correct his mistaken account of
Regeneration, or the New Birth . . . with a pre-
vious letter, addressed to the Religious Societies.
London, 1739.
Lee, William : Daniel Defoe : his life, and recently
discovered writings ; 3 vols. London, 1869.


A Letter from * * * a magistrate in the countrey to
* * * his freind: giving a new historical account of
designs, through the Christian worlds for reforming
manners therein [by Sir Francis Grant]. Edin-
burgh, 1701. (Advocates’ Library.)
A Letter from a member of the Society for Promoting
of Christian Knowledge in London, to his friend in
the Country, newly chosen a corresponding Member
of that Society. London, 1709.
A Letter from several Members of the Society for
Reformation of Manners to the Most Revered
Father in God, Thomas [Tenison] By Divine
Providence, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury. De-
cember 10, 1704.
A Letter from the Man in the Moon, to Mr. Anodyne
Necklace, containing an account .of a Robbery com-
mitted in Hell . . . with several copies of private
Commissions . . . and Memorandums of Pensions,
&c., paid to Pretended Reformers for Secret Services.
London, 1725. (Bodl.: Pamph. 377.)
A Letter to the Religious Societies, In and About the
Cities of London and Westminster ; Briefly Exhort-
ing them to sincerity in their profession, by a member
of one of them, Occasioned by an excellent sermon
preach'd before the said societies on Wednesday,
Sept. 28. 1737, at the quarterly meeting in the
Parish Church of St. Mary-le-Bow, by the Re-
verend Mr. Whitefield. London [n.d.]. (Bodl.:
141. k. 515.)
A Letter touching a Colledge of Maids, or, a Virgin
Society, written [by Clement Barksdale] August
12. 1675. (Bodl.: Wood 130 (3).)


Macky, John : A Journey through England. In
familiar letters from a Gentleman here , to his Friend
Abroad. London, 1724.
Meldrum, George: Letter , asserting the Lawful-
ness of against the vitious and prophane,
before the courts of immorality. Edinburgh, 1701.
(Advocates’ Library.)
A Modest Defence of Public Stews , or, an Essay upon
Whoring , as it is now practis'd in these Kingdoms ,
Written by a Layman , . . . London, 1724.
(Bodl. : Pamph. 375.)
More Reformation ; A satyr upon himself by the
Author of The True Born English-Man ;
[Daniel Defoe]. London, 1703.
Nelson, Robert : An Address to Persons of Quality
and Estate. London, 1715.
Companion to the Fasts and Festivals. London,
1715.
The Life of Dr. George Bull , Late Lord Bishop
of St. David's. London, 1713.
Newman, Thomas : Reformation , or Mockery . . .
A Sermon ... at Salters Hall , June 30, 1729.
London, 1729.
Nicolson, William : Letters on various subjects ,
literary , political , and ecclesiastical\ to and from
William Nicolson , D.D. . . . [ed.] by John
Nichols, 2 vols. London, 1809.
A Sermon preach'd at Bow-Church , London , on
Monday , Dec. 30, 1706, Before the Societies for
Reformation of Manners ... by the Right Reverend
Father in God , William Lord Bishop of Carlisle ,
London, 170®.


Observations upon the conduct and behaviour of a
certain sect usually distinguished by the name of
Methodists [By Edmund Gibson], [n.l.n.d.]
The Observator.
Orders belonging to a Religious Society , London,
1724. (Bodl.: 141. k. 515 (1).)
Parnell, Thomas ; Divine Entertainment, or, The
Hermit.
Paterson, James: Pietas Londinensis, London,
1714.
Penn, Thomas: A Sermon Preach'd before the
Society for Reformation of Manners, in the Parish
Church of Wmdover, in the County of Bucks, Oct.
7,1708. London, 1708. (Bodl.: Godw.Pamph.
99 8 (23)0
Plain English made Plainer : Being - Remarks on Mr.
Bissett's Scurrilous Sermon ... by a True Church-
man, London, 1704. (Bodl.: Pamph. 257.)
The Poor Man s Plea in relation to all the Proclama-
tions . . . which have been or shall be made or
publish'd for a Reformation of Manners [by Daniel
Defoe]. London, 1698.
The Post Man.
The Proceedings of the King's Commission of the Peace
... on ... the \th and days of June, 1701.
London ; Printed for Elizabeth Mallett at the
Hat and Hawk in Bride Lane, 1701. (Bodl.:
Nichols’ Newspapers.)
Proposals for a National Reformation of Manners,
Humbly offered to the Consideration of our Magis-
trates and Clergy . . . Containing The Names
and Crimes of several hundreds Persons, who have


been prosecuted by the Society, for Whoring,
Drunkenness, Sabbath-breaking, £rc. Pub-
lished by the Society for Reformation of
Manners. London, 1694.
The Protestant Mercury.
Reasons for limiting Bartholomew Fair to the three
days specified in the grant thereof London,
17 11.
Reformation of Manners, a Satyr, V<e Vobis Hypo-
crite: [by Daniel Defoe]. 1702.
Remarks on the Rev. Mr. Whitefield's Journals,
addressed to the Religious Societies , 1738.
A Representation of the Impiety and Immorality of the
English Stage , London, 1704. (Bodl.: Godw.
Pamph. 382.)
A Representation of the Present State of Religion, with
regard to Infidelity, Heresy, Impiety, and Popery :
drawn up and agreed to hy both Houses of Convoca-
tion in Ireland . . . Dublin, and reprinted at
London, 1712.
A Representation of the present State of Religion with
regard to the late excessive growth of Infidelity,
Heresy, and Profaneness, unanimously agreed upon
by a Joint Committee of both Houses of Convoca-
tion, London, 1711. (Brit. Mus. 694. m. 4
(i 3»
Rosewell, S.: A Sermon preach'd at the Evening
Lecture in Founder s Hall, Oct. 11. 1719, Upon
Occasion of his leaving that Lecture, London,
1 7 1 9-
Russell, John : A Sermon Preach'd at St. Mary-le-
Bow, June 28, 1697. London, 1697.


Ryder, Samuel : The Charge of the Grand Jury of
the City and Liberty of W°stminster at the General
Quarter-Session .. . Oct. 6. 1725. London,
1726. (Bodl.: Pamph. 331.)
Sacheverell, Dr. Henry: The Communication of
Sin: a Sermon preach'd at the Assizes held at
Derby , August isth, 1709. London, 1709.
The Scots' Magazine.
A Seasonable and Necessary Admonition to the Gentle-
men of the first Society for Reformation of Manners ,
[by Edward Stephens]. London, [l7oo].
(Brit. Mus.: 4105. d. 76 (14).)
A serious proposal to the Ladies for the Advancement
of their True and greatest Interest. By a Lover of
Her Sex [Mary Astell]. London, 1694.
A Sermon preached to a congregation of Dissenters on
Jan. xxxth, 1713. London, 1714. (Bodl. :
Pamph. 306.)
A Short Account of the Several Kinds of Societies ,
set up of late years , for the promoting of God's
Worships for the Reformation of Manners, and for
the Propagation of Christian Knowledge [by Mr.
Justice Hook. London, 1700]. (Bodl.: R. 1.
19. Jur.)
Shower, John : A Sermon preached to the Societies
for Reformation of Manners , Nov. 15, 1697.
London, 1698.
Somers, John, Lord: A Collection of scarce and
valuable tracts : second edition, 13 vols. Lon-
don, 1809-15.
A Specimen of a Declaration against Debauchery ,
Tendered to the consideration of His Highness the


Prince of Orange and of the Present Convention of
the Nation. [London], 1689. (Bodl.: Pamph.
190.)
The Spectator.
Stanhope, George: The Duty of Rebuking: A
Sermon . . . before the Lord Mayor and the
. . . Societies for Reformation oj Manners on
December 28. 1702. London, 1703.
The State of the Philadelphian Society , or , the Ground
of their Proceedings Consider d, in answer to a
Letter from Philalethes , upon occasion of the Theo-
sophical Transactions , &c. to a Member of that
Society. London, 1697.
Statutes of the Realm.
[Stephens, Edward] : The Beginning ... of a
. . . Reformation. See The Beginning.
A Seasonable . . . Admonition. See <A Seasonable.
Strype, John : Continuation of Stow s Survey. Lon-
don, 1720.
Summary Account of the Society for Promoting Chris-
tian Knowledge , March, 1813. (Bodl.: 133- c. 5.)
Swift, Jonathan : Works> ed. in Bohn’s series.
[Tenison, Thomas] : His Grace the Lord Arch-
bishop of Canterbury s Letter to the Right Reverend
the Lord Bishops of his Province. London, 1699.
Tong, W.: An Account of the Life and Death of
the late Reverend Mr. Matthew Henry , Minister
of the Gospel at Hackney , London, 1716.
Vanbrugh, Sir John : The Relapse. The False
Friend. The Provoked Wife.
A Vindication and Justification of the Philadelphian
Society. London, 1702. (Bodl.: Pamph. 246.)


A Vindication of an Undertaking of certain Gentle-
men, in order to the Suppressing of Debauchery and
Profaneness , [by Edward Fowler, Bishop of
Gloucester]. London, 1692.
A Vindication of Informers of the Breaches of the
Law against Prophaneness and Immorality [etc.,
by Sir Francis Grant]. Edinburgh, 1701.
Ward, Edward : See A compleat and humorous
account.
Watson, Richard : Anecdotes of the life of Richard
Bishop of Landaff, written by himself
London, 1817.
Watts, Thomas : Social friendship and charity de-
monstrated as the most proper remedies of humane
evils. Sermon preached before the honourable
Society of natives of Herefordshire at the first annual
feast , December 4, 1723. 1724. (Hereford
Public Library, vol. xxv. (5) 200 F.)
Wesley, John : Works of the Rev. John Wesley , 3rd
edition, 13 vols. London, 1829-31.
Wesley, Samuel : Letter concerning the Religious
Societies. London, 1724. (Bodl.: 141. k. 515
(5)-)
Account of a Religious Society begun at Epworlh,
1702.
Whiston, William : Aproposal for Erecting Societies
for Promoting Primitive Christianity. [n.L] 1712.
Whitefield, George : Journals of George Whitefield ,
ed. William Wale. London, n.d.
The Works of the Rev. George Whitefield . . .
6 vols. London, 1771-72.
Wilberforce, William : Life of William Wilberforce ,
2 N


by his sons Robert Isaac Wilberforce and Samuel
Wilberforce, 5 vols. London, 1837.
Williams, Daniel : zA Sermon preached at Salter's
Hall , to the Society for Reformation of Manners ,
May 16, 1698. London, 1698.
Wishart, W.: zA discourse of suppressing Vice , and
reforming the vicious [by W. W.]. Edinburgh,
1702. (Advocates’ Library.)
Wodrow, Robert: zAnalecta , or, materials for a
history of remarkable providences , mostly relating to
Scotch ministers and Christians , ed. for the Mait-
land Club, by the Rev. Dr. Leishman, 4 vols.
Edinburgh, 1842-43.
The Correspondence of the Rev. Robert Wod-
row, edited . . . [for the Wodrow Society] by
the Rev. Thomas M’Crie, 3 vols. Edinburgh,
1842-43.
Woodward, Josiah : zAn zAccount of the Rise and
Progress of the Religious Societies in the City of
London , London, 1701.
The judgment of the Reverend Dr. Henry Sacheverell
concerning the Societies for Reformation of Manners
compared with the judgment of many of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal and honourable Judges ,
of this Kingdom , and that of Ireland , with some
Reflections thereupon. London, 1711.
zA Disswasive from the sin of Drunkenness : [by
J. W.] London, 1701.
zA Kind Caution to Profane Swearers. London,
171 1.
zA Rebuke to the odious Sin of Uncleanness [by
J. W.] London, 1701.


tA Short to the Objections made against
those pious and highly useful persons who give
informations to magistrates of breaches of the laws
against prophaneness and immorality ; by a
minister of the Church of England. London,
1703. (Bodl.: 4 0 . L. 76. Th.)
Wright, S.: M Sermon preach'd the XXVlllth of
May , 1718 . . . to a Society of Protestant Dis-
senters. London, 1718. (Bodl.: Pamph. 344.)
tA Sermon preadi d before the Societies for Reforma-
tion of Manners in London , on June 27, 1715.
London, 1715. (Brit. Mus. : 693. c. 19
(”)•)
Yates : See An Account of the Societies.
C. Sources not Contemporary.
Benham, Daniel : Memoirs of James Hutton , Lon-
don, 1856.
Campbell, Alexander : The History of Leith , Leith,
1827.
Chambers, William : e A History of Peeblesshire ,
Edinburgh & London, 1864.
Corvan, Samuel: “ Ancient Capital of Scotland,”
1904.
Conway, Moncure Daniel : The life of Thomas
Paine , London, 1909.
Dictionary of and Pseudonymous Literature
(Halkett and Laing).
Dictionary of National Biography.


Foxcroft, H. C. ; Supplement to Burnet's History ,
Oxford, 1902.
Graham, Henry Grey : The Social life of Scotland
in the Eighteenth Century , London, 1906.
Herveiana ; or , graphic and literary Sketches , illustra-
tive of the life and writings of the Rev. James
Hervey , M.M. . . . Scarborough, 1822.
Hodgson, Robert: The Life of the Right Reverend
Beilby Porteus ) late Bishop of London , London,
1811.
Jackson, Thomas : Life of the Rev. Charles Wesley ,
M.A. , London, 1841.
Lecky, William Edward Hartpole : A History of
England in the Eighteenth Century.
Biographical Introduction to Swift’s Works in
Bohn’s Series.
Legg, Dr. J. Wickham : London Church Services
in and about the reign of Queen Anne (Trans-
actions of the St. Paul’s Ecclesiological Society.
Vol. vi).
McDowall, William : History of the Burgh of
Dumfries , Edinburgh, 1867.
Mahon ; History of 1713-83.
Marwick, James D. : Sketch of the History of the
High Constables of Edinburgh , Edinburgh,
printed for private circulation, 1865.
McClure, Edmund : zA Chapter in English Church
History , being the Minutes of the Society for Pro-
moting Christian Knowledge for the years 1698-
1704. London, 1888.
McClure, E. & Allen, W. O. B.: History of the
S.P.C.K. , 1698-1898.


Mac Gregory, George : The History of Glasgow.
Glasgow, 1881.
Nichols, John : Literary of the Eighteenth
Century. . . . London, 1812.
Nouvelle Biographic Generate.
Overton, J. H.: Life in the English Churchy 1660-
1714, London, 1885.
Pattison, Mark : Tendencies of Religious thought in
the Eighteenth century (Essays and Reviews.
London, i 860).
Pearce, E. H.: The Sons of the Clergy. London,
1904.
Plummer, Alfred : The Church of England in the
Eighteenth Century , Methuens, 1910.
Secretan, C. F.: Memoirs of the Life and Times of
the Pious Robert Nelson. London, iB6O.
Sharp, Thomas : The Life of John Sharps D.D. ,
Lord of York. London, 1825.
Smollett, Tobias : History of England. London,
Virtue [lB4B].
Stoughton, John : Religion in England under Queen
cAnne and the Georges , 1702—1800. London,
1878.
Tyerman, Luke : Life and Times of Samuel Wesley.
London, 1866. Life and Times of John Wesley.
London, 1870.
Wedgwood, Julia : John Wesley and the Evangelical
Reaction of the Eighteenth Century. London,
1870.




INDEX.
Account of Rise and Progress of
Religious Societies, 10, 223-
28 ; of Reforming Societies,
64 ; of Progress of Reforma-
tion of Manners, 66.
Acts of Union, 75.
Agreement of the Tower Ham-
let Society, 54.
America, Society Movement in,
11 3-
Anglicans, bigotry of, 119.
Anne, Queen, 67, 68, 75, 81,
88 ; Bounty of, 166.
Astell, Mary, A Serious Pro-
posal, 157-9.
Athenian Mercury, 46, 47.
Barbers, 52.
Barksdale, Clement, 159.
Bedford, Rev. Arthur, 73, 122,
123.
Bedfordshire, Society in, 116.
Beveridge, William, 8.
Bishops, approbation of, 64,
76, 118, 224; charges of,
189.
Bisset, William, 73, 92.
Black Rolls, 58, 237-9.
Blasphemy, 33.
Blasters, 206.
Bodleian Library catalogue,
226.
Bohler, Peter, 205 ; doctrines
of, 206, 209.
Bonnell, James, 139.
Booth, Archdeacon, 124.
Boston, Society at, 113.
Brampton, 99.
Bray, Dr. Thomas, 75, 79,
225.
Bridewell, 68.
Bristol, Minutes of Society for
Reformation of Manners at,
120 ; Accounts of, 123 ;
Mint Workhouse at, 121 ;
gaming in, 122 ; Sunday
Trading at, 122 ; old and
new Religious Societies in,
211-5, 217.
Brothels, 58, 178.
Brussels, Societies in, 112.
Bull, Bishop, 84, 114.
Burnet, Gilbert, 7, 58, 91, 158,
Canterbury, 133; Reformation
of Manners at, 13 3 —139-
Carlisle, Society at, 99-101,
125-


Charity Schools, 79, 81, 109,
160,195, 200, 201 • in Kent
and Ipswich, 135,
Chester, Reforming Society at,
119, 120.
Church of England, position of
in seventeenth century, 2;
Music, 73.
Churchmen and Dissenters,
Union of in Reforming
Societies, 55, 67, 75, 99-
103, 105.
Clubs, Infidel, in London, 10.
College of Maids, 159,
Collier, Jeremy, 71.
Compton, Bishop of London,
1 5> 57-
Congreve, William, 70, 72.
Constables, murder of, 69, 74,
176 ; Society of, 43-44 ;
Reforming, 158,
Convocation, 77 ; in Ireland,
140.
Cooper, John, 69.
Corporation for Assisting the
Poor of London, 166.
Cursing and Swearing, 30 ;
Act against, in 1695, 59 ;
Penalties for, 60, 238, 241.
Defoe, Daniel, Satires of, 84-
87 ; on Reformation of
Manners, 85, 95, 177, 226,
250.
Deism, effects of, 188.
Dent, John, 74, 239.
Derby, Reforming Society at,
H -
Disney, John, 84, 93 ; Essays
of, 103-106.
Dover, 133.
Drunkenness, 29, 52.
Dublin, Societies in, 139, 250.
Durham, Reformation of Man-
ners in, 124 ; Grand Jury
of, 124.
Edinburgh, Acts of Town
Council of, 143, 145 ; High
Constables of, 144, 153.
{See Scotland.)
England, State of Morals in,
1 737> 183 ; Attitude of, to
Religious Problems, 188.
Epworth, Religious Societies at,
129-13 1 ; Reformation of
Manners at, 130.
Evelyn, John, 35, 66, 84;
Private Society of, in 1659,
157-
Faith, Justification by, 201-3,
214.
Fielding, Sir John, 243.
Fowler, Edward (Bishop of
Gloucester), 19, 40, 47, 57,
7i-
Franck, Professor at Halle,
in.
Frank, Dr., 127.
Gentlemen, Society of, 23, 43.
George I, 194 ; Order of, to
Justices, 175.
Gin-drinking, increase of, 181 ;
Acts against, 181-3, 2 °S-


Grand Juries, Presentments of,
65 ; Charges to, 174, 175,
177* 1 79> iB 4> iB 5-
Grant, Sir Francis, 147, 148,
IS °’ Isl *
Gravesend, Religious Society at,
13 8 -
Hartley, Mr. R,, 46, 47.
Harvey, James, 220.
Henry, Matthew, 118.
High Church reaction, 68.
Holt, Chief Justice, 91.
Hook, Mr. Justice, 228.
Horneck, Anthony, 8,9, 46.
Hume, David, Lord Crossrig,
146, et seqq.
Hutton, James, his Opinion of
Religious Societies, 196 ;
joins Private Religious So-
ciety, 198 ; meets the Wes-
leys, 198 ; founds a small
Society, 198, 202 ; patron-
ized by Whitefield, 199 ;
joins Fetter Lane Society,
203, 217.
Ignorance, widespread in Eng-
land at Restoration, 3.
Immorality of Post-Restoration
Period, 5, 29 ; Statutes
against, 29, 30.
Informers, provided for by Law,
29, 48 ; gibes at, 46, 91,
179 ; bad reputation of,
46 ; from Religious Societies,
50 ; Prudential Methods for,
51 ; salaried, 53 ; oaths
and, 59 ; opposition to, 91,
92 ; defence of, 93, 94 ; in
Scotland, 145, 155 ; as
blackmailers, 173 ; and the
Gin Act, 183 ; private in-
formation superseded, 186 ;
procedure of, 235-240 ; re-
vival of, in 1758, 243.
Ingram, Chief Constable, 174.
Ireland, Religious and Reform-
ing Societies in, 139 ; Society
for Promoting Protestant
Schools in, 170 ; Lord’s
Committee on Profaneness
of, 205.
Jamaica, Reforming Society at,
112.
Justices of the Peace opposed to
Reformation of Manners,
46 ; attack London Gaming
Houses, 175 ; re-assume
executive responsibility, 184-
186 ; in London, 243.
Kidder, Richard, Bp. of Bath
and Wells, 10.
King, Archbishop of Ireland,
140.
Kirk, power of, in Scotland in
1672, 144 ; Commission of,
against vice, 144 ; officially
commends Reforming So-
cieties, 152.
Leith, 146.
Lewis, Mr,, 135.
Libraries, Parochial, 79, 160.
2 O


Lincolnshire, Clergy Society in,
109, 117.
London, Immorality of, in 1690,
33 ; Great Fairs in, 69 ;
Charitable Institutions in, 78;
Corporation for assisting Poor
of, 166 ; Scots’ Corporation
in, 168 ; philanthropy in,
1689-1750, 169, 171 ;
attack on Gaming houses of,
175 ; improvement in morals
of, 177 ; resolutions of
Corporation of, against im-
morality, 185, 243.
Magistrates, opposed to Reform,
46 ; corruption of, 68, 88 ;
attitude to informers, 91 ;
apathy of, 119.
Mary 11, Queen, 19, 38, 57.
Methodism, Fetter Lane Society
founded, 206 ; Foundry
Society established, 214;
break with Moravianism,
215; its dependence on
earlier Religious Societies,
215-219 ; the Band System
of, 219 ; revival of Reform-
ing Societies by, 244.
Molther, 214, 215.
Moravianism, Anglican appro-
bation of orders of, 203 ;
first Society in London, 204 ;
Fetter Lane Society founded,
206 ; heresies of, 214 ; in
England (1742-1765), 217.
Morrison, Thomas, Report of, to
S.P.C.K, 133.
Nelson, R0bert,22,78,98,128.
Newspapers of Anne’s reign, 89.
Nicolson, William, 56, 99-103,
118, 225.
“ Night-walkers,” 65.
Non-jurors, 80.
Non-resistance, 76.
Nottingham, 102.
Nunnery, Proposal for a Protes-
tant, 157.
Occasional Conformity, 77.
Paine, Thomas, 248.
Party-spirit, 79, 183.
Paterson, James, 18.
Patrick, Bishop, 57.
Peers, Approbation of English,
secured, 64.
Pemberton, Sir Francis, 44.
Philadelphian Society, founded,
162 ; doctrines of, 163 ;
Vindication of, 164 ; revival
of, by Whiston, 165.
Philanthropy in London (1689-
1750), 170-172.
Phillips, Sir John, 66.
Porteus, Beilby, Bp. of London,
248-50.
Potter, Archbishop, 203.
Preaching, 4.
Prisons, Reform of, 68.
Proclamations, of Charles 11, 3 2;
of Mayor and Aldermen of
London, 34; of William 111,
61 ; of Anne, 67, 78 ;
against Fairs, 69 ; of Anne
in Scotland, 153.


Profaneness, Statutes against,
29, 52 ; specimen Warrant
against, 237, 238 ; later
Acts against, 249.
Proselytes, Commission for Re-
lieving Poor, 169.
Puritanism, 4,5, 8, 45,
180,
Rationalism, 188, 205, 220.
Religion, political aspect of, in
seventeenth century, 3 ;
widespread discussion of,
188 ; its connexion with
social service, 19 1,
Religious Societies, Rise of, 1 o ;
first Rules of, 11 ; charge of
Popery against, 12 ; state of,
under James 11, 13 ; Con-
temporary objections to, 15 ;
Number of, in London in
1714, 18; Style of Devotions
and Personnel of, 19 ; in
Taverns, 21 ; not on French
models, 22 ; amalgamation
with Tower Hamlet body,
5 3 ; confusion with Reform-
ing Societies, 5 5 ; Revival of,
80 ; Jacobitism of, 80, 162,
193-4 ; Spread of, 108 ; in
America, 111 ; Supervision
of, by S.P.C.K., 127 ; Orders
of, 128, 193-4, 255-8 ; set
up by Dissenters, 128, 162,
194 ; at Epworth, 128-
13 I ; Women in, 13 1 ;
tabular account of, 132 ;
report of Visitation of, in
Kent, 133-139; in Ireland,
140-1 ; later relations with
Reforming Societies, 184-5 ;
Charity Schools of, 195, 200;
average membership of, 196 ;
decay of, 197 ; invigorated
by Whitefield, 199 ; singing
classes within, 200 ; warned
against Methodists, 202 ;
comparison of, with Fetter
Lane Society, 206 ; con-
nexion with Methodism, 208 -
220 ; Pelagianism of, 210 ;
Methodist Societies formed
from, 211 ; Whitefield’s
opinion of, 212 ; visited by
Wesley, 213 ; in Bristol,
212-4; extinction of, 219.
Renty,. Baron de, Societies of,
in France, 24.
Repeal of Laws against Immor-
ality and Profaneness, 235-
4 2 -
Romney, Kent, Religious Society
at, 17.
Sacheverell, Dr., 56, 75, 102.
St. Clement Danes, Daily
Prayers at, 13, 18.
St. Giles’, Cripplegate, 18, 195,
201.
St. Mary-le-Bow, 229.
St. Vincent de Paul, Societies
of, in France, 22.
Salter’s Hall, 60.
Salzburgers, 204.
Scotland, Act of Union with,
75 ; Reforming Societies in,


145 -15 5 ; legislation of,
against immorality and pro-
faneness, 142, 144; parish
Judges in, 144 ; Informers
in, 142, 144 ; Town Legis-
lation in, 15 1 ; Sunday trad-
ing in, 145, 146 ; foundation
of first Reforming Society in,
146 —5O ; organization of
Reforming Societies in, 150 ;
Societies commended by
Parliament of, 152; decline
of Societies in, 154; Re-
forming Society in Edin-
burgh, in 1742, 155.
Sermons, fondness for, during
Restoration period, 8; “ Pre-
paration” and “Funeral,”
17, 215 ; to Reforming
Societies, 60, 71, 93, 96,
101, 229-234 ; in Bristol,
122-3 ; to Religious Societies,
200, 211.
Sharp, Archbishop of York, 55,
101, 225.
Skeat, John, Report of, 133.
Smythies, Rev. Mr., 8.
Social obligations, refusal to
recognize, 97.
Societies, Clergy establishment
of, 108; spread of, 113-
117 ; tabular account of,
115 ;in Dublin, 140.
Societies for the Reformation of
Manners, origin of, 35 ;
initial procedure of, 38;
registers of, 41, 235-239 ;
sub-societies formed, 43 ;
rules of, 44 ; early opposition
to, 46, 47 ; amalgamation
with Religious Societies, 50 ;
invitation to Dissenters, 55 ;
fail to influence upper
Classes, 63, 78, 187 ; Politi-
cal views of, 67 ; numbers
of Prosecutions of, 77, 178,
183, 245 ; objections to,
83—106 ; opinions of Defoe
and Swift on, 84; accused
as Conventicles, 101 ; ob-
jections to, answered, 102-
106 ; books published and
distributed by, 107, 186 ;
at Bristol, 120-125 ; tabu-
lar account of, 125-127 ;
convictions of, at Canter-
bury, 137; in Ireland, 149 ;
in Scotland, 141-150; re-
vival of interest in, (1715-
1725), 173 ; important law-
suit of, 174 ; need of execu-
tive support for, 175 ; an-
nual reports of, 180, 251
254 ; affected by Gin Act,
181 ; extinction of, 183 ;
State interference affects, 184;
thank London J.P.’s, 185 ;
deterioration of organiza-
tion of, 187; Bishop’s sup-
port withdrawn from, 189 ;
causes of decline of, 182-
192; real function of, 19 1 ;
revived by Methodists, 244;
second failure of, 246; re-
vived by Wilberforce and
Porteus (1787), 247.


Societies, Religious (see under
Religious).
Societies, Various other, Conti-
nental and Colonial, 111
1133 for aiding Widows of
Dissenting Clergy, 161 3 The
Charitable, 1673 for Re-
lieving Distressed House-
keepers, 1683 Private So-
cieties, 1683 the Scots’
Corporation, 168 3 the
Herefordshire, 1693 for Pro-
moting Protestant Schools in
Ireland, 170 3 Wesleyan (see
Methodism) 3 Moravian (see
Moravianism) 3 the Blasters,
206 3 the Fetter Lane, 206,
209, 214, 2173 for enforc-
ing the King’s Proclamation
(1787), 249.
Society for Promoting Chris-
tian Knowledge, 61, 72, 74,
79, 107, 108 ; its policy of
reform, 109 j its book lists,
no, 127, 1863 its policy to-
wards Religious Societies, 1283
report of Agents of, 134,
151-1553 introduced into
Scotland, 154, 1603 dis-
tributes Reformation Litera-
ture, 186 3 Minutes of,
22 7.
Society for the Propagation of
the Gospel, 79, 159.
Soldiery, Licentiousness of Lon-
don, 69, 73.
Sons of the Clergy, Corporation
of, 160.
South, Robert, his Criticism of
the Commonwealth Clergy, 5.
Spandenburg, 204.
Spectator, The, 79.
Stage, Attacks on the, 70.
Stanhope, Dean, 55, 84.
Stephens, Edward, 37, 40, 56,
84, 208 3 Private Society of,
in, 1687, 157.
Stillingfleet, Bishop of Worces-
ter, 38, 57-
Stratford, Nicholas, Bishop of
Chester, 100, 118, 208.
Sunday Trading, 293 excuses
for, 52; in Scotland, 143,
145, 146.
Swift on the Reform of Man-
ners, 84.
Tenison, Archbp. of Canter-
bury, 57, 63, 70, 71, 108.
Tillotson, Archbp. of Canter-
bury, 15.
Tories, 77, 171.
Tower Hamlets, 36, 53.
Trelawney, Bishop of Exeter,
57, iH-
Upper Classes, Bad Example of,
63, 117,1903 Interestof,in
Wilberforce’s Society, 248.
Vanbrugh, Sir John, 70 ; Plays
of, 71, 7*-
Walpole, Robert, Policy of, 189.
Warrants from Magistrates, 30 3
Specimens of, 236—240.


Welsh, William, 245.
Wesley, John, 129, 187 ; goes
to America, 198; meets
Bohler, 205 ; Conversion of,
206 ; visits Germany, 209 ;
founds Fetter Lane Society,
206 ; criticises Moravian
Doctrine, 210 ; breaks with
Moravians, 213; leaves
Fetter Lane Society, 210;
connexion with the Revived
Reforming Societies in 1763,
245.
Wesley, Samuel, 128.
Whigs, Supremacy of, 80, 173.
Whiston, William, 165.
Whitefield, George, 199 ; cru-
sade amongst London Relig-
ious Societies, 200; attacks
on, 202; excluded from Ang-
lican Pulpits, 211 ; founds
Societies in Bristol, 211.
Wilberforce, William, 244.
William 111, 59, 67.
Wilson, Bishop of Sodor and
Man, 114.
Wingham, 136.
Wishart, William, 152.
Wodrow, Analecta , of, 148,
1 54*
Wolverhampton, Religious So-
ciety at, 132.
Women in a Religious Society,
I3l>
Woodward, Josiah, 10, 14,
18, 40, 51, 76, 84, 1o 1,
107, 112, 128, 140, 226,
247.
Yates, Mr., Barrister-at-law,
227, 228.
Ziegenhagen, 204.
Zinzendorf, 204, 205, 217.


Printed by A. R. Mowbray & Co. Ltd.
London and Oxford




