

P&TU PPrvn
?/. i .
I '^y/*c<sCs
. X C
CARLYLISM
CHRISTIANITY.
NOTES ON A LECTURE BY THE REY. W. HENDERSON.
DAVID BLAIR.
? One is your Teacher, even Christ.??Christ.
? Ie we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other
GOSPEL UNTO YOU THAN THAT WHICH WE HAVE PREACHED
UNTO YOU, LET HIM BE ACCURSED.??St. PAUL.
MELBOURNE =
W. B. Stephens ; Collins Street W.
1865.


'
'
. -
�
*
r
\
'


PREFACE.
The substance of this pamphlet consists of two articles reprinted, with
additional notes and illustrations, from the ? Ballarat Evening Post? of the
26th and 28th October. The occasion of these articles was a public lecture
on ? Thomas Carlyle,? delivered in Ballarat by the Eev. William Henderson,
some days previously. In the report of that lecture published in the ? Star
newspaper of the following day, the following passages occur:
The lecturer said he was glad of an opportunity of paying off some of the debt he owed to
Thomas Carlyle, as an author But criticism on Carlyle seemed at fault, and fell off him as water
of a duck?s back. Carlyle was of no school, but held a place by himself in literature. In po-
litics, he was neither whig nor tory, nor radical, nor revolutionist, or reactionary, In religion
too, ho was not very orthodox, but then, so had been once esteemed Knox, and Luther, and
others, though it would be a very great abuse of language to call Carlyle an infidel. Then he did
not believe either in modern political economy. lie denounced ballot-boxes, universal suffrage,
and other dcmocratical inventions of these latter days; and yet who like lie had denounced the
wrongs of the English people? He believed in a ? good time coming? of his own sort; but he
ran over with paradoxes, and sometimes one was inclined to say, ?Shall we not give him over
altogether?? Was he not an undeniable paradox ? The lecturer, however, found him paradox-
ical on the surface only, and that he taught something. Carlyle was not a mere cynic. He was
earnest in all his denunciations of the shams and cant of life, and lay about him like another
Sampson with a jawbone against all and everything, and even himself sometimes. Was he a sort
of John the Baptist, or was he not rather a Don Quixote ? The lecturer thought not?yet he had
not sullicient discrimination sometimes, and would throw away pure gold with the dross which he
rejecte d. For the most part his fight was against all false and unreal things, though he did not
fight after the most orthodox military fashion, and sometimes he seemed inclined to repeat the
old denunciation and say ?all men are liars.? But his morality was very much of the right sort,
for he denounced all lust and vice as energetically as any old Cameronian preacher could. None
more than he had thundered against mammonism?that worst of all modem vices. Success in
money making had no worship from him, and he asked right out, if we made the devil our part-
ner, how we could expect to help going to the devil in tht\end ? He grew wrath too over the
? Dismal Science? as he called political economy, and complained that horses and even part-
ridges were looked after and cared for, while men and women were not. The ballot-box and
universal suffrage, and constitutional government, and all the rest of it he fell foul of. And the
lecturer admitted that some of us here had not been able after hard striving to find out the north
of much that went for constitutional government in these days. He (the lecturer) was not
against universal suffrage, and would even go with J. S. Mill, and give the women the ballot, in
the belief that they would make as good a use of it as many of the men did. But the ballot and
universal suffrage were not all. He (the lecturer) had given up voting a long time for he saw no
good in it, in this eternal up and down see-saw of governments, in which Dick was as good appa-
rently as Harry. However, we should get all the good we could out of the ballot-box, but not
expect that it was to do everything. Carlyle might be called mad as a March hare on those mat-
ters, but lie (the lecturer) would say that ? constitutional government? was not quite a pure and
unmixed good. In illustration of this we here need not go far now to see how near it was to
anarchy. Here we had the first, and second, and third estates at war, and the fourth having a
sort of free fight all round?and the people seemed not to know what to make of the great hub-
bub. It was, however, a comfort to know that the police force was kept up still, for if not it
would soon be indeed a scene to see and tell of. Perhaps Carlyle was not so far out after all in
his politics, nor the poet laureate who sang the time when we might have men ? who can rule
and dare not lie.?
The lecturer would rather not have much to say about Carlyle?s religion, but must say some-
thing. It might be said by some people that Carlyle had no respect for religion. He certainly
denounced most sorts of ecclesiasticism as only a sort of mammonism. But there was more in
Christianity than Carlyle torpid in it, or said of it at all events. Yet was there not some truth in
his strictures when he said it was selfish to be thinking of nothing but how to save our own
souls? Could we not give ourselves to do the work of righteousness and leave our souls to God
to get what they deserved? A religion of mere soul-saving or mere cowardice was not the right


sort of rehgiou?a religion which made heaven a kind of paradise of sugar plums, and hell a bon-
fire to frighten men and women into being good. There was a time in England when English
people had different ideas from these about heaven and hell, and of the meaning of God?s reli-
gion. And if Carlyle had brought them to our remembrance we ought to thank him. It was
easy to call him bad names, but the lecturer thought it worth our while to listen to him in his
denunciations of the shams and cant and Jesuitry of modern times, in spite of his jokes about the
� black militia,? shovel-hats, episcopal aprons, and so forth. We should go far wrong if we re-
garded Carlyle as a pantheist, or anything of that sort.
The correctness of the report from which the foregoing extracts are taken
was not questioned. Its general accuracy is therefore assumed. But it may
be added that sentiments equivalent to those expressed in the extracts were
uttered from the pulpit more than once, in the hearing of the writer, in ser-
mons preached by the Rev. William Henderson in the regular course of his
ministrations. As the writer was but a casual hearer on these occasions, he
did not take any notes of the preacher?s precise words ; but he very distinctly
remembers that, repeatedly, anxiety about personal salvation was stigmatised
as nothing but a more refined species of selfishness ; that the blessed hope
of everlasting life was slightingly spoken of as a selfish expectation of ? a
paradise of sugar-plums,? and as a selfish resolve to ?go in and win no end
of happiness in another world that the fear of eternal punishment was
ridiculed as merely a cowardly dread of an impossible ? bonfire and that,
g morally, the most solemn and awful truths of Christianity were referred to in a
lone the very opposite in the writer?s opinion, of real earnestness and rev-
erent belief. The writer may add, that his surprise at hearing such senti-
ments spoken from a Presbyterian pulpit was only one degree less than his
astonishment at observing that a large Presbyterian congregation appeared to
accept them with entire acquiescence and approval.


CARLYLISM AND CHRISTIANITY.
It is to "be hoped, for the sake of the public weal, and in
view of the political future of this colony, that the Rev.
Mr. Henderson did not succeed in indoctrinating many ot
those persons who heard his lecture on Friday evening last
in the principles of the well-known writer whose works
he was reviewing. For Carlylism is a creed which, taken
either in its political or religious bearings, is in no way adapted
to promote the political or spiritual well-being of any community.
To prove this, nothing more would be necessary than the presen-
tation of a series of extracts, without notes or comments, from
the later writings of Mr. Thomas Carlvle. Such a selection
Or
would show a code of principles that could be truly characterised
only by the term atrocious,?principles subversive alike of all
human rights, of all public liberty, and of all the teach-
ings of Christianity. The fact that Mr Henderson, judging
from the brief epitomes of his lecture given in the news-
paper reports, does not seem to be aware of this, can only be ac-
counted for on the assumption that he has not read Carlyle?s
later writings. Rut the matter is very well known to all those
whose reading keeps pace with the literature of the time. It is
notorious in the world of literature that the publication of the
Latter Day Pamphlets marked a distinct change in Carlyle?s
views and opinions. In that book he scornfully disavowed all his
earlier and better principles, and openly declared himself the


advocate of the atrocious doctrine that Might is Eight, with all
the monstrous consequences which follow from it. And this
doctrine Mr Carlyle fervently preaches, in his own peculiar Car-
lylese dialect, throughout the six ponderous volumes of his
recently published Life of Frederick the Great. That
remarkable book may be briefly described as the most elaborate
attempt at historical ? whitewashing? which these times, fertile
in such works, has produced. Mr Carlyle?s hero, as all readers
of history know very well, was one of the most unprincipled and
unscrupulous tyrants that Europe has ever seen, ?a man without
fear of God or regard for his fellowmen, ?a man who sys-
tematically trampled on all laws human and divine, ?a?man whose
only law was his own imperious will, ?a man whom no treaty, no
compact, no oath could bind, ?a man who built up the fabric of
his power by wanton aggression and violence, by the robber?s
rule of the strong hand, ?a man, in fine, whose private character
was stamped with the darkest infamy, and who lived and died an
avowed Atheist. Such was Frederick, misnamed the Great, as
consummate a scoundrel, as ruthless a ruffian, as ever wore a
crown. But, nevertheless, Frederick is Mr. Carlyle?s model
hero and model sovereign ; and Mr. Carlyle writes six big
volumes to persuade the world that this Brigand-King of Prussia
was also a model man, worthy every way of the admiration, and
reverence, and humble worship of mankind throughout all future
generations.
It is as the declared apostle and advocate of despotism, of
slavery, of the absolute right of the strong to trample down and
exterminate the weak, and of a vague religious system which
contemptuously rejects Christianity and inculcates something
very like Atheism, that Mr. Carlyle stands before the literary
world now. He pieaches up absolutism and the divine rigut of
the Fredericks and the Louis Napoleons. He proclaims the
doctrine of the total unfitness of mankind for political freedom.
He decries all free political institutions as shams and impostuies.
He sneers, in his own Mephistophelean way, at constitutional
government as an unmeaning delusion, at the ballot-box as a


piece of designed trickery, and at popular freedom as a mis-
chievous and hateful thing, Mr. Carlyle?s model State would be
a State ruled by some crowned scoundrel of his Prussian Frede-
rick type, and in which the whole body of the citizens of all
ranks should be simply the crowned scoundrel?s serfs and slaves.
If it be asked how it is that, preaching principles so atrocious,
Mr. Carlyle gets a hearing in the intellectual arena of free Eng-
land at all ? the ready reply is, that his undoubted literary power,
his old reputation, his bright pictorial style, and the freedom of
opinion conceded to all men in England, enable him to keep his
place as a literary man. But followers he has none. His wild
and preposterous sentiments are looked on as merely the intel-
lectual vagaries of a clever man, ? Carlylism? is a word that
every well informed person understands ?and smiles at.
These are the reasons which lead us to hope that Mr. Henderson
did not succeed to any great extent in inculcating Carlylism on
his audience on last Friday evening. We regret indeed to see
that the lecturer himself seems to have imbibed a little of that
absurd and ridiculous creed. Mr. Henderson has caught Mr.
Carlyle?s trick of sneering at constitutional government, the
ballot box, and the other institutions of popular freedom. Like
Mr. Carlyle, too, Mr. Henderson, it seems, has abandoned all per-
sonal interest in political affairs, and never votes at an election.
Well! We suppose the colony and the mother country will
manage to outlive the loss of these two gentlemen?s public ser-
vices respectively. Mr. Henderson has no doubt a perfect right
to act in this regard as he pleases. But we must take the liberty
of plainly stating our conviction, that for any private citizen to
speak thus, and to act thus, in respect of the free and generous
political institutions of the land he lives in, is simply to prove
himself unworthy of the noble privileges he enjoys. And we
can assure Mr. Henderson that to these half-million or so of
brave and toiling men and women around him, political freedom
and the institutions of political freedom do mean some-
thing, and are held by them to be of real value. These
things mean life to them, and personal liberty, and social


security, and the right of labour for themselves, and the'earthly
hopes and prospects of their children and descendants in all time
coming. Therefore it is that these plain common-sense people
about us hold precious their free institutions, ?ballot-box in-
cluded, ?and could not by any persuasion be induced to speak of
them iu the terms of stupid sarcasm and flippant insolence
which Carlylism loves to use.
Of Hr. Carlyle?s religious teachings this is not the place to
speak. But we may just say, in concluding, that those teachings
cannot be otherwise than abhorrent, in the very highest degree,
to both the judgment and the feelings of persons who hold a
genuine belief in Christianity, and who learn their religious
views and sentiments from the New Testament, and not from
the writings of Mr. Thomas Carlyle.
In times like these, when the most monstrous doctrines are
openly preached from the Press, the Pulpit, and the Platform ;
when Bishops take in hand to write down the Bible; when
popularly elected Emperors write historical romances (disguised
as history) to show that the tyrants and wholesale murderers of
mankind are in fact the heaven-born rulers of nations ; when
historical writers undertake to prove that every conspicuous
crowned scoundrel of ancient and modern times was a saint and
a hero ; when the devilish doctrine that Might is Eight is openly
advocated by writers of the Carlyle stamp.; when Carlylism
supplants Christianity in many pulpits ; and when the principles
of popular freedom are sneered at and ridiculed even by persons
who come forward as popular teachers ; in such times it really
becomes necessary to recur now and then to first principles, just
to assure one?s self that the eternal distinction between right and
wrong still stands, and that good and evil have not by some
unaccountable process become interchanged. ? Woe unto
those,? says an ancient Book, ? who call evil good and good evil,


who put darkness for light and light for darkness!? And
certainly this woe lies heavy against such writers as the Imperial
author of the Life of Julius Caesar, and the writer of the
Life of Frederick the Great. We recur to this subject,
because some of the readers of our article of Thursday last have
expressed themselves as doubtful whether the strong terms of
reprobation used in that article in reference to the doctrines of
Carlylism are quite justifiable. That they are entirely so
it is now our purpose briefly to show.
Whoever, then, desires to know what the true character of
Frederick the so-called Great was, has only to read the estimates
of that king given by Lord Brougham, in his Sketches of
Statesmen, by Lord Macaulay in his Essays, and by Lord
Mahon in his History op England. They will find that these
three unimpeachable authorities pronounce Frederick to have
been a public robber, a brigand who plundered his neighbours of
their possessions, a violator of oaths and treaties, a man of the
most cruel and merciless disposition, destitute of natural
affection, and who never made a personal friend, ?in a word, an
enemy of the human race. Hot Sylla was more coldly blood-
thirsty : not Tiberius was more infamous in his private life ; not
Robespierre was more unfeeling and hard of heart; and not
Voltaire bore a deadlier hatred to Christianity. Such was
Frederick: and yet it pleases Mr. Thomas Carlyle to write six
big volumes to prove this unparalleled ruffian to have been one of
the best and wisest and justest of men! And Mr. Carlyle
endeavours to accomplish this miracle, how ? Why, by the
simple expedient of ? calling evil good and good evil, by putting
darkness for light and light for darkness.? By no other method
could the stupendous falsification of all truth and fact be worked
out. And this is Carlylism.
Take a single illustration. The invasion of Silesia by Frede-
rick in 1741, ?an event which, as Lord Macaulay rightly says ?
plunged all Europe into a long, and bloody, and desolating war,
?is admitted by historians of all shades of opinion to have been
one of the wickedest and most treacherous acts of public


brigandage and violence ever perpetrated by one power upon
another. It was as atrocious an act as would be the sudden
invasion of England by Louis Napoleon to-morrow. It was an
act to be justified only as the acts of the lately executed bush-
rangers of New South Wales are to be justified. But Mr.
Carlyle justifies it. And how, the reader asks in amazement ?
Why, in these terms ; ?? Just rights F What are rights, never
so just, which tou cannot make valid ? The world is full
of such. If you have rights and can assert them into facts, do
it: that is worth doing,? This is Carlylism, ? Might is right.
The strong may trample down the weak, and murder them at
pleasure. Evil is good and good evil. Success is the only thing
to be worshipped in this world. Popular rights are an imposture.
Popular freedom is a lie. The ballot-box is a humbug. And
down with shams!? There never was a greater sham in ex-
istence than the advocate of these abominable principles.
Take another illustration. One of Mr. Carlyle?s choicest
heroes is William, tne father of Frederick. And what kind of a
man was this William ? He was, ?as a writer in Blackwood for
July last rightly states, ?a truculent savage, ? whose reckless
and capricious cruelty could not be exceeded by any of the
ruffians who are charged before police magistrates with brutal
outrages on the members of their wretched households.? This
kind father kept his son Frederick in prison for years, and would
have hanged him, but for the interposition of the Emperor of
Austria ; and Frederick repaid this act of kindness by violently
robbing the Emperor?s daughter ?the noble-minded and beautiful
Maria Theresa ?of some of the fairest provinces of her domin-
ions. Both, father and son, in a word, were a pair of as un-
matched ruffians as this world ever produced. And these are
the heroes Carlylism would have us fall down and worship!
Neel we say more ? Yes, one thing more remains to be said.
We have deliberately charged upon Mr. Thomas Carlyle that his
later writings inculcate Atheism. Here are a few proofs : ?ln
his Life of John Steeling, Mr. Carlyle, in express terms
speaks of Christianity as an exploded imposture, ?? some old


Hebrew stars which have now gone out, 1 ? ?? old highways
which have long bacon e submerged in mud-oceans of dam-
nable dead putrescent cant.? In the same work he repre-
sents the whole body of Christian clergymen as an
?army of black dragoons, patrolling the earth, not to much
purpose, except the consumption of vast quantities of man s
meat and horse?s meat.? In other words, all Christian ministers,
in Mr. Thomas Carlyle?s view, are merely sordid, soulless, in-
satiable hypocrites, combined to keep up a system in which they
themselves have no faith. Then, when John Sterling, on his
death bed, wrote agonisingly to his old friend and teacher for
consolation and spiritual aid, the reply contained no reference
whatever to Christianity, but merely amounted to, ? I can do
nothing for you!? Lastly, in describing the death-bed of his
scoundrel hero, Frederick, Mr. Carlyle frankly avows that the
latter had no belief whatever in the existence of Gon, but
merely held some vague notion of an 66 unfathomable Demiiirgus.
And the hero-w?orshipper does not hesitate to hint that his own
views in that respect are pretty similar to those of his hero!
This is Carlylism. It begins in the coward-worship of success,
and ends, very appropriately, in atheism and blasphemy.
We devoutly hope this abominable system will never gain
disciples in this colony. For, in our view, the only things that
can make this colony a flourishing and happy country are, not
Carlylism and despotism, but popular freedom and pure
Christianity. "When even ministers of religion axe found
publicly inculcating Carlylism, it is time to speak out. It is time
for some one, who knows the difference between the two systems,
to enter a protest against Carlylism on behalf of insulted and
outraged Christianity. Not with our connivance and sanction,
at all events, shall public teachings be permitted which go to
recommend the practical adoption by all classes in society ot the
sentiments of slaves, the morals of bushrangers, and the princi-
ples of atheists.


In corroboration of the main statements contained in the
foregoing articles?which were of course written currents
calamo, and without immediate reference to the authority-
quoted,?l proceed to extract a few passages from unimpeach-
ably impartial writers, illustrative of the real character of Mr.
Carlyle?s latest hero, Frederick the Second of Prussia.
I.?Lord Brougham, in his Sketches of Statesmen (vol. 3.)
thus speaks of Frederick:?? If we turn from the truly great man
(Franklin) whom we were last engaged in contemplating, to his
celebrated contemporary in the Old World, who only affected
the philosophy that franklin possessed, and employed his
talents for civil and military affairs in extinguishing that in-
dependence which Franklin?s life was consecrated to establish,
the contrast is marvellous indeed between the Monarch and the
Printer.? Lord Brougham then goes on to adduce proofs, drawn
from notorious and undeniable facts in the life of Frederick, of
his base ingratitude to the House of Austria, and to his kind
friends the Wrechs?who had sacrificed them selves unsparingly to
soften the rigours of his early imprisonment; of his ? unfeeling
meanness,? in sheltering himself from the claims of honour and
gratitude by appealing to laws which had been generously viola-
ted in his behalf?; of his unnatural want of affection for his
wife, his brothers, his sisters, his nephews, and his relatives
generally; of his brutal harshness to his most faithful generals
and soldiers, the brave men who had won his battles for him; of
his utter selfishness and hardness of heart in all that concerned
his own personal pleasure and dignity; and of his coarse and
ruffianly treatment of his own chosen friends and intimate com-
panions. ? His treatment of persons employed in his service,?
writes his Lordship, ? and his manner of transacting business
with them, presents us with equal proofs of a tyrannical dis-
position, and examples of injustice and cruelty, altogether
unparalleled in the history of civilised monarchies.? Lord
Brougham further convicts Frederick of ? kidnapping the troops
whom he employed in plundering his neighbours? ; of forgery
and coining base money in order to augment his revenues.; of


the moat shameless falsehood in reference to that nefarious trans-
action ; of the most unfeeling injustice in his treatment of his
officers ; of outrageously brutal conduct in his treatment of his
judges; and of ?absurdity and violence? in his general govern-
ment of the kingdom. ? The history of the Prussian monarchy,?
his Lordship sums up, ? is that of an empire scraped together by
industry, and fraud, and violence, from neighbouring states. By
barter, and conquest, and imposture, its manifold districts have
been gradually brought under one dynasty ; and not a patch of
the motley mass but recalls the venality or weakness of the
surrounding powers, and the unprincipled usurpations of the
House of Brandenburgh??of which Frederick the second was
the greatest and the worst representative.
2. ?Lord Macaulay, after showing that the Pragmatic Sanction
by which the succession to the Austrian dominions intact was
secured to the Empress Maria Theresa, was an instrument solemnly
binding on all the European powers by the terms of a specific treaty,
-?an instrument ? placed under the protection of the public faith of
the whole civilised world,? ?and that ?from no quarter did the
young Empress receive stronger assurances of friendship and
support than from the King of Prussia,? goes on to say: ?? Yet
the King of Prussia had already fully determined to commit the
great crime of violating his plighted faith, of robbing the ally
whom he was bound to defend, and of plunging all Europe into a
long, bloody, and desolating war ; and all this for no end what-
ever, except that he might extend his dominions, and see his name
in the Gazettes.? The invasion of Silesia is the event here
referred to, and Lord Macaulay shows that no plea can be urged
in justification of that act of unexampled wickedness. In fact
Frederick himself attempted no justification. His own words
are: ? Ambition, interest, the desire of makingpeople talk about
me, carried the day; and I decided for war.?
3. ?Of the invasion of Silesia, Lord Mahon (History of
England, hi : 77 &c.) speaks in equivalent terms. Anec-
dotes illustrating the treachery, selfishness, hypocrisy, abject base-
ness,and even the cowardice, of Frederick are cited by Lord Mahon.


4 ?Sir James Mackintosh (Works : 454-9) says of the conduct
of Frederick in reference to the Partition of Poland: ?? So
signal a breach of faith is not to be found in the modern history
of great states. It resembles rather the vulgar frauds and low
artifices which made up the policy of the potty tyrants ot Italy
in the fourteenth century.? And again : ? The captive Diet was
compelled to sign two treaties with Russia and Prussia, stipu-
lating such cessions as the plunderers were pleased to dictate,
and containing a repetition of some insulting mockery which
HAD CLOSED EVERY FORMER ACT OF RAPINE.?
s.?Lord Macaulay says of Frederick?s private character,
Ci At a later period he was accused, truly or falsely, of vices from
which Historv averts her eyes, and which even Satire blushes to
name; vices such that, to borrow the energetic language of Lord
Keeper Coventry, the depraved nature of man, which of itself
carrieth man to all other sin, abhorreth them.? Mr Carlyle, in
one chapter of the Life of Frederick, deals with this dark
subject; and those who know anything of the social life and
private history of the Seventeenth Century must admit that he
rather confirms than disproves the unmentionable charges
in question. Frederick?s deep hatred of and contempt for
women was an avowed and notorious trait in his character. He
separated from his wife, and for years treated her with studied
coldness and cruelty. ? About women,? says Lord Macaulay,
6i he was in the habit of expressing himself in a manner which it
was impossible for the meekest of women to forgive. ? His
writings are frequently both blasphemous and indecent; and
some of Voltaire?s most scandalous productions were written
expressly for Frederick?s amusement. In fine, Lord Macaulay
sums up the character of Mr Carlyle?s hero by designating him
? a tyrant, without fear, without faith, and without mercy.
And the Rev. James White (Eighteen Christian Centuries :
p. 487) asserts of Frederick, that ?a more unprincipled remover
of his neighbour?s landmarks, and despiser of generosity and
justice, never appeared in history.?
The foregoing are but specimens of the almost numberless


testimonies that might he adduced to prove that this King, whom
Mr. Carlyle lauds to the skies as a wise, and just and heroic man,
was in fact a man both capable and guilty of the most gigantic
crimes. The ? heroes? of history with whom Frederick ranks
are the Catilines, the Borgias, and the Keros!
6. ?Mr. Carlyle is equally lavish in his laudations of Frederick
"William, father of his hero. Of this sovereign, whose habitual
conduct to all about him was so savagely capricious and brutal
that one is driven to the charitable assumption that he must
have been simply a madman, an account will he found in Lord
Macaulay?s Essay on ?Frederick the Great,? and in Lord Jeff-
rey?s Essays, (p. 812-8). A single sentence taken from the former
waiter will suffice for our purpose: ??But it was in his own
house that he was most unreasonable and ferocious ; his palace
was a hell, and he the most execrable of fiends, a cross between
Moloch and Puck.?
7.?That Frederick the second was an Atheist is a factso well
known to every person at all acquainted with the history of the
Eighteenth Century, that it almost seems like an impeachment of
the reader?s intelligence to adduce formal proofs of it. But it is
just necessary to say, by way of preface to such proofs, that
the word ? atheist? as here used is taken from the New Testa-
ment, not from the vocabulary of unbelieving philosophers,
falsely so called. He is an atheist, in the New Testament sense
of the word, who denies the ? One God and Father of Our
Lord Jesus Christ,? whom Christians worship. In this sense
Frederick was an atheist, and the leader and chief of as powerful
a conspiracy of atheists as modern times has seen. He was the
acknowledged head of that conclave of infidel writers and philos-
ophers of whom Voltaire?s is the most notorious name, whose
avowed purpose it was to put down Christianity tor ever,
and whose motto was the memorably blasphemous phrase,
Ecbasez x?inpame (? Crush the infamous w r retch?) applied to
its Divine Founder, and who inundated Europe with atheistical,
blasphemous, irreligious, immoral, and obscene books. Frederick
was the bosom friend of Voltaire, of Diderot, of DTlolbach,


(both avowed atheists even in the Philosophical sense of the
term,) of D?Alembert, and the rest of the atrocious gang. He
gave them an asylum at his palace of Sans Souci, when their
abominable writings led to their expulsion from France. At the
dinners at Sans Souci ?the fact is notorious, and is stated by
Louis Blanc in his History op the 1 bench Revolution, ?
the ? philosophers? were accustomed to address each other as
? Monsieur, and dear brother atheist!? Voltaire, moreover, applies
to Frederick, in letters and poems addressed to the King, language
purposely borrowed and parodied from the Christian worship of
God. He styles him the ? Great Captain whose mission it is to
destroy the nefarious Christian superstition.? It is revolting to
have to recur to these antiquated abominations ; but what is to be
said of writers like Mr. Carlyle who, deliberately suppressing
these facts, dare to challenge the admiration of the world (in-
cluding intelligent Christians) for this execrable tyrant and enemy
of God and man P
Mr. Carlyle?s own account of Frederick?s religious opinions is
stated in these words:??ln death,l think, he had neither fear nor
hope. Atheism, truly, he could never abide: to him, as to all of
us, it was flatly inconsistent that intellect, moral emotion, could
have been put into him by an Entity that had none of its own.
But there, pretty much, his Theism seems to have stopped. In-
stinctively, too, he believed, no man more firmly, that Right alone
has ultimately any strength in this world : ultimately, yes: but
for him and his poor brief interests, what good was it ? Hope
for himself in divine Justice, in divine Providence, I think he
had not practically any: that the unfathomable Demiurgus
should concern himself with such a paltry world of ill-given
animalcules as oneself and mankind are, this also is in the main
incredible to him.?
Mr. Carlyle, in this passage, has drawn a graphic picture of a
man who, in the phrase of the New Testament, lived and died an
Atheist (? without God?) and ? without hope in the world.? It
is the very image in words of an Atheistical mind. As to the
frivolous plea against the charge of Atheism founded on Fredi-


rick?s belief in an ? Entity? and an ? unfathomable Demiurgus,?
all that can be said of it is that, to any believer in Christianity,
it is at once preposterous absurdity and revolting blasphemy.
?To US THERE IS BUT ONE GrOD, EVEN THE FATHER.?
8. Lastly: whilst these pages were passing through the press,
the ?North British Review? for September, 1865, came to hand. It
contains an article on the ? Life of Frederick,? fully bearing out
all that has been said of that work here. We refer our readers
to the article in question in proof of this assertion, and content
ourselves with taking a single paragraph from it.?'? Mr. Carlyle?s
morality may be expressed by the formula?act up to your cha-
racter; that is, do whatever you like. His politics may be
expressed by the formula, seize whatever you have a chance of
getting; and when asked to give it up, answer by demanding
more. We are all under great obligations to him?his influence
is extensive; his power for evil is great. And this ? Life of
Frederick? is, we believe, more calculated to do mischief than
anything Mr. Carlyle has written. It contains the fullest expo-
sition of his views, and it carries out the views unflinchingly in
practice. In composition, style, and arrangement, a falling-off
from his former self cannot fail to be remarked ; but his humour
is as rich, his power of description as brilliant as ever. It is in
tone and sentiment that his deterioration is most painfully
obvious. * * * Mr. Carlyle?s denunciations, often very
commonplace in themselves, command attention from the force
and originality with which they are expressed ; and the con-
temptuous philosophy becomes popular because it appeals
pleasantly to our self-conceit. But beyond this he affords no
help; no troubled and truth-seeking mind will find any guidance
from him, A state of cheerless mockery, or passionate discontent,
leavened with a flattering sense of superiority to all mankind,
such would be the perfected triumph of Mr. Carlyle?s teaching.
He can pull down, but he cannot build. He leads his votaries
out into the wilderness, and leaves them to wander there alone.
He stirs up doubt and discontent in their minds, and then
abandons them to that unhallowed companionship. Happily we


}\ave nothing now to do with his tone on religious subjects. But
he has in this work assaulted political morality, the recognised
principles of Government, and the British Constitution. "We
refuse to cast aside any of these at his bidding.?
We have now to examine briefly into the real nature of the
religious teachings put forth in Mr. Carlyle?s recent writings.
Those teachings we pronounce to be in the strongest sense
autichristian, and in their tendency, if not in their avowed design,
atheistical. They are certainly teachings which no believer in
Christianity, and especially no genuine Christian minister, can
regard with any other feelings than those of abhorrence and
aversion. When the religious doctrines of Carlylism are the
doctrines openly preached from a pulpit, there is clearly a
deliberate purpose to banish the doctrines of Christianity from
that pulpit. The apostacy from the Truth may not be avowed,
but it is complete and manifest for all that. ?No man can serve
two masters.? But to the proofs
I.?Every candid reader of Tnk Latter Day' Pamphlets
must be struck with the conviction that these remarkable papers
are the production of a mind which has at least flung off all
belief in Christianity. It would perhaps be difficult to demon-
strate this by actual extracts taken from the book, because it
suits Mr. Carlyle to write in a wild strange style, evidently
designed to conceal his real sentiments on this point. The
? Pamphlets? are by far the worst specimens of the Carlylese
literature. They are written in such a barbarous dialect, are so
full of repetitions and disjointed interjectional sentences, are so
utterly impracticable in their drift, and so insufferably tedious
withal, that it is all but impossible to reduce the substance of
them to a series of plain and comprehensible propositions. But
take the paper entitled ? Jesuitism,? for instance, and let it be
asked what is its unquestionable drift and meaning? The answer
to the question must be that the author, under the phrase
Jesuitism, obviously includes all external forms of Christianity
now in existence ; that he denounces them all alike as being no
more than dead and soulless systems,?outward representations


of an extinct faith; that Christianity has wholly and for ever
lost its power in the world; and that of those who still possess
belief in it, the clerical (or official) section is a body of men who
traffic in cant and imposture for the purposes of sordid gain and
selfish advantage; and the lay section is a mass of persons who
are either ignorantly superstitious, and believe just what they
are told, or cunningly hypocritical, and pretend to believe what
in reality they disbelieve and reject. If this be objected to as
an incorrect summary of the pamphlet on Jesuitism, all we can
say is that it is open to the objector to prove it incorrect, if
he can.
2. ?But it is in his Life of Sterling that Mr Carlyle gives the
plainest indications of his religious sentiments. Every reader
of that book must admit that, from first to last, its tone and
spirit are in the most marked degree antichristian. On* this
point the Times would certainly be universally accepted as an
impartial witness; and the Times, in reviewing the Life of
Steeling, indignantly protests against Mr Carlyle?s classing
Christianity amongst ? shams.? The Times j reviewer, further,
pointing out the distinctly irreligious character of the work,
analyzed the writer?s account of Coleridge, and showed that Mr
Carly le, whenever he has occasion to speak of the deep religious
convictions of Coleridge?s later years, invariably sneers at the
expressions of these convictions as evidences w of moral and
intellectual feebleness.
The return of the venerable philosopher to childlike faith in
Christ and penitential trust in Clod, ?that manifest change in
Coleridge?s life which stamps his memory ineffaceably with the
seal of genuine Christianity, ?is scornfully derided by Mr
Carlyle as a pitiful attempt to ?to steal into Heaven by the
modern method of sticking ostrich-like your head into fallacies
on eartn.? In fine, the worst writings of Voltaire himself are
not more distinctly antichristian in both tone and teaching than
the Life of John Steeling.
3. ?In various parts of the same work, Mr Carlyle writes in a
tone of undisguised contempt of Sterling?s belief in a ? personal


God.? And there is given an anecdote narrating how, when
Sterling upon one occasion objected to certain doctrines of
his teacher that they inculcated ? flat Pantheism,? Mr. Carlyle
replied, ? And supposing it were Pot-theism, if the thing is
true P ? Mr. Carlyle adds: ?? the soul of his own creed in those
days was far other than this indifference to Pot or Pan in such
departments of inquiry,??and the creed of all believers in the
God of the Bible as well: we take the liberty of adding. Mr,
Carlyle?s studied sneers at the existence of and belief in a Per-
sonal God, are, undeniably, of the very essence of Atheism.
Prom first to last the Life of Sterling is essentially and
distinctively atheistical in its spirit and teachings.
It will be an evil day for this country when the doctrines of
Carlylism supersede in pulpit and on platform the soul-saving
truths of the Gospel of Christ. Between these two things
there can be no alliance and no compromise. If Christianity
be the truth, Carlylism is false, ?false as Hell. If Carlylism be
the truth, Christianity is a designed and stupendous imposture.
And if Christianity be the truth, and if Presbyterianism be not
Christianity but Carlylism, then is Presbyterianism a designed
and vast imposture, ?a mockery, a delusion, and a curse!
FEINTED AT THE OFFICE OF ?THE EYE NINO POST,? BALLAAEAT,
