

p
810
Caroline Chisholm
“The Emigrants’ Friend”




Caroline Chisholm




From “ The Catholic Press.”
Sydney. New South Wales,
September 9th, 1909.
Caroline Chisholm,
“The Emigrants’ Friend.”
A Great Catholic Woman.
SHE SETTLED 11.000 PEOPLE ON AUSTRALIAN SOIL.
T WOULD be a fine thing for Australian women to perpetuate
in some way the memory of the famous “ Emigrants’
Friend.” A society aiming at the doing of good
works, a woman’s league, a club, might well be called
by her name.
And it would be a graceful act on the part of one of our wealthy people
to present a portrait of Mrs. Chisholm (painted, of course, by a dis-
tinguished artist) to our National Art Gallery.
To thousands of young Australians her name is unknown, and with
the rapid disappearance of old landmarks all local associations with her
career in Australia will presently be sought for in vain.
Surely something might be done to keep her memory green, to retain
the “ unseen presence ” amongst us, as an incentive to the expression in
social life of higher ideals.


In Northamptonshire.
Mrs. Chisholm was born in a wholesome home environment in
Northamptonshire, England. Her father, a fine type of an English
yeoman, had a great love of country. On one occasion he brought an old
maimed soldier into his house, and, having treated him with every honour
and respect, gathered his children together, and told them to look at the
man who had fought and suffered for his country, that they might bide at
home in peace and safety. In gratitude for the kindness shown, the soldier
fought his battles in foreign lands over again, and from that day little
Caroline took an interest in lands over-seas. It is scarcely necessary to
say that she had a good mother, wise as the woman of Proverbs, and truly
devout. So far as we know, the future “Emigrants’ Friend” passed
through girlhood as a very happy maid, and when at the age of 20 she
married, the channel of her happiness was only deepened and widened, for
with Captain Archibald Chisholm she, as in the fairy tales, lived happily
ever afterwards.
The Beginning of Her Work.
In about two years from the date of her marriage, the first step of her
life-work in the cause of humanity was taken, not in Australia, but in
India, where her husband’s regiment was stationed. There she did much
good amongst the soldiers’ wives and children. It is very interesting to
note how the woman, who was afterwards to settle over 11,000 people on
Australian soil, started in a small way by making provision for the
domestic training of orphan girls. At Madras she established a school of
industry. In that school the girls were expected to keep a diary of their
daily house-keeping duties. A few lines from one of those old diaries,
always carefully read by the woman who in later years was to give evidence
on public affairs before the House of Lords, have in consequence a charm
all their own. So here is a fragment:—
“ For dinner, boiled rice for the curry, but the rice was too much
boiled. As there was some cold meat and a little rice left over, we made a
‘ pish-pash ’ for a poor blind woman.
“ Signed, Mary Smith, 13 ; Kitty McCarthy, 8, assistant house-
keepers.”
The school was flourishing when Mrs. Chisholm and her husband left
India for Australia.
Her Arrival in Sydney.
Those acquainted with the story of early colonial days will recognise
that Mrs. Chisholm sailed up our harbour to look upon terrible evils con-


nected with the system and with emigration. Poor, homeless, penniless,
friendless girls from the old country, for whom an autocratic Government
had made no provision on their arrival, were found at night seeking the
shelter of the rocks in the Domain. For the time being in those old days
the devil lived in Sydney as a gentleman. Amidst open evil on the right
hand and secret evil on the left, the strong forces of courage and self-sacri-
fice in Caroline Chisholm’s soul came into play. Almost immediately she
set out to interest the ladies whom she met in the society of her day in the
cause of the unfortunate emigrants, in order to bring pressure to bear on
the Government. Obstacles of all kinds lay on her path. Kindly offeVs of
help were oft-times withdrawn, and bigotry (it was hard to be a Catholic
in Sydney’s “ old times ”) sought, just as it seeks to-day, for the hidden
motive in a simple act of charity to a distressed fellow-being.
Difficulty after difficulty, however, was finally overcome.
At the Emigrants’ Home.
And it was a glad day for the brave woman when the Government
placed an old store (with a small room 7ft. long attached, to serve as an
office and private apartment) at her disposal as a future Emigrants’ Home.
Out of the mists of the past come stories of the famous bush journeys. But
if you wish to get a firm grasp of Mrs. Chisholm’s character you cannot do
better than picture her position on the first night spent by her alone in the
old store. Rats scudded across the floor like a flock of sheep, rats dropped
from the ceiling on to her shoulders ; rats stared at her brazenly,
unashamed and unabashed. Mrs. Chisholm sat on the side of her bed,
read by the light of a candle, prayed and thought over things, until dawn
broke over Sydney. To make a complaint to the Government officials at
such an early stage would probably mean the extinction of her cherished
scheme. So she kept silence for the time, and returned next night—but
laden with poison.
And in a little while the rats retreated before an invasion of emigrant
girls from England, Scotland and Ireland.
Mrs, Chisholm soon saw the evil of permitting the emigrants to loiter
workless in the city. So, while the Canterbury Emigration Society in
England was planning the making of an Empire at the Antipodes, in the
fashion of building castles in Spain, this practical woman, with but scant
Government assistance, started to place the people on the land. Some day
the Australian novelist yet to be will find deep wells of romance in the
3


story of Mrs. Chisholm’s bush journeys, when she personally conducted
parties of 50 and 60 —on one occasion 140 —to found homes for themselves
in the bush. On these journeys (the longest lasted for five weeks) many
charming love stories, pure and fresh as the virgin bush through which the
lovers passed, were born. And Caroline Chisholm always had a weakness
for a love story.
Following Her Footprints.
In Windsor, In Parramatta, we may as pilgrims follow her footprints.
But it is difficult to trace her steps on roads and blazed tracks further
inland. The bark hut, where she rested for the night on her mission, has
been replaced by a grand house ; the wayside settlement is a town. Yet
every step of the way she took should be of interest to Australia. No hill
was ever too steep, no creek or river too deep for the woman who had at
times to act as Moses, and give courage to the people whom she was lead-
ing to a Promised Land amongst the gums of New South Wales.
An extract from a letter tells much : “ I wish you would use your
influence to try and borrow a horse and covered cart for me. I require the
covered cart to sleep in at night and to carry little children by day. I have
just settled 70 people.” But if the journeys by steamer, coach and van
were arduous, they frequently brought much consolation of spirit.
Mrs. Chisholm and her emigrant companies usually met with the old-
time Australian hospitality. Payment was seldom accepted by squatter and
settler, and the boatman who hoped that his arm would wither before he
took payment for a row across a river from the woman of whose goodness
he had heard so much was only one of many glad to be of service to her.
Leaves Australia to Work in England.
When Mrs. Chisholm returned to England in 1846, she received before
leaving Australia an ovation from rich and poor. But in London she
continued to toil on behalf of those anxious to try a more promising life in
the colonies. Now we see her trudging to and from the small house at
Islington and Downing Street, ever armed (she was a business woman)
with documentary evidence in support of her statements ; and now she
makes a big fight against the capitalist ship owner in the cause of the poor
emigrant. One rich ship owner declared in public that he had lost heavily
through Mrs. Chisholm’s bold, and in the end successful, efforts to procure
proper ventilation, sanitary arrangements, better food and light on the
emigrant-carrying ships. And it is in London that we look on her as the
4


“ go between ” the emigrants in the new world and their friends in the old.
Daring her residence in England it is-said that 5,000 letters from Irish
people alone received attention at her hands. And so it came to pass that
many a member of a family, separated from the home circle, found again
“ his own” after long years.
In the small house at Islington the friends of the “ Family Coloniza-
tion Scheme” (no family was too large for Mrs. Chisholm, who held that
wives and children were “ God’s police ”) met morning, noon and night. At
one moment Lord Shaftesbury might be seen driving up in a cab, and in
his wake would follow a labourer, anxious to learn something about
Australia, At these informal “at homes” people going out in the same
ship were introduced to each other, letters were read aloud from settlers
getting on in the new land, and intending emigrants were encouraged to
ask questions concerning possible prospects at the end of the voyage. It
was, so far as Mrs. Chisholm was concerned, help, help, at every step of the
way.
She worked also by her pen. Hundreds of pamphlets are still in
manuscript, but numbers were published, and one dealing with the wealth
of Australia and its assurance of three square meals a day attracted the
attention of the workers, and induced many to emigrate. And her success
in bringing about, through Coutts’ great banking house, better arrange-
ments in connection with remittances from the emigrants must not be
forgotten. Up till then they had been obliged to pay as much for a £lO
note as for a £lOO.
But it would be impossible to give all the details associated with Mrs.
Chisholm’s work of peopling Australia.
She Returns to Australia.
Mrs. Chisholm sailed up Sydney Harbour again to live amongst us for
twelve years more. On every side she found evidences of the coming glory
of the future nation. The old order was giving place to the new. And,
doubtless, there were moments when the good woman smiled to herself,
listening to stories of success amongst the colonists, to the tale of Mary
Martin’s grandeur, Mary but a while ago a poor emigrant; and to the
family history of the Macgregors, who, rising from a lowly position in the
bush, had become a mighty clan in the State, remembering how she, a
woman, had had a fair share in the making of a nation.
“ A saint with the qualifications of a statesman.” This is how some-
one has described Caroline Chisholm, and that is how we may best think of
5


her. To-day, dwelling on former times, we see her carrying out a vast
colonisation scheme, and in her work manifesting marvellous statecraft.
And to-morrow she will come before us as a simple, tender woman, healing
grievous wounds.
In the silence of the night in the vanished Sydney Emigrants’ Home,
Katie Connor, an exile from Erin, is weeping softly, and there are tears on
Highland Mary’s cheeks. And it is Mrs. Chisholm, another lovely “ Lady
with the Lamp,” who is bending over the lonely girls, whispering to them
to rise and follow her into her own little room, where in a quiet talk
together maybe the trouble which caused the tears will be swept out of
sight.
There we leave her.
Where She Rests.
On Our Lady’s Day in March, 1877, Mrs. Chisholm died. She was
buried in the Catholic Cemetery at Northampton—Northampton, where as
a little girl she had dreamt dreams and seen visions of sailing ships and
foreign lands.
Australia will to all time be the richer and the better for her life.
ARRAH LUEN.
6


ECTURE
Delivered by
Miss Fitzsimons,
Chairman of the Catholic Women’s League,
Manchester,
On June 1 6th, 1 909.
The Influence of Women.
I WILL at once enter on my subject—The Influence of Women—by
quoting the opinion of John Henry Buckle, a writer born in 1822,
died in 1862 ; twenty years of whose short life were spent in
collecting materials for his projected History of Human Progress ; five
other years of ten hours a day devoted to writing the first three volumes of
the introduction (the History of Civilization in England), described as one
of the most remarkable fragments in any literature.
In an essay read before the Royal Institution on March 19th, 1858, he
says: “The influence of women has prevented life from being too exclu-
sively practical and selfish. It has softened the violence of men. It has
improved their manners. It has lessened their cruelty. From woman’s
habit of deductive rather than inductive thought she has rendered an
immense though * often ’ unconscious service to the progress of knowledge.”
He urges that those who are most anxious that the boundaries of know-
ledge should be enlarged ought to be most eager that the influence of
women should be increased, so that every resource of the human mind
might at once and quickly be brought into play, as the difficulties of the
future would require every sort of help and every variety of power.
7


In thinking’ over these words of John Henry Buckle and wondering
how best I could present my subject, so as to make it useful and interesting,
I have changed many timas my point of view—attracted first by one sphere
of women’s influence, then by another.
Though purposing to chronicle the doings of the lay woman, I thought
it would be helpful to have some idea of the work undertaken by women in
religious houses, and began to get together what statistics I could, but
soon abandoned that thought, for the magnitude of the work appalled me,
though I hope that some member of our League may later take up this
particular branch of the subject of the influence of women. Should she do
so, she will, I am sure, be grateful as I now am, for the knowledge obtained
by the reading necessary for such a paper will enrich immeasurably her
own life. To get material for my subject I have had to consult many
authorities, and have made acquaintance in the world of books with some
of the finest and noblest characters. In the limit of such a paper as this I
cannot hope to bring vividly before your minds the personality of the many
good women I have met in the last few months, but I can give you the
introductions I have myself obtained, by presenting to the League copies of
the books I have read, and thus you also may come within the influence of
those great ones
“Who live again
In minds made better by their presence; live in pulses stirred by generosity;
In deeds of daring rectitude;
In scorn for miserable aims that end with self;
In thoughts sublime that pierce the night like stars
And with their mild persistence urge man’s search
To vaster issue.” GEORGE EeioT.
Of the many women who have influenced their day the records of those
of the early part of the 19th Century will, I think, be most helpful to us of
the 20th Century. We are benefiting by the fruit of their labours ; in fact,
so perfect in many instances has been the work of their hands, that we are
apt to forget how hard they toiled, what difficulties they overcame.
Especially is this so in the case of Caroline Chisholm, whose name has now
only an echo of remembrance, though at one time it was in Great Britain
and in Australia a household word, and the recognition of whose work and
labours caused Michelet, in giving a sketch of her life in La Femme , to say :
“ La cinquieme partie du monde I’Australie n’a jusqu ici qu un saint, une
legende ce saint est une femme Anglaise. Sans fortune et sans secours, elle
a fait plus pour ce monde nouveau que toutes les societes d emigration et le
gouvernement Britannique. Le plus riche et le plus puissant des gouverne-
8


ments de la terre, maitre des Indes et d’un empire de cinq vingt millions
d’hommes, echouait dans cette colonisation qui doit reparer ses perles. Une
simple femme reussit et emporta I’affaire par son esprit vigoureu et par
la force du coeur. Elle est la legende d’un monde. Son souvenir grandira
d’age en age.” Unfortunately the prediction of Michelet has not been
fulfilled, though I am inclined to think that the very perfection of
Mrs. Chisholm’s work is the reason that the memory of her has to a
great extent faded away ! Happily we can claim this great and noble
woman as our very own. In a letter received a few days ago, in answer to
inquiries, her daughter, Mrs. O’Conor, says : “ My mother became a convert
either before, or immediately after she married Captain Archibald Chisholm.
She was instructed by the late Canon Oakeley of the Oxford Movement.
My mother told me she owed her conversion to a refugee French priest.
It appears her father, if not a minister, was a man of considerable local
position and influence in Northampton. He was one day assembled
with his family at the midday meal when he heard a great commotion
in the village. Hastening out to discover the cause, he found a crowd
following a man he judged to be a priest, and pelting him with stones
and mud. He rebuked and dispersed the people, and brought the priest
into his house, where he remained an honoured guest for many weeks.
This priest had travelled much, and my mother —a very little and very
clever and pretty child —was his inseparable companion, listening to his
travels and stories. On the final day, when the priest was to leave, my
hospitable grandfather had a little celebration at the midday meal when, as
was usual then, toasts were given and speeches made. The good Father,
in his broken English, gave graceful thanks for all that had been done for
him, and prayed God to bless this house and especially this child—laying
his hand in blessing on his little friend’s head, for of course her place was
next to him—and so he left. My mother always said his influence was
about her ! Perhaps the thought of the old priest’s blessing worked on her
soul, and caused her in 1830 to refuse to listen to the entreaties of
Archibald Chisholm to become his wife till he had well considered the
risks he ran in linking his life with one who felt that her mission would
extend far beyond the limits of her own home. He not only took the risks,
but aided to the full measure of his power her efforts to increase the “ sum
of human happiness.” In Madras, where they were stationed, Mrs. Chisholm
was the means of caring for and educating many young orphan girls and
daughters of poor soldiers. Some years later the family removed to Sydney,
New South Wales. It was here that the great work of Mrs. Chisholm
9


began. About this time there was a considerable influx in the
number of emigrants arriving at Sydney, and none of the precautions were
then taken which now make easy the path of entrance into a new and
unknown world. Girls and young women landed utterly destitute. At one
time there were known to be six hundred friendless girl emigrants wandering
about Sydney, sleeping in sheltered recesses of the rocks rather than
encounter the dangers of the streets at night—dangers aggravated by the
fact that the transportation system was then in full force. To a woman
like Mrs. Chisholm such a state of things was intolerable. After many
endeavours she at last obtained permission, on the promise that the
Government should be put to no expense, to use part of one of their
buildings for the purpose of her proposed home. Her own words will more
vividly than mine show what it cost her to take up the work.
I should preface them by saying that her husband, having been obliged
to return to India, she with her children lived in a pretty little cottage on
the outskirts of the town. Feeling her presence was necessary to the suc-
cess of the experiment, she left the cottage, placed her children in the care
of friends, and took possession of her new abode. “On closing the door I
reflected on what I had been compelled to endure for forty-nine square feet.
My first feelings were those of indignation, that such a trifle had been so
long withheld, but better feelings followed. I determined to trust to
Providence, to increase its size and prove my usefulness. Having been
busy all day, I retired wearied to rest. My courage was put to the proof at
starting. Scarce was the light out, when I fancied from a noise I heard that
dogs must be in the room, and in some terror I got a light. What
I experienced on seeing rats in all directions I cannot describe. My
first act was to throw on a cloak and get at the door with the intent
of leaving the building. My second thoughts were, if I did so, my
desertion would cause much amusement and ruin my plan. I therefore
lighted a second candle and seating myself on my bed, kept there, until
three rats descending from the roof alighted on my shoulders. I felt that I
was getting into a fever, and that, in fact, I should be very ill before morning,
but to be out-generalled by rats was too bad. I got up with some resolution.
I had two loaves and some butter (for my office, bedroom and pantry were
one). I cut it into slices, placed the whole in the middle of the room, put a
dish of water convenient, and with a light by my side, I kept my seat on the
bed, reading Abercrombie and watching the rats until four in the morning.
I at one time counted thirteen, and never less than seven did I observe at
the dish during the entire night. The following night I gave them a
10


similar treat, with the addition of arsenic; and in this manner I passed my
first four nights at the Home.” The success attending Mrs. Chisholm’s
work forced her to find an outlet for her girls, and afterwards led to her
conducting whole parties of them into the interior of the country, where she
placed them in the various homesteads scattered in the length and breadth
of the cultivated land. She and her horse, named “Captain” after her
husband, were known throughout the whole country. It is said she
ventured as far as three hundred miles into the interior, and never left her
girls till they were safely deposited in good homes. Once when she had
gone ahead to find a suitable camp-ground she was “ stuck up ” by bush-
rangers. The men, when they looked at her face and heard her voice, said:
“ You are Caroline Chisholm; go on, God bless you—never will we touch
you or your party.”
After a time Mrs. Chisholm took the charge of male emigrants, then
later the settlement of families; but in this settlement her greatest difficulty
lay in the fact that the minimum quantity of land the Colonial Government
would dispose of to settlers was three hundred acres at per acre, and it
was hopeless to expect her emigrants could take up so much as that. She,
however, induced large landowners to let emigrants have, on easy terms,
farms of fifteen, twenty or forty acres in extent, and on these the families
settled themselves, and were soon in a position of independence. The
Government, seeing the good done, voluntarily modified its conditions and
allowed lots of fifty acres of state land to be put up for sale. The help of
the colonists was the backbone of Mrs. Chisholm’s work, for she found at
the end of her first seven years’ labour, when she had already settled no
fewer than n,ooo persons in the Colony of New South Wales, that her out-
of-pocket expenses were 18s. 6d, —Government financial help not
counting for much, its contribution being but There is a story told
of a boatman, to whom Mrs. Chisholm offered payment of his service,
saying to her : “ No, ma’am, you don’t know me, but I know you, and may
my arm wither from the socket if I ever touch money of yours,” and another
story, given me by her daughter, of how when on a voyage of four months
a child was born to her, and she being very ill and unable to nurse her
baby—the milk of a goat on board was kept exclusively for the mother and
little one. Though provisions ran short and there were hundreds on
board, the goat was kept alive out of the ship biscuit rations, and when the
ship arrived at Sydney, decorated with ribbons it headed the procession in
which were carried Mrs. Chisholm and her baby, followed by her numerous
family of humble folk.
11


The one idea which by this time had taken deep root in Mrs. Chisholm’s
mind was the immense value of family life, and whilst helping the ordinary
colonists to land, and often to wives, her love went out to those
“ Emancipists ” who had been torn away from their families in Great
Britain, and were living separated from all domestic influence in, as she put
it, “ the demoralizing state of bachelorism.” She had seen that the ease
with which men could earn a living honestly “ had done more for the
reformation of the prisoner than any other observable cause,” and longed
to put heart into their labour by restoring to them those they had left
behind. On her return with her husband to England in 1846, she proceeded
to give the Home Government no peace till she had got what she wanted,
which was that it should grant free passages to the wives of convicts who
held tickets of leave in New South Wales. Her public letter to Earl Grey,
entitled “ Emigration and transportation relatively considered,” was one of
the noblest pleas for the refining influence of family life ever penned.
Among other things, she said : “ If Her Majesty’s Government be really
desirous of seeing a well-conducted community spring up in these colonies,
the social wants of the people must be considered. If the paternal
Government wish to entitle itself to that honoured appelation, it must look
to the material it may send as a nucleus for the formation of a good and
great people, for all the clergy you can dispatch, all the schoolmasters you
can appoint, all the churches you can build, all the books you can export
will never do much good without ‘ God’s Police ’ —wives and little children,
good and virtuous women.”
On Captain Chisholm’s undertaking to cover all land expense on this
side and the people of Sydney the arrangements and expense on the other,
the Home Government consented, and when later the New South Wales
Government made out a list of the children of good conduct convicts whom
it was prepared to take from England at its own expense, the heart of
Mrs. Chisholm rejoiced exceedingly. The value of this noble woman’s
work was, it is true, acknowledged, The Westminster Gazette once saying of
her : “ Mrs. Chisholm has done more for the moral regeneration of the
Australian Colonies than all their clergy with their four bishops to boot,”
and Mr. Robert Lowe (afterwards Viscount Sherbrooke), when a member of
the Legislative Council of New South Wales, declared that “one person
only in the colony has done anything effectual, anything on a scale which
may be called large, to mitigate this crying evil and national sin, and to fix
families on our lands in lieu of bachelors. And, strange to say, that one is
a humble, unpretending, quiet-working, female missionary ! An emigrant
12


missionary—not a clerical one. The singularity of her mission, looking at
the nature of her work, is one of the most original that was ever devised
or undertaken by either man or woman; and the object, the labour and the
design are all beyond praise.” Yet after such pronouncements it is
saddening to think that a yearly grant from the civil list pension of
was considered a just recognition of her services, in which she spent
and wore out her constitution fighting against prejudice and
stupidity. I have dwelt at this length on the character and influence of
Caroline Chisholm because to me she is the most real woman of her day.
Finding also that few of this generation knew of her, I rejoiced to think
that it might be given to us, members of the Catholic Women’s League, to
vivify her personality, and strengthened by the knowledge of what she had
effected, “ do noble deeds, not dream them.”
In this connection I would here also record the names of Georgina
Moore, Catherine Digby Beste, Maria Hudden, who by their influence at the
seat of war in the Crimea helped and strengthened the work of Florence
Nightingale—the Lady of the Lamp. Maria Hudden received from Queen
Victoria the Royal Red Cross at Windsor Castle. These three women, for
the knowledge of whose goodness we are grateful, later entered the Order
of Our Lady of Mercy. To the influence of Lady Georgina Fullerton, one of
our great social workers and a writer, limits can hardly be assigned, for it
is to her, to Blanche Lady Fitzgerald and to Miss Stanley, sister of the
well-known Dean of Westminster, that we owe the foundation in England
of the Sisters of Charity of St. Vincent de Paul.
The sweet name of Adeline Proctor attracts me, for I can well imagine
the influence of earnest literary women, the exercise of whose gifts has
hallowed, cheered and brightened the lives of many who without that help
would have been down-pressed by the weight of care, but I dare not pause,
for the length of this paper warns me I may possibly over-tax your patience.
I feel, however, we cannot afford to lose the knowledge of the great deeds
of Truth, Justice and Goodness wrought by those women who belonged
certainly to the Spirit, though not to the Body of our Mother the Church.
The arduous service of Mary Somerville, who at the age of 89 was still
engaged in deep study of abstruse questions of Science, has an everlasting
memorial in Somerville Hall, for even should the walls of that college be
shattered, the minds of those that have therein been elevated, tutored and
made strong will have their influence on all succeeding generations. This
thought opens out a vista of futurity wherein our women at the sister Hall
of Cherwell Edge, qualified by all the privileges of the Women’s College in
13


the ancient seat of learning—Oxford—will take their share, and I would
have these women be grateful to Sydney Lady Morgan, one who on the
surface appears frivolous, but only appears, and whose influence and that
of her husband in their social and political world, was exerted to its full
force in their fearless advocacy of Catholic Emancipation at a time when
that cause had but few supporters. Elizabeth Blackwell and other pioneer
women who opened the career of medicine were undoubtedly upheld by a
strong religious spirit, or they could never have overcome the many
difficulties which barred the way to the degree of Doctor—and now
recollection recalls in quick succession the names of Sarah Martin, a poor
dressmaker of Yarmouth, who preceded another great woman, Mrs. Fry, in
her work for prisoners ; Hannah More and her sister, Mary Carpenter,
Elizabeth Gilbert, Josephine Butler and many others, the remembrance of
whose good deeds stir a thrill of happiness in the soul, and cause thanks to
be given to God, that He has so blessed His servants that they may aid
Him in carrying out “ His ends.”
Give me your attention just a little longer, whilst, in conclusion, I read
two slight sketches of Fredrika Bremer, a Scandinavian writer, born at
Abo, in Finland, in iBor, whose talents acquired for her a European
reputation, and the expression ot whose thoughts must have strengthened
the heart of many a sorrowing man and woman in those bitter and
troublous days when war had waged on every side.
To me they are most beautiful.
In one she describes an obscure Atom who bewails his nothingness.
If he were only a dewdrop, so that he might refresh earth’s flowers, it
would be something, but he was a nothing, and nobody either wanted or
missed him. At the close of a certain day, night rested on the Atom, and
he felt his own darker night, “ Then upon Aurora’s rays came the Angel of
Consolation ” —a bright seraph, who with inexhaustible treasures of
celestial balm, soared forth over the earth ; and wherever a martyr suffers
for truth, wherever a down-trodden ant feels a pang, there he halts, gives
life, enjoyment, comfort, forgetfulness or death. The seraph saw the
suffering Atom and heard his silent complaint.
k< Rejoice, suffering Atom,” said his friendly voice, “ thy wish has been
heard by an ever-listening ear. A tear of compassion and consolation,
thou shalt glisten in my wreath, and fall, a drop of balm, upon affliction’s
burning pain.” He spoke, and already the Atom glittered, transformed,
blissful and bright like a smiling tear, upon a beautiful poppy in the
seraph’s wreath. “ Oh,” whispered he with humble joy, “I am but a drop
14


yet, beautiful seraph ; if sanctified by thee, it gives to me the power to
comfort a sufferer, then will I praise my glorious destiny, then will I bless
thee and my eternal origin.”
In the Allegory, the “ Home of Prayer,” Fredrika Bremer tells us that
Prayer was the offspring of Heavenly Love and Affliction. She grew up
amidst the delights of the celestial region, but felt always that this abode
was not her true home, and longed with an intense longing to visit the
terrestrial sphere. The genius of Heavenly Love marked with tender looks
his daughter’s silent sadness. And when had arrived the hour which
Jehovah had appointed, he took her hand and soared with her through
creation’s endless space. They approached a star called earth, where the
seraph’s eye, with melancholy joy, found again images congenial to her
heart and soul. Bright tears glistened in the bells of flowers. The sun burst
forth through heavy clouds. Summer days and winter nights rested alter-
nately on the shadowy vales, and gloomy fogs rolled over its loveliest land-
scapes. “ Here let us linger, here let us rest,” whispered she beseechingly.
They lowered their flight and alighted upon a hill from which wide-
spreading cedars threw their lengthening evening shadows. Sweetly
smiling the seraph looked round, looked towards heaven, over whose face
bright clouds were wafted by gentle winds ; and then at her heavenly guide,
saying : “ Here it is good to remain ; here is my home ; here let me stay.”
“ Daughter of my love,” replied her father, “yes, here thou shalt stay,
here is thy home; Jehovah wills it so; here is the cradle of immortal
beings, man’s native land. Here, under suffering, are born eternal joys.
But, in order that man shall not miss his goal, thou shalt be near him,
a link between me and my eternal home, which shall be his one day. Thou
shalt teach him to pray —that is, to trust and hope. Thou shalt watch at
his cradle and his grave. Thou shalt teach him in all changes to look
upwards that a ray of the eternal brightness may throw light into his soul.
“ Consolation shall be thy name ; thy mission, a woman’s, to comfort
and support,” So saying, he spread his dazzling pinions, and slowly
soaring upwards fixed a look full of measureless love upon his daughter
and vanished behind a veil of cloud.
Earth became Prayer’s home. Prayer became man’s good angel. She
watched at his cradle, watched over his youth, comforted him in every
period of his life, cheered his old age ; and, amongst the foliage of the trees
which overshadowed his mortal resting place, she was still heard to breathe
peace and joy, whispering that now she had borne him home and there he
did not need her aid any longer.
15


From “THE TABLET,” Saturday, June 19th, 1909.
THE efforts of Miss Charlotte O’Brien on behalf of emigrants to
America had their counterpart, more than a half-century ago, in the
pioneer work, done on a larger scale by a Scottish lady, also a
convert, on behalf of emigrants to Australia, This was Mrs. Caroline
Chisholm, known as “The Emigrants’ Friend,” who made several journeys
between England and Australia—in those days a matter of three months
and more —in company with numbers of women and children, thus acquir-
ing the practical experience which in our own day, and in another depart-
ment, the ladies associated with the militant cohort of the suffragist
movement hope to put to greatly needed good-purpose in the case of prison
reform. By land, too, Mrs. Chisholm journeyed through Australia with
large parties of her emigrants, and was the means of settling successfully
some eleven thousand of them. Among other claims to remembrance, she
was the pioneer advocate of “ Ocean penny postage,” as well as of the
money-order system ; while her school for the training of soldiers’ wives
and orphans at Madras (which still exists) served in many respects as the
model on which the industrial and technical training schools were after-
wards formed. Mrs. Chisholm became a Catholic some years before her
marriage with a Highland gentleman, the late Major Archibald Chisholm,
of Gusigan, Strathglass. And Ireland is not left out of the reckoning, for
her daughter married the late Mr. Edmund Dwyer Gray, M.P., the owner
of The Freeman's Journal.
16




Dublin :
The Wood Printing Works.
13 Fleet Street.
3 1 I 29.


3
v
1508
00062076
00246284
1508


