

"CAROONA"
COOKERY BOOK
OVER 240 FAVOURITE RECIPES
FOR USE ON ALL OCCASIONS
Compiled by Lismore Auxiliary,
North Coast Methodist Homes for the Aged


How To make A good Day
Take a little dash of water cold
And a little leaven of Prayer ;
Add a little bit of morning gold,
Dissolved in the morning air.
Add to your meal some merriment
And a thought for kith or kin,
And, then, as your prime ingredient,
A plenty of Work thrown in.
And spice it all with the essence of love
And a little whiff of play ;
Let the “Wise Old Book" and a glace above
Complete the well-made day.
Our Sponsors
We are indebted to the many
business firms and individuals
who have made this publication
possible. Through their gener-
osity, the entire proceeds from the
sale of this book will be devoted
to the building of “CAROONA”,
the North Coast home for old
people. Their names are recorded
at the bottom of each page. We
commend these firms to your
notice.
We are indebted to the following, who have made donations
towards the publication of this book :
W. Aubin, Grafton. G. Gibbins, Grafton.
F. R. Blood, Grafton. Mr. and Mrs. W. S. Steffens.
L. Buckley, Grafton. Westlewn Ladies' Church Aid,
Grafton.


"Caroona" Cookery Book
INDEX
CAKES : Page
Apple Cake 1
Apple Cake, iced 1
Apple Fruit Cake 1
American Feather Cake 1
Armenian Nutmeg Cake 1
Banana Cake 2
Black Devil’s Food Cake 2
Blitz Cake 2
Butter Cake 2
Butter Cake, Light 2
Caramel Cake 3
Caramel Cake Squares 3
Chocolate Cake. Arabian 3
Chocolate Cake. No. 1 3
Chocolate Cake. No. 2 3
Chocolate Cake, No. 3 4
Chocolate Butter Cake 4
Chocolate Coconut Cake 4
Chocolate Fudge Cake 4
Chocolate Pudge 4
Chocolate Cake. Economical ...... 6
Chocolate Slice f
Chocolate Walnut Sandwich 5
Christmas Cake. No. 1 5
Christmas Cake, No. 2 5
Christmas Cake, No. 3 6
Cinnamon Rocks 6
Cinnamon Sandwich 6
Coconut Cake, No. 1 6
Coconut Cake. No. 2 6
Coconut Cake, Brown 7
Coconut and Fruit Slice 7
Coffee Cake, Delicious 7
Coffee Cake, Spiced 7
Cream Cake 7
Cream Bar Cake 8
Cream Patty Cakes 8
Currant Squares 8
Date Cake, Canad an 8
Date Cake 9
Fairy Oakes 9
Fluffy Dreams 9
Foundation Mixture 9
Prangipanni Cake 9
Fruit Cake, Boiled. No. 1 10
Fruit Cake. Boiled. No. 2 10
Fruit Cake. Boiled, No. 3 10
Fruit Cake. Boiled. No, 4 10
Fruit Cake, Boiled, No. 5 10
Fruit Cake, Boiled, No. 6 11
Fruit Cake, Dark Moist 11
Fruit Cake, Pour-minute 11
Ginger Fluff 11
Honey and Coconut Topped
Cake 11
Honey Roll 12
Jiffy Cake 12
Little Cakes 12
Marshmallow Sandwich 12
Marshmallow Slice 12
Melt-in-the-mouth Layer Cake 12
One, Two. Three, Four Cake 13
Orange Cake 13
Orange Rock Cakes 13
Peach Blossom Cake. No. 1 13
Peach Blossom Cake, No, 2 13
Pearl Cake 13
Perfection Cake 14
Pumpkin Cake 14
Pumpkin Fruit Cake 14
Pumpkin Spiced Cake 14
Rainbow Cake 15
Seed Cake 15
Spice Cake 15
Snowballs 15
SPONGES ;
Brown Sponge 16
Cinnamon Sponge Sandwich
No. 1 16
Cinnamon Sponge Sandwich
NO. 2 16
Cocoa Fluff Sponge 16
Cocoa Sponge Sandwich 16
Coffee Sponge 17
Fielders Sponge Sandwich 17
Ginger Sponge 17
Ginger Fluff Sponge 17
Never-fail Sponge 17
One-egg Sandwich 18
Passion Fruit Sponge 18
Sponge Roll 18
Tutti Pruitti Cake. No. 1 18
Tutti Fruitti Cake. No. 2 18
Three-minute Cake 19
Walnut Cake 19
Walnut Sandwich 19
Welsh Cake 19
BISCUITS :
Butter Biscuits. Brown 20
Butterscotch Fingers 20
Butterscotch Shortbread 20
Cheese Biscuits or Straws 20
Cheese Pufferies 20
Cheese Wafers 21
Cocoa Biscuits 21
Coconut Biscuffs. No. 1 21
Coconut Biscuits. No. 2 21
Coconut Slice 21
Cornflakes Biscuits, No. 1 22
Cornflakes Biscuits, No. 2 22
Cornflakes Biscuits, No. 3 22
Cornflakes Meringues 22
Custard Cream Biscuits 22
Foam Biscuits 23
Ginger Biscuits 23
Ginger Nuts 23


Ginger Chews 23
Ginger Crunch Biscuits, No. 1 23
Ginger Crunch Biscuits, No. 2 24
Ginger Slice 24
Honey Crackles 24
Iced Nut Squares 24
John Bull Biscuits 24
Lemon Biscuits 25
Macaroons 25
Marshmallow Biscuits 25
Monte Carlo Biscuits 25
Nutty Crisps 25
Orange Crunch Cookies 26
Peanut Biscuits, No. 1 26
Peanut Biscuits, No. 2 26
Peanut Crisp Cookies 26
peanut Cookies, No. 1 27
Peanut Cookies. No. 2 27
Raisin Orange Drops 27
Bice Bubble Biscuits 27
LOAVES—
SCONES SHORTBREADS :
Allbran Loaf 28
Baked French Pancakes - 28
Brownie 28
Buns 28
Cheese Sauce Scones 28
Date Bread 29
Date Loaf 29
Date Loaf, Brown 29
Date or Raisin Loaf 29
Date Scones 29
Fruit Loaf, No. 1 30
Fruit Loaf, No. 2 30
Marshmallow Shortbread 30
Pikelets, No. 1 30
Pikelets. No. 2 30
Pumpkin Scones. No. 1 31
Pumpkin Scones. No. 2 31
Scones
Scotch Shortbread 31
Tea Cake 31
PUDDINGS :
American Boiled Pudding 32
Angel Pudding 32
Apple Crumble, No. 1 32
Apple Crumble, No. 2 32
Apple Snow 32
Banana and Passion Fruit Jelly 32
Banana Pudding 33
Chocolate Fudge Pudding 33
Chocolate Pudding, Steamed 33
Dandy Pudding 33
Date Pudding 33
Date Pudding. Steamed 33
Delicious Pudding No. 1 34
Delicious Pudding No. 2 34
Delicious Pudding No. 3 34
Dumplings 34
Fruit Pudding Boiled 34
Golden Pudding 34
Home-made Jelly 35
Ice Cream, No. 1 35
Ice Cream. No. 2 35
Ice Cream, No. 3 35
Banana Ice Cream 35
Ideal Milk Flummery 35
Lemon Pudding, No. 1 35
Lemon Pudding, No. 2 36
Lemon Sponge, Baked 36
Orange Dessert 36
Pineapple Delight 36
Plum Pudding No. 1 37
Plum Pudding, No. 2 37
Plum Pudding. No. 3 37
Plum Pudding, No. 4 37
Plum Pudding. No. 5 37
Popular Pudding Steamed 37
Sponge Pudding. Light 38
Syrup Pudding 38
Steamed Pudding 38
Steamed Pudding, Dark cup 38
Steamed Ginger Pudding 38
PASTRY :
Coconut Cream Pie 39
Coconut Tart 39
Dutch Tart 39
Egg and Bacon Tart 40
Fluffy Lemon Pie 40
Foam Pastry 40
Lemon Cheese Tart 40
Lemon Chiffon Tart 40
Lemon Pie 41
Lemon Tart. No. 1 41
Lemon Tart, No. 2 41
Lemon Tarts 41
Marshmallow Tart 41
Little Meat Pies 42
Mince Pies 42
Mushrooms 42
Pineapple Tart, No. 1 42
Pineapple Tart, No. 2 42
Raspberry Slice 42
Savoury Slice 43
Strawberry Chiffon Tart 43
Swiss Tarts 43
Weekend Daintee 43
CHtJTNEYS —
JAMS PICKLES RELISH :
Aunty Maud’s Green Tomato
Pickles 44
Chilli Relish. Uncooked 44
Choko or Cauliflower Pickles 44
Pour Fruit Jam 45
Gooseberry and Apple Jam 45
Grapefruit Jam 45
Green Tomato Pickles 45
Loquat Jelly 45
Mandarin Jam 46
Mango Jam 46
Mock Raspberry Jam 46
Paw Paw Chutney 46
Tomato Relish 46
MISCELLANEOUS ;
Boiled Dressing, No. 1 47
Boiled Dressing, No. 2 47
Curried Bananas 47
Egg and Asparagus Casserole 47
Fruit Punch 47
Lemon Butter 48
Lemon Cheese 48
Lemon Syrup 48
Maryland Souffle 48
Passion Fruit Cheese 48
Pork and Rice Patties 48
Potato Pie with Tomatoes 49
Savoury Bacon and Potatoes 49
Sweet and Sour Sauce 49


"OMEGA" agents "BLUEFIRE" Diamonds, Engagement Rings, Watch
Repairs by skilled tradesmen—HAßVEY BROS., Jewellers of Fashion.
CAKES
APPLE CAKE
Ingredients ; 1 cup S.R. flour, pinch salt, i cup brown sugar, i cup
butter, 1 egg.
Method ; Work together flour sifted with salt, brown sugar, butter and
egg. When all well blended, mould on a baking board
and cut into three parts. Roll each portion out to the size of a dinner
plate and bake in separate tins in a slow oven till light brown. Cook
some apples until dry and tender, mash with a little sugar and cinna-
mon and spread thickly between the cool layers of cake. Cover top of
cake with whipped cream, letting cream run over the sides until the
cake is completely covered. Serve cold.
Mrs. H. B. Attewell.
Lismore.
APPLE CAKE, ICED
Ingredients ; 6 tablespoons S.R. flour, Z tablespoons cornflour, 1 table-
spoon cinnamon, 1 teaspoon cocoa, 4 dessertspoons butter,
4 tablespoons sugar, 1 egg, 3 apples, 1 dessertspoon arrowroot.
Method : Cream butter and sugar. Add egg. Add sifted dry ingredi-
ents. Cook apples and thicken with arrowroot. Place half
cake mixture in tart plate, then the cooked apple. Place the rest of
mixture on top and cook in a medium hot oven about 20 minutes.
When cool ice with chocolate icing.
Mrs. M. Tulk.
Lismore.
APPLE FRUIT CAKE
Ingredients : 1 cup sugar, I cup butter, cups stewed unsweetened
apples (can use dried apples), 5 cup chopped nuts, i cup
raisins or mixed fruit, Z cups S.R. flour, I teaspoon each spice, nutmeg
and cinnamon, 3 dessertspoonsful cocoa, Z small teaspoons carb. soda.
Method : Cream butter, sugar, dissolve soda in hot apple and beat well.
Add nuts, raisins, etc. Lastly, fold in flour and spices. Bake
in moderate oven I hour and leave in tin until cold. Ice and sprinkle
with coconut and nuts.
Mrs. E. Edwards.
Lismore.
AMERICAN FEATHER CAKE
Ingredients : 1 cup butter, IJ cups sugar, 3 eggs, 3 cups S.R. flour, 1 cup
milk, vanilla essence.
Method : Beat butter and sugar, add eggs, add S.R. flour, milk and
essence. Bake in a moderate over i hour.
Mrs. A. Hanlon.
Teven.
ARMENIAN NUTMEG CAKE
Ingredients : 2 cups brown sugar, 2 cups flour, Z teaspoons baking
powder, 4 oz. butter, 1 egg, 1 cup milk, 1 teapsoon carb.
soda, walnuts.
Method : Combine brown sugar, flour and baking powder. Rub in but-
ter. Put half of mixture in greased yin. cake tin. Dissolve
soda in milk and add beaten egg and nutmeg. Mix into the half mix-
ture still in basin. This gives a soft mixture. Pour onto the mixture in
the cake tin and sprinkle with chopped walnuts. Bake in a moderate
oven for 1 hour. Cool before turning out.
Mrs. F. Playford.
Lismore.


Stationery, Toys obtainable at J. R. MORLEY'S, Newsagency,
Prince Street, Grafton.
BANANA CAKE
Ingredients : 1 cup butter, 11 cups sugar, 2 large eggs, 2 cups S.R. flour,
1 cup mashed bananas, i teaspoon salt, \ cup sour milk 4
1 teaspoon vanilla essence, 1 teaspoon mixed spice.
Method : Cream butter and sugar, beat eggs and add to creamed mix-
ture. Sift flour, spice and salt together, then alternately
with milk, add banana and vanilla, and mix well. Pour into paper-
lined tin and bake in a moderate oven 30 to 35 minutes. Ice with
butter icing and dust with cinnamon.
Mrs. V. Mortimer,
Old Bonalbo.
BLACK DEVIL’S FOOD CAKE
Ingredients : 2 cups S.R. flour, two-thirds cup butter, 11 cups sugar, 1
cup cocoa, 1 cup hot water, 3 eggs, 1 cup thick sour milk,
1 teaspoon vanilla, 1 teaspoon salt.
Method : Blend butter and sugar, add eggs, beat cocoa into hot water
until smooth and add to first mixture alternately with milk
to which has been added flavouring. Bake in Sin. tins. Ice with 2
cups sifted icing sugar, 1 tablespoon melted butter or 2 tablespoons
boiling water and flavouring. Mock cream filling. Substitute for sour
milk 1 cup junket.
Mrs. A. J. Drinkwater,
Kyogle,
BLITZ CAKE
Ingredients : I lb. butter, 2 ozs. sugar, 2 eggs, 5 teaspoon vanilla essence,
I lb. S.R. flour, almonds (blanched), extra 1 oz. sugar for
sprinkling on top.
Method : Cream butter and sugar, add beaten eggs and vanilla, then
add well sifted flour. Place in a deep well greased sandwich
tin, sprinkle with sugar and almonds. Bake in moderate oven 20 to 25
minutes. Split and butter while hot and serve as a tea cake.
Mrs. E. A. Graham.
BUTTER CAKE
Ingredients : % cup sugar, \ cup butter, essence vanilla, 2 eggs, 2 cups
S.R. flour. | cup milk.
Method : Beat butter and sugar to a cream, add essence, then add
eggs one at a time, then add the flour and lastly add milk.
Bake in a moderate oven half an hour.
Mrs. L. Dorey, Broadwater.
BUTTER CAKE, LIGHT
Ingredients : 8 ozs. flour, S.R. or plain with 4 teaspoons baking powder,
pinch salt, 4 ozs. butter, 4 ozs. sugar, 2 eggs, 5 tablespoons
milk, flavouring.
Method : Sift flour, baking powder and salt three times, cream butter
and sugar well, gradually add well beaten eggs and 1 tea-
spoon vanilla. Lightly fold in flour alternately with milk. Can be used
for patties or orange or light fruit cake.
Mrs. S. R. Kilmister,
Nimbin.


Never late for work . . . home in a jiffy if you ride a famous "Speedwell"
Cycle from J. A. NORRIS & CO., 14 Prince Street, Grafton.
CARAMEL CAKE
Ingredients : 1 tablespoon butter, 1 small cup brown sugar, 1 egg, I cup
milk, 1 cup flour, 1 teaspoon baking powder, pinch salt.
Method : Beat butter and sugar, add the egg, milk, salt, flour and
baking powder.
ICING
Ingredients : 1 cup brown sugar, Z tablespoons cream or milk, 1 dessert-
spoon butter, Z teaspoons vanilla.
Method : Boil the sugar, milk and butter for 6 or 7 minutes, then
take off stove, add vanilla and beat till thick enough to
spread on cake.
Mrs. L. V. Ellis,
Eureka.
CARAMEL CAKE SQUARES
Ingredients : 4 lb. butter, I cup brown sugar, 1 egjf, 1 cup S.R. flour,
I cup chopped nuts and mixed fruit, vanilla.
Method ; Melt butter and sugar together, add egg (beaten well), add
flour, fruit, etc. Bake in flat tin, cut into squares while still
warm.
Mrs. B. Soward.
Nimbin.
CHOCOLATE CAKE, ARABIAN
Ingredients : 4 ozs. butter, 6 ozs. castor sugar, 2 eggs, 6 ozs. S.R. flour,
pinch salt, 1 1 tablespoons cocoa, 1 dessertspoon coffee
essence, 4 cup milk.
Method : Cream butter and sugar, add eggs one at a time, beat well,
fold in sifted flour, cocoa and salt alternately with milk and
coffee essence. Spoon into greased Sin. ring cake pan. Bake in moder-
ate oven about 45 minutes. When cool cover with chocolate frosting
flavoured as desired.
Mrs. F. Coop,
Kyogle.
CHOCOLATE CAKE, No. 1
Ingredients : 4 lb. butter, 14 cups sugar, 2 eggs, 1| cups S.R. flour, i
cup cocoa, 1 cup milk, 1 teaspoon soda, pinch salt.
Method : Cream butter and sugar, add eggs and beat well, stir in
flour and cocoa alternately with milk. Place in two sand-
wich tins or one Sin. square cake tin and bake In moderate oven 20
minutes.
Filling : 1 cup icing sugar, 1 tablespoon butter. Blend with milk and
fill cake when cool.
Mrs. Ford,
Maclean.
CHOCOLATE CAKE, No. 2
Ingredients; i cap butter, 1 cup sugar, 1 egg, pinch carb. soda in i
cup milk, 11 cups S.R. flour, salt, 1 tablespoon cocoa, 4
cup boiling water.
Method : Cream butter and sugar, add egg and beat well. Dissolve
carb. soda in milk Mix alternately with flour and cocoa
and lastly the boiling water.
Mrs. N. Harrison.
Lismore.


This page donated by JOE McGUiRE, 33 Prince Street, Grafton.
Grafton's Sewing Machine Expert for New Machines, Reconditioned
Models and Repairs 'Phone 1680.
CHOCOLATE CAKE, No. 3
Ingredients ; 31 ozs. butter, 3 eggs, 1 cup cocoa mixed with 1 cup hot
water, 2 cups S.R. flour, 1 teaspoon cream of tartar, 1
teaspoon carb. soda, 13 cups sugar, 1 teaspoon salt, 1 teaspoon vanilla,
1 cup milk.
Method : Cream the butter and sugar, add the eggs separately and
beat well. Add the flour, cream of tartar, carb. soda, salt
etc. Stir the milk and dissolved cocoa in at the last. Bake in a hot
oven in three sandwich tins from 15 to 20 minutes.
R. Masterman.
Klllara.
CHOCOLATE BUTTER CAKE
Ingredients : 4 ozs. butter, 1 cup sugar, 1 egg, 1 cup milk, 2 level table-
spoons cocoa, 1 level teaspoon carb. soda, 11 cups S.R.
flour, 1 pkt. walnut pieces chopped, 1 cup sultanas.
Method ; Cream butter and sugar, add egg, beat well. Add sultanas
and nuts, add sifted flour and cocoa alternately with milk in
which soda has been dissolved. Bake in Sin. sandwich tins 25 to 30
minutes. When cool put together with chocolate filling.
Mrs. F. Daley,
Aistonville.
CHOCOLATE COCONUT CAKE
Ingredients ; 1 cup coconut, I cup milk, 4 oz. butter. 3 cup castor
sugar, 1 egg, pinch salt, 2 tablespoons cocoa, 1| cups S.R.
flour, vanilla.
Method : Soak the coconut in the milk and leave while creaming the
butter and sugar. Add the well beaten egg, then the coco-
nut and milk, and vanilla. Sift together the salt, cocoa and S.R. flour
and fold into the mixture. Cook in a moderate oven I hour. Ice with
chocolate icing and sprinkle with coconut.
Mrs. Clair Virtue,
Lismore.
CHOCOLATE FUDGE CAKE
Ingredients : 1 cup sugar, i cup butter, 1 egg, I cup milk, 11 cups S.R.
flour, 1 tablespoon cocoa, salt, 1 cup boiling water, 1 tea-
spoon soda.
Method : Beat sugar and butter, add egg milk with I teaspoon soda
dissolved in it, flour, cocoa, salt, then water. Bake in
sandwich tins. When cool put jam between and ice with chocolate
icing.
Mrs. E. A. Graham,
CHOCOLATE FUDGE
Ingredients ; | lb. butter, | cup sugar, 1 egg. 1 cup S.R. flour, 3 tea-
spoons cocoa, pinch salt, 1 tablespoon chopped nuts, 1
cup mixed fruit, vanilla.
Method : Cream butter and sugar, add beaten egg, S.R. flour, cocoa
and salt. To this, add chopped nuts and the mixed fruit
and a little vanilla. Mix thoroughly to stiff mixture. Flatten out on
baking tray and bake in moderate oven for 20 minutes.


This page donated by Gilbert's Dry Cleaners, Cooper's Maclean Super-
ette, C. V. Paine (W. McDonald) Furniture Store, River Street, Maclan,
and Clark Bros., Fruiterers, Prince Street, Grafton.
CHOCOLATE CAKE, ECONOMICAL
Ingredients : i lb. margarine, 1 cup sugar, I cup milk, i cup boiling
water, cups S.R. flour, pinch carb. soda and salt, 1 egg,
vanilla, 1 heaped dessertspoon cocoa.
Method : Cream margarine and sugar, add well beaten egg, mix cocoa
and milk, add pinch soda and beat gradually into butter and
sugar, add few drops vanilla, stir in lightly the sifted flour and salt and
add boiling water last of all. Cook in well greased round or square
cake tin 30 to 35 minutes in a moderate oven. When cool ice with
chocolate icing.
Mrs. A. W. Forster,
Tweed Heads.
CHOCOLATE SLICE
Ingredients : I lb. butter, 1 cup brown sugar, 1 egg, I cup S.R. flour,
2 cup cocoanut, 2 cup chopped dates, 2 level tablespoons
cocoa.
Method : Mix in usual way. Cook about 30 minutes in oven about
400 deg. Use dish about 8 or 9 inches square.
ICING : I cup icing sugar, 1 level tablespoon cocoa, 1 level tablespoon
butter, a little hot water to mix. Spread on hot cake.
Mrs. I. Somerville,
Lismore.
CHOCOLATE WALNUT SANDWICH
Ingredients : 2 tablespoons butter, | cup sugar, 4 eggs, I cup chopped
walnuts or mixed nuts, 1J cups flour, 3 teaspoons baking
powder, 3 dessertspoons cocoa, 1 tablespoon milk, a few drops of vanilla.
Cream, sliced bananas and grated chocolate for decorating.
Method : Cream butter and sugar together until soft and fluffy.
Gradually add beaten egg yolks, sift flour and baking pow-
der and cocoa three times, fold into mixture, add milk, walnuts and
vanilla, and lastly fold in stiffly beaten egg whites. Bake in two sand-
wich tins. When cool fill and top with whipped cream or mock cream
flavoured with vanilla. Decorate with grated chocolate.
Mrs. M. Simmons.
Mullumbimby.
CHRISTMAS CAKE, No. 1
Ingredients : 1 lb. raisins, 1 lb. sultanas, 1 lb. mixed fruit, 3 cups flour,
2 cups sugar, 1 lb. butter, 1 small plate candied peel, 8
eggs, 2 teaspoons nutmeg, I teaspoon cinnamon, spice and mace, li
dessertspoons vanilla, 1 teaspoon baking powder.
Method : Cream butter and sugar, add eggs beaten well. Sift half the
dry ingredients, then the fruit and peel. Add the rest of the
dry ingredients and vanilla. Mix well. Bake 4 hours.
Mrs. F. Schneider,
Kyogle.
CHRISTMAS CAKE, No. 2
Ingredients ; I lb. butter, I lb. sugar, \ lb. S.R. flour (or 2 breakfast
cups), 6 eggs, 1 teaspoon essence lemon, 1 teaspoon salt,
11 lb. mixed fruit, I lb. sultanas.
Mrs. R. A. Pursey,
Coraki.


This page donated by BIFFIN'S HIGH CLASS BUTCHERY,
38 Queen Street, Grafton.
CHBISTMAS CAKE, No. 3
Ingredients : 1 lb. brown sugar, 1 lb. butter, 1| lbs. flour, 10 eggs, 1 lb.
raisins, 1 lb. sultanas, 5 lb. currants, 5 lb. dates, J lb.
candied peel, 2 oz. almonds, teaspoon vanilla, 1 tablespoon treacle, | tea-
spoon baking soda, I teaspoon salt.
Method : Beat butter and sugar, add eggs one at a time, beat well, add
flour, salt and baking soda (sifted), add fruit, add treacle
and vanilla. Bake about 4 hours.
Mrs. W. Towns,
Lismore.
CINNAMON BOCKS
Ingredients : 1 cup sugar, \ lb. butter, 1 egg, 2 cups flour, 1 teaspoon
soda, 1 teaspoon cinnamon, i teaspoon nutmeg, J cup nuts.
1 cup coconut, 2 cup sultanas, i cup dates.
Method : Beat butter and sugar, add egg, add flour and soda, add
cinnamon, nutmeg, nuts, coconut, sultanas and dates. Make
into balls and put on tray to cook a nice brown.
Mrs. B. J. Moss,
Wyrallah.
CINNAMON SANDWICH
Ingredients : 4 eggs, 1 cup sugar, 1 cup flour, 1 teaspoon baking pow-
der, 1 tablespoon butter, 6 tablespoons milk, 2 teaspoons
cocoa, 2 teaspoons cinnamon.
Method : Beat eggs well, add sugar and beat well again, add gradually
flour with cinnamon and cocoa and baking powder and lastly
add butter melted in warm milk. Bake in moderate oven for 15
minutes.
Mrs. E. G. Barnes,
Barker’s Vale, via Kyogle.
COCONUT CAKE, No. 1
Ingredients : 3 tablespoons butter, 1 cup sugar, i cup coconut, 1 cup
milk, soak cocoanut in the milk, 11 cups of S.B. flour, 2
eggs.
Method : Beat butter and sugar to a cream, break in eggs one at a
time and beat for a minute, add milk and coconut and lastly
dry ingredients. Bake in a long well-buttered tin about I hour in a
quick oven.
ICING : Warm 2 tablespoons butter slightly and add 4 tablespoons of
icing sugar and beat until stiff! Spread on cake and springle
with coconut.
Miss E. Paine, Grafton.
COCONUT CAKE, No. 2
Ingredients : 1 cup sugar, 1 cup butter, 2 eggs, a cup coconut, 'i cup
milk, 2 cups S.B. flour, pinch salt.
Method.: Cream butter and sugar, add eggs, add coconut and milk,
sifted flour and salt. Ice when cool and sprinkle with
coconut.
Mrs. E. A. Graham.


For Latest Fashions, VIENNA STYLES, Prince Street, Grafton.
COCONUT CAKE, BROWN
Ingredients : 4 ozs. butter, 4 ozs. sugar, 3 eggs, 4 ozs. flour, 1 teaspoon
baking powder, 1 tablespoon cocoa, 3 tablespoons milk, 3
tablespoons coconut.
Method ; Cream butter and sugar, add eggs one at a time, beat well,
mix cocoa and coconut with milk and let stand until ready
to mix dry ingredients. Bake 30 minutes.
ICING ; 3 tablespoons icing sugar, 1 tablespoon butter. Beat well and
decorate with chopped nuts and coconut.
Mrs. K. Browning,
Nimbin
COCONUT AND FRUIT SLICE
Ingredients : I lb. butter, 3 teaspoons golden syrup, i cup sugar, 1 cup
coconut, 1 cup S.R. flour, 1 cup mixed fruit, little vanilla.
Method : Melt butter and syrup and pour into dry ingredients, mix
well. Press into square tin and bake in moderate oven. Ice
with lemon icing while warm.
Mrs. V. M.
Tulk, Lismore,
COFFEE CAKE, DELICIOUS
Ingredients : | cup butter, | cup sugar, 3 eggs, J cup milk, 1 tablespoon
coffee essence, U cups S.R. flour, pinch salt.
Method : Beat butter and sugar to a cream, add eggs one at a time
beating well between each addition, blend in coffee, then add
milk and flour alternately. Bake in two sandwich tins in moderate oven
20 to 30 minutes. When cold fill with mock cream and ice with coffee
frosting.
Mrs. L. J. Colefax,
Dunoon.
COFFEE CAKE, SPICED
Ingredients : 6 oz. butter, 8 oz. sugar, 13 oz. flour, 1 lb. seeded raisins,
1 teaspoon baking powder, 1 teaspoon salt, X dessertspoon
cinnamon, 1 egg, bare I pint strong black coffee.
Method : Beat butter and sugar, stir in coffee and egg which has been
slightly whisked together, add flour, baking powder, salt,
and cinnamon together (well sifted). Beat until quite smooth and
mix in fruit. Bake in a rather shallow tin for about 1 hour in a mod-
erate oven. When quite cold ice with coffee icing and decorate with
walnuts.
CREAM CAKE
Ingredients : 3 eggs, 1 cup cream, 1 cup sugar, 1J cups S.R. flour,
vanuTa.
Method : Beat the eggs and add cream, beat well, add sugar and beat
until dissolved, sift in S.R. flour, add vanilla. Bake in a
medium oven 40 minutes. Makes a nice orange cake or lamingtons.
B. Soward, Nimbin.


Model Aircraft and Accessories, Model Electric Railways, Handcraft
Supplies, Artist Supplies, Quality Toys for Boys and Girls, THE GRAFTON
HOBBY CENTRE, 35 Prince Street, Grafton. Phone Grafton 603.
CREAM BAR CAKE
Ingredients ; Z tablespoons butter, I cup sugar, 1 egg, 1 cup milk, 1
cup S.R. flour, essence vanilla.
Method : Cream butter and sugar well, add egg and beat well, add
flour and milk alternately, then 1 teaspoon vanilla essence,
beat till smooth. Bake in bar tin in moderate oven. When cold cut
a deep slanting cut in cake and fill with mock cream, dust with icing
sugar.
Mrs. E. J. Mortimer,
Mullumbimby
CREAM PATTY CAKES
Ingredients : 1 cup cream, 1 cup sugar, Z eggs, Z cups S.R. flour, 1
teaspoon baking powder, salt and vanilla.
Method : Dissolve sugar in cream, stirring with wooden spoon, add
beaten eggs, fold in sifted flour, baking powder, salt and
vanilla. Cook in a hot oven about 10 minutes in patty pans. Makes
approx. 4 dozen cakes. When cold All with cream and sprinkle with
Icing sugar.
Mrs. Thomson,
Alstonvllle
CURRANT SQUARES
Ingredients : PASTRY : Z tablespoons butter, I cup sugar, 1 egg, 1|
cups flour, 1 teaspoon baking powder, little milk.
Method : Cream butter and sugar, then add egg and beat well, add
flour sifted with baking powder, add milk, mix into pastry.
Take half the pastry and roll out very thin. Place in large flat tin
(about 12 x 10), spread with thickened currants on top then cover with
remaining pastry. Cook in a moderate oven for 20 minutes or longer.
When cool, ice and sprinkle with coconut and cut in squares.
Filling : Put 2 small cups of currants, I cup sugar, i teaspoon spice iii
a saucepan and cover with water. Boil 15 minutes, stir occassionally
to prevent sticking, then thicken with 2 tablespoons of flour mixed
with a little water.
Miss D, J. Myers,
Lismore
DATE CAKE, CANADIAN
Ingredients : i cup chopped dates, i cup water, \ teaspoon carb. soda,
I cup chopped walnuts, 1 cup butter, \ cup sugar, 1 egg,
1 cup S.R. flour, pinch salt.
Method : Soak dates In water with the carb. soda for I hour before
mixing. Cream butter and sugar, add egg and mix well.
Beat soaked dates to a pulp and add to creamed mixture with walnuts.
Lastly fold in sifted flour and salt. Bake about 40 minutes in moderate
oven. Ice with coffee or caramel icing.
Mrs. Delma Ford.
Lismore


This page donated by GRAFTON TRAVEL AGENCY.
DATE CAKE
Ingredients : 4 oz. margarine, 4 oz. soft brown sugar, 2 oz. golden
syrup, 2 eggs, 8 oz. plain flour, 3 level teaspoons baking
powder, 3 dessertspoons lemon juice, 6 oz. dates roughly chopped, a
little sifted icing sugar, 5 whole dates for the top of the cake. A 6 in.
cake tin will be required.
Method : Brush the cake tin with melted fat, then line it with grease-
proof paper, brush the paper lining also with melted fat.
Weigh the margarine, then soft brown sugar, leave the sugar in the
scales and put an extra 2 oz. with the weight, then pour the syrup on
to the sugar until the correct weight is reached. Slip the sugar with
the syrup on top of it into a mixing bowl, add the margarine and beat
to cream, then add eggs one at a time, beat well, then add flour and
lemon juice and lastly the chopped dates. Bake in moderate oven 1
hour 20 minutes. Dust the top with icing sugar, put dates around the
top.
Mrs. W. Pflugraat,
Kyogle
FAIRY CAKES
Ingredients : 4 oz. butter, 4 oz. sugar, 2 eggs, little milk, 4 oz. flour,
4 oz. cornflour, 2 teaspoons baking powder, 1 teaspoon
essence lemon or vanilla.
Method : Beat together into warm basin butter and sugar, add eggs,
beat well, add milk, mix flour, cornflour and baking powder
and add to other ingredients, lastly add essence. Fill cake papers and
bake in a quick oven for 10 minutes.
Mrs. A. Bryant,
Lismore
FLUFFY DREAMS
Ingredients : 1 tablespoon butter, 1 tablespoon plain flour, 1 cup milk,
1 tablespoon butter, 3 tablespoons sugar.
Method : Take a plain sponge slab cake and cut into squares as for
lamingtons and ice with boiled icing. Roll into coconut.
Icing : Put (tablespoon) butter in saucepan and when melted add
plain flour, then milk, cook until it thickens. Beat (1 tablespoon but-
ter) and sugar together, then add boiled mixture to this, a tablespoon
at a time.
Win. Worboys,
Clunes
FOUNDATION MIXTURE
Ingredients : 3 cups S.R. flour, pinch of salt, 3 tablespoons butter, 11
cups of sugar, 11 cups milk, 1 tablespoon of golden syrup,
2 eggs.
Method : Cream butter and sugar and syrup, add eggs, well beaten,
and beat well, then add flour and milk sifted with salt, cook
in two ring cake tins I of an hour. If electric stove, 300 deg., top off,
and bottom on high, 15 to 20 minutes, then top on low if not brown
enough.
Mrs. A. E. Brown,
Coolangatta
FRANGIPANNI CAKE
Ingredients : I cup butter, 3 tablespoons milk, i cup sugar, I cup coco-
nut, 1 cup S.R. flour, 2 eggs, 1 tablespoon orange juice
and a little grated rind.
Method ; Beat butter and sugar, add egg yolks, milk and flour, lastly
add orange juice and rind. Beat well and pour into greased
tin. Beat egg whites with 1 tablespoon sugar, add i cup coconut and
spread over uncooked cake. Bake i hour.
Mrs. M. Cosier,
Clunes.


Overnight Accommodation available at MISS STUART'S GUEST HOUSE,
93 Fitzroy Street, Grafton.
FRUIT CAKE, BOILED, No. 1.
Ingredients : 1 cup cold water, 1 lb. mixed fruit, 1 teaspoon spice, 1
cup sugar, 4 lb. butter, I teaspoon carb. soda, 2 eggs, 1
cup S.R. flour, 1 cup plain flour.
Method ; Mix and put into saucepan water, mixed fruit, spice, sugar
and butter, and bring to boil and cook 10 minutes, and when
cool add carb. soda, well beaten eggs and the flour. Beat well. Place
in greased and papered tin and bake 1 hour in a moderate oven,
Mrs. A. J. Felsch,
Empire Vale
FRUIT CAKE, BOILED, No. 2.
Ingredients : 1 cup sugar, 1 packet mixed fruit, 1 cup cold water, 1
teaspoon carb. soda, * lb. margarine, 1 egg, 1 cup plain
flour, 1 cup S.B. flour, pinch salt.
Method : Put the sugar, mixed fruit, water, carb. soda and margarine
into a saucepan and boil 12 minutes. When cold, beat egg
into it, add plain flour, S.R. flour and salt. Mix all in the saucepan
and turn into a 7 inch tin and bake in a moderate oven for about 1
hour.
Miss Jane Mortimer,
Mullumbimby
FRUIT CAKE, BOILED, No. 3.
Ingredients : 2 oz. butter, 2 oz. dripping, 1 cup sugar, 1 teaspoon carb.
soda, 1 teaspoon spice, 1 pkt. mixed fruit, 1 cup water,
2 eggs, 2 cups S.R. flour.
Method ; Put butter, dripping, sugar, carb. soda, spice, mixed fruit,
water in a saucepan and boil all together for 5 minutes.
Allow to almost cool and add well beaten eggs and self-raising flour.
(Eggs maye be omitted).
Mrs. T. Flanagan,
senr., Terranora
FRUIT CAKE, BOILED, No. 4.
Ingredients : i lb. butter, 1 cup sugar, 2 lb. mixed fruit, 1 cup water,
1 teaspoon carb. soda and a little salt, 1 cup plain flour,
1 cup S.B. flour, 3 eggs, essence and spice to taste.
Method : Place in saucepan, butter, sugar, mixed fruit, water, carb.
soda and salt. Simmer for 10 minutes and let cool. Add
the well beaten eggs, plain flour and S.R. flour, essence and spice.
Bake 2 hours. This cake is dark and moist, and will keep for months.
Mrs. G. W. Coop,
Lismore
FRUIT CAKE, BOILED, No. 5.
Ingredients : 1 pkt. mixed fruit, i lb. butter, 1 cup sugar, 1 cup milk,
1 small teaspoon carb. soda, 1 egg, 1 teaspoon yanilla, 1
cup S.B. flour, 1 cup plain flour.
Method ; Boil in large saucepan the mixed fruit, a lb. butter, sugar,
milk, carb. soda. When cool, add a well beaten egg, vanilla,
flour and plain flour. Bake in moderate oven for about 1 hour.
Mrs. Sylvia Abel


OWEN H. SANDERS, Photographer, for Fine Quality Studio Photographs,
Camera and Film Supplies, Developing and Printing Service.
FRUIT CAKE, BOILED, No. 6.
Ingredients : i lb. butter, 1 cup sugar, X cup water, 1 level teaspoon
mixed spice, i level teaspoon nutmeg, 11 lb. clean mixed
fruit, 1 slightly rounded teaspoon carb. soda, I tablespoon lemon juice,
1 well beaten egg, 1 cup S.R flour, 1 cup plain flour, J level teaspoon
salt, 1 teaspoon almond essence.
Method ; Place the first 8 ingredients into saucepan, bring to the
boll and simmer gently 8 minutes. When cool, add beaten
eggs and then sifted flour and salt, then the essence. Bake in i lb.
cake tin 2 to 2i hours in moderate oven.
Nimbin
FRUIT CAKE, DARK MOIST
Ingredients : 1 lb. flour, J lb. ground rice or cornflour, 1 teaspoon carb.
soda, 1 teaspoon cinnamon, 2 teaspoons mixed spice,
essence of lemon, vanilla and almond, 1 lb. brown sugar, sultanas,
raisins, currants, 8 eggs, I lb. mixed candied peel, \ lb. almonds, tea-
spoon salt, 1 lb. butter.
Method : Cream butter and sugar, beat in eggs 1 at a time, mix in
flour and mixed fruit, essences and spice and almonds and
carb. soda. Bake 3 hours.
Mrs. A. Bryant,
Lismore
FRUIT CAKE, FOUR-MINUTE
Ingredients : 2 cups S.R. flour, I cup sugar, 1 pkt. mixed fruit, 2 eggs,
i lb. butter, 1 cup milk, salt and essence.
Method : Put all ingredients in, in order in which they are given. In
basin put S.R. flour, then the sugar and fruit, break in
eggs and then the butter, which has been slightly softened, and add
milk, salt and essence. Mix with rotary beater or mlxmaster for 4
minutes and bake in moderate oven for about 1J hours. (There is no
need to mix anything until the beater is used.)
Mrs. Reta Ellis,
Lismore
GINGER FLUFF
Ingredients : 4 eggs, | cup sugar, 2 dessertspoons plain flour, i cup
cornflour or arrowroot, 1 teaspoon cocoa, 2 teaspoons
ginger, 2 teaspoons cinnamon, 1 teaspoon cream of tartar, i teaspoon
curb, soda, I dessertspoon golden syrup.
Method : Beat eggs and sugar, add sifted flour, cornflour or arrow-
root, cocoa, ginger, cinnamon, cream of tartar and carb.
soda. Lastly add golden syrup. Bake 20 minutes.
Mrs. H. Sunderland,
Nlmbln
HONEY AND COCONUT TOPPED CAKE
Ingredients : 4 oz. butter, 8 oz. sugar, 3 eggs, 10 oz. S.R. flour, } cup
milk, flavouring. Topping : 2 oz. butter, 3 oz. sugar, 3
oz. honey, 4 oz. coconut, 2 tablespoons not water.
Method : Cake: Cream together butter and sugar, add well beaten
eggs and milk, sift in flour. Pour into a greased tin and
bake in a moderate oven about 20 to 25 minutes. Spread top with
honey mixture and bake another 5 to 10 minutes or until golden brown.
Topping : Boil butter, sugar, honey and hot water together for 10
minutes, add coconut, mixing well.
Mrs. W. R. Dann,
Riley’s Hill


KEYNES' ECONOMY CORNER, Choicest Fruit and Freshest Vegetables.
Open every weekend. Prince and Bacon Streets, Grafton.
HONEY ROLL
Ingredients ; I cup flour, 1 cup arrowroot, 1 teaspoon cream tartar, \
teaspoon carb. soda, 1 teaspoon spice, 1 teaspoon cinna-
mon, 3 cup sugar, 4 eggs, 1 tablespoon honey.
Method : Beat eggs and sugar 15 minutes, add flour, arrowroot and
cream tartar, soda, spice, cinnamon, lastly honey.
Mrs. J. Evans,
Evans Head
JIFFY CAKE
Ingredients : 14 cups S.R. flour, I cup sugar, 2 oz. butter, 1 egg, 1 cup
milk.
Method : Sift the flour and sugar, melt the butter, beat egg well and
add to cooled butter and cup milk. Beat into flour and
sugar mixture till creSmy. It only takes a minute or two. Bake for
25 minutes in a moderate oven. Ice as desired.
Mrs. Percy White,
Lismore
LITTLE CAKES
Ingredients : 4 lb. butter, 3 oz. sugar, 2 eggs, 6 oz. flour, 1 teaspoon
baking powder, little vanilla, 1 cup sultanas, little spice.
Method : Mix butter and sugar to cream, add eggs well beaten, then
add flour and fruit. Bake in moderate oven 40 minutes.
Ice tops when cold.
Mrs. V. M. Tulk,
Lismore
MARSHMALLOW SANDWICH
Ingredients : 4 eggs, I cup sugar, 1 tablespoon syrup, 3 cup flour, 1
tablespoon arrowroot, 11 teaspoons baking powder, 1 tea-
spoon cinnamon, 1 teaspoon cocoa, 5 tablespoons milk.
Method ; Beat the whites of eggs to a stiff froth, gradually add sugar,
then syrup and yolks of eggs, not beaten. Sift the flour,
arrowroot, cinnamon, cocoa and baking powder three times, add to
mixture. Lastly add boiling milk. Bake in fairly hot oven for 20 minutes.
Mrs. A. J. Barnes,
Lillian Rock
MARSHMALLOW SLICE
Ingredients : 1 cup brown sugar, 1 cup coconut, 4 weet-bix (crumbled),
1 lb. copha, 3 cup S.R. flour, almond essence.
Method : Melt copha and mix into dry ingredients. Press into pan
and bake in slow oven 15 minutes. Stand till cool.
Marshmallow Ingredients : 11 cups sugar, 1 cup water, 1 oz. gelatine.
Method : Bring to the boil and stir while boiling for 10 minutes. Cool,
add vanilla and whisk till it thickens and whitens. Spread
on top of cake mixture and set in cool place. Cut in slices. A thin
coating of chocolate icing may be added.
Mrs. Ford, Maclean
MELT-IN-THE-MOCTH LAYER CAKE
Ingredients : 2 cups S.R. flour, \ teaspoon salt, 4 oz. butter, 1 cup castor
sugar, 2 eggs (well beaten), I cup milk, 1 teaspoon
vanilla.
Method: Sift flour and salt, cream butter thoroughly, add sugar
gradually and beat until light and fluffy. Beat in eggs
gradually. Add flour alternately with milk, small amount at a time.
Beat until smooth after each addition of flour and milk. Add vanilla.
Pour into two greased and flour-dusted 8-inch layer tins. Bake in
moderate oven about 25 minutes.


page donated by the FRIENDLY SOCIETIES' PHARMACY, Prince
Street, Grafton.
ONE, TWO, THREE, FOUR CAKE
Ingredients : 1 cup butter, 2 cups sugar, 3 cups flour, 4 eggs, i cup
milk, 2 teaspoons baking 'powder. Fruit may be added
if preferred.
Method : Cream butter and sugar, add eggs, milk, flour and baking
powder, and fruit if desired. Bake in moderate oven for 1
hour.
Mrs. E. G. Barnes,
Barker’s Vale
ORANGE CAKE
Ingredients : -i lb. butter, I lb. sugar, 2 eggs, 5 oz. S.R. flour (sifted
well) and salt, I tablespoon orange juice, mixed with 1
dessertspoon hot water, added last.
Method : Cream butter and sugar well, add eggs and lastly the flour
and salt, fold in the orange juice and water. Bake in mod-
erate oven about 40 minutes. Ice with orange icing.
Mrs. Thomson,
Alstonville
ORANGE ROCK CAKES
Ingredients : 3 oz. sugar, 8 oz. plain flour, 3 oz. butter, 1 teaspoon
baking powder, 1 tablespoon orange juice, grated rind, 1
egg and few sultanas.
Method : Sift dry ingredients, rub butter into flour until it resembles
breadcrumbs. Beat egg and add orange juice. Add it to
dry Ingredients with rind and sultanas. Put into small rough heaps.
Bake in hot oven for 10 to 15 minutes.
Mrs. L. V. Ellis,
Eureka
PEACH BLOSSOM CAKE, No. 1
Ingredients : 1 cup sugar, I cup butter, 1 cup flour, 1 cup cornflour, 1
cup milk, whites 4 eggs, desiccated coconut and cochineal
and vanilla.
Method : Beat butter and sugar to a cream, add well beaten whites of
eggs, then flour and cornflour, and, lastly, baking powder.
Divide mixture into two portions, colour one with cochineal and place
in tin as marble cake. Ice with white icing and sprinkle with coconut.
Mrs. M. E. Pursey,
Coraki
PEACH BLOSSOM CAKE, No. 2
Ingredients : 1 cup sugar, i cup butter, 5 cup milk, 1 cup plain flour,
11 teaspoons baking powder, 1 cup arrowroot, whites of
3 eggs.
Method : Cream butter and sugar, beat in milk gradually, add sifted
flour, baking powder and arrowroot, lastly add stiffly beaten
egg whites. Colour half pale pink and place sect’ons of mixture, latern-
ately in a well greased tin. Bake I to I hour in moderate oven. Ice
with pink icing and sprinkle with coconut.
Mrs. B. L. Williams,
Llsmore
PEARL CAKE
Ingredients : 2 tablespoons butter, | cup sugar, 2 eggs, 1 full cup S.R.
flour, 4 tablespoons milk, pinch of salt and essence.
Method : Combine all in basin and beat for 15 minutes. Bake in mod-
erate oven 30 to 40 minutes.
Mrs. T. Ryce,
Evans Head


GUS. ROBINSON PTY. LTD., 78 Prince Street, Grafton. Branches Maclean
and Coffs Harbour. Complete Home Furnishers. North Coast Leading
Furniture and Electrical Centres.
PERFECTION CAKE
Ingredients : 1 dessertspoon lemon juice, 2/3 cup of milk, 4 oz. soft
butter, 1 cup sugar, salt, 1 teaspoop vanilla, 1 egg, 2
level cups plain flour, 2 level tablespoons cornflour, 4 level teaspoons
baking powder.
Method ; Put lemon Juice into milk, cream butter and sugar and
vanilla very thoroughly, add egg and beat well with wooden
spoon until light and fluffy, sift flour, cornflour and baking powder,
add alternately with the soured milk, beat well after each addition.
Cook in sandwich tins. Bake 20 minutes.
Use for Icing and Filling : Cream together 1 level tablespoon butter,
i tablespoon cream of tartar, i teaspoon vanilla, add 1 tablespoon hot
water, 1 rounded tablespoon powdered milk, 1J cups icing sugar. Beat
until smooth and creamy.
Mrs. N, Harrison,
Lismore
PUMPKIN CAKE
Ingredients : 1 cup brown sugar, 6 oz. butter, I cup cold mashed
pumpkin, 2 eggs, 2 cups S.R. flour, pinch salt, 1 pkt.
mixed fruit, little essence.
Method : Beat together brown sugar and butter, and mashed pump-
kin, beat in gradually eggs, then S.R. flour, salt, mixed fruit
and a little essence. Bake in moderate oven 4.0 to 45 minutes.
Mrs. Val. Hansen,
Woodburn
PUMPKIN FRUIT CAKE
Ingredients: 1 tablespoon butter, 1 cup sugar, 2 eggs, 1 tablespoon
golden syrup, 1 cup cold cooked mashed pumpkin, 1 tea-
spoon vanilla, 2 teaspoons coffee extract, 1 teaspoon cinnamon, 1 tea-
spoon spice, a pinch of nutmeg and clove, 1 lb. assorted mixed dried
fruit, nuts if liked, 2 large cups S.R. flour.
Method : Cream together butter and sugar, add eggs and beat well,
add other ingredients in order given, lastly sift in the flour,
mix well, Bake about 2 hours in a moderate oven.
Mrs. R. S. Stanton,
Lismore
PUMPKIN SPICED CAKE
Ingredients : 2 cups S.R. flour, I teaspoon salt, 2 teaspoons mixed spice,
6 pitted dates, i cup cooked mashed pumpkin, 2 oz. butter,
1 cup sugar, 2 eggs, 1 tablespoon treacle, i cup cold water, teaspoon
carb. soda.
Method ; Sift flour, salt and spice and add pitted dates, chopped
finely. Cream butter and sugar until mixture is light and
fluffy, beat in eggs one at a time and beat for 2 minutes. Blend treacle,
mashed pumpkin, cold water and carb. soda and add alternately with
sifted dry ingredients, beginning and ending with dry ingredients. Bake
in greased, floured 8 inch sandwich tins or flat dish in moderate oven
and ice with lemon icing.
Mrs. I. W. Towner,
Wollongbar


This page donated by SIMPLE SIMON DELICATESSEN, Prince Street,
Grafton, which supplies the Purest, Perfectly Cooked Dainties for your
table.
RAINBOW CAKE
Ingredients : J lb. butter, I lb. flour, 6 ozs. sugar, 3 eggs, i cup milk,
2 teaspoons baking powder, vanilla, pinch salt.
Method : Cream butter and sugar, add well beaten egg, milk, then flour
with salt and baking powder, divide mixture into 3 parts, 1
plain. 1 carmine, 1 chocolate. Bake in sandwich tins 10 to 15 minutes
in quick oven.
Pilling : 2 tablespoons butter, 1 cup icing sugar, beat well, then add the
stiffly beaten white of 2 eggs.
Mrs. E. White,
Kyogle.
SEED CAKE
Ingredients : 1 cup butter, 1 cup white sugar, 3 eggs, pinch salt, 1 cup
milk, 3 cups flour (small), 1 teaspoon baking powder,
carraway seeds to taste.
Method : Beat butter and sugar together well, add beaten eggs and
salt, beat well again, add milk, then sifted flour, with baking
powder and carraway seeds, line a 7 inch tin with paper, pour mixture
in. Bake 1 hour fairly hot oven.
Mrs. A. Bryant,
Lismore.
SPICE CAKE
Ingredients : I cup sugar, I cup butter, I egg, Z cups flour, 1 cup raisins,
1 cup nuts, 2 teaspoons soda, 1 teaspoon vanilla, 1 teaspoon
nutmeg, cinnamon, spice, i teaspoon salt.
Method ; Boil raisins in 1 cup of water, allow to cool, drain. Keep water
for cake and if not one cup make it up. Cream butter and
sugar, add beaten egg, then flour and spice alternately with water, in
which soda is dissolved, then raisins, nuts and vanilla. Bake in sand-
wich tins.
Miss G. Orr,
Llsmore.
SNOW BALLS
Ingredients : Zi level tablespoons butter, i cup sugar, 1 egg Z table-
spoons milk, 1 cup flour, 1 teaspoon baking powder, vanilla
to taste.
Method : Beat butter and sugar to a cream, add beaten egg. milk and
flour and baking powder, mix together, drop into hot gem
irons. Bake in moderate oven.
Frosting : Melt 1 tablespoon butter, add 1 tablespoon flour and cup milk,
keep stirring until thick (or it will become lumpy). Stand as'de to cool,
beat together 1 tablespoon butter, 3 tablespoons sugar, add to other mix-
ture and beat until fluffy. Cut cakes in half, spread with raspberry or
dark plum jam and join together, then coat with frosting and roll in
coconut.
Mrs. A. R. Sutherland,
Maclean.


This page donated by MACKELLY & CO., 45-49 Prince Street, Grafton.
SPONGE, BROWN
Ingredients : 4 eggs, 1 cup sugar, 1 cup flour, 1 teaspoon cream of tar-
tar, i teaspoon carb. soda, 4 tablesuoons boiling milk, 2
tablespoons butter, 2 dessertspoons coffee essence, 1 dessertspoon cocoa,
salt.
Method : Beat egg whites until stiff, add sugar gradually, add egg
yolks and mix well together, sift in well sifted flour, cream
of tartar, salt, lastly add mixed cocoa, coffee, butter and soda and
boiling milk. Cook in 8 inch sandwich tins or square tin i hour (mod-
erate oven). Pill with cream and ice.
Mrs. W, Thomson,
Alston ville
SPONGE SANDWICH (CINNAMON), No. 1.
Ingredients : 4 eggs, 1 cup sugar, 1 cup flour, 1 teaspoon baking powder,
6 tablespoons boiling milk, 2 oz. butter, 2 teaspoons
cinnamon, 2 teaspoons cocoa.
Method : Beat egg whites and sugar until stiff, add yolks one at a
time, sift in flour, baking powder, cinnamon and cocoa, and
lastly add boiling milk and butter.
Mrs. A. J. Felsch,
Empire Vale
SPONGE (CINNAMON), No. 2.
Ingredients : 4 eggs, I cup sugar, 1 cup S.R. flour, 2 teaspoons cocoa, 2
teaspoons cinnamon, 6 tablespoons milk, li dessertspoons
butter.
Method : Beat eggs and sugar till stiff and creamy, sift in all dry
ingredients, boll milk and butter together and add. Fill
and ice as desired.
Mrs. S. J. Latimer,
Lismore
COCOA FLUFF SPONGE
Ingredients : 4 eggs, I cup sugar, 1 dessertspoon syrup, 1 dessertspoon
floqr, 3 teaspoon baking soda, 1 cup arrowroot, 2 tea-
spoons cocoa, 1 teaspoon cinnamon.
Method : Beat egg whites until stiff, add sugar and beat well. Add
yolks of eggs and beat well. Add syrup and beat well again.
Sift flour, baking soda, arrowroot, cocoa and cinnamon and add to
mixture. Bake in sandwich tins in moderate oven and put together
with mock cream.
Mrs. C. G. Carter,
Chatsworth
COCOA SPONGE SANDWICH
Ingredients : 4 eggs, 1 cup sugar, 1 cup flour, 1 teaspoon baking powder,
pinch salt, 4 heaped teaspoons cocoa, 1 teaspoon butter.
Method : Put cocoa into cup and pour on sufficient boiling water to
make into a thin paste, then put In sufficient milk to make
half a cup, put butter in and set on stove to heat. Separate whites
and yolks of eggs, beat whites till stiff and frothy (not dry), add yolks
and beat 5 minutes, beat sugar in and beat for another 5 minutes or
until sugar is dissolved and mixture will hold the form of figure 8
when dropped from beater (this is when using a hand rotary beater),
fold in flour and baking powder, then add hot milk and cocoa to mix-
ture, mix well. Pour into sandwich tins and bake 15 to 20 minutes.
Join together with a mock cream.
Miss Jane Mortimer,
Mullumblmby


This page donated by ROY and BRIAN HEBER, Ladies' Hairdressers,
20A Prince Street, Grafton.
COFFEE SPONGE
Ingredients : 4 eggs, I cup sugar, I cup flour, i cup cornflour, 1 level
teaspoon cream of tartar, 1 cup milk, 1 dessertspoon coffee
essence, 1 heaped teaspoon butter, 1 teaspoon carb. soda.
Method : Beat eggs well, add sugar. Place in saucepan milk, coffee
essence and butter and heat until just boiling; allow to cool
and add carb. soda. Sift flour, cornflour and cream tartar three times.
Add milk mixture to eggs and sugar, then add flour gradually.
Mrs. M. B. McInnes,
Mullumbimby.
FIELDERS SPONGE SANDWICH
Ingredients : 3 eggs, i glass cup Fielder’s cornflour, 1 teaspoon baking
powder, 1 cup sugar, 1 dessertspoon of plain flour.
Method : Beat egg whites to stiff froth and add yolks, add sugar gradu-
ally and beat till stiff and sugar dissolved, add sifted corn-
flour, plain flour and baking powder. Bake in 8 inch sandwich tins in
moderately hot oven 15 minutes.
Mrs. L. Dorey,
Broadwater,
GINGER SPONGE
Ingredients : 3 eggs, 1 cup of sugar, 1 tablespoon syrup, 1 cup S.R. flour,
1 teaspoon ginger, 1 teaspoon cinnamon, 3 tablespoons of
milk, 1 dessertspoon butter.
Method : Separate yolks from whites of eggs, beat whites, adding sugar
gradually until all is dissolved, then add yolks and syrup, add
flour, ginger and cinnamon after sifting three times. Heat butter and
milk and add to mixture. Pour into two 7 inch sandwich tins. Bake
in electric oven 425 deg. 25 to 30 minutes.
Ingredients Butter Filling : 3 dessertspoons butter, 1 small dessertspoon
sugar, 1 teaspoon gelatine in 3 dessertspoons hot water.
Method ; Mix till creamy, add milk to make fluffy.
Mrs. Shirley Snow,
Casino.
GINGER FLUFF SPONGE
Ingredients : 4 eggs, I cup of sugar, pinch salt, 1 cup arrowroot or corn-
flour, Z dessertspoons plain flour, 2 teaspoon ground
ginger, 2 teaspoons cinnamon, 1 teaspoon cocoa, 1 teaspoon cream of
tartar, i teaspoon carb. soda.
Method : Beat eggs with sugar and salt until light and fluffy, then sift
(twice) and add arrowroot or cornflour, plain flour ginger,
cinnamon, cocoa, cream of tartar and carb. soda. Mix well, then add
golden syrup. Bake in large sandwich tins 15 to 20 minutes in moderate
oven. Fill with cream.
Mrs. R. P. Strong,
South Lismore.
NEVER-FAIL SPONGE
Ingredients : 4 eggs, 1 cup sugar, X cup flour, 1 teaspoon baking powder,
4 teaspoons cornflour, 6 tablespoons boiling milk, 2 ai.
butter.
Method ; Beat the eggs and sugar together for 10 minutes. Fold in the
flour, baking powder and cornflour. Lastly add the boiling
milk and butter. Mix well. Bake in a moderate oven for 15 to 20
minutes.
Mrs. B. J, Moss, Wyrallah, and
Mrs. S. M. Pflugraat, Kyogle.


For Friendly Pharmaceutical Services, J. D. ADA, 64 Prince Street,
Grafton.
ONE-EGG SANDWICH
Ingredients : 1 cup S.B. flour, 3 cup sugar, I cup milk, 1 tablespoon
butter, 1 egg, 1 teaspoon cornflour, salt.
Method : Cream butter and sugar, add egg, beat well, then add flour
and lastly the milk.
Mrs. E. A. Johnston
PASSIONFBUIT SPONGE
Ingredients: 4 oz. butter, 8 oz. sugar, 2 eggs, 8 oz. S Jt. flour, small
teacup milk, lemon essence.
Method : Beat butter and sugar to a white cream, then whisk eggs
for 10 minutes and beat into butter mixture, stir in flour
and milk, with lemon essence, and bake in well buttered sandwich tins.
When cold, beat pulp of two passionfrult into some stiffly whisked
cream and spread between the layers. Ice top with passioniruit icing
or dust with a powdered sugar.
Mrs. S. J. Brown,
Kyogle
SPONGE ROLL
Ingredients : 4 eggs, 1 cup sugar, 1 cup flour, 1 teaspoon baking powder,
1 teaspoon butter, \ cup milk and vanilla.
Method ; Beat eggs and sugar 15 minutes, add flour and baking powder,
then milk and butter, which has been brought to the boil
together, lastly add vanilla.
Mrs. P. Morgan,
Woodburn
TCTTI FRUTTI CAKE, No. 1.
Ingredients : i lb. butter, 1 cup sugar, 1 egg, 1 teaspoon carb. soda,
1 cup milk, II cups flour, 1 teaspoon baking powder, 2
tablespoons cocoa, I cup chopped walnuts, I cup chopped raisins, pinch
salt.
Method : Cream butter and sugar, add egg and beat well. Gradually
add milk, in which carb. soda has been dissolved, then cocoa,
which has been slightly moistened with cold water. Add raisins and
walnuts and lastly flour and baking powder sifted together. If using
electric stove, put in at 400 deg. and reduce immediately to 375 deg.
By omitting raisins and walnuts this recipe makes a very nice chocolate
cake.
Mrs. W. Jackson,
Lismore
TCTTI FBUTTI CAKE, No. 2.
Ingredients : 1 cup sugar, I cup butter, 3 tablespoon hot water, 1 egg,
1 small teaspoon baking powder, I cup milk, 1 cup dates,
1| teaspoons baking powder, 2 cups flour, 2 dessertspoons cocoa, 2
dessertspoons coconut.
Method ; Beat sugar and butter to cream. Add hot water and egg
(well beaten), add 1 small teaspoon baking powder dissolved
in milk, dates, II teaspoons baking powder, flour, cocoa and coconut.
Bake in a well greased tin.
Mrs. H. Norman,
Lismore


Buy Your Cooking Needs, always fresh and clean, from E. B. COCKS,
MAXTED PTY. LTD., 67 Skinner Street, South Grafton, and 69 Victoria
Street, Grafton.
THREE - MINUTE CAKE
Ingredients : 1 cup flour, % cup sugar, 3 eggs, 2 tablespoons melted
butter, 3 tablespoons milk, pinch salt, vanilla essense, 1
teaspoon cornflour and 1 teaspoon baking powder.
Method : Beat together the flour, sugar, eggs, melted butter, milk, salt
and vanilla for 3 minutes. Then add cornflour and baking
powder. Bake in flat tin 8 inch x 11 inch in a moderate oven. Make
half of this cake into lamlngtons and other half cut in two, bottom halt
iced with soft butter icing, then layer of sao biscuits, then raspberry
jam, place top half and ice.
Mrs. H. B. Tulk,
Wyrallah.
WALNUT CAKE
Ingredients : 8 ozs. butter, 8 ozs. sugar, 2 ozs. cornflour, 8 oz. flour, 1
teaspoon baking powder, I teaspoon salt, 1 oz. grated
chocolate or cocoa, 4 eggs, essence vanilla, I lb. walnuts.
Method : Beat butter and sugar to a cream, add well beaten eggs,
then flour, baking powder, salt, chocolate, all sifted together,
then vanilla, ground walnuts through mincer. Bake in cake tin 13
hours. Ice with chocolate icing, decorate with walnuts.
Mrs, W. Orr,
Llsmore.
WALNUT SANDWICH
Ingredients : I lb. butter, large cup of sugar, 3 eggs, i cup milk, 1| cups
flour and 2 teaspoons baking powder, 2 teaspoons cocoa,
walnuts.
Method : Beat butter and sugar to a cream, add the well beaten eggs,
milk, flour and baking powder and cocoa. Add to the mix-
ture a few broken up walnuts. Bake in moderate oven. Join sandwich
together with mock cream and top with chocolate icing and decorate
with half walnuts.
Mrs. D. A. Eggins.
Grafton.
WELSH CAKE
Ingredients : £ lb. S.R. flour, 4 ozs. fat (2 ozs. margarine, 2 ozs. lard),
4 ozs. sugar, 1 egg, pinch of salt, 3 ozs. currants, milk and
water to mix.
Method : Sift flour and salt, rub fat into flour, add sugar and cur-
rants, add well beaten egg and enough milk to make a nice
dough. Roll out to thickness of not quite i inch and cut with scone
cutter. Have griddle or thick bottom frying pan very hot and just grease
with lard. Place cakes in pan and cook both sides until golden brown
Whilst still warm sprinkle with sugar. Delicious for lunch box.
Mrs. Colin Anderson, Chatsworth
Island.


For Fresh Fruit and Vegetables, Cut Flowers, Shrubs and Garden Supplies
see R. O'DONOHUE, Prince Street, Grafton.
BISCUITS
BUTTER BISCUITS, BROWN
Ingredients: i oz. butter, i oz. sugar, X egg, 5 oz. S.B. flour, almonds,
essence, salt.
Method : Put butter in a saucepan and heat till it becomes a light
brown colour. Take off the stove, let it cool, but not set.
Beat in the sugar, then egg, add the flour sifted with a pinch of salt
and essence Drop half a teaspoon of the mixture on to a cold greased
oven tray a little distance apart, as they spread. Place half an almond
on each one and bake in a moderate over.
Miss S. Smart,
Terranora
BUTTERSCOTCH FINGERS
Ingredients : 2 ozs. butter, X cup brown sugar, 1 egg, I teaspoon vanilla,
j cup cocoanut, i cup plain flour, X teaspoon baking
powder, pinch salt, I cup chopped walnuts or Queensland nuts.
Method : Melt butter, but do not allow to boil, add sugar, remove from
heat and stir until well mixed, stir in beaten egg, then vanilla,
and sifted dry ingredients, coconut and nuts. Spread the mixture over
a greased slab tin and bake in a moderate oven for 25 to 30 minutes.
Cut into fingers while still warm. Remove from tin when cold.
Mrs. M. Noble,
Lismore
BUTTERSCOTCH SHORTBREAD
Ingredients ; J lb. butter, I cup firmly-packed brown sugar, 2 cups
plain flour, pinch of salt and few drops vanilla.
Method ; Cream butter and sugar and mix flour in well. Press mix-
ture through biscuit forcer. Bake in moderately slow oven.
Margaret Stanton,
Lismore
CHEESE BISCUITS OB STRAWS
Ingredients : 5 ozs. plain flour, 6 ozs. finely grated cheese, 2 egg yolks,
lemon juice, pinch of salt and cayenne pepper, also pinch
baking powder.
Method : Sieve flour, salt and cayenne pepper. Rub in butter, add
cheese and mix to a dry dough with egg yolk and lemon
juice, turn on to a floured board. Cut Into straws or biscuits... If bis-
cuits, "laze and sprinkle with cheese and egg white. .. Bake in moderate
oven for 10 minutes.
Gertrude Kelly,
Grafton
CHEESE PUFFERIES
Ingredients : X cup of plain flour, salt, cayenne pepper, 1 teaspoon
butter, 2 tablespoons matured cheese.
Method : Sift flour, etc., together and rub in the butter and add the
grated cheese. Mix to a fairly stiff dough with cold water.
Break into pieces and roll out thinly. Place on biscuit trays of any kind.
Sprinkle very lightly with fine salt from a shaker. Bake in a moderate
own and watch very carefully, as they easily burn. Will keep well in
airtight tin. Serve buttered.
Mrs. S. Haythorne.
Tweed Heads


Send your pre-school child to JACK and JILL KINDERGARTEN, next to
Methodist Church, Prince Street, Grafton.
CHEESE WAFERS
Ingredients : 1 cup grated cheese, 2 cups plain flour, a spoonful butter,
I teaspoon salt.
Method : Sift flour and salt. Bub butter into flour, add grated cheese
and mix well with enough water to make a moist dough. Roll
out thinly and cut into shape. Bake in moderate oven.
Mrs. F. M. Graham,
Lismore.
COCOA IBISCUITS
Ingredients : 11 cups S.B. flour, 1 teapsoon salt, i cup cornflour, I cup
cocoa, i cup sugar, \ lb. butter, 1 large egg. I teaspoon
vanilla.
Method : Sift flour, salt, cornflour and cocoa together three times,
Cream butter and sugar together until light and fluffy. Beat
in egg until mixture is thick and smooth. Add vanilla essence. Blend
in flour. Drop from tip of teaspoon on to prepared baking shells. Let
stand a few minutes, then flatten cookies by stamping with a glass
covered with a damp cloth... Bake in moderate oven 10/12 minutes.
Sandwich together in pairs with mock frosting made by dissolving 1
tablespoon butter, 1 tablespoon cocoa and 1 tablespoon boiling water.
Add teaspoon coffee essence, pinch salt and 1 cup sifted icing sugar.
Beat until smooth and fluffy and spread between biscuits.
Mrs. A. J. Barnes.
Lillian Rock.
COCONUT IBISCUITS, No. 1
Ingredients : 6 ozs. butter, 6 ozs. sugar, 2 eggs, well beaten, 4 table-
spoons coconut, 10 ozs. flour.
Method : Mix butter with sugar, then add eggs and coconut and flour.
Break off pieces, dip in sugar and bake till light brown in
medium oven.
Mrs. S. Sanne,
Maclean.
COCONUT BISCUITS, No. 2
Ingredients : 1 small cup sugar, 1 large cup flour, 3 tablespoons butter,
1 egg, 1 teaspoon baking powder, 11 cups coconut—milk,
If necessary.
Method : Beat butter and sugar and egg well, add coconut, flour, etc.
Roll into balls, place on greased tray and bake 10 to 15
minutes.
Jane Mortimer,
Mullumbimby.
COCONUT SLICE
Ingredients : Biscuit Mixture : 3 oz. butter, 2 oz. sugar, 6 oz. S.B. flour,
pinch salt, vanilla, 1 egg yolk, 2 tablespoons milk, 3 table-
spoons jam.
Coconut Meringue : 1 egg white, I cup sugar, 2 tablespoons vanilla.
Method : Cream butter and sugar, beat till light and fluffy, add egg
yolk, milk and vanilla. Sift flour and salt, and stir into mix-
ture. 801 l evenly and place in Swiss roll tin. Spread with jam. Beat
egg white, add sugar, coconut and vanilla slowly until thick and then
spread on biscuit mixture. Bake in a moderate oven for about i hour.
Cut into finger lengths while still hot.
Jean Robinson,
Mullumbimby.


This poge donated by P. H. BUTCHER, General Merchants, Lawrence.
CORNFLAKES BISCUITS. No. 2
Ingredients : 6 ozs. sugar, 8 ozs. butter, 10 ozs. plain flour, 1 egg yolk,
1 cup cornflakes, grated rind of 1 orange.
Method : Cream butter and sugar, then add egg yolk and grated rind,
mix well, then fold in flour and cornflakes, turn out on
floured board, roll and cut into biscuit shapes, i inch thick. Glaze with
beaten white of egg and decorate with halved blanched almonds or
glazed cherries. Bake in moderate oven till lightly brown.
Miss V. Hermann,
Lismore
CORNFLAKES BISCUITS, No. 3
Ingredients : 1 cup flour, | cup brown sugar, I cup cornflakes (crushed),
1 cup coconut, I cup butter.
Method : Melt butter in saucepan on stove, mix all dry ingredients
together, then pour melted butter over dry ingredients. Stir,
then press out in roll tin, cook 30/35 minutes and while still hot, ice
with chocolate icing.
Mrs. R. Timms,
Riley’s Hill
CORNFLAKE MERINGUES
Ingredients : 1 egg white, 1 small half cup sugar, U small cups corn-
flakes, flavouring.
Method : Beat egg white till stiff, add sugar, a little at a time, beating
well till sugar is dissolved. Add a few drops of vanilla or
any other flavouring, then cornflakes. Bake in a very slow oven till firm
and crisp, from half an hour to an hour, according to temperature of
oven. Meringues should not be brown. This mixture should make about
one dozen.
Mrs. E. Gallegher,
Maclean
CUSTARD CREAM BISCUITS
Ingredients : 6 ozs. plain flour, I teaspoon baking powder, 2 ozs. cus-
tard powder, pinch salt, 6 ozs. butter, Z ozs. icing sugar.
Method : Sift dry ingredients three times. Cream butter and sugar
thoroughly. Gradually add sifted ingredients. Combine
evenly. Form in small balls or cut into shape. Sprinkle with castor
sugar. Place on greased tray, press with fork. Bake slowly in moderate
oven till light brown. Leave on tray till cold.
Filling: One teaspoon butter, 1 teaspoon condensed milk, 2 tablespoons
icing sugar, I teaspoon vanilla.
Method : Cream butter, add milk, sugar and vanilla. Beat well, join
biscuits together.
Miss M. Orr,
Llsmore


SMITH'S COUNTRY STYLE STORE (next B.P. sign) for your Fresh Fruit
and Vegetables, Groceries and Smallgoods.' Yamba, Phone 86.
FOAM BISCUITS
Ingredients : 1 cup of sugar, i cup milk, 1 spare teaspoon of soda, 1
cup butter or dripping, 3 cups flour, pinch salt.
Method ; Put sugar and milk on stove, when boiling add soda and
stir well. It will foam up. Let cool. Rub butter or dripping
into flour and pinch of salt. Mix into stiff paste, roll out. Bake in
quick oven until light brown. A cup of coconut may be added.
Mrs. A. Bryant,
Lismore
GINGER BISCUITS
Ingredients : 3 cups S.R. flour, 1 cup of dripping, 1 cup brown sugar,
i cup treacle, 4 teaspoons ground ginger, 1 teaspoon
cinnamon, 1 teaspoon carb. soda, pinch salt.
Method : Mix up with cold tea —eggs if you wish. Roll out and cut
in rounds. Bake in medium oven.
Mrs. T. Flanagan, senr.,
Terranora
GINGER NUTS
Ingredients : 1 cup sugar, 2 tablespoons dripping, i cup syrup, 1 egg,
2 cups flour, 2 teaspoons baking powder, 2 teaspoons
ground ginger, a little milk.
Method : Mix all ingredients together, let stand for 5 minutes and roll
pieces the size of a walnut into balls, put on hot slide far
enough apart to allow for spreading.
i «■ — n _j mil _ t i -
Mrs. Reta Ellis.
Lismore
GINGER CHEWS
Ingredients : 4 oz. butter, 6 oz. sugar, 1 egg, 5 oz. flour, 1 teaspoon
baking powder, 1 small cup preserved ginger, i cup chop-
ped walnuts.
Method : Cream butter and sugar, add egg and beat well. Fold in
sifted flour and baking powder and lastly ginger and walnuts.
Spread in greased slab tin and bake 20 to 30 minutes. Cut into fingers
while hot and leave in tin until cold.
Mrs. M. Thomas,
Lismore
GINGER CRUNCH BISCUITS, No. 1.
Ingredients : 4 oz. butter, 2 oz. brown sugar, 1 cup flour, 2 teaspoons
baking powder, 1 teaspoon ground ginger.
Method : Cream butter and sugar, add sifted dry ingredients. Mix
well until all thoroughly absorbed. Press into slab tin and
bake 15 to 20 minutes.
Ingredients : Topping : 4 tablespoons icing sugar, 2 tablespoons butter,
1 teaspoon ground ginger, 3 teaspoons golden syrup.
Method : Place all ingredients in saucepan and stir over a low heat
until butter is melted and mix well. Pour over biscuits while
both are warm. Cut into fingers when cold.
Mrs. K. Browning,
Nimbin


For your needs in Dress Fabrics, Patterns, Accessories and Manchester
call at SUTHERLAND'S FABRIC CENTRE, River Street, Maclean.
GINGER CRUNCH BISCUITS, No. 2.
Ingredients : 4 tablespoons icing sugar, 3 teaspoons golden syrup, 2
tablespoons butter, 1 scant teaspoon ginger.
Method ; Place all Ingredients in saucepan. When butter is melted
and mixture well mixed, remove from stove.
Ingredients : Pastry : 4 oz. butter, 2 oz. sugar, 1 cup flour, 1 teaspoon
baking powder, 1 small teaspoon ginger.
Method : Cream butter with sugar, add dry ingredients. Put into
greased roll tin and bake in a moderate oven until lightly
brown, about 15 to 20 minutes. Spread filling on top of pastry while
filling and pastry are warm.
Mrs. L. T. Ellis,
Eureka
GINGER SLICE
Ingredients : II cups S.R. flour, | cup of sugar, \ lb. butter, 1 cup
chopped dates, 1 cup of preserved ginger, 1 egg.
Method ; Melt butter, mix with dry ingredients, then add beaten egg.
Mixture is very stiff. Press into flat tin with fingers, cook
a few minutes then flatten out again with egg slice. Cook about 20
minutes until brown, press flat again just before removing from oven.
Cut into squares.
Mrs. E. J. Parker,
Klngscllfl
HONEY CRACKLES
Ingredients : 1 lb. butter, 3 tablespoons sugar, 1 tablespoon honey, 5
cups cornflakes.
Method : Boil together for 7 minutes, butter, sugar and honey. Add
cornflakes, spoon into patty containers and set.
Mrs. G. W. Coop,
Lismore
ICED NUT SQUARES
Ingredients : 3 oz. Copha, | cup brown sugar, 21 tablespoons milk, 2
tablespoons cocoa, I cup chopped walnuts, 1 teaspoon
vanilla, 1 lb. milk arrowroot biscuits.
Method : Crush biscuits finely, heat Copha, sugar, milk and cocoa
until boiling. Cool slightly, add to crumbs, add vanilla and
nuts, turn into a well greased tin, press down firmly with your fingers.
When cool and set, ice with chocolate icing. When icing sets, cut into
squares.
Miss Dulcie Coop,
Kyogle.
JOHN BULL BISCUITS
Ingredients: 11 cups S.R. floor, 15 cops rolled oats, i cop shortening,
1 cop sugar, 1 dessertspoon golden syrup, 1 level teaspoon
carb. soda dissolved in 2 tablespoons boiling water.
Method : Melt shortening and syrup. Put all dry ingredients together,
mix with melted shortening and syrup, soda and boiling
water, drop onto greased tray in teaspoonfuls. Cook in a slow to
medium oven.
Mrs. T. Flanagan,
senr., Terranora


This page donated by WEST'S PHARMACY, River Street, Maclean.
MACAROONS
Ingredients : 2 egg whites, 1 cup sugar, IS cups coconut, pinch salt.
Method : Beat egg whites with salt until peaks stand up. Add sugar
gradually, beating in well until mixture stands up in peaks
again. Fold in coconut. Drop from teaspoon on heavy brown paper,
well greased, on oven sheet. Bake in slow oven (20/25 minutes) or till
dry looking and pale tint. Cool for few minutes before removing from
paper. (1 tablespoon of cocoa may be added to the mixture).
Miss M. Orr,
Lismore
MARSHALLOW BISCUITS
Ingredients : 1 tablespoon good dripping, 1 tablespoon sugar, 1 egg, 2
tablespoons milk.
Method : Beat well dripping and sugar, add egg, beat again, add milk
and enough S.R. flour to make stiff dough. Roll out thinly,
cut into rounds with cutter, bake in moderate oven.
For Marshmallow : Take 2 cups sugar, pinch salt, drop vanilla, cover
with h cup hot water. Put heaped tablespoon gela-
tine into another cup, cover with i cup hot water, when dissolved pour
over other ingredients—beat with rotary beater for 10 minutes. Add
few drops of cochineal. Butter patty pans, All with mixture, place
biscuit on each. Leave till set (1 hour).
Mrs. Green,
Lismore
MONTE CARLO BISCUITS
Ingredients : \ lb. butter, I cup sugar, 1 egg, 1 tablespoon honey, 1
heaped tablespoon coconut, 2 cups S.R. flour, pinch salt.
Method : Cream butter, sugar, honey, add egg, then dry ingredients.
Place in small balls about 1 teaspoonful on lightly greased
tray, press down lightly with fork. Bake in moderate oven till golden
brown. When cold, place together with butter icing and a little rosp-
berry jam.
Mrs. I. Brown,
South Lismore
NUTTY CRISPS
Ingredients : 1 cup flour, 1 cup sugar, 1 cup rolled oats, 1 cup coconut,
1 cup chopped nuts, \ lb. butter, 1 tablespoon syrup, 1
small teaspoon soda, 2 tablespoons boiling water.
Method : Mix dry ingredients. Melt butter, syrup and soda in boiling
water, then add dry ingredients, drop in small pieces on
greased dish. Bake in moderate oven.
Mrs. F. S. Towner,
Lismore


This page donated by MACLEAN BAKERY, Proprietors, R. & K. Goodrich,
River Street, Maclean.
ORANGE CRUNCH COOKIES
Ingredients: 4 oz. butter, 4 oz. brown sugar, 1 teaspoon vanilla, 1 egg
yolk (or 1 small egg), grated rind of 1 large orange, 6
oz. S.R. flour, 1 level cup coconut.
Method : Combine all ingredients in a bowl and beat till thoroughly
blended. Form into two long rolls, drap in waxed paper and
chill for one hour. Cut into j in. slices and place on ungreased trays.
Flatten slightly with a fork dipped in flour. Bake in moderate oven.
Miss Mary Clark,
Lismore
PEANUT BISCUITS, No. 1.
Ingredients : i lb. butter, 1 egg, 1 cup sugar, 11 cups S.R. flour, 1 table-
spoon cocoa, 1 cup peanuts (minced).
Method : Melt butter, add sugar and leave over heat for i minute,
remove from fire and add beaten egg. Then flour and cocoa
sifted together, then peanuts. Place on greased tray in small teaspoon-
fuls and cook in moderate oven i- hour. (They spread, so allow for this
when placing on tray).
Miss D. Noble,
Lismore
PEANUT BISCUITS, No. 2.
Ingredients : 1 large cup flour, 11 cups rolled oats, 1 small cup brown
sugar, 3 cup peanuts, I cup raisins, I lb. butter, 2 table-
spoons golden syrup, 1 teaspoon cinnamon, 1 small teaspoon of carb.
soda, mixed in dessertspoon of water.
Method; Beat butter, sugar and syrup well, add dry ingredients.
Cook in a moderate oven 10 to 15 minutes.
M. Orr, Tweed Heads
PEANUT CRISP COOKIES
Ingredients : 4 oz. bntter, i cup sugar, 6 oz. S.R. flour, i teaspoon
cinnamon, 1 egg, I cup raw peanuts (either chopped or
minced), I cup Kelloggs Rice Bubbles.
Method : Cream shortening with sugar, add egg and mix well. Fold
in sifted flour and cinnamon. Stir in peanuts and rice
bubbles, stirring until mixture is even and peanuts thoroughly mixed.
Place rounded teaspoon of mixture on greased tray and bake in mod-
erate oven 15/20 minutes.
Mrs. G. C. Hill,
Riley’s Hill


For the Latest and Smartest in Ladies' and Children's Clothing, visit
"CLOVELLY SALONS" (Heather McAulay), River Street, Maclean, and
High Street, Yamba.
PEANUT COOKIES, No. 1.
Ingredients : 11 cups S.B. flour, 1 cup sugar, i lb. butter, 1 cup raw
peanuts, 11 tablespoons cocoa, 1 egg, a little milk, vanilla,
and pinch of salt.
Method : Beat butter and sugar, add egg and a little milk. Add
sifted flour, etc., and place in small pieces and bake in
moderate oven.
PEANUT COOKIES, No. 2.
Ingredients : 3 handfuls of cornflakes, 11 cups S.B. flour, I cup brown
sugar, I cup each coconut and peanuts, 6 oz. butter.
Method ; Mix dry ingredients, melt butter and add. Pat into well
greased tray and bake in moderate oven 30 minutes. Ice
while hot and cut into slices.
Mrs. Ford, Maclean
RAISIN ORANGE DROPS
Ingredients : 2 oz. butter, 2 oz. sugar, 1 teaspoon grated orange rind,
1 egg, 2 oz. raisins (chopped), 4 oz. S.B. flour, pinch of
cinnamon.
Method ; Cream butter and sugar and orange rind, add beaten egg
and then sifted flour and cinnamon, and lastly chopped
raisins. Place teaspoonful on a greased tray and bake in a moderate
oven for 10 minutes.
Jane Mortimer,
Mullumbimby
BICE BUBBLE BISCUITS
Ingredients : 6 oz. batter, 6 oz. sugar, 2 eggs, 2 cups Rice Bubbles or
Puffed Wheat, 2 cups S.B. flour, pinch salt.
Method : Cream butter and sugar, add gradually well beaten eggs,
then Rice Bubbles. Sift flour and salt and add gradually.
Drop small portions on cold greased oven tray. Bake in moderate oven
till golden brown. Improve with keeping.
Miss S. Smart,
Terranora


For Groceries, Smallgoods, Fruit and Ice Cream, Drinks and Confectionery,
PEARL LEWIS, 151 River Street, Maclean.
LOAVES - SCONES - SHORTBREAD
ALLBRAN LOAF
Ingredients : 1 cup Allbran, 1 cup brown sugar, 1 cup S.R. flour (large),
1 cup mixed fruit, 1 cup milk, salt.
Method ; Soak Allbran, sugar, fruit and milk for I hour, then add flour
and salt. Bake in loaf tin in slow oven.
Mrs. E. A. Johnston
BAKED FRENCH PANCAKES
Ingredients : Z ozs. butter, Z ozs. sugar. Z ozs. S.R. flour, Z eggs, I pint
milk (heated), pinch salt.
Method ; Cream butter and sugar, add beaten eggs, pinch salt and S.R.
flour. Add heated milk, pour into six individual coupes and
bake in slow oven, which has been heated first.
Miss V. Hermann,
Lismore
BROWNIE
Ingredients : 1 cup white sugar, 1 cup mixed fruit or dates (if pre-
ferred), 1 level teaspoon carb, soda, 1 tablespoon butter,
1 cup boiling water, Z cups S.R. flour, salt, 1 teaspoon spice, 1 egg.
Method : Put sugar, fruit, carb. soda and butter into bowl. Pour over
boiling water. Stir, then add sifted flour, salt and spice and
unbeaten egg. Mix well together and cook about j hour in moderate
oven. Slice and butter when cold.
Mrs. Thomson,
Alstonville
BUNS
Ingredients : 8 oz. flour, 4 ozs. sugar, Z ozs. butter, 1 teaspoon baking
powder, I teaspoon salt, X egg, a little milk and a few
sultanas.
Method : Mix the flour, sugar, butter, baking powder, salt, beaten egg,
and add a little milk and the sultanas. Make stiff and form
into scones. Bake in hot oven.
Miss G. Orr,
Llsmore
CHEESE SAUCE SCONES
Ingredients ; Z cups S.B. flour, 2 level tablespoon salt, I level table-
spoon butter, $ cup milk (approximately). Cheese Sauce ;
1 oz. butter, Z ozs. grated cheese, 2 level teaspoon mustard, pinch salt
and pepper.
Method : Sift flour and salt together, rub in the butter, add milk
all at once and mix lightly to a soft dough. Turn on to floured
surface, knead lightly, roll out to Jin. thickness, cut with small round
cutter and place on slide. Place butter for topping in a saucepan, and
just melt, add cheese and seasoning and stir until blended. Place a
little topping on each scone and bake in a hot oven (550 degrees) for
about 12 minutes or until cheese is browned.
Mrs. L. Vidler,
Gosford


all your Fresh Fruit and Vegetables and Frozen Food, call at
EVERSON'S FRUIT SHOP, River Street, Maclean.
DATE BREAD
Ingredients : Z\ cups S.B. flour, i teaspoon salt, 1 teaspoon cocoa, 1
teaspoon mixed spice, i cup brown sugar, 2 ozs. shorten-
ing, 1 egg, | cup milk, 1 tablespoon treacle, 8 ozs. pitted dates.
Method : Mix flour, salt, cocoa and spice together, cream shortening
and sugar, beat in egg. Blend in treacle. Add part of the
flour then the milk, mix smoothly, add remaining flour and dates, blend
thoroughly. Bake in a greased loaf tin in a moderate over (350 degrees
P.) about 50 minutes cool and store overnight before slicing.
Mrs. D. A, Foster.
Cawongla.
DATE LOAF
Ingredients : 1 teaspoon soda, 1 cup dates, 1 cup boiling water, 3 cup
brown sugar, 1 egg, I cup nuts, I tablespoon butter, 11 cups
flour and a little baking powder.
Method ; Sprinkle soda over the dates and pour the boiling water over
it and let it cool. Beat cream, the sugar, egg, nuts and butter,
add the flour and baking powder lastly. Bake i hour in a moderate oven.
Omit the nuts and put extra dates in—about i cup more, if desired.
This loaf is nice in a loaf tin, but a ring tin can be used.
Mrs. Reg. Johnston.
Wollongbar.
DATE LOAF, BROWN
Ingredients : 1 cup bran, 1 cup chopped dates, 2 cups wholemeal S.B.
flour, 1 tablespoon golden syrup, 1 tablespoon butter,
I teaspoon soda, 1 cup milk.
Method : Melt the syrup with the butter, then add soda which has been
dissolved in milk. Add the wet mixture to the dry and mix
to rather soft dough. Bake in greased loaf tin in moderate oven for half
hour.
Mrs. P. Playford,
Lismore.
DATE OB RAISIN LOAF
Ingredients : 2 cups plain flour, Z teaspoons baking powder, I teaspoon
carb. soda, I cup brown sugar, i teaspoon salt, 1 table-
spoon butter, 1 cup dates or raisins, 1 tablespoon treacle or golden syrup,
1 beaten egg, ;] cup milk.
Method : Mix dry ingredients, rub in butter, add dates or raisins, mix
in treacle, egg and milk, making a soft dough. Bake 3 hour
in a moderate oven in nut loaf tin.
Miss Jean Jamieson,
Lismore.
DATES SCONES
Ingredients : 3 cups S.R. flour, salt and spice, I lb. dates (chopped), 6
ozs. butter, 1 cup brown sugar, 1 cup sultanas, a few
pieces of walnuts, 1 egg, a little milk.
Method : Rub into the flour, salt and spice, the dates and butter, then
add brown sugar, sultanas and walnuts (if desired). Beat up
an egf with a little milk, and mix with flour, etc. Make into a fairly
moist dough mixture and press out-cut into shape and, if desired,
brush top with milk and sprinkle with sugar just before baking.
Mrs. R. Page,
Bangalow.


Men's and Boys' Wear, see GIESE and CLARKE, River Street,
Maclean.
FRUIT LOAF, No. 1.
Ingredients : 1 cup All-bran, 1 cup milk, pinch salt, 1 cup S.R. flour,
1 cup mixed fruit, 1 small cup sugar, 1 tablespoon coconut.
Method : Mix All-bran, milk and salt and leave for 3 minutes. Then
add S.R. flour, fruit, sugar and coconut. Cook in bar tin for
1 hour.
Mrs. S. M. Pflugraat,
Kyogle
FRUIT LOAF, No. 2.
Ingredients : 2 oz. butter, J cup brown sugar, I egg, 1 cup raisins and
-3- cup chopped walnuts, I cup milk, 6 oz. S.R. flour (11
cups), pinch salt, 1 teaspoon cinnamon or mixed spice.
Method ; Cream the butter and sugar. Add the beaten egg, raisins
and walnuts. Fold in flour, salt and cinnamon alternately
with the milk. Bake for i hour in a moderate oven.
Mrs. Claire Virtue,
, Llsmore
MARSHMALLOW SHORTBREAD
Ingredients : 3 crushed Vitabrits or Weetbix, | cup brown sugar, 1 cup
coconut, 1 cup S.R. flour, pinch salt, i lb. butter.
Method : Mix all dry ingredients together. Melt butter, do not boil,
and add to dry ingredients, mixing well. Press out in a flat
dish and cook 20 minutes in a moderate oven.
Ingredients : Marshmallow : 1 cup white sugar, | cup hot water, 1
level dessertspoon gelatine, juice of 1 lemon, vanilla, or
other flavouring to taste.
Method : 801 l together for 3 minutes. Let cool and beat till very stiff,
then spread on cold shortbread. Sprinkle with coconut.
Mrs. A. R. Barnes, Barker’s Vale
Mrs. J. W. Seccombe, Lismore
Mrs. H. R. Hanlon, Bangalow
PIKELETS, No. 1
Ingredients : 1 cup S.R. flour, pinch salt, 1 egg, I teaspoon cream of
tartar, | teaspoon bicarb, soda, I cup milk, \ cup sugar.
Method : Sift flour, salt and cream of tartar, add sugar. Mix bicarb,
with a little of the milk, add egg and rest of milk and beat. Add to
dry ingredients and beat well. Place in dessertspoons on greased hot
plate or griddle griller. When bubbles start to pop, turn with knife.
Mrs. A. J. Felsch,
Empire Vale
PIKELETS, No. 2
Ingredients : 2 eggs, 4 tablespoons sugar, 1 cup milk, 2 cups S.B. flour.
Method : Beat the eggs and sugar till thick and creamy, add alter-
nately the milk and flour. Blend well and drop small spoon-
fuls on hot griddle or electric hot plate. When bubbles begin to rise,
turn with a knife and cook other side. A tablespoon of melted honey
added to mixture gives a nice flavour.
Mrs. V. Mortimer,
Old Bonalbo


page donated by BEAUTIZONE REFRIGERATION SERVICE (R. J.
Griffiths), 44 Skinner Street, South Grafton. 'Phone 532.
PUMPKIN SCONES, No. 2.
Ingredients : X tablespoon butter, 2 tablespoons sugar, 1 egg, 1 cup
mashed warm pumpkin, 2 cups S.R. flour, pinch salt.
Method : Beat butter and sugar to a cream. Add egg and beat well,
then add pumpkin and lastly the flour and salt. Press onto
floured board, cut into scones and cook in quick oven 10/15 minutes.
Mrs. Jean V. Anderson,
Chatsworth Is.
SCONES
Ingredients : 3 cups S.R. flour, X teaspoon salt, 1 dessertspoon butter,
milk.
Method : Rub the butter into the flour, and mix with milk. Bake in
hot oven 20 minutes.
Mrs. F. Morgan,
Woodburn
SCOTCH SHORTBREAD
Ingredients : 7 oz. shortening, 9 oz. plain flour, vanilla, 2 oz. rice
flour or cornflour, 3 oz. icing sugar.
Method: Beat shortening and vanilla until soft, add icing sugar
gradually. Beat until light and creamy. Fold in sifted flour.
Press into strips and cut into fingers. Place on a greased tray. Bake
in a barely moderate oven for 15/20 minutes.
Mrs. J. Waddell,
South Lismore
TEA CAKE
Ingredients : 2 cups butter, I lb. flour, Z oz. sugar, 1 egg, Z teaspoons
cream of tartar, 1 teaspoon bicarb, soda, 1 gill milk.
Method ; Beat butter and sugar to a cream. Add beaten egg. Beat
well again. Then mix in the milk. Sift the flour and rising
together and add to the other ingredients. Beat all well. Bake in a
large sandwich tin in a moderate oven for i hour. Turn out. Split
in half with a large knife and cover the lower half with a liberal sup-
ply of little chunks of butter. Replace the top half and serve at once.
Miss E. M. Orr,
Lismore


Call at BRIDGES' NEWSAGENCY, Ulmarra, where the best in Gifts and
Toys is always available.
PUDDINGS
AMERICAN BOILED PUDDING
Ingredients : Z cups plain flour, 1 cup sugar (brown preferred), 1 tea-
spoon syrup or treacle, 2 ozs. shortening, 1 lb. mixed fruit
or any fruit you like, 1 teaspoon carb. soda dissolved in cup strong tea.
Method : Wring your pudding cloth out of cold water and tie tightly
and plunge into boiling water. Boil for 2 hours.
Mrs. T. Flanagan,
senr., Terranora
ANGEL PUDDING
Ingredients : 3 cups milk, Z eggs, i cup sugar, 1 pkt. red jelly, 1 cup
boiling water, coconut.
Method : Beat yolks of eggs with sugar, stir into milk. When cooked,
leave to cool. Dissolve jelly with boiling water. When cool,
stir into eggs and milk. Beat the whites of eggs to a stiff froth, then
stir into mixture. Place in refrigerator and when set sprinkle with
coconut.
Miss E. Jamieson,
Lismore
APPLE CRUMBLE, No. 1
Ingredients : 1 cup S.R. flour, 1 tablespoon butter, | cup sugar, i cup
coconut, stewed apples.
Method ; Almost fill a dish with hot stewed apple. Rub S.R. flour and
butter together, add sugar and coconut. Mix all together and
sprinkle over hot apple and bake about % hour in a moderate oven.
Serve with custard or cream. Delicious either hot or cold.
M. Edwards,
Lismore
APPLE CRUMBLE, No. Z
Ingredients : 4 apples, 1 cup S.R. flour, 1 cup brown sugar. 1 teaspoon
cinnamon.
Method : Place flour, sugar and cinnamon in basin and add very soft
butter and rub between hands till all the mixture goes to
crumbs. Place cooked apples in pie dish and sprinkle crumble on top.
Bake in moderate oven for about 20 minutes.
Mrs. G. Mitchell,
Maclean
APPLE SNOW
Ingredients : 1 lb. cooking apples, 3 ozs. sugar, Z egg whites, juice of
a lemon.
Method : Peel, core and sice the apples. Cook gently with the sugar
and water till tender. Pass them through a sieve. Add the
lemon juice and unbeaten egg whites. Beat until the mixture is stiff
and white. Pile into a glass dish and serve with cream or custard .
E. M. Orr,
Lismore
BANANA AND PASSION FRUIT JELLY
Ingredients : 1 lemon jelly, 1 cup boiling water, 5 cup sugar, 1 egg,
1 cup milk, 3 passion fruit, Z sliced bananas.
Method ; Set the jelly in the boiling water. Leave till cool. Beat
sugar, egg and milk together and add to cooled jelly. Stir in
the juice of the passion fruit and the sliced bananas. Leave in refri-
gerator till set.
Mrs. M. Sullivan


Holiday or Permanent Accommodation may be arranged at MRS. K. L.
WARBURTON'S RIVERVIEW FLATS 'Phone Ulmarra 6.
BANANA PUDDING
Ingredients : 6 bananas, II ozs. gelatine, X quart milk, 2 ozs. sugar.
Method : Dissolve gelatine in 1 cup water, put milk and sugar on to
boiling point. Take some of the milk to dissolve the gela-
tine. Then mix to remainder of milk. Return to stove and let simmer
a few minutes. Take off and allow to cool. Mash bananas well and
stir into mixture. Flavour. Pour into wetted mould and set.
Mrs. W. Orr.
CHOCOLATE FUDGE PUDDING
Ingredients : 1 cup S.B. flour, 'i cup sugar, J cup milk, i teaspoon salt,
2 tablespoons cocoa, 2 tablespoons melted butter or mar-
garine. vanilla and a few chopped nuts (if liked).
Method : Mix well and spread roughly in a buttered baking dish. Over
this mixture sprinkle 1 cup brown sugar and i cup cocoa.
Carefully pour over 2 teacups of hot water. Bake in moderate oven 3 hr.
Mrs. H. W. Buckman,
Wagga.
CHOCOLATE PUDDING, STEAMED
Ingredients : 2 ozs. butter, 2 tablespoons milk, 4 ozs. S.E. flour, 2 ozs.
sugar, 1 tablespoon cocoa, vanilla essence, 1 egg.
Method : Cream butter and sugar, add beaten egg, then milk in which
cocoa has been blended. Lastly add flour and essence. Steam
li to 13 hours.
Mrs. S. M. Pflugraat,
Kyogle.
DANDY PUDDING
Ingredients : 1 tablespoon butter, 2 tablespoons sugar, 1 egg, 1 pint boil-
ing milk, 1 h tablespoons S.R. flour, vanilla essence.
Method : Cream butter and sugar, add egg, beat well. Then add flour,
stir in boiling milk, add essence. Pour into a buttered dish,
allow to set slightly in a moderate oven.
Mrs. A. I. Keeling,
Lismore.
DATE PUDDING
Ingredients : 1 tablespoon butter, 2 tablespoons sugar, 1 cup milk, 1
cup flour, i cup dates, 1 teaspoon carb. of soda, pinch salt.
Method : Mix all together and steam 2 hours. Quickly and easily
made and really good.
Mrs. W. Allsopp,
Nimbin.
DATE PUDDING, STEAMED
Ingredients : i cup sugar, 2 tablespoons butter, 2 eggs, I cup milk, 2
cups flour, 1 teaspoon baking powder, 1 cup stoned dates.
A little nutmeg.
Method : Cream butter and sugar, add eggs one at a fme, add milk,
then all dry Ingredients, and lastly dates. Put in a greased
steamer and steam 3 hours.
Mrs. A. R. Barnes,
Barker’s Vale.


This page donated by ROY PARKER, Produce Merchant, South Grafton.
DELICIOUS PUDDING, No. 1
Ingredients : 1 tablespoon butter, 1 cup sugar, 2 egg yolks, 1 lemon,
2 tablespoons plain flour, pinch salt, 1 cup milk.
Method : Beat the butter and sugar to a cream, add egg yolks and
beat in. Grate the rind and squeeze the juice of the lemon
and add both to the egg and sugar mixture. Then stir in the flour
and salt. Gradually add the milk. Beat the egg while to a stiff froth,
lightly fold into the mixture. Cook in a pie d:sh sei in another dish
of hot water in a moderate oven for about 40 minutes, or until set.
Miss Doris Myers,
Lumore
DELICIOUS PUDDING, No. 2
Ingredients : li cups sugar, 2 tablespoons butter, 2 heaped tablespoons
S.R. flour, 2 cups milk, 2 lemons (juice and rind), 4 eggs,
salt.
Method ; Beat butter and sugar to a cream. Add lemon juice and
grated rind, yolks of eggs, flour and the 2 cups milk. Lastly
add the well beaten egg whites. Mix lightly together and bake in a pan
of water in a slow oven li to 2 hours. (Custard naturally sets more
with longer cooking).
Mrs. Thomson,
Alstonvllle
DELICIOUS PUDDING, No. 3.
Ingredients : 2 cups flour, 1 cup sugar, 1 egg, 1 tablespoon jam (any
kind), 1 tablespoon butter, 1 cup each currants and
raisins, 1 dessertspoon baking soda dissovled in 1 cup milk, pinch salt.
Method : Beat butter and sugar to a cream, add egg. then other in-
gredients. Boil for 3 hours.
Mrs. F. Schneider,
Kyogle
DUMPLINGS
Ingredients : 1 cup flour, 1 teaspoon baking powder, pinch salt, 1 tea-
spoon butter.
Method : Mix to stiff dough, divide into dumpling:, and drop into
boiling syrup.
Syrup : i cup sugar, 1 tablespoon golden syrup, grated rind and juice
lemon, 1 big cup boiling water. Heat, then crop in dumplings
when boiling and boil 20 minutes.
A. Lean, Bangalow
FRUIT PUDDING, Boiled
Ingredients : i lb. brown sugar, I lb. butter, pinch salt, 4 eggs, 3 cups
flour. 1 teaspoon carb. soda, I teaspoon baking powder,
2 packets mixed fruit, i packet raisins, 1 teaspoon vanilla, 1 teaspoon
spice and 1 teaspoon coffee essence.
Method : Mix as you would a fruit cake, tie in a damped pudding
cloth, and boil for 6 hours, keep adding boiling water to
saucepan as water boils away. For convenience, this can be mixed and
left in bowl overnight.
Mrs. E. Prior,
Bungalow
GOLDEN PUDDING
Ingredients : 1 large cup S.R. flour, pinch salt, 2 tablespoons golden
syrup, 1 tablespoon butter, 5 teaspoon carb. soda dissolved
In i milk.
Method : Beat butter and syrup well, add milk, then flour. Mix till
smooth. Steam li hours.
M. Orr, Tweed Heads


C. HOLLAND'S "Riviera" Ampol Service Station, Motel and Cafe,
Pacific Highway, Cowper, for all Traveller's Requirements.
HOME-MADE JELLY
Ingredients : 1 cup sugar, 1 tablespoon gelatine, 1 teaspoon raspberry
cordial flavouring, 2 cups boiling water.
Method : Stir all together till gelatine is dissolved.
Mrs. T. Flanagan,
Terranora
ICE CREAM. No. 1.
Ingredients : 1 cup cream, 1 pint of milk. 2 cup sugar, 1 tablespoon
flour, 1 teaspoon salt, vanilla.
Method : Make a blanc mange of the milk, sugar, flour, salt and allow
to cool. Whip cream, then beat in blanc mange and add
vanilla to taste. Put in trays and freeze.
Mrs. L. Strong.
South Lismore
ICE CREAM, No. 2.
Ingredients : 2 cups milk, 2 cup sugar, 2 level teaspoons gelatine, 3
heaped tablespoons powdered milk.
Method : Warm milk, add sugar and powdered milk and dissolved
gelatine. Beat until all ingredients are mixed well. Allow
to set. Turn out into basin, add flavouring (and colouring if desired).
Beat well until light and fluffy and set again.
Mrs. Reta Ellis,
Lismore
ICE CREAM, No. 3
Ingredients : I pint cream, i tin condensed milk, 2 cups milk, 1 tea-
spoon vanilla, pinch salt.
Method : Put cream in basin and lightly whip, add milk, condensed
milk, salt and Vanilla and beat again. Place in refrigerator
to set, then whip well and place back to set.
Mrs. Joan Robinson,
Mullumbimby
BANANA ICE CREAM
Ingredients : I banana, 2 cup sugar, juice of 1 orange, 1 small lemon,
1 pint milk, \ cun whipped cream.
Method : Mash the banana, mix sugar and juice of orange and lemon.
Mix well and add milk and freeze. When just set. add I cup
whipped cream—beat well and freeze again.
Mrs. E. L. J. Mortimer,
Mullumbimby
IDEAL MILK FLUMMERY
Ingredients : I dessertspoon gelatine, 1 cup hot water, 1 cup fruit juice,
1 cup sugar, 1 tin chilled Ideal milk.
Method : Dissolve gelatine in hot water, allow to cool. Beat Ideal milk,
add sugar, fruit juice and gelatine. Beat well, allow to set.
Passion fruit added gives a nice flavour.
Mrs. A. I. Keeling,
Lismore
LEMON PUDDING, No. 1
Ingredients : 1 tablespoon butter, 2 eggs, 2 cup sugar, 2 tablespoons
S.B. flour, 1 1 cups milk, 2 lemons or 1 if large and juicy.
Method ; Cream butter and sugar, add flour. Mix and add lemon
juice. Then add milk and beaten egg yolks. Whip egg whites
till stiff and add. Beat all well together. Place in dish and set in a
large dish of hot water and bake in moderate oven till it is Arm on top.
Underneath should be a creamy custard.
Mrs. E. A. Strong,
Lismore


This page donated by REG. J. WANT PTY. LTD., South Grafton.
For your Drapery and Mercery Supplies, SWEETEN'S, South Grafton.
LEMON PUDDING, No. 2.
Ingredients : 1 cup sugar, 2 tablespoons cornflour, 1 tablespoon butter,
juice and rind of 1 lemon, I pint boiling water, 2 eggs,
2 teaspoons sugar.
Method ; Place in a saucepan, cornflour, butter and 1 cup sugar, juice
and rind of the lemon, mix together and then add boiling
water. Place on the stove and stir until it thickens (boils). Remove
from the fire and stir in 2 beaten egg yolks. Put in a pie dish. Whip
the 2 egg whites until stiff and add 2 teaspoons sugar, then place on
top of first mixture, return to oven to brown. May be served either
hot or cold.
Mrs. M. Roberts,
Grafton
LEMON SPONGE, BAKED
Ingredients : 1 tablespoon butter, 2 eggs, 2 tablespoons S.R. flour, | cup
sugar, 2 lemons (small), li cups milk, pinch salt.
Method : Cream butter and sugar, add S.R. flour, pinch salt and mix
well, add juice of lemons and grated rind of one lemon.
Mix well, add milk and mix again, add beaten yolks of eggs and lastly
whites well beaten, pour into greased pie dish and stand in baking dish
of hot water. Bake in moderate oven until brown. Serve with cream
or custard.
Miss V. Hermann, Lismore
Mrs. H. Sunderland, Nimbin
ORANGE DESSERT
Ingredients : 2 or 3 eggs, pinch salt, 1 cup sugar, 2 oranges, 1 lemon,
1 tablespoon gelatine, 1 large cup of hot water.
Method : Beat the yolks of eggs, pinch salt and sugar together. Add
juice of lemon and oranges, stir well. Dissolve gelatine in
hot water and add to mixture. Beat whites of eggs till stiff and beat
into the egg yolks, sugar, etc. Place in fridge to set. Serve with ice
cream or custard.
Mrs. A. M. Johnston,
Eureka
PINEAPPLE DELIGHT
Ingredients : 1 pineapple, 1 cup sugar, 1 cup water, 1 teaspoon butter,
1 tablespoon cornflour, 2 eggs.
Method : Make a cake pastry and line a cake dish with it.
Filling : Grate pineapple and add the sugar, water and butter. Put
in a saucepan and bring to boiling point. Thicken with corn-
flour and yolks of eggs. When cool, pour into baked pastry. Beat the
whites of the eggs to a stiff froth with a little sugar, put back in oven
to brown. (Pilling can also be made without eggs, b’’t thickens with
custard powder Instead of cornflour).
Mrs. Robinson,
North Lismore


page donated by MUNNS BROS.' GARAGE, 70 Skinner Street,
South Grafton.
PLUM PUDDING, No. 1.
Ingredients : 1/3 lb. butter, 1/3 lb. sugar, 4 eggs, 1 large tablespoon
golden syrup, I lb. raisins, I lb. sultanas, I lb. currants,
I dates if available, a few cherries and nuts if liked, 1 teaspoon
ground ginger, 1 teaspoon ground nutmeg, 1 grated carrot, lb. lemon or
mixed peel, pinch salt, 14 oz. self-raising flour, 4 oz. breadcrumbs, I
cup caramel (made by leaving I cup sugar over fire until it gains the
appearance of treacle and adding sufficient water to make I cup).
Method : Beat butter and sugar, add eggs and syrup and beat well.
Add spices, fruit peel, carrots, salt, etc. Stir in well, then
add flour and mix. Finally add breadcrumbs and caramel. Tie in a
cloth dipped in boiling water and boil for 4 to 5 hours. May be boiled
4 hours on one day and hung up in cloth and boiled again for 1 hour
on day of serving. Serve with custard.
PLUM PUDDING, No. 2.
Ingredients : 4 cups S.R. flour, 2 small cups brown sugar, 5 eggs, 1 cup
butter, 1 large grated carrot, 1 teaspoon nutmeg, I tea-
spoon spice, cinnamon and ginger, 1 lb. sultanas, raisins and mixed
fruit, essence vanilla, lemon and almond, 1 teaspoon carb. soda dissolved
in I cup cold tea or milk.
P. K. Lane,
Lismore
PLUM PUDDING (STEAMED), No. 3.
Ingredients : J cup butter, 1 cup sugar, 5 eggs, 1 dessertspoon treacle,
a little nutmeg, a little candy peel, 1 cup currants, 1 cup
sultanas, I cup dates, 1 teaspoon mixed spice, 2 heaped cups plain flour,
1 teaspoon carb. soda, 1 cup raisins.
Method : Cream butter and sugar, beat eggs and add. Add other
ingredients and steam 4 hours in a tight fitting billy can.
Mrs. N. I. Boyd
PLUM PUDDING, No. 4.
(100-year-old English Recipe).
Ingredients : 1| cups sour cream, II cups sugar, 3 cups flour, 2 lb. fruit,
lemon peel, 2 teaspoons spice, 1 teaspoon bicarb, sodt, 3
eggs.
Method : Sift flour, spice and soda. Make a well in flour and break
in the eggs and add cream, sugar and fruit. Mix all together,
tie in cloth or put in covered basin and boil 4 to 5 hours.
Mrs. R. E. Strong,
South Llsmore
PLUM PUDDING, No. 5.
Ingredients : 2 tablespoons butter, 2 tablespoons golden syrup, % cup
milk, 1 cup S.B. flour, % teaspoon carb. soda.
Method : Melt butter and syrup, add soda, then milk and lastly flour,
steam 1 hour.
Sauce ; Cook until dark brown, 2 tablespoons brown sugar and 1 table-
spoon butter, add II cups of milk, just before it boils add 1
dessertspoon cornflour mixed to a liquid.
POPULAR PUDDING (STEAMED)
Ingredients : 1 tablespoon butter, 1 cup flour, 1 cup plum jam, 1 tea-
spoon carb. soda, 1 cup milk.
Method : Rub butter and flour together, t ( hen add jam, and blend
well. Dissolve soda in milk and stir well into mixture. Pour
into greased and floured basin and steam for 2 hours. Serve hot with
hot sauce or custard. If liked, 1 tablespoon sultanas may be added to
mixture.
Mrs. Jackson,
Lismcrc


This page donated by THOMPSON'S HIGH QUALITY BUTCHERS,
South Grafton.
SPONGE PUDDING, LIGHT
Ingredients : 1 tablespoon butter, 2 tablespoons golden syrup, 1 cup
self-raising flour, 1 cup milk, 1 teaspoon carb. soda, pinch
salt.
Method : Beat butter and golden syrup togther, add salt, dissolve soda
in milk, add to creamed mixture, fold in S.R. flour. Put in
basin and steam 1 hour.
Mrs. W. Alsopp,
Nimbin
SYRUP PUDDING
Ingredients : 1 cup S.R. flour, 1 cup milk, 1 teaspoon soda, 1 tablespoon
butter, 2 tablespoons syrup.
Method : Cream butter and syrup together, add part of flour, then
milk and soda and mix well. Add rest of flour. Put syrup in
basin. Steam 1 hour.
Mrs. E. M. Watts,
Kyogle
STEAMED PUDDING
Ingredients : 2 tablespoons butter, 2 tablespoons golden syrup, i cup
milk, X cup S.R. flour, I teaspoon card. soda.
Method : Melt butter and syrup, add soda, then milk and lastly flour.
Steam 1 hour.
Sauce ; Ingredients : 2 tablespoons brown sugar, 1 tablespoon butter,
Ih cups milk, 1 dessertspoon cornflour.
Method : Cook sugar and butter until dark brown. Add milk. Just
before it boils add cornflour mixed to a liquid.
Mrs. D. Barnes,
Lismore
STEAMED PUDDING, DARK CUP
Ingredients ; 1 cup plain flour, 1 cup dates or mixed fruit, % cup brown
sugar, 1 teaspoon mixed spice, lemon essence, 1 cup hot
milk, 1 teaspoon baking soda, 1 tablespoon dripping.
Method : Mix dry ingredients, add hot milk mixture and cook 2 hours.
STEAM GINGER PUDDING
Ingredients : 1 tablespoon butter, 2 tablespoons golden syrup, 3 cup
milk, 1 teaspoon baking soda, 1 cup S.R. flour, 2 teaspoons
ginger, a little cinnamon.
Method : Mix butter and golden syrup together, add milk w'th baking
soda mixed in it, sift S.R. flour, ginger and cinnamon together
and fold into the mixture. Place in a small steamer and cook for 1
hour in a pressure cooker. Serve with custard or ice cream.
Mrs. W. C. Burnham,
Bangalow


page donated by JARRETT'S FRUIT SHOP, Skinner Street,
South Grafton.
PASTRY
COCONUT CREAM PIE
Ingredients : 1 cooked and cooled 8 inch pastry case, 3 dessertspoons
butter, 3 tablespoons plain flour, pinch salt, 2,1 cups milk,
2 egg yolks, 4 tablespoons sugar, J teaspoon grated lemon rind, I tea-
spoon vanilla, | cup coconut.
Method : Melt butter, add flour and salt. Cook 2 to 3 minutes with-
out browning. Stir in milk till boiling and simmer 2 to 3
minutes. Cool slightly. Add egg yolks beaten with sugar, cook 2or 3
minutes longer but do not allow to boil. When cooled fold in lemon
rind, vanilla and coconut. Pill into pastry case.
Meringue Topping : Beat 2 egg whites stiffly with pinch of salt, grau-
ally add i cup sugar and beat till sugar is dissolved. Add i teaspoon
grated lemon rind, i teaspoon vanilla and spread over top of tart. Top
with shredded coconut and return to very moderate oven till lightly
browned.
P. Playford,
Lismore.
COCONUT TART
Ingredients : 1 cup plain flour or S.R. flour, 2 tablespoons butter. 1 egg,
1 cup sugar, 1 cup coconut, 2 tablespoons milk, 1 small
teaspoon baking powderl
Method : Mix flour and butter to make a paste. Take well beaten egg,
sugar, coconut, milk and baking powder and mix well —
spread over top of tart and bake a nice brown.
N. Eggln,s Maclean.
DUTCH TART
Ingredients : Pastry : i lb. S.B. flour, 2 oz. butter, little milk.
Cake : IE tablespoons butter, I cup sugar, 1 egg, 3 table-
spoons S.K. flour, I cup milk, 1 teaspoon mixed spice.
Method : Pastry : Rub butter in flour and mix with little milk. Line
a sandwich tin with pastry and spread lightly with jam. Then
place cake mixture on top.
Cake : Cream butter and sugar. Add egg, S.B. flour, milk and mixed
spice. Bake in moderate oven for about 20 minutes. Can be iced with
chocolate icing, sprinkled with nuts.
Mrs. M. Roberts,
Grafton.


Promptness and Courtesy with YAGER'S TAXI SERVICE 'Phone
Ulmarra 180.
EGG-AND-BACON TART
Ingredients : 6 oz. S.R. flour, pinch of salt, 3 oz. butter, 2 tablespoons
water, 6 oz. bacon, 3 eggs, 1 teaspoon chopped parsley,
salt and pepper.
Method : Sift the flour and salt, rub butter into flour until it resembles
breadcrumbs, add water to make a stiff short paste. Turn
on to floured board, divide paste into two. Roll out one section and
line a greased sandwich pan. Remove rind and cut bacon into 2 inch
strips and scald it. Break eggs into pastry case. Cut through yolks
with a knife. Cover with a layer of bacon. Sprinkle with parsley
salt and pepper. Cover with remainder of pastry. Trim edges and prick
pastry. Bake in hot oven 10 minutes, then reduce heat and cook in
slow oven for 20 minutes.
Mrs. C. R. Watson,
Mullumblmby
FLUFFY LEMON PIE
Ingredients : 1 lemon, 6 oz. sugar, 2 oz. flour, 1 oz. cornflour, \ tea-
spoon salt, 2 eggs, I pint milk, 1 tablespoon butter, 2 table-
spoons sugar, one 9 in. cooked pastry case.
Method : Grate the rind from one lemon and strain the juice. Mix
together grated lemon rind, sugar, flour, cornflour and salt.
Beat egg yolks until light, add milk and then add this to the dry
ingredients. Cook over boiling water, stirring all the while until very
thick. Add strained lemon juice and butter, beat until butter melts.
Beat egg whites until stiff, add 2 tablespoons sugar gradually and
beat until thick. Slowly pour the hot mixture on to ehe egg whites.
Cool. Pour into cooked pastry case and chill before serving.
Mrs. D. A. Foster,
Cawongla
FOAM PASTRY
Ingredients : i cup sugar, \ cup milk, S teaspoon baking soda, i cup
dripping, Xj cups S.R. flour, pinch salt.
Method : Boil the sugar and milk together. When beginning to boil,
add baking soda. Stir until it froths. Remove from life,
allow to cool. Beat the dripping, flour and salt. Mix until crumbly,
add cooled liquid. Mix and roll out very thinly. Baked in fairly hot
oven will make pastry cases or biscuits.
Mrs. E. M. Sneath,
Lismore
LEMON CHEESE TART
Ingredients : I pastry shell, i lb. butter, 1 cup sugar, juice of 1 large or
2 small lemons, 2 or 3 well beaten eggs.
Method : Make short pastry shell in fairly deep tin and brush with
white of egg. Put butter on stove to melt and add sugar
and lemon juice. Allow to cook and add well beaten eggs. Mix well
together and pour into the uncooked pastry shell. Cook slowly for 3
to 1 hour.
Mrs. J. W. Seccombe,
Lismore
LEMON CHIFFON TART
Ingredients : 7 or 8 inch cooked pastry case, 1 dessertspoon grated
lemon rind, 3 teaspoons gelatine, | cup water, 3 eggs, \ cup
lemon juice, 1 cup sugar, pinch salt, whipped cream.
Method : Soak gelatine in water. Cook egg yolks, rind, juice and
half sugar over boiling water until thickened to custard con-
sistency. Add gelatine and stir while cooling over a bowl of ice or
ice water. Fold in egg whites beaten stiffly with salt and balance of
sugar. Pill into pastry case. Chill until set.
Mrs. H. B. Attewell,
Lismore


This page donated by McKITTRICK'S SUPER MARKET—Groceries and
Housewares, Skinner Street, South Grafton.
LEMON PIE
Ingredients : 1 cup fine breadcrumbs, 1 cup sugar, 1 cup cold water,
juice and rind of 1 large or 2 small lemons, yolks of 3 eggs.
Method : Mix all together, bake in a large pie dish lined with pastry.
When cooked, make meringue with white of the 3 eggs and
4 tablespoons sugar. Put in moderate oven for a few minutes to brown.
The whole eggs can be used in the filling and whipped cream used on
top.
LEMON TART, No. 1.
Ingredients : 6 oz. short paste, 2 eggs, juice of two lemons, 1 cup
sugar.
Method : Make the pastry, line a tart plate with it. Beat the eggs,
add the sugar and beat well, add the lemon juice and mix
well. Pour into the plate lined with pastry—bake in moderate oven
till the pastry is cooked and the mixture is set.
M. Boyd.
LEMON TART, No. 2.
Ingredients : 2 eggs, 1 cup sugar, juice of 1 large lemon or li small
lemons and 2 tablespoons milk, X teaspoon butter.
Method : Line a Pyrex pie dish with cake pastry. Beat the eggs and
sugar together, add lemon juice and beat into the egg and
sugar. Add the milk to this mixture and pour gently on to the pastry,
add a lump of butter on the top. Bake in a slow oven till set.
Mrs. S. J. Virtue,
Bexhill.
LEMON TARTS
Ingredients : i lb. butter, I cup sugar, 1 egg, li cups S.R. flour.
Method ; Mix butter and sugar to a cream, add egg, then flour. Roll
out thin and cook in patty tins in quick oven.
Ingredients : Filling : 4 eggs, li cups sugar, i cup lemon juice.
Method : Beat all together and steam in a double saucepan until thick.
Put into tart shells when ready to use.
Mrs. S. Elvery,
Bangalow.
MARSHMALLOW TART
Ingredients : j lb. butter, i cup sugar, 1 egg, 1| cups S.R. flour, 1 cup
water, 1 cup sugar, 1 dessertspoon butter, juice of 2
oranges, essence lemon, 1 dessertspoon custard powder, 1 dessertspoon
cornflour, 1 cup sugar, i cup boiling water, 1 tablespoon gelatine, i cup
boiling water.
Method : Sweet Pastry ; Beat a lb. butter and I cup sugar, add egg
and beat well, then add li cups S.R. flour. Roll and place
In tart plate and bake in quick oven.
Filling : Place in a saucepan 1 cup water, 1 cup sugar, 1 dessertpsoon
butter, juice of oranges and a little essence lemon. Bring to
boil and thicken with 1 dessertspoon custard powder and 1 dessertspoon
cornflour. Pour into tart shell and let cool.
Marshmallow : Dissolve 1 cup sugar, i cup boiling water dissolve
gelatine in I cup boiling water. When cool, add to
syrup with vanilla and beat till thick enough to pour over tart filling
and decorate with jelly crystals.
Mrs. Jean V. Anderson,
Chatsworth Is,


This page donated by FERNANCE'S NEWSAGENCY, 36 Skinner Street,
South Grafton.
LITTLE MEAT PIES
Ingredients : X lb. mince, X small onion, 2 tablespoons plain flour, X
teaspoon salt, dash of pepper, X pint water.
Rough Puff Pastry : I lb. plain flour, X level teaspoon baking powder,
good, pinch salt, 2 ozs. lard, 2 ozs. fat, \ pint water, squeeze lemon juice.
Method : To make pastry, sift the flour, baking powder and salt. Blend
the fats until smooth and well mixed. Drop in pieces the size
of a walnut into the flour. Add water and lemon juice and mix to a soft
dough. Turn on to a floured board and knead lightly. Roll into a
long thin sheet. Fold into three, give the pastry a half turn and fold
again into two. Roll thinly to cut into rounds for the pies. Cook the
mince with chopped onion, salt, ,pepper and water for 1 to 15 hours,
then cool. Line small patty tins with rounds of pastry and fill with
meat. Damp the edges with water and top with smaller rounds of pastry.
Glaze tops with milk or egg, and bake in a hot oven. Temp. 450 deg.
F, gas, 500 deg. P. elect., for 20 minutes.
Mrs. C. R. Watson,
Mullumbimby
MINCE PIES
Ingredients : XI lbs. mince, 2 cups breadcrumbs, 2 eggs, X onion, salt
and pepper, 2 dessertspoons herbs.
Method : Mix together with beaten eggs, cover with breadcrumbs.
Bake in a moderate oven for H hours.
Mrs. F. Daley,
Alstonville
MUSHROOMS
Ingredients : 4 ozs. butter, 4 ozs. sugar, X egg, 8 ozs. S.R. flour.
Method ; Cream butter and sugar, add egg, then S.R. flour. Add a
little water if necessary. Roll out and cut with round biscuit
cutter. Place in shallow patty tins and bake in moderate oven. Roll
out a small portion for stalks and bake a very light brown. When
cold, fill with a little raspberry jam, whipped cream and put stalks in
centre and sprinkle with cinnamon.
Mrs. A. J. Webb,
Tweed Heads
PINEAPPLE TART, No. X
Ingredients : X tablespoon butter, 2 tablespoons sugar, X egg, X cup
S.R. flour (biscuit pastry).
Filling : X cup grated pineapple, X cup water, X cup sugar, X cup bread-
crumbs, X egg yolk.
Method : Line a tart plate with biscuit pastry and bake golden brown.
Fill with pineapple water and sugar, breadcrumbs and egg
yolk boiled till thick. Beat egg white, add 3 tablespoons sugar, place
on mixture and return to cool oven to lightly brown.
Mrs. V. Stenner,
Lismore
PINEAPPLE TART, No. 2
Ingredients : Pastry : i cup butter, | cup sugar, X egg, 1 tablespoon
milk, H cups flour, 1J teaspoons baking powder.
Method : Cream butter and sugar, add beaten egg and milk, then flour
and baking powder sifted together. Mix well and turn on to
greased tart plate and press well down.
Filling : Ingredients : X pineapple, X cup sugar, X large cup water, 1 tea-
spoon butter, 2 eggs, 2 dessertspoons cornflour, vanilla, X tablespoon
sugar.
Method : Grate the pineapple. Put sugar, water, butter and pineapple
in a saucepan and boil—when cooked and boiling, add beaten yolks of
eggs nrxed with cornflour. Put this into tart. Mix stiffly beaten eggs
whites with X tablespoon sugar and a little vanilla. Spread this on
top of filling and put in oven to brown.
Mrs. Porter, Woodburn


For High Class Men's and Ladies' Shoes, T. W. LAYTON, 19 Skinner
Street, South Grafton.
RASPBERRY SLICE
Ingredients : I cup sugar, i lb. butter, 1 egg, 2 cups plain flour, 2 tea-
spoons baking powder.
Method : Mix all ingredients together and press into dish —spread with
raspberry jam, then beat 1 egg, 1 cup sugar, 1 cup coconut
and spread on top of jam. Bake in moderate oven.
Mrs. J. McSwan.
Maclean.
SAVOURY SLICE
Ingredients : 1 lb. mince meat, 1 large onion (minced or grated), little
herbs, salt and pepper, 3 grated potatoes, 1 carrot.
Method : Mix all above ingredients together and spread over pastry
in tin. then cover with a layer of sliced tomato, then cover
with a layer of pastry and press edges together and prick top with fork.
Cook about 1 hour in a moderate oven. Can be eaten hot or cold.
Pastry : Ingredients : 4 tablespoons dripping, 1 egg, 2 cups flour, 1
large teaspoon baking powder (or use S.R. flour).
Method : Rub the dripping into the flour and baking powder (or S.R.
flour), add beaten egg and mix to a firm dough. Line a roll tin with
the pastry.
Mrs. M. Noble,
Lismore.
STRAWBERRY CHIFFON TART
Ingredients : I cup cold water, I heaped teaspoon gelatine, 1/3 cup
sugar, 1 teaspoon lemon juice, 2 eggs, a teaspoon grated
rind of lemon, I cup sugar (for egg whites), 2 doz. strawberries.
Method ; Soften geiat.ne in i cup cold water, mix 1/3 cup sugar with
lemon juice and rind, add egg yolks and cook over boiling
water for 5 minutes. Allow this mixture to cool, then add stiffly beaten
egg whites and sugar. Add chopped strawberries. Pour into pastry
cases (either tart plate size or individual patty cake size) and decorate
with strawberries and cream.
Mrs. L. Vidler,
Gosford.
SWISS TARTS
Ingredients : 3 ozs. sugar, 2 eggs, 11 ozs. butter, 3 tablespoons cake
crumbs, 3 ozs. currants, grated rind and juice of 1 lemon,
15 ozs. chopped mixed peel.
Method ; Cream butter and sugar, add eggs (well beaten), cake crumbs,
rind and juice of lemon, currants and peel. Line patty tins
with short crust pastry, half fill with mixture and bake in fairly hot
oven 20 to 25 minutes. When cold, put 6 ozs. of icing sugar into a
bowl with 1 teaspoon of lemon juice, add sufficient hot water to make
thick creamy mixture, cover each tart with same and place a slice of
crystallised cherry in the centre.
Miss M. Edwards,
Lismore.
WEEKEND DAINTEE
Ingredients : Pastry : 3 dessertspoons butter, 1 cup sugar, 1 egg, 11
cups S.R. flour.
Method : Put in sandwich tin and bake in a medium oven. When cool,
make this filling.
Pilling : 1 cup hot water, juice 1 or 2 lemons, i cup sugar, thicken with
1 tablespoon arrowroot. This may be artificially coloured if desired,
put on top of pastry.
For the top of this, 1 cup milk, boil and thicken with 1 tablespoon corn-
flour, let cool a little, then add 2 dessertspoons butter. 3 dessertspoons
icing sugar and a little vanilla. Pour over the lemon filling and sprinkle
with coconut or toasted coconut.
Miss Edith Noble.
Newrybar.


page donated by LES PAINE and FAMILY, Waterview, South
Grafton.
CHUTNEYS - JAMS - PICKLES - RELISH
AUNTY MAUD’S GREEN TOMATO PICKLES
Ingredients : 1 doz. green tomatoes, 4 onions, 6 chillies, vinegar, 1 table-
spoon curry, 1 tablespoon mustard, Z tablespoons flour,
3 cups sugar.
Method : Cut up tomatoes, onion and chillies. Cover with salt and
stand overnight. Drain brine off next morning. Put pickles
in saucepan covered with vinegar and boil i hour. In separate dish,
mix curry, mustard, flour and sugar. Mix with vinegar and add to
mixture and boil 10 minutes. Bottle. (Remove seeds from chillies).
Mrs. Clarke,
Llsmore
CHILLI RELISH, UNCOOKED
Ingredients : 9 large chillies, 1 lb. apples, I lb. onions, i lb. sugar,
small dessertspoon salt, 1 tablespoon vinegar.
Method : Remove and discard seeds from chillies, pare and core apples,
peel onions. Chop chillies, apples and onions finely, place in
bowl and add rest of ingredients. Mix well and bottle. Keeps well In
the refrigerator.
Miss S. Smart,
Terranora
CHOKO OR CAULIFLOWER PICKLES
Ingredients : 3 large chokes or I large cauliflower, | lb. onions chopped,
I cup salt, a cup sultanas, I lb. brown sugar, 3 cup vine-
gar, Z level tablespoons plain flour, 1 level tablespoon mustard, 5 level
tablespoon curry, 1/8 teaspoon Cayenne pepper, 1 level teaspoon Tumeric,
1/8 level teaspoon ground cloves, a little vinegar.
Method ; Cut chokos or cauliflower into small pieces, add onion, salt
and sufficient boiling water to cover. Stand 12 hours, strain
liquid off, place remainder in cooker, together with sultanas, sugar and
vinegar, and pressure cook 3 minutes. While pressure is being reduced
mix flour, mustard, curry, cayenne, tumeric and cloves with a little
cold vinegar into a smooth paste. Remove cover from cooker, add
mixture to contents of cooker, and boil for 5 minutes.
Mrs. G. Turnbull,
Grafton


This page donated by EDGAR STUART, 232 Ryan Street, South Grafton.
FOUR FRUIT JAM
Ingredients : 1 large Granny Smith apple, 1 navel orange, 1 grapefruit,
1 lemon (fruit in season jellies best).
Method : Peel fruit and cut up finely with scissors—remove white and
slice up all fruit—take out seeds and cores. Place all in a
pan except sliced peel. Put 9 cups water. Leave all night. Put on in
the morning and boil till soft. Put 12 cups sugar, boil till Jellies.
Always put peel in another pan with water all night—drain in morning
and put fresh water and boil till soft. Drain again and put with fruit
and sugar while boiling.
Mrs. E. M. Walmsley,
Lismore
GOOSEBERRY AND APPLE JAM
Ingredients : 4 cups gooseberries, 2 cups finely cut apple, 6 cups sugar,
2J cups water, J cup lemon juice, I small teaspoon salt.
Method : Bring sugar and water to the boll, add fruit, boil II to 2
hours or until it sets.
Miss E. Towns,
Lismore
GRAPEFRUIT JAM
Ingredients : 1 large fresh grapefruit, good handful salt, 6 cups water,
6 cups sugar.
Method : Cut the grapefruit finely and put in basin with handful
of salt, cover well with water and let stand overnight. Next
morning, drain off water and add 6 cups water and boil till tender
with a pinch of salt, then add 6 cups sugar and boil till it jellies--
about II to 2 hours.
Mrs. Percy White,
Lismore
GREEN TOMATO PICKLES
Ingredients : 1 doz. green tomatoes, 4 onions, 6 chillies, vinegar, 1 table-
spoon curry, 1 tablespoon mustard, 2 tablespoons ilour
and 3 cups sugar.
Method : Cut up tomatoes, onions and chillies. Cover with salt and
stand overnight. Drain brine off next morning, put pickle
in saucepan covered with vinegar and boil I hour. In a separate dish,
mix curry, mustard, flour and sugar. Mix with vinegar and add to
mixture. Boil ten minutes. Bottle. (Remove seeds from chillies).
Mrs. Clarke,
Lismore
LOQUAT JELLY
Ingredients : 2 quarts of stoned loquats, 1 orange, 1 cup sugar for each
cup of juice.
Method : Add orange roughly cut up to the stoned loquats. Cover
with water, boil slowly until well cooked. Strain through a
Jelly bag and leave overnight. Measure Juice and allow 1 cup of sugar
for each cup of juice. Boil slowly 11 hours or until sample will jell on
cold saucer. Bottle and seal when cold.


This page donated by JOHN SKINNER, 217 Ryan Street, South Grafton.
MANGO JAM
Ingredients : 5 large mangoes, 3 medium sized pineapples, juice 3
lemons, 31 lbs. sugar.
Method : Cut up fruit, barely cover with water. Boil half an hour —
let stand overnight. Add sugar and lemon juice, boil 11 hours
or till it jells.
Mrs. E. L. J. Mortimer,
Mullumblmby
MOCK RASPBERRY JAM
Ingredients : 9 lbs. melon, 7 lbs. sugar, 1 tin raspberry conserve, 1
bottle raspberry topping or raspberry cordial extract (use
reddest brand).
Method : Put the peeled melon through fine mincer, sprinkle a little
of the sugar over it, and leave overnight. Next day, boil until
melon is tender, then add remaining sugar and boil rapidly for 15-20
minutes. Add raspberry extract and conserve and boil again for a few
minutes. Bottle and seal.
Mrs. E. L. Dunn,
Leeton
PAW PAW CHUTNEY
Ingredients : 3 lbs. paw paw (peel and cut Into inch squares), 1 lb.
onions (cut very finely), IS lbs. white sugar, I lb. sultanas,
1 teaspoon salt, \ pint vinegar.
Method : Put into a saucepan and boil rapidly until paw paw is trans-
parent. Generally takes about 2 hours. Remove from stove
and bottle.
Mrs. S. Elvery,
, Bangalow
TOMATO RELISH
Ingredients : 6 lbs. tomatoes, 3 lbs. onions, i cup salt, 3 parts bottle
vinegar, 3 lbs. sugar, 4 tablespoons cornflour, 3 tablespoons
curry powder, 1 teaspoon pepper, 1 teaspoon cinnamon, 1 teaspoon
ginger.
Method : Peel and slice the tomatoes, and cut up onions finely, cover
with salt and leave overnight. Next morn ng, drain off all
liquid, and add 3 parts bottle of good vingear and the sugar. 801 l till
tender, about 20-30 minutes. Mix into a paste with remaining vinegar,
cornflour, curry powder, pepper, cinnamon and ginger. Add to mixture
and boil another i hour.
Mrs. A. Aitchlson,
Lismore


For High Class Shoe Repairs, see COL. REA, Fitzroy Street, Grafton.
MISCELLANEOUS
BOILED SALAD DRESSING, No. 1
Ingredients : 2 eggs, 2 tablespoons sugar, 1 tablespoon vinegar, 3 table-
spoons water, mustard and salt to taste. Cream is an
improvement.
Method : Beat eggs, add other ingredients, bring to boil and stir until
it thickens.
Mrs. H. Sunderland.
Nimbin.
BOILED SALAD DRESSING, No. 2
Ingredients : 1 cup milk, 2 tablespoons sugar, 1 egg well beaten, 1 tea-
spoon salt, i cup vinegar, 1 teaspoon mustard and pepper
to taste, 1 tablespoon butter (scant), 1 teaspoon cornflour.
Method : Mix together and stir over fire till it thickens, remove and
whip with egg beaten until smooth.
Miss S. Smart,
Terranora.
CURRIED BANANAS
Ingredients : 1 small onion, 1 apple, 1 dessertspoon butter or dripping,
1 dessertspoon curry powder (or less if a mild curry is re-
quired), i oz. flour and 1 cup stock or water, X dessertspoon chopped sul-
tanas, any left over cold meat, a little lemon juice and chutney, 4 to 6
bananas.
Method : Chop onion and apple into small dice and fry in butter, add
curry powder, flour and stir all well together, add 1 cup stock
or water and bring to the boil. Add sultanas, chopped cold meat, lemon
juice and chutney or any sauce you may fancy, for flavouring, and sim-
mer about h hour, stirring occasionally. About 5 minutes before serving
add the bananas peeled and diced. Pile on slices of hot buttered toast
and garnish with chopped parsley and serve at once.
Mrs. Towner.
Wollongbar.
EGG AND ASPARAGUS CASSEROLE
Ingredients : cups well seasoned thick white sauce (1 tablespoon
butter, 2 tablespoons flour, li cups milk, salt and pepper),
1 small tin asparagus cuts or tips, 2 hard boiled eggs, j cup grated
cheese, | cup dry breadcrumbs.
Method ; Cut the eggs and combine with asparagus and sauce, pour
into buttered casserole, sprinkle with cheese and crumbs and
bake in moderate oven 20 minutes.
Mrs. R. Percy.
Lismore.
FRUIT PUNCH
Ingrdients : 3 pints tea, 1 cup sugar, 3 oranges, 3 lemons, 2 cups stewed
rhubarb juice, 2 large bottles lemonade.
Method : Make the tea and allow to stand 5 minutes. Add the sugar
(you maye have to add more later). Strain and add juice of
lemons and oranges and rhubarb. Chill for 1 hour. Add 2 large bottles
lemonade. Pour over a large piece of ice or ice cubes in a punch bowl
or large glass jug. Garnish with thin slices of lemons and oranges.
Nimbin.


This page donated by E. W. COLLINS, Maclean Garage and Service
Station your B.M.C. Dealers, River Street, Maclean.
LEMON BUTTER
Ingredients ; 4 eggs, 1 cup sugar, 1 tablespoon butter, 1 cup lemon
Juice.
Method : Beat eggs and sugar together for 5 minutes, add butter and
lemon juice. Cook in a double saucepan and stir till it
thickens.
Mrs. R. L. Hanlon,
Bangalow
LEMON CHEESE
Ingredients : 1 dessertspoon butter, juice of 1 lemon, i cup sugar, I
cup of water, 2 small tablespoons of arrowroot.
Method : Put first four ingredients in saucepan, thicken with beaten
egg and arrowroot, bring to boil.
Mrs. Beryl White,
Lismore
LEMON SYRUP
Ingredients: 4 lb. sugar, 6 pints water, 1 tablespoon citric acid, 1
tablespoons cream of tartar, 1 pkt. Epsom salts.
Method : Put all in a container and add boiling water. When cold,
add one dessertspoon essence of lemon.
Mrs. P. A. Pursey,
Corakl
MARYLAND SOUFFLE
Ingredients ; 1 cup milk, 1 cup grated cheese, 3 eggs, 1 cup bread-
crumbs, 1 tablespoon butter (melted), salt and pepper.
Method : Soak crumbs in milk. Stir in cheese, butter and egg yolks,
seasoning, and lastly fold in well beaten egg whites. Bake
4 hour. Sprinkle with parsley.
Mrs. R. Percy,
Llsmore
PASSIONFBUIT CHEESE
Ingredients : 6 or 8 passlonfrnit, 2 eggs, 1 lb. sugar, 2 oz. butter.
Method ; Put fruit in saucepan with sugar and eggs slightly beaten,
add butter, stir the mixture over fire till thick (do not
let boil).
Mrs. A. Lean,
Bang alow
PORK AND RICE PATTIES
Ingredients ; 4 level tablespoons boiled rice, 1 lb. pork mince, 1 onion
1 egg, salt and pepper, very small amount mixed berbs.
Method : Add rice and finely chopped onion to mince, then seasoning
and bind together with well beaten egg. Pry in hot fat about
10 minutes on each side. Serve hot or cold.
Miss Mary Clarke,
Llsmore


This page donated by GRAFTON METHODIST YOUTH FELLOWSHIP.
Use "FOREMOST" MILK CRYSTALS.
POTATO PIE WITH TOMATOES
Ingredients : 1 cup mashed potatoes, 2 tomatoes, 1 tablespoon grated
cheese, 1 tablespoon sliced onion, 1 teaspoon chopped
parsley.
Method : Scald, peel and slice tomatoes, melt a little butter in a
saucepan, add tomatoes and onions and cover and simmer
till a thick pulp. Then beat in potatoes, add parsley and cheese. Place
in buttered pie dish, dot with butter and sprinkle with cheese. Bake in
moderate oven till heated and browned on top.
Mrs. R. Percy,
Llsmore
SAVOURY BACON AND POTATOES
Ingredients : 6 potatoes, 2 onions, bacon rashers, salt, pepper, 1 egg,
11 cups milk, chopped parsley.
Method ; Remove rind from bacon, cut in 2 or 3 inch lengths. Ar-
range thin slices of peeled raw potatoes on bottom of greased
dish, then a layer of thinly sliced onion and pieces of bacon. Continue
in this way until dish is full. Sprinkle salt and pepper between layers.
Beat egg and milk, pom* over bacon, potatoes and onions, completely
covering. Bake in moderate oven 30 to 40 minutes. Sprinkle with
parsley before serving.
Mrs. Towner, Wollongbar
SWEET AND SOUR SAUCE
Ingredients : 3 tablespoons sugar, 3 tablespoons of vinegar, i cup water,
1 tablespoon soy sauce, 1 dessertspoon cornflour, 1 level
tablespoon finely chopped parsley, 1 level tablespoon finely chopped red
capsicum, 1 level tablespoon finely chopped green capsicum.
Method : Place all the ingredients except the cornflour and the parsley
into a saucepan and bring to the boil very slowly, stirring
all the while. Cook for 2 minutes and then remove from the heat.
Blend the cornflour with a little cold water and add. Return to the
stove and cook until thickened, add the chopped parsley and serve
with fish, chicken or pork.
Mrs. D. Hoy,
Mullumblmby


"NORTHERN STAR'* PRINT
