

CASE OF LIBEL,
REV. C. SIMSON AND REV. J. MACKERSEY
VERSUS
THE REY. JOHN STORIE,
Minister of St Andrew's, Robert Coton.
Reprinted from the “ Mercury and “ Advertiser




I.—THE LETTER.
To the Hon. JAMES WHITE, Esq., Colonial Secretary.
Sir,
. I submit in silence to much misrepresentation ; but your conduct at the recent
meeting in St. Andrew’s and the public letter with which you have thought right to
follow it considering the official position you at present hold—it is clearly my public
duty and my private not to allow to pass unchallenged.
You know that in the August ol 1860 you invited and entreated me in the name
of God to undertake the office of your Pastor and the charge of your soul; and pro-
mised respect, encouragement, and obedience in the Lord. You know that since then
you have worshipped only once in St. Andrew’s; and only once, I believe, for four
years, have you been within its walls, till you entered it on Wednesday last to head a
mob.
You know that Messrs. Campbell and Corrie; Mills and Horne; Cunningham and
McConnel; Livingstone, Piguenit, Yates, Thompson, and many more then voting
with you, are not sitters in St. Andrews, nor had they paid for seats, nor thought of
paying, till the occasion came that there was a meeting to pack and votes to fabricate.
You know that Mr. Thomas Horne has paid for no seat for years, if he ever paid ;
nor worshipped in St. Andrew’s once, since his conduct became the subject of public
investigations, and he stepped down from the Bench. Yet this is the man you selected
to fill the Chair in my Church.
Y°u know that the Managers advertised from pulpit and from press the usual
seat-letting in July last; and that they held the Church doors closed against both
members and strangers. You know that since then payments of regular seat-holders
nave been declined, and accepted only with the specification—“mind you have no vote.”
*ou know that oaths were heard at that Meeting which made the blood run cold;
that Constables were sent for to expel the Minister; and that most of the usual wor-
shippers left the Church in sorrow and shame. Yet to these proceedings, you (the
Premier of tiie Colony) lend your sanction, aud judge it seemly to censure me who
condemn them.
Let me now advert to jour Letter. In this you say or you insinuate, that when I
came to bt. Andrew s, tiie income from seat-rents amounted to £2OO or £3OO, and is
tal en now to £BO : yet you know or ought to know, that in the June of 1856, on the
petition of the Managers, the collections were diverted from the poor to help a failing
an e cient revenue; that in the December of 1857, the Treasurer intimated to the
incumbent Minister that—“he had gone round the town and begged Subscriptions to
• i ’ even i n the face of this, —the “ Congregation would be
indebted to the Managers between £BO and £9O ”at the close of the year. You know
or ought to know, that so embarrassed and insolvent was the Church that £25 due to me
on the 31st December 1860, was not paid till the 16th April 1862; that when I came,
f no f, e * aa .' was due for Mr. Mackintosh; more than £lO owing for twelve months
Missionary; upwards of £36 to Mr. Kissock; to Messrs. Robertson and Moir
in iL ai f
lberaiity of my friends, in part by myself and by the holding back of my own personal
c aims - J-et, in the face of these facts, and at a time when first for so many years, the
expenditure though vastly increased, has been £43 less than the income, you do not
shrink to charge me publicly and offensively, that I am to blame for the Church’s
diminished funds !
Sa 7 or y° u i ns^nua t e > that lam the first Minister in whose time the peace of
ot. Andrew’s has been disturbed. I have to remind you that the Congregations of St.
ohn s, of Chalmers’, of Knox’s, have all been drafted or driven from it; and you must
kuow in whose incumbency and by whose violences these secessions were made.


You say or you insinuate that, when I came, the Church was full and is now
empty. I have to inform you that the average congregation was then 200, “eluding
strangers, the Church being seated for 700 : and I have it on record that on the 9th
of August 1849, the officiating Minister preached in St. Andrew s to thirty persons, of
whom ten were in the gallery. ,
These facts are now extorted by a public and unprovoked attempt on your part,
to injure a Christian Minister who never did and never wished you wrong; to whose
ministry, character, and conduct, you have been till now an almost absolute strang 5 .
Your own conduct in this matter I leave to your conscience : your position I leave to
the verdict of the community, who have here one more element to assist m the decision
how far a gentleman who can so forget, in the zeal of the kinsman or the passion of
the partisan, the equanimity of the statesman and the justice which becomes high
office, is fitted to fill with credit the seat of their Premier, and to commend the Colony
to the respect of surrounding nations.
I have the honor to be,
Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
The Manse , Ilobart Town, JOHN STORIE,
January the %th, 1864.
I have now to add that the closing of the two Newspapers of the City against the
statement of these facts, is neither an honorable way to injure my reputation, nor a
dignified way of retreat from the damage done your own.
January the 9th, 1864.
To this letter there was a letter in reply disputing the facts and charging Mr.
Storie with wilful misrepresentation and deliberate falsehood. It was addressed to
the Members of Presbytery, published in the Newspapers, and afterwards printed
in a pamphlet. This letter was signed by the three Managers for 1863 ; one of
them Mr. W. Robertson, brother-in-law to Mr. J ames Whyte ; the second Mr.
R. Ballantine, well known in Hobart Town as the political agent for Mr. Whyte’s
party. Prom this reply and a printed petition by which it was accompanied arose
the following Libel.


11. THE LIBEL.
Unto the Reverend the Moderator
and other Members of the Presby-
tery of Tasmania,
The complaint of Charles Simson
and John Mackersey, a Committee
appointed to prosecute the matters
after mentioned,
Sheweth That the Reverend John
Storie, Minister of the congregation of Saint
Andrew’s Church, Hobart Town, has been
guilty of the sins of slander, wilful mis-
representation and deliberate falsehood—ln
so far as in a letter dated the fifth day of
January in the year one thousand eight
hundred and sixty-four, addressesd to the
Honorable James Whyte, Esquire, Colonial
Secretary, written by the said Reverend
John Storie, sent by him for insertion in
the ‘ Advertiser ’ and ‘ Mercury ’ News-
papers, rejected by those papers as being
‘‘libellous,” and in “the highest degree
libellous,” and thereafter printed with
omissions and alterations by the direction
of the said Reverend John Storie for private
circulation, and delivered by post and other-
wise to the said Honorable James Whyte
and other gentlemen, and also printed and
published by the said Reverend John Storie
as an advertisement in the ‘Launceston
Examiner ’ newspaper, of the twenty-first
day of January last past—the said Reve-
rend John Storie in the second paragraph
of the said letter did slanderously and
falsely assert that the annual meeting of
the seat-holders of St. Andrew’s Church,
held in terms of the Act of Council in that
behalf on the thirtieth day of December,
in the year one thousand eight hundred
and sixty-three, was a “ mob,” and that
the said James Whyte entered the Church
in order to “ head this mob.”
11. Farther that the said Reverend John
Storie in the fourth paragraph of the afore-
said letter, so printed and circulated by
him, has wilfully misrepresented facts,
when he alleges that after advertisement
of the usual seat-letting in July last, the
managers “held the church doors closed
against both members and strangers; ”
when he avers in the same paragraph that
“payments of regular seat-holders have
been declined,’’ he states what is wholly
false and destitute of even a colorable
foundation. And his statement in the
same paragraph that any such payments
have been “ accepted with the specification,
mind you have no vote ” is equally untrue.
111. Farther that in the filth paragraph
of the said letter the said Reverend John
Storie falsely and slanderously asserts, in
disparagement of his congregation, and of
the respectable meeting then assembled that
at the meeting of seat-holders held on the
said thirtieth day of December, in the year
one thousand eight hundred and sixty-three,
“ Oaths were heard which made the blood
run cold.” And that the assertion of the
said Reverend John Storie in the same fifth
paragraph of the said letter “ that most of
the usual worshippers left the church in
sorrow and in shame; ” if it mean that they
left sorry for and ashamed of the conduct
of the meeting, is positively untrue.
IY. Farther that the statements of the
said Rev. John Storie in the sixth para-
graph of the said letter that “ collections
were diverted from the poor to help a fail-
ing and deficient revenue,” that when he
(Sir. Storie) came in November, one thou-
sand eight hundred and sixty, more than
seventy pounds was due to Sir. Mackintosh;
and that these debts, namely, forty pounds
to the missionary, thirty-six pounds to Sir.
Kissock, and two hundred and thirty-three
pounds to Slessrs. Robertson and Sloir,
“ have been paid off through his (Sir.
Storie’s) exertions, by the liberality of his
friends, in part by himself, and by the hold-
ing hack of his own personal claims,” are
in part gross misrepresentations and in part
absolute fabrications.
Y. Farther that in the postcript to the
said letter dated the fifth day of January,
in the year one thousand eight hundred
and sixty-four, the said Reverend John
Storie has falsely represented and caused
it to be believed that the closing of the
two newspapers against the letter sent to
them, was in consequence of the statements
contained in the letter which he the said
Reverend John Storie subsequently printed
for private circulation. Whereas the news-
papers aforesaid were closed against the
letter sent to them in consequence of its
containing statements which were with-
drawn and which did not appear in the
letter printed and circulated by himself.
All which is to the great scandal of Reli-
gion and disgrace of his sacred profession.
May it therefore please your Reverend
Court to appoint service of this libel
to be made on the said Reverend
John Storie, and him to appear
before you to answer to the same,
and on his admitting the charge, or
on the same being proved against
him ; to visit him with such censure
as the Word of God and the Rules
and Discipline of this Church in such
cases prescribe, in order that he and
all others may be deterred from
committing the like offences in all
time coming, or to do otherwise in
the premises as to you may appear
expedient and proper.
According to justice, &0.,
(Signed) C. Simson,
Jn. Makersey.


CHURCH OF SCOTLAND.
SPECIAL MEETING OF PRESBYTERY.
First Day—Wednesday, April 6th.
Present : The Revs. Messrs. Simson,
(Moderator), Mackersey (Clerk), M‘Clean
Robertson, Dove, Garrett, Ewing, Dugald,
Storie, and Dr. Turnbull.
All the members, with the exception of
Mr. Storie, sat inside the communion rails.
Messrs. W. L. Dobson, W. Pitt, and J.
Roclier, of Launceston, were present as
counsel for the various parties interested
in the proceedings, in reference to the case
of the Rev. J. Storie.
MINUTES.
The minutes of the last sittings of the
Presbytery were read, and a minute made
to that effect, Dr. Turnbull expressing his
dissent from such portion of the record as
had not been previously sustained.
CALL OF THE PRESBYTERY.
The roll of members was next called
Over, in compliance with a resolution adopt-
ed on the motion of Dr. Turnbull at the
last sitting, when it appeared that the Rev.
Messrs. Henderson and Russell were absent.
The Moderator read a letter from Mr.
Henderson, apologising for the writer’s non-
attendance, which was occasioned by a
severe attack of rheumatism.
Rev. Mr. Mackersey said he had written
an official letter to the Rev. Mr. Russell, in
the terms of the motion, and had received
from the former gentleman a reply to the
effect that he had never heard or read of
such a thing as a call of the Presbytery,
and that, if the Presbytery wished to com-
pel his attendance, he would rather resign
and go to Victoria.
THE LIBEL AGAINST REV. J. STORIE.
The Moderator produced the libel pre-
pared against the Rev. J. Storie, together
with the list of witnesses, declarations of
service of summons, &c.
Mr. Rocher said he had to apply for
leave to appear on behalf of the Managers
of St. Andrew’s Church, in support of the
Mr. Dobson said that he appeared for the
Rev Mr. Storie, but he presumed the first
thing would be to prove the service of the
Libel, which he had no doubt Mr. Stone
would admit, and it would then he for Mr.
Storie formally to appear, after which, he
would apply for leave to appear for that
gentleman. He (Mr. Dobson) would then
have some remarks to make as to Mi.
Rocher’s being allowed to appear as that
gentleman had applied to do.
Rev. Mr. Storie admitted the service of
the document.
Rev. Mr. EWING moved that permission
be given to the learned gentlemen on both
sides to appear.
Rev. Mr. Storie objected to Mr. Rocher's
appearing, until that gentleman stated
whom he appeared for.
Rev. Dr. Turnbull observed that the
proper and regular course was for some
member of the Presbytery, who took charge
of the libel, to move that its relevancy, or
whatever else he chose to move, be con-
sidered, and that being carried, the next
motion would be that counsel be heard.
The motion of Mr. Ewing having been
put.
Rev. Mr. Storie said he must take a
decided objection to Mr. Rocher’s applica-
tion. The managers of St. Andrew’s had
no title to appear before the Court. The
question had been put at the last sitting,
whether they were prepared to initiate a
libel.
Rev. Mr. Mackersey : Who moved it ?
Rev. Mr. Storie begged that he might
not be interrupted. Such interruptions
were unseemly, and, if the Moderator
would act with the power belonging to
him, he would put them down. The Pres-
bytery had decided that they themselves
would libel, and they had accordingly pre-
pared a document, and served it on him,
not in the name of the managers of St.
Andrew’s, but in that of the Moderator and
the Rev. Mr. Mackersey. He (Mr. Storie)
was not prepared to allow other prosecutors
to appear now. If the Presbytery found
out that public opinion was setting against
them, or that difficulties which, in their
want of business knowledge, they did not
anticipate, would prevent their proceeding,
in the name of justice and honor, let the
libel be withdrawn. Let the Presbytery
say openly, candidly, and honorably that
they could not, or would not, face these
difficulties ; but let them not attempt by
subverting every law of justice and every
form of the Church of Scotland’s laws,
without giving him notice, introduce new
accusers, and a new trial, for which he was
not prepared. He objected to Mr. Rocher’s
appearing for the Managers, who had no
standing before the Court that day.
Rev. Mr. Mackersey held that when
the libel was drawn, the business of the
committee was at an end. The Managers,
on whose behalf the libel was drawn, came
forward, and said they were prepared to
prove their allegations, and the Presbytery
now called on them to do so, so that all
the tine phrases about want of justice and
want of law went for nothing.
After one or two further remarks,
The Moderator said that as far as he
was aware, the Court was following the
practice of the Church.


Rev. Dr. Turnbull held that the libel
was altogether illegal, and foreign to the
practices and laws of the Church of Scot-
land. He regretted that the Rev. Messrs.
Storie and Mackersey had opened up this
discussion, and that his (Dr. Turnbull’s)
suggestion had not been followed, so as to
leave all points of the kind now in question
to counsel. He did not require that the
relevancy of the libel should be considered,
but only that the members having charge
of the libel should move that the matter be
proceeded with.
Rev. Mr. Storie said he had not the
least objection that Mr. Rocher should be
heard for the libellers.
Mr. Dobson then said that he had two
objections to the constitution of the Court.
The first of these was, that there were no
lay elders present, and in support of this
objection he cited ‘ The Styles,’ a book pub-
lished by the Church Law Society, attached
to which was the signature of Robert Bell,
procurator of the Church of Scotland. At
page 52, it was stated that a Presbytery
should consist of ministers of all parishes
within the bounds of the district, professors
of divinity being members of any U niversity
within the bounds, and a lay elder from
each parish. The learned gentleman cited
also the Second Book of Discipline, p. 154,
and Hill, p. 40, in support of his views.
He now looked around him and found no
elders. There were only ministers, and
therefore, he objected to the Court, as not
duly constituted. Another objection was,
that there was a gentleman present, he
would not say who, who was not a minis-
ter, within the meaning of the law, as laid
down in the Second Book of Discipline,
cap. 4. That gentleman, he presumed, did
not claim to sit as an elder. The definition
of a minister in the authority he had cited
was, a pastor, bishop, or minister appointed
to a particular congregation, which he
ruled over by the word of God, and over
which he watched. Was the Presbytery
bound by that rule, or, if not, by what rule
was it bound ? He had also one or two
preliminary objections to the document,
called a libel. That document was not
only not in accordance with the laws of the
Church of Scotland, but such as no Court
of the Church of Scotland had ever re-
ceived. He (Mr. Dobson) was very anxious
to know who the libellers were. If the
Moderator and Mr. Mackersey were the
parties, then the Moderator should not sit
as President of the Court. But it appeared
now that the libellers were the Managers.
He wished to know whose accusation he
was called upon to meet ?
Rev. Mr. Robertson conceived that the
Presbytery were the libellers.
Rev. Mr. Mackersey read an extract
from tlie Rules of the Church of Scotland
in Victoria, and added that the Presbytery
had instructed the Moderator and himself
to libel Mr. Storie.
Mr. Dobson said that the laws of the
Church in Victoria were different from
those of the Church in Tasmania, as the
former possessed independent powers con-
ferred by the Colonial Legislature, whilst
the latter was under the laws of the Church
of Scotland in Scotland. As he under-
stood the document he was speaking of, it
was supposed to be a libel by the Presby-
tery of Tasmania. He knew nothing more
than what appeared within the four corners
of the document, and he apprehended that
was all that Mr. Storie could be called
upon to answer. He thought his best plan
would be to show, in the first place, that it
was no libel at ail.
Mr. Rocher objected to this course being
taken.
Mr. Dobson said he wanted to show
that the document was one not recognised
by the Church of Scotland. As far as ha
could see there were two courses of procee-
dure, one by a private libeller, the other by
the Presbytery ; but there was no case in
which a committee of the Presbytery could
libel. But this document did not even
allege that the committee was one appoint-
ed by the Presbytery, and a criminal at
the bar was not to go back through all the
minutes to find out a fact of that kind. The
document only said that it was prepared by
Charles Simson and John Mackersey. These
gentlemen might be a self constituted com-
mittee. But, if it was otherwise, he ob-
jected to these two persons sitting in the
Presbytery. They could hardly present a
petition to themselves, and this document
was a petition, for it ended with a prayer
to its framers. It was not signed by the
Moderator and the Clerk of the Court, but
by Charles Simson and John Mackersey.
It was not a libel but a petition from
two Judges of the supreme Court to them-
selves. He should like to see such a docu-
ment presented to the Supreme Court.
Under the Church law, the libel should be
addressed, not to the Presbytery, but to the
person libelled, and it must be a complete
syllogism, consisting of a major proposition,
a minor proposition, and a conclusion. The
learned gentleman read the commencement
of the form of libel, according to the Church
of Scotland, and proceeded to say that it
was not sufficient to charge a person libelled
with having stated what was untrue. To
state what "was untrue was not against the
law of God or man, but only to state wil-
fully what was untrue. The Moderator or
he (Mr. Dobson) might state what was
untrue, and yet be guilty of no wrong. The
syllogism of a libel should set forth, for


instance, that a person absenting from
public worship should be punished, then
that the person libelled had absented him-
self from public worship, and lastly, that
that person should be punished. Again,
he objected, that in this documentdrrelevant
matter was introduced, which would cause
scandal in the Church and in the town. It
was laid down in the Church books that
the propositions should be made as brief
and comprehensive as possible, and the
libellers in this case should not therefore,
have dragged in the opinions of
or the Advertiser. It was laid down that
nothing should be introduced which was
not essential to the criminal charge. The
present document was only a petition, and
why was it taken in preference to another
petition more numerously signed which had
been presented previously 1 In the Supreme
Court, to charge a man with having sworn
falsely, was to charge him with no offence
at all. The indictment must charge him
with having wilfully sworn falsely. It was
not sufficient to charge a man with that
which might or might not be a crime. He
also objected to the document on the ground
that facts were far from correctly stated in
it, which ought to have been known to the
libellers at the time the document was
drawn. As to the preparation of the docu-
ment by a committee, he had thought at
first that the Court was desirous of getting,
by that means, over the difficulty of the
judges being prosecutors, by appointing tvvo
of their number to act as prosecutors, in
order to avoid the painful necessity of
judges being also prosecutors. As to the
allegations made against Mr. Storie of
falsehood, he (Mr. Dobson) would have to
show that they recoiled upon those who
made them. He would point out one case
in which a letter was misquoted, by a word
being altered, and another, in which, be-
cause cu word was omitted from a letter, it
was stated that the letter was withdrawn.
He thought that from the libel itself, he
would be' able to show how easily mis-
statements were made, for, in libelling Mr.
Storie, the committee had copied a passage
from the letter of gentlemen who had
libelled Mr. Storie, and who had made
great exaggerations. The Rev. Messrs.
Simson and Mackersey were not even stated
to be members of Presbytery at all. In-
deed, the piece of paper which he held in
his hand was neither in form, in substance,
or in anything necessary to constitute one,
a libel, and, although it was the Presby-
tery’s own document, he appealed to the
members as honest men, to say whether it
was what it professed to be.
Mr. Rocher replied that his learned
friend had taken up two points. First, as
to the jurisdiction of the Court, he asserted,
that to make it a legal Court it required
the presence of elders, but the members of
the Court were the best judges on that
point. They were perfectly aware of their
own powers, and if they did not feel that
they were a competent Court, they would
not sit as such. As Englishmen, they
knew that where there was any wrong there
was a remedy, and if there was any wrong
to Mr. Storie in the Presbytery sitting there
that day, Mr. Storie had the laws of the
land to appeal to. If Mr. Storie could
come out of the accusations against him as
triumphantly as his counsel said he could,
it would be a pleasure to see that he was
innocent; but, if on the other hand, Mr.
Storie should be found guilty, and that the
Court was illegally constituted, then Mr.
Storie would sustain no injury. The next
point was as to the libel. His (Mr. Rocher’s)
learned friend compared it with an in-
dictment of the Supreme Court, but they
■were so perfectly different, that it would be
a waste of time to refute that argument.
If the libel was bad, the whole proceedings
were a nullity. His learned friend said
that no such libel had ever been presented
to a Court of the Church of Scotland, but
he (Mr. Rocher) held in his hand a copy
of one.
Mr. Dobson : Under the rules of the
Church in Victoria.
Mr. Rocher did not mind the distinction.
So far from the libel being unprecedented,
if the Court considered itself competent, it
was entitled to proceed. His learned friend
had said that he would animadvert upon
some members of the Court. (Mr. Dobson ;
I said nothing of the kind). But he (Mr.
Rocher) hoped the C urt would not be af-
fected by any threat of that description.
Mr. Dobson, said that his learned friend
had quoted the practice of the Church of
Scotland in Victoria.
Rev. Mr. Storie said there was no such
Church.
Mr. Dobson : Then of a body of Christ-
ians who had obtained a constitution from
the legislature. He appealed to the Mode-
rator, and that gentleman’s reverend breth-
ren, as men prepared to do justice, to say
whether they had anything to do with the
case. These persons might frame any rules
they pleased, or make new laws, but they
were not the laws of the Church of Scot-
land in Tasmania. As to the argument of
his learned friend, that the matter was to
be proceeded with, because Mr. Storie
could not be damnified by it. Such a thing
was never heard of in a Court. Suppose
Mr. Storie was to go to the Supreme Court,
and have these proceedings set aside, would
it have no effect upon him, that he had
been condemned by a Court of his own
Church ? He (Mr. Dobson) apprehended


that neither the Moderator, nor the Rev.
Mr. Mackersey, would sit as judges after
declaring themseives prosecutors.
The Moderator said that the presbytery
had now heard counsel with respect to its
being a properly constituted Court, and
also as to the form of the libel, and it was
for the members to decide whether they
would proceed in the face of the objections
taken against both. As he believed it was
usual for the Moderator to do what he
could to guide the Court, he would say
that he saw no reason why the Presbytery
should not proceed. There was no act
brought forward by Mr. Dobson to show
that the Court must have elders, and he
(the Moderator) held in his hand an autho-
rity from the Church of Scotland, empow-
ering colonial Churches to form Presby-
teries without elders. He could also go to
the First Book of Discipline, and show that
power was given there. The next point
was as to the Reverend Mr. Mackersey
being a member of the Court, but Mr.
Mackersey had been chosen as a member
by the Presbytery, which had full power to
do so, and in the Church at home similar
choices were made. Then again with
respect to the mere form of the libel, the
Presbytery was not tied down to any form
at all. Mr. Dobson had stated most cor-
rectly what a libel was. It was a syllogism,
but Mr. Dobson’s logic had led him too far.
Supposing it was a case of murder, would
it be necessary to state that murder was
an offence against the law of God ? In the
little book of the Victorian Church, heresy
and all crimes against religion were stated
in full. In their plan of proceeding with
respect to choosing of a committee, the Pres-
bytery had followed the practice of the
free Church of Victoria, which there was
nothing to prevent them from doing. The
publications of the Church Law Society
were comparatively recent, and, he sup-
posed, had been issued since the formation
of that (the Tasmanian) Presbytery, and
the Presbytery had not a copy of them. It
w r as contrary to the principles of the Church
of Scotland'to be tied down by any rules,
even in prayer. The substance and reason
of everything was given, but nothing more.
Rev. Dr. Turnbull, wished to state
one or two reasons why the Presbytery
could not proceed with the libel as it now
stood, and to move that it be no further
proceeded with. He moved upon some of
the grounds stated by Mr. Dobson, and also
on others which he found in the books of
practice and of the laws. He did not
make these remarks in the interests of their
rev. brother Mr. Storie, but because it was
desirable that the Church should have a
distinct and reasonable course of procedure,
and he could not see that it could have a
better than that laid down by the wisdom
of their fathers and the civil law which
was said to include all wisdom. The Mo-
derator had said that the Church was above
all forms, and he (Dr. Turnbull) would
quite admit that, if the members of the
Presbytery were raised above all liability
to error, but being w r eak and unstable and
liable to be led into error, it was necessary
that they should have rules for their
guidance. He subscribed with his w'hole
heart to that great maxim of English juris-
prudence that the discretion of the judge was
the very height of tyranny. With all
respect for the Moderator, and for that
gentleman’s earnest desire to act truthfully,
he (Dr. Turnbull) differed from him on
many points. For instance, in reference
to the necessity of elders being members of
a Presbytery : he (Dr. Turnbull) thought
the remarks of the Moderator did not apply
to a state of things where the Church was
constituted. That Presbytery was to the
Church in the colony what the General
Assembly was in Scotland to the Church
of Scotland. He thought that once the
point was raised it was beyond dispute.
He made no remark as to the propriety of
its being raised, but it was unanswerable,
as the highest authority in the Church
had been cited in support of it. The rev.
gentleman read the authority in question,
to the effect that where no elders were com-
mission ated, the Presbytery was null, and
proceeded to enquire whether any ruling
elders were commission ated to that Presby-
tery. The objection was all the stronger,
because he and Mr. Storie had made a pro-
position for the introduction of elders,-
which would have made the Court pro-
perly constituted ; but that proposition
had been rejected by jealousy on the part
of some members as to the introduction of
the laity. The commissionating of elders
was the safest guarantee for calmness of
procedure, and the freedom and right work-
ing of the Church. As to the libel, the
recognised authorities had not only pointed
out that a libel must be a syllogism, but
had impressed on Presbyteries, the parti-
cular form of syllogism, and that form
should continue in use, unless the Church
introduced a law qualifying the existing
law, which he would not give any opinion
as to its power of doing. What was now
before them, was the complaint of two
individuals whom he knew to be members
of the Court, though it did not appear on
the face of the document. What authority
had they for saying that such a form was
derived from the law of the Church of
Scotland ? They had a precedent from the
Church of Victoria, a noble institution
which was gloriously doing its work, but
they were not bound by its laws. And


under what circumstances had the Church
of Victoria introduced this form of libel ?
He would soon show how inapplicable it
was to Tasmania. The present libel was
signed by Charles Simson and John Mac-
kersey, and it positively declared that cer-
tain things were true. How did the
gentlemen signing it know that ? There
had been no previous enquiry. In fact the
libel was a kind of interlocutory judgment.
The Presbytery gave no opinion on the
facts of the case but appointed a committee
to prepare a libel. And because this pro-
ceeding was unconstitutional, see where it
had landed the Presbytery. The Modera-
tor and another member had pledged
themselves by their signatures that certain
facts were true which they could not know
to be true. In Victoria the committee
sat first with the Court and had pre-cogni-
tion of the facts. In the United Presby-
terian Church it was laid down clearly
that the Presbytery never ought to assert
anything as a fact, but that the private
libeller should do so. The committee
appointed in Victoria was appointed to
prosecute the matter to the end, and its
members stood at the bar instead of sitting
as judges. What would be thought in
Victoria, if the prosecutor under such cir-
cumstances took his place in the Presby-
tery ? What a pity the Presbytery did
not take the trouble to read the regula-
tions of the Church of Victoria. Would it
be believed that the Presbytery which ap-
pointed the committee never adjudicated
finally at all 1 In this argument, he as-
sumed that the libel involved the highest
penalties of the Church, even deposition,
Cases of that kind were sent to the General
Assembly, by which alone sentence of de-
position could be pronounced. See how
that Church provided for the protection of
a person accused against having the repu-
tation which was dearer than life taken
away by prosecutors who were at the same
time judges. The idea was not altogether
original, as it was taken in part from the
Free Church of Scotland. That Church
declared in the case of the prosecutor and
judge meeting in the same person, that it
should be competent for any Presbytery to
refer a case on that ground alone to the
General Assembly, and this was done by
the issue of a commission to try the case.
In Scotland it was felt how distressing it
was that the judge and the accuser should
be the same person, but respect for old
usage still bound the church to its ancient
practice, although the public feeling and
the feeling of the church, were against it,
and the church had within the last seven
years legislated to virtually do away with
it altogether. He found no law in Victoria
to prevent the two accusers taking their
seat as judges, but there was a power to
the person accused of complaining, if any
animosity was displayed in the preliminary
proceedings, by which he could bring the
matter before the General Assembly, and
the members of the Presbytery could do
nothing in the General Assembly. He
asked whether the Moderator and Mr.
Mackersey signed the statements in the
document (the libel), believing them to be
true, and having already made up their
minds on the subject 1 for, in that case, he
held that the committee had pre-judged
the matter. Or, if, on the other hand, the
committee signed the document as a mere
matter-of-form, the sooner such forms were
done away with the better, as the fictions
of law have been of late years abolished by
the civil Courts. He moved that the libel
be not further proceeded with.
The motion was not seconded.
Rev. Mr. Ewing expressed at conside-
rable length his regret that a question as
to the jurisdiction or competency of the
Court should have been allowed to be
raised. He also commented on the views
put forward by Dr. Turnbull as to the
necessity of elders being commissionated,
If that was the case, what became of all
the presbytery had done pieviously in
ordaining and exercising other spiritual
functions, and receiving public money from
the state ? The very gentleman who made
the objection had himself, as Moderator,
taken part in the proceedings of the Court.
He (Mr. Ewing) thought that, if a member
made such reflections upon the church
with which he was connected, as that its
constitution would not secure him justice
in the event of his being accused, that
gentleman had better seek connection with
a Church from which he would expect
justice. The broad ground of objection
was that the Presbytery should be both
judges and prosecutors, but every minister
of the Church asked connection with it,
knowing the peculiarities of its constitution
and so virtually said that he was prepared
to take the consequences. Again, it was
distinctly stated that the case appeared to
be prejudged, if not by the Presbytery, by
the Moderator and Mr. Mackersey. But if
the Presbytery had considered the whole
case, framed a libel, and then sat in j udg-
ment upon it, it would be equally said to
have prejudged the whole case. The rev.
gentleman replied briefly to one or two of
Mr. Dobson’s arguments, and concluded
by observing that Mr. Storie’s appearance
was an admission of the proper constitution
and jurisdiction of the Court. He moved
that the business of the libel be at once
proceeded with.
Kev. Mr. Garrett seconded the motion,
and made a few remarks to a similar pur-


port as those of Mr. Ewing as’to the position <
taken up by Dr. Turnbull. !
Rev. Dr. Tuenbull in reply said his
mind was strongly impressed with the con- :
viction that Mr. Dobson’s position was
tenable. It was said he had been a long !
time a member of the Court, and that
now at the eleventh hour he took exception
to its constitution. His reply was that the
question could only have arisen since the
Ist January, for until that time there was
a lay element embraced in the Court.
The objection had therefore no retrospective
operation, or scarcely any. But even did
it go back during the whole period of ex-
istence of the Presbytery, if a fatal point
was discovered by counsel or any other
person it must be attended to. He did not
often speak of himself, but at one period he
was Sheriff of the Colony, and in examin-
ing some commissions in his office, he
discovered that all the commissions issued
from the beginning of the colony were null
and void. On further examination lie
found that his own commission, given him
by the Law Officers of the Crown, was
invalid. He was told that, if he drew
attention to the fact, he would lose his
office, but he did call attention to it, and
in consequence he did lose his office. Suppose
a libel proved in such away as would lead
to the deposition of the minister charged,
could he (Dr. Turnbull) take part in the
deposition, knowing that he had no right
to do so.
Mr. Dobson said that one statement had
been made, which he wished to correct.
It was said that by appearing for Mr.
Storie, he (Mr. Dobson) admitted that
there was no weight in the objections which
he had raised. He wished to state that he
adhered to his objections.
The question was put that the objections
raised by Mr. Storie’s counsel be overuled,
and carried, Rev. Dr. Turnbull dissenting.
Mr. Ewing’s motion to go into the relevancy
of the libel was then put and agreed to.
Mr. Dobson proceeded to address the
Court upon the relevancy of the libel. The
question was hardly whether the matters
charged were censurable, but whether speci-
fic statements of them had been made ?
The facts stated were offences against the
law of God. Slander, misrepresentation,
and delibeiate falsehood were breaches of
the law of God. The first paragraph
charged Mr. Storie with slander, in so far
as that in a letter of the sth of January
last addressed to the Hon. James Whyte
and sent for insertion in the Advertiser
and Mercury newspapers, and rejected by
them as in the highest degree libellous,
but which was thereafter printed with
omissions and alterations by Mr. Storie
for private circulation and copies of it
delivered to Mr. Whyte and others, and
also published as an advertisement in the
Launceston Examiner , Mr. Storie did
falsely and slanderously assert that the
last annual meeting of the seat-holders ot
St. Andrew’s Church was a mob, and that
Mr. Whyte entered the Church to head the
mob. Now he (Mr. Dobson) had already
shewn that the rule was that no irrelevant
matter should be introduced, and what did
he find here but matter that was absolutely
irrelevant, as it was destitute of truth.
Why introduce the opinions of the Mercury
or the Advertiser that the statements of
Mr. Storie were slanderous ? Why should
the Court be influenced by the opinions of
iSas Mercury or the Advertiser ? The mem-
bers of the Presbytery were there to say
whether the statement was false or libellous.
Yet they had in a document prepared by
the judges themselves an appeal to the
Mercury and Advertiser as to what was
slanderous and libellous, and in the highest
degree libellous. In no court in the world
would such a proceeding be tolerated. He
said this merely to point out how absurd
the document was, but there was one state-
ment on the face of this indictment for
libel which referred to what the Advertiser
and Mercury said, which was worse than
absurd. He alluded to the words 11 there-
after printed with omissions and altera-
tions, by Mr. Storie.” Now that was abso-
lutely not the case, for as appeared by a
document in retentis only one word was
omitted, and why aggravate the charge by
dragging in what the Mercury and Adver-
tiser had said? Mr. Storie was charged
with wilful misrepresentations, but was it
not unfair when only one word was omitted
to speak of omissions and alterations ? He
only asked the same measure of charity
for Mr. Storie as for any other member of
the Presbytery. He (Mr. Dobson) might
also cavil at the word mob. There might
be a difference of opinion as to what a
mob was. One of the English poets had
i spoken of
1 “ A court of cobblers, and a mob of kings.”
' Was that libellous? Or suppose he (Mr.
’ Dobson) went outside the Court, and said to
! some one outside, “ There is a mob in-
side, would anybody say he had told a lie.
f It was a matter of opinion, especially if the
i phrase was used towards a body of chur ch-
- men who sent for a policeman to take their
r own minister out of the church ; he would,
1 however, say no more on that point, until
- he had to address the Court more fully on
j the facts. In the first place the opinions of
the press had no right to be quoted. As
l to the meeting being a mob, and Mr.
e White’s entering the Church to head it
t if the Presbytery insisted on having the


conduct of these people characterised, he
(Mr. Dobson) would have to comment upon
it, and he thought every unprejudiced man
would agree with him that the language used
by Mr. Storie was mild. There were many
persons present, and he (Mr. Dobson) was
afraid that the publication of what occurred
would do great mischief, excite much ill
feeling in this small community and damage
the cause of Christianity itself. Still he
had no desire to withdraw from the accu-
sation. He believed he could justify the
expressions used, by evidence, and that the
man that put the first resolution, was the
man that headed the mob. At the same
time he was sorry to be obliged to comment
on the conduct of one whom he could wish
not to see mixed up with such proceedings.
The second accusation was, that when the
Eev. J. Storie said that after the advertise-
ment of the usual seat-letting, one of the
managers held the Church closed against
members and strangers, he stated what was
wholly false, and destitute of even a color-
able foundation. He (Mr. Dobson) would
produce witnesses to prove that Mr. Bal-
lantine did what was asserted.
Mr. Hook er enquired whether the course
being pursued by Mr. Dobson was the
proper one. The only question now was
whether there were sufficient facts to justify
the libel.
Mr. Dobson said he would endeavor to
confine himself to the course indicated.
The next charge was that the statement of
the Eev. J. Storie, that payments of regular
seat-holders were declined, was equally
false as the previous one. This also
would be proved. But he might make
a statement which was untrue, and yet
not wilfully untrue. Wherever the docu-
ment alleged that a statement was untrue,
it should say wilfully untrue. Again the sth
paragraph stated that the Eev. J. Storie
falsely and slanderously asserted in dispa-
ragement of his congregation and the re-
spectable meeting assembled that oaths
were heard which made the blood run cold.
He (Mr. Dobson ) thought the statement
was in disparagement of the gentleman who
used the oaths, and not of those who were
merely present. The document went on to
say that the assertion in the same para-
graph of Mr. Storie’s letter, that most of
the usual worshippers left the Church in
shame and sorrow, if it meant that they
left in sorrow and shame at the conduct of
the meeting, was untrue. That was to say
that if the words bore one meaning Mr.
Storie was guilty, and if they bore another
he was not guilty. It was like saying that
if John Smith wilfully pulled a trigger and
shot John Brown, he was guilty of murder.
Such a ridiculous charge was never made
before. It did not assert that the people
did not leave in sorrow and in shame. No
tribunal in any civilised country could en-
tertain such a charge. The next para-
graph charged Mr. Storie with stating that
collections were diverted from the poor to
help a failing and deficient revenue, and
that when he came to the parish in 1860,
there was a sum of £7O due to Mr. Mackin-
tosh. Now, no such statement appeared in
any part of Mr. Storie’s letter. The money
was said to be due “ for” Mr. Mackintosh,
but not “to” him. Was that a wilful
misstatement or was it not ? This para-
graph charged Mr. Storie with two differ-
ent things, gross misrepresentations, and
absolute fabrications, but it did not specify
which statements were gross misrepresen-
tations, and which absolute fabrications.
The charge proceeded to say that Mr. Storie
stated that other sums were paid off by the
exertions of that gentleman, partly through
the liberality of his friends, and partly by
himself. It did not say that the money
was not paid. Was it paid by the exer-
tions of Mr. Storie ? Was it paid partly
by his friends ? was it paid partly by him-
self? There were a dozen different facts
jumbled together. Which of them were
false, and which were deliberate mistate-
ments, and which absolute fabrications ?
“ By holding back his own personal claims.”
Had those claims not been held back?
The next charge asserted that the Bev. J.
Storie in the postscript of a letter addressed
to the Hon. J. Whyte falsely suggested, and
led it to be believed that the closing of the
two newspapers against him was in conse-
quence of statements contained in such
letter, whereas the papers were closed in
consequence of statements made in another
letter, which were withdrawn. He (Mr.
Dobson) would have to go to the newspa-
pers to ask them why they did not print
that letter, and whether it was solely on
account of the omission of a word, and if
they said it was, would any man in the
colony believe them? What statements
were withdrawn ? There was one word—
one word only, and they were to be asked
to believe that that was the reason of the
papers being closed. He did not know
whether he could get the facts in evidence,
but he should do his best, and if he suc-
ceeded, the objections would be found to be
of a very much more substantial character.
Was any man ever charged with a crime,
from treason to picking a pocket, tried in
such a way as that? And were they to
deprive Mr. Storie of his office and emolu-
ments by a process by which they would
not try a pickpocket ? As to the postscript,
which charged Mr. Storie with causing it
to be believed, who could be answerable
for the construction put upon his language,
more especially by ignorant persons ? Why


not say that the postscript was untrue, and
eive Mr. Storie the opportunity of proving a
it to be true 1 No man could be answer- n
able for his writings, or anything else, it p
the construction of a third party was to be h
put upon them, and that upon construe- c
tions they were to be declared false. v
Mr. RoCIIER said that his learned friend i
had endeavoured to impress upon them < !
that a libel must be as carefully prepared l
as an indictment against a felon, but here t
he was at issue with him. From the little 1
he had been able to glean from the books i
with reference to Kirk Sessions, or courts <
of this description, he found that all that i
was required was simply to make such a I
statement in a clear, fair, and intelligible 1
manner that the party accused might not <
be misled, but might be able to gather
from the statement what the accusation i
was. To say that it must be couched m ;
strict terms, and that there mas to he no «
assuming of facts, was, he thought, going i
too far, and he felt convinced that in going
through the different allegations in the
libel he would satisfy them that it was
fairly drawn, and that there was nothing
to complain of on the part of the defendant
in reference to the setting forth of the alle-
gations and the language used. The fiist
paragraph, and that was really the mam
point, set forth, “ That the Reverend John
Storie, minister of the congregation of St.
Andrew’s Church, Hobart Town, has been
guilty of the sins of slander, wilful misre-
presentation, and deliberate falsehood.
The whole charge was not with reference
to the Rev. John Storie as an individual,
hut as the minister of St. Andrew’s Church,
and it was in that capacity that they ac-
cused him of “ slander,” wilful misrepre-
sentation, and deliberate falsehood. In so
far as a letter dated the sth of January, m
the year 1864, addressed to the Hon. James
Whyte, Esquire, Colonial Secretary, written
by the said Reverend John Storie, sent by
him for insertion in the “ Advertiser and
“ Mercury ” newspapers, rejected by those
papers as being “ libellous,” and in “ the
highest degree libellous.” His learned
friend had said that the gentlemen appoint-
ed to frame the libel did not take the
trouble to enquire into the facts of the
case, but merely framed it without any
ground work, and presented the document
to the Presbytery, by whom it was adopted.
The paragraph from which he had been
quoting shewed that they had gone to
trouble in getting evidence. They disco-
vered that the letter complained of had
been sent to the “ Mercury ” and “ Adver-
tiser” newspapers, and rejected because
it was “libellous, and in the highest
degree libellous.” The paragraph went on
to say that the letter in question was
I “thereafter printed with omissions and
alterations.” Probably these words were
incorrect, and he was instructed by the
parties who had framed the libel that they
had not the letter before them, and had
consequently made use of the above terms
when the word “omission” might have
met the case. A great deal had been said
as to the strictness necessary in framing a
libel, but he was informed by Mr. Pitt that
they had never seen the original letter, and
his learned friend knew that in an indict-
i ment they made use of words in the plural
i at times when it would be more correct to
; use the singular number. The paragraph
, proceeded, “ delivered by post and other-
. wise to the said Hon. James Whyte and
1 other gentlemen, and also printed and pub-
■ lished by the said Reverend John Storie as
i an advertisement in the “ Launceston Ex-
l aminer” newspaper, of the 21st day of
i January last past, the said Reverend John
i- Storie iii the second paragraph of the said
r letter did slanderously and falsely assert
a that the annual meeting of the seatholders
s of St. Andrew’s Church, held in terms of
r ipe Act of Council in that behalf, on the
t 30th day of December in the year 1863
was a ‘ mob,’ and that the said James
it Whyte entered the Church in order to head
n this mob.” He was not prepared with any
n poetic quotations like his learned friend ;
t. he would go upon the plain simple con-
n struction of the word “ mob,” and he would
i- ask any unprejudiced man if any one could
” tell him that this did not mean that a dis-
,e orderly mob entered St. Andrew’s Church,
1 headed by the Hon. Jas. Whyte, the Colonial
r’ Secretary. Was it not intended to convey
this meaning not only to the whole town
3- but also to the neighbouring colonies ? If
io they agreed to this definition and the words
A used were not true, he would say that the
es Rev. John Storie as minister of the congre-
;n gation of St. Andrew’s Church was guilty
>y of gross slander, to the great scandal of
id religion and disgrace of his sacred profes-
se sion. If they were in a position to prove
lie that the statements made were false, would
ed not that prove that they were slanderous,
it- a wilful misrepresentation and a deliberate
he falsehood? The libel further stated that
be the said Reverend J. Storie falsely and
ny slanderously asserted in disparagement ol
■nt his congregation, and of the respectable
3d. meeting then assembled, that at the meet-
en ing of seatholders held on the said 30th
to day of December in the year 1863, Oaths
■•o- were heard which made the blood run
ad cold ” If this was not a libel upon the
er- congregation of St. Andrew’s, lie did not
ise know what was. He must confess that it
cst was not complimentary to the minister
on himself if he had done so little good that
- as his congregation should have so far forgot


themselves, even if they were the lowest of
the low, as to make use of oaths at a meet-
ing of that description, which were desig-
nated by their pastor to be of such a nature
as would make the blood run cold. Could
there be a more fearful libel on the con-
gregation if untrue ? He drew a distinc-
tion between words used in a sudden ebul-
lition of temper, and where a person sat
down, and deliberately wrote these words.
It was a fearful libel, and if not disproved,
it was almost the strongest feature in con-
junction with the first paragraph against
Mr. Storie. The libel went on to say that
the statements of the Rev. J. Storie of
“ collections being diverted from the poor
to help a failing and deficient revenue,”
that when he came in November, 1860,
more than £7O was due to Mr. Mackintosh,
and that these debts, namely, £4O to the
Missionary, £36 to Mr. Kissock, and £233
to Messsrs. Robertson and Moir, had been
paid off through his (Mr. Storie’s) exer-
tions by the liberality of his friends, in
part by himself, and by the holding back
of his own personal claims, were in part
gross misrepresentations, and in part abso-
lute fabrications. Here they charged Mr.
Storie that when he made these represen-
tations he was guilty of absolute falsehood.
What could be clearer ? (The learned gen-
tleman then referred to and quoted the last
allegation in the libel.) He took the
meaning of this to be that Mr. Storie
wished to fabricate a letter. Any one using
common sense could collect the charges
against Mr. Storie from the various para-
graphs. According to the law of the Church
of Scotland, if any one of the libels was
proved, the defendant was amenable to
punishment, but if his instructions were
correct, he would be able to prove them
all, although he would almost hope, for the
honor of the Church of Scotland, that the
allegations would not be proved.
Mr. Pitt would point out—
Mr. Dobson said that according to the
practice of that court, only one counsel
was allowed to apper.
The Rev. Mr. Storie did not think that
the libellers should be allowed two counsel.
Mr. Rocher objected to Mr. Storie being
allowed to address the court.
Mr. Dobson said that his client had
taken the objection, and perhaps as a mat-
ter of convenience it would not be well for
more than one counsel to speak on each
side.
Mr. Pitt said that he had been instruct-
ed to appear.
Mr. Dobson would ask by whom he had
been instructed ? He would deny the right
of the Managers of St. Andrew’s to appear
by counsel. Their names did not appear
on the record, and he would ask in com-
mon fairness who were the person or per*
sons represented by his learned friend ?•
The Moderator would say that the
counsel might be said to appear for the ac-
cusers, and those appointed by the Presby-
tery to conduct the prosecution.
Mr. Pitt was not so vain as to suppose
that Mr. Dobson’s objections arose from a
fear that he would be able to add any-
thing to or strengthen what had been said
by Mr. Rocher. The conduct of the learned
counsel for the defence, and his remarks
upon Mr. Whyte, were so unlike his usual
course of procedure that lie presumed it must
be adopted in consequence of instructions,
and he would consequently say no more upon
that point. The question was not whether
the allegations could or could not be proved.
All they had now to say was do these dif-
ferent paragraphs per se contain suffi-
cient charges against the minister ? With
reference to the newspapershaving rejected
certain letters, he would say the insertion
of this fact was highly relevant. The
papers stated that they were libellous, and
in the highest degree libellous. The lec-
ture given by his learned friend was rather
uncalled for and scarcely ingenuous. He
must point out that the first paragraph
was manifestly intended to cover every
paragraph to the end. He was sure that
they would be governed by this rule, viz.,
assuming them to be proved, are they sins.
Mr. Dobson, in reply to Mr. Pitt, denied
that he had as yet made any attack on
Mr. Whyte. Neither would he make any,
but he would make comments upon the
conduct of the meeting, and he would take
care that they were such as to be suitable
to the occasion, and would probably des-
cribe the assemblage as something more
than a mob. He appealed to his learned
friend to say whether the libellers had not
shown about the letter referred to by that
gentleman ? The learned counsel concluded
by some further comments upon the libel.
Thursday, April 7, 1864.
Second Day.
The Presbytery met at 11 o’clock.
The Moderator said the business was to
consider the relevancy of the libel, the first
question being whether the major proposi-
tion be relevant; of course they would all
understand what was the nature of the
proposition ; there were two syllogisms, the
first to the effect that slander, wilful mis-
representation and deliberate falsehood
were sins ; the second that all sin was cen-
surable more or less, and the third that
slander, wilful misrepresentation, and deli-
berate falsehood were censurable by the
word of God, and the laws of the Church.
He thought that form of drawing up a


libel was better than the form drawn up
by the raw youths of the Church Law
Society.
Rev. J. Mackersay begged to be excused,
but the matter was in the hands of the
Presbytery, and it was out of order for the
Moderator to give any instructions at
present.
Rev. Dr. Turnbull in reference to the
remarks of the Moderator, said that the
forms were drawn up by some of the oldest
and most eminent ministers of the church,
one of whom was Dr. Cooke; they were
not drawn up for the church by the Church
Law Society or any one else, but were a com-
pendium of the forms used in the church
courts, from time immemorial since the
commencement of the church. The rev.
doctor here referred to the book of Styles and
Forms of proceedings of the Church Courts
in Scotland.
The Moderator said he looked on the
forms used in the Church of Victoria as
the best that could be used, and he
adverted to the complaints made of the
use of the old form on another occasion.
Rev. Dr. Turnbull said the forms of the
Church of Scotland did not state that the
party charged was guilty.
The Moderator —The question is the re-
levancy of the major proposition. He
thought there could be no discussion as to
the relevancy of the proposition that
slander, wilful misrepresentation and deli-
berate faslehood —
Rev. J. Mackersey again interposed, and
said the relevancy of the libel was before
the court, and they wanted no directions
from the Moderator at the present time.
Rev. Dr. Turnbull objected to this inter-
ruption, which was unbecoming the dig-
nity of the Court. He thought the right
course was to consider the libel paragraph
by paragraph.
The Moderator —I leave it to the. Pres-
bytery ; there seems to be no objection to
the major proposition. I think the course
proposed by Dr. Turnbull is the best.
Rev. J. Mackersey differed with the Mo-
derator ; the relevancy of the libel was
before the Presbytery when they adjourned
last night. It was in their hands.
The Moderator thought Mr. Mackersey
was mistaken.
A discussion took place during which
Dr. Turnbull urged that the Moderator
ought to be supported; if not they might
as well dispense with a Moderator. Mr.
Mackersey said he was aware of the object,
but the question was in the hands of the
court, and it was too late to take direc-
tions from the Moderator
The Moderator said it was evidently the
wish of the Presbytery that the matter
should be left to them,
Eev. Mr. Ewing read from the Adver-
tiser the report of the proceedings at the
close of yesterday’s sederunt, which he
thought might guide them.
Rev. Mr. Robinson, on looking at the
Advertiser which contained a correct re-
port, thought it was an open question
whether they should take the relevaticy of
the libel as a whole, or paragraph by
paragraph.
On the motion of the Rev. J. Mackersey,
seconded by Rev. Mr. Garrett, it was resolved
that the question having been opened last
night, the discussion should go on.
Rev. J. Mackersey moved that the Pres-
bytery find the libel relevant and proceed
to proof.
Rev. Mr. Garrett seconded the motion.
The Rev. Dr. Turnbull was astonished
to hear one of those gentlemen who con-
ducted the libel move its relevancy without
a single remark or reason assigned, or
without any attempt whatever to reconcile
the statements made by the counsel, or to
show which of the statements or views
taken by counsel should be adopted in the
case.
The Rev. Mr. Mackersey said that he
simply made the motion in order to bring
on the discussion. He wanted to know
whether the gentlemen opposed to them
wished to contest such a motion. Dr.
Turnbull had no right to make such remarks.
Rev. Dr. Turnbull would submit that
he was entitled to make such observations,
and strictly speaking no remarks of his
could be replied to by the Rev. Mr. Mac-
kersey, for seeing that he had not opened
the motion, he could not reply.
The Rev. Mr. Mackersey would claim
the right of speaking.
The Rev. Dr. Turnbull said he was willing
to retire, and permit Mr. Mackersey to rec-
tify the error into which he had fallen.
The Rev. Mr. Mackersey could not see
that he had fallen into any error. He was
entitled to make a motion, and to intimate
that he would speak to it.
The Rev. Dr. Turnbull said that most
unquestionably Mr. Mackersey had no right
to reply to anything he might say upon
the motion. The rev. gentleman had no
right to bring forward any new matter in
his reply, and Mr. Mackersey had put him-
self in a position that precluded him from
making a reply. If he was allowed to do
so it would only be by courtesy.
The Rev. Mr. Mackersey begged leave to
withdraw the motion.
The Moderator said that the law was
that the person who made the first motion
should have the right of reply.
The Rev. Mr. Robertson thought that the
discussion should go on.
The Rev, Dr Turnbull said that if this


rule was to be followed out a member
might come forward and move a resolution
without assigning any reason. Some per-
son might oppose, and the mover would
then be able to state the whole of his case,
and prevent any reply. It was the way of
evading the ordinary course of a debate,
and strictly speaking, it was not fair and
regular. When he (Dr. T.) came there he
was entitled to hear the reasons assigned
for making a motion, in order that he might
be able to speak upon it, and by this means
the whole of the question could be fully
ventilated.
The Rev. Mr. Mackersey said that the
whole of the matter had been discussed,
and he simply moved that the libel be
found relevant. If Dr. Turnbull was cor-
rect in saying, that having made the motion
he (Mr. Mackersey) precluded himself from
replying, all he could say was that he had
acted under a misapprehension, and would
withdraw his motion.
The Rev. Dr. Turnbull meant to say that
no member should give his original speech
in the form of a reply.
The Rev. Mr. Mackersey wished to know
whether he was precluded from speaking
to the question.
The Rev. Mr. Dove said that in the case
supposed by Dr. Turnbull, the mover put
himself in too favorable a position.
After some further discussion, Mr. Mac-
kersey’s motion was put to the Court.
The Rev. Dr. Turnbull wished to make
a few observations. He would read the
following clause, —“ The parties were then
heard on the relevancy of the libel, and
being removed, the Presbytery did and
hereby do find the major proposition of the
libel relevant ” The next clause also found
the articles of the minor proposition rele-
vant. The question now before them was
not, whether the libel in general was rele-
vant, but whether the major propositon
was relevant, and the articles. The latter
he presumed, would be considered seriatim ,
in order to arrive at a decision upon each.
Thus they would perceive that there were
two great things to be done. The clause
then stated, “ and the parties being called in,
this sentence was intimated to them.” The
Presbytery was, therefore, bound to adjudi-
cate carefully, as they had to give sentence
on each point, and the Rev. the Clerk,
would have to put upon the records, the
words he (Dr, T.) had used. He was of
opinion that the first question was, whether
the major proposition be relevant, and he
would move to that effect.
The Rev. Mr. Mackersey said that the
question had been decided, and was now in
the hands of the Presbytery, the question
being “ do you find the libel relevant or
not ?” Dr. Turnbull was opening up what
had been already decided, by coming for-
ward with such a motion.
The Rev. Dr. Turnbull said that a greater
error than that into which Mr. Mackersey
had fallen had never been committed.
The Moderator understood that Dr Turn-
bull wished to speak to the question now
in the hands of the Presbytery.
The Rev. Dr. Turnbull said that it might
promote his own views as being opposed, to
the libel, if he would favour its being
passed in as awkward and illogical a form
as possible, but he would not do so. It
was his duty to assist the Court so far as
he could. What would be the effect of Mr.
Mackersey’s motion? Its effect was that they
should at once decide whether the libel was
relevant or not. Supposing they decided
that it was relevant, what would be the
consequences, why, there were propositions
contained in the libel, which were admitted
by the counsel for the prosecution to be
untenable. Were they to stultify themselves
in another way, viz., by introducing a hy-
pothetical clause into the libel? It had
been said by the counsel for the prosecu-
tion, that a strict form of libel was not
necessary, but he thought otherwise, the
ecclesiastical courts of Scotland were as
jealous of their technicalities, as the civil
courts of the land. Why, such as the fol-
lowing, viz, “ if A. B. committed murder,
he should be punished,” would never be
sufficient to put a man on his trial. The
commission of a certain offence, sh ould be
charged directly, and so strict was the
course of proceeding in Scotland, that the
prosecutor consented to undergo the very
punishment annexed to the crime charged,
unless he succeeded in thoroughly proving
his charge. No hypothetical statement
should be introduced into a libel. He
would not now move another resolution,
but would oppose Mr. Mackersey’s motion,
because the libel was fallen' from by the
prosecutors themselves, and because it con-
tained statements that should not be found
in any libel. It required purging—each
statement should be tested. There had
been a great deal of misconception yester-
day, as to the effect of the major and minor
propositions. The counsel for the prosecu-
tion said that the major qualified the
minor proposition, a thing that was never
known. If the proposition declared that a
certain person was guilty of slander, or
wilful and deliberate falsehood, that was
the major or general proposition. The
minor proposition must statethat A. B.
or C. D. did a certain thing slanderously,
with deliberate falsehood, or with wilful
misrepresentaton. It must contain a par-
ticular statement, made out on the major
proposition. He felt tbat they could not
do justice unless each clause was read,


and considered, and amended, if found to
be necessary.
Rev’ Mr. Mackersey again objected to
the remarks of Dr. Turnbull; he was well
aware of the object, therefore he strenuously
contested the point, and submitted that the
discussion was irregular, as the question
had been determined that morning.
Rev. Dr. Turnbull asked Mr. Mackersey
did he mean to call on the Presbytery at
once to vote for or against the relevancy
of the libel ?
Rev. Mr. Mackersey—l made the motion
with a view to bring on a discussion as to
the relevancy of the libel. The object
sought to be gained, is to compel the Pres-
bytery to proceed in a certain course, but
I say you have precluded any member from
proceeding in that course, (hear, hear)j
The Moderator —Is this your reply f
Rev. Mr. Mackersey—l have only given
an explanation of what you asked of me.
The Moderator —Has any other member
anything to say on the subject ?
Rev. Mr. Mackersey—All I ask is that
every member be allowed to say is this
libel relevant or not 1 We are not to be
instructed to take any particular course.
Rev. Dr Turnbull —That is the intention,
that the libel should be considered as a
whole, not by paragraphs.
Rev. J. Mackersey —It is understood that
any member may express his own view,
but we are not to be prescribed to as a
court.
Rev. Mr. Dove —In the present shape, it
must be held to be irrelevant on the
grounds so ably stated by counsel yesterday,
and by Dr. Turnbull again this morning.
The Moderator—l must remind the court,
that in the discussion that takes place, any
member may propose to amend the libel.
After a few remarks by Dr. Turnbull,
Rev. Mr. Robertson said there was one
part of the libel strongly objected to by the
able counsel, and by Dr. Turnbull. Pie con-
fessed he concurred in the objection, and
he proposed that it should be struck out of
the t libel altogether, namely “ And that
the assertion of the said Reverend John
Storie in the same fifth paragraph of the
said letter, ‘ that most of the usual wor-
shippers left the church in sorrow and in
shame,’ if it mean that they left sorry for
and ashamed of the conduct of the meeting,
is positively untrue.”
Pev. J. Mackersey—Will you allow me
to ask if the libel is amended, what course
will be adopted ?
Mr. Dobson—Any part of the libel that
is not relevant suspends proceedings on
that part.
Pev. Dr. Turnbull—When probation
comes you can leave out those parts.
Pev, Mr, Mackersey asked another ques-
tion—Supposing those parts were not left
out, but were proceeded with, what the
effect would he ; as he understood the libel
might be found not proven when they went
to proof; and if so, where would be the
advantage of throwing it out ?
Tho Moderator—The question is not as
to the truth or falsehood, but whether its a
proper charge, or irrelevant, because it is
not a proper charge. The objection to the
third paragraph, made by Mr. Eobertson,
is that it is not in proper form.
Eev. Mr. Eobertson—To my mind, its
something like nonsense.
After remarks by Dr. Turnbull, the Mode-
rator, and Eev. J. Mackersey,
Eev. E. K. Ewing said it would be invi-
dious for him to say much on the libel,
after the able manner in which counsel had
spoken ; but he confessed that when the
learned counsel for the defendant was taking
his objections, he (Mr. Ewing) was struck
with them as reasons for sustaining its
relevancy. With respect to the foi*m of the
libel, peculiar cases required to be met in a
peculiar manner, and if there was a pecu-
liarity in the form of the libel, the peculiar
nature of the circumstances, the character
of the offences required the libel to be a
peculiar document. The laws of the Church
left to them broad ground in their applica-
tion to new colonies and settlements, dis-
tant from Scotland, so that they might be
modified and adapted as circumstances re-
quired. Even in the administration of the
law in the Supreme Court, it was often a
question for the Judge to enquire how far
the English law was applicable here. The
laws of England were only acted upon here,
as far as they could be adapted, and the
judges were called on to decide, whether
such and such laws, were to be recognised
and applied here. Taking the general prin-
ciples of the law of the Church of Scotland
for their guides and helps, the Presbytery
were not bound by it in its strict and
literal technicality. No better illustration
could be given than the church in Victoria,
and on that principle they had acted in
this Presbytery, which had been acceded
to by Dr. Turnbull in the admission of
members to the Presbytery as Ministers.
In a most important matter, the general
forms and procedures of the Church of
Scotland had been departed from, namely
in the reception of ministers, and one in-
stance was enough to illustrate a general
principle, Eooking at in that broad way,
he (Mr. Ewing) was prepared to affirm the
relevancy of the form of the libel. After
the able manner in which the learned
counsel for the prosecution had addressed
them, he need not add much, but the ob-
jection by the opposite counsel to the rele-
vancy of the libel in the first paragraph,


speaking of omissions and alterations, be-
cause there was only one omission, sur-
prised him, and he felt that the use of the
plural, instead of the singular, was a strong
reason for sustaining the relevancy of the
libel, as it seemed he had but small grounds
to go on when he (defendant’s counsel)
was driven to take such a microscopic view.
The plural was used that justice might be
done. The learned counsel for the prosecu-
tion had referred very ably to the various
points, and he was sure each member of
the Presbytery must have felt the force of
his remarks on the idea of a mob, as ex-
pressed by the rev. defendant, coupled with
the reflection, that it was made by a min-
ister of the church, made by a minister on
the Premier of the colony, and made hy a
salaried officer of the government, and in
that respect the matter became to his (Mr.
Ewing’s) mind, still more offensive.
Eev. Dr. Turnbull here rose and said
while he was sorry to interrupt, yet Mr.
Ewing was not speaking to the logical
structure of the libel, but the merits of the
case.
Mr. Dobson —And introducing facts not
in evidence 1
The Moderator —He is speaking to the
relevancy of the libel.
Eev. Mr. Ewing would not pursue the
remarks if they were thought to be irregular.
As to the first paragraph, the question to
his mind was this, was it an offence for a
minister to say a meeting of his congrega-
tion was a mob, and to speak of Mr. James
Whyte one of the congregation, as having
gone to head a mob ? A “ mob ” suggested
to his (Mr. Ewing’s) mind the idea of a
disorganized rabble, headed by Mr. James
Whyte, for some purpose scarcely in accord-
ance with the usual purposes of meeting in
a church. For the minister of that particu-
lar congregation to use such an expression
was calculated to exasperate feeling, arouse
indignation, to awaken them to extraordin-
ary acts of resistance to their minister, and
to disorganize the whole church, and to re-
act on the Presbytery of Tasmania. It did
not seem to admit of question whether the
matter was a libel at all ; it was self-evident
that the minister who made a statement
which was untrue, and to use terms calcu-
lated to bring about the state of things
referred to, was open to be libelled ; and he
(Mr. Ewing) could not conceive how any
one could say it was irrelevant. The bring-
ing in the ‘ Mercury,’ and the ‘ Advertiser ’
newspapers widened the ground, and gave
the rev. defendant broader ground to justify
himself, and gave him a better opportunity
of obtaining justice. The next paragraph
was quite clear, the defendant was charged
with having said the church doors were held
closed against both members and strangers,
and that was said to he amisreprsentation of
facts and he would ask was that an offence to
be libelled ; what would be the effect on the
minds of the managers, the congregation,
and the church, of such statements ? They
could easily see what would be the effect:
but when they were told the statements
were untrue, positively false, a wilful mis-
representation, and that all that was done
by the Rev. John Storie, was it not per-
fectly relevant to charge it? Was he not
exposed to be libelled 1 They knew what
the effect would be, had any lay gentle-
man made such statements; how much
more then by a minister of the gospel!
As to the next paragraph, he agreed with
his rev. brother Mr. Robertson that it
should stand as one instead of two, and he
seconded the proposal to leave out the lat-
ter part. The next paragraph was as to
the collections being diverted from the
poor, and other matters, and, considering
the whole peculiarities of the case, and that
the libel was cumulative, it must be brought
out in evidence, if it could be done, to show
what are “ gross misrepresentations” and
what “ absolute fabrication.” The libel
stated that when Mr. Storie came, in No-
vember 1860, more than £7O were due to
Mr. Mackintosh. The learned counsel for
the defence stated that it should be for Mr.
Mackintosh. Now if the Rev. Mr. Robert-
son was told to pay £7O to Mr. Ewing, he
could understand that. If Mr. Robertson
was told to pay Mr. Garrett £7O for Mr.
Ewing, the result in his mind was quite the
same. The play upon the words “ to” and
“ for” was something so insignificant in its
ultimate bearing upon the broad question
of equity and justice, that he felt the ground
must be narrow enough upon which the,
matter appeared to stand when anything
was attempted to be hinged upon the use
of the word “ to” instead of “ for.” It
could not admit of question that, if a
clergyman be accused of “ slander, wilful
misrepresentation, and deliberate false-
hood,” the principle referred to by the
learned counsel for the defence could not
be entertained in his case. The principle
laid before them was that a gentleman
might state what was positively untrue
without having told a lie, that he might
be under a wrong impression, or the matter
might have been misrepresented to him,
but however loose might be the morality
of the men of the world in their intercourse
with one another, he conceived that of all
men of the world, a Christian Minister,
when he employed statements calculated
to damage the character of other men,
statements that reflected upon the charac-
ter of the congregation statements as
would appear from the learned counsel not
known to his own personal knowledge, but


based upon hearsay—when he uttered these
Statements by word of mouth, or committed
them to paper, he was emphatically bound
to enquire earnestly and minutely into the
details of the case, and make himself ac-
quainted with all the facts. He was not
at liberty in this haphazard way to cast
forth statements to the world which could
only become firebrands, separate friends,
break up churches and bring scandal and
disgrace upon religion and the character of
a Christian minister. There were none who
would be more earnest in putting the mat-
ter, than the rev. defender himself, and he
could not hesitate in going to the proof
of whether these things be fact or not. If
they were not true, he could not suffer. If
true, then of course, consequences of some
kind must follow. He had used the words
“he cannot suffer,” deliberately. No man,
if tried before such a court, and proved to
be innocent, could in the long run suffer
by a deliverance in his favor ; on the con-
trary, the reaction would be of the most
satisfactory and gladdening kind. He was
surprised at the objections that had been
taken as to the relevancy of the libel. He
had tried to put himself in the position of
the person libelled, and he was not unac-
quainted personally with that position. If
he knew that he was in possession of evi-
dence, that no counter evidence could
shake ; if he knew in his own heart as be-
fore God and man that he was innocent,
and that all that was laid at his door as
“wilful misrepresentation and deliberate
falsehood,” was in itself a falsehood ; if he
knew that he could by proof demonstrate
this to that court, and through that court
to society, he would tell them candidly
that he would spurn at such objections as
had been taken in the present case. He
might have adopted them in a criminal
court, but in a court of equity, in a court
of Christ such word-fencing, such mere
trifling in order to prove the relevancy of
the libel, he would have held beneath what
he knew his character to be, beneath what
he knew his evidence to be. He would
have taken far higher ground, and said as
he said before, “ I care not for such irregu-
larities, I pitch the matter on a higher
platform than mere technicalities,” and in
that way he would be prepared to go to a
court of Christ, constituted as they now
were. This was the course he (Mr. Ew-
ing) would have taken. He had stated
his reasons generally for holding the
relevancy of the libel with the exception
of the second paragraph in the third
section, and he would support a motion
that this part he held irrelevant, and be
left out.
The Eev. Mr. Garrett held the libel
to be relevant throughout. The objec-
tions had no weight with him TIIO
counsel for the prosecution stated their
relevancy in the clearest and plainest
language.
The Eev. Mr. Dugall thought that
it was absolutely necessary for the Pres-
bytery and Mr. Storie’s own character
that the matter should be proceeded
with. He looked upon the libel as rele-
vant.
Eev. Mr. Mackersey expressed his
astonishment at the opposition made
to the present proceedings. The Presby-
tery had been assured by Mr. Storie
himself that with one small exception
of no importance, everything alleged
against him was untrue and unfounded.
The same statement was repeated by
his counsel, so that Mr. Storie was a
perfectly innocent man. And yet at every
step in the progress of the libel every exer-
tion had been used to impede the busi-
ness. He could not understand that. If
he had been in Dr. Turnbull’s place
as a supporter of Mr. Storie’s he should
say, “ Go directly to the proof. Find
the libel relevant, and if it goes to the
proof, Mr. Storie will be fully acquit-
ted.” Should not Mr. Storie desire that ?
But even if it went to the proof, and
Mr. Storie was not acquitted, then accord-
ing to what the Presbytery was told,
it would pronounce a sentence which could
not take effect. One objection to the libel
was that from the position which Mr.
Storie held as minister of St. Andrew’s
Church, he could not be interfered with
by a decision of the Presbytery. He
confessed that he did not understand
the matter. He thought, if Mr. Storie
was an innocent man, he would go
on. At present one paragraph of the libel
was objected to, namely, that the assertion
of the Eev. John Storie in the said sth
paragraph of the same letter, that most of
the usual worshippers left the church in
sorrow and shame, if it meant shame at and
sorrow for the conduct of the meeting,
was positively untrue. Now he held that,
if that statement could be all disproved,
the Presbytery would be doing Mr.
Storie a positive service in allowing
him to disprove it. He was, therefore, in
favor of the paragraph being allowed to
stand ; though he had no objection to its
being struck out.
Eev. Dr. Turnbull wished to speak in
explanation, as attacks had been made
upon him of a particularly bitter character.
He sat there as a member of the court, to
do justice, yet he had been characterised
as a supporter of Mr. Storie’s. He stood
towai’ds Mr. Storie in the relation in which
every member ought to stand. They ought


all to be friendly towards Mr. Storie. They
ought all to be his supporters, but the
meaning of the rev. gentleman who used
this language was, that he was unduly a
supporter of Mr. Storie, and the advocate
of that gentleman. He denied, with all the
indignation he ought to feel, such an
allegation. He was there to do that which
was right between man and man, and if it
were proved that Mr. Storie was guilty of
any of the charges, did the Moderator
think that he would attempt to defend or
support that gentleman ? The statement
which hed been made, whilst it was
slanderous to him was also deroga-
tory to the Presbytery, for it implied
that the court was divided into two parties.
According to the rev. gentleman (Mr.
Mackersey), he was the defender of,
and he supposed the rev. gentleman
wished to class himself with the aggressors
upon Mr. Storie. See what the conscious-
ness in the rev. gentleman’s own mind had
led him to. The rev. gentleman was con-
scious that there was a division in the
Presbytery, but he repudiated the idea of
being a supporter of Mr. Storie’s. This
state of things arose in a great measure
from the unfortunate position in which the
rev. gentleman had placed himself as one
of the prosecutors of Mr. Storie. Now he held
that every member of the Presbytery, the
clerk, the Moderator, and every member,
should be as far as human fallibility would
permit unprejudiced —
Eev. Mr. Eobertson submitted that the
rev. gentleman was out of order. The in-
troduction of these personal matters only
showed the ill feeling which existed between
certain gentlemen.
Eev. Mr. Mackersey explained that Dr.
Turnbull had misapprehended him, and
hence all this virtuous indignation was
thrown away. What he had said was sim-
ply, that Dr. Turnbull supported Mr. Storie
as he believed, and as he was bound to
believe, from considering that gentleman
an innocent and injured man. He merely
said that if he was in the position of any one
supporting Mr. Storie, believing him to be
an innocent man, he would say “by all
means go at once to the proof.”
The amendment for the omission of the
words already specified was then put and
carried, and the motion affirming the rele-
vancy of the remainder of the libel was
carried by 7 votes to 1, Dr. Turnbull being
the minority.
Mr. Eocher asked whether the witnesses
would be required in the afternoon ?
The Moderator said he must first ask
Mr. Storie if he wished for any conference?
The Eev. Mr. Storie said that with all
respect to the meeting and the ministers
he had no desire for any conference. He
meant to stand upon the proof of all the
statements.
The Court re-assembled at 3.20 p.m.
Eev. Mr. Storie said he had been re-
quested to make a statement to the
Presbytery. Mr. Dobson had informed him
that he had some time ago been retained
in a case of importance in the Supreme
Court. He believed it was one which
affected the liberty and might affect the
life of the person accused. The only medi-
cal witness who was in town wished the
case to be called on that evening, and Mr.
Dobson believed that the case would be
called on in a quarter of an hour. It would
not be agreeable to himself nor satisfactory
to the legal gentlemen on the other side
that he should take an active part in
the cross-examination of witnesses, and
he, therefore, requested an adjournment
till 10 o’clock next morning. He had
spoken to the gentlemen on the other
side, and they were willing to agree to the
adjournment.
Mr. Eocher said there was one witness,
Dr. Officer, to whom it would be a great
convenience to be enabled to leave town
that evening. If Mr. Storie had no objec-
tion, he proposed to take the evidence of
that witness.
Eev. Mr. Storie was very reluctant to
impose any inconvenience on Dr. Officer,
and as he was told that gentleman’s evi-
dence was of no very great importance, he
would leave the matter in the hands of
the Presbytery.
After some discussion, it was agreed that
Dr. Officer’s evidence should be taken.
Eobert Officer sworn, deposed: I am
Speaker of the House of Assembly, and a
magistrate of the colony. I have been for
many years a member of St. Andrew’s
Church, about 12 or 14 years. I have been
many years a resident of this town, and am
well acquainted with the inhabitants. I
know Mr. Jhonson, a wine merchant of
this town; Mr. W. T. Eobertson, Mr.
Jos. Moir, Mr. J. C. Corrie, Mr, Eobert
Wilson, Eobt. Ballantyne, W. Campbell,
Hon. Jas. Whyte, John McConnell, David
McFarquhar, John Livingstone, B. Cun-
ningham, W. Eoberts, Mr. Cutmear, H.
Mills. J. Wilson (Argyle-street), W. Eobert-
son, Mr. Stewart, of the Commissariat. I
have known them all for many years, I
should say they are all men of good cha-
racter and standing in the community in
their respective spheres of life. I have
known nearly the whole of them as mem-
bers of the congregation of St. Andrew’s
Church, There is a distinction between
members of the Church and seatholders.
Members of the Church are communicants.
Some of these gentlemen are members, and
others only seatholders, I cannot say pos-


itively which are members, and which only
seatholders. Looking at the list now hand-
ed to me, I can state that all the names in
it are those of gentlemen who are support-
ers of the church.
Cross-examined by Mr. Storie : I cannot
say how long it is since I have been in St.
Andrew’s Church. I think it is 18 months.
I cannot say whether it is three years. I
think it is two. I cannot speak of my
own knowledge as to any of the gentlemen
whose names appear on the list handed to
me as being members of the church. I
cannot say whether Mr. Henry Mills was a
member or a seatholder during my connec-
tion with the church. Henry Mills was
keeper of the church. I don’t know that
he gave money liberally to the church. By
supporting the church I mean persons
giving their attendance at the church. Not
only that, for some of these persons gave
money munificently. Some gave money,
others paid church fees, and all of them I
think paid for sittings. I knew Mr. Corrie
as a regular attendant at the Church.
That was many years ago. I cannot say
within the last four years. I cannot say I
saw him in church since Mr. Storie came
there. Before Mr. Storie came, he was a
very punctual and regular attendant. I
know there was a time when I attended
the church regularly, and I seldom saw
Mr. Corrie absent. I cannot testify within
two years of Mr. Storie’s coming whether
Mr. Corrie was a regular attendant, be-
cause I was not a regular attendant myself.
I don’t know whether H. Mills is a
regular attendant at St. Andrew’s at pre-
sent. He was always a salaried officer of
the Church. I think that Mills several
years ago was dismissed from his situation
of doorkeeper and officer. I don’t know
for what. I cannot say whether, on being
dismissed, he ceased attending the Church.
He was in England about a year or two
years ago. I cannot say whether he re-
sumed his office on his return. I cannot give
even an approximation to the time. I have
known the Hon. J. Whyte as an attendant
at St. Andrew’s. I think I have known
him thirty years in Hobart Town, and that
was the Church he attended all that time.
I believe he has been in the habit of resid-
ing occasionally at Risdon. I don’t know
whether he has a house at Risdon, and
never did know. I cannot say I ever saw
Mr. Whyte in St. Andrew’s Church since
Mr. Storie became its minister. I think I
have already told the Court that I have
not resided in Hobart Town for 10 years,
and during that time I have been very
seldom at St. Andrew’s, so that a more
incompetent witness could scarcely have
been called.
Rev. Mr. Storie said that after this state-
ment he should not question the witness
further.
Re-examined by Mr. Rocher : Whenever
I came to Hobart Town, I frequented St.
Andrew’s Church. During the. last ten
years I have occasionally resided in Hobart
Town for a month or two. During the last
two years, perhaps three, I have not been
in St. Andrew’s Church.
Mr. Rocher : Why did you leave the
Church ?
Rev. Mr. Storie objected to the question
as not arising out of his cross-examination.
The question was repeated.
Dr. Officer appealed to the Court, whether
he was bound to answer the question. He
had no objection himself do so.
After considerable discussion between Mr.
Rocher and the Rev. Mr. Storie,
The question was put to the Court whe-
ther Mr. Rocher’s question should be put,
and the Court decided in the affirmative.
Mr. Rocher then asked the witness why
he had not continued to attend the church.
Dr. Officer : The reason I did not con-
tinue to go to St. Andrew’s, was, that there
were various parts of Mr. Storie’s conduct
which led me to believe that I could no
longer attend his ministry with pleasure or
advantage.
By Mr. Rocher : When I ceased to at-
tend, I was an elder of the Church.
The Rev. Mr. Storie said that this had
gone too far, and a point had been opened
up that required sifting. He would throw
himself upon the honor and justice of the
court, and ask for an adjournment.
Mr, Rocher said that he had finished
and that the examination was closed.
The Rev. Mr. Stoi’ie would submit that
there were questions that must be put either
by him, or by counsel through the court.
They would permit a grand injustice to be
done if the examination was not proceeded
with.
The Rev. Mr. Dove did not think that
the question should have been put.
The Rev. Mr. Mackersey said that they
had agreed to examine Dr. Officer at Mr.
Storie’s own request. They had been per-
fectly willing to consent to a postponement.
He believed that when a question w r as ob-
jected to in a Civil Court, the matter was
referred to the judge. On the present
occasion it had been referred to the court,
and decided to be a fair question. Was it
competent for Mr. Storie to make the de-
mand he now made.
The Rev. Dr. Turnbull said that when
Mr. Storie consented to the examination,
he did not think that the laws of evidence,
would have been so signally departed from.
He believed that Mr. Storie was entitled to
throw himself on the justice of the court
as he had done.


Mr. Rocher said that Dr. Turnbull was
mistaken, he had done with it.
The Rev. Mr. Storie said that if Mr.
Rocher had done with it, he had not. He
would not make use, however, of observa-
tions which he might afterwards reflect
upon with pain. He would say that a
statement was left in a position, in which
it would not be permitted to remain, if
justice was done. This matter had been
brought out, he knew with what end. It
did not bear upon the libel, nor assist their
decision, but it would be sent in the Adver-
tiser through all Victoria next week, and
home to England in the course of a fort-
night. It was intended to damage him,
and to do so without his counsel or himself
being warned in the libel that it would be
introduced, it would not do for Mr.
Rocher to say “ I am done with it.” He
had not done with it, that court could
not be done with it. He trusted that
they would do justice to him They
had permitted a question to be put, and
commanded it to be answered by a reluct-
ant witness, a question which they must
see had no bearing on the facts charged in
the libel. He would throw himself on the
meeting and ask justice at their hands
Mr. Rocher would abide by the decision
of the learned counsel for the defence. He
was perfectly justified in taking up the link
and asking the questions he did. Accord-
ing to the law of evidence, if a fact was
drawn out, it could be followed to the
end. He could not have asked the
question in the first place, but it was Mr.
Storie’s own act, and he (Mr. R.) had acted
strictly in accordance with the rules of
evidence.
The Rev. Mr. Mackersey said that if a
question was put in a civil court, which
was objected to, the matter was referred to
the judge, whose decision was final. Now
this being the case in the civil courts, and
a similar practice having been followed
here, the threat of taking proceedings
against them seemed perfectly monstrous.
The Rev. Mr. Storie would appeal that
Dr. Officer’s evidence be not considered
finished until he could obtain the assistance
and advice of counsel.
The Rev. Mr Robertson did not see how
they could refuse this application.
The Rev. Mr. Mackersey would distinctly
and strenuously oppose anything of the
kind. How would such a proceeding be
looked upon in a civil court of justice ?
The thing was utterly irregular.
The Moderator put it to the court whether
the evidence of Dr. Officer was to end here.
The Rev. Dr. Turnbull said that a ques-
tion was put by Mr. Rocher as to motives,
a question having nothing to do with the
matter now in hand. Mr. Storie had con-
son ted to the examination of Dr. Officer, on
the understanding that a few questions as
to the respectability of the attendants, &c.,
were to be put, hut a new point arose, and
a question was asked as to Dr. Officer’s
motive for leaving St. Andrew’s Church.
What could be more reasonable than to
acquiesce in Mr. Storie’s request ?
The Rev. Mr. Ewing would ask what had
led to Mr. Rocher’s question 1 Counsel was
admitted on the strict understanding that
the Rules of the Supreme Court were to be
allowed. Mr. Storie in cross-examining,
asked a question which led Dr. Officer to
state that he had not attended St. Andrew’s
Church for some two years, Mr. Rocher
had a right, according to the laws of evi-
dence to ask a question founded upon Mr.
Storie’s question. Had Mr. Storie not asked
the question, Mr. Rocher would not have
done so. The learned gentleman had offered
to refer the matterto the counsel for the de-
fence. Mr. Mackersey had put the matter in
another light, and pointed out thatin courts
of justice matters of this sort were referred
to the judge, whose decision was final.
And yet they were now told that they were
proceeding in an unjust way. The next
thing would be to say that light was not
light, and darkness was not darkness.
The Rev. Mr. Mackersey moved that Dr.
Officer’s evidence be read over to him.
Mr. Garrett seconded.
The Rev. Dr. Turnbull asked if the Pres-
btyery was prepared to close the matter
thus ?
The Rev. Mr. Dove believed that in
allowing the question to be put, gross in-
justice had been done to Mr. Storie, and he
thought they should accede to any course
Mr. Storie might point out for the purpose
of obviating any wrong done.
The Rev. Mr. Mackersey’s motion was
then put and carried, and the evidence was
read over and signed by Dr. Officer.
The Presbytery adjourned to 10 a.m. to-
morrow, (this day.)
Third Day.
Friday, April Bth, 1864.
The Presbytery met at 10 a.m. and was
constituted with prayer.
The minutes of the previous sederunt
were read.
The Rev. Mr. Storie objected to the
minutes as incorrect.
The Rev. Mr. Mackersey apprehended
that Mr. Storie being at the bar of the
court, could not be allowed to engage in a
discussion.
The Moderator thought that Mr. Storie
should be allowed to speak upon the matter,
his counsel having been absent on the pre-
vious evening.


The Rev. Mr. Ewing said that if Mr. a
Storie had asked to speak as a matter of
courtesy, he would not have objected, but o
Mr. Storie claimed it as a matter of right, d
That gentleman could easily have informed c
his counsel of the facts of the matter.
Mr Dobson said that even if Mr. Storie had t
done so, he , (Mr. Dobson) could only have f
spoken upon hearsay, and he was astounded i
to hear such an objection coming from a t
The Rev. Mr. Robertson believed that t
the deficiency in the minute was, that it <
was not stated that a motion had been put c
and carried by a majority of five to three. 1
The Rev. Dr. Turnbull thought there was
another mistake, as the minute stated that ]
Mr. Storie made his objections after the '
evidence of Dr. Officer had been closed.
Whereas it was part of the res gesta of the <
examination.
The Rev. Mr. Mackersey said that Dr.
Turnbull was in error. It was a recalling
of the witness to examine him upon the
point raised by Mr. Storie.
After some further discussion the minute
was amended as suggested by Mr. Robert-
son, and confirmed.
The Rev. Dr. Turnbull moved as fol-
lows “ Whereas the Presbytery is bound
in its judicial procedure, by the laws and
customs of the Church of Scotland, and
whereas it is held by her Majesty’s Attor-
neo-General for this colony to be empow-
ered by the I. Vic. No. 16, to administer an
oath to every witness examined before it to
whom in accordance with such laws and
customs an oath would be administered in
Scotland, and whereas by the said laws
and customs every libel and indictment
must be at the instance either of the Pres-
bytery itself, or of a private prosecutor or
private prosecutors acting upon their own
responsibility, and liable to be dealt with
for slander in the event of their failing to
show reasonable grounds for the accusation,
and whereas neither of such courses has
been adopted in the present case, but a
mode of procedure and form of process has
been adopted unknown to the laws and
customs of the Church of Scotland —that
is a mode of procedure by way of a com-
plaint framed and signed by two members
of the court especially appointed to prose-
cute—and whereas such members are now
in fact prosecuting by counsel, and yet
nevertheless continue to sit as judges in the
case, and whereas it cannot be shown that
in furtherance of any such process or mode
of procedure, witnesses either lawfully can
be, or have ever been examined on oath in
the courts of the Church of Scotland in
Scotland, and therefore it cannot be shown
that it is competent so to examine. them
here : The court decides not to administer
any oaths to the witnesses now called.”
The Rev. Mr. Mackersey said that it-was
opening up matter that had been finally
decided, and he did not believe that the
court could entertain it.
The Rev. Dr. Turnbull would submit
that the question had not been settled be-
fore. The letter read from the Attorney.
General was satisfactory, as showing that
they had a colorable foundation for pro-
ceeding upon an indictment ; but seeing
they had not followed the customs of the
Church of Scotland, he thought it right in
exoneration of himself to submit this mo-
tion to the consideration of the Presbytery.
Mr. Dobson said that he had not been
present on the previous day when Dr.
Officer was sworn, but he could not sanc-
tion by his silence the administration of an
oath, as he held that the Presbytery had
no right to administer one.
The Moderator said that the Court had
had the opinion of the Attorney-General.
Mr. Dobson observed that the Court
took part of the opinion of the Attorney-
General, but not the whole. In fact, it
took the part that suited its convenience,
and rejected the remainder.
The Moderator replied that the opinion
of the Attorney-General was accepted so
far as that gentleman was conversant with
the law, but not as to the jurisdiction of an
Ecclesiastical Court.
Mr. Rocher said he should next pro-
ceed to offer evidence. The first witness he
. would tender was Mr. J. Davies.
Mr. Davies, after the opinion given by
l Mr. Dobson, wished to know, whether in
s the event of his taking the oath, he would
; be liable to any pains and penalties. He
• did not speak as to the position of the Mo-
* derator or the Presbytery but as regarded
l himself.
l Mr. Dobson said that as the Attorney-
> General’s opinion had been taken on one
, point he would prefer its being taken on all.
3 He was not Mr. Davies’s legal adviser,
i The following evidence was then taken.
3 John Davies sworn and examined by
1 Mr Rocher deposed : I am proprietor of
t The Mercury newspaper published in this
- town. I know the Rev. J. Storie now pre-
s sent by sight only. To my knowledge I
- never exchanged a word with him. In the
v early part of this year I received a manu-
t script letter bearing the signature of the
e Rev J. Storie. It was addressed to the
,t Hon. James Whyte, Colonial Secretary,
e It was in an envelope addressed to some
n person. I have that letter.
n Mr. Rocher : Will you produce it 1
n Witness : No. I will state here for the
n information of the Court, that it is contrary
ato the rules of journalism to produce cor-
JV respondeuce without the express consent of


the party sending it, or under some coer-
cion. I hold it to be true journalism to
retain inviolable the secrets of correspond-
ents of newspapers.
Mr. Rocher: What is the date of that
letter 1
_ Mr. Dobson objected to evidence being
given of one part of a document without
the whole document being put in.
Mr. Rocher (to witness) : I understand
you to say that it is a rule of journalism
not to produce a letter without the consent
of the writer or the coercion of the Court,
Witness: Yes.
Mr. Rocher : Then I now ask Mr. Dob-
son, as counsel for Mr. Storie, will he con-
sent to the production of the letter ?
Mr. Dobson, after consultation with Mr.
Storie, said he would consent to the pro-
duction of the letter.
Witness : Then I have no objection, and
I now hand the letter in. I should explain
that the reason I retained the letter was in
my own justification as a journalist. I
hand in the letter, still considering it my
own property.
Mr. Dobson : Oh, of course.
Examination continued : The letter was
not published. When I read it, I found it
to contain a very severe libel upon Mr. T.
Horne, one of the members for this city,
and formerly a judge of the Supreme Court.
I published a notice to correspondents now
produced (newspaper tendered in evidence,
but objected to by Mr .‘Dobson, an objection
after argument overruled.) The reasons
assigned in the paper were my public rea-
sons. I did not state about Mr. Horne, be-
cause it would be libellous to do so. I af-
terwards saw a printed letter addressed to
the Hon. J. Whyte, Colonial Secretary, and
signed by the Rev J. Storie. I compared
the documents and found a great difference
between them, and I commented strongly
upon the fact in my newspaper. The letters
in fact were not the same. The words that
“ Mr, Thomas Horne stepped down from
the Bench degraded ” which appeared in
the original are not in the printed letter.
It was upon these two lines that I refused
the publication of the letter. The docu-
ment now handed to me is, I have every
reason to believe, a copy of the circular
letter I have referred to, I know it prin-
cipally by the postscript, which is person-
ally offensive to myself, and wholly untrue.
The material alteration in this circular as
compared with the manuscript letter con-
sists in the omission of the word ‘ degraded,’
as applied to Mr. Horne. I may add that
had the manuscript letter been in the form
of this circular I should have published it.
There is also a postscript to the circular
which was not appended to the written
letter (postscript read.) I cannot say that
I afterwards saw the letter in the Exam-
iner. I heard it was in the Examiner.
[.Examiner handed in, admitted by Mr.
Dobson.]
Cross-examined by Mr. Dobson: Mr.
Storie applied to me by note for the return
of the letter. I told him it was locked up
in Mr. Allen’s drawer, and that he could
have it when Mr. Allen came in. Mr.
Allen is my associate on my newspaper.
I never showed the letter to anyone, most
positively and emphatically not, but I
took it in my hand to a friend of mine,
and read over to him the paragraph, and
asked him whether he thought it would be
safe to publish it, and he said he thought
not. The gentleman I asked was Mr. T.
Gib! in, whom I am in the habit of consult-
ing occasionally on matters of this kind as
in cases of difficulty. Ido not like some-
times to trust my own discretion. I
swear the letter was never out of my hands,
except whilst it was in the hands of Mr.
Allen, my principal writer. I am the
editor of my own paper, I had no conver-
sation with Mr. Ballantine or Mr. Bobertson
respecting the letter. I had a conversation
with Mr. Whyte about it. I was at the
Colonial Secretary’s Office on the morning
I received it on business connected with
my constituency at Devon, and in the course
of conversation I said to Mr. Whyte, not
having read the letter at the time, that I
had a letter from Mi*. Storie respecting
him, which would appear in the next morn-
ing’s Mercury. Mr. Whyte said, “ You
had better take care that there is nothing
libellous in it! ” I thought this was said
rather in banter than seriously, but after
I came back to the office I read the letter,
and I then rejected it as I have already
stated. I most positively assert that I never
showed the letter to anyone but Mr. Giblin,
and if anyone asserts to the contrary they
are either fools or knaves. No one ever
saw or read the letter, except myself and
Mr. Allen, who is my confidential associate,
and part of my establishment. It has been
locked up in my secretaire ever since. I
think I may be allowed here to state
the reason of my being so careful of the
letter. As a journalist I made a statement
impugning the truthfulness of Mr. Storie.
Letters are sometimes given up by journal-
ists, but as I made some rather strong
remarks upon Mr. Storie, I kept this letter
as a protection to myself, I don’t think
I published a reply to that letter, but I did
to the circular. I have had 25 years’ ex-
perience as a journalist, and I don’t think
that reply went beyond the bounds of pub-
lic controversy.
Mr. Dobson : then you don’t think that
to charge a man with malignant falsehood
is libellous 1


Witness : The charge might be true. I
cannot say I have read the letter carefully
at all. It came with the names of a number
of responsible persons attached to it, and
passed through the hands of an official in
my office. He saw nothing objectionable
in it, and I did not see it until it was in
print. It is customary for editors to cut
out of correspondence a word which is
libellous; but it appeared to me at the
time I received this letter that the essence
of it was in the word “degraded.” The
principal object in that part of the letter
was to hold Mr. Horne up to public ridi-
cule and contempt. I do not know that
there was anything else libellous in the letter,
I may say I think this cross-examination
hardly fair, for I never read the letter care-
fully through. In fact I take no interest
in the matter. I was not at that time
under pecuniary obligations to either Mr.
Whyte, Mr. Robertson or Mr. Ballantine.
Mr. Whyte some years ago lent me his name
to some bills for £2OOO. At that time I
was a partisan of his. I retired the bills,
some of them before they arrived at matu-
rity, and the others, when they became
■due, so that Mr. Whyte never even heard of
them, and he can gainsay me, if I am wrong.
{Mr. Whyte was sitting in the Church). I
was never under a pecuniary political
obligation to any man, and if any man
says I was, it is utterly untrue. I am in-
dependent of every man. I was indebted
to Mr. Robertson £2OO at the time I re-
ceived this letter, and I have since paid
him. I borrowed £7OO from him:to pay
on the purchase of a house in Macquarie-
street, and I had paid him all but £2OO at
the time of my receiving this letter. I
paid the £2OO while Mr. Robertson was in
Melbourne lately.
Rev. Mr. Robertson suggested that it was
not necessary for Mr. Davies to go into these
matters.
Witness : I do so because Mr. Storie im-
pugned the honesty and independency of
my paper.
Rev. Mr. Ewing : Was it money, simply
money borrowed in the usual way of busi-
ness ?
Witness : Yes, many months before the
letter was sent. lam not quite clear that
the bills were due at the time. One of them
■was I believe. It w r as 18 months ago. It
■was not a special arrangement made at the
time of the letter being sent.
Mr. Penny, of the Advertiser , was the
next witness called. That gentleman ac-
cordingly came forward and said that he
bad been summoned to produce a letter,
nnd he was willing to do so, if Mr. Storie
bad no objection, but he declined being
sworn.
Mr. Dobson objected to the letter being
received unless Mr. Penny consented to be
sworn.
Mr. Rocher said the only question be
would put to Mr. Penny was to ask where
that gentleman got the letter.
Mr. Dobson said that he should put
further questions. He thought that when
a witness was present it was a contempt of
Court to refuse giving evidence, if any
thing could be a contempt.
After some discussion,
Mr. Penny was allowed to withdraw,
and the letter was not received.
The Hon. James Whyte deposed : I am
Colonial Secretary of this colony. I re-
ceived the printed letter now handed to me,
probably on the day after it is dated, the
9th January. It is addressed to me, and
alludes to pertain proceedings which took
place in St. Andrew’s Church. I was pre-
sent on the 30th December, at a meeting in
St. Andrew’s Church. It was the usual
annual meeting of seatholders for certain
purposes connected with the church. I
am not aware that it was an unusually
large meeting, but not being in the habit
of attending such meetings, lam not in a
position to give a positive opinion. I was
present from the commencement to the
conclusion of the meeting. [A list of names
was read over to the witness, and he iden-
tified most of the persons mentioned as
having been present at the meeting. The
others, he had no doubt, were also present.
He then proceeded to say.] I went to the
meeting as a seatholder of St. Andrew’s
Church to take part in the proceedings. I
would certainly not designate the persons
who attended the meeting as a mob, and I
did not go, as stated,' to head that mob. I
did not go for the purpose of heading any
body of men. I don’t think you could
find a more respectable body of men, taking
an equal number of persons, from any con-
gregation in Hobart Town, nor a body
which conducted itself with greater pro-
priety. The second paragraph of the letter
now handed me is false in stating that I
went to head a mob. That statement is
utterly false. I heard no oaths uttered by
any person during the proceedings, and I
do not think they could have been uttered
without my hearing them, as I sat nearly
in the centre of the meeting. The state-
ment in the next paragraph of the letter
that oaths were uttered which made the
blood run cold, is, I believe, a false and
slanderous assertion. I did not observe
that any of the worshippers left the church.
Cross-examined by Mr. Dobson : I do
not recollect about the month of March,
1860, meeting Mr. Robertson and Mr. Kis-
sock at Mr. John Walker’s house to consi-
der how a debt of £IOO, due to Dr. Lillie,
was to be paid. I don’t say that it did


not occur, but I have no recollection of it.
I don’t recollect it being arranged that ten
persons should be asked to contribute £lO
each to pay that debt. I had not been at
a meeting at St. Andrew’s for two and
a-half or three years previously to the one I
have spoken of. I think I was at an annual
meeting of seat-holders within the last five
years. I don’t think I was at one within
four years. I certainly was not at one
within three years. I don’t think I was at
any meeting there for two and a-half years.
I had sittings at St. Andrew’s and have
still. I have occasionally within the last
two and a-half years, attended at other
churches. I have sittings at St. David s.
The reason I went to this meeting was that
I was exceedingly dissatisfied with the state
of things at St Andrew’s, that I wished to
exercise my privileges as a seatholder. It is
perfectly possible, indeed very likely, that I
had a conversation with Mr. Ballantyne
about this very meeting, but I am not sure.
I am not sure whether I saw Mr. Ballan-
tyne, but I think it is very likely. lam
almost sure I spoke with him about the
meeting. I think I went to the meeting
with Mr. W. Robertson, jun. He is not a
seatholder. I cannot tell why he went. I
did not anticipate anything stormy. There
was a reporter there who is present here
now, but I believe he was told to with-
draw. I did not see Mr. Yates there, but
lam told he was in the gallery. I don’t
think I put the motion to the meeting that
Mr. Horne take the chair. Mr. Robertson
moved, and Mr. Ballantyne seconded the
motion, that Mr. Horne take the chair. It
is very likely that I put the question after-
wards. Mr. Storie insisted upon taking
the chair, and refused to put the question
that Mr. Horne do take the chair. . Now
that you mention it, I think that I did put
the question that Mr. Horne take the chair.
I did not come here to be catechised upon
the confession of faith, and the larger and
shorter catechisms.
Mr. Dobson read an extract from the
Directory for Worship to the effect that at
meetings of the kind in question, a clergy-
man or in his absence, an elder, should pre-
side, with a view to preserve calmness in the
proceedings. The learned gentleman asked
the witness whether he was aware of this
principle having been laid down.
Considerable discussion ensued as to whe-
ther the question should he allowed, and
ultimately it was withdrawn.
Examination continued: I think the
question as to Mr. Home’s taking the chair
was decided by the people dividing, and
going to either side of the church, and their
names being taken down. Mr. Storie pro-
tested against the whole of the proceedings,
and claimed, as a right, to take the chair.
Previous to the meeting dividing, Mr. Sto-
rie left the church. I don’t recollect Mr.
Storie’s protesting against the show of
hands. I don’t know that a policeman
was sent for at all. I did not hear Mr.
Ballantyne or anybody else say anything
about a policeman. I have since heard of
a policeman’s being sent for, but not until
after the meeting was over. I did not hear
Fisher ordered to go for a policeman. I
did not see any persons leave the church
with Mr. Storie. I did not see persons go
up into the gallery. When I put the mo-
tion, “ That Mr. Horne take the chair,” I
believed that he was a seatholder, and had
been for twenty years. I was not aware
whether he had paid for his sittings. I
took it for granted that he was qualified to
be present. After Mr. Storie left, I put a
motion that his salary be reduced by £IOO
a-year. That was carried. The adver-
tisement was, I believe, for the election of
managers and trustees. I had an inten-
tion of proposing a reduction of Mr. Storie’s
salary, if no one else did. I might have
mentioned that intention to some persons
before. I did not communicate my inten-
tion to Mr. Storie. I had not seen Mr.
Storie for some time previously. I did not
consider it my duty to do so.
Rev. Mr. Ewing submitted that Mr.
Whyte was being examined as to matters
of fact, and not of opinion.
Rev. Mr. Robertson pointed out that it
was competent to the seatholders to reduce
the donation, for it was not a salary, to the
minister, if they thought proper.
Rev. Dr. Turnbull had never heard of a
minister’s salary being reduced without
notice.
Mr. Rocher pointed out that the reduc-
tion was one in the allowances from seat
rents, not of salary.
Mr. Pitt said the usual course was to fix
the minister’s stipend at the annual meet-
ing.
Mr. Dobson : But not to send for a po-
liceman to remove the minister, and reduce
his salary in his absence.
After some further remarks—
Mr. Dobson said that before he proceed-
ed further with the cross-examination, he
wished to ask the ruling of the Court as to
whether evidence of the respectability of
of the persons attending the meeting was
considered relevant. He perceived that in
his absence on the previous day evidence
had been elicited from Dr. Officer to show
that these persons were respectable. _ It
would be most painful to him to be obliged
to go into evidence to rebut that testimony,
but, if it was considered relevant, he should
be compelled to do so ; and if it was not
relevant, such evidence should not be re-
, I ceived. The persons then present in the


church might be all very respectable, but
still they might be a mob at times.
The Moderator said he would have to
put the question to the Presbytery as to
whether evidence of the respectability of
persons should be taken. He thought the
question was put to Dr. Officer in a very
gentle way. It was to ascertain whether
Mr. Whyte went at the head of a number
of persons likely to make a riot.
Mr. Dobson : Who did make a riot!
Mr. Rocher explained that his reason
for putting the questions was, to show first,
that the persons at the meeting were not
likely to form a mob, and afterwards to
give evidence that they were not a mob.
Mr. Dobson said in that case he should
have to enter into the question of charac-
ter, and show that the persons were not
respectable.
Dr. Turnbull deprecated strongly so in-
quisitorial a proceeding as the taking of
evidence as to the individual characters of
any body of persons. It had been said
that the House of Commons, consisting of
the best gentlemen in England, was on
some occasions a mob. He was most anx-
ious to avoid such an investigation as that
referred to by Mr. Dobson. He did not
know, if such a course was followed, but that
the parties against whom facts were
brought out, would have reason to com-
plain of the Presbytery, or that they would
not have a right of action, though he looked
upon these as secondary consideratons ?
Rev. Mr. Mackersey pointed out that
Mr. Whyte was charged with going to the
meeting for the purpose of heading a mob.
That implied that Mr. Whyte expected to
find a mob to place himself at the head of,
and could only be met by shewing that the
persons who went to the meeting were not
likely to form a mob.
Rev. Mr. Robertson protested against the
threat held out by Mr. Dobson of taking
evidence as to the private character of in-
dividuals. The persons at the meeting
might,under provocation,—and he believed
they had received strong provocation—
have transgressed the bounds of propriety,
but the effect that would be produced
in England and the colonies by the publi-
cation of these statements would be most
injurious.
Rev. Dr. Turnbull contended at some
length that the respectability of the per-
sons at the meeting should be judged
of only by their conduct and their
intentions, if any evidence could be pro-
cured respecting them. In the absence of
any such evidence, their intentions could
only be inferred from their acts.
Rev. Mr. Ewing said that he was pre-
pared to listen to counsel with attention,
but he protested against the wrong done
to him and to the Presbytery by the Mode*
rator allowing the Rev. Dr. Turnbull to
lecture the members as he was constantly
doing. Dr. Turnbull was always assuming
an air of higher morality, and addressing
the other members as if he stood upon a
higher platform, whilst they were on a
lower. Every hour or so he had to listen to
a lecture from that rev. gentleman, until he
was perfectly sick of it. He had no anxiety
go into questions of personal character, but if
Dr. Turnbull attempted to lecture the Pres-
bytery again, even though it should bring
every member to his feet, he would stop him
by crying order, order. It was intolerable.
Dr. Turnbull rose to to speak.
Rev. Mr. Ewing : there again ; now we’ll
have it!
Dr. Turnbull: I have a right to speak !
Mr. Ewing : well ; I’ll reply to you !
Rev. Dr. Turnbull said he would not sit
there to be lectured by the member for
Launceston. He was not to be brow-beaten.
Rev. Mr. Robertson : It is you who are
brow-beating the Court.
Rev. Mr. Garrett submitted that the word
brow-beating was one not to be allowed.
Rev. Dr. Turnbull: Then the practice
ought not to be allowed. It was the right
of every member to point out the course
which should be followed, and he would
exercise that right, (at this moment the
Rev. Mi’. Ewing left the Court, followed
immediately by the Rev. Mr. Robertson).
Members might leave the Court if they
pleased, and discuss matters elsewhere, but
that was the place in which he was en-
titled to speak, and, most undoubtedly, he
should exercise his privilege, and not be
brow-beaten by any one.
Mr. Dobson said that he had no idea of
insulting the Court as he had been charged
with doing, by the Rev. Mr. Robertson,
whom he saw looking though the window.
Rev. Mr. Garrett submitted that the
counsel should confine his observations to
the matter before the Court, without di-
recting attention to who was looking
through the window. It was not worthy of
their position.
Mr. Dobson said he would not look
through the window any more, but he
wished to have the ruling of the Court, as
to whether evidence as to personal charac-
ter was relevant.
At this period, Messrs. Ewing and Ro-
bertson re-entered the Church, and resumed
their seats. After a protracted discussion.
Mr. Dobson said as he had received no
answer from the Court, he should proceed to
show th at the persons at the meeting were not
respectable. He would therefore ask Mr.
Whyte who was the chairman.
The Hon. Mr. Whyte said he should
decline to answer the question, as the ob-


ject of it was merely mischievous.
Mr. Dobson said that in that case Mr.
Whyte was not a witness , as he would only
give a portion of his evidence.
After some further discussion.
Mr. Dobson said that as he saw that
the feelings of the Court as well as
his own were against going into ques-
tions of private character, he should drop
that line of examination, though he was
entitled to pursue it.
Examination of Mr. Whyte continued :
There has been a considerable debt I believe
paid off lately. I don’t know whether I
was a contributor to paying it off, I put
my hand in my pocket several times.
Re-examined : I think that there was no
objection to Mr. Horne’s qualification to
preside at the meeting, on the ground that
he had not paid his rent. _ I have no recol-
lection of any such objection being made.
John M‘Connell deposed : 1 reside in
Collins-street, Hobart Town, and have
been a member of St. Andrew’s Church
ever since it was built. At least I was
member of this Church too, but I still re-
tained my sitting at St. Andrew’s. I was
at a Meeting at St. Andrew’s on the 30th
Dec. last. It was the usual annual meet-
ing. I was present when the meeting
opened, and remained until it closed. I
should say there were about 50 persons
present. I know a great many attendants
at St. Andrew’s, but I have not attended
there myself for a long time. There was
no mob at the meeting. It was orderly
and well conducted. I heard no oaths,
and I am sure they could not be used with-
out my hearing them.
Cross-examined by Mr. Dobson : I have
not been at St. Andrew's since Mr. M‘ln-
tosh left. My family used to go regularly.
I never heard Mr. Storie preach. I don’t
know that I ever attended a meeting at St.
Andrew’s to elect trustees before this one.
I was not invited to go to this meeting.
I went because I had heard of some Church
business. I went partly because my chil-
dren and wife wished me to go in conse-
quence of the way in which Mr. Storie was
going on. I had many conversations with
Mr. Ballantine about Mr. Storie. Mr.
Ballantine did not ask me to attend the
meeting, nor did Mr. Robertson. They
know me better. I think there would be
harm in asking me to go. I saw no one
leave the Church when Mr. Storie left.
I heard no one send for a policeman. I
did not hear Fisher told to go for one.
A person might have told Fisher to go for
a policeman without my hearing it, but it
must have been in an under tone, as I was
nearly in the middle of the Church.
David Barclay deposed : I have been
connected with the Scottish Church in this
town ever since St. Andrew’s Church was
built. I was present in St. Andrew’s
Church the 30th December last as a spec-
tator. I had then ceased to he a seat-
holder. I had ceased to be so about two or
three years. I ceased to attend after Mr.
Young was excommunicated. As I did not
want to take any part in the proceedings,
I waited until the others went in,
and then went up in the gallery. When
I went in, Mr. Storie was in the chair,
hut nothing was done. The proceed-
ings were as orderly as at any church-
meeting I ever saw in St. Andrew’s —that
is after Mr. Storie left the chair. _ I heard
no oaths, nor anything approaching to an
oath, from beginning to end. I must have
heard them had they had been used.
Cross-examined by Mr. Dobson : The
reason I went was that I heard such an
extraordinary account of the previous meet-
ing—that it was something lively. The
one of the 30th December did not at all
come up to my expectations.
Thomas Jhonson deposed : I reside in
Hobart Town and have done so for the last
33 or 34 years. I have been a member of
St. Andrew’s Church ever since it was
built. I was a seat holder on the 30th
December last. On the evening of that
day there was a meeting that I attended.
I was there when the proceedings opened
and remained to the close. There were
about 60 persons present. I saw a number
of gentlemen who used to be seat-holders.
I left the Church 18 months or two years
ago. The meeting was most orderly, more
so than the generality of such meetings.
I heard no oath uttered, and I think, if
there had been, I must have heard them.
Cross-examined hy Mr. Dobson : I
heard no order given for a policeman.
I don’t see the reason there should have
been.
Eev. Peter Campbell deposed : I am a
minister of the Church of Scotland, and
have been about twenty-four years con-
nected with St. Andrew’s Church. I was
present at a meeting there, on the 30th
December last. I sat at first at the back,
but, when the votes were taken, I came where
the body of the members were. I was
present throughout the whole of the
proceedings. I recognised many of the
gentlemen there, who have been in the
habit of attending the church for the
last twenty-four years. I think the meet-
ing was very orderly, as orderly as meet-
ings of that description generally are.
I heard no oaths uttered during the
whole of the proceedings. I don’t think
from the position I occupied, that oaths
could have been uttered without my hear-
ing them.
Cross-examination by Mr. Dobson : I


attended the meeting from curiosity. I was I
a seatholder. I had permission to occupy a
pew without paying for it ever since 1856.
I went through curiosity. I heard there was
to be a contention for the managership,
and I wished to see how it would go.
I had seen Mr. Ballantine often before
the meeting, but had not spoken to
him about the meeting. I am a licentiate of
the Church. I never held a cure. I never
was ordained. I often officiated at St.
Andrew’s in place of Dr. Lillie.
Re-examined by Mr. Rocher : I had pre-
viously heard of some lively proceedings on
the part of the defendant. That was what
induced me to go.
By Rev. Mr. Robertson : I am duly li-
censed by a Presbytery of the Church of
Scotland, to preach the Gospel.
James Affleck Corrie deposed : I reside
in Hobart Town, and have been a member
of St. Andrew’s Church. lam a member
still. I became so in 1842, under Dr. Lillie.
A member is a communicant. I continued
a communicant until nearly the departure
of Mr. MTntosli. I have not been a seat-
holder the whole of the time since. I was
at a meeting on 30th December last, from
the commencement of the proceedings, to
the close. I was there by virtue of being
a seatholder, and am still a seatholder. I
sat in the vicinity of the pulpit at the
meeting. I did not notice whether there
was anyone in the gallery, but in the body
of the church there were about 50. I re-
cognised them as persons who used to be
members of St. Andrew’s Church. There
was some considerable excitement in the
early part of the meeting caused by the
defiant attitude of the Rev. Mr. Storie
who determined to keep the chair in defi-
ance of the wishes of the seatholders. The
disturbance was from no other cause.
During the disturbance I heard no oaths.
Had oaths been spoken with a loud voice,
I think I must have heard them.
Examined by Mr. Dobson : I was not at
one period about to jump over the pew and
pull Mr. Storie out of the pulpit. I said I
felt so exasperated at Mr. Storie’s attitude,
that I felt inclined to go and do it, but I
never did it. I had too much respect for
myself and the church to do so. I paid Ithink
7s. 6d. for my seat. I paid for it more
than a fortnight before the meeting. I
attended the meeting because I had a
strong desire to go back to the church,
and to see a more pacific state of things.
It was with a view of going to the
'meeting that I took a seat. I heard
there was a desire to out-vote our present
managers, and I desired, if possible, to save
the church from wreck. I moved a reso-
lution that evening expressive of regret at
the melancholy exhibition made by Mr.
Storie, but withdrew it on the suggestion
of Mr. Horne. lam a seatholder for the
present year, but cannot, I am sorry to say
attend the Church whilst Mr. Storie con-
tinues the Minister.
John Lees Livingstone deposed : I am a
resident in the neighborhood of Hobart
Town and have been a member of St. An-
drew’s Church in one way or other for
nearly a quarter of a century. I was pre-
sent in the Church at a meeting on the
30th December last from the opening to
the close of the proceedings. I sat very
near the pulpit. Irecognised a great many
persons present who had been in the habit
of attending St. Andrew’s Church. At first
there was some disorder, but after Mr.
Storie left there was nothing but order.
The disorder was caused by Mr. Storie con-
tinuing to hold the chair in defiance of the
wishes of the meeting. Mr. Storie main-
tained his right to the chair on a constitu-
tional principle. During the time Mr.
Storie occupied the chair I heard no oaths.
Had oaths* been uttered in a violent and
outrageous manner, oaths which would
make the blood run cold, I must have heard
them.
Cross-examined by Mr. Dobson : I had
not been at Andrew's for some time. I knew
that the Church was in a disorganized state.
I had heard of what occurred at a previous
meeting, and 1 paid for a sitting to enable
me at any time to take a part in the secular
business of the Church. I am not bound
to answer whether I ever wrote anonymous
letters against Mr. Storie. I claim my
privilege in that respect.
Robert Wilson deposed : I am a resident
in Hobart Town, I have been a seatholder
for myself and family in St. Andrew’s
Church ever since it was opened. My
family left some 18 months or two years
since, but I still hold a seat myself. My
family have joined another Church, because
they felt dissatisfied with remaining in Mr.
Storie’s Church. I was at the meeting of
the 30th December last. I was not present
at the commencement of the proceedings.
When I went in they were contending as to
who should occupy the chair. After the con-
tention as to who should occupy the chair,
the meeting was quite orderly. There was
merely a verbal discussion as to who should
occcupy the chair. I should say that during
the contention as to who should occupy the
chair the people were not like a mob in
any way. After that discussion Mr. Storie
left and" all the rest of the proceeding was
quiet. I heard no oaths, but it is possible
there might have been some uttered.
[This witness was not cross-examined.]
William Robertson deposed : I reside in
Park-street and have been for thirty-odd
years a seatholder of St, Andrew’s Church,


I attended a meeting of the Church on the
30th December last, and was present from
the opening of the proceedings to the con-
clusion.“|All the persons near the pulpit had
been seatholders. The only disorder I saw
was from Mr. Storie’s obstinacy in refusing
to leave the chair. Mr. Storie left the
church, and after that everything was or-
derly.
Cross-examined by Mr. Dobson : I had
never attended any of the meetings pre-
viously. It was mere fancy that took
me to the meeting. Mr. Ballantine asked
me on the previous Sunday to attend if I
liked. I did not ask anyone to attend the
meeting, I was not aware that there was
to be any other business transacted at the
meeting than ,tlie appointment of trustees
and managers.
John Wilson deposed : I reside in Hobart
Town and myself and family have been for
many years seatholders in St. Andrew’s
Church. We were so on the 30th Decem-
ber last, and I attended a meeting of seat-
holders on that evening. I was not present
at the commencement. Mr. Storie was
in the chair when I came. He wanted to
keep the chair and the seatholders were
against it. There were a few extra words,
nothing more. After Mr. Storie left every-
thing was very orderly. I heard no swear-
ing. There was none.
Cross-examined by Mr. Dobson : I was
not in the habit of attending these meet-
ings very often. I was not at one, for
about three years. Nobody asked me to
go to the meeting. I have seen Mr. Bal-
lantine frequently. He did not ask me to
attend the meeting.
Benjamin Marriott Cunningham de-
posed : I am a resident of Hobart Town.
Myself and family have been seatholders,
and myself and wife communicants of St.
Andrew’s Church, for about seven years.
About two years ago, I left the Church,
but returned to it about nine months since.
I was at the meeting on the 30th December
last, from the commencement to the close
of the proceedings. The commencement
of the proceedings was that a chairman
should be appointed, Mr. Storie announced
his intention to fill the chair ex officio.
The meeting objected to it, and a slight
ebullition of feeling took place. Finally,
Mr. Storie left the meeting as well as my
memory serves me when, the division took
place. The number of persons favorable to
Mr. T. Horne’s taking the chair was 44,
and against it 10, from which I infer that
there were 10 in favor of Mr. Storie taking
the chair. There was no disturbance be-
yond the natural indignation which
such conduct as Mr. Storie’s would excite.
Had Mr. Storie conducted himself in the
same manner at a civil meeting, I think
much more serious consequences would
have ensued.
Cross-examined by Mr. Dobson : I had
had conversation with several persons for
months before the meeting about it.. I
spoke with Mr. Ballantine on the subject,
and asked him when the meeting was to be
held, as I was anxious to be present at it.
Rev. Mr. Ewing would ask Mr. Cun-
ningham’s reasons for ceasing to be a mem-
ber of St. Andrew’s.
Mr. Dobson objected, as this matter was
not upon the face of the libel.
The Court then adjourned to 10 a.m.,
this day.
Saturday, April 9, 1864.
Fourth Day.
William McFarquhar sworn : I reside ill
Hobart Town ; I have never been a mem-
ber of St. Andrew’s Church, but I have
been a seatholder there to and fro since
1836 ; I was a seatholder on the 30th of
December last, and I attended a meeting
of the church on the evening of that day ;
I was not there at the commencement of
the proceedings; I entered the church
about the time that Mr. Storie was leaving
the chair ; there was a little loud talking
when I went in ; the major part of the con-
gregation sat near the pulpit, but I sat a
good way back; I can undertake to say
that I heard everything that took place;
I remained to the close of the proceedings ;
I heard no oaths uttered during the whole
of the time ; after Mr. Storie left every-
thing went on quietly ; I would not desig-
nate the parties assembled at the meeting
as a mob. By Mr. Dobson : I have had a
seat for the last three years at St. Andrew’s
Church ; I had not sat in the Church for
some nine or ten months previously ; I had
attended annual meetings during Mr. Mac-
kintosh’s time, but not since Mr. Storie
came to St. Andrew’s ; I went to the meet-
ing because I wanted to see and hear what
was going on ; I had no conversation with
anyone about it; there was nothing parti-
cular that led me to go ; I did not know
that there would be any other business
brought before the meeting beside the elec-
tion of Trustees and Managers, I have been
a Manager of this (St. John’s Church) for
the last two years, but I have not been a
communicant.
By the Rev. Dr. Turnbull: I was pre-
sent at one annual meeting during Mr.
Mackintosh’s time, but I cannot say who
took the chair on that occasion.
Robert Ballantine sworn : I am one of
the Managers of St. Andrew’s Church, and
I reside in this town ; I recollect the ad-
vertisement as to the usual seat-letting in
July last; I have perused a letter written
by the Rev, Mr, Storie ; in that letter he


alleges that the manager held the church
doors closed against both members and
strangers ; that statement is partly untrue ;
I attended at the church from 12 to 1 on
that day; no one came either to pay or
take sittimgs ; at 20 minutes to 7 in the eve-
ning I left my store and went towards the
church ; it was raining in torrents and I
got wet through, and not thinking that any
one would come out on such a night I went
home to New Town ; there are three letters
that will further explain the matter, and I
would like to have them read (letters pro-
duced) ; there was some communication
made to Mr. Storie in reference to the
doors being closed; these letters were
handed to me by Mr. Storie’s manager,
Mr. Robertson. Mr. Robertson replied,
and that is the reply (letter produced) ;
Mr. Storie was made perfectly cognizant of
the reason for the church doors being
closed ; the statement in Mr. Storie’s letter
that “payments of regular seat-holders
have been declined,” is false; there is a
collector appointed (Mr. Piguenit) to col-
lect the seat-rents, or any of the managers
will receive them ; Mr. Robert Walker is
the minister’s manager, and the other ma-
nager for the congregation is Mr. William
Robertson ; I can only say that payments
have been accepted with the specification,
“ mind you have no vote,” is not true, so
far as I know ; I was present at a meeting
in St. Andrew’s Church on the 30th Decem-
ber last; I was there at the commence-
ment of the proceedings, and remained to
the close ; it was a meeting held in pursu-
ance of the Act of Council; I should say
that there were from 40 to 50 persons in
the church ; the majority were seat-holders
in St. Andrew’s ; the first step taken was a
proposal by myself that Mr. Horne should
take the chair ; the motion was seconded
by Mr. William Robertson ; Mr. Storie was
in possession of the chair, and refused to
leave it; but he had no more right to that
chair than I have to take the chair of the
Chief Justice at the Supreme Court; he
detained the meeting for nearly two hours;
he eventually left the chair and we pro-
ceeded to business, Mr. Horne being elected
chairman ; during those two hours there was
nothing disorderly on the part of the meet-
ing. Mr. Storie’s conduct was insolent; I
heard no oaths uttered, and if they had
been used, I must have heard them ; there
were none uttered after Mr. Storie quitted
the meeting ; there was a good deal of dis-
cussion when Mr. Storie declined to leave
the chair ; I have attended meetings of
this description for 7 or 8 years back ; a
seatholder connected with the church has <
generally taken the chair on those occa- >
sions ; Mr. Mackintosh did so once, but it <
was as a favor; we had to ask him to do so; <
t at the meeting previous to the one held on
■ the 30th December last, Mr. Storie took
the chair ; the managers have charge of
the minute book ; when the minutes are
■ entered, they are signed by the chairman ;
that book is the record of the proceedings at
those meetings.
Mr. Dobson said that he would admit
the minute book, and the signatures of the
respective chairmen.
By Mr. Dobson—Mr. Storie was chair-
man of the annual meeting in 1862, he was
also chairman in 1861; there is no record
of any division on the question of chair-
man in either of those years ; the meeting
in 1862 was closed with prayer, but I can-
say whether it was opened with prayer. Mr.
Walker presided at the 1860 meeting but I
cannot say if any clergyman was present. Mr.
Young was chairman in 1859. Mr. Mackin-
tosh was chairman at the annual meeting,
because we could not find anyone else to take
the chair ; Mr. Mackintosh was the chair-
man in 1858 ; I was present at the meeting
in 1862, when Mr. Storie took the chair ;
he was permitted to do so without any
objections being made ; during the last
meeting, I sent a message to the Inspector
of Police by Mr. Fisher, who is a seatholder
at St. Andrew’s : I told him to give my
compliments to Mr. Forster and ask him
to send a policeman to the front door
of the church ; I did so because Mr. Storie
was disturbing the meeting, and insisted
upon holding the chair against the wishes
of the majority of the seatholders present;
I wanted a policeman to remove Mr. Storie
if he persisted in keeping the chair; the
policeman was to come into the church if
necessary ; there were other chairs in the
church, but I consider that Mr. Storie
had no right there, except to appoint his
own manager ;I do not remember telling
Mr. Storie at the commencement of the
meeting that he was not a seatholder, and
had no right to take any part in the pro-
ceedings ; there is a minister’s pew, and a
Governor’s pew, but the Governor could
not vote, the act distinctly states that seat-
holders only who have paid for sit-
tings. : whose rent is not “ due and
unpaid,” have a title to vote. (Mr.
Dobson) : was Mr. Storie’s rent due and
unpaid ?) I did not shortly previous to the
meeting refuse to receive money ; I never
refused ; I called out to Mr. Galt at the
meeting that he could not vote as he had
not paid ;in a few minutes afterwards he
was told by Mr. Robertson in the church
that as he had paid for his sitting that
afternoon to Mr. Moir, he and any others
could vote ; I was at the church door of
St. Andrew’s on the last communion Sun-
day ; I don’t remember whether I gave a
copy of the manager’s letter to a comrnu-


cant at the church door ; I never told a
man named Lowrie, who was going in to
communicate, that all the respectable peo-
ple were outside, and that he had better
not go in ; I never said anything of the
kind ; I always do my duty as manager,
but do not enter the church ; I have been
at the church door for the last twelve
months for the collection; I cannot
say how often at night; I refuse to say
who has taken the money at the
church doors at night during the last
twelve months ; I have answered the
question.
Mr. Dobson said that a question had been
asked which was not objected to by the
prosecutors’ counsel, or by the Court, and
the witness refused to answer it. He
would be able to comment upon it as show-
ing the animus against the defendant. He
would ask the witness if he had ever de-
clared that he would crush Mr. Storie.
Mr. Rocher objected to this question, as
the witness had already sworn that he had
no malice against the Rev. J. Stoiie.
By the Moderator: I reside at New Town,
and I have frequently been unable to attend
at the Church in the evening.
By Mr. Dobson : I reside near Bishop-
stowe. It is nearly three miles from the
Church.
Mr. Dobson said that according to the
practice of the Supreme Court, if it had
been stated that a person had boasted that
he would injure the prisoner, an answer to
a question of this kind could be compelled.
The Moderator believed that in the
Supreme Court a counsel could not compel
a man to criminate himself.
Mr. Dobson said that his object in cross-
examination was to test the truthfulness of
the fact. A person might come before them
without such malice as to involve perjury, al-
though there might be such in an inferior de-
gree. The feeling existin g on the part of a per-
son chai’ging a prisoner was an ingredient in
the Criminal Court. However, there was
no use in going any further into the matter,
as the witness had declined to answer the
qU The°Rev. Mr. Robertson thought that if
Mr. Ballantine answered this question, it
would lead to other questions which would
be objected to by Mr. Dobson himself, and
he hoped that it would be withdrawn.
By Mr. Dobson : I know Mr. Penny who
was here with a letter, and refused to be
sworn ; he is the manager of the Advertiser
newspaper which belongs to a company ;
I have one share in it; neither Mr. Wm.
Robertson, nor Mr. Whyte are sharehol-
ders ; I cannot say whether the paper is
under any pecuniary obligation to Mr.
Whyte or Mr. Robertson ; it is a matter
unconnected with the libel,
The Rev. Mr. Ewing did not think that
this matter was on the face of the libel.
The Rev. Mr. Robertson would
the question had not been put to Mr. Whyte
himself.
Mr. Dobson said that it was competent
for him to ask the question of any witness
he might choose ; Mr. Ballantine was a
member of the Advertiser newspaper com-
pany ; and he would ask him if at the date
of Mr. Storie’s letter, the Advertiser was not
under pecuniary obligations to Mr. Whyte
or Mr. Robertson ?
Mr. Ballantine : I know nothing about
it ; I cannot say ; I will not say if I ever
saw the manuscript letter written by Mr.
Storie, whether I ever had it in my hand,
or if I ever had any conversation with Mr.
Penny about it; the annual meeting at St.
Andrew’s was not larger than I have seen
some 6 or 7 years back.
(Here the letters handed in by Mr. Bal-
lantine, viz., from Mr. Storie to Mr. Robert-
son, enclosing a letter of complaint with
reference to the non-attendance of mana-
gers at the meeting, for the purpose of
letting the seats, (together with Mr. Robert-
son’s reply thereto were read.)
By Mr. Dobson—We have only autho-
rity that one person did attend and com-
plain ; I consider Mr. Storie’s conduct in
holding the chair against the wish of the
seatholders, was insolent; he acted most
rudely ; his manner and words were rude ;
I can give no farther explanation ; I have
answered the question.
By Mr. Rocher; I cannot say that he
was violent in his manner, but he was
rude and insolent ; it was to guard against
what occurred at a previous meeting, and
to prevent the sad spectacle that Mr. Storie
then made of himself, that I sent for a
policeman ; I always fulfilled the duty of
attending at the plate; my custom had
been to enter the church, but for some time
past I have not done so ; the other mana-
gers generally enter the church up to the
present time ; I ceased to do so within the
last two or three months, and I go when
any strange clergyman preaches ; I would
not go to hear Mr. Storie ; my reason for
ceasing to go into the church after the
collection, was because I would not hear
Mr. Storie.
Mr. Dobson would call attention to the
fact that according to the minutes of the
meeting in 1862, the meeting was opened
with prayer. , ,
Mr. Ballantine thought that he had
spoken of 1861. >
By the Rev. Mr. Ewing. There is a
stranger’s pew • if a strangei was in the
habit of sitting in this pew, he would cer-
tainly not be allowed to vote at the annual
meeting, as he would not have right to


do so'.
William Robertson sworn : I am a resi-
dent ot this town ; I recollect the usual
seat-letting iii July last; I was one of the
managers at that time ; I was the Minis-
ter’s manager; so far as any act of mine
goes, the statement in Mr. Storie’s letter
that at the usual seat-letting in July last,
the managers held the church doors closed
against both members and strangers, is
false ; I never accepted any payment with
the specification,—“ mind you have no
vote,” and that statement is untrue as far
as I am concerned ; I received a letter of
complaint from Mr. Storie in reference to
the meeting in July ; I replied to it; I have
heard the letters read, and they are quite
correct; I was at a meeting in St. Andrew’s
Church on the 30th of December last; I was
there at the commencement, and continued
to the close; the demeanour of those present
was orderly throughout, as far as the con-
gregation was concerned. Mr. Storie per-
sisted in keeping the chair, and caused a
little confusion ; during the whole of the
proceedings I did not hear any oaths ut-
tered, I was in the very centre, and if they
had been used I must have heard them.
By Mr. Dobson : I think that the greater
Humber of those wishing to take sittings
usually attend in the evening; I did not
let slip anything in the shape of an oath,
and if any person has said that I did so, it
is infamously false ; I could not be guilty
of doing so ; I am not a shareholder in the
“Advertiser,” and at the date of Mr. Sto-
rie’s letter, that paper was not under any
pecuniary obligations to me, but I cannot
say with reference to Mr. Whyte ; I under-
stood that Mr. Whyte was anxious that the
letter should be published, but I do not
know if he had seen the letter ; Mr. Whyte
told me that he wanted it to be published ;
I never saw the letter, but a party read two
or three sentences of it to me; I did not want
to hear it; I decliue to say who this per-
son was.
Thomas Horne sworn : I reside in Ho-
bart Town ; I was present as a seatholder
at St. Andrew’s Church on the 3.oth De-
cember last; I was there from the com-
mencement to the conclusion of the pro-
ceedings ; I was elected chairman; the i
demeanour of those present at that meeting i
was orderly ; I should certainly not desig- ]
nate them as a mob ; it would be an insult l
to do so ; I did not hear any oaths uttered, ]
and if I had I would have taken proper I
steps to stop it. )
By Mr. Dobson : I did not attend the s
church for some months before Mr. Young 1
was excommunicated, as I had been in ill ;
health ; I was always a communicant until a
Mr. Storie’s arrival; I became a seatholder 1
a short time previous to the meeting in 1
I question, for, having left the church a
- that time, I was perpetually spoken at, i
1 not to, by the last witness, (Mr. Robertson'
a on the impropriety of leaving the chare!
- in consequence of any fault I found with
J the minister; I have heard Mr. Stork
preach before the meeting, but I had no
, sitting then; I will not undertake to say
■ that I did attend after I took the sitting
s and before the meeting ; I never saw the
letter produced by Mr. Penny, and its con-
i tents were never communicated to me ;
■ Mr. Penny has told me that I was libelled
in it, but in what way he did not say.
Mr. Rocher would now inform the court
that he had concluded his evidence with
the exception of that upon financial mat-
ters.
The Rev. Mr. Robertson proposed that
the Presbytery adjourn to Monday next at
II o’clock, a.m.
Mr. Dobson said that as he understood
that many of the witnesses for the defence
would not attend voluntarily, but would
obey the authority of that court, he would
in all probability have to ask for a citation
from the court, and he apprehended that
it would be at once granted.
The Presbytery then adjourned at 12.50
to 11 a.m. on Monday next.
Monday, April llth, 1864.
Fifth Day.
William Robertson recalled and exam-
ined by Mr. Rocher : I have been connected
with St. Andrew’s Church since it was
built, and I have been a Manager since
1838 ; the statement in the 6th paragraph
of the letter written by the Rev. Mr. Storie,
that when he came in Nov. 1860, more
than £7O was due to Mr. Mackintosh is not
true ; on the 28th of March, 1860, Mr.
Mackintosh was finally settled with ; it is
also stated that £4O was due to the Mis-
sionary, but the managers had nothing to
do with that; the sum of £36, which he
states to have been due to Mr. Kissock, was
paid to him in the usual manner by the
managers in 1861, when Mr. Kissock left
the church ; it is true that the sum of £233
was due to Messrs. Robertson and Moir ;
it was liquidated by subscription ; £75 and
some odd shillings of that amount were
subscribed by Mr. Moir and myself, and no
portion of it by Mr. Storie ; I have the
list showing how the sum of £233 was
raised ; this is made up by £ll6 11s. lOd
by Mr. John Walker, £2O 15s. collected
by Mr. Robb, £l4 15s by Mr. John-
son, £1 by Mr. Hood, £2 11s. 4d. paid
by Mr. Ballantine, and £77 10s. by myself
and Mr. Moir ; the statement that this sum
was paid off’ through Mr. Storie’s exertions
by the liberality of his friends, in part by
himself, and by the holding back of his


own personal claims, is in part a gross £
misrepresentation, and in part an absolute a
fabrication. Mr. H. Mills was pew-opener 1
at St. Andrew’s, and he was never dismissed t
from that office.
By Mr. Dobson : Mr. Mackintosh was t
settled with in March, 1860, and the money 1
came out of the funds then in the hands of 1
the church ; at that time the church was 1
in debt, and consequently the debt was in- 1
creased ; £7O was due to Mr. Mackintosh ]
for expenses incurred in coming here, and
it was paid in December, 1859, and became
part of the church debt ; when Mr. Storie
came, there was a large amount of debt \
due for or on account of Mr. Mackintosh.; i
I was manager and treasurer, and that is a
portion of my debt; lam not aware of a
present of £250 having been made to Mr.
Mackintosh before he went away, and lam
not aware that he got that sum from the
managers ; there was no present made to
him before he went away that I am aware
of; £IBB was paid to him for the furniture
bought from him on account of St. Andrew’s
Church, which furniture is still in the Manse;
£65 was paid by Mr. Kissock and myself
for furniture that we purchased from Mr.
Mackintosh on account of Mr. Storie ; Mr.
Storie must have given authority for the
purchase, or it would not appear so in the
books ; Mr. Storie paid us £65 for money
laid out on his account; I never told Mr.
Storie in Melbourne, that £230 worth of
furniture had been bought for his use ; I
cannot say if I mentioned anything to him
with reference to the furniture; Ido not
remember getting any authority from Mr.
Storie to purchase £65 worth of furniture
on his account; when Mr. Storie came,
£65 were due to Mr. Kissock and myself
for money advanced on Mr. Storie’s behalf;
I believe that there was a subscription equal
to the sum of £IBB ; I did not deny that
£4O were due to the Missionary ; I was not
aware that a shilling was due, for it was a
matter with which I had nothing to do ;
the £36 due to Mr. Kissock was paid in the
usual way out of the funds of the church ;
Mr. Kissock was treasurer, and it is not
necessary for the managers to give any
order for the payment of money ; the ma-
nagers generally meet without any parti-
cular call; Mr. Moir used to attend, but
we had no formal meetings, and we kept
no minutes of our proceedings ; one half
of the £233 was subscribed by Mr. John
Walker, a friend of Mr. Storie’s ; I cannot
say that I was his friend, but I was not an
enemy ; I do not recollect Mr. Storie’s ap-
plying to me for a handsome subscription
to pay off this debt; Ido not recollect Sir
R. Dry’s carriage being upset and Mr. Storie
applying to me upon that occasion ;I do
not remember any conversation with Mr.
Storie upon the subject; I remember that
at the meeting in 1861, Mr. Storie said that
he would give £25, provided the whole of
the debt were paid off, but not otherwise ;
the £2 opposite Mr. Ballantine’s name in
the list, were paid by me ; in December,
1862, Mr. Walker moved that £IOO should
be added to the manager’s accounts towards
Mr. Storie’s salary, although not voted at
the previous annual meeting ; it was im-
properly voted.
Mr. Rocher submitted that the witness
was travelling out of the proper course.
By Mr. Dobson : Mr. Storie never press-
ed for the amount due to him, and it is
still due.
By Mr. Rocher : Mr. Storie never paid
the £25 he promised conditionally, nor did
I hear anything more about it; the £65
for furniture had nothing to do with St.
Andrew’s church ; it was entirely a private
affair between Mr. Kissock and myself; we
bought the furniture and paid-for it; Mr.
Storie repaid us, and it is now his property ;
it was from a kindly feeling towards Mr.
Storie that the sum was advanced ; when
asked for a subscription, I am generally in
the habit of giving pretty liberally, especi-
ally towards St. Andrew’s Church ; I would
do so to-morrow ; I have heard Mr. Storie
say with reference to the debt £IOO due to
him, at a public meeting of seatholders in
1862, that he would carry it into the Su-
' preme Court, so help his God; it was in
' 1862 that oaths were used at a public
i meeting, and that by the minister of the
; Church, the Rev. Mr. Storie.
By the Moderator: The only sum due to
i Messrs. Robertson and Moir was £233.
By the Rev. Mr. Robertson: The debt
f due to the Missionary was not owing by the
; Church. , ,
1 The Rev. Mr. Robertson explained that
t the Missionary was appointed by the Pres-
t bytery, and consequently St. Andrew’s
i Church had nothing to do with the matter.
Alexander Kissock sworn —I am a resi-
e dent in Hobart Town ; the Rev. Mr Storie
• came here as minister of St. Andrew’s in
t November 1860 ; at that time there was no
y debt of £7O due to Mr. Mackintosh from
the Church ; the sum of £36 was due to
f. myself, and it was paid to me by the man-
it agers on my giving up the books, when I
it left the Church in 1861 ; I was then acting
If treasurer, and had the monies of the
n Church in my possession ; I balanced the
>t books, and the money was thus paid ; when
n Mr. Storie came, I was both manager and
i- acting treasurer ; I know something with
in reference to the sum of £233 alleged to be
ir due to Messrs. Robertson and Moir ; it was
ie due to those gentlemen ; the sum of £65,
lo paid on Mr. Storie’s account for furniture,
x. I was entirely a private matter, and had


nothing whatever to do with St. Andrew’s
Church ; I quitted in the early part of 1861;
the managers had nothing to do with the
sum said to be due to the missionary.
By Mr. Dobson: I handed over the
books and deducted the sum due to myself;
I know of no order having been made pre-
vious to my doing so, to pay a sum of £25
to Mr. Storie.
Mr. Dobson quoted from the books,
whereby it appeared that a motion had
been made by Mr. Kissock, and carried, to
pay the sum of £25 to Mr. Storie.
Examination resumed : In balancing up
the books, I deducted the sum of £36 ; £7O
of the debt due in 1859 was charged for
Mr. Mackintosh ; Mr. Storie’s letter states
that the sum was due for Mr. Mackintosh,
but that conveys the same meaning to my
mind as if it had stated that it was due to
Mr. Mackintosh ; I got no instructions
from Mr. Storie to purchase furniture, but
I got instructions from Dr. Officer and Mr.
Walker to purchase part of the furniture ;
I never bought all; when Mr. Mackintosh
was about to leave for England he made
an inventory of his furniture ; it was then
considered to buy that part of the furniture
which might fairly be considered as fixtures
viz., what might be considered as part of
the church property, as chairs, &c., they
are property which may be kept in the
manse as the property of the church ; the
inventory was then submitted to the elders
of the church; and returned to myself mark-
ed in three different ways; the value of the
furniture was placed opposite each article ;
a portion of the furniture valued by the
elders, and accompanied by a list, amounted
I think to £IBB ; that was marked as to
be the property of the church ; part was
valued at a reduced rate of £65, as part
that Mr. Mackintosh's successor was to pay
for ; the other portion, as crockery, &c.,
was left for Mr. Mackintosh to sell, or do
what he might think proper ; for the fur-
niture I have spoken of as amounting to
£IBB, and that amounting to £65, I paid
Mr. Mackintosh £250 ; the remainder of
the furniture was left in his own hands ; I
am sure that the furniture valued by Mr.
Mackintosh was bought at a reduction of
some £2O or £25 per cent; it was con-
sidered necessary to raise £250 to put into
Mr. Mackintosh’s hands in addition to the
balance of the furniture that the elders had
agreed to take ; the £66 was advanced by
myself and Mr. Robertson on account of
Mr. Mackintosh’s successor, but we did not
know who would take his place; Mr. Storie
objected to the valuation ; I told him that
I had nothing to do with it, and I believe
he got some furniture dealer to value the
property ; he appeared to me to be looking
Very keenly after the “ loaves and fishes
I am sure that Dr. Officer and Mr. Walker
were two of the elders who valued the fur-
niture, and I acted with their sanction ; it
would appear from the paragraph in Mr.
Storie’s letter, stating that more than £7O
was due to Mr. Mackintosh, £4O to the
Missionary, £36 to Mr. Kissock, and £233
to Messrs. Robertson and Moir, that these
sums were all due and owing, but the fact
really was that only £233 were due ; all
the amounts were merged in the sum of
£233.
By the Rev. Mr. Robertson : I only know
of the sum of £233 being due to Messrs.
Robertson and Moir: it includes the £7O
paid to Mr. Mackintosh, and the £36 paid
to myself; the debt was simply £233 in-
stead of £379 ; I think that the sum of £4
was paid to Mr. Mackintosh for green stuff,
and I believe that Mr. Storie had the bene-
fit of it without charge ; this is my hand-
writing (memo produced) ; so far as I re-
member, Mr. Storie did not pay the £4 ;
the £IBB paid to Mr. Mackintosh, was for
articles now the property of St. Andrew’s
Church, and are for the use of the minister
for the time being.
By the Rev. Dr. Turnbull: The £7O was
paid to Mr. Mackintosh in 1859, and it is
included in the sum of £233 ; the sum of
£65 paid for furniture, had no connection
with the sum of £7O.
Joseph Moir sworn: I reside in the
country, but my business establishment is
in town; When Mr. Storie arrived in
1860 I was one of the managers of St. An-
drew’s Church; the statement in Mr.
Storie’s letter, that collections were diverted
from the poor to help a failing and deficient
revenue is untrue ; those monies went to-
wards the repairs of the church ; the sum
of £7O was not due to Mr. Mackintosh ;
the statement that when Mr. Storie came
in November 1860, £7O was due to Mr.
Mackintosh, £4O to the missionary, £36 to
Mr. Kissock, and £233 to Messrs. Robert-
son and Moir, is in part true, and in part
a fabrication ; Mr. Storie came to me once
or twice in reference to the debt of £233,
and seemed anxious to have it paid out of
the church funds ; those were the exertions
made by Mr. Storie ; a meeting was then
got up, and Mr. Walker offered to pay one
half of the sum, I contributed for the pur-
pose of defraying the debt; £233 were due
to Mr. Robertson and myself, it was the
full amount of debt; I was at a meeting in
St. Andrew’s on the 30th of December last;
I was there from the commencement to the
conclusion, and I sat in the stranger’s pew;
Mr. Jhonson the Wine Merchant, sat beside
me, but no one else ; I recollect seeing Mr.
Wm. Robertson there, he was distant about
the middle of two pews, and the passage,
and we faced one another; I heard what


he said, and observed what he did ; I heard
no oaths uttered by him or by any other
person ; if any oaths had been used I think
I must have heard them, and I could not
have sat so quiet; there was shameful
conduct enough, without swearing; I did
not see anything disorderly after the chair-
man was elected ; I would rather not say
what I saw before the time ; it was any-
thing like proper conduct in that house of
God ; I refer to the behaviour on both
sides, but Mr. Storie cut the strongest; he
used the severest language in a gentlemanly
tone ; this jeering, cutting, and sarcastic
language, created a great disturbance, but
after Mr. Storie left the meeting everything
was orderly.
By Mr. Dobson : Mr. Storie was sarcastic
to several, to all the speakers ; he referred
to Mr. Whyte being the Colonial Secretary;
he asked if it was the opinion of Sir Valen-
tine Fleming, and seemed as if he would
adhere to it; the words were, “is that the
opinion of Sir V. Fleming, as it was the
only one he would adhere to we applied
for £132, and the answer came back, that
we could get the plate ; I did suggest in a
letter that collections should be made at the
church door in the morning, for the purpose
of repairs ; the church was always able to
meet the expenditure, and the statement con-
tained in that letter (put in) signed by my-
self and others,that the “ordinary revenue
would scarcely meet the general expendi-
ture,” is not quite correct to the best of my
recollection ; Mr. Storie asked me if I
would take ten shillings in the pound, and
I would be willing to do so now ; I recol-
lect Mr. Kissock sending me some church
books ; the books showed that he had
kept the sum of £36 in payment of his
debt ; 1 am not aware that any authority
was given to him to do so ; I did not like
it and would not do so myself; an attempt
was made before Mr Storie came to clear
off the debt; about £6O or £7O were raised,
I think against a debt of £132, for special
repairs to the school.
By Mr. Rocher : The repairs alluded to
in the letter I have just seen were not oi di-
nary but extraordinary ; I knew that the
ordinary revenue was anticipated, and we
asked to have the sums collected in the
morning, applied for the purpose of defray-
ing extraordinary expenditure.
Robert Ballantine recalled : In my evi-
dence on Saturday I stated that I sent for a
constable on the 30th December last, no
constable came, nor was the assistance ot a
peace officer called in ; Mr Foster was fiom
home, and never received the message.
Mr. Rocher said that the case for the
prosecution was now closed.
Mr. Dobson said that the books he would
wish to inspect were the Pew book, Cash
and Minute books, and he apprehended
that that there would he no objection made
to his doing so. He would now ask for an
adjournment till Wednesday morning, in
order to prepare the defence, and have the
witnesses forward.
Rev. Mr. Ewing said that so far as he
was concerned, the time asked for would be
granted on the distinct understanding that
they would sit the whole of Thursday,
which was to be a public holiday, if neces-
sary. If those who lived at a distance
started for home on Saturday morning,
they would have to sit up nearly the whole
of Saturday night to prepare for their ser-
vices. He had not expected that another
day would be required.
Wednesday, April 13, 1864.
Sixth Day.
Mr. Dobson wished to know in what
form, and when the counsel for the defence
would be allowed to address that tribunal.
In the courts of the land, an opportunity
was always afforded at the close of the
plaintiff’s case, for the defendant’s counsel
to comment upon the evidence which had
been taken, and to state what evidence he
was going to produce. He wished to know
if he would be allowed to comment upon
the evidence, and to state as far as he was
able, the facts he intended to adduce in
support of the case for defendant ?
Mr. Rocher said that his learned friend
had the right to speak now.
The Moderator supposed that they would
follow the practice of the Supreme Court.
Mr. Dobson quoted from one of the
authorities of the Church of Scotland, from
which it appeared that the defendant had
the right to the last word.
Mr. Rocher had understood that they
would follow the practice of the Supreme
Court, according to which, the counsel for
the defence could comment upon the evi-
dence, and call his witnesses, after which,
the counsel for the prosecution would be
entitled to reply.
Mr. Dobson would have no objection to
his learned friend being allowed to com-
ment upon the evidence that he (Mr. Dob-
son) would produce.
Mr. Rocher was willing to agree to that
course. .
Mr. Dobson would still submit that ac-
cording to the authority from which he had
quoted, he was entitled to the last word.
The Rev. Mr. Robertson said that they
had started on the distinct understanding
that the practice of the Supreme Court
should be followed. The authority quoted
by Mr. Dobson was rather antiquated.
The Rev. Dr. Turnbull quoted from the
latest authority, by which it appeared that
1 the appellant had right of reply.


Mr. Dobson said that questions bad been
raised by him as to the jurisdiction of the
court, —questions as to the form of the libel,
and as to its relevancy. He had in all
these cases taken certain objections which
had been overruled, but which he had in
no way waived or withdrawn, and it was
now his duty without retiring from the
position he had at first assumed, to com-
ment upon the evidence that had already
been taken, —to make such remarks upon
it as he might believe the circumstances of
the case required, and to state shortly to
the court, the evidence he proposed to
adduce on behalf of the defence. He might
say, however, that he had only part of the
evidence before him, which was received at
about 10 o’clock on the previous evening,
the rest would be placed in his hands
in the course of the day, but he had been
put in possession of sufficient to keep the
court employed for the rest of the day. He
felt some difficulty in selecting from the
evidence that had been taken, that portion
upon which he felt it his duty to comment
in the first instance, but possibly it would
be well to clear up as far as possible, those
parts of the evidence that could easily be
cleared up, and upon which he could make
a few comments. And first he would go
to the fact of oaths having been used or
not: it had been sworn to by a good many,
that oaths could not have been uttered
without being heard by them. Now nega-
tive testimony as to what they did not
hear went a very little way. It had been
said that no one was seen to leave the
church and go into the gallery, but he
would produce witnesses who did leave the
church and go into the gallery. The order
to go for a policeman was not heard by a
great many, but for all that, the order was
given. Oaths might not have been heard
by many, but it was perfectly consistent
with truth, that they might have been
used, and if he was able to put into the
witness box a man who had heard
oaths made use of, and who could repeat
them, he apprehended that these facts
would go far to prove that oaths were ut-
tered, although many had not heard them,
or if they had heard them, could not recol-
lect. He believed that he would put two
or three or four persons in the witness box,
who would tell them that between the com-
mencement of the meeting, and the final
breaking up, oaths were uttered. He would
also tell them what oaths were made use
of, although Mr. Storie did not say that he
heard them, but stated that oaths were
uttered, and if he rested upon information
received from members of the congregation
who heard oaths made use of, he (Mr. Dob-
son) apprehended that the repeating of this
fact was but a venial sin, for even if his infor-
mers were mistaken, Mr. Storie received the
information from credible authority, and
stating it thus, he would submit that the
reverend defender had done nothing more
than any other man would do. With these
observations he would dismiss the question
of oaths, because he had no wish to trouble
their ears with the language made use of,
or go into the question of what an oath was,
and on that there might be a difference of
opinion, for he apprehended that, as clergy-
men, they would be sensitive upon the
point. He would simply leave the wit-
nesses to state what they heard. It was
an awkward thing that some of the wit-
nesses did not like to come there and state
what they had heard, and they could not
compel them to do so. Many were in sub-
ordinate positions, in which, those mixed
up in the case were their superior officers ;
and as it was very hard to get them to
come forward, it showed an honest deter-
mination on their part when they did so.
He wished to make no disclosures as to who
uttered the oaths, all he wanted was to
justify Mr. Storie’s statement, that oaths
were made use of, but if the question was
asked, no doubt it would be replied to by
the witnesses who would appear before them.
His examination, however, would only go
to show that oaths were used, and that Mr.
Storie had information of the fact before he
wrote ; and that he did not falsely, or know-
ingly falsely, make statements which were
without foundation. Having dismissed this
portion of the case, he would proceed to
another, which he took it might be pretty
easily disposed of. He referred to that
portion of the libel which charged the
defendant with having made the statement,
that a letter was kept out of the press
through the influence of Mr. James Whyte.
They might differ as to what influence was,
but to make such a charge, believing
it at the time even without any great
foundation, was simply an accusation
against Mr. Whyte of no very grave
character. It was Mr. Storie’s belief, and
he apprehended his honest one. Wheth-
er Mr. Whyte had any influence, had not
appeared, and he would tell them why. It
was because the prosecutor, Mr. Ballantine,
when before that tribunal, had refused in
defiance of that tribunal, although a share-
holder, to answer the question as to whether
Mr. Whyte had any pecuniary interest in
the Advertiser. The charge was, that Mr.
Storie falsely asserted that Mr. Whyte’s
influence prevented the insertion of this
letter and Mr. Ballantine refused to state
whether Mr. Whyte had any influence over
the Advertiser. This refusal was made by
the man to whom authority was delegated
to conduct the prosecution. He refused
also to state if a letter had been taken to


Mr. Whyte, or hawked about town. He , a.
was not prepared to make a clean breast, ti
and there they had a striking comparison w
between Mr. Ballantine and Mr. W illiam h
Robertson. The latter gentleman had done tJ
nothing to be ashamed of, —lie spoke as a a
generous man who would make a clear ti
breast, whether his evidence was for, or t
against the case. Mr. Ballantine on the e
contrary, would tell as much as he liked, t
and no more. Although a member of the a
Advertiser Company, although knowing, \
in all probability, its pecuniary affairs, c
they could get no evidence from him as to i
the pecuniary circumstances of the paper ; -
and, when the prosecutor himself had appa- j
rently so much to keep back, and refused to
give certain evidence before the court, how (
could they expect to get it from others ?He j
(Mr. Dobson) had anticipated that the evi- -
dence of Mr. Benny w T ould have gone a long
way to substantiate the statement, that it
was through Mr. Whyte’s influence, the let-
ter referred to did not appear in the Adverti-
ser, But Mr. Penny, who, if sworn, would
no doubt have spoken the truth, was a mere
servant, for they found that Mr. Ballantine
was one of his masters, and it vms no wonder
when a master would not give testimony as
to the affairs of the Advertiser, that Mr.
Penny was not permitted to do so ; he must
act as directed by his superiors. So far as Mr.
Davies was concerned, that gentleman was
prepared to come forward, and he was glad
to say did come and state what took place
with regard to the letter that he received.
He had apparently read a little of it, for
he saw Mr. Whyte, and told him amongst
other things, that he had received a letter
from Mr. Storie with reference to Mr.
Whyte himself. Mr. Davies must have
known some of its contents, and what did
they find ! Mr. Whyte at once said, lake
care it is not a libellous letter.” M hen
they could not get evidence, they were
obliged to take advantage of the best lights
they could obtain. Now what should sug-
gest to Mr. Whyte that it was a libellous
letter, without that which in all probab. h y
Mr. Penny did not like to divulge, or Mr.
Ballantine would not divulge, namely, that
the letter sent to the Advertiser had been
disclosed? Mr. Davies went back read
the letter, and did not publish it, and, but
for Mr Whyte’s interference, that letter
would probably have been published next
morning. So far as that charge was con-
cerned, the court had not got the whole
truth before them, because the prosecutor
and his servants would not give evidence,
and therefore he would ask the members of
that court to dispel that charge altogether
from their minds, and go to the more seri-
ous charges in the information. They found
that the letter contained one adjective
applied to Mr. Horne, and he was glad
that they had not gone into the question
with a view of ascertaining its truth ox-
falsehood. It was not asserted in the libel
that it was true or false, they had no evi-
dence upon this point, and he was thankful
that they had not, and for the members of
that court to say that it was false, without
evidence of the falsehood or truth, was a
thing that as judges they would never do,
and the question whether true or false,
was, he apprehended, the very gist of the
offence. If true, he thought there was no
very great sin, if Mr. Horne took the chair.
The question, however, was not raised, and
he did not want it raised, but they must
have specific evidence before them, to de-
cide upon it. and it did not represent the
gist of the accusation against Mr. Stone.
Again, he might remark on the fact that
in the paper put in by his learned fiiend,
which was held relevant, it appeared in
the “notice to correspondents” that the
letter to the Advertiser had gone into the
waste paper basket. .
j Mr. Rocher said that he had not put in
s the Advertiser.
Mr. Dobson—lt appeared, however, that
\ it did not go into the waste paper basket,
but was revived and came before them in-
t tact. Mr. Robertson had heard part of it
read, it w r as not long in the basket, and it
j was no wonder that the affairs of the
1 Advertiser , with respect to that letter, weie
3 not made manifest to the public, when in
the “ notice to correspondents,” it was
r stated that it was in the waste paper basket,
t and yet afterwards a resurrectionary move-
r ment took place, the letter came up, and
• Mr. Robertson heard passages from it,
e but, like an honest man, he did not wish
i to hear more, he stopped the reader and
e would not divulge his name. He did not
n think that he need labor this charge any
•e longer, for he apprehended that it was
-g hardly one upon which they could tmd
r. Mr. Storie guilty of a grave offence. They
Is were not allowed to hear how it was kept
y out of the papers, by the fact of the prose-
r. cutor and his servants refusing to give
it evidence. The libel went on to say that
!n statements were withdrawn. This was ab-
,d solutely untrue, there was but one single
it word, and that unhappy word was the only
er one, and the assertion that statements were
st withdrawn, was not consistent with the
n- truth. He would now leave this part of
le the case, but would not go to the question
or of figures, because that would be a ques-
,e tion of books, and he would show them to
of demonstration, that although the £3(>
er were said to be included in the £233, yet
ri- that it was not so, and therefore there was
id but one sum of £7O. There were two sums,
ve one of £65, and one of U, making together


£G9, and another sum of £7O, but he be-
lieved he might say for his client that the
£7O, to which he had alluded, was substan-
tially the £G9 ; he had told them that there
were two sums of £7O, but perhaps, he
(Mr. Dobson) had made more of it than he
should have done. Mr. Storie understood
that the Manse would have been furnished,
and when he came he found that £250 had
been given to Mr. Macintosh before he
went away, that the amount subscribed
for furniture was £lBB, and that he was
called on to make up the balance, and that
the £65 was in the Church books. Who
would believe that from the evidence ? He
would produce the books, an accountant
had gone through them, and he believed
that Mr. Walker would assist him in show-
ing that it was in the church books. _ If,
however, he was in error upon this point,
he would be happy to recant. It came to
this, that £7O were paid by Mr. Storie, and
he would show that £4 were paid by Mr.
Storie for crops, although Mr, Kissock was in
doubt as to whether it had been paid or
not. There was no question that £4O
were due to the Missionary and that there
was a debt of £233, and had not this been
paid olf through Mr. Storie’s exertions ?
They had evidence that he went to Mr.
Moir and pressed him upon the subject.
Mr. Walker paid one half, was it not
through his influence? Was it not also
paid in part by himself? Was not this
£65 paid for furniture a part, and he had
also paid the sum of £1 towards the church
debt. The only difference that existed
as to the truth, was, whether he had paid
the £65, and the £4 for himself or for
the church. The sum of £250 had already
been paid to Mr. Mackintosh on account—
£6s were advanced to Mr. Mackintosh by
somebody, and Mr. Storie had to repay
that amount; he said that he did so for
Mr. Mackintosh, and it went into his
pocket, making up the £250. Where then
was the fabrication? As to the sum of
£36, where was the fabrication ? It was
paid by Mr. Kissock to himself in a way
that surprised Mr. Moir. Half the sum of
£233 was paid by Mr. Walker, and a large
part by Mr. Robertson, who was not at
that time an enemy to Mr. Storie, although,
perhaps, not a friend. Mr. Storie offered
£25 but it was said he never paid it.
Was it not his intention to do so, how-
ever, if called on by the congregation ? but
they did not require him to pay. Mr.
Storie’s sincerity and anxiety to have it
done was proved, and the congregation,
apparently pleased with his liberality, did
not ask him to do so, and they could
scarcely have asked him to pay a debt
which accrued before his arrival. If these
were the fabrications that called the prose-
cutors to ask the court to deprive Mr
Storie, he would say that the whole appeal
must be absurd. With reference to the
statement of “ collections being diverted
from the poor to help a failing and deficient
revenue,” they had seen an application
under the hands of Messrs. Robertson,
Moir, and the late Joseph Dixon, stating
that “ the ordinary revenue was insufficient
to meet the ordinary expenditure,” and
asking that the collections at the church
doors should be appropriated towards the
ordinary expenditure. Reading the letter
in question he could put only one construc-
tion upon it. Mr. Moir said there was an
error, but Mr. Storie wrote upon the autho-
rity of that letter, and had they a right to
complain, if he was misled 'by it ? He
believed, however, that he would be able to
show by means of Mr. Walker that no error
was made, and that for 6 months the col-
lections in question were diverted in order
to pay the debt upon the church. Those
were the facts which had been brought
before them, and which, if there had been
that enquiry which was ordinarily made,
would never have appeared in that libel.
Mr. Dobson took it to have been quite
sufficiently shown, not only that the debts
were paid off ; that the whole of the debts
had existed, that none of the greater ones
could have included some of the smaller
ones, but that the whole debt was paid off
through his friends, in part by himself,
and in part by holding back his claims.
As to his claim, they had it in evidence
that a sum was ordered to be paid, but it
was not paid ; the fact of his not applying
for it was sworn to by Mr. Robertson ; and
that was witholding his personal claims.
It all showed Mr. Storie’s anxiety to get
the debt paid off; and it was the most
decent, the most decorous course, the with-
holding his claim. And therefore, in the
words of his letter, it was clear that the
sums had been paid off through Mr. Storie s
exertions by the liberality of his friends,
in part by himself, and by the holding back
of his own personal claims. He (Mr. Dob-
son) had at first sought to know which of
Mr. Storie’s statements were gross misre-
presentations, and which were absolute fa-
brications ; and now, having heaid the
evidence, he failed to perceive them. He
would go back to another charge which he
could easily dismiss, namely as to the seat
lettino - They found the fact was the seat
letting was advertised for the middle of the
day and the evening, the evening being
tbe time when the bulk of the people went
to take their seats; they found that one
manager went in the day time, but in the
evening Mr. Ballantine could not go through
the rain, he could not walk along a few
I streets, with high walls on either side ;


lie might have called a cab, a closed cab
if he wished it, hut he was deterred, as
he said,, by the rain, and went home in-
stead of to the church as he ought (as
a manager who always did his duty)
to have done. Mr. Dobson said he thought
he should he able to bring out that it was
moonlight and there was no rain ; that
during part of the time there was no rain
he should be able to prove ; but, he said,
they found, as a fact, that the church doors
were closed when it was the duty of the
managers to attend. He (Mr. Dobson) had
heard of a Scotch mist, which had made
people wet to the skin, but he never heal’d
of a manager declining a five minutes walk
in the rain, a manager who always did his
duty. The statement that “payments of
regular seat-holders have been declined ”
was said to be “ wholly false and destitute
of even a colorable foundation,” but he
(Mr. Dobson) woul 1 be able to prove that
payments were refused. The books accord-
ing to the Church Act, were to be made up
to the 31st December. He would show
that before the end of the year, Mr. Priestly
had paid for his seat, but seeing Mr.
Ballantine, that gentleman said to him,
“ mind you have no vote.” Mr. Priestly
replied “I sent a cheque this afternoon.”
Mr. Ballantine admitted that the cheque
then lay on his desk, but contended that
it was too late ; that evidence could be
confirmed by Mr. Robb, who had unfortu-
nately been obliged to leave town, he had
left a memorandum, under his hand, con-
firming the statement of Mr. Priestly ; he
hoped the Court would receive Mr. Robb's
evidence ; if not he should have to ask to
call him on his return from Sorell on Friday.
These facts coming to Mr. Storie’s ears,
was he not justified in his statement as set
out in the libel that “payments of regular
seat-holders have been declined ” and could
it be said either wholly false or destitute
of a colorable foundation ? The Church
doors were held c'osed against both mem
hers and strangers, and supposing it rained,
a shower of rain would be no more excuse
than the clergyman would have on the
Sabbath day for not appearing there to
perform the service. The managers did
decline payment from regular seat-holders;
and on looking at the books did they find
that a clergyman was usually charged with
such offences as saying the managers closed
the church doors against seat-holders and
strangers, or that payment for seat rents
were declined 1 He (Mr. Dobson) might
rest his case there, and ask that court if
they would find a brother clergyman guilty
of a breach of church discipline upon such
a case : but he would come last of all to
the charge of calling the congregation a
•“ mob” ; and certainly they had testimony
of witnesses which was very extraordinary;
if he (Mr. Dobson) could have examined
the witnesses apart, he should have put the
question to them separately what con-
stituted a mob, and doubtless, no two of
them would have agreed as to the meaning
of the word ■“ mob ; ” it was a hard word
to define ; and few people would agree as
to what a mob was. He would go to the
facts as to a mob. They found a meeting
was called in accordance with the Church
Act: to that meeting went several persons,
and to that meeting went the clergyman,
and that as a matter of right. He (Mr,
Dobson) could only say that in the Church
of England, he knew at St. George’s, for
eleven years the clergyman took the chair ;
but he did not want to go to other churches:
in the minute hook he found that at the
meeting of the previous year Mr. Storie
took the chair, without any objection
made. He found the meeting was con-
stituted by prayer, and closed by prayer;
they did not find the Manager, (who swore
that the clergyman had no more right there
than he had to go and take a seat in the
Supreme Court) objected then; no, he
assented to it, and all who were there
assented to it, and held that he had a right
to be there to preside. Mr. Storie went
and constituted the meeting by prayer.
Did not the Moderator approve that at a
meeting called to select men to manage the
temporalities of the church, the proceed-
ings should commence by prayer! He
(Mr. Dobson) spoke as a Christian, as
well as a counsel, and asked was it not
advisable that such meetings should be
opened and closed by prayer 1 And Mr,
Storie had adopted that course. He went
back to the year before, and he found that
Mr. Storie was also in the chair; the
minute said “ the Rev. Mr. Storie took the
chair ; ” mark the word “took;” at ano-
ther meeting Mr. Walker was elected
chairman, and at another “ the Rev. Mr,
Mackintosh took the chair.” In 1862 Mr.
Storie took the chair, and opened the
meeting with prayer ; at the 1861 meeting
Mr, Storie was in the chair, and Mr. Storie
constituted the meeting by prayer. Then
in the previous year, when Mr. Storie had
just arrived, Mr. Walker was in the chair ;
it did not say he “ took ” the chair. He
went back to the next year and found that
in 1859 Mr. Mackintosh “ took ” the chair ;
in 1858, Mr. Mackintosh “took” the chair.
At any rate they found that for five years
previous the minister had on every occasion
taken the chair except one, when Mr,
Storie was not present. They had heard
from one of the witnesses that Dr. Lillie
did not take the chair; but he asked if
use did not sanction the practice, and had
I it not lpd Mr. Storie to believe that it was


g, right thing for him to take the chair,
and to refuse to give up what the church
had previously recognised to he his duty ?
It was what the congregation and managers
had submitted to for five years, with one
exception, and it was only fair that Mr.
.Storie should think it right to do it. He
.(Mr. Dobson) had to ask that court to give
to Mr. Storie the benefit of honest intentions;
he had a right to expect it; and he could only
say, if it wasnot right, and his duty, he had
been only misled by his congregation as to
former meetings. He went into the meet-
ing, and was he permitted to open with
prayer ? Did he find there his own con-
gregation to whom he was accustomed to
minister ? No, he saw strange faces ;
some who had not heard him preach,
others who had not been there for years ;
■and what did they come for 1 To manage
the temporalities of the Church. Mr.
Storie saw men collected there ; he saw
Mr. Horne who for months before the
■difference with Mr. Young had not been
there ; Mr. Whyte, he had been there, how
often, he could not say, whether two, three,
or half-a-dozen times ; Mr. McConnell had
never been there during Mr. Storie’s time :
Mr. Bai-clay, not for two or three years;
Mr. Corrie, not for a considerable time,
which might be counted by years; Mr.
Livingstone, he had not been there for
twelve months: and many others. Mr. Storie
saw the whole of these men suddenly col-
lected together, one a manager and com-
municant at St. John’s, another a communi-
cant at Chalmer’s Church ; if any of those
men had left the church through the
misconduct of Mr. Storie, that was not an
.element in the present libel ; if Mr. Storie
had done wrong, whereby they had been
induced to leave, let him be libelled for it;
the reason of their leaving, the Presbytery
had at present nothing to do with it; they
had abandoned the church, whether rightly
•or wrongly was immaterial, and having
■done so, they came there, paid 7s. 6d. for
a solitarv seat some of them ! He (Mr.
Dobson) had no hesitation in saying that
every man who came there under such
•circumstances was committing a fraud
under the Church Act, the Ist section of
"which, spoke of the “ frequenters ” of the
church, and that was what was meant,
frequenters who paid their sittings : did
the act intend the seat-holders to consist of
mere seat-payers? Why, any fifty men
coming from Port Arthur who liked to pay
3s. 9d., or 7s. 6d. could have done the
sa me, and have claimed to control the
temporalities of the church ! It was
monstrous ! The law intended the meet-
ings to consist of seat-holders, who paid
Hieir seats, and who frequented the church.
To suppose otherwise, was to suppose that
at any time they might get half-a-dozen
men to pay for a seat, and that these men
would be able to control the funds of the
church, and the management of the whole
of the temporalities. For that tribunal to
hold that men could go to the Scotch
Church, pay for sittings, and have a right
to vote at the meetings, was to hold what
could not be right or desirable A stranger
could not be a frequenter of the church, if
so he must become a seat-holder ; if he
was a frequenter of the church he was no
longer a stranger, and that would do away
with a difficulty as to why Mr. Storie was
a seat-holder, for strangers do not frequent
the church. He thought the thing too
manifest to require further exposition ; it
must be apparent that it was a sham and
a delusion to call a man a seat-holder if
he simply paid 7s. 6d,, and had not entered
the church for years, nor intended to do
so, so long as Mr. Storie was there. He
would say with deference that those who
should manage the temporalities of the
church were those intended by the Legis-
lature, namely, the frequenters of the
church. He believed that such conduct
was a fraud on the Act, to say nothing
more ; a fraud which he was satisfied that
court would never countenance. Mr. Storie
found a number of persons collected to-
gether, and he found that instead of being
allowed to perform his duty he was to be
called out of the chair. There was no
waiting till the meeting was opened with
prayer ; these men came to manage their
secular interests. The last thing they
thought of was prayer or listening to
prayer. No, they came there to insult their
minister in his own church. Let any one
of the members of that court put them-
selves in Mr. Storie’s position, let them
imagine the fact of meeting a number of
strange faces, and that when they proceed-
ed to open the meeting with prayer, as they
had done for years previously, they were
not to be allowed to do so, but were to be
put down and turned out of the chair by
men who would not listen to the prayer,
the ordinary short prayer, which he sup-
posed was made use of in opening the
meeting, Would they be at the beck and
nod of those who might hold the highest
position in the land, would they not obsti-
nately adhere to the chair it they had any
respect for themselves ? He apprehended
that they would, and that they would say,
“ Don’t let these who refuse to listen to my
ministrations come by fraud to drive me
out of the chair and take the management
, of affairs out of the hands of the congrega-
tion who come and sit here.” These men
and it was a wonderful coincidence—
went together at a particular time and
; without any pre-concert as it was wished


to be shown—they all turned up at the
same moment to commit a fraudulent act,
and succeeded in putting it to the meeting
that Mr. Storie be turned out of the chair,
and that Mr. Horne do take it. The min-
ister who had previously been there was
obliged to quit the church and to leave the
meeting to itself. They had heard Mr.
Whyte himself say that Mr. Storie’s con-
duct was not violent. Mr. Moir said that
the conduct on both sides was shameful.
What did he state Mr. Storie’s conduct to
be ? He said that he spoke in a gentle-
manly tone, but that he said cutting things.
He would ask if it was not his duty to say
cutting and strong things, if it was not his
duty to insist upon adhering to the chair,
and to tell those who came there claiming
to vote under the Church Act, that they
were committing a fraud and should know
better? And if the chair was wrongly held
by a man who had once been a judge of
the Supreme Court, to tell him that the
Chief Justice of the day was the man to ex-
pound the law, and that he would not be dic-
tated to in his own church by a gentleman
who had not been there for years, and had
once been a judge of the Supreme Court.
At this meeting, the conduct of which was
shameful according to Mr. Moir—and he
(Mr. Dobson) would bring a witness before
them who would satisfy them that it was
more shameful than had yet appeared—
Mr. Storie persisted upon holding the chair,
the question was put and the moment it
was decided against him he got up, pro-
tested, and left the church. But before he
left, what did they find with reference to
the manager, who swore that he did his
duty ? They found that before the ques-
tion was put, that Mr. Horne do take the
chair, and Mr. Storie was maintaining his
rights as a clergyman, and an honest man,
this manager sent for a policeman to come
and drag Mr. Storie out of the chair. Mr.
Ballantine stated in his evidence that he
sent a message to the Inspector of Police,
with his compliments, and begged that he
would send a policeman to the front of the
church, that he did so because Mr. Storie
insisted upon holding the chair, and he
wanted a policeman to remove him if he
persisted in keeping the chair. Now the
only fair inference to be derived from this
was that it was to take Mr. Storie out of
the chair. The manager who always did
his duty sent for a policeman to drag Mr.
Storie out of the chair, before the question
had even been put to the meeting. A con-
tention was expected, and so determined
were they to have a “ row,” so determined
was this manager to have something that
should bring things to a climax, that he
sent for a policeman before the motion was
carried as to who should take the chair.
Apparently a case was to be got up against
Mr. Storie, and Mr. Ballantine was doing
the matter ably, and he would say with
sorrow, that no more disgraceful fact could
come out with reference to any body of
Christians. And that the manager should
send for a policeman to take Mr. Storie
out of the chair, even if he had persisted
in keeping it after the division, was as dis-
graceful as could be to an elder of the
church, and he feared to some extent the
church itself, through that elder. The
meeting of seatholders was only called for
the purpose of electing managers and trus-
tees, but what did they proceed to do?
Now, after turning Mr. Storie out and send-
ing for a policeman, they could scarcely be
in a tit state of mind to consider Mr.
Storie’s rights.
Mr. Rocher said that the evidence went
to show that not a single member heard
Mr. Ballantine send for a constable because
he went out of the church.
Mr. Dobson believed that he could pro-
duce witnesses who had heard the order
given. Well, having voted Mr. Horne to
the chair, they proceeded to elect managers
and trustees, and the next thing they did
was to take Mr. Storie’s salary into consi-
deration. No intimation had been given
that this question would be brought for-
ward, and yet the moment that Mr. Storie
left the chair, the meeting set to work to
consider his stipend. (The letter of the
elders, with reference to the £IOO per an-
num, was read.) It appeared from the
information that when Mr. Storie came,
the government emoluments amounted to
£450, and £IOO per annum was to be paid
by the congregation, making in all £550.
He would ask if that allowance was for
one year only, or if Mr. Storie was not
light in believing that it would be perma-
nent? The letter was from Messrs. Officer,
Walker, and Paterson. It was stated in
the minutes that the managers should be
instructed to pay the salary from the seat
rents, all inducing Mr. Storie to believe
that he would receive this £IOO a-year so
long as he held office. When Mr. Storie,
however, went out of the church, it was
voted that he should not have it any longer,
voted by many who had not been in the
church for a long time, who were in fact
sham seatholders. Mr. Storie ventured to
call a meeting, composed of men who had
apparently come together suddenly, and
were not accustomed to attend his preach-
ing, who refused to allow him to do what
he had always done, and who, as he heard,
sent for a policeman—he ventured to call
them a “ mob.” Some swore that it was
an orderly meeting ; one plain man told
them that some extra words were used ;
another said there was some excitement;


and he (Mr. Dobson) would bring a few gc
witnesses before them to show what sort of to
excitement it was. Mr. Moir said that the cc
conduct on both sides was shameful ni the fa
House of God, but that Mr. Stories tone m
was gentlemanly. Mr Whyte said that his p
conduct was not violent All that he did w
was to adhere obstinately to the chair, tc
which he was turned out of: be heard p
that a policeman was sent for and that n
oaths were uttered ; he found that his sal- tl
ary out of the funds of the congregation v
was reduced ; and that he was put down n
by some whom he had not heard of for /
years before, and who came there with a j
confederacy and design, and he ventured r
to call these men a mob. Was it so ve y 1
far wrong 2 Was it not a mob ? He be-
lieved that the witnesses he should produce
would swear it was a mob; and was it
very disgraceful to call men who came to- -
gether to commit a fraud on the law of t
land, men whose conduct was described as i
shameful, who paid seven shillings and
sixpence—was it, he would say, disgraceful
to call them a mob ? He apprehended
that it was not very far wrong, taxing the
evidence so far as it had gone The letter
stated that Mr. Whyte entered the chuich
to head a mob. Now Mr. Whyte took the
first part in the meeting, and on the mo-
tion ot Mr. Ballantine, seconded by Mr.
Robertson, he put the motion that Mi.
Horne do take the chair The Tanner
however recollected so little that he could
not say in his evidence whether he had
put the question or not, he could not tell
them if he saw Mr. Ballantine or conferred
with him before the meeting, he could
hardly give a consistent statement, and his
recollections were as imperfect as could be,
his testimony was either doubtful or reti-
cent, and he wished to put no harsher
construction on his testimony or that oi
any other man. As he (Mr. Dobson) ap-
prehended, Mr. Whyte (lid not go for the
purpose of heading a mob, but lie entered
the church and did so. He could not say
if he had any conversation with Mr. Bal-
iantine probably, or knew that there would
be a row, and that many had paid for their
.seats when they had no right to go, and he
apprehended that there was enough on the
facts before them to showt.iat Mr. "VV iy e
did take the lead, and that he put the first
motion at that meeting whose conduct
was described by a witness as shameful.
He regretted that the Premier should have
been present at a meeting where the con-
duct was sworn by a witness for the piose-
cution to have been shameful in the House
of God ; and the greater the position the
greater the infamy ; but he took a, leauiug
part in the shameful proceedings, knowing
pretty well what would be done. He was
going to move tliat £IOO be reduced; and
to say that he was going there without pre-
concert was absurd. His memory was at
fault, no doubt, for no man would go to a
meeting intending to reduce the salary
precisely £IOO without a little pre-concert
with some one. What made him so anxious
to go at that particular moment and take
part in the proceedings ? No doubt the
mover had talked over and thought over
the matter, and in consequence of that
went to the meeting ; and if Mr. Whyte’s
memory was clear, he would have recol-
lected having had discussions on the sub-
ject. What was the value of Mr. Whyte’s
memory, when he could not tell them if he
had put the first motion, and did not think
that he had done so, till his memory was
refreshed. It appeared now that he did
put the first resolution, and his memory in
such a doubtful state was worth little. He
took upon himself to head them by put-
ting the first resolution, and was there any-
thing very grave in calling the meeting a
mob” or in saying that he headed it. Could
any member ot that court feel that he. had
committed a sin deserving of censure if he
had called this meeting a mob, or said
that Mr. Whyte headed a mob ? He (Mr.
Dobson) thought it was a venial offence, and
that most of them would agree that, how-
ever discreet it might have been to drop
’ the word “ mob,” yet that when Mr. Storie
■ was assailed and persecuted in the house
L of God, of which he was a minister, he
l committed no great sin, either against the
1 discipline of the church or the law of God
1 when he called that meeting a mob.
1 He believed that no tribunal could sin-
s | cerely say that Mr. Storie was amenable to
. | censure under such circumstances. If they
'l took the sins mentioned in their books, sins
r for which deposition was adjudged, they
,f find them much more serious ones. Did
they think that calling the people a mob,
e and that Mr. Whyte headed the mob, after
d they found that under such circumstances
y Mr. Whyte moved the first resolution,, was
1- inch a sin as to deprive a man of being a
d minister of the word of God ? That to say
ir ! the managers closed the doors against
ie I members and strangers, and that payment
le by regular seat-holders was declined, was
te sufficient ground to depose a man as no
st longer to be fit to be a minister of the word
ct of God! He thought not. They next
rl came to the question of oaths. “ Oaths were
ye heard which made the blood run cold
n There was a report m town that oaths
' W ere heard, Mr. Storie was not the only one
, se who heard it; he (Mr. Dobson) heard it,
he a minister of his (Mr. Dobson’s) own
tie church heard it ; and to state the fact
u | cou id not surely be an offence according to
-as > the word of God. The learned counsel next


alluded to the accounts, and said it was
quite possible for any gentleman to make
an error in accounts ; any of them might
he mistaken. He thought he might appeal
to that court, and to every man sitting
there, whether, at that moment, there was
anything on the face of this that could in
any way call for a sentence of deposition.
There had been many things drawn into
the case which he regretted : different per-
sons left the church, annoyed for certain
reasons ; but, if Mr. Storie had done any-
thing wrong, let him he libelled for it. He
apprehended that what they had to do was
to take each charge by itself, “ proven” or
“ not proven” ; if proven, was it not a ve-
nial offence ? But he would like to know
which one had been proven ? With regard
to the oaths, he believed they would be sa-
tisfied from the evidence he would adduce.
He would also go into the accounts, and
leave the case in their hands, satisfied that,
if he left it as it stood at present, that court
could not, in accordance with the laws of
the Church of Scotland and he believed
would, not as brethren in the ministry,
find that there was sufficient cause to de-
pose a brother on the facts that had been
proved.
John Walker, sworn : I have been an
elder of St. Andrew’s Church since 1828 :
there was an agreement made that Mr.
Storie should receive other salary than the
Government made ; there was a meeting of
the congregation, who passed resolutions
to sign a call to Mr. Storie, and authorise
the elders to forward the call, and state
what the terms were ; the elders should
then either go with the call, or appoint a
commissioner to represent them in the
presbytery of the minister called ; and the
elders appointed Mr. Peter McTavish, of
Castlemaine, to represent them.
Rev. It. K. Ewing wished to know whe-
ther the evidence was as to the laws of the
church, or as to matters of fact 1
Mr. Walker intended only to give evi-
dence as to matters of fact; Mr. McTavish
accepted the appointment, in a letter (pro-
duced and read); that was in reply to the
letter formerly read, stating that Mr. Sto-
rie’s salary and allowances would be £550
per annum ; the £IOO was added as a
salary; I have regularly attended the
church during the last four years, unless
when absent in Victoria ; with the excep-
tion of 5 weeks in 1861, and 9 weeks in
1863, I was present twice every Sunday ; I
know the usual worshippers there ; Mr.
Whyte is not a usual worshipper there ; I
have seen him once there since Mr. Storie
came; he attended much oftener before
then ; for 2) years Mr. Horne has not been
a usual worshipper ; he was theer the Sab-
bath after the meeting, but not since ; Mr.
Come I have not seen there for at least I|-
years; Mr. McConnell I have never once
seen in the Church ; Mr. J. W. Campbell
has been once within the last 4 months, but
not for a long period before ; Mr. Living-
stone not for a long time ; Mr. McFarquhar
not for the last 9 months, but tolerably regu-
lar in an evening before then ; Mr. H. Mills
I do not know as a seatholder ; Mr. T.
Jhonson used to be regular in attendance,
but not for the last 12 months ; Eev. Mr.
Campbell I have not seen there for the last
two years; Mr. Cunningham has not at-
tended lately, but has been there on two or
three occasions ; Mr. Barclay I have not
seen there for two or three years; these
gentlemen named were not members of the
congregation, according to our laws ; as an
elder, I should not have felt it my duty, in
my capacity as an elder, to have visited
them, if sick; I was not present at the last
meeting, as I thought I should only have
been insulted, had I attended ; have been
absent from many annual meetings, but
have attended them the last few years, with
one exception ; there have been from 7 to
10 persons present, sometimes 12, and in
18G2 there were 19 at the annual meeting ;
I never saw anything like 50 at an annual
meeting ; I know Mr. Duncanson, the Mis-
sionary ; there were about £4O due to him
when Mr. Storie came ; Mr. Duncanson, by
letter, pressed for payment, and threatened
legal proceedings ; it was a debt owing
partly by the Presbytery, and partly by St.
Andrew’s Church, but not by the Managers;
Mr. Storie on the lOtli November, 1860, col-
lected in the church £lB 2s. for the purpose
of paying it, and Mr. Duncanson acknow-
ledged the receipt by letter ; Mr. Storie
frequently applied to me as to paying the
amount; I paid the balance (£23) by a
cheque I sent to Mr. Mackersey on January
12, 1862 ; the finances of the church have
been in an embarassed state for years past;
it cost me about £SO per annum to assist
the finances, while Mr. Mackintosh was
here; the embarrassment has been since
1857 ; in 1856 the managers applied to the
Kirk Session, by letter, to divert the collec-
tions, and the collections were given up to
the managers for 6 months, and the mana-
gers have had the plate ever since ; Mr.
Storie is correct in stating, that in 1856 the
collections were diverted from the poor to
sustain a failing revenue ; in December,
1857, Mr. J. Dixon, (Treasurer) complained
by letter to Dr. Lillie of the state of the
finances, (letter read, suggesting that the
monies collected, should not be appropri-
ated to charitable purposes, until the debts
were paid off.) In 1858 £IOO was due to
Dr. Lillie, and it was paid in 1860, by a
subscription agreed to in my house, and to
which I subscribed ; the amount did not


come out of the ordinary revenue of the
church ; there were £25 due to Mr. Storie
at the end of 1860; Mr. Storie never
pressed me for any payments for his salary ;
I was not the proper party to apply to ;
on December 29,1862, I proposed a motion
that the church was indebted to Mr. Storie
£IOO to that date ; I did eventually give
one half the debt due by the church ; I
heard Mr. Kissock’s evidence yesterday,
and I consider that Mr. Kissock made a
mistake in saying that the £36 was included
in the £233, as that would have left only
£197 to pay, after Mr. Kissock had stopped
the £36, whereas £233 were paid ; the
debt was not reduced below £233 after Mr.
Kissock was paid ; there were £66 due to
Mr. Moir, and £167 to Mr. Robertson,
when Mr. Storie came; those debts had
been standing several years ; the three sums
named, amount to £269; the £36 had
nothing to do with furniture ; the whole of
that debt has been paid off since Mr. Storie
came ; I do not know if there was a ba-
lance in favor of the church in December,
1863; Mr. Storie often expressed great
anxiety about the debt due ; at the time
the debt was liquidated, there was money
due to Mr. Storie ; I remember Mr. Storie
urged the clearing off the debt, at the an-
nual meeting in 1861 ; he offered to give
£25 towards its entire payment, but the
offer was not responded to; as far as I
know, the £4O to the Missionary, and the
£269 have been paid off since Mr. Storie
came, and through his exertions; Mr.
Kissock’s statement about the furniture
Avas all correct; the furniture taken for
the Manse at the cost price amounted to
£167, —not £IBB ; Mr. Storie’s statement
in his letter about paying the debts through
his exertions I know to be true, with the
exception of the reference to Mr. Mackin-
tosh’s debt to which I cannot speak ; the
statements are not in part gross misrepre-
sentations ; I Avas a friend of Mr. Storie ;
my reason for contributing so largely was
because I wished the church to have the
full benefit of Mr. Storie’s labors without
the annoyances caused by the debts.
Cross-examined by Mr. Rocher : I did
not knoAv there was a debt of £36 due to
Mr. Kissock until it was paid. It was not
paid through Mr. Storie’s exertions ; it was
paid after Mr. Storie came into the colony ;
the £IOO to pay Dr. Lillie was subscribed ;
there were not funds in the manager’s
hands to pay it; there had been £IOO
erroneously paid to Mr. Mackintosh ; part
°f it ought to have gone to Dr. Lillie ; the
subscription was to make up the sum erro-
neously paid; the £IOO named to Mr.
McTavish, in addition to the salary, xvould
he derived from seat-rents, burial fees, and
Quarterly collections; the seat-rents would
depend upon tlie n limber of the congrega-
tion : I do not know the number of the
seatholders in September, 18G0 ; the elders
made no calculation as to the amount of
seat-rents ; they were authorised by the
meeting to make the offer ; the call to a
minister is signed by certain parties ; I do
not know how many who signed Mr. Sto-
rie’s call were not members ; a great many
non-members, or adherents, signed the
call; in 1856, when the proceeds of the
plate were given to the managers, I had a
balance in favor of the Poor Fund ; I think
it was £lll to £ll9 ; in those days there
were calls upon the Poor Fund ; the mana-
gers applied for the collections to meet the
expenses of the church ; there was a ba-
lance in favor of the Church in 1856, of
£22 7s. 7d.; the authority to pay Mr. Sto-
rie the £lOO was derived from the meet-
ing ; I cannot tell whether the managers
ought to make any payment to the minister
that is not ordered and inserted in the mi-
nute-book ; I do not know that the course
adopted on 27th December, 1860, in refer-
ence to Mr. Storie’s salary is the correct
one ; there was a motion made in 1862,
that the salary be paid.
Re-examined : In 1856 the church fund
received £75 19s. 2d. from the diverted
collections, so there would have been a ba-
lance against the fund but for that; I un-
derstood that Mr. Storie was entitled to
his £lOO a-year, whatever the seatholders
might do ; the congregation recently has
averaged—morning 180 to 200 ; evening
80 to 115 or 120; the 350 named in the
call would not have been all present at
once ; there have never been more than 80
to 90 at the communion, and on the last
occasion there were 60 ; I do not think so
many as 350 young and old attended at
once, but some at one time, and some at
another ; I think Mr. Storie has now a
congregation far short of that number ; I
cannot say what the number now is; I
was at the presentation of an address to
Mr. Storie on the 7th of March ; the elders
have no authority to divert the funds in
hand for the Poor Fund to other purposes.
By Mr. Ewing : I considered that the
£lOO to Mr. Storie was a perpetual obliga-
tion, binding on the managers in the first
instance, and then on the Kirk Session ;
the obligation rested on all the people of
the congregation ; if the congregation di-
minished, it would come heavier on the
few ; the payments should be kept up by
the parties concerned ; how can I tell who
they are ? If there was a deficiency, the
obligation to raise the money would have
rested on those able and willing to do so ;
if Mr. Storie had required a bond, as many
ministers do, he would have known who
was responsible : I cannot tell who are the


responsible persons to make up the defici- 1
ency ; the sum due to Mr. Duncanson was <
a church debt, as the amount of his salary i
was paid by several churches.
By Dr. Turnbull : By the minutes of 1
December 27, 1860, I understand that the
sum of £25 therein named for 1860, had
become due under the original engagement
without any vote of the congregation.
By Mr. Robertson : I think the mana-
gers might have paid the £25 for 1860,
and the £IOO for 1861, without any resolu-
tion, with perfect safety.
By Mr. Mackersey : I cannot produce
any other authority by which the managers
would have been justified in paying the
money.
By Dr. Turnbull : The managers pre-
sented their accounts at the meeting in
1862, and I objected to them as incorrect,
until the sum of £IOO as due to Mr. Storie
was inserted therein ; the proposal caused
discussion, but the motion was carried :by
that resolution, an existing debt was ac-
knowledged.
Alfred Priestly sworn : I am a seatholder
and communicant at St. Andrew’s, and
have been so for 13 or 14 years ; I was at
the meeting respecting Mr. Storie’s call,
and acted as clerk at the meeting, and
took minutes of all the decisions arrived at;
the minutes went first to Mr. Walker’s
office, and I think Dr. Officer took them
away next morning : the letter to Mr. Me
Tavish was framed from those resolutions
by Dr. Officer, and I copied it; I have in-
spected the church books now in court, and
I find that in September 1856, there was a
balance in favour of the church of £22
7s. 7d., and but for the collection of £75
there would have been a balance of more
than £SO against the church ; in 1857 there
was a balance against the church of £77
14s. 9£d. ; in 1858 in favor of the church
of £6B 17s 7d ; there is no payment to any
minister, so that £IOO would turn the
balance; in 1859 the actual debt due by
church is £163 9s. Bd. ; in 1860 the debt
against the church was £271 17s 10d.,
and that although there was £2l Bs. 2d.
carried from the Organ Fund to the Church
Fund ; by the books, from 1856 to 1861
there is a failing and deficient revenue ;
in 1861 there was a payment to Mr. Kis-
sock of £3B 16s. 6d., the amount of his
debt being 7s. 2d. less ; in 1862 the debt
was lessened by £2 Bs. 4d.; Mr. Stone not
having been paid his £IOO that amount
was really paid by him ; in 1863 £233 3s. al.
was paid off, leaving £IOO due to Mr.
Storie ; I contributed £2 10s. towards the
payment of the debt; lam a friend of Mr.
Storie’s and know that he made exertions
to have the debt paid off ; the subscription
list for purchase of a portion of Mr, Mac-
kintosh’s furniture was £IBB ; there is ait
entry that Mr. Kissock and Mr. ltobertson
advanced £65, making £253 ; of this, £250
was paid to Mr. Mackintosh, the balance
of £3 was carried to the Church Fund ; the
rent of Glebe in Dec. 1860 and 1861 is placed
to the credit of the Church Fund—two sums
of £lO each; there is a sum of £4 credited
as paid to Mr. Mackintosh for green ciops
in August 1860 ; I have inspected the seatlet
ting books; they do not show that Mr. Horne
was a seatholder in 1857, 1858,1859, 1860,
1861, and 1862 ; in 1863 15s. was paid by
Mr. Horne ; I have not seen Mr. Horne in
church for 2 years back ; Mr. Campbell
has only paid 7s. 6d. from 1858 to 1863,
but I do not find that credit has been given
for that amount in the cash book ; I do
not remember having seen him in the
church during 1863 ; I do not see Mr.
McFarquhar’s name as a seatholder during
1861, 1862, 1863, and this book does not
show that he was a seatholder at the last
annual meeting ; the Managers do not give
credit for having received payment for
that sitting ; I find that H. Mills pain
10s. in 1863, but I do not see that he was
a seatholder before ; Thomas Jhonston paid
10s. in 1863 ; B. M. Cunningham paid £5 in
1861 ; I do not find his name after that till
the year 1863, when he paid 155., but I
have not seen him occupy it in 1863 ; he
was at the church once or twice during
that year ; Mr. Corrie made a payment in
1859 ; I find that he paid 7s. 6d. in 1863,
but I have not seen him at the church, for
a long time ; I do not see Mr. J L. Living-
stone’s name mentioned in 1863 ; he had
not been an attendant at the church lately;
I went to the meeting with Mr. Robb ; I
saw Mr. Ballantine on the way, he and
Mr. McConnell went down the street to-
gether as far as Elizabeth-street ; when
Mr. Ballantine saw me, he said that my
cheque was on his desk, that the books
were made up, and to mind that I had no
vote ; I was very much annoyed, and gave
him a pretty sharp answer; I said I did
not care for the cheque or the vote, but
that I would go the meeting ; the cheque
has been cashed, but it is not entered in
the cash book ; I paid that cheque for no
other purpose than for pewrent; Mr. Bal-
lantine was very violent in some of his
remarks respecting Mr. Storie, he was de-
nouncing that gentleman loud enough for
, me to hear him ; he told me twice or
, thrice that my money was paid too late, and
that I would have no vote at the meeting ;
, I left the cheque at Mr. Ballantine’s office
s at about three o’clock in the afternoon of
, that day ; I went to the church, and when
i I entered Mr. Storie was asking Mr. Horne
i to point out any part in the Church Act
■ forbidding him (Mr. Storie) to take the


chair ; three or four of the people called
out “is there any clause to say that he
shall ? ” then they all began talking at
once; Mr. Storie appeared to be wishful
to show the meeting that he was legally
and rightfully taking the chair ; he seemed
to be rather excited as there was such a
noise in the church that he could not be
heard, but he was in no wise uncivil; some
called “ sit down, ” and others “ go out, ”
and such kind of expressions ; Mr. Storie
once said that he was not to be led by the
ignorance of Mr. Horne, but there was
nothing insolent in his demeanour ; Mr.
Ballantine was main man apparently ; he
jumped up once or twice making some
gesture, and he was walking about in the
aisle ; Mr. Corrie said “ let us hold our
meeting on the other side and let him stop
where he is ; ” before they came to the vote
Mr. Robb and I got up and went out dis-
gusted with the proceedings; we came
back and went into the gallery ; when we
went back Mr. Ballantine was busy at the
far end taking the names of those who
were seatholders and who were not ; Mr.
Storie left the church before they had
finished the scrutiny ; he protested against
the way in which the votes were taken;
Mr. Storie said it was too late to take the
scrutiny, and Mr. Corrie said “ It is not too
late for you to leave the chair” or church ;
Mr. Robertson and his son were outside the
porch, and I think Mr. and Mrs, Galt;
there was coarse language used, but I can-
not say by whom, or what it was ; I know
that offensive language was made us of; I
cannot say if the name of God was used ;
after Mr. Storie left, matters proceeded
quietly ; whilst the discussion was going
on as to the chair, I consider that the
meeting gave Mr. Storie great provocation
and insulted their minister in his own
church; I was present at the annual meet-
ing in 1862 ; I heard the discussion respect-
ing Mr. Storie’s salary being paid quarterly;
I think Mr. Storie used the words “ So
help me God” ; he did so seriously ; there
was a debt of £IOO due to Mr. Storie, and
when the accounts were brought up they
were objected to by Mr. Walker, and I
think by Mr. Storie, because this £IOO,
then due to Mr. Storie, was not acknow-
ledged in the church books; there was a
discussion about it as to whether it should
be placed in the church books at all; Mr.
Storie wished it to be placed there as a
debt due to him at that date ; as the church
was in debt at that time he said he should
not push for his money, or even ask for it,
at that time ; all that he wished then was
that the church books should show that
the church was indebted to him in that
amount; a warm discussion took place, and
several wanted not to put it there, or take
any notice of it, assigning as their reason
that they could not pay it, the church be-
ing then overburdened with debt; this dis-
cussion lasted for some time, and Mr. Sto-
rie said that if he saw from a factious op-
position that the people were determined
to withhold his rights, he would seek re-
dress elsewhere, “ So help his God.”
By Mr. Rocher : I have gone over the
chui-ch books, and made extracts from
them ; in 1856 the roof was repaired at a
cost of £l7 ; that is the only extraordinary
expenditure that I can find during that
time ; my name appears in the book for
1863 without any amount opposite, al-
though I have paid ; it states the amount
for the first half-year, but my last pay-
ment does not appear ; I made it from 3
to 4 o’clock in the afternoon of the day on
which the meeting was held : I called at
Mr Ballantine’s store, but he was not in ;
I gave it to his man, and he said he would
give it to Mr. Ballantine as soon as he
came in ; I met Mr. Ballantine shortly be-
fore the time of the meeting, the subject
was then mentioned, and he told me I could
not vote ; he told me that the books were
made up, and assigned that as the reason ;
after Mr. Ballantine bad declared in the
church that we could not vote, Mr. Robert-
son got up and said “ let them all vote,” ;
this book does not show any dates of re-
ceipts of money; according to the books,
Galt, Gellie, Livingstone, Priestly, McFar-
quhar, Snowden, senr., Snowden, junr.,
made payments after the books were closed;
when I took a part in the meeting in 1862
I do not think that I had a pew in the
church : in the book it is entered that a
sum of £2 was paid by me, I paid it to
Mr. Moir ; I do not think I paid it at that
meeting in 1862, but I might have done
so ; I took a part in the meeting, and
voted ; in 1860 the pew rents were £173
16s. 3d.; the four quarterly collections
amounted to £4l ; in 1862 the pew rents
were £lll 2s. 6d, the quarterly collections
£26 9s. lid.; in 1863 the pew rents were
£llO 13s. 6d.; the pew rents have de-
creased since 1860, and the quarterly col-
lections also ; I said that I left the meet-
ing in disgust in company with Mr. Robb ;
I then came in, and went into the gallery :
I took no part in the meeting ; when I
came out of the church, and before I went
into the gallery, I had some little discus-
sion with Mr. Robertson’s son ; language
of an improper nature was used, but I have
already said I cannot recollect by whom ;
I have answered the question, and I will
not tell a lie; I think that Mr. Robb was
there ; I have never said to any person
that I heard no oaths there ; I said that I
heard no oaths inside, but I never said, and
I would not say, that I heard no oaths out-


side, I never heard an oath uttered by any
person at any meeting in the church ; I
know you allude to Mr. Storie’s words ; Mr.
Robertson coached me ; Mr. Wilson, the
saddler, said that Mr. Storie made use of
those words, and 1 said that he had, and
that I was sorry to hear them ; I know a
Mr. John Campbell; I never said to him
that I had never heard an oath uttered in
St. Andrew’s Church except what I had
heard used by the minister Mr. Storie : I j
have no knowledge of having said anything
to him to that effect.
By Mr. Dobson : I know that some peo- j
pie pass the plate, but I cannot say that j
they do so because of the managers who j
are in office ; I do not know why they do
so ; when Mr. Ballantine said that we
could not vote, I called out “ you had bet-
ter give me back my cheque in the morn-
ing,” and Mr. Robertson called out simul-
taneously, “ let them all vote.”
By the Rev. Mr. Robertson : I said that
the offensive language I heard, was made
use of outside the church.
By the Rev. Dr. Turnbull: It was used
in the church ground, I was standing at
the church door.
James Cutmear, sworn : I have been a
seatholder at St. Andrew’s for about the
last 5 years, and I was at the last annual
meeting at St. Andrew’s ; I saw Mr. Bal-
lantine as I was going to church on the
Sunday morning, and he said “ there is a
meeting on Wednesday night, will you
come ?” I went on Wednesday night, and
I saw some who are not in the regular
habit of attending St. Andrew’s Church ;
it was very noisy at first; it was about
Mr. Storie taking the chair ; Mr. Storie
insisted that he had a right to take the
chair according to the Church Act; Mr.
Storie was not noisy, any more than speak-
ing, and he was not insolent in my hearing ;
I thought that the conduct of the meeting
towards Mr. Storie, was rather rough ; I
should say that he was insulted ; I did
not remain to the close; I heard some
rough language used near where I was sit-
ting, and I -moved down the church ; I
cannot exactly say who did so, as the per-
son or persons, were sitting behind me ; I
should say that it had reference to Mr.
Storie : I heard some one behind me say,
“ Send for a constable, turn him out
another party said “he had a good mind
to go and drag him out ?” I then moved
down the Church ; I did not like such
company ; that part of it was not at all
like a meeting of Christians; two or three
were talking at one time, but I cannot say
that I heard people knocking sticks against
the pews.
By Mr. Rocher : There was a difference
of opinion ; Mr, Storie wanted to keep the
chair, and several did not wish him to do
so ; Mr. Storie said that he had a right to
the chair, and he persisted in remaining in
it for some time ; it was put to the vote,
whether Mr. Storie or Mr. Horne should
take the chair ; scrutineers were appointed,
but that was after Mr. Storie had left; it
was the noisy party that wanted to put
Mr. Horne in the chair; I did not alto-
gether approve of the proceedings of the
noisy party, but I voted for Mr. Horne by
mistake (laughter).
Thomas Downie sworn : I am a seat-
holder at St. Andrew’s Church ; I attended
outside the church, at the meeting in July
last, for the purpose of seat-letting : the
doors were shut, and I could not get in ;
the streets were rather dirty, but there was
no rain ; I saw seven or eight people out-
side, but like myself, they could not get in ;
I walked up and down, and waited for
nearly an hour, and there was no rain
during that time ; I was a stranger then.
By Mr. Rocher : I knew some of the
seven or eight people I saw there that eve-*
ning ; Wm. Munro, a seatholder, was there,
and two of the name of Snowden, Mr.
Gellie was there, Mr. Campbell the saddler,
and a female, but I do not know her name.
I made no complaint about it; I took a
sitting afterwards ; Mr. Munro got it for
me, but I do not know where ; I was there
from about seven to nearly eight o’clock ;
that was the first time I had gone to take
sittings.
John Gellie sworn : I am a seatholder
and communicant at St. Andrew’s Church,
and secretary of the Sunday School con-
nected with that church ; I was at the
church-doors on the occasion of the seat-
letting in July last, and I could not get in ;
the day had been wet, but so far as my
memory serves me, it had not rained from
six o’clock ; between the hours of seven
and eight it was bright moonlight, and I
think it was impossible for anyone to have
got wet through at that time ; eight per-
sons came that evening ; I was at the an-
nual meeting in December last; I saw Mr.
Storie enter the church ; when he came in
he looked around him, and took a chair on
the platform ; he then stood up as I thought
to open the meeting with prayer ; Mr. Bal-
lantine got up and proposed that Mr. Tho's.
Horne do take the chair; his demeanour
was violent; Mr. Robertson seconded the
motion ; Mr. Storie said that the motion
was incompetent, and that he had a right
to the chair as pastor of the church ;
Mr. Ballantine brandished his arms, and
said “ now, now, we have had enough of
you,”—Mr. Robertson said, “ it’s time we
had done with him,” —Mr. Whyte rose to
speak with apparently a pamphlet in his
hand ; after he had spoken, Mr, Storie said


that Sir Valentine Fleming was the high-
est legal authority, and to that, and to that
alone, would he bow. Mr. Horne next
6poke, and he said, “ as respects the meet-
ing, it might have been held in a tavern,
and that the poorest beggar might be called
in to take the chair, if Mr. Storie was per-
mitted to do so.” The next incident that
I noticed was Mr. Ballantine standing up
very excited; he called out, —“ Fisher,
Fisher,” who appeared to be in readiness
for a call; Mr. Ballantine said “ go for
Mr. Forster and constables ; ” it was called
out loudly in the meeting before Mr. Storie
left the chair; after Fisher left, I rose from
my seat and went to the front door ; there
were a number leaving, and I intended to
have left also ; I was ashamed of the man-
ner in which the proceedings had begun ;
I was ashamed of those who had come to
the meeting ; I saw a great many whom I
had never seen in the church before ; I
have missed three evening services, and
one morning service during the last three
years; I returned from the door to the
church ; one or two were going round with
papers, apparently taking the names of
those present; Mr. Storie left before I went
out; when I went back Mr. Ballantine
met me, and he said in a very rude man-
ner, “ Have you paid ? ” I replied that I
had, and he said, “When did you pay? ”
I said that I had paid to-day. He then
said, “ Who did you pay ? ” I replied,—
“ One of the managers,” and said further,
“ that if he had attended to his duties, I
should not have had occasion to pay to-
day.” He said, “ It is all very fine ; it was
a wet night.” I replied that it was not
wet, and if it had been it was also wet for
us ; the conversation then ceased. I heard
Mr. Ballantine say to a seat-holder, “ Sit
down, you young bully.” Mr. Corrie was
standing in the early part of the meeting,
and appeared very excited ; I heard him
call for a scrutiny ; I do not recollect him
saying anything further ; while Mr. Storie
was in the chair, the conduct of the meet-
ing to him was violent and abusive ; after
Mr. Storie had left, a motion was made to
reduce the minister’s salary ; I had heard
no notice of anything of the kind ; I was
not present at Mr. Storie’s call; I said I
thought it was incompetent for the meet-
ing to pass such a resolution, and gave as
my reason my belief that it was a binding
contract between Mr. Storie and the con-
gregation ; my objections seemed to cause
a little merriment, and I intimated that I
Would move an amendment; the chairman
said that if there were no objections, he
Would put the original motion; before I
could get to my feet all hands were held
fip, and they cried out, “ You are too late.”
■i reminded the chairman of what I had
stated, and also of what I had intimated,
and he permitted my amendment to be
put; the chairman said that he would put
the amendment first, and there was a cry
of “ that’s right; ” it was put and lost; I
saw Mr. Yates in the body of the church not
long after Mr.Storiehad left; Mr.Ballantine
moved the motion for taking away a part
of Mr. Storie’s salary, and Mr. Whyte
seconded it; on the day of the annual
meeting I went to Mr. Moir, and he said
he would rather that I should go to Mr.
Ballantine ; I went to Mr. Ballantine, and
said that I had come to pay my seat rent;
he said, has the collector been to you ? I
said he had, but I was not in the habit of
paying collectors ; I requested him to take
the money, and give me a receipt; that
was about 10 o’clock in the morning ; he
declined, and said that I must go to Mr.
Piguenit, I said, shall Igo now ; he replied
yes; I went to Mr. Piguenit, but he was
not in his office ; in an hour or two I called
upon Mr. Moir, and told him that Mr. Bal-
lantine had refused my money, and sent
me to Mr. Piguenit; I told him that Mr.
Piguenit was not at home, and asked him
to be kind enough to take my money, and
give me a receipt; he said Mr. Ballantine
ought to have taken it, however, he would
accept it; I paid for Mr. Galt at the same
time ; I was present at the annual meet-
ing in 1862 ; either 17 or 18 attended ; I
cannot say that I saw Mr. Ballantine at
the church doors on the Sunday morning
previous to the meeting of the Presbytery ;
he attends occasionally.
By Mr. Bocher : I made a communica-
tion, in writing, to Mr. Storie about the
church doors being closed, in July last; I
did not first make a verbal communication
to him ; when that letter was written, Mr.
Storie was either at Campbell Town, at a
Presbytery meeting, or on his way from it;
I had no communication with Mr. Storie
on the subject until I wrote that letter ; I
swear positively that on the morning of the
30th December last, I, myself, went to Mr.
Ballantine’s office ; no one was with me ;
I was only once at Mr. Ballantine’s, and
twice at Mr. Moir’s ; I have not the slight-
est doubt upon the point of my being at
Mr. Ballantine’s office on that morning ; I
went to the meeting in the evening, and
the language was abusive and violent to-
wards Mr Storie ; the expression “We have
had enough of you, Sir, it is time we had
done with you ” I consider insulting and
abusive; I do not remember any other
language ; I was sitting next to the minis-
ter’s pew, near the pulpit; the major part
of the congregation sat near the pulpit, but
on the other side of the church, from where
I sat; Mr. Horne was sitting in the front
pew, Mr, Whyte in the second, and Mr,


Ballantine, and some one else in the third ; j 1
Mr. Snowden sat near me and Mr. McCon- <
nell the gunsmith, and Mr. Thomas John-
son, Cottage Green; Mr. Ballantine told
Fisher to go for Mr. Forster, and constables,
in a loud voice ; I heard it distinctly ; it
was loud enough for those who were m the
church to hear ; I am a teacher at ot. An-
drew’s Sunday School, and I have been
very active in getting up an address to Mr.
Storie. , . , . ~
By Mr. Dobson : The facts stated m the
address are true, to the best of my know-
ledge ; on the day that Mr. Ballantine de-
clined to receive my money, I went and
complained to Mr. John Walker.
By the Bev. Mr. Ewing : When the
meeting was held to call Mr. Storie I was
not a seatholder, or connected with the
church ; I was connected with St. Andrew s
about 12 years ago, but I left at one of the
disruptions, and I have joined it since Mi.
Storie’s induction ; I have seen the letter
addressed to Mr. McTavish, with reference
to the £IOO for Mr. Storie; Mr. Storie
shewed it to me; I cannot say positively
when, it was some time ago; I did not
write the address to Mr. Storie ; eight per-
sons were present on the night of. seat-let-
tino- and could not obtain admission ; 1
know them all, —Miss Wilson of Aigyle-
street, Mr. Johnston of Elizabeth-street,
Mr. Campbell, Messrs. Downie & Munro
of Murray-street, Mr. Semple of Bathurst-
street, Mr. Snowden of Battery Point, and
myself. ..
By the Bev. Dr. Turnbull: The address
was written by the Bev. Mr. Macdonald of
Victoria. ~
By the Bev. Mr. Ewing : Mr. Walker
communicated the matters contained in the
address to Mr. Macdonald ; I do not say so
from my own knowledge, but I believe
such to be the case.
Charles Colvin sworn : On the oOth ot
December last, I was living in Bathurst-
street, opposite St. Andrew’s Church ; my
attention was called on that evening to the
number of persons going into the church ;
what called my attention was, the fact ot
so many strangers going in ; I went over to
the church; Mr. Storie was m the chair
when I entered; I saw him leave the chair;
he left in consequence of the noise and cla-
mour of the meeting ; there were noisy and
violent gestures and exclamations ; the in-
dividual members would not constitute a
“mob,” but it would not have been tar
wrong to apply the term “ mob ” to the
meeting : T believe tbat tbe majonty o
those who voted Mr. Horne to the chair,
were men who had been absent for two,
three, four, or five years ; there were very
few of the usual attendants present; alter
Mr. Storie left, I heard some persons at-
tempt to speak in his favour ; they were
constantly interrupted in an unseemly
manner, and on one occasion, what I
thought, amounted to an insult; I saw no
improper conduct whatever on the part of
Mr. Storie ; I was not there as a seatholder ;
I have not been such for more than six
years ; one reason why I left was, on ac-
count of theatrical amusements being
allowed in the church ; I had another rea-
son, but it might be offensive to a member
of the Presbytery to state it.
By Mr. Bocher: The theatrical repre-
sentation to which I allude was an orato-
rio ; I never heard of its being allowed in a
Presbyterian Church before ; I merely went
to the last meeting from curiosity at seeing
so many strangers go in ; I had never been
in the church since the theatrical represen-
tation up to the night in question ; I knew
that they were strangers because I live di-
rectly opposite, and I almost invariably
meet the congregation ; some of those that
I saw had been occupants of seats some
years back ; Mr. Corrie occupied a seat m
my time, and Mr. Campbell, Mr. Thomas
Jhonson, Mr. McFarquhar, Mr. Cunning-
ham, Mr. William Robertson, Mr. Moir,
Mr. W. C. Robertson, Mr. Robert Wilson,
Mr. McKay, and Mr. Wilson (Mr. Mills
was pew opener), and Mr. Cutmear, Mr.
Livingstone was precentor.
By Mr. Dobson : When I speak of stran-
gers, I consider if a man has left the church
for some 4 or 5 years he is a stranger, and
if I had not paid for a sitting for some
years, until that morning, I would not have
considered myself a seatholder.
By Mr. Rocher : I sat in the gallery next
to Mr. David Barclay ; there were gestures
and exclamations, and when Mr. Stone
left the chair, they were ready to fly at him ;
the exclamations were similar to what you
hear at political meetings, so many were
talking at one time, that it was utterly im-
possible to select one word ; there was a
great deal of confusion, Mr. Ballantine
said to Mr. Snowden, in a very rude tone,
“ sit down.”
Seventh Day.
Thursday, April 14th, 1864.
The Rev. R. K. Ewing wished to ask
Mr. Dobson if he would have any objec-
tions to recall Mr. Gellie and Mr. Colvin
at any time during the day, as there were
one or two important questions he would
like to ask these witnesses.
Mr. Dobson (after communicating with
' Mr. Storie,) said that Mr. Gellie was pre-
sent in the church, and he would be happy
to recall him. He did not know what
were Mr. Colvin’s engagements for the day.
Charles Allen Galt sworn : lam a seat-
holder and communicant, at St, Andrew’s;


1 have been so for nearly three years ; I
was present, for a short time, at the annual
meeting in December last; I entered the
church after Mr. Storie had taken the
chair ; when I went in, they were arguing
about the question of Mr Storie keeping the
chair; Mr. Storie’s demeanour was cour-
teous, gentlemanly, and very forbearing;
the conduct of the meeting was very insult-
ing to him ; amongst those who took part
in the meeting, were many whom I have
never seen in the church ; I heard several
persons calling out “ lie down, sit down
I did not hear Mr. Ballantine say anything
to Mr. Storie ; the only violence I saw, was
in the shape of gestures; Mr. Ballantine
was violent by gestures; Mr. Corrie was
excited, he got up in an agitated state, and
some person caught him by the coat; and
I heard some profane language used in an
undertone ; I heard the word “ hell ” dis-
tinctly ; it was used in the church : I can-
not say if this was heard by any one else ;
a gentleman sitting beside me, asked me if
this was the way we conducted our church
meetings, and he got up and left the church ;
I received some treatment on the part of
Mr. Ballantine, to which I objected ; he
told me in a most loud tone of voice, that
I had no vote ; this was after I paid my
seat rent, that morning, to Mr. Gellie ; im-
mediately after this I left the church ; I
was there about half an hour, and during
the whole of that time Mr. Storie remained
in the chair ; I left the church as I was
disappointed on being told that I had no
vote ; I was born and bred a Presbyterian,
and so were all my forefathers ; the minis-
ter, when present, has always presided ex
officio at meetings of a similar description,
and in his absence, the ruling elder ; the
meetings at which I have attended, have
always been opened and closed with prayer;
I saw the show of hands to put Mr. Horne
in the chair ; those who voted for him were
nearly all sitting together in the body of
the church, and were apparently acting in
concert.
By Mr. Rocher : I did not remain there
till Mr. Storie left the chair ; I was told
rudely by Mr. Ballantine that I had no
vote ; Mr. Robertson said afterwards “ its
all right; ” when I left the Church I was
aware from what Mr. Robertson had stated
that I was entitled to vote ; the only pro-
fane word that I could distinctly hear was
“ hell; ” I decline to say by whom it was
used ; it was uttered by a person sitting at
a short distance from me, and several per-
sons were talking at the same time ; it was
used while they were wrangling about Mr.
Storie being in the chair ; I could name
the person who to the best of my belief
made use of the word “ hell ” but I decline
to do so, and I might be mistaken, as se-
veral persons were speaking ; I saw Mr.
Gellie there ; he was sitting on the oppo-
site side of the church from where I was ;
I recognized one of the Snowdens sitting
close beside him ; I left before Mr. Storie
did.
By the Rev. Dr. Turnbull: The show of
hands was taken before Mr. Robertson said
that I could vote, for it was in consequence
of my holding up my hand that Mr. Bal-
lantine called out that I had no vote.
By the Rev. Mr. Ewing: I was dis-
franchised from voting on the first occasion
but I understood that I could vote before I
left the Church ; the arrangement at St.
Andrew’s Church with respect to the seats
are similar to those in this (St. John’s)
Church ; I sat on the right side of the
pulpit, 6 or 7 pews distant from the
strangers’ pew ; the persons who were appa-
rently acting in concert sat in the middle,
but some persons sat on the left side ; the
greater bulk sat in the centre ; the profane
word that I heard came from the top end
towards the pulpit, where several persons
were talking in an excited state, and were
knocking their sticks on the floor ; it was
during the period of this excitement and
before the sticks commenced rapping that
I heard the profane word made use of ;in
order to reach my ears it must have tra-
velled past a few persons ; others might
have heard this word if they had been
listening.
By the Rev. Mr. Robertson : A few mi-
nutes elapsed between the show of hands, and
Mi\ Robertson’s calling out that I could
vote, and I believe it was decided that my
vote was taken.
By Mr. Dobson : I have no doubt about
the word “ hell ” being used.
By the Rev. Dr. Turnbull: I believe that
my vote was eventually taken.
By the Rev. Mr. Mackersey : The con-
duct of the meeting was insulting to Mr.
Storie ; the disturbance arose in conse-
quence of Mr. Storie’s retaining the chair :
I considered that Mr. Storie had a constitu-
tional right to the chair, and I considered
that his conduct was gentlemanly consider-
ing the extreme provocation he received
from many present.
William Munro, sworn: I am a seat-
holder and a communicant at St. Andrew’s
and have been so for about three years ; I
attended at the seat letting in July last ; I
went there at the exact hour appointed ;
I did not get wet through going there ;it
had been raining in the day, but not at
night ; I found the doors closed and did
not get into the church; I waited till 8
o’clock ; I think I made the eighth person
there ; I saw Mr. Ballantine a day or two
after this; I said that there had been a
few waiting at the church doors on that


evening, who could not get in ; he said P
that he had been there in the middle of
the day, but that nobody came, and he a
said that he did not think that it was S
worth his while to go down to the church t.
in the evening as it was so cold ; he did not
tell me that he started to go there and got s
wet through on his way ; I said if it was 1
cold for him to be inside, it was cold for us t
to be outside; he said that if persons wanted t
sittings, they knew where to come to his c
office, and that if I knew anyone that 3
wanted sittings, he was ready at any time 1
to go down and open the church doors, i
and show them the sittings ; I was at the c
annual meeting in December last; I met s
Mr. Priestly, Mr. Robb, and Mr. Fulton, s
at the door, and I think that young Mr. s
Robertson was standing there ; I had some <
conversation with these men as to _ what :
had taken place inside : while I was in the 1
porch a person came out, but I decline
exactly to give his name ; I heard profane
language used ; he asked the parties who
had come out to come in and vote,
and said do you think that I am going to
be beaten by a d d sheepshanks like
that ; I took the term sheepshanks to be
applied to Mr. Storie ; I heard no other
bad language in the porch, I afterwards
went into the church ; I entered at the
left hand door ; Mr. Storie had gone, and
Mr. Horne was in the chair; there was
very little said whilst I was there ; I re-
mained there but a little time, as I was
told by Mr. Short that I had no vote, as
I had not paid in advance, I thought
that if we paid from the Ist of January it
would have been time enough ; I saw a man
in the body of the church rapping with
a stick as a proposition was passed ; there
was some confusion, and it was a noisy
meeting as far as I saw ; I had no intima-
tion that the question of Mr. Storie’s salary
would be discussed that evening.
By Mr. Rocher : I came up to the porch,
and found Messrs. Priestly, Fulton, Robb,
and young Mr. Robertson there ; I just
asked Mr. Fulton what was wrong, and
then some person came out and asked
them to come in and vote, as he would not
be beaten by a“ d d sheepshank like
thathe did not address any one particu-
lar ; I then went into the church ; Mr.
Storie had gone ; I came to the conclusion
that these words were applied to Mr. Storie
from the discourse I heard in the porch
with those who had been inside.
By the Rev. Dr. Turnbull: I cannot say
if I told anyone afterwards, within a few
days, what had taken place ; I do not
remember.
Ry the Rev. Mr. Ewing : I am quite sure
sure that this conversation took place in
the porch, I have no doubt whatever, Mr,
Priestly was there.
By the Rev. Mr. Mackersey : A few days
ago I reported what I had heard to Mr.
Storie, but I did not do so shortly after
the meeting.
James Campbell sworn : I have been a
seatholder at St. Andrew’s since March
1837, when it was first opened ; I went
there in July last in the evening to take
two sittings in a pew ; I found the church
door closed ; there were four others waiting
while I was there : I remained till the
Launceston coach came in which was at
about a quarter to 8 ; I arrived at the
church about 5 minutes past seven ; it was
a cold dry night; I had no umbrella ; the
streets were damp but there was no rain ; I
saw Mr. Robertson the next Sunday at the
church door, I told him that I was. very
much disappointed at finding no one in at-
tendance ; he told me that he had attended
in the forenoon and that not a single indi-
vidual came, that Mr. Ballantine promised
to go in the evening, it had been raining
in the fore part of the day ; I saw Mr. Bal-
lantine a few days afterwards, and paid
him for the sittings; Mr. Ballantine said
that it was raining so heavily on the night
of the meeting that he could not come out;
I did not contradict him, but paid my
money and came away.
By Mr. Rocher: I very often paid at
the church before, but I sometimes paid
Mr. Robertson in the street.
Walter Snowden sworn: I am a seat-
holder at St. Andrew’s, and a teacher in
the Sunday School connected with the
church ; I attended the annual meeting in
December last; I came to the gate and
saw about a dozen persons assembled at
the gate ; I went away and came back in
about a quarter of an hour ; there were
■ from six to ten persons at the door of the
■ church; Mr. Corrie, Mr. Campbell (Cus-
toms), Mr. Ballantine, and Mr. William
, Robertson were there ; when I returned to
, the church, there were from forty to fifty
t present; I saw a great many who were not
1 in the habit of attending the services of the
l church; Mr. Horne, Mr. Campbell (school-
t master), Mr. Campbell (Customs), Mr.
3 Corrie, Mr. Livingstone, Mr. McConnel,
- Mr. Jlionston (wine merchant), Mr. James
'. Whyte (Colonial Secretary), and Mr. Mills,
i Mr. Storie was addressing the meeting
e when I entered upon a point of law with
a reference to the chair ; his demeanour was
very calm and courteous, exceedingly so ;
y the conduct of the meeting was like that
v of a political assembly ; I never attended
it a meeting where there was such noise and
confusion, considering the number of per-
e sons present; there was a great deal of
n confusion, but I could not make out any
r, words; after Mr, Storie had addressed the


meeting, Mr. James Whyte and Mr. Horne
replied, and after that, Mr. Storie replied
to the remarks, and left the meeting ; the
show of hands was called for after I ar-
rived ; Mr. Ballantine appeared very vio-
lent, but I did not notice any of his
remarks; he was calling out something, but
I cannot say what it was ; I heard Mr.
Ballantine say “ Fisher, Fisher, go for Mr.
Forster and constables ; ” Mr. Horne said
that the meeting might be held in a tavern
and the poorest beggar in the street might
take the chair if Mr. Storie could ; that
was before Mr. Storie left the church ; I
heard an oath that made my blood run
cold uttered while the scrutiny was going
on ; the words were—“ By Almighty God,
we’ll get rid of Storie ; ” I communicated
that to Mr. Storie after the meeting, for I
felt it my duty to do so as a Sunday
School teacher ; there was no sign of order
in the meeting at all; I rose to speak in
favour of Mr. Storie, and I was insulted
twice; Mr. Ballantine told me to sit down,
and made use of some other expression
which I could not catch; Mr. Robertson
got up and said they were going to have a
collection, and asked me how much I would
give in a very insulting way ; I pass the
plate every Sunday on account of the ma-
nagers who hold office ; I had no intima-
tion that the minister’s stipend would be
considered at that meeting.
By Mr. Rocher : I pass the plate on Sun-
days, and have not contributed for the last
nine months ; I give extra to the Sunday
School ; I heard a person say, “By Al-
mighty God, we’ll get rid of Storie,” and it
made my blood run cold; I was at the
annual meeting for the previous year, and re-
mained during the whole of the proceedings ;
I heard a person make use of the exclama-
tion “ So help me God ” ; my blood did not
run cold then ; the Rev, Mr. Storie made
use of the expression on that occasion; I
was not surprised at it, it was the way it
was said ; I took it to mean “ By God’s
help ” ; I dij no t take the exclamation at
the last meeting to mean that in the least ;
I was sitting in the seat next to the minis,
ter’s pew, and Mr. Gellie was sitting beside
?ie ; the exclamation was not uttered when
Mr. Gellie was near me, as I was walking
m the aisle of the church at the time, and
was almost under the pulpit; there were
one or two in my vicinity, but not more ;
the majority of the congregation were on
the opposite side of the church, a few yards
distant from the pulpit; I was walking on
the left hand side of the church; there were
other persons on my side of the church, but
tcan only recollect Mr. William Robertson;
Mr. Horne was sitting in the centre of the
ohurch, in the first pew near the pulpit;
there were very few in the centre seats at
the time ;it was during the scrutiny that
this observation was made use of; I could
not say tol whom it was made, but I heard
it distinctly ; I could name the person who
made use of the exclamation ; Mr. Wm.
Robertson made use of it.
The Rev. Mr. Storie called attention to
the fact of indecent merriment on the part
some individuals in the church while this
dreadful examination was going on.
Cross-examined by Mr. Rocher : There
were only two or three near where Mr. Ro-
bertson was standing; he was standing at
the corner, and Mr. Storie was distant from
him the length of two pews ; I think that
Mr. Whyte was sitting either in the first or
second pew behind Mr. Horne ; I cannot
call to mind any others who were near;
Mr. Corrie was sitting on the other side ;
I saw Mr. Moir in the strangers’ seat,
but I cannot say if he was there when the
exclamation I have referred to was made
use of; I know something of an address
that has lately been got up to Mr. Storie ;
it was got up by Mr. Walker, Mr. Gellie,
my brother, and myself; there were other
persons also connected with it; Mr. Galt,
Mr. Thomas Johnston (Cottage Green), Mr.
Cutmear, and Mr. Munro ; the address was
framed by the Rev. Mr. Macdonald of Vic-
toria, with the assistance of Mr. John
Walker ; I saw the draft, but I cannot say
in whose handwriting it was ; I saw it at
Mr. Gellie’s in Harrington-street; it was
submitted there for the approval of myself
and others ; the copy presented to Mr. Sto-
rie was engrossed by Mr. Priestly, to the
best of my knowledge ; I know the subject
matter of the address (here Mr. Rocher
handed the witness a slip of paper with
writing upon it) ; there are some things
here that are in the address ; I cannot say
whose handwriting this is ; I cannot say if it
is Mr. Storie’s handwriting ;it is similar to
Mr. Storie’s handwriting.
By Mr. Dobson : I have never received
any letters or written communications
whatever from Mr. Storie ; after it was
announced that an address was going to be
prepared, I believe Mr. Storie was con-
sulted with reference to the presentation ;
I was not present at the preliminary draft-
ing of the address ;at the time I heard
the oath uttered, there was great confu-
sion in the meeting ; I was walking up
and down the church ; others were stand-
ing in the aisle, but I cannot say if any
were walking about, except the scrutineers
and myself; I signed the address and the
contents were true to the best of my know-
ledge ;it was put in print, and I got a
great many signatures ; I allowed no per-
son to sign it until they had been made
acquainted with the contents; when Mr.
Storie used the words “So help his God,”


he did so very seriously, and it was in re- se
ference to a dishonest act; Mr. Storie sta-
ted that he had heard of a report that had _
gone through the streets of Melbourne like it
wildfire, that they had discovered a plan to a<
deprive him of the salary received hy him a<
from the congregation, and that if he saw a:
any dishonest act in reference to that sala- d
ry, he would make the streets of Hobart
Town ring with that dishonest act, —“So s<
help me God ;” I don’t recollect his saying h
anything about taking the matter into the n
Supreme Court in reference to that ; that ii
was, I think, shortly after Mr. Storie had n
returned from Melbourne. §
By the Rev. R. K. Ewing : I have been o
connected with St. Andrew’s about six I
months previous to Mr. Storie’s arrival: I r
am in the habit of attending public meet- 1
ings of different kinds, both religious and t
political; I have been present at several s
disorderly meetings in Hobart Town, such t
as one at the Amphitheatre in Murray-st.; 1
that was a political meeting, and it was t
very disorderly; I heard hooting and i
groaning, and several persons were turned i
out; I have said that the annual meeting s
in December was the most disorderly one i
I ever saw, considering the number of per-
sons present; I noticed no one sitting on
the right hand side of the pulpit; Mr. Ro-
bertson was standing at the corner of the
aisle, and I had just passed him when he
made use of the exclamation ; I believe
that he was a scrutineer ; he was very
much excited, and spoke in a distinct
voice, so that I could hear him audibly ; I
should think that he could have been heard
by any person distant from him about three
yards ; I am just past 20 years of age.
By the Rev. Mr. Mackersey : When I
heard the words used hy Mr. Robertson I
saw no expression of feeling on the part of
any person ; when I heard it I trembled
from the crown of my head to the sole of
my foot, and I faltered in my footsteps ; no
one ever spoke to me in regard to that ex-
pression, until I spoke about it myself; I
informed Mr. Storie of the fact of my hav-
ing heard the exclamation within an hour
after the close of the meeting.
By the Moderator : I cannot tell the
name of the two or three persons who sat
near where Mr. Robertson was standing.
Mr. Dobson (during the reading over of
the evidence to the witness) said that he
would object to the paper that had been
put in, and shown to the witness on his
examination with reference to the address
to Mr. Storie. It had apparently been
purloined, and there was part of a sermon
on the back. He objected to its being
handed round the court, and a person
possessing an honorable and honest mind
would have put it in an envelope, and
sent it to Mr. Storie.
Mr. Rocher said that he did not put it in.
Mr. Dobson would now object to its be-
ing withdrawn, but would let it stay in or-
der that they might compare it with the
address. He thought that an honorable
and honest man would never have pro-
duced it.
Thomas Johnston sworn : I have been a
seatholder at St. Andrew’s Church for the
last seven or eight years mostly a commu-
nicant, and connected with the church since
it was built; I went to the last annual
meeting ; I was standing at the church
gate ; I saw several persons coming, many
of whom I did not recognise, and also Mr.
Ballantine came up ; I hid him good eve-
ning, and I tliink I shook hands with him ;
I said, are we going to have something new
to night; I said that through seeing these
strangers present; I understood his reply
to be, “ What can you expect from a vil-
lain ?” I replied “We had better leave it
till we are inside I could not say to
whom the word “ villain ” was applied ; I
accompanied him to the church door, and
stood speaking with Mr. Wm. Robertson
until we all went into the church ; when I
went inside the church I found all those
who I called strangers, with one exception,
I think, on the right side of the church ; I
occupied the third seat from the front, on
the left; Mr. Storie was standing at the
chair at the time I took my seat; Mr. Bal-
lantine, or some other person, proposed
that Mr. Horne should take the chair ; Mr.
Storie disputed his right to do so, on con-
stitutional grounds, and read clauses from
. the Church Act, or from a pamphlet which
he held in his hand, to show that he was
; iustified in what he was doing, namely,
; keeping the chair ; shortly after the dispute
f arose, Mr. Ballantine got up in a, very
l menacing manner to Mr. Storie, and sai
f “We have had enough of you he held
) his arm in a menacing manner; he then
- called to a person by surname, who was
I sitting behind me, “Go and fetch con-
- stables ” ; the second time he called out
r “ Tell Mr. Forster I want constables, I’ll
have him out of that,” meaning Mr. Storie
e out of the chair ; then there was a deal ot
,t loud talking on the right side and they
appeared to be half talkers and half listen -
>f ers ; I did not hear anything else called
e out to Mr. Storie from my side of the
n church : I cannot say who called for a shew
is of hands, and I cannot say who declared it
is carried ; Mr. Storie entered his protest and
n left ; while Mr. Storie was in the chair he
in behaved very calmly considering the excite-
ig ment he must have felt at the rudeness
, n shewn him ; the only thing I saw out of
id the way, was when he told Mr. Thomas
id Horne that he was sorry to see a person


like him so ignorant of the church law,
and cautioning the congregation not to be
led away by his statements with regard to
the laws of the church ; his demeanour
was gentlemanly; I voted once for Mr.
Storie to take the chair ; after that I took
a resolution not to take any part in the
proceedings, for I was so annoyed, and I
may say disgusted with the fact, that a
person like myself, who had subscribed so
largely to the church, could be, in a man-
ner of speaking, disfranchised or outvoted
by people whom I considered to be strangers
altogether ; I have assisted the church by
donations and by gathering money within
the last two years ; I had never before wit-
nessed so disgraceful a proceeding in the
church; I heard Mr. Ballantine tell one
person in a sort of domineering way that
he had no vote, but I cannot say who it
was ; when the vote of the minister’s salary
came on, was the only time I was inclined
to take any part in the proceedings, when
Mr. Ballantine called the youngest Snowden
a puppy, and said “ sit down, sir I was
inclined to take some part in the affair, for
I knew that these young men were the only
persons who were trying to do good for the
church, by forming Bible classes, and at-
tending the Sunday School as teachers ; but
I restrained myself, thinking that it would
be no use to speak to them ; I attended
two meetings convened by Mr. Storie for
the paying off the debt upon the church ;
Mr. Ballantine and Mr. Robertson called
at my shop after the meeting, and asked
me to sign the petition ; Mr. Robertson
asked me to sign it, but he never opened it;
he said it was to do away with all quarrels
and dissensions in the church; I told him
that I thought it was different from what
I could guess ; I said, now Mr. Robertson
we’ll take it for granted that you have got
Mr. Storie out of the church, his salary
goes with him ; to that he said he did not
think the Government would so strictly
adhere to the letter or point of the law ; he
then said should that not be the case, he
knew two or three individuals who would
endow the church sufficient for a minister’s
salary; I was adverse to that because it
brings the church under the dominion of
two or three individuals, who, I rather
think, would like to put in a man to suit
themselves ; Mr. Robertson then said that
he only came and asked me to sign the
petition, as a matter of courtesy to one
who had been so good to the church, for
Mr. Ballantine did not want to come near
me, because he knew it was no use.
By Mr. Rocher : I retired because I did
not want to be outvoted by people whom I
considered strangers ; when I entered the
church the proceedings had not commenced;
I sat in the third seat; I saw Mr. Gellie,
he sat behind me in the next seat; I can-
not say if he moved from that seat during
the whole of the proceedings ; I did not
notice if he did so ; Snowden was not in
the church when I came in first, I think I
first saw Snowden when we turned out to
vote, he was on my side of the church ; I
saw him sitting alongside of Gellie, when
the question of the minister’s salary was
being discussed ; he was then behind me,
and in the same pew with Gellie ; Mr. Wm.
Robertson came into the church about the
same time that I did ; I do not know
where he took his seat, but a short time
after the meeting commenced, he was sit-
ting on the opposite side of the church ; I
think he came up to Mr. Ballantine, who
was on the same side of the church, once
or twice : he was a prominent party to a
certain extent, but not so much as Mr.
Ballantine ; I went out of the seat to vote,
and returned to it, and remained there
during the rest of the proceedings ; I do
not recollect if I saw Mr. Wm. Robertson
come across to the side where I was sitting;
he might have done so during the time that
the votes were being taken; I saw Snowden
on my side of the church about the time the
votes were being taken ; he might have
been walking up and down, but I do not
remember seeing him there at any other
time; if there had been no disturbance,
and Mr. Robertson made use of the words,
“ By the Almighty God we’ll get rid of
Storie,” and was standing near me at the
time, I think I would have heard it if he
spoke in an audible tone ; the controversy
about the chair, lasted as nearly as possible
half an hour ; I can give no other instances
of disorder than those I have already men-
tioned ; after Mr. Storie left the chair all
went on pretty quietly, until Mr. Snowden
or Mr. Gellie rose to speak on the subject
of salary ; Mr. Storie had strong provoca-
tion, but I thought he travelled out of his
way by addressing Mr. Horne as he did ; it
might have been dispensed with; Mr.
Storie’s manner was cutting, but not jeering
or offensive ; what I mean by “ cutting ” is
saying something that comes point blank to
the subject under discussion; I cannot say
that he appeared to jeer and sneer at the opin-
ions advanced by the opposite parties; while
the votes were being taken all was quiet
on my side, but I did not take much notice
as to the other side ; I met Mr. Robertson
the next day ; some conversation took place
between us in reference to the meeting ; I
said I was so disgusted with last night’s
goings on that I thought of leaving the
church altogether ; if Mr. Robertson made
any remark, it was to “ stick to the church.”
By the Rev. Mr. Robertson : To the best
of my belief Mr. Ballantine said “What
can you expect of a villain ;” there was one


stranger on my side of the church ; I have
been a seatholder of St. Andrew’s for eight
years, and a member for about two years ;
I would not consider any persons strangers
if they were bona fide seatholders, even if
they had ceased to attend the services at
St. Andrew’s from dislike to the minister
of the church.
By Mr. Dobson : I did not notice Mr.
Robertson leave the church during the
meeting ; he might have done so and re-
turned to his seat without being observed
by me; Mr. Corrie took the scrutiny on
my side : I am not prepared to say whe-
ther Mr. Robertson did pass in front of me
or not; I sat for some time with pencil
and paper, and took no notice of the pro-
ceedings ; I was disgusted with the con-
duct of the meeting in general, and not
with Mr. Storie ; I know that for awhile
Mr. Storie adopted a conciliatory tone, but
I cannot say whether at the commence-
ment or afterwards ; I cannot say if Snow-
den moved about during the meeting ex-
cept during the time that the scrutiny was
being taken ; I cannot say if Gellie went
out into the porch.
By the Rev. R. K. Ewing : On my side
of the church all was quiet while the scru-
tiny was being taken ; I paid no attention
to the other side; a loud talking might
have taken place whilst I was engaged
with another person, and my back was
turned towards that side ; if such an ex-
pression as “ By Almighty God, we’ll have
Storie out ” was used in an audible tone
near me, I think I should have heard it;
I did not hear that sentence ; when Mr.
Robertson asked for my signature to the
petition, he said there were two or three
persons who would endow the church, and
I said that I was averse to it; the thought
as to whether this could or could not be
done never struck me ; I supposed that it
could be done ; I was paying seat-rent at
the time Mr. Storie was called, but I was
very ill and unable to attend for a long
time ; I signed the call for Mr. Storie ; I
have no objection to gentlemen contribut-
ing largely towards the support of the
church and the minister, when they form
part of the congregation ; I like the volun-
tary system when it comes from the whole
congregation ; I have no objection to large
sums being contributed by one or two per-
sons, if it does not give them more influ-
ence than they ought to have.
By the Rev.” Mr. Mackersey : I said that
I was disgusted with the conduct of the
meeting generally, and part of it arose out
of a dispute about the chair ; the blame
would rest upon the party who wrongfully
claimed the chair, so far as that confusion
was concerned.
By the Rev. Mr. Robertson : My vote
was not objected to; Ido not consider that
because the minority are outvoted, they
are disfranchised ; I never saw so much
noise nor such scenes take place in any
church before, and I hope I never will
again.
By Mr. Dobson : By being disfranchised
I meant that persons like me belonging to
the church were put down by strangers.
By the Bev. Dr. Turnbull: When Mr.
Wm. Robertson is excited, he does not usu-
ally speak as loudly and as distinctly as
Mr. Ewing did when he asked me a ques-
tion with reference to the exclamation.
The witness said that he wished to clear
up a portion of his evidenc ; he considered
one half of those on one side of the church
strangers, as he had not seen them at
church for some time.
Robert Snowden sworn : I am a seat-
holder at St. Andrew’s church, and I have
been connected with it since Mr. Storie
came here ; I have not missed more than
four whole Sundays since his arrival ; I
am a teacher, and the treasurer of the
Sunday School; I attended the annual
meeting in December last; I was present
when Mr. Storie came into the church ; he
did not continue in the church for more
than half-an-hour ; when he entered he
took a chair on the platform ; I expected
the meeting to be opened with prayer, and
before time was given, Mr. Ballantine got
up and proposed in a very insulting man-
ner that Mr. Horne should take the chair ;
Mr. Wm. Robertson seconded the motion ;
Mr. Storie said he had a right to the chsfir
as minister of St. Andrew’s Church ; he
spoke for a short time, and then Mr. Whyte,
I think, got up and replied ; the meeting
was very noisy, and there was great con-
fusion during the time that Mr. Storie was
addressing the meeting; they wished to
drown Mr. Storie’s voice, so that he could
not be heard ; several voices called out, and
there was a knocking with sticks ; I heard
some expressions; I heard “ sit down ” two
or three times, “ you have been here long
enough,” “ we have had enough of you.”
Mr. Storie’s conduct and demeanour were
calm, and he was very gentlemanly in his
manner; I consider the conduct of the
meeting was such as to insult Mr. Storie
in his own church ; I heard Mr. Ballantine
calling “ Fisher, Fisher, go for Mr. Forster
and constables, I’ll have him out; ” there
was great confusion at this time ; I cannot
recollect if the motion that Mr. Horne take
the chair was put; there were several shows
of hands, but I do not recollect if there was
a show of hands upon this motion ; I re-
collect Mr. Storie entering his protest; I
believe he entered three protests, and in
doing so, he did not speak rudely or im-
) properly ; he spoke loudly in order to be


heard, but such was the noise that I only
heard part of what he said ; I recollect the
scrutiny being taken after Mr. Storie left;
I had some conversation with Mr. Robert-
son while this was going on; told him that
these men had no vote, that they were not
seatholders in the church ; he said “ what,
what, who told you they had no vote,” —
and in saying that he held his stick in his
hand, and raised it up as high as the top
of the pew ; I did not like the look of the
stick, and turned my head round; I thought
there had been enough scenes in the church,
and I would not create another; he was
standing at the corner of the aisle on my
side of the church ; Walter Snowden was
standing near; when Mr. Robertson was
near, I did not hear any language of a pro-
fane character made use of; during the
scrutiny and when I turned from Mr. Ro-
bertson, Mr. Ballantine addressed a seat-
holder, and said that he had no vote ; he
asked him whom he paid ; the way in
which it was said was insulting ; I heard
my brother called either a young bully or
puppy ; it was when he attempted to speak
on behalf of Mr. Storie; the words were
“sit down, young bull} 7 ,” or “puppy,” I
cannot say which ; I went to the church
door in July last at the time of seat-letting ;
it was not raining ; it was a fine moonlight
night; I got up to the church which is
distant about a mile and a quarter from
my residence ; from six to nine o’clock
there was no rain, whilst I was in the
street; and I was so duringjthat time, with
the exception of about a quarter of an
hour ; I waited till a quarter-past eight,
but the doors were closed ; on the day of
the annual meeting I called on Mr. Bal-
lantine between 11 and 1 o’clock to pay
for sittings ; I saw him and told him that
I had come to pay seat-rent for my father
and myself; he made a pause for some
time, and then said that Mr. Piguenit was
the collector; I said shall I go and pay
him. He said that Mr. Piguenit had sent
over the cards ; he took them down and
said “ Mind that you have no vote at the
meeting ” or “ to-night,” I cannot say
which ; he turned them over and said, “ I
believe these are yours ; ” I then paid for
the sittings; Mr. Horne said that the
meeting might be held in a tavern, and
that the poorest beggar in the street could
take the chair; the words so struck me,
that I took out a pencil and paper and put
them down ; I had only been at the pre-
vious annual meeting, and I believe that
seventeen or nineteen persons were present
on that occasion.
By Mr. Rocher —I cannot recollect the
exact words ; I took part of them down,
and they were something to the effect I
have stated; when I take notes I never
take the whole of the sentence down ; there
was a great noise ; I cannot say if he said
that the poorest beggar, if a seatholder,
could take the chair.
William Short sworn—l am a seatholder
at St. Andrew’s Church ; I went to the
annual meeting in December last; when I
got to the church I saw three or four times
the number of people that I saw the year
before, and I said what mob is this 1 I did
not mean a rascally mob ; I saw a number
of people there that I had not seen before ;
when I entered the church Mr. Whyte was
speaking, but his back was turned towards
me, and as I am rather hard of hearing, I
could not hear the half of what he said ; I
heard a dreadful noise while Mr. Storie
was in the church ; it did not begin till
Mr. Horne had commenced speaking ; I
heard constables sent for ; Fisher was
standing near me, and when Mr. Ballan-
tine told him to go for constables, he
needed no pressing, but ran as hard as he
could ; my side of the church, where’there
were ten, could not manage the other side
at all (laughter) ; I voted more than once ;
I turned round at the last vote and found
that there was only one voting; Henry Mills
who is a member of Mr. Wilkes Simmons’
congregation, was there making himself
very busy ; I saw nothing disorderly on
Mr. Storie’s part.
By Mr. Rocher—l sat in the fourth seat
from the front; I did not come at the com-
mencement, but I stopped to the close ; I
saw Mr. Robertson in two or three places ;
I saw him on that side.
By Mr. Dobson—l cannot say if when
Mr. Robertson came to my side the votes
were being taken ; I cannot say where
Mr. Ballantine and Mr. Robertson were all
that time ; it did not trouble me much ; I
saw Mr. Gellie there, he was sitting just
before me; I do not recollect seeing him
leave his seat; when Mr. Ballantine told
Fisher to go for constables he was standing
on the right of the pulpit, and Fisher did
run (laughter) ; it was said in a sort of
hurried voice as if he was frightened of
something, it was not at the top of his
voice, but I heard it, and I was two or
three pews distant; I voted for Mr. Storie
as chairman.
James Fulton sworn —I have four sit-
tings at St. Andrew’s Church, and I have
been connected with it from within 12
months after Mr. Storie came ; I was a
member some years ago, and since that I
went out of town for a time ; I was present
at the last annual meeting ; when I entered
the church I was much surprised to see
many faces there I had not seen before
during my time ; I left immediately after
Mr. Storie quitted the church ; I did so in
consequence of the way in which things


were going on, I saw that in my opinion
the meeting was packed foi’ some object;
I went in with the intention of voting for
part of the present management, but when
I saw the state of things I went out and
did not vote ; I did not see anything rude
or insolent on the part of Mr. Storie ; he
appeared to be calm ; I can hardly tell
what the conduct of the meeting towards
him was, as he was protesting when I went
in, and when he left I did so. Mr. William
Robertson did not come to the porch to the
best of my recollection ; I was having some
high words ; there was some rather rough
language used in the porch ; I did not hear
any oaths.
By Mr. Rocher —I was in conversation
with a person in the porch, who was then
a stranger to me.
Mr. Dobson put in, by consent, a certifi-
cate from Mr. William Robb, corroborating
Mr. Priestley’s evidence with respect to his
having met Mr. Ballantine on the night of
the 30th December last.
David Lowrie sworn—l am a communi-
cant at St. Andrew’s Church ; I attended
at the church on the last Communion Sab-
bath ; Mr. Ballantine was at the church
door when I entered ; he said that he
thought that I had left the church; I said
you can think no such thing, for I have
not been out of the church one day for the
last nine months ; he said nothing more ;
I said that the greatest and most respecta-
ble part of the congregation was inside
then ; I knew them all, and those who
were in the church were considered the
most respectable.
Robert Ballantine recalled and examined
by Mr. Dobson, who held a slip of paper
with writing on it, and which had pre-
viously been shown to the witness Snowden:
That document has been in my possession ;
I will not state where I first got it; I refuse
to do so, as I do not consider it my pro-
perty ; it was read to me ; I will not tell
you how it was got; the vestry is open to
any one that enters the church ; I have not
been there for some weeks ; I was not there
at the last quarterly collection, or since ;
when I first saw the document it was not
in an envelope.
Mr. Dobson said that he felt it his duty
to put a question to the witness, which re-
lated to the members of that court as well
as to Mr. Ballantine himself; he would put
it with all deference, but he believed the
honor of the court required it, and he had
no doubt that a word or two would clear up
the matter. He wished to ask Mr. Ballan-
tine if any money had been sent or given
by him either to the Rev. Mr. Dugall, the
Rev. Mr. Garrett, or the Rev. Mr. Ewing,
by cheque or otherwise ?
Mr. Ballantine: I will not answer it.
Impertinent question f
Mr. Dobson : I appeal to the reverend
gentlemen themselves to clear the matter
up. I have no doubt that two words can ex •
plain the reason, object, and everything else ;
I only say that there is such a report, and it
is calculated to create an unfavourable im-
pression, and I have thought it my duty to
put the question to clear up the facts of the
case. Mr. Ballantine apparently refuses to
answer it.
The Rev. Mr. Robertson: I consider that
Mr. Dobson’s question is out of order, and
quite irrelevant. The fact of the matter is
that he is impugning the judgment of cer-
tain members of this court. In other words,
he is bringing forward a charge of bribery.
I should have considered that the right
mode of proceeding would have been to
bring an action. If he believes that they
are guilty, it is for him to bring an action,
and produce the evidence, and not to put
the question, “ are you guilty or not guilty?”
I am no lawyer, but I think that I have an
ordinary share of common sense, and it
appears to me that that is the right mode
of proceeding. I may be mistaken, but I
consider that Mr. Dobson’s questions are
insulting to the members of this court. If
he conceives that any of the members of
this court have been bribed, he has his
action afterwards. Let him then bring
forward his evidence, but do not let him
ask gentlemen now, “have you or have
you not been bribed ?”
Mr. Dobson : If such a report is current
I apprehend that the only honest course is
to lay it before the court for an explana-
tion. I have done it. I have simply put
a question to Mr. Ballantine. I have done
so in order that the matter be explained,
but I bow to the decision of this court, and
will persist in the question no further than
I have gone. The fact is, that such a report
was abroad, and I thought it right to put
the question, to bring it before the court,
and let that court deal with it. Mr. Robert-
son says that it is an improper question,
and that an action can be brought after-
wards, but I apprehend that no action can
be brought.
Mr. Ballantine was then examined by
Mr. Rocher, as follows : That document
was read to me, I think about three weeks
ago, I asked permission of the party who
read it, to make use of it if I required it,
and having obtained that permission, I
produce it to-day.
The Rev. Mr. Storie : The thing is stolen,
he cannot put in a stolen document.
The Rev. Mr. Ewing : Moderator, will
you attend to the court ?
The Rev. Mr. Storie : I am ready to give
evidence.
Mr. Rocher: If it is stolen, Mr. Storie


had better go to the Police Office, and not
make an exhibition here.
Mr. Dobson said that there was no exhi-
bition, but any man would be nettled if a
document was purloined.
Mr. Rocher said Mr. Ballantine had
stated upon oath where he got it.
Rev. Mr. Storie said he had not stated
that.
Mr. Rocher : He did.
Mr. Dobson thought that this was an
irrelevant discussion.
Mr. Rocher said that if Mr. Storie at-
tempted such an exhibition, he would find
that it would not be allowed there.
Mr. Dobson said that he must now pro-
tect his client, a counsel was never allowed
to speak in such a manner to the prisoner
at the bar.
Mr. Rocher said that in no court of
justice would a prisoner be allowed to
make such an exhibition. He would say
that it was a monstrous thing to allow
anybody to charge Mr. Ballantine with
producing stolen documents. He had been
pretty well insulted, highly insulted, and
such a charge was a gross insult.
Rev. Mr. Ewing—l feel it imperative
that the character of this court must be
maintained. It has been—l will not say
intentionally on the part of Mr. Dobson,
for I scarcely think that he would inten-
tionally insult anyone, but he is acting as
counsel for Mr. Storie, and that perhaps
will explain the question to the court. It
could scarcely be possible for any counsel
or any man to perpetrate a greater insult,
whether intended or not, than that same
learned counsel. He has proposed that a
question should be answered, as to whether
Mr. Dugall, Mr. Garrett, and myself, have
received money. We put up with that
quietly. I could have answered him,
perhaps, in a way that would not have been
gratifying to himself. I expected that you
would, as Moderator, protect us three
gentlemen, but I endured it even under the
threat held over our heads that reports
were about. Moderator, what are reports
to me ? Of what value are they, knowing
how reports are originated, and knowing
the materials that are at work to originate
reports. lam sitting here to all intents
and purposes, on my honor and oath as
truly as the witnesses, to deal according to
the evidence before me, and am I to be
intimidated by being told that there are
reports about ? Sir, no. They who know
me best, know that reports never influence
my conduct, and I trust never will. So
long as I know that I am right and doing
right, reports of any kind may flock about
but they will never give me trouble, and
the learned counsel’s reference to these
reports can have no influence with me, and
I trust will have none with the two mem-
bers of this court beside myself, nor with
this court itself. After quietly enduring
that which I feel to be an insult, not to
myself alone, but to the court, the rever-
end defendant makes a distinct charge of
felony now in the face of this court against
Mr. Ballantine. Again there is another
insult and this is to be tolerated, and
.because the learned counsel for the prosecu-
tion wishes to protect the witness he is
called to order for doing an improper thing.
If insults are not stopped at once, Ido
not know where they will end. It cannot
be endured.
The Rev. Mr. Garrett would endorse
every syllable uttered by Mr. Ewing. He
was sorry that the rules of the court would
not permit him to answer the question.
He would be exceedingly glad of an oppor-
tunity, and he would do so to that gentle-
man’s satisfaction. He would say nothing
more as to the insult offered to the court,
for it was too palpable.
Rev. Mr. Dugall said that at the proper
time he would be prepared to give a satis-
factory answer, but he would not do so
now.
Mr. Dobson said that the case for the
defence was now closed.
Mr. Rocher said that the usual course
adopted was the following, which had been
suggested, namely, that the plaintiff could
call rebutting testimony in reference to any
evidence that had been adduced on the
part of the defendant, that was to say on
any particular point whereon the party had
been previonsly examined.
Mr. Dobson said that such a course had
never been heard of in any court of justice
in the world. He did not hesitate to say
that such an absurd course had never been
suggested in the Supreme Court. If a new
case was set up by surprise, or pleadings
would enable it, it might be done, but they
could not recal the same witnesses simply
because they had not chosen to examine
them on the points at issue.
Mr. Rocher said that Mr. Wm. Robertson
had been examined, and an opportunity
afforded to the learned counsel for the
defence, of asking that witness if he had
moved from one side of the church to the
other. He never put that question, and all
he (Mr. Rocher) wanted was to recal one
or two witnesses. The opportunity had
been afforded of asking the question in
order to enable them to give their version,
but it was never asked, and he would say
that it was right to recal them.
Mr. Dobson could only say that for such
a question as that, no witness had ever been
recalled in the world. Mr. Robertson had
already sworn that he made use of no oaths.
1 Mr. Robertson had also been interrogated


as to his whereabouts in the church.
Mr. Rocher : He was never asked if he
made use of that specific oath.
Mr. Dobson said that the charge was
that oaths were heard. Mr. Robertson
swore that he did not hear any oaths, and,
as a matter of fairness, he asked him if he
had made use of any oaths whatever. He
replied that he had not, consequently he
(Mr. Dobson) did not see any use in
troubling the court further. If Mr. Rocher,
however, wanted to ask his question of Mr.
Robertson, let him be recalled, but he did
not want to go fully into the whole case
again.
William Robertson recalled and exam-
ined by Mr. Rocher: I heard one of the
witnesses state that when I was on the
other side of the church, I made use of the
words, “ By Almighty God we’ll get rid of
Storie I solemnly declare to God that I
did not use those words ; a more deliberate
and fearful perjury was never committed
by any man in the world ; I did not go to
that side of the church at all.
By Mr. Dobson : If every witness here
was to state that I went to that side of the
church, I still say that I never went to the
other side at that meeting ; I was not so
excited as I am now.
Rev. Mr. Ewing : Before anything pro-
ceeds further, permit me to say a sentence
or two. Had Mr. Dobson put such a ques-
tion to the judges on the bench, I scarcely
know of what character the proceedings
would have been after it. I hold that the
learned counsel is called on as a gentleman,
a professional man, and as a man of honor,
to apologise to the court, for having put a
question of such a character.
Mr. Rocher did not think there was any
necessity for doing so. A counsel will put
a question as instructed by his principal.
He thought that they had all been a little
warm, he himself was so, for he had looked
upon it as an uncalled for question, and he
thought the better plan would be to let it
drop, for counsel was in a great measure
the mouthpiece of his client, and they must
not take these observations as emanating
from Mr. Dobson himself. That would be
monstrous, upon his client let it lie.
The Rev. Mr. Ewing said, that with that
view of the case he was prepared to receive
it, and hold Mr. Dobson entirely innocent,
for he could scarcely from his knowledge
of that gentleman attach it to him.
Mr. Dobson said that to a certain extent
he was responsible for putting a question
of that nature, and he did not wish to relieve
himself unfairly from responsibility. He
had submitted to put the question, and so
far he was in the hands of the court.
Friday, April 15, 1864.
The Rev. Mr. Ewing said there was one
matter in which he thought they should
have some further statements, as to oaths
alleged to have been used in the church
by Mr. Robertson. He should like to have
some further evidence to indicate his lo-
cality, perhaps one or two of the witnesses
could be re-called to clear up the matter.
Mr. Dobson said he had no desire to im-
plicate anyone as having used the oaths,
but that Mr. Storie had heard that the
same were used ; he should be glad to
know that he was mistaken in the fact,
but what he said was that the witness
went in and told Mr. Storie ; that wit-
ness was a communicant of the church,
and a Sabbath School teacher, and Mr.
Storie looked at him as a credible party.
He did not want to connect Mr. Robertson
with the oaths, he had no wish to increase
the mischief, though he produced a man
who swore that he did ; he should be very
sorry to raise the question, he put the case
on the circumstances that information had
been given to Mr. Storie, and that he had
acted on it.
Rev. Mr. Ewing : It might be fairly put
in that shape, but as it is affirmed that it
is in itself the fact, it becomes a question
of credibility of evidence ; and it is neces-
sary in order to enable us to do justice in
the case. If Mr. Storie had attempted to
prove simply that he heard it, it would
have been different, but it is put before us
in this way, “ it is true ; ” therefore it be-
comes a question of credibility of evidence
on both sides.
Rev. Mr. Dove said it struck him it was
a point they need not enter into ; it was
enough for them to know that Mr. Storie
had information to that effect.
Mr. Dobson remarked that it would be
very difficult to get witnesses to attend
again ; it was not a holiday as yesterday,
and it might be their employers might not
be willing to let them come, and he sub-
mitted that it was not necessary. The wit-
ness might be in error, but there was no
doubt he communicated the fact to Mr. Sto-
rie, which Mr. Storie relied on ; they would
require an adjournment, which might be
inconvenient. He should not have allowed
any name to be mentioned, unless his learn-
ed friend had called for the particulars.
The Moderator put the question to the
court, and it was decided that no further
evidence should be called.
Mr. Dobson said there was but one duty
remaining, namely, to sum up the evidence.
It was his intention to do so with as rea-
sonable curtness as he could, and he would
confine himself closely to mere comments
on the evidence adduced, referring seriatim
to the different charges on the face of the


indictment. Mr. Storie was first charged
with slanderously calling the meeting a
mob, and the first question that arose was,
as to what was a mob ; he did not wish to
trust his own judgment, but had extracted
from the Imperial Dictionary the definition
of the word mob —“ a crowd, or promiscu-
ous multitude of people, making a riot,
tumultuous and disorderly,” and again mob
—“ a disorderly assembly,” and a quota-
tion was given that “ had every Athenian
been a Socrates, every Athenian assembly
would have been a mob.” It was depend-
ent not on individual character, but on the
behaviour of the people when assembled.
And whatever would be a mob in an ordi-
nary place, it would take much less to con-
stitute a mob in the house of God than in a
tavern or meeting elsewhere. Was this dis-
tinctly proved to be a disorderly assembly 1
Mr. Corrie spoke of excitement, Mr. Living-
stone of disorder, Mr. J. Wilson of a few
extra words, and Mr. McFarquhar of loud
talking ; Mr. Moir of the conduct of both
sides as shameful; and when he was asked,
he said Mr. Storie’s conduct was gentle-
manly, but his language was cutting. . Mr.
Ballantine said there was nothing disor-
derly in the meeting, in that meeting where
he sent for a policeman, and called out in
the body of the church for constables!
Was there nothing disorderly in the meet-
ing 1 That ornament of the church as
manager, sends for a policeman 1 Mr.
Priestly, Mr. Johnston, Mr. Snowden swear
that he was in the meeting loudly calling
for constables, and he apprehended that
was rather disorderly in a church. But that
was a mere trifle as to disorder; coarse
language was used. “ Sit down,” “Go
out,” “ Lie down,” heard not by one wit-
ness, but by. several, “ We’ve had enough
of you ! ” “ We’ll have you out of that,”
shouted out. They heard of noise, violent
gestures, and exclamations. They heard
from Mr. Galt, an old witness, who gave
evidence in quite a collected way, that per-
sons were talking, were excited, there was
knocking of sticks. But there was no dis-
order, said Mr. Ballantine. Mr. Galt said
the word “ hell ” was pronounced ; they
heard from him that a stranger sitting by
his side, got up and asked if that was the
way they conducted their meetings in the
church, walked out and left it. They heard
Mr. Colvin’s testimony, a man who came
there unconnected with Mr. Storie, or the
opposite side. His wife, astonished at see-
ing a collection of persons at the church
who had not gone there before, at any rate
for years, tells Mr. Colvin; he goes over
from curiosity, and as an honorable man
came forward, and told them at once that
to call the meeting a mob was not far
wrong ; he spoke of unseemly interruption
and insults to one of the speakers in Mr.
Storie’s favor, and after Mr. Storie left;
was that an orderly assembly or a disor-
derly one ? They found that so disgusted
with the meeting was Mr. Priestly, that he
left the body of the church, and went into
the gallery ; Mr. Robb did the same thing;
Mr. Galt left the church; Mr. Johnston
was disgusted ; Mr. Gellie went out to the
porch, determined to leave, but he return-
ed ; Mr. Fulton came in, found the meeting
was packed, and so he left; Mr. Cutmear
would not stay to see it out; and, lastly,
that old gentleman who told them that
three only remained to vote on a resolu-
tion in favor of Mr. Storie. The rest had
gone, having been outvoted by many who
had not been there for years. Some who
had become communicants of other church-
es, attending St. John’s Church, Chalmers’
Free Church, Mr. Wilkes Simmons’ Church,
were all present on that occasion, and he
thought the expression used by Mr. Fulton
was not far wrong, that it was a packed
meeting. What was it that excited the
indignation of Mr. Johnston ? That he
saw people who were not usual worshippers
at the church, come there to outvote those
who were. That those men came there by
accident would be simply miraculous ; no
doubt it was by design ; they had one ob-
ject to attain, and they met to attain that
object. And what was the spirit of those
who attended at that meeting ? He would
give an instance in one who took a fore-
most part; Mr. Ballantine started from
Collins-street; he called on his way for Mr.
McConnel, and as he was going to the
church they found him denouncing Mr. Sto-
rie ; saying, “ Whatcan you expect of a vil-
lain ?”' That was the spirit of one. Then
what was the spirit manifested at the
meeting ? That spirit might be tested by
the conduct of the one who sent for con-
stables ; and that was the man who stood
there, and declared before God that he
bore no malice to Mr. Storie 1 Need he go
further to ask them if that meeting was a
“ mob ” ? Could any man say it was not a
disorderly meeting, a crowd of people, rio-
tous 1 Lie down I Sit down ! Go out!
We’ll have you out of that! Sit down you
young bully 1 What are you going to sub-
scribe ! A riot surely ! For a church, tu-
multous 1 Proceedings like that in the
house of God ! He apprehended he could
not appeal to the Rev. Moderator,, or any
Christian minister, without finding the
response expressive of shame and degrada-
tion, that such a meeting could have taken
place in a church, that the house of God
should have been insulted by conduct so
degrading! It would have been better
that such a meeting should have been held
in a tavern, much better for the honor


of not only the church to which that court
belonged, but also for every other church
in the community, if that meeting had been
held in a tavern, and Mr. Thomas Horne
had there presided. It was next stated
that Mr. Whyte entered the church to head
a mob. The language used in the letter
was, that he had not been in the ch urch,
but once, for four years, until he entered it
to head a mob. And he did take a leading
part in the mob. He apprehended that
when they found the Premier among the
body of Christians behaving in that way,
and he taking a leading part, to say he had
not been at the church for so many years,
and then he entered it and headed a mob,
was no slander, no untruth. But his desire
had been to forget that Mr. Whyte was
Premier, it was, however, forced on him by
the remarks of a member of the court, and
his learned friend, who alluded to tbat as
an aggravation of the charge. His reply
was that it was an aggravation of this
offence. They had been told that Mr. Sto-
rie was a public officer, and that it was
officially wrong as such for him to make
the charge ; as a matter of law he should
like to find out how he was a government
officer, more than the Moderator himself.
The Government knew no clergyman for
the future, but the governing body : under
the recent Act there was no power in
the Government to appoint, dismiss,. pay,
or stop the payment of the ministers’
stipends ; therefore he denied that Mr.
Storie was a government officer ; and the
truth was that the moment Mr. Whyte
entered the church he became the clergy-
man’s inferior. Why if Lord Palmerston
went into a meeting where a mere curate
was preaching, the curate was the servant of
God, and the Premier of England as a wor-
shipper, his inferior. If Mr. Whyte had
been Mr. Storie’s Bishop, comment might
have been made ; but so long as he was
one of his pupils, Mr. Storie to teach him
to do that which is right, to teach him his
duty to God and man, Mr. Storie was supe-
rior, and those who heard him were inferiors.
And now he would gladly pass over that
part, for the position in which he stood
with reference to Mr. Whyte, was such as im-
pelled him to deal as delicately as he could
with the subject, but he should be degra-
ding the position in which he stood, if he
allowed anything beyond what was con-
tained in the libel to influence him. Was
it false or slanderous for Mr. Storie to. say
that the meeting was a mob ? It might
be said he caused the mob ; but the con-
gregation submitted for two years previous
to Mr. Storie’s presiding ; those present had
not objected to the meetings being opened
and closed with prayer ; and on the last
occasion he stood up to offer prayer, when
Mr. Ballantine got up and moved that Mr,
Horne take the chair. Mr. Ballantine
knew that Mr. Storie opened the meeting
with prayer on the former occasions, and
he might have had the decency to wait till
prayer had been offered, before he expressed
the feelings which he had displayed on the
road to the meeting. That was the act
that did the mischief, and, but for that act,
the meeting would have had a different
aspect, and he had no doubt the painful
feelings excited in Mr. Storie’s mind would
not have induced him to write the letter.
If reasonable forbearance had been shown
on the part of that very man to whom the
court had entrusted the functions of prose-
cutor, that case would never have come
there, and the meeting might have been
conducted with ordinary propriety as a
Christian assembly. He put it to the
court whether it was not a mob, and could
they find Mr. Storie guilty of falsehood in
saying it was a mob? And Mr. James
Whyte, one of the leaders, was the one
who headed the mob. He was one of the
four stated in the evidence to have been
the most prominent; Mr. Ballantine moved
and Mr. Robertson seconded that Mr.
Horne should take the chair; Mr. Whyte
put it, and Mr. Horne took it; and to put
in the man who took upon himself to be
chairman of the meeting before the chair-
man was elected, and say he was the leader,
was not far wrong. He might go, if he
wanted mere excuse instead of justification,
to the position of Mr. Storie on entering the
church ; he finds a large body of what the
witnesses called strangers there; finding
the church occupied with strangers, he
might think what’s going on here, or as a
witness exclaimed—“ What’s all this mob?”
The same thing would strike Mr. Storie’s
mind ; and when he attempts to pray he
is interrupted, and when he attempts to
speak is told to “ sit down,” “ lie down,”
“go for constables.” They found the word
“ hell ” used ; and was he wrong in calling
it a mob ? As a Christian minister his duty
was to speak out, and if he had to write
about a mob, could he have called it any-
thing but a mob ? If he had called it a
disorderly assembly, that is a mob ; if he
had gone further and called it a conspiracy,
he would have been nearer the mark ; they
came there for a particular object; they
insulted the minister; was the meeting
there to promote the welfare of the church ?
Was it proceeding in a way that they
would expect men to act in promoting
Christianity, in promoting the law of God
amongst us? Was that the spirit of the
men there? Was that the conduct of the
meeting ? No, he was afraid if they looked
at it properly, they would say there was little
religion in it, Looking to the conduct of


the bulk of them, as sworn to, did they
appear to have gone there stimulated by a
religious desire to promote the welfare of
the church, and its spiritual interests, or to
have gone there by a confederacy, to do
that which had better been left alone to
the usual worshippers at that church ? He
said again the Church Act never antici-
pated that any man who went and paid
7s. 6d. should be entitled to vote, without
they did, or intended to frequent that
church. The Church Act spoke of certain
petitions sent in by those who frequented
or intended to frequent the church, and it
went on to speak of wardens and seat-
holders, meaning of course such as were
elected by the worshippers ; if it were not
so, any dozen men might go to any church,
pay 7s. 6d., overwhelm the usual worship-
pers, and take the management of the tem-
poralities ; men who had not been for years,
men who had’renounced the minister and
left his ministrations, whether rightly or
wrongly, might over-ride the usual worship-
pers and place the management in the
hands of a few who were against the
minister, men who for purposes of their
own prevented the congregation from in-
creasing ; for many would not go to a church
when they found the seatholders thwarted.
No wonder the communion roll fell joff,
that the congregation decreased when such
was the conduct of the Managers, one of
them speaking of the minister as a villain :
when they found one went and took the
collection and then walked away without
entering that church ; when at intervals
of seven days that insult was cast by a
manager upon the minister, it was not
surprising that men should turn their backs
on Christianity as ministered in that
Church. He would trouble them no longer
as to that first charge ; he left it with con-
fidence in their hands ; he believed that as
a body of ministers they were undesirous to
convict a brother on trifling or trivial
grounds, and if ever a case justified the
application of the word mob this is one.
The word “ mob ” was admitted in good
English, in decent English, in English that
a clergyman might make use of. Ti'ench,
in his study of Words, said that it was a
word that had come from the kitchen into
the parlor and there admitted among re-
spectable people. As to the charge respect-
ing the managers having held the church
doors against both members and strangers,
it was said one of the managers attended
in the day time, but no one came ; it was
wet weather ; the reasonable presumption
is that if none attended when it was rain-
ing they would attend in the evening ; but
then the church doors were closed. On his
oath, Mr. Ballantine stated that he started
from his stores and got wet through and so
he did not go. Well, excuses for not doing
duty were always suspicious. He said it
was wet—was it wet ? They had the evi-
dence of no less than five witnesses that it
was not wet, and that Mr. Ballantine did
not come. Now, who spoke the truth, and
who said what was false 1 Was it Mr.
Ballantine who made an excuse inconsistent
with truth, or had Messrs. Gellie, Downie,
Munroe, Snowden, and Campbell all sworn
that which was false ? Even a female was
there, but the manager who always did
his duty, was not there, for it was wet 1
There could not be the slightest doubt as
to the men the court would assign the
truth to, Mr. Gellie and the others who
walked up and down at the church doors
for an hour, there was no rain, and that
the doors were closed ; closed against sit-
ter's and strangers, for Mr. Downie went to
get seats and could not get them. Then
they had the charge that Mr. Storie wil-
fully misrepresented the facts. He was
sorry to find the Moderator’s name with
that of Mr. Mackersey to the document
containing such a statement; a little pre-
vious enquiry would have avoided it. They
found that Mr. Gellie went to Mr. Ballan-
tine, he was told to go to Mr. Piguenit the
collector ; but he had no right to go to the
collector ; it was the duty of Mr. Ballan-
tine, the man who swore that he always did
his duty. There was another one, Mr.
Priestly, he left a cheque for his seat money
at Mr. Ballantine’s store in the afternoon,
but was told that he was too late ; they did
not find that Mr. Ballantine sent back the
cheque, he kept it, but told Mr. Priestly
he had no vote ; now, he either accepted
it or repudiated it; if he accepted it, it
was under the stipulation “ you have no
vote,” if he declined it, he did wrong, for
there was no law that he should not receive
money up to the last moment, because the
Church Act said payment was to be made
up to the 31st December ; that cheque was
left on the 30th, and the books could not
be lawfully made up till the 31st. Mr.
Ballantine knew Mr. Priestly was a friend
of Mr. Storie and he would not accept it,
Messrs. Gellie’s, Galt’s, and Priestly’s, he
declined to accept ; when Mr. Snowden
offered to pay, he first objects, but after-
wards accepts, informing him he had no
vote at the meeting. No vote, why ? Was
it illegal ? But he knew he was another
friend of Mr. Storie’s. We won’t have you ;
we will not have the rents of the usual
worshippers ; but we will accept the rents
of those who have been away for years,
and who wish to attend the meeting, for a
purpose 1 Such was the conduct of that
manager. It was not the fact that the
statement that “ payments of regular seat-
holders have been declined” was wholly


false, and destitute of even a colorable
foundation. Mr. Ballantine had sworn it
was untrue, but had he not sworn what
was untrue from the moment he took the
oath? Was it not in evidence? Was it
not in the evidence that he would not take
a payment offered at 10 in the morning on
the day before the 31st, and that with
the gesture and bounce which he exhibited
at the meeting to which he was going, to
put down these men ? When the facts
came to Mr Storie’s ears, was it not right
that he should denounce such a proceeding;
he asked every one of the court, had a
manager acted in that way in any of their
churches would they not have denounced
him and rightly denounced him? They
found that all those men whose payments
were not received by Mr. Ballantine were
voters for Mr. Storie, those who supported
that gentleman, and were usual worship-
pers at his church. Mr. Walker told them
that he did not go the meeting to be in-
sulted. He supposed that he had heard of
the little “ whipping up.” He would now
leave that question, because he apprehended
that there could be no doubt as to the
truthfulness of Mr. Storie’s statements.
There was nothing to contradict the' evi-
dence of the witnesses, but Mr. Ballantine,
and he apprehended that a man who had
so misconducted himself as Mr. Ballantine
had, and who had brought disgrace upon
the church and upon the community, was
not the man they would rely upon after
hearing the evidence of men whose evidence
and conduct were both unimpeachable.
In the sth paragraph it was stated that
the Rev. J. Storie asserted “ in disparage-
ment of the congregation, and of the re-
spectable meeting then assembled that
“ oaths were heard that made the blood
run cold.” He regretted to see the word
“ respectable” made use of, for it was their
conduct in the aggregate and not their
respectability as individuals must he con-
sidered. Now one statement was perfectly
clear. The word “ hell ” was distinctly
heard. He trusted that it might be a mis-
take : and another person had sworn to an
oath, which he would not repeat, and he
hoped it had not been made use of. They
had heard Mr. Robertson say that it was
not, and he would give him credit for it.
But granting that there was a mistake,
and that Mr. Snowden had misinterpreted
it, all he had to say was that it was proved
and not contested, that a witness went
within an hour, or directly after the meet-
ing, to Mr. Storie, and informed him of the
Oath and of its character. Was Mr. Storie
wrong in relying upon the statement of a
communicant and a Sunday Schoolteacher;
He had heard a question put to Mr.
Snowden by the court. “What age are
you,” as if that would affect the credibility
of his testimony. He apprehended that as
men of experience they all knew that a
little mixture with the world made the ears
harder than they were in youth, and when
oaths were made use of they would not
notice them so much as they would have
before they had mixed with the world, and
he believed that if improper language was
likely to ring in the ears of anyone, it
would be in those of a young man only
twenty years of age—a communicant and
Sunday School Teacher. They had heard
Mr. Johnson say that these young men
were the only ones who did good as to the
spiritual part of the church ; he did not
mean by spending large sums of money
but by doing the work that ought to be
done. He did not wish to go into the
truth or falsehood of the evidence, but he
would say that Mr. Storie was right in be-
lieving the testimony of a young man such
as Snowden, and that he wrote as a man
of common sense would do under the im-
pression, that if any man would notice
such conduct at a meeting, it would be a
young man like this, regular in his duties,
attentive to the duties of the Sunday School,
and to those of the church. It might be
suggested did Snowden hear this or not, or
did he believe that he heard it when he
told Mr. Storie ? When they found that
coarse language was heard in the porch,
from men who had come outside for a
short time ; when they found, such expres-
sions made use of as “ d—d sheepshanks,”
they might know that the simple line be-
tween the church and the porch was not
likely to make such a difference as to alter
the style of conversation very much, and
it was not too much to suppose that their
passions had not subsided when they step-
ped from the threshold into the house of
God. Mr. Snowden communicated this to
Mr. Storie, the latter gentleman knew what
the temper of the meeting had been; he
found that constables were sent for, and
oaths were uttered at the meeting that
made his blood run cold. He (Mr. Dobson)
thought that the very preface, namely, the
conduct of the meeting, was sufficient to
induce Mr. Storie to believe that it was not
impossible that such things should have
happened at the meeting. Mr. Storie re-
lying on the statement of Mr. Snowden,
wrote what he had written, not in dispar-
agement of the usual congregation, because
he stated that “ most of the usual worship-
pers left the church in sorrow and shame.”
He wrote it of those who were not usual
worshippers. Some had never heard him,
and many had not been in the church for
years before. (Rev. Mr. Ewing: That is
not in the libel.) He remarked it to shew
that the letter was misinterpreted, for so


far from disparaging the congregation, Mr.
Storie stated that they left the church in
sorrow and shame. They now came to
the statement made by Mr. Stone —“ that
collections were diverted from the poor to
help a failing and deficient revenue.” They
found that a letter was written by the ma-
nagers in 1856, applying for the collections
to assist a failing and deficient revenue,
“ that the ordinarylrevenue was hardly suffi-
cient for the ordinary expenditure,” and
they also found that the collections were
diverted, that £75 went that half-year to
the credit of the church ; money that had
previously gone to the poor ! In 1856, the
balance in favor of the church was £22,
the sum received from the collections was
£75, and the extraordinary expenditure
was £47. These collections had ever since
been diverted to the general church
revenue. He did not think that Mr.
Storie was far wrong, when he said
that they were diverted from the poor
to help a failing and deficient revenue,
and he thought that it was unfortunate that
such wild charges of absolute fabrication
and gross misrepresentation should be made
against a clergyman ; in 1858 they found
that there was a balance of £6B, in 1859
there was a debt of £163, in 1860 a debt of
£271, in 1861 Mr. Kissock paid himself
£36, leaving a debt of £235, in 1862 £2
were paid off, leaving £233 due, which
was paid off in 1863. Clearly then Mr.
Kissock’s debt could not have been in-
cluded, but must have been paid off in
1861. The letter stated that when Mr.
Storie came, more than £7O was due for Mr.
Mackintosh. All he could say was simply
that Mr. Storie came to St. Andrew’s ex-
pecting to find a furnished manse ; he found
that £250 had been paid to Mr. Mackin-
tosh, that £lBB only had been subscribed,
and that £65 were still to be paid, and
that he was called upon to pay that
amount; the sum was not paid to Mr.
Mackintosh, but on account fo7- money
advanced to that gentleman ; and he paid
£4 for crops. He felt this to be certainly
the weakest point in the whole case, but he
believed that this was Mr. Storie’s meaning
when he stated that more than £7O was
due for Mr. Mackintosh. They now came
to the statement that £4O were due to the
Missionary. This was true, and out of
whose pockets was it to come ? The Mis-
sionary was not a mere servant of the
minister, and consequently £4O had to be
got from the people. Those who paid off
the debt of £233, had to contribute, and
did so. Was Mr. Storie wrong in stating
that these debts were paid off through his
exertions? Those exertions were clear in
two cases, namely the sum due to the
Missionary, and the debt on the church.
The liberality of his friends was conspicuous;
Mr. Storie offered £25 per cent., but in fact
the church could hardly call on him to
subscribe largely, when debts due to him
were held hack, "had never been demanded,
and were due now. In the minute book
they found an order made to pay £25 to
Mr. Storie; Mr. Kissock helped himself
after that order was made, and Mr. Storie
was not paid for months, if for years after;
there was another sum of £lOO debited in
the books, which was not paid, and was
not pressed for, therefore Mr. Storie had
held back his personal claims ; the debts
referred to, with the exception of the £36
due to Mr, Kissock, were paid through his
personal exertions, through the liberality
of his friends, and in part by himself, for he
had subscribed and offered to subscribe
largely. How then could any of his state-
ments be held as gross misrepresentations or
absolute fabrications ? If his own personal
claim of £25 had been insisted on there
would not have been a balance of £36 for
Mr. Kissock. Could that court for one
moment find Mr. Storie guilty of gross mis-
representation or absolute fabrication as
to any part? How difficult figures were
to deal with was shown by the fact of as
good a business man as Mr Kissock com-
ing before them and making an error, in
respect to the £36 due to himself. lie
apprehended that Mr. Storie’s statements
were substantially, if not literally true. As
to the postscript to the letter they had not
all the facts before them. Mr. Ballantine
would not give evidence, and they could
not get the testimony of Mr. Penny. If
Mr. Storie believed that Mr. Whyte’s in-
fluence in any way affected the publication
of the letter he apprehended that it was
no very great sin to state it, and as to a
certain word made use of, it was not in the
libel, and the court could not consider it.
They had not all the evidence before
them, and he beleived that the court
would not act upon half evidence. There
was one matter to conclude with, namely,
with reference to Mr. Storie’s salary of
£lOO a-year. It would be said that
the meeting had absolute authority to
deal with the question, and it had been
asked if it was a permanent or binding ob-
ligation. The practice of the colony was
nothing to the point : the question was,
what was represented to Mr. fetorie and
Mr. McTavish ? It was represented by
Messrs. Officer, Walker, and Paterson, that
the emoluments would be—Government
allowance £450, added by the Congrega-
tion £lOO, making a total of £550. The
latter sum was not to be voted annually or
for a limited period; and, without going
further into the question, he would put
that document into the hands of any gen-


tleman sitting in that court, and ask him I
whether, if he had been placed in a similai t
position to the defendant, he would not >
have understood the meaning to be that he .
should receive £550 a-year ? The amount a
was set doAvn, and added to the govern- 1
ment salary and allowances, and nothing e
was said as to the congregation huA T ing
power to vote the sum, or to interfere with i
it. In the minutes it was spoken of as a :
salary paid by four quarterly instalments,
not that the congregation voted £lOO
a-year, and he apprehended that Ayhen a
person represented a thing, the rule, in IaAV
was that it was taken strongly against the
person making it. He found in the min-
utes that it was moved and seconded, that
the church was indebted to Mr. Storie in
the sum of £lOO. It was not stated that
it Avas to come out of any particular fund,
and he would put it as a matter of provo-
cation to Mr. Storie that his salary, which
he had a right to believe Avould be as per-
manent as his office, was reduced without
notice. Could they not as well take away
the government allowances? Mr. Storie,
in writing the letter, might Avell have con-
sidered their conduct illegal, in voting that
it should be taken away. If a question
arose as to a man’s pay and allowances,
especially when there was a written undei -
taking, and a doubt as to its construction,
he apprehended that the only fair and pro-
per course was to give a person whose
salary was to be discussed an opportunity
of being heard. He believed that was the
case in every court in the British domin-
ions, but no notice was given in this case,
that this letter containing a solemn en-
gagement was going to be repudiated. He
did not use the word invidiously, because
many had probably not seen the letter, and
he did not wish to say anything hard or
offensive if it was not necessary. He
thought that he had noAv gone fairly
through the libel, and he would submit
with every deference, that the facts proved
on the face of that libel Avere .such as
would never induce a court to visit a min-
ister with the most trifling censure. It
was clear that the great bulk of the charges
were absolutely disproved. For others,
Mr. Storie had sufficient ground, arid that
court, himself, or anybody else, might be
misled or mistaken, but where were the
errors or mistakes ? As to the £7O due for
Mr. Mackintosh, if any member of that
court Was smarting under the fact of haw-
ing come, expecting to find the manse fm-
nished, and found when he came that he
must pay £65, he would probably be an-
noyed, especially if he had. not got the
worth of his money, and. might say that
he paid it for Mr. Mackintosh ; it was. a
kind of forced purchase by Mr. Storie,
That was the only thing he could see in
the least approaching an untruth. Did
Snowden tell him that he heard the oath ?
To write this Avithout some information
would have been madness ; he must have
had some information, and Snowden had
SAVorn that he gave information, and. this
was not contradicted, and the rule in a
court of justice was, to accept the testimo-
ny of a witness, except his evidence could
be disproved with reference to any particu-
lar fact. That Mr. Storie would go and
make this broadcast statement Avithout au-
thority, was not consistent with his con-
duct, for he had facts for everything else
that he stated. He would say that Mr.
Storie was not A r ery far wrong, that it was
not a violent presumption, and if he want-
ed corroborative assurance, he would take
the conduct of the meeting. When they
kneAV that outside of the House, of God, the
minister was called a “ villain ” and a
“ d d sheepshanks,” it Avould he very
little to go in and say that “by the Al-
mighty God, they would have him out of
the church.” They had a right to give
Mr. Storie credit for honestly believing the
information given by Snowden. It w r as
not a question as to Avhether he had heard
it or not, but as to whether Mr. Storie had
sufficient ground for the statement made
by him, as he apprehended that for a man
to make a statement in error was no offence
in any known tribunal. He would now
leave the case in the hands of the court,
and would submit to them, as a body of
Christians, as brethren in the ministry,
that the reverend gentleman he represented
Avas entitled to their acquittal on every
syllable contained in that libel.
Mr. Rocher : It now becomes my. privi-
lege to address to you such observations as
I think necessary in support of the prose-
cution. I propose to read the allegations
of the libel seriatim, and to observe on
; the evidence in support of the allega-
tions. But to bring us fairly to the
! meeting of the 30th December, I shall
■ make a few preliminary remarks. We
; find from the evidence that the reverend
5 defendant received a call from the con-
, gregation of St. Andrew’s in August,
t 1860. We find in obedience to that call,
3 Mr. Storie came in November, 1860 ; and
3 we also find, Avhat I think will be ad-
r mitted on all hands, that Mr. Storie was
t most cordially Avelcomed by the congrega-
tion of St. Andrew’s :we find that matters
- went on smoothly until the introduction of
3 Avhat I my term Popish sermons in the
- church, —
b Mr. Dobson : You might confine yourself
t to the charge ; it is not usual to go into
a matters of aggravation, confine yourself to
s. ' the charges, and not refer to the previous


history of the prisoner; it is not fair or
just to do anything of the kind.
Mr. Rocher : I do not know whether the
rev. gentleman is prisoner or defendant :
we have not adopted the course pursued on
the prosecution of a prisoner : the course
has been what is adopted in a civil case
between plaintiff and defendant.
Mr. Dobson : No, I have not had the
opportunity of examining Mr. Storie.
Mr. Rocher : We have a right to allude
to the fact, for we have the evidence, of
two witnesses that they left Mr. Storie’s
church when Mr. Young was excommuni-
cated.
Mr. Dobson : I put it to my learned
friend whether it be fair or just: the court
has decided on that matter, and have ex-
culpated Mr. Storie.
Mr. Rocher : Two witnesses have said
they were induced to leave St. Andrew’s,
in consequence of the excommunication of
Mr. Young.
Mr. Dobson : The libel does not say Mr.
Storie excommunicated him.
Mr. Rocher : We find that when that
took place, it was the commencement of
the dissension in the church ; we go on
and find an ill feeling rises between the
pastor of St. Andrew’s and the congregation
in consequence of an alleged claim of Mr.
Storie for the sum of £lOO. Now I submit
to this court this point,—that Mr. Storie
sits there as the chairman in his own case.
It has been argued by my learned friend
Mr. Dobson, that Mr. Storie had a right to
the seat by the custom and usage of the
church ; I say that custom and usage has
done nothing of the sort; that a layman
always took the chair. Now with that
fact prominently known to my learned
friend how could be attempt to argue that
the minister had a right to the chair ?
Mr. Dobson : I took the last five years.
Mr. Rocher : Here’s the minute book
beginning with Mr. Jackson’s being called
to the chair in 1839, and Mr. Mackintosh
took the chair in 1858, and I’m to be told
that the minister was entitled to that chair
by custom and usage ; why the very word-
ing of the minutes shows differently : “ The
Rev. Mr. Mackintosh took the chair.”
“ The Rev. Mr. Mackintosh was voted to
the chair.” My learned friend took a
marked distinction between “ taking ” the
chair, and being voted to it; well, you
heai’d from the evidence of Mr. William
Robertson what took place at that meeting
in 18G2 ; you heard that there was consid-
erable dissension and discussion in refer-
ence to the salary of £lOO claimed by Mr.
Storie ; and you heard also, that on that
occasion Mr. Storie made use of the obser-
vation, that so help him God he would
press his claim. Mr, Robertson tells you
that to prevent a repetition of such con-
duct,—and I come here boldly to assert it,
not to mince the matter in the slightest,—■
that the friends of St. Andrew’s Church,
men who have contributed by hundreds
and thousands of pounds to the erection of
the church, determined that such a scene
should not take place again, rallied in a
body, and resolved to oust Mr. Storie
from the chair. There’s no mincing or
beating about the bush ; the seatholders,
the very men who built the church, com-
municated in the church, till driven out of
it by Mr. Storie, determined to submit no
longer to this tyranny from the pastor, and
to oust him from the chair, and they did
so. My learned friend has made great
capital of the interruption to the pastor in
opening the meeting with prayer. I was
surprised to find such a species of Peck-
sniff argument used, for it was nothing
else. That a mere meeting of seatholders
should be opened with prayer is farcical.
Why, it was opened for twenty years with-
out prayer, and where was the necessity
for this meeting being opened with prayer.
The observation of Mr. Thomas Horne
was correct, as far as the meeting, went—
“ it might have been called in a tavei*h,
and the veriest beggar in the street, had he
been a seatholdev in St. Andrew’s Church,
might have been voted into the chair/’ It
certainly did astonish me to hear such em-
phasis laid on the fact of the meeting not
being opened with prayer. Well, we come
to the meeting, and we find that at that
meeting were present the minister’s mana-
ger, and men who had subscribed for
twenty years, who were seatholders, com-
municants, and managers of St. Andrew s,
and we were gravely told they were stran-
gers ; Mr. Wm. Robertson, who had assisted
in building the church, whose purse was
ever ready to contribute ; he was a stranger.
We are told that Mr. Thomas Horne, who
was a communicant and a member to a
period approaching Mr. Storie’s arrival,
and who, for reasons I am not entitled to
say, did not feel disposed to remain under
Mr. Storie’s ministry,—although for many
years a member of St. Andrew’s, Mr. Horne
was a stranger ! The same with Mr. Whyte;
he was a stranger ! Mr. Corrie, a stranger!
Mr. Thomas Jhonson, a stranger! And
the pastor of St. Andrew’s chooses to pub-
lish to the world that his congregation,
consisting of his own manager, Mr Wm.
Robertson, and the other gentlemen I have
referred to, were a mob ! If he had said so
in the heat of excitement There would
have been some little excuse ; but he delibe-
rately sits down, and addresses a letter to
the public prints, and designates the con-
gregation of the standing I have mentioned,
as a mob. Now, my learned friend took


a great deal of pains, and has searched up
dictionaries to find the definition of a mob.
I don’t trouble myself in the same way, I
ask you as men of plain, common sense,
who understand the English language, it
a more offensive word could have been se-
lected than the word mob? This letter
was intended to go elsewhere, he it remem-
bered ; it was not to be confined to the
mere town where the truth or falsehood
could be tested. Ask a man of common
sense what he understands by a “ mob,”
and he can come to no other conclusion,
than that the meeting was riotous, disor-
derly, ill-conducted, and a vulgar assembly
of individuals. Now I will take the libel
paragraph by paragraph. The first para-
graph is “ That the Kev. John Stone, &c.”
As to this, my first proof is this letter. in
manuscript produced by Mr. John Davies.
It is asserted here that the letter was writ-
ten on the sth Jan., addressed to the lion.
Jas. Whyte. It also says it was sent for
insertion in the Advertiser $ Mercury news-
papers. I may as well say you have no
evidence that you can legally take notice
of that it was sent to the Advertiser. Well,
here is a letter produced by Mr. Davies.
Mr. Davies tells you he is the proprietor
and editor of the Mercury , and he re-
ceived this letter. He says he rejected
the letter, for why ? For the very reason
alleged here, because it was libellous, and
in the highest degree libellous. Now I’ll
read it. (The learned counsel here read
from the letter, commenting as he proceed-
ed.) Mr. Dobson objected to his learned
friend commenting, and Mr. Eocher read
to the beginning of the Fifth paragraph,
including the reference to a mob, and Mr.
Horne having stepped down from the Bench
degraded, the latter word being omitted
from the printed copy, and he proceeded
with his remarks. Now then, where is the
proof that this was a mob i You have the
evidence first of Dr. Officer ; and he says
that so far from these gentlemen being
likely to create a disturbance or being a
mob, they were gentlemen of the highest
respectability. All those gentlemen were
called, and every one denies that the con-
duct of the meeting was such as. to justify
the calling of it a mob. As to it being a
disorderly meeting, they describe what took
place and go to the extent of saying that
to designate such a meeting a mob is a
scandal and nothing but scandal. Then
the libel goes on to say that this letter
being rejected, the rev. defendant addressed
a circular —if it can be so called —wherein
he very wisely omits the slanderous matter :
but in that circular, he still follows up the
charges, nay more, on the 21st January
he publishes the same in the Launceston
Examiner: there you have a clear delibe-
rate and well-weighed act, the letter of the
sth January, though cautioned that it is
libellous, immediately followed by the cir-
cular, and a repetition of the charges in
the Launceston Examiner of the 21st Jan.
re-iterating the attack, publishing to the
world and stigmatizing the worshippers at
St. Andrew’s church as a mob. I ask with
confidence can any of you for one moment
say that it is not a wilful slander? Now,
let us see what is the evidence on the
part of the defendant. The first wit-
ness is Mr. John Gellie ; he is the prin-
cipal gentleman ; he says “ I was ashamed
of the manner in which the proceedings
begun ;—I saw a great many come to the
meeting who were never in the church
before.” Does he attempt to say it was
anything approaching a mob ? He tries
to give a coloring to it in one or two
sentences, 1 >ut I submit that neither Gel-
lie nor any other witness has given the
slightest testimony to enable you to sup-
pose that there is the slightest doubt to be
placed in the evidence of the gentleman
called in support of the libel. You must
be satisfied on the evidence and character
of the witnesses for the prosecution that
the allegation here that the meeting was a
mob is, to say the least of it, a slander and
wilful misrepresentation. I don’t hesitate
to say that those seatholders, who went
there, went for the purpose of preventing a
repetition of the scene of the previous
meeting. Warm words may have been
bandied between one and another, but had
the rev. defendant, as he ought to have
done when he saw the feeling so strong
against him, quitted the church, or taken
his seat in his own pew, no disturbance, no
unseemly conduct would have arisen ; and
the whole of the conduct arose wholly and
solely from the demeanour of the rev. de-
fendant himself. The learned counsel then
read the next paragraph in the libel as to
the church doors being closed against both
members and strangers. Now what are
the facts of the case ? We are told that in
the morning Mr. William Robertson at-
tended at the church and not a single indi-
vidual applied for seats; that it was Mr.
| Ballantine’s duty to attend in the evening,
! but he did not, and he tells you the reason
why. The gentleman who makes the com-
plaint is a sort of protege of the rev. de-
fendant, for, in getting up petitions, and
attending meetings where are disturbances,
Mr. John Gellie is the most prominent; he
is the writer of the letter. Now look how
simple it was to get up a case against the
manager ; at that time dissensions had
arisen in the church ; the then manager,
after he took the plate at the door, did not
enter the church, and Mr. John Gellie went
to take a seat, but he did not find the ma-


nager there ; now we can pretty well judge
what a fine opportunity that was for Mr.
J ohn Gellie ; now, says he, I’ve got a capi-
tal slap at Mr. Ballantine ; it’s just the
thing for a friend and supporter of the Bev.
Mr. Storie ; I will just go about and get
four or five more to come and back me in
saying there was no manager at the church.
Did it not strike you, Moderator, and rev.
gentlemen, that it was a very nice little
manoeuvre of Mr. John Gellie, no doubt
kindly prompted by the rev. gentleman ?
Mr. Dobson : Mr, Storie was at Camp-
bell Town.
Mr. Bocher : He could easily have man-
aged it the day before.
Mr. Dobson : He went a week before.
Mr. Bocher : How easily could Mr. Gel-
lie go and find the church doors not open-
ed, and pick up, not beggars from the
street, but persons who want to be seat-
holders, so as to complain against the ma-
nager ; I don’t dispute the fact that Mr.
Ballantine was not in attendance, and he
tells you why he was not there : then I ask
you if it is not a misrepresentation, on the
part of Mr. Storie, when after having re-
ceived but one complaint, he says the
managers held the church doors closed
against seatholders and strangers ?
Mr. Dobson : There’s no evidence that
there was only one complaint.
Mr. Bocher : There’s no proof that there
was more than one complaint made, and
why should Mr. Storie take up a matter
that took place in July, in the spirit of the
Malay, to stab where he could by raking
up old affairs. Then he said “ payments
of regular seatholders were declined.”
Where is the evidence of that ? I suppose
the evidence of that fact is through that
Jack-of-all-Trades, Mr. John Gellie; he
comes up to prove everything, and I trust
the court will look well to his evidence ;
he tells you that he came to Mr. Ballan-
tine, that Mr. Ballantine told him to go to
Mr. Piguenit; Mr. Piguenit is not at his
office, and eventually he pays Mr. Moir ;
that is really the whole and sole testimony
to support an allegation like this. Mr.
Ballantine tells you he never declined a
payment. There is no evidence that can
justify the rev. defendant in writing that
“ payment of regular seatholders was de-
clined,” and Gellie is the only man who
comes forward to prove the fact. He goes
on further to allege that such payments
have been accepted with the specification,
“ mind you have no vote.” That I suppose
is to be supported by Mr. Priestly; and
what does Mr. Priestly tell you ? Pie went
in the morning of the day of the meeting
to Mr. Ballantine’s store, and he left a
cheque on his desk ; subsequently he saw
Mr. Ballantine in the' street, and he told
him he had no vote. I don’t know what
the insinuation of my learned friend meant,
but my learned friend said Mr. Ballantine
took the money ; does he mean that Mr.
Ballantine took the money to his own pri-
vate use? All that the evidence of Mr.
Priestly went to was this, that he left a
cheque, hut you have no proof that it ever
came to Mr. Ballantine.
Mr. Dobson : The cheque was cashed ;
we produced the cheque cashed.
Mr. Bocher: That may he, but at the
time Mr. Priestly spoke to Mr. Ballantine,
and he said “ Mind you have no vote,”
Mr. Ballantine was under the impression
that the money was paid too late. We
find Mr. Priestly present at the meeting,
and there he is undeceived by another ma-
nager, who tells him he has a vote. Where
is the harm done to Mr. Priestly ? I sub-
mit that the words of the libel are proved
that the allegation accepted with the spe-
cification, “ mind you have no vote,” is
untrue. It is untrue, because payment
was not accepted, and when at the meeting
Mr. Priestly was undeceived, and told he
had a vote : whether he exercised that' vote
during the meeting or not I cannot say.
The next paragraph was that “ oaths were
uttered which made the blood run cold.”
Now you have the testimony of fourteen
or fifteen witnesses who were present during
the whole of the proceedings, and they dis-
tinctly deny that anything in the shape of
an oath was uttered. They go further, and
say had oaths been uttered, they must have
heard them ; they distinctly deny that any
were used. I had heard it whispered at the
commencement of the ease who the gen-
tleman was whom the defendant said
had uttered oaths ; knowing that fact, I
particularly examined the witnesses as to
the locality of Mr. Bobertson’s seat, and
you will find if you look through the
evidence that these witnesses all corroborate
each other in saying where Mr. Bobertson
was, and being in the immediate vicinity
of Mr. Bobertson, they were in a position
to swear that no oaths were used by that
gentleman ; it now turns out that Mr. Wm.
Bobertson is the gentleman, but you have
the evidence of fifteen or sixteen, that no
oaths were uttered, and that they sat in
the vicinity of Mr. Bobertson. Then comes
the evidence that oaths were uttered, —and
who is the party ? A Sunday school teacher;
he is one of Mr. Storie’s i>rotefj6s again,
and he tells you he was walking up and
down, that Mr. Wm. Bobertson was stand-
ing close there, and he heard Mr. Bobertson
utter the oath; an oath that made his
blood run cold. Now is it not strange that
out of all the persons in that meeting, he
cannot produce any witness except this
one boy, to swear to the fact ? Gellie must


have been in the immediate vicinity ; Mr. f
Horne, and the other gentlemen, were not
asked, and the whole testimony on that 1
point was that of this prat eg 6 ; they hung <
him forward, and wish to induce you to >
take that evidence against the direct denial J
of Mr. Robertson himself, and of the other 1
respectable parties who were present. Now 1
I ask you if that is not pretty well the ;
height of presumption ? To come here he- ]
fore a respectable court like this, to wish i
you to believe that one witness in opposi- :
tion to the direct testimony of Mr. Robert-
son, and the fourteen or fifteen respectable |
witnesses you have heard ! Nay more, the i
witness’s own brother, and the celebrated i
Mr. Gellie, not one of them heard the
oaths. It is true one of the witnesses spoke
about the word “ hell,” whether he heard
the imp of hell, or a devil of hell, he could
not say, strange to say, that again was not
heard by any other witness. And this is
the evidence on which the pastor pens the
assertion, “ oaths were heard which made
the blood run cold 1” We find Mr. Storie s
protege with Mr. Storie within an hour
after the meeting to communicate the fact.
My learned friend says Mr. Storie was
justified in writing what he did on the evi-
dence of his Sunday school teacher, now
is that feasible for one moment; is he jus-
tified because his Sunday School teacher
chooses to come in to him, knowing that
his pastor will be well pleased with such
intelligence, to tell him that a man like
Mr. Robertson had made use of the oath in
question, without the slightest enquiry,
without going to his manager ! No, it is
too good an opportunity; he was deter-
mined to slander every man he could; he
first slanders Mr. Horne, then Mr. Robert-
son, on the authority of this Sunday School
teacher ! The very defence was worse than
the charge contained in the paragraph ;
the fact of insulting the court, consisting
of men of intelligence, supposing they
would believe that Sunday School teacher,
in contradiction to the evidence of the gen-
tlemen who had been called. The next
point was as to the collections being di-
verted from the poor, to help a failing and
deficient revenue. What were the facts of
the case? The managers asked for the
plate for extraordinary purposes. Now it
they would only bear in mind the testimony
of Mr. Robertson, that even with these
collections being diverted for extraordinary
purposes, at the end of the year there was
a considerable balance in favor of the
church, he would say that the assertion ot
collections being diverted from the poor to
help a failing and deficient revenue, was
false. It was a false assertion, and. made
for nothing else than to gratify a malignant
feeling on the part of Mr. Storie, Why
should that gentleman go back to ISSG ?
He was determined to “ run a muck,” and
he did not care whom he libelled, he made
an assertion that was flatly disproved. .Mr.
Storie further stated that when he came in
November, 1860, more than £7O were due
to Mr. Mackintosh. Even his learned
friend admitted that this was an erroneous
assertion, and as he understood, wished to
put it on the furniture, but he did not
read it as connected in any way with the
furniture, but at the eleventh hour it was
attempted to mix it up with it, in order to
get Mr. Storie out of the “mess.” Mr.
Storie stated that the £4O due to the mis-
sionary, £36 to Mr Kissock, and £233 to
Messrs. Moir, were paid off by his exertions.
So far as the £4O were concerned, _ they
were told that the managers had nothing to
do with it, he thought that the members of
that court were best able to judge as to the
accuracy of the statements made by the
managers, as they knew the usages of the
church. (Mr. Dobson : Mr. Storie. does
not say that the managers had anything to
do with it.) They could not read it any
other way than that when Mr. Storie came
in 1860, mbre than £7O was due to Mr.
Mackintosh, that was false, that £4O were
due to the missionary, £36 to Mr. Kissock,
and £233 to Messrs. Robertson and Moir.
And that these were paid off through his
exertions, through the liberality of his
friends, in part by himself, and by holding
back his own personal claims. Now that
was not correct. These amounts were not
due, and more than that, they did not find
that they were paid off through the instru-
mentality of Mr. Storie, or his friends. He
went twice to Mr. Moir, and ranked Mr. John
Walker as his particular friend, but Mr.
Robertson contributed, and he did not
want Mr. Storie to ask him to contribute
to St. Andrew’s Church, he should say not,
he was a man who had contributed his
thousands to the church, and did not re-
quire an application, but subscribed libe-
rally, and he would say that when Mr.
; storie asserted that these sums were due
by the insolvent church, and that until he
came, no attempt was made to pay them
’ off, it was a misrepresentation, not a fact,
s He now came to Mr. Storie’s statement
: with reference to the closing of the news-
• papers. Did he not state that their inser-
; tion was frustrated by Mr. Whyte, but
r what did Mr. Whyte say,—“ I had nothing
; to do with it.” And Mr. Robertson told
; them that Mr. Whyte urged those connect-
f ed with the Advertiser to publish the let-
) ter, and still this gentleman came and
3 asserted a fact for which there was no
3 earthly foundation. Now it would be
t borne in mind, that what was conplained
j of in the libel, were the acts of Mr. Storie


as minister of St Andrew’s Church, that i
he had created dissensions among his p
parishioners, and written libels upon the 1
congregation. He would submit that this r
had been clearly proved, and that in defi- d
ance of the evidence adduced by Mr. Storie, m
they had not the slightest ground work upon c
which they could fairly assume that he had I
not been guilty of the sins of “slander, wil- t
ful misrepresentation, and deliberate false- 1
hood.” Mr. Storie was not only guilty of s
these sins, in stating for facts what never 1
did occur, but he went and raked up old t
matters with which he had nothing on i
earth to do, for they had it in evidence on t
this behalf, to show how he was appreciated i
by his congrepation, that a petition was got 1
up in his favor. Now who did they find again 1
in that petition ? Mr. Gellie and Mr. Snow- 1
den, the witnesses—Mr. Storie’s proteges.
They were told that it was prepared by some <
rev. gentleman in Melbourne, and this was i
again in evidence to show the esteem in
which Mr. Storie was held by his congrega- :
tion. It was very surprising that by the
piece of paper adduced in evidence yester-
day. (Mr. Dobson said that the address
was not given in evidence, and that he
would comment upon it, if Mr. Rocher
did.) The witness was examined on the
address, and if not put in, it was not his
fault. They found that Mr. Storie was the
writer of the very petition himself. (Mr.
Dobson—lt is not the fact.) Take the
piece of paper for what it was worth —it
was put in and marked for evidence by the
defendant, let them take if for what it was
worth. (Mr. Dobson —I should think that
the court would not look at it.) They must
look at it, and they could form their own
opinion as to whether it was written by
Mr. Storie. He had now gone as shortly
as he could through the different allega-
tions in the libel, and he thought that they
must be satisfied that each had been proved
with the exception of the one referring to
the Advertiser newspaper ; that was not
proved in consequence of Mr. Penny de-
clining to give evidence. He would now
read the different documents that had been
put in as evidence, with such observations
on them as he might think necessary.
(The learned counsel then read a portion
of Mr. Storie’s manuscript letter.)
Mr. Dobson said that this part was not
at issue. The learned counsel was going
into matters which were not before the
court, simply to prejudice their minds un-
fairly. If he persisted in doing so, he (Mr.
Dobson) would walk out of the court.
Such a thing was never done in a court
before.
Mr. Rocher was not doing anything ot
the sort; it was evidence. A letter had
been put in, wherein Mr. Storie claimed
£IOO. The Managers would not dare to
pay that amount, unless it was voted.
There was no vote of it in 1862. He had a
right to show this, for they had it in evi-
dence that whatever addition Mr. Storie
was to receive could only be collected ac-
cording to the number of seat-payers. Mr.
Walker told them there was a minute of
the contract. Where was it ? Now, he
had expected that there would be a minute
showing that such an arrangement had
been sanctioned by the congregation ; but
there was none. Mr. Storie alluded to it
in his letter, and he (Mr. Rocher) was jus-
tified in showing that the Managers could
not and dared not pay that amount, as it
had never been voted, in consequence, as
he was going to show, of the seat rents
having fallen off.
Mr. Dobson :Is that relevant 1 It is not
everything that comes out in the evidence
that is relevant to the charges.
Mr. Rocher was only going to show what
Mr. Storie had said about the pewrents.
Mr. Dobson : Is that material ?
Mr. Rocher said that of course it was.
Had they not been detained days and days
with respect to the £IOO.
Mr. Dobson : Not in that respect.
The Moderator : I think we can scarcely
say till Mr. Rocher goes a little further.
Mr. Rocher : In the printed letter they
found an omission took place as was as-
serted ; the libel said “ omissions and altera-
tions there was an omission and an altera-
tion, for there was a postscript. He did not
think that any one would attempt to deny
that the letter contained a libel, not only
upon a member of the congregation but
also upon the legislature of the colony. It
stated that Mr. Horne stepped down “ de-
graded.” Sir Francis Smith, the then At-
torney-General, Mr. Chapman, the then Pre-
mier, and others, had given a pension of
£BOO a year to this very gentleman who
was thus libelled by Mr. Storie. (Mr. Dob-
son :Is that relevant ?) It was, for it was
a most cruel libel, and was calculated to
set the congregation by the ears. Mr.
Horne had many friends, and could they
i expect that a minister who could write
such slander would be looked upon except
l in the light of degradation ?
Rev. Dr. Turnbull said that the learned
; counsel was drawing attention to slander
;■ not in the libel. He thought that what
3 they had heard for the last qua,rter of an
- hour had no relevancy to the libel. It did
. not illustrate or prove any charges that
. Rad been brought forward, and he would
t submit that it was incompetent.
Mr. Rocher said that it illustrated the
f fact of the letter having been rejected as
I libellous. The reverend gentleman left
d out one word, but he would say that this


did not make it one whit the better. The
printed letter said “ Stepped down from the
Bench ; ” was not that a libel ? He would
say that it was extremely relevant that this
letter should be put in. ' His learned friend
had some days previously spoken as to the
jurisdiction of the Court. From the con-
duct of the defendant throughout they
were led to suppose that he had a tri-
umphant answer to all the allegations, yet,
strange to say, he occupied two days in
battling with the court to prevent the case
being heard ; every possible objection was
brought forward, and now where was the
triumphant answer? Had he given one
single answer to the charges that they
would for one moment listen to 1 No, no,
nothing of the sort, but he would tell them
what he had done. Not contented with
slandering his congregation with publish-
ing libels, he had through the instrumenta-
lity of his counsel, first tried to intimidate
that court, (Mr. Dobson. That I deny at
once, it is not relevant. I think that the
question had better be left alone.) Through
the instrumentality of his counsel it was
said that he would have to observe upon
members of that court with regret. [Mr.
Dobson —I do not recollect it, and I take
it the court would have asked me what I
meant if I had done so.] His Mr. (Eocher’s)
reply was that he trusted the court would
proceed without being intimidated by
threats. He did not impute these acts to
his learned friend [Mr. Dobson—What-
ever I have said or done don’t excuse me.]
He would not say that it was an intentional
insult to the court, but he thought that the
court would bear him out in the assertion
that the learned counsel had made use of
such an expression.
Mr. Dobson : Did I make use of those
words ?
The Moderator said that he was not
listening at that moment. Would Mr.
Eocher repeat the words ?
Mr. Eocher did so.
Mr. Dobson : I had no intention of doing
so. I said that I might remark upon the
witnesses. I may have done it, but with-
out my knowledge.
Mr. Eocher : I pass it by.
The Eev. Mr. Robertson said, that in
justice to Mr. Dobson, lie must say that he
did not remember having heard him say so.
If he had done so it had escaped his
memory.
The Moderator did not think that Mr.
Dobson had made use of personal observa-
tions. They were with respect to the
character of the court.
Eev. Mr. Garrett had heard observations
similar to those repeated by Mr. Eocher.
Mr. Ilocher would pass it by. What was
the next step ? A species of intimidation
was attempted, namely, to get the ccrart to
decide if the private character of indivi-
duals should he gone into.
Mr. Dobson : It is a question I should
put in any [court in this world. Mode-
rator, is it relevant, is it not a matter that
has been done with and has gone by ? My
learned friend is travelling to matters that
cannot affect your judgment.
Mr. Eocher said that it would have a
great effect on their judgment. The judg-
ment of that court would go forth to the
public. They must bear in mind that im-
putations had last night been thrown upon
members of that court which was neither
more nor less than that they were bribed.
What was the object? It was to throw
slander on the members of that court.
Did the reverend defendant for one moment
expect that the question would be an-
swered? No, it was put with a full con-
viction that no answer would be conde-
scended, but the dirt was spattered, and
the reverend defendant hoped that some
of it would stick upon the members of
that court. Now he would say that a man
who could even insinuate such a thing, and
instruct his counsel to put such a question
to a brother minister, must be a very black
hearted man indeed. It was a notorious
question to put, and coupling that with the
fact that the character of private individuals
was to be raked up, it did not redound to the
character of the defendant to adopt such a
course. It was rumours ! Rumour’s busy
tongue was very loud in this town—were
they to go by it. He was a stranger here,
but he had heard it rumoured since his
arrival that even the moral character of
those in high places—rulers in the Church
of God,—had been assailed, and probably
wantonly. Now supposing that any elders
or men of high standing in the church had
been called there as witnesses, would that
court have allowed him under his privilege
as advocate to preface his address with “ I
wish to put a question, it is a delicate
question, but rumour has made free with
your moral character ; you can answer me
in one word —yes or no.” Would he have
been justified in doing so, would not the
person questioned be perfectly justified in
saying, “ what have I to do with rumour ?
I will not answer your impertinent ques-
tion,” and he would have been very pro-
perly rebuked. So much for rumour, and
he must confess that he had felt hurt that
such a question should have been put tending
as he considered to the insult of the Court.
He felt assured that in spite of every insi-
nuation thrown out against that Court —in
spite of anonymous communications re-
ceived by the Moderator holding out threats
against—him, that the members of that
court would divest their minds of all this,


and would consider the case impartially.
The congregation of St. Andrew’s church
had complained, and that court had adopt-
ed the course pointed out by the Church
of Scotland. No laymen were introduced,
and his brethren would take care that a
brother minister should not be libelled
without reason. The usual safeguards were
taken before a libel was found, and the
members of the court sat there to hear the
evidence, and be guided by it alone. And
now in discharge of his duty he would call
upon them as the Presbytery of Tasmania
to weigh the evidence carefully. And if
they could concientiously find that Mr.
Storie had been grievously libelled let them
in God’s name acquit him. Let them bear
in mind that it was not verbal slander, but
a deliberate concocted letter and followed
up from the sth to the 25th. If they
thought that the minister of St. Andrew’s
or any minister on earth was justified under
the circumstances in publishing libels on
the congregation, on the mere statement
of a boy, if they thought that he was justified
in libelling the manager and other respec-
table members of his congregation, let them
acquit him ; but if they did not think so
he would say that they were in duty bound
to protect the congregation of St. Andrew’s;
and that if they found the imformation
established, or any part of it, for they were
not tied down to the whole, they would
in the words of the prayer of the petitioners
“visit him with such censure as the Word
of God and the rules and discipline of this
church in such cases prescribe.”
Saturday, Aphil 16, 1864.
The Presbytery met at twelve o’clock.
When the doors were opened, a consider-
able number of persons of various denomi-
nations entered and took their seats.
The Eev. J. Mackersey read the following
minutes :
Friday, April 15tli, 1864.
St. John’s Church, 4 p.m.
The Presbytery met and was duly con-
stituted with prayer by the Moderator.
Sederunt: —The liev. Charles Simson,
(ModeratorJ, liev. J. llobertson, Ilev. It.
K. Ewing, liev. Dr. Turnbull, Eev. James
Garrett, Eev. Eobcrt Maclean, Eev. Thos.
Dugall, Eev. Thomas Dove, Eev John Mac-
kersey.
The Presbytery sitting with closed doors
entered upon the consideration of the evi-
dence which had been given before them
in the case of the Eev. John Storie, Minis-
ter of St. Andrew’s Church, Hobart Town,
prosecuted by libel for offences therein
specified. After mature deliberation the
Presbytery an’rived at the following conclu-
sions. Ist.—The fii-st chai’ge in the libel,
That in a letter dated the sth day of Jan.,
1864, addressed to the Hon. James Whyte,
Esquire, Colonial Secretary, written by the
Rev. John Storie, sent by him for insertion in
the Advertiser and Mercury newspapers,
rejected by those papers as being ‘ libellous,
and in the highest degree libellous,’ and
thereafter printed with omissii ins and alter-
ations by direction of the said Reverend
John Storie for private circulation, and de-
livered by post and otherwise to the said
honorable James Whyte and oilier gentle-
men, and also printed and published by the
said Reverend John Storie as an advertise-
ment in the Launceston Examiner news-
paper, of the twenty-first day of January
last past —the said Reverend John Storie in
the second paragraph of the said letter did
slanderously and falsely assert that the
annual meeting of the seatholders of St.
Andrew’s Church, held in terms of the Act
of Council in that behalf on the thirtieth
day of December in the Year One Thousand
Eight Hundred and Sixty-three was a
‘ mob,’ and that the said James Whyte
entered the Church in order to head this
mob.” The Presbytery find proven by a
majority of seven to one with the exception
of the reference to the Advertiser newspa-
per, the editor of which paper declined to
be sworn, or to give evidence in the case,
and with the further exception that the
words “ alterations and omissions ” have
not been proved, but only that there was
one omission. 2nd. —Find proven by a
majority of seven to one, the statement in
the second count of the libel that the said
Rev. J. Storie has wilfully misrepresented
facts, when he alleges that after advertise-
ment of the usual seat-letting in July last,
the managers “ held the church doors closed
against both members and strangers.” Find
proven the statement in the same second
count that when the said Rev. J. Storie
avers that payments of regular seatholders
have been declined, he states what is wholly
false. Find not proven that the statement
in the second count of the libel “that any
such payments have been accepted with
the specification, mind you have no vote,
is equally untrue.”
3rd. —Find proven the 3rd count relative
to “ oaths being heard which made the blood
run cold,” by a majority of seven to one.
4th. —Find not proven, the fourth count
by the Moderator’s casting vote.
sth. —Find proven the fifth count by a
majority of six to two.
The Rev. J. Mackersey moved the Pres-
bytery do adopt the following as the de-
liverance of the court in the case of the
Rev. John Storie, minister of St. Andrew’s
Church, Hobart Town :
That after careful and patient investiga-
tion of the charges exhibited against the
said Rev. John Storie, and examination of


witnesses and documents, the Presbytery j
having found the said charges in great part
proven, the sentence of the court is that the
pastoral tie now subsisting betwixt the
said Rev. John Storie and the congrega-
tion of St. Andrew’s Church be and hereby 1
is dissolved. That the said Rev. J. Storie i
be called upon to acknowledge the faults of t
which he has been found guilty, to express t
contrition for them, and to apologize to t
that portion of the congregation of St. <
Andrew’s Church which he has offended
and insulted, in terms approved of by the 1
Presbytery. That Mr. Storie on submit- 1
ting himself to the judgment of the court i
shall retain his status as a minister of this
church, and shall be eligible to receive a
call from any other congregation within
the bounds to which the Presbytery will
give effect, provided it comply with and be
proceeded in according to the rules of the
church ; and that meanwhile Mr. Storie
be employed as a missionary under the ju-
risdiction and at the disposal of the Pres-
bytery.
The Rev. J. Robertson seconded the mo-
tion, which was put and passed.
The Rev. Dr. Turnbull then put in the
following dissent:
“ I respectfully dissent from the deliver-
ance now given by the Presbytery.
“ Because the findings or verdicts of 1 Pro-
ven’ are in my opinion contrary to the
evidence.
“Adam Turnbull.”
“ 16th April, 1864.”
Rev. Mr. Ewing moved an adjournment
till four o’clock to receive Mr. Storie’s
apology.
A rev. member called attention to the
absence of Mr. Storie.
The Moderator : The deliverance may be
given in his absence. His agent is here.
Mr. Dobson: No, I am not his agent ;
my duty ceased yesterday.
Rev. Mr. Ewing said he must leave to-
morrow morning for Launceston on a work
of necessity and mercy ; and there should
be no unnecessary delay.
Rev. Mr. Mackersey thought it would be
too precipitate to go on before Monday
morning.
The Moderator: I have been tola that
Mr. Storie is at hand if we require him
The Rev. Mr. Garrett moved that Mr.
Storie be informed at once ; he did it more
on Mr. Storie’s account than anything else.
The Moderator : Is it the wish of the
Presbytery that Mr. Storie be requested to
attend.
Rev. Mr. Mackersey moved an adjourn-
ment until Monday. Mr. Storie. would
require time for consideration, and it would
be far more becoming after an investigation
of nine or ten days, and it would answer no
purpose to precipitate matters.
Rev. Mr. Dove seconded the motion ,
which was put and passed.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE.
Leave of absence was given to Rev. Mr.
Ewing, as his presence in Launceston was
urgently required. A similar request by
the Rev. Mr. Dugall, who said he had been
taking medicine, and wished to leave by
the Richmond coach that afternoon, was
complied with.
Rev. Dr. Turnbull said before the motion
for adjournment was put, he had a letter
to bring before the Court, affecting another
matter.
Several ministers indicated to Dr. Turn -
bull that business was before the Chair, and
he resumed his seat, with the letter in his
hand.*
The motion that the Presbytery adjourn
until Monday, at 12 o’clock, was then put
and carried.
Rev. Dr. Turnbull would now bring for-
ward the matter of which he had spoken.
He had a letter —
Rev. Mr. Mackersey: The Presbytery
adjourned. You can’t do it now.
The Moderator at once pronounced the
benediction.
Monday April 18, 1864.
Tenth Day.
The Presbytery met again to-day at noon.
As the Clerk was about to read the
minutes,
The Rev. Mr. Storie rose and read a
protest, during the reading of which there
was considerable interruption. The Clerk
called to the Moderator to interfere; he
then proceeded with reading the minutes.
Mr. Storie persisted in his reading at the
same time. There were loud cries of “ Ad-
journ.” The Moderator appealed to Mr.
' Storie, who nevertheless continued his
reading. The Rev. Messrs. Ewing and Ro-
bertson left the church ; the Rev. Mr. Gar-
rett moved an adjournment, the Rev. Mr.
Mackersey seconded it. It was put by the
, Moderator, and passed by a shew of hands
sine die.
Rev. Mr. Storie (desisting from reading,
which he had continued to do up to this
moment) said that after the indecent pro-
ceedings which had just taken place, he
[ should lay the document on the table, and
quit the Court. His counsel was his wit-
! ness, and he would leave a copy of the
) paper in the hands of the Press.
The document read by Mr. Storie was as
follows
* A letter from the Hon. J. Walker undertaking
to prove that cheques for £lO and £8 hearing the
name of Rob. Ballantine had been cashed in Laun-
ceston by the Rev. J. Garrett and R. K. Ewing
respectively a day or two before the Presbytery met.


“ I John Storie, of St. Andrew’s, Hobart
Town, having taken formal objections—
“ Ist. To the constitution of this so-call-
ed Presbytery ;
“ 2nd. To the proceedings in which this
case originated;
“ 3rd. To the alleged libel and proceed-
ings thereon, as not being in conformity
with the law and usage of the Church of
Scotland, nor consistent with justice ;
“ Having, moreover, formally objected
that the parties appointed to prosecute, and
who have signed the complaint, have been
sitting in judgment; that some who have
avowed personal enmity have occupied the
judgment seat; and that at least two of
those who claim to sit here in judgment
have received money from the person most
active in conducting these proceedings ; and
the facts of this case having now come
before the tribunal of public opinion, moved
by a sense of duty as a Minister of the
Church of Scotland do hereby protest that
though prepared in all matters spiritual
and ecclesiastical to submit to the jurisdic-
tion of a legal and competent Presbytery,
I have not submitted and decline to submit
my standing, orders, or office to the adjudi-
cation of the Ministers who claim to sit
here as a Presbytery ; and I further protest
against the whole of these proceedings as
illegal and unjust.
“ Dated at Hobart Town this 18th day
of April, 1864.
“(Signed) John Stokie.”
The rev gentleman then left the church
with Mr. Dobson, Mr. John Walker, and
others of the audience.
The court thereupon re-assembled and
the Rev. the Clerk called the roll, and read
the minutes.
The Moderator : I may state that I in-
tended to propose that we should have a
conference with Mr. Storie, but after what
has taken place, it’s impossible.
The Rev. Mr. Mackersey, : The proper
course was now to call on Mr. Storie to receive
the sentence of the court; they had nothing to
do with that document, it was introduced
at the wrong time ; they did not know what
it was. He proposed that Mr. Storie be
called in, and if he did not appear, they
would know what to do. They were willing
to give him every advantage, and time to
consider the course he intended to follow,
but he proposed since the matter had taken
that turn that Mr. Storie be called on
with certification, that he be summoned to
appear before them at such time as they
thought proper to appoint to hear the
sentence of the court. It would then be
competent for Mr. Storie to lay that paper
before them, or to make whatever protest
• he thought fit, and the Presbytery knew
perfectly well what course they would have
to follow.
Eev. Mr. Garrett moved that the court
proceed according to the course indicated
by Mr. Mackersey, and he proposed that
Mr. Storie be summoned to appear at the
bar of the house at three o’clock that
afternoon.
Rev. Dr. Turnbull wished to make a few
observations in reference to the proposal;
they had had very little time to consider
the sentence ;it was only that morning
that he had read the same in print, in one
of the newspapers, and carefully looked
into it as far as he could in so short a
time ;he thought the sentence was not
such a sentence as that court on careful
consideration would enforce.
Rev. Mr. Mackersey : It was adopted by
the court and we cannot question it. The
question now is, and the only question,
shall Mr. Storie be re-summoned ?
Rev. Dr. Turnbull: Far be it from me to
oppose the ruling of the Moderator, but I
tell you fairly, I think I have grave reasons
to bring before you, but if you, Moderator,
rule that lam out of order with reference
to the motion, I wish not to infringe in a
single respect on the Presbytery, but to
pay all deference to your office and your
ruling.
The Moderator: I, as Moderator, am
only the organ of the Presbytery, and if
they are willing to hear Dr. Turnbull
they will say so; at the same time it is
quite in accordance with our laws that Dr.
Turnbull should move to review the pro-
ceedings.
Rev. Mr. Dove : I think it is very com-
petent to us to reconsider the sentence ; we
were perhaps precipitate in deciding upon
it at the time. I think it competent to
Dr. Turnbull to propose to reconsider it
before carrying it into effect.
Rev. Mr. Ewing seconded Mr. Garrett’s
motion that Mr. Storie be cited for three
o’clock ; and at the same time wished
to correct an impression that might arise
from the remarks which had been made.
The rev. member for St. Andrew’s Camp-
bell Town, sat in deliberation when the
evidence was duly considered, and the mat-
ter gone into at length ; they did not leave
that building till a quarter to ten o’clock,
having sat from four o’clock, and they had
time enough to consider the finding and
sentence ; every member must be aware
that the libel and sentence were considered
with the utmost calmness; and he men-
tioned that, wishing to correct the impres-
sion that might arise from Dr. Turnbull’s
remarks, and likewise those of Mr. Dove,
respecting their having acted precipitately.
Rev. Dr. Turnbull: I simply have to
state, that in point of fact, the sentence


was not written out, and the clerk can
contradict me if lam wrong. It was not
written out fully till a few minutes of the
coming in of the public to day to hear the
decision. All I said was, that I had not an
opportunity of calm])’ reviewing it, as put
before me in writing or print, till I read it in
the newspaper this morning, and if I used
any words calculated to convey such an im-
pression as the rev. member for St. Andrew’s,
Launceston, alludes to, I had no idea of
creating such an impression. My state-
ment went this length, that I did not
think the members of this court have had
sufficient time to review the proceedings,
and that I never read the document in its
integrity, till this morning. I await the
decision of the Presbytery, whether I shall
be allowed to be heard on what I believe
to be a grave matter of consideration.
Eev. Mr. Mackersey : On Friday evening
the Presbytery met with closed doors to
consider whether the libel was proven or
not; we did so, and we returned the ver-
dict on the table. After we came to a con-
clusion on that point, it was suggested as
desirable, that the kind of sentence to be
passsed should be propounded to us, that
was done, substantially, and the same is
recorded in our minutes, Dr. Turnbull
being present, and entering into the dis-
cussion of the whole question. No dissent
was taken to that : the dissent from Dr.
Turnbull, was from finding the libel proven.
The next morning I made a motion which
embodied the sentence I thought should be
pronounced, the Presbytery adopted that
motion, and the sentence is on the records ;
therefore I conceive there can be no com-
plaint of any precipitancy. I wish to
make an observation as to another matter ;
I conceive with all deference to you, Mode-
rator, that you are not entitled to rule that
the sentence of one meeting should be
open to discussion at another meeting ; the
Presbytery itself has not that power. In
Scotland, where there is a gradation of
Courts, Presbyteries, Synods, and the As-
sembly, a sentence may be reviewed, but
the Assembly itself cannot to-morrow order
a sen tense to be revised that was passed the
day before ; when the Assembly comes to
a decision, that cannot be disturbed or
interfered with subsequently. I protest
against your ruling that the question can
be re-opened ; the sentence is passed, and
we must now proceed.
Eev. Mr. Eobertson: I regret that this
discussion has taken place ; it appears to
me to be entirely I believe the
decision must, of necessity, be much the
same, if not aggravated by the contumacy
of Mr. Storie, offered to the court this
morning. I protest against the question
being opened up again ; there has been far
too much of it already, and the sooner it
is concluded the better.
Rev. J. Mackersey : They had nothing
to do with that paper (produced by Mr.
Storie); it might contain matter bringing
up the whole question at issue, or that may
lead to the highest censure in the power of
the court; the party must attend to hear
sentence, and if he chose to protest, they
must receive it, and take what steps they
pleased.
Rev. Dr. Turnbull here read the law of
the church from Pardovan, that Assem-
blies might review or recall their own sen-
tence on some new or extraordinary dis-
covery made. Rut he now left the matter
in their hands.
Rev. Mr Mackersy observed_ that that
rule was inapplicable here ; it did not give
power to open up a sentence on one day,
which had been passed the day before, but
meant that if in the course of tune, at a
subsequent meeting, new matter was pro-
duced, it was competent to open up the
proceedings of the former one. He could
state from his own experience and know-
ledge of church courts in the General As-
sembly, that he never heard or saw such a
proceeding as that now proposed. He
believed that in Parliament it was not
allowed to reverse a decision in the same
session.
Rev. Dr. Turnbull: I have made my
application, and with you sir, I respectfully
state, rests the responsibility.
The Moderator : I offered to submit it,
and the Presbytery is not willing that it
should be opened again.
Rev. Mr. Mackersey : It’s not because
we are unwilling to do what Dr. Turnbull
asks us to do, but because it is incompe-
tent to do it.
Rev. Dr. Turnbull: I’m sorry the mat-
ter has been revived again, after bowing to
your decision ; I am prepared to bring for-
ward the strongest case, as I think that
could be, but I bow to the wish of the
Presbytery.
The question being put, it was resolved
to cite Mr. Storie to appear at four o’clock.
Rev. Mr. Ewing submitted that the sum-
mons should be made out at once, and a
proper officer named to serve it, and make
affidavit that it had been done*
The citation having been prepared,
The Presbytery adjourned.
The Presbytery resumed at four, and was
constituted with prayer by the Moderator.
The Clerk read the minutes of the morn-
ing sederunt, which were sustained.
The Moderator: Is Mr. Storie present,
or any one for him 1 There being no reply,
and the rev. gentleman not appearing,
Rev. Mr. Mackersey said : I think the
* This citation was recoivedby Mr. Storie at 4.20. p.m.


last proceedings of the court have been
somewhat irregular. On Saturday I inti-
mated to Mr. Storie that his presence was
expected here at twelve at noon to-day, to
have communicated to him the sentence of
the Presbytery. Mr. Storie did appear,
and he answered that citation ; he appear-
ed. but would not wait to hear the sentence
of the court, but left the Presbytery ; after
that no further citation was necessary, and
the court was entitled to proceed to sum-
mary judgment, but though we adopted
this proceeding hastily, I suggest that we
give Mr. Storie another notice. I think we
should adjourn till to-morrow at twelve, to
give Mr. Storie that opportunity of coming
forward, as we can have no desire to hasten
a crisis.
Rev. Mr. Dove seconded.
Rev. Mr. ltobertson : I move that we
proceed to final judgment immediately.
Mr. Storie has done what he could through-
out the proceedings to show his absolute
contempt of us ; as he did this morning ;
after we had given him every opportunity
for repentance, and repentance, in his case,
is the fitting and proper word, he has set
us at defiance; we ministers from the
country come here, are summoned here on
his account, and I say for myself, he has
mulct me, although I do not begrudge it,
most severely on his account; he has, I
understand, left town, and he has set us at
defiance absolutely. Under these circum-
stances, although I have been prepared all
along to go all lengths for Mr. Storie, and
to make every excuse for him, but I con-
sider he has placed himself beyond excuse,
he cannot excuse his conduct, and the
sooner we bring this business to a conclu-
sion the better. I move that we proceed
and bring the matter to a conclusion at once
and for all; he has forced us to it, much
against my will ; and as it stands, it is the
only course ; he has driven us to, and we
cannot help ourselves, his deposition. I
move that the court pronounce final sen-
tence with regard to Mr. Storie, and be
done with it.
Rev. Dr Turnbull: It seems to be im-
portant that all the time that can be given
upon this question, should lie given, for the
sake of the Presbytery, and that Mr. Storie
may be enabled to realize fully his position
under the circumstances in which he is
placed at present. It seems to me important
that the Presbytery should have more time.
I throw out this, whether we are acting
with due consideration of our own position it
we proceed to extremities while we have
not even proposed the terms of the recant-
ation required of Mr. Storie. _ I can only
say that if I were in Mr. Storie’s position,
if I had not anything to support me in the
world, I do not see how I could accede for
any consideration this world would give to
the terms of the sentence as it now stands ;
but how can we tell but you might name
some terms which might be acceded to ;
why not draw out the terms, or if drawn out,
which I believe to be done, make public to
Mr. Storie. I could speak more at large,
but I felt embarrassed by some communi-
cations made to me ; but I think it should
be made known to Mr. Storie what the
particular requisition is that you are about
to put to him.
Rev. Mr. Ewing : Moderator, I find here
the questions put to a minister on his or-
dinate in; and to which Mr. Storie, once,
twice, thrice subscribed. Now what are
the facts? That by the decisions of the
court on two, three separate occasions he
has violated those vows, and he has re-
ceived sentence for such violation. The
present case has come before us, in which
we have sat ten or eleven days ; but it is
not a case by itself, it is just the end of the
beginning and the middle : and Modera-
tor, I challenge Mr. Storie or any man who
listened, whether Mr. Storie has not had a
trial, the fairest, the fullest, and the am-
plest ; I challenge any man w r ho listened
to the evidence and the whole case to say
in what respect he has not had a patient
hearing and the most merciful considera-
tion. After we had gone into the case, we
retired to go into the facts, and after con-
sidering what was proven or not proven,
the decision and sentence were agreed to,
and Mr. Storie was duly summoned to
have that sentence read to him. And how
stand the facts ? He came into court;
before the court was constituted, instead of
listening to the sentence, lie begins reading
a paper ; he is called to order by yourself,
Moderator, he causes confusion in court,
declines to admit its jurisdiction, declines
to carry out his ordination vows to be
subject to the government of the church,
he takes a divisive course, resists your au-
thority, the authority of the court, and
places on the table at an improper time, a
document in itself untrue, defiant of the
court’s authority, and setting forth that he
did not recognize its power to deal with
him. And what does that amount to?
Without looking at the libel, what he did
this morning, demands for that act that
we deal with him instanter and simpliciter
as for the highest contumacy. And, Mod-
erator, if any member of the court had
done what Mr. Storie did this morning,
from what we know of him, no man would
have been more ready than Mr. Storie to
visit him to the utmost. To defer it till
to-morrow, after the act of to-day, would
be to compromise ourselves; we are at
liberty now to set aside the libel if we
choose, and for the act of this morning,


the highest contumacy, to proceed to ac-
tion.
Eev. Mr. Mackersey : I don’t differ as to
the import of the course proposed, but the
very circumstances mentioned by those
gentlemen appear to me to be reasons for
giving every indulgence. It is clear there
is a feeling of irritation in the minds of
some, and that is a feeling that we ought
to allow to subside, by which we should
not be influenced, but it is a reason for
giving a little further time. In regard to
what was stated by Dr. Turnbull, that he
would peril his very means of existence,
rather than submit to the sentence passed
on Mr. Storie. I beg to call the attention
of the court to the way in which the case
stands. In the Church of Victoria, from
which Mr. Storie comes to us, and with
which he repeatedly expressed the earnest
wish that we should connect ourselves as
a Presbytery under their jurisdiction, here
is one of the laws “ When a dispute
arises between a minister and his session
and congregation, if the Presbytery find
the minister’s usefulness lost to the people,
it may dissolve the pastoral tie. There
without a single charge, because they have
quarrelled, the governing body may step m
and dissolve the pastoral tie, leaving the
minister to obtain, if he can, another sphere
of labour. If he had been in Victoria, he
would have been compelled to give up, and
to have gone forth without a fai thing.
We have no law of the kind, and we cannot
insist on the proceeding. But it has hap-
pened that Mr. Storie has subjected him-
self to serious charges. The Presbytery
has deliberated most cautiously, discussed
most fully, and have decided that the
charges, in a great measure, are substan-
tiated. That places Mr. Storie in mu-
power, and gives us the power which, if it
had been in Victoria, it would have been
our duty to have done without such char-
ges, and now that the proof of these charges
gives us the power, we are told that the
minister who, had he still lived in that
church, would have been dismissed without
a single charge, is not amenable to us. It
has been distinctly proved that Mr. Storie
is guilty of the charges libelled, and our
position is that we are entitled to proceed
at once to pronounce sentence of depriva-
tion. I think we shall act in a better, a
more wise, temperate, and brotherly spirit,
if we give a still further opportunity.
Eev. Mr. Eobertson: I made the motion,
and after what I have heard from Mi.
Mackersey, I consent to withdraw it, with
the consent of my seconder, and agree to
defer the consideration of the matter, and
allow another day to Mr. Storie.
Eev. Dr. Turnbull: As matter of expla-
nation as to the remarks of Mr, Mackersey,
perhaps I ought to say what it was I spoke
of, and to which he has so strongly advert-
ed, which was simply this, the enforcing of
the expression of contrition from Mr. Sto-
rie, as a condition of his remaining in the
church ; to that I more especially advert-
ed ; for if we give him credit as to the past,
how can we believe in such a change of his
views as that he can say conscientiously what
is required of him by the sentence ? What
would he the opinion of the world as to the
man who made such a change ? There is
an expression used in the East not very
elegant, but one very emphatic ; it would
he said of such a man, who had under the
coercion of necessity made such an admis-
sion, “He has eaten dirt, and has lost caste
for ever.” I am sure there is no member
of this Presbytery who, if the thing came
home to himself, would not feel how im-
possible it was, without a complete change
of all his views, to comply with the terms
of the sentence. Therefore I think a little
delay would be good ; it would enable you
if you think fit to lay before Mr. Storie
what it is you require of him, and then,
perhaps, there might be some advantage
from delay : who can tell what might tran-
spire from it ? I feel it to be so di eadful a
thing, the deposition of a minister, casting
him on the wide world, for that is the
alternative ; himself cast out, driven out,
and you all feel it, you do feel it. (Hear,
hear.) We 1!. let there be a little delay,
and let those members put into a practical
shape what they require, then you will do all
justice, and put Mr. Storie in a position to
realize your views and respond to them.
Eev. Mr. Dove thought the Presbytery
might not wish to exact any great amount
of contrition from Mr. Storie, and there-
fore that it would be difficult to fix the
terms as suggested by Dr. Turnbull.
Eev. Mr. Ewing : I am accustomed to
speak with great earnestness, but when I
speak in that way I am not in a state of
temper i I have the utmost confidence in
speaking when I feel warm. I trust a dis-
tinction may be observed between earnest-
ness, warmth of manner, and his manner
when angry. I am not angry but indignant.
I feel strongly. Has Mr. Storie been here
to hear what the terms are ? Are we to
run after Mr. Storie and say “ Eev. and
dear sir, do pray listen to us, hear what
we have to say ? ” He has put us out of
the pale, told us by a written document,
and by his manner, “ I don’t want to
hear, I throw you off, I’ve done with you,
I deny your right to deal with me.” In
what position are we put now, that we
should wait till to-morrow to have some
fresh indignity cast in our teeth ; are we
to submit to this, and say to Mr. Storie we
are particularly anxious that he should


accede to our wishes? We shall come
down moderate, we shall bring down
justice. It is clear that Mr. Storie has
this morning committed the highest act of
contumacy, and we are entitled to deal
with that act alone, irrespective of the
libel; but if the court think it the more
expedient course, I put myself in the hands
of the court.
Rev. R. McClean : Permit me to say that
with a brother in such circumstances,
though we have borne long, have examin-
ed the case with much care, it would be
kinder towards a brother to postpone it
till to-morrow. I therefore move that the
Presbytery meet to-morrow, and insist on
it that Mr. Storie be present, giving him
the opportunity, perhaps, for penitence and
sorrow; and I hope he will come before
the court as a Christian man and confess
his sin, and so far from degrading him, it
will elevate him, in my sight at least, and
in that of every worthy person.
Rev. Mr. Mackersey : I would not cite
Mr. Storie any more, but it might be con-
veyed to him that he attend at 12 o’clock,
adding that we are quite prepared to con-
fer with Mr. Storie on the matter, if he
thinks proper, as proposed this morning,
before taking any further proceeding. It
appears to me that Dr. Turnbull thinks
if a man’s intentions are good, you cannot
ask him to express contrition for the acts
which follow from that. I don’t under-
stand that. You cannot ask him to ex-
press contrition for having formed an erro-
neous but honest judgment, but surely for
acts which proceed from that erroneous
judgment, it is a thing he ought to do,
which every man ought to do. A man
may say, “ I certainly did not mean wrong,
but 1 find I have done what is wrong, and
am sorry for it.” That is all we ask of
Mr. Storie ; we don’t doubt his intentions,
only we say he has done wrong, and we
ask him to express his sorrow for having
done wrong.
Rev. Mr. Garrett had hesitation in yield-
ing to delay, as it was chiefly owing to Mr.
Storie himself; he had l'eason to believe
that their delaying would only involve
their rev. brother in the opportunity of go-
ing further wrong ; for instance, what rea-
son had they to believe that Mr. Storie
would meet with the court and confer with
it? The first, second, and innumerable
other acts, the last act, as had been stated,
was one of the highest acts of contumacy
in an ecclesiastical court that could be; and
what reason had they to expect that Mr.
Storie in the transit of hours between that
and 12 o’clock to-morrow, would reconsi-
der his position, and sincerely repent for
his misdeeds in the whole base ? The cir-
cumstances of delay would lead persons to
conclude that the Presbytery had been pre-
cipitate in its movement ; but there never
was a case on record which had received
more patient enquiry, more attention, more
deliberation than this, to which attention
had been called for the last fortnight, and
as for the last act of Mr. Storie, it had been
witnessed by all. He, however, expressed
his desire to concur with the feeling of the
court, and give Mr. Storie longer time, but
he had no hope that it would be beneficial.
Rev. Mr. Ewing : This is a new motion,
and lam entitled to speak to it. The very
reason for which Mr. Garrett assents to
the wished for delay and that expressed by
the rev. member for St. Andrew’s, Campbell
Town, are two reasons for proceeding to
immediate action. I have no reason to
implicate Mr. Storie further than has been
done, but the giving him an opportunity
for further insults will be giving the chance
of committing greater guilt and wrong than
he has had ; therefore I am for immediately
proceeding to action. I can only judge
what he will do, by what has taken place.
However strongly Mr. Storie may feel with
regard to the libel, he cannot feel more
strongly than on the matters of doctrine
two years ago ; and in one hour every
doctrine which he so remorselessly con-
tended for two years, and during the
contention for which members of the court
were insulted, individually and collectively,
and one libelled, all was swallowed within
sixty minutes; and in requesting Mr.
Storie to do as now wished they had only
to look to the same mental manifestation,
the same power of swallowing as on the
former occasion.
Rev. Mr. Mackersey : After that remark
I am sorry to hear it, and I protest against
it—l must say Mr. Storie is in such a very
serious position we ought to sympathise
with him and grant the delay asked for.
The Moderator : It has been hinted at
in the course of discussion that the terms
of the apology should be made known.
Rev. Mr. Mackersey : My motion is to
delay the sentence, and that in the mean-
time we should offer Mr. Storie a confer-
ence, express our willingness to come to an
understanding.
The motion was then put and agreed to,
the proposed conference to be in private.
Tuesday April 19th, 1864.
The Presbytery met at noon, and was
constituted with prayer by the Moderator.
There was a numerous auditory, including
several of the Church of England and other
clergy.
The Clerk said that in compliance with
the instructions received, he wrote to Mr.
Storie last night.
The Moderator ; I have received the fol-


lowing letter from Mr. Storie . ®
“ St. Andrew’s, Hobart Town, t
“April 19th, 1864. t
“ Eev. Sir,—l have received a note from a
Mr. Mackersey intimating a desire for a I
private conference. To this I am willmg t
to accede, if I may understand that the t
conference is to be with yourself and the i
rest of the brethren as private ministers, t
and I may have some friend with me to 1
assist and advise me. I should wish Mr.
Dobson.
“ I am. Eev. Sir,
“ Your humble servant, *
“John Stohie.” i
“ Eev. C Simson.” '
Eev. Mr. Eobertson moved that Mr. Sto- i
rie’s request be complied with.
Eev. Mr. McClean seconded.
Eev. Mr. Mackersey : I accede to this, :
but if you agree, you must adjourn for a
little while. , ~ , ■
The Moderator : It has been stated to me j
that Mr. Storie desires it to be about three
° °Eew'Dr. Turnbull : To consult Mr. Dob-
son’s convenience. . .
Eev. Mr. Garrett: If Mr. Stone is con-
venient to the court, I should move that
the conference be had immediately : it will
not take long ; the Presbytery could retire
for a few minutes, and the business forth-
with gone on with ; we can’t put on m this
manner from time to time.
Eev. Mr. Eobertson said he had taken
his place by that night’s coach, and so had
Mr. Ewing.
Eev. Mr. Ewing : Moderator, if the Pres-
bytery will it, of course they will decide so,
hut I cannot permit it to pass in its present
form, all I said yesterday I adhere to ; we
have done a new thing Moderator, changed
places. Mr. Storie dictates terms to the
court. (Eev. Mr. Mackersey —No.) I have
the liberty to state my personal opinion,
and I claim the right. After having taken
the steps we have, and gone the length we
have —right or wrong,—to have Mr. Storie
or any other member who is in his position,
dictating terms to us, is a new thing in the
administration of justice, natural justice,
and legal justice. The effect may be, not
to wear members out, but from a pressure
of circumstances, to compel them to leave;
and from what has taken place, Mr. Storie
knew the question was to be asked, and
might have prepared himself; the over-
looking our convenience is just reversing
the order of things, hut if the Presbytery
agree, I consent; at half-past six I leave.
Eev. Dr. Turnbull: I do not wish to
produce excitement, hut I do desire calmly
and solemnly, after the speech which the
rev. member (Mr. Ewing) made yesterday,
to declare my opinion that the rev. member
ought not to sit again in this court during
the continuance of this question. The sen-
timents to which he gave expression are so
abhorrent, so different to what should find
place in the mind of a judge, that I feel it
to be my duty, in the most solemn way, to
express my conviction that this Presbytery
will be degraded if he take his seat, and
take an active part in the deliberations of
this assembly. .
Rev. Mr. Garret said he was still against
delay. He was inclined to give Mr. Storie
every possible opportunity of doing his
duty ; he had every friendship for Mr.
Storie ; but to keep on adjourning the or-
dinary business of the court, he could not
refrain from expressing his opinion that it
was trifling. . , _
Rev, Mr. Mackersey: I remind Dr.
Turnbull that we disclaimed these senti-
j ments yesterday, and I am sorry to _ see,
| now there is a prospect of coming light,
I that it should he again introduced, and
that harmony should be disturbed by mere
personal recrimination.
Rev. Dr. Turnbull: Most solemnly do I
repudiate any wish to disturb peace by in-
troducing recrimination, I made no refer-
ence to Mr. Ewing whatever, but, on prin-
ciples of public justice, I was bound to
mention it. As to the rev. gentleman (Mr.
Mackersey), having rebuked that speech,
I gave him all honor at the time, and was
glad to be able to sympathize with him on
the occasion.
The question was then agreed to, the
conference to take place at three, and the
Presbytery to meet at four.
Rev. Mr. Garrett: We meet as a Presby-
tery as soon as the conference is closed ; I
anticipate the conference will be brief.
There will be no court in two or three
hours, it will de dwindled down to two or
three members.
Afternoon Sitting- and Concluding
Proceedings.
The conference proposed by the Presby-
tery on the previous day, and accepted by
the Rev. John Storie, took place in St.
; John’s Church at three o’clock. Mr. Storie
was accompanied by Mi'. Dobson as his
■ friend and legal adviser.
. The Rev. Mr. Ewing, who in the morning
; had intimated that he could not attend a
i private conference with Mr. Storie, was
l absent. The other members of the morning
- sederunt were in attendance. The church
r doors were closed during the conference.
’ Shortly after three o’clock, numbers of
persons congregated outside the church,
> and from the earnest manner in which the
f proceedings were discussed by various
e parties, it was evident that the greatest
interest was felt in the result. A good many
r I ladies were among the crowd in waiting.


tfttJE CONFESSION AND APOLOGY.
“ Having received the sentence of the
“ Presbytery in reference to statements
“ made by me in a Letter to the Hon.
“ James Whyte, I feel that it is my duty
“as a Presbyterian minister, to bow to the
“ decision of the Court: I acknowledge
“ that I made statements for which I had
“ not sufficient evidence, under the influ-
“ ence of feelings which, as a Christian, I
“ ought to have checked : and I trust that
“ the Elders, Managers, Members, and
“ Seatholders of St Andrew’s Church whom
“ I have aggrieved, will accept this apology,
“ and that the Congregation will hence-
“ forth be united, while I retire in accord-
“ ance with the will of the Presbytery.”
In these terms were confession and apo-
logy dictated at the private conference ;
no deviation nor discussion permitted ; and
the original findings and sentence neither
communicated, explained, nor discussed.
The church doors were opened at ten
minutes to four, and the seats in the
body of the church, speedily occupied by
members of the Church of Scotland, and
not a few members of the Churches of
England and Home, and other denomi-
nations.
The Moderator rose and said : I have
how to intimate that the Rev John Storie
had a conference with us as appointed, but
he refused to make any apology whatever,
and now, therefore, the matter is in the
hands of the Presbytery ; it is for them to
decide what must be done under the cir-
cumstances.
Rev. J. Robertson, (after a considerable
pause) said : Moderator, I rise to discharge
a duty the most painful that was ever im-
posed on me in my life, and to move the
following resolution :
“ Whereas the Reverend John Storie,
Minister of St. Andrew’s Church, Hobart
Town, has been convicted after trial by
libel regularly proceeded in before this
Presbytery, of the offences therein charged
against him ;
“ And whereas sentence has been passed
upon the said Reverend John Storie, con-
formable to the laws of the Church :
“ And whereas the said Reverend John
Storie refuses to submit himself to the
judgment of the Presbytery, or even to
appear before them, when duly summoned ;
“ The Presbytery, therefore, resolve, as
the only alternative left them, to proceed
solemnly to depose the said Reverend John
Storie from the office of the Holy Ministry.”
Rev. Mr. Garrett: Moderator, I rise im-
pressed profoundly with similar feelings
and sentiments to those just expressed by
my rev. friend and brother, Mr. Robertson.
In pressing this motion on the house,
j I feel that lam about to perform an act
the most important, the most awful ever
presented to me in the whole course of
; my life. But sir, a profound sense of
I duty places me in the position I now oc-
cupy ; and I feel that lam in the pre-
sence of the venerable the Presbytery of
Tasmania, and in the presence of this nu-
merous audience; more than that, I feel
that I am in the presence of the great King
and Head of the Church, before whom we
must all ultimately stand ; I say, sir, lam ac-
tuated by a profound sense of duty, a duty to
myself and Presbytery of which lam a mem-
, her, to the church over which we preside, and
of duty to Mr. Stone himself. I say of duty
to myself, for it is obvious that as a member
of this court 1 could not have avoided the
duty to the Presbytery; for the hour seems
to have arrived when the Church over
which we preside expects every member of
this court to do his duty. This hour was
kept lingering to give our brother Mr. Storie
an opportunity of coming forward and
making that acknowledgment which it was
his duty to make, but which he has not
done. A duty, I said, to the Church, the
whole Presbyterian community, not only
in this colony, but also in the adjacent
colonies ; for in the adjacent colonies they
are sufficiently acquainted with this whole
case, and they have a right to expect us to
perform our duty, and to act according to
the strict course which the laws of the*
Church have pointed out to us. And then
with regard to Mr. Storie himself; I state
to you most frankly, that I have always
had a very sincere friendship for Mr. Storie,
and I believe my brethren in this Presby-
tery will admit it; and that friendship, sir,
has always prompted me to seek opportu-
nities to advise with him ; but all has
proved unavailing. I confess sir, I have
been more disappointed than any man in
this court, for the terms proposed to him in
the conference this afternoon, were, in the
opinion of the whole court, the mildest
terms which could have been proposed to
him under the circumstances. I believe,
sir, however, lam supporting a motion
which has all along been expected by Mr.
Storie himself. Ido not desire to dip into
the mysteries of his feelings and motives
on the subject; but when I review the
whole course of Mr. Storie’s progress, I
think Mr. Storie took the shortest steps to
bring it to this point; and for, perhaps,
the best of reasons; he felt or assumed
that he could not act with the Presbytery :
that he could not labour with the Presby-
tery ; that he could not discharge the
duties of the ministerial office in connec-
tion with the Presbytery of Tasmania.
I support the motion because, if Mr.
Storie is released from the relationship in


which he stands to the court, it is possible gi
that he would make a useful minister m se
another sphere of labour ; but I am per- tl
suaded he would never act with the Pres- ai
bytery of Tasmania in discharging the tl
functions of the holy ministry. I will not u
detain the court with any further remarks, ai
Rev. Dr. Turnbull: I rise under a deep t<
sense of the solemnity of the present occa- d
sion, and of the fearful consequences which t
may be connected with the present pro- r
ceedings of this assembly. I rise to oppose s
the motion now made, because the sentence c
on which it is founded is, in my judgment, c
founded on a finding of the Presbytery, i
utterly and altogether repugnant to the t
evidence which was placed before you : a
that is my first ground. I consider, sir, 3
that on every finding, the evidence was 3
against that finding, therefore I oppose, 1
and solemnly oppose the sentence founded <
on them. But, sir, under all the circum- 1
stances, surely the first part of the sentence :
which was read in the Presbytery yester-
day, was quite sufficient for all purposes
had in view by those in the Presbytery
who supported the findings. You had dis-
solved the pastoral relation between Mr.
Storie and his flock, and what more do you
require ? Was it necessary to follow him
up, to make him as it were a persecuted
man? Surely, all that was necessaiy,
even according to the views of those who
'have been most opposed to Mr. Storie, was
loosing the tie which bound him to the
congregation of St. Andrew s Church!
Who could have desired more ? Is it any
one of those who were opposed to Mr. Sto-
rie, who declared they bore no malice, no
ill-will against him 1 Who can desire more
than this, that he should no longer be pre-
sent in the pulpit of St. Andrew’s Church ?
Surely they are not wise to follow him in
his course, and to blight the whole of his
future life, all his prospects of future use-
fulness ! Surely, they do not require that
those talents which God has given him,
sanctified by knowledge and the love of
the truth, they do not require that he
should cease to preach that glorious gospel
that he loves, in other places, and under
other circumstances, in other situations, or
to another congregation who might call
him I I cannot imagine that any one who
is opposed to Mr. Storie should desire more
than that a minister with whom they can-
not fraternize, should be removed from
them. And, sir, your sentence would ac-
complish this for them. What more can
possibly be indicated by justice or any
other consideration of practical value m
the present cae? But what have you
done ? You have annexed to the sentence
a condition ; you have said to Mr. Storie,
—“ If you will confess that you have been
guilty of falsehood, if you will submit to a
sentence which proceeds on the assumption
that all the charges brought against you
are true ; if you are willing to go forth to
the world a dishonoured man, we are will-
ing to continue to employ you to go forth
as our missionaiy, or should you be called
to a charge by any congregation who may
desire to receive you within our jurisdic-
tion, we will sustain the call; but if you
refuse to destroy yourself; if you refuse to
say ‘I have said that which in truth i
could not have said ; ’ if you refuse to
declare you have said that which is false,
refuse to destroy your moral reputation and
to go forth as a man self-condemned, we
will not employ you, we will not retain
you in our communion.” That is what
you say in effect. Without giving weeks and
months which he ought to have in such a
case, to form new opinions, to take new
views of the case ; and, if possible, to take
a new course of action ; you call on mm
in an instant to change his views, after
having declared himself solemnly, not guil-
ty, to declare himself guilty ; and the con-
dition that he do that is attached to youi
sentence before you will consent to retain
him in your communion ! Well, he has
refused that; he is unable to take that
course, and he will rather subject himself
to poverty, to be cast on the wide woilci
, than to submit to retain a competency,
s and a position in the church, by declaring
. that to be true which he knows to be false,
i I S ay Mr. Storie having so refused, is a far
r more noble, a more excellent man, more
- worthy of favor, of confidence, a thousand-
> fold, than if he could have descended to
; the meanness of foul falsehood to retain
- elevation, position, and confidence. He
? has been put to the test, and he has not
i been found wanting ; terms have been pi-o-
-s posed to him ; he is well aware of all the
- consequences; but he has said, as eveiy
t honourable man, under the circumstances,
l, would do, touched with a sense of what is
if due to himself, he has said in elicct ; I
e will not, no consideration will induce me
;1 to declare that false, which I believe to be
;1 . true : not worldly position, worldly income,
>r or even for the favour of that Church
11 which I have loved, and in which I should
lo still desire to live.” Instead of proceeding
re to the extreme act of deposition, how much
l- more generous, how magnanimous would
:n ft be for the Presbytery to say—“ We have
r> - done enough for the ends of justice, enough
,n to satisfy the desires of those of the con-
iy oregation of St. Andrew’s who are opposed
in to him, in removing him from that church ;
>u he is now removed from that position, there
ce has been an incompatibility of disposition,
e of temper, between him and certain members
m of that church : and we have removed him,


and he has to go to an entirely new sphere.”
Surely that is enough ! Mr. Storie has
given a pledge of his sincerity, his truthful-
ness, inasmuch as he lias l’efused for world-
ly honour and worldly competence, to dis-
honour his own truth ; and sui’ely the
magnanimous, the Christian course for the
Presbytery would be to say, we will not re-
quire the latter part of the sentence; we will
forgive all, abandon all, it is sufficient to re-
move him from St. Andrew’s Cliureh, we will
retain him in the work; he is the moi’e ho-
noui’ed, as he has not yielded to appeals so
powerful, so likely to move him ; we honor
him, we l’espect him, we love him the more;
he thought he was sacrificing every thing
when he maintained the truth under cir-
cumstances so difficult, we also love the
truth ; we honor such self denial, we honor,
that adherence to truth and rectitude, that
condition of the heart in which truth is
preferred to worldly honor, or wordly posi-
tion, and by which he preferred poverty to
the advantages which might be possessed
by the saying of a single word. Surely we
ai’e not the men to dishonor him who could
so act in such cii’cumstances! What was the
gloiy of the Church in days of persecution
of the exalted martyrs of the Church ? Was
it not as Macaulay said, the men who when
worldly honors, life, and every earthly
blessing were offered to them, refused to
retain them by sacrificing one word of
truth ? And I say Mr. Stoi'ie has gone far
to establish his truth, in the position he is
called to occupy. I will sir, add nothing,
but to say that whilst we have the re-
membrance of the noble self denial of the
martyrs who for the truth’s sake gave up
all, we should honor Mr. Storie because he
has shown his readiness to do the same.
I say, sir, let that sentence of deposition
pass, and what will be your condition and
his, in the estimation of all noble minded
persons ? But I will not follow up the sub-
ject; I x'ather appeal to your generous, your
magnanimous feelings ; I rather appeal to
your Christian charity, your Christian love,
to say you honor the truth which you have
seen in that man to-day. Let me suppose
for an instant that this day he had con-
descended to meet even the modified views,
suggested to him in the presence of his coun-
sel, who explained his views, what could
each of you have felt ? Would you have
believed that the change was conscientious ?
would not every one of us have said that
man’s conversion to these new views so
suddenly could not be sincere ; he has
yielded to the coercion of cii’cumstances ;
and we cannot honor him. But now he
has shown that he is supei'ior to the coer-
cion of cireumstances, he prefei’s honor and
ti'uth, and he has given a saci’ed pledge
thereof to-day. I call on you, whatever
your previous determination, to respect and
honor the truth, the uprightness so mani-
fested, and not cast out from the church one
whose talents qualify him for the highest
usefulness, and whose integrity and truth
show that you may rely on him. Sir, and rev.
brethren, I make this appeal in no rheto-
rical spirit, but in a calm spirit; I can
imagine to myself how exalted the Presby-
tery would be could you come to the con-
clusion of honoring the truth as exhibited
by Mr. Storie. (On Dr. Turnbull resuming
his seat there was a demonstration of ap-
plause by a portion of the audience.)
Rev. Mr. Mackersey : Moderator, I call
upon you to keep order in the house.
Rev. Mr. Robertson : If this sort of thing
is to go on, I shall move that the house be
cleared.
Rev. Mr. Mackersey : Moderator, the
rev. gentleman who has just now taken his
seat began his speech I think with asserting
solemnly, that he believed that on every
count of the libel Mr. Storie was innocent,
that nothing had been proved against him ;
he went on to say our sentence was per-
fectly sufficient if we had limited it to
severing the tie between Mr. Storie and St.
Andrew’s Church. I ask what right had
we to separate the pastoral tie if nothing
was proved against Mr. Storie ? With re-
gard to the solemn appeals made to us that
the accused is a person of such sublime
truth, that he had honored himself by*
refusing to make an apology, and admit
that he was in the wrong ; why surely the
first duty of a Christian man is to admit
that he is in the wrong when he has been in
the wrong. Why, whoever can be con-
victed if the doctrine is to be admitted,
that a man’s declaration that he is not
guilty is to save him from punishment?
That style of argument I am not prepared
to admit. The case is this : we, after full
examination and investigation found Mr.
Storie guilty of certain offences, we gave
Mr. Storie every oppox-tunity it was in our
power to give, to make reparation ; at home
in the Chui’ch of Scotland, with which I
am acquainted, a man accused of inferior
offences, offences not of the most flagrant
nature, may ask to be convicted, and the
court receives the confession and apology ;
and we put that in Mr. Stoi-ie’s power ; and
we say to him “ You have been convicted,
and if you acknowledge your error, we will
allow you to l-etain your status in the
church and your stipend too, and we will
hold you eligible to i-eceive a call from
another congregation aud yet Mr. Storie
comes forward and says I am ixot guilty of
that wi-ong, and I will not apologize. Now,
we ai'e shut up to it, we have the greatest
reluctance to pi’oceed to exti’emities ; we
have done everything in our power ; and


simply because Mr. Storie through sheer li
obstinacy, sheer temper, will not do as a cl
Christian man ought to do, we are told that a:
Mr. Storie is a sublime person and we p<
are degraded by our sentence. I see no a
other course open to us. I consider Mr.
Storie has brought it on himself, and li
is thoroughly deserving, in the circum- t
stances, of the punishment intended to he n
inflicted on him. . 11
Bev. Mr. Dove : Moderator, there is no c
one who desires more heartily than I to t
adopt the course mentioned by Dr. Turn- t
bull, if possible ; no one who more deeply t
regrets the necessity of imposing sentence t
on Mr. Storie than myself, but I conceive r
the court is shut up to the alternative ; and 1
we have met, as is evident to the public, i
with the utmost possible reluctance. It is i
not the first time, nor the second, but once i
and again, have we endeavored to convince i
Mr. Storie of his error, and to induce him 1
to do what is claimed of him, but he puts i
us at defiance. What is required of him / 1
To admit that he has erred in sending forth I
statements so atrocious on grounds so 1
slender. There is one count in the libel <
which he must acknowledge to be proven ;
that in which he speaks of the managers oi
the church having closed the doors, when
he knew it was not the fact, that although
true it was the doors were not opened, it
was not by design, which was explained
♦long ago, and yet he comes forward and
wilfully charges the managers with having
held the church doors closed against seat-
holders and strangers ; and were we wrong
in saying he had done so ? I repeat tna
if I could I would support Dr. Turnbull in
adopting a course for placing Mr. fetorie
without a stain on his character, in a situ-
ation where he could, he useful &nd h&pp}.
We must, however, feel that as far as re-
maining in Hobart Town, it would not
conduce to his comfort or usefulness. W e
asked him to say he had done wrong in
putting forth statements on inadequate
grounds, and surely, that was wrong. And
when a man had done wrong it was heroic
to say he had done so. The court has not
erred in calling on him to acknowledge
his fault; it would have stultified itself if
it had not. Why call on him to dissolve
the pastoral tie if he had not done wiong
I am sorry Mr. Storie has opposed himselt
so strongly to our wishes, but I cannot
see how we could adopt any otner altema-
rive than the one we propose.
Bev. Mr. Dugall: Moderator, with regard
to Mr. Storie, I do not believe any member
of the Presbytery has an unfriendly feeling
towards him. I can this moment lay my
hand on my heart and say I wish lnm well;
he is, I believe, a man calculated to do a
great deal of good, and though we are ob-
liged, constrained by the authority of the
church, to cast him off, it is deeply painful,
and I feel it very much ; but we must sup-
port our authority, or we must cease to be
an ecclesiastical body.
Bev. Mr. Ewing : Moderator, I have
little to say, and I think I would not say
the little which has passed through my
mind within the last few minutes, were it
not necessary to protect the moral prin-
ciple that this Presbytery stands by, and
to protest against the _ principles I have
heard enunciated, principles which are an-
tagonistic to the word of God, antagonistic
to the principles of true honor, and antago-
nistic to the principles by which this Pres-
bytery is governed. I allude to the an-
nouncement of this principle, that no man
is required to make an apology to another
man if he thinks he is right; whatever
amount of evidence the pressure of truth
brings on him. Perhaps it is incumbent on
me personally to say this much, that in
the Presbvtery, I have spoken out fully,
fairly, and honestly, my sentiments. I
have been charged by members of the
court with entertaining an animus ; I chal-
lenge any human being to bring before me, or
you sir, a statement which will in anyway
go to corroborate that assertion ; never, by
word or act, have I tried to influence mat-
ters connected with this case, except in
court, and as a member of the court. I
feel it incumbent on me to make that
statement, because of personal matters be-
tween Mr. Storie and myself: and I thank
God that I have been enabled as an indi-
; victual, to restrain feelings generated by a
warm and impulsive temperament, which
i might have led me into acts for which I
• might have been sorry thereafter. Now,
how stand the facts ? There has been the
■ fullest enquiry into the facts; evidence
b has been taken day after day, accumulated
3 evidence ; and after having taken it, after
l Mi*. Storie had full opportunity of re-
-3 butting it, his witnesses heard, and after
1 mature consideration, Mr. Storie has been
3 found guilty of certain grave moral of-
t fences ; and what are we told now? We are
e told that all the witnesses, whose testimony
f is beyond dispute, that each one of them
e has lied ; that we have erred in judgment,
? that we ourselves have not only erred, but
if lied, in saying the libel was proven ; now,
>t having gone through all this, to say that
.. Mr. Storie has acted rightly, his witnesses
spoken the truth, he is a slandered and ca-
d lumniated man; why I can imagine nothing
>r more atrocious than such a statement; it
„ i s an insult to our understanding, to the
y character and veracity of every witness,
1 . directly upsetting all their testimony. Why
a if the criminal who stands on the gibbet,
b- ' and a few minutes before he is launched


into eternity, after it is demonstrated that p
he is the murderer, that he is guilty, says t
he is an innocent man, is he to be held not v
guilty, to he discharged, taken out, cast u
loose upon society to slaughter again, to c
act upon his own debasing views ?if so, i- t
crime, if any crime, is to stand on such a c
foundation as that, the foundations of so- e
ciety will be broken up, and the greater '
the criminal, the greater the murderer,
the greater the honor with which he is i
to be crowned. I repudiate the doctrine,
and I hope every member of this court J
will do so also. Repentance is necessary ]
to salvation, and yet here are two men J
who stand up against repentance, and one •
of them says lam not in error, the wit- ■
nesses are in error, the judges are in
error, every one is in error, and I am right,
and that is the man who is to receive an
ovation at our hands, as the representative
of the truth itself.
Rev. Dr. Turnbull here rose amid cries
of “ order,” and some confusion; but he
begged to say that his argument was com-
pletely misrepresented, the truth was for-
gotten by the rev. member. He had said
a very different thing ; what Mr. Ewing
said passed by him as idle wind, but he
thought it due to others to take notice of it.
Rev. Mr. Ewing: I am speaking to a
principle, and that I speak emphatically.
How stands the matter now ? This course
is placed on us ; opportunity has been
afforded time after time ; but matters have
transpired during the course of the pro-
ceedings, which justified the Presbytery in
taking the present course, irrespective of
the libel. What charges have been brought
against the members of the court ? A charge
in itself, suppose there were nothing else,
which is untrue, and that, had there been
no libel, would have justified the Presby-
tery in what it is doing. And yesterday,
did he come in the spirit of unusual peni-
tence, in the spirit of meekness, dignified
meekness, to meet his brethren as Christian
men, and as a court whose decisions, and
whose discipline, he was bound to obey ?
But yesterday, he insulted the court, vio-
lated our authority, defied us to our teeth,
and then walked off. You, Moderator,
know what would be the consequence had
such conduct taken place in Scotland ; and
we know from the nature of the Assembly
in Melbourne, what would have ensued
had it occurred there. It has been borne
with; another conference sat with him,
and that has closed with the refusal in any
way to acknowledge his error. I was not
present, as I deemed it my duty to be ab-
sent. So at last there is no alternative but
the one now adopted. Suppose we had
adopted the course of separating the pasto-
ral tie, and passed Mr, Storie on to another
part of the colony ; in what way would
this court have been situated? There
would have been sins unrepented of, and
unacknowledged, and we should have been
chargeable with having admitted the guilt,
but not rebuked it, a position which we
dare not take up. I feel there is a neces-
sity for the present step, but it is a necessity
we cannot avoid. Would that Mr. Storie
had made a concession, and saved this last
necessity.
Rev. R. McClean: Moderator, I never
recollect, save once, being present, or more
pained in giving a decision ; if there had
been any way by which my brother Mr.
Storie could have escaped, I should have
rejoiced. I don’t know a single thing left
undone by the Presbytery to do justice to
Mr. Storie; even to-day I addressed him
in the most kindly manner, I put th 3 ques-
tion to him to make some confession, say
“ Were you not wrong, have you not done
something amiss?” But he would not
make the slightest concession from first to
last. What step could we adopt as honest
men, if we are to keep the church pure ;
it is a step which pains us to the heart, but
which we must take in faithfulness to God,
and in faithfulness to the church, I could
say much more, but I will say no more at
present.
Rev. Mr. Robertson then replied. He said :
All the members have expressed their opin-
ions, and it is not my intention to add to
what has been said, further than simply to
remark, that if Dr. Turnbull proceeds on
the supposition that we are entirely in the
wrong, and himself the only one capable of
judging among us, such a thing is possible.
It will require other evidence to convince
me than the assertion of Dr. Turnbull. I
conceive each one is capable of forming an
opinion of what is right; the evidence has
been gone over very carefully, and the con-
clusion come to, that Mr. fetorie has to a
certain extent erred. A proposition was
’ made to him, a confession was. required
[ which would not have disgraced him in any
'> way < but what is the position he takes up*
' That you are all wrong, the whole of the
evidence against me is false evidence, and
’ I should feel degraded myself, if I made
{ any apology whatever. Now, either we
1 have all judged wrongly, we are all in error,
r and the doctor calls on us to acknowledge
1 that we were wrong, and all prejudiced,
3 our eyes blinded, the evidence of gentle-
men of the highest intelligence, holding the
Y first position in colonial society, is wrong,
t that they have perjured themselves.
_ Rev. Dr. Turnbull: I never said so, I
t never suggested it. I disavow such a
tl statement.
Rev. Mr. Robertson : If he disavows it 1
:r submit at once. I consider that after the


closest investigation on our part, we have
come to one conclusion, and we could not
come to any other ; he has refused to make
any acknowledgment, and set the court at
defiance ; he has told us to the teeth that
we are all wrong, and he is right, he will
not acknowledge that he is in error, he
would pollute his soul by so doing, and
under these circumstances, we are driven
by Mr. Storie, most reluctantly on our
part, to move his deposition. We should
stultify ourselves if we did not proceed
with it.
Rev. Dr Turnbull: I wish to say this, —
I have been guided to a conclusion by the
usual rules of construction of evidence, but
I impute untruth to no man.
Rev. Mr. Robertson : I am satisfied.
The Moderator : Every member of the
Presbytery has now expressed his opinion,
and I have no wish to add. anything to
what has been said, there is one remark it
becomes me to make in justification of one
of the judges. I know that Mr. Ewing has
been looked on by many as a prejudiced
judge ; I can state from my own personal
knowledge, that Mr. Ewing lias been most
unwilling to come to such a decision as the
Presbytery has now arrived at. Ido not
speak of what occurred during the meeting
of Presbytery, but with respect to what oc-
curred a considerable time before. He mas
most unwilling that Mr. Storie should be
removed from the office of the ministry.
That statement I make, and for which I
think I could produce his letters. I feel it
would be unbecoming in myself to say
more on the question.
The Clerk having read the motion, the
question was put by the calling of the roll,
and each member saying yes or no, in the
following order :
Rev. J. Robertson : Yes.
Rev. J. Garrett: Yes.
Rev. T. Dove : Yes.
Rev. R. K. Ewing : Yes.
Rev. R. McClean : Yes.
Rev. J. Mackersey : Yes.
Rev. Dr. Turnbull : No.
Rev. T. Duggall: Yes.
For the motion of deposition 7; against 1.
Rev. Dr. Turnbull handed in the follow-
ing protest :
“ I respectfully dissent from this sentence.
“1. Because a declinature is competent
or warrantable when a judicature is de-
clined as having committed injustice in
some interlocutory sentence.
“ 2. Because I believe Mr. Storie to have
been put on his trial in a way repugnant to
the laws and customs of the Church of
Scotland.
“ 3. Because the respective findings or
verdicts on the libel are in my judgment
contrary to the evidence.
“ 4. Because of the five findings, the fifth
appears to me to be inconsistent with part
of the first.
“ 5. Because that part of the sentence
which renders Mr. Storie’s future status
conditional upon his acknowledging the
faults of which by a majority of the Pres-
bytery he has been found guilty, is, in my
judgment, a proceeding repugnant not only
to the laws and customs of the Church, but
also to Christian charity.”
The Moderator : I have now to ask
whether the Rev. John Storie appears in
person, or by any one to represent him ?
There was no response.
The Moderator then offered a solemn
prayer to the Almighty for a blessing on
the Church of St. Andrew’s, and the con-
gregation, those who approved of what was
about to be done, and those who disagreed;
that there might not be any complaining,
or any division; also upon the minister
about to be deposed from the sacred office,
and upon that court in the solemn pro-
ceeding then to be taken.
The Moderator then pronounced the sen-
tence of deposition in terms to the following
effect. In the name, and by authority
of the Lord Jesus Christ, the sole King
and Head of the Church, the Rev. John
Storie, minister of St. Andrew’s Church,
Hobart Town, having been regularly cited,
and having appeared before this Presbytery,
and having been found guilty of the sins of
slander and wilful misrepresentation, after
a careful trial, and having declined to
apologize, the Presbytery of Tasmania by
their vote have deposed, and hereby do
depose, by virtue of the power and authority
committed to them, the said John Storie
from the office of the holy ministry, pro-
hibiting him, and discharging him from
the exercise of the same or any part thereof,
in all time to come, in connection with this
Presbytery.
The Presbvtery arranged that the Mode-
rator should on Sabbath morning first
declare the church vacant; and that until
the Standing Committee should be enabled
to make due provision, the Rev. R. McClean
should preach after Sabbath first, in St.
John’s and St. Andrew’s alternately.
[The Mercury, 21st April, 1864.]
Shame on the Presbytery of Tasmania !
Burning, everlasting shame, on all they
represent ! They have disgraced them-
selves, disgraced the body to which they
belong, disgraced the sacred name of reli-
gion ! This is the cry from one end of the
colony to the other. And it is the cry, not
of other denominations only, but of the
Presbyterians themselves. We allude to
the trial of the Rev. Mr. Storie, and to
| his deposition from the ministerial office.


It is a shocking affair, and all the more
serious of the Presbyterians are perfectly
shocked at it. There are not, in fact, fifty
men in the colony, capable of forming an
opinion on such subjects, Presbyterians or
not Presbyterians, who do not look upon
the trial and deposition of Mr. Storie, as a
great public scandal, and almost blush to
think that they have any knowledge of it.
But that cannot be avoided. The Presby-
tery of Tasmania have made the thing pub-
lic. And on them devolves the responsi-
bility of what follows.
Premising what should, we think, be
well understood, —namely, that we have no
bias in this case, either in Mr. Storie’s
favor or against him,—we still take the
opportunity of stating that nothing is
farther from our intention than to attempt
that gentleman’s defence. * * * *
Much as our position might be strength-
ened by drawing largely on the evidence
tendered on both sides of the trial, that is
not a course that would commend itself to
the better judgment of the public. Enough
of that kind has already appeared in these
columns in the sickening details of the
Presbytery’s proceedings, over which all
would now be glad to drop a veil. On no
one do these proceedings reflect the slight-
est credit, but discredit upon all, from the
Moderator downwards. Some may have
been distinguished by the enormity of their
conduct, both among the Presbytery and
the witnesses, but where the whole is one
dark blot, it would be a folly to attempt to
discriminate between the shades of black-
ness. No one cares to inquire now whe-
ther all Mr. Storie said in the letter upon
which the charge against him was mainly
founded is or is not true, or whether any
one did or did not send for the police, and
swear that he would have him out of the
church. All have seen enough in the
course of this trial, extended over eleven
days, to convince them that Mr. Storie is
not a man of inordinate prudence, and yet
that many of the things alleged against his
accusers in his letter are not only possibly,
but very probably true. As a rule, how-
ever, the public had got beyond that long
before the trial was concluded. They had
at a very early stage of the proceedings
arrived at the conclusion, that Mr. Storie
was not to be tried at all. The Presbytery
did not meet to try him, but to condemn
him. They constituted themselves what in
solemn mockery they called a sacred court,
not to take evidence, and thoroughly sift
it, but to justify them in a foregone con-
clusion. Whatever the evidence, they in-
tended from the first to condemn Mr.
Storie, and not to acquit him. This, at all
events, is what is everywhere said, and we
regret our inability in the smallest degree
to controvert it,
Mr. Storie has had no trial, that is, no
fair trial, nor yet anything that is deserv-
ing of the name of a trial. This is the
solemn and irreversible decision of the
public on the subject. Mr. Storie may be
chargeable, like many of his brethren of
the Presbytery, with all sorts of things, of
which we have not yet even heard : but that
does not mend the matter. That is not to
be accpted as evidence of the truth of that
with which he was lately charged. Nor
was the court, before which he was put on
his trial, in a position to get at the truth.
It was a most corrupt court, corrupt in its
initiation and corrupt to its very core.
We do not found this on the nice and sub-
tle disquisitions into which counsel and the
court entered, as to what is or is not eccle-
siastical law, as laid down by the govern-
ing body of the church to which Mr. Storie
belongs. We leave them to settle those
matters among themselves, and come to
the common sense view of the question
No church has ever more loudly protested
against the Inquisition and its horrors
than has the church with which the Pres-
bytery of Tasmania is allied. But what
closer resemblance between the conduct of
the Inquisition could be had,—if we ex-
cept its horrors, the rack, the thumb-screw
and. the boot, which are contrary to the
spirit of the age,—than that of the Presby-
tery of Tasmania delegating two of their
own body to find a libel or true bill against
Mr. Storie, and afterwards constituting
them judges ? Ecclesiastical law, or not
ecclesiastical law, every sentiment of fair-
ness, of honor, and of justice rises up
against this as a monstrous invasion of
man’s inherent rights. And that Mr. Sto-
ne was not prepared to submit to this as
his reading of the ecclesiastical law by
which he holds himself bound, is suffici-
ently evident from the protest of his coun-
sel against it.
We have said nothing yet of the pro-
ceedings in court, and should have been
glad to have been spared the disagreeable
duty °f a specific reference to them. But
m their general character, so
striking an element in this great public
scandal, that they must not be altogether
overlooked. . Sorry indeed should we be to
speax of evidence given by a number of
professing Christian men, some of them
past or present managers of a Christian
church, as a mass of perjury, and we,
therefore, adopt the more euphemistic
phrase of a mass of contradictory swear-
ing. In no church do we ever before re ■
member to have read of anything to equal
it. With one witness, there was manifest-
ly a ‘ paltering in a double sense.” With
another, the evidence was all backwards


and forwards, up and down, just as it was c
thought best to suit. And with a third, c
all that seemed to be cared about was, the c
giving something that had gone before the 1
flattest and the most positive denial. If this t
had occurred in a court of law, we should i
have known how to describe it. But what
are we to say in this case, in a court open-
ed and closed with prayer ? What do the
walls of the building in which the court
was held say 1 Do they not protest against
it as a desecration of their sacred precincts. i
But what said the court that sat theie t
then, and what say they now ? Their ver- i
diet shows what their innermost thoughts l
were at the time. They gloated over that :
portion of the evidence which gave them 1
the pretence for a conviction, and slurred <
over that which was offered in rebuttal.
They swore their witnesses, and we should ]
now like to have them put on their oaths,
so that we might see what would be then
testimony, jointly and severally, now that ;
it is all over. Would any one of them say
it was a true verdict, fairly obtained 1 Or,
if he did, where would he look for support !
It is not often that we go out of our way
to touch upon quasi-ecclesiastical subjects,
or that we even meddle with them when
they fall directly in our way. But this
question l’esolves itself into one of common
decency and common justice, and thereby
loses much of its distinctive character of
an ecclesiastical or quasi-ecclesiastical one.
It is in everybody’s mouth alike, in the
mouths of the godly and the profane. By
this act of theirs, the Presbytery of Tasma-
nia have done their best to bring religion
into contempt. It, therefore, becomes a
serious question with us whether the public
should not take some notice of it, and if so,
what ? The matter was mooted, we under-
stand, at more than one of the places of
worship in this city, not connected with the
Presbyterians, last Sabbath day, and will
probably be so again. But that is not our
meaning. Wliat we tnink the Presbyteiy
of Tasmania should be given to understand
is that, as the recipients of State aid, they
are expected to conduct their proceedings
with some regard to public decency, and,
in fact, that a continuance of that aid de-
pends pretty much on the way in which
they hereafter behave themselves. H they
are to have any more meetings of this kind,
let them be held with closed doors, and let
us not have the whole of the people of the
colony scandalized by them.
At the close of these proceedings, the
Messrs. Whyte, Robertson, and Ballantme,
seized the Church and School House ;
changed the locks; cut off the gas, and
closed the doors against the minister, the
congregation, and the Sunday School with*
outlntimation to Mr. Storie, without pro-
cess of law, without consulting elders or
people, and without authority of the Trus-
tees. A few gentlemen of the city having
met', drew up the following
ADDRESS:—
To the Reverend John Storie, Minister of
St. Andrew’s Church, Hobart Town.
« We the undersigned, Colonists of Tas-
mania, feel called upon to give expression
to the strong feelings of disapprobation
with which we have viewed the proceed-
ings adopted against you by the body
arrogating to itself judicial functions undei
the title of “ The Presbytery of the Church
of Scotland,” in this Colony.
Those proceedings have been conducted
in such a way as to destroy all confidence
in the integrity of the tribunal-
Moreover, two members of Presbytery
asserted, by way of complaint, that you
had wilfully slandered your neighbour;
and having thus prejudged your case, and
become your accusers, they, nevertheless,
took their seats as judges, to decide upon
this accusation, for which, under their own
hands respectively, they had rendered them-
selves responsible.
With the honorable exception of the
Reverend Dr. Turnbull, those who sate in
judgment upon you exhibited throughout
an impatience of disposition, and a spiiit
of personal rancour, utterly inconsistent
with the impartial exercise of their func-
tions either as judges or jury in the case.
Lastly, the finding of the Court was en-
tirely against the evidence, and the undue
severity of the sentence by which it was
followed —deprivation of office and depo-
sition from the Ministry, except upon de-
' grading conditions, and the abandonment
: of the friends who had given evidence in
your favor—shocks all sense of justice, and
■ is opposed to the dictates of truth and
• religion.
Overwhelmed as you must now be under
- a sense of wrong and cruel oppression, we
5 hasten to offer you all the consolation the
most cordial sympathy can afford, and at
■ the same time to express the heartfelt hope
i and prayer that, for injustice so grievous
T and unprecedented, an effectual remedy may
, yet be found.” '. _
t Pending an application to the Supieme
3 Court, for the restraining of this last out-
rage, the Address has not yet been pre-
sented; but it is understood to have receiv-
-3 ed already from 2,000 to 3,000 signatures ;
r and among these the names of Magistrates,
! Ministers, and gentlemen the most respect-
-1 ed and influential in the colony.


In Equity.
STORIE & WALKER versus WHYTE & OTHERS.
Ox the 20tli April, Mr. W, L, Dobson, instructed by Mr. Adams, moved for eu 1
Injunction to lestiam the Hon, J. AViiyte and the two Managers from excluding
the Eev. J. Storie from the Church or Manse of St. Andrew’s, or hindering him in
the exercise of his office as Minister of that Church, or excluding the Congregation,
or permitting any other Minister to officiate therein. To this application a Demur-
rer was entered. The Attorney-General appeared for the defendants, and
argued at length that the Court had no jurisdiction ; that the plaintiffs had no case
in equity ; that the Attorney-General and the Presbytery should have been made
parties to the suit. The Court gave its decision on the 20th May, dismissing the
Demurrer, and finding against the defendants on all the points,
On the Bth of June and following days the Ixjuxctiox was argued : for the
plaintiffs Storie and Walker—Mr. W. L. Dobson and Mr. Adams ; for the Colo-
nial Secretary and other defendants—the Attorney-General and Mr. Pitt.
On the 2nd July the decision of the Court was delivered by Sir Francis Smith
as follows :
“ In this suit a motion was made for an injunction to restrain the defendants from
excluding the plaintiff St®*ie, from the Church of St. Andrew’s, and from interfering
with him in the due exercise of his office as minister of that Church, and from per-
mitting any other minister to officiate in the Church without his consent. It appeared
from the affidavits that certain proceedings in the nature of a prosecution had been
taken against the plaintiff Storie before a body styling itself the Presbytery of Tas-
mania, resulting in two sentences, one of dissolution of the pastoral tie between him
and the congregation of St. Andrew’s, and the other of deposition from the office of
the ministry. In consequence of these sentences, and as it would appear, for the purpose
of giving effect to them, the defendants Pobertson and Dallantine, the Whrdens or
Managers, with the sanction of the other defendants, two of the Trustees by locking
the Church doors and by other acts which the law regards as forcible, excluded the
plaintiff Storie from the exercise of his functions as minister of the Church Argu
mentswere addressed to us on the part of the plaintiff with the view of establishing
that the Presbytery was not duly constituted, and had not jurisdiction to pronounce
the sentences above-mentioned ; and further, that its proceedings were inverso ordine
as having been informal, irregular, and not consonant with the principles of justice’
For the defendants it w-as.contended that the Presbytery was duly constituted and
had the lequisite jurisdiction, that its proceedings were regular, and its sentences valid.
It is not our intention to give any opinion whatever upon the points thus argued.'
They are properly the subject of determination at the hearing; and it would be"
improper, upon insufficient and imperfect data, and upon an interlocutory motion to
anticipate that determination. An injunction is usually granted to prevent irrepara-
ble injury, in cases where betvveen the mischief caused by the injunction in case the
right should eventually jbe decided to be with the opposite party, and that caused by
refusing it in case the right should be with the party applying for it, the balance is
clearly in favor of interposition. With reference to these considerations, we should
be disposed to refuse the injunction in this case, there being no irreparable injury to
be prevented, and the balance of inconvenience not being such as to call for the
extraordinary interposition of the Court. But there is a principle upon which the
Court is compelled to interpose, and which I now proceed to state :—the Presbytery
was, in no sense, a court, and, therefore, whether its sentences were, or were not bind-
ing upon the plaintiff Storie, by reason of his acquiescence, express or implied, or his


non-acquiescence, it had no power of its own to carry out those sentences, which
could only be enforced through this Court. That is clearly established by the Privy
Council in Long v. The Bishop of Cape Town, 11 W.R., where it is said that when any
religious or other lawful association has not only agreed on the terms of its union, but has
also constituted a tribunal to determine whether the rules of the association have been
violated by any of its members or not, and what shall be the consequence of such viola-
tion,then the decision of such tribunal will be binding when it has acted within the scope
of its _ authority , has observed such forms as the rules required, if any forms be
prescribed, and if not, has proceeded in a manner consonant with the principles of
justice. In such case, the tribunals so constituted are not, in any sense, courts : they
have no power of their own to enforce their sentences ; they must apply for that pur-
pose to-the courts established by law, and such courts will give effect to them as they
give effect to the decisions of arbitrators whose jurisdiction rests entirely upon the agree-
ment of parties. As it is unlawful for the Presbytery directly to enforce its sentences so
it is equally unlawful for any other person to do so. The defendants have assumed to
themselves a power by reason of the sentence of Presbytery, which the Presbytery itself
did not possess. They have taken upon themselves to give effect to a decision, which
could only be lawfully enforced, if valid, by a resort to this Court. They have taken
the law into their own hands, and have thereby infringed one of the fundamental
principles of law. To show that the Court will interfere by injunction to restrain the
assertion of a right by forcible means, it is only necessary to refer to the case of The
Attorney-General v. The Hospital of St. Cross, 24 L.J., c. 148. There the church-
warden, Mr. Holloway, for the purpose of enforcing his assertion that the chapel of
the hospital was the church of the parish of St. Faith, prevented the minister
appointed by the master of the hospital from officiating, on the ground that he had
not the Bishop’s license. The Master of the Rolls granted an injunction to restrain
hnn from interfering with the minister, without deciding whether the church was the
parish church or not, and therefore without deciding whether the minister had a right
to officiate or not. He observed that it was the policy of the law not to permit a
person to take the law into his own hands and to enforce his rights by what might be
called force. The law required him to go to the proper tribunals, and if he established
his right, those tribunals by their own officers would enforce his right, and put him
in possession of what he claimed. The Master of the Rolls pointed out the course
which Mr. Holloway might have adopted to .enforce hi , night, and held that the
Court would not allow him, instead of taking that course' to take the law into his
own hands for the purpose of throwing on the other side the necessity of establishing
their right, they, up to the time of his interference, having been in actual possession.
In that case there was the additional circumstance that a receiver of the income of
the hospital property had been appointed, but that circumstance does not appear to
us to affect the principles laid down in their application to the present case. Being
then of opinion that the defendants, Robertson and Ballantine, committed an illegal
act in taking the law into their own hands, and excluding the plaintiff Storie °by
force from the Church of which he was in actual possession as minister, and that the
other defendants have violated their trust in sanctioning these illegal proceedings, we
consider that it is the duty of the Court to interpose for the purpose of correcting' the
unlawful acts already committed, and restraining them for the future. Without giv-
ing any opinion, at this stage of the case, upon the validity of the proceedings of the
Presbytery, we simply place the plaintiff Storie in the position which he occupied until
illegally disturbed by the defendants; and we leave the question, whether he ought
to be removed from his office by virtue of the sentence of the Presbytery to be deter-
mined in due course of law. The injunction will issue in terms of the motion. The
plaintiffs’ costs to be costs in the cause. The defendants’ costs to be borne by’them-
selves.”
The Chief Justice said that upon the opinion given by' His Honor, it was
unnecessary for him to say more than that he entirely concurred.
St. Andrew’s Church.—The above place of worship was re-opened yesterday
the service being conducted by the Rev. J. Storie, in the presence of a large con-
gregation. The Rev. preacher, in his morning sermon, made no special reference to
the recent disturbances in connection with the Church, beyond announcing that in
consequence of the supply of gas having been cut off, the evening service would be
held m the Manse, but that he hoped on next Sunday, the gas would be again
available, The evening service was accordingly held in the Manse.— The Mercury
