

Casino War Memorial
OLYMPIC POOL
Opened by
His Excellency, Lieut. General Sir John Northcott
K.C.M.G., C B., M.V.O.
Governor of New South Wales
SATURDAY, OCTOBER 25, 1952
Souvenir Booklet


FAR NORTH COAST CARNIVAL OFFICIALS
STARTER: H. BUSH, Lismore.
REFEREE: T. BAKER, Kyogle.
REFEREE STEWARD: B. STACEY, Lismore.
D. WALPOLE, Murwillumbah.
COSTUME STEWARD: M. McNIVEN, Lismore.
JUDGES: R. RUSHBROOK (Chief), Kyogle.
A. ELKINGTON, Murwillumbah.
J. GALBRAITH, Casino.
TIMEKEEPERS: D. WALPOLE (Chief), Murwillumbah.
W. SEWARD, Kyogle.
C. NIND, Lismore.
A. WILSON, Lismore.
RECORDER: J. BROWN, Lismore.
REGISTRAR: M. McNIVEN, Lismore.


FOREWORD
TODAY marks the culmination of many year s of planning and hard work by many citizens
of Casino who were ambitious and far siahted enough to envisage the construction oi
an Olympic Pool, yet adding another amenity for the enjoyment of the citizens of this town.
I extend my thanks to members of Council, the Baths Committee and citizens who
have always lent their support to attain this objective.
To Council's staff, contractors and all who have worked so well to ensure the suc-
cess of this Memorial I also render my person al thanks.
R. W. MANYWEATHERS, Mayor.
MUNICIPAL COUNCIL MEMBERS:
Aid. R. W. Manyweathers (Mayor), Aid. R. S. Anderson, Aid. J. A. Gorton, Aid. J. W. Green, Aid. I. J« Hudson, Aid. E. Jones,
Aid. M. Runkler, Aid. A. H. G. Rickard, Aid. G. F. Thomson.
A. R. Samut,i Town Clerk.
R. E. Hughes, Overseer.
C. H. Ramsay, Health Inspector.
PHOTOGRAPHS BY COURTESY R. J. FROGLEY, SOMERVILLE STUDIOS.


CASINO
WAR MEMORIAL
OLYMPIC POOL
MEMORIAL. OLYMPIC. POOL. CASINO.
The dimensions of this pool,
are 165 feet by 50 feet with
a children's pool 50 feet by 25
feet and it is situated on the-
corner of Centre and Rich-
mond Streets.
The pool which is 3 feet 6
inches deep at one end and is
eleven feet in its deepest
part is fully tiled in cream with
a green band, and both pools
are enclosed by a three feet
wire fence with foot pools at
all entrances.
The first suggestion for the
establishment of this Memorial
came from Mr. R. W. Colley
at a meeting of the Casino*
R.S.S. & A.1.L.A., in September, 1943.
In October 1943, the then Mayor, Aid. A. E. Robinson, convened a public meeting at which a Baths Committee was
elected to take the project in hand and now that task is accomplished.
With a target of £20,000, the Committee undertook to raise, £B,OOO and the Council the balance, but with rising costs that
amount promised by Council had to be increased.
On June 8, 1951 the Council contracted with Messrs. W. J- Green <S Son for the construction of the War Memorial Pool,
the filtration plant being supplied and installed by Filtration and Water Softening Pty. Ltd. Melbourne.
The completed pool will cost £33,000, contains 330,000 gallons of water, which is continuously being filtered, has eight
racing lanes and is lit by under water lighting.
The buildings which are to be brick, it is hoped, will be commenced at an early date.


His Excellency
Lieut.-Gen. Sir John Northcott
Governor of N.S.W.
A. E. Robinson, Esq.
Mayor 19391945
R. W. Colley. Esq.
Alderman R. W. Manyweathers.
Mayor 1948-1952


CASINO
BOWLING CLUB
This club was formed in-
-1920 by a number of Casino
townsmen, many of whom,
gave donations of from five to
twenty five pounds toward
the project.
The first President was Mr.
G. J. Mortimer, still a citizen of
this town and the first Secre-
tary Mr. W. A. McConaghy.
The construction cf the first
green cost £l,OOO the work be-
ing done by man and horse
power, not by the modern
methods of today. The first
years were difficult ones for
finance with a membership of
between thirty and forty.
In 1924 the freehold of the-
land was acquired from the Lands Department and the club formed into Casino. Bowling and Recreation Co-operative Society
with one pound shares.
In 1947 the Casino Bowling Club Ltd., was formed and from here the club progressed to such an extent that it now has cr
membership of over two hundred and a new Club House, the equal of any in* the State, costing £13,000.
A second full size green has been laid down on the site of the old club house and this will be opened by His Excel-
lency, the Governor of New South Wales, Lieut.-General, Sir John Northcott, on October 25, 1952.
Altogether the club has expended £17,000 on the new dub house, ■ greens and amenities.


Council Chambers
ADMINISTRATIVE BUILDING,
CASINO
The Administrative Building
in Casino was officially open-
ed by the Honourable B. S. B.
Stevens, M.L.A., Premier of
New South Wales, on 20th
November, 1937.
The building is constructed
of brick and houses Council's
Offices on the lower floor and
the Council Chamber, Com-
mittee Room, Mayor's and
Aldermen's rooms on the first
floor. This building is most
attractively situated off the
main street and is approached
through an arcade between
Council owned shops which
front the main street.
The Council Chamber has been designed with great taste, the furnishings toning with the walls which are of walnut
veneer. There is a parquetry timber floor and the ceiling is beamed with inset lighting. The Aldermen and Principal Officers of
Council are provided with their individual desks and chairs in the Council Chamber.
Special provision has been made for the accommodation of the public which is separated from the main portion of the
Council Chamber by a dwarf timber partition.
It is truly said that the Council Chamber in Casino is one of which the citizens of any community may well be proud.


CASINO DISTRICT
AMBULANCE
STATION
Set amid spacious and well
cared for grounds, the Casino-
Ambulance Station is situated
in Centre Street, Casino.
Analogous with the humble-
beginnings of other public ser-
vices, Ambulance transport m
Casino has evolved from a
wheeled stretcher housed at
the General Hospital, later a
horse drawn vehicle was pro-
cured, until today a fleet of t>
modern motor vehicles serve
an area from the Clarence-
River to the Coast.
The main building war
erected in 1938 on the existing
site; land was acquired on
either side and alteration and additions were effected in 1947.
Facilities available for servicing the fleet include a modern hydraulic hoist and accessories, emcient tool room and car
refuelling and washing equipment under cover.
The service is maintained by local public support in administration and finance.


CASINO
MEMORIAL
HOSPITAL
The first definite action
Taken by thei residents of Cas-
ino in regard to establishing
a Public Hospital took place
on August 9, 1884. Prior to
that date it had been the earn-
•est wish of the citizens to pos-
sess a hospital but little had
been achieved financially as
they could only boast of a
credit balance of £146.
The Committee had already
secured a site from the Gov-
ernment, which is the present
ten acre block, and it was
upon this site on May 2, 1885
that the foundation stone of u
building costing £l5OO was
laid by Mr. (afterwards Sir George) Dibbs,. and this building received its first patients on January 1, 1886.
In 1924 the committee reported on the inadequacy of the building and in 1932 the Memorial Hospital, which is now,
used as Medical and Surgical Wards, capacity 60 beds was opened.
On March 10, 1938 a new Maternity Unit of 20 beds was opened, but although beautifully furnished and equipped is
today inadequate! for the needs of the district and steps have b :en taken to add a further 14 beds, but lack cf finance has made
this temporarily impossible.
In 1949 the Richmond Private Hospital was acquired to meet the further needs of the district and today with a capacity
of 104 beds, the Casino Memorial Hospital now provides a first Hass service of which we are very proud. All sections are
well furnished and equipped and the service provided to patients is comparable with any Hospital in New South Wales.


Governor Performs
Official
Opening Ceremony
His. Excellency the Governor of New South Wales Lt. General Sir John Northcott, K.C.M.G., C.B.,
M.V.O. cutting the ribbons which allowed the flags covering the memorial plaque to fall away.
Others on the official dais with His Excellency included the Mayor and Mayoress of Casino Aid.
and Mrs. R. W. Manyweathers, the President of Casino sub-branch of the R.S.L. Mr. A. J.
Cowdery and Mrs. Cowdery, the Town Clerk Mr. Austin R. Samut and Mrs. Samut and Sir John's
private secretary Major J. F. Martin.


Section Of Large
Crowd
In Attendance
A section of the large crowd representative of all Far North Coast centres, which attended the
official opening. In the background is the Guard of Honour, which prior to the opening was
inspected by Sir John. It was comprised mostly cf Universal Trainees. A similar crowd lined
the other side of the pool. Immediately the ceremony was over, 200 children, who had waited
patiently and quietly during the speech making, dived into the water.


The Northern
Co-operative Meat
Co. Ltd.
Generally known as the
Casino Meatworks, was in-
corporated in 1933. The Com-
pany operated on a small
scale up till 1939 when tire
present abattoirs were opened,
and large scale operations
commenced.
The district in which the
Works are situated is ideal for
meatworks as it provides a kill
every week in the year. The
annual number of stock treat-
ed in the first years of the
Company's operations was
approximately 50,000 head,
worth one quarter of a million
pounds. This kill has grown
to this year's record of 212,244 head, worth two million pounds, made up as follows: Cattle, 29,234; Calves, 73,498; Vealers, 2,608;
Pigs, 106,904.
With such a consistent kill the Company is able to provide constant work for 150 employees. We have a super-
annuation scheme in operation, and bonus wages are paid as a l appreciation of the employees' efforts and co-operation.
The Company itself is a co-operative unit, as evidenced by its name, and is administered by a Board of seven Directors,
who are elected by the share holders. It is an interesting fact that a substantial proportion of the capital of the Company is sub-
scribed by some 750 district farmers, graziers and business men.
One of the largest Operators at our v/orks is erecting a bacon curing and canning annexe which is expected to be in
operation before the end of this year. This, it is anticipated,will further boost the development of the Northern Co-operative
Meat Co. Ltd.


PREMIER
VISITS
MEATWORKS
On 8/8/52 the Premier of
N.S.V/., Mr. J. J. Cahill officially
visited the Works and express-
ed. immense satisfaction of
benefits of country killing as
evidenced by what he had
seen.
Official Party (reading from left to right): Mr. A. S. Jeffery, Manager; Mr. J. J. Cahill, Premier of
New South Wales; Mr. R. W. Manyweathers, Mayor of Casino; Mr. C. F. Thomson, Chairman of
Board of Directors; Mr. Austin R. Samut, Town Clerk cf Casino; and Mr. W. C. Wurth, Chairman
of Public Service Beard.


WALKER STREET,
CASINO
LOOKING NORTHWARD
FROM MAFEKING LAMP
Casino as a township was
first established in 1839 by
Messrs. Clay and Stapleton
and was soon the centre of
three large cattle stations
Wooroowoolgan, Runnemede
and Tomki.
In those early days the
nearest. market,.was Sydney,
consequently most of ' the
cattle were converted to tallow
and with the hides consigned
by boat to Sydney.
The discovery of Cedar fol-
- by that of pine brought
new life to the Richmond River
till today we have mills
operating to the extent that in 1951, thirty nine million feet of log timber was handled in this district, approximately eighty five
per cent, being hardwoods. A very extensive policy of replanting of these areas has been undertaken by the Forestry
Department.
Subdivision of the station property was the commencement cf the growth of our dairying industry, which is today
exemplified in the Casino Co-operative Dairy Company.
The growth of the district can be gauged by the increase in population. (1891) 1486. (1921) 3455. (1951) 7550.
The town has amenities comparable with most cities, citizens enjoying electricity, filtered water supply, modern,
sewerage system and gas. Sporting facilities, 18 hole golf course, turf cricket wicket, bowls, croquet lawns, hockey grounds,
tennis courts and Olympic swiming pool.


CASINO
SCHOOL OF ARTS
The Casino Schopl of Arts
was established in 1873 on a
block of land made available
for the purpose of establishing
a School of Arts. At first it
occupied only a small room
but in 1907 it built a mere pre-
tentious home at the corner of
Walker and Barker Streets.
These premises were burnt
down in 1932 but in 1934 the
present buildings were erect-
ed.
Most of the old records were
burnt but we know that in
in 1908 there were roughly
about 150 members, while to-
day we have a membership
of over 600.
The first Trustees were Messrs. R. Earling, F. G. Crouch and W. C. Bundock while the present ones are D. J. Byrne,
W. S. Mackney and G. P. Raphael.
The Railway Institute was incorporated with the School of Arts in 1944 and it has two representatives on the Committee
of the School of Arts..
On March, 1946 free membership was made available to all children under the age of 16 years and a special feature
has been made of the Young People's Section in conjunction with the Free Public Library which was opened and housed in
ourlibrary -on. November 1945.. -When the new additions are made, of building a second storey op. the Walker Street frontage it is
hoped that the Young People's Section will have a separate room. This is essential if the greatest benefit to the ypurg people
is to be obtained. These children will be members of tomorrow and must be guided so as to get the greatest value from
their reading.


The Casino
Co-operative Dairy-
Society Limited
The Society in its present
form dates back to 1903, when
only butter was manufactured.
The yearly output then being
500 tons per annum, at present
2500 per annum is manufac-
tured.
In 1949 the Society started
to receive whole milk and from
this the society manufactures:
Sweetened Condensed Milk
250 tons per annum.
Whole Milk Concentrate 195
tons per annum.
Roller Powdered Milk 700
tons per annum.
Ice Cream 24500 gallons per
annum.
Pasteurised Eottled Milk 97000 gallons per annum.
During six months of the year whole milk is sent by rati tanker to Sydney at the rate of 24,000 gallons per week.
At present further expansion in the milk section is being made to incorporate a Spray Drying plant for the small con-
tainer trade.
The Society is purely co-operative, managed by a Board of Directors elected by the shareholders annually. The present
Board have seen service for an average period of 20 years each.
The Society also has a large store for service to its sup oliers, from which small goods and hardware are sold. The
Society also has a modern ice making plant which is the only source of supply in the Casino District.
At present some 780 suppliers send their milk and cream to the Society all of which are shareholders, who over the past
ten years have received cut of profits the total of £229,429 in bonuses and dividends.


BENNETT BROS.,
CASINO (N.S.W.)
BENNETT BROS., of Casino
(N.S.W.) are an old establish-
ed firm of sawmiliers in the
Richmond - Tweed district,
where its annual output of ap-
proximately 1,500,000 super
feet of sawn timber (mainly
scantlings, flooring and weath-
erboards) finds a ready mar-
ket. Logs are hauled from
forests up to 40 miles distant
on the slopes of the Richmond
Range, and all logging opera-
tions are carried out by the
firm's own equipment.
The firm was founded by
the late Mr. John Samuel
Bennett, father of the present
owner, Mr. Cec. Bennett, who,
?hon! Q 0 S J Pert sgwmiller ' is a most ingenious engineer. He designs and supervises the manufacture in his work-
snops ot all major mechanical equipment required in his mill and logging operations.
whirh IYlterrup * lng curr ent operations, new machinery and plant is being installed in the mill. The new installation
mit wili make , lt . P ° SSlb e t 0 i h lCr£aSe to 50/60,000 super tset sawn timber oer week, is following a totally new lay-
out with, a view to improving efficiency. Y * ay
At present there are 40 men regularly employed in actual sawmilling operations, bush work, etc.
r’or.cirta t 0 a^ sisti u g in supplying much needed timber for the rapidly growing local demand, Bennett Bros, export
considerable quantities of ironbark to the U.S.A. p


POSTAL HISTORY
OF CASINO
(New South Wales)
The earliest records of the
Postmaster-General's Depart-
ment reveal that the Casino
Post Office was established on
Ist January, 1849; unfortun-
ately the name of the first
Postmaster is not known.
However, the official records
show that a Mr. Barnes was
the Postmaster in the -year
1851 when a drop box was
supplied for use at Casino
Post Office.
It has been noted that dur-
ing May, 1856, 719 letters and
906 newspapers passed
through the hands of the Post-
master at Casino. At that time
mails were exchanged with two other offices.
In 1856 mails were despatched from Sydney by steamer for Casino once a fortnight.
In the yeac 1858 a telegraph line connected Casino to Brisbane, a distance of 120 miles.
In January, 1861 a mail service was established between Grafton and Casino with Contractor Ellen Thompson once a
week per horse-back for £4OO per annum. A similar service was established to the Richmond River Heads with Contractor, James
Duffy for £l5O per annum and to Brisbane with Contractor, John Brown for £265 per annum.
The Postmaster's salary in 1898 was £240 per annum; there were now three telephones in Casino, and there were 122
mails received and despatched each week. In 1900 the Casino Telephone Exchange was opened and 23 telephone lines were
connected to it.


CASINO AMATEUR SWIMMING CLUB
RE-ESTABLISHED 1952
FATRONS: SIR EARLE PAGE, M.H.R., MR. J. T. REID, M.L.A., MR. R. W. MANYWEATHERS, Mayor.
PRESIDENT: MR. J. GALBRAITH.
VICE-PRESIDENTS: MESSRS. A. E. ROBINSON, G. F. THOMSON.
HON. SECRETARY: MR. J. H. BUCK.
HON. TREASURER: MR. E. S. VAIL.
CAPTAIN: MR. GORDON McNAUGHTON.
RACE SECRETARY: MR. KEITH GOOLEY v
COMMITTEE: MESSRS. N. IMESON, M. DOUGHERTY, W. COX, L. MacDONALD, H. MURPHY.
POLICY. The Teaching and Encouragement of Swimming, Natatorial Sport, The Study and Practice of The Methods of Life Saving
SUBSCRIPTIONS: ADULTS 6/-. JUNIORS (under 16), 3/- Per Year.


"express" print, casino
