

Price Is., or y mounted on canvas in a cloth case, o{3«^6c|»


mMOOMARnr© rso&ip ©if wq©t®ko^ q


ce Is., or, mounted on canvas in a cloth case,
LIST OF
CASSELL’S
EMIGRANTS’ MAPS
HANDY GUIDES,
ONE SHILLING BACH;
Or Mounted on Canvas, in Cloth Case, 2s. 6d.
PRINCIPAL BRITISH COLONIES.
AUSTRALIA.
NEW ZEALAND.
SOUTH AND WEST AUSTRALIA.
QUEENSLAND.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
VICTORIA.
CALIFORNIA.
NORTH AMERICA.
TASMANIA.
UPPER CANADA.
LOWER CANADA.
CAPE COLONY.
IWSC3BO
SOS I c


V.l 3
■CASSELL’S
EMIGRANTS’ HANDY GUIDE
VICTORIA.
LONDON:
CASSELL, FETTER, AND GALPIN,
LA BELLE SALVAGE YARD, E.C.


K'.VS'Ar ; P* ■
r s , ; > f v '
V
LONDON•
ST3TT3XI AND 6ALPIN, BELLE SALVAGE PRINTING WOKWSj*
LUDGATE HILL, E.C,
7A :
.AVi ! . < ... . /;>
; i


CASSELL’S
EMIGRANTS' HANDY GUIDE.
VICTORIA.
The colony of Victoria, formerly known as Port Philip,
comprises all that portion of the continent of Australia
south of the rivers Murrumbidgee and Murray, having,
to the north-east, New South Wales; in the west,
the colony of South Australia; the south, the ocean
and Bass’s Straits, by which it is divided from Tas-
mania.
The first enumeration of settlers in this district was
made in 1836 ; the result arrived at was 177 : 142 males,
and 35 females. In 1861, the date of the last census, the
numbers had swelled to 640,322: 328,651 males, and
211,671 females. This extraordinary increase of popula-
tion is unexampled in any other of the Australian
colonies. A later estimate of the population, made by
the Registrar-General, on the 31st of March, 1864, and
which may be assumed as correct, gives a total of
680,113; 834,248 males, and 245,865 females. The
total increase in population, therefore, had been at the
rate of about 9 per cent, in three years. The increase of
the male population has been at the rate of less than 2
per cent., while that of the female population has
reached nearly 17 per cent,, showing that the disparity
of the sexes is rapidly lessening.


The total area of Victoria is 8G,831 square miles—that
is, nearly as great as that of England, Scotland, and
Wales united. There are 16 counties: Anglesey,
Bourke, Dalhousie, Dundas, Evelyn, Eollett, Grant,
Granville, Hampden, Mornington, Normanby, Polwarth,
Ripon, Talbot, and Villiers. Of these the most densely
populated are Bourke (109 persons to a square mile),
Talbot (65), Grant (39), Grenville (21). Besides the
counties there are the five districts :—Gipps Land, the
Loddon, Rodney, the Murray, and the Wimmera, The
Loddon is the most thickly populated, having 10 persons
to a square mile, while in Gipps Land there is not one
person to two miles of territory. The average of the
entire colony is a little under 7to the square mile. As
there is scarcely any part of the colony which is not
adapted for occupation—and as even the least densely
populated of English counties has more than 80 to the
square mile—it is apparent that there is ample room for
any probable number of emigrants. It was calculated,
in 1861, that, in the counties, the houses were on the
average 978 yards—rather more than half-a-mile—apart ;
and in the five districts, 2,405 yards, or nearly a mile
and a half apart.
The approximate agricultural statistics for the year
ending March 31, 1864, show that there were 5,213,564
acres in occupation; 3,736,944 acres enclosed; 496,606
under tillage; 308,146 acres devoted to cereals, peas,
and beans ; and 28,127 acres to green crops. In 1863,
the average produce per acre of wheat was 18 J bushels;
but in 1864, from various causes, the average produce
was only 8£ bushels.


CLIMATE OF THE COLONY.
But the intending emigrant wishes, first of all, to
know whether the climate of Victoria is adapted to an
English constitution; surely land and wealth are pur-
chased too highly, if they cost your health, and perhaps
your life. Nothing on this score has to be feared in
Victoria. The climate is most genial, closely resembling
that of Italy. The clearness and purity of the air exer-
cises a strong influence on the habits and temperament of
the people, who “certainly appear more buoyant and
happy than those who dwell in colder latitudes.” As a
whole, it is asserted by those who have the best means of
forming an impartial opinion, so delightful is the climate
that colonists, returning to England, look back to Vic-
toria with regret. From the registrar’s report it appears
that there are proportionally more births and marriages,
and fewer deaths, in Victoria than in England. Now it
is always found that the mortality of very young chil-
dren in any country has an intimate relation with the
climatic influences to which they are subject. It has been
urged that Victoria is, in this case, particularly un-
favourable ; but the returns distinctly show that it bears
a favourable comparison with Great Britain.
The hottest month is January, the mean temperature
of which is about 68°.
The coldest month is July, the mean temperature of
which is about 49°. Ice is very uncommon; hoar frost
is sometimes seen early in the morning. The year is
divided thus: Spring —September, October, and Novem-
ber. Summer —December, January, and February.


Autumn —March, April, and May, Winter —June, July,
and August.
The winds blowing during the summer from the north
are generally very dry and warm; as the wind shifts
towards the west a sensible change in the hygrometer is
observed; the air becomes damp and the sky dull, and
rain often falls copiously. Rain sometimes falls suddenly
in great quantities, but usually the average is one-tenth
of an inch per hour during very wet weather. Hurri-
canes are very uncommon in Victoria, the force of the
wind seldom being greater than a strong gale. The
annual fall of rain is much influenced by the direction of
the winds, but the average appears to be about thirty
inches per annum.


s.
d.
s
d.
Carpenters, per day
• • •
. 8
0 to
10
0
Masons, ditto
• •
. 10
0 „
12
0
Bricklayers and Plasterers,
ditto . ,
. 8
0 „
10
0
Blacksmiths, ditto
• • •
. 10
0 „
12
0
Quarrymen, ditto
• • •
7
0„
9
0
Able pick and shovel men,
ditto .
• •
•
6
0
DEMAND FOR LABOUR
With respect to the occupations of the settlers in Vic-
toria—a matter of very great importance to those about
to proceed thither —the returns show that the govern-
mental, professional, and trading classes have remained
remarkably steady ; that the manufacturing and labour-
ing classes reached their highest in 1854; that the
agricultural and pastoral classes have been rapidly in-
creasing, and that gold mining has absorbed the atten-
tion of about a fifth of the population.
The following return, as to the ordinary rate of wages,
will furnish some idea of the prices that may reasonably
be expected; but reference should, in all cases, be made to
the last return, giving the latest prices quoted in the
colony, as this prevents much deception and disappoint-
ment. Information on this subject will be given by the
accredited agents of the colony ;
WITHOUT RATIONS.
Fencers, 3 rails. Is. 3d. to Is. lOd. per rood.
WITH RATIONS.
£ s. d. £ s. d•
Ist class Ploughmen, per week . . 0150tol00
Bullock drivers, ditto . . 0150,, 0 17 0


WITH RATIONS.
£ s. d. £ s. d
Ploughmen, from 3 to 6 months’ hire,
per annum 40 0 0 ~ 45 0 0*
Mowers, per acre, from. , . . 03 6 „ 0 5 0
Haymakers, per week .... 100
Binders, ditto . . . . 1 50 „ 110 0
Reapers, per acre, and according to crop 14 0*
Cradlers, from 1 5 0 „ 1 10 0
Garden labourers, per week ... 15 0
Milkmen 15 0 „ 1 0 0
Gardeners, per annum . . . . 52 00„ 55 0 0
Shepherds, ditto . . . . 30 00„35 0 O'
Cooks, with board and lodging, per wk. 1 0 0 „ 1 5 0
Waiters, from 10 0
Customary rations per week are, 121bs. flour, 12Ibs. meat,
21bs. sugar, ; l f lb. tea.
FEMALE SERVANTS.
-Cooks and Laundresses, per annum , . . ,£3O to <£3s-
Housemaids, ditto . . , 26 „ 30
Competent women for general house work . 30
Upper-class Housemaids 26
Nurse-girls, from ....„, 14 „ 2&
Needlewomen 26 „ 30
If they are dressmakers 35
Really good servants in private houses in the colony
can always obtain a higher rate of wages than that which
is given above.
In respect to the general reduced rate of wages already
alluded to, it must not be lost sight of that although at
one time the artisan or labourer was receiving, in actual
money, a far higher emolument than at present, yet the
cost of almost every article required for the use of him-
self and family has declined in even a greater ratio than
his own earnings. An attempt has been made in the
following table to show what has been about the actual


Bread, 28 lbs. ...
Beef or Mutton, 21 lbs.
Potatoes, 21 lbs.
Flour, 5 lbs.
Tea, 1 lb.
Sugar, 6 lbs.
Soap, 3 lbs.
Candles, 2 lbs. ...
Milk, 7 pints ...
Butter, 2 lbs. ...
Firewood, £ ton
Water, 1 load ...
•weekly cost of living to an artisan and his family during
1851, 1857, and 1861:
Upon tlie supposition of the follow-
ing Rates of Consumption, &c.
Rent of a Cottage
Clothing*
School Fees for children’s edu-
cation
£ s. d.
0 12 6
0 15 9
o 5 io:
0 2 2
0 2 0
0 3 0
0 10
0 16
0 7 0
0 9 0
0 12 6
0 10 0
2 0 0
0 15 0
£ s. d.
0 6 8f
0 12 3
0 2 10i
0 1 2*
0 2 6
0 2 6
0 10
0 14
0 3 6
0 5 6
0 6 0
0 5 0
0 10 0
0 10 0
0 3 0
1861.
JS s. d.
0 5 3
0 6 10
0 10
0 10
0 2 9
0 2 3
0 0 9
0 12
0 2 4
0 3 0
0 4 0
0 2 0
0 6 0
0 G 0
0 3 0
0 3 0
7 0 3*
Total Weekly Expenditure...
3 13 4*
2 7 4
The weekly wages of an artisan, if working full time,
would, in 1854, at £1 10s. a day, amount to £9 a week;
in 1857, at 15s. a day, they would amount to £4 10s. a
week; at 12s. a day, to £3 125.; at 10s. a day, to £3.
Thus, in 1854 he would have each week £1 19s. Bd.
above his wages; in 1857,165. 7*d,; in 1861, £1 4s. Bd.;
and at the present still further reduced rate of provisions,
about £1 Bs.
♦ Intending emigrants are advised to select their outfit and cabin
requisites at some respectable colonial outfitters, of which there are
several in London. E. J. Monnery & Co., 165, Fenchurch Street, is
one of the oldest establishments of that class. They publish an
illustrated price list, which may be had free on application ; and
every information as to the most suitable articles will be afforded
by them.


SALE OF LAND.
The occupation of land is a very important point with
the emigrant. On first arriving in the colony he may
be willing and anxious to take service, but his ultimate
object is to obtain land for himself—to be a landed pro-
prietor—to have a real stake in the country. It appears
that there are 10,000,000 acres of good agricultural
land available for settlement, in addition to large areas
reserved for general use as public commons and un-
stocked country, suitable for sheep and cattle stations.
The land in the agricultural areas is divided into farms,
varying from 40 to 640 acres, and is sold at the uniform
price of £1 per acre. The purchaser can pay at that
rate for one-half the farm selected by him, and rent the
other half for eight years, at 2s. 6d. per acre, at the end
of which time the land so rented becomes his property.
One-fourth of the land fund is diverted from the
general revenue, and is expended on paying the passage
of poor emigrants, to keep the labour market supplied.
The scheme is so new that nothing can be offered with
certainty as to its practical application. It is proposed
that new settlers in the colony, in common with the rest
of the community, should, on payment of a small sum in
the colony, be entitled to nominate relatives or “ skilled
labourers ” at home, the bulk of whose passage-money
shall be paid by the state. This arrangement may tem-
porarily glut the labour market, and render emigration
to Victoria less expedient than to other colonies ; but if
the scheme answers the expectation of the local Colonial
Government, it will serve to build up the settlement, and
render it one of the most important in Australia.


AGRICULTURE.
The cereals grown in Victoria are admitted to be
•equal to the best of similar produce in any part of the
world. The wheat and oats have been highly com-
mended. The cultivation of the vine is rapidly extend-
ing, and it is confidently expected that in a few years’
time the colony will carry on a large and profitable
export trade in wine. 92,000 gallons of wine were pro-
duced in the year ending March 31, 1863 ; and in 1862,
566 gallons were exported, chiefly to the United King-
dom. At the end of March, 1863, there were very
nearly 4,500,000 vines in the colony. In the meantime,
the local demand for colonial wine is already sufficient to
cause a sensible reduction of the duties received on im-
ported wine, beer, and spirits. It is calculated that a
vineyard will yield on the average a profit of £lOO an
acre per annum. Many parts of the colony are well
adapted for the growth of cotton, and some of the colonists
have commenced its cultivation. Flax can be grown in
most parts of the colony, and the silkworm thrives re-
markably well; its favourite food, the mulberry, grows
here in great perfection. Arrowroot thrives well, and
can be easily and profitably cultivated. Tobacco is now
being grown on a large scale, a considerable impetus
being given to this branch of agriculture by an enter-
prising firm in Melbourne offering £llO per ton for all
the leaf tobacco supplied to them.
The olive, orange, lemon, pine-apple, melon, and other
tropical fruits thrive well in the open air, and require
but little attention. The experiments which have been


tried on the tea-plant go to prove that it could be-
successfully cultivated in Victoria.
There were at the end of March, 1863, 2 steam-
ploughs, 655 reaping, 260 threshing, and 18 mowing-
machines at work in the colony; and 87,018 acres had
been reaped, and 12,312 mowed by machinery.
SHEEP FARMING.
The pastoral interests of the colony—that is to say r
sheep-farming—are of primary importance in point of
utility. At the end of March, 1863, there were 87,000
horses employed in agriculture, nearly 600,000 head of
cattle, 6,800,000 sheep, and about 53,000 pigs in the.
colony.
In the year 1837 the quantity of wool exported was
of the value of £11,639. In the year 1862 the quantity
was 87,055 bales, or 26,812,9101b5., of the value of
£2,350,956; more than double the value of the export of
1852, and £300,000 more than that of the preceding
year, 1861.
Nearly one-half of all the wool received by Great
Britain is exported from Australia, and the largest
amount from the colony of Victoria.
The exports of tallow and hides from Victoria for the
year 1862 amounted to
Tallow £06,515 0 0
Hides 130,350 0 0
It is noticeable that while the exports of wool have been
steadily increasing, the exports of tallow and hides have-
greatly fluctuated within the ten years ending 1862.


Those accustomed to sheep-farming are, therefore,
-whether as labourers or capitalists, the very men for the
colony. Pasture land is to be had at a merely nominal
price; and the sheep thrive with very little attention.
With common prudence and ordinary industry, a man
cannot fail to make money.
The pasture lands or “ runs ” are let under an annual
licence, and they vary in extent from about 2,000
acres to 200 square miles ; the annual rent paid being
according to the grazing capabilities of the soil, at the
rate of £lO per every 4,000 sheep, or 640 head of
cattle. Newly-discovered country can be had on appli-
cation to the Board of Land and Works, but country
better known, or where more applications than one have
"been received for the lease of the same, is generally put
up to tender. Annual and other licences are reserved
for the occupation of smaller portions of land as sites for
runs, stores, mills, &c., the rent not exceeding in any
case £5O per annum.


GOLD MINES.
But there is a glittering temptation to forsake the
ways of ordinary industry at the gold mines. Who has
forgotten the gold trophy at the Exhibition of 1862?
This pyramid represented the mass of gold exported by
the colony of Victoria in ten years ending the Ist of
.October, 1861, the quantity being 26,162,432 oz. troy,
or 800 tons 17 cwt. 3 qrs. 71bs., and its value
£104,649,728 sterling. The pyramid is now erected at
the Crystal Palace, a base being added to show the
further quantity produced in the year ending October 1,
1862, this being 1,817,408 oz., or 55 tons 12 cwt. 2 qrs.
22£lbs., of the value of £7,269,632. The value of gold
exported in 1862 was £6,685,192.
It is an error to suppose that this was the amount of
gold exported from the whole of Continental Australia.
It came from Victoria only. And there the largest nug-
gets that have ever been found in the world have been
discovered. One of these nuggets, called the “ Wel-
come,” found at Ballarat, sold for £10,500 ; another, the
“ Blanche Barkly,” sold for £6,905; another, the “Sarah
Sands,” sold for £5,532; two others sold at “ Dunolly ”
for £5,500 ; another, called the “ Lady Hotham,” valued
at £3,020. Two nuggets found at Ballarat sold for
£7,500. The “ Heron ” nugget, value £4,080, was
found by two young men who had only been three
months in the colony. In August, 1860, a nugget of
the value of £3,336 was found at Ballarat at a depth of
400 feet from the surface. About the same time one was
found at Kingower, worth £3,220, within a foot of the
surface. Similar lumps of gold have been discovered
from time to time within a few feet of the surface, while
in the great reefs and deep sinkings, some of which have


now reached a depth of between 500 and 600 feet, rich
deposits of the precious metal are constantly met with.
The gold fields of Victoria are divided into six princi-
pal districts:—Ballarat, Beechworth, Sandhurst, Mary-
borough, Castlemaine, and Ararat. These are again
divided into mining divisions or sub-districts, and are
each placed under the supervision of a warden.
In each of the six mining districts a local mining
Board is established, with power to mate bye-laws, appli-
cable to mining affairs generally, in the district and the
occupation under business licences. Each of these
mining Boards consists of ten members, who are elected
to the office for a term of twelve months by the holders
of miners’ rights and business licences, resident in the
district. Chinese, however, are not entitled to vote.
For the settlement of mining cases, a “ court of
mines ” is established, which holds its sittings at stated
periods in various places in each mining district.
The whole of the mining departments are under the
control of a responsible minister, who has a seat in the
Legislative Assembly and in the cabinet.
The annual fee for the miner’s right is £l, which
entitles the holder thereof to occupy, for mining purposes
and for residence, so much of the Crown lands as may
be prescribed by the bye-laws of the Local Mining Board.
Storekeepers’ or business licences are issued at the
following rates, entitling the holders thereof to occupy
and carry on business on the gold fields, on such portions
not exceeding 20 perches as may be prescribed by tho
Local Mining Board.
For 8 months £2 10 0
„6„ 5 0 0
12 „ 10 0 0


Leases of auriferous land for mining purposes are
granted for any term not exceeding ten years. For
ordinary leases, an area not less than one acre nor more
than 30 acres; for quartz leases, an area the length of
which is not less than 100 yards nor more than COO
yards along the line of the lode, and the width not
less than 50 yards nor more than 200 yards measured
across the lode; the rents in each instance £2 10s. per
annum per acre.
a }
Leases of Crown lands containing minerals and metals
other than gold are granted for any period not exceeding
thirty years. For coal leases, an area not less than
50 acres nor more than 640 acres; for iron leases,
an area not less than two acres nor more than 100
acres; for all other leases (except gold), an area not
less than a quarter of an acre nor more than 60
acres. The rents charged are, where one mineral or
metal only is worked, 2s. per annum per acre, and
for every ton of mineral or metal raised, a further
sum equivalent to two per cent, on the value of the
mineral or metal at the mouth of the mine. Where a
lease has been granted for working land containing one
mineral or ore of metal, or metal other than gold, and
the lessees propose to work more than one, an extra gUm
of Is. per annum is charged for each additional ore
or metal, and also for every ton of such mineral or
metal raised a further sum equivalent to two per cent, on
the value of the mineral or metal at the mouth of the mine.
The escort of gold from the principal gold fields is
undertaken by the Government, free of charge, if in-
tended for export; otherwise a charge of 6d. per ounce
is made, except from the more distant gold fields, when
the rate is Is. per ounce.


The duty on gold exported from the colony, whether
by sea or land, is fixed at the rate of 2s. 6d. per ounce.
The extent of ground in Victoria more or less
auriferous is upwards of 20,000 square miles, or about
one quarter of the entire area; only 829 square miles
are actually worked upon. In consequence, the employ-
ment offered to miners is exceedingly encouraging, and
must continue to be so for a long period to come. But
.while the gold fields have made the fortunes of success-
ful finders, and furnished remunerative labour to those
merely employed by others in the work, they have, at
the same time, been the ruin of many, and the source of
severe disappointment to many more. In the early days
of their working they were the scene of outrageous
acts of violence, were the occasion of untold misery,
and seriously deranged the whole of the ordinary labour
market.
The gold fever has now subsided, and the fields are
worked with a tolerably even success, while ordinary
industry has returned to its legitimate channels, and the
growing interests of the colony have thereby been ensured.
The official estimate of the population of the gold
fields on the 31st of December, 1862, was 230,805 of all
classes. Those actually employed in alluvial and quartz
mining numbered 93,379, of whom 23,662 were Chinese,
the latter being all males, not one Chinese woman being
in the colony.


PROGRESS OF THE COLONY.
There are several very encouraging facts -which illus-
trate the progress of this important colony.
In ten years, ending December, 1861, no less than
£5,272,620 was expended on public roads and bridges ;
£7,828,233 on Government railways; £163,000 on the
electric telegraph; £820,000 on supplying Melbourne
with water; and in 1862, £421,589 was expended in
public roads, bridges, &c. The Post-office revenue for
1862 amounted to £128,644. There were 408 post-
offices, through which 6,279,623 letters and 4,909,219
newspapers passed.
Ihe first line of electric telegraph commenced in Vic-
toria was that from Melbourne to Williamstown in 1853.
It was completed and opened on the Ist of March, 1854,
and was the first line laid in the Southern Hemisphere,
the second instance being in Chili, where it is reported
that a line was subsequently opened between Copiapo
and Coquimbo. In 1862, 211,685 telegraphic messages
passed along the wires, at a cost of £25,883.
The commencement of railways dates from 1853. The
first line actually commenced was a private one, con-
necting Melbourne and Hobson’s Bay, bringing goods
from the shipping in the port, a distance of 2£ miles, to
within close proximity of the merchants’ stores in Mel-


bourne, and providing appliances for the loading and
discharge of cargo inferior to few in England. A pier
of 2,180 feet in length receives ships of the largest
burden alongside, and by means of steam cranes, the
cargoes are, with great rapidity, moved directly from
the ship’s hold into the railway trucks, which deposit
them under extensive sheds in Melbourne, to wait the
convenience of the consignees.
The other private lines around Melbourne connect the
city with the populous localities of St. Ivilda, Brighton,
Bichmond, Prahran, Hawthorn, &c.; and how far this
railway accommodation was needed is apparent from the
fact that within twelve months 3,015,687 passengers
travelled on these lines.
There are seven main lines of railway now open,
having a length of 228 miles.
In Melbourne and its suburbs an excellent supply of
water is obtained from an artificial lake known as the
Yan Yean reservoir. It is estimated that the Yan Yean
will suffice for the supply of 200,000 persons, at the
rate of 100 gallons per head per day, so that it will
be more than sufficient for the wants of the residents
for many years to come. In London the supply is at
the rate of twenty gallons per head per day. The water
is delivered at Melbourne on the constant service prin-
ciple, and at high pressure, and has proved of great
value in extinguishing fires. The cost of the gigantic
work by which this accommodation is achieved (£820,000)
was raised by Government debentures, bearing 6 per
cent, interest. The expenditure was entrusted, by an
Act of the Legislature, to the Water and Sewerage Com-
mission, already referred to, whose duties and powers are
now merged in the Board of Land and Works. The


present income from the water supply is considerable
(about £60,000), but this will be much increased as the
supply is extended through the various suburban districts,
it being estimated that future extensions will yield about
) 70 per cent, per annum on the cost of such extension.
All these things show steady progress, and to these
may be added the facts that there are in the colony 1,187
places of worship, and 989 public schools; that the colony
has its own university (Melbourne), public library, and
museum of art; and that there are several influential
journals, daily and weekly, with other serials, besides
all the leading British journals and popular periodicals.
When, in addition to this, we find 30 hospitals and
charitable asylums, more than 13,000 savings bank de-
positors, and 4,000 volunteers, we may safely affirm
that the social status of the country is gratifying and
satisfactory.
The University of Melbourne has been open ten
years, and its degrees are reckoned as equal to those of
the English Universities. A recent report by Sir Red-
mond Barry, its chancellor, affirms that, “In addition to
the training for the degrees in arts, upon a scale of com-
pulsory instruction more comprehensive than that in
many other universities, schools have been opened for
conferring degrees in law, and for teaching the useful
arts of architecture, civil engineering, and surveying.
The'students are attending lectures in law, civil engineer-
ing, and surveying, with a regularity and attention
from which good expectations of their ultimate success
may be reasonably entertained.” The National Museum
of Natural History, and Manufactures and Mining, at-
tached to the university, is a source of much popular
instruction.


It will be interesting to intending emigrants to learn
that numerous praiseworthy efforts have been made with
a view to the establishment of Friendly Societies. Tho
existing societies consist chiefly of the Lodges of Odd
Fellows and the Courts of Ancient Foresters.*, A dispo-
sition has been shown to place these clubs under the pro-
tection of the law, and to follow professional advice, not
only in the calculation of the premiums and benefits, but
also in the necessary laying out of accumulating funds at
compound interest. As population increases, and the
habits of the people become more settled, it is hoped that
prosperous Friendly Societies will form a striking feature
in the social economics of the industrial orders of Vic-
toria. Seeing that the laws of sickness, mortality, and
the duration of life have now been reduced to the re-
quirements of exact science, it remains but for the prac-
tical common sense of the masses to use them, under
professional guidance, in such wise as to avoid much, if
not all, of the lamentable consequences hitherto entailed
upon the great bulk of mankind in the old world by
periods of illness unprovided for, premature death, and
indigent old age.
Another interesting fact, and one of considerable im-
portance to intending emigrants, is the encouragement
given to the introduction of animals as yet ud known, or
almost unknown, in the colony.
In addition to other efforts towards the development of
the capabilities of the colony, very energetic exertions
have been made recently to secure the introduction and
acclimatisation of foreign animals. A new and valuable
site in the Royal Park at Melbourne has been granted by
* There are about 70 lodges of Odd Fellows, and nearly 40 of Foresters i
the former having 650 members, and the latter 260.


the Government to the Acclimatisation Society; and
money-aid, in addition to a large sum contributed by
private individuals, has been voted by the Legislature, to
the extent of £l,OOO for the purpose of fencing and
building, £2,000 for a further supply of pure alpacas,
£5OO for the introduction of the salmon, and £5OO for
other animals. Consignments of valuable animals are
already taking place from England, France, India, and
other distant countries. Canaries, blackbirds, pheasants,
skylarks, thrushes, starlings, &c., are valuable, and fetch
good prices in Victoria.
The manufacturing arts have not, as is often the case
in new colonies, been neglected by the Victorian settlers.
About 600 mills were shown to be in operation by a
recent report. Of these, those connected with or depen-
dent upon agriculture, numbered 159, and consisted of
104 mills for grinding and dressing grain, 91 of which
were worked by steam, 11 by water, 1 by wind, and 1 by
horse; 1 oatmeal manufactory, 6 bread and biscuit manu-
factories, 13 agricultural implement manufactories, 13
steam chaff-cutting machines, and 4 bone manure manu-
factories. Those working upon raw materials, the
production of the pastoral interest, numbered 97, and
included 34 tanneries, 27 soap and candle manufac-
tories, 22 fellmongers and curriers, 2 woolstaplers and
washers, and 2 woollen flock factories. Works for
the manufacture or preparing of food, the raw material
not being the produce of agriculture, and for the manu-
facture of articles of drink, amounted to 132, including
1 sugar refinery and distillery, 1 steam coffee and spice
mill, 2 ice manufactories, 60 breweries, 67 ginger-beer
and soda-water manufactories, 7 cordial manufactories,
and 2 cider manufactories. The number of works for the


making of building materials and for carrying on plastic
manufactures was 222, including 71 saw-mills, 16 lime-
kilns, 125 brick-yards, 10 drain-pipe and tile manufac-
tories, and 1 pottery. The machine manufactories, and
those for working in brass and iron numbered 44, among
them 34 iron, brass, and copper foundries, 2 lead works,
and 7 machinists. The following miscellaneous works
and manufactories were also returned: 2 chemical works,
6 dye works, 2 electro-platers, 8 gasometers, 3 piano-
forte manufactories, 11 printing-presses, 3 rope-works,
and 15 ship and boat builders. The patents issued for
original inventions in the colony numbered over 400.
The next point for consideration is, who should go to
Victoria. Not those who are doing well here ; not those
who have a fair prospect of success here; not those who
have neither the ability nor the will to work hard, live
hard, fare hard, and be content with small profit to begin
with; but those who, having capital, can find no such
profitable source for its investment here as they can
there; those who, having skilled or merely manual
labour at disposal, find the market here over-crowded, so
that they, however unwillingly, may stand all the day
idle; those who have a little money and a great deal of
energy,—these are the people wanted in the colony.
The gentleman idler is wanted nowhere; the lady who
can do nothing is in a like predicament; if wanted any-
where, it is certainly not in a rising colony.
With regard to all private enterprise there is one point
that should especially be borne in mind by the capitalist
emigrant, namely, that the active part taken by Govern-
ment in the development of the colony is only tem-
porary. This will be seen from the following extract
from the report of the Civil Service Commissioners :


It is a necessary incident of the imperfect stage of politi-
cal development that pertains to a very young country, that
the Government is obliged to undertake many functions from
which, at a more advanced period of the country’s growth,
it is relieved. In addition to the ordinary duties of govern-
ment, the Government of this country is compelled to con-
duct the business of a great landowner—to survey, to lease,
and to sell its property, its town lots, its country lands, its,
pastures, and its mines; to construct and maintain roads
and bridges, and other works of public utility; to form rail-
ways and electric telegraphs; to assist municipalities, road
boards, mining boards, and charitable institutions; to estab-
lish and supervise lighthouses, lunatic asylums, pounds, and
cemeteries, and to do many other acts which, in older coun-
tries possessing similar institutions, are effected either
through private enterprise or through local exertion. Such
undertakings may be, indeed, in our present circumstances
unavoidable, but they form the principal part of the public
expenditure, and their cost, like that of every extraordinary
business conducted by Government, is necessarily greater
than it will be when the progress of the country admits of
these functions being discharged by more suitable organs.
The cost of a cabin passage to Victoria per overland
route is about £l5O ; per sailing vessel, about £42. An
intermediate passage may be taken for about £2O; a
steerage passage for £l5. Concerning passages for emi-
grants full particulars will be forwarded on application
to the Secretary of the Victoria Emigrants’ Assisting
Society, 27a, Bucklersbury, to whose courtesy we are
indebted for most of the foregoing particulars.
Messrs, Houlder Brothers and Co., shipowners, of
146, Leadenhall Street, London, dispatch vessels to Mel-
bourne on the 7th and 21st of each month from the
London Docks. These ships sail punctually, are care-
fully equipped, and fitted up with arrangements expressly
for the health and comfort of all classes of the passengers..


Cassell’s Illustrated Family Bible.
£ s. d.
Complete in One Volume, handsomely bound in cloth,
gilt edges 1 11 6
CASSELL, FETTER, AND GALPIN’S
CATALOGUE
ILLUSTRATED AND EDUCATIONAL WORKS.
Complete in Two Volumes, handsomely bound in cloth,
gilt edges 1 15 0
Complete in One Volume, handsomely bound in calf,
gilt edges 2 10 0
Complete in One Volume, handsomely bound in morocco,
elegant 3 0 0
Complete in Two Volumes, handsomely bound in
morocco, elegant 4 0 0
The above can also be had with the Scotch Version of the Psalms, in One
Volume, cloth, for 355.; in calf, gilt edges, 555.; and in morocco, with gili
edges for 655.
The OLD TESTAMENT, complete in one volume, in
handsome cloth, gilt back and side, and gilt edges ...1 5 0
The NEW TESTAMENT, uniform with the Old
Testament 0 10 0
Handsome Cloth Cases for Binding in One Volume, 6s. 6d.; and in
Two Volumes, ss. each.
Superior Edition of Cassell’s Illustrated Family Bible.
Complete in One Volume, handsomely bound in cloth, gilt edges,
505.; in calf antique, gilt edges, 605.; elegantly bound in morocco,
gilt edges, 705.; Handsome Cloth Cases for Binding, 7s.
Cassell’s Popular Natural History. Profusely Illustrated
with splendid Engravings and Tinted Plates. Complete in Four
Volumes, bound in cloth, 345. ; ditto Two Volumes, ditto, 305.;
ditto Two Volumes, half-calf, full gilt back, 2 guineas; ditto Two
Volumes, half-morocco, full gilt back and edges, 455.
The Family Prayer Book; or, Morning and Evening
Prayers for Every Day in the Year. In One Complete Volume,
bound in plain cloth, at 7s. 6d.; and in handsome cloth, with gilt
edges, 9s.
Cassell’s Illustrated Bunyan.—The Pilgrim’s Progress,
superbly Illustrated throughout. Printed on Superfine Toned
Paper. (Size Io£ by 71 inches.) Complete in One Handsome
Volume. Plain cloth, 7s. 6d.; full gilt cloth, gilt edges, 10s, 6d.;
full morocco antique, 215.; full morocco gilt, 255.
Cassell’s Illustrated History of England, from the
Earliest Period to the Present Time. Volumes I. to VII., bound,
in cloth, 6s. each. ( The Eighth Volume, now in course of Publication,
concludes the Work.)
LA BELLE SALVAGE YAED, LONDON, E.C.


•Cassell’s Illustrated Family Paper. Yols. I. to XIII.,
bound in cloth, 4s. 6d. each.
Cassell’s Popular Educator. Complete in Six Volumes,
crown 4to, price 4s. 6d. each, in cloth boards; or in Three Double
Volumes, price Bs. 6d. each.
The Biblical Educator, complete in One Thick Volume,
crown 4to, price 10s. 6d.
The Youth’s Popular Educator, complete in One Vol.,
crown 4to, cloth boards, Bs.; with gilt edges, 9s.
English Spelling and Reading Book, with upwards of
150 Engravings on Wood. New Edition. Bvo, cloth. Is.
Lessons in English. By J. Beard, D.D. 12mo. In
paper covers, 35.; cloth boards, 3s. 6d.
The History of England. By Robert Ferguson,
LL.D. 12mo, cloth, 35.; strongly bound in leather, 4s. Fine
Edition, cloth, gilt edges, 4s.
Science Popularly Explained, containing 4,000 Questions
and Answers on General Science. Bvo, cloth, 3s. 6d.
The Model Copy-Books: ensuring a Good, Fluent, and
Rapid Handwriting, in a Course of Eight Progressive Books.
Foolscap Quarto Edition, price 3d. each, or 2s. per Set; post
Quarto, 6d. each, or 4s. per Set.
The Great Sermons of the Great Preachers, Ancient and
with an Historical Sketch of the Greek and Latin Pulpit.
Third Edition. Bvo, cloth, ss.
Popular Preachers of our Time: their Eloquence,
Ministry, and Works. By J. Johnson, Esq. Crown Bvo, cloth,
price ss.
Cassell’s Pocket Concordance. 32mo,bound in cloth, Is. 6d.
Will shortly be ready, price Ninepence each, in stiff paper covers.
A Series of First Books or Catechisms. By the Rev.
Dr. BREWER, Author of “ Guide to Science,” &c.
My First Book of Reading and My First Book of Geography.
Spelling. My First Book of Science.
My First Book of Bible History. My First Book of Common
My First Book of History of Things that I See around
England, Me.
The whole of the six books bound in one volume, and forming a
compendium of general knowledge, cloth, 3s. 6d.
Guide to Every-day Knowledge. By the same Author.
18mo, bound in cloth, 2s. 6d. [Shortly.]
LA BELLE SAUVAGE YARD, LONDON, E.C.


POPULAR HAND-BOOKS.
12 mo, cloth, Is. each; free hy post for 13 stamps.
Amusing and Instructive Experiments; containing an
endless variety of Winter Evening Amusements for Youth.
“ Will be an acceptable present to an ingenious boy."— Spectator.
Book-keeping, by Single and Double Entry. Ruled
Account Books to ditto, extra. Is. 6d. each set.
“ a very bandy little work.” —Brighton Gazette.
Business; a Dictionary of the Terms and Technicalities
used in Commerce, and Tables of Foreign Moneys, Weights, and
Measures.
“Exceedingly useful to every one desirous of knowing exactly
what the various terms employed in business represent.” —News and
Bankers' Journal.
Chess and Draughts ; containing a clear exposition of the
Games, Laws of Chess, Technical Terms, Advice to Young
Players, &c.; with an account of the different Openings and
Endings of Games, &c.
“A most useful little manual."— Edinburgh News.
Civil Service ; being a complete guide to the examinations
for the Appointments to the various Departments in the Civil
Service.
How to Colour a Photograph in Oil or Water. It con-
tains all the information necessary to acquire proficiency in the
art of Colouring Photographs in Oil or Water, on Paper or Glass,
together with a list of the pigments used, their method oi pre-
paration, &c. &c.
Investments ; a Complete Account of the Public Se-
curities, Railway Shares, Foreign Stocks, and other means of
Investment, Explanatory and Statistical, with Information to tne
latest date.
“This work is destined to go through many editions. . . • •
The chapters on house property and mortgages are very excellently
and clearly written, and will be of great value to those who are
about to invest in this description of property.” — Economist.
Letter Writing; with Hints on Composition and Style,
and Fac-similes of Handwriting, including models of the Style re-
quired in the Civil Service.
“A decided improvement upon any other manual of the kind with
which we are acquainted.”— Spectator, March 23rd.
Natural Philosophy ; being a Popular Guide to Physical
and Experimental Philosophy, from the simplest Elements to the
Phenomena of Electricity and Magnetism. With Eighty Wood
Engravings.
LA BELLE SALVAGE TAED, LONDON, E.C.


Domestic Recipes; including Cookery, and a variety of
valuable and interesting information.
Elocution and Oratory; being a systematic Compendium
of the necessary Rules for attaining proficiency in Reading and
Speaking.
Emergencies; containing Hints and Cautions to those
engaged in Dangerous Occupations, and to Sufferers by the com-
mon Casualties of Life.
Etiquette; being a complete Guide to the Usages of
Polite Society.
Gardening. By George Glenny. A Guide to the Cul-
tivation of Fruits, Vegetables, and Flowers. Especially adapted
to Amateurs.
Health and Physiology. Containing the Best Rules for
the Preservation of Health, with a Popular Description of the
various Functions of the Human Body as affecting its General
Health,
“As a book of reference, or as an elementary work, this little
treatise, so far as it goes, leaves nothing to be desired.” —British
Press and Jersey Times,
Our Domestic Pets ; containing Descriptive Notices of
favourite Birds and other Animals, the Mode of Preserving them
in Health, &c.
Photography. Will be found invaluable; containing a
complete system of instruction in the art of taking pictures by
means of light, including descriptions of all the various processes
in use, the best method of performing, the causes of failure, &c. &c.
Railway Situations ; including the complete System of
Railway Accounts and Returns, to which are added valuable Hints
on Commercial Employments generally.
“A very useful manual. The forms of railway accounts and
returns add a great value to the manual.” —City Press.
CASSELL’S ATLASES AND MAPS.
Cassell’s Complete Folio Atlas, containing 260 coloured
Maps, engraved in the first style of art, and presenting one of the
fullest and most perfect delineations of the Surface of the Globe
ever published. Price, in paper boards, 425. Bound in half-roan,
505.; in half-morocco, 635.
Cassell’s Folio General Atlas, consisting of 60 Maps of
the Countries of the World, with all their Geographical Boundaries,
Rivers, Navigable Canals, Roads, Railways, &c., forming one of
the most complete Atlases of Modern Geography extant. Price,
in paper boards, 10s. 6d. Strongly half-bound, 18s.
LA BELLE SAUVAGE YARD, LONDON, E.G.


Cassell’s British Atlas, of 122 Maps. Half-bound, in
paper boards, 21s. Strongly half-bound, 28s.
Cassell’s Folio County Atlas, containing 50 Maps of the
Counties of England and Wales, with all Eoads and Railways fully
and accurately laid down. Price, in paper boards, 10s. 6d. Strongly
half-bound, 18s.
Cassell’s Railway Atlas, consisting of 20 Folio Maps
(four being Double) of the principal English Bail way Eoutes.
Price ss.
Cassell’s Oriental Atlas, of 36 Folio Maps. Price, in
paper boards, Bs. Strongly half-bound, 15s.
Cassell’s Colonial Atlas, of 30 Folio Maps. Price, in
paper boards, Bs. Strongly half-bound, 15s.
Cassell’s Indian Atlas, consisting of 15 Folio Divisional
Maps of India. Price, in a Wrapper, 3s. 6d.
Cassell’s Emigrant’s Atlas, of 14 Folio Maps of Colonies
and Places of especial Interest to the Emigrant. Price, in a
Wrapper, 2s. 6d.
Cassell’s County and Home Maps, folded in a neat
Wrapper, for the pocket, 4d. each. These Maps are wrought out
with such laborious fulness and exactitude, that they present the
most complete delineation of the British Isles ever published; so
full and detailed, indeed, that scarcely a hamlet, and, in many
instances, scarcely a farm, is omitted
Foreign Maps, in sheets, 3d. each.
A Complete List of Cassell’s Atlases and Maps forwarded hy Pott, o
receipt of a Postage Stamp.
SEA-MIDSHIPMEN APPRENTICES, PASSENGERS.
VACANCIES for respectable Youths as Mid-
shipmen and Apprentices in several Clipper East
Indiamen, carrying from 1,500 to 3,500 tons burthen, bound
to healthy Ports, commanded by kind and Christian Cap-
tains. Cheapest passages to all ports in Australia, New
Zealand, Cape, Port Natal, New York, and Canada. Cir-
culars with list of Ships, Outfit lists, and other particulars,
on application to F. S. Gray & Co., Merchants and Ship
Brokers, 54, King William Street, City, London.


BRANCHES.
In Victoria.
In South Australia.
MELBOURNE.
ADELAIDE.
GEELONG.
PORT ADELAIDE.
BALLARAT.
GAWLER.
KAPUNDA.
TARRADALE.
KOORINGA.
DAYLESFORD.
MOUNT BARKER.
HAMILTON.
MOUNT GAMB1ER.
BACCHUS MARSH.
ROBE.
KADINA.
SALE —GIPP’S LAND.
WALLAROO.
CLUNES.
PORT AUGUSTA.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
THE NATIONAL BANK OF AUSTRALASIA.
Capital, £1,000,000. Paid up, £400.000.
CHIEF OFFICES IN THE COLONIES:—
MELBOURNE AND ADELAIDE.
IN LONDON -10, COKDTHILL.
Letters of Credit issued ou the above Branches payable on demand,
and One per Cent, alloired on amount of same. All other Banking Business
with the Australian Colonics transacted on favourable terms.
FREDERICK WEIGHT, Manager.
London, —10, Cornhill, E.C. [lO
ASSISTED PASSAGES TO VICTORIA
(AUSTRALIA).
riV) Small Farmers, Farm Labourers, Shepherds, Miners,
1. Quarrymen, Gardeners, Sawyers, Weavers, &c., who are de-
sirous of Emigrating to Victoria.
The VICTORIA (AUSIRALIA) EMIGRANTS’ ASSISTANCE
SOCIETY is prepared to receive applications from persons of the
above callings who are able to pay 11 11s fid towards their passage
money, the Society finding the balance.
For further information apply personally, or by letter, to
R. R. ALEXANDER, Secretary.
During the last two months the following emigrants have been
assisted by the Society :
Nine persons hy the ship Red Rose.
Seven persons by the ship Empress of the Seas.
Three persons by the shin Matilda.
Twenty-five persons by the ship Golden Land.
Four persons by the ship R .ysl Dane.
On the 25th of May three families left in the ship British
Trident.
On the 28th of May thirty-five persons left in the ship Golden
South, ,
On the sth of June sixty-one persons left in the ship
Lightning.
A furthur. number will leave by the ships Avalanche and
Donald Me Kay.
VICTORIA (AUSTRALIA) EMIGRANTS’ ASSISTANCE SOCIETY.
27a, Bucklersbury, London, E. C.
May IS, 1864.


CABIN FURNITURE, SEA BEDDING, &c.
E. J. MONNEEY & CO.,
166, FENCHURCH STREET, E.C.,
Supply Colonists and Passengers with every requisite for Voyage and
Residence abroad at Wholesale Prices.
Cabins Fitted, at an Hour’s Notice.
Cabin Furniture,
Sea Chests*
Overland Trunks,
Sea Beds,
Blankets,
Sheets,
Counterpanes,
Life Belts
Cabin Filters,
Towels,
Iron Bedsteads,
Tents, *
&c. &c.
Hosiery,
Gloves,
Cravats,
Shirts,
Waterproofs,
Flannel Shirts,
Tweed Suits,
Serge do.,
Leather Gaiters,
Carpet and
Leather Bags,
&c. &c.
Passengers’ Baggage'Warehoused Free of Charge, and
carefully Shipped if required.
ILLUSTRATED LISTS FREE ON APPLICATION.
Outfits containing every requisite, from £1 4 &
Ditto for second-class Passenger „ ... 219 0
Ditto First-class Passenger „ 5 7 G
(See Illustrated List.)
PORTABLE FURNITURE FOR HOME AND COLONIAL USE.
Emigrants* Bedding and Hless Utensils, from 12s. Od.
E. J. MONKERY & 00., 165, Fenclmrcli Street, London,


HOULDER BROTHERS & Co.’s
REGULAR LINES OP
AUSTRALIAN AND NEW ZEALAND PACKETS
LONDON TO MELBOURNE,
7th and 21st of every month.
Taking Passengers at through rates to Adelaide, Hobart Town,
Launceston, Ac.
LONDON TO SYDNEY,
Uth and 25th of every month,
Taking Passengers at through rates to Brisbane, Rockhampton,
Newcastle, Twofold Bay, and all tho Now Zealand ports.
•' ♦
LONDON TO NEW ZEALAND.
Auckland ... ... Monthly. Southland
Otago ... ... Monthly. Hawks's Bat a« occasion
wSotoU Marlborough f require
Nklson ) n quire*. New Plymouth .
Tho vessels of this lino are chosen especially for their adaptation
to tho Passenger Trade, and are carefully provisioned and fitted
up with every convenience that tho great practical experience of
the owners can suggest.
Among the vessel* may bo mentioned the celebrated Clipper Ships-;-.
Golden Horn Empress Goldbn Cm
Gpr.KDOWPR Eagle Speed Lucibei-LB
ItrPLKifAE jr Ramsj?i Daphne
|>oob(sl Sprat op nil? Ocp.u) Hej.ybli.ts
For plans of Saloon Accommodation, Rates of Passage, Dietary
Scales for Second and Third-class Passengers, apply to the Country
Agents of the Line; Messrs. Ghindlay &
