

C 6 IS., or, mounted on canvas in a cloth case, 2s. 6d.


LIST OF
CASSELL'S
EMIGRANTS’ MAPS
HANDY GUIDES,
OME SHILLING EACH
Or Mounted on Canvas, in Cloth Case, 2s. 6d.
PRINCIPAL BEITISH COLONIES.
AUSTRALIA.
NEW ZEALAND.
SOUTH AND WEST AUSTRALIA.
QUEENSLAND.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
VICTORIA.
CALIFORNIA.
NORTH AMERICA.
( TASMANIA.
UPPER CANADA.
LOWER CANADA.
CAPE COLONY.






CASSELL’S
EMIGRANTS’ HANDY GUIDE
QUEENSLAND.
• LONDON:
CASSELL, PETTEE, AND GALPIN,
LA BELLE SALVAGE YAED, E.C.


LONDON?
FETTER AND GALPIN, BELLE SADVAGE PRINTING WORK?,
LGDGATE HILL, E.C.


CASSELL’S
EMIGRANTS’ HANDY GUIDE.
QUEENSLAND.
Queensland was formerly the northern portion of the
territory in Australia known as New South Wales. It
was called Moreton Bay. It was constituted a separate
colony towards the end of the year 1859, under letters
patent from the Crown, dated June C, 1859. Proclama-
tion to this effect was made on the Ist of December, in
New South Wales, and on the 10th in Queensland.
Queensland is bounded on the west by an imaginary
line, and includes a vast tract of territory, a very small
portion of which has been investigated by the travellers
who have penetrated into the interior of Australia.
The entire area of the territory called Queensland is
678,000 square miles; but the approximate area of
country on which settlements have been made is less
than 195,000 square miles, but that is more than three
times the size of England and Wales. The census of
the 7th of April, 1861, gave the population at 30,059,
exclusive of aborigines, who were estimated at 15,000.
During the previous five years the population had in-
creased at the amazing rate of nearly 78 per cent. The
Registrar-General of the colony calculated the popula-
tion to be, on the 31st of December, 1862, 27,186 males,
and 17,891 females; total, 45,077; having increased
during the year at the rate of very nearly 23 per cent.


In the settled districts, the average number of persons
residing on each square mile is only four, and that in one
of the most fertile places on the face of the earth. Com-
pared with an average English agricultural county, there
is ample room in those parts alone of the colony where
settlements have been made for a population seventy
times as large as the present.
The coast line of Queensland is indented with several
good harbours, of which Moreton Bay is the principal.
“Anchorage may be found in almost any part of it,
under shelter of the numerous shoals. It is about forty
miles long, north and south, by seventeen miles wide,
and receives the waters of five navigable rivers, namely,
the Arrowsmith, the Logan, the Brisbane, the Pine, and
the Caboolture. Most of the rivers have, however, a
bar entrance. Besides Moreton Bay, there are Keppel
Bay, Wide Bay, Port Curtis, Port Bowen, Port Denison,
and others.”
CLIMATE.
The climate closely resembles that of Madeira. The
temperature is more constant than in many other regions
within the same isothermal lines. This equalisation is
due partly to the sea breeze tempering the heat of sum-
mer, and partly to the copious rains which fall during
the hottest months of the year. The peculiar coolness
and dryness of the atmosphere as compared with the lati-
tude has been explained by the intense and active evapo-
ration which takes place in this part of Australia. The
absence of the hot winds that frequently afflict the other
Australian colonies further accounts for the comparative


coolness of the climate in Queensland. During a large
proportion of the year the weather is fine, the sky cloud-
less, the atmosphere dry, elastic, and exhilarating. The
summer mouths (December, January, and February)
are hot, but not sultry or oppressive. The winter season,
when dry—as it almost invariably is—is very agreeable.
The mornings and evenings are cool; during the day the
air is warm and balmy, the sky brilliantly blue, and the
atmosphere singularly transparent.
The colony is free from endemic diseases, and epidemics
are of rare occurrence. The diseases incidental to youth
are usually very mild in their character, and short in
their duration. In the incipient stage of consumption
the climate usually affords great relief.
PASTURAGE.
Queensland possesses both agricultural and pastural
lands. The Darling Downs, Fitzroy Downs, Waterloo
and Calvert Plains, besides many other districts, afford
throughout the year excellent pasturage both for sheep
and cattle.
By the Unoccupied Crown Lands Occupation Act, No
11, of 18G0, passed on the 17th September of that year,
pastural leases for fourteen years may be granted, thus
securing the lessee of Crown lands used for grazing
against any other person wanting such for the same pur-
poses, subject, however, to a twelve months’ notice to
quit should the land be required for public use, or to be
sold for agricultural purposes. The lands are also to be
revalued at short periods. The rent for the first four
years is merely nominal, with a view to encourage enter-


prise in taking up new country, and is increased,
according to circumstances, during the two succeeding
periods, each of five years. The quantity of country
held in one block is limited to 200 square miles, and
must be stocked with sheep or cattle to one-fourth
of its estimated capabilities during the first year. Grass
lands are estimated to carry and to fatten 100 sheep or
twenty head of cattle per square mile. The rent for
the first four years is 10s. a square mile; during the first
of the two succeeding periods not less than £25, nor
more than £SO, the “ block,” containing twenty-five
square miles, and during the second period of five years
not less than £3O, nor more than £7O for a block.
The pre-emptive right of purchase having in many
instances resulted in depreciation of Crown lands by the
alienation of water frontages, and other more valuable
portions of the country, has been abolished, and the
principle substituted of compensation to the lessee, for
improvements, to be paid at the termination of the lease.
AGRICULTURE.
Queensland possesses many agricultural advantages,
the climate and soil being well adapted for the growth of
wheat, maize and other cereals, potatoes, cotton, sugar,
tobacco, indigo, coffee, rice, and almost all the English as
well as tropical fruits. In the uplands, beyond the
mountain range, the wheat is of the finest quality, free
from smut, rot, or blight, weighing above sixty pounds
to the bushel, and yielding about thirty bushels to the
acre. The average yield of maize is about forty bushels,
and of potatoes about three tons to the acre.


The following are the chief regulations with regard to
the sale of Crown lands :
Public Reserves. —The Governor, with the advice of the
Executive Council, may proclaim lands as reserves for the
site of towns or villages, and may make grants for public
purposes.
Minimum Price. —No land is to be sold for less than
£1 an acre, nor until it has been surveyed and mapped.
Auction. —All Crown lands must be offered for sale by
public auction, duly notified in the Government Gazette, not
less than one nor more than three months before the auction.
Classification or Lands. —The lands are to be divided
into three classes —town, suburban, and country lots. Town
lots are those within the actual boundaries of town. Suburban
lots are to comprise all lands (except such as the Government
may think fit to exclude) within two miles from the nearest
boundary of any town. Country lots are to comprise all
other lands, and the Governor in Council may, from time to
time, fix the upset price of any lot not lower than £1 per
acre.
Sales by Private Contract. —Lands which have been
offered for sale at auction, and not sold, may afterwards bo
sold by private contract at the upset price; but such lands
may be withdrawn from private sale and again offered for
sale by auction.
Payment of Purchase Money. —ln the case of sales by
private contract the whole of the purchase money must be
paid down at the time of purchase. In the case of auction,
a deposit must be made of not less than one-tenth of the
purchase money, the remainder must be paid within one
month, or the deposit will bo forfeited.
Agricultural Reserves. —Within six months from the
passing of the Act, the Government in Council may proclaim
aiid set apart what are called “Agricultural Reserves,” which
are to be sold, not by auction, but at a fixed price of 20s. an
acre. These reserves are to contain not less than 100,000
acres on the shores of navigable waters of Moreton Bay, Wide


Bay, Port Curtis, and Kcppel Bay; and not less than 10,000
acres within five miles of all towns containing more than
000 inhabitants. The Governor in Council may, however>
by proclamation withdraw and deal with such lands as
country lands.
Conditions op Purchase. —Persons wishing to occupy
land within an “ agricultural reserve ” must pay in advance
to the nearest land agent 20s. an acre for the lots he may
wish to select, and six months afterwards a deed of grant
will be issued if the land shall have been occupied, and im-
provements and cultivation commenced thereon, otherwise the
purchase money, less 10 per cent., will be returned, and the
land be again open for selection.
Leases of Agricultural Reserves. —Owners of farms
within “agricultural reserves” may obtain leases for five
years of contiguous unoccupied land (not exceeding three
times the extent of the purchased land in the farm, nor in the
whole, 320 acres including the farm), at a rent of 6d. per
acre, payable annually, in advance, with a right of pre-emption
during the currency of the lease. .Default of thirty days in
payment of rent, or failure within twelve months to fence
off the land, makes void the lease. No lease must be held
by an agent, or pledged as security for money lent.
Size, &c., Farms. —Farms within agricultural reserves must
be selected in one or in conterminous lots, and must not be
less than 40 nor more than 320 acres in all in the same reserve.
Commonage. —All unenclosed lands in any such reserve
are to be subject to the rights of commonage of land pur-
chasers, and of the residents in any adjacent townships.
Sale of Improved Lands. —Land within the boundaries
of any townships or village on which improvements may have
been made may be sold to the owners without competition, if
application be made within twelve months of the passing of
the Act, as regards existing towns or villages, or within twelve
months after the proclamation of any new town or village.
Closing of Roads. —The Act also provides for the closing
and alienation of unnecessary roads, and the sale of the land
without competition to the holders of the adjacent lands.


FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
The form of government in the colony of Queensland
resembles that existing in England, but with a much
more extended franchise. There is a Governor, who is
the representative of the Queen. There are two Houses
of Parliament; the Upper House, or Legislative Council,
is nominated by the Governor, in the name of the Crown;
while the Lower House, or Legislative Assembly, is
elected by the people. All money bills must originate in
the Assembly; and the responsible ministers of the
Governor, forming the Executive Council, must be per-
sons possessing the confidence of the Legislature, in
accordance with the practice of the British Constitution.
It will be seen from the above that full political free-
dom has been granted to the colony, and that it has been
entrusted with the entire management of its own affairs,
while, at the same time, as a colony of the British Crown,
it enjoys the powerful protection of the mother country.
The highest offices in the Civil Service, as well as the seats
in the Legislature, are open to all who possess the public
confidence.
No distinction is made between foreigners who have
been naturalised and British-born subjects. Aliens can
be naturalised by an inexpensive form, and then obtain
the franchise.
EDUCATION.
This subject engaged the early attention of the Colonial
Legislature, and a system has already been established of


the most efficient and liberal character. In the primary
schools a thoroughly good English education is brought
within the reach of the very poorest classes, while in the
grammar schools facilities are provided for obtaining, at a
very moderate cost, a good classical and general education,
such as will fit the pupil for the English Universities,
Boys distinguishing themselves in the primary schools
are eligible for scholarships at the grammar schools; and,
again, the best scholars at these higher seminaries will
be eligible for exhibitions of a certain annual value, at
any British or Australian University. These exhibitions
are open to all indiscriminately, and are to be obtained
by public competitive examination.
PUBLIC WORSHIP.
Public worship is well supported, the number of places
of worship in the principal towns being very large in
proportion to the present number of inhabitants. Bris-
bane, the seat of Government, with a population of about
7,000, contained, during the first year of the existence of
the colony, no fewer than fourteen churches and chapels of
various denominations. There is a bishop of the Church
of England, and also of the Roman Catholic Church,
besides ministers of all the principal Christian com-
munions.
COTTOK
The climate of Queensland, east of the main range of
mountains, is admirably suited to the growth of cotton.
On account of the absence of hard winters—frosts are
unknown in the district—the cotton plant is perennial,
instead of, as in America, annual. It is now ascertained


for a certainty that some millions of acres are peculiarly
adapted to the production of the finest kinds of cotton.
For the purpose of encouraging its cultivation an Act
was speedily passed by the Colonial Legislature. This
Act empowered the Governor in Council to issue land
orders during the three years next after the passing of
the Act (1861) to the extent of £lO, and during the
two following years to the extent of £5, for every bale
of cotton weighing BOOlbs., not damaged or discoloured,
grown in the colony, and exported to Great Britain.
The bonus here stated will continue only till the end of
1865, but will remain at half the amount for the two
succeeding years, till the end of 1867.
As a further encouragement to the cultivation of
cotton,, by regulations dated Ist August, 1861, any per-
son or company, by depositing in the Colonial Treasury
at the rate of 2s. per acre, might obtain the occupation
of a block of land not less than 320 nor more than
1,280 acres. If within two years one-tenth of the land
had been planted with cotton, and at least £5,000 to
each 640 acres been expended in clearing, fencing, culti-
vation, or improvements connected with cotton growing,
the deposit of 2s. an acre would be returned, and a grant
in fee issued to the occupant. On failure of these con-
ditions the land, the deposit, and all improvements were
declared forfeited, or if the cultivator had proceeded to
half the above requirement the land might be saved on
payment of £1 per acre for the portion unimproved, but
the whole deposit of 2s. would be forfeited. No appli-
cations under these regulations would be received after
the 10th August, 1863.


Several cotton companies are now in successful opera-
tion, and the estimated yield for 1863-4 is nearly
£50,000.
The benefits resulting from these judicious arrange-
ments have been clearly shown in the anxiety manifested
to obtain the blocks, in the promptness with which large
portions of country have been cultivated, and the excel-
lence of the cotton yield. A large number of cotton
“ hands” have found employment. In a letter received
from one of a number of emigrants from Belfast to the
Queensland cotton fields, we learn that they got employ-
ment the third day after their arrival at £1 a week with
board. The writer says :
We have more rations than we can use—l6lb. of flour, 41b.
of sugar, and Boz. of tea per week, with liberty to kill the
best sheep we can find in the flock for onr use. The masters
all keep stores, and if we want any luxuries from it the man
brings them with our rations. The price of a gun is £2 10s.
in the store. We can kill as many wild ducks, pigeons, white
and black swans, and pelicans as we can turn our face to,
with wild turkeys from 101 b. to 201 b. in weight. We have
fenced in a garden, and have vegetables, pumpkins, melons,
cucumbers, cabbages, beans, and lettuces growing, and shall
have English potatoes in season, so that we require very little
from the store. Dogs cost from £2 to £8 each. Our dogs;
with a mare and foal, cost about £2O. Next year we shall
have £45 each, and less articles to buy. I hope to be able to
send for my brother and family in September next. I shall
get them nominated here for £4 per passage.
MILITARY AND NAVAL SETTLERS.
Officers of the British Army and Navy purchasing land
in the colony are to be entitled to the benefit of any


imperial regulations in force in Australia at tire passing
of the Act for granting a remission of purchase money
according to length of service. The Governor in Council
may also grant to any officer who has served seven years
and upwards, but who may not be entitled to a remission
of purchase money under the improvement regulations,
and also to any British soldier or sailor discharged with
a certificate of good conduct, a remission of purchase
money to the extent of £SO. But the soldiers and sailors
must be certified to be in sound bodily health, and not
more than forty-five years of age; and must be bound,
under conditions to be agreed upon between the Governor
and Secretary of State for War, to serve when called upon
for the defence of the colony.
DEMAND FOB LABOUR.
The demand for labour throughout Queensland is
steadily on the increase. Skilled mechanics find ready
and profitable employment, and the untrained labourer
is sure to find work. Emigrants with limited means
arriving in Queensland will find it to their advantage to
take service, partly to increase their fund for independent
action, partly to learn the ways of the colony. Land,
as we have shown, may be obtained at a very cheap rate,
and it must be borne in mind that most of the land thus
disposed of is good productive soil; still, it requires skill
as well as capital to work it, and there is no better way
of learning how to do it than by serving those who have
been settled in the colony for some time.
There is no great demand for professional men, and
for men with no profession, no trade, no capital, there is


no demand at all. For energetic men with a little money-
sheep farming offers a very profitable pursuit; but the
main staple of the colony promises to be cotton, and in
the growth of this grand necessary of English manufac-
ture fortunes are yet to be made.
RATE OF AVAGES.
The ordinary rate of wages for shepherds and farm
servants is £45 a year, with board and lodging. The
board and lodging consists of a dwelling, with a ration
of lOlbs. of meat, Mbs, of flour, 21bs. of sugar, and 4ozs.
of tea per week. Skilled artisans, such as blacksmiths,
bricklayers, carpenters, glaziers, painters, &c., get about
10s. a day, without rations. Coopers receive 15s. a day.
COST OF PROVISIONS, CLOTHING, etc.
The cost of clothing throughout Queensland is about
one-fourth more than in England. As to provisions,
bacon is from Is. 2d. to Is. 6d, per lb.; butter, 2s. to
2s. 6d.; cheese, Is. 6d.; colonial cheese, Is.; bread,
IJd. to 2d. per lb.; eggs, Is. 6d. to 2s. a dozen ; milk,
6d. a quart; fresh meat, 4d. per lb.; salt meat, 3d. Coffee,
Is. per lb.; tea, 2s. to 3s. These are, of course, only
given as average prices.
The cost of erecting a dwelling suitable for an agri-
cultural labourer, is about £l5.
QUEENSLAND EMIGRATION SCHEME.
The peculiar advantages offered by Queensland to the
emigrant are materially increased by the facilities afforded
to settlers by the Queensland Emigration Scheme. The


principle of this scheme is to give land orders, in the
proportion of £3O to each adult or two children between
four and fourteen, to those persons who pay their own
passage to the colony, being cabin or intermediate pas-
sengers. Steerage passengers will receive an £lB land
order. The intention is to encourage the emigration
especially of a class of small farmers or persons who may
have limited means at their disposal, not sufficient to
enable them to make more than the barest living in
England, and altogether inadequate to their making any
provision for themselves or their families for the future.
Such persons, having a number of children, if trained in
habits of industry, who are disposed to cultivate the
land, have thus the opportunity of at once obtaining a
freehold estate of good land near the market, besides the
privilege of leasing three times as much as they buy at
an annual rent of sixpence an acre for five years, and
then the right of purchase at the lowest price. The
extreme productiveness of the soil, and the high prices
obtained for farm produce, together with the healthiness
of the climate, and other advantages, unite to make this
colony now most attractive to the class of persons to
whom the scheme is especially suited.
Class of Persons to whom the Scheme is
especially addressed. —There are doubtless thou-
sands of respectable farmers with limited means and
large families, who cannot possibly do more than barely
pay their rent, and meet the necessary expenses of their
families. Many of these see their sons and daughters
growing up around them, and are saddened by the
thought that their children must necessarily sink to


a lower social position than that which they themselves
occupy. They cannot hope to get farms for their hoys,
and these must become mere farmers’ labourers, and their
daughters must in most cases occupy a similar position.
Land Orders—Agricultural Reserves—Price.
—lt must be understood that the land orders are like so
much money, and are available for the purchase of land
on the agricultural reserves near all the large towns.
The price of these farm lands is equal to five shillings
paid down, and fifteen shillings more at the end of the
five years; i. e., forty acres purchased at twenty shillings
an acre will secure 120 acres adjoining, on lease for five
years, at a mere nominal rent of 6d. an acre a year, with
the right of buying the leased portion, a part, or the
whole of it, any time within five years, at twenty shillings
an acre.
No one can hold more than 320 acres on the reserves,
including the part which he leases.
No land orders will in future be given to single
females paying their own passage unless they are going
out under the protection of one or both of their parents.
Persons going as intermediate or first and second-class
passengers will now have the right to select and take up
the whole quantity of thirty acres of land, at once , on
any of the agricultural reserves.
Persons going out as steerage passengers are entitled
to an £lB land order, with which they may now at
once take up eighteen acres of land on any of the reserves.
This is very important.
The Operation of the Queensland Emigration
Scheme is plainly shown as follows: —A man, with a wife


and ten children, determines to cultivate his own farm in
Queensland. Suppose six children between four and
fourteen years, and four over fourteen—that is, with
the parents, six adults and six children; these count
as nine adults, and would cost nine times seventeen, or
£153, to convey them to Queensland. On arrival, the
family is entitled immediately to £162 of land orders.
Forty pounds’ worth of these land orders are used in
purchasing a forty-acre farm on the agricultural reserves
near the towns; the farmer is then entitled to lease 120
acres more at 6d. an acre per annum for five years. He
has also £122 worth of land orders left, more than
enough to secure the fee-simple of the whole at the end
of five years, or at any period in the interim. If he
has paid for cabin or intermediate passages, costing as
much as £2O per adult, he is entitled, after two years,
to nine times twelve, or £IOB worth more of land-
orders.
Thus a man, with a wife and ten children, who can
manage to command £153, finds himself, immediately
on landing in Queensland, in possession of a farm con-
taining 160 acres of good land, one-fourth of it paid for,
money enough in his pocket to pay for the rest in five years,
and in two years he receives a further amount of £lOB
worth of land orders, which he can use in the same way
for his sons. The only restriction is that persons must
be under a certain age: men under forty, and women
under thirty-five.
Money need not be reserved for Expenses in
the Colony. —Persons of limited means need not fear
to spend all they possess in taking their families to Queens-


land, if they are disposed at first to take employment for
a short time. The money which pays their passage to
the colony also buys their farm. In many cases it is
recommended that even persons who may take some
capital with them, if they intend to cultivate the
land, should hire with farmers in the colony on first
arriving, in order to obtain experience, to learn how
to split timber for fencing, the readiest way of clearing
the land, and many other things peculiar to farming in
Australia.
There is no degradation in this in the colonies, where
there are few conventionalities, and labour is always
honourable. A man will command immediate wages, as
much as £4O a year, with a hut to live in, and weekly
rations, consisting of 101 b. of beef, 101 b. of flour, 31b of
sugar, and £lb. tea. If his wife will hire too, they will
command £7O a year, and double rations.
It is natural that persons intending to emigrate should
think it necessary, generally, to take out a little capital
with them ; but in this case, in consequence of the facts
here stated, it will be evident that persons who do not
possess more than barely enough to cover the cost of their
passage, need not be afraid of landing there without money.
If they choose to hire, there need not be any delay ; and
in a year or two they can save enough out of their
wages to enter on their own land. The number of
children constitutes no difficulty; on the contrary, all
over twelve may be immediately hired with their parents
at good wages.


ASSISTED PASSAGES.
Assisted passages are given to female domestic servants
of good character. Such persons are placed on board the
vessel, under the protection of a respectable matron.
Upon their arrival they will be immediately engaged
at high wages at from £lB to £25 a year. A great
number of respectable young women have gone out to
this part of Australia within the last few years, but they
are so soon settled that the cfemand for female domestics
is still very large.
Provision is also made for granting a limited number of
assisted passages to ploughmen, road-makers, quarry-men,
professed gardeners, and a few miners to work the copper
mines at Gladstone and coal mines at Brisbane; also
carpenters, masons, bricklayers, blacksmiths, wheel-
wrights, shipwrights, and female domestic servants of
good character. It must here be borne in mind that it
will be useless for any one to apply for assisted passages,
unless they belong to one or other of the classes above-
named, and can furnish written proofs of their being
honest, industrious, and sober; they must also be
in sound health, and be good hands at their trade
or calling. The number of children in a family is no
bar to an assisted passage to Queensland. If there are
as many as five children in the family, there is no bar as
to the ages of the parents; but if there are less than five
children, the father must be under forty, the mother under
thirty-five years of age. Should either of them be more
than this, they cannot obtain assisted passages unless
they have as many as five children with them. To ac-


commodate a class of passengers whose circumstances
enable them to assist towards their passage, but who
cannot afford to pay the full price, a plan has been
adopted of helping them, as follows :
Persons eligible as above described, and passed at the
Queensland Emigration Office, will receive a passage at
less than half its cost on the payment of £8 per adult.
Two children of twelve months and under 12 years of
age, are counted as one adult. Children under twelve
months are taken entirely free. Single men can obtain a
passage for £8 each. Single women , being respectable
female domestic servants , may receive a passage for £4
each. In families there will be a reduction of £4 for
each unmarried female over fourteen, in excess of single
males over fourteen in such families. In families where
there are single females over fourteen, and no single
males over that age, a reduction is also made; half the
number of such females will then be taken at £4 each,
instead of £B. When the number of these is an odd
number, the reduction is on half of the next lower even
number, thus: the number of these being five, two
would be taken at £4 instead of £8 each. No assistance
can be given to families where individual members are
proposing to pay their full passages.
Land orders will not be granted in the case of persons
receiving these assisted passages , either on arrival or
afterwards, but will still be granted to persons paying
their full passages to the colony, being cabin or inter-
mediate passengers, in the proportion of what will be
equal to thirty acres of laud, that is, £3O worth of
land orders to each adult, eligible by the Emigration


Regulations, and obtaining a land order warrant now
issued at the Queensland Emigration Office. Steerage
passengers will receive an £lB land order. Land orders
in future will not be transferable except by permission of
the Government in special cases.
Any persons belonging to any of the above-named
classes, and under the age named, or having the requisite
number of children, who will pay the amount required,
are in these respects eligible, and may apply for a form,
stating in their letter what is their occupation, also the
number of their family, and the age of each person.
Assisted passengers are to remit, in addition to their
passage money, sufficient to cover the cost of the articles
as supplied to them when they join the ship, in accord-
ance with either of the lists which will be found in the
form. A ticket will then be sent to them, being an
order for getting these necessaries on board. The cost
of these articles will be either 10s. 6d. or 20s. for each
adult, according to their own choice.
Persons taking their own servants to the colony under
an agreement to serve them at “ current rates,” will be
entitled to an £lB land order for every adult thus in-
troduced, two children over four and under fourteen
years old counting as one adult. The servants should
be hired under the regular form, to be obtained at the
Queensland Emigration Office.
Persons desirous of obtaining assisted passages to the
colony, being of the class above-named, must apply for
printed forms to H. Jordan, Esq., Queensland Emigra-
tion Office, 17, Gracechurch Street, London.
N.B. —All persons applying for assisted passages, in


1 beavertcen jacket (warm lined) . . , , 6 6
1 ditto waistcoat, with sleeves 4 6
1 ditto trowsers (warm lined) 6 6
1 duck ditto 2 3
1 coloured drill jacket 2 9
1 ditto trowsers 2 6
1 ditto ditto waistcoat 2 0
1 pilot over-coat or jacket 10 0
Or, 1 waterproof coat 7 6
2 blue serge shirts, or Jersey frocks . . . . 4 6
accordance with the above directions, must enclose a
certificate from some late employer, or some other satis-
factory proof, showing that they belong to one of the
above-named classes, are of good moral character, and
good hands at their trade or calling. All applications
for information should be accompanied with postage
stamp for reply. Persons communicating with the office
by letter are particularly requested to write their name
and address very plainly. Henry Jordan, Queensland
Emigration Office, 17, Gracechurch Street, London, E.C.
LENGTH OF VOYAGE, OUTFIT, etc.
The average length of a voyage to Queensland is about
three months and a half. During the voyage, in what-
ever time of the year it may be made, the hottest and
the coldest weather have to be encountered; it is there-
fore necessary to be prepared for both.
The following outfit is recommended by Her Majesty’s
Emigration Commissioners to all emigrants proceeding
to Australia:—
single man’s outfit.


S. d.
1 felt hat 2 0
1 tweed cap ~..10
6 blue striped cotton shirts, each .... 1 6
1 pair of boots 8 6
1 pair of shoes 5 0
4 handkerchiefs, each 0 6
4 pair worsted hose, each 10
2 pair cotton hose, each . . . ... • 09
1 pair braces or belt 0 8
4 towels, each 0 4
Razor, shaving-brush, and glass . . . . 16
SINGLE WOMAN’S OUTFIT.
1 warm cloak, with a cape 6 0
1 bonnet 5 0
1 sun hat 2 0
1 stuff dress 11 0
2 print ditto, each 6 0
6 shifts, each ........ 1 3
2 flannel petticoats, each 2 6
1 stuff ditto 3 9
2 twill cotton ditto 2 0
1 pair of stays 2 6
4 pocket handkerchiefs, each 0 3
2 net ditto for neck, each 0 5
3 caps, each 0 10
4 night caps, each 0 7
4 sleeping jackets, each 14
2 black worsted hose, each 0 10
4 cotton ditto, each 0 8
1 pair of shoes 2 9
1 ditto boots 5 0
6 towels, each ..04
Bowl and can 2 3
1 knife and fork, 1 deep tin plate, 1 pint tin drinking
mug, 1 table-spoon, 1 tea-spoon 16


EACH PERSON WOULD ALSO REQUIRE
S. d.
An assortment of needles and thread ... 1 0
2 lbs. of marine soap, at 0 4
1 comb and hair brush 10
3 sheets, each 10
2 pots blacking, each 0
2 shoe brushes, each . \ A married couple re- / 07£
1 pair of blankets . I quire only one set of j 7 0
1 counterpane . | these articles, but of | 13
1 strong chest, with lock ' larger size. v 8 9
1 linen clothes’ bag 19
1 mattress and pillow 4 6
Cost of above outfit for a single man, about <£s 10 0
Ditto ditto single woman „ 5 15 0
Ditto ditto married couple „ 10 10 0
Messrs. Boulder Brothers and Co., of 146, Leadenhall
Street, London, carry passengers through to Queensland
by their Sydney vessels sailing on the I.lth and 25th of
each month. From the high class of these vessels and
their excellent equipment, this route is usually preferred
by first-class passengers to the direct one, as, in addition
to all these advantages, the splendid harbour of Sydney
and the city itself, which is the oldest on the Australian
Continent, may be visited on the way.
Intending emigrants are advised to select their outfit
and cabin requisites at some respectable colonial outfitters,
of which there are several in London. E. J. Monnery
and Co., 165, Fenchurch Street, is one of the oldest
establishments of that class. They publish an illustrated
price list, which may be had free on application; and
every information as to the most suitable articles will be
afforded by them.


MISCELLANEOUS INFORMATION.
The colony is divided into twelve districts: Brisbane,
Ipswich, Warwick, Drayton, Dalby, Condamine, Gayn-
dah, Maryborough, Taroom, Port Curtis, Rockhampton,
and Kennedy. There are seven municipalities: Bris-
bane, established in 1859; Ipswich and Toowoomba, in
1860; Rockhampton, Maryborough, and Warwick, in
18X51; and Drayton, in 1862.
In connection with the Registrar-General’s returns, a
very remarkable fact is the large number of males who
have died compared with females. In 1862, 516 males
and 281 females died. Making every allowance for the
larger number of the male population, males have died
faster than females in the ratio of 130 of the former to
100 of the latter. The death-rate is highest in the
months of December, November, March, and April,
In 1862, 6,067 acres were under cultivation; the
quantity sown with maize being nearly four times that
appropriated to wheat. 67,873 acres of land were pur-
chased from the Crown, being an increase of nearly 20
per cent, as compared with the previous year. There
were 35,625 horses, 610,204 cattle, 4,345,901 sheep, and
7,019 pigs, of which information was received, but the
real numbers were somewhat higher. During the year
24,000 tons of coal were raised.
The imports in 1862 amounted to £1,320,225, and the
exports to £748,519 ; an immense increase upon the
previous year’s trade. Of wool, 8,063,612 lbs. were
exported, an increase of 15 per cent. 830 vessels were


entered inwards at the five ports of Brisbane, Hervey’s
Bay, Port Curtis, Rockhampton, and Port Denison;
177 having entered at Brisbane. In 1861 only 8 vessels
arrived direct from Great Britain ; but in the following
year the number was 23.
In the Moreton’s Bay Savings Bank there were 489
depositors; the amount of the deposits being about
£21,000.
There were 13 schools under the supervision of the
Board of General Education; 5 Church of England
schools, 36 private schools, 30 Sunday-schools, and au
average of 5,000 scholars. As that number is just one-
ninth of the entire population, almost every child of
suitable age must be receiving education.


Complete in One Volume, handsomely bound in cloth,
gilt edges
1 11
6
Complete in Two Volumes, handsomely hound in cloth,
gilt edges
1 15
0
Complete in One Volume, handsomely bound in calf,
gilt edges
2 10
0
Complete in One Volume, handsomely bound in morocco,
elegant
Complete in Two Volumes, handsomely bound in
morocco, elegant
3 0
4 0
o
0
The above can also be had with the Scotch Version of the Psalms, in One
Volume, cloth, for 35s.; in calf, gilt edges, 55s.: and in morocco, with gilt
edges for 65s.
The OLD TESTAMENT, complete in one volume, in
handsome cloth, gilt back and side, and gilt edges ...
1 5
0
The NEW TESTAMENT, uniform with the Old
Testament
0 10
0
CASSELL, FETTER, AND GALPIN’S
CATALOGUE
ILLUSTRATED AND EDUCATIONAL WORKS.
Cassell’s Illustrated Family Bible.
£ s. d.
Handsome Cloth Cases for Binding in One Volume, 6s. 6 d.; and in
Two Volumes, ss. each.
Superior Edition of Cassell’s Illustrated Family Bible.
Complete in One Volume, handsomely bound in cloth, gilt edges,
505.; in calf antique, gilt edges, 605.; elegantly bound in morocco,
gilt edges, 705.; Handsome Cloth Cases for Binding, 7s.
Cassell’s Popular Natural History. Profusely Illustrated
with splendid Engravings and Tinted Plates. Complete in Pour
Volumes, bound in cloth, 345.; ditto Two Volumes, ditto, 305.;
ditto Two Volumes, half-calf, full gilt back, 2 guineas j ditto Two
Volumes, half-morocco, full gilt back and edges, 455.
The Family Prayer Book ; or, Morning and Evening
Prayers for Every Day in the Year. In One Complete Volume,
bound in plain cloth, at 7s. 6d.; and in handsome cloth, with gilt
edges, 9s.
Cassell’s Illustrated Bunyan.—The Pilgrim’s Progress,
superbly Illustrated throughout. Printed on Superfine Toned
Paper. (Size 10f by 7i inches.) Complete in One Handsome
Volume. Plain cloth, 7s. 6d.; full gilt cloth, gilt edges, 10s. 6d.;
full morocco antique, 215.; full morocco gilt, 255.
Cassell’s Illustrated History of England, from the
Earliest Period to the Present Time. Volumes I. to VII., bound
in cloth, 6s. each. (The Eighth Volume, now in course of Publication,
concludes the Work.)
LA BELLE SALVAGE YARD, LONDON, E.C.


Cassell’s Illustrated Family Paper. Yols. I. to XIII.,
bound in cloth, 4s. 6d. each.
Cassell’s Popular Educator. Complete in Six Volumes,
crown 4to, price 4s. 6d. each, in cloth boards; or in Three Double
Volumes, price Bs. 6d. each.
The Biblical Educator, complete in One Thick Volume,
crown 4to, price 10s. 6d.
The Youth’s Popular Educator, complete in One VoL,
crown 4to, cloth boards, Bs.; with gilt edges, 9s.
English Spelling and Beading Book, with upwards of
150 Engravings on Wood. New Edition. Bvo, cloth, Is.
Lessons in English. By J. Beard, D.D. 12mo. In
paper covers, 35.; cloth boards, 3s. 6d.
The History of England. By Egbert Ferguson,
LL.D. 12mo, cloth, 35.; strongly bound in leather, 4s. Fine
Edition, cloth, gilt edges, 4s.
Science Popularly Explained, containing 4,000 Questions
and Answers on General Science. Bvo, cloth, 3s. 6d.
The Model Copy-Books: ensuring a Good, Fluent, and
Rapid Handwriting, in a Course of Eight Progressive Books.
Foolscap Quarto Edition, price 3d. each, or 2s. per Set; post
Quarto, 6d. each, or 4s, per Set.
The Great Sermons of the Great Preachers, Ancient and
Modern, with an Historical Sketch of the Greek and Latin Pulpit.
Third Edition. Bvo, cloth, ss.
Popular Preachers of our Time: their Eloquence,
Ministry, and Works. By J. Johnson, Esq. Crown Bvo, cloth,
price ss.
Cassell’s Pocket Concordance. 32mo,bound in cloth,ls. 6d.
Will shortly be ready, price Ninepence each, in stiff paper covers.
A Series of First Books or Catechisms. By the Eev.
Dr. BREWER, Author of “ Guide to Science,” &c.
My First Book of Reading and
Spelling.
My First Book of Bible History.
My First Book of Geography,
My First Book of Science.
My First Book of Common
My First Book of History of Things that I See around
England, j Me.
The whole of the six books bound in one volume, and forming a
compendium of general knowledge, cloth, 3s. 6d.
Guide to Every-day Knowledge. By the same Author.
L 18mo, bound in cloth, 2s. 6d. [Shortly.]
LA BELLE SALVAGE YARD, LONDON, E.C.


CASSELL, FETTER AND GALPIN,
POPULAR HAND-BOOKS.
12 mo, cloth, Is. each; free hy post for 13 stamps. 1
Amusing and Instructive Experiments; containing an
endless variety of Winter Evening Amusements for Youth.
“ Will be an acceptable present to an ingenious boy.”— Spectator.
Book-keeping, by Single and Double Entry. Ruled
Account Books to ditto, extra, Is. 6d. each set.
“ A very handy little work.” —Brighton Gazette.
Business; a Dictionary of the Terms and Technicalities
used in Commerce, and Tables of Foreign Moneys, Weights, and
Measures.
“Exceedingly useful to every one desirous of knowing exactly
what the various terms employed in business represent.” —News and
Bankers’ Journal.
Chess and Draughts ; containing a clear exposition of the
Games, Laws of Chess, Technical Terms, Advice to Young
Flayers, &c.; with an account of the different Openings and
Endings of Games, &c.
“ A most useful little manual.” —Edinburgh News.
Civil Service ; being a complete guide to the examinations
for the Appointments to the various Departments in the Civil
Service.
How to Colour a Photograph in Oil or Water. It con-
tains all the information necessary to acquire proficiency in the
art of Colouring Photographs in Oil or Water, on Paper or Glass,
together with a list of the pigments used, their method of pre-
paration, &c. &c.
Investments ; a Complete Account of the Public Se-
curities, Railway Shares, Foreign Stocks, and other means of
Investment, Explanatory and Statistical, with Information to the
latest date.
“This work is destined to go through many editions
The chapters on house property and mortgages are very excellently
and clearly written, and will be of great value to those who are
about to invest in this description of property.”— Economist.
Letter Writing; with Hints on Composition and Style,
and Fac-similes of Handwriting, including models of the Style re-
quired in the Civil Service.
“ A decided improvement upon any other manual of the kind with
which we are acquainted.”— Spectator, March 23rd.
Natural Philosophy ; being a Popular Guide to Physical
and Experimental Philosophy, from the simplest Elements to the
Phenomena of Electricity and Magnetism. With Eighty Wood
Engravings.
LA BELLE SALVAGE YAKD, LONDON, E.C.


CASSELL, FETTER, AND GALPIN,
Domestic Recipes; including Cookery, and a variety of
valuable and interesting information.
Elocution and Oratory; being a systematic Compendium
of tlie necessary Rules for attaining proficiency in Reading and
Speaking.
Emergencies; containing Hints and Cautions to those
engaged in Dangerous Occupations, and to Sufferers by the com-
mon Casualties of Life.
Etiquette; being a complete Guide to the Usages of
Polite Society.
Gardening. By George Glenny. A Guide to the Cul-
tivation of Fruits, Vegetables, and Flowers. Especially adapted
to Amateurs.
Health and Physiology. Containing the Best Rules for
the Preservation of Health, with a Popular Description of the
various Functions of the Human Body as affecting its General
Health.
“As a book of reference, or as an elementary work, this little
treatise, so far as it goes, leaves nothing to be desired.” —British
Press and Jersey Times.
Our Domestic Pets; containing Descriptive Notices of
favourite Birds and other Animals, the Mode of Preserving them
in Health, &c.
Photography. Will be found invaluable; containing a
complete system of instruction in the art of taking pictures by
means of light, including descriptions of all the various processes
in use, the best method of performing, the causes of failure, &c. &c.
Railway Situations ; including the complete System of
Railway Accounts and Returns, to which are added valuable Hints
on Commercial Employments generally.
“A very useful manual The forms of railway accounts and
returns add a great value to the manual." —City Press,
CASSELL’S ATLASES AND MAPS.
Cassell’s Complete Folio Atlas, containing 260 coloured
Maps, engraved in the first style of art, and presenting one of the
fullest and most perfect delineations of the Surface of the Globe
ever published. Price, in paper boards, 425. Bound in half-roan,
505.; in half-morocco, 635.
Cassell’s Folio General Atlas, consisting of 60 Maps of
the Countries of the World, with all their Geographical Boundaries,
Rivers, Navigable Canals, Roads, Railways, &c., forming one of
the most complete Atlases of Modern Geography extant. Price,
in paper boards, 10s. 6d. Strongly half-bound, 18s.
BELLE SAUYAGE YARD, LONDON, E.O.


Cassell’s British Atlas, of 122 Maps. Half-bound, in
paper boards, 21s. Strongly half-bound, 28s.
Cassell’s Folio County Atlas, containing 50 Maps of the
Counties of England and Wales, with all Roads and Railways fully
and accurately laid down. Price, in paperboards, 10s. 6d. Strongly
half-bound, 18s,
Cassell’s Railway Atlas, consisting of 20 Folio Maps
(four being Double) of the principal English Railway Routes,
Price ss.
Cassell’s Oriental Atlas, of 86 Folio Maps. Price, in
paper boards, Bs. Strongly half-bound, 15s.
Cassell’s Colonial Atlas, of 30 Folio Maps. Price, in
paper boards, Bs. Strongly half-bound, 15s.
Cassell’s Indian Atlas, consisting of 15 Folio Divisional
Maps of India. Price, in a Wrapper, 3s. 6d.
Cassell’s Emigrant’s Atlas, of 14 Folio Maps of Colonies
and Places of especial Interest to the Emigrant. Price, in a
Wrapper, 2s, 6d.
Cassell’s Great Map of London, in Nine Double Sheets,
and on a scale of nine inches to the mile. In a Wrapper. Price
ss. Mounted on Canvas, with rollers, coloured and varnished,
12s. Mounted on Canvas, and folded in a Cloth Case, 12s.
Coloured and varnished, and mounted on Canvas, with patent
spring rack, and mahogany head-box, gold lettered, 255.
The same, with Two Additional Maps of Old
London. Price 6s.
Cassell’s Map of the Environs of London, in Eight
Sheets; in a Wrapper. Price 2s. 6d. Mounted on Canvas, with
roUers, and varnished, 7s. 6d. Mounted on Canvas, and folded in
Cloth Case, 9s. Coloured and varnished, and mounted on Canvas,
with patent spring rack, and mahogany head-box, gold lettered,
15s.
Cassell’s Separate Maps. Various prices.
Cassell’s County and Home Maps, folded in a neat
Wrapper, for the pocket, 4d. each. These Maps are wrought out
with such laborious fulness and exactitude, that they present the
most complete delineation of the British Isles ever published; so
full and detailed, indeed, that scarcely a hamlet, and, in many
instances, scarcely a farm, is omitted.
Foreign Maps, in sheets, 3d. each.
A Complete List of Cassell’s Atlases and Maps forwarded ly Post, on
receipt of a Postage Stamp.
LA BELLE SAUVAGE YARD, LONDON, E.C.


AUSTRALIAN AND NEW ZEALAND OUTFITS.
GOY AND COMPANY,
36, LEADENHALL STREET, LONDON,
FROM CORNHILL,
Hosiers, Silfni UTaKers, bailors, §ool & flatters,
OUTFITTERS TO MANY OF THE FIRST NEW ZEALAND COLONISTS,
OOLIOIT from intending Emigrants to New Zealand
kT and the Australian Colonies an inspection of their General Outfitting
Stock, and beg to inform them that, having now had many years’ experience
in the trade, they are thoroughly acquainted with the articles necessary for a
Settler’s Outfit.
Priced Lists of Outfits forwarded by post to any part of the country.
CABIN FURNITURE, BEDDING, AND MESS UTENSILS
OP EVERY DESCRIPTION.
CABINS FITTED AND BAGGAGE SHIPPED.
GOY AND COMPANY,
36. LEADENHALL STREET, LONDON. [8
In one thick vol. the Twelfth Edition, price 16s.
MODERN DOMESTIC MEDICINE. Forming a
Comprehensive Medical Guide for the Clergy, Families, Emigrants, &c.
By T. J. GRAHAM, M.D.,
Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh.
“ Of all the Medical Guides that have come to our hands, this is by far the
best. For fulness and completeness they all yield the palm to Dr.
Graham’s.”— Banner.
“ Far excelling every publication of its class.” —British Standard,
“ Popular works have been published by several medical practitioners—but
none of them equal those by Dr. Graham.” —Medical Circular, Jan., 1862.
London: Published by Simpkin, Marshal], & Co., Stationers Court. Sold
by all Booksellers.
SEA-MIDSHIPMEN APPRENTICES, PASSENGERS.
VACANCIES for respectable Youths as Mid-
shipmen and Apprentices in several Clipper East
Indiamen, carrying from 1,500 to 3,500 tons burthen, bound
to healthy Ports, commanded by kind and Christian Cap-
tains. Cheapest passages to all ports in Australia, New
Zealand, Cape, Port Natal, New York, and Canada. Cir-
culars with list of Ships, Outfit lists, and other particulars,
on application to F. S. Gray & Co., Merchants and Ship
Brokers, 54, King William Street, City, London.


QABIN FURNITURE, SEA BEDDING, *c.
E. J. MONNERY & CO.,
165, FENCHUECH STREET, E.C.,
Supply Colonists and Passengers with every requisite for Voyage and
Residence abroad at Wholesale Prices.
Cabins Fitted at an Hour’s Notice.
Cabin Furniture,
Sea Chests,
Overland Trunks,
Sea Beds,
Blankets,
Sheets,
Counterpanes,
life Belts
Cabin Filters,
Towels,
Iron Bedsteads,
Tents,
&c. &c.
Hosiery,
Gloves,
Cravats,
Shirts,
Waterproofs,
Flannel Shirts,
Tweed Suits,
Serge do.,
Leather Gaiters,
Carpet and
Leather Bags,
&c. &c.
Passengers’,'Baggagel Warehoused Free of Charge, and
carefully Shipped if required.
ILLUSTRATED LISTS FREE ON APPLICATION.
Outfits containing every requisite, from £1 4 6
Ditto for second-class Passenger „ 219 0
Ditto First-class Passenger „ 5 7 6
(See Illustrated List.)
PORTABLE FURNITURE FOE HOME AND COLONIAL USE.
Emigrants’ Bedding and Mess Utensils, from l*s. 9d,
E. J. MOItfNEEY & CO., 165, Eenclmrcli Street, London


HOULDER BROTHERS & Co.’s
REGULAR LINES OF
AUSTRALIAN AND NEW ZEALAND PACKETS.
LONDON TO MELBOURNE,
%‘ v 7th and 21st of every month,
TtjJcing Passengers at through rates to Adelaide, Hobart Town,
Launceston, &c.
LONDON TO SYDNEY,
Uth and 25th of every month,
Taking Passengers at through rates to Brisbane, Rockhampton,
Newcastle, Twofold Bay, and all the New Zealand ports.
LONDON TO NEW ZEALAND.
Auckland Monthly. . Southland 'j
Otago Monthly. I Hawke’s Bat lAs occasion
- wsr* A «aui^ oa i maiub, ’ rouoh requir,s
Kklsoh ) requires. i New Plymouth J
The vessels of this line are chosen especially for their adaptation
to the Passenger Trade, and are carefully provisioned and fitted
the great practical experience of
the vessels may be mentioned the celebrated Clipper Ships ;
| Empress • Golden Citt
I Eagle Speed Lucirklle
Rifleman I Ramset Daphne
I/>«aiK(. I Spkay or the Ocean Hklvelltn.
For plans of Saloon Accommodation, Rates of Passage, Dietary
Scales for Second and Third-class Passengers, apply to the Country-
Agents of the Line; Messrs. GrlndLay & Co., 55, Parliament
Street, S.W. ; or to Houlder Brothers & Co., IP>, Lewlephah
Street, London, E.C.
’ ’*• . I ■ "■ n »»'■■■<■ - ■■' i 1 ■ ' 1,1 ' ■ «■■■——- ' r
'’LONDON: FEINTED BT PBTIBB AND GALPIN, BELLE SALVAGE WORKS, E.C.
